CAPEL'S REMAINS. Being an useful APPENDIX to his Excellent TREATISE OF
Tentations. Concerning the TRANSLATIONS of the HOLY SCRIPTURES. Left written
with his own Hand.

By that incomparably learned and judicious Divine, Mr. RICHARD CAPEL,
Sometimes Fellow of Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford.

With a Preface prefixed, Wherein is contained an Abridgement of the Authors
Life, By his Friend Valentine Marshall.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for John Bartlet, at the Gilt Cup on the South Side
of Paul's over against the Drapers, and at the Gilt Cup in Westminster Hall.
1658.

TO THE Christian Reader.
Reader,
HAving nothing of mine own, that I count worthy of the public view, I was
fully resolved to have quit the Stage, as the mute person in the Comedy,
without being known to any, save some private friends only; and most of those
also, in or about that private little corner, wherein the great God of Heaven
has seen it fit to make use of me. But now I am enforced to launch further
into the deep, then ever I expected, intended, or desired; by being importuned
to set these Heb. 13. 22.
few lines, (which could not in civility be declined) before this
Posthumus-piece, of the dearest and usefullest friend, (whilst he was here
amongst men,) that I had in the whole world, out of mine own family.

Concerning whom there is need to say little. His Works in print already
sufficiently praise him in the Gates; and have got him great place in the
hearts of a many, seen in the Theory; but much more room in the breasts of all
such as are any way versed in the Practical part of Divinity. But as he writ
things worthy to be read: so he did things worthy to be writ, Scripserit
legenda, seceritscribenda. Adamus in ejus vit. p. 238.
with Beza. Something then would be set out: partly, to do him right, that's not
to be buried in Oblivion, See Cajet. Paraeus in loc.
Heb. 13. 7. But principally, 1. For the honor of that great God, that gave
him such rare endowments; and continued them in their full beauty, to his very
He died in the seventieth year of his Age.
last breath. 2. For the provoking of us that knew him, to a more lively and
fresh Ut iis ve lut facibus -- ad. imitationem hujus testis idonei,
fortissimique militis, nos ipsos magis ac magis non paremus. Jun. in Orat.
Funeb. Ursini.
emulation of those eminent virtues, that we both saw and knew, that he shone
so bright in. 3. For the stirring up of all such as be at a further distance,
to a more through sense and feeling of the heavy hand of God, laid upon us all,
in the removal of this able and excellent instrument.

We live in a Jer. 12. 11.
stupid Age. The greatest strokes of God, if any whit remote, scarce make the
least dint; Those that cut to the quick, usually be doft too soon. We read of
some that 2 Samuel 14. 1.
mourned long for their dead. 'Twas three years Genesis 24. ult.
full, ere Isaac could be comforted after the death of a good mother, though of
a very great age. Jacobs pathetick expressions, clothed with such aggravating
circumstances, Genesis 48. 7. so About 40 years.
long after the decease of his dear and good wife: Now, how near it sat his
heart. The loss of Quae^imus invidi. Ho^. Carm. l. 3. Od. 4
good men, (especially of good note) is much to be bewailed. There Is that goes
to the ground with them, that is not easily had again. Who will takeup their
Quae^imus invidi. Ho^. Carm.l. 3. Od. 4
virtues? 'Twill be along work ere the like can be reared in their steads. They
give the greatest check to sin, Judge. 2, 7. 10, 11, 19. the chiefest lift to
good, Psalm. 75. 3. 2 Chro. 11. 17. They keep off storms, Genesis 19. 22. Numb.
16. 45. Be they taken away? it is from some Ps. 12. 1 Ezec. 21. 3 4, 6. Mic: ^
1, 2.
Is 57. 1 2 Reg. 22: ult.
evil to come. It Is well observed by some, what a number of our prime and
choice old Standards we have lost of late days. If the Lords hand be stretched
out further yet in this kind, we may be left to green heads; to those that be
little better then Isa. 3. 2, 3 4.
children; and what can we expect then? but to be cast into a very sad
condition Cedo qui v^stram Remp. tan^am, aurisistis tam cito -- proveniebant
O^at^r^s novi, stulti, adolescen^u^i, de Senect* p. 238
. Tu^ie tells us of a flourishing Commonwealth, that was quickly overthrown by
men of that stamp.

We that had our abode by this renowned Champion, look upon his death as a most
bitter blow to us. It concerns us more, (we know it too) then all the world
besides. We cannot but see our own sin, haling and pulling this great burden
upon us. We did not know what we did enjoy, whilst we had him to put on
ornaments upon us, better then those of gold upon our apparel. We have cause
enough to lift up our voices, and to weep over him, again and again too, (as
they did over 2 Samuel 3. ^4.
Abner, and Achilles, over his Homer. I^^ad. S and Y.
Patrecl. s) he is not buried to this day, nor will he be in haste. As often as
any new trouble is started in body or mind, and begins to sit close to us, to
ours; our wound bleeds afresh, and we cannot but indulge our selves in it; (as
B^za did after In Praesante Com. Calv. in E. zech.
Calvin was gone to rest) hoping our heart, shall be fitted for the due and
desired effect of it, at the last. But when all comes to all, we must learn to
submit to the only wise God, and endeavor now to fetch that from the fountain,
that we have lost in the Cistern.

It Is besides my purpose to set out a Narrative of his life, or to dwell upon
that, that may savor of glorying in the flesh. He was very far from that
(with famous Ab omni specie (...) alienissimus. Jun. in Orat. funeb.
Ursinus) all his life long; and he has better things to embellish him, now,
after his decease. And yet he was not behind in matters of that kind, if there
were any list to look that way. He was An. 1586
borne in Gloucester, of good Parentage, descended from an ancient family of the
Gentry (of his own name) in Herefordshire, and of Alliance to the Lord Capel,
(but he had learnt with brave Philpot, to tread that under his feet Act. and
Mon. Vol. 3. p. 541
) His father was a stout man, and an Alderman of the City: a fast friend to Mr.
Tho. Prior first, and afterward to Mt. John Work^an, (having had a principal
hand in the drawing of him thither,) both of them mine ancient and faithful
friends; and men of great sufficiency for the preaching of the Gospel, and
instruments that the Lord made much use of, for the advancing of the true
saving knowledge of himself, and for the setting up of the real and substantial
power of godliness, in that city; during their times. His elder brother is an
Alderman there, at this day.

His Youth is quite out of my reach. His eminency for Learning was great,
whilst he was yet in the University of Oxford: where he was Fellow of
Magdalene-Colledge, and had the breeding up of some there that proved excellent
Scholars: Dr. Frewen by name, (a thankful man to him for his education) and
famous Mr. Pemble, who ended his days at his house. His attendance at Court,
upon the chiefest Favorite, (in the days of that learned King, King James, of
famous memory,) would have put him on in the way of preferment, if his thoughts
had been that way bent; where he continued till the death of Sir Thomas
Overbury, that learned Knight, his very friend indeed, and then he bade adieu
to that course of life.

As for his inward storms; they were very many, and exceeding bitter,
(together with a number of bodily infirmities, attending him in his younger
years) but it was well for him, that he bore the yoke in his youth. And none,
that I know, can now set out these to any purpose, (if ever an occasion be
offered) but that eminent and learned Divine, Dr. Harris, that knew so much of
his See his Preface before Brad^ord, Sermon of R ^ pentance.
temptations and desettions, by reason of that intimate acquaintance he had
with him in those days, (being his Kinsman besides) occasioned the more, by
the often recourse he had then into those parts, for the fetching of some
spiritual refreshing from that Divine of Divines, Mr. John Dod, that was both
able and willing to speak a word in season to a broken and a contrite heart.

Mine intent is only (as Exmultis pauca decerpemus. in Orat. Funcb.
Junius did with Ursine,) to pitch upon some few things of many; and to confine
my self to what I know of mine own certain knowledge: having had the favor to
stand in the repute of more then a common friend of his, for above these thirty
years together. And this I must needs say,

I.
1. For the eminency of his parts. I never came near any that came near him,
in all particulars. The most even of our most highflowen Eagles, have commonly
some peculiar Sparta, which they adorn well, and do very good service in it,
to Christ and his Church; but this man had grasp't all good learning; and made
every thing his own so evenly to see to, that he was as expert in his way, as
Hector in (...). 11. H.
Homer, and would with Cato the elder be up in the Fortissimus, peritissimus,
eloquentissimu^. Live. dec. 5. l. 9 p. 182*
height, in all that ever he was to act in.

Melancthon would say of Pomeranus, he was the Grammarian: of himself, he was
the Logician: of Jus^us Jonas, he was the Orator: but of Luther, he was Omnia
in omnibus. Adam. in vit. Luth. p 170.
all in all. Here was one would fetch out Luthers mark, if he list to turn to
the School or to Case-Divinity; to Austin or Chrysostom, Galen or Hippocrates,
Aristotle or Tully, to History or Philosophy, to the Arts or Tongues; who could
tell but himself, which he was least versed in? He was a very living Library, a
full storehouse of all kind of good Literature, no less then a little
University; the Mirror of our parts; above the envy of all that I knew. The
least draught of his pencil would have told any Plin. Not. Hist^l. 35 c. 10. p.
340, 341
Protogenes, he had been the Apelles. He excelled in all that ever I saw he
would set his hand to, unless it were in his utterance, in the public
Congregation, and therein I must needs confess he had a great defectivenesse.

God gave him great understanding of the times, to know what Israel 1 Chronicles.
12. 32
ought to do. He stood upon the Watchtower, and saw what was hid from most of
our eyes, and being quick of I^. 11. 3. in the margin.
Sent, in the fear of the Lord, he gave timely notice to some that d Quotquot
ibi essent doct^ homines, ^on esse tam doct^s, ut intelligerent, quanta esset
doctriua ejus. Adam. in vit. Melanct. p. 330.
stood in place; which had it been heeded, we had never been so fearfully
pestered with those Hydraes heads, that are now starting up afresh daily, to
the great disturbance of our people.

Simler said of Melancthon at his going from Tubing, that none of the learned
men there, how many soever they were, had so much learning, as to know the
great learning that was in that man. Too too many of us were sick of the same
disease: we knew not the depth in this man's breast. We had many a man in this
one man, even all Scholarship epito nized in this profound Clerk. And yet for
all this, that great blessing he had, which he himself observed, as a singular
favor vouchsafed to Dr. John Rainolds, that great Oracle of Oxford, that he
never set on foot any manner of new opinion. The like is observed of learned
Dr. Nullam propriam and peculiarem sententiam ampl^xus est, praeter sanam
doct^inam in Ecclesia Dei receptam. Abd. Astit. in ejus vit. p. 47.
Whitakers styled the Oracle of Cambridge, and the Miracle of the world. A
mercy, that most men of Fere omnes magni Nominis Theologi in veteri via novam
semi^am quaecentes. ib. ex Hier.

II.


superlative parts, use not to be too rich in. There Is scarce any strong brain
without some strange fancy. If the great wits of our times had kept themselves
close to the steps of these rare Divines, we had never seen the sorrows that we
now sigh and groan under; and would be glad to be shift on if we knew how.

2. For the excellency of his preaching* Wherein, if I mistake not (as I think
I do not) he excelled all men, I am sure all that ever. I came near, (without
the disparaging of any.) There be a great many that I know; and a many-many
more there be that I know not, (the Lord increase their number) that be
singularly well-fitted for this great emploiment. Worthies they be, and must
be, as well as those were, that attained not to the first 2 Samuel 23. 19
three. This man's lot fell in the foremost rank. He was an Interpreter one of a
thousand. His understanding was strangely opened, for the understanding, and
the opening of the Scriptures. He would bolt out that, out of the holy book of
God, that would not come into any other man's consideration; yet it should be
genuine; and evidently appearing to be the drift and meaning of the holy Ghost.

An intelligent man could never sit at his feet, but he should meet with that
there, that would never fall from any other man's mouth, nor ever drop from any
other man's pen. His words were as goads, as miles fastened by the masters of the
Assemblies. They were edged with so much reason, re-enfo^ced from the lively
Oracles, that they could not fall to the ground. It Is no wonder then that the
cream of the whole Country (as they could have their opportunities) would
(...). Luke 19. ult
hang upon his Ministry.

Yet, how plain would he be in all his expressions! he would not deliver what
he had from God in an unknown tongue; nor yet in terms that were too spruce
and trim. He had learnt his lesson well, of that great Apostle that came not
with 1 Cor. 2. 4
inricing words; nor with any other then such as the very 1 Cor. 14. 18, 19 Sec
Bez. in l^c.
Catechumeni, the youngest beginners, might understand. He kept close to the
footin^s of our own choicest Worthies; famous Mr. Dod (that would say, so much
Latin, was so much flesh in a Sermon.) Master Cleaver, Master Hildersam, and
such See Dr. Daven. in Col. p. 54. Dr. Tho. Tailor on Tit. p 245. Dr. Pressed. on
Col. 3. ^ p. 99. 100, 102. Mr. Hieron. preachers plea. p. 534.
holy men of God, led by the self-same spirit. He would deliver the holy and
wholesome truth of God, in such an holy and wholesome way, that it bred very good
blood in the hearts of the hearers. He would stoop so low as to speak to our
poor countrey-people, in their own proper dialect, so as they could not but
even see, and feel, and find out God; and be occasioned to speak of him all
the week after. If he came to a deep mystery, he would make it plain to the
shallowest capacity. What ever he fell upon, he would follow it so divine-like,
that the hearts of his Auditors would be rapt up into heaven, whilst they
heard him winding and turning a point of Divinity, like a workman that needed
not to be ashamed.

Whereas, now-a-dayes, whilst some of our best Divines, seem to be too much
taken up with quaint and historical flourishes, there is a sensible decay in the
power of godliness amongst us* An Exotic tongue, in the public Congregation
(whatever men think of it) is set out as a ^ Cor. 14 21* 22. See Bez. and ^ar.
in loc. See Juu. parallel. p. 290.
sign of displeasure. It feeds such humors as would be purged. it had no good
effect in the Church of Corinth. Men's wits will wax wanton, when they be not
overawed by the plain power of Gods Word. When Preachers keep not close to
the very 1 Timothy 6. 3 (...)
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine that is according unto
godliness; but love to be tampering with another (...)
doctrine, though not with another in the maine, but even in the manner of the
delivery only (as when it savours too much of the pomp of humane Eloquence,
says in 1 Timothy 1. 3
Calvine; when it differs from the style of the holy Ghost, says in 1 Timothy 6. 3
Danaeus,) the people be in danger of turning aside to vain jangling, to
perverse disputings, desiring to be teachers; and such like matters. The gilt
upon the pill, may please the eye, but it profits not the patient. The paint
upon the glass, may feed the fancy, but the room is not well lighted by it.
The sword of Gods Spirit can never wound so deep, till it be plucked out of
these gaudy scabbards. Nuda verit^s. Nuda Grati^^.
Nakedness deforms too too many in these days, but it is the best garnishing
truth can have. A sober dress best becomes a grave Matron. There be 1 Cor. 2.
13
words as well as things, which the holy Ghost teaches. The Arrows fetched out
of Gods own quiver will pierce the deepest, and make the people fall the
soonest under Christ. The weakness of God is stronger then men. Paul's weapons
were mighty. The sincere milk of the Word, will make Gods babes to grow best.

This curious age is too too much given to affectation of Words; as a Doctor
Wilkinson. epist. to the Reader before Bradfords Sermon of repentance.
good friend of mine, has well observed. And Doctor Sibs was wont to say, that
great affectation and good affection, seldom go together. The swelling words
of vanity, may tickle the ear, tip the tongue, please in matters of discourse;
but when it comes to push of pike, they afford but little comfort. This grave
Divine had another manner of wisdom then that of Words. He was made an able
Minister of the New Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit; that has
given, (...) 2 Cor. 3. 6
does give, and will give life. Having this hope then, he used great plainness
of speech; and by the manifestation of the truth, He commended himself to every
man's conscience, in the sight of God; and has so well seasoned the country,
that I hope the fruit will remain, and be seen many a year hence.

III.
3. For the liveliness of his prayers. He was a man that had a very large
measure of that spirit of grace, that is the spirit of supplication. He was so
well fitted for the opening of his mind to God, as if with holy Acts and Mon.
Vol. 3. p. 241.
Bradford, he had been almost ever upon his knees; he could tell his own
errand, or any other man's, at the Throne of grace; with as good freedom, and
to as good purpose, as any man living. He would not be rash with his mouth,
when he came before God; nor set out what he had to say, there, with painted
eloquence or court-like complement; but his mouth should be filled with such
savoury arguments, as very well became an humble suppliant. He would be far
from those battologies and miserable extravagancies, that the greatest part of
us be so sorely haunted with. He would pour out his soul to God, at all manner
of times, upon all manner of occasions, with all manner of prayer and
supplication; and with that admirable variety of all sorts of quickening and
feeling meditation, that it would even ravish their hearts, that could be so
happy as to partake with him.

Yet for all this, He was clear in his opinion, for the lawfulnes^e of the use
of set forms; b* Calv. ep. 55. p 69 Perk. Ca^es p. 67. Ames Cas. p. 190 T. C.
great. Catechis. p. 256. Attersol. Numb. p. 424 Hill. Ps. ^1. p. 63 Dr Pressed. on
John 1. 16.
according to the tenet of all the best Divines that ever I met with, that were
in their cold blood: (and much heed is not to be given to what any man says,
that is in the height of his sick fit;) and according to the practice of all
Churches, even the best reformed; says The seven Treat. p. 240
Master Rogers, now and ever; says Ps. 51 p. 63
Mr. Hildersam: nay Upon the Lords pray. p. 24. and 26*
Mr. Smith himself, says, (who was warping at that very time, and afterward
wandered far in the ways of the separation) it was the practice of the
ancient Church, and of all the reformed Churches in Christendom; of the Church
immediately after the Apostles; nay (says he) of the Church in the time of the
Apostles, as may probably be gathered out of 1 Cor. 14. 26. this has been the
practice also of the very best Calv praeca^io quaeuti perpetuo solebat. Ant
comment. in Ez^ch. Pa^aeus ante comment in Jacob.
lights that ever were set up in the Churches of Christ. It Is very well known,
that the flower of our own Divines, went on in this way, when they might have
done otherwise, if they had pleased; in their prayer before their Dr. Sibbs
before his Sermon. on Joh. 14. 1. Mr. Hilder. before his doctr. of fasting. Dr.
Dowuham. Dr. John Burgess. Mr. Richard Stock. Master Nich. Byfield.
Sermons. Nay, Mr. Dod his own self (as I have been often told by this great
Divine) would seldom end his devotions in his own family, but with the use of
the Lords prayer. Nay, yet more, Hist. Chri. part. 3. p. 535
Mr. Cartwright thinks it very ptobable, that Christ, his own self made use of a
set-form at meals.

It Is not good to cast stones of offense, before our weak brethren, that be of
meaner parts, wanting in ability, memory, or audacity; that they be not taken
off from, or disheartened in this necessary service. Nor may we lay a trap for
our own feet. Who knows what times may pass over him? If God plunge us in the
ditch, and leave us laboring in the noose; the loftiest of us all may be feign
to take relief from these poor contemptible props, and crutches, (as some do
deem them.) When the soul's so troubled, that it Ps. 77. 4
cannot speak, but chatter only, like a Crane or Swallow; when it is so full of
grief, that it can no more then sigh and groan, and Psalm. 55. 2 (...)
tumultuor. vat.
make a confused noise; 'twill be glad to catch at any thing, to give it self
vent by. Dr. Pref: before Bradfords Ser. of repent.
Harris tells us of a second Bradford, that in time of his distress, was fain
to adopt Mr. Bradfords words, and to spread them before God as his own: because
he had said more for him, (as he thought) then he could say for himself. I knew
a rare and eminent Divine, indeed (that would be as often upon his bended
knees, as any man, that ever I conversed with;) that would sometimes be in such
dumps, that he had no more to set before God, ^o give his heart ease by, then
the words of David in the one and fiftieth Psalm. Well might then this knowing
Divine of ours, that had been so tossed with tempests be tender of that, that
might be in such stead, for poor trembling hearts in a stormy day.

Get to God then as thou can; sad distempers be upon our people. Spiritual
judgments be the sorest judgments. What if thou have but the Mat. 26. 44. Heb.
10 11
self-same words? The song of Moses was a Apoc. 14. 3. and 15. 3
new song, tendered to God with new affections. What if the petitions be Exodus
14. 10, 11, 12 Josh. 24. 7 Romans 8. 26
broken, confused; This poor Psa. 34. 6
man cried, says the Text, when he was in a poor case indeed; like a 1 Samuel 21
13
bedlam, and yet he was heard. The lesser lisping children some-whiles have the
grant; when those that be of greater maturity, seem to be fet aside: Whilst
Moses his hands were up (though in a poor way) Israel had the better. Who can
tell what God may do? Abraham left asking ere God left granting, even for a
filthy Sodom. Remember Latimers Acts and Mon. Vol. 3. p. 463
once-again, once-again; tugg and wrestle. We may come to see, and our people
may be made to know, that their heart is 1 Reg. 18. 37
turned back-again, to the God of their fathers.

IV.
For the soundness and settlednesse of his judgment. He pitched at first upon
a good foundation, and being (...), 1 Timothy 4. 6 See Bez. in loc.
nourished up in the words of faith, He continued in the things he had learned
and been well assured of, knowing from whom he had received them. He was with
Socrates an Diog. Laert. p. 103
(...), grounded in his opinion; one that stood like a brazen wall, as firm as
a very rock, (with Virgils Aeneid. 7
Latinus) in the midst of all the dashings, and clashings of tempestuous times.
He saw with a clear eye, through all the painted glosses of those that were
given to change; and therefore was not moved at all, with any thing said or
done in that kind. He was true to his Religion, and clave close all along to
his first principles; holding fast the faith that was Jude 3
once, and (as he himself would often express it) but once delivered to the
Saints. He lived and died a true Orthodox Divine, according to the known
doctrine of the Church of England. He knew full well, for all the great talk of
the Gosspel, as though it were but newly dropped out of the clouds, that there is
not any other Gosspel, Apoc. 14 8
then the everlasting Gospel, that was Gal. 3. 8
preached before unto Abraham, and has been entertained all along, still by
Gods faithful people, and shall be so continually, to the worlds end. But some
there be (no mean pretenders to the Gospel) that be in great danger of
perverting the Gospel of Jesus Gal. 1. 7
Christ.

This stable man, was set up as a sure Seamark. Stand to his steps, though we
stand alone. God and a good conscience, be very good company. Elijah was but
one, yet did very good service. One Hist. Tripartit.
Athanasius in the East; one Hilary in the West; was of mighty great use in a
staggering time. What if we meet with storms? It Is but a poor Religion that is
not worth suffering for. 'Twill turn to Luke 21 13
a testimony; When the wild humor is spent, men will look home again. A
Mercuries statue will be looked upon then. Those poor silly souls, that be
tossed to and fro, and (...). Ephesians. 4. 14
whirled about and about again with every wind of doctrine, will be glad of
such a sight, in the day of their visitation. Whereas if they that know, or
should know more of God, be not steady in their steering, but varying their
course: poor bewildered hearts will be at their wits ends, not knowing which
way to turn, nor to whom to go, nor whom to walk after.

As there is but one God, so there is but one Faith, one Baptism; Jer. 32. 39
one way to eternal life: one Rule for us all to walk by. Why be we not then all
of one heart? all in one tract? so many men as we see, so many minds there be.
Every Christian^s menstruam fidem hab^re proverbium fuit, Parae. in Apoc. p. 611
month (almost) a new faith. It Is easy to swim with the tide; to persuade the
heart of the rectitude of that, that is turned up trump by the times; and yet to
pretend still it is from more light. We may talk of the Spirit; but (...) See 1
Cor. 1. 10. and 3. 3, 4.
Schism is a fruit of the flesh. The old way is the good way; he shall stumble
and hamper his feet, that swerves from the Jo^. 18: 15
ancient paths. What Is got by gadding? men itch for change still. There Is no
rest but with our first Hos. 2. 7
husband. It Is good to be all of one mind in God. Where Is not unity in
judgment, there is scarcely unity in affection. Too fierce we be against such
as close not with our notitions. It was Acts and Mon Vol. 1. p. 261
Bell, Book, and Candle once; it is not much better now. Wildfire flies amain.
We cannot all cut to a thread, there will be some variation in the compasie;
but whilst we aim at the white, the P^ssumus de quibusdam rebus salva
charitate, and pace dissentire. Whitaker. in conc. ult ^x Augustino. p. 3
odds is to be passed by, without bitterness. Why should there be such huge
rents and divisions in the Church? Where Is our forbearance? We have not yet
learnt our lesson well, to wait one for another, till God shall reveal, Phil.
3. 15. Whilst we be so sharp in our contests, Satan makes his Markets; Veritas
altercando amittitur. Serran. in Eccl. p. 299
Religion goes to wrack; our differences Erasmus and Luther were of the same
mind with the Tigurines about the Sacrament til* he contention grew hot. Adams
in vit. Leon. Jud. but afterward how far they flew off, it is too well known.
widen; Some be ready to give up all, seeing there is no better harmony; others
could wish themselves well out of the world, that they may be delivered (as
Melanchthon says) from the Veritas altercando amittitur. Serran. in Eccl. p.
299
implacable differences, even of some Divines. Hearken to God: He would have
the truth (...), Ephesians. 4. 15.
followed, but in love, If the Word will not sway; the cross will come; and
set an Acts and Mon. Vol. 3. p. 147.
Hooper and a Ridley to the embracing of one another. f Ab in manibus and
implaca^ bilibus odiis Theologorum. Ad. in vit. Strigelii p. 427.


Fall upon that one and only solid way of God: and stick there. Be we steadfast
men. It was once the Martyrs Act. and (...).
style, it will ever be the good man's glory. Get we then to God: he can
stablish the shuttle heart, 2 Cor. 1. 21. See the judgment be so rightly set,
Is. 33. 6. and the heart so firmly knit to God and his Truth; he that Ex. 21.
5, 6
loved his Master would not leave his Master. Tamper we not with opinions, 2
Pet. 3. 17. nor with opinionative 1 Timothy 6. 5
men, Romans 16. 17, 18. nor yet with books that scatter Tares. This grave Tent.
4. par. p. 250
Divine himself, gives very good caution to this purpose, from famous In his 6.
Ser. p. 172. See Hildersam also, Ps. 51. p. 7^9.
Mr. Dod, a man of that vast experience. An honest heart may be sorely puzzled
with a forked Argument, The Martyr could die for Christ, that could not Acts
and Mon. Vol. 3
dispute for him. Some pretend, they must try all things, but they speak
besides the Sea Dr. Tho Tailor in loc p 52.
book. Who will try Ratsbane, or a sharp sword, whether it will pierce into his
bowels? Some think to withdraw when they see danger: but Satan is subtle;
venom will get in we know not how; and error will ^ Ti. 2. 17
stick and eat. What gets the fly that goes whisking by the Candle? They that
nibble at the bait, shall hardly 'scape the hook. Again, gingle not with terms
that be improper in matters of Religion; they savor of singularity; breed U^
ex dentibus Draconis in Cadmaea Historia, n^ta est sobole^inter se dimicantium,
sic ex improprio sermon, dissidia Opi^nionum, in decemibus, and popu^o
n^^cuntur. Adam. in vit. R^gii. p. 80
rents and divisions amongst Preachers and People; and take off the mind from
things more essential. Learned men have observed the advantage that heretics
got, by the unwarie speeches of the Fathers. Some of Calvin's expressions, not
so well pondered, have done no great good to some in our times. Ser. in Eccl.
p. 299
Nesto^ius fell into his heresy, by defending an improper speech of his: and
Eutyches thinking to mend it, fell into the other extreme. Dr. Thomas Progress
^o holiness p 134. 135 and 154
Taylour speaks much to this point, to very good purpose: and tells us in
Conclusion; If we will keep the faith of our Fathers, we must keep the words of
our Fathers.

5. For the singleness of his heart, he was with Jacob a plain man, Genesis 25.
27. that is, downright honest, as it is in the (...) Integer.
Original; a very Nathanael, an Israelite indeed, John 1. 47. in whom, though
there was some infirmity, yet there was no guise. He had a deal of the Wisdom
that's from above, and was as far from hypocrisy, as any man that ever I knew.
If others were made of his metal, Momus had no need to complain of the want of
a window at any man's breast. He was what he was, in deed and in truth; without
dissimulation, very high in his conformity to the Act. 2. 46
primitive Christians; and left a brave President to all that would be what
they should be in this particular.

We of this doubling and deceitful generation, had need to look about us, and
see what was here set before us in Roman Characters, that we may learn to be
more above-board in all our dealings. We are fallen into an Age, like that of
the Prophets, wherein every one has too much of the hypocrite. We may well
cry, Help Lord, for the faithful fail; with a double heart and a double tongue
do they speak. The most be for all Tides and Times, for any manner of Mode, so
as they can serve their own turns by it. Isa. 9. 17
Alcibiades could swagger it at Athens, take any pains at Thebes, live most
sparing at Lacedaemon, bib amongst the Thracians, hunt amongst the Persians.
Some can be any thing, but what they should be. We had need to beware of men;
when every brother will supplant Corn. N* pos. ser. 7. c. 11.
Pro. 11. 9
. The hypocrite with his mouth destroys his neighbor. It Is good to be wise as
the Serpent, but we must be innocent as the Dove. Though it be just with God
that the doc iver shall be deceived: and some Fallere fallentem.
like it well: yet will it not be just in us to do it. They that turn: aside to
crooked ways, shall be led forth with the workers of iniquity. Psalm. 125. 5.

Plain-dealing is a jewel, yea, though it be in sin; as this acute man Tent^t.
part. 3
tells us. It Is a dainty fine thing in our Josh. 7. 20 21. Jer. 31. 18, 19.
Isa. 39. 4. Genesis 16. 8
confessing, repenting, and in all we are to act in. He that uses it (whatever
men say or think) shall neither live, nor die a Prove. 28. 22
beggar. Downright honesty is the best policy. It Is delightful to God, Prove.
12. 22. 'twill be a comfort to us, 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing, we
never eat our meat with more gladness, then when with singleness of heart,
Act. 2. 46.

VI. Adamus in ejus vit. p. 327 At Eastington.
6. For the usefulness of his life. He was born for the common good with
M^l^ncthon, and lived for the public benefit of the whole Country.

First, whilst he was at his pastoral charge: he gave himself fully and wholly
to Reading, Exhortation and Doctrine: and his profiting appeared to all; so
that he was generally and justly reputed, a man approved of God, rightly
dividing the Word of truth. It Is well known what pains he took, and to how
good purpose, during the whole Twenty one years.
time of his abode there: preaching twice constantly every Lords day; and
lecturing (there) besides one day weekly: though he had but an infirm body)
until he was taken off by sickness: after that (his Sabbath-dayes work
excepted) he preached only upon the festival days. His lips were touched with
a coal from the Altar. Adamus in ejus vit. p. 379
Musculus his words, so would his, pierce like a two-edged sword. He could be a
Boanerges, but his bent was most to be a Son of Consolation. He was a true
Evangelical Preacher; and comforted many a drooping heart by his labors in
public, and gave abundance of satisfaction in private, to many troubled
spirits, that used to resort to him, out of all Countries, both far and near.

And after this also, he showed himself to be a Tree of Gods own planting, by
bringing forth still more fruit in his Age. When the times were such, (some
flying so extremely high, the ceremonies being pressed with rigor, and such
grievous penalties inflicted) that he (being tender in matters of conformity)
must needs Nov. 27. 1634.
quit his Pastors place. He betook himself then to his little At Pitchcombe.
Ap. 20. 1635
Cell, (as Samuel to his Ramah) that had never been looked upon if he had not
come there (no more the Arpinum, if not for Tullie: nor Is^ebium and Bretta, if
not for Luther and Melancthon,) and there he had more health and cheerinesse of
spirit then formerly, which he improved well for public advantage, diverse
ways.

1. In his falling upon the practice of Physic. His studies had bent that way
beforehand (foreseeing what followed) yet he would do nothing in that kind,
(it not being his Calling) so long as that great Work lay upon him: But when he
had quit that more special Tie of the Care of men's Souls, He took himself then
to be ar more freedom; and (upon a Jan. 1634
License sent him by one that might The Bp. of Gloucester.
authorize him) he fell upon the cure of men's bodies. And being of great
sufficiency, his fame was quickly up. He was looked upon as a very
Trismegistus, and a second Aesculapius. He could do much at the diving into a
disease, and in applying of medicines proper and fit. Not like some that will
be tampering with that Profession, and give their doses Medici ex Co^. E. ra.
chapter p. 304
at Adventure. He was quick, yet in case of danger, he would weigh things well.
In desperate diseases he would adventure far, according to the Rules of Reason:
What he gave should be safe; he mixed all with his own hands, he would stoop to
the meanest; and serve all, at an easy rate. His recipees amounted not to the
half, nor quarterth part of a common Apothecaries Bill. He was blessed with good
success; and had such resort, especially toward his lattenend, out of our
own, and other counties, that he had not time, to sit at his own meals in
quiet. Many times he was quite tired out: so God took him to his rest.

2. In the words he would let fall. His tongue was a tree of life; his lips fed
many. Who ever came near him, should have something dropping, (if he did but
heed it) worth his carrying away with him. It Is true, he would be pleasant, and
jest more freely, then many did, or could well like. (Some of his best friends
wished it had been otherwise) but there will be something of humane infirmity
cleaving to us all. Yet the times are to be considered, and the nature of a
many with whom he had to deal, that could no more away, with a downright blow,
then some can away with sound doctrine. And let me say this, that know it,
there is never a prudent heart, but it might have picked sweet out of that, that
some did most of all distaste. Jobannes Grynaeus dicebat, pontifici Romans
Erasmum plus nocuisse, jocando: quam Luth* stomachan. Adamus in vit. Gryn. p.
378
Erasmus hurt the Pope more by his jesting, then Luther by his ruffling. This
man gave a deadlier blow to the iniquiry of the times, in his jocular way, then
the best of us all can do in our most serious undertakings.

Let me further add, he would be as serious as any man living, upon a just and
fit occasion; and would be as tender to troubled spirits, as heart could
desire. Vrbanus Regius, having one days converse with Luther, said it was one
of the Adam. in vit. Regii. p. 78
sweetest days that ever he had in all his life: Some can say as much of this
rare man; when they had him (as all might have had him) in the right vein.

3. In that faithful advice and counsel he would give; to all of all sorts upon
all emergent occasions. It was said in old time, they shall ask counsel at Abel
2 Samuel 20 18
: and so they ended their matters. The common conflux, of almost all in our
parts, has been still to his house. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart; so
did the Pro. 27. 9
sweetness of this man by his hearty counsel. He was to thee as another
N^sior; I found him ever a most faithful Achates; and therefore I made him (as
Tully did his Atticus) my constant Asylum, for many a year together. The light
I had from him was a good cynosura: His dexterous counsel, the Ariadne's
thread, that led me out of many a perplexing Labyrinth. He was as that famous
Augur in Iliad. ^^.
Homer; that could see things past, and present, and shrewdly guess also at
those that were to come. Senum confilia, Juvenum Lanceae. Chiliad. p. 607
Old men's counsels, (they say) are young men's lances. Bez. in eius vit. ad finem
Calvines were very prosperous: so were his. Many a young Beginner, and tired
conflicter; fetched all their best weapons out of this man's Armory.

4. In his preaching the Gospel so freely, for the most part of his last twenty
years. Freely he had received, and freely he would give. Not that he thought it
unlawful for a Minister to take maintenance orto take that maintenance that
has been publicly set aside in this land: for that He paid himself, and very
duly too (all the whole time of his preaching thus freely) to One that did
not much in the work of the Ministry; and He did it upon this ground al(o,
because He knew it to be His due. I dispute not his point with those that be
hampered in opinion; but heartily wish them, with all those, that in these
times be so extremely defective in their practice: to consider what has
befallen from the pens of pious men, that have been far enough off from being
this way interessed. Master Hoe tempor^ Christi vestimenta partiantur -- dum
praedia pauperum and decimos Ministrorum subducentes, illa in proprios ^sus
convert^n!; hau ^ dubie Christum ipsumdenuo crucifixuri, si in terris esset.
Hist. Chri. part. 3. p. 448
Cartwright writes (sharply I confess) they that take away the tithes of the
Ministers, and turn them to their own use; would doubtless crucify Christ
Himself again, if he were here upon Earth. In Cant. Sermon. 8 p. 102
Beza speaks of some, that leave Christ, as the soldiers did, which crucified
Him; either stark naked, or but sorrily clad: so to do (says he) is not to
love God, but the goods of God more then God. Doctor Upon Oha. p. 42, 44, 45
John Rainolds says, our Ancestors provided Houses, Glebeland, Tithes, and
other profits, fot the maintenance of Pastors; and a little after he says, The
Churches goods allotted to the maintenance of Pastors and Teachers, are not
profane but sacred: and therefore the sin of them, that purloine them is
sacrilege, not theft, wherein God is spoiled Prove. 20. 25
. It Is a snare to devour that that is holy: and after vows to make enquiry.
Anan^as and Saphira were made a dreadful spectacle, for nimming of a little, of
that that was set aside for God. The Eagle fired her whole nest, by one poor
piece of flesh plucked from the Altar. I can propose this the more freely,
because it is well known, I never had one mites worth in tithes, in all my
days, nor do I desire it. The people of this land are cursed with a curse, and
will not see the cause of it; their robbing of God, Mal. 3. 8, 9. in tithes and
offerings. When shall we prove God, and see if he will not pour us out a
blessing, Mal. 3. 10. It would be a great joy to some, that shall get nothing
by it, to hear the Israel of God, tuning it out once again before the Lord
Deuteronomy. 26 13, 14 Analys. in loc.
: I have brought away the hallowed things, out of mine house: I have not taken
away ought thereof, for any unclean (that is common) use; says [c] J^nius. For
then they might say with heart and hope, Lord look down from thy holy
habitation; and bless thy people, and the Land that thou have given us,
Deuter. 26. 15.

The practice of this knowing man, will sway with some; that was such a burning
and shining lamp. The more to be admired, that it blazed so long, and so
clearly too, without any of this sublunary oil. His mind was so well a-paid,
with his small gain in Physic, together with what he had of his own temporal
estate, that he would accept of nothing for his preaching, of any man living;
though never so much pressed and tendered. He took not himself bound, (as the
case stood) to the labor of the Ministry; there being another incumbent in the
place. What he did was merely in love to God, and men's souls. He met with many
diversions; the tempests of the times; His own domestic troubles: age creeping
one: store of sick and sad people; recourse of all sorts; so that he had scarce
an hour Ursinus was then the most busy, when 'twas thought he was least
busy. Jun. in Orat. funcb. This man made his Sermon when 'twas least imagined.
free for study; yet nothing would take him off from this employment, till God
took him off from all his labors.

5. In his living down the iniquity of the times. He did not only cry it down
in his public preaching, but gave it a more deadly blow in his contrary
walking. Noah condemned the world, more by what he Heb. 11. 7
did, then by what he said. The way this man took, put some to a stand: caused
others to relent and repent, and set some the more on, in the good and right
way; whilst they had his pattern, that could not be contradicted. Now that
He Is gone we have an harder task; but God will carry on his own work. VII


7. For his self-denial. This is in every man's mouth: but hardly to be had in
any man's practice. Self has ever been, is and will be the great Diana, for
all men's fair pretenses. We read of him that could give golden Ruth 4. 4, 6
words; but when it came to the point, he would not mar his inheritance. Self
has too great a stroke in the best of us all: both Preachers and Professors,
in Church and Commonwealth. It began to work betimes; we see in Paul's days,
all sought their own things, Phil. 2. 21. It Is now grown to a greater head, in
this age: when we neither eat, nor drink, nor fast, nor pray, nor do any thing
(to speak of) but too too apparently still Zac. 7. 5, 6
for our selves. How much then was this brave man to be admired! seeing all
that knew him, can bear him witness, how far he surpassed in this rare grace!
He could deny himself in his own understanding, and go after God in a way that
he knew Heb. 11. 8
not, in his own Will: when He that is above would lead him in a way that he
would Joh. 21 18
not: and in his own affections too; when he came to be crossed in what he could
have most desired; ruling them by reason and religion (as Aristotle would say,
(...). Hesych. page 14.
a wise man should) subjecting himself to bear with quietness, what could not
be helped, without raising of too much dust. It Is strange to see how far he
could deny himself, in apparel, diet, tendance; and in what not!

All that would be Christ's Disciples, are to fetch out this mark. It Is to be
our first and last work; that we may Mat. 16. 24
take up our cross and go after him. It Is self that spoils all. It lies as a
Jezabel in all our bosoms; and opens the door for the foulest enormities. It
wants no varnish, for that that is of foul aspect; out comes its plausible
arguments; and it has its seconds to sooth thee, when thou Pss. 49. 18
do well to thy self. It has too great an hand, upon the very best men in
the Jer. 45, 5
very worst times. We must seeto self; and see that self be subdued. Cut off
that hand and foot that offends. Let sinful self die; and we our own selves
(that have neither lived nor died to our selves) shall be sure to have our
selves (our souls and bodies) saved in the day of Christ Jesus.

VIII.
8. For his contempt of the world. He had gotten the start of most men in that
particular. He would be beating upon this point mainly, both in his public
preaching, and in his private conference, and showed the reality of what he
pressed, when he came to act himself. He could not say, as Luther did, he never
had temptation that way; but he kept himself far from any noted taint; nay from
the least suspicion of that foul crime, with famous Alienus fuit ab omni
Avaritiae suspitione. vel minima. Abd Aston in vit. p. 34
Whitakers. I have heard him often say, when he had things under his hand, he
still charged his servants to do what few men practice; never to set in corn,
nor to bring home cattle, but to take as the Market would afford. All in these
parts know, he was far enough off from the using of indirect means to get;
and I never knew any more willing to part with money, upon a just and fit
occasion, then he was. It Is well known, he gave over a living of good value;
one of the best in all our parts, above twenty years before his death; and
betook himself to a poor little corner, from which he would never be
withdrawn; no more then Ludovic. Lucius in ejus. vit.
Musculus from his Berne. And even there he might have picked men's purses, if he
had been this way given. I have seen him many and many a time, put back money,
and take but a small matter, from those that were able, and would have
willingly given him more; They would force him to take it, but he would utterly
refuse it.

The greatest part of men are willing he should go on in this way by himself;
few, or none care to foot it after him. All sorts be seeking great things;
Though the world was never more ticklish. It Is or should be well known, The
love of the world, and of the Father, be not compatible. It deadens our
spirits; bites us sore; yet will our hearts be hankering that way. Our Religion
is made a scorn by it, to those that be but for the pot and pipe? when they
see some of us, looking up toward God, yet bending our course so directly
toward 1 Timothy 6. ^
gain, as if it were the only godliness. It Is sad to see some that erst-while
would strain at the least gnat; swallowing down Camels without any regret.
Paul speaks of such with weeping, as of (...) phil. 3. 18 See Bez. in loc.
the enemies (with a witness) of the Cross of Christ; and their end will be
doleful, if they go on still to mind earthly things. See to the world; (though
we must be in it, and may have to do with it) that we love it not. Sue out our
divorce, and do it more fully; be more perfectly linkt to our head; by whom the
world is crucified unto us, and we unto the world; tugge hard for a further
supply of spirit and of grace; keeping our eyes more fully fixed upon the City,
that has foundations, and the world will fall under our feet.

IX.
9. For his great humility. This was the grace that graced all the good that
was in him. He would be often speaking of what he heard concerning Doctor John
Rainolds Dr. Smith Bishop of Glouces. that made the large preface before the
great Church Bibles.
one would say it, that knew it. He was as learned a man as any was in the
world; as godly, as learned; and as humble, as godly. This man loved and
reverenced the Doctor; and trod in his steps. He left us a rare extract in
humility. He could speak with tongues more then we all; yet would he never make
use of them in the public Congregation. He would honor all men; acknowledge
the gifts and parts of those that were far below him; and rejoice in them; as
Acts and Mon. Vol. 3. p. 153
Hooper in the blind boy. He would not meddle in things that were too high,
nor entrench upon that that was beyond his sphere. He would not stand in the
place of great men. He could refuse honors, Ludovic. Lucius in e^us vita
as Musculus did; and content himself with plain and mean things. Caj^tan (the
Rainolds conf. 72
flower of the Cardinals) would never be in his silks, nor braveries; but keep
his Epist ante eius comm. in proverb.
old fashion to his lives end. Camerar. in tius vit. p. 66
Melanchthon would not disdain to do that, that the meanest servant would
scarcely have put his hand to. So here, and he would bear things that went
awry, with very much temper. Moderation he would press, and moderation he
would practice. Adam in vit. p. 20
Staupicius said to Luther concerning his own government; in the first three
years. He did all according to the utmost rigor; and that would not do: in the
next three years he did all according to the Laws and Councels of the
Ancestors, and that would not hit; in the third Triennial, He did all
according to the Will of God; and yet that would not succeed. And then he was
feign to be content with what he could have.

I touch not on this, for the heartning on of any in any base or vile way; but
to help my self, and some others of pious dispositions to a fitter medicine for
things amiss, then some-whiles we hit on. An Artist will be loath to pitch
upon that to mend things; which will make them worse. Let this man's pattern
(together with brave Acts and Mon. Vol. 3. p. 633
Cranmers) be pasted up before our faces. It Is not for us to fill the Houses,
Congregations, places, where we come with combustion; nor to cast them into
broiles, by bitterness. When we have the repute of Lambs abroad; we must not
be lions at home. God has called us to peace. The servant of the Lord must not
strive, but be gentle to all men. The words of the wise will be heard in quiet,
more then the cry of him that rules among fools. It Is better to be of an
humble spirit with the lowly; then to divide the spoil with the proud. All our
things are to be done in charity; and none thorough strife, nor vainglory.
This prudent man, p. 11. and 49. and 56
minds us more then once or twice in the ensuing Tract that there is no such
power in the Church, as some look after; seeing all the power the Church has
as Church; is rather Ministerial then authoritative: 'Twas once looked upon as
an hateful crime, to be Lording it over Gods heritage. We may not come nigh
that, that has such an ill resent. By soaring too high, we have lost our
selves too much already. We are brought to the dust, and laid full low; and
must all of us now learn to bear the shame of it. Holy Bradfords old medicine
is the best hope that is left us. Acts and Mon. Vol. 3. p. 307
Repent, repent. It will strike the stroke, if we repent in deed, and repent in
truth; and repent of that that has let in the storm upon us. (But there is
little of that in sight, yet) Hezekiah humbled himself, and found it a fit
salve for such a disease as ours is. If we can hit it right, to humble our
selves under the mighty hand of God; we shall be exalted in the true and due
time, 1 Pet. 5. 6.

Here Is a taste, and but a little taste (in this that is thus set forth) of the
precious liquor, that was poured into this earthen vessel. If I should mention
the quickness of his apprehension, the strength of his memory; His sense of
the public evils; his passing by offenses, his special regard to such as loved
their wives, and Ministers; and the like; where should I end that have exceeded
already? These and his other eminencies would be laid in oil and lime by him
that has a better pencil. I have collected some scattered fragments, only,
for mine own, and some others, use; and have assayed to show those, that be
more remote, that we had more in his life, then they had in his writings.

Toward his latter end, he met with some pinching griefs, which he bare with
invincible fortitude; he would submit, because it was Gods will to have him so
exercised. All of us must look to drink of the self-same cup; our last days
commonly be our worst days, in Psalm. 71. argum.
as Mollerus observes, the clouds will be returning then after the rain. We
must be taught to speak it out, that we be but pilgrims: We must be more truly
taken off from the World: more ripened and mellowed; and seasoned for God; and
be made more serious in all our undertakings. Melanchthon would say, Si nibil
curarem, nihil orar rem. Adam. in ^ius vit p. 258
if he had no cares, he would have no prayers. The comfort is, the time is but
short: the most and best of our treasure is gone before, our hope is laid up in
Heaven. Get we more communion with God; more faith, more patience; and put on
the whole Armor of God; and we shall be able to stand, and withstand, in the
evil day.

This knowing man looked upon storms impending; r^joycing, he should be in his
grave before their fall; whether he came, according to the (...) Job 5, 26
ascending of a shock of corn in his season. The Sabbath day was the last day
of his life. The strict observation whereof, I have heard him press: He would
say, we should go to sleep that night with meat in our mouths (as it were,)
That same Sept. 21 1656
Lords day he preached twice, taking his leave of the world, with pressing
faith in God. He repeated both his Sermons that night in his Family, somewhat
more largely then usually: He read his Chapter also; went to prayer and to
bed, and died immediately, by that time the words were well out of his mouth.
None of us must choose his own death; but who can desire to die better then
calling upon God, as Stephen did. He would often say, (if God saw it fit,) one
had better die of a quick, then of a lingering death: suiting to Caesar's Sueton.
in Jul. p. 65
speech. The suddenness of the stroke was great trouble to some of us at the
first; but since we have collected our thoughts, We must needs say, Gods way is
the best. If he had had time, he would have been apt to dispute, and so to have
Adamus in ^ius vit. p. 261
been too hard for us all. Justus Jonas, Luthers great friend had much ado at
his death, to fasten upon any manner of comfort. It has been the case of many
a choice man. God prevented it here.

This present Tract, is his last and best; I am sure of most use. It Is but a
piece of what was intended; as appears by the paper that was last tackt up for
it; whereof, the fourth part is not written. But he had the justest excuse (as
Vrsine for his inchoate Comment upon Isaiah) being Morte pr*eveniente (quae
omnium justissima ^st excusatio) Joh* Zacha* riae filius. in Ep. Ded
taken off by death. If he had lived to review it, it would have been more
polite. But blessed be the Lord, we have it as it is. Who can sufficiently
admire the wisdom of God, in setting of this able pen to work, upon such an
useful subject? for the laying a firm foundation, for a trembling heart to
ground it self upon; when it may see it clearly made good, that it may safely
pitch upon that Translation of the holy Scripture, that's set before it in its
native tongue. God stirred up the Spirit of this great Disputer, to put in a
seasonable and a substantial bar, in a needful time, when some curious and
quaint heads, opened the door so dangerously against all Translations. Other
opinions overthrow the faith of some few; but this strikes at the root, and
endeavors to destroy the faith of all that are not skilled in the Original
Tongues. Pr^f. before Bains. Ephesians.
Dr. Sibbs that worthy Divine, mine ancient acquaintance, and loving friend,
has a pretty observation; God has raised up men (says he) and gifted them
proportionably to the times, to fence his truth, when it has been opposed by
men of stronger wits; as the ancient Fathers to deal with the Pagans and proud
Heretics; and Austin, to vindicate Gods Predestination and free Grace, out of
the hands of the enemies of Grace, and Flatterers of Nature. So here, he moved
the heart of this man of sublime parts, that could ^rapple with the strongest,
and argue with the subtillest, to clear this point about Translations so fully,
that there is no color of scruple left now for the poor soul, that is willing to
close with the eternal Truth of God, set before it in its own Mothers Tongue.

So that I cannot but call upon, and encourage all much, that tender their own
weal, to fall on with more boldness and eagerness, upon the reading of the
holy Scriptures, seeing now it is so infallibly proved by this man of a
thousand, that it is the very Word of God that's reached to them in that
Translation, that they have before them in the tongue, wherein they were borne.
We of this Nation have great cause to bless God, for that King James.
learned Prince, that caused our last and best Translation: which has gained
an high Testimony, from a Walaeus de Sab. p* 166 Accura*tissima Ver^io
Anglicana.
learned Writer of a foreign Country: when he calls it the most accurate
Translation of the English.

Honor we then the reading of the Word of God, 1. In the public Congregation,
Deuteronomy. 31. 11. Ezra 8. 2, 3. Act. 15. 21. that is attended with the greatest
blessing, Ezra 8. 14, 16. Nehem. 13. 1, 3. 2. In our private houses, 2 Reg. 22.
10. Jer. 36. 12. 15, 16. 3. In our proper Closets, or where we can have our
opportunities. See Acts 8. 30. Apoc. 1. 3.

Read so as we read all, Josh. 8. 34, 35. though it be never so difficult,
it is given by inspiration, and it is profitable. The very Lavat* in Josh. 19. p.
64.
Craggs and Rocks have their physical he bs. We are Pascimur apertis exercemur
obscuris. Par. ex Aug. Praef. ante Genesis p. 13.
fed by the clear, and tried by the obscure. There Is an Pemble Pers. Mon. p. 22
immanent, where is not a transient power to edify. Something is a going when we
little think it: If it be but to humble us, that we cannot see the reason of
the setting those hard names together; The wisdom of God is there, though man
cannot fathom it; Besides, it keeps our hearts in order; and gives us cause of
thanks, when we meet with other things that be more facile, in things that be
most essential. And read in Parrs Grounds. p. 28, 29
order; young Beginners, may take the New Testament first, (as being the
easier,) and the Old after it. The Books be writ in Order, (Luke 1. 3.) Let
them be read in Order. Work goes on best, when men take it as it is before
them. He that reads confusedly, will come to little. He that takes the Bible
as it lies, will get most good by it. See Neh. 8. 13, 14. Read every day,
Josh. 1. 8. all the days of our lives, Parrs Grounds. p. 29
Deuteronomy. 17. 19. Psalm. 119. 96. Alphonsus King of Arragon, read the Bible over
fourteen times, with some Comments upon it. Read in thine own book; the King
was to write him out a Copy of the Law for his own peculiar use, Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
Parrs Grounds. p. 32
Theodesius the second had writ out the New Testament with his own hand. Men
shoot best in their own Bows: work best with their own Tools. David did best
with his own Scrip, and Sling. The side of the leaf is remembered, when the
chapter and verse cannot be thought on. Read with the greatest reverence, for
it is the Word of God, See, Neh. 8. 3. 5, 6. with the best understanding, Mat.
24. 15. with sincerest affection; bringing our selves to the Bible, not the
Bible to us. A Veil is upon them, that comes with prejudice, 2 Cor. 3. 14. and
read with hearty prayer unto God, thar he will open our eyes, Psalm. 119. 18.
and sanctify our hearts, Psalm. 119. 36. and order our steps, Psalm. 119. 133.
It will be else as a book sealed up to us. See Isa. 29. 11, 12.

The result of all is this. We must so read, and so hear besides, that there
may be both an holy faith, and an holy life too. Nor this alone, not that by
its own self: What God has set together, let not us put asunder. 'Twill but
little avail a man to be sound in his opinion, if he be loose in his
conversation; without holiness there is no seeing God, Heb. 12. 14. Nor will
strictness of Life be much advantageous, where there be rotten principles. He
was utterly unclean (in the Law) that had the Leprosy in his head: and (under
the Gospel) men of corrupt minds, have but a sad character for all their form
of godliness. See 2 Timothy 3. 5, 8, 13. Adam. in vit. Bull ingeri. p. 484
Swenck feldius was a man of plausible behavior; and so was Sie^d: ^, 10
Rotman too, for a while. It Is no mean stroke to be given over to strong
delusion. 2 The^. 2. 11, 12. Nor was it a light thing, which they received as a
recompense of their error, and yet it was but meet too, Romans 1. 27. See then,
that our faith be most holy, Jude 20. and that our lives be according 2 Pet. 3.
12. in all holy Ev (...)
conversations and godlinesses: How shall we hold up our faces, before God,
before men, in all cases, conditions; and appear without spot in the day of
Christ Jesus?

Give attendance to reading. It Is too little thought on, even of some
well-minded people. The Bible is the Book of Books; a full Storehouse. There
be Rules for all sorts of persons, young and old, Tit. 2. 2, 3. rich and poor;
in all manner of conditions, prosperous and adverse; in all cases, whatsoever
we shall be put upon; The Sea Ex, 23. 13 See 1 These. 5. 22.
exactest Rules too, to keep a man so far from usurie, that he shall not be as
anusurer, Exodus 22. 25. And those that will be for his greatest glory too,
Deuteronomy. 4. 6, 7, 8. even in the eyes of common men. Here we shall meet with that
that will enlighten our eyes, Psalm. 119. 130. Dan. 9. 2. humble our hearts,
Deuteronomy. 17. 20. kill our sins, Psalm. 119. 9. enable us against Satan, and all his
temptations, 1 John 2. 14. Matthew. 4. 4, 7, 10. strengthen our faith, Romans 10.
8. Though we have much ado to believe what we read sometimes; yet reading will
master it. Adam. in vit. Lutheri p. 165
Antonius Musa complained to Luther, he had much ado his own self to believe,
what he preached to others; Luther was glad there was any as bad as himself,
but the Word helped rhem, and it will help us. Here we shall have that, that
will overawe our hearts, Psalm. 119. 161. that will increase our patience and
our comfort, Romans 15. 4. Here we shall have that, that will help in life, Prove.
16. 22. 23. and support in death, Luke 2. 29.

And read we shall, again and again too. If 1. We be so truly taken up with
God: we shall then look upon the Scriptures as upon his Hilders. Ps. 51. p. 455
love letters, Hos. 8. 12. 2. If we so truly taste the sweet that's there. See 1
Pet. 2. 2, 3. If we taste we shall desire. 3. If we be so much advantaged by
the use of the other Ordinances. See Acts 8. 30. when he had been at Jerusalem.
So Acts 17. 11. 4. If we be so far above the world, as it does become us.
Martha was cumbred and could not hear, no more then we can read when we be so
clutter'd; but Mary sat down at Christ's feet, Luke 10. 41, 42. 5. If we be so
willing to order our steps, to be so exact in our doings; then we shall see to
that word that's a light and a lamp, Psalm. 119. 105. See 2 Reg. 22. 16. and 23.
2, 25. 6. If our hearts be so well be sprinkled with the blood of Christ; See
Heb. 9. 19. and Exodus 24. 7. 7. If we be so humbled under the sense of that
body of death we have about us; See how it was with Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 23,
30. when his heart was touched with the wickedness of the time. He read, and
so shall we when we have a sense of the sin that is in us.

This Man of God, in this short, but sweet and elaborate discourse that
follows; has cleared the way daintily, for poor, plain Christians, to build
upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, in those Translations, that
God in his great mercy, has set before them. Here Is the price put into Pro.
17. 16
the hand, where is the heart to use it? we can but call on men. It Is God must
persuade Japhet, to dwell in the Tents of Shem. He was touching a little, and
but a little, upon man's imperfections, and upon the working of grace, whilst
it is here in this life; and God took him to the place where the souls of the
just are made perfect, where grace is completed in glory.

This brief and pithy piece, has lien longer upon mine hand then I am
wellpleased with. This I can say, 1. It was written in his fast hand; and so it
was the longer work ere it could be picked out perfectly; by my self and some
others, that best knew his writing. He was like Adam, in vit, Muse^li, p. 374
Bucer in this, he his own self could not read his own hand, sometimes in a
month after he had writ it. 2. I have been let by sickness, much upon my
self, and some also in those that be near me; besides some other urgent
occasions. 3. Not being cut out for work of this nature, I had the more ado to
satissie my self in this that's let abroad (such as it is) at the last.

I have been more large by far then I intended: but it is for a friend, to
whose memory I owe, as much as Philemon did to Paul, more then I can pay. 2.
It Is for a man of men, the Phoenix of his Age, as 'twas said of Adam. in vit.
p. 23^
Beza. 3. Besides, it is all that I intend (in this kind) to trouble the world
withal. God grant his blessing may attend it. I remain

Thine in Christ Jesus. VAL. MARSHALL.
Elmore, May the 20. 1658.
A Resolution of certain Cases to clear some doubts concerning my former
Writings.
1. Of the Scriptures.
IN all buildings the maine is to settle the Foundation. First of all, next to
Christ the foundation is laid upon the Prophets and Apostles. So Paul, (are
built upon the foundation of Ephesians. 2. 20
the Apostles and Prophets) meaning the foundation which the Apostles and
Prophets laid: Laid where? In their doctrine Prelect. 17. p. 140 Joh. 5. 39
contained in their Writings: So Doctor John Rainolds the famous. Hence that of
Christ, search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life. By
which place it is put beyond all Queries and Question, that the Scriptures are
the foundation of Religion, since in them is said, Ye think (and ye think well
in it) to have eternal life. So again Mat. 22. 29
ye err (says Christ to the Sadd^ces) Act. 18. 28
not knowing the Scriptures. And again, Apollos showed, and convinced the Jews
publicly by the Scriptures, that Jesus was Christ: and once more, all 2 Timothy
3. 16
Scripture is given by inspiration (by the breath of God.) Now by Scripture is
meant the Word of God written. Written then, Printed now; (by the way note and
grant that written and printed come all to one; written then, printed now) so
then by Scriptures we mean the Word of God written.

Now here the first case is, What ground there is that we should ground our
selves on the Scriptures, since for a matter of two thousand years the Church
was without Scripture, and many went to heaven when there was (before Moses) no
Scripture at all, and the Christian Church was best and purest before the New
Testament was written at all? This was pleaded in the Council of Trent to
justle out the Scriptures, and to place Traditions in the place of the
Scriptures. All this should not shake and totter the heart of a Christian.
Before Moses the Lord did teach by tradition, without Scripture, and the Church
did by the providence of God walk by as certain rules then, as now. For this
they who Tit. of Traditions
will may see Dr. Abbot against Bishop.

Many Reasons are given why then the written word was not necessary as it is
now; as that the Church was in families: after it came to be all one Nation
over, now over all Nations. As also that the Patriarchs then had a spirit we
have not. Anabaptists say they have an infallible spirit, which Wotton calls (a
lewd opinion) yet they say this as only for themselves But sure the
Patriarchs, and the Church under the Patriarchs, had a certain and infallible
rule to walk by, which was to them as the Scriptures are to us Their rule was
the Word of God (but not written) ours is the same Word of God (but written) It
is enough that the Law has now tied us to the Word of God written. And for the
Apostles time, the Apostles, men immediately inspired being living, and other
infallible men (not Apostles) as Mark, Luke, there was no such necessity to
have the Word of God written, as there was after. Wherefore they did provide
for this ere they died, and committed the Word of God to writing, when there
should be no such men to consult with.

Let us then sit down by the Scriptures, the Word of God written, as the only
sure card, and rule to guide us in all matters of faith, and life: For if we
leave this once, there is nothing but Sea and Air, no place for this poor
Dove, this poor soul of ours to rest her foot; without which, when, and where
to stay, none can tell.

That then we may not run from opinion to opinion, from Christ to Christ, from
Church to church, till we have run our selves out of all, our only sure way is
to fly to the Scriptures, to the written Word of God, as to an Anchour, that
so we may have hope, if hope, then faith.

Before we go further we must take it as clear, that by Scriptures, Christ and
his Apostles do mean the Word of God written. Our enquiry is, What written
word? Not the Original Copy, for that was in the Ark, and there only, and not
1 King. 8. 9 Heb. 9. 4
to be seen of every body, if of any body, but the high Priest: and I know
nothing but those Tables perished with the Temple. Nor can it be, that when he
did call upon them to search the Scriptures he did send them to the Ark, which
then was not. I doubt not but he meant by the Scriptures, the writings of Moses
and the Prophets. Now who can think that Christ and his Apostles did turn over
the Church and people of God to the Scriptures written by Moses and the
Prophets own hands? those were not then extant, nor when extant to be seen of
every body. What then? when he bade them search the Scriptures, he must needs
mean some transcribed Copies, or some Translations For Copies in the Hebrew, I
doubt me whether the common people did then understand the Hebrew, and amongst
the Bereans, who did search the Scriptures, I think it past question, that
there were many ordinary people, and perhaps Cobblers or Tailors, or such, as Dr
J. Rainolds seems to judge.

If this be granted that those who were commanded to search the Scriptures, and
commended for searching the Scriptures, did not, could not search the Original
Hebrew, what shall we think then? No other can be imagined but some
Translations, which they did understand, Syriack, Chaldee, but chiefly the
Greek Translation, which the most, if not all, understood.

But you will say, the Translators were subject to mistake, and err, or worse,
being no Prophets; and if they did understand the Hebrew, yet since they could
not come by the first Original Copy, they must needs have recourse to some
transcribed Copies. Whether the Church were to repair to Translations, or to
transcribed Copies, all comes to one, since neither Transcribers nor Translators
were Prophets. Very good men let them be, yet men they were, and subject to
error. May I speak my Opinion, I think when Christ said search the
Scriptures, he meant the Sc iptures translated into Greek, and by Scriptures,
the Apostles meant the Greek Translation, which tongue, if not in Christ's time,
yet in the Apostles times in a manner all did understand. Wherefore when the
Apostle says (is given by inspiration, and is profitable) he means it is
profitable to be read, or heard read in the Greek Translation. And the rather
am I of this mind, because Scholars do know that the New Testament does cite
the places out of the Old Testament according to the Greek Translation, and
most an end are very punctual in it. However, whither we look on Translations,
or Transcriptions, since the first Table written by God himself was lost with
the Temple, and the Original Greek Copy of the Translation of the Old Testament
was, the Learned think, (and I think they think well in it) burned by Julius
Coesars Army, when they fired Alexandria, and the famous Library there.

The Ephesians were built on the Prophets and Apostles; the Apostles they had
with them, but the Prophets were dead and gone; Malachi was the last; the
Apostles they might consult with and they had their writings, but for the
writings of the Prophets, the Ephesians being Gentiles (I take it for granted)
understood not the Hebrew, at least the body of them, but being Grecians, they
might and did understand the Greek translation, which I doubt not was purer
then, then it is now: yet then being but a translation, and the Original it
self but carried up and down in transcribed Copies, it is consented unto by all
parties, that the Translators and Transcribers might err, being not Prophets,
nor endued with Nullos alios libros Canonicos babemus five veteris five Novi
Testamentiquam quos Apostoli probaverunt atque Ecclesi^e tradiderunt. Can. l.
2. cap. 7
that infallible spirit in translating, or transcribing, as Moses and the
Prophets were in their Original writings.

The tentation lies on this side, how the Ephesians then, and much more since
there are no Prophets, no Apostles, no nor any infallible spirits in the
Church, how can we build on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles now,
since the Scriptures in their translated Copies are not free from all possible
corruptions, in the Copies we have either by transcribers or translators

Besides, many are unlearned, and cannot read a Letter. For these last, though
they cannot read, yet they can hear it read to them. Do not we see many blind
men in Schools come to great learning by hearing others read Philosophy, and
Divinity, and the body of other Arts and Sciences to them? and so it is with
the Scriptures, they cannot read them, but they can hear them read and preached
by others.

Dr. Jackson in his first book of his Commentaries on the Creed, and Mr. John
Goodwin in a set and large Treatise to justify the authority of the
Scriptures, have showed much learning, and taken great pains in this Argument.
But like two Elephants, they both swim so deep, that the benefit and comfort
of it can reach but to a few, we must fight lower and in a briefer way (least
we weary the Reader and charge the Printer) and set down the brief of the
matter in it, so that common people, and men of ordinary brains, (who are most
subject to Tentation) may find a way to spell out the right of this, how faith
can be had, and the soul built on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
since this foundation was in their Writings, and their Writings are under no
other notion to any, but either the Original transcribed or translated.

Take it either way, it is done by ordinary men, not by Prophets or * postles,
and so subject to mistake, insomuch that Cajetan was wont to say, That to
believe translations of the Scripture was not to believe the Word of God, but
the words of men: Yet the Papist is more to seek then the Protestant; for the
Papist has no Translation to compare as we have: most of them allow, no not
Scholars to correct their translations, as we all do. The Papist does allow no
translation to be read in Churches, no nor in Houses (but under caution) but
the Latin; none in the mothertongue, which all the people understand. And
therefore they are to take up their faith on the credit of the Priest, and he
many times little wiser then a fool, little better then a son of Belial.

Hist. of Trent. p. 155.
Cajetan did much rely on the words of Hierome, who said, That to prophecy and
write holy Books proceeded from the Holy Ghost, but to translate them into
another tongue was a work of humane skill. Nay, for the Originals themselves
Wotton is bold to Print, That no man can tell what the signification of the
Hebrew and Greek Word is, even in the Bible, but by the report of man; And
another as learned as he tells us, That we can know further that that is the
Hebrew tongue, or Greek tongue, wherein the Old and New Testaments are in the
Originals, but by the credit of men, who tell us so.

In the Council of Trent, there were many great wits, and men of great learning
too, who did toss this Argument up and down about Translations, and when they
had done, left it little better then they found it. Upon these grounds the
third of the Popish Articles, (passing under the name of Wrights Articles) in
terms is thus. All Protestants who are ignorant of the Greek and Latin
Tongues are Infidels: and why? because (forsooth) he relies upon the Ministers,
who may and do err. The second Article is, That all learned Protestants are
Infidels; so that by his sentence, all Protestants, learned and unlearned are
Infidels, because they rely on a private spirit. Thus with him and the rest of
that Tribe, all Protestants are damned. All this is to take us off from the
Scriptures, and to cast us, and our consciences on the authority of the Church.

We list not to dispute with them about the Infallibility of that which they
call their Church. For I doubt not but that the learned among them do not
themselves believe what themselves do write. But our work lies not in that
road. We grant what they would have as touching the Church by way of Ministry;
but for that which they call the Churches Authority, we know not any such
authority, the Church as Church, 2 Cor. 1. ^^
being not a Domination, but a Ministration.

But that we may not leave any rubb in the consciences of the weak, as touching
the authority of the Scriptures, as touching the Originals and Translations, we
will shut up all in brief.

For the Originals, though we have not the Primitive Copies written by the
finger of God in the Tables, or by Moses and the Prophets in the Hebrew, or by
the Apostles, and the rest in the Greek for the New Testament, yet we have
Copies in both languages, which Copies vary not from the Primitive writings in
any matter which may stumble any. This concerns only the learned, and they
know that by consent of all parties, the most learned on all sides amongst
Christians do shake hands in this, that God by his providence has preserved
them incorrupt.

What if there be variety of readings in some Copies? and some mistakes in
writing or Printing? this makes nothing against our doctrine, since for all this
the fountain runs clear, and if the fountain be not clear all translations
must needs be muddie.

Besides, it is a saying of a wise Philosopher, That, what some say is like to
be false, what many say, may be false; But what all say is more then like to be
true. Now Christians of all parties do agree, as touching the Originals that
they are kept pure: Only some of and among the Papists, passionate men do bite
at the Originals; but herein they do but bl^t their own vulgar translation,
since they confess it to be drawn out of the Originals. I confess some men by
their picking quarrels with the Originals, as a matter whereof they talk, as
though there were no certainty of faith as touching them, have troubled the
spirits of some men with a thorny tentation, which my b^sinesse is to do what I
can to remove, which I now endeavor to do as briefly as I can.

The foundation I first lay is, That we may have a certainty moral of things
whereof we have no evidence: which is sufficient to settle us in an acquired
faith, free from all fear, and material doubt of the contrary. We believe
without making any question of it, that Scot. prole. Sent. q. 2. quart.
there is such a place as Rome, though we never saw it, that such a man is our
father, such a woman our mother, and we out of conscience do duties to them,
albeit we have no evident certainty of it, but by belief that such a Prince is
true heir to a Crown, and out of conscience we do perform obedience, and yet
we can have Howard. p: 37.
no more certainty of this but moral: For who has or can have an evidence of
this, that such an heir is the true begotten of such a King.

It Is agreed on by almost all Divines of all sides, that if one of the
Propositions be in the Scripture, and the other be but a moral certainty which
leaves no dubitation behind it, the conclusion binds the conscience. As thus,
every child is bound in conscience to honor his Parents (this is an act of
faith grounded on the Scripture) such or such a man is my father, this is but a
moral certainty, yet hence it follows, that in conscience I stand bound, in
conscience to honor such a man as my Father. And that he is my Father, all the
certainty I can have is but moral, built on the credit of my mother. If these
reasonings were not firm, it would destroy all Policy and Order in this life,
nor could Gods Law to honor father and mother bind the conscience, nor can a
man tell that he was baptized in his youth but by such Testimonies as these.

De conciliis l. 2. 0. 9.
Therefore I like that of Bellarmine, who stands upon it, that of such like
things a certainty may be had from the testimonies of men, in some sort*
comparable to natural evidence it self, for that it leaves no scruple or
dubitation in our minds: But what of all this? Why it shows that the general
consent of (in a manner) all Hebricians and Grecians in the Christian world,
consenting that our Originals are by the good hand of God preserved incorrupt,
and pure, is a sufficient persuasion, to breed a moral certainty answerable to
natural evidence, excluding all reasonable dubitation to the contrary.

That the Originals were for the provision and food of the souls of his Church
kept pure and incorrupt by the Prophets and Jews for the old; by the Apostles
and Christian Churches for the New Testament, Scot l. 1. D. 26. contra istam.
sealed up by St. John the Secretary of Christ, as Scotus calls him. Else the
Lord must have been wanting to his Church, which cannot be imagined. And that
acquired faith makes way for infused faith to act I have Lib. 3. D 34. q. 1. ad
questionem.
learned long since out of Scotus.

Thus the case stands. The Originals are to be received and believed. That the
Hebrew and Greek are the true Originals we believe by humane testimonies, which
leave the mind without perplexity, without all doubting, and so it follows,
that by man's testimony the Originals are to be received, and believed by us,
so that the heart stands free from any true cause of any doubting at all, which
being equivalent to the highest certainty that is, it cannot but lay a
foundation to build our faith upon, this certainty being a means by which we
come to the other of the Scriptures, being the last ground on which we build
our faith; we are not to look for demonstrations in arguments of this nature.
It Is a foolish thing to expect from a Mathematician to deal by persuasion: his
Art lies in evident and ocular demonstration. Now it is as absurd to expect
demonstration from an Orator or Moralist; his business lies in persuasion. But
yet in our point in hand, our persuasions must be grounded on such moral
certainty as is to us without question, and without fear of the contrary. It
is a piece of wise counsel of Aristotle, That it is Eth. l. 1. c. 3
the wisdom of a learned man so far forth to seek after proofs of truth in
any matter as the nature of the subject matter will bear. And it is agreed
upon, that in all learning, in the highest science of all, the principles are
proving, but not proved: For that which is the first cannot be proved by any
thing before it; else the first were not the first; as the first mover is never
moved And in all Inferior Sciences, the first principles of that Science, must
be proved in an higher School. Now the first principle in the School of Christ
is the Scriptures, which being the first is to prove, not to be proved but in
an higher School the School of heaven, by evidences unprovable, and
unreprovable evidences taken from the Prover, and Spirit of God. Of which
hereafter.

N 2 Of translations. How Anabaptists overthrow all Translations.
History of Trent. p. 155.
I No way like that of Cajetan, That to understand the Latin Translation, was
not to understand the infallible Word of God, but the word of the Translatours
subject to error. Though he took it from Hierome, that to write holy Books
proceeded from the Holy Ghost, but to translate them into another Tongue was a
work of humane skill. For if an Ambassador deliver his mind by an
Interpreter, are not the words of the Interpreter the words of the Ambassador?
Right, say you, if the Interpreter do it truly: So, say I, a Translation, is a
translation no further then he does translate, and interpret truly: for a
false translation, Verum and cus convertuntur.
as far as it is false, is no translation.

Can. lib. 2. cap. 14.
I have read in a great Papist, That it is a great error for a man to think,
that he can understand, or interpret the holy Scriptures without some peculiar
gift of the Holy Ghost. And since the Lord has commanded his people to hear
and read the word, and the common people cannot read the word, but in some
translation of other, that therefore translations are in special a special
Ordinance of God, and that therefore God being in his providence very careful,
that his Church shall not want sufficient provision for their souls, has
ever, does, and will ever so assist Translatours, that for the main they shall
not err. I am of mind, that there was never any Christian Church, but the
Lord did so hold the hands, and direct the pens of the translators, so that the
translations might well be called the Word of God.

The vulgar Latin (which the Papists out of a vein of opposition do advance
too much) is faulty enough, yet it is so sound, that I think many have been
led by it to their conversion. Why may I not think that those many who have
been converted from Popery in the Church of Rome, and joined themselves to our
Church, have been beholding for the most of them (next to God) to their vulgar
translation, as Martyr, Zanchius, Luther, Oecolampadius, and a many others?

The Ephesians were builded in their faith on the Prophets and Apostles: the
Apostles were living, but the Prophets were dead, and gone long since, and they
could no way build their faith on the Prophets, but on their writings: For 600.
years after Christ the Church used no translation but the Greek called the
seventy sixth. Se^en. l. 8 haeres. 13. Rain. prael. 28. p. 241. Bellar. cont. 1.
l. 1 ^. 20. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 18, c. 43
Now the writings of the Prophets in the Original were in Hebrew; and I take it
for granted, that the Ephesians being bred and borne Grecians, did not
understand the Hebrew tongue, and that therefore there were translations of the
Prophets, which translations were made by such men as were ordinary as ours
are, subject I confess to some error, but not such error, but that it did
serve to help the Church to faith, for the salvation of their souls.

In the Apostles time I know that they that did know the Apostles to be
Apostles, and that they did preach, they did preach as Apostles, they were to
take them at their words. But when they did hear them preach (as the Bereans
did not, so I think a Paul did not always speak in the Church by Revelation 1
Cor. 14. 5
many else) did not look on them as Apostles, and infallible speakers: And no
question there were many Pastors, and Teachers then, who, though many had more
then a common gift of prophesying, yet had not the infallible spirit of the
Apostles. Those Prophets had not the same supreme spirit which the Apostles
had (as says (to me) Rain. prael. 34. 299, 300.
the most Learned amongst the Learned) but yet, says he, they had a more
extraordinary spirit, (not to write, nor to translate, but) to interpret
Scripture then the ordinary Pastors and Teachers had: but I think that gift of
interpreting died with them.

Now what the Bereans did to Paul, so all stood bound to do to the ordinary
Pastors and Teachers, even to examine by the Scriptures, whither those things
they taught were right or not: And those who were thus to examine the Sermons
of the ordinary Pastors and Teachers, were to do it by the Greek Translation,
since many did not understand the Hebrew; and they that did understand the
Hebrew, yet were to do it (no question) by Transcripts made by ordinary men
after the Prophets ended with Malachi, which Transcripts of the Hebrew text
some quarrel at as done by ordinary gifted men, which were (they say) subject
to mistake in transcribing, as well as translatours might mistake in
translating: In which neither of them must be looked as free from all mistake.

Wotton says, and says truly, that many thousands were converted, Trial. c.
14 p. 243
and many Churches settled, by the preaching of the several Apostles sent abroad
to convert the world amongst the Jews and Gentiles, without the knowledge, and
before the penning of the Books of the New Testament; but that they did it
without the use and authority of the Old Testament, and the Word of God written
there, there is no proof, nor I think can there be any.

Besides the Apostles carried the Word of God in their bosoms, having that holy
Library in their Heads, by immediate and infalible inspiration. I doubt not but
the Ephesians were converted by Paul, but yet Paul when he did convert them,
did it by the truth of doctrine left behind them by the Prophets; which is
clear in that the Apostle makes the Prophets, the Foundation, as well as the
Apostles.

By Prophets, I take it for granted he means the writing Prophets of the Old
Testament, not the preaching Prophets of the New. And I take it also to be
clear of it self, that the Ephesians living so long after all those Prophets
were dead and gone, had their writings only; so then the Ephesians were
converted by the truth of doctrine left for them by the Prophets, and preached
to them by the Apostles.

I will also take it for granted till I hear, or read any deny it, that the
Ephesians understood not the Hebrew. (In which tongue the Prophets left their
doctrine as the Canon of the Church.) And hence it cannot but follow, that
(saving what help the Ephesians had from Paul) they were to have recourse to
the doctrine of the Prophets (not in Hebrew, which they understood not, but) in
some Translation of others, which without dispute must be the Greek translation
of the Seventy, there then being no other translations: The Ephesians being
also not Jews, but Grecians.

The resolution 1. As touching the Originals. 2. As touching the Translations.


1. I cannot but confess that it sometimes makes my heart ache, when I
seriously consider what is said, That we cannot assure our selves that the
Hebrew in the Old Testament, and the Greek in the New, are the right Hebrew and
Greek, any further then our Masters and Tutors, and the General consent of all
the Learned in the world do so say, not one dissenting. But yet say these,
since the Apostles, there are no men in the world but are subject to deceive,
and to be deceived. All infallibility in matters of this nature having long
since left the world. Again, too like unto this is that of Master Wotton, who
Answ. to Art. 3
cantell (says he) what the signification of the Hebrew and Greek words is even
in the Bible, but by the report of men? And to the like purpose is that
observation, That the two Tables written immediately by Moses and the Prophets,
and the Greek Copies immediately penned by the Apostles, and Apostolical men
are all lost, or not to be made use of, except by a very few. And that we have
none in Hebrew or Greek, but what are transcribed. Now transcribers are
ordinary men, subject to mistake, may fail, having no unerring spirit to hold
their hands in writing

These be terrible blasts, and do little else when they meet with a weak head
and heart, but open the door to Atheism, and quite to fling off the bridle,
which only can hold them and us in the ways of truth and piety: this is to
fill the conceits I have r^ad how Austin (contra Faustum) calls the Jews
Scriniarios Ecclesiae christi; that is the Keeppers of the Rolls of the Church
i e. the Scriptures* Can. 588.
of men with evil thoughts against the Purity of the Originals: And if the
Fountains run not clear, the Translation cannot be clean.

The best is, this does concern the learned, who can best get out of such
scruples as these, it being made plain to them by the Jews themselves (no
friends to Christian Religion) That the Hebrew Text is curiously preserved by
them in its integrity. For if the Oracles of God were (as they were, Romans 3.
2.) committed them, it deeply concerns the Providence of God to look to it,
that the Jews should keep the Oracles of God not only safe but pure, not
only from Rain. Conf.
not being lost, but also from not being corrupted.

It Is out of question that the same God, who committed the Oracles to the Jews,
did also take care that they should preserve them fafe and sure, incorrupt and
pure.

It is the use of Saint Paul, much to follow the Greek translation, which does
use to use the (...)
Greek word translated Oracles, to mean the Scriptures of Moses and the
Prophets. And what if there be scapes in some Copies, yet other Copies run
clear? But since this concerns the Learned, whom I much look not after, from
the Originals, let us turn to the business of the Translations. As for other
matters about the Greek and Hebrew, which it is, and what is the meaning of the
words, I pass, as a mere excrement of wit, since this is cried down by all
the learned world, whither Christian or unchristian, and therefore is not like
to take to do any hurt unto the souls of any.

2. As touching Translations.
IT is granted that translators were not led by such an infallible spirit as
the Prophets, and Apostles were. In the Council of Trent, after much debating
by witty and learned heads, they concluded, That Canus Bell.
Translators were not Apostles, but very near unto them. The greatest Papists
are of the same mind, only Sixtus Senensis is of opinion, the seaventie two
Translatours of the old Testament into Greek were infallible. Some are so
quite another way, that they like not any translations Difference of Churches
c. 11
at all. Smith, the Se-baptist is utterly against reading translations in times
of worship. Amongst his Reasons, two are the chiefest. One is, that we must
worship God with the best we have: Translations are not the best, but the
Originals. Yet I hope they that know not the Originals, Translations are the
best they have.

If this were true, then none can worship God in and by reading of the
Scriptures, but such as understand the Originals; nor is that current in reason
or Divinity, that we must serve God with the best. There is good, there is
better, there is best of all: So that if one do that which is good, he sins
not, though he do not that which is better, if he do that which is better, he
sins not, though he do not do that which is best of all. He sins not, who
keeps within the circle of that which is good, albeit he do not do that which
is better, or that which is best of all.

Again, a thing may be absolutely better in it self, yet a less good thing in
it self may be better in some respects and circumstances. As simply in it
self, marriage is simply better then a single life, yet in some respects Paul
shows that a single life is better then marriage; 1 Cor. 7.
and this is Paul's Divinity, Though a man do not that which is better, nor that
which is best, yet as long as he does do that which is good, he sins not.

His other reason is, That we must worship God with our own gifts, not with
another: As Translations are not our doing, but made by the gifts and pains
of others. To this we say, that it is true, we must worship God with our own
gifts, but it is not true, that in the worship of God with the help, and by the
means of that which is another we do not exercise our own gifts. The maine
of the worship of God is, That we worship him in and with the Spirit, and truth
in the inward parts: and so we must and may do, and do do, when we make use of
Translations. When we read translations, we must read them with Faith, and
with the Spirit, which are our inward gifts and graces, else our reading is not
to profit our selves withal: and what hinderance the translation is, to the use
of Faith and the Spirit, they do not* they cannot prove.

So we are said to sing with the Spirit, and yet we sing with the Spirit the
better for that; and to pray with the Spirit, and yet the book is no hindrance
to that neither. Others gifts as long as they rather further then hinder the
use of our own gifts, can be no blur in the worship of God.

The same man does wrangle with the originals too, not denying them, but
denying the use of the book in the originals themselves in worship, for that
the Prophets and Apostles wrote books, but did never divide their books into
Chapters and Verses, till Henry Stephens, but the other day first made the
verses of the New Testament, which being man invention, is not, says he, to be
used in the worship of God.

But whether Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, did it first for
chapters, or Robert, or Henry Stephens for the New Testament did it into
verses, is not material, since we place no Religion in it, and this provision is
known to be a great help to men in the worship of God* We pass by this as a
giddiness of a weak brain in this Sebaptist.

He grants Translations are of good use, but not in the worship of God: and if
of good use elsewhere, why not there? Saint Paul exhorts the Collossians, That
the Word of God might dwell Col. 3. 16.
in them richly, in all wisdom. They being Grecians, I take it for granted,
that the most of them were not skilled in the Hebrew, the New Testament being
not written, not any of it, till after Pentecost, not all of it nntill John a
matter of sixty years after Christ's death. This to the Colossians could not be
meant of the New Testament, but of the Old. So again, the Thessalonians, being
Grecians, did not understand the Hebrew, yet they were commanded to prove all
things: By what? why by the Scriptures, and this was the Old Testament which,
they understanding not (the Hebrew) then it cannot but be meant of the
translation.

This Conclusion I think is clear, since the Churches of the Gentiles were
commanded to read Moses and the Prophets, and read them they could not but in a
translation; therefore translations are commanded by God, as an Ordinance and
constitution of Heaven it felf.

The same Smith in the same book falls foul on the Greek translation of the
seventy, as that it was a grievous sin to translate the Old Testament into
Greek, or any language else. His reason is, for that this ought not to have bin
done til the fulness of time of the calling of the Cartw. Hist. Christi. part. 3
page 85. Was it not lawful for the Jews in captivity to labor the conversion
of the Gentiles? Did Daniel sin, when he urged Nebuchadnezzar to break off his
sins by repentance? Dan, 4. 27. Tho. Cart. in Prove. 16. 6. holds this was only
for this life; But though I am not of Melanctons mind, that Nebuchadnezzar was
converted, yet I see no reason but Daniel might seek for converting and the
saving of his soul.
Gentiles: other reasons he has not worth a fig, nor is this reason much
better. It Is known that Eusebius. de praep. Evangelii. l. 8. c. 1.
Ptolomy King of Egypt had together certain Learned Jews, skilful in the
Greek Language, in number seventy two, and by them he caused the Old Testament
to be done into Greek about two hundred and ninety years before the Birth of
Christ: And this is observed to be a fit time to have it done; for, if it had
not been done till after the coming of Christ, either the Jews out of envy
would have kept and hid the Hebrew Copies, or corrupted them, or else cast some
suspicion, and evil report of evil doings on the translators; All which (it
being done at this time) was prevented.

Now though this were done before the coming of Christ, and so of the time of
the full calling of the Gentiles, yet it was not so long before, but that it
was a fit preparative against the calling of the Gentiles, (whose language
since Alexanders conquest generally was Greek) and since there then was no
printing, no Copies could be scattered abroad but by manuscripts, and writing,
which is great labor and cost, and this being such a slow work, there needed
that this translation should be done some good space before the calling of the
Gentiles, that so a sufficient number of Manuscript-written Copies might be had
and scattered abroad among the Gentiles, they all understanding the Greek, and
but few or none the Hebrew: that the books being the foundation of the
Prophets, might be ready done against the time of the calling of the Gentiles
for their The Greek translation in the Old Testament does translate ^ehovah by
(...), i. e. Lord. Now the New Testament in citing places one of the Old
Testament where Jehovah is in the Hebrew, they follow the Old Greek, and use
for it (...), ^. e Lord, and vet this translation must be called to be (a
grievous sin) w^ ch the holy Ghost does so punctually follow, and allow in to
gra d^ matter as the signal name Jehovah. If the Apostles do, (as hey ^o)
justify the ^se of it, do not they with the same breath justify the making of
it? So Mat. 1. Luke 3. in the Genealogies the names are according to the Greek,
not the Hebrew. Junius exported by D. Rainolds in his second edition of his
translation of the Syriack Testament, altered those names, which in the first
edition he had set down according to the Hebrew, into those names which are
according to the Greek in the 70. translation.
need and use.

Vid. Ju^. Parall. p. 11.
The time of this translation being after the Jews had been amongst the
Gentiles in captivity, we find that the Gentiles being to creep into the
Church, and now and then some to turn Proselytes; and was it not fit that there
should be a translation, ready to bid them welcome into the Church? And what if
it were a sin to attempt the full calling of the Gentiles, before the full
time, yet who can say with any reason that it was a sin to provide a
translation (which they understood) against their calling? Nor could this
translation be sufficiently provided for number in written Copies, and
sufficiently scattered till the time of their calling* So that this was not to
go about to call them before the time was they were to be called, but rather an
excellent Providence to have Copies ready in a language they understood against
the full time of their full calling.

And whereas it is objected, that these Jews who did put it out of the Hebrew
into the Greek, were profane men, is more then I know, or then they can prove.

Again, to make it good, that the act of translating the Scriptures into Greek
was no unlawful thing, I need go no further then to the Apostles, who becoming
all things to all men to save some, were careful in citing places out of the
Old Testament) to tie themselves much to this Greek translation. Insomuch, that
though they did never vary from the Hebrew in sense, yet they did chose rather
to follow the phrase and words of the Greek, then the Hebrew, to condescend as
far as might be to the Gentiles who were acquainted with the Greek translation,
but not with the Hebrew original.

Wherefore it must needs be the froth of a giddy head in this man, to call this
act of translation into Greek a grievous sin; since the Apostles did so much use
and reverence it, and chiefly Paul who chiefly the Apostle of the Gentiles.

We all do or should know, that the Gospel began at Jerusalem, from Gre^a
leguntur in omnibus f^re gentibus, Latina suis sinibus exiguis sine
continentur. Cie O^^t. pro. Archia peet.

The Greek tongue was of that public use in those days that Jimes, Peter, and
Paul writing to the Hebrews, (...) in Hebrew but in Greek: and Paul in his
E^^st e to the Hebrews, cites the places h^ quotes out of the Old Testament
accordi g o the Greek Sep^uagi^t translation, rather then the Original Hebrew
c^n^^.


Jerusalem it went to Judea and Samariah, thence to Syria and Cilicia, from
thence to Ciprus, Asia, Greece, Italy, and from these parts to the utmost
coasts of the earth according to the commission of Christ. Now in all Isa. 2. 3
Acts 1. 8.

Paul writing to the Romans (wh se n^ot^er tongue was I a^ine) w i^e^ in G e^k,
following the Greek translation in places cited ou^ (...) O^d Testament* R. m.
^.


those parts the Greek was most in use in most, only in use in some, and of
necessity they had recourse to the Greek translation.

Smith speaks foul of it, as a false, and forged translation. I dispute not
what it is now, but what it was then: If it had been such a piece, the Apostle
Paul would not have looked after it so much as he did, nor the church have used
it so long as it did, is well known to those who know the state of the Church,
that the church did generally use this Greek translation, and a Latin one
framed out of this, and scarce any other, if any other at all, for six hundred
years after Christ.

I know Sixtus Senensis, and Senen. Bib. l. 8. haer. 13. Bell. dc verbo D. i.
l. 2. c. 6.
Bellarmine (men of great reading) do write that the seventy Interpreters,
though they were not Prophets, who wrote Scripture, yet that they had a line,
and light of the spirit, which did direct them, so that in translating they did
not er^e at all: which perhaps is too much on the other hand: however it held
very pure I am persuaded along time, till the greek tongue began to grow out of
use, and then came in a world of translations in Latin, and popular languages.

I am clear of opinion, that those Anabaptists, who are against all learning,
are against all translations whatsoever: For without the knowledge of the
Hebrew and Greek tongues, it is not possible to turn the Old and New Testament
into any language whatsoever. Nor without the understanding of those two
languages can any understand the Bible in the Originals neither: And on this
ground God may be said to bind us to what is impossible, I mean to build on
the Scripture, when we can neither have it (by their principles) in any
Translation, nor understand it in the Originals.

Trial. p. 112.
Mr. Wotton says, that the Anabaptists do every one claim a privilege of not
erring for himself, (yet not for others) which opinion, he calls a false and
lewd opinion. And on the matter, if that they do so hold, I know no great need
or use they have of the Scriptures in the Originals or translation.

Before we come unto the maine of the business, we cannot skip over a
business of Mr. Trial. p. 94
Wotton: his words are these. No man ever dreamed that we commonly build our
faith upon our English translation. What he would have by the word (commonly) I
know not, except his heart did fail his pen, when he wrote this, and by this
word (commonly) he had a conceit that he might find by it some shift and
starting hole.

A strange speech it is to me, that English men (of such he speaks) who can
understand no language but English, should be said not to build their faith on
the English translation. On what then? The Original they know not, other
translations they understand not. And if they must not build their faith on the
English translation they are left nothing to build their faith on. And what is
this, but to leave all unlearned in the Originals without a rule. And if this
be not to steal Atheism into the hearts of the common people, I know not what
is, since Atheism is such a welcome guest to the corrupt heart as it is.

Counselor of State.
Which makes me call to mind an Observation of Villeroy, a late wise Secretary
of France, That the maine different Sects of Religion in the East, and the
fierce opposition they made each against each, made the people weary of the
Christian Religion, and so Mahomet crept in with his religion, and was too
welcome to almost all, who were almost weary of the sundry Heresies and
Schisms, which were so brief and rife amongst Christians of the East: And this
(says he) overthrew the Christian Church first, and the Christian Empires and
states next, over the East, and let in Mahomets Alchoran, and Mahomets Sword.

I doubt there is scarce any strange opinion pressing hither, but would be
welcome to us: The Christian Religion was never in such danger since my time as
it is now, since men run so many and so contrary ways, that few can now tell
which is true. And since so great a Clerk, and so great a Reformer as Wotton,
has left the poor English man no rule to prove his own, or to disprove the
contrary: For if the English translation be not to an English man, let Elias
come, and tell us what, and which is the rule, and on what an English man may
build his faith on, being that there is nothing left him but his English
translation.

So the old Church after Malachi, what was left to the most but the Greek
Translation? and after the Apostles were dead and gone, the Christian Churches
were tied to the Greek translation of the Old Testament, or else the Old
Testament was no rule to them, except to a few, who understood the Hebrew.

That which all men say, (says Aristotle) is not to be doubted, but all the
learned (I think) agree, that the Church used no translation but the Greek, for
a matter of six hundred years after the birth of Christ, for two hundred
years before. So that for my part, I look upon it as a position full of danger
for men to affirm, That translations are not a rule to ground our faith on,
when we understand no other. That (say I) or none: not none, therefore that.

And now at last, after the clearing of what is past, we come to the maine
point, to find out what it is that a poor soul who understands not the
Originals must rest upon.

First, I say, that the Lord is not, nor will not be wanting to his Church in
things necessary to salvation: And to have a rule to build our faith on, is
absolutely necessary to salvation. And that rule for common people must be the
Scripture translated, or nothing. And therefore I take it to be a special
Ordinance, that the Scriptures should be translated for the use of the Church
in several languages.

Lib. 2. c. 7 p. 37
For the Original Copies, I must subscribe to that of Ganus a Papist, who tells
us, That we are not to*receive into the holy Canon both for the Old and New
Testament, but such books as the Apostles did allow, and deliver over to the
Church of Christ. And as the Church of the Jews did preserve the Hebrew
Original of the Old Testament safe and sure, so I doubt not but the same hand
of the providence of God, has and does preserve the Greek Original of the New
Testament.

And for that it is not possible that the Originals should serve the turn of
all, or immediately of any, but of such as have the knowledge of those tongues,
(who are but a poor few in respect of all the world over) wherefore I take it
for granted that the line of Gods providence has, and does, and will carry the
matter, in having translations of several languages so inti^e, as to be a
sufficient rule to ground their faith: else God in his providence must needs be
wanting in providing necessaries for his Church. Nor do I think that there was,
or ever shall be a Church of Christ, or a Church of Christians in the belly of
Antichrist, but have had translations sufficient to rest their souls on.

I doubt not but the vulgar, for all its faults has sufficient for the saving
of some souls Besides among the Papists they have Pagnine allowed by two
Adrian 6. Clement 7
Popes, which runs as pure as any Translation in the world; and Arias Montanus
a translation without exception. Senensis Ann. 1290
much commends Jacobus de Voragine a Papist, Archbishop of Genua his
translation into the Italian, and Senensis could well tell, having great skill
in the Originals.

To me it is much, that Senensis (so sharp a Papist as he is) should in print,
and that since the Council of Trent, so highly commend a translation of the
Bible into the Italian tongue. And Leo the tenth, Bishop of Rome, did just
before Luthers days, print a recommendation of Erasinus translation of the New
Testament into Latin. So that I look on it as a special providence of God,
that there were translations, and those exact too in the heart of Popery: And
if so, then he will not suffer the visible Church to be without a sufficient
translation, as a sufficient rule.

Smith himself the great backbiter of translations, says, That if the
Translation agree with the Original, it may well be said to be the Word of God:
and if it do not agree with the Original, it is not the translation of the
Original.

And now we will draw toward the main conclusion, How a simple Countryman is
to believe our Bible to be the Word. Doctor Jackson, and Master John Goodwin
have set down many, and many excellent things, but they fly so high, that
they are for Eagles. One may say of their books, as Aristotle said of his books
of Philosophy, That they were published, yet not published, seeing not to be
understood without his help. Now all the considerations these great Sophies
have, and let there be as much more added to them, yet they will not do the
work, till they come to the testimony of the spirit: They may and do work, and
acquire in us an humane faith, which may stand free from actual hesitation, and
doubting, but not from possible dubitation, for lay them all together, yet they
may deceive, or be deceived.

Canus disputes strongly against L 2. c. 8. Vid. Vellos. ad q. 27. quaefit in
Ambrosium dub. ult.
Scotus, Durand, Gabriel, and others, who rested themselves on the authority of
the Church by an acquired faith first, before they come to an infused faith:
This (says he) were to sit down by the Authority of man, not of God, and the
formal reason of our infused faith would be other then the increated truth of
God: whereas the difference of faith gotten by helps may err, but faith
infused by God cannot err.

So that when we have all done, and got all the help we can to rest on the
Scriptures, the work is not done* till we by the Spirit of God have this sealed
by infused faith in our souls that these books (which we have translated) are
the very words of God.

Diff. of Churches c 8. A translation so far forth as it does truly and fully
express any thing of th Or ginal may be said to be inspired of God* and no
farther.
Smith himself, that grand backbiter of translations confesses at last, that
if the translations of the Word of God do agree with the Originals, that then
they are the Word of God; nor are they the Translations except they do, and as
far as they do concord w th the Originals. If an Ambassador deliver his mind
by an Interpreter, and the Interpreter do relate things right (else he is not
an Interpreter) then his words are the speeches of the Ambassador.

Well then, though all humane reasons, the consent of all the world, will not
help us to that faith in the Word, which will help us to heaven, yet they are a
preparation, and such a preparation to this faith infused, that we cannot
ordinarily look for faith infused, but by the way of this faith which is gotten
by the arguments, reasons, considerations, convictions, and helps wrought by
the Argumentations, and considerations proposed by men which do work (as most
often it does) in us an acquired humane faith free from actual (though not from
possible) mistake and doubting.

This may be and is, a fair means to bring us to look on the Scripture
without any actual question made of it as the Word of God. And then by the use
of the Word to attain to a Divine faith, which is infallible by reason of the
Divine infallible truth rightly conceived and believed by it. For it is out of
question that by the Ministry of men, who are not simply infallible, both we
may, and do attain unto that faith in the divine Revelations of the Word, which
are or is infallible.

Its no Paradox to hold, that a thing not infallible, may by way of Ministry
lead us to that certainty which is infallible: For my part, I hold universal
tradition as far as it looks only on the votes and vices of men to be of all
reasons the weakest. For the arguments from the authority of God be the
strongest, yet conclusions from the authority of men is an unartificial
argument, and the weakest. However, what Arminius says is true, that this
humane faith built on such an universal tradition, may be a fit preparation to
that other faith which is built on the Authority of God: I am far^e from once
thinking, that in universal tradition men do once dream to make the last
resolution of their faith into the veracity of any such universal tradition:
For our faith must rest on the same that the Apostles and Prophets did rest
their faith on But they did resolve their faith only on truth uncreated, and
divine, and not on the votes of the Church, or any universal tradition.

Loc. 1. 2. 8. p. 47.
Canus speaks the truth, when he says, that the authority of the divine
Scriptures is not to be sought from the reason, or authority of men. For the
assent Arist. 1. post.
to a conclusion cannot be more certain then the assent to the premises, and
proofs of that conclusion. Now if our infused faith did rest only or chiefly
on the credit of the Church, or universal tradition, then our infused faith
could go no higher then an humane and created truth: I mean only or chiefly on
the voices, or reasons of men, and not on the voice and authority of God.

But what is this to translations? Much every way. I argue thus: The end of the
Church, and people of God is that they should be saved: Now if God set down the
end, he will provide the means of their Qui dat sinem, dat consequentia ad finem
salvation, and that is faith: and faith is not built on the authority of the
Church, or of universal tradition, (all which are the voices of men) but on the
Word of God: Now this Word of God cannot concern common people, but only as
translated.

Now, what shall a poor unlearned Christian do, if that he has nothing to
rest his poor soul on? the originals he understands not; if he did, the first
Copies are not to be had; and he cannot tell whether the Hebrew and Greek
Copies, be the right Hebrew, or the right Greek, or that which is said to be
the meaning of the Hebrew, or Greek, but as men tell us who are not Prophets,
and may mistake. Besides, the Transcribers were men, and might err: These
considerations may let in Atheism like a flood: To help all this, we will
deliver our mind in some Propositions.

I. That God (as I showed) did lay up the Hebrew Copies to be kept by the
Jews, who were ordered by God to be faithful notaries to keep these Records,
and a world of places are cited out of the Old in the New Testament according
as they are now in the Hebrew Copies: and the Old Testament has in it the
life and soul of the New Testament. Moses and the Prophets wrote of Christ.
The New Testament is but a clear, and infallible counter-part of the Old. Its
clear that the Hebrew of the Old Testament stood clear and incorrupt, without
any breaches made in them by transcribers, or otherwise, till the time of the
publishing of the New Testament, as appears by the many places cited in the
New out of the Old: chiefly where Hebrew words are kept, and repeated, as
Hosanna, Golgotha, Eli, Eli, Lamasabachthani, Mat. ^7. suitable unto the places
whence they are taken out of the Old, chiefly in Saint Matthews Gospel, who was
most punctual in applying and suiting the Prophesies of the Old Testament of
all the holy penmen of the New Testament.

And it is easy to be proved that Matthew wrote after that was done, which
Luke wrote in In his eight book of the Creed. p. 322.
the Acts of the Apostles. Doctor Jackson says a long time after Peter made
that Sermon, Act. 1. Saint Matthew adds, and says (says he) it was called
the field of blood unto this day Which argues, that he wrote his Gospel a long
time after St. Peter made his Comment upon the Psalmist, Acts 1. 15, 16, 17.

Well then, as God committed the Hebrew Text of the Old Testament to the Jews,
and did and does move their hearts to keep it untainted to this day: So I dare
lay it on the same God, that he in his providence is so with the Church of the
Gentiles, that they have and do preserve the Greek Text incorrupt, and clear:
As for some scapes by Transcribers, that comes to no more, then to censure a
book to be corrupt, because of some scapes in the printing, and it is certain,
that what mistake is in one print, is correctin another.

A second Proposition is, That God never did suffer his Church to be without a
sufficient Rule, and there can be no rule but translations to the Vulgar:
Therefore I make no question, but the sweet providence of God has held the
hearts, and hands, and pens of translators, so in all true Churches in all
times, that the virnacular, and popular translation into mother tongues, have
been made pure, without any considerable tincture of error to endanger the
souls of his Church.

For what if Interpreters and Translators were not Prophets, yet God has and
does use so to guide them, that they have been, are, and shall be preserved
from so erring in translating the Scriptures, that the souls of his people may
have that which will feed them to eternal life, that they shall have sufficient
for their instruction, and consolation here, and salvation hereafter? This is
the opinion of Bellarmine himself, albeit he appropriates it to their vulgar
Translation, yet I think the eye of providence provides for all vulgar, and
vernacular translations in their mother tongue for all true Churches in the
world.

3. Propos.
Translations are sufficient with all their mistakes to save the Church. I will
deliver this in the Spiritual arm^y. 263, 264
words of Master Baine. Faith comes by hearing of the word from a particular
Minister, who by confession of all is subject to error; As God has not
immediately and infallibly assisted Ministers, that they cannot err at all, so
we know that he is in some measure with them, that they cannot altogether err.
A Translation that erreth cannot beget faith, so far forth as it erreth, The
word Translated, though subject to error, is Gods Word, and begets, and
increases faith, not so far forth, as man through frailty erreth, but as he
is assisted through speaking, and translating to write the truth. So he, This
gives full satisfaction to me, and I hope it will to others.

4. Propos.
The maine Conclusion, for a ground of all, is the evidence and seal of the
Spirit of God, which persuades us of the saving truth in the Translation, and
by way of Ministry to come to saving faith by the preaching of the Word by our
several Ministers Papists cry up the inerrable and infallible authority of the
Church, and yet they themselves deny not but their particular preachers (whom
they hear) are as subject to err as any of ours are: I know no In the Church
it is rather (...) then it. (...).
authority the Church has, whatever the Church does is but Ministerial. The
Papists and we agree in this, That Translations, Originals, Reading, Preaching,
is of no saving effect without the Revelation and Testimony of the Spirit:
Canus (I rather Rain. conf. p. 424
choose to mention him the oftener, because Dr. John Rainolds says, that he
was of better mind, and sounder judgment then Popish Doctors are Loc. 1. 2.
^. 24, p. 109
the most of them:) It is a great error (says he) in them who think they can
either understand, or interpret the Scripture without the peculiar gift of the
holy Ghost: And again, c. 8.
The last resolution of our faith must be in the inner efficiency of God moving
to believe. We believe not for that John or any man else says it, but because
God has revealed it. Now that God has revealed his mind, we do immediately
believe it by special instinct. And again, The formal reason of our assent is
the light of God, which God does infuse into us; and for this he cites Aquinas,
Lect. 2. ad Romans 10.

And as the understanding in us discernes of natural things, and the taste in
matters of sense, so when the mind of a man is enlightened by the Spirit; we
are enabled to discern doctrines necessary to falvation from errors which are
not of God. This his resolution is often up and down in his book.

De great. l. 6. c. 2.
Bellarmine is for the same conclusion. A man cannot (says he) without the
special illustration of De bapt. l. 1 c. ^1. and tertio.
God believe the mysteries of faith. And again, Faith cannot arise in the
heart, but by divine revelation, which is either immediately from God alone, or
by the instrument of the Word read or preached.

I think it has truth in it, Loc. l. 2: c. 8 p. 48.
which Canus observes, That Peter had heard the Testimony of John Baptist, when
with open voice he proclaimed Christ to be the Son of God, John 1. 84. and had
moreover with his own eyes seen many miracles of Christ, yet after all these,
Christ does ascribe Peter's Mat. 16. 17
confession of his says to none of of these, but only to divine revelation.

So then Protestants and Papists, we and they concur in this, That at last we
must sit down by the evidence and sealing testimony of the Spirit; but with
this difference: They say, The Spirit gives light and evidence to the authority
of the Church; we say, To the Sovereignty of the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 2.
Nothing can be seen without some light or other: Things of Reason cannot be
conceived without the light of reason, nor things of the Spirit without the
light of Faith, and of the Spirit.

Though Wotton has cast an unhappy stone or two at translations, yet when he
comes to answer Fisher, who said, That the Spirit of God teaches, and
persuades men to believe the Church, Are you (says Wotton) Trial. p. 72
they who mock at private spirits, and yet are glad to fly that help? Is it
not as likely the Spirit should teach men which is the Scripture, as which is
the Church, and assure them of a translation, as of this or that man's
Ordination and Priesthood? So he, thus at last, he is for the divine authority
of translations.

But is not this to fall upon private revelations? No such matter: for we call
not in for the Testimony of revealing of the Spirit to teach us any thing but
what is revealed in the word; that were to bring in private revelations: But
because none does, or can know the secrets of God, but the Spirit of God,
therefore 1 Cor. 2. 10
we say, that we are made to see the evidence of truth first revealed in the
Word, and then by that light, which the Spirit kindles in our hearts, both the
Scripture to be the Word of God, and the mind of the Sripture is not only
revealed, but confirmed to us by the Testimony of the Spirit in us and to us.

So here is no use of the Spirit to reveal new lights, but to show us the
evidence of these truths which are in the Word. A private spirit is to lead us
from, this is to lead us to the Word. And all this is done by illightning our
understandings, and sanctifying our wills to discern and to approve the
evidence of truth, which is in the Scripture and no other.

They say, their Church cannot err in matters of Faith. And why forsooth?
Because it is infallibly guided by the strait line of the spirit. We say, The
true Church cannot so err in matters of faith or life, as to fall away from
Christ, and so to fall into damnation. And why? Because (besides other helps)
the true Church is guided by the certain and infallible direction of the
spirit, the vicar general Joh. 16. 23.
to our Lord Jesus. Why then may not we twit them, rather then they do us with
the private spirit?

Aquinas, the first through-Papist Part. 1 9. 1 a. 8. ad 2.
that ever was, (It is Dr. John Rainolds censure of him) shall speak last for
this point* All holy learning is proved out of the Scriptures only,
necessarily; out of all other authors only, probably: For our faith does rest
on the revelation made to the Apostles and Prophets who wrote the Canonical
Books, and not on any other revelation, if any be made to other Doctors. So he,
and he was preferred by Innocent the Pope before all Writers next to the
Scriptures, and well might the Pope so do (says the same Dr. Rainolds) for
that he deserved better of the Papacy then all the Fathers.

These things are so plain, that to argue more were to weaken Perspicuitas
argumentatione elevatur. Cic.
them. As I have read it to be the observation of Tully, That things
perspicuous and clear are much obscured by much arguing: I hope the Papists for
shame will give over fooling against us, that we run after private Spirits and
revelations, since Aquinas the flower of the Papists speaks out as much as we
do, as touching the sealing of the Spirit.

The Application of all.
I have made a long and tedious discourse about the Originals and Translations,
because I find by my self, that things let fall in Print by learned men and
great reformers as touching the Originals, that none can say this is the
Hebrew, that the Greek, but because Linguists and learned men say so, and they
may err: Nor that this is the English of the Hebrew, or of the Greek which we
say is, but men subject to trip, do so say, That the Originals transcribed into
many Copies might err, and mistake: and for the translations, that there be
flaws in them too, since the transcribers, and translators were no Prophets,
but men, though not willing perhaps, yet subject to speak and write besides the
matter: that translations are not the Word of God, nor our rule.

These and such things as these, I doubt not do stagger the thoughts of weak,
and of strong Christians too, and drive a many toward Atheism: And now says
a sick soul, What shall a poor feeble-hearted Christian do?

My counsel is, that when he is come to be certain without actual doubting by
reasons, arguments, consent of times, and of the Church, that our Bible is the
Word of God, that he would in all humility and sincerity apply himself to read
it, to hear it read, to hear it preached; and he may promise to himself that
by the use of the word the Spirit of God will infuse and inspire divine and
saving faith into his soul, and free him not only from all actual, but possible
doubting, that the Bible translated is the word of God. And if the translation,
then the Originals: For what ever is the instrument to convert the soul; must
needs be the pure word of God.

Some are firm that God never works a miracle, but to confirm truth: This is
past question, that the Spirit of God does never work this miracle to convert
the soul, but by Gods word: So say, Now I know that it is the pure word of
God, for that it is a means to convert my soul: so Psalm. 19. 7: The Law of the
Psalm. 19. 7.
Lord is perfect, converting the soul; By this then I know that it is without
dispute the perfect Law of the Lord, because it does not only evince and
convince me, but convert my soul: St: Austine says, that he was converted by
reading the last verse of the thirteenth to the Romans, and that did prove to
Austine that it was the perfect Law and word of God: It is storied, that
Cyprian was converted by reading the Prophet Jonas: And Iunius in his life
written by himself, Niceph. l. 5 ^. 27
says that he was converted by reading the first Chapter of the Gospel of
John: For Austine and Cyprian, I think neither of them had Austine was
converted by eading the translation his skill was little or none in the Creel;
and Cyprian by reading Jonas in the translation he having no skill in the Hebr.
much skill in the Originals, no, nor Iunius neither at that time: wherefore it
is plain enough that they were converted by reading translations.

When then a man does find that by reading or hearing translations read or
preached upon, it has pleased God to warm thy heart, to turn and change thy
poor soul, to convert thee into a new creature, go thy ways, doubt nothing its
an argument past answer, that the Bible even as translated is the Word of God.
Go on, look on it as Gods word, read on still, be diligent to hear it, with the
best ears thou have, and thou shall find it more and more to convert and
sanctify thee, and so by consequence to assure thee by an undoubtful, and
divine faith inspired and infused into thy poor soul by the Spirit of God, that
this book, and no other, is the very Word of God.

By this you see, where, and how the poor crazy soul may find rest, and it is
to rest on the translated Word of God, waiting therein on the line of the sweet
providence, who by the use of the word will breath into his soul divine faith
infused by the sure influence of the Spirit of God, which spirit brings a light
with it by which we know that, and what we know, this is done by a divine
faith, not by humane conjecture, being wrought in us by a special providence of
God persuading and drawing us to acknowledge the contents therein to be of
Divine authority.

Nor is this (as I said) to make our private spirit the rule of our faith, but
we lay all at the foot of the divine providence to put light into our minds,
and then to work in us a firm assent to the Word of God, that it is indeed and
truth the very Word of God. And none of this is done otherwise then by the Word
of God itself, and the spirit joining with the Word.

In a word, nothing can work saving grace in any man to the conversion of his
soul, but the very Word of God: But this the word translated has wrought in
me, therefore I know by this, that the Scripture translated is the word Psalm
19
of God, since nothing but Gods word can turn and convert the soul.

Make the most of that which some call universal tradition* it can bring us no
farther then an humane belief, little better is it then that which the Papists
call the authority of the Church.

The Ministry of the Church we grant needful, and useful, but for the authority
of the Church, we acknowledge none. Thus the Jews are for their Rabbines, and
their universal tradition. So did the Saracens; like as the Gentiles did, build
on the universal tradition.

But after this tedious discourse, the thing which we Christians are to rest
our faith on, which is common to all, even to the meanest, is that internal
light infused into us all by the Spirit of God, whereby we most firmly, and
most certainly are moved to believe that the bible, and all the Bible, and
nothing but the Bible, is our most certain rule which cannot err; but that
the Universal Tradition of Jews, Saracens, Papists, has been, is, and will
be subject to errors more or less.

The end and use of all, is to call upon all Christians, chiefly when they are
in some doubting vein, to turn away from all authority of Churches, of men,
of universal 1 Pet: 2. 2
Tradition, and to look up to the providence who has provided sincere food
and physic for our poor souls, which Christians have found, do, and shall
find, to be the Bible translated into several Languages, for the use of
those, who cannot skill in the Originals. And I think no man dares deny, but a
Minister who has himself little skill in the Originals, may by expounding and
propounding the Translations convert the souls of such Christians as are the
hearers of such Preachers.

C. 2. How it is said, he that is borne of God cannot sin, 1 John 3. 9.
HOnest Melancthon speaks against some in his Country in his days called
Swenkfeldians, who held themselves after new birth to be just and perfect. I
have, not long since seen a little English printed book, cast into sundry
propositions, one whereof, and as I remember the first is, that after they are
renewed once, they are as perfect as Jesus Christ was, and as Adam was in
Paradise; which was the tenet of the Familists of old, that being once endued
with the Divine nature in their conversion, that then they are Goddified.

The report is that those sprung up amongst us, commonly called Quakers, are of
the same fancy, and that they press this place of John, that being once borne
of God, they do not commit sin, for Gods seed remains in them, and that
they cannot commit sin, because they are borne of God.

Their senseless sense cannot 1 John 1: 8, 9, 10.
be the meaning of that place. For the same Apostle in the same Epistle says,
that, if we say that we have no sin, we make him a liar. And is not Council.
Milevit. can. 6.
this a sin, and a very great one too, to make God a liar? John says not, if
(you) but if (we), comprehending himself too: and I hope it cannot be thought
but John, a chief Apostle, was born of God.

Besides it is not only said, That he who is borne of God does not sin, but
(cannot) sin. And all over the Bible in the stories of the best of men who
were borne of God, we see that they could sin, and did sin, and those
sins which were very great too.

This then is not the sense of the place, that there was, is, or ever shall be
any mere man borne so of God as not to sin, or to be in and under such a
condition, as to say truly of him, that he (cannot) sin.

Now for that which these write, that when once made partakers of the Divine
nature, they are as perfect as Adam in Paradise, This is but their own fancy,
it is no such matter: But say it were so, and not only so, but as perfect as
the Angels in heaven, yet from that it follows not, that it could, or can be
said of them simply, that they cannot sin: For Adam did, and therefore could
sin: he had indeed a Tempter without, but no concupiscence to tempt him
within. Nay, more then that, the lapsed Angels before their fall had nothing
from within, nothing from without to tempt them. Within nothing but purity and
holiness, no sin, no shadow of sin: Nothing from without to tempt them;
nothing within but holiness, nothing without but holiness, without spot, or
wrinkle, yet then those very Angels were sin-able, for they did fall, and
therefore could sin.

The truth is, None but God ia absolutely free from all possibility of sinning:
God only Apoc. 15. 4
in this sense is holy, he not only does not lie, but he cannot lie: Adam in
Paradise was made upright, the Angels in Heaven were made more pure then Adam,
both Adam and the Angels had the advantage of the places to be kept from sin,
but being creatures created with free will, those Angels in heaven, and Adam in
Paradise (that heaven upon earth) might and did sin; and so might all the
rest of the Angels too, had they not been supported by grace for those were 1 Timothy 5. 21
elected, and Romans 11. 5
Election is of grace. And should the elect Angels sin but once the least sin
that is, they could not be saved, as it fell out with those Angels which did
sin: For Heb. 2. 14
Christ took not the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham; therefore they
cannot sin, because they cannot be restored by a Mediator. The Angels are
holy, Daniel 4. 13. and so must be saved, which could not be, if they could and
should sin, Matthew 21. 30, 31. Mat. 18. 10
Again, those ministering spirits do always see the face of God, which were
not true, if they should sin: For no sooner did those non-Elect Angels sin, but
they presently left their habitation, Jude 6. and were cast down into Tartar,
that is Hell, 2 Pet. 2, 4.

Indeed when men are once in Heaven they are safe from sin, there is no place
for tears, therefore not for sin, Revel. 21. 4. Now Luke 20. There is no more
promised to the blessed men after the resurrection, then to the Angels, that
then they shall be equal, not superior to the Angels: therefore nor men, nor
Angels Elect can or shall sin in Heaven, which the other Angels did once in
Heaven, for that they were not Elect, nor confirmed in and by grace.

Thus then you see that it could not be said of the unelect Angels once in
heaven, nor of any sort of men till they come to heaven that they nor do, nor
can sin. For my part, I think, that those who say they do not, they cannot sin,
though they say so, yet I think they themselves do not think so. I remember a
golden saying of Austine: He says, he who thinks De Civit. Dei. l. 14. c. 8
he can live without sin, does not avoid sin, but rather excludes all
pardon. So that this is not the sense of the words, That ever any man was, is,
or shall be in the world, who either cannot or does not sin.

Of Idol. p. 15
Doctor Hammond following many Learned men says this (cannot sin) is meant
that upon that head and score he cannot sin, to signify that their being borne
of God can be no patent, Aug. hom. 4 in epist. Joan de bap. parvul. c. 8.
contra Parmenianum. c. 7. l. de prof. Justitia sufius
or security for their sinning. The same says Austine, to wit, That the borne
of God sin not, as, or upon this, that they are borne of God. For this is
alleged that of the same Saint John 1 Epist. 3. 6. Whosoevor sins has not
seen him, neither known him, meaning, that the seeing and knowing him does not
let in sin, but rather this is against sin. So Paul, I do that I would not, I
do not do what I would: there is no question, but there is some ignorance, some
not knowing of him when any sin is sinned.

Master Anthony Burges speech I think is in the right. All sins says he are
called, because all sinners are ignorant of something they should know, there
being no sin which does not proceed from some error in the practical
judgment: For although a man sin wilfully and advisedly, so that there is no
other cause of the malice, but the malice it self, as Austine speaks of some of
his sins; yet even then there is an error in Burgess against the Antinom. p.
237
that man's conscience. Thus he, and to this I subscribe. So that it is not
faith, nor knowledge which dwells in us, is the cause why we sin, but as Paul
speaks of himself, it is sin which dwells in us: Not I (as I) but sin that
dwells in me. So then a man borne of God, when he treads beside the line, he
may say, it is not I, but sin that dwells in me: so in this sense, it is a
truth, that he that is borne of God, as born of God does not sin, nor cannot
sin.

This is pious, and truth, but under correction I do not think it to be the
square meaning of this text. What then? some think it to be this. He that is
borne of God, sins not, that is, sins not as the devil did, who ve*se 8.
of this chapter, sins (not sinned) but sins from the beginning. And this
is like to be the mind of this text, for that it is said in the same verse
before, He that commits sin is of the Devil. That I think is too short
which some say, that the proper sense of this Text is, he that is born of God
sins not, that sin of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.

In a word then, the full meaning is, that he that is borne of God does not
commit sin, that is, he does not make it his practice, his occupation, his
work; he does it, when he does it besides his mind, and when he does it, he
Luke 15
is besides himself in that particular, as the Prodigal was. It is long of some
fits in his disease, when he does it not only as his act, but as his work, who
give Romans 6. 16
themselves over to be sold, and servants to sin. So Paul, so Christ, Matthew.
7: 23: Depart from me all ye that work iniquity: Therefore Saint John speaks of
such who are not regenerate, whose desire is to sin, and are afire to commit
it: For otherwise all the regenerate do sin: so this our Apostle, If we say we
say we have no sin we seduce our selves.

Nor do they sin only of infirmity, but sometimes they fall into greater sins,
even into some of the greatest sins, but this is not 1 John 5. 16
unto death as our Apostle says. So that such as are born of God sin they may,
sin they do, and sometimes great sins, but to go on in a course of finning to
the death, this they do not, that they cannot do, because they are born of God.

The only show of exception that can be taken, is, that Adam who is called
(they say) Luke 3. ult. the son of God did sin, and might, as the state stood
with him, unto death: And the Angels called the sons of God, Job 2. 1. did a
many of them sin unto death.

But we read not that these were said to be borne of God, or that they had this
seed remaining in them. They were called the sons of God in respect of that
that holiness wherein they were created; but the regenerate that are (said to
be borne of God) are so said, not only in respect of the image of God, but of
Christ, and the grace of regeneration, which is rooted in Christ, which as it
cannot die in Christ the root, so it cannot wither away in Christians the
branches. The sap, which is still alive and fresh in Christ, is by the Spirit
of Christ kept so alive in them, that albeit it do not keep them from sinning,
yet it does so preserve them, that they cannot sin unto death; they are so the
members of Christ, that he will not suffer any of his true members to sin all
their spiritual life away.


Power of our wills; but for habits and graces infused into our wills (the seat
of them) our wills are rather under them and their power.

Then thus (under the power and determination of God) that there is a force in
them to rule, and overruled all. In this, the string is in the hand of God, and
therefore it is said in the Word of God, that he it is, that does make us walk
in his ways, and keep his Laws. Had we a fullness of created graces as the
Angels had, yet if God stand by, and leave us to them and our selves, and do
not uphold us we may fall for all them; though there be nothing from without,
or from within to push us down, the mutability only of our own free will might
do it in us, as it did in the lapsed Angels. But those habits or divine
qualities being lost in Adam (in whom we all sinned) such as are regenerated
and born again have supernatural graces of redemption, which albeit they be
not so full, yet are more firm then those of creation were. Those of God as
Creator were lost, those of God in Christ our Redeemer can never be so lost,
but as the same St. John says, There is a seed remaining in them, which does
so keep spiritual force up in them, that they cannot sin unto death.

infused habit of grace may be said to have a ruling hand over our will?

It has such a rule many ways, but in this one thing the power of the Spirit
appears above the power of the flesh, for that the Spirit does ever bring us
first or last, one way or other to repent of the works of the flesh, but the
flesh is never able to make us sorry for, and repent of the fruits, and acts of
the Spirit. No man is sorry for his virtues, all good men are for their vices.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed for John Bartlet, and to be sold at the Gill-Cup, on the
south side of Paul's over against the Drapers.
A Volume of Dr. Tho. Tailors in Fol. Dr. Harris works in fol. A supplement to
the former Edition in 4. His threefold state of man. 12. Sibs excellency of the
Gospel. 12. Christ's Exaltation in 12. The establishment in 40. Grosses fiery
pillar of heavenly truth. 12. Capel on Tentations in four parts, besides this
remains. Child's Trade by Tho. Wilson. Countrey-mans Catechism, by To. Ram.
Walker on the Covenant. Dr. Tailor of Contentment, improvement of time, and the
holy War. Walker on the Creation and Providence. -- On the Subbath. Dr. Gouge
on John. Light to Grammar.

