THE CHARACTER OF A LONDON DIURNALL.

Printed in the Year 1644.

THE CHARACTER OF A LONDON DIURNALL.
A Diurnall is a puny Chronicle, scarce pin-feather'd with the wings of time:
It is an History in Sipp^ts; the English Iliads in a Nut-shell; the Apocryphal
Parliaments book of Maccabees in single sheets. It would tire a
Welch-pedigree, to reckon how many aps it is removed from an Annal: For it is of
that Extract; only of the younger House, like a Shrimp to a Lobster. The
original sinner in this kind was Dutch, Galliobelgicus the Protoplast; and the
modern Mercuries but Hans^en Kelders. The Countess of Zealand was brought to
Bed of an Almanac; as many Children, as days in the year. It may be the
Legislative Lady is of that Lynage; so she spawnes the Diurnalls, and they at
Westminster take them in Adoption, by the names of Scoticus, Civicus,
Britanicus. In the Frontispice of the old Beldame. Diurnall, like the Contents
of the Chapter, sits the House of Commons, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.
You may call them, the Kingdoms Anatomy before the weekly Calendar* For such
is a Diurnall; the day of the month, with what weather in the Commonwealth.
It Is taken for the Pulse of the Body-Politique; and the Empetick-Divines of the
Assembly, those spiritual Dragooners, thumb it accordingly. Indeed it is a
pretty Synopsis; and those grave Rabbyes (though in point of Divinity) trade in
no larger Authors. The Country-Carryer, when he buys it for their Vicar,
miscalls it the Vrinall: yet properly enough; For it casts the water of the
State, ever since it staled blood. It differs from an Aulicus, as the Devil
and his Exorcist; or as a black Witch does from a white one, whose office it to
unravell her enchantments.

It begins usually with an Ordinance, which is a Law still-borne; dropped, before
quickened by the Royal assent: It Is one of the Parliaments by-blowes, (Acts
only being legitimate) and has no more Sire, then a Spanish Gennet, that is
begotten by the wind.

Thus their Militia (like its Patton, Mars) is the issue only of the Mother,
without the concourse of royal Jupiter.

Yet Law it is, if they Vote it, though in defiance to their Fundamentals; like
the old Sexton, who swore his Clock went true, what ever the Sun said to the
contrary.

The next Ingredient of a Diurnall is Plots, horrible plots; which with
wonderful Sagacity it hunts dry-foot, while they are yet in their Causes,
before Materia prima can put on her Smock. How many such sits of the Mother
have troubled the Kingdom, and (for all Sir Walter Earl looks like a
Man-Midwife) not yet delivered of so much, as a Cushion? But Actours must have
their Properties; And, since the Stages were voted down, the only Playhouse
is at Westminster.

Suitable to their Plots are their Informers; Skippers and Taylours; Spaniells
both for the Land and the Water: Good conscionable Intelligence! For, however
Pym's Bill may inflame the Reckoning, the honest Vermyn have not so much for
Lying, as the Public Faith.

Thus a zealous Borcher in Morefields, while he was contriving some Quirpo-cut
of Church Government, by the help of his out-lying Ears, and the Otacousticon
of the Spirit, discovered such a Plot, that Solden intends to combat
Antiquity, and maintain it was a Taylours Goose, that preserved the Capitol.

I wonder my Lord of Canterbury is not once more all-to-be-Traytor'd for
dealing with the Lions, to settle the Commission of Array in the Tower. It
would do well to crampe the Articles Dormant, besides the opportunity of
reforming those Beasts of the Prerogative, and changing their prophaner names
of Harry and Charles, into Nehemiah and Eleazer.

Suppose a Corne-cutter, being to give little Isaac a east of his Office,
should fall to pareing his Brows, mistaking the one end for the other; because
he branches at both. This would be a Plot; and the next Diurnall would furnish
you with this Scale of Votes.

Resolved upon the Question; that this Act of the Corne-cutters was an absolute
Invasion of the Cities Charter, in the representative Forehead of Isaac.
Resolved, that the evil Counselors about the Corne-cutter are Popishly
affected, and Enemies to the State. Resolved, that there be a public
Thankesgiving for the great deliverance of Isaack's Brow-antlers; and a solemn
Covenant drawn up, to defye the Corne-cutter and all his works.

Thus the Quixotes of this Age sight with the Windmills of their own Heads;
quell Monsters of their own Creation; make Plots, and then discover them; as
who sitter to u^kennell the F^x, then the Tarryer, that is a part of him.

In the third place march their Adventures; the Roundheads Legend, the Rebels
Romance; Stories of a larger fire, then the Ears of their Sect; able to
strangle the Belief of a Soli-fidian.

I Will present them in their order; and first, as a Whiff^ler before the show,
enter Stamford; one that trod the Stage with the first, traversed his ground,
made a leg and Exit. The Country People took him for one, that by Order of
the Houses was to dance a Morice through the West of England. Well, he is a
nimble Gentleman; set him but upon Banks his Horse in a Saddle Rampant; and it
is a great question, which part of the Centaure shows better tricks.

There was a vote passing to translate him, with all his Equipage, into
Monumentall-Gingerbread: but it was crossed by the Female-Committee, alleging
that the valor of his Image would bite their Children by the Tongues.

This Cubit and an half of Commander, by the help of a Diurnall, routed his
Enemies fifty Miles off: it is strange you will say; and yet it is generally
believed, he would as soon do it at that distance, as nearer hand. Sure it
was his Sword, for which the weapon-salve was invented; that so wounding and
healing, like loving Correlates, might both work at the same removes.

But the Squibbe is run to the end of the Rope. Room; for the Prodigy of
Valor; Maddam Atropos in breeches* Wallers Knight-errantry: and, because every
Mountihanke must have his Zany, throw him in Haslerigge, to set off his story:
these two, like Bell and the Dragon, are always worshipped in the same
Chapter: they hunt in their Couples what one does at the head, the other scores
up at the beele.

Thus they kill a man over and over, an Hopkins and Sternhold murder the
Psalms, with another to the same; one chimes all in, and then the other
strikes up, as the Saints-Bell.

I wonder, for how many lives my Lord Hoptons Soul took the Lease of his Body.

First, Stamford slew him: then Waller out-killd that half a Bar: and yet it
is thought the sullen corpse would scarce bleed, were both these Man-slayers
never so near it.

The fame goes of a Dutch Heads-man, that he would do his Office with so much
ease and Dexterity, that the Head after Execution should stand still upon the
shoulders: pray God Sir William be not Probationer for the place. For, as if he
had the like knack too, most of those, whom the Diurnall has slain for him,
to us poor Mortals seem untoucht.

Thus these Artificers of Death can kill the Man, without wounding the Body,
like lightning, that melts the Sword and never singes the Scabbard.

This is the William, whose Lady is the Conqueror; This is the Cities
Champion, and the Diurnalls delight; he, that Cuckolds the General in his
Commission: for he stalks with Essex, and shootes under his Belly, because his
Oxcellency himself is not charged there. Yet in all this Triumph there is a
whip and a Bell: Translate but the Scene to Round* way-downe: There Hasleriggs
Lobsters were turned into Crabs, and crawled backwards; there poor Sir William
ran to his Lady for a use of consolation.

But the Diurnall is weary of the Arm of flesh, and now begins an Hosanna to
Cromwell, one that has beat up his Drums clean through the Old Testament:
you may learn the Genealogy of our Savior, by the names in his Regiment: The
Muster-Master uses no other List, then the first Chapter of Matthew.

With what face can they object to the King the bringing in of Forraigners,
when themselves intertaine such an Army of Hebrews? This Cromwell is never so
valorous, as when he is making Speeches for the Association, which
nevertheless he does somewhat ominously, with his Neck awry, holding up his
Ear, as if he expected Mahomets Pidgeon to come, and prompt him: He should be
a Bird of Prey too, by his bloody Beak: his Nose is able to try a young Eagle,
whether she be lawfully begotten. But all is not Gold that glisters: What we
wonder at in the rest of them, is natural to him; to kill without Bloodshed:
For most of his Trophies are in a Church. Window: when a Looking Glass would
show him more superstition: He is so perfect a hater of Images, that he has
defaced Gods in his own Countenance: If he deal with Men, it is when he takes
them napping in an old Monuments Then down goes Dust and Ashes. And the
stoutest Cavalier is no better. O brave Oliver! Times voyder, Sub-sizer to the
Worms; in whom Death, that formerly devoured our Ancestors, now chewes the
Cud: He said Grace once, as if he would have fallen aboard with the Marquisse of
New Castle: Nay, and the Diurnall gave you his Bill of Fare; But it proved but
a Running Banquet, as appears by the Story. Believe him as he whistles to his
Cambridge Teeme of Committy-men; and he does Wonders. But Holy men (like the
Holy language) must be read backwards. They risle Colleges, to promote
Learning; and pull down Churches for Edification. But Sacrilege is entailed
upon him: There must be a Cromwell for Cathedralls, as well as Abbyes: A secure
sinner, whose offense carries its Pardon in its Mouth: For how can he be hanged
for Church-robbery, which gives it self the Benefit of the Clergy.

But for all Cromwells Nose wears the Dominicall Letter, yet compared with
Manchester, he is but like the Vigils to an Holy Day. This, this is the man of
God; so sanctified a Thunder bolt, that Burrowes in a proportionable blasphemy
to his Lords of Hosts, would style him the Arch-Angell, giving Battle to the
Devil.

Indeed as the Angels, each of them makes a several, Species; so every one of
his Soldiers is a distinct Church. Had these Beasts been to enter the Arc,
it would have puzzled Noah to have sorted them into Paires. If ever there were a
Rope of Sand, it was so many Sects twisted into an Association.

They agree in nothing, but that they are all Adamites in Understanding: It is
the sign of a Coward, to wink and Fight; yet all their Valor proceeds from
their Ignorance.

But I wonder whence their Generals Purity proceeds; it is not by Traduction:
if he was begotten Saint, it was by Equivocall Generation: for the Devil in
the Father, is turned Monk in the Son; so his godliness is of the same
Parentage with good Laws; both extracted out of bad Manners; and would he
alter the Scripture, as he has attempted the Creed, he might vary the Text,
and say to Corruption, Thou art my Father.

This is he, that has put out one of the Kingdoms eyes, by clouding our
Mother-Vniversity, and (if the Scotchmist further prevail) will extinguish
this other: He has the like quarrel to both; because both are strong with the
same Optic Nerve, knowing Loyalty. Barba^ous Rebel! who will be revenged upon
all Learning, because his Treason is beyond the Mercy of the Book.

The Diurnall as yet has not talked much of his Victories: but there is the
more behind: For the Knight must always beat the Giant; That Is resolved. If
any thing fall out amiss, which cannot be smothered, the Diurnall has a Help
at Mawe; It is but putting to Sea, and taking a Danish Fleet; or Brewing it
with some success out of Ireland; and it goes down merrily.

There are more Puppets, that move by the Wyre of a Diurnall; as Brereton and
Gell; two of Mars his Pettytoes; such sniveling Cowards, that it is a favor to
call them so, was Breroton to fight with his teeth as in all other things he
resembles the beast, he would have odds of any man at the weapon; O he is a
terrible slaughterman at a Thankes-giving Dinner, had he been a Canniball to
have eaten those that he vanquished, his gut would have made him valiant.

The greatest wonder is at Fairfax; how he comes to be a Babe of Grace?
Certainly it is not in his personal, but (as the State Sophies distinguish) in
his Politic Capacity; regenerated ab extra, by the zeal of the House he sat
in, as Chickens are hatched at Grand Cairo, by the Adoption of an Oven.

There is the Wood-Monger too, a feeble crutch to a declining cause; a new
Branch of the old Oak of Reformation.

And now I speak of Reformation, vous avez Fox, the Tinker; the liveliest
Emblem of it that may be; For what did this Parliament ever go about to
reform, but Tinker-wise, in mending one Hole they made three.

But I have not Ink enough to cure all the Tetters and Ring-wormes of the
State.

I will close up all thus. The Victories of the Rebels are like the Magical
combat of Apul^ius; who, thinking he had slain three of his Enemies, found
them at last, but a Triumvirate, of Bladders. Such, and so empty, are the
Triumphs of a Diurnall: but so many impostumated Fancies, so many Bladders of
their own Blowing.

FINIS.

