A CATECHISM Containing the PRINCIPLES OF Christian Religion.

Together with A Preparation Sermon Before the Receiving of the Holy Sacrament
OF THE Lord's Supper, As it was Preached in Serjeants-Inn-Chappel in
Fleet Street, London.

By JAMES CLIFFORD, M. A. late of Magdalen-College, Oxon: And Chaplain to the
Honorable SOCIETY of Serjeants-Inn.

LONDON, Pri^^^^ ^or J. Deacon, at the Angel, in Gilt-(...) ^^reet, without
Newgate, 1694. And (...) be Sold by the Booksellers of ^^^^don and Westminster.

THE PREFACE.
Ephesians. 6. 4. Fathers, bring up your Genesis 18. 1^ 2 Timothy 1. 5. and 3. 15.
Children in the nurture and admontion of the Lord.
A Cat^chism is a Word now used in a Church-sence, signifying a little Book,
containing the Brief Sum, or Chief Principles of Christian Relgion.

He who Teaches, is called a Catechist; and he who is Taught, Catechumenus, a
Disciple, Scholar, one taught, instucted, or edified. All which words are
derived from [(...)] a Sound; from whence comes the English word Echo, which
is but a Repetition of the Voice, or a Return, or Report of what is uttered. --
And therefore, not without Reason, did the Spirit of God choose, and the Church
retain those Notions: Because the Chief Principles of Christianity were, at
first, instilled by, the Ear, (which is called Wisdom's Gate) the Sound of the
Apostles Words going out into all Lands. They are but Eccho's, or Sounds, whose
Property is, to report what is heard.

This is to be observed by all Catechists, who are not to teach for Fundamental
Doctrine their own Imaginations and Conceits, but to sound into the Ears of
others, what they have heard, and nothing but what they have heard, viz. the
certain Words of Christ, and his Apostles, first sounded in the Gospel, we are
to teach you nothing but what we have been taught by Christ and his Apostles.

The Catechist, called by St. Paul, [(...)] he that Teaches: In the Gal. 6. 6.
Primitive Church [(...)] the Catechist. An Office which the greatest Doctors
of the Church have not disdained, or thought beneath them; as Pantenus, Clem.
Alexand. Origin, Cyrill, Greg. Nyss. and Nazianz.

The Catechumeni, or Catechized, in the Primitive Times, were commonly of Two
sorts, and truly so may well be in our Times.

1. Adulti, Men grown, whether Jews or Gentiles, who were persuaded to receive
the Gospel, but were not yet baptized, and consequently, not to be admitted to
the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, till they had given an Account of their
Faith, and promised to lead and holy Life, consonant to the Rules of the Gospel.

2. Children of Christian Parents, born in the Pale of the Church; -- who,
because born whithin the Covenant, and by Baptism admitted solemnly into the
Congregation of Christ's Flock, when grown to a Capacity of Learning, were
taught the Principles of Christianity. Of which when they could give a
competent Account, were brough to the Bishop to be Confirmed.

Matter of Catechism only, of such things as necessarily, or very profitably to
be known by every Chirstian.

Questions Short, Answers Full and Pertinent; that might be easilier learned and
remembered given and taught in fewest and plainest Words that might. -- It Is not
reason that Rules should be long, and laden with unnecessary Words. Our
savior reduced the whole Law to two Heads, Love to God, and Mat. 22. 37.
Love to our Neighbor. -- St. Paul, to one Syllable, viz. Love; Love Romans 13.
9, 10.
is the fulfilling of the Law. -- Repentance toward God, and Faith toward
Act. 20. 21.
our Lord Jesus Christ, -- set Heb. 6. 1.
down as the Sum of the Gospel.

These then are the principal Matters of any Catechism; and the briefer the
Rules are about them, the better. -- It Is the Commendation of the
Church-Catechism, it is Short, it is Plain: No cause of this Complaint, Brevis
esse laboro, obscurus sio: Though brief, yet not dark and obscure.

This to be learned of every Child.] With us Persons to be instructed in these
Principles, Children; not excluding Elder Persons, in case of Ignorance. Our
Church supposing the Aged to be well grounded in these Principles, (they should
be so indeed, but Experience shows the contrary,) fits and enjoins these
Lessons to the Younger sort. And indeed, this is according to the Command of
God, [ Words Deuteronomy. 6. 6,
which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart; And thou shall teach 7.
them diligently unto thy children. -- Forget not things thine eyes have Chap.
4. 9.
seen; teach them thy sons, and thy sons sons. -- Fathers, bring up your
children in the nurture and admonition Ephesians. 6. 4.
of the Lord. -- Treading in the Genesis 18. 17.
steps of Abraham, that taught his Household Covenant. -- And the Mother 2 Timothy
3. 15.
of Tomothy, who instructed her Son in the Scriptures, from a Child.] -- This
is one way to have good Children, and good Servants. -- However, I shall have
Comfort in performing my Duty. But, I say, by means of Catechizing Children
reasoned with Religious Principles (before Malice, Pride, Self-love, by-Ends,
lustful Inclinations, or corrupt Examples, have depraved their Minds, and
Actions,) a good Foundation would be laid betimes, for the ordering of their
Conversation aright; and the Seed of the Word would be preserved in them whole
and sound. -- Men would be better Livers, and sounder Believers* Horrid Vices,
nor Hellish Heretical Opinions, would not so much prevail. -- For, doubtless,
were the Younger sort but well seasoned with Orthodox Truths, and the
undeniable Principles of Christian Religion, they could not be as Children
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, nor so easily
hurried down the stream of prevailing Wickedness. -- The Jesuit would not gain
so many Proselytes, nor the Sectary so many lightheaded Followers.

A CATECHISM, Containing the PRINCIPLES OF Christian Religion, etc.
Quest. What ought to be the Chief and Continual Care of every Man in this Life?

Answ. To glorify God, and save his Soul: as St. Paul says,

Whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory 1 Cor. 10. 31.
of God. Q. Whence must we take Direction to attain hereunto?

A. Out of the Word of God alone.

Q. What call you the Word of God?

A. The Holy Scripture immediately inspired, which is contained in the Old and
New Testament; as St. Paul says,

All scripture is given by inspiration 2 Timothy 2.
of God? Q. What is your Opinion concerning the Bible, or that Book which we
call the Scripture?

A. I steadfastly believe it to be the true Word of God, written by holy Men, as
they were taught and moved by the Holy Ghost.

When ye received the word of God 1 These. 2. 13.
which ye heard of us, ye received not the word of men, but as it was indeed
the Word of God.

For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit Mat. 10. 20.
of my Father which is in you.

The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and 2 Samuel 22.
his word was in my tongue.

For the prophecy came not in old time 1 Pet. 1. 21.
by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost.

Q. To what end were the Scriptutes written?

A. To Teach, Instuct, Convince, Correct, and Comfort.

All scripture is given by inspiration of 2 Timothy 3. 16.
God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness.

That the man of God may be perfect, -- Ver. 17.
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Romans 15. 4

Q. What does the Scripturs especially teach us?

A. The saving Knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ.

And this is life eternal, that they might Joh. 17. 3.
know thee, the only true God* and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Search the scriptures, for in them ye Joh. 5. 39.
think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me.

Q. What does the Scripture teach thee concerning God?

A. It Teaches me, and I verily Believe it, and am persuaded that there is a
God, as is proved,

For the invisible things of him, (that Romans 1. 20. Act. 14. 17.
is, his Eternal Power and Godhead) are seen by the Creation of the World,
being considered in his Works, to the intent they should be without excuse,

Who is an Essence, or Spiritual Substance:

And God said to Moses, I am that Exodus 3. 14.
I am.

God is a Spirit, and must be worshipped J^h. 4. 24.
in spirit and truth.

Q. How many Gods be there?

A. Only One, and no more:

Unto us there is but one God, which is 1 Cor. 8. 6.
the Father.

Unto thee it was showed, that thou Deuteronomy. 4. 35.
might know that the Lord he is God, and that there is none but he alone.

Q. How is this One God to be conceived of us?

A. Not by framing any Image of him in our Minds; Take good heed therefore,
that ye corrupt ^t. 4. 15, 16.
not your selves, and make you a graven image, or representation of any figure,
whether it be the likeness of male or female. neither can we conceive him in
his glorious Nature; Why ask thou thus after my name, Judge. 13. 18.
which is secret? but we are to conceive God as he has revealed himself in his
Word, by his Properties and Works.

Q. What are the chief Properties of God?

A. He is most Wise; O the depth of the riches both of the Romans 11. 33.
wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways
past finding out! Most Holy; Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of Isa. 6. 3.
Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. Righteous; The Lord is righteous
in all his ways, Psalm. 145. 17.
and holy in all his works. Just; God is true, and without wickedness: Deuteronomy.
32. 4.
just and righteous is he. Merciful; The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and Exodus
34. 6, 7.
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquities, transgressions and sin. True and
Unchangeable; My covenant will I not break, nor Psalm. 89. 34.
alter the things that is gone out of my mouth.

Heaven and earth shall pass away, but Mat. 24.
my words shall not pass.

Present in all Places; O Lord, thou have tried me, and known Psalm. 139. 1, 2,
3, 4.
me; thou know my sitting and rising; thou understandest my thoughts afar
off.

Thou compasses my path, and my lying Jer. 23. 13.
down, and art acquainted with all my ways; for there is not a word in my
tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether.

Almighty; And the Lord said, I am God Almighty; Genesis 17. 1.
Walk before me. Eternal; I the Lord am the first, and with the Isa. 41. 4.
last I am the same. Infinite in Presence; Am I a God at hand, says the Lord,
Jer. 23. 23.
and not a God afar off?

Can any hide himself in secret pla^es, -- Ver. 21.
that I shall not see him? Do not I fill heaven and earth? says the Lord.

Ininite in Power; For the Lord your God is God of gods, Deuteronomy. 10. 17.
and Lord of lords; a great God, mighty and terrible,

being able to be what soever he will. Psalm 115 3.




Q. What are the Works of God, by which we are to conceive him?

A. They are Two principally, Creation and Preservation.

How are we to conceive God, in respect of Creation?

A. That he is the most Mighty Creator of the World, and of every Thing that
has a Being in the World.

O Lord, thou art the God which have Act. 4. 24.
made the heavens and the earth, the sea, and all things that are in them. Q.
There be many Evils, and hurtful Things in the World, as venomous and poisonous
Beasts, Herbs, and such like; Did God create them?

A. Yea, God did create all these things, as in Genesis 1. 25. But we must
understand, that God made not poisonous Creatures so at the first, but they
became so by the Fall of Man, and are now for the Correction and Punishment of
Man, for Sin; which should not have been so, if Man had not fallen.

Cursed be the earth, for thy sake; Genesis 3. 17, 18.
thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee. Q. Did God make Sin,
Sickness, Diseases, and Death, or no?

A. No; these be no Creatures of God. Sin is no Creatures of God, but the
Destruction of God's Image which is a Creature; and Sicknesses, Diseases, and
Death, came into the World by Sin, and follow Sin.

As by one man sin entered into the Romans 5. 12.
World, and death by sin: so death went over all men, forasmuch as all men have
sinned.

Q. What is the Work of Creation?

A. It is the Making of all Things in their several Kinds, of Nothing, by the
mighty Power of God, in the first Six Days of the World

For in six days the Lord made heaven Exodus 20. 11.
and earth, the sea, and all that in them is.

And are not made of things which did Heb. 11. 3.
appear.

Q. In what Form and Manner were all Things created?

A. In an excellent Order, and exceeding Good.

And God saw all that he had made, Genesis 1. 31.
and lo it was exceeding good.

Q. For what End did God make all Things?

A. For the Praise of his Power, Goodnese, Wisdom, Perfection and Freedom.

The Lord has made all things for his Prove. 16. 4.
own sake; yea, the wicked for the day of evil, Rev. 4. 11.

Q. What is the Second Work whereby we are to conceive God in our Minds?

A. We are to conceive him in our Minds, as the most Wise and Mighty Preserver
of all Things created. God is a faithful Creator: He did not only 1 Pet. 4. 19.
make Heaven and Earth, and all Things in them, and so leave, them; but he, by
his wise Providence, and mighty Power, does preserve and govern the same.

Q. What is that Preservation or Providence of all things?

A. The Alimighty Power of God every where present, Can any hide himself in
secret places, Jer. 23. 24.
that I shall not see him? says the Lord: Do not I fill heaven and earth?

whereby he does, as it were, with his Hand, uphold and govern Heaven and
Earth, with all the Creatures therein. Heb. 1. 3.
So that those things which in the Earth grow, as likewise Rain and Drought,
Fruitfulness and Barrenness, Meat and Drink, Health and Sickness, Riches and
Poverty: In a word, all Things come not rashly, or by Chance, but by his
Fatherly Counsel and Will; as is manifest: Viz.

Let us now fear the Lord our God, that Jer. 5. 24.
gives rain, both early and late, in due season.

He gave us rain from heaven, and Act. 14. 17.
fruitful seasons; filling our hearts with food and gladness.

The rich and the poor meet together, the Prove. 22. 2.
Lord is the Maker of them all.

Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? Mat. 10. 29.
and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your Father.

The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole Prove. 16. 13.
disposition thereof is of the Lord.

Q. How know you that God orders and governs all things by his most wise
and mighty Power, and by his special Providence?

A. By Experience we see that Meat and Drink being void of Life, yet preserve
the Life of Man. Clothing being void of Heat, yet it keeps the Body warm;
which could not be, but by the special Providence of God.

Q. What does the Knowledge of the Creation and Providence of God teach us?

A. That in Adversity we may be Patient, and Thankful in Prosperity, and have
herefter our chiefest Hope reposed in God our most faithful Father, being sure
that there is nothing which may withdraw us from his Love; forasmuch as all
Creatures are so in his Power, that without his Will, they are not able not
only to do any thing, but not so much a once to move.

Q. What are we further to Believe and Conceive concerning God?

A. That in One Spiritual and infinitely Perfect Essence there be Three Divine
Persons; the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost: as is proved,

Furthermore, God said, Let us make Genesis 1. 26.
man.

Hereby showing, that in the Unity of the Godhead there is a Plurality, which
is not Accidental, nor Effential, but Personal.

Go therefore and teach all notions, baptizing Mat. 28. 19.
them in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

These Three Persons are not. Three several Substances, but Three distinct
Subsistences, or Three diverse Manner of Beings, of One and the Same Substance,
and Divine Essence.

Q. Why is the first Person named Father?

A. 1st, In respect of his Natural Son Christ;

This is my beloved Son, in whom I am Mat. 3. 17.
well pleased. 2ly, In respect of the Elect, his adopted Sons;

Doubtless thou art our Father: though Isa. 63. 16.
Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not, yet thou, O Lord, art our
Father, and our Redeemer.

Q. Why is the Second Person named the Son?

A. Because he is begotten of his Father's Substance or Nature;

Thou art my Son, this day I have begotten thee.

Q. Why is he called the Word?

A. 1st, Because the Conception of a Prove. 8. 12.
Word in Man's Mind, is the nearest thing that, in some sort, can shadow unto
us the Manner how he is eternally begotten of his Fathers Substance; and in
this respect he is also called the Wisdom of his Father.

2dly, Because that by him the Father Joh. 1. 18.
has from the Beginning declared his Will for our Salvation.

3dly, Because he is the chief Argument Heb. 1. 1.
of all the Word of God, or that Word whereof God spoke, when he promised the
Blessed Seed to the Fathers, under the Old Testament.

Q. Why is the Third Person called the Holy Ghost?

A. 1st, Because he is Spiritual, without Joh. 4. 24.
a Body.

2dly, Because he is Inspired, and (as it were) Breathed from the Father and
the Son; that is, proceeding from them Both.

And he breathed on them, and said, Chap. 20. 22.
Receive the Holy Ghost. And he is called Holy, both because he is Holy in his
own Nature, and also the immediate Sanctifier of all God's Elect.

As he that has called you is holy, so 1 Pet. 1. 15.
be ye holy.

Elect, according to the foreknowledge -- Ver. 2.
of God, the Father, unto sanctification of the spirit.

Q. What is the Father?

A. The First Person of the glorious Trinity, having neither his Being nor
Beginning of any other but of himself, begetting his Son, and together with his
Son sending forth the Holy Ghost from Everlasting.

Q. What is the Son?

A. The Second Person of the Trinity, and the only begotten Son of his Father;
not by Grace, but by Nature; having his Being from the Father alone, and the
whole Being of his Father, by an Eternal and Incomprehensible Generation; and
with the Father, sends forth the Holy Ghost.

Q. What is the Holy Ghost?

A. The Third Person of the Trinity, proceeding and sent forth equally from
both the Father and the Son, by an Eternal and Incomprehensible Inspiration:
For as the Son receives the whole Divine Essence by Generation, so the Holy
Ghost receives it wholly by Inspiration.

Q. How does this Order between the Three Persons appear?

A. In that the Father Begetting, must, in Order, be before the Son Begotten;
and the Father and the Son, before the Holy Ghost, proceeding from them both.

Q. Are not these Three Persons, in Degree, one before or after another?

A. This Divine Order excepted, there is neither First nor Last, neither
Superiority nor Inferiority, among the Three Persons: but for Nature, they are
Co-essential; for Dignity, Coequal; for Time, Coeternal; the Divine Essence
being in every one of the Three Persons.

Q. Are these Three Persons Three several Gods, as three Persons amongst Men
are three several Men?

A. No: The Three Persons are but One God.

There be three which bear record in heaven, 1 John 5. 7.
the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three are one. In that he
says Three, he notes the Distinction of the Persons; and in saying One, he
shows the Unity of the Essence. Because the Divine Essence is Infinite, and
admits n Division; and the whole Divine Essence is in every one of the Three
Persons; which are not severed, but only distinguished one from another.

Q. How are we to coneive the Three Persons in the Godhead distinct one from
another?

A. Two ways.

1st, In the Manner of Personal Being, which each Person has proper to
himself. As,

The Father is the Person which Begets.

The Son, the Person who is Begotten of the Father.

The Holy Ghost, the Person who proceeds from the Father and the Son.

2ly, In the Manner of Working in the Creatures: For the Scripture ascribes To
the Father, the Beginning of Working.

To the Son, Wisdom and Counsel, and the Dispensation of the Work.

To the Holy Ghost, Virtue and Power, and Efficacy of Operation. In a Word, God
the Father, in the Son, by the Holy Ghost, works all things,

By the word of the Lord were the heavens Psalm. 33. 6.
made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. Of all visible
Creatures, which is the Chiefest?

A. Man: For in Man, above all other Visible Creatures, the Lord sets forth the
Glory of his Wisdom, Power and Goodness.

Q. What was the State and Condition of Man, at the first, by Creation?

A. It was an holy and happly Condition; a State of Innocence, and a State of
Life.

Q. Wherein stood that holy Condition of Man?

A. In that he was free from Sin, and created after God's own Image and
Likeness.

And God said, Let us make man in our Genesis 1. 26.
image, according to our likeness. Q. What was that Image of God in which Man
was at first created?

A. It was a Conformity of Man to God, even a Conformity of all the Power of
the Soul of Man to the Will of God, standing in Wisdom and Holiness.

Put on the new man, which, after God, Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10.
is created in righteousness, and true holiness. Q. What was that Wisdom that
was in Man at the first?

A. A perfect Knowledge of God his Creator, and of his Will to be obeyed, and
of his Wisdom and Will touching the particular Creatures; for Adam named them
according to their Natures.

Q. What was that Holiness that was in Man at the first?

A. It was a Conformity of the Will and Affections, and the whole Disposion of
Man, in Body and Soul, to the Will of God his Creator.

Q. Wherein stood that happy Condition of Man, in his first Creation?

A. In Three things.

1st. In a blessed Estate, which was in Communion, which Man had with the True
God, with whom he had daily, and (as it were) familiar Conversation.

2dly. In Dominion over the Creatures: Genesis 1. 28.
An Example whereof, is, when all Creatures presented themselves before him, to
receive their Names from -- Ver. 29.
him.

3dly. In a Body endued with Beauty, Strength and Immortality. And that his
Body was Immortal, there is no question, seeing Death came in by Sin.

Q. Man being in this happy Estate, what Employment had he?

A. Twofold.

1st. Particular and Outward: To Till Chap. 2. 15.
and Dress the Garden.

2dly. General and Spiritual: To Worship and serve his Creator.

Every one shall be called by my name; Isa. 43. 7.
for I created him for my glory. Q. How was be fitted and enabled for this
Service?

A. He was fitted of God with Freedom of Will, and Ability for perfect
Obedience. Being manifestly proved, from the Perfection of the Image of God, in
which Man was created.

Also, he having the Moral Law written in his Heart by Nature.

Q. How does that appear?

A. 1st. By the Effect of his Law in his Heart. For Man having sinned, the
Guilt G^n. 3. 8.
of his Conscience forced him to hide himself from God's Presence.

2dly. By the Remainders of the Law of God in all Mankind; who having not the
Law of God; are a Law unto Romans 2. 14
themselves.

Q. Did Man continue in that happy State in which he was created?

A. No: But harkening to the poysned Genesis 3.
Suggestions of the wicked Serpent, and by obeying his Persuasions, he lost his
Free Will, and Perfection, and fell from Righteousness to Sin.

Q. How was it that Man lost his first State, and fell from Righteousness to
Sin?

A. God suffering Satan to tempt him, and leaving him to the mutability and
liberty of his own Will, he fell into Sin, eating of the forbidden Fruit.

Q. How did Man yield to Temptation, being created Good?

A. Being left of God to the liberty Chap. 3. 6.
and mutability of their own Will, they voluntary inclined to that Evil
whereunto they were tempted.

Q. What is the State of Man, being fallen from his first Estate in which he
was created?

A. It is a State of Corruption and Misery,

Q. What is the State of Corruption following the Fall of Man?

A. It is the Loss of the Image of God, in which Man was created at first; and
the Image of Satan succeeding in the place of it: so that Man, in that State,
can do nothing but sin. And this the Scripture calls the Old Man, the Flesh.

And Adam begat a child in his own Genesis 5. 3.
likeness, after his image.

Cast ye off, concerning the conversation Ephesians. 4. 22.
in time past, the old Man, which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts.

Q. What is Sin?

A. Sin is any swerving from the Law of God, though it be in the least want of
that which the Law requires.

Whosoever sins, transgresses the law; 1 John 3. 4.
for sin is the transgression of the law.

I had not known lust, except the law Romans 7. 7.
had said, Thou shall not lust.

Q. How many sorts of Sin be there?

A. Two: Original, and Actual. Sin is either the Corruption of Nature, or the
evil Actions that proceed from thence, as the Fruits of it.

Q. What is the Corruption of Man's Nature?

A. It is that Corruption that is derived from our first Parents by Natural
Generation, called Lust, or Concupisence.

But sin took an occasion by the commandment, Romans 7. 8.
and wrought in me all manner of concupisence. Q. Wherein stands that
corruption?

A. In Two things.

1st. In an utter Disability and Enmity to that which is good.

I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) Chap. 7. 18.
dwells no good things.

The wisdom of the flesh, is enmity against Chap. 8. 7.
God.

2dly. In a Proness to all manner of Evil.

The law is spiritual; but I am carnal, Chap. 7. 14.
sold under sin. Q. In whom is that Corruption of Nature found?

A. In all Men and Women, none excepted, descending from Adam by Natural
Generation.

For there is no difference; for all have Chap. 3. 23.
sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God. Q. How is it that all Men and
Women are deflied with the Corruption of Nature?

A. Through the Infidelity and Disobedience of our first Parents, in Eating the
Forbidden Fruit; all Men being guilty of that Sin.

Wherefore, as by one man sin entered Romans 5. 12.
into the world, and death by sin; and so death went over all men, forasmuch as
all men have sinned. Q. How are all Men Guilty of that Sin?

A. 1st. Because they were in the Heb. 7. 9.
Loins of our first Parents; from whom they should, by course of Nature,
descend.

2dly. Because our first Parents were, by God's Appointment, to stand or fall;
not as singular Persons only, but also as Heads and Roots of all Mankind, and
as public Persons, representing all Mankind. So that every one naturally
descending of Adam, is Guilty of Adam's Sin, it being imputed to him; as St.
Paul manifests:

As in Adam all die.

By the offense of one, the fault came on Romans 5. 18.
all men to condemnation.

By one man's disobedience, many were -- Ver. 19.
made sinners.

Q. Is Original Corruption found in every one equally?

A. Yes, it is: for that which is born of Natural Generation, is nothing but
Corruption. For, as St. John says, That which is born of flesh, is flesh. Joh.
3. 6.


Q. Does this Corruption of Nature break forth and show it self equally, and in
all Men alike?

A. No: Though Original Corruption be found equally and alike in all Men
naturally; yet does God, for the Good of Humane Society, limit Man's
Corruption, and restrain Man from notorious Crimes, y their Natural Temper, by
Fear of Shame and Punishment, Desire of Honor and Reward, and such like.

Q. Now what is Actual Sin?

A. It is a Fruit of Original Corruption; and it is a Particular and Actual
Breach of God's Law.

For out of the heart come evil thoughts, Mat. 15. 19.
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, and such like.

When lust has conceived, it brings Jam. 1. 15.
forth sin.

Q. How is Actual Sin distinguished?

A. Into Inward and Outward. It is either the Inward Faculties of the Soul, as
the Mind, or Will and Affections; or in the Outward Members of the Body.

Q. What is the Actual Sin of the Mind, Will, and Affections?

A. It is the evil Thought or Intent of the Mind, which comes either by the
Conceiving of the Mind it self, or by Satan's Suggestion.

The Lord saw that the wickedness of Genesis 6. 5.
man was great in the earth, and all the imaginations of his heart were only
evil continually.

And Satan stood up against Israel, and 1 Chronicles. ^1 1.
provoked David to number Israel.

Also, it is every Motion, and Lust, and Desire, stirring in the Heart,
contrary to God's Law.

For the flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5. 17.
and the spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary one to the other. Q.
What is Outward Actual Sin in the Outward Members of the Body?

A. It is that which is committed by the Members of the Body, carrying with it
the Faculties of the Soul.

Q. How is Actual Sin effected?

A. Two ways. Either by Omission or Commission; either by omitting that which
ought to be done, or by committing that Evil that is forbidden, and ought not
to be done, whether it be inwardly, in the Mind, Will, or Affections; or
outwardly, in Word or Deed.

Q. What is the State of Misery following the Fall of Man?

A. It is a continual Subjection to the Curse of God, whereby Man, by the just
Sentence of God, is continually subject and liable to God's Curse, for Sin.

Cursed is every one that continues not Gal. 3. 10.
in all things which are written in the book of the law, to do them. And that
in this Life, both in Body, and outward Estate.

The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave Deuteronomy. 28. 21.
unto thee, until he have consumed thee from off the land, whither thou go
to possess it.

The Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, -- Ver. 22, etc.
and with a fever, and with an inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and
with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursue thee
till thou perish, -- etc.

And also in Soul; and that with Blindness of Mind, Hardness and Astonishment
of Heart, Horror of Conscinece, and such like.

And the Lord shall smite thee with Deuteronomy. 28. 28.
madness, and with blindness, and with astonishment of heart. And not only in
this Life, but also in the End of this Life; and that is the Power of Corporal
Death, the Death of the Body, whereby the Soul is severed from the Body.

And also after this Life is ended: And that by Eternal Death of Body and Soul
in Hell Fire, called the Second Death; which is a final Separation from the
comfortable Presence of God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and a sense and
feeling of God's Wrath in that Separation, whenas it shall be said to them,

I never knew you: Depart from me, Mat. 7. 23.
ye that work iniquity.

Depart from me into everlasting fire, Chap. 25. 41.
which is prepared for the devil and his angels.

Q. Seeing then, by the just Judgment of God, we are subject both to Temporal
and Eternal Punishment; Is there yet any Way or Means remaining, whereby we may
be delivered from these Punishments, and be reconciled to God?

A. God will have his Justice satisfied: Wherefore it is necessary, that we
satisfy either by our selves, or by another. For,

The soul that sins, it shall ^ie. Exodus 18. 4.
Q. Are we able to satisfy our selves?

A. Not a whit: Nay, rather, we do every Day increase our Debt. For,

If thou, O Lord, should mark our Psalm. 130. 3.
iniquities; O Lord, who should stand? Q. Is there any Creature, which only is
a Creature, in Heaven or Earth, able to satisfy for us?

A. None: For, first, God will not punish that Sin in any other Creature, which
Man has committed. For,

The soul that sins, it shall die. Exodus 18.
Neither can that which is nothing but a Creature, sustain the Wrath of God
against Sin, and deliver others from it:

Who can stand before his wrath? or Nah. 1. 6.
who can abide in the fierceness of his wrath? Q. What manner of Mediator then,
and Deliverer, must we seek for?

A. Such a one, verily, as is very Man:

For since by man came death, by man 1 Cor. 15. 21.
came also the resurrection of the dead. And perfectly Just:

For such an high priest it became us to Heb. 7. 26.
have, which is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. Q. Wherefore
is it necessary that he be very Man?

A. 1st. That he might die, and suffer the Punishment due to Sin, which the
Godhead could not do: Forasmuch then as the children were Chap. 2. 14.
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part with them,
that he might destroy, through death, him that had the power of death; that is,
the devil.

2dly. Because the Justice of God requires, that the same Humane Nature which
sinned, do it self likewise make Recompense for Sin:

The righteousness of the righteous shall Exodus 18. 20.
be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself. Q. Why
also must he be very God?

A That he might, by his Godhead, sustain in his Flesh the burden of God's
Wrath:

For the Lord thy God is a consuming Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
fire, and a jealous God. And might recover and restore unto us that
Righteousness which we had lost:

He was wounded for our transgressions, Isa. 53. 5.
he was broken for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and with his stripes we are healed.

Yet the Lord would break him, and -- Ver. 10.
make him subject to infirmities, when he shall make his soul an offering for
sin.

Q. And who is that Mediator which is both very God, and perfectly Just Man?

A. Even our Lord Jesus Christ, who is made to us of God, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption:

There is one Mediator between God and 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Man, which is the man Jesus Christ. Ye are of him in Jesus Christ, who is 1
Cor. 1. 30.
made of God unto us, wisdom, righteteousness, sanctification and redemption.
Q. But what are we to Know and Believe, touching the Distinction of the two
Natures in Christ, his Godhead, and his Manhood.

A. That there is a real Distinction of Mat. 26. 39. Joh. 10. 17, 18. Act. 3.
21.
those two Natures, without any Mixture the one with the other, and without any
Conversion, or turning of the one into the other; and that the Essential
Properties and Actions of both Natures remain distinct one from the other.

Q. What are we to Believe and Know, touching the Union of Christ's two
Natures, his Godhead, and his Manhood?

A. That they are united by Personal Union; that the Godhead and Manhood in
Christ, make but One Person.

Q. What is that Personal Union?

A. It is the assuming of the Humane Nature into the Person of the Son of God;
so as the Manhood being not a Person in it self, is received into Unity of
Person with the Second Person in Trinity, and does usually and only subsist in
the same. This is a Mystery of Godliness:

And the word was made flesh, and Joh. 1. 14.
dwelt among us, full of grace and truth.

Great is the mystery of Godliness; which 1 Timothy 3. 16.
is, God is manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, etc.

Q. What is the Office of Jesus Christ, being God and Man in One Person?

A. It is his Mediatorship, to be the only Mediator and Advocate between God
and Man:

There is one mediator between God and 1 Timothy 2. 5.
man. Q. What is meant by a Mediator, or Advocate?

A. A Mediator, or Advocate, is a third Person, that takes upon him to agree
and reconcile two that be at variance: As Christ, being both God and Man, did
set at one God and Man, who before were separated by Sin: I the Lord have
called thee in righteousness, Isa. 42. 6.
and will hold thine hand; and I will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant
of the people, and for a light of the Gentiles.

Q. How did he that?

A. By the Satisfying of God's Justice by his Death.

By Praying and Entreating for the Guilty. And,

By applying, forcibly and effectually, his Merit, through Faith, on them that
Believe, and regenerating them by his holy Spirit, effecting that they cease
from sinning: And, lastly, Hearing their Groans and Petitions, when they call
upon him:

For thus it becomes him who was our Mat. 3. 15.
faithful high priest, to fulfill all righteousness. Q. What be the several
Functions and Offices of Christ, as he is Mediator?

A. They are Three, namely his, Prophetical Office. Priestly Kingly

Christ was anointed of his Father, to be the Prophet, King, and Priest of his
Church:

For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise
up unto you, of our brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things
whatsoever he shall say unto you.

Wherefore in all things it behoved him Heb. 2. 17.
to be made like unto his brethren; that he might be a merciful and faithful
high priest, in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins
of the people.

The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou Psalm. 110. 1.
at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.

Q. What is the Prophetical Office of Christ?

A. It is the Office of Revealing the Will of God, and the Means of Salvation
to his Church, in all Ages. As,

No man has seen God at any time; Joh. 1. 18.
the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared
him. Which Office Christ performs Two ways:

1st. Outwardly, By the Ministry of his Word:

Christ was put to death concerning the 1 Pet. 3. 18.
flesh, but was quickened in the spirit. By which spirit he went and preached
-- Ver. 19.
unto the spirits that were in prison. 2dly. Inwardly, By the Operation and
Teaching of his holy Spirit: As by the Example of Lydia,

Whose heart the Lord opened, that she Act. 16. 14.
attended unto the things which Paul spoke. Q. What is the Priestly Office of
Christ?

A. It is that whereby Christ has and does reconcile God to his Elect: He
performing all those things to God for them, whereby they may come to Eternal
Life:

But this man, because he endures for Heb. 7. 24.
ever, has an everlasting priesthood. Wherefore he is able also perfectly to
-- Ver. 25.
save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. Which Priestly Office Christ performs Three ways, for
God chosen.

First, In fulfilling the Law of God, and performing perfect Righteousness for
them. Which Perfection

He is made unto us, of God, wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
righteousness, sanctification and redemption. stands in Two things:

1st. In the Purity of his Humane Nature; he being conceived and born Pure and
Holy, void of all Sin.

2dly. In the Obedience of his whole Life; he doing all that the Law required
of him for God's Chosen:

Who did no sin, neither was there any 1 Pet. 2. 22. Isa 53. 9.
guile found in his mouth. Secondly, As he was Man, consisting of Body and Soul:

Yet the Lord would break him, and Isa. 53 10.
make him subject to infirmities, when he shall make his soul an offering for
sin. Offering of himself unto God his Father, a sacrifice without spot, thereby
appeasing his Wrath for all their Sins:

How much more shall the blood of Heb. 9. 14.
Christ, which, through the eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to God.

But now, in the end of the world, has -- Ver. 26.
he appeared once, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.

Thirdly, His entering into Heaven, and there appearing before his Father,
continually making Intercession for all the Faithful:

Who shall condemn? It is Christ, who Romans 8. 34.
also is at the right hand of God, and makes request for us. Q. After what
manner does Christ make Intercession in Heaven for the Faithful?

A. Not by Prostrating himself, and uttering Words to his Father; or by putting
up a Prayer or Supplication to him:

But by presenting himself, and the Sacrifice of himself once offered upon the
Cross, and the infinite and unvaluable Merit of that Sacrifice before the Eyes
of his Father: willing, as he is God and Man; and desiring, as he is Man, that
his Father would accept of his perfect Satisfaction for all that are given unto
him:

For Christ is not entered into the holy Heb. 9. 24.
places that are made with hands, which are similitudes of the true sanctuary;
but is entered into the very heaven, to appear now in the sight of God for us.
Q. What is the Kingly Office of Christ?

A. It is that whereby Christ exercises the Power given him of his Father over
all Things; distributing his Gifts, and disposing of all things for the Good of
God's Chosen:

All power is given to me, both in heaven, Mat. 28. 18.
and in earth. Which Office Christ performs Two ways:

1st. In the Spiritual Government of his Church: which stands partly in
collecting and gathering his Church, and the Members of it, out of the World,
and from under the Tyranny of the Devil, Sin, and Death: Who has delivered us
from the Col. 1. 13.
power of darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son.

And, partly, in keeping it, being collected and gathered in the way unto
Eternal Life:

The increase of his government and peace shall have none end; he shall sit
upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to stablish it
with judgment, and with justice, from henceforth, and for ever. 2dly. In the
Destruction of his and their Enemies: partly in this World; but most fully in
the End of this World, in the Day of Judgment:

Then shall the wicked man be revealed; 2 These. 2. 8.
whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish
with the brightness of his coming. Q. What be the Laws of Christ's Spiritual
Government, by which he governs it, and the Members of it?

They are Two,

1st. His Word; namely, the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, written in
the Old and New Testament.

2dly. The Power and Operation of his Spirit in the Hearts of his Servants:

Mark 1. 14. Isa. 53. 1. Jer. 31. 33.
Q. How is Christ, and all his Benefits, available to us?

A. By being made ours. For otherwise they shall no way help us, to the
satisfying of God's Justice; even as other Men's Riches avail nothing, to
deliver us out of Debt, except they become ours.

Q. How therefore may his Gifts and Benefits be made ours?

A. If we be made one with him. For by the Benefit of that Union, we are made
Partakers of all his Spiritual Graces and Riches; which are no less imputed
unto us before God, than if they were ours by Nature: For this cause, says the
Apostle,

That we are by Christ reconciled, in Col. 1. 22.
the body of his flesh through death, to make you holy and unblameable, and
without fault in his sight. Q. Can no Man therefore be a Partaker of Christ's
Gifts, except he be made one with him?

A. He cannot: even as a Woman cannot be a Partaker of the Riches and Honor of
some Great Man, except she be joined with him in Marriage, so that they become
one Body, and one Flesh: The Members also cannot draw Life from the Head, if
they be not joined with it. Therefore there is no true partaking of Christ,
except there be an Union with him. For this cause, Christ says,

Except ye eat the flesh of the son of Joh. 6. 53.
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Q. How are we United to
Christ, and made One with him?

A. As many as are United to Christ, are Incorporated, and made Members of that
Mystical Body whereof Christ is the Head: As St. Paul says,

For we are members of his Body, of his Ephesians. 4. 30.
flesh, and of his bones. Q. What manner of Union is it, whereby we are joined
and made one with Christ?

A. Our Incorporation into Christ, and Union with him, is a great Mystery: As
St. Paul says,

This is a great mystery; but I speak Ephesians. 4. 32.
concerning Christ and the church. A. And not any way Corporeal, but Spiritual:
For,

He that is joined with the Lord, is one 1 Cor. 6. 17.
spirit. Q. How are we to conceive of that Mystical Union with Christ?

A. Thus: That our Mystical Union with him, is a most near and real Union: For
as the body is one, and has many 1 Cor. 12. 12.
members, and all the members of the body, which is one, though they be many,
yet are but one body; even so is Christ.

And that our whole Person, Body and Soul, are united to the Body and Soul of
Christ: so that we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones* For,

Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ; and that we are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. And by his Flesh, we are
also joined ot his Godhead, to his Divine Nature:

For that whereby we have Fellowship with God, joins us to God.

Now by the Flesh of Christ, we have Fellowship with God.

Therefore the Flesh of Christ does join us to God:

By the new and living way which he has prepared for us, through the vail,
that is, his flesh. Q. Now show unto me the M^ans how we are united, and made
one with Christ?

A. We are Spiritually united to Christ, Two ways.

1st. The Spirit of Christ, one and the same Spirit, being both in Christ, and
in us. First in Christ, and then in us:

For by one spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Grecians.

And we know that we dwell in him, 1 John 4. 13.
and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit.

2dly. By Faith: As Christ himself testifies, in the Prayer which he made to
God for all the Faithful:

Father, I pray thee, for such as shall Joh. 17. 20.
believe in me, that they all may be one; as thou, O Father, art in me, and I
in thee, that they also may be one in us. Q. Seeing that by Faith we are
united, and made one with Christ, show me what true Faith is?

A. It is not only a certain Knowledge, whereby I surely assent to all things
which God has revealed unto us in his Word, As the devils, they believe that
there Jam. 2. 19.
is one God. but also, an assured Trust, Neither did Abraham doubt of the
pro-mise, Romans 4. 20.
through unbelief, but was strengthened in the faith;

Being fully assured, that he which had -- Ver. 21.
promised, was able also to do it,

kindled in my Heart by the Holy Ghost, This is the work of God, that ye Joh.
6. 29.
believe in him whom he has sent.

For flesh and blood has not revealed Mat. 16. 17.
it to thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

through the Gospel, For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Romans 1. 16.
Christ; for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes.
whereby I make my Repose in God; being assuredly resolved, that Remission of
Sins, Everlasting Righteousness, and Life, is given not only to others, but to
me also; For being justified by faith, we have Chap. 5. 1.
peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. and that freely, through the
Mercy of God, for the Merit of Christ alone:

We are justified freely by his grace, Chap. 3. 24.
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. Q. Show me what are those
things which are necessary for a Christian Man to Believe concerning Faith?

A. All things which are promised us in the Gospel: As Christ says,

These things are written, that ye might Joh. 21. 31.
believe. The Sum whereof is briefly comprised in the Creed of the Apostles, or
in the Articles of the Catholic and Undoubted Faith of all Christians.

Q. Which are the Articles and Sum of Christian Faith, or the Apostles Creed?

A. I believe in God the Father Almighty,

And in Jesus Christ, his only Son,

Which was conceived of the Holy Mary;

Suffered under Pontius Pilate; was

The Third Day he rose again from

He ascended into Heaven, and sits

From thence he shall come to judge

I believe in the Holy Ghost.

I believe the Holy Catholic Church,

The Forgiveness of Sins;

The Resurrection of the Body;

And Life Everlassting.

Q. Show me the Reason why it is called the Apostles Creed?

A. Because it contains, as it were, a brief Sum of all the Apostolical
Doctrine, written in the Books of the Old and New Testament.

Q. What are the Parts of this Creed?

A. They are Four.

1st. Of Faith in God the Father.

2dly. Of Faith in God the Son.

3dly. Of Faith in God the Holy Ghost.

Q. But why is our Faith distinctly referred to every Person by it self, seeing
that it is One God in whom we Believe?

A. That our Faith may be the better strengthened: Which is then done, when we
consider distinctly, and apart, what each Person, according to his distinct
Property, has wrought in our Salvation: Notwithstanding, our Faith is not at
all the less referred to One God.

Q. How?

A. For it is all one as if a Man should say, I put all my Hope and Trust in
One God, of whose Love I cannot doubt at all: For whereas he is distinguished
into Three Persons, every one of them confirms in me the Assurance of that
Love.

For the Father has both Created me by his Omnipotency, and does also Guide me
by his merciful Providence.

The Son has Redeemed me by his Death: Reconciled me to God the Father; and
even yet makes Intercession to him for me.

The Holy Ghost, by his Divine Power, has Sanctified me, and joined me with
Christ and his Church; that with it I might be made Partaker of all Gifts,
until he bring me even to Eternal Life.

Q. Which is the First Article of the Creed?

A. I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.

Q. Why say we rather, I believe; and not, We believe? whereas in Prayer, we
say not only, My Father; but, Our Father?

A. Because howsoever we ma and must one Pray for another, yet we cannot one
Believe for another: but when we come to Years, every Man must believe for
himself; and be saved by his own, and not by another's Faith: As the Prophet
says,

The just shall live by his faith. Hab. 2. 4.
Q. What is meant, in saying, I Believe in God?

A. I do not only Believe God, And that there is but One God: But I Believe in
God: that is, I Believe that he is my God; that is, I am persuaded, That
whatsoever God is, and is said to be, he is all that to me, and refers it
all to my safety, for his Son's sake; and therefore, from my Heart, I put all
my Confidence in him.

Q. What Comfort is reaped hereby?

A. So long as I repose all my Trust in him, I may assure my self of my
Salvation, and of an happy Deliver^nce in all Dangers and Necessity*

For Daniel, when he was brought out Dan. 6. 23.
of the cruel lions den, had no hurt found on him, because then he trusted in
his God. Q. Why is God called a Father?

A. 1st. In respect of Christ, his only begotten and natural Son.

2dly. In respect of all the Creatures, as he is Creator and Preserver of them
all.

3dly. In respect of the Elect, whom he has adopted to be his Sons:

Who has predestined us to be adopted, Ephesians. 1. 5.
through Jesus Christ, unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will. Q. What Comfort comes by this?

A. I do therefore believe in him to be my God, and my Father, for Christ's
sake:

As many as received him, and believed Joh. 1. 12.
in his name, to them he gave power to be the sons of God.

But ye have received the spirit of adoption, Romans 8. 15.
whereby we cry Abba, Father.

And therefore I do trust in him, and so rely on him, that I may not doubt but
he will provide all things necessary both for my Soul and Body:

Though I be poor and needy, the Lord Psalm. 40. 17.
thinks on me.

Behold the fowls of the heaven, they Mat. 6. 26,
sow nor reap not, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are not ye much
better then they?

And why care ye for raiment? the lillies 28,
of the field they neither labor nor spin.

Wherefore, if God so cloth the grass of 30,
the field; shall he not do not much more unto you, O ye of little faith!

Therefore take no thought, saying, What 31,
shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or what shall we put on?

For your heavenly Father knows that 32,
ye have need of all these things.

But seek ye first the kingdom of heaven, 33.
and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be ministered unto
you.

And that he will bear with my Wants and Weaknesses:

I will spare them, says the Lord, as Mal. 3. 17.
a man spares his own son that serves him.

As a father has compassion on his children, Psalm. 10^* 1^*
so has the Lord compassion on them that fear him.

For he knows whereof we be made; 14.
he remembers that we are but dust.

And what Afflictions he sends on me in this troublesome Life, he will turn
them to my Safety:

For all things work together for the Romans 8. 28.
best, to those that love God. And furthermore, he never chastises me but for
my good:

But the Lord chastises us for our profit, Heb. 12. 10.
that we might be made partakers of his holiness.

We are chastised of the Lord, because 1 Cor. 11. 32.
we should not be condemned with the world.

When ye thought evil against me, God Genesis 50 20.
disposed it to good.

Q. Now show unto me what Profit the Faithful reap by their Afflictions?

A. 1st. By them, God brings us to Humility:

With rebukes thou chastises man for Psalm. 39. 11.
iniquity. 2dly. By Afflictions, God calls us to true Repentance: for when he
corrects our Sins, he does it to make us understand how much he detesteth
Sin, that so also we might detest it; and withal, he tameth the Rebellion of
our Flesh, and daily, more and more, teaches us Obedience:

It is good for me that I was afflicted, Psalm. 119. 71.
that I might learn thy statutes: 3dly. God works in us, that we should learn
to pity such as be in distress: for no Man has Compassion, or suffers with
another, who himself has not suffered before. For,

We have not an high priest, which cannot Heb. 4. 15.
be touched with our infirmities; but such an one as was in all things tempted
in the like sort, yet without sin. 4thly. By Afflictions, the Lord shakes off
our Deadness and Drowsiness, and does stir us up the more earnestly to come and
call upon him by fervent and hearty Prayer:

Call upon me in the time of thy trouble, Psalm. 50. 15.
and I will hear thee. 5thly. By them the Lord makes trial of our Faith; for
they do either Consume the Wicked through Impatience, or else Harden them
through Despair. On the other side, they Soften the Hearts of the Godly, to
make them call upon God, and to trust the more upon him: Blessed is the man
that endures temptation; Jam. 1. 12.
for when he has been tried he shall receive the Crown of life.

6thly. By Afflictions, God does call our minds away from these Earthly things,
that we may the more earnestly desire the Life to come. Seeing then, there is
so many Comforts by Affliction,

My son, despise not the chastning of the Heb. 12. 5,
Lord, neither faint when thou art corrected of him:

For whom he loves, he chasteneth. 6.


Q. Why is he said to be Almighty?

A. Because he is able to do whatsoever he will:

Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did Psalm. 135. 6.
he, in heaven, in earth, in the sea, and in all the depths. Yea, he is able to
do more than he will.

For I say unto you, God is able of these Mat. 3. 9.
stones to raise up children to Abraham. Q. What Comfort is there, in that God
is said to be Almighty?

A. It strengthens me in my Prayer to him; assuring me, that he can make good
whatever Promises he has made unto me in his Word:

Being fully assured, that he which Romans 4. 21.
had promised, was also able to do it. And though I be weak, and unable to
resist mine Enemies, bodily or spiritual, and no way able to help or provide
for my self; yet my heavenly Father is of all Majesty and Power, guiding and
overruling continually Men, Angels and Devils, and all Creatures, to serve for
his own Glory, and the Good of his Children:

Yea, though I should walk through the Psalm. 23. 4.
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none evil; for thou art with me.

When the ways of man please the Lord, Prove. 16. 7.
he will make his enemies to be at peace with him.

Q. What is meant in saying, He was Maker of Heaven and Earth?

A. That he formed and framed this whole World, and all the Creatures that are
therein, only by the Power of his Word and Commandment, even of Nothing:

By the word of the Lord were the heavens Psalm. 33. 6.
made; and all the host of them, by the breath of his mouth. Q. What Comfort
comes by this?

A. That although, through Adam, I had lost the Right both of Heaven and Earth,
and of every Creature, so as I could have no Comfort in the Use of them; yet,
through my Savior, the Second Adam, since I truly Believed in him, I am
restored to a far better Estate, being made in him a right Heir of all; and all
the Creatures are blessed and sanctified to me, that I may have a holy Use of
them:

For if we be children, we are also Romans 8. 17.
heirs; even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ. 2dly. All the
Creatures in Heaven and Earth are at league with me, to help for my Good, so
far as may stand with his Glory:

For the stones of the field shall be in Job 5. 23. Hos. 2. 18. 1 Cor. 3. 21.
league with thee, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. Q.
Declare unto me the Second Part of the Creed, concerning Faith in God the Son.
Which is the Second Article?

A. And in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord.

Q. What is signified by that Word JESUS?

A. This Word signifies a Savior:

Thou shall call his name Jesus: for Mat. 1. 21.
he shall call his people from their sins. Q. Why is the Son of God called
Jesus? that is, a Savior?

A. Because he saves us from all our Sins:

Therefore, he is able also perfectly to Heb. ^. 25.
save them that come unto God by him. Neither ought any Safety to be sought for
from any other, nor can elsewhere be found:

Neither is there salvation in any other Act. 4. 12.
name ^^der heaven, whereby we must be saved.

I, even I am the Lord, and beside me Isa. 43. 11.
there is no savior.

Q. Whom does he save?

A. He saves all and only the Elect and Believers, which have been, are, or
shall be, even from the Beginning to the End of the World:

God so loved the world, that he gave Joh. 3. 16.
his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life. Q. What Evils does he deliver his Elect from?

A. From all Sin. So the Angel testifies;

He shall save his people from their Mat. 1. 21.
sins.

The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us 1 John 1. 7.
from all sin.

And also from the Punishment of Sin: For the Cause being taken away, which is
Sin; the Effect is taken away, which is Punishment:

Now then, there is no condemnation to Romans 8. 1.
them that are in Christ Jesus:

I give unto them eternal life.

Q. How does Christ save his Elect?

1st. He saves us by his Merit or Satisfaction: Because, by his Obedience,
Passion, Death, and Intercession, he has merited for us Remission of Sins,
Reconciliation with God, and Everlasting Life:

The blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, 1 John 1. 7.
cleanses as from all sin.

By the obedience of one, many shall be Romans 5. 19.
made righteous.

He was wounded for our transgressions, Isa. 53. 5.
he was broken for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and with his stripes we are healed.

He has made him to be sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
which knew no sin; that we should be made the righteousness of God in him.

Christ has redeemed us from the curse Gal. 3. 13.
of the law.

2dly. He saves us by his Efficacy, Power, and Operation: Because he not only
obtains, by his Meriting for us, Remission of Sins, and that Life which we
had lost; but also applies effectually unto us, by virtue of his Spirit,
through Faith, the whole Benefit of our Redemption: For what Benefits he
merited by his Death, he does not retain them unto himself, but bestows them
on us.

Q. What is it therefore to Believe in Jesus?

A. It is not only to Believe, that he is able to save, and that he is the only
Means to obtain Salvation by; but also, that he is my Savior:

My spirit does rejoice in God my Savior. Luke 1. 47.


The Lord is my light, and my strength. Psalm. 27. 1.


And that I rely wholly upon him, and none but him, for the Salvation of my
Soul:

Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have Joh. 6. 68.
the words of eternal life. Q. What Comfort have thou by this?

A. That though I am guilty of innumerable Sins, both Original and Actual, even
the Breach of the whole Law, and so am worthy to be damned; and have all the
Plagues of God, due to my Sin, cast upon me; yea, though I were a Bond-Slave to
Sin and Satan: yet I Believe that Jesus is my Savior, and that he has
delivered me from all my Sins, both the Guilt, and the stisfactory Punishment
of them; and also from the Power of Sin and Satan:

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me; because he has anointed me, that I should
preach the gospel to the poor, heal the brokenhearted, preach deliverance to
the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, that I should set at
liberty them that are bruised. Q. What is signified by the Word CHRIST?

A. Christ signifies Anointed.

Q. Why is he called Christ? that is, Anointed?

A. Because he was Ordained of the Father, and Anointed of the Holy Ghost, the
Chief Prophet and Doctor, The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet
like unto me. Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
who has opened unto us the secret Counsle, and all the Will of his Father,
concerning our Redemption:

For all things that I have heard of Joh. 15. 15.
my Father, have I made known unto you. And the High Priest, who, with that one
only Sacrifice of his Body, has redeemed us.

So Christ was once offered, to take Heb. 9. 28.
away the sins of many. And does continually make Intercession to his Father
for us:

Who shall condemn? It is Christ which Romans 8. 34.
is dead; yea, which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and
makes request for us. And a King, who rules us by his Word and Spirit; and
defends and maintains that Salvation which he has purchased for us:

And he shall reign over the house of Luke 1. 33.
Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be none end.

And I will give unto them eternal Joh. 10 28.
life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand.

Q. What Benefit have thou by this?

A. That both I, and all the Elect of God, are made spiritual Kings, Priests,
and Prophets:

And from Jesus Christ, which has made us kings, and priests, unto God, even
his Father. Kings; in bearing rule over our Hearts, and mastering our
rebellious Thoughs, Wills, and Affections:

Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal Romans 6. 12.
bodies, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. Priests; in offering up
to God our Spiritual Sacrifices, And ye, as lively stones, be made a 1 Pet. 2.
5.
spiritual house, and a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ. Of Prayer; Let my prayer be directed in thy
sight, Psalm. 141. 2.
as incense; and the lifting up of mine hands, as an evening sacrifice. Of
Thanksgiving; Let us therefore, hy him, offer the sacrifices Heb. 13. 15.
of praise always to God. Of Alms; To do good, and to distribute, forget --
Ver. 16.
not; for with such sacrifice God is well-pleased. Of a Contrite Heart; The
sacrifices of God are a contrite Psalm. 51. 17.
heart: a contrite and a broken heart, O Lord, thou will not despise. Of our
whole Souls and Bodies for the Service of God; I bescech you therefore,
brethren, that Romans 12. 1.
ye give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. And
Prophets; in applying that Knowledge we have, to the Benefit and Good of
others: When thou are converted, strengthen Luke 23. 32.
thy brethren.

Q. Now show me why this Jesus Christ is called the only Son of God? seeing we
also are said to be the Sons of God?

A. Christ is called God's only Son, because he alone is the Coeternal and
Natural Son of the Eternal Father:

And the word was made flesh, and Joh. 1. 14.
dwelt among us; and we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only
begotten Son of the Father.

Thou art my Son, this day begat I Heb. 1. 5.
thee: I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son.

The Angels also, and Adam before his Fall, are his Sons, by Creation. But we
are Sons adopted of the Father, by Grace for his sake:

Who has predestined us t be adopted, Ephesians. 1. 5.
through Jesus Christ, unto himself.

As many as received him, to them Joh. 1. 12.
gave he power to be the sons of God, even to them that believe in his name.

Q. What Comfort comes by this?

A. It shows the wonderful Love, and great Mercy of God to me, that when I
was, by Nature, the Child of Wrath and Perdition, he spared not to give his
only Son for me, to make me his Child, and Hell, by the Grace of Adoption:

But God so loved the world, that he Joh. 3. 16.
gave his only begotten Son, that whoseever believes in him, shall not perish,
but have eternal life. Q. Wherefore is he called Our Lord?

A. Because he redeeming and ransoming both our Body and Soul from Sin, not
with Gold and Silver, but with his precious Blood, and delivering us from all
the Power of the Devil, has set us free to serve him:

Knowing that ye were not redeemed 1 Pet. 1. 18,
with corruptible things, as silver and gold;

But with the preceious blood of Christ: 19
That ye should show forth the virtues Chap. 2. 9.
of him that has called you out of darkness, into his mavelous light.

Q. What is the Comfort of this?

A. That Christ being my Lord, and I living under his Dominion, I need not fear
what Enemies, whether Devil, or wicked Men, can do unto me:

If God be on our side, who can be against us? And though I was under the
Prince of Darkness, having Satan my Lord, until I believed in Christ; yet find
I am Christ's, and he is my only Lord, and that by Purchase with his Blood, by
Gift from his Father; and by Marriage contracted, to be consummate at his
Appearing.

Q. Which is the Third Article?

A. Which was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.

Q. What Believe thou in this Article?

A. I Believe, That the Son of God, who is, and continues True and Everlasting
God, took the very Nature of Man, of the Flesh and Blood of the Virgin Mary,

For he in no sort took the Angels; but Heb. 2. 16.
he took the seed of Abraham.

When the fullness of time was come, Gal. 4. 4.
God sent forth his Son, made of a woman.

By the working of the Holy Ghost:

The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee; Luke 1. 35.
and the power of the most high shall over-shadow thee. That withal he might be
the true Seed of David,

Concerning Jesus Christ, our Lord, Romans 1. 3.
which was made of the seed of David, according to the flesh. Like unto his
Brethren in all things, Wherefore, in all things it became him Heb. 2. 17.
to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be merciful, and a faithful
high priest in things concerning God: Sin excepted, But was in all sort, in the
like manner, Heb. 4. 15.
tempted; yet without sin.

Q. What Profit is there by Christ's holy Nativity and Conception?

A. Hereby our Faith is confirmed, that he is the True Mediator. For he cannot
be a Mediator between God and Men, who is not by Nature True God, and True Man:

For such an high priest it became us to Chap. 7. 26.
have, which is holy, blameless, undefiled, separate from sinners. And that he
does cover, with his Innocence, and perfect Holiness, my Sins, in which I was
conceived, that they might not come in the sight of God:

He is made unto us, of God, wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

Christ has suffered for our sins, the 1 Pet. 3. 18.
just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God.

Q. Which is the Fourth Article?

A. Suffered under Pontius Pilate; was Crucified, Dead and Buried; he descended
into Hell.

Q. What Believe thou, when thou say he Suffered?

A. I Believe, That Christ, all the time of his Life which he led in the Earth,
especially at the End thereof, sustaineth the Wrath of God, does in Body and
Soul, against the Sin of all Mankind:

Surely he has borne our infirmities, Isa. 53. 4,
and carried our sorrows: we did judge him as plagued and smitten of God, and
humbled:

Who his own self bare our sins in his 5.
body, on the tree; by whose stripes ye were healed.

That he might, by his Passion, as the only Propitiatory Sacrifice, deliver our
Body and Soul from Everlasting Damnation:

Yet the Lord would break him, and -- Ver. 10.
make him subject to infirmities, when he shall make his soul an offering for
sin.

Who has delivered us from the power Col. 1. 13.
of darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son.

Christ has redeemed us from the Gal. 3. 13.
curse.

And purchased unto us the Favor of God; Righteousness; and Everlasting Life:
He has made him to be sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
which knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

Q. What is meant by this, He Suffered under Pontius Pilate? being as his Judge?

A. That he being Innocent, and Condemned, before a Civil Judge, might deliver
us from the severe Judgment of God, which remained for all Men:

For he has borne our infirmities; and Isa. 53. 4,
carried our sorrows.

And he was wounded for our transgressions; 5.
he was broken for our iniquities.

Q. But is there any thing more in it, that he was fastened to the Cross, than
if he had suffered any other kind of Death?

A. There is more. For by this I am assured, That he took upon himself the
Curse which did lie on me:

For Christ has redeemed us from the Gal. 3. 13.
curse. For the Death of the Cross, was accursed of God:

His body shall not remain all night Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
upon the tree; for the curse of God is upon him that is hanged. Q. What is it
then, to Believe in Christ Crucified?

A. It is not only to Believe, That Christ suffered such a kind of Death; but
also, by virtue of this Death, I am crucified to God, and my Sins pardoned, and
the Curse of the Law is taken away from me; yea, That by virtue of the Cross of
Christ, my Sins are mortified and crucified:

God forbid that I should rejoice, but in Gal. 6. 14.
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me,
and I unto the world. Q. Why was it necessary for Christ to humble himself unto
Death?

A. Because the Justice and Truth of God, who said, Whenever thou eatest of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall die the death: could by no
other means be satisfied for our Sins but by the very Death of the Son of God:

For God sending his own Son in the Romans 8. 3.
similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh:

That he might destroy, through death, Heb. 2. 14.
him that had the power of death; that is, the devil.

Q. But Death is the wages of sin, Romans 6. 23: 1 Pet. 2. 22.
and Christ was without sin; and therefore, How could Death have any Power at
at all over Him?

A. Christ, indeed, was free from the the Commission of Sin in his own Person;
but he was made sin for us: 2 Cor. 5. 21.
And by the means of our Sins, Death seized upon him:

For he was delivered to death, for our Romans 4. 25.
sins.

God spared not his own Son, but gave Chap. 8. 32.
him for us all, to death.

Q. Did Christ die for All, according to the Testimony of Scriptures, 1 Timothy 2.
6.
where it is said, He gave himself a ransom for all men?

A. No* certainly; he died not for All, but for Many: as is proved by Scripture,

I pray not for the world, but for those Joh. 17.
which thou have given me; for they are thine.

Christ was once offered, to take away Heb. 9. 28.
the sins of many.

Thou shall call his name Jesus; for Mat. 1. 26.
he shall save his people srom their sins.

So that it is manifest, that Christ died and offered up himself only for Many;
for his Elect, for his Church, and peculiar People.

Q. Now is Christ said to have died for all Men, and not to have died for all
Men?

A. 1st. Christ died for all Men, Absolutely, and without Exception, as
touching the Sufficiency which he paid in Price.

2dly. Christ died not for all Men, but for the Elect only, and the Faithful,
as touching the Application, Participation and Efficacy of his Merit and
Passion.

Q. What Benefit does the Church of God, and every true Believer, receive by
the virtue of Christ's Death?

A. 1st. Not only those Articles beforementioned, do declare and show those
Benefits which we receive by the Death of Christ; but also, we are assured of
the freedom from the Sting of Death:

But thanks be to God, which has 1 Cor. 15. 57.
given us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. 2dly. Death it self is
turned into a sweet Sleep:

Peace shall come; they shall rest in their Isa. 57. 2.
beds. 3dly. Death is made a Gate and Passage into Eternal Life:

Lazarus died, and was carried by the Luke 16. 22.
Angels into Abraham's bosom. 4thly. By virtue of Christ's Death, the Church of
God, and every particular Member, receives a spiritual Death to Sin:

Know ye not, that all ye which are baptized Romans 6 3.
into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his death?

We are buried with him, by baptism, -- V^r. 4.
into his death.

Q. But since that Christ died for us, why must we also die?

A. Our Death is not a Satisfaction for our Sins; but the abolishing of Sin,
and our passage into Life Everlasting:

For my desire is to be loosed, and to be Phil. 1. 23.
with Christ, which is best of all. Q. To what end was he Buried also?

A. That thereby he might make manifest that he was dead indeed:

And when they had fulfilled all things Act. 13. 29.
which were written of him, they put him in a sepulcher. Q. What Benefit does
the Church of God receive, by virtue of Christ's Burial?

A. By virtue of this Burial of Christ in a Garden,

1. Original Sin, which was committed by Adam in the Garden of Eden, is
satisfied for:

Who shall condemn? It is Christ, which Romans 8. 34.
is dead. 2dly. The Power of Death is vanquished for us:

Death is swallowed up of victory. 1 Cor. 15. 55.
3dly. Hereby Sin is more and more wasted and consumed in us.

Q. Show me what is meant by Christ's descent into Hell?

A. Hell, in Scripture, is taken Three ways:

1st. It signifies the Grave. Genesis 4^. Psalm. 16. 10. Luke 16. 23. Psalm. 139. 3.


2dly. The Place of the Damned.

3dly. It signifies the Pains of Hell; that is, the Terrors and Torments of
Soul and Conscience: When the snares of death compassed me, Psalm 116. 3.
and the grief of the grave caught me: in this 3d. sense, I believe it is
taken, in this Article.

Q. Did not Christ totally descend into Limbo, or, into the Pit of Hell?
(according to the Opinion of many, who also will all edge Scripture for it?)

A. If Christ descended locally into Hell, he descended as touching his
Godhead, his Soul, or his Body.

He did not, as touching his Godhead; for that is every where present.

Nor, as touching his Body; for that rested in the Grave three Days.

Nor, as touching his Soul; because Christ said of his Soul,

Father, into thy hands I commend my Luke 23. 46.
spirit. Therefore the Soul of Christ, after his Death, was in the hands of his
Father, in Paradise, and not in Hell.

Q. Seeing then, Christ descended not into Hell locally, what then is the true
meaning of these Words?

Namely, That Christ endured, in his Humane Soul, the Sense of the fierce Wrath
of God, due for Man's Sins, partly in the Garden, and partly on the Cross, when
he said,

My God! My God! Why have thou forsaken me? The which intolerable sense of
God's Wrath, is commonly called in Scripture, by a Metaphor, Grief, or, Pain of
Hell. Not because the self-same in kind; for Christ was not utterly Forsaken,
nor eternally Damned, nor Tormented in Body with that Fire wherewith the
Reprobates shall be Tormented for ever:

But this Sense of the fierce Wrath of God, is called the Sorrows of Hell, or,
a descending into Hell; because it was nothing inferior, for the time it
lasted, to the very Torments of Hell it self.

Q. How is this proved, That Christ suffered in Soul, as well as in Body?

A. It is expressly proved, out of the Gospel by St. Matthew, in these words,

And he began to wax sorrowful, and Mat 26. 37.
grievously troubled, and said, My soul is very heavy, even unto death. Q. What
Reasons are there for the better confirming of this, That Christ suffered in
his Soul the Sense of the fierce Wrath of God?

A. 1st. Because all our Sins were imputed unto Christ:

The Lord has laid on him the iniquity Isa. 53. 6.
of us all. Therefore God's Justice requires, that he should bear the
Punishments that are due to Sin, both Spiritual and Temporal.

2dly. If Christ had not suffered in Soul, as well as in Body, he had only
redeemed our Bodies, and not our Souls. But it is manifest, that Christ
redeemed the Soul, as well as the Body:

Ye are bought with a price: therefore 1 Cor. 6. 20.
glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, for they are the Lord's.
Therefore Christ suffered in Soul, as well as in Body.

2dly. If Christ had neither suffered Hell Torments himself; nor the Wrath of
God, which was proportionable to Hell Torments;

Then it remains, that Hell Torments remain still to be suffered by Mankind;
and so, by necessary consequence, Christ's Redeeming of us, is no perfect
Redemption.

Q. What Benefits redounds to God's Church, by virtue of Christ's descent into
Hell?

A. 1st. Deliverance from God's Wrath:

Being now justified by his blood, we Romans 5. 9.
shall be saved from wrath through him. 2dly. The Church of God is delivered
from a tormenting Conscience, and from the beginning of Hell Fire, which the
Reprobates endure, even in this Life:

These things have I spoken to you, that Joh. 16. 33.
in me ye might have peace. 3dly. It Is an happy Deliverance from Hell it self,
and from all the eternal Torments of the same:

There is no condemnation to those that Romans 8. 1.
are in Jesus Christ.

Blessed and holy is he that has part in Rev. 20. 6.
the first resurrection, for on such the second death has no power.

Q. What is it therefore to Believe in Christ, as he descended into Hell?

A. It is, not only to believe, That Christ suffered in his Humane Soul the
full Viol of God's Wrath, due for Man's Sins; but also, That I, by virtue
thereof, am freed from God's eternal Wrath, and my Troubles of Mind hereby are
abated, or, at the least, sanctified unto me, and turned to my good: yea, by
virtue of Christ's descent into Hell, my Soul is delivered from Hell it self,
and from all the Torments thereof, and that now the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against me.

Q. What is the Fifth Article?

A. The Third Day he arose again from the Dead.

Q. How is it proved that Christ rose again?

A. Many Evidences and Proofs does the Scripture afford. St. Paul says,

Christ therefore died; and rose again, Romans 14. 9.
and revived.

But now is Christ risen again from the 1 Cor. 15. 20.
dead.

Q. After what manner do you believe that Christ rose again?

A. I believe, That Christ did rise truly and indeed, so that his Soul did
truly and indeed return into his Body, from which it was severed by Death; and
he did truly come forth; even out of the Grave also.

2dly. That he rose the very same Body which before was dead; the same Jesus
Christ, God and Man, according to the Nature wherein he suffered:

Behold my hands and my feet: for Luke 24. 39.
it is I my self; handle me, and feel me. 3dly. He rose by his own Power; he
put Death to slight, quickened his dead Body, reunited it to his Soul, and
restored to himself a blessed, heavenly and glorious Life, and that by the
Might and Power of his Godhead:

Destroy this temple, and in three days Joh. 2. 29.
I will raise it up again.

I have power to lay down my soul, and Chap. 10. 18.
have power to take it up again.

4thly. He rose the Third Day, by his Father's, and by his own Power:

Him God raised up the third day. Act.


He rose the third day, according to the 1 Cor. 15. 4.
scriptures.

Q. What Benefit redounds to the Church of God, by virtue of Christ's
Resurrection?

A. The perfect Accomplishment of the Work of Justification:

Who was delivered to death for our Romans 4. 25.
sins, and is risen again for our justification.

2dly. The Resurrection of Christ, our Head, is a pledge unto us of a glorious
Resurrection:

But now is Christ risen from the dead, 1. Cor. 15. 20.
and made the first fruits of them that slept. 3dly. By virtue of Christ's
Resurrection, God's Church obtains a spiritual Resurrection from Sin:

We are buried with him, by baptism, Romans 6. 4,
into his death, that, like as Christ was raised up from the dead, so we should
walk in newness of life.

For if we be grafted with him to the similitude of his death, even so shall we
be to the similitude of his resurrection.

4thly. By the Resurrection of Christ, we are warranted and confirmed of his
Merit, that he has fully and perfectly satisfied for our Sins. For one only
Sin not being satisfied for, had withheld Christ still in death.

5thly. We are assured not only of his meriting for us; but also, that he is
able, and does bestow on us the Fruit and Benefit of his Merit: For,

Christ is risen again for our righteousness. Romans 5. 25.


Blessed be God, even the Father of our 1 Pet. 1. 3.
Lord Jesus Christ, which, according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us
again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

Q. What is it to believe in Christ, as he rose again the Third Day from the
Dead?

A. It is not barely to Believe, That Christ did indeed Rise, the Third Day,
out of the Sepulcher, alive; but also, That I, by virtue of his Resurrection,
am fully Justified, truly Regenerate, Preserved in Grace, Reserved to a blessed
Resurrection unto Eternal Life; and that Christ ever lives, to apply this unto
me.

Q. Which is the Sixth Article?

A. He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father
Almighty.

Q. How shall I be certain, that Christ ascended into Heaven?

A. By the Testimony of Holy Scriptures, where it is said,

That after the Lord had spoken to Mark 16. 19.
them, he was received into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God. Q. What
is meant by these words, He ascended into Heaven?

A. I Believe hereby, That Christ ascended into Heaven, in his Humane Nature
only; and that the very same which was born of the Virgin, dead, buried, and
which rose again, and that locally, or bodily, truly going from one place to
another, visibly and apparent to the Apostles.

What then, if ye should see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before?

While they beheld, he was taken up Act. 19.
out of their sight. The Fortieth Day after his Resurrection:

Forty days was he seen of them, speaking Act. 1. 3.
of things which appertain to the kingdom of God. And that by the Power of his
Godhead:

This Jesus, by the right hand of God, Chap. 2. 33.
has been exalted. Q. But Christ promised he would be with us until the end of
the World; how then is he ascended?

A. Christ is True God, and True Man. According to his Manhood, he is not now
on the Earth:

The poor you have always with you, Mat. 26. 11.
but me ye shall not have always.

I leave the world, and go to the Father. Joh. 16. 28.


But according to his Godhead, his Grace and Spirit, he is at no time from us,
as he has promised:

Lo, I am with you until the end of the Mat. 28 20.
world. Q. Are not, by this means, the two Natures in Christ pulled asunder, if
his Humanity be not wheresoever his Divinity is?

A. No: For seeing his Divinity is Incomprehensible, and every where present;
Can any hide himself in secret places, Jer. 23. 24.
that I shall not see him? says the Lord. Do not I fill heaven and earth? it
follows necessarily, that the same is without the bound of his Humane Nature,
which he took on him; and yet it is nevertheless in it, and abides personally
with it:

For in him dwells all the fullness of Col. 2 9.
the Godhead bodily. Q. What Benefit redounds to the Church of God, and every
particular Member, by virtue of Christ's Ascension?

A. 1st. By virtue of Christ's Ascension, Satan, Sin, and Death, are led
Captives; so that now they have no Power to hurt God's Church, nor any of his
Members:

When he ascended up on high, he led Ephesians. 4. 8.
captivity captive. 2dly. I Believe, That there is prepared in Heaven, for me,
and God's Church, a Mansion, or Dewlling Place:

In my Fathers house are many dwelling-places: Joh. 14. 2.
I go to prepare a place for you. 3dly. The Ascension of Christ's Humane
Nature, is a sure Pledge unto me, That it shall come to pass, That he who is
our Head, will lift up his Members also unto him:

Father, I will that they which thou Chap. 7. 24.
have given me, be with me, even where I am. 4thly. I am assured, That he will
send me, and the rest of the Church of God, his Spirit, instead of a Pledge
between him and us:

I will pray the Father, and he shall Chap. 14. 16.
give you another Comforter, that may abide with you for ever. Q. In what sense
are we to understand the words of the rest of this Article, He sits at the
Right Hand of God the Father Almighty?

A. Not in a literal sense: For God has not a Right Hand, or Left Hand, like
unto Men. For,

God is a Spirit. Chap. 4. 24.


And the strength of Israel is not a 1 Samuel 15. 29.
man.

But it is evident, that the Word Right Hand, is often times used, in
Scripture, for the Power of God, or for his Presence:

They inherited not the land by their Psalm. 44 3.
own sword, neither did their own arm save them; but by thy right hand, and and
thine arm, and the light of thy countenance.

In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at Psalm. 16. 11.
thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

Also, it is as manifest, that Sitting is used in Scripture, for Authority, or
Regiment:

Solomon thy son shall reign after me, 1 King. 1. 30.
and he shall sit upon my throne. Q. From whence then is this borrowed Speech
taken?

A. It is taken from the manner of Men, who are wont to give the Right Hand to
such as they do Prefer or Advance; as by the Example of Solomon.

And he sat down on his throne; and Chap. 2. 19.
he caused a seat to be set for the kings mother, and she sat at his
right hand. Q. What Spiritual meaning does this Sitting at the right hand of
God, imply?

A. 1st. A Rest from Labor; and thus it signifies, That Christ is now freed
from all his Passions and Miseries:

Blessed are the dead which die in the Rev. 14. 13.
Lord, for they rest from their labors. 2dly. It signifies Supreme Authority:
and thus it signifies, that the Government of all things is committed unto
Christ:

All power is given to me, both in Mat. 28. 18.
heaven and earth. 3dly. It signifies a great measure of Honor and Happiness:
and thus it signifies, That Christ is now entered into a great and infinite
State of Glory and Happiness:

But we see Jesus crowned with glory Heb. 2. 9.
and honor. Q. What Benefit comes to the Church of God, and every
partiticular Member, by virtue of Christ's Sitting at the Right Hand of God?

A. 1st. Thereby Christ has Power to gather his Church, and to defend it, and
every Member of the same, against all Force and Violence:

Thou art Peter, and upon this rock Mat. 16. 18.
will I build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
2dly. The Church, and every Member thereof, is made Partaker of Christ's
Intercession:

Who shall condemn? It is Christ Romans 8. 34.
which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request
for us. Q. How does Christ make Intercession for his Church? or wherein does it
consist?

A. 1st. In Appearing for his Church before God his Father.

2dly. By the continual presenting of his Merits, in our Name, before his
Father. Therefore Christ is called a Priest.

3dly. By continual wishing Good unto Joh. 17. 24.
it: And Christ's Wishing of Good, is a strong Intercession for Good; and in
this sense he is called our Advocate. (As formerly has been spoken.)

Q. Which is the Seventh Article?

A. From thence he shall come to judge both the Quick and the Dead.

Q. How are you certain that Christ shall come to Judgment?

A. 1st. It is confirmed by Christ himself. Chap. 14. 3. Rev. 22. 20.


2dly. By Testimony of the Angels. Act. 1. 11.


3dly. By the Testimony of the Apostles. Chap. 17. 31.


And also by Testimony of other Scriptures:

The Lord shall judge for ever: he has Psalm. 9. 7,
prepared his throne for Judgment:

For he shall judge the world in righteousness, 8.
and shall judge the people with equity.

The Father judges no man, but has Joh. 5. 22.
committed all judgment to the Son:

Q. Shall the Father, and the Holy Ghost, have no part at all in the latter
Judgment?

A. Yes, verily: I believe that Judgment shall belong unto all the Three
Persons in Trinity, as concerning their Consen^ and Authority; but unto Christ,
as touching the Publishing and Executing of the Judgment.

Q. But it is said, that the Saints shall Judge the World?

A. The Saints shall Judge the World, not by pronouncing Judgment: But,

1st. By sitting with Christ (as it were) upon the Bench.

2dly. By yielding Consent and Approbation unto Christ's Sentence.

3dly. By their good Lives.

Q. From whence shall the Judge come, when he comes to Judgment?

A. From Heaven: as it is manifest by Scripture:

The Lord himself shall descend from 1 These. 4. 16.
heaven.

The Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven, with his mighty angels.

Q. But how, and after what manner shall Christ come to Judgment?

A. I Believe, That Christ, in the appointed Time of his Father, shall come
truly, visibly, and locally, to Judge both Quick and Dead: They shall see the
Son of man come in Mat. 24. 30.
the clouds of heaven: even as he was seen to go up, in the same Shape, Form,
Figure and Substance that he took in the Virgin's Womb; that being Glorified,
and induced with Immortality: This Jesus which is taken up from Act. 1. 11.
you into heaven, shall so come as ye have seen him go up: and that in Majesty,
Power and great Glory, accompanied with all the holy Angels:

And they shall see the Son of man come Mat. 24. 30.
in the clouds with power, and great glory. Thus shall Christ himself, in his
Humane Nature, visibly descend from Heaven upon the Clouds, with a Shout, and
with the Voice of the Archangel and Trump of God, accompanied with thousands of
his Saints:

Behold, he comes with clouds, and Rev. 1. 7.
every eye shall see him.

The Lord himself shall descend from 1 These. 4. 16.
heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump
of God.

Behold, the Lord comes with thousands Jude 14.
of his saints.

And this his Coming shall be sudden:

The day of the Lord shall come as a 1 These. 5. 2,
thief in the night:

And when they shall say, Peace and 3.
safety; then shall come upon them sudden destruction.

Q. Who are the Persons that shall be Judged?

A. All Men, both Quick and Dead, that is, those that shall be found Alive at
the Day of Judgment, and those that are and shall be Dead before the Day of
Judgment:

We must all appear before the judgment seat 2 Cor. 5. 10.
of God. And not only Men, but the very Devils:

Know ye not, that we shall judge the 1 Cor. 6. 3.
angels? Q. Shall all wicked Men receive the same measure of Punishment, at
that Day?

A. No: For they shall receive a greater or lesser Punishment, according to the
degree of Sin:

But I say unto you, It shall be easier for Mat. 11. 22.
Tire and Sidon, than for you, at the day of judgment. Q. What is the Last
Judgment?

A. I Believe it to be a Manifestation of the Hearts and inward Thoughts of all
Men, and a Declaration of all their Actions, and a Separation of the Just and
Unjust, who ever have lived, or shall live, from the Beginning of the World, to
the End, proceeding from God by Christ; and a pronouncing of Sentence on these
Men, and an Execution thereof, according to the Doctrine of the Law and Gospel;
the Issue whereof shall be the perfect Delivery of the Church, and the final
Abjection of wicked Men and Devils into Everlasting Punishment.

Q. But in what Time, Age, or Year shall the Day of Judgment be?

A. It shall be in the End of the World:

But of that day and hour knows no Chap. 24. 36.
man, no, not the angels in heaven, but my Father which is in heaven. Q. What
Benefit shall the Church of God, and every particular Member, receive, by
virtue of Christ's coming to Judgment?

A. I believe hereby, That they shall then receive their own Bodies again,
which so long time had lain in the Earth; and that in a far more excellent
Estate than when they left them:

God gives even to every seed his own 1 Cor. 15. 38,
body.

The body is sown in dishonor, and is 43.
raised in glory.

And that they shall then receive Honor; as in Rev. 3. 5, 21. And that blessed
Sentence of the Judge, Come, Mat. 25. 34.
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you.

And also all the Benefits that Christ has purchased for them:

Then lift up your heads, for your redemption Luke 21. 28.
draws nearer. And they shall be freed from all the Powers of Death; they
shall die no more:

Death is swallowed up in victory. Yea, they shall be freed from all Sorrow and
Want, from all Hunger and Thirst, and they shall weep no more:

They shall neither hunger nor thirst any Rev. 7. 16.
more.

God shall wipe away all tears from Rev. 7. 17.
their eyes.

Q. Wherein consists the Third Part of the Creed?

A. Of Faith in God the Holy Ghost.

Q. Which then is the Eighth Article of the Creed?

A. I Believe in the Holy Ghost.

Q. Wherefore is the third Person in the Trinity called a Ghost or a Spirit?

A. 1st. Because he is a Spiritual Nature:

God is a Spirit. Joh. 4. 24.
2dly. Because he is breathed or inspired into the Hearts of the Elect, by the
Father and the Son:

He breathed on them, and said unto Joh. 20. 22.
them, Receive the Holy Ghost. 3dly. Because it is his Office, to inspire our
Hearts with good Motions:

Holy men of God spoke as they were 2 Pet. 1. 21.
moved by the Holy Ghost. Q. Wherefore is he called Holy?

A. It is not to deny either the Holiness of the Father or the Son; but because
he is the Means of the Sanctification of others, and therefore he is called the
Spirit of Sanctification, Romans 1. 4.

Q. What is the Holy Ghost? or how is he described?

A. The Holy Ghost is the Third Person of the Trinity; There are three which
bear record in 1 John 5. 7.
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one:
proceeding from the Father and the Son: But when the Comforter shall come, Joh.
15. 26.
whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which
proceeds from the Father: being also very God with the Father and the Son;
There are three which bear record in 1 John 5. 7.
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit; and these three are one:
Coeternal, and Because he created the Heaven and the Earth, and was from the
very Beginning; The Spirit of the Lord moved upon the Genesis 1. 2.
waters: Coequal with the Father and the Son; And that is manifest by his
Divine Attributes; as Omnipotency, Psalm. 33. 6. Omnisciency, 1 Cor. 2. 10.
Infinite Goodness and Holiness, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Unchangeableness, Act. 1. 16.
Truth Infallible, Joh. 15. 26. Mercy Unspeakable, Romans 5. 5. and 8. 26.

Q. What is the Office of the Holy Ghost?

A. The chief Parts of his Office, are,

1st. To Teach us;

The Holy Ghost, whom the Father will Joh. 14. 26.
send in my name, he will teach you all things. 2dly. To Regenerate us;

Except a man be born of water, and of Joh. 3. 5.
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. 3dly. To Unite us with
Christ;

Hereby we may know that Christ dwells 1 John 3. 24.
in us, even by the Spirit that he has given us. 4thly. To Rule and Govern us;

As many as are led by the Spirit of Romans 8. 14.
God, they are the sons of God. Q. By what means may the Holy Ghost be given,
or received?

A. He is given either Visibly, as unto the Apostles; There appeared unto them
eleven tongues, Act. 2. 3.
like fire. or Invisibly, as unto the Church, from the Beginning to the End of
the World:

He which has not the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9.
is none of his. For without the Spirit, there neither was, nor should have any
Church. Also he is given after an ordinary way; By the Ministry of the Word,
and by the Use of the Sacraments:

While Peter yet spoke, the Holy Ghost Act. 10. 44.
fell on them which heard the word. Q. To whom is the Holy Ghost given?

A. He is said to be given to all to whom he comunicateth his Gifts; to the
whole Church that are called, both to the Elect, and to Hypocrites.

To the Elect he is given, not only as concerning his Common Gifts; but also,
as concerning his Proper and Saving Graces, Knowledge of God's Word,
Regeneration, Faith, and Conversion.

To the Hypocrite he is also given, only as touching the Knowledge and
Doctrine, and other his Common and General Gifts:

The world cannot receive him; because Joh. 14. 17.
it sees him not, neither knows him. Q. How is the Holy Ghost kept or
retained?

A. 1st. By diligent Use of the Ecclesiastical Ministry:

He gave some to be Apostles, some to Ephesians. 4. 11.
be Prophets, for the edification of the body of Christ. 2dly. By Meditation in
the Doctrine of the Gospel, and by studying to Profit therein:

Let the word of God dwell in you plenteously, Col. 3. 16.
in all wisdom. 3dly. By Increase, and Continuance, and Amendment of Life:

Unto him that has, shall be given. Mat. 13. 12.


He that is righteous, let him be righteous Rev. 22. 11.
still.

4thly. By daily earnest Prayer and Invocation:

How much more shall your heavenly Luke 11. 13.
Father give the Holy Ghost to him that desire him. Q. How shall a Man know
whether he has the Spirit, or no?

A. It may be known by the Effects:

1st. If Sin be weakened in him:

If Christ be in you, the body is dead, Romans 8. 10.
because of sin. 2dly. If he be freed from the Bondage and Dominion of Sin:

Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there 2 Cor. 3. 17.
is liberty. 3dly. If he can love his Enemies: This must needs be of God's
Spirit, because it is above Nature:

Love your enemies. Mat. 5. 44.
4thly. If he have the Spirit of Supplication, and can Pray with the Heart,
from a feeling, and from a fervent and holy Desire:

The Spirit helps our infirmities; for Romans 8. 26.
we know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
request for us. 5thly. If he can find in himself any of the Fruits of the
Spirit, as Love, Gal. 5. 2.
joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, etc.

Q. May the Holy Ghost once received, be afterward totally and finally lost?

A. In the Reprobate he may be lost totally and finally:

The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit of the Lord
vexed him. But in the Elect it cannot be lost, though for a time it may in some
part, as concerning some Gifts, or some measure of it; so that in the Elect it
cannot be utterly lost:

For a little while have I forsaken thee, Isa. 54. 8.
but with great compassion will I gather thee. Q. What Benefits are received by
the Holy Ghost?

A. They are such as concern the Reprobate:

As, by virtue of the Holy Ghost, they may be enabled to preach the Historical
Faith,

As in the Example of Balaam, who Numb. 24. 17.
Foretold of Christ.

To Interpret the Scriptures aright, in some places,

As the Scribes, and the Chief-Priests. Mat. 2. 5, 6.


They may receive some measure of Illumination:

They may be restrained for a time from this or that Sin;

As in the Example of Abimilech. Genesis 20. 6.


They may obtain some measure of Worldly Joy, or some Counterfeit Joy;

As in the Example of Herod, and Mark 6. 20. Luke 8. 13.
the Parable of the Seed.

Or such as concern the Elect:

By the Holy Ghost they are Regenerated. Joh. 3. 5.


By it the Fruits of the Spirit are Gal. 5. 22.
wrought in the Hearts of the Elect.

By it is wrought the Assurance of Romans 8. 15.
Salvation in the Elect.

By virtue of the Holy Ghost, the Elect Chap. 14. 4.
are preserved in the State of Grace.

Q. What is it to Believe in the Holy Ghost?

A. I do not only Believe, That there is a Holy Ghost; but also, That I, by
virtue of th^s Holy Ghost, am truly Regenerate, Comforted, Preserved, Settled
in Faith, and made Partaker of all other necessary Benefits of the Spirit.

Concerning the Church, the Fourth Part of the Creed:

Q. Which is the Ninth Article of the Creed?

A. I Believe the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.

Q. Why is it not as well said, I believe in, as, I believe the Holy Catholic
Church?

A. It is warrantable to believe the Church, but not warrantable to believe in
the Church, or to rest our Judgments upon the Authority of the Church, without
any Warrant from the Word:

Believe not every Spirit, but try whether they are of God. And the Reasons
wherefore we are to Believe in the Church, are,

1st. Because it is an Honor peculiar to God, to be depended upon, or to be
believed in:

Ye believe in God; believe also in Joh. 14. 1.
me. 2dly. Because the Word is the Foundation of the Church, and not the Church
of the Word.

Ye are built upon the foundation of the Ephesians. 2. 20.
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone.
3dly. Because the Church may err, as did the Church of Corinth err about 1 Cor.
20.
the Sacrament.

Q. What is the True Church?

A. The True Church is nothing but a peculiar Company of Men Elected and Called:

But ye are a chosen generation, a 1 Pet. 2. 9.
royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that you should show
forth the virtues of him that has called you out of darkness into his
mavelous light. Q. Is there but One Church of God? or be there Many Churches
of Christ?

A. There is but One True Catholic or Universal Church:

There is one body, and one spirit, even Ephesians. 4. 4.
as ye are called in one hope of your vocation. This True Church is either
Triumphant with the blessed Angels in Heaven;

Therefore are they in the presence of the Rev. 7. 15.
throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple; and he that sits
on the throne, will dwell amongst them. Or Militant on Earth; fighting under
Christ's Banner, against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil:

And there was a battle in heaven; Michael Rev. 12. 7.
and his angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon fought and his
angels. This Militant Church is either Visible, as a Company amongst Men,
professing the True and Incorrupt Doctrine of the Law and Gospel; in which
Company are many dead and unregenerate Members, and Hypocrites:

Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Or Invisible; that is, a Company of those that are elected to Eternal
Life, in whom a New Life is begun here by the Holy Ghost, and is perfected in
the Life to come.

This Church, as long as it sojourneth on Earth, always lies hid in the
Visible Church.

Those that are in this Invisible Church, never perish; neither are there any
Hypocrites therein, but the Elect only, of whom it is said,

No man shall pluck my sheep out of my Joh. 10. 28.
hands.

The Lord knows who are his. 2 Timothy 2. 19.


Q. Who is the Head of this Mystical Body the Church?

A. Only Christ himself; as may appear,

The husband is the wife's head, even Ephesians. 5. 23.
as Christ is the head of the Church; and the same is the Savior of the body.
And that,

1st. Because he only is able to perform the Office of an Head unto his Church;
as, to Quicken, to Preserve, to Nourish, to Direct and Govern it.

2dly. Because he only is able to prescribe Laws to bind the Consciences:

There is one Lawgiver, which is able Jam. 4. 12.
to save, and to destroy. Q. What are the Notes or Signs of the True Church?

A. They are either Internal Signs;

1st. The Spirit of God dwelling in the Heart;

Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, by Ephesians. 4. 30.
whom ye are sealed to the day of redemption. 2dly. Is True Regeneration;

For that which is born of flesh, is flesh; Joh. 3. 6.
and that which is born of the Spirit, is spirit. 3dly. True Faith, is a Sign;

for the Church is called by the Name of the Faithful:

Mine eyes shall be unto the faithful of Psalm. 101. 6.
the land, that they may dwell with me. Or External Signs: As,

1st. The pure Preaching of the Word of God:

If ye continue in my word, ye are verily Joh. 8. 31.
my disciples. 2dly. The right Administration of the Sacraments; namely,
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper:

Go and teach all nations; baptizing Mat. 28. 19,
them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:
Teaching them to observe all things 20.
whatsoever I have commanded you. 3dly. The Third Sign, is, A sincere
Profession of Justification by Christ alone:

Neither is there salvation in any other Act. 4. 12.
name; for among men there is given no other name under heaven, whereby we must
be saved. Q. Wherefore is the Church called Holy?

A. 1st. Because the Holiness of Christ is imputed to it:

Ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of 1 Cor. 1* 30.
God is made unto us wisdom, righteteousness, sanctification, and redemption.
2dly. Because Holiness is begun in every Soul that is regenerate in this Life:

Surely they work none iniquity, that Psalm. 119. 3.
walk in his ways. 3dly. It is Holy, in respect of Profane Persons:

Aaron and his Sons are not to drink Lev. 10. 10.
strong drink, that they may put difference between the holy and unholy. Q. If
the Church be Holy, what are we to esteem of Swearers, Liars, Whoremongers, and
such like wretched Persons that live in the Church? Are they Members of the
Church, or no?

A. They are not, so long as they live under the dominion of any notorious Sin;
but are as Chaff among Wheat, whose end is to be burned:

Christ will come with his fan in his Mat. 3. 12.
hand, and will gather his wheat into his garner, but will burn up the chaff
with fire. Q. May the Church of God obtain a Perfection of Holiness in this
World?

A. No, verily: For howsoever the Triumphant Church is perfectly Holy, at
least, in Soul; These are they which are not defiled with Rev. 14. 4.
women; for they are virgins. yet the Militant Church is but Holy only in part:
If we say we have no sin, we deceive 1 John 1. 8.
our selves.

Q. By what means may Holiness be increased?

A. By the diligent and frequent Use of God's Ordinance:

Sanctify them with thy truth; thy Joh. 17. 17.
word is truth. Q. Wherefore is the Church called Catholic?

A. The word Catholic signifies Universal; and the Church is so called, for
these Causes:

1st. In respect of Time; because the Church has been in all Ages, is at this
Present, and shall continue, by Succession^ unto the World's End:

For the gates of hell shall not prevail Mat. 16. 18.
against it. 2dly. In respect of the Members of the Church; for they are
universally gathered out of all Nations and People.

3dly. In respect of Place; for the Church is dispersed in all Nations:

I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, Rev. 7. 9.
which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and
tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white
robes, and palms in their hands. Q. Whether may any one be saded, out of the
Church?

A. No Man can be Saved, out of the Church:

1st. Because without the Church, there is no Savior:

Without me ye can do nothing. Joh. 15. 5.
2dly. Because whomsoever God has chosen to the End, which is Eternal Life; he
has chosen to the Means, which is the Inward and Outward Calling.

The Elect therefore, though they be not at all times Members of the Visible
Church, yet they are made such before they die.

Q. Whether is there any such Counsel of God, which has severed some to be
Saved, and some to be Damned?

A. I do believe, and am persuaded, That there is Predestination; which
consists of these Two Parts, Election and Reprobation.

Q. What is Election?

A. Election is the Eternal, Unchangeable, Free, and most Just Decree of God,
whereby he has decreed to convert some to Christ, to preserve and keep them in
Faith and Repentance, and by them to give them Eternal Life.

Q. What is Reprobation?

A. Reprobation is such a Decree of God, as whereby he has decreed to leave
some, according to his most just Judgment, in their Sins, to punish them with
Blindness and Damnation, being not made Partakers of Christ everlastingly: Both
being God's Decree,

I know whom I have chosen. Joh. 13. 18.


He has mercy on whom he will. 2 Timothy 1. 9.


His grace was given before the world Romans 9. 18.
was.

Q. How do you prove, That there is Election in God?

A. It is proved by Testimony of Scripture,

He chose us in him, before the foundation Joh. 15. 16.
of the world.

Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you.

As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed.

He predestined us to be adopted, through Jesus Christ, unto himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will.

Q. How do you prove, That there is Reprobation in God?

A. It is proved also by Scripture,

God does show his justice on the vessels Romans 9. 22.
of wrath.

Who were before, of old, ordained to Jud. 4.
this condemnation.

It is given unto you to know the secrets Mat. 13. 11.
of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not.

Q. What are the Causes of Predestination?

A. The Efficient and Motive Cause of our Election, is, the good Pleasure of
God, who has not foreseen any thing in us, for which he should choose us: for
there can be no good thing in us, as of our selves, seeing we are by Nature the
Children of Wrath, as well as others.

So likewise the Efficient Cause of Reprobation, is the most free, good
Pleasure of God: for we being all by Nature the Children of Wrath, had all
perished, if Sin were the Cause of Reprobation; wherefore the Cause of
Reprobation is not in Men themselves, but that is in God's Will, in showing
forth his Justice. Therefore, of particular Men, why this Man is elected, and
he reprobated, there can be no other Reason given, but the good Pleasure of God
only. But the Cause of Damnation is altogether in Men, which is Sin:

He has mercy on whom he will; and Romans 9. 12.
whom he will, he hardneth. Q. Is Predestination Unchangeable, or no?

A. Predestination is Firm and Unchangeable: which may appear by this Reason;
Because God is Unchangeable, and does not depend on the Interchangeable Course
of Things, but the same rather depends on his Decree.

What therefore he has from Everlasting decreed, of Saving the Elect, and
Condemning the Reprobate, that has he unchangeably decreed:

And therefore both Election and Reprobation is Firm and Unchangeable:

This is the Father's will, That of all Joh. 6. 36.
which he has given me, I should lose nothing.

My counsel shall stand, and I will do Isa. 46. 10.
whatever I will.

I am the Lord; I change not. Mal. 3. 6.


None shall pluck my sheep out of my Joh. 10. 28.
hand.

Q. Whether are the Elect always Members of the Church?

A. The Elect are not always Members of the Church, but then, first, when they
are converted and regenerated by the Holy Ghost:

If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9.
the same is not his. Q. Whether may the Elect fall from the Church, or not?
and the Reprobate always continue?

A. The Elect cannot fall wholly and finally from the Church, as has been
proved by the Unchangeableness of God's Predestination; though sometimes they
may fall from it; but wholly and finally to forsake it, they can never:

None shall pluck my sheep out of my Joh. 10. 23.
hands. But the Reprobate and Hypocrite do, at length, finally depart from the
Church; and fall away from Gospel-Gifts and Graces, which they seemed to have:

They went out from us, but they 1 John 2. 19.
were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us.
Q. What is meant by Communion of Saints?

A. The Communion of Saints, is, the Society that all they that believe have
one with another, as Members of one Head, Jesus Christ:

For as the body is one, and has many 1 Cor. 12. 12.
members; and all the members of the body, which is one, though they be many,
yet are but one body, even so is Christ. For by one Spirit we are baptized into
-- Ver. 13,
one body, whether we be Jews or Grecians, bond or free; and have been all made
to drink into one spirit.

For the body also is not one member, but 14.
many.

For we that are many, are one bread, 1 Cor. 10. 17.
and one body; because we are partakers of one bread.

We being many, are one body in Christ; Romans 12. 5.
and every one, one another members.

But let us follow the truth in love, and Ephesians. 4. 15.
in all things grow up into him which is the head, that is, Christ.

For we are members of his body, of his Chap. 5. 30.
flesh, and of his bones.

Whereby we are ready to communicate all God's Benefits, both Spiritual and
Temporal, to the mutual Health and Comfort of one another, according to the
measure which we have received of God in this Life:

Besides the things that are outward, I 2 Cor 11. 28.
am cumbred daily, and have the care of all the churches.

Bear ye one another burden, and so Gal. 6. 2.
fulfill the law of Christ.

If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if
any fellowship of the Spirit, if any compassion and mercy; Fulfill my joy, that
ye be like-minded, having the like love, being of one accord, and of one
judgment: That nothing be done through contention, or vainglory; but that in
meekness of mind, every man esteem other better than himself. Look not every
man on his own things, but every man also on the things of other men.

Q. Wherein have the Saints Communion one with another?

A. 1st. In that they are made Partakers 1 Cor. 12. 13.
of the same Privileges in Christ, and of the same Saving Graces in his Life.
And though not in the same Phil. 1. 7.
Measure, yet of the same Glory in the Life to come:

For henceforth is laid up for me 2 Timothy 4. 8.
the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me
at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing. 2dly. In that they are made Partakers of the Prayers of one another:

I exhort therefore, that prayers and supplications 1 Timothy 2. 1.
be made for all men, etc.

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Psalm. 122.


And therefore our Savior Christ taught us to pray Our Father, and not My
Father: To signify, That we ought to pray for all the Militant Churches, as
well as our selves.

3dly. In that they do employ those Talents that God has given them, not
altogether to their own private Good, but to the Good of God's Church:

The manifestation of the Spirit is given 1 Cor. 12. 7.
to every man to profit withal.

So that ye labor together in prayer for 2 Cor. 1. 11.
us; that for the gift bestowed upon us for many, thanks may be given by many
persons for us.

For the gathering together of the Saints, Ephesians. 4. 12.
and for the work of the Ministry, and for the edification of the body of
Christ.

4thly. In that God's Saints are ready to relieve the Necessities of their
Brethren:

And the multitude of them that believed, Act. 4. 32.
were of one heart, and of one soul: neither any of them said, that any thing
of that which he possessed, was his own, but they had all things common.

He is ever merciful, and lends. Psalm. 37. 26.


A devout man, one that feared God, Act. 10. 2.
with all his household, which gave much alms to the people.

He that has two coats, let him part to Luk 3. 11.
him that has none; and him that has meat, do likewise.

5thly. The Communion of Saints, consists, in respect of Society and Fellowship
one with another:

And all that believed, were in one Act. 2. 24,
place, and had all things common:

And they continued daily in the temple 26.
with one accord; and breaking bread at home, did eat their meat together with
gladness, and singleness of heart.

Thou art my Lord; my well-doing extends Psalm. 16. 3, 4.
not to thee; but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent,
all my delight is in them.

And not only in Private Meeting together of the Saints, but also in the
diligent and cheerful Meeting together at God's House, at his Public
Ordinances, as at Public Prayer, Hearing the Word Preached, Receiving the Holy
Sacrament, etc.

I thank my God, having you in perfect Phil. 1. 3.
memory;

Because of the fellowship which ye have 5.
in the Gospel, from the first day, till now.

When I remembered these things, I Psalm. 42. 4.
poured out my very heart; because I had gone with the multitude, and led them
into the house of God with the voice of singing and praise, as a multitude that
keeps a feast.

Q. What is to be understood by Saints, in this Article?

A. Not only dead Men, much less such as are Canonized by the Pope, but also
such Servants of God that live upon the Earth, being Sanctified by the Blood of
Christ, and by the Spirit of God; being also set apart and separated out of
the World, I mean, from the Estate of an Unregenerate Person, and such as are
called Saints in diverse places of Scripture:

Unto the church of God which is at 1 Cor. 1. 2. Corinthians; to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, Saints by calling.

To the Saints that are at Ephesus. Ephesians. 1.


To the Saints in Christ that are at Philippi. Phil.


To them which are at Coloss, Saints Col.
and faithful brethren in Christ.

Q. Which is the Tenth Article of the Creep?

A. The Tenth Article to be believed, is, Remission of Sins.

Q. What is the Remission of Sins?

A. Remission of Sins, is, the free Gift of God, whereby the Elect are freed
both from the Guiltiness and Punishment of Sin, by the means of the Passion and
Intercession of Christ, and that in this World.

Q. Who is it that gives Remission of Sins?

A. Remission of Sins is given of God only:

I, even I am he that puts away Isa. 43. 25.
thine iniquities, for my own sake, and will not remember your sins.

Why does this man speak blasphemy? Mark 2. 7.
Who can forgive sins, but God only?

And it must needs be so; because Sin is only committed against God, and
therefore God only has Power to forgive it.

Q. But Remission is ascribed to the Apostles, and the Ministers; as is
manifest, Mat. 18. Joh. 20. 23.

A. The Apostles remit Sins, in that they are Signifiers and Declarers of God's
Remission.

The Church remitteth Sins, when, according to the Commandment of God, she
denounces Remission of Sins to the Repentant.

One Neighbor remitteth Sins and Trespasses unto another, as concerning the
Pardoning of the Private Offense.

Q. Whether is Remission of Sins freely given?

A. Albeit God remitteth not our Sins unto us, except a most sufficient Price
or Punishment be first paid for them; yet he remitteth them freely unto us, for
Christ's sake.

Q. But Christ did Merit Remission, therefore Remission is not Free?

A. It was God's Free Grace to give Christ unto us; and therefore whatsoever
comes by Christ, comes freely.

Q. For what is Remission of Sins given?

A. Besides the Free Mercy of God, Remission of Sins is granted by the Virtue,
Passion and Intercession of Christ:

Behold the Lamb of God, that takes Joh. 1. 29.
away the sins of the world.

Christ has once suffered for our sins, 1 Pet. 3. 18.
the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God.

The blood of Christ cleanses us from 1 John 1. 7.
all sin.

It pleased the Father, that in Christ Col. 1. 19, 20.
should all fullness dwell; and by him, to reconcile all things to himself; and
to set at peace, through the blood of his cross, both the things in earth, and
things in heaven.

Ye are come to Jesus, the Mediator of Heb. 12. 24.
the New Testament; and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things
than that of Abel.

By Christ we have redemption, through Ephesians. 1. 7.
his ^^ood, even the forgiveness of sins.

Q. How could it stand with the Justice of God, to punish Christ for us?

A. Christ was willing to be punished for our Sins; yea, he offered himself
freely for us:

Walk in love, as Christ has loved us, Ephesians. 5. 2.
and has given himself for us, to be an offering and a sacrifice of a
sweet smelling savor to God.

Christ loved the Church, and gave himself Chap. 5. 25.
for it, that he might sanctify it.

He gave himself for us, that he might Tit. 2. 14.
redeem us from all iniquity.

Q. Does not Christ as well deliver us from the Punishment, as the Guilt of Sin?

A. Yes, as plainly appears: And therefore what Judgments are executed upon
the Elect, after Justification, are not properly Punishments, but Fatherly
Corrections, and of Love:

Being justified by faith, we have peace Romans 5. 1.
with God.

Even Jesus, which delivered us from ^ These. 1. 10.
wrath to come.

The END of the Catechism
A Preparatory SERMON For the Worthy Receiving of the Holy Sacrament OF THE
Lord's Supper. As it was Preached in SERJEANTS-INN-CHAPPEL, IN Fleet Street,
London.

By JAMES CLIFFORD, M. A. Chaplain to the Honorable SOCIETY.

Psalm. xxvi. 6. I will wash mine hands in innocence, O Lord, and compass thine
Altar. LONDON, Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel, in Giltspur-street, without
Newgate, 1694.

And are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster.

A PRAYER.
PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Let us pray for the whole State of Christ's Catholic Church, dispersed over
the face of the whole Earth, That it may please God to govern it universally in
the right way.

Let us pray for the Lord's Anointed, King WILLIAM, and Queen MARY, of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc.

For Catherine the Queen Dowager, Princess Anne of Denmark, and all the Royal
Family.

Let us pray for all the Lords of Their Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, all the Nobility, Judges, Gentry and Commons of this Land, ( If
Sitting.
more-especially for the Honorable High Court of Parliament, now assembled.)

Les us pray for the whole Body of the Clergy, whether Archbishops, Bishops, or
other inferior Priests and Deacons: And for a Supply of their Mortality, water
with the Dew of thy Blessing the Two Famous Universities, Oxford and Cambridge;
and especially for this Honorable Society of Law and Equity.

Lastly, O Lord, we return unto thee for a Blessing upon our selves here met
together: O Lord, be present both with Speaker and Hearer; bless me, O Lord,
that am to speak, bless these thy People that are to hear; open unto me the
Door of Utterance, that I may deliver thy Word plainly, powerfully, and
profitably: open, we pray thee, not only the Ears, but the Hearts of these thy
People, that they may receive the Word, not as the Word of sinful Men, but as
the Word of thee, the ever Living God, which is able to save their Souls:
Grant, good God, that they may hear it attentively, conceive it readily, apply
it wisely, lay it up in their Memories faithfully, meditate and practice it in
their Lives and Conversations conscionably; so that it may prove to none of us
the savor of Death unto Death, but unto every Soul here present the savor of
Life unto Life, that hereby our Understandings may be enlightened, our Hearts
purified, our Consciences pacified, our sinful Lives reformed, and our precious
Souls eternally saved at the Day of the Lord Jesus. These, and all other
needful Mercies, we beg at thy hands, for the sake and worthiness of Jesus
Christ the Righteous, the Son of thy Love, in whom thou art well pleased, in
whose Name and Words we call upon thee, Our Father, etc.

1 COR. xi. 27, 28, 29. Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of
the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. -- But
let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that
cup. -- For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body.
THE Apostle having declared the true Institution of the Sacrament, and the
right End to be observed in the Celebration of it; viz. The perpetual
Commemoration of Christ's Death, in the foregoing Words, -- In the next place
he show; the great Danger Men run into, by an undue and unworthy Participation
of this Ordinance. -- They commit a great Sin, which draws upon them great
Judgments, both Temporal and Eternal; unless, by a diligent Examination of
themselves, the Sin be prevented, and the Punishment warded off.

In these Words, we have,

I. The Sin of Unworthy Receiving. -- Ver. 27.
II. The Means to avoid this Sin; -- Ver. 28.
which is, careful Examination of one's self before the Sacrament. III. The
Punishment which they -- Ver. 29.
incurr, who Commit the Sin, and Neglect the Means; and that is, Judgment, or
Damnation.
First, Here Is the Sin of Unworthy -- Ver. 27.
Receiving laid down, Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

1. In which Words we may take notice,

1. Of the Sin it self. 2. Of the Quality of this Sin.
First, Here Is the Sin it self, Unworthy Receiving.

There Is a Twofold Unworthiness.

1. Of the Person. When the Person coming is Unworthy, that is not here meant;
for so none is Worthy, can merit or deserve this honorable Privilege.

2. Of the Action. When we come in an undue, unworthy, and unprepared Manner:
when Men care not with what Minds, nor in what Manner they come to the Lord's
Supper, but rush hand-over-head upon the Ordinance.

There are Three sorts who Receive Unworthily.

(1.) The Ignorant. (2.) The Superstitious. (3.) The Profane and Ungodly Ones.
1st. Such as are Ignorant: That come out of Custom, rather than Conscience;
for Shame of the World (because it is counted a Disparagement not to be admitted
to that Ordinance) rather than out of any Sense, Apprehension or Desire of the
Benefit accruing by this Ordinance. Such as discern not the Lord's Body, are
not able to look farther than that which they see with their Eyes: They,
indeed, behold Bread broken, and Wine poured forth; but what the Meaning and
Signification of those things are, they know not: They behold the Ceremony, but
understand not the Mystery: They talk of the Sacrament, but know not what it
is, who instituted it, why it was ordained, to what End and Use it serves; and
therefore their Receiving, cannot be (...), a Rational and Intelligible Romans
12. 1.
Service, and so is not acceptable to God.

2dly. The Superstitiously Conceited, that attribute more to the Outward
Elements, and External Administration, than is meet. The Papists lead the Van
in this Brigade, who pervert the simplicity of this Ordinance, turning the
whole business into a Tragedy, or Stage Play, by their abominable, ridiculous
and absurd Gestures and Actions, to the high Dishonor of God, and grand Abuse
of this Sacred and Holy Institution. And next unto these, follow many Ignorant
and Superstitious Protestants, who have many fond Conceits, and fantastical
Opinions of this Ordinance, resting in the Opus operatum, or Work done; --
thinking that the bare Outward Actions and Elements are able to sanctify them;
-- That if they go Fasting, they have the more; if having Eaten somewhat, the
less Benefit by coming: -- That even the very Receiving of the Elements, is of
great virtue to a sick Man: -- Or, That whosoever Receives upon his Deathbed,
must needs be saved, and go to Heaven.

3dly. Such as are Ungodly, and Profane, Proud, Covetous, Voluptuous,
Drunkards, Swearers, Neglecters and Despisers of God's Service, Scoffers and
Jeerers at the Profession of Religion, Envious, Malicious, False-hearted,
Deceitful, Dissembling Wretches, that so they may carry it fair toward; the
World, regard not Inward Sanctity, Holiness and Integrity at all; such as come
in the guilt of these Sins, unrepented of, unbewailed, unresolved against;
these are Spots in our holy Feasts, as St. Jude -- Ver. 12.
speaks, Bloaches, Stains and Reproaches to our Christian Assemblies, and such
as give great Occasion of such Multitudes separating and withdrawing themselves
from our Congregations; many profane^ ungodly Persons there are in these days,
who will be railing and inveighing against Separatists and Independents, when
they themselves give occasion to the being of such.

Secondly, Here Is the Quality of this Sin: It Is very heinous; and they that
commit it, are guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ. -- One would think this
were a very hard ^ensure, of a Fault that seems not to be very great, That
coming unworthily to the Sacrament, should be Murder, and Blood-guiltiness;
nay, Guiltiness of the Blood of the only begotten Son of God, and so as heinous
a Sin as that which Judas, and Pilate, and the Jews, were guilty of, in
Crucifying the Lord Jesus Christ, the Prince of Glory. -- But the Quality of
Sin is not to be measured by ours, but by God's Judgment of it: God calls it
such here, and we must believe it to be such.

But how are they guilty? Not as principal Actors and Doers in the business,
(for so the Jews were only guilty,) but as Accessaries and Abettors. For,

1. It Is a slighting of Christ's Death; a not laying of it to heart in a due
manner. It implies, that we, in the secret of our Souls, conceive the putting
of Christ to Death, was no such heinous Offense; whenas we can behold the
visible Representation of it in the Sacrament, without being at all affected
with it; as if Christ had been a guilty Person, deserving to be used as he was;
and the Jews had done an Act of Justice, in Crucifying him.

2. It Is an Injury and Abuse, that reflects upon the Person of Christ; as he
that shall violate the Picture, Seal, or Arms of a King, offers an Indignity to
the King himself, and shall be punished accordingly: so he that unworthily
uses this Sacrament, or Memorial of Christ's Death, does offer Contempt unto
the Death it self.

3. It Is a sign we do not lay to heart the Sin of our Nature, which was the
occasion of Christ's Dying. If Man had not sinned, Christ had not died. -- And
therefore the Prophet Isaiah tells us, That he was wounded for our Chap. 53. 5,
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities. All we like sheep have gone
astray, 6.
and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. Hence it is, that in the
Sacrament we should exercise Repentance; we should look upon him whom Zech. 12.
10.
we have pierced; and mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son.

It Is a Tradition, That if the guilty Murderer be brought to the sight of the
Party murdered, or touch his Body, he will presently fall a bleeding^ The Sight
of Christ crucified, whom we have murdered by our Sins and Transgressions,
should cause our Hearts within us to mourn and bleed: -- We should undo that by
Repentance, which we have done by Sin. -- But thus do not such as Receive
unworthily, and so remain guilty of the Body and Blood, i. e. of the Death of
Christ.

4. It Is a frustrating of the End of Christ's Death; and as to their
particular, a shedding of the Blood of Christ in vain. Christ gave his Body to
be crucified, and suffered his Blood to be shed, that he might nourish and
preserve the Souls of the Faithful unto Everlasting Life. Hence it is, that he
says, that his Flesh is Meat indeed, and his Joh. 6. 55.
Blood is Drink indeed. But to whom is it such? To those that feed on him by
Faith. This was the End why Christ gave himself, that he might become the Bread
of Life. But so cannot unworthy Receivers; and therefore the End of Christ's
giving himself, as to them, is utterly frustrated and disappointed; and so they
become guilty of the Body and Blood, i. e. of the Death of Christ; are
interpretatively, and in effect, Christ's Murderers and Destroyers.

Now it is a fearful thing to be guilty of any Man's Blood; yea, of a wicked
Man's Blood: how much more, to be guilty of the Blood of the Son of God! of the
Blood of God! Deliver me, O God, from bloodguiltiness (says David.) It was a
Sin, the guilt whereof Psalm. 51.
lay exceeding heavy, yea, like a Talent of Lead, upon his Spirit.

It Is an heavy thing, to have an hand in Man's Blood; nay, in a wicked Man's
Blood. What a fearful Imprecation was that upon Joab, for the Blood of Abner,
who was none of the best: Let the blood of Abner, the 2 Samuel 3. 28,
son of Ner, rest on the head of Joab, and on all his fathers house; and let
there not fail from the house of Joab one that has an issue, or is a leper, or
that leans on a staff, or that falls on the sword, or that lacks bread. Yea,
but what is it then, to have an hand in the shedding of Christ's Blood? The
Apostle says, That the blood of Christ speaks better Heb. 12. 24.
things than the blood of Abel. -- But if we make our selves guilty of it, by
coming unworthily and unpreparedly to the Sacrament, it speaks no better things
than the Blood of Abel: It then speaks and cries as Abel's Blood did, for
Justice and Vengeance.

Now, woe be to him for whom Christ's Blood speaks not; -- but woe a thousand
times more to him against whom Christ's Blood cries

Thus you see it is a very dangerous Sin, to come unworthily and unpreparedly
to the Lord's Table.

APPLICATION.
First Exhortation: Let us take heed how we come unworthily to the
Participation of this Ordinance: Let us look to our Feet, when we come to God
on this Errand, as the Preacher speaks: i. e. seriously ponder and consider of
what Consequence and Concernment the Business whereabout we go therein, is; --
how much Comfort, Benefit and Advantage we shall have, by a due, worthy and
prepared Coming; -- but how exceeding mischievous and prejudicial an unprepared
Coming will prove.

But what Means (will you ask) may be prescribed for the avoiding of this Sin,
for the preventing of this Danger?

The Apostle does this; Let a man -- Ver. 28.
examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. Here
is prescribed a diligent Examination of a Man's self, before he come unto the
Sacrament.

1. Here Is a Duty commanded; and that is, Examination of a Man's self: But let
a man examine himself, etc. -- Ver. 28.


2. The Time, or particular Occasion that requires it; and that is, before he
come to the Sacrament.

It is the Duty of all such as desire to be made Partakers of the Sacrament of
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, to prepare themselves, by serious and
solemn Examination: Sanctify your 1 Samuel 16. 5.
selves, and come with me to the sacrifice.

The Jews were to prepare themselves, 2 Chronicles. 35. 6. Exodus 12. 3, 6.
before they eat of the Passover. So kill the Passover, and sanctify your
selves, and prepare your brethren. And the Paschal Lamb was to be separate, and
set apart four days.

What was this Separation, but a standing Sermon of Preparation? When invited
to our Neighbor's Table, how do we spruce up our selves? Shall we not dress
our Souls, against we come to the Lord's Table?

REASONS.
1st. We come to meet God in the Sacrament; And prepare thy self to Amos 4. 12.
meet thy God, O Israel.

2dly. According to our Preparation, 2 Cor. 9. 6.
shall be our Profit and Benefit: He that so^s sparingly, shall reap sparingly.
To slight the Preparation, is a small Gen, 44. 1.
Benefit. Fill the men's sacks with food, as much as they can carry. More Sacks;
and the bigger the Sacks, the more Corn.

A prepared Heart, is a Vessel that shall be filled at the Sacrament^ (...)
such Men's Hearts with spiritual Blessings, with Virtue from Christ, with the
Comforts of the Holy Ghost, with Increase of Grace, says the Lord, at the
Sacrament: Fill them with spiritual Food as full as they can hold; let them
have as much as they can carry. The larger our Preparation, the larger our
Vessel; the larger our Vessel, the larger our Comfort and Benefit.

3dly. None can come so worthily as he should, when we have prepared our selves
the best we can, but, alas, what a deal of Deadness and Dullness of Spirit, and
Hardness of Heart, will come along with us? Nay, though a Man may have many
Wants, and come far short of what he should be; yet if the Lord sees that a Man
sets himself seriously to prepare himself, and that he ^akes Pains in the Duty,
that he may seek God sincerely in the Use of the Sacrament, he will wink at
Failings, and pass by many Infirmities, so that they shall be no hindrance to
his profitable and comfortable Receiving. Consider, For a 2 Chronicles. 30. 18,
multitude of the people, even many of Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and
Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet did they eat the passover otherwise
than it was written: but Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, The good Lord pardon
every one that prepares his heart to 19,
seek God, the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to
the ^urification of the sanctuary. And the 20,
Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people. And the children of Israel
that 21.
were present at Jerusalem, kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days, with
great gladness; and the Levites and the Priests praised the Lord day by day,
^nging with loud Instruments unto the Lord.

Hezekiah knew that Faith, and Sin^ ^erity of Heart, was more agreeable ^o God,
than the Observation of these Ceremonies; and therefore he prayed unto God to
pardon this Fault unto ^he People, which did not offend of Malice, but of
Ignorance; i. e. did ^ccept them as purified.

They could not keep.] Viz. Although Numb. 9. 6.
there were no express Law which should exclude such Persons from the Passover,
nevertheless there was a manifest Scruple grounded upon that. God, in any
religious and sacred Act^, required Purity in the Person acting or
participating.

Came before] Viz. Because the 2 Chronicles 30 18.
Practice of the Law ( Numb. 5. 2.) to put such Persons out of the Camp, was
not yet brought in.

Of the Sanctuary.] A Request which -- Ver. 19.
every one made, who came into the Temple; being all to come there at the
Feasts, ( Lev. 15. 31.)

Healed.] That is to say, held them -- Ver. 20.
as purified through his Grace, and by his gracious Pardon; and preserved them
from such Diseases and Plagues as such a Disobedience was accustomed to provoke
and bring upon them, ( Exodus 15. 26.)

Unto the Lord.] Ital. Of the Glory of -- Ver. 21.
the Lord: Hebr. Of the Strength. These two Words, in the Hebrew, being often
taken one for another: as much as to say, by which Instruments he is glorified,
and his Power and Strength exalted.

Again, Not to come preparedly, as we are commanded, Let a man examine himself,
etc.

1st. A Matter of Shame.

2dly. Of Danger.

1. Of Shame. A Shame for a Man to come to a Great Man's Table in filthy Rags
and Tatters: And is it not a shame to come rudely, unpreparedly, and
unbeseemingly, to the Lord's Table? (2 Chronicles. 30. 15.) The Priests and the
Levites were ashamed, and sanctified themselves, (as before.) A shame if foul
Vessels at the Sacrament, dirty Cloth, foul Napkin, foul Cup. Is it a shame
that the Vessels and Linen should not, in their kind, be handsomely fitted, and
decently prepared? And is it not a shame, not to have our Hearts and Souls
prepared? Is it a shame to have a foul Cup, and is it not a shame to have a
foul and filthy Heart? shall precious Liquor be put into musty and unclean
Vessels? Shall filthy, ^nhallowed, unclean Souls, be filled with spiritual
Comfort?

2. Of Danger. To partake of the Passover unworthily, a very dangerous thing!
and that made Hezekiah ^pray so earnestly, (2 Chronicles. 30.) A dangerous Business
to come to the Sacrament; a Matter of Life and Death, Tremendum Mysterium, Holy
Judgment.

1st. Danger: He that eats and drinks 1 Cor. 11. 27.
unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of Christ. Instead of Drinkers of
Christ's Blood, are Shedders of his Blood: instead of remembering of Christ's
Death, they put Christ to Death^ An unworthy and unprepared Receiver becomes
guilty of Christ's Blood. How so? Because he does as if he shed his Blood; he
does so as the Shedders of Christ's Blood did: For look, as they that crucified
and pierced Christ, poured not forth his Blood, that they might drink it, but
only that they might pour it ^orth, and shed it; so he that does unworthily and
unpreparedly drink his Blood, receiving thereby no Profit or Benefit, he has
rashly and in vain shed his Blood. Now, what a fearful thing it is, to be
guilty of Christ's Blood: Deliver me from blood-guiltiness (says the
Psalmist.) Woe be to him that Christ's Blood speaks not for; but ten thousand
times woe to him that Christ's Blood ^peaketh against.

2d. Danger: He that comes unworthily and unpreparedly, not only receives no
Good, but a great deal of Hurt. Good he receive's none, a vain Sacrament,
Ordinance blasted; and not only so, but a great deal of Hurt.

1. Instead of receiving Christ, receives the Devil. The Devil entered into
Judas, after the Sop. Satan fills their Hearts worse than before, ten times
more Children of Wrath than before.

2. Instead of receiving that which may further Salvation, receives that which
furthers Condemnation: The Zech. 12. 2.
Cup of Trembling. Some poisoned by Poison put into Wine, Mors in Olla. Stone
instead of Bread; a Scorpion instead of a Fish.

3d. Danger: Bodily Danger.

4. It is a very dangerous thing, not to come to the Sacrament; to neglect
God's Ordinance, in an unfrequent Use thereof, or utter Disrespect of it: He
that neglected Circumcision, was to be cut off, (Genesis 17. 14.) And we see that
God would have killed Mo^es, for neglecting his Child's Circumcision, ( Exodus
4. 24.) And see the place ( Numb. 9. 13.) And we know the Severity of this
Punishment, that neglected to come to that Supper of the King, ( Mat. 25. 5,
7.) And to be without the Sacrament, and without Christ, and without God in the
World, are joined together, ( Ephesians. 2. 11, 12.) Whilst they were called
Uncircumcision, i. e. without God's Sacraments, they were without Christ, and
without God in the World.

And the Necessity of the Use of the Sacraments, appears by this, That before
the Israelites must enter into Canaan, they must be circumcised, and eat the
Passover, ( Josh. 5. 7, 10.) To teach, That all that will enter into the
heavenly Canaan, must of necessity, in Obedience to God's Commandment, be
Partakers of his Sacraments. It is very dangerous therefore to neglect the
Sacraments.

And yet as dangerous as it is, not to come to the Sacrament; yet it is no less
dangerous to come, if we come unpreparedly. Unprepared coming, is as dangerous
as not coming at all.

It is with this Supper in the Sacrament, as it was with that Supper of the
King's, in the Parable, ( Mat. 22.) They that neglected to come, and absented
themselves, they smarted. But ( ver. 13.) there was one that came to the
Supper, and yet he seems to be more severely punished than those that came not.

Now, shall Men be punished for not coming, and for coming too? this seems to
be an hard case: (I am in a very great Straight, may many a poor Creature say,
that begins to be convinced of the greatness of the Sin of neglecting so holy
and useful an Ordinance of God, and of the unworthy and unprepared coming to
it:) Yes, surely; if Men come not as they should, their coming will not serve
the turn. Mark that Question, Friend, how came thou in hither? Mat. 22. 12.
He does not say, Friend, how ^atest thou down? but, how came thou hither?
This shows us, that his Sin was not some Indisposition that had overtaken him
in sitting down; but, that he did not look to sit and prepare himself before he
came in.

So it is in the Supper of the Lord: A Man commits as great a Sin, in an
unprepared coming, as in a profane not coming at all: He may expose himself to
as great a danger by coming, as by not coming.

There is no Man that comes to the Sacrament, but God has an Eye upon him,
(...), God's allseeing and all-piercing Eye is upon him: God takes special
notice of him, to see how he comes prepared: If he comes unworthily, he is like
to hear of it to his sorrow.

We come to the Sacrament, to enquire of God, to seek his Face and Favor, to
receive Comfort and Consolation from him. But whosoever comes unpreparedly,
instead of a gracious Answer, shall meet with an angry Question, Friend, how
came thou in hither? A Question, that put thoroughly home to the Conscience;
of Men, will so astonish and affright 'em, that they shall not be able to say a
Word for themselves.

People, generally, will not endure that their Minister should Catechize them,
and Question with them, to prepare them the better for the Holy Sacrament: But
let such know, God Himself will Catechize them; and put such a Question to
them, as shall strike them dumb and speechless.

Now is it thus, That it is the Duty of all such as desire to be made Partakers
of the Holy Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, are solemnly to
sit and prepare themselves for it by Examination? and that such as come
unpreparedly, come unworthily? Oh! the great Abuse of that Holy and Sacred
Ordinance, that has been ^ound among us, in admitting unworthy and unprepared^
Persons to the Participation of it. Surely, one Reason, and why the Sword, this
day, drinks up so much Blood, and devours so much of our Flesh, is, because we
have been guilty of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, in our unworthy
Receiving of the Holy Sacrament. I beseech you therefore, for the sake of the
ever Blessed and Adorable Jesus, who so freely laid down his Precious Life for
you, and as you prize the Everlasting Happiness of your own Immortal Souls,
that you would make it your utmost Care and Diligence so to direct your Lives
and Conversations, that with prepared Hearts, and joyful Souls, you may
cheerfully approach the Holy Table.

Now, it follows, we should consider what this Preparation is, and wherein it
stands.

This Preparation is Two fold, Habitual, and Actual.

Habitual: There Is somewhat that Men must have, and something that Men must do.

1. Habitual Preparation stands, in the having of all such Dispositions and
Graces, or gracious Dispositions, as qualify and fit a Man for the Work of
Receiving.

2. Actual Preparation stands, in the exciting and awakening of those Graces
and Dispositions, and renewing of them when a Man is to Receive. Both these
must be done by him that will Receive worthily. For there is a Twofold
Unworthiness found in those that come unpreparedly to the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper; an Unworthiness of the Person, an Unworthiness of the Action:
when such come to the Sacrament, as have no Right to the Sacrament; or when
such as have Right to it, come not in a right and due manner. It is in this
Ordinance, as in the Preaching of the Word.

A Man that will Preach the Word, must first be habitually prepared for the
Work, by having such Gifts, Graces, Abilities, and Ministerial Qualifications
of Learning and Knowledge in the Scriptures, as are required to accomplish and
fit a Man for that Work: A Minister should be a Man well read, and well studied.

Now, though a Man be sufficiently qualified, and proved and gifted for the
Work of the Ministry, he will not on a sudden step up into the Pulpit, take a
Text at adventure, and fall a Preaching; but, besides his Habitual Preparation
in the course of his Studies, he will study a fresh upon a particular Text, and
for a particular Sermon, and bestow special Pains for that particular Work.

I am no Prophet, I am an husbandman; Zech. 13. 5.
for man taught me to keep cattle from my youth.

Ye men and brethren, if ye have Act. 13. 15.
any word of exhortation for the people, say on.

Every Scribe instructed unto the kingdom Mat. 13. 52
of heaven, brings forth out of his treasure things new and old.

Now, thus it is in the case of the Sacrament; there must be an Habitual
Preparation, and an Actual.

Think him to be saved by him in his own way; whereupon God bestows his Son
upon the poor Sinner, and in due time crowns all with the Assurance of his Love
in particular, by the infallible Testimony of the Spirit.

Now, Christians, How has the Case been with you? What Experience have you had
of these workings? Did you ever see your selves to be lost and undone
Creatures? Was the News of a Savior ever as welcome and acceptable to you, as
a Pardon to a ppor Malefactor ready to be turned off the Ladder? What longings,
thirstings after Christ? Have you besieged Heaven with strong and earnest Cries
and Groans after Christ? Has the Kingdom of Heaven suffered Violence by reason
of you? Has Christ been ever precious in your esteem? etc.

2. But, Secondly, Consider how Faith works; what the Fruits and Effects of it
are; and by that judge: It purifies the Heart; it begets a striving against,
and resisting of Sin and Corruption; it draws the Heart to a Dependence upon
God in all Estates and Conditions; it trusts God, as well for a supply of
Outward Necessaries, as for Eternal Salvation it self. -- And (which I shall
only insist upon) it causes a Man to have respect unto all God's Commandments,
to yield universal Obedience, without Dispensation. A True Believer does not
allow himself in the Omission of any known Duty, or in the Commission of any
known Sin: If he do sin, it is out of Weekness and Infirmity, or through
Violence, and Suddenness of Temptation; but it is not out of Wilfulness and
Presumption: He may fall into Sin, but he does not live and lie in the Practice
of Sin; he does not make a Trade of it. Judge therefore how the Case stands
with you in this respect: -- Are all, or any of God's Commandments grievous to
you? Do you make a trade of Lying, Swearing, Drunkenness, Profaning God's Day,
Scoffing at Religion, etc. Oh! it is to be feared, you are far from Believing,
and so cannot partake worthily of this Ordinance.

A Second Grace, is, Repentance: Which may be described to be a spiritual
Sorrow for Sin, joined with a true Hatred and Detestation of it. It implies,

1st. A Conviction and Acknowledgment of Sin. A Man does not deny, conceal, or
seek to hide his Sin, or justify himself, and stand stoutly upon his own
Vindication and Innocence, (when his own Conscience is privy to the contrary,)
but with holy David, he does freely and ingenuously confess and acknowledge his
Sin, and that particularly: Against thee, thee Psalm. 51. 4.
only have I sinned: Wash me, cleanse me, -- Ver. 14.
deliver me from blood-guiltiness.

2dly. It implies inward Grief, and Sorrow of Heart for Sin, and the Offense
given thereby to God: It 2 Cor. 7. 11.
causes the Sinner to sorrow after a godly sort.

3dly. It implies an inward Hatred and Dislike of Sin, an Aversion and turning
away of the Heart from Sin: so that whereas a Man before had a secret Love and
Liking to it, now he comes to see the Ugliness and Deformity of it, to loath
and detest it, as an Offense to God, the great Enemy of his Soul, and Bane of
all his Peace and Comfort.

4thly. It implies a leaving and forsaking of Sin, and a practicing of the
contrary Good. Amendment and Reformation of Life, is the great Fruit, Evidence
and Effect of true Repentance. He that confesses Sin, professes Sorrow for
Sin, and Detestation of Sin, and yet continues in the Practice of Sin: He that
by his Practice licks up those Sins, which he seemed to have vomited up by
Confession, there are seven Abominations in his Heart; he may seem to repent,
he may think he repents; but the truth is, he deceives himself and others. For
it is Reformation, and Amendment of Life, that crowns Repentance, that argues it
to be sound and Isa. 1. 16.
sincere. Wash you, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes; cease to do evil, Learn to do well, etc. -- Ver. 17.
Repentance without Reformation, is no better than Abomination.

Examine therefore thy self upon this Point. Do thou, with Adam, seek to
hide thy Sin? Do thou deny it? extenuate it? excuse it? justify it? Or,
though thou confessest it in thy Mouth, yet is there a secret love and liking
to it in thy Heart? Do thou roll it under thy tongue, as a sweet Morsel? Is
it with thee, as St. Augustine confesses it was with him, before his
Conversion? he prayed, That God would be pleased to suppress and subdue in him
the Lusts of Concupiscence; and yet he was afraid God should hear his Prayers,
in regard of the secret liking he had of those Lusts. Is there no Amendment and
Reformation of thy Life, but thou art as vile, as wretched, as profane and
ungodly, as hypocritical and deceitful, etc. as ever? Alas! thou dwell far
from Repentance: Saul, and Judas, and Cain, and many that are now in the Pit of
Destruction (for ought I know) have repented as much as that came to.

Thirdly, They that would come worthily to the Lord's Table, must examine
themselves in point of Love and Charity, whether this Grace be in them of a
truth, yea, or not.

Now, Love is an Affection of the Heart, whereby we wish Good to our Neighbor,
as to our selves; and are willing, in what we are able, to do him that Good we
would have done to our selves in his Case.

Now, this Love is to be considered, either as respecting the Godly, or as it
respects all Men in general.

1. Love to the Godly, is then right and sincere, when it is to all that fear
God, Poor as well as Rich, Low as well as High, Mean as well as Honorable;
when we have respect to him that is clad in vile Raiment, as well Jam. 2. 2, 3
as to him that wears the Gold Ring, and is arrayed in goodly Apparel, (as St.
James speaks.) -- He truly loves a righteous Man, in the Name of a righteous
Man, that loves him because he is such; that can place his Affection where God
has placed his; that can love a Saint, though he be poor, mean and
contemptible in the esteem of the World.

2. Love to the Godly is then right and sincere, when it is constant at all
times, as well in Adversity as Prosperity: He truly loves Christ, that will own
Christ in his persecuted Members; that will visit them in Prison; that will not
be ashamed of them, when they are under the Cross. 'Twas an Argument of a truly
godly and Pious Affection in Obadiah, when, in the time of Persecution, he
sheltered and protected the Lord's Prophets, hiding them by fif^ies in Caves,
and seeding them. And 'twas the Honor of Onesiphor^s, that he was not ashamed
2 Timothy 1. 16.
of Paul's Chain.

Now, examine thy Heart upon this Account: How stand thou affected to those
that fear God? Are they the object of thy choicest and entire Affection? Or,
Do thou hate them; malign them in the secrets of thy Soul; scoff at them,
deride them, injure them? -- Or do thou carry a Respect toward those that
fea^ God, and are withal Rich, Honour^^^le and Great in the World; but in the
mean time* Despis^^^ those of (...) Rank, and meaner Condition? It may be, they
are more Eminent in Grace and Goodness, than the other. -- And art thou ash^^^d
to (...) the Servants of Christ, in their Adv^rsity? Do thou then look
strongely upon them? Do thou ^^^nch, and shrink back, when thou see them
haled to Prison, Convented before Earthly Tribunals? etc. It Is to be feared,
thy Heart is not sincerely affected; neither is there that Love to the Image of
God, which should be in all the Children of God.

2dly. How stand thou affected to thy Neighbors in general?

1. Is there a sympathy and fellowfeeling in thee of thy Brother's Condition?
Art thou grieved for the Afflictions of Joseph? Art thou affected with the
Miseries of others? Do thou mourn with them that mourn? grieve with them
that grieve? Do thou pity them? pray for them? help and relive them,
according to thy Ability, and as thou have Opportunity? -- So, Do thou
rejoice in the Wel^are and Prosperity of thy Brother? Art thou so far from
envying him, and repining at him (a thing too common in the World now adays)
that it does thee good to see him thrive and prosper? This is an argument of
true Love and Charity. But, it may be, thou have no Bowels of Pity and
Compassion toward thy Brother in Misery; thou shuttest up thine Heart, and
withdrawest thy Hand from him: It may be thou art one that enviest and repinest
at the Prosperity of thy Neighbor; thou art lean, because he is fat; thine Eye
is evil toward him, because God is good to him: Oh! thou art an uncharitable
Wretch! And how dwell the Love of God in thee, when thou have no Love to thy
Brethren?

A Second Note of True Charity, is, when a Man is willing and ready to pardon
and remit Offenses done unto him; and to seek Reconciliation where he has
given Offense. -- Indeed, this is a very hard Matter to put in practice, Men's
Hearts are so full of Pride, Scorn, Rancour, Malice and Revenge. -- But a truly
Charitable Man will do for Man, as God has done for him, who has freely
pardoned him for greater Offenses; and though he were the offended Party, yet
first sought Reconciliation with him. And therefore, how far are those
implacable, revengeful, and irreconcilable Spirits, who know not how to pardon
an Offense, or to pass by an injury; but, Aeternum servant sub pectore vulnus,
carry an everlasting Grudge with them; will watch an Opportunity of Revenge,
though it may be seven Years hence? How far, I say, are these implacable and
revengeful Spirits from that Love and Charity which becomes Men, more-
especially Christians? -- Are there not many come to the Sacrament with this
Mind, that will profess they are in Charity with all the World, freely forgive
all^ owe no Man ill Will? But as the Serpent i^ said to lay down her Poison
while she drinks, and afterward swallows it up again; so these seem, while
they come to the Lord's Table (which ought to be a ^^nd of Christian Love and
Charity) to lay down their malicious and revengeful Thoughts, but afterward
will reassume and take them up again to the purpose. Such Hypocrisy and
Impiety God will certainly find out, and severely punish.

Thus you see wherein and how we are to Examine our selves, before we come to
the Lord's Table^ ^t may be demanded what is to be done, if, after Examination,
we ^ind our selves Unworthy?

R. They that find their wants of these Graces, that do unfeignedly bewail and
mourn for them, that make it their humble and earnest Prayer to God for
Redress; these are, indeed truly Worthy, though not so worthy as they would be.

But now, they that neither have these Graces, nor yet care for them; that are
in no wise sensible of their sp^itual Wants, mourn not under the same, etc.
these are utterly Unworthy: These are no better than Dogs, and such a^are to be
ex^luded; and it is to be hoped Authority will, in time, fu^nish us with a Staff
to keep them off.

As for poor, humble, contrite, mourning Hearts, etc. though they may be
conscious to themselves of much Unworthiness; yet let them not draw back, but
come with holy Fear, and humble Reverence: And with a word of Direction to
such, how to behave themselves there, I shall conclude.

1. Know what your Minds must be ^ixed and think upon in the Sacrament.

2. What Affections are to be stirred up in you at the Sacrament.

For the First: Your Thoughts are not to dwell upon the Outward Elements and
Actions of the Sacrament; but to be raised up to a Meditation upon Christ's
Death, and the Benefits thereof.

The Bread and Wine, separated by Consecration to this holy Use, should re-mind
us of Christ's being foreordained, and set apart by God, from all Eternity, to
the work of Man's Redemption.

The Breaking of the Bread, and the Pouring forth of the Wine, should bring to
our remembrance how Christ was torn in his Body with Wounds and Stripes, and
to^tur'd in his Soul with the sense of his Father's Wrath and Indignation, and
that for our Sins and Transgressions.

When the Minister offers to thee the Bread and Wine, think of Christ given to
thee of God freely, and freely giving himself to thee, if thou will receive him.

When thou receivest and eatest those Elements, think on Christ, the living
Bread, that gives Life to thy Soul, and by his Merits preserve; it from Eternal
Death. Let thy Heart cleave unto him by Faith; throw thy self into his Arms;
wash thy Soul in his Blood; hide thy self in the Holes and Clefts of this Rock,
from the stormy Tempest of God's Wrath. -- This is the Life of this holy
Sacrament; without which Spiritual Applications, all is but a dead and empty
Ceremony.

Now, of the Affections that must be excited and stirred up in thi^ Ordinance:

1. Our Hearts must be drawn to a firm relying and dependence upon Christ, as
an All-sufficient Savior, having paid the utmost Farthing, and trod the
Wine Press, defeated all the Powers of Darkness, and purchased for us a Kingdom
that cannot be shaken. Let not greatness and difficulty of the Work of
Redemption, terrify us; Christ has finished.

2. The sight of Christ Crucified, should beget in us a godly Sorrow for our
Sins, that were the Judasses, Pilates, Zech. 12. 10.
Jews. Mourn over him.

3. Thankfulness: Because by Christ's Death, is purchased for us the greatest
Blessing that ever was, Pardon, Reconciliation, Grace, Glory.

2. On our part, the greatest Undesert that might be.

3. Infinite Disproportion betwixt Christ and us, the Just for the Unjust; the
Prince of Glory, for Vassals of Baseness.

4. Love unto Christ. How should we love Christ, that loved us, and gave
himself for us!

1. A Man must Examine himself, after he is come from the Sacrament, to
consider what Comfort and Increase of Grace he has received, what quickening
Virtue and Refreshment he has found to flow out of Christ into his Soul. Now,
upon such Examination, a Man shall find that it has ^een well with him at the
Sacrament, o^ that it has not, and so accordingly he is to proceed.

First then, If a Man has found no Joy, Comfort, or Enlargement; but, upon
Examination, finds that he has been unfruitful dead, and dull, then two things
are to be done.

1. Suspect thy self, that thou have been ^ailing either in thy Preparation to,
or Performance of the Duty. Labor therefore to find out what it was that
hindered the Efficacy of the Sacrament, and be seriously humbled for it. Yea,
if we can but be sensible of our Senselessness of Heart, -- that holy Duty, and
truly mourn for it, we need no^ ^e much dishea^tned; because this is one Fruit
of the ^ife of Christ, which was undoubtedly received in the Sacrament.

2. Endeavor by after Pains and Humiliation, to quicken and awaken the
Efficacy of the Sacrament: For we must know, Sacraments do not always work for
the present, but the Efficacy may come afterward.

The first Sacrament of the Supper the Disciples received, it is like they found
not the Efficacy of it for the present; for then they understood nothing of
Christ's Death, neither could it sink into their Heads that He should die: but
yet afterward, when they came more clearly to understand the Mysteries of
Redemption, and the whole ^octrine of Christ, ^o question but they reaped the
Benefit of that Ordinance, which then they fully understood not.

It Is with the Sacrament, as with the Word. Many a Man hears the Word, and, in
some measure, minds it; but for the present, it has no Effect at all. It Is
possible it may work many Years after. A Sermon preached seven Years before,
may prove the Means of a Man's Conversion seven Years after. We have an Example
in that kind; All things that John spoke Joh. 10. 41, 42.
of this man, were true: And many believed on him there. This is written of
some of John's Hearers. John had preached Christ before: They did not thereupon
believe in Christ when he preached. John was dead and gone; but now, when
Christ comes among them, they, upon John's former Sermons, preached a great
while before, do now believe. John was dead, but not his Word; that works,
while he lies in his Grave. Thus also may it be with the Sacrament: it does not
always presently work; it may and does work with some a long time afterward,
when a Communicant, humbled for his Unprofitableness in the Duty, endeavors,
by after-Diligence and Humility, to quicken and put Life into it -- Though we
have miscarried in our Preparations to the Sacrament, and Disposition in the
Sacrament; yet may the Virtue, Efficacy and Comfort of it be recovered by
after-Diligence, and after-Humiliation. -- But if, when the business is once
over, Men shall never look back, nor reflect upon it more, so as to be humbled
for their Deadness, Hardness and Indisposition in the Duty, and have no care to
make up that by after-Diligence, which was wanting in the present Performance,
no marvel though they receive no Benefit or Advantage by it.

But, Secondly, If, upon after-Examination, and a Review of the Business, we
find that we were refreshed, our Hearts comforted and enlarged, that we had
Virtue from, and Communion with Christ.

1. Let us bless God with our whole Soul, for his Mercy and Goodness to us; and
with all thankfulness acknowledge his gracious dealing with us.

2. Let us be careful to keep up and maintain that graciou^ and holy frame of
Spirit which we brought from the Sacrament. Pray we as David did for the
People, when he saw them in a good frame of Spirit, and that they offered
willingly and freely toward the Building of God an House: O Lord, 1 Chronicles. 29.
18.
keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy
people. -- So, when we find a good frame of Heart wrought in us at the
Sacrament, we should pray and endeavor that this frame of Heart might be still
upheld and continued in us. -- We should endeavor to keep alive as long as may
be, that holy fire that was kindled in our Hearts in the Use of the Sacrament.

It Is a great fault in us, when we come from the Sacrament, that we have no
care to keep our Hearts in good frame, by Prayer, Meditation, or good
Conference, but presently fall a discoursing about secular Business, or
foolish, idle and unprofitable Matters. This is a dangerous quenching of the
Spirit, and tends to the hardening of the Heart; as thrusting red-hot Iron into
Water, makes it harder. Such sudden coolings and dampings of spiritual heats
got in holy Duties, cannot be without much Danger to the Soul.

A Second thing to be looked into, is, A great care to make good and perform
that Vow of New Obedience which we have renewed with God, in the Sacrament. Our
Hearts are very s^ippery (like a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke,) and Satan
is very subtle to draw us speedily to a breach, and therefore it concerns us to
be watchful.

The Devil is exceeding desirous to go in, and go down after a Sacramental Sop.
No sooner was Christ Baptized ( Luke 3.) but ( Luke 4.) presently after the
Sacrament received, he sets ^iercely upon Christ with all his might, strength
and skill, in his Temptations; so he lies upon the catch to tempt us,
immediately after we come from the Ordinance: And therefore we must have a
special care to keep our Covenants, and to express the Power of God's Ordinance
in the Hol^ness and Obedience of our Lives.

We must have a care to walk closely with God, to forsake all former Sins, to
perform all Duties of Obedience, formerly neglected.

Elias, after he was fed by God, went in the strength of that Food, 1 King. 19.
8.
Forty Days, and Forty Nights together. So should we walk in the strength of
our Sacramental Food many Days, and show that indeed we have received Strength
from it, and by it, by keeping our Covenants with God, of Holiness and
Righteousness.

Novus Dies, Novos Mores. Now God requires we should take up new Thoughts,
Resolutions, Endeavors, that we should lead new Lives.

It should be with us, after our Communion with God in the Sacrament, as it was
with Jacob after his Communion with God in Beth^l: Then Jacob lifted up his
feet, and Genesis 19. 1.
came into the land of the people of the East. He lift up his Feet, went with
Strength, Spirit, and Cheerfulness. So, when we have had Fellowship with God in
the Sacrament, in the Strength of the heavenly Food we should lift up our Feet,
and go on cheerfully in God's Ways.

It Is said, That Jesus returned from Luke 4. 1.
his Baptism in Jordan, full of the Holy Ghost, to be tempted of the Devil^ He
went from the Sacrament full of the Holy Ghost, and full of Power against the
filthy Ghost. So should we rise from the Sacrament, full of the Holy Ghost,
full of Power, and spiritual Strength: Tanquam Leones Ignem spirantes, Like
Lions breathing Fire, (as St. Chrysostom speaks,) that so we may be Terrible
to Satan, and Powerful against our Lusts.

That which St. Paul speaks, must Ephesians. 4. 28.
be especially remembered, Let him that stole, steal no more. Let him that
swore, swear no more; that used to lie, be drunk unclean, etc. Eccl. 5. 4.
do so, be so no more. We do interpretatively, and in effect, Vow this in the
Sacrament.

Reason thus with thy self therefore; I have been at the Sacrament; I have
there vowed, and taken the Sacrament upon it, That I will forsake my Sins,
become a New Man: And with this stop the Mouth of the Devil, when he shall
tempt thee to Evil, either by himself, or Instruments, [ Christiana sum.]

Many come to the Sacrament, and there vow New Obedience; and yet when once the
Action is over, O! how soon are their Vows forgotten.

It Is said, That the people sat down Exodus 32. 6.
to eat and drink, and rose up to play. How many sit down to eat and drink the
Sacramental Elements; and that done, rise up to play? To what play? To play the
Beasts, the Swine, the Wantons, the Wretches; and so make themselves, by such
Receiving, twofold, more the Children of the Devil than they were before.

The Abassines, after the Receiving of the Sacrament, think it not lawful for
'em to Spit on that Day, till the Setting of the Sun. This is Superstition; and
yet such Superstition, as shall condemn the Profaneness of many among us.

They that hold it unlawful so much as to Spit that Day; would they, out of
Excess of Drunkenness, Spue that Day? They that will not Spit that Day; would
they endure the h^llish Drivel of ungodly Oaths, and unsavory, rotten
Communication to fall from their Mouths that Day? They that would not Spit that
Day: would they in that Day spit in God's Face, as our common Swearers and
Blasphemers do?

The Rock followed the Israelites: 1 Cor. 10. 4.
The Water issued out of the Rock (according to some) followed them as they
journeyed, and streamed after them in their removes: so should we have a care
that the Virtue and Efficacy of the Sacrament should follow us, and stream
after us, all the while we are traveling in the Wilderness of this World.

Unless it be thus with us, we horribly pollute and take God's Name in vain,
and make our selves guilty of Spiritual Perjury, in the sight of God. And woe
be to that Man that breaks Covenant with the Great God of Heaven and Earth! who
will not be mo^ked, (...) will not be baffled, who will be a swift Witness
against all such as gros^ly take his glorious Name in vain, and so ^oully
pollute his Holy Ordinance.

You see then, how much i^ concerns us to walk Holily, Circumspectly,
Faithfully, after our Participation of this Blessed and Holy Ordinance.

Doct. It is a necessary Duty required of every one, before he come to the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, That he examine himself diligently and
carefully.

Quest. Wherein does this Examination consist?

Resp. In a diligent Enquiry, Whether we have those Graces, or not, which are
requisite to be found in every one that would come Worthily to this Ordinance.
They are Three, Faith, Repentance, and Charity.

Without Faith, we cannot ^eed on Christ, or drink his Blood. Without
Repentance, we cannot mourn over Christ, whom we have pierced by our Sins, and
crucified by our Transgressions; which is a Duty to be exercised in the
Sacrament. And without Love, we have neither Union with Christ the Head; nor
yet with the Faithful, who are the Members of Christ's Mystical Body.

First therefore, we are to examine our selves in Point of Faith. -- Now, we
may judge of the Truth of this Grace, by taking into our serious Consideration,

1st. How it is Wrought. 2dly. How it Works.
It Is wrought by the Ministry of Romans 10. 17.
the Word: Faith comes by hearing.

1. Convincing us of our Misery and Wretchedness, by reason of Sin, Original
and Actual, the Sin of our Nature, and the Sins of our Lives.

2. Terrifying us with the Threats of the Curse Internal, External, Eternal.

4. Humbling us, and laying of us low, in the sight of God.

4. Revealing unto us the Lord Jesus Christ, in his Fullness, and Allsufficiency
to Save, in his Willingness and Readiness to Embrace poor, contrite,
brokenhearted Sinners.

5. Working the Heart to an insatiable Hunger and Thirst after him; to a
Willingness to accept of him upon any Terms; to a Contentedness to do, or be
any thing, so we may but have him.

6. To a Recumbency and Relying upon him alone for Lif^ and Salvation; and a
Resignation of our selves up unto Him: To whom, etc.

A PRAYER After Sermon.
ALmighty God, our Glory and our Hope, our Lord and Master, the Father of
Mercy, and God of all Comfort, we present to thee the Sacrifice of a thankful
Spirit, in humble and joyful Acknowledgment of those infinite Favors by which
thou have supported our State, enriched our Spirits, comforted our Sorrows,
relieved our Necessities, blessed and defended our Persons, instructed our
Ignorances, and promoted our Eternal Interests. Amen.

We praise thy Name for that Portion of thy holy Word of which thou have made
us Partakers this Day; Grant that it may bring forth Fruit unto thee, and unto
Holiness in our whole Life, to the Glory of thy Holy Name, to the Edification
of our Brethren, and the eternal Comfort of our Souls in the Day of our Lord
Jesus. Amen.

Have Mercy on all that desire, and all that need our Prayers: Visit them with
thy Mercy and Salvation; Ease the Pains of the Sick, Support the Spirits of the
Disconsolate, Restore all that are Oppressed to their Rights: Remember them
that are appointed to die, give them Comfort, perfect and accept their
Repentance, give them Pardon for Jesus Christ's sake, that in the Glories of
Eternity they may magnify thy Mercy for ever and ever. Amen.

Hear the Cries of the Orphans and Widows in their Calamity: Let all their
Sorrow be sanctified, and end in Peace and Holiness, in the Glorification of
thy Name, and the Salvation of their Souls. Amen.

Lord, pity and pardon, direct and bless, sanctify and save us all: Give
Repentance to all that live in Sin, and Perseverance to all thy S^ns and
Servants; for his sake who is thy Beloved, and the Foundation of all our Hopes,
our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus: To whom, with the Father, and the Holy
Spirit, be all H(...)r and Glory, Praise and Adoration, now, and for evermore.
Amen.

The Peace of God, which passes all Understanding, keep your Hearts and Minds
in the Knowledge and Love of God, and of his Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord; and
the Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be amongst you,
and remain with you always. Amen,

FINIS.
Books Sold by J. Deacon, at the Angel in Gilt-spur-street, without Newgate.
DR. Horneck's Fire from the Altar. Dr. Jeremiah Taylor's Rules of Holy Living
and Dying. A Weeks Preparation to the Receiving the Sacrament. Two Discourses:
The First, A Christian Exhortation against the Fear of Death; The Second, A
Brief Declaration of the Resurrection of the Dead. Dent's Plain-mans Pathway
to Heaven. Dr. Horneck's Great Law of Consideration. Dr. Sherlock's Preparation
for Death. -- His Discourse of Judgment. The Doctrine of the Bible. Smith's
David's Repentance. Garden of Spiritual Flowers. Ecclesiastical History
Epitomized. Dr. Hammond's Practical Catechism. The Countess of Morton's Daily
Devotions. Dr. Taylor's Golden Grove; being, A Choice Manual of Prayers.
Kempis's Christian Pattern. Gerhard's Meditations. Smith's Great Assize.
Books Printed for, and Sold by J. Deacon, at the Angel in Gilt-spur-street,
without Newgate; where any Gentlemen, or Country Chapmen, may be furnished
with Bibles, Common Prayer Books, and School Books: And all sorts of Books in
Divinity, History, Astrology, and Navigation, etc.
THE Pious Christian's Devotion, and most excellent Family Companion, etc. The
Grounds of Reading, Writing, and Pronouncing of the English Tongue: Laid down
in a New and Easy Method. By T. Osborn, Minister of the Gospel, and Teacher of
a Private School in Hatton-Garden. A Short Catechism, containing the Principles
of Christian Religion, composed for the Instruction of Youth; together with
Prayers for every Day in the Week, and Graces Before and After Meat. By James
Clifford, M. A. late of Magdalen College, Oxon. The most Excellent and Famous
History of the most Renowned Knight, Amadis of Greece, surnamed Knight of the
Burning Sword. The English Fortune Tellers. Quarto.

