To all that Desire and Breath after THE LORD, AND The true Knowledge of his
Everlasting Way, and the Righteousness and Peace of that Kingdom which
consists not in Words, but in Power, Life and Joy in the Holy Ghost;

And whose souls truly hunger after that Bread of Life which comes down from
above, 1 Cor. 4.20. which who comes to eat of (says John, Chap. 6.35.) shall
never hunger more; without which your souls cannot be satisfied, nor the
expectation thereof answered. Even to you all, I say, the Visitation and tender
Salutation of the Fathers Love through me reaches, with Informatiof, and
certain Call unto that Way and Truth of the Everlasting God, in which many at
this day find the true peace and satisfaction to their souls, who have long
sought and enquired after him, who now are come to find him.

Written by JOSEPH COAL.

London, Printed in the Year, 1667.

To all you that Desire and Breath after the Lord, and the true Knowledge of
his Everlasting Way, and the Righteousness and Peace of that Kingdom which
consists not in Words, but in Power, Life and Joy in the Holy Ghost, etc.
OH Friends, and distressed scattered People, Ezekiel. 34^ throughout.
who have been as Sheep scattered upon the Mountains without a Shepherd, in the
cloudy, dark and dismal Day which has come over the World, in which men have
been groping as the blind for the Wall, and have not found the resting place,
but have wandered to and fro, from Mountain to Hill, and have even wearied
themselves for very vanity, Jer. 50.6.
and spent their money for that which proves to be no bread, and their labor
for that which, at length does not, nay cannot satisfy the truly hungry soul.
Wherefore, oh ye People, in every desolate Village, arise, arise and hearken ye
to the Voice and Call of the true Shepherd, who is now calling and seeking you;
awake; awake and arise that he may give you Life: Hearken diligently unto him,
Ephesians. 5.13, 14.
and ye shall eat that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in
fatness. Incline your ear and come unto him, hear and your souls shall live;
and he will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, Isa. 55.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
and call ye upon him while he is near; let the wicked forsake his ways, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord; and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Now Jesus
Christ he is the true Shepherd that lays down his life for the Sheep, John
10.11, 27.
and his Sheep hear his voice, and they follow him, and he leads them forth,
and gives unto them eternal Life, and satisfies their souls as they hear his
voice, who speaks within, by his Light and Spirit in the heart and conscience,
which whosoever hears, and obeys, and follows, shall be led into the green
pastures of Life, and shall come to know a quiet and sure resting place by the
Rivers of living Water, where they shall lie down and none shall make them
afraid, and shall eat and be filled, and drink and be satisfied. Oh therefore,
ye that are hungry, and that find a want of the true Bread, and desire to be
satisfied, hearken diligently to the Light and Voice of Christ in you, even
that true Light which he has enlightened you withal, Ps. 36.8.
which convinces of sin, and shows the thoughts and intents of the heart,
and lets you see your own estates and conditions, I say hearken unto it, and
wait low in it, and therein will you feel and know the true power of God arise
to work in you; by which you will feel a stop put unto sin, and a subjecting of
that evil spirit, which has led you into disobedience and transgression
against God your Maker, and into the ways and works which are displeasing to
him; because of which you have been separated from him, and wandering in the
ways of death and darkness, where your souls have been laden, and burdened,
Isa. 59.1, 2.
and compassed about with sorrow and trouble, being separated from its true
life, and having lost the feeling of that power which preserves our of sin and
transgression, which you will come to feel, as your minds are turned into that
Light of the Lord Jesus, which does appear in you against all sin and
unrighteousness; in which, as you believe, you will receive power, even the
power of Christ, who is the true Light, that lights all mankind, John 1.12
or every man coming into the world; by which power you will feel a subjecting
of your minds, and nature, and thoughts, bringing you into the true obedience
to Christ; so you will be made willing to follow him in the denial of the
world, its works, ways, and all things that are contrary to him, which they
that will be his Disciples must be separated from, 2 Cor. 10.5.
and must deny themselves, as he has said, and take up the Cross and follow
him; who is not of the world, and therefore the world hates him, and those that
do follow him, whose Kingdom is not of this world, and cannot be entered into
but through the denial of the world, its ways and works, as I have said: and
though such now are hated, Luke 9.23.
and cast out of the fellowship and society of the world, because they cannot
be partakers with it in its sins, and unrighteous ways, and cannot be
conformable to them in their practices, and ways of worship, which are
contrary to the persuasion of the Spirit of God in their Consciences, yet the
Lord will and does receive them into Fellowship and Communion with himself; who
says, Isa. 51 7.
Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my
law: Fear ye not the reproaches of men, neither be ye afraid of their
revilings, Isa. 50.15.
for the Moth shall eat them up like a Garment, and the Worm shall eat them up
like Wool; but my Righteousness shall be for ever, and my Salvation from
generation to generation. And though such are reviled and cast out because they
have and do deny the world, and cannot be conformable to its changable ways,
and are made a prey upon because they depart from iniquity, yet the Lord will
appear to their joy, and their enemies shall be ashamed; Chap. 66.5.
and he will receive such as are cast out for his Name sake, and speak
comfortably to his Beloved.

And therefore all you tenderhearted people that cannot turn with the wind, in
conforming to those things which are contrary to the persuasion of that Light
of God's Spirit in your Consciences, but feel in your selves, breathings and
longings after immortal substance, and would rather suffer outwardly in your
persons and estates, the punishments, forfeitures and penalties of man's Law,
than transgress the righteous Law of God written in the heart, and do those
things to please men, which are contrary to that Light and Knowledge which God
has given you, Jer. 39.33.
which undoubtedly would bring and be the cause of the wrath and judgments of
God to come upon you; and so turn to be men-pleasers, 1 These. 2.4.
which the Apostle spoke against, to displease the righteous Lord, whose ways
are not man's ways. I say, oh Friends, mind ye the Lord alone, Isa. 55.8.
and take heed of them that are given to change; look ye singly at, and put
your trust in him, and he will carry you on in boldness, and by his power
(which, as I have said, you will feel as your minds are turned unto, and as you
wait in that Light, which convinces of sin in the Conscience) you will be
strengthened and enabled to bear a Testimony for him in this day of trial,
against the world, and all things which ye are convinced of not to be of God;
and ye will be up held above all worldly fear, in the feeling of the perfect
love of God, which will refresh your souls in all your trials; for truly this
is a day of trial in which the Lord is making a separation thoroughly between the
precious and the vile; between him that truly fears God, 1 John 4.18.
and him that only talks of him; yea between the professors and the possessors,
who have found him, and cannot deny him before men, nor let him go, who is the
chiefest of ten thousand; but walk with him, and abide faithful in their
generation, and such shall be recorded in the Book of Life among the Righteous,
whose memory shall live for ever; when those that have denied the Lord before
mem, and betrayed the Just in themselves, and lose their Testimony to run with
a multitude to do (that which once they were persuaded was) evil, and so sink
under the fear, terror, and threatenings of men, who in the height of their
power and glory are but like the flower of the field; and under the temptations
of the Devil, who will say, This thou will lose, and such will hate and envy
thee, and thou will not be esteemed amongst men, but wilt lose thy reputation
in the world, and thy worldly gain, and the love and friendship thereof. And
thus the Devil deceives many, by presenting these with many other such like
reasonings in the mind, whereby some are overcome and swallowed up, and so deny
the Lord to please men, and act contrary to what it may be they have
experimentally known of him, and so become slaves and bondmen for a morsel of
bread, or a thing of naught; and bow, and creep for the gain of that which will
perish, even to the wounding and piercing of their own souls, and to the utter
loss of their peace with God and a good Conscience, and the Names of such will
surely rot, except they repent, if it be not too late; and such will now be
discovered and manifested in this day, who have not been right and sound to
God, but deceitful and rotten hearted, and have had a Name to Live, but are
found to be Dead, as to the sense of Life and Truth within, though they have
made a fair show for a time, while the Powers of the Earth have been their Prop
to uphold them by an outward Law; And truly of this sort have been the very
Teachers and Priests themselves: I speak it not as upbraiding any, but with
pity unto such who have been led by them, Jer. 23.32. John 6.4, 5.
who, as the Lord by the Prophet said, have caused them to err, by their lies
and their lightness; against whom the Lords hand was turned because thereof in
that day; because they had not caused the People to hear his Word in their
hearts. And the Lord has promised to gather his People from their mouth, and
to feed them, and teach them himself, and this is the day in which he will
accomplish it. Wherefore cease ye wholly from them, and wait upon the Lord, Isa
54.13
that you may witness his Teachings, who will teach and lead you into all Truth
by his Spirit, and you shall not want, but he will supply your wants and give
you all good things, and be a God and Father unto you, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17.
and you shall be his People; and he will dwell in you and walk in you,
according to his promise, if you will be obedient to his voice, who is now
calling out of Babylon (Confusion) and out of the many confused noyses in the
world, and out of the sins of Babylon, which they that are partakers of, must
as surely partake of her dreadful Judgments, which God will reward her with. Oh
therefore, Rev. 8.4.
ye scattered people in the Borders, and by the Waters of Babylon, Come away,
and shake your selves from the dust; arise, and do not delay, for the sound of
a mighty Trumpet is gone forth and is heard in the Earth. Rev. 22.12.
Prepare, prepare to meet the Lord by repentance, and by turning every one from
the evil of his way, and cast off the works of darkness, for behold he comes
swiftly, and his reward is with him. Come out of Babylon, and be you thoroughly
separated, and touch not the unclean thing, and the Lord will receive you. And
what though ye are cast out and hated of men, if the Lord receive you and take
you into his favor and protection, happy and blessed are you. Gal. 1.18.
Wherefore bow down the ear and hearken to the Call of the Lord, and give up to
follow him in truth and faithfulness, according to what he makes known in you,
and reason not with flesh and blood but be obedient to the heavenly Call, and
the Lord will delight to do you good, and will withhold no good thing from you,
Psalm. 84.11.
as you walk in faithfulness and uprightness before him, and answer his
requirings, and fulfill his will, but he will be near unto you to answer when
you call upon him, and hear your cries, and give you your souls desire, and
will be a present help unto you in the time of need. Oh let these things dwell
upon your hearts, and let the Fathers love melt you, Psalm 46.3.
and let it be a sufficient obligation to cause you to walk in subjection to
him, seeing he has not wholly left you, nor given you up to your selves, nor
left you altogether in darkness, but has given you light that you should walk
in it, and so become his Children, who kindled and raised good desires after
Righteousness in you, and that those desires in you are not quite lost nor
quenched, but are kept alive and fresh in you, which the Lord no doubt will
answer and satisfy as you diligently wait upon him, who will not quench the
smoking Flax, Psa. 145.19.
nor break the bruised Reed, till Judgment come forth into Victory; and ye
will come to enjoy that which you have desired after, and to know the work of
rigteousness, which is peace, and the effect of righteousness, which is
quietness and assurance for ever in Christ Jeses the everlasting substance; and
so will come to see through, and be gathered out of all those shadows which in
their time were representations of him, which now comes to be abolished and
done away by him, Isa. 32.17, 18.
in all that witness him come in Spirit and Power within, who puts an end to
sin, and finisheth transgression, and brings in everlasting righteousness and
peace to all those that do truly believe in him. Dan. 9.24
And now at this day People sticking and hanging in outward things as the Jews
did, they miss the substance, and come short of that which is the souls life,
food, bread, wine, water and true nourishment, and indeed all; and who became
the Saints all, and fullness that did fill all, and is now to such as do believe
and obey him, and follow him in all things, which he at this day does require
of them: and yet all those things are truly owned in their time and place,
which the Saints and People of God were to do and observe according to the then
particular command of God, to them in every age, and because of some that did
uphold such things which were sometimes required, who themselves were forward
in the outward practice, it was said, Who has required these things at your
hands? [mark] at your hands. Isa. 1.12.
And so may it be said now to many who are sticking in outward things, But who
has required these things now at this day? Nevertheless I say, If any do find
the Lords presence with them in those things, and do make a Conscience of them,
and judge they ought to do it, I judge them not, if they are not otherways
persuaded in themselves; and if they can in truth say, The Spirit of the Lord
leads them to do it, which I have very much doubt of, and desire they may
seriously consider, and truly examine. Wherefore now come ye on and press
toward the true Life and substance and look not at things that are seen, 2
Cor. 13.12.
which are carnal, as the Apostle said, but the things that rae not seen are
eternal and invisible; And these things the Apostle brought the Saints on to,
and to the knowledge of Christ in them, which he told them if they did not come
to know, they were yet reprobates notwithstanding they had done many things in
the outward practice; yet this was the end and substance of all, and that great
mystery which was hid from ages, Col. 1.27.
even Christ within, the Hope of Glory, which mystery now comes to be made
known unto such (as then) who have believed in that light which shines in the
heart, which gives the true knowledge of God in the face of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6.
and reveals the mysteries of his Kingdom, and is the true guide unto the
everlasting way in which the Righteous have always walked, even the way of
true peace and eternal happiness, and in it is the knowledge of that truth
received which the souls of many have longed for, who had long sought but could
not find, because they sought amiss, or missed that in which all that seek and
wait, come to find. So come ye now and seek after this as for hid treasure,
even after the knowledge of that everlasting way and truth which your souls
long after, which some are saying, Lo its here, others, lo its there, but,
says Christ, Go not forth; for behold, the kingdom of heaven is within: Luke
17.21, 23.
and the truth you must find in you, though its appearance at first is but low
and little, yet being owned, it grows in stature; and the Kingdom which is but
as a grain of mustard seed, the least of all, in you, Mat. 13.31.32.
yet it will spring up to be the greatest of all in you, and will overcome all
that which has been great and strong in you, even every other seed which the
Devil has sowed in the night of darkness whilst men have slept in carelessness,
as you may read in the Scriptures of truth. verse. 25.
Wherefore go not forth, but receive the truth as it appears in you, and walk
in it as it is made manifest within, and through obdience you will come more
and more into the knowledge of it, and it will grow in you, and this knowledge
is true and everlasting, and saving, even the knowledge of the truth in its
appearance and operation in the heart of the creature; for Truth has a great
work to do in man, to change his heart, mind and nature, and to destroy the
Devils work, which has been within; Ephesians. 2.2^*
the Devil has wrought and ruled in the hearts of the children of
disobedience: I Joh. 3 8*
And for this purpose, says the Apostle, was the Son of God made manifest,
that he might destroy the works of the Devil. And so as ye receive and believe
in the Truth, as it appears in you, you will feel it subduing the Devils works,
and working down that which has been exalted in you, which has hindered you
from beholding the glorious presence and countenance of the Lord, the Lifting
up of which makes whole and refreshes the soul, and makes the heart truly glad.
Which that you may come to see, to the satisfaction and everlasting peace of
your souls, is my end in what I have here written unto you, and that which my
soul truly and faithfully desires to the Lord for you. And this is a Visitation
of Love unto all you who are enquiring the way to Sion, unto which the Redeemed
of the Lord our God are now returning, with Songs of Deliverance and
everlasting Joy upon their Heads, and they shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and
Sorrow and Sighing shall flee away. Among the number of which that ye may be
found, in this Day of the Lords Visitation and Gathering, is the desire and
travel of my soul, who am a true Friend unto you, and all that are seeking the
Kingdom of God, and desire the everlasting Salvation and Welfare of all your
Immortal Souls; and am known in the world (in which I labor and travel for the
Redemption of the Righteous Seed) by the Name of

Joseph Coal.
Tregangrees, in the Parish of Austel in Cornwel, the 13th Day of the 1st.
Month. 1664.
Concerning Reconciliation, and how it comes to be Effected in, and Witnessed
by Man.
REconciliation is Effected and Witnessed through the Operatition of the
Eternal Word of Life in the heart, working out and destroying that which is the
cause of Separation from God, which must be slain and subdued by the Word which
is quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged Sword, which slayes the Enmity
which God is never reconciled to, and man being in the Enmity is separated from
God, living in that which is contrary unto him, which the powerful Word of Life
subdues and works out, as it is received and felt in the heart, which is known
through believing in the Light, which convinces of sin and transgression.

Wherefore all that come to witness Reconciliation, must receive the Light
which shows transgression, and wait in it, to feel the operation of the eternal
Power, destroying the Devils works, and loosing them from his chains and
bonds, and defacing his Image and and likeness which he has changed and
begotten the Creature into, which consists of pride, envy, malice, hatred and
deceit, etc. and all unrighteousness, which must be destroyed; and no further
is Reconciliation witnessed by any, than that is destroyed and subdued by the
living operation of the living Power or Word of God, which changes man
inwardly, and quickens and renews him into God's Image, which consists of
humility, love, tenderness, righteousness, and holiness, and all good; and so
he comes to bear his Image and Likeness, and is changed into the Image and
Likeness of God, and so is Reconciled unto him. And for this end did Christ
Jesus come, and for this purpose was made manifest, to destroy the works of the
Devil, and to subdue that in man which is contrary, which is the cause of
separation, to slay the Enmity, to break down the wall of partition, and of
twain to make one new man, so making Peace and Reconciliation; ending the sin,
making Reconciliation for iniquity, and so to bring in everlasting
Righteousness. And no man does, or can, truly witness Reconciliation that yet
lives in iniquity, transgression and enmity against God, and in a nature
contrary to him, but must be changed by the living operation of the Eternal
Word, which will burn up and consume the contrary, which the Light makes
manifest in the secret inward parts; and through the spirit of judgment and of
burning is he redeemed, which burns up that which cannot endure and dwell with
consuming fire, and so it cleanses, purges and purifieth, slays and buries
under all fleshly carnal love, desires, affections, and all self-conceits,
heights, boastings, gloryings, shows, likenesses, images, inventions, and
contrivances in the mind and wisdom, and whatsoever is not of God must dye, be
subdued, cut down and destroyed, which the Light makes manifest to be contrary;
for he that lives and acts in and from that, it separates him, and keeps him
out, and off, at a distance from God; and he must depart from that, and must
die unto it that witnesses Reconciliation, which is effected by the operation
of the eternal power working in man, fashioning, framing and moulding of himin
to Gods likeness and slaying of him to the world, and all that is contrary to
God, to which he cannot be reconciled, nor to man, as he lives, and still
remains in that, and while as he walks in the ways that grieve his ho-Spirit,
And this is a true and certain Testimony unto all People.

Joseph Coal.

THE END

