Midsummer-Moone.

OR LVNACY-RAMPANT.

BEING A Character of Master Cheynell, the Arch Visitor of Oxford, and
Mungrell- President of Saint John Baptist's College.

With a Survey of the three Renegado-fellowes Web, Inkersell and Lownds.

Iam Seges est ubi Troja fuit. Printed, An. Dom. 1648.

CHEYNEL is Bedlam seven stories high, or Sir Thomas his gowty leg wire-drawn:
His head is shot up, as if it would only converse with the Prince oth'aire, and
what we mistake for the man ith'moon is but a piece of him. He Is an Index
expurgatorius in the largest folio, or was intended for hoopes for the tun at
Heidelberg; you may take him for the 119 Psalm, lasting the execution of a whole
Universitie, or the Pinnacle from which the Devil would break the neck of it.
It Is a sufficient argument of Cromwells death to see this May Pole set up in
Oxford. Dido, with his hide, might have had ground enough for her Carthage
without slicing it into leashes. He Is a monopoly of Steeples, and as often as
he sounds, the bell goes out for some deceas't Scholar. Babels are erected for
confusion.

His red Nose is pearch't like a Beacon flaming on a mountain; Nature when she
forged it, forgot to quench it: Web surrendered to it for a flag of defiance;
Inkersell for a red Lattice, and only submitted to an Alehouse. The
Scarlet-whore of Babylon spawned it with her menstruous profluviums. 'Twas
painted with the blood of a witch when she morgag'd her self. The single
sight of it made Sedgewick dream of doomes-day and the second destruction of
the world by fire. Such vessels are broach't when Villanes ratify their
Conspiracies in Sacraments of Blood. If there be such an AEtna such a
Purgatory aloof, what is the Demogorgon the Hell in the Center?

The spirits which ascend from so hot a Limbeck have converted his brains to
Sulphur, and made him nothing but an unruly Squib: He Is as prodigiously
furious, as if he had been bolted out oth' Monks pot when he invented
gunpowder, or his mother limed by the Devil shot from a Canon. He was begot
in the Dog-dayes, or at Michaelmas when his Dam went to Rut. The Hecuba when she
conceived this Paris dreamed of wildfire: His Nurse was a bleare eyed Hound,
Run-wood, and his native soil the Antipodes to Anticyra. His Sire engendered
him in an Itch beyond the cure oth' brimstone which ruined Sodom. You may take
him for a Spanish-Jennet, begot by a whirlewind or a tempest raised by a
Conjurer, or all AEolus bag'd up and sold by a Laplander for shipwracks; he
ruminates on nothing but his Salisbury Chains, and his breaking loose from
'em, and therefore it is his continual business either to imprison or expel.
Yet Mahomets disease must be a divine rapture; in his paralytick fit, he
converses with his Gabriell. Shuffle him with the rest oth' visitors, and he
comes forth like mad Orestes switchd on by furies to kill his mother the
University. Brutish Ajax because he is a beast himself wallowes in the gore of
his fellow Greeks and thinks 'em swine. The Caniball swears Mu^mie's Bacon:
he differs from an ordinary Tom of Bedlam, as a wild Wolf from a tame one, or
Rome on fire from Neroes Fiddle. Sure he is don quicksotted, takes the College
for an enchanted Castle, the fellows for Giants, Web, Inkersell, and Lownds,
for three distressed damsells. He sweepes the house clean that his Fairy
tennants may dance to him with money, his phrensy flames higher because it is
sprinkled with a little reason, as women paint themselves into wrincles and
ugliness. His blood rides the round post, or dances the Morris through him,
and so makes him giddy. His skull is a mere nest of hornets, which sting into
him their own waspishnesse. This makes the mad bandog snap at all he meets.
This new Judge (without the Kings writ) is the prime Bencher at condemnation
but usually removed at the execution, and kills with his weekly bill as
secretly as the Plague: Still like a mad dog which (they say) never barks. He
wounds at farther distance than the stars influence can bless: this long
boared murdering piece will carry destruction point blank from Petworth to
Oxford. Cheynell in a University out rifles Cromwell in an Abbey. The Divill is
busiest in the Church. Pickhatch nere was visited; Turne-Bull-Streete needs no
reformation.

Cheynell among the visitors, is a mountebanke extraordinary with 4 zanyes, or
blustering AEolus with his Cardinal winds. This purger is the only scammony;
the rest somewhat milder simples, Rhubarbe and Sena, one indeed is all honey and
manna dropped from heaven, but kept till it is moldy and stinkes. This
Sugar-Cane, this Posset, and Cawdle visitor; with his marmulade quagmire, his
blather'd puffe-past, liquorish Kate Subs the second, are the Universities
tooth drawers, and will leave no more Scholars then themselves have gummes.
These Figs and Almonds rot the Universitie, while Cheynell like aqua fortis
corrodes it. And yet that Cormorant can be dainty too: Doctors and Seniors are
too tough for continual cramming, he must have Batchellers of art and Rabets,
under-graduats and Chickens; master commoners and Phesants. Domitian gorged
with men, wantons with flies afterward. He runs himself off his legs the
first days journey, and like a Brewer tuns once a week. Though he rides post
yet he must have his stages: the dismallest Tragedy is cantell'd into Acts,
sure he has got the mathematical trick to make so many Turks, and then by
his hocus pocus Arithmetic, juggle them over board; yet the visitors like
their harbinger the last new disease, murder the best. Among Moors blacks are
the only beauties: Cheynell good Churchman (like Alters) protects the guilty
only; he thinks others breath corrupted when it is but the reflected rancour
of his own; like Senecaes wifes fool, struck with a soddaine blindness,
imputed it to the darkness of the room: You would scarce believe he should
have any Proselites but that some have worshipped Cacodemons; and Asses yet
kneel to Mahomet: Dirt will submit to be trampled on; good ingenious souls
confess themselves sufficiently vicious and are thought worthy heaven because
they boast no merit. But Cheynell admits them as Politicians do Jews to use
their villainies, or Romulus his Asylum Courtiers to Lord over them; else why
should the Muscovite worship painted images and reject carved ones? why should
my Lady expose her child and nurse her dog, be divorc't from her Lord, and
wanton with her Catamite Monkey? But alas a slip may break a sober man's neck,
while drunkards tumble and have no hurt. A privy-councellor is scarce secure in
his dream: My Lord of Pembrooke and Archy can never speak Treason. Ugly cubs
are most lick't, and the Changling's still the dilling: In Martyrdomes the best
must to the stake; and who so fit to be Pilgrims as the holy? if their be any
left in the hive it will be the drones; Cheynells thirst draines the liquour,
the lees would choke him. Thus of Theophrastus characters, the vices only
survive, the virtues are expelld the world.

Cheynell and Doctor Baily differ as the College good and bad ^eni^us, as a
wisard and a prophet, or the dipped horse in Cornwall and a Christian. He
succeeds the Doctor as Caligula's horse did the deceased Senator, or as the
Apocrypha does the old Testament, and Tobie and his dog, Moses and Aaron; thus
Innocents day pursues Christmas, a damnd massacre at the heels of a blessed
nativity; nor can Herod persecute innocence without murdering St. John's,
every meal he carves the President, at every course the Baptists head is
dish't for him, and yet (unless the Merchant-taylors prove almoners) perhaps
he may be devourd by his Colledgiate vermin.

Saint John's looks like Scevaes shield, so many expelled pieces so many wounds
it is reformd into it is primitive purity and turned into the Baptists desert: The
whole University resembles Greece overrun by Turks, or Italy Goth'd and
Vandald, it looks like the world purged by a deluge, and destruction. Delos is
turned errant at Apolloes death, as it was at his birth. Colleges are converted
into Hospitalls, lodges for diseases, scall'd heads and crutches, it is the only
expulsive crime here to be wholesome.

For how should Cheynell be a reformer, unless as an Atheist makes a Pope
pious? as winter brings the Halcyon, or dead beer makes Aqua vitae: He is a
strainer, retains all the dreggs, and clarifies the University as milk and
whites of eggs does Ippocras; thus sinkes, and common shoares are the best
scavengers, dirt is sometimes a good fuller, and filthy Soap the only
Lawndresse, miraculous Cheynell! Clay and Spittle shall be a collyrium for the
Kingdoms eye.

He has sullyed the University and will huckster in washing it; the
mountebank gives out it is poisoned, that he may quack in curing it. Thus
Oxford, like the house of office at Westminster, is voted to be reformed by
those who fould it.

But perhaps man must still forfeit paradise for too much knowledge; and
Scholars perish (like the old Bishop) for discerning the visitors to be Truth's
and the Law's Antipodes. Is the University Pim'd, and therefore must change
shifts, or are men turned out (like the Israelites out of Egypt) for being
scabby? Because Cheynell itches, must all smart? The Pope excommunicates the
King of Spain on one day, and restores him the next, Cheynell has his Maundy
Thursday, but the good-Friday's Popery. Extremes may concenter, Rolfe and a
Jesuit are both Ravilacks; Cheynell and Captain Allen (his blasphemous
adversaries second) can covenant in mischifes, as humiliations and
thanks-givings conspire to ruin the Kingdom, or Naseby field and the Butchers
dog to worry Skippon. But he would have us mistake a hangman for an Angel,
and kiss his lightning, because it comes from Heaven. Indeed he goes to
Church but (like the Divill) it is to tempt: each prayer devours a widdowed
College, each bead pistolls a Scholar: he never preaches but it is the
Universities funeral Sermon, his doctrines and motives are mere
proscriptions, and he will murder a whole College with a use of consolation; his
reformation has got him more then the work of 10 talents got Aristotle, this
one word has cost more then would have purchased the Sibills books and
Prophet too. Beggars sell their ulcers at the rate of Diamonds; but though he
excommunicates, it must be still the Pope and his holiness: It Is his faith
removes the University, as the public faith the silver mountains of
Guild Hall, and Xerxes leveld Athos through the worlds credulity. But this
Kennell-raker, this Jaques-farmer is durty only on weeke-dayes. O the Sanctity
of a sunday pudding! And yet perhaps the Sabaticall river is no better then
profane Isis. Turks have their Saboth, and not only a monthly fast, but a fast
for a month. But Cheynell is a double Turk; Captain Prestor Franck is both
Muftie and Aga too.

Thus is Oxford at last reformed into an Algeers haunted by Pirates, where
Janissaries are the only favorites: What to others is an inquisition, is to
these a shrift. These are the only converts, because the only sinners: Some are
expelled for just oaths, others are dandled for loud perjurie; like the Priest
that lost his benefice for having a wife, and was retrived when she was proved
his whore. But Cheynell (like Romulus) is the son of heaven; when no man will
own the brat, a God must father it. He Is a libell and an ordinance; has never
a Sire, and yet perhaps a hundred: His mother sure hacknied herself to one of
the guard, or the great porter on a mask night, and so conceived this
hipocrite: Had he kept within his pulpit the lower part of the Minotaure might
have skulkt undiscovered, but when he would be a bastard president too, a
Perkin Warbeck Doctor Baylie (like Alexander, ambitious to be a God) he
proved himself a by-blow.

Cheynell, with his precious Triumvirats Web, Inkersell and Lownds, thinks
himself the Emperor with his three spiritual Electors, or the Pope with his
triple Crown; He looks like wild March borrowing three days of February.
These are forsooth the 3 children (or Plutoes 3 furies) whom no flames can
blister. All 3 are oth' progeny of Noah, drunk: Their mothers longed for wort,
they were borne in a brew house, and christened in a Stand of Ale. They are only
3 Sponges possessed, and submit to the upper and lower houses, as representatives
of the Buttery and Seller. Certainly they are entertaind for Gospellers,
because they have drunk away their Bibles. I might as well say Inkersell were
a Nightingale, because he has lost his tongue. Moths and Worms are
acquainted with more Authors, and Parrots are better linguists. Latin's not the
language of these Beasts, nor have they any thing of Greece, but drunkenness
and lying. Hebrew to them is Welsh, they reele sufficiently of themselves, they
need not study to go backward. Their Souls are blankes sufficient to write new
mod'led Preachers in. Tiresias could not foresee any thing til he was blind.

Inkersell has one property of a Scholar, Poverty. You would take him for
country- Tom broke loose from the Gallows. If a man be a Tree inversed, he is
Beggars-bush. He was borne in Lent at a coursing, and sent into the world with
sippets. He Is sunk below the wardrobe of dunghills, and the use of
paper-mills. He must tick with Charon, and have his Epitaph writ in chalk. By
his maggot-eaten face, you would swear he had been raised out on's grave with
all his worms about him to bait Eele-hookes. You may compare Cheynell to the
Chemists aqua Stygia, and him to their terra damnata. He Will shortly be a
Baptist without a voice, and wheases already as if he fed on nothing but
Locusts and Grasshoppers.

Cheynell and Web look like Mahomet and his Pigeon, or my Lord of Pembrooke,
and Michaell Oldsworth. Had every bird their feathers of him, he would be oth'
same callow livery with Inkersell: he hates all books because he is so much
in the mercers; and without a strong antidote will die of gall and Coperas: he is
as much in Ink as Inkersell in chalk, the one is all in mourning, the other is
in his winding-sheete: his brother and he drink duells, yet both, like their
thirst, are still immortal; though the Sea they have drunk would have made
stage enough for the battle of Lepanto: Yet his brother may be dead drunk at
last, he looks like Tiffany already; brimstone and hell will have him
shortly, It Is fit the Soldier should conquer especially in bowsing combats:
But our Mars must have his Venus, and his salt Nancy newly duck't looks like
the Sea-born goddess. Cheynell cannot expel him farther then Bocardo, nor any
College so fit for him, as where Cheynell's President, and who but those
Goale-birds were ever bribed to christen him so? What baseness would submit to
the scorn of Prisoners? Who would be slave to a penny ballad?

Lownds submitted to Cheynel's Sanguine promontory for fear of a bloody Nose;
he may be steered with any rudder: You may hang in a single thread and use him
instead of a bobin to weave Bone-lace: This rabbet sucker would submit to a
ferret, and is scarce fit to be a fellow of a Warren: he would adore a
reformer though he were a Chimny-sweeper, and go bare to Pidgeon as willingly
as to Cheynell: A well grown spider might be his President, Whittingtons Cat a
Lord Mayor over him. He cannot go a high lone yet, but is carried on his
fathers sleeve like a faulkoners Hawk; he will damme himself least he should
be whipped, and be perjurd because his father has covenanted, like the fellow
who would not be a Christian because all his friends were gone to hell before
him.

O that Lice should be humane offsprings as well as men! but the happiest
mothers may have abortions. The Kings Image is sometimes stamped on lead, and
natures mint coins monsters; as this Ostracisme proves the University a true
Athens, so some Apastates makes her a Heaven.

FINIS.

