THE LITTLE MANVEL OF THE POOR MAN'S DAILY DEVOTION Collected out of several
pious and approoved Authors.

By W. C.

Piety is profitable for all things: having promise of the life that now is,
and of that to come.

1. ad Titum 4.8. And are to be sold at Mr GONTIERS Libraire Jure before our B.
Ladies Church door.

PRINTED AT PARIS. By VINCENT DV MOVTIER, M.DC.LXIX.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
DEAR Catholic Brethren who by Gods order and disposition are to gain your
livelihood by honest labor and industry; to you principally is this short
method of devotion addressed: for although they whom the Divine Providence has
placed in a heigher condition in this world, are more plentifully furmisht with
books and other helps for their instrucction; yet the goodenesse of God is so
great, as to accept your faithful endevors according, to your capacity; and so
as you love and serve him Religiously in your several vocations here upon
earth, your reward will be equal with theirs in Heaven. Great are the
prerogatives of the poor: who was poorer then Lazarus, who lay at the gate of
the rich Glutton full of sores and ulcers, suffering hungar, cold, and all kind
of necessity? Yet his patience and conformity to the Divine will in those his
afflictions, obtaynd him the glory to be canonized by Jesus Christ himself,
while the same presumptuous rich Man, clad in purple garments, and gloriing in
his abundant wealth, and temporal felicity, was cast down into those horrid
flames, where he shall never cease to be tormented.

Whoever will enter in at Heaven gate must stoop very low: the greatest
Princes if they pretend to Eternal riches, must become like you, poor upon
Earth, at least in affection: Blessed are the poor of spirit, for theirs is
the kingdom of Heaven: Yea the richest Emperors Carry no more with them out of
the world then the poorest beggar. When S. John Baptist sent his Disciples to
our Blessed Lord to inform themselves, whither he were the Messiah, or no; one
of the marks he gave them whereby to prove himself to be truly so, was, that
the poor received the Gospel, which showed that his Divine goodness had the
poor in recommendatio^.

Since then by these passages and many more which are found amongst the sacred
oracles of our Divine Master; Yea since by his own life and example we are
taught how grateful the poor are to him, and with what difficulty the rich
enter into the kingdom of Heaven; you who are poor ought to comfort your
selves in your poverty, and rest assured, that if God had foreseen that riches
would have more conduced to your salvation, he would have given you abundance,
since it was as easy to his infinite power to have made you the richest Princes,
as the poorest artisans. Bless then Gods goodness in your poverty, love him
fervently, serve him faithfully; believe that his design in making you poor,
was to render your salvation more easy, since those who have great possessions,
like the young man in the Gospel forsake them with as great anxiety. Farewell
and in your prayers remember.

Your truly affectionate and dearly well wishing Countryman. W. C.

AN ADVERTISMENT.
DEAR Christian Reader, you are to observe that in this little Manuel of
devotion, besides vocale prayer, you will find intermixed several other pious
exercises for the holy employement of a virtuous soul: as spiritual
cogitations where upon happily to busy her mind either by day or night as best
occasion shall be offered. Spiritual advises. Pious reflections, as well for
the embracing virtue, as for flying vice; and may be used also for the subject
of so many profitable meditations, by such as have leisure and disposition for
it. An Exercise also for practicing the acts of the most necessary virtues.
Holy Maxims pronounced by Jesus Christ; and how different they are from the
maxims of the world. Aspirations, and jaculatory prayers. Brieffe Meditations
for each day in the week. And finally a profitable Exercise containing a
preparation to death, with the Recommendation of the soul in english: all
which may serve for pious entertaynement of the virtuous soul with pleasing
and profitable diversity of piously employing her solitary thoughts according
as time and leisure shall give occasion, respectively to make use of them for
the greater encreace of true piety and devotion.

The sum^e of the Christian Catholic faith.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Creator of Heaven and earth.

And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord.

Who was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary.

Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried.

He descended into Hell the third day he rose again from the dead.

He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God, the Father
Almighty.

From thence he shall come to judge the quick, and the dead.

I believe in the Holy Ghost.

The holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints.

The forgiveness of sins.

The resurrection of the body.

And life everlasting Amen.

Our Lords Prayer.
OUR Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from all evil. Amen.

The Angelical salutation.
HAIL Marie full of grace, our Lord is with thee blessed art thou amongst
women. And blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus.

Holy Marie Mother of God pray for us sinners, now, and in the hour of our
death Amen.

The ten Commandments.
J am the Lord, thy God etc.

1. Thou shall have no other Gods before me. 2. Thou shall not take the name of
God in vain. 3. Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day. 4 Honor thy Father,
and thy Mother. 5. Thou shall not kill. 6. Thou shall not committ Adultery. 7.
Thou shall not steal. 8. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor. 9. Thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife. 10. Thou shall not
covet thy neighbors goods.
The seven Sacraments.
1. Baltisme. Math. 28. 2. Confirmation. John. 7. 3. Eucharist. Math. 29. 4.
Penance. John. 20. 5. Extreme Unction. James 5. 6. Holy order. Math. 26. 7.
Matrimony. Math. 29.
Three Theological virtues.
1. Faith. 2. Hope. 3. Charity.
Four Cardenal virtues.
1. Prudence. 2. Justice. 3. Temperance. 4. Fortitude.
Seven gifts of the holy Ghost.
1. Wisdom. 2. Understanding. 3. Counsel. 4. Fortitude. 5. Knowledge. 6.
Godliness. 7. The fear of our Lord.
Twelve fruits of the Holy Ghost.
1. Charity. 2. Joy. 3. Peace. 4. Patience. 5. Benignity. 6. Goodness. 7.
Longanimity. 8. Mildness. 9. Faith. 10. Modesty. 11. Continency 12. Chastity.
The Precepts of Charity.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with thy whole heart, and with thy whole
soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as
thy self.

The Commandments of the Church.
1. To keep certain appointed days holy, without servill works, and hearing
Mass. 2. To keep fast and abstinence, certain days appointed. 3. To pay
tithes to the Pastor of the Church. 4. To Confess to their Pastor, at least
once a year; or to an other with his license. 5. To receive the blessed
Sacrament at Easter, or there about.
To which many do adjoyne, not to marry at certain times forbidden; nor
within certain degrees; nor privately without witness.

The works of mercy corporal.
1. To feed the hungry. 2. To give drink to the thirsty. 3. To cloathe the
naked. 4. To visit, and ransom the Captives. 5. To harbor the harbourlesse.
6. To visit the sick, 7. To bury the dead.
The works of mercy spiritual.
1. To correct the sinner. 2. To instruct the Ignorant. 3. To counsel the
doubtful. 4. To comfort the sorrowful. 5. To bear patiently injuries. 6. To
forgive all wrongs. 7. To pray both for the quick, and the dead.
The eight Beatitudes.
1. Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven. 2.
Blessed are the meek: for they shall possess the Land. 3. Blessed are they
that mourn: for they shall be comforted. 4. Blessed are they that hungar and
thirst, for righteousness; for they shall be filled. 5. Blessed are the
merciful: for they shall find mercy. 6. Blessed are the clean of heart: for
they shall see God. 7. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called
the children of God. 8. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for
righteousness sake: for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven.
The 5. senses of the body.
1. Sight. 2. Smelling. 3. Hearing. 4. Tasting. 5. Touching.
The 3. faculties of the soul.
1. Memory. 2. Understanding. 3. and Will.
The office of Christian justice.
To decline from evil, or sin: and to do good, or the duty of Justice.

Of sin.
Sin is double. Original, or Actual. Mortal, or Venial.

7 Capital sins, commonly called mortal, or deadly sins.
1. Pride 2. Coueteousnesse. 3. Lechery. 4. Wrath 5. Gluttony. 6. Envy. 7.
Sloth.
The 7 contrary virtues.
1. Humility. 2. Liberality. 3. Chastitv. 4. Meekness. 5. Astinence. 6.
Patience. 7. Devotion.
6 Sins against the Holy Ghost.
1. Presumption of Gods Mercy. 2. despair. 3. Impugning truth, more freely to
sin. 4. Enuiing an other man's spiritual good. 5. Obstination in sin. To dye in
final Impenitency.
4. Things crying to Heaven for vengeance
1. Wilful murder. 2. Sin of Sodom. 3. Oppression of the poor Widows and
fatherless. 4. Defrauding Laborers of their wages.
9. Ways of being accessory to an other man's sin.
1. By Counsel. 2. by commandment. 3. by Consent. 4. by Provocation or
Leading others. 5. by praise or flattery. 6, by concealing the faulty. 7. by
partaking. 8. by holding our peace, and not speaking unto such as be Under our
charge. 9. by dissembling, or not finding fault, or hindering when we may, or
have charge.
3. Kinds of good works.
1. Alms deeds, or works of mercy. 2. Praying. 3. Fasting.
3. Evangelicall Counsels.
1. Voluntary poverty. 2. perpetual Chastity. 3. Entire Obedience.
The 4. Last things.
1. Death. 2. Judgment. 3. Hell. 4. Heaven.
THE LITTLE MANUEL OF THE POOR MAN'S DAILY DEVOTION. Containing several
exercises of piety; as time and fit occasion may require.
An exhortation to prayer.
ST Thomas gives this solid reason for the great necessity of prayer; that God
by his Divine order and Providence, from all Eternity has determined to bestow
upon souls, what in time he affords them by prayer: as also that thereby he
has measured the salvation, the conversion, and perfection of souls. For even
as he has disposed that by plowing and cultivating the ground he affords us
abundance both of bread and wine, and other necessaries for the life of Man: so
has his Divine disposition ordained to communicate his graces and heavenly
gifts to our souls, by this good means of holy prayer. For to receive of
him, he first requires, that we should ask; Math. 7.
to find, that we should seek; and that we knock before the door be opened to
let us in So that prayer is the proper means, and conduit whereby God supplies
our necessities, releeves our poverty, and replenisheth us with grace and
benefits.

By this we see our great necessity of betaking our selves unto prayer; which
is compared by the holy Fathers to Jacobs Ladder reaching from Earth to Heaven,
Genesis 28.
and the Angels descending and ascending thereby. S. Augustine calls prayer, the
key of Paradise, which opens to all the treasure of God: oration justi, clavis
est coeli; ascendit precatio, and descendit Dei miseratio. Yea; prayer is to
the soul as is bread to the body, says he; all men have as much need of
prayer, says S. Chysost. as plants have of water; nor is it possible for us to
bring forth the fruits of piety, says this great saint, unless our hearts be
well watered with prayer.

A Morning exercise of holy prayer.
YOU awakeing in the morning, endeavor to raise up your first thoughts to God
with thanks giving for preserving you that night, and affording you the good
beginning of a new day, wherein to labor for his glory, and for your own
salvation, by the amendment of your life, and better serving his Divine Majesty.

You having now taken sufficient rest, and your usvall repose, being hindered by
no just cause, nor indisposition; but if it be mere sloth and slugishnesse
which would robb you of precious time (whereof for every moment we must give
exact account to God) then endeavor, to surmount all sinful sloth, by
offering that act of mortification to God, as your first fruits of that new
day, most justly due to him: and immediately raising up your self, making the
sign of the holy cross, say.

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ crucified I do rise; he bless me,
govern me, and confirm me in all good works, this day and ever more. And
after this mortal life bring me to life everlasting. Amen.

Here make to God a morning oblation of all your thoughts, words, and deeds of
that day. And in particular resolve carefully to avoyde that sin to which you
find your self daily most subject to fall into.

You being now made ready, and kneeling down devoutly in your place of prayer
before a Crucifix, or some devout picture, thereby the better to fix your
thoughts upon piety: there humbly adore the Divine presence of God; acknowledge
your own vileness, and render him most humble thanks for all his gracious
benefits. Crave humbly his grace to preserve you that day from all sin, and to
enlighten your Understanding to know his blessed will, and his divine help to
perform the same.

Come holy Ghost replenish the hearts of the faithful, and kindel the fire of
thy divine love in them.

Illuminate our minds, o Lord, we beseech thee, with the light of thy
cleerenesse, that we may see what we ought to do, and have power to accomplish
those things which be rigtfull; through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Prevent, we beseech thee, o Lord, our actions by thy holy spirit assisting,
and in helping forward: prosecute them, that all our prayers and works may
begin always from thee: and begun by thee, may so be ended. Through Lord Jesus
our merciful Redeemer. Amen.

Our Father etc. Hail Mary. etc. I believe in God etc. All as above.

I Confess me to Almighty God. To the blessed Virgin S. Marie. To the blessed
S. John Baptist. To the holy Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul, and to all the
Saints in Heaven, that I have grievously sinned, in thought Word and deed.
Through my fault. Through my fault, through my most grievous fault. Therefore I
Beseech the blessed Virgin Marie, blessed S. Michel the Archangel, blessed S.
John Baptist: the holy Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and all the Saints in
Heaven to pray unto our Lord God for me.

Almighty God have mercy upon us, and all our sins being forgiven he bring us
to everlasting life. Amen.

Almighty and merciful Lord, give unto us pardon, absolution an remission of
all our sins. Amen.

Vouchsafe O Lord, to keep us this day without sin; be merciful unto us, let
thy mercy O Lord, be upon us, even as we have our trust in thee. O Lord hear
my prayer; and let my cry come to thee.

O Father Almigthy, who have brought us to the beginning of this new day, save
us by thy power; to the end that we fall not this day into sin: but that our
words, our thoughts, and works may be directed to execute thy justice, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

A devout recommendation to be used every morning.
I Adore, bless, and glorify thee, O holy Trinity, God Omnipotent, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. Behold I offer my self to thy Divine Majesty. Take from
me, I beseech thee, and from all faithful Christians what soever displeases
thee; and give unto us that which is grateful in thy sight; and grant that we
may become such as we are commanded to be.

I recommend unto thee O Lord my soul, my body, my wife, my children, my
Father and Mother, my brothers and sisters, my kindred and benefactors, friends
and enemies, and all those who have recommended themselves to my prayers; or
for whom I am bound to pray. I commend unto thee the holy Catholic Church;
grant O Lord that every one may know thee, that all may worship, honor, and
reverence thee, all may love thee, and likewise be beloved of thee. Those who
err reduce and bring again into the way. Destroy all false sects and
heresies; convert all to the true faith grant O Lord thy peace; let thy holy
will de done; comfort, and help all who are in tribulation, and misery, as
well Spiritual, as corporal. Grant O Lord unto the living grace, and to the
faithful souls departed mercy and everlasting rest.

A recommendation to God.
INto the hands of thy infinite mercy, O Lord, I commend my soul and body, my
senses, my words, my counsels, my thoughts, my works, and all my actions,
with all the necessites of my body and soul, my conversation, my death, and
resurrection with thy Saints, and happy elect. Amen.

A recommendation of ourselves to the blessed Virgin Mother of God. To the
Angels and Saints, out of S. Augustine, chapter 40. of his medit.
O Marie Mother of God, our Lord and Savior Jes. Christ, thou sacred and
unspotted Virgin, vouchsafe to make intercession for me unto him who made thee
a worthy temple for himself to inhabit. O S. Gabriel, S. Raphael, O holy
quiers of Angels, and Archangels, of Patriarchs and Prophets, of Apostles, and
Evangelists, of Martyrs and Levits, of Monks and Virgins, and all such as
have lived righteously. I beseech you (even for his sake by whom you have been
elected, and in whose contemplation you have so much delighted, that you will
be pleased to pray for me a poor sinner, unto him our God, that I may be
delivered from the furious jaws of the infernal Fiend, and from that death
which shall never have end. Amen.

A devout Prayer to our Lord Jesus.
O My divine and most merciful Redeemer Jesus son of God, and of the
glorious Virgin Marie, who dying for all mankind, and me; the third day did
rise again. I beseech thee, dear Lord, have mercy on me, a vile and wretched
sinner, but yet thy creature; and for thy bitter Passion, save and keep me
from all perils bodily and ghostly, and specially from all things that may
turn to thy displeasure. And with all my heart I thank thee, most merciful
Lord, for the many mercies thou have showed me in the great dangers I have past
both in body and soul; and as thy grace and endless goodness has always
kept and saved me, from the hour of my birth until this day: so Lord, I
beseech thee, that thy mercy may continue my safety. And for my many offenses,
and great ingratitudes of my sinful life, I humbly ask mercy. And for that I
cannot lead such a life, as it becomes thy servant, I humbly prostrate and
cry: God be merciful to me a most wretched sinner. And I humbly thank thee,
most gracious Lord, for the multitude of Divine benefits, which thou have more
largely bestowed on me, then upon many others, who have much better deserved
them, then I. Wherefore most gracious Lord, I humbly thank thee, rendering all
honor and praise to thy holy name: who live and reygnest one God, world
without end. Amen.

A Prayer to persever in goodness.
GRant, O Lord Jesu, that I may persever in good purposes, and in thy holy
service until my death: and that I may now, this present day perfectly begin;
for it is nothing that hitherto I have done.

A Prayer to our Angel guardian
O Angel of God, who art my keeper, illuminate, guard, rule and govern me this
day by the supernal piety committed to thee. Amen.

O Lord bless us, and defend us from all evil, and bring us to eternal life.
And the souls of the faithful, through the mercy of God, rest in peace. Amen.

A blessing.
THe peace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the virtue of his sacred holy passion, the
sign of the holy cross, the integrity and great humility of the blessed
Virgin Mary, the blessing of the glorious Saints, the keeping of the happy
Angels, and the suffrages of all the chosen of God, be with me, and between me
and all mine enemies, now and in the hour of my death, sweet Jesu. Amen.

The Almigthy and merciful God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost bless and
keep us now, and evermore.

When at morning, noone, and evening you hear the Ave Mary bell to ring, say.
THe Angel of God declared unto Mary, and she conceived of the Holy Ghost.
Hail Mary full of grace, etc.

Behold the hand-maide of our Lord, be it unto me according to thy word.

Hail Mary full of grace, etc.

And the word was made flesh, and dwelt in us. Hail Mary full of grace, etc.

The Prayer.
VOuchsafe, we beseech thee O Lord, to power forth thy grace into our hearts,
that we who know the incarnation of Christ thy son; the Angel declaring it,
may be brought by his holy Cross and Passion unto the glory of his
Resurrection, through the same Christ our Lord Amen. The souls of the
faithful, through the mercy of God, rest in peace Amen.

Be mindful to say this holy devotion thrice every day. In the morning, in
grateful memory, and adoration of that divine Mystery of the glorious
Resurrection of our Redeemer Jesus Christ.

At midday, in memory and adoration of his bitter death and Passion.

And at the Evening, in memory and adoration of the Incarnation of the son of
God in the womb of the pure and immaculate ever Virgin.

Certain general advertisments much conducing to Christian perfection.
Think often upon the moment of this life whereon depends Eternity.

Call frequently to mind, that thou art placed in this world for no other end,
but that, by serving God to save thy soul.

Remember that thou art always in the presence of God, and raise often thy
heart unto him.

Observe not the imperfections of other persons; but think rather of mending
thy own.

Judge rashly of no body, nor give any willing care unto the detractor.

Let no dryness nor barrenesse in devotion cause you to omit any accustomed
exercise of piety.

Do all your actions with a pure intention for the glory of God.

When you hear the clock to strike, stir up sorrow for your sins; beseeching
God to have mercy on your soul at the dreadful hour of death.

Be not singular in your exterior devotion, least some inward vanity may
outwardly appear thereby.

Neglect not divine inspirations which God shall give for the amendment of your
most habitual and daily sins.

When you are assaulted with any dangerous temptation, cross your heart, in
token that you humbly crave Gods grace, and disavow the sin which that ill
thought suggests to you

Be not forward to contradict others: and if you be contradicted, grow not
angry thereat; but only mildly make answer: that so is your opinion.

Remember that there is but one Heaven, which, if we seek it in this world, we
shall not find it in the other.

Virtue and true resignation to the will of God, consists not in words, but in
real deeds and actions.

An Evening Exercice for Prayer before bed.
IT being now time for your repose; retire your self to the place of prayer;
and in the presence of God, devoutly upon your knees there adore his divine
Majesty; acknowledging your own unworthiness: render him most humble thanks
for all his gracious benefits; beseech him to preserve you that night from all
sin. And sixing the interior sight of your soul upon Gods infinite greatness
and Majesty, and upon your own baseness, abjection, and indignity; say as in
the morning Exercise.

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost Amen.

Blessed be the holy, and undevided Trinity, now and for ever more Amen.

Our Father etc. Halle Mary etc. I believe in God etc. I confess me to
Almigthy God etc. all as in the morning prayer.

Almighty God have mercy upon us and all our sins being forgiven; bring us to
everlasting life. Amen.

Omnipotent and merciful Lord, give unto us pardon, absolution, and remission
of all our sins. Amen.

I most humbly thank thee, my great God, who have created me of nothing, and
redeemd me with thy precious blood; made me a member of the Catholic Church,
and graciously provided for me all necessaries both for body and soul.

For all which, as also for thy so frequent heavenly inspirations, Sacraments,
and sacrifices; as also for so many other means for my salvation; from the
bottom of my heart and with all the powers of my soul, I render thee, my
loving God, most humble thanks: beseeching all the holy Quires of Angels, and
all the blessed Saints in thy celestial kingdom, that they vouchsafe to
supply my deficiency in praising, adoring, magnifying, and extolling this thy
great mercy and infinite goodness owards me.

Almighty and everlasting God, I yield thee most hearty thanks for that thou
have vouchsafed of thy great mercy and goodness to preserve me this day from
all evil. And I also beseech thee for thy bitter death and passion most
mercifully to forgive me, a wretched sinner, all my offenses; which I have this
day committed, by thought, word, and deed, and hereafter to preserve and keep
me from all danger, as well of body, as of soul; to the end I may rise again
in health to praise thy glorious name, and joyfully to serve thee in
thankesgiving with a chaste body and clean heart Amen.

O Lord God, and my heavenly Father; for as much, as by thy divine ordinance,
the night approaches, and time requires that we give our selves to bodily
rest. I yeald unto thee most hearty thanks for thy great love, vouchsafing to
preserve me this day from the danger of all enemies, to give me my health, to
feed me, and afford me all necessaries for the comfort of this my mortal
life. I most humbly beseech thee, for thy blessed son Jesus his sake, that
thou will mercifully forgive me all that I have this day committed against thy
fatherly goodness by thought, word, or by deed; and that thou will vouchsafe
to shadow me this night under the safe wings of thy Almigthy power, and defend
me from Satan, and all dangerous assaults; that neither he, not any of his
ministers have power either over my body or soul. But that, although my body
enjoys sleep, yet my soul may watch unto thee, delight in thee, and ever
more praise thee; that when the comfortable light of the day returns
according to thy good appointment, I may rise again with a faithful soul and
undefiled body; and so afterward behave my self all my life according to thy
blessed will and commandment, by casting away the works of darkness, and
putting on the armor of light, that men seeing my good works may be moved to
glorify thee, my heavenly Father, who with thy only begotten son our loving
Savior, and the holy Ghost live and reygnest one true and everlasting God,
world without end Amen.

A Prayer to our B. Lady and to her divine Son.
O Benign and merciful Virgin Mother, most meek, most mild and gracious,
obtain for us, O B. Lady, grace and strength to withstand and overcome all our
enemies ghostly and bodily, visible and invisible: that after the course of
this short life, we may by thy gracious help attain everlasting life in the
kingdone of Heaven, where we may with thee, O Virgin, ever more dwell, and
with all the holy Angels, Archangels, Patriarcks and Prophets, Apostles, and
Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins, worship, glorify, and magnify our divine
Redeemer, and thee, O sacred Virgin, in everlasting bliss without end Amen.

O Lord Jesus Christ, the glory of the Father, the orient beauty of eternal
light, and bright mirror wihout spot or deformity; I humbly beseech thee by
thy sacred divinity to grant me this night chastity of mind, cleanesse of
heart, simplicity of spirit, and sincere purity of body and soul.

O sweet and most merciful Jesu, mortify in me all vices, and disordered
motions, and unruly passions: take away from me whatsoever is unlawful,
inordinate or unpleasing in thy sight; and give me a heart according to thine
own, right, simple, pure and godly; and deliver and keep me from all sin.

O most loving Jesu, I offer unto thee my body, my senses, and all the powers
of my soul, and whatsoever I am, to be moderated; kept, governed, and possessed
by thee.

O good Jesu preserve me from all vicious, vain, and proud cogitations,
unchaste affections; grant that I may sincerely seek thee alone, and that in
thee only I may take my rest. Amen.

A Prayer to our good Angel.
O Blessed Angel, who art my keeper, deefnd, aid, and guard me from all
invasions, and assaults of the devil, wheresoever I be, either wakeing or
sleeping; drive away from me all the temptations of Satan, and thou by thy
prayers obtain at the hands of the Almighty that he may have no place in me.
Amen.

A brief examen of Conscience before going to bed.
FIrst place your self in the presence of God. Crave his grace that you may
call to mind such sins as you have committed that day.

2. Examen wherein you have offended God, from whom you have received so many
gracious benefits.

3. Detest your sin, and be heartily sorry for having offended so good and so
loving a God.

4. Make a full and firm purpose to sin so no more, with hope in Gods mercy,
and Christ's merits to obtain pardon, resolving to confess, and to do your
penance for the same.

Finally we must endeavor to put our selves in that state wherein we would
gladly be found at the hour of our death, by producing the holy acts of Faith,
of Hope, of Charity, and of true Contrition for all our sins; by this or some
such like act of true hearty Contrition as follows.

An Act of Contrition.
MY God, my Savior, and my Judge, I repent with my whole heart and soul for
having offended thee who art infinitely good, and souverainly loving and
amiable. therefore hencefourth I will love and honor thee above all things
whatsoever: and most firmly purpose (thy holy grace assisting me) never
mortally to offend thee; but to confess, and perform my imposed penance;
confiding in thy infinite mercy, and in the sacred merits of the bitter death
and Passion of thy dearly beloved son Jesus, my divine Redeemer, that thou
wilst graciously forgive me.

These 7. Penitential Psalms of David, are not placed here as part of the
evening prayer before bed. But that after the act of contrition you may take
one or more of them, most moveing you to repentance for sin; according to each
ones leisure, and devotion.

Antiph. Remember not Lord our, or our parents sins, neither take vengence of
our offenses.

King David his seven penitential Psalms showing his great grief and sorrow
after he had sinned with Bersabee.
Psalm. 6.
LOrd rebuke me not in thy fury: nor chastise me in thy wrath.

Have mercy on me, O Lord, because I am weak: heal me Lord, because my bones
be troubled.

And my soul is disquieted exceedingly: but thou, O Lord, how long?

Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul: save me for thy mercy.

Because there is not in death that is mindful of thee: and in hell who shall
confess to thee?

I have labored in my mourning, I will every night wash my bed: I will water my
couch with tears.

Mine eye is troubled for fury: I have waxen old among all mine enemies.

Depart from me allyee that work iniquities: because our Lord has hard the
voice of my weeping.

Our Lord has hard my petition: our Lord has received my prayer.

Let all my enemies be asshamed, and very sore troubled: let them be converted,
and asshamed very speedily.

Glory be to the Father and to the Son, etc.

Psalm 31.
BLessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven: and whose sins be covered.

Blessed is the man, to whom our Lord has not imputed sin: neither is there
guile in his spirit.

Because I held my peace, my bones are inveterated: whilst I cried all the day.

Because day and night thy hand is made heavy upon me: I am turned in my
anguish, while the thorn is fastened.

I have made my sin known to thee: and my injustice I have not hid.

I said, I will confess against me my injustice to our Lord: and thou have
forgiven the impiety of my sin.

For this shall every holy one pray to thee, in time convenient.

But yet in the overflow of many waters; they shall not approach to him.

Thou art my refuge from tribulation which has compassed me: my joy, deliver
me from them that compass me.

I will give thee understanding, and will instruct thee in the way that thou
shalst go: I will fasten mine eyes upon thee.

Do not become as a horse and mule, which have no understanding.

In bit and bridle bind fast their jaws, that approach not to thee.

Many are the scourges of a sinner: but mercy shall compass him that hops in
our Lord.

Be joyful in our Lord, and rejoice ye just: and glory all ye right of heart.

Glory be to the Father etc.

Psalm 37.
LOrd rebuke me not in thy fury: nor chastise me in thy wrath.

Because thy arrows are fastened in me: and thou have confirmed thy hand upon
me.

There is no health in my flesh in respect of thy wrath: my bones have no peace
in respect of my sins.

Because mine iniquities are gone over my head: and as a heavy burden are
become heavy upon me.

My scarres are putrid and corrupted: because of my foolishness.

I am become miserable, and made crooked, even to the end: I went sorrowful
all the day.

Because my loins are filled with illusions: and there is no health in my
flesh.

I am afflicted, and am humbled exceedingly: I rored for the groaning of my heart.

Lord before thee is all my desire, and my groaning is not hid from thee.

My heart is troubled, my stength has forsaken me: and the light of mine eyes,
and the same is not with me.

My friends and my neighbors have approached and stood against me.

And they that were near me, stood far of, and they did violence, who sought
my soul.

And they that sought me evils, spoke vanities, and meditated guiles all the
day.

But I as deaf did not hear: as one dumb not opening his mouth.

And I became as a man not hearing; and not having reprehension in his mouth.

Because in thee, O Lord, have I hoped: thou shalst hear me, O Lord, my God.

For I have said; least sometimes my ennemies rejoice over me; and whilst my
feet are moved they speak great things upon me.

Because I am ready for scourges: and my sorrow is in my sight always.

Because I will declare my iniquity, and will think for my sin.

But mine enemies live, and are confirmed over me: and they are multiplied that
hate me unjustly.

They that repay evil things for good, did back bite me: because I followed
goodness.

Forsake me not, O Lord my God, depart not from me.

Incline unto my help, O Lord God of my salvation.

Glory be to the Father etc.

Psalm 50.
HAve mercy on me, O God, according to thy great mercy. And according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my iniquities.

Wash me hencefourth from my iniquity; and cleanse me from my sin.

Because I do know my iniquity: and my sin is always against me.

To thee only have I sinned, and have done evil before thee: that thou may
be justified in thy words, and may overcome when thou art judged.

For behold I was conceived in iniquities: and my mother conceived me in sin.

For behold thou have loved truth: the uncertain and hidden things of thy
wisdom thou have made manifest to me.

Thou shall sprincle me with hysope, and I shall be cleansed: thou shalst wash
me, and I shall be made whiter then snow.

To my hearing thou shalst give joy and gladness: and humbled hearts shall
rejoice.

Turn away thy face from my sins: and blot out all my iniquities.

Create a clean heart in me, O God: and renew a right spirit in my bowels.

Cast me not away from thy face: and thy holy spirit take not away from me.

Render unto me the joy of thy salvation: and confirm me with a principal
spirit.

I will teach the unjust thy ways: and the impious shall be converted unto
thee.

Deliver me from bloods, O God, the God of my salvation: and my tongue shall
exalt thy justice.

Thou O Lord, shall open my lips: and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Because if thou would have had sacrifice, I had verily given it: with
whole-burnt-offerings thou will not be delighted.

A sacrifice to God, is an afflicted spirit: a contrite and humble heart, O God,
thou wilst not despise.

Deal favorably, O Lord, in thy good will with Syon: and let the walls of
Jerusalem be built up.

Then shall thou accept sacrifice of justice, oblations and
wholeburnt-offerings: then shall they lay calves upon thine altar.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Psalm 101.
O Lord hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee.

Turn not away thy face from me: in what day soever I am in tribulation,
incline thine ear to me.

In what day soever I shall call upon thee: hear me speedily.

For my days have vanished as smoke: and my bones are withered as a dry-burnt
firebrand.

I am smitten as grass, and my heart is withered: for I have forgotten to eat
my bread.

For the voice of my groaning, my bonne has cleaved to my flesh.

I am become like a pelican of the wilderness; I am become as a night raven in
the house.

I have watched, and am become as a sparow; solitary in the house top.

All the day did my ennemies upbraide me: and they that praised me, swear
against me.

For I did eat ashes as bread: and mingled my drink with weeping.

At the face of the wrath of thy indignation; for that lifting me up thou have
thrown me down.

My days have declined as a shadow: I am withered as grass.

But thou, O Lord, endurest for ever: and thy memorial in generation and
generation.

Thou rising up, shall have mercy on Syon, for the time is come.

Because the stones thereof have pleased thy servants: and they shall have
pity on the earth thereof.

And the Gentiles shall fear thy name, O Lord; and all the Kings of the Earth,
thy glory.

For our Lord has builded Syon: and he shall be seen in his glory.

He has had respect to the prayer of the humble: and he has not despised
their petition.

Let these things be written in an other generation: and the people that shall
be created shall praise our lord.

Because he has looked fourth from his high holy place: our Lord from Heaven
has looked upon the earth.

That he might hear the gronings of the fettered: that he might loose the
children of them that are flayne.

That they may show fourth the name of our Lord in Syon: and his praise in
Jerusalem.

In the assembling of the people together in one, and kings to serve our Lord.

He answered him in the way of his strength: show me the fewness of my days.

Call me not back in the half of my days: thy years are unto generation and
generation.

In the beginning, O Lord, thou have founded the earth: and the Heavens are the
works of thy hands.

They shall perish, but thou art permanent: and they shall all wax old as a
garment.

And as a vesture thou shalst change them, and they shall be changed: but thou
art the self same, and thy years shall not fail.

The children of thy servants shall inhabit: and their seed shall be directed
for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Psalm 129.
FRom the depthes I have cried to thee, O Lord: Lord hear my cry.

Let thine ears be intent, to the voice of my petition.

If thou shall observe iniquities, O Lord; Lord who shall sustain it?

Because with thee there is propitiation: and for thy law I have expected thee,
O Lord.

My soul has expected in his word: my soul has hoped in our Lord.

From the morning watch even until night, let Israel hope in our Lord.

Because with our Lord there is mercy: and with him plentiful redemption.

And he shall redeem Israel, from all his iniquities.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Psalem 142.
LOrd hear my prayer: with thine ears receive my petition in thy truth: hear
me in thy justice.

And enter not into judgment with thy servant because no man living shall be
justified in thy sight.

Because the enemy has persecuted my soul: he has humbled my life in the
Earth.

He has set me in obscure places, as the dead of the world: and my spirit is
in anguish upon me, with in me my heart is troubled.

I was mindful of old days, I have meditated in all thy works: in the facts
of thy hands did I meditate.

I have stretched forth my hand to thee: my soul is as earth without water
unto thee.

Hear me quickly, O Lord: my spirit has fainted.

Turn not away thy face from me: and I shall be like to them that descend into
the lake.

Make me hear thy mercy in the morning: because I have hoped in thee.

Make the way known to me, wherein I may walk: because I have lifted up my
soul to thee.

Deliver me from mine enemies, O Lord, to thee I have fled: teach me to do thy
will, because thou art my God.

Thy good spirit will conduct me into the right way: for thy names sake O Lord,
thou will quicken me in thy equity.

Thou wilst bring forth my soul out of tribulation: and in thy mercy thou
wilst destroy mine enemies.

And thou wilst destroy all, that afflict my soul: because I am thy servant.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

The Antiphone.
Remenber not O Lord, our, or our Parents offenses, Neither take vengence of
our sins.

The Litanies of the Saints.
LOrd have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ hear us. Christ graciously hear us. God the Father of Heaven. Have
mercy upon us. God the son Redeemer of the world. Have mercy upon us. God the
Holy Ghost. Have mercy upon us. Holy Trinity one God. Have mercy upon us. Holy
Mary. Pray for us. Holy Mother of God. Holy Virgin of Virgins. S. Michael. Pray
for us, S. Gabriel. S. Raphael. All ye holy Angels and Archangels All ye holy
Orders of blessed spirits S. John Baptist. All ye holy Patriarcks and Prophets
S. Peter. S. Paul. S. Andrew. S. James. S. Philip. S. Bartholomew. Pray for us.
S. Matthew. S. Simon. S. Thadey. S. Mathias. S. Barnabe. S. Luke. S. Mark. All
ye holy Apostles and Eva^gelists. All ye holy Disciples of our Lord. All ye
holy Innocents. S. Stephen. S. Laurence Pray for us. S. Vincent. S. Fabian and
Sebastian. S. John and Paul. S. Cosme and Damian. S. Geryase and Protase. All
ye holy Martyrs. S. Sylvester. S. Gregory. S. Ambrose. Pray for us. S.
Augustine. S. Hierosme. S. Martin. S. Nicolas. All ye holy Bishops and
Confessors All ye holy Doctors. S. Antony. S. Benet. S. Bernard. S. Dominick,
S. Francis. All ye holy Priests and Levits. All ye holy Monks and Eremits.
S. Mary Magdalen. S. Agatha. S. Lucy. S. Agnes. Pray for us. S. Cicily. S.
Chatherine. S. Anastasia. All ye holy Virgins and widows. All ye Men and
Women Saints of God. Make ye intercession for us Son of God. We beseech
thee to hear us. Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. Spare
us O Lord. Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. Hear us O
Lord. Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Have mercy upon us.
Christ hear us. Christ graciously hear us
Vouchsafe, O Almighty God, that we honoring the memory of thy blessed Saints;
thou grant us by their intercession the desired abundance of thy mercy through
Christ Jesus our Lord Amen.

O God whose proper it is always to have mercy and to spare: receive our
petition, that the tender mercy of thy piety may mildly absolve us, and all thy
servants, whom the chain of sin does bind Amen.

Hear we beseech thee, O Lotd, the prayers of thy supplicants, and pardon the
sins of them that confess to thee: that thou being unto us benign, may, in
like manner give us pardon and peace.

Show with clemency, O Lord, thy unspeakable mercy unto us: that thou both
acquit us of our sins, and deliver us from the pains which for them we deserve.

O God who by sin art offended, and by penance art pacified; mercifully respect
the prayers of thy people making supplication to thee: and turn away the
scourges of thy a^ger, which for our sins we deserve. Have mercy on all
sinners, sweet Jesu I beseech thee, turn their vices into virtues, and make
them true observers of thy law; and lovers of thee: bring them to bliss in
everlasting glory.

Have mercy also on the souls in Purgatory, for thy bitter passion sake, I
beseech thee, and for thy glorious name Jesu: O holy Trinity, one true God have
mercy on me.

Your prayer ended, dispose your self in recollection of mind to bed; and
putting of your clothes, consider how fast the time is coming on, and is
perchance much nearer then you imagine, when you shall be unclothed of all but
a poor winding sheet, to be covered with earth, which your bedcloathes
covering you do represent as also the ensving sleep, does your death, and
your bed, the grave. where laying down your self, commend both your body and
soul unto God, saying as did Jesus Christ upon the Cross; recommending your
soul to the Eternal father in these sacred words: Into thy hands O Lord I
recommend my spirit.

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, I lay me down to rest: he bless me,
defend me, and bring me to life everlasting, Amen.

Save us good Lord wakeing, and keep us sleeping that we may watch with
Christ, and rest in peace. Amen.

God the Father bless me; Jesus Christ defend me; the virtue of the holy
Ghost illuminate and sanctify me, this night and ever more. Amen.

O Angel of God, who art my keeper, me by the supernal piety committed to thy
charge keep, and defend this night from all peril of body and of soul. Amen.

And lastely with a fervent aspiration to God, conclude saying.

O dear Jesu, the everlasting repose of thine elect: when will the happy hour
come, that my soul may without end receive her rest in thy eternal glory!

And hereupon, with an act of the love of God compose your self to sleep.

When awakeing in the night.
IF you awake in the night, endeavor to make an elevation of your heart to God
by some ejaculatory prayer: as, O good Jesus, be to me Jesus, and save me. or. O
dear Jesus, that I may know thee and that J may know my self! upon which words
S. Augustine was wont to spend whole nights in pious contemplation. As also did
S. Francis in these other not unlike: O who art thou my divine Lord, and who am
I: or say. O Eternal God, when shall I love thee with my whole heart and soul?
and if I were at this very instant now to dye; am J in the state to obtain thy
gracious mercy? or the like, And then without any further application of mind,
compose your self again to sleep.

Holy cogitations, whereof some one being chosen at the end of your evening, or
morning prayer, may serve as a subject for a virtuous employment of your mind,
when either you cannot sleep; or for all the day following; at such times, as
best leisure shall give occasion to make some good Reflection there upon.

Of the true end of Man.
MAn is made to love and to serve God, and thereby to obtain his own
Beaitude. Our very heart assures us of this certain truth, which being made for
God, it finds no quiet rest, but only in that its proper center: thou have
created us O Lord for thy self (says S. Augustine) and our heart is unquiet
until it repose in thee. Yea plain experience makes it manifest, for neither
could Alexander the great, be content with his glorious conquest of the world,
together with all other temporal felicity: nor Solomon with all which his
soul could either possess or desire for the full content both of his body and
mind: all which in the end, he confessed to be but vanity and affliction of
spirit. And Alexander did no less; who weeped when he was told that there
were no more worlds for him to conquer; the satisfaction of what he had done,
gave him so small content.

We being therefore made only for God, let us be only his, and give our selves
entierly to him performing what according to our end we are made for. For as
the suune is made to give light, the fire to heat, and salt to season; to
which end, should they not answer, to what purpose remained they in the world,
but with the insipid salt are to be cast forth (as says Jesus Christ) upon the
dunghill. And so likewise if we correspond not to our end, what can we justly
expect, but our own destruction?

But do thou, my soul, now act according to the end of thy creation? are all
thy actions, directed to the glory of God? o how far am I from it! and
therefore how fruitlesly do I employ both my time and labor, and what a
reproach will it be to me an other day for so shameful a sin, unless I do
speedily amend?

The due gratitude which in justice we owe unto Jesus Christ.
YOU are not your own (says the great Apostle) for you are bought with a dear
price, which was no less then the precious blood of Jesus Christ, by which he
so mercifully has redeemed us from the eternal captivity of Satan. And
therefore most duly as redeemed slaves, we ought both in justice and true
gratitude to consecrate with a pure intention to his greater glory, all our
actions and service: which not doing we do robb most unjustly Jesus Christ of
his right. Which well considered: o what confusion will it be at our appearing
before his dreadful tribunal when after 40. 50. or 60. years as in proper
quality of his redeemed slaves, we shall not be able to show one day perhaps,
employed faithfully in his service or true gratitude. If I give but a dog an
unprofitable bone, he faunes and shows me love, yea and renders me much
service: whereas we show neither love nor gratitude to Jesus Christ, who has
given us his life, his infinite merits, so many several great graces, and
divine inspirations, and finally purchaced Heaven for our Beatitude, and we
remain insensible. O horrid ingratitude! the dog will be our shameful
reproach, unless touched by his example, we amend.

Our maine great affair in this World is to save our souls.
O Strange and stupide folley of man to spare no cost, pains nor diligence for
mere worldly vanity; and to want courage and resolution to labor for eternal
salvation, for which least care or industry is taken! All loss whatsoever does
trouble us, and we are insensible of loosing our own dearest soul. We find
upon our accounts great expenses for our bodily commodities: so much for
apparel; so much for feasting and curiosity in diet; so much in pleasure and
gaming: so much to gain, or to preserve some temporal interest: so much to
Physicians and Apothecaries for our corporal health; but little or nothing for
the spiritual health of our infirm and much diseased soul; which in some
manner, and unchristian like, might seem least of all to belong to us; or as
if it were to dye and end, as does the soul of a beast. O what true brutality
is this in vain, worldly, and voluptuous men, thus to prefer Earth before
Heaven, misery before beatitude, their corruptible body, before their immortal
souls, and this uncertain moment, before an Eternity of bliss and never
ending happiness! A serious reflection upon so great a folley ought to give us
warning, that whilst it is the acceptable time and the days of health we ought
to prevent our crernall misery.

Of the divine presence of God.
WHo is a Christian must both be leeve, and religiously adore Almighty God as
truly present and really acting at the very botome of our soul; for him we
both live and moove in all we do: and therefore much greater confusion, a
thousand times, needs must it be to us, that our many and great desloyalties
should lie more open to his divine view then were they exposed upon a public
stage to the eyes of all the kings and people of the world. And yet, O
senseless and wretched man, to fear and be so much asshamed to committ in the
sight of a mortal man, that which he most impudently fears not to do in the
sight of God, who immediately in most just revenge may command the Earth to
open, and swallow him down alive both body and soul into the eternal
tormenting flames of Hell! which if we desire to avoyde, let us deeply imprint
this Christian verity in our souls by a serious and frequent reflection of
this overseeing divine presence of God in all both our actions and thoughts,
whereof we are to give to him an exact account, even to the least idle words.
And hereafter to receive an everlasting reward, or punishment, according to due
desert.

Use often this holy practice whilst the time of health, and the days
acceptable are afforded you, and fear to offend.

How we ought to distrust our selves.
NO enemy is so dangerous to damn us, as our selves; and therefore the best
means to avoyde sin is to distrust our own great frailty, and carefully to
watch over that badd humor, and vicious propension to which we find our
corrupt nature most inclined to draw us to offend, which being well observed,
we shall easily perceive that all our sin and misery springs from that infected
fountain, in following our disordinate humor and natural inclination, quite
contrary to the internal holy motion of grace; well verifying, that man's
domestic enemies are most dangerous.

We ought therefore seriously to examen what is our predominant and most
vicious inclination, against which we must earnestly crave Gods grace to
resist, and to stand watchfully upon our guard to suppress and oppose the
same. But to get a perfect victory over this dangerous enemy; we must resolve
to oppose it by the practice of that virtue, which is most opposite thereunto:
as who is inclind to covetousness, must practice the virtue of liberality: if
to vain glory and pride: the virtue of humility must be opposed: If to cholere
and passion; the mildness and meekness of Jesus Christ: and so of all the
rest. Who shall practice this, will not fail to be happy.

Against detraction and Calumny.
THe holy proverb and S. Paul do both agree that the detractor is odious both
to God and Man; Proverb. 24.9. Rom: 1.30.
and yet no fault is so frequently committed in conversation, as is this cursed
sin of backbiting and calumny, which sends more to Hell (says S. Benard) then
any other vice whatsoever: for as the Divill possesses: the tongue of the
detractor; so does he also the ear of him who willingly harkneth there unto;
and of-the two who commits the greater sin, S. Bernard confesses
jugenuously he could not easily determine.

A good expedient in hearing detraction, to avoyde the danger of offending God;
will be to answer as did our B. Savior to the accusing Pharisees: he who
amongst you is free from sin, let him cast the first stone at her. We must also
abstain from speaking of other men's faults in their absence, nor willingly
harken to them who shall do it; as being a thing from which no good can be
likely to proceed, but rather breach of charity, and much harm, Wherefore if
any shall press you to give ear to them in any such backbiting discourse,
imitate the excellent practice of a holy servant of God, who used to desire
them who made any such discourse; that they much rather would tell him of some
fault of his own (whereof he had many) for thereby (said he) you will do me
great charity for which I will both heartily thank you, and also endeavor to
amend.

Think, well upon this holy practice, for it is of great importance to avoid
much sin, to practice true charity toward our neighbor; and finally to
procure peace and happy quiet to our own mind thereby.

Of flying the occasion of sin.
WHo loves danger shall porish therein (says the wise man) and who is most
careful to shun the occasion, Eccles. 1.17.
he doubtless will least offend: for as who stops the fountain, will
certainly dry up the brook: so likewise who flies the occasion, will preserve
himself from sin. For as taking away the cause, one will hinder the effect; so
in the combat with vice no way is so secure to gain the victory, as by flight.
The holy Ghost assures us, that as we cannot touch pitch without being defiled:
so is it also as difficult to stay voluntarily in the occasion of sin without a
defiled conscience. The common proverb says very well: that the occasion makes
a Thief; which is but too truly verified, in making adrunkard. a detractor, a
Luxurious man and the like. And who but reflecteth upon his most offending God,
will find that his neglect of avoiding the occasion, was still the chiefest
cause of his sin. Solomon, David, and Sampson did all greatly offend by
exposing themselves to the occasion: let us take good warning by them, who are
much inferior to their perfections.

To avoyde therefore sin, we must beware of all ill company; for they serve but
as alluring baits to draw souls to offend. We must greatly mistrust our own
frailty, and place our whole confidence in God, craving humbly his celestial
grace to strengthen us against all the dangerous temptations of our three
mortal ennemies, the world. the flesh, and the devil.

The small number of the Elect.
THis thruth is exceeding terrible, Math. 7.
grounded upon the words of Jesus Christ saying, that the gate is wide, and the
way broad which leads to death, and many walk therein; but the gate unto
life is narrow, and few do find it. many ate called, but few are chosen; God
himself has said it, and therefore it must be true.

The figures of this divine truth, do well confirm it; and by the holy
Fathers they are so expounded. As that infinite number perishing in the deluge;
and but eight persons only escaping it in the Arc. And secondly of eighteen
hundred thousand Israelits who went out of Egypt, two only of them lived to go
into the land of promise. These are esteemed by the holy Fathers true figures
to represent to us the small number of the Elect, which ought not to seem
incredible, considering the small number of Christians in comparaison of all
the rest. And secondly amongst the Christians how few are truly virtuous, or
love God as they ought, or live according to their calling.

This well considered what horrid fear ought we to have, least our unhappy lot
should fall out of this little blessed compagnie of the Elect. Phill. 2.21.
Which to prevent by S. Paul's advise, whorke in fear and trembling your
salvation. O what would not a damned soul now wish to have done whereby to
have escaped those eternal flames! let us do now what at the hour of our
death we should undoubtedly wish to have done. And according to S. Peter, let
us employ all our solicitude and labor to secure our salvation by good
works. Let us frequently renew the promise and protestation which we made in
Baptism, ^et. 1.
to renounce the devil and all his works, the pompes and vanities of the
world, to follow our Christian maxims, and to imitate the holy virtues of Jesus
Christ.

Who suffer persecution for justice sake, Math. 5.
are beatifi'd by Jesus Christ himself.
THe soldier seeks no privilege above is Prince or General, nor is the
servant more then his Master now our divine Redeemer having led us the way
through all manner of perfection, why should we, despicable worms and criminel
offenders, be troubled, or refuse cheerfully to follow him through so much
easier a combat of suffering and persecution, in comparison of what this great
Lord of glory and in^ocent la^be of God has suffered for our sakes? for are
our persecutors more cruel, barbarous, or inhumane then were his? have they so
greatly injured, moked, scorned or affronted us, as they did him? have they
spitt or struck on our faces, as they did on his? have they by false calumny
taken away our honor, and sought our death and destruction, as they did his? O
no, not such outrageous injuries have been offered us, and therefore it would be
most unworthey for the member of so suffering a head to be so very nice and
delicate or much troubled at small and little injuries.

Finally what other persuasion need we to suffer with all cheerfulness, then
is the very conclusion of this Beatitude, Math. 5
in these words: exult ye and rojoyce, because your reward is very copious in
Heaven: this reward being the beatificall vision of God for all Eternity.

To what multitude of miseries Man's life is subject.
Man's life though but short and very uncertain, yet it is replenisht with a
multitude of miseries as well of body as of soul: the holy wiseman calls it a
heavy yoke imposed upon the children of Adam, Ecc. 40.1.
from the day of their birth till the day of their death and burial. These
miseries now being so very great, may well make our life seem long to us,
though but short in it self, by reason of the sad and tedious accidents, to
which our frail nature is so subject, by fear, by pain, by grief, by
necessity and want: which to prevent, and to grow rich, what pains and
industry do Men use in crossing the dangerous seas, undertakeing long painful
journies, enduring great distempers of opposite clymats for gayning wealth. And
having at last quite spent, tired, and worn out themselves, how properly may
that their great toil and industry be compared to the spinning but a poor
spiders webb, consuming their whole life and labor, as does that little
creature, by drawing out the substance of their very bowels to weave their
little nett to catch some contemptible fly. Which lively represents mere
worldly men, whose thoughts and industry, both day and nigth are to contrive
the obtaining wealth, honor, or some small sensvall pleasure; which by a right
understanding and virtuous soul ought to be esteemed as vnworthey the
occupation of his life and whole industry, as is the catching of a silly fly.

The premises well considered, we must adore the great goodness of God, who
therefore has mixed these many miseries with this present life; thereby to
compel us to hate it; and to draw us to aspire to life everlasting, which is
so free from all these afflicting miseries. For if being thus even overwhelmed
with so many daily sufferings, we are yet notwhithstanding, so unwilling to
depart from this wretched world; what then would become of us if we enjoyed all
here at great case, and to our hearts full content.

S. Augustine proves man's life to be a continual misery, Li. Con. fes. 10 chapter 28.
because in adversity [saith he] we desire prosperity: and in prosperity, we
fear adversity: nor are we ever quiet or free from the one of these tormenting
passions; either of desire of what we want; or of fear to loose the prosperity
which we enjoy.

Woe be therefore [saith he] to the prosperity of this life for the fear wherein
we are of adversity; and for that our joy may be quickly at an end: and woe be
to the adversity of this life, through the desire which we have of prosperity;
and because adversity is of it self a thing hard to be endured. And is not
therefore the life of Man upon Earth a mere temptation [saith S. Augustin]
without any kind of intermission, and void of all true happiness or content.

Reflections upon the dreadful word of Aeternity.
ONe good consideration of Aeternity makes all temporal felicity but
contemptible [saith S. Greg.] yea that very thought of Aeternity gives courage
to bear patiently all persecution, and the afflictions of this miserable life,
and with S. Augustine it will make us say: here cut, here burn, here do not
spare me Lord, so that thou spare me eternally. A serious reflection upon
Aeternity is a souverainne remedy against all sin: for who would presume to
offend God if he well considered that by his sin he forfeits an Aeternity of all
beatitude; and engages himself to the endless torments of Hell.

A good reflection upon Aeternity is capable to make us to admire, to adore,
and love Gods mercy, as also to dread his justice, in rewarding so little
service done him in this world with everlasting recompense in the other: and
for one mortal sin, committed by thought or deed, to punish eternally in hell.
O that this wholesome thought of Aeternity could take so deep a root in our
souls, as never to be plucked from our thought. For what is Aeternity, but the
measure of a present and perpetual during without end. Imagine a thousand
millions of years; yea as many milions of years, as there have been moments
from the beginning of the world, and shall be till the end thereof: and then you
may truly say how all that is nothing in comparaison of Aetetnity, which is to
dure so long as God is God; and so long shall the just be blessed with glory in
Paraidse; and the wicked remain no less in the tormenting flames of hell
always, for ever, and for Aeternity; and this for their foolish choice, here
to enjoy but one uncertain moment of vain and deluding pleasure.

O Aeternity, Aeternity, how is it possible that thou should be no more
considered by men! he doubtless needs must want both faith and all true
judgment who does not tremble at the serious true reflection upon Aeternity.
Whereupon to make good profit by this wholesome thought of Aeternity; consider
by an act of faith this certain truth; that you are to be either happy or most
miserable for all Eternity; and that the last moment of your life is to
determine this great affair: and therefore when you find your self solicited
to any sin, detest that motion which for a moment of false content does entice
you most tray terously unto endless misery.

Which to avoyde resolve with a courageous resolution to suffer both
persecution and all affliction whatsoever, much rather then to hazard the
torments of Hell for all Eternity. Fly sin with great horror, much more then
death it self; and from the occasions thereof, as the most dangerous serpent;
it being only which can destroy you eternally. In sine he must either want
faith, or be a fool who is not touched nor draws profit by this wholesome
thought of Eternity: for can we judge him less then frantic, and quite out of
his wits, who will venture by committing one mortal sin to expose himself to
damnation for all Aeternity.

Here follows a brief signification of the Priestly ornaments at Mass; as
also a short declaration of the other Ceremonies, and holy mysteries of that
divine sacrifice, for the instruction and comfort of the poor, and less
learned people, for whom this little manuel is principally intended; though not
unwelcome, I hope, to any, behoulding so clearly thereby how perfectly the
bitter death and Passion of our divne Redeemer is represented to our memory;
whereby to stir us up to love and gratitude for what so loving a Savior has
suffered to pay our debt. And by this means to moove us also, for his sake,
and for the expiation of our grievous sins, to suffer the afflictions which his
blessed order and heavenly providence has mercifully disposed for us to
undergo in this world, thereby to avoyde the eternal torments in the other.

And now as for these ceremonies, ordained for the more solemn celebrating the
holy sacrifice of the Mass; whereby the peoples devotion is much encreaced,
God is more glorified, and our souls are instructed and drawn unto his love;
therefore great impiety it is, proceeding chieffy from ignorance, in such as
do so irreligiously despise those holy Ceremonies, inspired by the holy Ghost
into his beloved spouse the Catholic Church, for the increace of devotion, and
greater Majesty in Gods divine service and worship.

Yet here it is to be observed, that we do not place any true perfection in
these holy Ceremonies, but only use them as means whereby we are induced to
true perfection of the love of God: a Ceremony being only an outward religious
act, no further piously laudable, then it is exercised for Gods honor and
glory by its pious signification. And like as we know that chastity and poverty
are not true perfection themselves, because they may, and also often times do
happen to be without it: yet none can deny them to be good means to obtain
contempt of the world, and the love of God, wherein only true perfection does
consist. And as the children of Israel by behoulding the stones which their
Fathers had brought with them when they passed dryfoot over the red sea, were
put in mind of Gods great miracles in their protection, and were also moved by
that means greatly to love and honor God for it: so likewise holy Ceremonies
put us in mind of their pious significations; and are like savoury sauce, which
gives a pleasing relish to the meat, although of it self it be but of little
substance. Or as the leaves, and bark, which although they bear no fruit, yet
are both ornaments, and a needful defense to preserve the pleasing fruit. The
poles in the vineyard, bear no grapes, yet they sustain and preserve the
same. So likewise, although the Ceremonies of the Church be neither the
substance, nor the perfection of Religion, yet they preserve, and do also
begett, and stir up in us the reverance and grateful memory of the holy
mysteries of our faith, and are an excellent, and needful ornament to
religion. Yea S. Aug. against Faustus the Manichean heretic. li. 19. says
that: without external Ceremonies it is impossible to preserve Religion.

This supposed, and [as I hope] you will find truly verified by what does
follow: that now which in the next place I am to recommend to you, is that you
having paid due honor and homage to God by your morning prayer; then apply
your self to such employments as the obligation of your present calling and
condition may require of you. But if afterward good leisure and opportunity be
permitted you to hear the divine sacrifice of the Mass, omit not to be
present at that supreme act of our Christian religion; whereby we give to God
the highest honor of sacrifice, which is proper to him alone: there being
offered to him that most grateful Host of the law of grace, which is the
sacred body and blood of Jesus Christ, that most pure and immaculate lamb of
God, which though but once only offered in a visible and bloody manner for us
upon the Cross, as a sacrifice of Redemption for all the sins of the world;
yet that very self same sacred Host and victime, now daily is offered upon the
holy Altar by the hands of the Priest in an unbloody and invisible form; not
as a new price or payment for our sins; that being here only applied in the
Mass, which was already paid upon the Cross. Like as it is also applyd unto
our souls, both by faith, by Baptism, and the other Sacraments: and therefore
is here in the Mass but only as the real true sacrifice of application of the
very selfsame victime, not in a bloody and visible, manner, but in an unbloody
and invisible, under the sacramental forms of bread and wine.

And how avayleable now it is to all who devoutly assist at this holy
sacrifice, much and vith great authority might here be said; but my design
aiming at brevity, take only what that divinely devout Thomas a Kempis tells us
in his imitation of Christ chap. 7. lib. 4. There is no oblation more worthy
(says he) no satisfaction greater for the washing away of sin, then to offer
up our selves to God purely with the oblation of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ in the Mass, and holy communion.

Now that this holy sacrifice of the Mass is a most true and lively
representation of the life and death of Jesus Christ; he who shall observe
either the ornaments of the Priest, or the ceremonies, and holy mysteries in
the Mass; will be forced to confess that to be most true; as it will
manifestly appear to any who read but our Catholic Authors, that explicate
the primitive institution of the same.

And to begin with the holy Altar; of the Altar, and what it signifies.
he shall find that it has relation to sacrifice, which must necessarily be
offered to God in the Church where his true faith is professd. And therefore
this name of Altar is given to us by S. Paul. Hebr. 13.10. we have an Altar
whereof they have not power to cate, whoserve the Tabernacle. And 1. cor. 9.24.
and S. Math. 5.24. all which is abundantly sufficient warrant for us to use
this name of Altar. Which represents the table whereon our divine Redeemer did
celebrate the last supper with his Disciples, (...)
the night before his bitter death and passion.

The linning for the altar, or the altar clothes, are to be very pure and
white; they representing the purity of our blessed Saviors humanity from all
stayne of sin, or disordered passion. That linning is also to be blessed; to
signify the great sanctity of Jesus Christ his life; which we must endeavor,
of the lighted candles upon the altar.
the best we can to imitate.

The lighted candles upon the altar, admonish us, according to S. Luke, to be
ready, in imitation of the wise Virgins, with the oil of good works, in our
lamp of true faith, and to expect at the pronouncing those sacred and
operative words of consecration, the real and true substantial presence of
that our divine and heavenly spouse; who requires the light of our good works
so to shine before men, as thereby they may be moved to glorify their Father
who is in Heaven. The two candels, signify the two testaments of holy
scripture; the old and new. They also signify the light of fatih, revealed to
the Jew, and Gentill. And they advertise us of the great splendour, both of
faith, of good life, and works, required in the celebrating of so heigh and
dreadful a mystery. of the Cross and Crucifix


The Cross or Crucifix is the principal ornament upon the Altar, which ought
never to be wanting at the celebration of the Mass. It betokens our B Redemers
victory over death: and is placed at the midst of the altar, most in view, to
represent to our mind the death and passion of Jesus Christ which is there
chiefly to be considered, and piously meditated in that holy sacrifice.

The Chalice does represent the cup wherein our B. savior did consecrate his
most precious blood Math. 26. of the chalice
And it puts us in mind of his sacred passion: our B. savior himself so
calling it: the Chalice of his passion.

The Paten serves for the use of the consecrated body of our Lord; of the Paten
as the Chalice does for his most precious blood. And as it does cover the topp
of the Chalice; it represents the stone which was rouled against the door of
the holy sepulcher. Mark 15.

The white linen corporal upon which is consecrated the most precious body
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: of the corporal
does represent to us that white and pure syndon wherein Joseph ab Aremathia
involued his most sacred corpse before it was buried. The clean and bright
purity whereof, does aptly admonish all such, as by the holy communion receive
and harbor within their breasts this sacred, and most precious body of Jesus
Christ, to be chaste and clean, both of body and soul; and endued with true
purity of intention.

The Veil does cover both Paten and Chalice all round about. of the veil
And it represents to us the handkercher wherewith our savior's most sacred
head was covered when he was laid in the sepulcher. Whereof mention is made Luke
24. S. Peter having discovered it in the sepulcher: and he there beheld the
linen, lying apart, and the handkercher which had been wrapped about his head.

Of the several colors which the Church uses for her ornaments; and the
meaning of them.
THe Propht Ezechiel in his 6. chap. speaking of the splendour of the Church,
seems to place a great part of her glory in the various colors of her
beutifull robes. Which variety of mystical colors, symbolyzing with the
several virtues of the glorious Saints, does greatly adorn and beautify this
holy spouse: and is to us a motive, and great encouragement to imitate those
holy virtues, which by means of these various colors used in the Church, are
so fitly proposed to our view.

Nor was it without great reason that God in the old law appointed those 4.
different colors for the Priests and Churches ornaments, which were: the
color bissynus: that is a yallow color like to that of raw silk. The second
was purpureus color. The purple color The third was hyacinth: that is a
violet read blew, or violet purple. The fourth was coccineus: that is a scarlet
or crimson color. And as these different colors had their several mystical
meanings for the peoples instruction: so I doubt not but the impartial reader
will confess, no less to be contained in the meanig of these colors which
the Church inspired by the holy Ghost, has appointed to be used in the law of
grace, for the ornaments of Christ's holy Church, and for the Priests vestments
belonging to the same: as by this brief declaration it will appear.

The white color is used upon the feasts of Angels, Confessors, What means
the white color used by the church
and Virgins. To represent to us the imitation of their holy chastity and
saintly purity. As also upon the solemn feasts of the Nativity of our Lord and
Savior. Upon the Resurrection, Ascension, Corpus Christi, and other the
chiefest feasts of the greatest mysteries of our Faith; which are to be
celebrated in the white color of Symbolyzing joy: as testifies our Savior's
glorious splendour at his Transfiguration. The two Angels in white, who
denounced his Resurrection. And the joyful white of his Saints in Heaven Apoc.
3.4. and Apoc. ca. 4. v. 4.

Red, What is signified by the red color
is the scarlet dye of our. B. Saviors passion, and is the proper color for
the Churches ornements upon the feasts of the holy Cross. Of the Apostles and
blessed Martyrs; to show that their glorious passage from this valley of misery
to eternal joy, was through the red sea of many tribulations: and that their
glory is purchased with the price of their own dear blood. They dyed their
robes in the blood of the lamb. Apoc. 7.

The green color is used in the Church from the octave of Epiphanie till
Septuagesima. What is signifid by the green color
And from the octave of Pentecost till Advent exclusively: containing the
greatest part of the whole year, and is to be industriously employed for our
pourchasing Heaven, which is to be got by vigorous force well represented by
this color, the hierocliff; of youth; and consequently betokens this
courageous and vigorous strength in virtuous exercises. whereby that celestial
City is to be conquered.

The violet color is a kind of blew, What means the violet color
and resembles the color of the sky of Heaven; which we must know to be fast
shutt againgst all sinners, who by their true repentance shall not amend. And
therefore this color is used in the Church all lent and Advent, the proper
times allotted for the practice of the worthy fruits of holy penance, and
satisfaction for our sins; the only unhappy bar of the gate of Heaven against
our souls.

Black is the mourning standart of the Church, What means the black color
displayed upon her Altars and other ornaments in the mournful times wherein we
celebrate the death and passion of our loving Lord and divine Redeemer Jesus
Christ. It also is used at the office of the dead; thereby to testify, as well
a civil respect from nature for our present separation from our friends; as
also to stir up, and moove in us thereby a true compassion of their souls
temporal great pain in Purgatory, for whose speedy relief we ought most
heartily to pray.

Having briefly here spoke of the quality, and colors of the chief ornaments
belonging to the Altar. I will with like brevity treat also about the
vestments, and attire belonging to the Priest for celebration of the holy
sacrifice of the Mass, that high function, and supremest divine homage which
can be done to him by any creature.

And therefore those ornaments if not very rich, at least they ought to be
comely and very decent, as well in regard of that great reverence which is most
due to those sacred mysteries; as also that those divine actions should be had
in greater veneration; and thereby the better to represent to us Christ's bitter
death and passion; as I shall here declare by the meaning of those several
ornaments. Observing here first the great antiquity and use of those holy
ornaments; which well appears in England by that of S. Gregory the great, who
above a thousand years ago did send into our Country, vessals for the Altar,
Relics, books, and ornaments for the Priests and Clearkes: as both S. Bid
and most historians do declare.

The meaning of the several ornaments which the Priest does wear in
celebrating the holy Mass.
THE Amice which the Priest puteth over his head; What means the amice, that
first ornament the Priest puts on when be goes to celebtate
does signify the humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ under which lay hid and
covered his most sacred Divinity. 2. it signifies the linen napkin where with
this our Merciful Redemer was blind-foulded, and after strock upon the face by
those sacrilegious Jews, then saying to him: Prophecy to us, Math 26
o Christ, who is he that strouck thee. by which outrageous injury suffered for
our sakes, he purchaced grace enabling us to behold him face to face in
eternal glory.

In putting it on he says; put on o Lord the helmit of salvation upon my head;
that I may overcome all my temptations to wicked sin.

The Albe, or long white garment, of the Albe
does signify the robe of innocence given us in the Sacrament of Baptism. And
it represents the white garment which Herod put upon our Savior, reputing him
as an idiot, when with mockery and derision he sent him back to Pilate.

The Priest putting it on, he says: Luke 23
Make me white o Lord, and cleanse my heart: that being whitned in the blood of
the lamb, I may enjoy eternal gladness.

The girdle which the Priest puts about him, of the Girdle
does signify the cord wherewith our Savior was bound to the pillar, when the
cruel soldiers scourged him. The two ends of the girdle turned up: the one on
the right side, and the other on the left, do signify the two means to
conserve our chastity: which are fasting and prayer, whereby we subdue the flesh
and strengthen the spirit. The Priest when he puteth the girdle about him,
says: gird me o Lord, with the girdle of purity, and quench in my loins the
humor of lust, that there may remain in me the virtue of continency and
Chastity.

The Manuple represents to us the cords which bound our Savior's hands and
arms when he was dragged from place to place, of the Manuple
and from one Judge to an other. It is put on the left arm (which is nearest
to the heart) to declare with what love and affection he endured all those
outrageous injuries to expiate our sin.

When the Priest puts the manuple upon his arm, he says: vouchsafe me Lord
so to bear the Manuple of weeping and sorrow, that I may receive the reward of
my labor with exultation. Which prayer also alludes to the ancient devouter
times, which used this manuple as a linning cloth or hand kercher to wype
their tears which their fervent piety made often to runn in abundance from
their eyes. of the Stole


The Stole, which the Priest pureth about his neck; does signify the yoke of
obedience, even unto death upon the Cross: whereunto our Lord Jesus submitted
himself for our redemption. The Priest kisseth the Cross which is upon the
middle of it, when he puteth it on; to show his cheerful willingness to
bear the sweet yoke of Christ's Cross, with all patience in tribulation. He
puteth the two ends of it overthwart his breast in form of a Cross:
representing [saith S. Bonaventure] the passion of Jesus Christ which the
Priest ought to have most seriously fixed in his heart.

The Stole also does properly signify that long rope about our Savior's neck
whereby those barbarous executioners dragged him charged with the heavy cross
upon his neck and bloody shoulders. The two crosses at the ends of the Stole
hanging on either side of the Priest, do signify the crosses whereon the two
thieves were crucified by him, one on the right hand, and the other on the
left, and the cross on the middle represents that whereon himself was crucifid
in the middle betwixt them both.

The Priest in putting on the stole says: Render me, o Lord, the stole of
immortality, which I have lost by the prevarication of my first parents, in
transgressing thy holy law.

The Vestment, of the vestment
represents that purple garment wherewith the Jews did cloth our Lord and
Savior, after that his most tender body was all in gory blood with those cruel
stripes: and in scornful mockery exposed him to the peoples view with a reed
in his hand, and a crown of thorns on his head, saying: Ecce homo.

This Vestment consists of two parts; which signifies the two-fould charity;
the one toward God [which is the larger] the other toward our neighbor: we
being commanded to love God above all things and our neighbor as our selves.
Deuteronomy. 6.
The great cross upon the back of the vestment; is to put us in mind of our
divine Redemer as he went fourth of Jerusalem carriing his heavy cross upon
his wounded shoulders. Finally the Priest when he puts on the vestment says.
Lord thou who assurest us that thy yoke is sweet, and thy burden light:
vouchsafe that I may so wear this, as thereby I may obtain thy holy grace,
Amen.

The Priest coming fourth to the sacrifice thus attyred with these holy
ornaments, What the Priest thus attyred does represent: to us
does represent our blessed Savior led fourth through the streets of
Jerusalem to his bitter death and passion. And by the Altar is signified mount
Calvary, upon which he was crucified for our Redemption.

And it is worthy to be here noted, that who mock and scorn both at these holy
ornaments, as likewise at the Priest for wearing them, do rightly resemble the
spiteful jews, who most blasphemously mocked and scorned our Savior Jesus
Christ himself in the purple robe and thorny crown which they had put upon
him for that end.

The Clark carriing the book before the Priest, What is representedly the
clark carrying, the book before the Priest
does represent the Angel Gabriel who brought the good tidings of our Savior
becoming incarnate for our Salvation; which is a heigh office, and ought to be
used by the clark with all devout piety and reverence. And would Christians
consider but the honor and great spiritual gains which is to be got by
those who have the happiness to serve their souveraine Lord with due and
reverent devotion in that near approaching office; they would not permit, nor
make it [as they doe] their lackies employment; nor would they suffer their
servant to deprive them of that honor, whereof the greatest mortal Prince is
far unworthy.

The Clark carries the book to the right end of the Altar, Wherefore the
missas is laid first on the right side of the Altar. a^dvvherfore shutt
where he lays it down shutt to be opned afterward by the Priest himself.
Heerby to signify to us how the holy Gospel, first was manifested to the jews,
as is testifid Act. 15. To you it behooved us first to speak the word of God.
The book is shutt to show that all things were closed under dark shadows and
figures until the coming of Jesus Christ, who revealed the mysteries of our
holy faith to the Apostles. And so ought the Priest to preach, to teach and to
lay open the word of God and the holy scripture to the people; as his laying
there open the book does signify.

The priest in this sort adorned, and accompanied with the Clark to assist him:
and having placed the chalice upon the Altar, and opened the book, he descends
to the lowest stepp. Where in imitation of the humble Publican, he profoundly
boweth himself to the Crucifix, saying (at least in his hart] God be merciful
to me a sinner. And then with all fervent devotion and true reverence he
begins the most holy sacrifice of the Mass; in which Jesus Christ, true God
and Man, is really received; the memory of his death and passion is renewed;
his sacred merits are thereby applied in remission of our sins, our souls are
replenished with many heavenly benedictions; and therein is given unto us the
happy pledge of future and eternal glory.

And the faithful Christian assisting devoutly at this holy sacrifice, does
offer together with the Priest the self same victime in expiation for his sin,
which was offered upon the cross for the Redemption of all the world, it being
the self same price and satisfaction of application upon the Altar, as it was
of redemption upon the Cross. And it is that clean and pure sacrifice
foretold and promisd also by the prophet Malachy to be continually, Malach.
cap. 1
and in all places offered in his name.

All which but well considered, o with what affection, reverence, purity, and
devotion ought we to assist at this divine sacrifice; so venerable unto
Angels, as may greatly confound our impiety and the little respect we bear to
those dreadful mysteries, at which, o how usually do careless Christians [to
their great reproach] assist with less respect and reverence, then they durst
appear in a Princes chamber.

A reflection to be used as you go to the Church to assist at this holy
sacrifice.
IT being now the time to hear Mass, represent to your self that you are
called to accompany the B. Virgin, S. Jo. Evangelist, and holy Magdalen to
mount Calvary, there to assist at that dreadful sacrifice, which this does so
truly represent; and that together with the Priest you now are going to offer
it upon the Altar to the Eternal Father for the whole cath. Church: as also
for your own necessities; and for all others, both living and dead, for whom
you are bound to pray.

The Priest ascending up to the Altar with that great cross upon the back of
the vestment, may renew in us a lively memory of that heavy Cross which Jesus
Christ did bear upon his wounded shoulders to mount Calvary: there to pay that
dear and painful ransom for our sin. And the crown or tonsure of the
Priest, may represent to us that crown of sharp thorns which was beaten upon
our Saviors head. Admire here his infinite love and mercy to ungrateful Man.

The exterior and interior disposition required to assist at the holy
sacrifice of the Mass.
THe Priest now approaching to the Altar; we must procure a right interior
disposition, by stirring up in our hearts an actual sorrow and contrition for
our sins, and renouncing all affection to them; thereby to purify our souls
from that foul blemish, which might render our devotion unpleasing to God.

2. We ought there to behave our selves with all exterior reverence, and very
carrefully to avoyde all needless words and looks, still keeping the eyes of
our soul firmly fixed upon the Altar, and our minds wholly busied with devout
attention upon those holy mysteries of the life and death of Jesus Christ which
in this sacrifice of the Mass is so truly represented unto us.

A form of directing our intention before Mass, in form of prayer.
O Sacred Trinity accept this holy sacrifice of the most precious body and
blood of our Lord Jes. Chr. in union of that most holy sacrifice which our
divine Redeemer offered in his last supper, and upon the Cross. I offer it to
thee by the hands of the Priest, First to the honor and eternal glory, of thy
divine Majesty. In acknowledgment of thy supreme excellency and dominion over
us, and our subjection and dependence upon thee; as also in perpetual
commemoration of the death and passion of our most merciful Redeemer Jesus
Christ. 2. in honor and increase of glory to all the B. spirits in the Church
triumphant. And for the suffering souls in Purgatory. And in particular for
the souls of N. N.

3. In eternal gratitude for all thy gracious benefits bestowed on me, thy
ungrateful creature and in satisfaction for my sins, and for those of all the
faithful; as well living as dead.

And finally for the obtaining of such or such a grace. And in particular for
N. N. And for all those for whom I am wont, and bound to pray.

To obtain rest to the dead; and to the living grace to know, to love, and to
glorify thee perfectly in this world, and happily to enjoy thee in the other
for all Eternity, Amen.

An advertisment.
WHat finally I do here recommend to all, is; that with devout attention they
religiously accompany the Priest; and make serious reflection upon each my
stery in order; yet very briefly; endevoring to stir up some fervent and pious
affection, or holy aspiration, whereby to move their hearts to a divine and
ardent love of so merciful a God, and to detest all sin, which so very highly
offends him.

A DEVOUT EXERCISE FOR HEARING MASS BOTH WITH TRUE PIETY AND MUCH INSTRUCTION.
From the rising of the sun, leven to the going down: in every place, there
is sacrificing; and there is offered in my name a clean oblation.

Malach. 1. cap. ver. 11.
A prayer before Mass.
O Most clement Father of mercy: who have bestowd not only once thy dearly
beloved son to dye upon a Cross for Man's Redemption, but would that his
oblation so infinitely acceptable unto thee, should daily be renewed in thy
Church, to increace in us the fruit thereof: Grant us we beseech thee, so
attentively and reverently to be present at this so adorable a mystery of thy
piety, that we may be able to ataine the participation thereof, through Christ
Jesus our Lord and only Redeemer. Amen.

At the Priest's ascending to the Altar, and there opening the book.
THe Priest ascending to the Altar and having placed the Chalice, he opens
the book. To signify that the mysteries of our faith lay shutt up in dark
shadows, and obscure figures in the old law, till Jesus Christ (there
represented by the Priest) laid them open to us in their true substance and
verity.

Rejoice with gratitude for our enjoying the law of grace: and stir up a firm
belief of all those holy mysteries of Man's Redemption, by Christ's bitter death
and Passion, which are here to be represented to us in the holy Mass.

At the Priests descending to the lowest stepp; and beginning with the sign of
the Cross, and saying the Confiteor etc.
THe Priest descends to the lowest stepp: and there begins, in making the sign
of the Cross. To show that we had no other hope, nor remedy for our
reconciliation to God; but by the merits, and sacred passion of Jesus Christ
who died for us upon the Cross. At the Confiteor stir up true sorrow and
detestation for your sins: as a preparation to appear with more purity, and
profound humility in Gods divine presence at all those sacred mysteries,
represented there to us at the holy sacrifice of the Mass.

At the Priests ascending, and kissing the Altar.
THe Priest ascending he kisseth the Altar, as a symbol of reconciliation and
peace made betwixt God and Man, by the precious blood and bitter passion of
Jesus Christ. For which endeavor to stir up due love and gratitude.

At the Introite, and Kyrie elysons
THe Introite is so called, because at high Mass it is sung whilst the Priest
is coming to the Altar. It represents the sighs, and longing desires of the
Patriarckes for the Messiah coming. As also do the Kyrie and Christ elysons.
At which let us humbly crave the needful visit of Gods grace for our souls as
also his mercy and gracious pardon of all our sins.

Of Gloria in excelsis. Dominus vobiscum. and the prayer.
JOy here at our divine Redeemers birth, and at his choice of so poor, so
mean, and so suffering a manner. We must learn to contemn all worldly pomp
and vanity: and that the only true way to beatitude, is that of mortification,
humility, and proper abjection.

The Priest salutes the people with Dominus vobiscum, to stir up their
attention before he begins the prayer: to the end that their petitions therein
may be more grateful to God.

And he says Oremus before the prayer; to desire the people to join their
prayers and intentions with his, to obtain those necessities which our holy
mother the Church recommends to be prayed for thereby.

At the Epistle, and remooving the book.
THe Epistle is read on the right hand of the Altar: to show that the jews
were the elect people of God; and to whom the Gospel first was preached. But
they repelling the same, were justly abandoned by God: and that blessing was
transferd to the Gentiles; as is represented to us, by carrying the book to the
other side of the altar, where the Gospel is read. Crave here humbly a true
docil and humble spirit to admit good counsel, and Gods divine inspirations,
and to be strengthened by his holy grace to put them in execution.

At the Graduel, and Tract.
IN the Graduel, by the Alleluyas we give praise, and joyful thanksgiving to
God for his so happily calling us in the incredulous jews place. But in the
penitential days of lent, advent, etc. in stead of Alleluya, is said the
Tract in a more mournful tune; as craving pardon for our sins. For which we
are here to stir up hearty sorrow and contrition.

At the Gospel.
THe Priest saying Dominus vobiscum; does advertise the people to raise up
their hearts, and to harken with good attention and devotio^ to those sacred
words which were uttered by the divine mouth of Jesus Christ, and recorded by
his holy Evangelists. Crave divine grace to illuminate your understanding; and
to inflame your will, whereby the better to put in execution; what we are either
taught or commanded to do.

At the Creed.
HEre we must make a firm act to believe whatsoever has been revealed to
Christ's true Catholic Church; and is by her so proposed to us, to be believed.
And chiefly those blessed Mysteries which are represented in the holy sacrifice
of the Mass. Humbly beseeching Gods grace that we may never yeald to any
temptation against the same. And to detest all cursed Schism and Heresy.

At the Offertory.
AT this oblation of the bread and wine: admyre the infinite humility and
goodness of Jesus Christ, who for our sakes vouchsafed to place his precious
body and blood under the consecrated species of so contemptible mean
creatures, bread and wine. The mingling wine with a little water, does show the
intimate union of Gods divinity (represented by the wine) with our humanity,
signifid by that little water, and simple element. Crave humbly here so united
a heart to Gods divine will, as that with S. Paul, you may truly say: I live
now, not I, but Jesus Christ does live in me.

At the Lavatory.
PIlate washed his hands, to testify before the people his not being guilty of
Christ's innocent blood. But our consciences stained with many crimes have need
to be washed by the water of true compunction for our sins. And for that end we
must endeavor to frame a holy act of Contrition; that so we may appear with
greater innocence at the consecration, before this our souveraine judge.

At Orate fratres.
THe Priest makes here a second oblation of that sacrifice to the B. Trinity;
in memory of the principal mysteries of Jesus Christ as also in honor of his
chiefest Saints. And for the better obtaining grace to perform that holy
function, he turns to the people, desiring them to join their prayers with
his, thereby to render the oblation of that their common sacrifice more
grateful to God, both for him and themselves. Which with a fervent ejaculation
we must humbly crave.

At the ensving secret.
BY the ensving private prayer, (or secret, as the Church does call it] we must
humbly beseech Almighty God to produce in our souls the effect of all those
good thoughts which he has given us for our better preparation, to appear
more worthily in his divine presence at that near approaching consecration.

At the Preface.
THe Preface is so called, as being the entrance to the Canon of the Mass; and
a general preparation to that holy sacrifice. The Priest there exhorting the
people to raise up their hearts to God with thanksgiving for all his benefits,
accompaniing the Angels, Cherubins and Seraphins in adoring and praising him
incessantly with that Angelical himne of holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath.
For in loving, adoring and Praising the B. Trinity consists the Saints
Beatitude, and endless felicity.

At Te igitur etc. where the Canon of the Mass begins.
HEre begins the Canon and chief part of the Mass, pronounced with a low
voice, to show the greater reverence and veneration to that most sacred and
near approaching act of consecration. Which ceremony bears resemblance with
that of the Priests of the ancient law, who entering into the Sancta Sanctorum
were covered with a veil, and were neither to be heard nor seen.

Whereby we are advertised, that by private recollection, withdrawing our hearts
from all worldly cogitations, we should unite our selves closely to God, with
pious contemplation upon those divine and holy mysteries.

At the first Memento
IN this Memento we must pray for the catholic Church. For its chief Pastor.
For our king and Prelate. For peace amongst Christian Princes. For our kindred,
friends, benefactors, enemies; and for all for whom we are oblidged to pray.
That we being thus united to the living by Charity: and by craving likewise the
intercession of those powerful Advocates, Gods chief Saints in Heaven; we may
testify our communion, both with the Militant, and Triumphant Church.

At Hanc igitur oblationem.
THese five crosses renew in us the memory of those cruel torments, which our
divine Redeemer did suffer in all his five senses. As also the memory of his
five precious wounds. By the merits where of we must humbly crave his grace,
that we never wilfully offend him grievously by any of our five senses
hereafter.

At the consecration, and elevation.
THe Priest here, according to the command and example of Jesus Christ,
blesses and consecrateth the bread and wine in the self same manner, as he
performed it in the institution of this divine mystery; and commanded his
Apostles and their successors to do the same. He elevateth those consecrated
species, offering Jesus Christ to his Eternal Father; as he once did offer
himself upon mount Calvary for all the sins of the world.

Here making an act of firm faith of the real presence of Jesus Christ we
must humbly crave his grace; that as he vouchsafed to dye upon the cross for
us: so that we, for his sake, may cheerfully endure all crosses and
afflictions whatsoever, as from the loving correction of his fatherly hand, for
our innumerable sins.

At the second Memento.
HEre according to the continual custom of the Church, we must offer this
holy sacrifice for the faithful souls departed this mortal life, yet
remaining in Purgatory. And for such in particular, as we find our selves to
be obliged. Concluding as before, with a devout address to Gods blessed Saints
to pray for them, and us. Humbly beseeching his divine Majesty to receive us
into their glorious society, by the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord and loving
Savior.

At Nobis quoque Peccatoribus.
THe good thief by his happy repentance applying the sacred merits of Christ's
holy passion for the healing of his sinful soul; found thereby his perfect and
speedy cure. let us by the grateful sacrifice of a contrite and humble heart,
dispose our souls to true repentance: and knock our breast; as did that humble
Publican with unfeigned sorrow for all our sins; saying with him, God be
merciful to me a wretched sinner. That at the hour of our death we may
happily hear pronounced by our Savior that joyful sentence: this day thou
shalst be with me in Paradise.

At the several Crosses made upon the holy Host and Chalice.
THe frequent making of this holy sign; as well after, as before the
consecration; does repre sent to us the several sorts of cruel torments which
Jesus Christ endured in his bitter passion; by his flagellation, coronation,
bearing his heavy Cross, his crucifixion, derisions, scorns, blasphemies, and
the like. The three Crosses which the Priest makes, saying: Per ipsum etc, put
us in mind of the three hours which he suffered upon the Cross. The other
two which he makes saying: Deo Patri omnipotenti etc. represent to us the water
and blood which camefourth of that sacred wound of his side. And that elevation
of the Host and Chalice, and immediately deposing them again upon the
corporal: represents the taking down of his blessed body from the Cross.

All which are strong motives to draw from us a feeling compassion of those his
great sufferings for our sake, and to offer to him a resigned heart, with true
conformity to his blessed will for what soever his heavenly providence has
desined for us, living or dying, for time or Eternity.

At the Pater noster.
WE may make here our humble supplication unto the Eternal Father with great
confidence to obtain what we shall justly, and rightly demand by this
petition, taught us by his divine ad beloved son. And there fore with much
confidence we may here make our humble petition to him for that in partilar,
for which we principally intended to offer up that holy, and impetratory
sacrifice of the Mass.

At the division of the Host into 3. parts; whereof one is put into the Chalice.
THis division of the holy Host, signifies the separation of the body and soul
of Jesus Christ. And the particle put into the Chalice, mingling thereby
together the consecrated species of bread and wine represents to us the reunion
of his body and soul at his glorious resurrection. By which is also
represented to us the horror of a mortal sin, which separating Gods grace
from our soul, does kill the same; never more to be revived, but by the merits
of Jesus Christ applied by true repentance for our sins, which therefore we
ought carefully to fly, and most heartily to detest.

At Agnus Dei, etc.
WHat greater comfort can man's heart conceive, then to hear this joyful
repetition, that it is the lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world: for should not he be engaged for this great debt, which we owe for sin;
our case would be desperate; since that all creatures joined together could
never make satisfaction to his divine justice for the least venial sin: Isalae
c. 53. v, 5.
but the was wounded for our iniquities, and with his stripes we are healed.
Agnus Dei is thrice repeated, to put us in mind to make 3. acts of Contrition
answerable to our 3. usual sorts of sin: by thought, word, and deed: against
God, against our neighbor, and our selves.

At Domine non sum dignus and the holy Communion.
THe Priest thus disposed, and producing fervent acts of faith and love, of
humility, and true contrition; he takes the holy Communion, protesting with the
humble Publican his great unwor thinesse, and Knocking thrice his breast at
Domine non sum dignus; he makes the sign of the Cross with the holy Host, as
if taking Christ's heavenly benediction; he beseeches him to consecrate his
heart, a clean and pure sepulcher, fit to receive his most precious body: and
that it may never be made unpleasing to him by any grievous sin.

At the Ablution.
WE are put in mind by this Ablution which the Priest takes to purify his
fingars, and Chalice: that we must cleanse our souls from the remainder of all
vicious habits, from all ill affections, and disordinate passions, or
inclinations to sin, which defile our soul, that ought to be the pure and
undefiled temple of God. Crave here humbly such virtues, as may adorn and make
it a pleasing habitation for the holy Ghost.

At remooving the book again to the other side of the Altar.
HEre adore the great goodenesse of God; and his infinite patience: who, not
withstanding the Jews long obstinate contempt of all his graces proffered them;
will yet vouchsafe finally, and toward the end of the world to receive the^ to
his mercy and heavenly bless, by their true profession of his holy faith. Let
us be careful not to neglect the grace of his divine inspirations, wher-upon
our endless felicity does so greatly depend.

At the Postcommunion.
THe great benefit received by this holy sacrifice; as likewise the innumerable
other gracious favors which are so continually communicated unto us from the
bountiful, and loving hand of God, do justly oblidge us to this due grateful
thankfulness; which the Priest here makes to his divine Majesty; as well in his
own behalf, as for the people, in saying the Postcommunion; as also the
ensuing prayer for the self same end.

At the next Dominus vobiscum.
THis Dominus vobiscum, is to put us in mind of our Saviors appearing to his
Disciples, and conforting them with his blessed presence after his glorious
resurrection. But now as this apparition only was so great a comfort to the
Disciples; o how much more may it well be to us, not only to behold him really
and truly in the Mass; but so frequently also to receive him personnaly into
our breasts. Where he remains with us in person so long as the Sacramental
species shall continue: and with his grace, till he be most ungratefully
expelled by mortal sin.

At the last Collect or prayer.
BY this prayer we make grateful acknowledgment of all Gods innumerable
benefits; and to stir up much sorrow for having so greatly abused them by the
small amendment of our habitual vices. Which may justly render us unworthy of
his future graces, unless we be more constant to our good purposes, and pious
resolutions.

Of the last Dominus vobiscum.
THe Priest saluting the people with this Dominus vobiscum, does represent to
us our B. Saviors Ascension, in the sight of all his Apostles and Disciples.
Drawing doubtless all their hearts with him. Upon whom, both their love,
thoughts, and whole desires were firmly fixed. Whereas our unhappy engagement
to vain worldly contents, do so depresse our souls, as we are rendered
incapable of celestial thougths, and remain even as buried in mere humane
and transitory affairs. And wholly made captives to flesh and blood.

Of Ite Missa est, and the last benediction.
THe Ite Missa est, represents that last dreadful sentence upon the reprobate,
at the day of Doom: go ye cursed in to eternal flames, etc. As the last
benediction immediately following, signifies the joyful sentence upon the
thrice happy Elect. Come ye blessed of my Father, possess ye the kingdom
prepared for you from Eternity. O let us therefore be diligent and careful to
make use of precious time whilst it is lent us: that we may avoyde that
endless misery; and purchase eternal Bliss.

At the Gospel of S. John.
AFTER the conclusion of all these sacred and divine Mysteries with this
representation of Christ's joyful benediction upon the Elect at the end of the
world: the holy Church has very properly concluded this her chiefest sacrifice
with the Gospel of S. John, which proposes to us, the Words eternal birth;
with all the deepest mysteries of Gods Divinity. Thereby to intimate to us; that
after the before mentioned benediction, those blessed Elect shall enter into the
celestial Paradise; there to know, to love, and eternally to praise the B.
Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, three persons, Apoc. 7.12.
and one only God; to whom be benediction, and glory, all thanksgiving,
honor, and power for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer to be said after Mass.
I Render to thee, o sacred Trinity, most humble thanks for vouchsafing me the
gracious favor to assist at this divine sacrifice of the Mass; whereof so many
are deprived who would have made much better use of it I humbly crave pardon,
most loving and merciful God, for all the distractions, irreverences, and
discipation of my wandering Spirit, committed in time thereof. And for my dear
Saviors sake, I most humbly beseech thee, that those infinite merits of his
bitter passion, and most precious blood, shed for my Redemption, and sacrificed
to thee in remission of the sins of the world; may render me worthy to be made
partaker of those divine and adorable holy mysteries, here so truly represented
in this most holy sacrifice of the Mass; and that with final repentence I may
dye in thy happy grace. Amen.

Reflections to be used so soon as Mass is ended.
MASS being ended, call to mind your negligences committed therein. Crave
pardon of God for them, and Beg heartily his grace for your amendment, and more
strength and courage to resist all sin. Renew then also the morning oblation of
all your actions for that day; and confirm your good purpose to avoyde that
passion, sin, or fratliy which puts you most in danger to offend. Finally your
devotion being ended; retire your heart very gently from that holy exercise, to
your wordly affairs; retayning as long as you can the feeling, and affection
of your former devotion.

Observe also, that by these declarations upon the holy mysteries of this
divine sacrifice; it sufficiently now appears, that the Mass puts us in
mind, and very lively represents to us Man's banishment from Paradise by Adam's
sin; and his restitution to grace by the precious blood of Jesus Christ. And
therefore this manner of hearing Mass is most conformable to the design of our
B. Redeemer in his instituting this holy sacrifice: thereby obligeing us to keep
a continual memory of that his bitter passion which he suffered for the
Redemption of the world: this do in commemoration of me etc. For so often as
you shall eat this bread, and drink this Chalice, you shall show the death of
our lord, until he come. Do this in memory of me. 1. Cor. 11 Luke. 22.


Spiritual advises of S. Theresa, greatly conducing to live happily, both with
God, and man.
ACcommodate your self to the harmless condition of those with whom you
converse. To enjoy true content and happiness;
With the merry show signs of joy. With the afflicted, a feeling of their
grief. And finally endeavor to please all, to the end to gain all.

In all your actions remember to be in the presence of God. And direct them
with a pure intention to his greater honor and glory.

Accustom your self to make many acts of the love of God, and of your
neighbor; for they will kindle charity, and make tender your heart.

In any spiritual desolation, forsake not your accustomed practice of
devotion: but much rather encreace the same. For thereby you will soon
experience Gods divine favor and comfort.

Let your desire be to see God; your fear to loose him. Your sorrow for
having offended him. Your joy in doing his will. And by this means you will
possess a most blessed and happy peace.

Never speak any thing in your own praise, for knowledge, for virtue,
kindred, For meekness, and humility.
or good actions; unless there be good cause to hope that some great good may
come thereby. And then also it ought to be with much humility, and
consideration, that these are gifts which come from the mere goodness of
God, and not from you.

Never busy your self in thinking upon other men's faults; but rather in
mending your own.

When any shall reprehend you, take it both with inward, and outward humility;
and pray to God for them who shall tell you when you do amiss.

Be careful to exercise your self in the fear of God, which ingendreth
contrition and true humility in the soul.

Offer up your self to Almighty God many times in the day and that in much
fervor and affection.

Endeavor with diligence to have frequently before your eyes, For Prayer and
devotion
your morning good resolution; for that is of great profit for gayning
perfection.

Neglect not Gods holy inspirations: and put in practice the good desires which
he has given you in your prayer.

Never make show of more devotion outwardly, then you have truly within. And
what devotion you find inwardly, be careful to concele it.

Behold your life past, and bewail it; and be confounded at your present
coldness in devotion, considering how much it wants of deserving that
Beatitude which God has promissd to all who truly love him.

When you are in company of many speak but little.

Never contend, For conversation
nor strive in words with any: for that argues but obstinacy, and self opinion.

Speak to all Persons with a pleasing, sweet, and gracious modesty. Never
reprehend any, without discretion, and humility.

Exagerate nothing; but deliver your opinion and advise with moderation.

Offer not to give your advise, unless it be first demanded: or that charity
require the same.

Be merry without immoderate laughter; but with a modest, affable, and
edificative mirth.

Be not desirous to speak, nor inquire of things which do not concern you.

In all your conversation mix something of piety: whereby you will avoyde much
idle, or worse discourse.

Misery it self, is not to be desired; but a will to endure with moderation of
mind for the love of God, when he shall please to send it.

Whosoever shall read these instructions once a month, or oftener; and
endeavor to put them in practice; he will undoubtedly reap much profit
thereby, and arive, by Gods grace to great perfection in his state and calling.

Pious Reflections, as well for the embracing, and practice of virtue, as for
the flying of vice. Which may also be used for the subject of so many
profitable meditations.
IT is, you know, the custom for such as being to frequent pestiferous places,
and have care to preserve themselves from that dangerous infection; to carry
with them some preservative, to which they smelling, or which they tasting in
time of danger, do fortify thereby their spirits to resist the contagious air.
It is spiritually the like case with Man, whose frail nature is exposed to
continual danger of infection with sin, unless he make use of some spiritual
preservative whereby to prevent his will from the pernicious tainter of consent.
Against which I have here proposed these following Reflections: whereof you
daily making use of some one of them, by way of a morning meditation, to be
still borne in your mind in all occasions of temptations in that day, your
soul will thereby be greatly strengthened to resist the dangerous infection of
sin, and be preserved in the spiritual health of Gods grace to practice holy
virtues and devotion which are like unto little children, who though they give
great content in their mothers arms, yet in bringing them fourth, they cause
them much pain: even so the production, and first bringing fourth of all
virtue is laborious and painful, but the enjoyment and good fruit thereof, is
exceeding gustfull and gives great delight, as by the practice of these
following devotions, I doubt not but you will experience to be true.

Of the virtue of Charity.
THis great Queen of virtues, Charity, and the love of God, consits not in the
tender affection only of the heart; which may proceed from a tender and sensible
complexion, as well as from divine grace, wherein many are greatly mistaken.
And much less does it consist in words. But the true mark of Charitiy, and of
the love of God, consists in deeds: for the trial of love, is the perfomance
of deeds, says S. Greg. Yea our B. Savior demands this proof of it: if you
love me keep my commandments. And therefore there is no truer mark of our
loving God, Joan. 14.
then to be in all things conformable to his blessed will; in body and mind:
in health, in sickness; in disgrace, in persecution; in life, or in death etc.
our continual prayer being ever: thy will be done.

Of the love of our neighbor.
Bear ye one an others burdens; Galat. 64.
and so ye shall fulfill the law of Christ. By these burdens the Apostle
understands our unpleasing humors, our ill governed passions, imperfections,
and antipathies in our neigbours nature and actions; wherein we must mutually
beatre one with an other, if we will comply with the law of Christ by which we
are all strictly obliged, and commanded to love our neighbor, as our sulfs;
and if not being able to show it by any other deeds; we ought, at least to
suffer, and quietly to endure his imperfections, as he undoubtedly must also
do many of ours. And can we conceive any reason that God should be more
indulgent, loving, and merciful in suffering with so great patience our
innumerable offenses against his divine Majesty; then we should be in bearing
with so few and small faults and imperfections of our neighbors against us! o
shameful confusion to man, God suffers all ingratitude, sin, and injury from
us; and yet powers he down incessantly his great blissings and favors, whilst
we seek deep revenge for but trifling injuries. O infinite goodness of God,
to our just confusion and shame.

Wherein consists the enjoyment of a true and happy peace.
TRue peace is what we all desire; but few take the right way to find it, and
therefore cannot enjoy it. The means therefore to purchase this happy peace,
with a virtuous repose of mind; is by establishing a firm and holy peace,
with God, with our neighbor, and with our selves: for which take this holy
practice to obtain it.

First, to procure our peace with God; mildness and humility of heart is
required: learn ye of me who am mild and humble of heart, and you shall find
rest to your souls. 2. to enjoy true peace with our neighbor: we must despise
injuries; we must bear with their imperfections; and do them what good we
can. And finally, to be at true peace and tranquillity of mind interiourly with
our selves; that must be gained by an intyre and perfect renouncing our own
proper wills, by virtuous patience, and true conformity to the will of God: for
in your patience you shall possess your souls. Lu. 19.21.
Says Jesus Christ.

Of Christian Patience.
AN injury patiently suffered for Jesus Christ is much to be preferred before an
act of great austerity which may be omitted without sin; but to fall into
impatience, you cannot without offending God; which ought not to be done to
save all the world. Many fancy in their minds to suffer cruel martyrdom for
Jesus Christ who yet have not the patience to be Crossed, nor to endure the
least word of injury, or of comtempt. They frame to their fancy to do great
matters a far off, which are never likely to happen; but they loose all
patience at the least offense; the divill on set purpose busiing their thoughs
in unprofitable fancies of things which will never arrive; thereby to hinder
them from what much more imports them to do, and by that means to hinder them
both of merit, and grace. Infine, no virtue is more necessary, then is
Patience, we being almost continually in occasion for the practice of it: and
by the help thereof we surmount the greatest difficulties.

Of true obedient submission to the will of God.
GOd has no need of his creatures for the execution of his design; and
therefore we ought not to be troubled at our own insufficiency; he can do what
he pleases without our help: and if it be for him that thou laborest; call well
to mind that he needs no creature to lend him help. It happens frequently to
be much better for you to mortify some disordered appetite, then to preach many
well studied sermons, or to do diverse rigorous penances. And if God deprive
you of health, he gives you but thereby occasion to augment your merit.

Serve not God according to your own desire, but as it is his blessed will. It
would little avail a servant to take great pains, if it be not according to
his Masters good likeing; for at the end of his labor, he will only have
gained his Maistens ill will and anger.

If therefore by infirmity thou be hindered to do penance; be assured that
obedience is better then sacrifice, and that there is much more merit to
submitt with holy patience, then do great abstinence, and other austerities
according to your own inclination.

Persuade not your self to become a saint after an other manner then God has
ordained for you; nor to be more holy, then he does require of you. That fall
is not hurtful which preserves you from a much more dangerous precipice: let
but your former fault make you more humble, and you have greatly profited
thereby; for in true humility it is, that God will have you to take deep root.

Of Prayer.
Seek not the sublimest prayer, but rather what is most profitable; for that
prayer doubtless is best which produces most patience, most humility,
mortification, and contempt of this world; and not that which gives most gust,
content, and satisfaction to the mind.

Be assured, that if you leave your prayer for some just exterior employment;
your motive for it being charity, or necessity; you do but follow Gods order,
and execute thereby his will. Seek God much rather in your prayer, then his
divine gifts, and cherishments. Nor leave of your prayer for any dryness, or
barennesse therein. Serve God purely without seeking your own interest; for
far greater falls have hapened by much pleasure from spiritual gusts and
tenderness in devotion, then from the dryness, and greatest sterility therein.

Suffer patiently to be deprived of all sensible, and tender devotion, and
consolation in your prayer, for you using but diligence on your part, and
humbly, and willingly submitting the rest to Gods divine pleasure; the constant
continuance in those your accustomed devotions, are most grateful, and will
merit his divine benediction.

Of the virtue of Mortification.
MOrtification and payer have the same mutual connection, as have the two
wings of a bird, supporting her to fly, if you deprive her of the one, the
other can not support her, but of necessity she must fall. It is the like with
prayer, and mortification; for the soul, which forsakes the one, shall never
enjoy the other; since they do mutually support themselves, as experience makes
it manifest. Yea mortification is the true nursing mother to all other virtues;
for without it, no virtue can either prosper, or long continue; for that our
corrupt and depraved nature by sin, does so oppose all virtue, as should it not
be supported by the help of Mortification, it would soon decay; as well
appears, not only in prayer, but also in patience, in humility, obedience,
temperance, and in all the rest, which would but languish, and fall to ruyn,
should they not be preserved by the practice of Mortification (as experience
will force us to confess.) And therforit ought to be very carefully practiced.

Confidence in God, and grief for sin, must go rightly tempered together.
MOst just it is that we conceive due grief and sorrow, with true repentance
for having offended so great and good a God: yet so as not to loose our
confidence in his mercy. Nor must we permit, that therefore melancholy and
vicious vexation possess our hearts. For Judas sorely grieved, and was
sorrowful for his crime but in dispairing for pardon, he excluded all remedy
by his greater sin. Consider well therefore your offense, on the one side, which
is great, and repent; but remember Gods infinite mercy, on the other, which far
exceds it; and is much more powerful to give you consolation, then should the
other be, to cause despair. For he is not inclined to revenge, who is all
goodness, mercy, and compassion. Have therefore horror of the least sin
against so good a God; but hope for pardon of the greatest. Fear all sin
whatsoever before it be committed, as doubting of pardon: but being now guilty
fly to God as a prodigal child to his compassionate Father, with all humble
confidence, and firm hope to receive pardon and grace. Approaching to him with
a contrite and humble heart which he will never despise.

How to draw profit from sin.
BE you greatly humbled, considering your sin and misery; nor differ to amend
with a quiet and peacible spirit, without fretting or vexing your mind. Fail
not to have this confidence in God, that although you should fall a thousand
times in the day, he would be ready to lend you his hand two thousand times to
raise you; because with our lord there is mercy; and with him plentuous
redemption; for well he knows our weakness and great misery. Serve God
therefore with more fervor then before; and learn by your fall to know both
his goodness, and your own misery much better then before; for thereby you will
master your enemy with his own weapen, wherewith he intended to wound you:
for to serve God withouth all sin, that only is to be found in Heaven. Be you
therefore assured whilst breath remains in your body, never to be exempt from
temptation: be always prepared for the combat, whereby not only to defend your
self from harm, but also to get victory therein and glory. You feeling
temptation to assault you, approach nearer to God by prayer, and humbling your
self before his divine Majesty; call to mind his innumerable benefits, and
think seriously upon the four last things to happen; and you will reap much
profit by the temptation.

Of distrust in our own selves.
NO enemy is so dangerous to our salvation, as our own selves: and the
chiefest means to avoid sin, is to distrust greatly our frailty, and carefully
to watch over our chief natural inclination; which being subject of it selfeto
great corruption, it usually disorders all our actions. And this being but well
observed, we shall easily perceive that all our sin and misery springs from
that infected fountain, by following our disordered affection, and natural
bent, quite contrary to Gods inspirations, and internal motions of his grace.
We ought therefore diligently to examen, what is our most predominant vicious
inclination; which having discovered; we must crave Gods grace, and use all
diligent industry to oppose, and root that disorder out of our soul.

Against presumption in our own endeavors.
SPeter above all the rest did most presume of his fidelity; promissing that
though all should abandon their Lord, yet he would never deny him: who
notwithstanding, but few hours after, was made thrice, both to deny and
forswear him, through the fear only of a poor silly maid; whereas had he
more humbly mistrusted himself, and craved constancy by holy prayer; it is
likely he would have prevented so shameful a fall but when he should have
prayed, as his divine Lord had commanded him, thereby to have armed himself
against the approaching temptation, he was still found floathfully asleep, and
therefore not having demanded divine help from above, he soon did experience
his own great faulty, and weakness. Are we not now as frailty herein, by our
great infidelity to so many good purposes and pious resolutions; wherein we most
shamfully do fail, for want of demanding grace by prayer to put them in
execution. But we presuming too much in our own endeavors, we prove
unconstant, and most unfaithful to God.

The least sins are carefully to be avoided.
WE can give no better proof of our love to God, then to be exact in the
smallest mafters which concern his divine honor and glory. For thereby we
plainly manifest the great esteem which we make of his holy will and command;
we having no other motive nor respect to draw us thereunto. 2. because those
small occasions, being very frequent, they give much practice for virtue; and
thereby to obtain great grace and many favors from God. Let us therefore make
this good use of the least occasion, to testify our love and true fidelity to
him, and thereby to encreace his grace in our souls, to which, in Heaven is
answerable eternal glory. And who on the contrary, shall be negligtfull
therein, will experience that the holy Ghost has most truly fore told us;
Eccl. 1^.
that who contemns small thins, shall fali by little and little.

Reason ought to be the Rule of all our actions and affections.
Man's nature is to live according to reason, but passion blinding us, we weigh
not all things by the just weight of their worth, but rather by our deceiptfull
affections, and disorderly appetits: the affection which we have for one
person, making all his actions to seem grateful and good; and our aversion
to the other, but unpleasing and badd: whereas he notwithstanding may well have
what is worthy of praise; and the other, what may deserve much blame.

Have not a double heart; the one for your self, and the other for your
neighbor; it being reason which ought to be the Rule and guide of our will.
Esteem not things accordding only as they seem pleasing to you, and in
appearence, but according to their worth and valor. Be not troubled that
others seek their own conveniences, seeing that they are not offended to let
you procure yours.

Do as you would be done to, and deal with others in the same manner, as God
deals with you: who although he suffers much at your hands, yet he refuses
not to bestow blessings and great favors daily upon you. Nor be you much
troubled if men deal ungratefully with you, you being so very ungrateful to
God.

The examen of spirits, according to their different feeling in the heart.
GUsts and interior feelings must be examined, to try whither such as are
thought to be spiritual, spring not from flesh and blood; that devotion is not
spiritual which has its root merely from sense; and which is grounded on
this foundation can not be solid and stable yea the greatest fervours, and most
violent ardor in the love of God, is frequently discipated like unto watery
froth. That devotion as true which proceeds from the purest love of God, and is
best known by a generous resolution, whereby the soul does unite her self
inviolably to his divine will and pleasure through the greatest difficulties
and contradictions to nature; not having regard neither to gain, nor loss;
not to sensible consolation in prayer, nor to the greatest dereliction and
barrenness therein: but only and purely to the honor and glory of God. And who
build not upon this foundation, will little advance in perfection; but rather
whil be still to begin, so long as nature bears such a sway.

The right spiritual gusts, and the true holy motions from the spirit of God,
are; that we greatly humble our selves; that we renounce our own will,
conquering nature, and its reluctance to suffering: neglecting all interest;
and that we have no other aim, nor end; but purely to please, and to serve
Almighty God.

How to draw profit from afflictions, and painful sufferings.
ARe you in painful sufferance either by bodily affliction, or by some
desolation in mind: comfort your self, in that by patience your gain will be
without comparison far greater, then can be your harm. For if none can show
greater charity, then he who gives his life for a friend; what then may besaid
of him, who suffers for the love of God, that which he both dreads and fears
much more then he does death it self: I mean, derelection and privation of
all spiritual consolation, temptations, scrupules, and other afflictions of
soul.

Fear fin, and not pain; nor do you abhor what God gusteth with pleasure:
nor be you discontent at what is very pleasing to him. It is now the very
proper time of suffering, and yet self love makes any pain to be to you
extremely troublesome. Yea so weak is the love of God in you; as you most
unwillingly do suffer that which even for your own greatest good, he most
fatherly ordaynes for you. Can he who hopes to enjoy God for all Eternity,
fear to suffer one little moment for his sake? Force nature but a little to
bear Christ's holy Cross, and thereby your peine will much be lightened: for
nothing does so greatly augment our sufferance, as does our own proper will.
And if we do so greatly love and reverence the Cross of Christ for its being
sanctified hy his continuing fastened, three or four hours there upon; why
should we not love, esteem, and honor laborious and painful sufferings,
which he endured three and thirty whole years, continuing the whole space of
his life.

The reason wherefore all men naturally seekeing happiness, so few do find it.
OUr divine Redeemer, declaring to his diseiples wherein beatitude and true
happiness in this life did consist: he disabuseth them of the false opinion
of worldly people; who though they naturally seek happiness, and labor for
that end; yet they spending their labor to pourchace worldly vain honor and
deluding pleasurs, or sordid wealth, according to the pernicious false
principle of the world; they wholly neglect what their divine Master Jesus
Christ has taught us, both by word and example, whereby to lead us the way to
true beatitude; beatifying the poor of spirit. The meek and humble. Who weep
and mourn. Who hunger and thirst. The merciful. The pure and clean of heart.
The peace makers. And finally the persecuted and afflicted persons for justice.
All these our divine Redeemer declares to be blessed, and that the kingdom of
Heaven belongs to them; whom yet the deceived world (according to their false
maxim) do judge to be but miserable and most unhappy. Nor is it a wonder,
that what Jesus Christ proposed here as happiness, seems rather misery to the
delued eyes of men; whose thoughts, not going beyond this present life, which
being but truly misery in it self; it can no other wise make us happy, but as
it serves to help us to gain that other of endless bliss.

Of sloth and idleness.
THis mother of vice, is contrary to nature it being the proper nature of man
to labor, as for a bird to fly: nor has he a greater enemy, then is sloth
and idleness. Which is a sin quite contrary to the nature of man; the very
institution of his first creation, being properly to work: God placed Adam in
Paradise, Genesis 1^.
that he should work. And after his fall, it was appointed him in punishment
of his sin it being pronounced against him, and all his progeny; Gen, 3.19.
that in the sueate of his hrowes he should eat his bread. And therefore
idleness is both unnatural to Man, and unpleasing to God: Math. 25
cast out the idle servant. And the barren figtree was commanded to be cut
down, and cast into the fire. For wherefore has God given us a body with all
its members, and senses; and a soul with all its noble faculties, but that we
should employ them, as a talent lent us for his glory. Let us therefore be more
careful not to loose our precious time which is but lent us here to labor for
eternity; for the night of death will suddenly surprise us in our sinful
floath; and then no more time will be afforded us to repair our former
idleness and neglect of time.

Of the sin of scandal.
MOst justly has our blissed Savior given so dreadful a curse against this
wicked sin, Math. 18
which so truly represents the sin of Lucifer; who by the scandal of his
ambitious pride did draw with him a third part of those unhappy Angels unto the
low pit of Hell.

Yea like to the pestiferous plague, one scandalous person is capable, by his
ill example, to communicate the infection of his sin to a whole town and
country. But finally be we most certainly assured, that all such as by our
scandal were brought to their endless perdition; they at the dreadful day of
judgment will cry vengence against us; and will require that we be eternally
punished for that their irreparable harm, which by scandal we caused to them,
by our provocation to sin.

Of Choler and Anger.
THe holy Ghost disswads us from harboring anger in our breasts, Eccles. 7
least it place us in the rank of fools; assuring us also that who is soon
moved to anger, is much inclined to sin. Prove. 25.
The usual attendants of this pernicious vice, is Pride, Contumely,
Indignation, Oaths, Blasphemies, Quarrels. Murders and the like. This vice is
not only hurtful to the Author; but so insupportable to others, Prou. 22
as the holy Ghost peaswads us to fly their company, who are subject unto it,
and well it is to be observed, that whilst we strive by anger to master our
enemy, we are most shamfully overcome by our selves. This pernicious vice
obscures reason, and precipitats the will into dangerous actions sur future
repentance; for who is blinded with the fumes of this passion, is neither
capable of right reason, nor counsel.

Wherefore seeing that it is a vice so prejudicial to our selves; so injurious
to our neighbor: and so greatly detested by God; let us resolve to resist the
first motions of this unruly passion, and by craving Gods grace, and imitating
the mildness and meekness of Jesus Christ, to over come the same.

Of Rash judgment.
THe holy Church, though particularly assisted by the holy Ghost, yet she
judges not of inward things: and shall a particular ignorant Man, vicious, and
passionate, take the liberty to judge what only lies open to God; O
unsupportable pride and presumption! We must therefore judge ever the best of
the intention of others; it being a secret which belongs only to God, the true
scarcher of the hearts of men. Yea it is a sacrilegious usurpation to trench
upon that which is Gods own due; and it makes us truly to resemble those
hypocrites of the Gospel, who espying a moate in their brothers eye, perceive
not the beam which remaynes in their own. S. Bernards advise herein is
singularly good, exhorting us that when we perceive in an other, some fault
which displeases us: amend it (says he) in thy self: but behoulding in him
what is virtuous and good, examenwhither thoupossessest the same, and if not,
then labor to obtain for thds doing, thou will make prosit of all.

Of the virtue of mildness, and meekness.
THe reason wherefore this virtue is often recommended by Jesus Christ and that
they are called blessed who are gentle and mild, is for that, God being the
God of peace, he loves to rest in a mild and gentle heart, factus est in pace
locus eius. Psalm ^6
2. it makes us to enjoy true solid content of mind: they shall be delighted
in abundance of peace. It is the motive which our Savior gives us to practice
the same: learn of me who am mild etc. and you shall find rest to your
souls: for as no quarrel can be fixed upon a cheerful mind, and pleasant
countenance, so also courteous and friendly language will conquer the greatest
enemy. The conversation of such a man is grattefull and welcome to all company,
nor is any more offensive and displeasing, then is a froward, angry, and
impatient person. We must therefore as S. Paul does admonish us, show mildness
and meekness to all, Tit. 32
which is the true means to gain love, both of God and and Man. Eccl, 3 19
Son do thy works in meeknes, and thou shall be belovod above the glory of
Men.

Of true humility of heart.
THere are two sorts of humility. The one of spirit, and understanding; and
the other of the heart, and will. That of the spirit makes us to know, and to
acknowledge, that of our selves we are pure nothing, nor can do any thing but
merely from God. Tat we are borne in sin, and inclind to all evil. All which
but well considered, how can we be proud, or vain glorious.

But this humility of spirit will little availle us, without the humility of
heart, and of will: for the devils know well their own great abjection and
indignity; but they have not humility of heart, and of will: which consists in
being glad and willing to be despised; and in flying the praise of men; wherein
consists true Christian humility of heart and of will. For it consists not in
certain little ceremonies, or composed humble terms, or actions; but in real
deeds; acknowledging that all the good which we either enjoy, or do; is from
God, to whom we are to render all glory and gratitude; and nothing but contempt
and all abjection to our selves, for our great and grievious sins.

A 2. Reflection upon holy patience.
NO virtue is more necessary then this, we being almost continually in occasion
for the practife of it; and by the help thereof we surmount the greatest
difficulties: nor does any thing more edify our neighbor, or confund; yea
caven conquer an enemy, as does holy patience; whereas impatience does all quite
to the contrary. 2. the impatient man refuses sinfully to submit to Gods
decree, who is the Author of all our sufferings, which, in that they cannot be
resisted, the impatient Man is most unreasonable; and by that means he begins
his Hell even in this world.

And as that man is of all others the most happy, who is of all others the most
patient: so on the contrary, he is most miserable, who is most impatien.

Now the best means to obtain this so necessary a virtue is to reflect upon
Gods great patience in suffering all our perverse great sins, and most
enormious offenses done aginst him. 2. That this life is but very short, and
uncertain our peine cannot be long. 3. to reflect how justly we have deserved
to suffer much more whithout comparaison, and that eternally. And finally we
ought each morning to foresee what sufferance or vexation may that day be
likely to befall us: and to offer it to God; resolving patiently to suffer the
same for his sake.

The practice of Gods divine Presence.
A Principal and divine fundamental verity mainly conducing to man's
salvation, is to keep in our memory the divine presence of God. Genesis 17
Walk in Gods presence and be perfect. For he is more intimately present to
us, then is our very soul; The memory of this divine presence is able to rule
our disorderd passions, and to onercome the strongest temptations of our
ghostly enemies. Chaste Joseph and Susanna had no other buckler, but this, to
defend themselves from so great assaults against their purity. The frequent
Acts by faith of Gods divine presence in all places, in all our actions, words
and, thougts, would be a special preservative against all sin. Who shall be
faithful to this holy practife, in all his chief actions, may hope by Gods
grace to frustrate the dangerous snares of all his ghostly enemies. Still
calling the holy proverb to mind: Prove. 15.3.
that in all places the eyes of our lord beholds both the Good and badd.

Of true purity of intention.
THe greatest secret for Christian perfection, is the right rectifying our
intention in all we shall do. It being the intention which gives them their
price and value. If it be Good, the action will be meritorious, if vicious the
act will be nolesse give you a thousand pound in alms, yet with some bad
intention, or out of the motive of vanity; all that alms is not only lost to
your soul; but is also sinful, and deserving punishment from God; whereas one
penny given for his love, will merit eternalle reward. And therefore whither we
eat, or drink, or what else soever we do, let us do it with a pure
intention for the glory of God.

This was the perfect practife of Jesus Christ. Cor, 101,
Who had no other end nor intention in all he either did or said, but purely
his eternal Fathers glory. And have we then not great reason to frame all our
actions upon so divine a modle.

Of good purposes and pious Resolutions.
TO confess our sins without a firm purpose to amend, were but by sacrilege
to abuse the Sacrament, and a mere mocking of God. A true good purpose, wihch
is pleasing to God, must be with a firm resolution to practife virtue; and not
an in efficacious defire of a sloathfull soul described by the holy Ghost.
Saying that the sloathfull man will, and he will not. Hell is full of such
fruitless desires, which those wretched souls, yet living in this world had
sometimes to embrace Gods holy inspirations, and wish they had been faithful
to those good purposes; which by their neglect and infidelity, they now well
perceive. with enraiged grief to be brought to eternal misery. All serving at
present but as tormenting worms to gripe, and to know their guilty
consciences; and ought to be a sufficient warniing to us, yet in good time, to
be more constant and faithful to our pious resolutions reflecting what shame
and great confusion it would be unto us, to have so very often promissed,
without performance, but to a mortal man, as we have done, by our good
purposes to Almighty God, without all care, shame or industry to perform what
we have so often promissed to his divine and dreadful Majesty.

OF CONFESSION
If we Confess our sins; he is faithful, and just, for to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all iniquity.

1. Joan. 1.
Advertisments before Confession
Satan our mortal enemy uses all industry to deter us from this holy
Sacrament of Penance; or at least, to put such impediments as may much hinder
the happy fruits thereof; well knowing that by a true contrite confession he
loses, what in much time he had labored to gain before.

Conceal nothing in your Confession; for God you cannot deceive but your self
you may.

For one mortal sin wilfully concealed, renders your confession a sin of
sacrilege; and your self incapable of absolution.

Conceive not your Ghostly Father to disesteeme you for your sins: for confess
but with sorrow, and full purpose to amend; and although you approached a great
sinner, yet he regards you by repentance to return a Saint.

Prepare your self to Confession, as if it were to be your last, and at the
hour of death: and endeavor to put your self in the same condition, as you
would desire to be found at that last dreadful moment: by stirring up fervent
acts of faith, of hope, of charity, and true contrition for your sins.

Crave divine light of God, to call to mind your offenses; and that you may
now behold them, as they would appear to you at your death, and with the same
enormity, that you may abhor them, and accuse your self of them, with firm
purpose to amend; and to do due penance and satisfaction for the same.

Consider how often you have deserved eternal damnation; from which God has
of his mere mercy so often preserved you, as you have offended him by mortal
sin: which is as great a mercy, as to have so often reduced you from that
infernal pit of endless misery.

Know also that a good Confession requires a good purpose of amendment, a right
good purpose requires a true intention to avoyde the occasions of our sin; for
to do other ways, would be like to him; who would not have the plague, but
would not avoyde infected houses, for such a man's purposes would be but a
mockery and in vain.

To your good purpose of amendment, add also hearty sorrow and detestation of
your sin. The want whereof may be the cause of your small amendment; and of so
frequent relapses into your former faults.

Our confession must be sincere and true; accusing our selves freely, telling
the doubtful things as doubfull; and the certain as certain, without
artifice or excuse, covering, or diminishing; our Confession being to God, who
already well knows how far we are guilty.

Lastly recommende your self to the sacred Virgin mother of God, to your good
Angel, and to the intercession of all Gods blessed Saints to obtain for you a
true repentant heart, detesting all your sins, with a firm purpose to avoyde
them here after, and the occasions thereof. Confiding in the mercy of God, and
in the sacred merits of Jesus Christ applied by the ministry of the Priest in
this holy sacrament unto our souls for the remission of our sins; for it is
not absurd (says S. Cyril) that they forgive sin; who have the holy Ghost; for
when they remit or retain, the holy Ghost remits or retaynes in them, and that
they do two ways, first in baptism, and then in Penance Cyril. lib. 12. c.
56. in Joan. Let every one, my brethren, J beseech you, confess his sins,
whiles he is yet alive, whiles his Confession may be admitted, whilst
satisfaction and remission made by a Priest is acceptable before God. S. Cypr.
de lapsis nu. 11.

These premises supposed place your self in the presence of God, and with a
due reflection upon all his innumerable great blissings bestowed upon you;
examen with great confusion your abominable ingratitude unto so loving and
merciful a God: beseeching him to reduce unto your memory all your grievous
sins whereby you have offended him, as also the spirit of perfect penance,
confession, and contrition, and from all odious sin to purge you.

A table of sins, helping the memory for a general Confession by method to
examen our conscience wherein we may have offended Almighty God.
NOT loved God above all things. of the first commandment. of honoring God
above all things.


Doubted or staggered in matters of faith.

If continued in heresy more out of humain respect, then ignorance.

Ignorant of the chief mysteries of the Christian faith.

If murmured against God in adversity.

If distrusted in Gods goodness, or mercy.

If presumed of his goodness, to sin.

If gone to witches, or sorcerers for counsel.

If hindered any ones conversion to the faith, or good life.

If blasphemed God, or cursed creatures.

If exposed himself to the danger of mortal fin. Or taken delight in any sin
done in time past.

If procured by way of lots to find out any theft or some secret thing. of the
^ commandemnt. of not taking Gods name in vain


If sworn what was false; knowing or doubting it so to be.

If sworn to do some unlawful thing. Or had not then intention to perform
it.

If been cause that any did swear false; or not to observe the lawful oath,
which he swore.

If sworn to do evil. Or not to do a thing which was good.

If sworn false in judgment. Or induced others to do the like.

If he have had a custom of sweering often without consideration or care
whither it were true or false.

If not faithful, or if negligent in performing a vow.

If not observed sunday, The 3. commandment.
and holy days. But either done or commanded some servill work. of
sanctifying the sabbath day


If omitted to hear mass without, a lawful cause. Or if voluntarily
distracted some notable part thereof, on days of obligation.

If not gone to confession, at least once a year. Or not procured others of his
charge, to do it.

If gone to confession, without necessary examen of conscience; or purpose of
leaving his sin.

If concealed any mortal sin in former confession.

If fasted, lent, vigils, and ember days, being bound thereunto.

If eaten or drunk with much

prejudice to his health. Or if voluntarily drunk.

If done any injury or irreverence. to any sacred thing.

If for sloth or negligence he has left undon any good work, to which he was
bound.

If undutifull, The 4. cammandement.
or irreverent to parents, by word, or deed.

If cursed, or spoke ill of them. honor thy Father and mother.


If not obeyed parents, and superiors in just commands.

If not succored Parents in necessity, to their power.

If deliberatly desidered their death, that he might have the inheritance.

If not fulfilled their last will and Testament.

If not observed the just laws and decrees of Superiors.

If detracted, or spoken ill of Superiors, temporal, or spiritual.

If not succored the poor in their great necessity, well being able.

If Parents, have cursed or wished ill to their children.

If they have not brought them up in the fear of God, and due Christian
instruction.

If Masters of families have the same care of their servants. And that they
observe the Commandments of God and the Curch.

If borne hatred toward some person; The 5. commandment. Thou shall not kill.
desiring to be revenged. And how long he has stayed therein.

If desired any man's death; or some great evil, or damage, to his body, or good
name.

If been angry with some person with intention to do him harm, or to be
revenged of him.

If struken, wounded, or killed. Or commanded, or consented to do the same. Or
given aid or counsel, or favor thereunto.

If having offended others, he refused to ask pardon, or reconciliation; or
not sufficiently satisfied for the offense.

If refused to pardon injuries.

If for hatred he have refused to speak unto, or salute others; and scandalizd
his neighbor thereby.

If in adversity or misfortune he have desired death, or in fury or anger
cursed himself, or mentioned the devil.

If cursed others. If sowed discord; or caused enmity between others.

If for hatred, or envy he has been greatly sorry for the prosperity and good
of others temporal, or spiritual. Or has rejoiced at any harm of others.

If in anger he has offended others with injurious, and contumelious words.

If flattered others, praising them for some sinful act.

If with ill example, counsel, or praising that which was evil; or blaming what
was good, he has been cause that one has left some good woke. Or if induced
thereby to some sin, or to perseverance therein.

If omitted to correct or admonish one of a sin, when probably he hoped thereby
that the other would amend.

If given receipt unto outlawes, and murderers, or with his counsel, or
favor, or otherwise assisted them.

If spoke ill of his neighbor, manifesting any secret fault of his, to
discredit him, or cause, him some other harm.

If stricken injuriously any Ecclesiastical or religious person, wherein there
is also excommunication.

If given consent to any carnal temptation. The 6. and 9. commandments. Thou
shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not covet thy neigh hours wife.


If taken delight deliberately in any filthy cogitation.

If negligent in casting away evil cogitations, when he feels himself in
danger to give consent, or deliberately, to take delight in them.

If spoken, or harkned to unchaste words.

If sent letters, or messages to dishonest ends.

If used unchaste looks, beheaveour, gesture, or opparel, to any evil end.

If used unchaste touching, kissing, or embracing etc.

If actually committed any carnal sin; with a secular or religious person.
Married, or unmarried, or of near kindred.

If not avoided the dangerous temptations to fin.

If corrupted a Virgin by salfe and deluding promises.

If taken any thing from an other, of the 7 and ^. commandments. Thou shall
not steal. Thou shall not desirethy neighbors goods.
by deceit, or violence to what value, and if any sacred thing.

If retayning any thing of an other person without his consent, or restores it
not presently; if he be able.

If for not paying of his debts (when able) his creditors have sustained any
damage,

If finding any thing, or other wise it falling into his hands, he has not
endeavored to have it restored to the owner.

If in buying or selling, he has used any deceit in the ware, price, measure,
or weight.

If bought of such persons as could not sell; as of children under age,
suspected persons, and like not to have come well by what they would sell.

If he have had a resolution to retain an other man's goods, if he could; or to
gain, or increase his wealth by right, or by wrong.

If committed any sort of usury: or made any usurarious contract.

If having wages, or pay for any work, or office; he has not done it well and
faithfully.

If defrauded servants, or workmen of their hire; or differed their payment, to
their harm and prejudice.

If moved any suite in law against justice, or if in just suits, he has used
any fraud or deceit to prevail.

If in gaming he has used fraud, that he might prevail; and has wonn by
deceit, or played with persons who could not alienate, as children under age,
and the like.

If defrauded any just impost or toles.

If committed simony; in what sort soever. Or if defrauded the Church of what
was due as are tithes etc.

If by unlawful means, and ill information he has obtained what was not due
to him. Or has unjustly hindered others from the obtaining some benefit or
commodity.

If given help, or counsel, or in any other manner abetted such as have taken
other men's goods, or (being able, or bound the runto) has not discovered, or
hindered any theft.

If borne false witness in judgment, The 8. commandment. Thou shall not bear
salfe witness.
or out of judgment, or induced others to do the like.

If spoken any untruth, with notable prejudice, or hurt to our neighbor.

If detracted from the good name of others; imposing falsely upon them some sin;
or exaggerating their defects.

If murmured in weighty matters against an other man's life and conversation:
especially of qualified persons; as Princes, Prelates, Religious, and persons of
good name.

If willingly given ear to detractions, and murmurings against others.

If disclosed some secret sin of others; causing their infamy. Which though
true, yet unlawful to be published to the blemishing my neighbors good name.

If uttered a secret committed to him, or which secretly he came to know, in
that case he is bound to restore the damage happened by so revealing.

If opened other men's letters unlawfully, or for any ill end.

If judged rashly the deeds or words of his neighbor, what might have been
well interpreted, or condemning in his heart of mortal sin.

If not observed a just promise, without due cause, and if for want of
observing it, our neighbor is notably prejudiced, it is a mortal sin.

If not acknowledged all blessings both of nature, of grace, of the seven
deadly sins of the sin of Pride.
and of fortune, to be from the mere bounty of God, but rather ungratefully
accounts them due to his own desert, not giving to God the glory and praise of
all.

If vain glorious and boasting of some virtue which he has not. Or seeking to
be esteemed more then he deserves; despising others, as if far inferior to
himself.

If proud and vain glorious of some sin. As of revenge, drinking, lust, etc.

If ambitious; too earnestly coveting honor, and promotion, etc.

If out of pride and self-esteeme, he has despised others; doing something to
their disgrace and contempt.

If he will rather offend God, of covetousness
then part with his goods; when charity, and just cause does require it.

If over earnest, and greedy in gathering wealth; and too near, and miserable
in spending it.

If hard hearted, and unpittifull to the poor, and needy.

If not contended with his own estate; but ever coveting for more.

Of Luxury. See the 6. Commandment. of Luxury


If angry, of Anger
impatient, overhasty, furious, disdainful, wayward, fretfull, quarelsome,
immoderate in grieving, of Gluttony.
too severe in correcting.

If intemperate in eating ad drinking.

If overcurious in diet, and seeking to please the palate.

if too much bending his thought upon good cheer.

If not observed the fasts of holy Church.

If made your self sick by over much eating, or drinking.

if envied or grieved at others prosperity, of Envy
or to hear them well spoke of.

If rejoiced at their harm; if made the worst of all their actions.

If drousy, heavy, of Sloth
and unwilling to devotion.

If idle and wholly given to take our own ease.

If inconstant in good purposes.

If not labored to resist the loathing, and teadiousnesse which we find in our
prayer and exercise of virtue.

If spent our time wholly unprofibly.

If not employed our labors and gifts which God has given us, to his glory,
and our souls good.

If negligent in preparing our selves to the holy sacrament of Confession and
Communion.

Of the many fins of omission, thorough sloth and negligence.

If careless to amend our daily, and most habitual sins.

Of all idle and ill spent time, lent us by God to be employed for his honor,
and our souls good, which we have abused by sin, to his dishonor, and our
souls harm.

Want of gratitud to God for all his great blessings. And for neglect of his
divine inspirations.

Finally let each one examen his conscience, according to the offenses most
subject to each ones particular profession, state, and degree, and according to
their senerall obligations.

And it is also to be observed that in all these above numbered sins; one may
not only sin by his own committing them; but also by being accessory, and the
cause of an other man's sin; by commanding; by counselling; by consenting, by
receiving, by partaking; by not reprehending. And finally by ill example,
flattering, and applauding ill doers.

You having diligently examined your conscience according to the articles
above: and carefully observed wherein you find your self to be guilty of any
offense; ask humbly pardon of God with hearty contrition; and firmly resolve
(by the help of his grace) humbly, and truly to confess them with sorrowful
repentance, and firm purpose never more to commit them again.

And you having humbly confessed all the sins which you can remember: conclude,
and say. For all these, and for all my secret sins, and all the rest committed
from my first instant of reason; whereby I have offended my most merciful God,
by thought, word, or deed, or by omission; I am most heartily sorry for them; I
detest them, and most humbly crave his heavenly grace, that I may never fall
into them again. And I desire you my Ghostly Father to give me penance, and
absolution for the same.

Your diligent examen of conscience being made. You are next to stir up hearty
sorrow and true contrition for all your sins, with a firm purpose, and true
resolution by Gods grace to be very careful to commit them no more. Both which
are necessarily required for a fruitful confession. For to what other end do
we confess, and accuse our faults, but to testify thereby true sorrow for
having offended so powerful, and so good a God: from whom we continually
receive so great and innumerable benefits. Which hearty sorrow, and true purpose
of amendment, may best be performed by this, or the like true act of contrition
as follows.

O my great God, An act of contritio^
my loving Redeemer, and my dreadful Judge: I repent with my whole heart and
soul for having so grievously offended thee; whom I truly love above all
things what soever. I constantly resolve, by thy helping grace carrefully to
avoyde all occasions of my grevious sins, and from the bottom of my heart, I
bliss and adore thy great goodness for affording me so happy and secure a
means by this holy Sacrement, to make my blessed peace and reconciliation by
grace and pardon again with thee; who has so long and often times preserved
me from Hell. For which I having nothing whereby to show in gratitude, I offer
to thee, O Eternal Father, the bitter death and Passion, with all the sacred
merits of thy divine son Jesus; of his immaculate Virgin Mother, and of all
the blissed Saints and Angels of Heaven; to praise, and magnify thy mercy, and
great goodness unto me for all Eternity.

A prayer before Confession.
REceive my Confession, O most benign and clement lord Jesus, the only hope
for the salvation of my soul, give unto me, I beseech thee, contrition of
heart, and tears to my eyes, that both day and night, I may bewail all my
negligences, with humility and purity of heart. Let my prayer o lord, approach
near in thy sight. If thou shall be angry against me, what helper may I seek?
who will have mercy on my iniquities? remember me, o Lord, who did call the
woman of Canaan, and Publican to repentance; and did receive Peter weeping. O
Lord my God accept my prayers. O good Jesu, Savior of the world, who gave
thy self to the death of the Cross, that thou might save sinners; regard
me a wretched offender, calling upon thy name; and take not such heed to my
wickedness, that thou forget thy mercy. And though I have committed whereby
thou may condemn me, yet thou have not lost that, whereby thou art wont to
save us. Spare me therefore, O Lord, my Savior, and have mercy on my sinful
soul: loose the bands thereof, heal the wounds, Lord Jesu, I most humbly
beseech thee. Show me thy face, and I shall be safe. Send fourth therefore, o
most loving Lord, through the merits of the most pure, and ever Virgin Mary thy
immaculate mother, and of all thy blessed Saints, and Angels, send fourth thy
light into my soul, which may show unto me truly all my defects, which it
behooveth me to confess; and which may help and teach me to express them
fully, and with a contrite heart, who with the Father, and the holy Ghost
lives, and rayneth one everlasting God Amen.

This done, next go and cast your self upon your knees with a reverent and
humble heart, as if at the feet of Jesus Christ in the person of his Vicar the
Priest. there conceiving your self as a criminel before your judge, and as
wholly depending upon Gods mercy; not having any thing to allege in your own
behalf, but a guilty conscience deserving eternal punishment, raise all your
hope in an humble confidence of his mercy, and sacred merits of Jesus Christ,
detest your sin, whereby you have offended so good, and so gracious a God; and
crave humbly grace to amend.

You having asked your ghostly Fathers benediction; and said your Confiteor til
mea culpa etc. then accuse your self plainly, humbly, and entirely, and with
all confidence and freedom, endeavor to lay open to him wherinsoever you can
conceive or doubt to have greevously offended God, for this freedom in
confession takes away all scruple of conscience, and gives a great peace and
tranquillity to the soul; which is far to be preferred before the greatest
felicity in the world.

Finally you having confessed all, and said the rest of your Confiteor. Then
harken attentively to what the Priest shall say to you, without any further
searching into your conscience: but take with humble submission the
advertisments which he shall then give you, as there the substitute of Jesus
Christ. And perform faithfully what he shall ordain you; either by way of
counsel, or penance.

This done retire your self with a recollected mind, to give humble thanks
unto God; and with feeling piety and devotion say this followinge prayer after
your Confession.

A prayer out of F. Granada exciting in the soul compunction and sorrow for
our sins.
O only son of God, how great and ineffable are the blessings I have receiud'
from thee! thou have produced me of the dust and slime me of the earth, thou
have created my soul out of nothing, according to thy image and likeness;
thou have endued me with understanding, memory, and will, thou have given me a
free will, together with all my members and senses, to the end that by their
means I might know and love thee. Thou have conserved me in the narrow prison
of my mothers womb, to the end I might not dye without the saving water of
holy baptism. After so many sins as I have multiplid against thee, thou have
had long patience with me even to this hour, whilst many others, less guilty
then my self, whom thou have not so long expected to repentance, are
peradventure at present tormented in Hell. Besides this, o my Lord, thou have
vouchsafed to make thy self Man, and to converse amongst Men for my sake. For
me thou would suffer grievous afflictions, a bitter agony, sorrow of soul,
and a bloody sweat. Thou would be apprehended, bound, struck, spit upon,
injured, blaspheamd', buffeted; thou would be clad at one time in a white
robe, at an other in a red one, in mockery. For me thou would be beaten,
scourgd, crowned with thorns, struck with a reed, upon thy sacred head, thou
would be blindfoulded, condemned to death and dragged to the place of
execution with a heavy cross upon thy back, to which cross thou would be
fastened with hard and-ruged nails: thou would be placed between two
thieves, and numbered amongst the wicked. Call and vinagar was presented to thee
for thy last draught; and finally thou would loose thy life by a most cruel
death In this manner, o my Lord, and with these sufferings have thou redeemed
me, and yet I most ungrateful for so great benefits, have many times crucified
thee again by my sins, whereby I have merited that all thy Creatures should
rise up against me, and in thy name take revenge upon me for these injuries.

Moreover what shall I say of the fearful abuse I have made of thy
Sacraments, those blessed remedies which thou have ordaynd' me with thy most
precious blood. Thou have washed, and receiud me in holy Baptism as one
belonging to thy self, there thou have adopted me thy son: there thou have
consecrated me as thy temple. Thou have anointed me as a Priest, as a King, and
as a soldier, who ought incessantly to fight against thy enemy. There thou
have espoused my soul to thy self, and adorned her with all the ornaments
requisite to so high a dignity. What have I done with all these jewels. What
care have I taken to conserve such immense riches? thou have adopted me thy
son, and I have rendered my self a slave to sin. Thou have consecrated me thy
temple, and I have made my self a Den of Devils. Thou have armed me as thy
soldier, and I have taken part with thy enemy. Thou have anointed me a King,
and I have employed the power thou have given me in rebelling against thee. Thou
have espousd my soul to thy self in perpetual charity, and I have loved
vanity more then truth, and preferred the creature before the Creator. It is now
high time, O my Lord, that he who has committed all these excesses should begin
to lament them. And this is what thou have so long expected of me, even since
thou have given me my life. For this have thou so often called me; so long
tolerated me. For this have thou sometimes chastised me other times comfotted
me; thy infinite goodness having used all possible means to draw me to thee.
Thou have patiently expected me; and I have abusd thy patience. Thou have called
me, and I have shutt my ears a against thy divine voice. Thou have given me
time to repent, and I have employed it in pride and vanity. Thou have struck
me, and I have been insensible to thy strokes. Thou have chastisd me and I I
have rejected thy discipline. Thou have labored and sweat to purify me; yet
neither thy merciful sufferings, one the one side, nor thy just chastisemonts
on the other, have been able to remoove the rust of my vices. I have hardened
my heart as well against thy punishments, as against thy favors; having been
ungrateful to the one, and rebellious to the other. Nevertheless, O my Lord,
since thou have suffered so much for me, and have commanded me never to loose
confidence in thee, I recurre with my whole heart to thy mercy; beseeching thee
to give me grace for amendment: to the end that for the time to come, I may
love and serve thee in such manner, as never to be separated from thee; world
without end Amen.

THe former table of sins being proposed for a general Confession; as also for
such as frequent but seldom this holy Sacrament of penance. It will be but
very convenient also to propose an other for persons of more devotion, who do
often make use of this souveraine cure of sin: seeing that many virtuous souls
are much troubled; in that examining their consciences for Confession, they
find so small matter whereof to accuse themselves; they well kowing, on the
one side that they cannot be without sin; and yet on the other, by their examen
they cannot discover it. And hence they are greatly disquieted, fearing that
they never confess as they ought.

But these over timorous souls must confider, that it is very hard for a Man
to know rightly himself, or truly to see into all the secret windings of his
own conscience, which made the Royal Prophet with much good reason to say:
Psalm. 18.^3
who sees well his own faults; from my secret sins wash me o Lord.

It is more over to be observed, that the sins of these vertvous persons, are
more usually sins of omission, which are not so perceptible, as are the sins of
commission, against which they stand much more carefully upon their guard.

Yet that none my have such difficulty to find out sufficient matter for their
Confession I doubt not but by this ensuing table, they will be eased of that so
needless a scruple.

A method for examen of conscience, intended for the devouter sort, who do
often frequent the holy Sacrament of Penance.
IF loved God with your whole heart and soul; or if not set too much affection
upon Creatures.

If not ungratfull to God for his blessed benefits.

If not negligent in calling upon him for help, both in your corporal and
spiritual necessities.

If not irreverent and negligent in admitting voluntary distractions in time of
prayer.

If omitted accustumed prayers, or examen of conscience at night, out of sloth
and indevotion.

If done your works with a pure intention for the honor of God. Or if not for
vain glory, or for some sinister end.

If for fear of displeasing others, you have omitted some duty, or vestuous
exercise to God.

If impatient at some Cross accrdent which by Gods divine providence has
happened to you.

If neglected Gods divine inspinations, or been inconstant in your good
purposes, for the amendment of your daily and greatest imperfections.

If offended by pride, and vain glory, by thinking better of your self, then
of others.

If judged rashly of others, and that in a matter of moment.

If sworn rashly, or untruly.

If observed fasting and holy days with due piety and devotion.

If eat or drunk with intemperate excess.

If censured or judged rashly of others.

If spoke ill by detraction, or slander, and thereby diminished their good name
and reputation.

If given them any ill language or reproachful words, or showed disdain to
them.

If caused any discord, or breach of charity between others, by your reports
of them.

If negligent in suppressing passion and anger; or been too impatient upon
small occasion.

If too earnest and obstinate in defending your own opinion, and contradicting
others, which proceeds from self esteem and pride.

If used too much vanity, or curiosity in apparel, or dyct.

If entertained any thoughts to envy, by seeing others better esteemed, or to
enjoy betters gifts from God, then your self.

If negligent in resisting unpure thoughts; or if used unchaste words, or
daliances.

If lost much tymein sloth and idleness; or in vain and unprofitable
conversation.

If told an untruth for any ill end; or if to the prejudice of any other
person.

If borne any ill will, or alienation of mind to your neighbor. If taken
content to hear detraction, and your neighbors imperfections to be reported
by others.

If too much inclination and industry to seek your own ease and commdoity,
neglecting true Christian perfection.

If too much self love; and desire of esteem in your actions. And the like
which upon examination may best occurr to memory by the virtuous soul.

By all which heads of usual venial frailties may be sufficiently reduced to
mind abundant matter for our confession. We reslecting likewise upon the
strict account which we must give to God of each idle word; as also of every
moment of ill spent time: wherein who shall but well consider, will very easily
find, both by thought, word, and deed, and by omission to have daily just cause
to crave Gods gracious mercy, and to apply Christ's sacred merits to abtayne it
by this holy Sacrament of Confession; wherein you having accused your self of
what you can remember, concluding with Mea culpa and the other advertisments as
above after the general Confession. Then attend with much devotion and
reverence the spiritual counsel and comfort of your ghostly Father, as also
to the penance which he shall enjoyne you: and then observe all the other
advertisments as above after the general Confession. And he dismissing you,
retire your self with a recollected mind into a convenient place, most free
from distraction; and there say with a devout and repentant heart this following
prayer.

A devout Prayer after Confession.
O Sovereign Creator of all things, I a most vile and ungratfull sinner
prostrate before thy sacred feet in true grief and hearty sorrow for all may
heinous Trespasses where with I have so grievously offended my Lord and Maker;
and for which thou have vouchsafed to endure so cruel torments upon the
Cross. I confess my great ingratitude, dear Lord, for all thy innumerable
benefits, and for having thus mercifully spared me so long persisting in my
sinful courses, and contempt of thy divine commandments and blessed will, for
which in stead of casting me into Hell, as I most justly deserved, thy
boundless goodness has expected me to penance, and amendment of my life. For
which, o how often have thou knockd at the door of my heart by thy heavenly
inspirations: how often have thou prevented me with blessings? allured me with
comforts? drawn me with favors? Yea forced me many times by crosses and
afflictions to seek unto thee? and yet neither has my flinty heart been
mollifid there with, nor my will reclaymed. But behold now at last, o my
ungratfull soul, the grievousness of this thy sin; and pierce my obdurate heart
o divine Redeemer, with contrition, and detestation of the foulness of all my
detestable offenses; for which unworthy I am to be called thy creature, or whom
the earth should bear, much less afford so plentifully all conveniences for
humane life to me, upon whom even nature it self ought rather to take just
vengance of my great contempt, and odious sin.

O merciful Father, how many by thy righteous judgment are now burning in the
eternal flames of Hell for a less number of sins then those of mine, who might
have been Saints in Heaven, had they received so great a measure of thy
gracious mercies, as I have done. But now, o merciful Father, of all pity
and compassion; in unfeyned sorrow and remonse of conscience for all my
misdeeds; I prostra to at thy feet most humbly beseech thy pardon, look on me,
o loving Lord, a wretched sinner, with the eye of mercy, as thou did on the
pentitent Publican, the repentant Magdalen, and the Apostle who thrice denied
thee, vouchsase once more to admit me again unto thy gracious favor. Lord
work that speedily in me, for which cause thou have so long spared me, and to
which, from all Eternity thou have ordained me. But woe is me, who have refused
to bestow my heart on thee who would have made it a temple and habitation for
thy own abode, which I have sacrilegiously defiled with so much impiety, and
made it but as a stew of unpure thoughts. But I confess all this my grievous
wickedness to thee my God of all piety, and therefore will not despair; but
throw my self into the sea of thy infinite mercy; for as my sins be
numberless, so are thy mercies endless.

O Most loving Father, if thou wilst thou can make me clean heal the wounds
of my soul. Remember sweet Lord, thy comfortable promise to us pronunced by
thy Prophet: thou have committed folly with many lovers, yet return thou
again to me, and I will receive thee. Great confidence this gives me, O Lord,
and with my whole heart I return to thee. I am that defiled soul; that
prodigal child, that unfaithful servant, who have separated my self from
thee. I have forsaken thee, o fountain of living waters, and diged to my self
cisterns which will hold no water; I have fedd upon empty husks with the
swyne, which could not satiate my hunger.

But what is past, let it be cancelled, o gracious Lord, and forgot, I bessech
thee, and for the time to come, let there be an eternal covenant betwixt us;
that thou will vouchsafe to be my merciful Father; and that I again may be
for everthy obedient and faithful child. I ask, dear Lord, neither riches,
honors, nor long life; but this one only thing alone, which I will never cease
to crave; that from this present instant until the dreadful hour of my death
I may never more offend thy heavenly Majesty, nor defile my conscience with any
mortal sin. Grant me this my humble suite, for the merits and bitter death and
Passion of thy only and dearly beloved son Jesus my divine Redeemer, to whom
with thee, and the holy Ghost three persons and one ever living God be all
honor and glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

I beseech thee, Lord Jesu, let this my Confession be grateful and acceptable
to thee, by the merits of the blessed Virgin thy Mother, and all thy glorious
Saints: and whatsoever has been wanting unto me now and at other times, of the
sufficiency of Contrition, of the purity and integrity of Confession; let thy
piety and mercy supply; and according to the same, vouchsafe to account me more
fully and perfectly absolved in Heaven, who live and raignest world without
end. Amen.

A Reflection.
IT may here finally be observed; as it happens ofentymes, that the sick man
dies because he makes not use of the Physician, concealing his disease, and not
following his order and davise: so many a soul does perish for not making use
of his spiritual physician, by the holy Sacrament of Confession. The great
benefit whereof (were it but well considered) we should not so much neglect the
incomporable benefits which are to be reaped thereby. For being duly
frequented, it expiats the guilt of all sin, and changes the eternal pain
(which was due to mortal sin) into temporal. It purifies our souls, and
renders them grateful to God, By infusion of grace, and gifts of the holy
Ghost. It greatly strengthens as against all evil temptations, and gives great
quiet to our couscience. All which but scriously considered, who will neglect
frequently to make use of so souveraine a good. For is there any that had he
but a plant in his garden of so rare a virtue, as if but weekly taken, should
cure all diseases, and preserve him in perfect he alth; would he neglect to
make use thereof? undoubtedly he would not. Let us then for the eternal health
of our soul do what we old most diligently perform for the mere temporal
health of our body.

OF THE HOLY COMMUNION.
Come ye to him, and be illuminated: and your faces shall not be counfounded.
Psalm. 35.6.
A preparatory instruction disposing to the holy Communion.
IF it be requisite that a Chrifstian come well prepared, and with due
disposition to any Sacrament, it ought to be, doubtless with greatest care and
diligence to this of the holy Eucharist; it containing the divine Author
himself both of all Sacraments and grace. And therefore to be received with all
purity and devotion, to receive the great fruit and benediction thereby. For as
he who receives it worthily becomes the habitation and temple of God, who
replenisheth him with all abundance of grace: so who receives him unworthely,
receives (according to the Apostle) his own damnation and judgment.

It does therefore greatly import him, who approaches to this divine banquet.
First that he examen well himself (as S. Paul does exhort (that he come
prepared, and fittingly disposed, on his part. For which purpose these four
dispositions are principally required.

The first, a firm faith to believe Christ's own word, and his Churches
doctrine; teaching that the words of consecration being pronounced; what was
bread before, is changed by divine virtue into the true, real and substantial
body and blood of Jesus Christ, and that although the color, figure, taste,
and other accidents of bread remain, yet the substance is converted into the
body of Jesus Christ, which being now living, glorious, and immortal, it can
receive no division nor indignity, but is united to his blood, soul, and
divinity.

The second disposition required, is a great purity, principally from all
mortal sin; as also from all voluntary and deliberate affection, to either
mortal or venial. And besides this purity of conscience, purity also of
intention is requisite: for he would be greatly blamable, who should approach to
this divine table for vain human respect, to be esteemed devout, or to gain
the good opinion of Men. But his intention must be purely to please God, to be
more closely united to him; and to be made more capable thereby to glorify, to
love, and to serve his heavenly Majesty.

The third disposition, is profound humility: to which the Christian may
strongly be moved, he well considering, on the one side Gods greatness and
infinite sanctity, and his own origin from nothing, brought by sin to so
despicable a state, on the other. Which very thought ought to give great
confusion to a penitent sinner now ready to approach to this God of all glory
and Majesty, before whom the Angels, Seraphins, and Cherubins do tremble with
respect and fear.

Finally the fourth disposition, is love and ardent charity toward this our
divine Redeemer, who gives himself to us with so excessive good nesse, with
graces and benedictions from the superabundant fountain of this divine
Sacrament; flowing copiously into an open, and loving heart. And therefore
undoubtedly the most excellent disposition which a Christian can bring to the
holy Communion, is to excite himself interiorly to the fervent acts of love
toward Jesus Christ, with strong resolutions wholly to consecrate himself, to
please and love him, to serve and glorify him by his whole life and actions.

But although these dispositions regarding our soul, be both the principal
and most necessary: yet such as concern the body must not be neglected. As
first that the communicant present himself to this divine banquet with fitting
decency in apparel. With modest and reverent comportment; yet all within the
bounds of decent modesty, and without all superfluous affectation.

He must also be fasting; and have swallowed nothing from the midnight before
his communion. Who being now to approach to this heavenly table; it must be
with great modesty and devout humility: saying the Confiteor with true hearty
sorrow, for having offended so great and so good a God. And the Priest saying
Domine non sum dignus etc. Let him humble his heart before God, acknowledging
his great unworthiness to receive so divine a guifte.

The sacred Host being presented unto him, he must receive it with all humble
respect, his eyes bending downwards, and opning moderately his mouth, without
stirring his head or body, or moving his lips with words. Let the tongue touch
the side of the lipp, not too much put fourth; that it may conveniently receive
the holy Host, which there moistened with decent motion may be let down into
the stomach: for it is not to be chewed with the teeth, nor to be brought to
the rouse of the mouth.

Let the whole body be erected, and quiet without any motion, sighing, groaning,
knocking of the breast, exclamations, vocal prayers, or the like; which would
be unfitting, and inconvenient.

Having communicated, he must be careful for one quarter of an hour, not to
spit: but if forced to it; be careful it be with respect, and where it be not
trod upon; or more decently to take it with his handkercher.

Let him retire to some convenient place, where for the space of a quarter of
an hour, at the least, he ought to recollect his soul in thanks giving;
considering whom he has received, and with the eyes of fervent faith, there to
behold within his breast his loving Savior, and God of all Majesty: and with
great attention, and devout acknowledgment of humble thanks for that
inestimable benefit received: there offering, sacrificing, and entirely
consecrating himself, his soul, his body, and all the powers and actions of
them both to his divine honor and glory for all Eternity.

When you actually receive the sacred Host conceive your self (as S. Theresia
did) as if behoulding with her corporal eyes, Jesus Christ to enter into your
poor habitation, and stir up thor at your faith, laying aside all mortal
objects whatsoever. and as if entering in with him; procure there to recollect
all the powers of your soul to attend upon that so divine a guest, to do him
all adoration and homage; so that they neither distract nor hinder your soul
from a quiet, and entire enjoyment of him. There represent your self as at his
feet deploring with repentant Magdalen your many sins. And although we should
have no other devotion, but this alone; yet faith would persuade us that we
were both well and very happy there to speak with our divine and loving
Savior so present to give care to the propositions of all our necessities; at
least whilst the sacramental species remain uncorrupted with us. And therefore
we must not loose one moment of this so precious time of his true real and
substantial presence with us; but to spend it in all true fervent devotion,
with so merciful and powerful a Lord and guest. For this is a most profitable
practice after communion; which that seraphical 8. Theresa did usually
exercise with great comfort and profit to her soul.

And now finally that the virtuous soul may the better comply with her duty in
this divine action, as well before the holy communion, as also after the same;
let her read much rather with heart, then with mouth these following prayers:
she framing in her soul the interior acts, which are but exteriorly framed
in words.

A prayer to be said before the holy Communion.
O MOST benign Lord Jesus. I a sinner presuming nothing on my own merits, but
wholly trusting on thy mercy and goodness, do fear and tremble to have
access unto the table of thy most sweet banquet. For I have a heart and body
spotted with many crimes: a mind and tongue, not warily gwarded. Therefore, o
benign Deity, o dreadful Majesty, I a wretch, holden in these streights, have
recourse unto thee, the fountain of mercy, I hasten to thee to be healed, I
fly under thy protection: and he whom I cannot endure a Judge, I hope to have a
Savior.

To thee, o Lord, I show my wounds; to thee I discover my shame. I know my sins
to be many and great, and withoot number. Look down upon me with the eyes of
thy mercy. O Lord Jesus, the eternal King, God and Man, and Crucified for Men.
Hear me graciously, hoping in thee: have mercy upon me full of sin and
wretchedness, thou that wilt never restrain the fountain of thy pity to
flow.

All hayle, healthful sacrifice, offered upon the tree of the Cross for me,
and for all Mankind. All hayle, o noble and precious blood, gushing out of the
wounds of my Lord Jesus Christ crucified and washing away the sins of the whole
world.

Remember, o Lord, thy Creature, which thou have redeemed with thy blood. It
repents me that I have sinned: I desire to amend what I have done amiss.
Take then away from me, o most clement Father all mine iniquities, and
offenses; that purified in mind and body, I may deserve worthily to taste the
holy of holies. And grant that this holy tasting of thy precious body and
blood, which I most unworthy intend to receive, may be the remission of my
sins, perfect purgation of my crimes; driving away of filthy cogitations, an a
begetting of good thoughts, and wholesome efficacy of works, pleasing to thee;
and withal a sirme protection of soul and body against the dangerous wiles of
my Ghostly enemy. Amen.

An other payer of S. Tho. of Aquine before receiving the holy Communion.
ALmighty and eternal God; behold I comme to the Sacrament of thy only
begotten son, our Lord Jesus Christ. I repair as one being sick unto the
Physician of life. As one unclean, unto the fountain of mercy. As one poor
and needy, to the Lord of heaven and earth. I beseech therefore the abundance
of thy infinite bounty; that thou would wouchsafe to cure my infirmity; to
wash my filth; to lighten my blindness; to enrich my poverty; to cloth my
nakedness, that I may receive thee, the bread of Angels, King of Kings, Lord
of Lords, with so great reverence and humility, with so great contrition ad
dovotion, with so great purity and faith, with such good purpose and intent as
is expedient for the health of my soul. Grant me, I beseech thee, not only to
receive the Sacrement of our Lords body and blood, but the thing and virtue
thereof. O God most meek, grant me so to take the body of thy only begotten
son, our Lord Jesus Christ, which he took of the Virgin Mary; that I may
deserve to be incorporated into his mystical body, and accounted amongst the
members thereof. O most loving Father, grant me for ever with open face to
behold thy beloved son; whom now covered in this way-fare I intend to
receive. Who together with thee and the holy ghost three persons, and one only
God, lives world without end Amen.

A preparatory meditation disposing our souls before the holy Communion to
approach with due disposition to receive not only the Sacrament, but also the
grace and great virtue thereof.
Approach ye with faith, with fear, and with love.

S. Greg. Dial. li. 2.
THese words were anciently pronunced in the Church with a loud voice by the
Deacon to all such as intended to communicate. To which holy action, for a more
fit disposition, four things are required. For like as to a solemn banquet;
it is necessary, first that our hands, face, and linning be pure, well washed,
and clean. 2. that we come decently and well apparelld. 3. that we bring a
rigthly prepared stomach and good appetite. And 4. we must not sit down to a
feast with a heart charged with anger, gall, or envy; for that would hinder both
the content and benefitt which otherwise we should or might have received
thereby. So in like manner our soul must come pure, clean, and well washed from
the foul stayne of sine; and as a neat vessel to receive the grace of this
holy Sacrament. Math. 5.3
For blessed are the clean of heart, etc. 2. It must come clad with the nuptial
garment of virtue and good purposes. Friend where fore entredst thou hither
without a nuptial garment? Math. 22.
3. with hungar and a true desire to please God; and to serve him with fidelity
the best we can. Matthew. 5.
For blessed are they who hungar and thirst after justice, etc. And lastly, as
the holy Ghost commands; we must depose all enmity and ill will against our
neighbor, and embrace all in love and charity: Math. 5.24.
Leave thy offering before the Altar, and go first to be reconciled to thy
brother etc.

And as truth convinces all this to be most just and reasonable; so ought we
to practice it with due fidelity; so that neither blindness of passion, nor
frailty of nature may lead us out of this true path or rightly loving, serving
and enjoying this our loving Lord and Savior.

Grant me thy grace dear Jesu to receive thee in this divine Sacrament with
firm faith of thy presence: with true purity and contrition of heart; with
dreadful fear of thy Majesty (which makes all the celestial spirits with
reverentiall fear to tremble) and to receive thee with a heart enflamed with
divine and ardent love of so merciful and bountiful a loving Lord; who in
this divine Eucharist gives us thyselfe wholly and entirely, body and soul,
divinity, humanity, thy graces and merits: and therefore I give thee (my loving
great God) wholly and entirely my self in perfect oblation; my soul and body,
life, and death, time, and Eternity. And finally I most humbly crave such
necessities, as I most need for thy glory, and my own souls heath.

Of Thanks giving after the holy Communion.
IT is the practice of most pious persons, to make best use of the most
precious time whilst this divivine gueste remains with us under the
consecrated species, uniting there, their hearts and all the faculties of their
souls, in doing homage and adoration unto their great Lord and God; craving
humbly pardon for their sins: force to overcome their passions and temptations;
grace to obtain the virtues of humility, of patience, conformity, charity,
perseverance, and the like: then also making good purposes, and firm
resolutions to amend our most habitual vices. And that day, in tankes-giving,
and for his honor to resolve and practice, as occasion shall be offered; that
virtue which is most opposite to the vice which is in us predominant. Or to
exercise some work of mercy with that prious intention. This done you may
continue your devotion by these flollowing prayers.

A Prayer after the holy Communion.
O My divine Recdemer, I humbly beseech thy unspeakable mercy, that this
Sacrament of thy precious body and blood, which I most unworthey, have
received, may be to me a purging of offenses, a fortitude against frailties, a
fortititude against the perils of the world; and obtaining of pardon: an
establishment of grace, a medicin of life, a memory of thy passion, a
nourishment against weakness, and a happy viaticum of this my pilgrimage.

Let it guide me going, reduce me wandering, receive me returning, uphould me
stumbling, lift me up falling, and persevering bring me into glory.

O God of all goodness and Majesty let the most blessed presence of thy most
precious body and blood, so alter the taste of my heart, that besides thee, at
any time it feel no sweetness, it love no fairness, it seek no unlawful
love, it desire no consolation, it admit no delectation at any time, it care
for no honor, it fear no cruetly; who live and reighnest God with thy
eternal Father, in unity of the holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

An other prayer after the holy Communion.
Thanks be unto thee, o Eternal Father; that thou did vouchsafe of thy
great pity, to send thy only dear son, from thy glorious throne into this
vale of woe; here to take our mortal nature, and in the same to suffer sharp
pains, and a bitter death, to bring our souls unto the glory of thy happy
kingdom, and to leave that precious body here to be our strength and comfort.
I thank thee, o most loving Lord Jesu with all the powers of my soul; for
that thou have thus graciously fed me with thy most precious body: by which I
hope to have health of soul, and eternal life; with joy at my depar ture from
this vale of tears and misery. O holy Ghost, come Lord and inflame my heart
with the burning beams of thy love, and make me with true humble and virtuous
gratitude continually to yeald acceptable thanks to the holy and glorious
Trinity, three persons and one eternal God, to whom be all honor, glory, and
thankes-giving from all creatures, without end Amen.

The soul of Christ sanctify me, the body of Christ save me, the water of the
side of Christ wash me, o good Jesu hear me, within thy wounds hide me, suffer
me not to be separated from thee, from the malignant enemy defend me, and bid
me come to thee, that with all the celestial blessed spirits I may praise and
glorify thee, throughout all Eternity.

A Conclusion.
COnvert, o Lord all wicked sinners, call to true faith all heretics, and
schismatics; lighten the infidels, who do not know thee, help all that be in
great necessity, releeve all who have commended themselves unto my prayers,
have mercy upon all my parents, friends and benefactors; as also upon all those
for whom I am bound to pray. Let thy blessing be upon this place, with
humility, peace, charity, purity, and conformity to thy blessed will; that we
may all amend, fear, and faithfully serve thee, love, and please thee. Lord be
merciful to all people, for whom thou have shed thy precious blood. Grant to
the living forgiveness, and peace, and to the faithful departed rest and
everlasting life. Amen.

Finally the devout soul, the more to dilate her self in the praises of her
merciful and loving Lord, and to render him due humble thanks for so great a
benefit, may here with a fervent heart inflamed with love and gratitude recite
this following canticle wherein all creatures are invited to Laud and praise
Almighty God.

The Canticle of the three children
ALl the works of our Lord, bless ye our Lord; Daniel. 5.
praise and extol him for ever.

Bless ye our Lord, ye Angels of our Lord: ye Heavens bless our Lord.

All waters that are above the Heavens, bless ye our Lord, bless ye our
Lord, ye powers of our Lord.

Sun and moon bless ye our Lord: stars of Heaven bless ye our Lord.

Shower and dew, bless ye our Lord: every spirit of God bless ye our Lord.

Fire and heat, bless ye our Lord: cold and summer, bless ye our Lord.

Dewes and hoarie frost, bless ye our Lord: frost and cold, bless ye our
Lord.

Ice and snow, bless you our Lord: nights and days, bless ye our Lord

Light and darkness, bless ye our Lord: lightming and clouds, bless ye our
Lord.

Let the earth bless our Lord: let it praise and extol him for ever.

Mountains and little hills, bless ye our Lord: all things that spring in
the earth, bless ye our Lord.

Bless our Lord ye fountains: seas and rivers, bless ye our Lord.

Whales, all that move in the waters, bless ye our Lord: bless our Lord all
ye fowls of the air.

All beasts and cattle, bless ye our Lord; sons of men bless ye our Lord.

Let Israel bless our Lord: let it praise and extol him forever.

Priests of our Lord, bless ye our Lord: servants of our Lord, bless ye our
Lord.

Spirits and souls of the just, bless ye our Lord: holy and humble of heart,
bless ye our Lord.

Ananias Azarias, Misael, bless ye our Lord: praise and extol him for ever.

Let us bless the Father, and the son, with the holy Ghost: let us praise
and extol him for ever.

Blessed art thou, o Lotd, in the firmament of Heaven: and praised, and
glorifid, and extolled for ever.

This Canticle of thanks giving with the two following, and the Hymn of S.
Ambrose and S. Augustine in praise and thankes-giving at his conversion are
proper to be used to bless and praise God for some singular favor and
benefitt.

The Canticle of Zachary.
BLessed be our Lord God of Israel; be cauese he has visited and wrought the
redemption of his people.

And has erected the horn of salvation to us; in the house of David his
servant.

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets: that are from the beginning.

Salvation from our Enemies: and from the hand of all who hate us.

To work mercy with our Fathers: and to remember his holy testament.

The oath which he swear to Abraham our Father, thathe would give himself to us.

That without fear being delivered from the hand of our enemies; we may serve
him.

In holiness and justice before him, all our days.

And thou child shalst be called the Prophet of the highest: for thou shall go
before the face of our Lord to prepare his ways.

To give knowledge of salvation to his people: unto remission of their sins.

Trough the bouels of the mercy of our God: in which the Orient from on high
has visited us.

To illuminate them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death: to direct
our fect in to the way of peace.

Glory be to the Fater, etc.

The blessed Virgins Canticle of Magnificat. etc.
MY soul does magnify our Lord: and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

Because he has regarded the humility of his handmaid: for behold from hence
fourth all gererations shall call me blessed.

Because he that is mighty, has done great things to me, and holy is his name.

And his mercy from generation to generation, to them that fear him.

He has showed might in his arm: he has disperced the proud in the conceit
of their heart.

He has deposed thy mighty from their seat: and has exalted the humble.

The hungry he has filled with good things: and the rich he has sent away
empty.

He has received Israel his child; being mindful of his mercy.

As he spoke to our forefathers, to Abraham and his seed for ever.

Glory be to the Father etc.

The himne of S. Ambrose and S. Augustine in praise and thanks giving to God at
his Conversion.
WE praise thee God, we confess thee our Lord.

Thee, the everlasting Father, all the earth does worship.

To thee all Angels, to thee, the Heavens, and universal powers.

To thee Cherubin and Seraphin do cry out with incessant voice.

Holy, Holy, Holy: Lord God of Sabbath.

Full are the Heavens and the Earth of the Majesty of thy glory.

Thee, the glorious Quire of the Apostles.

Thee, the laudable number of Prophets.

Thee, the white clothed army of Martyrs does praise.

Thee, the holy Church throughout the world does confess.

The Father of infinite Majesty.

The venerable, true, and only son.

Also the Holy Ghost, the comforter.

Thou, O Christ, the King of Glory.

Thou art the everlasting son of the Father.

Thou willing to take upon thee, to deliver Man, did nor abhor the Virgins
womb.

The sting of death being overcome, thou have opened the kingdom of Heaven to
all believers.

Thou sit at the right hand of God, in the glory of the Father.

Thou art believed to be the judge that shall come.

We therefore beseech thee, help thy servants, whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood.

Make us to be rewarded with thy Saints with eternal glory,

O Lord, make safe thy people, and bless thy inheritage.

And govern them, and extol them, even for ever.

Every day we do bless thee,

And we praise thy name for ever and for ever and ever.

Vouchsafe, o Lord, this day to keep us without sin.

Have mercy upon us, o Lord, have mercy upon us.

Let thy mercy, o Lord, be upon us, even as we have hoped in thee.

In thee, o Lord, have I hoped, let me not be confounded for ever.

Psalm 148. wherein all creatures spiritual and corporal are invited to
praise God, their Creator, and conserver.
PRaise ye our Lord from the Heavens, praise ye him in the high places.

Praise ye him all his Angels, praise ye him all his Hosts.

Praise ye him sun and moon, praise ye him all ye stars, and light.

Praise him ye heavens of heavens; and the waters that are above the heavens;
let them praise the name of our Lord.

Because he said, and they were made; he commanded and they were created.

He established them for ever, and for ever and ever: he put the precept and it
shall not pass.

Praise ye our Lord from the earth; ye dragons, and all the depthes.

Fire, hail, snow, ice, spirit of storms: which do his word.

Mountains, and all little hills: trees that bear fruit, and all Ceders.

Beasts and all cattle, serpents and fethered fowls.

Kings of the earth, and people, Princes, and all judges of the earth.

Young Men, and Virgins: old with young let them praise the name of our Lord
because his name alone is exalted.

The confession of him above heaven, and earth: and he has exalted the horn
of his people.

An himne to all his Saints; to the children of Israel, people approaching unto
him. Alleluya praise ye our Lord.

A MEDITATION of thanks giving after the holy Communion.
What shall I render to our Lord for all things that he has rendered to me?
Psalm. 15.3.
IT may well be accounted an exorbitant neglect, and sacrilegious irreverence,
(having been visited by so souveraine a Majesty) to use so small respect in
leaving him so immediately after his vouchsafing to visit us; by turning to
entertayne our selves with frivolous thoughts and needless businesses; more
slighting this our heavenly Guest thereby, then we would an ordinary friend,
whom civility would oblidge us to give much longer, and more respectfull
entertainment. This is the cause that we reap so little spiritual profit by
that divine presence. And moreover it cannot choose but give much scandal to
the people, to see the Communicant leave the Church almost so soon as he does
the Altar. Scarce giving any sit leisure or decency for his acknowledgment of
thanks: and leaving thereby an ill example to others to do the like, and to
conceive less esteem of that divine and holy mystery.

A practice for this thanks giving may be; (after the usual prayers of the
Church for that purpose) to produce some acts of several virtues: as of faith,
of hope, of charity humility, confusion adoration, conformity, patience, and
the like. Others consider Gods divine attributes: as his goodness, his
justice, his wisdom, his power, his immensity, his sanctity, and the like, and
this with comparison to our contrary defects in all. Let us finally conclude
with humble thanks for all his benefits, craving humbly his grace for the
chief necessities of our souls: and finally to consecrate to him all our
actions and sufferings; beseeching him, that we may sooner be struck dead then
to give a deliberate consent to any mortal sin. This is a true Christian and
profitable practice for thanks giving, either after Mass, or communion, to
preserve our souls, and bodies also true to God all the day after, he having
vouchsafed to take possession of his habitation therein.

And when negligent in this holy practice they must not marvel, that after so
many holy Communions they remain, with out fruit, and all progress in virtue;
they neither aporoaching with fit disposition, nor yet using due thanksgiving
afterward.

Let us therefore resolve seriously to amend this sinful ingratitude; and to
entertain our divine and souveraine Lord, one good quarter of an hour, at
least, in that so precious and very advantageous a time; wherein to hear him
speak to our hearts; and for us to propose to him our greatest spiritual
necessities; and to beg grace to overcome the temptations of all our ghostly
enemies.

An exercise for practicing the Acts of the most necessary virtues.
ALthough it be the holy Ghost which tells us, that by walking from virtue to
virtue, we must obtain everlasting life: and that so many virtuous actions, as
the just shall practice in this life, are so many stepps, by which they raise
themselves to mount unto Paradise; yet how great is the number of Christians
who fail exceedingly in this point; and paradventure in all their life scarce
rightly frame in their hearts one act of true virtue: contenting themselves to
recite but vocally some certain prayers, with otheroutward religious duties,
which are ordinarily void of that inward feeling which ought to accompany the
same.

And therefore you have here a form for making Acts of the most necessary
virtues to assist such persons as have most need of this instruction, to form
them rightly in their hearts: they being made, for the greater facility, in the
form of prayer. Which because in few words they express the acts of those
excellent virtues; it will not be sufficient that they only recite them with
their lips, unless therwithall they join a diligent attention: and that in
pronouncing the words, they also well conceive what they signify; framing in
their hearts the true sense and feeling of what they mean.

Acts of the love of God.
WHo am I, my Souveraine Creator, and who art thou, who thus imposest so
expressly on me a command to love thee? was it not sufficient for thee, my God,
to permit me so to do? and was it not thy abundant goodness to permit thy
self to be beloved by so poor and so wretched a heart as mine and with thy
grace there unto to enable me?

Wherefore seeing that is thy command my God, I will obey: and though a wretch
and unworthy sinner; I here in thy presence protest that I will love thee with
my whole heart, and with my soul and force.

And from hencefourth I choose thee, for ever to be the chief and Souveraine
object af all the purest affections of my heart; the accomplishment of whose
blessed will I prefer before all that is in Heaven or Earth; yea and my
dearest life I would hold most gladly employed to testify this my love and due
homage unto thee.

O dear Jesu, king of eternal beauty, and heavenly glory; I will no other
inheritance but the, O divine keeper of my soul, take thou possession of this
my heart which was created for thee, and pierce it with a thousand wounds of pure
love, that I may sweetly languish with wholesome sorrow for my having so much
offended thee.

Acts of Faith.
OOmnipotent and Eternal God, who have given me an understanding to know
thee, and a will to love thee. I here protest before thy souveraine Majesty,
that with a firm faith, I do believe what thy holy Church, inspired by the
holy Ghost, proposes to be believed: to which I entirely submit, as being
reveled to her by thee; which therefore I embrace, profess, and by thy grace
shall persever in it until my dying day.

And I do utterly disclayme, and disavow what thy beloved spouse, the holy
Catholic Church, condemns. This is the faith which I profess, and wherein I
desire to be found at the hour of my death; and at that dreadful day of dome
to be judgd by it accordingly.

Acts of Hope.
ALl my hope and considence is in thy mercy, my loving God, and in the sacred
merits of my divine Redeemer Jesus; by whom I hope for remission of my sins;
and humbly trust in his great goodness to continue in thy grace to my lives
end; and to praise and glorify him with thee, o eternal Father, and with the
holy Ghost for all Eternity: this my hope is laid up in my bosom. Job. 19.


And although through humane fralty I daily offend thee; yet I hope, most
gracious Lord by thy divine assistance to amend, and to gain more strength
and constancy against my ghostly enemies.

O Lord of infinite mercy, to whom a sorrowful and repentinge heart is always a
greatefull sacrifice, although the multitude of my fins, and great ingratitude
might tempt me to despair, yet certain I am, my merciful God, that a
contrite and humble heart thou will not despise. Psalm. 50.


Acts of Adoration.
WIth the profundest and most humble respect of my soul, prostrate both in
heart and body before thy souveraine Majesty, o Omnipotent and eternal God: I
adore, and acknowledge thee my souveraine Lord, both of my life and being, who
can again reduce me to that nothing out of which thou first createdst me: and
who by thy mere boundless goodness have preserved me from it till this
present day: I render thee, o Lord, all adoration and homage as thy submissive
and humble creature, depending entirely upon thy blessed will and pleasure.

And considering that what honor I am able to render to the merit of thy
infinite Deity is so inconsiderable, (to supply that great defect) I offer to
thee, the adoration which eternally thy Saints and Angels shall ever render to
thee: and my great desire is, that all the creatures of Heaven, and Earth may
bless, adore and glorify thee with endless praise for all Eternity.

Acts of thanks giving and gratitude.
I Have merited nothing according to the effect of thy great liberality to me,
o my great God; nor is there any thing in me which could move thee to bestow so
great and many benefits both of body and soul on me who am so far incapable
to render thee due thanks for having created, redeemed, preserved, and called
me to the happy way for my salvation.

Thou have given me, o Lord, reason both to know and serve thee, and what daily
favors have thou conferd on me? from how many perils of body and soul have
thou carefully by thy fatherly providence preserud me? how great spiritual
benefits have thou bestowd on me by the merits of the bitter death and passion
of my most loving Redeemer Jesus? how often have thou nourisht my soul at the
sacred table with the bread of Angels, whereby to give true force and grace to
serve thee.

O how often have thou awaked me from the mortal drowsiness of sin, by thy
heavenly grace; and prevented me by thy holy inspirations from grievously
offending thee?

Accept; o heavenly Father, in stead of my defect, all the acceptable works
which Jesus Christ, my loving Savior, has offered to thee for me; take this
in my acknowledgment of due gratitude for these thy gracious benefits bestowed
on me, and grant that all my life may be a continual thanks giving to thy
divine Majesty; to whom only is due all honor, glory, praise and benediction
for ever and ever without end.

Acts of Love toward our Enemies.
THou have taught me, o God of all love, both by thy word and example, to love
my enemies: yea the whole practice of thy divine life well appears to have been
a continual exercise of doing good for evil; as also was thy death the
souveraine sacrifice to expiate their sins. O grant me grace, I beseech thee,
herein to imitate thy charity, and to observe this thy holy command.

Forgive therefore, sweet Jesus I beseech thee, all those that persecute, and
do me any injury; grant them final repentance of all their sin^es, and after
a happy persevetance in thy grace, to enjoy thee in eternal bliss.

Acts of Humility.
I Acknowledge, and before thee, my God, do confess, that of my self I am a
pure nothing; neither any thing could I do. My extraction is from nothing, and
my inheritame, and proper share is only weackenesse, sin and misery.

It is thou, o Lord, who have drawn me from my nothing, wherrin without thy
mere goodness, I had continued for all Eternity, and thither should I again
return, were not thy powerful hand which continually preserves me from it.

All this I now acknowledging for truth, what greater follye can there be then
to flatter my self with vain esteem? nay let me but pass yet one stepp
further onn, and consider my innumerable sins committed against this souveraine
Majesty; ought not I then to confess my ill deserving the least of these thy
so gracious benefits

I do acknowledge, to my great confusion, and thy glory, that I neither have
deserved thy consolation, nor from thy creatures any assistance at all, yea
should they by thy just order, all quite abandon me, I could have no cause to
make my complaint to thee.

O when I consider but what it is to have offended, my God of all glory and
Majesty; I must avow that the least of my sins against thee, makes me justly
deserve not only that every creature should tread on me; but even to be over
whelmed also with all sorts of punishments, and miseryes.

Wouchsafe, o Lord, so deeply to grave this feeling, and true humble knowledge
of my self, into my heart, as it may never wear out; but rather serve me as a
secure antidote against all vain glory, and self esteem; whereby to be
disposed ever to enjoy the Spirit of true Humility, and to render all honor
and glory, to whom only it is due for time and all Eernity.

Acts of true dread and fear.
IF I make but good reflection on those thywords, O Souveraine Judge of Men;
that we are to render thee an account of the least idle word; and that
according to the talent given us of thy grace, we must render fruit in due
proportion; and receive our judgment proportionably there unto; I should be
very senseless if I should not be struck with horror and great fear;
considering not only the infinity of my idle words; but also of my grevious
sins committed against thee; as also the multitude of thy graces bestowed on
me, whereof I have made so very ill employment.

O my God what shall I say when thou shalst come to judge and question me? what
answer shall I make to thee? And were I now to appear at that tribunal of thy
most dreadful judgment; in what state art thou, my soul? art thou in gracious
favor wih thy God, or no? art thou now worthy of his love; or, rather, art
thou not in his just disgrace and hatred?

But this whilst here I live I cannot know: Nay should I with bloody tears
deplore my sins, what certain assurance could I have, that thou have pardond
me? nay more though thou thy self affirm it yet should I be still uncertain,
in this life, of my perseverance.

And have I not therefore just cause both to tremble and fear, considering this
great uncertainty of my salvation? the many perilous dangers which on all sides
inviron me; the multitude of conspiring enemies, who seek continually to
destroy me by all art and industry, drawing me to consent to sin, and all
iniquity.

O my Souveraine Lord, inspire my soul with this wholesome terror, and pierce
my heart, and rule my disordered affections with the sharp piercing nail of thy
fear; to the end that I never more rebel against thy holy law. Cause by thy
grace that this apprehension and wholesome fear of thy judgment may separate my
heart from what soever may displease thee: and let it dedicate and consecrate
to thee entirely, all its actions and affections forthy eternal glory.

Acts for the exercise of the virtue of Penance.
WHen I consider thy infinite Majesty, o God, who art goodness it self: and on
my part behold my ungrateful rebellion so often committed against thee; it
seems to me a wonder how I durst so impudently offend so mighty a power, and
so good a God.

O what penance can be proportionable to the enormity of these my crimes? what
satisfaction can I make for these my faults? alas, should I power out as many
bloody tears, as are the dropps of rain from all the clouds; or should I
expose my body to as many torments, as all the blessed Martyrs have endured;
all this, according to true justice, could not be able for to expiate one
mortal sin; which committed against a God of infinite Majesty, no due
reparation can be made for it, but by a penance of infinite satisfaction.

It is then to thee alone, my divine Redeemer Jesus, to whom I must recurr;
that thou wilst vouchsafe, by thy satisfactions, which are infinite, to supply
the want of mine.

But seeing that so thy justice does require it, that, I being the offender,
should also on my part make such satisfaction as I can, although not as I
ought: I therefore with a contrite and humble heart, grieve and lament for that
by my wicked sin I have so grievously offended thee, my dear and loving God;
whom I love above all things either in heaven or in earth. I firmly purpose,
by thy divine grace, rather to dye, then so to offend again; but to confess
and do due penance for my sins committed; confiding in thy infinite mercy, and
in the sacred merits of Jesus Christ, to obtain thy pardon, and to bless,
adore, and praise thee in Eternity.

And now in expiation of my sin, and some reparation of thy honor, so
grievously offended thereby: I here renounce all pleasures which displease thee.
I renounce all friendship which may hinder me from truly loving thee, and I
renounce all occasions which may expose me to the danger of loosing thy holy
grace.

Grant me, loving and merciful Lord, the succor of this thy so necessary
grace; that by so heavenly a succor, these my good resolutions may be made so
hapily efficacious, as to produce the fruits worthy of true penance, which may
be grateful to thee; and enable also me to magnify thy infinite goodness, and
Eternal Majesty, together with all thy celestial happy spirits in Beatitude.

An act of submission and Resignation to the will of God in all encounters
whatsoever.
Merciful Jesu, thy divine will be now and ever more fulfi'ld; for whatsoever
does thence proceed must needs be Good, though flesh and blood may not accord.
Wherefore I denying my understanding, sense, will, appetite, and desires: yea
disclayming all interest and propriety in my self; do commend into thy
gracious hands my soul and body, together with all guists of nature and grace
which thou of thy goodness have bestowed on me; being resolved hence forward not
to seek my own consolation, my ease, credit, or commodity; but to endeavor,
that in me, thy will be done in all things, according as thou, my Lord and
Savior, have appointed.

And therefore, he it thy pleasure to send me sickness or health, honor or
contempt, prosperity or adversity, liberty or restraint, life ordeath: welcome
for thy names sake be they; and for that thou have so ordained them. Only
grant, dear Lord, that I may be partaker of thy grace, and continue thy
servant for ever.

But for so much as the holy Ghost has pronounced that the heart of Man is
deceiptfull; and therefore has reserved the search thereof unto himself: if
then in any corner of my breast, there remain any self-will, self-likeing, or
secret reservation, contrary to this my express and absolute Act of
Resignation; let it be thy merciful work, so to root out the same, as that I
may truly, (though not in the like degree of perfection) say, as thou, my Lord
and Savior, did to thy Eternal Father in the garden, the night before thy
passion; not as I will, but as thou wilst, not my will, but thine be done.

Grant, sweet Jesus, even for thy bitter passion's sake, that I may perform,
what by thy grace I have thus resolved, humbly, fervently, faithfully, and
constantly, that my ghostly enemy may never have any just cause to reproach me
for my infidelity therein. Amen.

Acts to be made in time of affliction or of trouble, either in body or mind.
O Father of mercy, and God of all consolation; it being now the hour ordained
by thy divine pleasure that I should suffer, I bless and adore thy holy name,
desiring to persevere in that due fidelity which I owe thee. I most humbly
submit my self to the divine order of thy holy will, as well in all grief and
pain, as in my consolation and joy.

I acknowledge and do freely confess, that the least sin, which I have
committed against thee deserves far greater punishment. And therefore I most
humbly thank thee, O merciful Lord, for thy so lovingly and so very favorably
chastising me.

And notwithstanding all the repugnance nature feels herein: with a most
willing heart I accept thy correction, and most willingly submit to it, in what
manner soever it shall please thee to dispose of me: and I will always
sincerely say with my divine Redeemer: thy will be done, not mine.

Grant me the patience, O heavenly Father, by the sacred merits of thy dear
son Jesus, which shall be necessary for my well suffering, and then
accomplish in me what shall be to thee most pleasing. For to thee I do
entirely abandon my body, my soul, my goods, my life, yea all I have, into the
hands of thy fatherly providence; to the end that both for time and Eternity
thou dispose of me according to thy blessed will and pleasuro.

Acts of mildness and meekness.
THou O my Lord, who art the true peace; thou love to rest in a quiet, mild,
and gentle heart: Grant me, I beseech thee, this thy beloved virtue, whereby I
may truly banish from my heart all disquiet and impatience; thereby to enjoy true
solid content of mind; for the meek shall delight in abundance of peace.

Vouchsafe, O Lord that I may learn this lesson of thee, who command me to
be mild and humble of heart, thereby to find true rest unto my soul: for as no
quarrel can be fixed upon a pleasant countenance, and cheerful mind: so also
courteous language and gentle hehaviour will conque the greatest enemy: the
conversation of such a Man is gratfull to every company, and yealds both
comfort and content to all, for nothing is more pleasing, then is a sweet,
mild, and peacible humor; nor is there any thing more offensive and
displeasing then is a froward, peevish, and impatient nature.

Acts of Mortification.
THou know right well, my God, that such is the corrupt inclination of Man,
that it incits him continually to sin; and keeps him as tossed with the
contrary waves of unruly passions, unless, by needful mortification he make
virtuous resistance thereunto. Grant therefore to me a true mortified spirit;
whereby to subject the flesh to the spirit, my passions to reason, and my reason
entirely unto thee.

But oh! how far am I from enjoying this holy virtue, who give so great scope
to my unruly passions, to my disordered affections, as also to my proper
judgment and will? Grant me, Lord Jesu, that I may show this virtue unto
others, much rather by practice, then by fair promissing words; and that I may
put a careful watch both over my senses, affections, and passions of hatred,
chollar, fear, or love etc. and finally to mortify my unruly will, and to
submitt my judgment in all things to thy divine will and pleasure.

Acts of the virtue of Patience.
NO virtue is more necessary, then holy Patience; we being almost continually
in occasions for the practice of it: and by the help thereof, we surmount the
greatest difficulties: whereas an impatient Man refusing sinfully to submit to
Gods decrees (who is the Author of all our sufferings) in as much as they
cannot be resisted, he is most unreasonnable; and by that means, he begins his
Hell, even in this present world. And as that Man is of all others living the
most happy; who is of all others the most patient: so on the contrary, he is
most miserable, who is most impatient. Thy heavenly grace therefore, O loving
God, enable me to practice this so great a virtue, and to avoyde the contrary,
which is so dangerous a vice.

Vouchsafe, O gracious Lord, that I may but well reslect upon thy long great
patience in suffering my perverse and many sins against thee. And secondly
conceave how justly I have deserved to suffer far greater evils, without
comparison, and them too, eternally. And therefore what afflictions soever
shall befall me; I resolve by thy holy grace to suffer patiently for thy sake,
and in hopeful expiation for my sin.

Acts of Perseverance.
IT is upon Perseverance, my God, on which depends the assurance of salvation,
all former resolutions, and good purposes whatsoever, without it, were but lost
labor, and in vain; for he only that persevers shall be crowned with victory,
and will save his soul; which is a reward indeed sufficient to encourage us to
give the present moment of an uncertain life, for so never-ending a Bliss.

O happy perseverance, which winns such a glorious crown! and without it, to
small purpose it would be with Judas well to begin the holy practice of virtue,
unless by the help of mortification, we shall persever to the end. Yea our
damnation would be much the greater for our neglect of Gods holy grace.

Strengthen my soul, O my souveraine Redeemer, with this happy virtue of
perseverance in holy patience and conformity in all adversity, as well as in
prosperity; in sickness, as in health; in poverty as in wealth; in contempt
and calumny, as in prosperity and praise, or heighest favors from Men. For our
beginning well, is the effect of Gods grace; but our not persevering is sinful
neglect, and deeply deserves punishment.

O what cause of horror and just fear have I, to conceive for my so great
inconstancy in persevering in so many good purposes and pious resolutions,
which thy great goodness, my loving God, has vouchsafed so frequently to
inspire me; with I falling from luke warm to be keycold, and thence unto
total neglect of what I was bound to do. But thou my merciful Lord, although
thy great mercy has thus long expected me with much patience for my amendment;
yet further presumption may justly draw upon me thy wrath, and my endless
punishment: which he prevent who has paid with his most precious blood so
dear a ransom to satisfy the justice of his Eternal Father; with whom and
the holy Ghost, three divine persons, and one living God, be benediction, and
glory, and wisdom, and thankes-giving, honor, and power, and strength, for
ever and ever Amen.

A Collection of some few holy maxims, pronounced by the sacred mouth of Jesus
Christ, whereby the virtuous soul may see how different they are from the
pernicious maxims of the world; which she ought most carefully to fly.
BLessed are the poor of spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven. Math.
5.8
Mark well how formely opposite to this divine maxim, is that of the world,
which compts them only happy who are every way rich, both in wealth and able to
make most show and glory in vain flourishing it. But our divine Redeemer, begun
the publishing of his Ghospel, by declaring to his disciples wherein the true
Beatitude of this life did consist: and thereby to disabuse them of the false
opinion amongst the people of this world; who though they all do naturally
seek for happiness, yet taking a quite contrary way for it, they cannot enjoy
it: some spending their whole time and labor to pourchace vain worldly
honor, or deluding pleasures: others are as earnest to hurd upp sordid wealth;
as no less pensive afterward in preserving it. All which great folly,
proceeds from guiding themselves by the false principles of this world; and
neglecting the counsel of their heavenly Master Jesus Christ. For the world
and its concupiscence does so strongly possess their hearts; that they become
incapable to give ear to his doctrine, which is only to conduct us to
Beatitude.

And therefore it is no wonder, if that which Jesus Christ proposes here for
happiness; seem rather misery to the wordly eyes of Men; whose thoughts not
going beyond this present life, which being but truly misery in it self; it
can no otherwise make us happy, but only as it serves to help us to gain that
other of endless Bliss.

Blessed are those who mourn, Math. 5.
for they shall be comforted. This seems no less contrary to the sense of
worldlings, then the former. But to understand how our Beatitude can consist in
tears and mourning; we must consider, that by sin we are banished people in
this world and that all our felicity consists in the hope of our
reestablishment and pardon, by mourning, penance, and penitent tears. And
hence it is, that mourning is the ground of our Beatitude.

Learn ye of me, who am mild, and humble of heart, Matthew. 11
and you shall find rest to your souls. This mildness and humility of heart is
esteemed by the vogue of this world to be but dullness, unmanlinesse, and
weakness of heart. They falsely judging that true courage and generosity must
show their Passion for the least offense, or disrespect, which their self
esteem conceives: and thereupon engage themselves in great and dangerous
quarrels, with rest less disquiet of mind: whereas the contrary is very happily
enjoyed by the, meek and humble of heart.

Blessed are they who hungar and thirst after justice, Math. 5
for they shall be filled that is, they who have ardent and earnest desires for
the glory of God, by accomplishing his Commandments and holy will. But
according to the maxim of the world; we hungar and thirst much rather after
our corrupt sensualities, which bend all our thoughts and desires much rather
to the transgression of his divine law; whereby we can never hope to be
satiated, no more then was the prodigal child with empty husks, the proper
food for swine.

Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God: that is, Math 5
by a clear vision in Beatitude. But the maxims of the world, which tie our
hearts to creatures by affection make them become defiled, and impure; and
thereby obscure their spiritual sight from behoulding God.

Blessed are those who suffer persecution for justice; for theirs is the
kingdom of Heaven. Math. 5
But by the maxims of the world quite contrariwise, they are accounted to be
most miserable: and whereas by virtuous patience in suffering such persecution,
the godly obtain the reward of eternal felicity; the worldlings, by seeking
unjust revenge, with indignation, and wrath; do east their souls into the
endless flames of Hell.

Give and there shall be given to you, Luke 6, ^8
etc. for with the same measure that you do measure it shall be measured to
you again. But self-interest being the great maxim of this world: its
practice is to take, and obduratnesse of heart not permitting them to exercise
this holy charity in releeving the needy and afflicted pore, according to their
own measure; they must expect justice without mercy, because they showed no
mercy. Says S. James.

Woe to you that now do laugh; Luke 6.5.
because you shall mourn and weep. Blessed 8. Augustine upon due reflection on
this holy maxim, did often beg of God, here to cut and burn, and not to
spare him; thereby to spare him eternally. But the wicked maxim of this world
is to pass their days in present delight, and jolity; although in a moment
they descend into Hell for ever.

But J say to you, love your enemies, do good to them that hate you, Math. 5
43.
and pray for them that persecute, and abuse you. Our divine Redeemer Jesus,
both by his words and exemple has recommended to us the practice of this holy
maxim: his whole life being a continual exercise of doing good for evil. But
the wicked maxim of this world, now contrariwise, for an imaginary honor (as
they conceive it) to revenge a wrong will put all at stake; their hody and
soul, Gods honor, and their neighbors damnation, by that diabolical
practice of their duels.

If one strike thee on the right cheeeke, turn to him also the other. Math.
5.39.
What herby we are taught by Christian patience to do for gayning an enemy,
the world houlds it great baseness of mind, not to take full reparation by
unlawful revenge.

To him who will contend with thee in judgment, Math. 5 40
and take away thy coats let go also thy cloak unto him. This charitable
maxim though given us to avoyde disquiet, contention, and breach of charity:
yet worldlings account it mere folly; and make small scruple to gain an
unlawful fuite; although to the great prejudice of their own souls, and
total temporal unjust ruin of their poor neighbors livelihood.

Why see thou the mote in thy brothers eye; Luke 6 41
but the beam which is in thy own, thou considerest not, by this divine
maxim we are advertised to look well to the amendment of our own faults,
much rather then to observe those in others. But the sinful maxim of the
world; is to cover and conceal our own great defects, and to discover, and
publish much less in our neighbor.

But when thou do an alms deed, Math. 6.3
let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does. This holy maxim does
teach us to hope by well doing to obtain a recompense in Heaven: but the
Spirit of this world, by seeking to be paid by the vain glory of Men; their
merit can be no other, but only the due punishment of their sin.

When thou do fast, Math. 6 16
anoint thy head, and wash thy face; that thou appear not to men to fast.
This holy maxim gives us the same instruction; as the former: and to avoyde
hypocricy by vain dissimulation.

Heap not up to your selves treasures on the earth; where the rust, Math. 6 19
and moth do corrupt; and where tho thieves do digg through, and steal. The
maxim, which wordlings do so generally practice; is not only quite contrary
unto this holy counsel of Jesus Christ, but also even to reason it self: they
spending all their pain, and industry for mere temporal wealth; which they
well know must be left unto others to spend; and themselves only also charged
with a very dangerous account for all, and for which their eternal felicity
may be greatly in danger.

Be not careful therefore for the morrow; Math. 6 34
for the morrow shall be careful for it self. After our humane usual industry
employed; then for the rest, we must wholly place our confidence in God: But the
wordly maxim is with restless solicitude to make it the whole employment of
their mind; which should give also place to better thoughts.

Seek therefore first the kingdom of God, Math. 6 33
and his justice; and all these things shall be giving you. The wordly
irreligious maxim, as contrary unto this; perswads us first, and principally
to labor for our temporals; which argues the putting much more confidence in
our own humane industry, then in the divine providence of God; which is
sinful and great impiety.

All things therefore what soever you will that men do, Math. 7 12.
do you also to them for this is to you the law, and the Prophets. By this
holy maxim, we are taught by Jesus Christ the Commandment of loving our
neighbor, as our selfs. But experience makes it too manifest, how greatly
contrary the worldly maxim is there unto; which having interest, for its
guide; must needs be defective in this holy rule of charity.

Broad is the gate, and large the way that leads to perdition; man 12
and many there be that enter by it. How narrow is the gate, and strait is the
way that leads to life; and few there be that find it! The great truth of
this divine maxim is plainly confessed by all; and experience makes it
manifest. Yet such is the besotted folly of men, (with the present deluding
follies of this world, that they neglect as well to again the eternal felicity
of Heaven; as also to avoyde the never ending flames of Hell.

Fear ye not them that kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul:
math. 10 38
but rather fear him that can destroy both soul and body in Hell. This maxim
is given to deterr us from sin, whereby God is offended, and our soul put in
danger to be lost. But sensual people are so bwitched with their temporal
affairs, and their affection so fastened to the transitory contents of this
world; as they neither fear the offending of God, nor the exposing their
souls unto endless perdition thereby.

He that takes not up his cross, and follows me; math. 10 38.
is not worthey of me. This holy maxim teaches us, that Heaven is not
purchased, but by bearing the cross of tribulation: contrary to the maxim of
this world, which perswads us here to seek our paradise of pleasure, and
content. But Paradise being only one; it cannot be found, both in this world,
and in the other.

The kingdom of Heaven suffers violence; and the violent benre it away. math.
11.13
The violence, meant here by this holy maxim, is in curbing and ruling our
passion and disordered affections: to which the maxim of this world allows
full scope and liberty; accompting that, but an effect of magnanimity, which is
the guilt of sin.

He who seeks to exalt himself, math. 23
shall be humbled: and who humbles himself shall be exalted. Jesus Christ
hereby does teach us, that to seek vain glory, and the praise of Men, is but
to loose the same; and that flying, and contemning it, is the true means to
obtain it. But the maxim of this world is to seek and earnestly to runn
after it, and therefore we see by experience, that they are like those who runn
but after a shadow, which, as fast as we runn after it to catch it; so fast it
flies from us: although it follows them who fly away from it.

Where is your treasure; math. 6
there is your heart. This divine maxim does advertise us to labor for, and
(as S. Paul exhorts us) to gust and relish what is above, where Christ sits at
the right hand of God, and not what is upon the Earth. But worldly people have
their hearts so fast fixed upon the transitory affairs, and vain contents of
this present life; that their thoughts, and industry are least of all upon what
is eternal.

Many are called; but few are chosen. math. 20 1.
This holy maxim is given us by our divine Redeemer; to prevent our bold
presumption; who being called unto the profession of his holy faith; neglect to
animate the same with the life of good works; without which, faith it self is
but dead, and of no effect for our election unto beatitude; as well appears by
that most dreadful sentence at the day of doom, against the reprobate; who
are not condemned for their want of true faith, but for their not having
accompanied it with good works; for which, with a woeful go ye cursed into
internal fire etc. they are excluded everlastingly from Beatitude.

He who persevers to the end; math. 10
shall be saved. It is only perseverance, which gayneth the crown of victory;
and we must give this moment of our life to get it, but the pernicious
worldlings maxim prefers the enjoyment of this uncertain moment in their
vain deluding pleasures and contents, before the purchase of heavenly bliss;
which they might have gained at so easy a rate; yea and with less torment both
to their body and mind, then they take to be condemned to the eternal flames
of hell.

Devout prayers to be said, some daily; and others at convenient opportunity; as
each one shall best make choice.
IT is most certain that prayer is absolutely necessary for our salvation: it
being so that God will never bestow on us his graces requisite there unto, but
by the means of holy prayer, Whereby we demand the same: by this he preserves
us also humble, and acknowledging, that of our selves, we are able, neither to
resist our enemies, nor to fly sin, nor practice virtue; whereby to work our
salvation: but that from him must proceed all needful succor to obtain that
Bliss. No, we neither are able to begin to do well; nor to persever, without
the special grace of God; which is obtayn'd by holy prayer. Yea, like as the
body cannot live without respiration and air: so neither can the soul long
continue in the life of Gods grace, without the needful exercise of prayer;
which is as necessary for the soul, as is water for plants; without which, as
they could produce no fruit: so neither can the soul without prayer be able
to bring fourth the fruit of true virtue and piety. The necessity of this holy
virtue of prayer is such; as our divine Redeemer tells us; that it behooves
alvayes to pray, Luke 18.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
and not to be weary. Yea, without intermission pray (says S. Paul) which is
not to be understood, by continual vocal prayer, for that is impossible; but
that with a pure intention we always praise God, and direct all our actions to
his glory, whatsoever we do.

Finally to pray fruitfully, and as it may be most grateful to God: we must
consider with whom we treat; and who we are that treat with him; and greatly
to humble our selves thereat, with fear. Secondly consider that he is our
Creator, our Redeemer, and our judge. Now as he is our God, adore him: as he is
infinitely good, and bountiful, love him; as he is just, fear him: in regard
of his benefits, bless and be thankful to him. And lastly as our Father; let
us recurr to him for all our necessities, with much hope and humble confidence
in all our wants and necessities.

Before prayer, ^les. 18
prepare thy soul and be not as a Man that tempts God.

A prayer to the most sacred and Blessed Trinity.
OEternall Father, by all Creatures to be adored. I a most wretched sinner do
offer unto thee for my innumerable offenses, and for the sins of all the world
the bitter death and passion of thy divine son, our merciful Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. I offer to thee his labors, his fastings; all his
toylsome wearisomnesse: his watchings, his prayers; his tears, his humility,
his patience, and his charity. I offer to thee his suffered contumelies, his
pains, his stripes, and dolorous wounds. I offer all the dropps of his most
precious blood. I offer also here the merits of his ever imaculate and pure
Virgin Mother; and of all the holy Saints in Heaven.

O blessed Jesus, my loving Savior. I render thee most humble thanks for thy
innumerable benefits bestowed on me, though most unworthey. For thy miraculous
incarnation and chastely pure Birth: for thy holy life and conversation: for thy
most ignominious death and passion. Make me, I beseech thee, partaker of thy
sacred merits; and vouchsafe that by the imitation of thy virtues, I may be
found a living branch in thee, who art the true vine of everlasting life.

O Holy Ghost my comforter. I commend to thee my soul and body; the
beginning, and ending of my life; grant me grace, and true repentance for all
my sins, whereby, and by thy infinite mercy to be purified from them all, before
I depart from my mortal body. To thee O Lord I wholly commit my soul, and
body; my life, and death; my time and my Eternity; defend and keep me, thy
unworthey servant, from all evil; illuminate my understanding, guide my will;
strengthen my spirit against pusillanimity; and keep in me an humble heart,
that it fall not into pride or presumption, give me true faith, firm hope,
with sincere and perfect charity; that I may wholly delight in thee; that with
my whole heart and soul I may love thee, and every way fulfill thy most blessed
will and pleasure.

O holy and blessed Trinity, God omnipotent, to thee I most humbly commend all
my affairs, both Spiritual and corporal. I commend unto thee my benefactors,
my kindred, friends and enemies; and all for whom I ought to pray, or who have
desired me to pray for them. I commend unto thee, the whole Catholic Church;
renew in it, I beseech thee, purity of life; Nourish and keep amongst the
true members thereof mutual charity, that with their whole hearts and souls
they may love thee. Such as do err, call back to the way of truth;
extinguish all heresics: confort, and releeve all troubled minds and
consciences, as also such as are oppressed, either with internal temptations,
or corporal calamities, Amen.

A devout form of thanks giving, with an humble craving of all requisite
virtues.
BE merciful unto me, O God, according to they great mercy: and according to
the multitude of thy mercies blot out all my offenses.

I a most wretched sinner, do heartily desire in all humility to adove and
worship thee, to render unto thee immortal praise, and tankes-giving for all
thy blessings, especially for that unspeakable charity, wherein thou did send
down thy only begotten son into this vale of tears for the work of our
redemption. O merciful Father, I the least of all thy servants, do magnify
and praise thy ever glorious name; for his holy Incarnation and Nativity; for
his poverty and familiar conversation; for his heavenly doctrine and miracles;
for his death and Passion; for his Resurrection and Ascension.

I yeald unto thee all possible thanks for that divine mystery of his precious
body and blood in the venetable Sacrament of the Eucharist; wherewith we are
spiritually and strongly nourished, we are cleansed and sanctified, and our
souls made partakers of all heavenly grace and benedictions. I give thee hearty
thanks, that me, a handful of dust of no value, thou have vouchsafed first to
wash with the laver of baptisine to remission of my original sin: and after
convenient time, thou brought me by the light of thy holy grace to the
profession of the only true saving faith.

I humbly thank thee, that from my cradle thou have nourisht, clothed, and
cherished me; supplying all things necessary for the relief and maintenance of
this my present life.

I evermore extol and magnify thy holy name, that in great mercy thou have
hitherto spared me; albeit from my youth I have wantonly ryoted in manifould
excesses; thou patiently expecting, till by thy grace I might be awaked from
the sleep of sin, and reclaimed from my vanities and wicked life. For had
thou dealt with me according to my demerits, my soul long ere this, oppressed
with innumerable sins, had been plunged into the bottomless gulf of Hell.

In respect of all which thy mercies, graces, and blessings; I desire that my
heart may be enlarged to render thee a more ample tribute of praise and
thankes-giving, then hitherto I have done.

And now for those things, whereof I stand in need, and most desire to obtain
at thy hands. First O my God never leave me I beseech thee unto my self, but
let the bit of thy chaste fear be ever in my jaws, to curb and keep me
within the compase of thy obedience, that I may dread nothing so much, as in
the least sort to offend and displease thee: for which cause let thy holy love
so temper all trials and temptations which happen unto me, that I may profit,
by them. Thou, my Creator, know how frail I am and that my strength (of my
felfe) is nothing,

Moreover, O heavenly Father, even for the venerable and profound humility of
thine only son Jesus, I beseech thee, that thou would keep far from thy
servant, all pride and hautinesse of mind, all self-love and vain glory, all
obstinacy and disobedience, all craft and hurtful dissimulation: that I may
cast down and tread under my feet the Spirit of gluttony and lechery; the
spirit of sloth and dullness; the spirit of malice and envy; the spirit of
hatred and disdain; that I may never despise, nor contemn any of thy
creatures, nor prefer my self before others; but, ever little in my own
eyes, think the best of others, and deem and judge the worst of my self.

Invest me, holy Father, with the wedding garment of thy beloved son, the
supernatural virtue of heavenly charity, that I may love thee, my Lord God
with all my heart, with all my soul, and with all my strength; that neither
life nor death, prosperity nor adversity, nor any thing else may separate me
from thy love. Grant that all inordinate affection to the transitory things of
this world, may daily decay, and dye in me; that thou alone may be tastfull,
pleasant and savoury to my soul.

O most gracious God, give unto thy servant, an humble, contrite, and obedient
heart, and understanding always occupied in honest, virtuous cogitations; a
will tractable, and ever prone to the better, affections always calm and
moderate; a watchful custody of my senses, that by those windows no sin may
enter into my soul: a perfect government of my tongue that no corrupt or
unseemely language may proceed from my lips, that I may not busy my self in
the faults and imperfections of others, but rather attend to the amending of my
own.

And finally so long as I am detayned in this prison of my body, and exiled
from my heavenly country, let this be my portion, and the comfort of my
banishement; that free from all immoderate wordly cares, and pensive
solicitude of this present life; wholly devoted to thy service, I may attend
only to thee, I may cleave unto thee, I may rest my soul in thee, and sitting
in silence, I may give way and entertainment to thy heavenly doctrine, to the
good motions and inspirations of thy holy spirit. In these sweet exercicises
let me pass the solitary hours of my teadious pilgrimage, with patience,
expecting the shutting up of my days, and a happy end of this my miserable
life.

And grant, O thou lover of mankind, my lord and my God, that when this my
carthly tabernacle shall be dissolved; being found free from all pollution of
sin as after baptism, I may be numbered amongst those blessed souls, who
through the merits and passion of thy dear son, are held worthey to reign
with thee, and to enjoy the glorious presence of the blessed Trinity, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, to whom by all creatures in Heaven and Earth be rendered
praise, and thankes-giving, world without end. Amen.

A prayer to the blessed Virgin, as also to the holy Saints and Angels.
O Blessed Virgin, mother of my divine Redeemer, have pity on me a most
wretched sinner: I devoutly salute and honor thee, O glorious Queen of
heaven, and powerful advocate of all distressed souls; obtain for me, I
beseech thee, of thy dear son Jesus, the remission of all my great offenses;
obtain for me perfect charity, and profound humility, true mortificatio^ and
forsaking of my self: obtain for me constant patience, refrayning, and
temperance of my tongue, and senses: obtain for me purity, simplicity, and
sincerity of mind; and that I may be one according to the hearts desire of thy
divine son my loving Savior.

All hail O immaculate Virgin of whom Christ Jesus the brightness of his
Fathers glory would be borne, and whom with thy precious milk thou did feed
and nourish. O blessed mother of true compassion, assist my weakness in all
my temptations and necessities, in all my perils of sin, and in the hour of my
death; that by thy powerful intercession I may be protected against the
dangerous assaults of my ghostly enemies, and obtain the needful help to dye
in the happy perseverance of Gods holy grace.

O ye Angelical blessed spirits, pray for me; and thou especially, my holy
Angel, the faithful keeper of my soul and body; have thou faithful care over
me. O all ye holy faints of God, who have passed over the troubles and
vexations of this exile, and attained most happily the secure resting port of
your celestial beatitude: I most humbly crave your protection: help me with
your powerful intercession, both now and in the hour of my death. Amen.

An other prayer to the B. Virgin.
REmember O most pious Virgin Marie Mother of all consolation never yet was it
kowne that any; who in tribulation made their recourse for succor, by the
happy assistance of thy grateful prayers, and powerful credit with thy dear
son Jesus, was ever refused or forsaken by thee. Wherefore in this assured
and humble confidence, I a most sinful soul, make my recourse unto thee, O
mother of true pity, with sighs and repentant tears, from a devoted heart, I
do earnestly cry and humbly crave thy help. Refuse not therefore with wonted
compassion to behold my weeping heart, and to give ear to my instant cry: that
by thy celestial favor, I may be forgiven by thy divine son Jesus, my
merciful and only Redeemer. Amen.

An other prayer to the same.
O Glorious and incomparable Virgin, most truly mother of God, and Queen both
of heaven and Earth: although thy glory exceeds without comparison what honor
soever we are able to render thee: yet that excellency which most excells in
thee, consists in true conformity unto the will of God, who is thy Father, thy
spouse, and thy only dearest son: from whence it proceeds, that nothing is
refused thee: for thou demandest nothing, but what is pleasing unto him whom
nothing can resist. Be pleased therefore, O Mother of pity, and after God, my
only hope, to make powerful intercession for me, for my friends, kindred,
benefactors and enemies, and for all sinners whatsoever: to the end that we may
behold thee in that celestial habitation, there with thee, to praise and
glorify the most sacred Trinity for all Eternity. Amen.

An other prayer to the same.
O Glorious Virgin, Mother of God, most pleasing temple of the Divinity, the
sacred vestry, wherein the second person of the blessed Trinity was invested by
the holy Ghost with our humanity, the gate of Heaven, and my second hope. I
beseech thee, O glorious Virgin, that in thankes-giving for the love which God
has sheud to thee, as to his Mother daughter, and beloved spouse, thou wilst
vouchsafe to take me this day, and for the whole course of my life, into thy
singular protection: procure that my actions, words. and intentions be always
pleasing to thy divine son Jesus: that I may live to him, and dye for him.
Amen.

A prayer to the Holy Ghost.
O holy Ghost, our heavenly comforter, we humbly beseech thee by that strait
union, (or much rather unity) which is betwixt thee. and the two other divine
persons: unite so happily by thy celestial help, my will in all things most
perfectly unto thine; that by this happy subordination, I may obtain that
blessed end, for which I was created. and be thereby united with thee, here by
grace, and by glory in Eternity. Amen.

A prayer before the B. Sacrament; or before Communion.
I Adore thee, O true bread of Angels, the God of life, the eternal Fathers
spendor, and Heavens beauty. Behold one here present before thee, full both of
fear and confidence. I approach by thy command, in true simplicity of heart,
and firm belief; truly confessing that thou art both God and Man here present
in this most holy sacrament: to which I approach, O lord, as an infirm, to the
physician of life; as one defiled, to the fountain of mercy: as one blind,
unto eternal light, and as in great want and needs, to the Monarch of heaven
and earth.

O my hope, my only health, my glory and all my content: vouchsafe to rejoice
the heart of thy poor servant, which burns with desire to receive thee into my
poor and unworthey habitation; yet please to bliss it, as thou did that of
little Zachee. Alas! my Lord, it is most unworthy, as being so very unclean;
yet thou coming for the salvation of sinners into this world, disdaynedst not
to be borne in a stable amongst brute beasts; vouch safe now likewise, I
beseech thee, and for my salvation sake, despise not the unclean manger of my
soul full of brutall and unbridled passions; return once more to foul
leapers, and converse again with Publicans, as thou did in this world; or
rather, O my omnipotent God, descend once more into Hell: for so alas! I ought
to call my dark, my miserable, and tormented soul.

But seeing that such is thy mercy, as whersoever thou vouchsafest to enter,
thou never failest there to leave marks of thy grace, and much benediction; I
confide, my loving Lord, that thou wilst do the like to me. Enter therefore
under this my poor roof, and render it worthy of thy presence, purge it of
all impurities, discipate the obscurity of its darkness, replenish it with
thy divine light, and adorn it with the gifts of the holy Ghost.

Thou know well, dear Lord, my want, as one poor and naked before thee,
much pressed with great hungar and misery: but thou being the bread of life,
comfort my sighing sobbs, dismiss me not fasting from thy delicious table,
least I faint in this my pilgrimage: but rather grant that fortified by thee,
I may, with holy Elias, arrive to the mountain of eternal felicity.

I most humbly beseech thee, my merciful and clement God, and by this thy
incomparable charity whereof thou give so great a testimony by thy loving
institution of this most blessed Sacrament: I beseech thee to grant me grace to
receive it with true contrition and sorrow for all my sins, with fear and due
reverence; with devotion and faith, fervor, love and convenient purity to so
sublime a mystery: and grant also, I beseech thee that, I may receive not only
the Sacrament of this thy precious body, but therewithal the grace and virtue
of the Sacrament; for the supporting my weakness, for the healing my
infirmities, for the confirming my hope, for the suppressing my passions, for
the fortifying my faith, for the inflaming my love; to enlighten my
understanding, to be my company in banishment, and spiritual nourishment to
my soul: and finally to the end that by the help of this celestial food of my
soul I may be united, transformed, and made all one in will and desire with
thee, who live and raignest with the Father and the Holy Ghost for ever and
ever Amen.

A prayer to obtain a fervent love toward God, our neighbor, and our enemies.
O Merciful and divine Redeemer Jesus who have washed us with thy precious
blood, and given thy self to death for us; thou have been reputed with the
wicked, and most cruelly wounded for our iniquities, breused, and abused for
our offenses; and by thy stripes have made us whole. I beseech thee, O Lord,
for this thy ineffable mercy and charity to power into my heart the unquenchable
heat of thy heavenly grace, so that the fire of thy charity may perpetually
burn, and work within me; and that there may always grow in me such a
continual chaste and nover failing affection of pity, benevolence, and piety,
as extends it self to all creatures, through the love and contemplation of
thee.

Fill, O Lord, I beseech thee, my soul, my senses, and desires with fervent
and perpetual charity, that in all things, and above all I may most heartily
love thee, and that according to thy good will and pleasure I may love my
neighbor in thee, and for thee. Grant me grace I humbly beseech thee, that
with all my heart I may, to thy glory, love, search, and advance the salvation,
profit, and commodity of every one.

Grant me, O Lord, to love mine enemies with sincerity, both in word and truth,
take from me all bitterness of mind, wrath, anger, disdain, envy, and
whatsoever is against or contrary to pure and sincere charity; so that in all
sincere simplicity of heart, I may have a good opinion of all, may judge no Man
rashly, but love every one in thee with holy and hearty affection, and that I
may show them both in words, and works, all sweetness, all clemency, and true
love.

A prayer that we may receive the B. Sacrament before our death.
O Almighty and most merciful Lord, I praise and give thee most humble thanks
for having so graciously made me several times partaker of that divinly great
mystery of thy holy Sacrament, and thereby to be fortified and greatly comforted
with thy blessed presence. O heavenly Father, let every tongue bless thee, let
every creature laud thee for this souveraine gift of thy divine bounty; for
which, with them, I also offer and present to thee, my God, all the praises of
the Angels, and of all the Elect which already do or ever shall enjoy thee in
Eternity.

And I beseech the, Ordeare Jesu, the gracious Redeemer of my soul, that at
the hour of my death, thou wilst vouchsafe to visit me with this thy gracious
presence in this most blessed Sacrament; and by thy grance, prepare my soul, I
beseech thee, by a faithful and contrite confession, whereby to make it a
pleasing habitation for thee, true God and Man, my loving Savior. Forgive my
former many trespasses, by the sacred merits of thy bitter death and passion,
and that I may end this my mortal life in the final perseverance of thy grace.

O God omnipotent have mercy on me for the love of thy dear son Jesus, the
life of all that shall be saved. O Jesu equal God with the Father and the holy
Ghost, conserve and keep me in thy grace; suffer me not to be drawn from
thee, through any subtle persuasion of my ghostly enemy. O Holy Ghost
proceeding from the Father and the Son, the comforter of the elect, and
inspirer of all good gifts; replenish my heart with all charitable desires and
heavenly inspirations necessary for my salvation. Grant this O holy Trinity,
for the bitter passion of our divine Redeemer Jesus and by the merits and
intercession of the glorious Virgin Mary, and of all the blessed Saints and
Angels Amen

A prayer to demand heavenly virtues and good life.
GRant unto me, O merciful God, ardently to desire such things as are pleasing
unto thee, prudently to accomplish them to the praise and glory of thy namne.
Grant me, O Lord my God, that I ta^le not betwixt prosperity and adversity:
that in the former I be not too much puffed up, nor in the latter too much
dejected; that I may joy or sorrow at nothing, but at what leads unto thee,
or draws away from thee: that I covet to please none, nor fear to displease
any, but only thee. Let all transitory things, O Lord, become vile unto me, and
let all that is pleasing to thee, be for thy sake most dear into me. Let that
joy be but teadious to me, which is without thee, and let me desire nothing out
of thee. Let that labor delight me, O Lord, which is for thee, and let all
ease be unpleasing to me which is without thee. Make me, O Lord obedient
without contradiction, poor without murmuring, chaste without corruption,
patient without repining, humble without baseness, merry without dissolution,
sad without dejection, quick without levity, fearful without despair, true
without presumption, to correct with discretion, to edify without
dissimulation. Grant me, O Lord my God, an understanding knowing thee, a
diligence seeking thee, a wisdom that may find thee out, a conversation
pleasing to thee, a perseverance faithfully expecting thee, and a confidence
finally embracing thee, to be pierced with thy pains through penance, to make
use of thy benefits to thy glory, and my own souls good;and at length by thy
grace to enjoy thy glory, there to praise and magnify thee for ever and ever.
Amen.

A prayer of praise, of thankesgiving, and of magnifying God.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, unto thee all the heavenly company of the
celestial city do incessanty with due reverence sing continually glory and
everlasting praise. Thee, O Lord, al Saints, and holy souls do laud and
magnify with condign honor, and as to whom all praise and glory is most due:
nor is there any creature that can sufficiently, according to thy worthlinesse,
give sufficient praise to thee.

For thou art that unspeakable, incomprehensible and everlasting goodness.
Thou, O Lord, have made me, and by the merits of the bitter passion of thy most
blessed son, (which he vouchsafed to suffer for man's salvation) restored me
to grace and favor. To thee only is due all laud and honor. O souveraine
Lord, I miserable wretch, a creature of thy making, a silly worm of the earth,
have a good will to praise and magnify thee with all my heart and soul; but
without thy special grace I am but faint, and wonderful weak. Wherefore I come
to thee, my God, my life, my strength, my hope, and only comfort, to crave thy
mercy and grace, to give me power to praise and honor thee, and that all I do
may be pleasing and acceptable unto thee Grant me the light of thy grace, that
my mouth may speak, and my heart study thy glory, and my tongue may only be
employed in the song of land and praise to thee. But because all praise in a
sinners mouth is base and vile, and that I manifouldly have offended with my
lips; thou therefore cleanse, o divine Jesu, my heart from the foul silth of
sin: sanctify me, most powerful Lord and Savior, and make me worthy to
magnify thee. Let thy divine sweetness wholly possess my mind, and feed my
soul with the delight of relestiall cogitations. Separate it, O Lord, from the
love of all visible things, and incline it to the study and meditation of
invisible.

O Almighty God, inspire thou my heart, that I may continually give thanks and
honor unto thee.

Grant me grace that in this pilgrimage and vale of misery, I may so praise
thee, that through thy grace and mercy, I may be associated to their blessed
Fellowship who see thee everlastingly, and singe praises to thee, world without
end. Amen.

A prayer of thankes-giving, and of craving divine favor.
O Most merciful Lord Jesus, in remembrance of thy blessed Jncarnation, death,
passion, wounds sorrows, griefs, tears, and drops of thy most precious
blood: and in remembrance of thy infinite love to Man: and in the union of that
oblation and holy sacrifice, by which thou did offer thy self on the Altar
of the Cross; I do offer my self to thy praise and glory: humbly beseeching
thee to give to the living grace, to the deceased mercy and rest; and to us all
the true spirit of repentance, and life everlasting. And I commend unto thee, O
Lord, my souleand body, most humbly beseeching thee to have mercy on me, and
upon all those for whom either by nature, friendship, or by gratitude I am
bound to pray: and in particular for N. N. etc.

I most humbly render to thee due thanks, O my Lord, God, and merciful
Father, for that thou did vouchsafe to send thy only dear soune Jesus into
this world to dye for Man the reproachful death of the Cross, to the end that
he might offer himself to thee a most pure, holy, and acceptable sacrifice of
our sins, and purge thereby our conscience fro all its foul staynes of impiety.

By this thy excessive and infinite love, and by those most cruel torments of
thy own son, our Savior, we most humbly beseech thee to preserve in us
continually those divine fruits of our Redemption, and make us also daily to
die with him to the world, and to be crucifid to the lusts and desires of the
flesh, and to live to thee only all our life; so that finally we may reign
with him eternally: where thou with the Holy Ghost live one true and eternal
God for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer to all the Saints.
ALI hail, ye holy and most glorious Saints of God, who now have past the
dangerous sea of this mortality, and have attaind to the secure haven of
everlasting rest and security; and deserved to be made now fellows and
partakers of the heavenly joys; being now without care for your selves, be ye
careful for us. Whouchsafe to be our advocats, and governors. Pray unto God
for us, that by your intercession and merits we may in this life obtain grace,
and at the hour of death, our souls departing in the happy state of grace,
may arrive at the safe port of eternal glory, where you with the glorious
Trinity do reign world without end. Amen.

A prayer to all the Angels.
Al hail ye blessed Angelical spirits, who with celestial melody do praise
and glorify our omnipotent Lord, and in his glorious presence do continually
rejoice; have compassion on me a poor wretch. And tho especially, O holy Angel
the keeper and guardien of my soul and body, unto whom by Gods special
commandment I am committed; I beseech thee to discharge that office toward me
with faithful diligence, and to keep, defend, and protect me this day from all
evil, visible and invisible. Amen.

A Prayer in sickness.
LEt my request enter into thy fight, O Lord, and let thy hand stretch forth to
make me whole. Behold I am the Man that coming down from Jerico, was forely
wounded by thieves, and left half dead. Do thou assist me, O merciful
Samaritan. I have grievously sinned in thy sight, and so full is my soul of
those deadly wounds, as had thou not died for me, my soul would have dwelt
in Hell. I am sweet Jesus, a part of that dear purchase; for me tho did shed
thy precious blood; cast me not away. I am the sheep that went astray, seek
me, O good shiphard, and put me in thy flock, that thou may be justified in
thy word; for thou did make me a promise, that at what hour soever a sinner
should repent him of his sins, and turn to thee, he should he pardoned: I
repent, O Lord, and bewail my sins, I acknowledge my iniquities: I am not
worthy to be called thy son; for I have sinned against Heaven, and before
thee. But turn away, O Lord, thy face from my offenses, blot out my
iniquities, according to thy great mercy: cast me not away from thy sight;
deal not with me, according to my sins, nor reward me after the desert of my
iniquities: but help me, O Lord, my God, and Savior, and for the glory of thy
name, deliver me; that I may praise thee for ever more, with all thy glorious
elect in thy celestial kingdom of Beatitude, for all Eternit.

A Prayer to obtain a blessed ending.
O Blessed Jesu, wel-spring of pity, and fountain of endless mercy; I humbly
beseech thee to give me grace so to spend this my transitory life in virtuous
and godly exercises; that when the day of my death shall come, though I feel
pain in my body, yet I may find comfort in my soul; and with faithful hope
of thy mercy, in due love toward thee, and charity toward all others, I may
through thy grace depart hence out of this veil of misery; and hasten me to
that glorious country, wherein thou have bought us an inheritance for ever with
thy most precious blood, there to praise and glorify thee with the Father and
the holy Ghost, three persons and one living God, world without end. Amen.

A Prayer when we begin our actions.
PRevent we beseech thee, O Lord, our actions by thy spirit assisting us, and
in helping forward prosecute them: that all our prayers, and works may begin
always from thee, and begun, by thee, may be ended; through Christ Jesus our
Lord. Amen.

An Evening Prayer.
ALmighty and everlasting God, I yeald thee most hearty thanks, for that thou
have vouchafed of thy great mercy and goodness to preserve me this day from all
evil: and I do also beseech thee for thy bitter death and passion, most
mercifully to forgive me wretched sinner all my offenses that this day I have
committed by thought, word, and deed: and hereafter to preserve and keep me
from all danger both of body and soul; to the end I may rise again in health,
to praise thy glorious name, and joyfully to serve thee in thanks giving, with
a chaste body, and a clean heart; and so for ever after behave my self,
according to thy blessed will, by casting away the works of darkness, and
putting on the armor of light, which Men behoulding may be provoked to glorify
thee, my heavenly Father; who with thy only begotten son, our only Savior,
and the Holy Ghost, live and raygnest one, true, and everlasting God.

A Prayer for the sick.
O Almighty and everlasting God, the eternal health of them that believe in
thee: hear us for thy sick servant, for whom we humbly crave the help of thy
mercy, that health being restored unto him, he may yeald thanks giving to thee
in thy Church; through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Prayers to obtain the grace of the Holy Ghost.
O God, to whom each heart is open, and each will does speak, and from whom no
fecret lies hid: purify by the inspiration of the holy Ghost the agitations of
our heart; that we may deserve perfectly to love thee, and worthily to praise
thee: through our Lord true God. Amen.

To obtain the same grace for our friends.
O God, who have powered the guifs of charity by the grace of the holy Ghost
into the hearts of thy faithful; grant unto thy servants for whom we crave thy
clemency, health of mind and body: that they may love thee with all their
strength, and accomplish with all love what things are pleasing unto thee;
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

To obtain the same grace for our enemies.
O God the lover and keeper of peace and charity, give unto all our enemies,
peace, and true charity; and grant uto them remission of all their sins: and
powerfully deliver us from all their deceipts: through Christ Jesus our Lord.
Amen.

A Prayer to repel wicked thoughts.
O Almighty and mild God, mercifully regard our Prayers, and deliver our hearts
from the temptations of evil thoughts: that we may deserve to be made a worthy
dwelling for the holy Ghost: through the same Lord Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer to require charity.
O God who makes all things to profit them that love thee; grant unto our
hearts an inviolable desire of thy charity: that the desires conceived by thy
inspirations, may by no temptation be altered; through the same Lord Jesus.
Amen.

A Prayer to beg Patience.
O God who have broken the pride of the old enemy, by the patience of thy only
begotten Son: grant unto us, we beseech thee, worthily to call to mind what
he so meekely suffered for us, and by his example, quietly to endure the
adverse changes falling upon us: through Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer to require the suffrages of Saints.
WE beseech the, O Lord, defend us from all perils of body and mind, and the
glorious Virgin Mary mother of God praying for us, together with the blessed
Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, blessed S. Joseph, Saint etc. and all the
glorious Saints and Angels: thou being benign, grant unto us salvation and
peace: that adversities, and all errors being destroyed, thy Church may serve
thee in secure liberty: through Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer to require continency.
KIndle with the fire of the holy Ghost our raines and our hearts, O Lord, that
with chaste bodies we may serve thee, and with pure hearts please thee; through
our Lord and only Savior Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer in time of war.
O God who dissolveth wars, and by the power of thy protection do vanquish
the impugners of them that trust in thee: help thy servants, earnestly craving
thy mercy, that the cruelty of all their enemies being depressed, we may praise
thee with incessant thankes-giving; through our Lord Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer for peace.
O God, from whom are all holy desires, rightful counselles, and just works:
give unto thy servants that peace which the world cannot give: that our hearts
being disposed to keep thy Commandments, and the fear of enemies being taken
away, the times, through thy protection, may be peacible, by the merits of thy
dear son Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer in time of famine and Pestilence.
GRant unto us we beseech thee, O Lord, the effect of our prayers, and by thy
mercy, turn away from us pestilence and famine, that the hearts of Men may
know that such scourges proceed from thy indignation, and cease by thy mercy;
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer for rain.
O God in whom we live, are moved, and have our being; grant unto us
competent rain, that sufficiently releeved by thy present aid, we may more
confidently desire things everlasting: through our Lord Jesus Amen.

A prayer for fair weather.
Hear us, O Lord, crying unto thee, and grant unto us, making humble
supplications, fair weather: that we who justly are afflicted for our sins,
may by thy grace preventing, find mercy: through our Lord Amen.

A prayer in any tribulation.
A Lmighty God, despise not thy people crying unto thee in affliction; but for
the glory of thy name, thou being pacified, succor the afflicted: through our
Lord Amen.

A Prayer for forgivenes of sins.
O God who rejects none, but art pacified by merciful pity through penance,
even toward the greatest sinners: thou being merciful, respect the prayers of
our humility, enlighten our hearts, that we may be able to fulfill thy
commandments: through our Lord Jesus Christ Amen.

A Prayer for such as are in a journey.
HArken to our supplication, O Lord, and dispose the way of thy safeguard, that
among all varieties of this passage, and life, they may ever be protected by
thy aid; through our Lord Jesus Christ Amen

A Prayer to be said at the conclusion of our usvall prayers.
ACcept, O most clement God, by the prayers and merits of the blessed and ever
Virgin Mary, and of all thy glorious Saints, the office of our service: and if
we have done any thing worthy of praise; thou being merciful, regard it; and
what is done negligently, mercifully pardon it: who live and raignest one
God in perfect Trinity, world without end Amen.

A blessing to be used at the end of all our daily prayers.
The Imperial Majesty of God bless me.

The Regal Divinity protect me. The everlasting Deity keep me. The glorious
unity comfort me. The incomprehensible Trinity defend me. The inestimable
goodness direct me. The power of the Father govern me. The wisdom of the
son quicken me. The virtue of the holy Ghost illuminate me, and be with me
Amen.

O souveraine, and my most merciful God, let this blessing be unto me all
health, and safty, both of body and soul against all mine enemies, visible,
and invisible; now and for ever more Amen.

Of Aspirations and jaculatory Prayers.
A jaculatory prayer, is a brief elevation of our mind and heart to God, as
meditation is the same at large. They are a special great means to all
spiritual progress and virtue, yea they are as the vital spirits, and the very
nerves of prayer, and are to be used both in time of prayer, and also very
often at other times. They are a great support, a cherishing, and a very
powerful invitation to the soul in the time of dryness and desolation to
raise her affection unto God.

This kind of prayer is very brief easy, and very fruitful. It is to be made
with fervent affection, devotion, and true tenderness of heart, as king David
usually did practice it; and by this holy exercise we may be enabled to obtain
that gift commended to us by our blessed Savior: Luke 18.1. Thest. 5.
it behooves continually to pray and never to give over. pray without ceasing;
says S. Paul. These jaculatory prayers are often in the day to be repeated,
according to the diversity of occasions, and oportunities, either vocally, or
only mentally. What fruit they bring, and how efficacious they are to gain
perfection, and to transport the mind from earthly cogitation unto celestial,
the experience of innumerable virtuous souls have made good proof; and will
better teach then words can express.

They are called jaculatory, as darting prayers, because in a moment they
pierce the heavens, and present our requests to Almighty God, testifying the
ardent desires and holy affections of a soul, seeking and thirsting after the
fountain of all perfection, goodness, and sanctity.

Say with S. Austin: O my Lord and God, that I but knew thee, and knew my self!

O grant me perseverance in thy graces and true contrition for all my offenses.

Forgive me Lord the multitude of my sins, and have mercy on me.

O my great and loving God, o that I had never offended thee.

O that I could obtain the right practice of true humility, and patice! Grant
me, O Lord, the grace, that I may hate nothing but sin and my self, and love
nothing but thee and my neighbor in thee, and for thee.

O that thou, my dear Lord, may be the beginning, the progress, and the end
of all my actions.

Not my will, O Lord, but thine be done. Thy will be done in earth, as it is
in Heaven.

Let al transitory things, O Lord, become vile unto me; and let all things that
are thine be dear unto me, and thou, O God above all.

Forsake me not, O Lord my God, depart not from me, attend unto my help, Psalm.
37.
O Lord, the God of my salvation.

To thee, O Lord, Psalm. 24.
I have raised my soul; my God in thee is all my confidence.

Create a clean heart in me O God and renew a right spirit in my bowels. Psalm.
50.


The practice of Aspirations upon the affection of the imitation of our divine
Redeemer Jesus Christ.
AMongst all sorts of Affections; that above all others is most profitable,
which mouveth us to imitate that most perfect example of all divine virtues our
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, stirring up our affection and desire to
embrace and to imitate his holy virtues by the practice of these or the like
holy and fervent aspirations.

Most mild, most loving and patient Jesus, the perfect example to be imitated:
grant me the grace to imitate thy mildness, meekness, patience, and thy
profound humility.

Ah, grant me, O most powerful Lord, in all things to be conformable unto thy
heavenly will and pleasure.

O the true owner of my soul, endowe me with thy love, for which thou hat
created me, and nothing else can give it true rest and satisfaction but that
alone.

O most profound humility, correct my pride.

O invincible patience; when shall I by thy example be truly patient? bestow on
me thy benignity to correct my choleric passion, and great impatience, I
beseech thee.

O my benign and powerful Lord, when will thou bestow on me the grace to make
me humble, patient, devout, and conformable to thy holy will.

The practice of Aspirations upon the affection of admiration of our divine
Redeemers love to Man.
O my God, who art thou that suffered; and for whom?

O my great God, and should my sin cause thee to endure such torments, such
injuries, and so reporachfull a death?

O love; thou art exceeding powerful; thou overcommest him, whom none but thy
self alone can overcome.

Hamel who will grant it me, that I may dye for thee!

Ah that the love of all Creatures were now united in my heart, to make a
present of it unto thee.

The practice of aspirations upon the affection of Compassion of our blessed
Redeemers many dolorous sufferings for ungrateful Men.
O From whence so strong a chain, as to draw thee from the throne of glory, to
be stretched forth upon a most reproachful Cross?

O Merciful and most loving Jesu, what is it that I ought not to suffer for
thee, who have most willingly endured so much for me?

Whence is it my dear Lord, who art the comfort of Angels that thou should
to subject thy self to be replenisht with grief and desolation?

O Jesus, what is it that I ought not to suffer for the love of thee, who have
most willingly endured so bitter a death and passion for me?

O merciful Redeemer how thy very posture upon the holy Cross, invites me to
cast my self into thy open stretched arms, to receive the happy embracement
of hy peace, which by repentance of my fins in virtue of thy sacred passion is
communicated unto me.

The practice of aspirations upon the affection of love.
When shall I perfectly love thee, O the only Souveraine goodness above all;
and without whom no good is to be found,

Ah! when shall I truly love thee with all my heart, with all my soul, and
powers; with all my actions and affections, and that they all be wholly employed
in thy true love and service.

Ah! when shall my soul be so happy, as that it may love all things in thee;
and nothing else without thee?

O when shall my corrupt affection desire nothing but the perfect
accomplishment of thy blessed pleasure in me; and by me, in all things, and in
all times, in prosperity or adversity.

O my God, that I could serve and love thee as thy Saints and Angels do in
Heaven; and remember that thou art always truly present with me.

Ah! that I may once truly say: what is it to me in Heaven? and besides thee (my
God) what would I upon Earth?

O true and happy center of all happy rest: make all my thoughts, my words; and
deeds to tend to seek out, and finally to rest in none but only in the love of
thee.

The pratise of aspirations for the obtaining of certain virtues.
O My God, and when will thou replenish me with thy divine love: O that I could
but truly love thee above all other things, and after that my neighbor as my
self.

When shall I in all my adversity have only recourse unto thee, and rest
contentedly in the holy disposition of thy most holy providence, yea praise and
magnify thee in all my greatest tribulations.

Place thy confidence in God (my soul) and let him be thy love, and thy fear.

O when shall this great tepidity and coldness of my soul be thawed and
melted by the enflamed heat of true charity and the true love of thee?

Ah! when shell I perfectly dye to my felfe, in my affection to all wordly
creatures?

When shall I renounce my own vicious and corrupt unruly will?

O blessed Jesu, when will thou make me to be in all things grateful and
trully pleasing un to thee?

The practice of aspirations, whereby to free our selves from some certain sins
and imperfections.
HElas, my dear God, when will thou give me grace to mortify such, or such a
passion, or disordinate affection, which so greatly disquiets the peace and
happy repoe of my soul?

How long, O Lord, shall I runn headlong still into this pervere and wicked
imperfection?

Aid my frailty, thou O God of all pity, with thy holy grace; for with my
whole heart I desire to leave the same.

O my good God, and when shall I conquer and subdue such, or such a passion? my
will is good; but the frailty and corruption of my infirm nature has need of
thy grace, which I most humbly now crave of thee.

O my Almighty God, and shall I then never obtain the practice of true
humility?

O help me for thy great mercies sake to subdue by thy grace, such, or such a
vice which greatly molesteth me.

O when shall I truly practice a virtuous contempt of my self and seek a
perfect conformity unto thy blessed will?

O my merciful God, I now unfeynedly desire to resist, and perfectly to subdue
this vice, or that passion; grant me thy gracious help and succor me.

An advertisment.
ANd in the self same manner as in the former aspirations, so likewise you may
proceed to practice any other Aspirations when you perceive your self moved by
pious affection to some certain virtue, or to fly some vice; presenting the
same unto our Lord and Savior, by some such fervent jaculatory aspiration, as
above, to the end, that he may vouchsafe to give his divine aid to perform
the same.

Of Meditation.
PRayer is usually divided into vocal and mental. Vocal is that which is
articulated by the tongue. But Mental prayer is made by the mind, or soul,
thereby to raise it self unto God, be it by meditation; that is, by attentive
pondering some divine mystery, wherein the understanding is employed by
discourse, thereby to draw out some good affection, by which to exercise the
will upon good resolutions to piety, which is properly called Meditation, and
consists in a devout cordial and affectuous consideration of holy things, which
may move us to love and to bless Almighty God, and to imitate the virtues of
our blessed Savior, and of his Saints, to embrace good, and all virtue, and to
fly all evil, and vice: and it does powerfully stir us up, and puts us on
fervently to recurr unto God in all our necessities.

Neither are the simple and unlearned people to think that this mental prayer
is too high a practice; for often times the simple people speed best therein,
as God himself has testifyd by the mouth of the sacred Virgin Mother in her
Magnificat saying: Luke 1.
the hungry he has filled with good things: and the rich he sent away empty.
Yea and the holy Ghost in his proverbes 3.32. does plainly verify the same in
these express words: and his communication is with the simple: with such as in
a sincere and devout intention so love God, to contemn themselves, and to
seek in simplicity to accomplish his blessed will, much rather then to spend
his thoughts, doctor-like in learned and high speculative discourses, which is
rather a true study, and not a devout meditation; and therefore it produces
but small spiritual fruit: Whereas the less learned applying their thoughts
only to profit their souls by drawing from their meditation affections of the
love of God; of embracing such vermes, of hating such a vice (as the subject of
their Meditation suggests to them) they become by their meditation more humble,
more patient, and conformable to Gods blessed will and pleasure in all; which is
the certain mark of a holy and fruitful Medication, how dry or barren soever
it seemed to them, and deprived of all sensible or selfsatisfaction; or forced
fervours; whilst learneder persons with all high speculations producing no
great affections nor resolutions for the practice of virtue; all proves but
vanity in their own imagination, which produces no fruit at all.

But now that the less learned people are not incapable to practice this
prositable prayer of Meditation; it may be fitly expressed by this familiar
example of a pervere and wicked Meditation, made by a sinner; of whom King
David speaks saying; and they who sought me evils, speaks vanities: and
mediate evils all the day. For the revengfull man, pondering and musing with
him felfe of some disgrace, or injury, by memory he calls to mind the disgrace,
or wrong offered him. Then with his understanding, he considers the nature and
weight of such an injury; and thereby he provokes his will to hatred, to envy,
to malice, and to secke revenge upon the party from whom he received it.

This now is a most wicked Meditation, wholly interior, and all without one
word of the mouth.

Even so in like manner (and quite to the contrary) a good Man, calling to
mind his sin, and injuries thereby which he has offered unto God; he ponders,
considers, and examens the greatness thereof, the enormity, causes, effects, and
the properties of sin; whence he makes a firm resolution, out of the hatred
thereunto, to banish the like hereafter, and to avoyde all future occasions; and
this is an interior and a holy Meditation of sin.

This briefly in general. Here now follows a short meditation for each day in
the week; whereby the virtuous soul may put in practice this holy exercise:
and it may also serve as a little method inducing her to make more use of this
profitable devotion, according to leisure, and other helps for the same.

Matter of Meditation for ever day in the week.
Sunday, of Gods benefits unto mankind.
FIrst place yourselfe in the presece of God with a profound adoration thereof;
The Preparation.
and beseech him to inspire you with his grace. Which serves as the general
preparation for all the ensuing Meditations.

1. Consider the benefit of thy Creation; that when thou wast nothing,
Considerations
the Almighty created thee, not a stock, or a brute beast, but a reasonable
creature, endued with understanding, will, memory, and capable of all virtue.

2. Consider the end for which thou wast created; namely the service of God;
and that after a short time spent therein, thou might be partaker of those
celestial joys, which be prepared for thee in the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. Consider that all other creatures, and what soever thy God has bestowed
upon thee, is for the attainement of thy foresaid end; and so accordingly to be
employed by thee.

4. Consider the benefit of thy Redemption, of thy Vocation unto the catholic
faith; such also as concern thine own estate in particular.

For which, Affections
and all others, as well known, as unknown, labor to be thankful. Admire
with great confusion, and be truly sorry for your great ingratitude,
considering Gods infinite love to so unworthey a creature, abusing those his
innumerable blissings.

Resolve to be more carrefull for the future: Resolutions
preparing your mind with all indifferency to possess, or to be deprived: be
it of health or sickness; plenty or want; esteem or contempt; so it be
conformable to gods blessed will, let it be welcome.

Monday, of sin, and the grieviousnesse thereof
COnsider how odious sin is unto God. Which may appear by the greatness of the
punishment. First in the Angels. Secondly in our first Parents, who for eating
the forbidden fruit were deprived of that happy estate wherein thy were created
in Paradise: yea not only they, but we, and all their posterity do bear the
burden thereof; for so much as all the miseries of this life, and the next, do
spring from that bitter root.

Consider the malice of sin, which in a sort is infinite, being against the
infinite goodness of God. And therefore Jefus Christ, God and Man, was only
found worthy and able to accomplish the work of our Redemption: whose actions
being of infinite merit, were answerable to infinite justice.

Consider the lamentable effects thereof. 1. of Gods grace, whereof we are
deprived. 2. of the evils which we incur as the wrath of God; torment of
conscience; the servitude of satan; and the guilt of eternal damnation.
Astection


All this considered, ought not the very name of sin be more horrible to us,
then is Hell it self: and yet o how great is our senseless carelessness in
committing it; as also Gods infinite mercy to most ungreatefull Man, in
suffering his wicked boldness in offending so great, and so good a God!

Resolve therefore, and crave his grace, Resolutions
that thou may rather dye then offend him mortally: recurt to him for mercy,
as a prodigal child, and detest all thy former sins; and resolve to fly all
dangerous occasions of falling into them again.

Tuesday, of the miseries of this life.
1. COnsider the great frailty of Man's nature, subject to so many dangers, as
no glass is half so brittle, and therefore in the holy scripture it is
compared to a buble in the water, to flowers, to grass, to a shadow etc. As
for the soul, so many snares and ginns are laid by the world, the flesh, and
the devil, to ruyn it as S. Antony seeing them in a vision, cried out; o Lord
who shall be able to avoyde all these nets?

2. Consider in respect of temporal things; what a misery it is, that scarce
any one is contented with his own estate, seem he to others never so
prosperous: for that in this life we are like unto sick men, who tumble and
toss in their beds, not considering the cause of their discontent to be their
inward infirmity of vexing in mind.

3. Consider, that for so much as this life is so uncertain, and so fraught
with miseries, there is no greater madness in the world, then to set out hearts
and affections thereupon, and with such diligence to cast about for the things
thereof; and so little, or not at all, to labor for those which concern our
eternal felicity.

Adore and greatly admire the great goodness of God, Affections
who therefore has mixed those many miseries with this present life, thereby to
compel us to hate it; and to draw us by it to aspire unto our Beatitude.
Resolution


Resolve hereafter to withdraw your heart from such vain and deceiptful
contentments of the world, and fix your mind upon what is eternal.

Wednesday, of the hour of death.
I Magin thy self to lie upon thy death bed, having a hallowed candle in thy
hand, a crucifix upon thy breast, thy ghostly Father calling upon thee, that
though thou can not speak, yet to move thy hand, in token of thy hope in the
mercies of Jesus Christ. Thus then disposed proceed to the points of meditation
following.

Consider the certainty of death according to that of the Apostle: it is
appointed for all Men once to dye, Hebr. 16
of which our Eternity depends: but as for the hour when, the place where, or
the manner how, all this is most uncertain; save that we see death commonly to
come when it is least expected.

2. Consider what a trouble it will be at that time, not only to look back to
the things of the world, which in a moment thou must forsake, but especially
when thou shalst look before thee to what is to come: finding thy self very
uncertain of thy salvation, both by reason of the multitude of thy sins (many
whereof being utterly forgot then come fresh unto thy mind, and such as before
seemed small, shall then be thought heavy (as also in regard of the suddenness
and strictness of thy account, the severity of the judge, and the terror of
Hell, etc.

Beg at Gods hands, Affections.
that these points may be so imprinted in thy mind, as thou may always have
a care so to live, as thou would be found in the hour of death. Resolutions.


We must therefore firmly resolve to do presently what we are certain we shall
wish at that hour to have done, as in particular to forsake such, or such a
vice: to embrace and practice such, or such a virtue. To begin presently to
live well, according to our calling: for he hardly dies well who lives ill, and
repentance made by a dying Man, is exceeding dangerous and doubtful. And
therefore resolve to watch, for you know neither the day, nor the hour, which
God will have to be unknown to us, to the end we should be always ready and
prepared.

Thursday, of judgment.
1. SO soon as our soul is separated from the body, it appears immediately
before the tribunal of Gods judgment, there to render a most exact, a severe,
and dreadful account of all our thoughts, words, and deeds; yea and for each
moment of time since our first use of reason; as also for all his gracious
gifts, bestowed on us, either of grace, fortune, or nature to be employed for
his glory, and our own souls health.

2. Consider that this account is so much the more dreadful, in that it is made
to a judge, to whose power none can resist: to whose knowledge nothing can lie
hid; whose sentence is souveraine, without appeal, and the consequence of it
concerns an Eternity of weal, or woe; and that to be put in execution
immediately, and to endure so long, as God is God.

3. All this considered, O stupid carelessness of Man to think so little to be
prepared for this uncertain and most dreadful hour. Affections
What steward would be so ill provided to make his reckning but to a temporal
Prince, although it only should concern this present life, whereas this is to
God himself, and concerns Eternity, which as yet we have happy time to
negotiate by the faithful practice of these ensving necessary resolutions.

First to detest and fly all mortal sin, above death it self; Resolutions
and to crave Gods grace to that end. Secondly to frame our thoughts, words,
and actions, as if to be considered, examined, and sentenced now here immediaty
by this our heavenly judge. 3. To keep a lively and perpetual memory of our
four last things, death, judgment, Hell, and Heaven: and lastly to examine
frequently our selves, whither we are at present in that state, as were fit to
appear, if God should now immediaty call us to render that our last most
dreadful reckening whereon should depend our sentence of Eternity.

Friday, of Hell.
1. Hell being the prison of Gods justice for his enemies, as Heaven is the
place of recompense for his friends; so are they opposite in all, and beyond
expression; the one for torment, and the other for felicity; and both to last
eternally; and comprehend all which can be either said or thought of both
respectively, in their several kind.

2. Consider that the sinner here for a moment of seeming and deluding content
forfeits his heavenly and eternal bliss, for which he was made: and it is most
happily pourchaced by such as prefer the love of God, and his blessed will
before their own corrupt sensuality, cooperating with his holy grace for
avoiding of sin.

This now being well pondered; Affections
have we not just cause to bless, and adore Gods love and goodness for having
provided us of so many power full helps for our beatitude with no less
persuasions to fly and avoyde those eternal torments of Hell; and to preserve us
from sin, the only cause of that endless misery, by Sacraments, by
instructions, by holy inspirations, by good exemples, and by many other helps
and powerful motives to virtue, and to detest all sin.

We must therefore resolve, Resolutions.
whilst God here graciously does lend us this acceptable time, and the days
for salvation, to employ them much more carefully, then formerly we have done,
for that happy end: and to be firm and constant in faithfully observing the
good resolutions with which God has graciously inspired us for the amendment
and avoiding our most habitual sins, as also the chief occasions thereunto,
whereby we are in most danger to offend Almighty God, and to cast our souls
into the eternal flames of Hell, where they shall be cruciated, day and night
(says S. John) for ever and ever. Apoc. 10.10.


Saturday, of the joys of Heaven.
1. COnsider that this Beatitude consists in the most blessed vision of the
glorious Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. In the fellowship and society
of Angels, Cherubins, Apostles, Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, Virgins,
Confessors, and generally of all the faithful departed this life, and now
crowned in the eternal glory of Heaven.

2. Consider that in this celestial estate; is not only the absence of all
evil, but the abundance of all good things; according to that of the Apostle:
the eye of Man has not seen, nor the ear has heard, neither has it entered
into the heart of Man, to conceive what God has laid up for them that love him.
1 Cor. 2 9.


3. Consider with your self, by what steps, and degrees the Saints, and holy
servants of God (who now reign in everlasting glory with him) have obtained
the same; and labor to imitate their examples.

O bless inexplicable! Affections
those happy souls possess God; and God possesses them: God is their whole
all, in all. He is their all in substance, by communicating to them their final
perfection, and by elevating them to a being which is divine. He will be their
all to their understanding; by clearly manifesting himself unto them: he will
be their all to their will, bestowing himself unto them by a most sweet
intimate gust and savor, drawing them by this blessed means into an ocean of
infinite joys.

Let us therefore resolve to shake off this stupid dullness in neglecting our so
happy land of promise; Resolutions.
for the love of which, we ought to despise all earthly pleasures, and vain
contents, as too base and abject for our higher and more noble thoughts, and
hopes which we expect in Heaven.

An advertisment.
THis following exercise made by a pious and approoved Author (whose humility
would not permit himself to be known) I have judged both useful and very
necessary for all who desire to gain their heavenly bliss by the happy art of
dying well; which must be learnt by frequent practice of holy acts in time of
health, like as they are to be used at the time of death: for who neglects them
in health, will, diyng, hardly perform them well, weakness, pain, fear,
trouble, and many impediments, very hardly then permitting a dying Man to
produce those acts, whereof a former habit was not gained. Which now
notwithstanding by the practice of this holy exercise (being made familiar in
time of health) may also produce both happy acts, and such as are not so hard
to be exercisd in that extremity of sickness.

A most profitable exercise containing a preparation to death. Togeither with
the acts necessary to dispose the soul to this last passadge. As also the
Recommendations of the soul in English.
Blessed are the servants whom, when our Lord comes, he shall find watching.
To our blessed Lord Jesus Christ.
Savior of the world, word Incarnate, thou who art the life of those who dye,
and the death of those who live: the life (I say) of those who dye, by the
glory which thou give them, and which thou have purchased for them with thy
most precious blood: the death of those who live, by the grace thou give them
to dye to the flesh, and live in Spirit: quicken this exercise with thy divine
love, to the end that by the practice of it, thou may find us so well
prepared for death, that we may live eternally with thee in Heaven; there to
bless, praise, and love thee, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Advise for the due practice of this exercise.
SInce it is a most constant truth verifid by daily experience [which
nevertheless we easily forget] that we must dye, and that peradventure we may
either be surprised by a sudden death [as we see it happen to many when they
least think of it] or that the extreme pains, or other accidents of our
sickness, may deprive us of the liberty and capacity to perform acts requisite
in that last hour: that hour [I say] which is the most important of all
hours; that hour, after which we shall have no more hours: that hour which
must decide our happiness, or misery for all Eternity.

It will be most profitable to set aside one day in every month, wherein to
prepare our selves by the exercises of a spiritual death, to those we should
really make, when we come to dye actually. Watch and keep your selves
prepared, says our Lord for the son of Man, Mark. 13
will come when you expect him not: and the wise man says: wheresoever the
tree falls, there it shall remain. Eccles. 11


If opportunity present it self, we ought, either upon the eve, or the day,
which we design for this exercise, to make our Sacramental Confession to the
Priest: notwithstanding which, for greater purity, and more vest preparation,
we may make our spiritual Consession to Jeins Christ before, or after the
Sacramental, each one according to his devotion.

After Consession we are to communicate really, or spiritually in form of
viaticum; and to consider it as the last Communion of out life.

Upon the day we perferme this exercise, if we have convenienty, we ought to
hear Mass, to the end, that in his sacrifice [which is a real representation
of that of the Crosse] we may more nearly and particulary unite our selves to
Jesus Christ dying, offering as well this as all other sacrifices which shall be
offered to the end of the world; for obtaining the grace of a good and holy
death.

It will be most profitable to fix one day in every month [each one according
to his leisure and devotion for this exercise; and they who cannot perform it
all at once, may take the first point in the morning, and the second at some
other hour of the same day; or make it in two days. But in that case, the
acts of contrition, says, hope, and charity, contained in the first point,
must be repeted. And besides that, our Meditations and lectures of that day,
ought to be upon the subject of death.

We ought further to employ our selves more particularly in good works and
practices of mortification and virtue.

And it is to be noted, that although there be many acts prescribed in this
exercie, nevertheless it is not intended thereby to oblidge any one precisely
to those acts, but only to facilitate the practice of them, to such as have not
yet attained to a habit of such acts; for the best are those which love
produces.

At the end of this exercise are added the Recommandations of the foul in.
English for the consolation of such as (for a boly prevention of their death)
having devotion to join them to this exercise, may not peradventure understand
them in latin. And in this, the terms which relate to an other, must be
changed, and applied to our selves; as in steed of saying, pray for him,
receive his sonic; we must say; pray for me, recove my soul: and so of the
rest; reserving the contlusion of this exercise, till after the last prayer.

Now the principal fruits we ought to gather from this exercise (as shall
besaid in the following meditation) are contempt of the world, disesteeme of
the creatures, abnegation of our selves, and amendment of our faults, which are
the true means to obtain the grace of such a death, as shall be the beginning
of a happy life for ever.

Meditation to enter into the dispositions of making a good death.
Place your self in the presence of Gods beseech him to inspire you.
FOr a foundation of this Meditation, we must well and thoroughly conceive, and
be fully satisfied of this truth; that God has given us our life only in
trust: from whence it follows, that if we be not always prepared and disposed
to render it to him, we deny him his right of Souverainety over our being.

It is ordained that all Men shall dye once; Heb. 9.
and after death follows jndgment, says the great Apostle.

Considering this truth, that we can dye but once, and that an ill death can
never be repared in the whole extent of Eternity; we see how necessary it is
for prevention of a surprise to watch al ways, and to live like the servant
mentioned in the Gospel, Duke 12.
who attends the coming of his Master.

The first point.
NOw since we must necessarily dye, it highly concerns us, thoroughly to
comprchend this truth: that death being most certain, and the hour of it most
uncertain, all Christian wisdom consists in a good and holy preparation for
that moment, to the end we neglect not a business which is in truth to us the
business of businesses; and the sole, and only business we have to do in
this world; since we are here only to save our soul: and loosing it we loose
all: for what shall it prefit a Man to gain the whole world, Mar. 2.
if he loose his own soul says our souveraine Master Jesus Christ.

O God, how great is the blindness of the most part of Men; who never
reflecting upon this so divine and important a truth, lead only an earthly,
sensual, and animal life, and never elevating their spirit to heavenly things,
settle their affections so firmly upon this mortal life, as to prefer it
before that which is eternal. John 10.
Whosoever loves his life [saies our B. Lord] shall loose it, and whosoever
hates it in this world shall gain it in Eternity.

O my God, we do not then love our life as we ought when we adhere too close
to it, since this adherence to our temporal life proceeding from an inordinate
love of our selves, putts us in danger to loose that which is eternal. Since
also thou thy self asseurest us, Luke 14
that whosoever comes to thee, and hates not his own life, can not be thy
disciple. Grant me such a holy hatred of this mortal life, as may cause me
continually to aspire and pretend to that which is eternal there to live with
thee world without end.

2. Point.
PRecious in the sight of our Lord is the death of his Saints says the
Psalmist. Psalm. 15.
If we will dye their life, keeping always our affections alienated from the
creatures, as if we were to dye every moment; since there is no moment wherein
we may not be surprised by death, and wherein we ought not to be prepared to
receive it, if we will not hazard our salvation. We ought to surmont the
natural fear we have of it, by faith, and by a confidence we should have, that
Jesus Christ, who keeps the keys of life and death, and who loves us
infinitely more then we love our selves, will send it us in such a time and
manner, as in his divine providence he has forseene to be most convenient for
us. Has he not created us for life eternal? Do we not believe that life to be
more happy, then this which is mortal? if we live not in this belief, we have
no faith, and consequently no hope, since we cannot arrive at this happy life
which he has promissed us, but by the way of death. But what charity can that
interessed soul have, who loves her own life more then the will of God, and
whose fear of dying exceeds her desire of seeing and uniting herself to him?
Ioh. 4.
Perfect charity [sayes the holy Evangelist] drives fourth fear. And if we
ought to testify our love to God by our hatred of sin, where is the hatred we
bear it? since knowing that we cannot live without daily relapsing into it, we
have nevertheless an extreme apprehension of death? O if we truly loved God,
with what joy would we embrace death to the end we might be in a state never
more to be able to offend his infinite goodness, since the least sin [as the
Doctors say] is more to be dreaded thendeath if self.

3. Point.
IF God should leave the time, hour, and manner of our death to our choice,
could we make a better then he himself, who ordaynes it by his infinite
wisdom, power, and goodness, and who having made us for himself, and
redeemed us with his blood, desires nothing so much as to save us, and conduct
us to our last end? Since our faith teaches us this truth, why do we not
entirely abandon the care of our life and death to him? What can be more
advantageous to us in Heaven, in Earth, in life and in death, then to
accomplish his most just and holy will? And since we must necessarily undergo
the ordees of his divine will, were it not better to do it meritoriously by an
humble submission, and filial confidence in his divine goodness, then to
execute it by force, like the devils; and by our resistance to render this
action more worthy of punishment then reward?

If the fear of our sins cause us to apprchand death, and desire prolongation
of life, to the end to do penance for them, what penance can be more
efficacious, and acceptable to God, then our perfect conformity to his holy
will, and our entyre submission to the sentence of our death, to the end to
render him the obedience due from a creature to its Creator, and to testify to
him that we prefer the honor of pleasing him, before our own life? if the
merit of our acts bear proportion with the difficulty we find in their
execution, what can be more difficult then to renounce our life? and what
better penance can we perform, then to give it with a good heart to God; since
in making him this present, we not only give him all we are able to give, but
also all which is most dear and precious to us? no Man has greater charity
then he who lays down his life, says our divine Savior, and if a God would
vouchsafe for us to dye so painful and grievous a death, and loose his life
upon a cross for our salvation, shall we dare to refuse him ours: shall we
esteem our life more precious, or more necessary then his? O my soul if we
loved God, ifwe had a true sense, and acknowledgment of this sovereign benefit,
would we not desire to have a thousand lives to give him! O my God, since I am
nothing but by thee, I will be nothing but for thee; and so as I be what thou
desire I should be, it imports me very little whither I live or dye.

Affections and Resolutions.
SInce that upon the moment of my death, depends my eternal salvation, grant
me grace, O my God, to keep my self prepared for this last hour by a true
hatred of sin, by a perfect contempt of the world with its vain honors,
pleasures, and riches, and by a perfect abnegation of my self: suffer me not
to sleep in the forgetfulness of death, least the lamp of chrity being
extinguished, and the oil of good works spent, thou surprise me in this state,
and pronounce against me, as heretofore against those foolish Virgins that
dreadful word, I know you not: but keeping my self always in expection of
thy com^ing, grant that I may merit to enter with thee to that eternal
marriage where neither eye has seen, nor care has heard, nor the heart of Man
comprehended what thou have prepared for those who love thee. Give me, O Lord,
the light of thy holy spirit to the end I suffer not my self to be deceived
and seduced by my senses, in mistaking falsehood for truth, nor esteem the
things of this mortal life good, or evil, but in as much only as they
advance me toward this end, or divert me from it.

The Conclusion.
LEt us conclude this meditation with this truth: that if we will dye the death
of the just, we must live their life also; since the true means to obtain a
good death, is to lead a good life. And as there is nothing more precious,
nothing more to be desired, then a good death; so there is nothing more
miserable, nothing more to be dreaded, then an ill one. In a business of so
high importance the most secure way, is, to live every day as though we were to
dye before it expire; always keeping our affections so disengaged from earthly
things, as if we were really at the point of death, where all that is not God,
will appear but smoke and vapor.

A most profitable Exercise to prepare our selves for death.
Upon the moment of death depends Eternity.
THe day we make this Exercise; as soon as we awake, we are to enter into the
thoughts of death, and consider it as the last of our life.

Preparation.
WE are to imagine our selves sick in our bed, even to extremity, and that our
good Angel comes by Gods command to declare to us the irrevocable sentence of
our death, saying as Isay said to Exechias: put thy affairs in order, for thou
shalst dye.

Prostrate at the foot of the Crucifix, or before the B. Sacrament, let us
implore from the bottom of our heart grace and light from the holy Ghost, the
assistance of the B. Virgin, of the saints our Patrons, and our good Angel;
and then make the following acts.

An act of Resignation.
1. MY heart is ready O God, my heart is ready; not my will, but thine be done in
me, upon me, and by me, now and in all Eternity.

O God eternal, immense, and infinite, who art abundantly sufficient to thy
self, and have no need of thy creatures: what matter is it whither I live or
dye, so as I accomplish thy holy will, in which only my true life consists?
Let not then my will bo done, but thine, O my God.

Confession of our own nothing.
2. TO the end to acknowledge the dependence I have upon thee, my sovereign
Creator, and openly to confess before Heaven and Earth that thou art only, he
who is; and that I am that vile Creature, who is not; I embrace with all humble
submission the destruction of this corruptible being, and am content, that by
death it return to the nothing from whence thou have taken it.

Restitution of our being to God.
3. O My Sovereign Creator, I desire to restore thee the being which thou have
given me; and to this effect, I accept death in such manner as may most please
and glorify thee. Dispose then of thy Creature, and destroy this body of sin in
punishment of the offenses it has committed against thy divine Majesty. Let
this carth return to earth, but let my Spirit, which is created after thy
image and likeness, return to thee.

Acknowledgement of the Sovereign dominion of God.
4. O My God, although I must dye by necessity, yet I desire by submission to
render my death voluntary, and am glad, that in punishment of the ill use I
have made of the free will thou have given me, it shall put me into a state,
wherein I shall be no more able to resist that Sovereign Dominion which thou, as
lawful Lord of all creatures, have over me.

Acceptance of death in punishment of our sins.
5. SInce death, O my God, is the punishment thou have ordained for sin; with
an humble heart, and entire submission to thy most just decree, and a Spirit of
penance, I accept it; together with all the pains, humiltations, and
privations which accompany it, in satisfaction for all those offenses which I
have committed against thy awful Majesty.

Oblation of our life to God.
6 REceive, Omy Savior, the oblation I make of my body and life, which I offer
and immolate to thy divine Majesty, as a sacrifice and burnt offering: unite it
to that which thou have offered upon the Cross for me, and consume it with the
fire of thy divine love.

Desire to render to Jesus death, for death.
7. O My divine Jesus, since that the love of me has caused thee to dye upon
the Cross for my salvation, is it not reasonable, that for the love of thee I
should accept death with a good heart, to the end to recompense, as far as I
am able, that which thou have suffered for me? O why have I not a thousand
lives, that to this end I might lay them down all, and thereby testify that
thou art my God.

Spiritual Confession.
Humbling our selves profoundly at the feet of Jesus Christ, as if he were
present in his holy Humanity, we ought to accuse our selves to him of all our
sins, taking a short review of them, but especially of those which are most
notable: in consequence whereof, we may excite our soul to a lively and loving
repentance for them.

An act of Contrition.
O My God, prostrate before thy Sovereign Majesty, I most humbly crave pardon,
as well for all my contempts, and abuses of thy holy graces, as for the sins I
have committed since the very day of my birth, in thought, word, and deed; I
retract and disavow them; yea from the bottom of my heart I renounce them, and
wish I had never committed them, not in regard of the pains which they merit,
but because I have offended thy infinite goodness which deserves to be
infinitely loved and served by all Creatures. O that my heart were capable of an
infinite grief wherewith to expiate them. But to supply what is wanting in me, O
my God, accept that which my Savior has sufferd in the garden of Olives, and
upon the Cross for the sins of the whole world, and particularly for me.

Accept also to this end, the grief and contrition of all the saints; cleanse
me from my secret sins, and pardon me those which I have committed in others. O
my Lord despise not an humble and contrite heart, which expects pardon of thy
mercy alone. Thou have said, that whenever a sinner shall truly grieve for
his sins, thou will no more remember his iniquities.

And if be thy pleasure to prolonge my life; I make a sin purpose, by thy
grace, to amend my faults; especially such and such; and will endeavor to
satisfy for what is past.

Having made this act, we may receive the absolution which Jesus Christ the
Sovereign Priest gives us, by applying to our selves his divine merits: after
which let us contemplate him, saying to us, as he did to S. Mary Magdalen: thy
sins are forgiven thee, go in peace. Say the Psalm, Miserere mei Deus, etc.
in the Spirit of true penance.

Aspirations to the three divine Persons.
O Eternal Father, since thou have so loved the world, as to give us thine only
Son, ought not I to hope for salvation from thy mercy? Thou have not given
him to condemn us, but to save us, and to this end have thou imposed upon him
the most holy name of Jesus.

O divine Jesus, be to me Jesus. Remember what thou have said; that thou came
not for the just, but for sinners. O my God thou desire not the death of a
sinner, but that he should be converted and live. Convert me then to thee, that
I may live eternally.

Come, O divine Spirit, repose in my soul with thy seven gifts, to the end
to purify, quicken, and sanctify her. Consume with the fire of thy holy love,
all earthly inclinations yet remaining in her, and strengthen her in the last
passage against all the temptations of her enemies.

An act of Faith.
I Protest, O my God, before Heaven and Earth that I will dye in the faith and
union of the holy Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church. I firmly believe
what she believes and teaches, because thou, O God, who art the eternal
truth, have said and revealed it.

Thou art that infinite goodness and sanctity, which cannot deceive, that
infinite wisdom which cannot err. From hencefourth I renounce all
temptations, which the enemy may suggest to me in the last moments of my life
contrary to this my protestation: and I render thee thanks from the bottom of
my heart, for the immense favor thou have done me, in placing me amongst the
children of thy holy Church.

Recite here the Apostles Creed, and make reflection upon every Article of it,
protest to believe them all.

An act of Hope.
O My God although for the multitude, and enormity of my sins, I most justly
deserve Hell; nevertheless confiding entirely in the merits of my Savior Jesus
Christ and in the greatness of thy mercy, which can pardon more then I can
effend, I will hope for remission of all my transgressions, and grace to
persevere in thy holy love, to which I especially consecrate the last moment of
my life.

An act of Charity.
O My God, when shall the time come that my soul being separated from this
mortal body, and from all Creatures, it shall be perfectly united to thee, to
live thee with that pure and invariable love, wherewith the Saints in Heaven
love the?

What do I desire in Heaven, or in Earth besides thee? the God of my heart, my
God and my eternal portion! I esseeme al things as dung and silthynesse to
gain Jesus Christ.

An act of Charity toward our neighbor.
O My Lord, I beg grace and salvation for all the Creatures whom thou have
redeemed with thy most precious blood, especially for the children of thy holy
Church; and more particularly for those who have any way offended me. I pardon
them, O my God, from the bottom of my heart, as I desire thou should pardon
me.

Desire to receive Jesus Christ.
O My God, my Creator, and my Redeemer, my beginning and my end, my only
satiety and Beatitude: I ardently desire to receive thee, to the end to unite
my self to thee. Come then into my soul, sanctify and replenish all her
faculties: come into my body, and purify all its senses: come into my heart and
possess all its affections; to the end that every moment in the remainder of
my life my be entirely consecrated to thy love.

A spiritual Communion, by way of Viaticum.
I Et us hear our good Angel, who invites us to eat of this bread of life,
and who speaks to us, as heretofore to the Prophet Elias: rise and eat, for
thou have yet a great way to go.

We may represent to our selves Jesus Christ accompanied by the B. Virgin, our
good Angel, and holy Patrons, entering into our Chamber, to the end to
administer to us with his own divine hands his most sacred body; as he did
heretofore to his Apostles in the last supper; and saying to us: take and eat,
this is my body; which shall be delivered to death, to the end to give thee life.

Having adored him with all our heart, we may say to him these words.

O my God, since thou have said, that he who eats thee shall live eternally:
grant me this grace, that by receiving thy holy body, I may never more live,
but in thee, by thee, and for thee: and that when I shall leave this mortal
life, I may by the force, and virtue of this divine bread, attain to an union,
and sight of thy divine Majesty in Heaven.

O whence comes this happiness to me, that my God should vouchsafe to visit me?

O Lord I am not worthy that thou should come unto my soul, but say only
the word, and it shall be heald.

Having receivd him; we must discourse lovingly with him; calling before him
all our senses and faculties, to the end to swear fidelity to him: let us
renew all our vows and promises to him, and conjure him never to forsake us,
saying with the Disciples who were going to Emaus: stay with us O Lord, for it
is late, the evening of my life is come.

And with S. Simeon.
O Lord let now my soul depart in peace, since she has seen thy salvation.

And with David.
ALthough I walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil,
because thou art with me.

O God put thy self as a divine seal upon my heart, to the end that no earthly
thing may find entrance there.

Let us unit our Communion to that which our divine Savior made before his
death, and to all other which the B. Virgin, and all the Saints have made: to
all those also which shall be made even to the end of the world; thereby to
supply the defects we have committed in receiving this divine Sacrament.

Let us render thanks, as well for the grace of the Communion, as for all
others which he has so liberally bestowed upon us, inviting all creaturs to
bless, praise, and magnify him with us by the psalm; Laudate Dominum omnes
gerues, or the Canticle Benedicite omnia apera etc.

2. Point. Spiritual Extreme unction.
WE may represent to our sselves Jesus Christ emering into our Chamber
accompanied as before, in the article of Communion, bringing with him the holy
only composed of his precious blood, to the end to apply to us these sacred
unctions with his own divine hands: and in receiving them, we may make these
acts of Contrition for our sins committed by each of our senses.

At the unction of the eyes.
O Jesus, my Savior, and my God, I most humbly beg pardon for all my sins
committed by so many inordinate looks, and tears unprofitably shed; for the
effacing of which, vouchsafe to apply to me the merit of those amorous looks
which from the Cross thou were pleased to cast upon those who crucisi'd thee,
and of the tears thou have shed for my salvation.

Of the Ears.
PArdon me also the sins I have committed in hearing with pleasure so many
evil discourses, and in satisfaction for them vouchsafe to apply to me the
merit of that patience and humility wherewith thou were pleased to hear all
their blasphemies, injuries, and calumnies which have been uttered against thee.

At the nostrills.
I also most humbly crave pardon, O my God, for the excessive pleasure I have
sought, and taken in perfumes and sweet odours, and for my too much niceness
and impatience in ill ones, which I have so sensually avoided. To satisfy for
this; vouchsafe to apply to me the merit of those ill odours which thou did
daigne to smell in the Stable, and upon mount Calvary.

At the Mouth.
O My Savior Jesus Christ, pardon me the infinite number of fins which I have
committed both in words, and in excess of eating and drinking; expiate them, O
my God, by applying to me the merit of thy divine prayers, preaching, and holy
fastings.

At the hands.
Pardon me my divine Jesus, so many evil and unprofitable actions which I have
done, and all the pleasure and delight I have sought to satisfy my sense of
feeling, and to this end apply to me the merit of those holy actions and divine
miracles which thou have wrought with those sacred hands, which were nayld to
the hard wood of the Cross.

At the feet.
O My God, from the bottom of my heart I beseech thee to pardon all the stepps
I have employed either unpromably, or with evil intentions: apply to me in
satisfaction for these faults, the merit of those sacred stepps which thou have
trodden barefoot with so much weariness, especially in carrying the Cross.

After Extreme unction, we may make these following acts in a spirit of
penance.

1. O my God, to the end to satisfy thy divine justice, as far as I am able,
and with my whole being to make reparation for my faults, I accept death with
all my heart, and rejoice that my soul shall be separated from my body in
punishment of the sins I have committed, in preferring my corrupt inclinations
before thy holy will.

2. And that this body in punishment for its pride and ambition shall be hidden
in the earth, and trodden under foot.

3. And that in satisfaction for the inordinate love I have borne it, and the
excessive care I have had to give it ease and pleasure; it shall return to
corruption, and become the nourishment of worms.

4. And for the inordinate affection I have borne to the Creatures and the
abuse I have made of them; I am glad, to be deprived and separated from them.

5. And for my forgetfulness of thee, O my God, during my life, I accept that
which will be had of me, after my death.

6. And for having used all my senses to offend thee; I accept, and effer thee
the privation I must now suffer, of the use of them.

7. And in punishment for all the vain complacence I have had for the
creatures I submit my self by death, to be the object of their hatred and
horror.

The approach of death.
LEt us hear our Good Angel saying to us, Math. 15
as to the Virgins in the Gospel. Behold the Bridegroom is coming, go
fourth to meet him.

Preparing our selves coming, with the burning lamp of charity in our hands,
we may say with David.
I Was, glad when it was said to me, we will go into the house of our Lord.

O my Lord God of Hosts, how amiable are thy tabernacles! my soul longs after
them.

My soul thirsts after the fountain of life, when shall I come and appear
before thy face?

As the thirsty heart longs after the fountains of water; so, o my God, my soul
longs after thee.

O how ardent is my desire to be delivered from this body, to the end to be
with Jesus Christ.

Union to Jesus Christ dying.
O my divine Jesus, grant that my pains may be united to thine, that my agony
and death may be sanctified by thine, and that I may partake of those holy
dispositions wherein thy sacred soul was in the last moment of thy life, to
which with my whole heart I unite my self to supply those which are wanting in
me. I abandon my self to thee, to the end to suffer for thy love the pains of
death, even as great and as long as thou shalst please. And I disavow all the
imperfections which the violence of my sickness may cause me to commit.

Recourse to the B. Virgin, and the Saints.
O Holy Virgin Mother of my Lord and Savior, refuge of sinners, be now my
Advocate, employ thy power for me to the most holy Trinity.

O Mary Mother of grace, Mother of mercy, receive me at the hour of my death,
and defend me from the enemy.

Show thy self to be a mother, and obtain that he who for my salvation would
vouchsafe to be thy son, and be borne of thee, may also receive me by thee.

O all ye Saints and Blessod spirits intercede now for my soul, and assist me
in this extremity, to the end I may obtain victory over my enemies.

Great S. Joseph, and my holy Patrons and Protectors assist me.

Blessed S. Michael, fight for me.

O glorious Angel, my dear guardian, defend me from the ambushes of my enemies,
and forsake me not in this last passadge.

Then addressing our sselves to God, we may say.
FTernall Father, look upon me in the face of thy dear son Jesus Christ,
who has spilt his blood for my salvation.

Have pity on me, according to thy great mercy, and pardon my sins for the
glory of thy name.

O my God enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight no Man
living can be justified.

O my divine Jesus, interpose thy Cross and Passion betwixt thy judgment and
my soul.

My God, my Lot is in thy hands, save me, O my Lord, I have hoped in thee, I
shall not be confounded for ever.

An act of Adoration to the most holy Trinity.
O Most holy and individed Trinity, I adore thee with my whole heart, and now,
and for all Eternity, unite my self to all those adorations, and praises which
the most holy humanity of my Savior Jesus christ, his most glorious Mother,
and all the Saints, and blessed spirits render thee, and shall render thee
eternally in Heaven. I offer thee all the sacrifices of this most sacred
humanity which are already offered, and which shall be offered even to the day of
judgment upon all the Altars in the world, in satisfaction for my sins, and in
gratitude for all thy divine benefits.

Those who make use of the Recommendation of the soul may remember to make
this conclusion after it. And then may be said. Subvenite Sancti.
Conclusion of this exercise.

An act of entire resignation or abandon of our selves to God.
O My God I abandon my soul entirely and without reservation to thy divine
judgments: I submit my self to them from the bottom of my heart, I adore and
reverence them now and in all Eternity, as most just and equitable.

Spiritual expiration.
Houlding the Crucifix in our hand, we may say these words.
MY God, my Creator, and my Redeemer, behold I come to thee, because thou
call me, receive me into the bosom of thy mercy.

And kissing with tender affection the wounds of the Crucifix, we may at each
of them pronounce the holy names of Jesus and Marie: and then having repeted
these last words of our Savior.

Into thy hands O Lord I commend my spirit.

We may expire in the sacred wound of the side of sweet Jesus, and choosing that
for our toumbe, we may hide our selves in his divine heart. Then after a little
recollection we may say the prayers which are to be rehearsed after death.

Subvenite.
SUecour spedily o ye Saints of God etc. The rest of these prayers are placed
at the end of the Recommendations of the soul.

After this exercise, we ought to consider our selves as dead to the world, and
our selves. In consequence whereof, we ought often to say with S. Paul I live
new no more J, but Jesus Christ lives in me, my life is hidden with Jesus
Christ in God.

The recommendation of the soul, which ought to begin with the little
Litanies: and the following prayers are to be said during the agony.
LOrd have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.
Holy Marie pray for him. All ye holy Angels and Archangels pray for. Holy Abel
pray for All ye quires of the just. pray ye Holy Abraham S. John Baptist S.
Peter. S. Paul pray. S. Andrew S. John Al ye holy Apostles and Evangelists. Al
ye holy Disciples of our Lord. Al ye holy Innocents S. Steven S. Laurence
pray Al ye holy Martyrs. pray ye S. Silvester S. Gregory pray S. Augustine Al
ye holy Bishops and Confessors. pray ye S. Benet S. Francis pray. All ye holy
Monks and Heremits. pray ye S. Mary Magdalen. S, Lucy pray. All ye holy
Virgins and Widows. pray ye All ye Saints of God. Intercede for us. O Lord be
favorable to him and pardon him his sins. O Lord be gracious to him, and
deliver him. From thy wrath. O Lord deliver him. From the danger of death. O
Lord deliver him. From the pains of Hell. O Lord deliver him. From the power of
the devil. O Lord deliver him. By thy holy Nativity. O Lord deliver him. By thy
Cross and Passion. O Lord deliver him. By thy death and burial. O Lord deliver
him. By thy glorious Resurrection. O Lord deliver him. By thy admirable
Ascension. O Lord deliver him. By the grace of the holy Ghost, our souveraine
Comforter. O Lord deliver him. In the day of judgment. O Lord deliver him. O
Lord, we miscrable sinners, pray thee to hear us. That thou may spare him. O
Lord hear us. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have
mercy upon us.
The Prayers.
Proficiscere anima Christiana.
Go fourth of this world, O Christian soul, in the name of the Father
almighty, who created thee in the name of his son^e Jesus Chapter who redeemed
thee: in the name of the holy Ghost who infused himself into thee: in the name
of the holy Angels, and Archangels: in the names of the Thrones and
Dominations: in the names of the Principalites and Powers: in the name of the
Cherubins and Seraphins: in the name of the Patriarchs and Prophets: in the
name of the holy Apostles and Evangelists: in the name of the holy Martyrs and
Confessors: in the name of the holy Monks and Herimits, in the name of the
holy Virgins and of all Gods Saints: let thy dwelling be this day in peace,
and thy habitation in holy Syon, by the Merits of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Deus misericors, Deus clemens.
O God of mercy and clemency, who according to the multitude of thy mercies
forgettest the sins of such as are penitent, and by pardon abolishest the guilt
of their past crimes: look graciously upon thy servant N. who with a sincere
confession of his heart implores remission of all his sins, and mercifully hear
him. Repair in him, o most indulgent Fasher, whatsoever is corrupted by
earthly fraitly, or ruind by the malice of the devil; and unite this member of
thy Redemption to the body of thy Church. Let his sighs, O Lord, moove thee to
pity let his tears excite thee to compassion, and receive him into the favor
of thy reconciliation, who confides in nothing but thy pure mercy: through
Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Commendo te.
I Commend thee, dear brother, to God almighty, and remitt thee into the hands
of him, whose creature thou art; to the end that when by death thou shall have
paid the debt of humane nature, thou may return to thy Creator, who formed
thee of the slyme of the earth. Let the splendid quires of Angels come fourth
to receive thee, let the maiestical senate of the Apostles meet thee: let the
tryumphant Host of Martyrs accompany thee: Let the glorious assembly of bright
Confessors encompasse thee: let the shining troop of rejoicing Virgins
congratulate thee: Let the embraces of a happy repose transport thee into the
bosom of the Patriaches; let the mild and gracious countenance of sweet Jesus
appear to thee, and ordain thee place amongst those who never cease to serve
him. May thou never know the horror of Hell, the tortures of its flames nor
the cruelty of its eternal torments: let not wicked Satan with his hydeous
band presume to touch thee; let him tremble to see thee arrive in company of
the Blessed Angels, and let him fly into the dreadful confusion of eternal
darkness let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered: let those who hate
him fly before him: let them vanish like smoke, and as wax melts before the
fire, so let sinners perish before the face of God, and let the just feast and
rejoice in his sight: let then all the infernal legions blush and be
confounded, and let not the ministers of Satan dare to hinder thy passage: let
Christ who was orncifi'd for thee, deliver thee from torments: let Christ who
vouchsafed to dye for thee, save thee from eternal death: let Christ the son
of the living God place thee in the flourishing pleasures of his paradise, and
let that true Pastor acknowledge thee for one of his flock; and having absolud
thee from all thy sins, let him fett the at his right hand amongst his elect.
May thou see thy Redeemer face to face, and being always present before him,
let thy happy eyes behold the manifest truth, and having finally received thy
place amongst the troops of the blessed spirits, may thou enjoy the
sweetness of divine contemplation world without end Amen.

Suscipe Domine.
O Lord, receive thy servant into that happy place where he hopes for salvation
from thy mercy. Amen.

O Lord deliver the soul of thy servant from all the dangers of Hell, from the
snares of torments, and all pains and sufferings Amen.

O Lord deliver the soul of thy servant, as thou have delivered Enoch and
Elias from the ordinary death of Men Amen.

O Lord deliver the soul of thy servant, as thou have delivered Noe from the
flood Amen.

O Lord deliver the soul of thy servant, as thou have delivered Abraham from
the Chaldeans Amen

O Lord deliver the soul of thy servant, as thou have delivered holy Job from
his sufferings Amen.

O Lord deliver the soul of thy servant, as thou have delivered Isaac from
being immolated by the hand of his Father Abraham. Amen.

O Lord deliver the soul of thy servant, as thou have delivered Lot from
Sodom, and from the flames which burnt it. Amen.

O Lord deliver the soul of thy servant, as thou have deliveeed Moses from
the hand of Pharao, king of Egypt Amen.

O Lord deliver the soul of thy servant, as thou have delivered Daniel from
the den of Lions Amen.

O Lord deliver the soul of thy servant, as thou have delivered the three
children from the fiery furnace, and from the hand of the wicked king. Amen,

O Lord deliver the soul of thy servant, as thou have delivered Susanna from
the false accusations of the Elders Amen.

O Lord deliver the soul of thy servant, as thou have delivered David from the
hands of king Saul, and Golias. Amen.

O Lord deliver the soul of thy servant, as thou have delivered S. Peter, and
S. Paul out of prison. Amen.

And as thou have delivered the most holy Virgin and Martyr S. Tecle from three
cruel torments, so vouchsafe to deliver the soul of this thy servant, and
make him rejoice with thee in the eternal possession of heavenly riches Amen.

Commendamus tibi.
WE commend to thee o Lord, the soul of thy servant. N. and beseech thee O
Lord Jesus Christ Savior of the world, that as thou have vouchsafed most
mercifully to descend from heaven for it, so thou will not refuse to place it
in the bosom of the Patriarchs. Acknowledge O Lord, thy creature, who was not
created by any strange Gods, but by thee, the only true and living God. For as
there is no God like thee; so there are no works like thine O Lord make his
soul rejoice in thy presence; and remember not his old sins and excesses,
which the heat, or fury of his inordenate desires have caused him to committ,
for although he has transgressed, yet he has not denied the Father, son and
holy ghost, but beleeud and reteynd a zeal for thy glory, and faithfully adord
thee, the God and Creator of all things.

Delicta iuventutis.
REmember not O Lord, we beseech thee, the offenses of his youth, and his
ignorances; but according to thy great mercy be mindful of him in the
brightness of thy glory, open heaven to him, and let the Angels rejoice at
his entrance. O Lord receive thy servant into thy kingdom, Let S. Michael the
Archangel who has merited to be prince of the heavenly host, receive him let
the Angels of God come fourth to meet him, and conduct him to the holy city
of the heavenly Hicrusalem: let the B. Apostle S. Peter, to whom thou have
committed the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, admit him: let S. Paul the
Apostle, who was found worthy to be a vessel of election, assist him: let S.
John, the shaft and beloved Apostle of God, to whom the secret, of Heaven were
reveald intercede for him let all the Apostles to whom, God has give^ a power
of binding and loosing, pray for him: let all Gods Saints, and elect who have
suffered torments in this world for the name of Christ, intercede for him; to
the end that being freed from the bonds of the flesh, he may arrive at the
glory of the heavenly kingdom, by the merits of the same Jesus Christ our
Lord, who with the Father and the Holy ghost; lives and raynes for ever and
ever Amen.

If the soul continue in her agony, the psalm 117 Confitemini, here for set
down, may be reheared and also the 188. Psalm beati immaculati, which is
omitted here because of its length.

The soul going out of the body, the subvenite is to be recited.
Succor speedily O Saints of God, hasten ye Angels of our Lord, receive this
soul, and offer it up in the sight of the most high. Jesus Christ who has
called thee receive thee, and let the Angels carry thee into Abraham bosom,
eternal rest give her O Lord, and let perpetual light shine upon her.

Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.
Our Father etc. From the gate of Hell. O Lord deliver this soul. Let her rest
in peace Amen. O Lord hear my prayer. And let my cry come to thee.
We commend to thee O Lord, the soul of thy servant N. that being dead to the
world, he may live to thee: and those sins which through frailty of human
conversation he has committed, let them be pardned by thy infinite goodness
and mercy, and by the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ Amen.

Confitemini Psalm 117.
PRaise our Lord for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.

Let Israel now say that he is good; for his mercy endures for ever.

Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endures for ever.

Let those who fear our Lotd now say; that his mercy endures for ever.

In my tribulation I called upon our Lord; and our Lord heard me at large.

Our Lord is my helper; I will not fear what Man can do to me.

Our Lord is my Protector; therefore will I despise my enemies.

It is better to trust in our Lord, then to trust in Men.

It is better to hope in our Lord, then to hope in Princes.

All nations compased me about, but in the name of our Lord I have taken
vengance upon them.

They have girt, and environd me round, but in the name of our Lord: I have
taken vengance upon them.

They have surrounded me like Bees; but in the name of our Lord, I have taken
vengance upon them.

They pusht and thrust me so as I staggerd, and had almost falen; but our Lord
sustaynd me; our Lord is my force, and my prayer: and he is become my salvation.

The voice of joy and health; in the tabernacles of the just.

The right hand of our Lord has wrought mighty things, the right hand of our
Lord has exalted me: the right hand of our Lord has showed strength.

I will not dye, but live, and declare the works of our Lord.

Our Lord by correction has chastised me: but he has not given me over to
death.

Open me the gates of righteousness, that entering into them I may bless our
Lord; this is the gate of our Lord, the just shall enter into it.

I will praise thee, because thou have heard me; and art become my salvation.

The stone which the builders rejected: the same is become the head of the
corner.

This our Lord has done: and it is admirable in our eyes.

This is the day which our Lord has made: let us rejoice, and be glad in it.

O Lord save me, O Lord prosper me: blessed is he who comes in the name of our
Lord.

We have wished you happiness, who are of the house of our Lord: God is our
Lord, he has shind upon us.

Ordain a festival day in triumph let it extend even to the horns of the
Altar.

Thou art my God, and I will bless thee: thou art my God, and I will exalt
thee.

I will praise thee, because thou have heard me, and art become my salvation.

O praise our Lord for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.

An abridgment of the Exercise of preparation to Death.
Which may be used every day
MY heart is ready O God, my heart is ready; not my will, but thine be done, O my
Lord, I resign my self entirely to receive death, at the time, and in the
manner, it shall please thee to send it.

I most humbly ask pardon for all my sins com^itted against thy sovereign
goodness, and repent me of them from the bottom of my heart.

3. I firmly believe, whatsoever the holy Catholic Church believes and
teaches, and by thy grace will dye in this belief.

4. I hope to possess eternal life, by thy infinite mercy, and by the merits
of my Savior Jesus Christ.

4. O my God, I will love thee, as my sovereign good, above all things, yea
even to a contempt of all things: I will love my neighbor as my self, and
pardon him with all my heart.

6. O my divine Jesus, how ardent is my desire to receive thy sacred body: and
to the end to communicate spiritually, I unite my self to all the communions
which shall be made in thy holy Church, even to the end of the world,
especially, at the hour of my death.

7 Grant me grace, O my divine Savior, to expiate all the sins I have
committed by my senses, in applying to my self thy blessed merits, the holy
unction of thy precious blood.

8 Holy Virgin, Mother of my God, defend me from my enemies, and present me to
thy divine son.

9. Glorious S. Michael, my holy Angel guardian; my B. Patrons, interceede for
me, assist me in this my last dreadful passage.

10 O my God, I renounce all temptations of the enemy; and generally whatsoever
may displease thee. I adore and accept thy divine judgments upon my soul and
most entirely abandon my self to them, as most just and equitable.

O Jesus, my divine Jesus, be to me Jesus. O my God hiding my self with an
humble confidence in thy lovely wounds, I render my soul into thy divine
hands, receive it into the bosom of thy mercy Amen.

An Appendix.
Whereas God almighty does (in some manner, and by certain conduits, as it
were) descend to us, so by prayer we ascend (says S. Franc. de Sales) unto
him; prayer being properly [according to S. Jo. Damascen] an elevation of our
mind unto God; and therefore what ever it be that truly does raise, and
devoutly stir upp our hearts to bless, to love, and to adore Almighty God,
that properly is true, grateful, and essential prayer, be it but procured by
a pure intention for the glory of God in whatever we do, whether by fervent
ejaculations of divine love; by pious considerations, inducing us to the
practice of virtue; or to a virtuous preparation for a blessed death, by holy
maxims; or finally by vocal prayor, or mental meditation, so that we bless
and praise God in all, that is the proper prayer which we are commanded to make
continually, and without intermission says S. Paul, which could not be
performed in that crytick sense, but must necessarily be understood of all the
pious exercises mentioned in this Manuel conducing to raise our hearts to the
love and praise of God; and therefore [according to S. Jo Damascen] they are
true, proper, and essential prayer.

But because one may here justly demand, how this true and holy prayer may
best be known, from that which is but false and counterfeit; therefore I have
judged it not unfitt to set down the proper marks, and surest signs whereby
rightly to understand, and distinguish, the one from the other; which may serve
as a true touchstone for the right trial of true holy and profitable pray,
from what is but false and deceiptfull; and it is principally intended for such
as do practice the more elevated prayer of meditation; who, if not rightly
guided, are more subject to illusion and deceit, then such as only use vocal
prayer, and the purgative way, which the over speedy aspirers unto the unitive,
do neglect before they have laid the first foundation to it, in the purgative
way, by laboring to destroy and ruin sin, to root out vice, to correct evil
habits, or unruly passions, and disordered affectations, the true and necessary
preparation to that high prayer of holy contemplation, whereby with a pure
intention we must sincerely seek the right end of true prayer without which it
would be but vain and fruitless. Now the true and pure end of all good prayer
is humbly thereby to crave light from God to unsterstand his holy will; and
grace to perform the same; with encreace in his love, and advancement in virtue.

A touchstone for right trial of true and profitable prayer from what is but
false and counterfeit.
THe blessed Apostle counsels us not to give credit to every spirit, but to
try if the spirit be of God. often times the devil transformes himself into an
Angel of light deceiving many: and most dangerously of all under the pretense
of sanctity: be proposing to us his illusions for divine favors. And therefore
to prevent any danger to be deceived herein, observe well these marks whereby
to avoyde or to discover them.

First be assured says Molina as of a general Rule, that who will only give
credit to himself, in his spiritual affairs, and will be governed by his
own judgment alone; that man is utterly deceived and overthrown, be he never
so seeming wise, virtuous, and accompagned which all the signs of goodness
and sanctity; because such a spirit not submitting his judgment to any other
man, nor communicating with any for their advise; may well be presumed naught
and dangerous.

But some untimely contemplators will tell you, that they have good and
approved Authors for their practice. I answer that the Authors which they
pretend for themselves are pious and approved good; but the practice which they
frame thence according to their own sense and private opinion is allowed by
none of the approved and best spiritual directors of souls. whose authority,
these over hasty contemplators ought far to prefer before their own. For
sectaries pretend many true texts of scripture for their false errors; but
they refusing the holy fathers and counsels authority for the true
understanding thereof, and taking them obstinately according to their own
deceived sense and opinion, they runn wilfully into error and heresy, to their
endless perdition.

But they will reply to you, that the effect of true prayer is to unite our
soul to God, whereby we are replenished with great consolation and comfort, yea
the very gust and tender consolation which God communicats to the virtuous thus
devoutly serving him, does give both joy and courage to love and serve him by
this fervent kind of holy prayer.

For answer to this their reply, it is to be here observed, that there are two
sorts of sensible devotion or consolation, the one from God which is good; the
other dangerous and pernicious, proceeding from nature or from our ghostly
enemy. Now the affections and passions of our soul are known by their fruits:
that heart is good, from which proceeds pious affections, good effects, and holy
actions. If it make us more humble, more patient, and more charitable, if more
to mortify our unruly passions and affections; more constant in good exercises,
more yealding and obedient to Superiors, more plain dealing with Christian
syncerity in all our actions; then doubtless these consolations are from God.

But if those consolations in devotion rest only in our selves; or that we
become more curious, peewish, captious, impatient, wilful, obstinate, fierce,
presomptuous, uncharitable, less subject to others direction; then undoubtedly
such spiritual tenderness or consolation in prayer, is false and pernicious;
for a good tree brings fourth good fruit. We must not therefore much regard
these spiritual tender consolations, but carefully observe what good fruit
they produce in us. Thus that true director of all right and holy spiritual S.
Fran. de Sales.

And by this we now plainly see that the good fruits or effects of prayer can
only give a right judgment of the goodness and true value thereof. If
therefore by prayer, You find your self more humble, desirous to be contemned,
less wilful, more charitable etc. No doubt but your prayer is Good, and
profitable: if by it you grow more sincere, less curious, and wilful: if it
produce more vigor of affection to virtuous actions; if finally you find your
self more meek and patient; if mortification seem pleasing to you for the
love of God: if modesty appear in your gesture and conversation; if virtue be
pleasing to you, and vice distasteful: All these are secure signs of good and
holy prayer; and infallible marks of true and solid devotion.

An other secure mark that our prayer or meditation is true; is, when the
soul regards not so much the consolation, gust, or sweetness which she
feels therein, as the effects which it causes, of the forces which it brings
and endeves her withal, to be thereby more able to love, to please and to serve
God, so that she bears very patiently the want of these cherishments: yea
even of her own accord she deprives herself thereof, for the least occasion
offered to do God the greater service; or for her neighbors good, to give
satisfaction to any due obligation thereby: she kowing that true sanctity or
perfection consists not in receiving such cherishments, and delightsome
favors, but in the practice of true and solid virtues; wherein we ought so much
the more to exercise our selves, by how much, such cherishments and favors are
bestowed upon us in prayer which oblidgeth us to the greater perfection.

But now contrariwise when this contemplation is false, and suggested from the
evil Spirit, then we are wholly bent and feed upon those gustfull contents; if
therefore the privation thereof makes us impatient and discontent, and for fear
of loosing this pleasing sensible content, we both relinquish our obligation
and duty, to which otherwise we were bound: which they noewayes do, who
receive the true visits of God, but on the contrary; they much more desire
labor, penance, mortification; and to bear their Cross for the love of God,
with a pious hatred and contemp of their own selves. Whereas that which is
false and counterfeit, encreaceth self love, refuses, and shunneth any labor,
Crosses, and mortification, etc.

A third secure sign and good mark to examen and know whether our prayer be
of God, and his holy grace; or of nature only, (therefore not solid, but
dangerous and deceiptfull) is, to observe our own inclinations: if we covet
that our good deeds, be made manifest, it is an effect of nature, whereas grace
does endeavor to keep them secret, thereby to avoyde the honor and worldly
glory which nature does greatly covet: if again we find, our selves variable
and unconstant, it is nature that is working: for grace remaynes constant and
unvariable, as well in adversity as in prosperity, with humble resignation
and mortification of our selves, in all things according to the holy will of
God, with much content and joy finally if singularity self esteem, and desire
of humane glory, be the aim of our heart, know that nature rules; since grace
does absolutely despise and hate them.

Lastly a true means to discover whether ons prayer begood, and of God; or
whether badd, and from the evil Spirit, we must carrefully examen and observe,
whether we seek the mortification of our own will, and inclinations of
nature: or contrariwise, whether not much rather our own satisfaction and
desire, which nature ever seeks, always excusing her selve, and by no means
will be troubled, but by earnest contesting, projects and labor, yea even with
violence, she strives to prevail and to obtain her desire in all. But Gods
grace, and all motions from the good Angel, does always incite us to our own
abjection, and pretends no excuse at all, Again the instinct from the holy
Ghost, and all motions from the grace of God, and from the good Spirit, does
both move and invite us unto submission and obedience, and still directs and
guides us from all vicious and sinful extremes.

And to conclude most certain it is, that, that prayer is not always the
best, which is most inflamed by greatest feeling tenderness, but rather, and
most undoubtedly, that of which ensues the best and holiest life, most
profoundest humility, charity, patience, and perfection; and that it have the
power to make this happy change. But if contrariwise our prayer have none of
these good effects, but that it leaves us in the same estate and imperfections
wherein we were before, then undoubtedly, all our sensible devotion, and tender
feelings of seeming great virtue, and perfection, are but false, and full of
delusion and deceit. And therefore hence it is that the chief and principal
matter to be regarded, and well observed in prayer is, that after the end
thereof our resolutions, good purposes, and pious feelings in the time thereof,
be afterward put, by us, in faithful practice and ezecution.

Out of the premises is to be observed that the profit; the end, and true
perfection of prayer, consists in becoming thereby more humble, more resigned
to God, more charitable and affable toward our neighbors, more obedient to
superiors, more patient in contradictions etc. for such prayer best pleases
God, and is most profitable for our souls; it does most edify our neighbor,
and far surpasses the prayer although accompagned otherwise with
illuminations, and abundance of fervourous affections not effectual and
efficacious in producing that holy fruit of true virtue, which is the only
profit, and principal end of all true prayer, and meditation: prayer not being
the end, but only the means to be used for our advancement in perfection, and
to gain thereby the victory over our pereverse inclinations and passions, and
therefore we must not rest only in our prayer, as in the end of our work, for
perfection consists not in much consolation, or sweetness, or sensible gust in
our prayer, but in that perfect victory over our self, over our passions, and
unruly affections; as is said; nor in the sublimest prayer, but in that which
with a pure intention does syncerely seek the encreace in Gods divine love,
our own aduanement in virtue, with true resignation to the will of God, and a
perfect contempt and abnegation of our selves, renouncing all curiosity of
Spirit, and self satisfaction by it; for otherwise we seek not God so much as
our selves, and our own interest, and therefore no marvel if we do not find
him.

The certain marks and most evident signs of false and mere counterfeit
prayer.
THe first mark. If our manners and conversation be nothing amended.

2. If there be great levity and vanity in our actions.

3. If great remissness in obligations of piety,

4. If our care and diligence be small to avoyde evil occasions, and the
causes of our most habitual sin.

5. If we presume to be now arrived to a high degree of prayer, or aspire to
visions, revelations, or extaces, etc. Or to the like favors in the passive
way.

6. If passions bear sway in us.

7. If mortification seem harsh and unpleasant.

8. If our senses be petulant and wanton.

9. If to temptations we make but a weak and careless resistance.

10. If labor and employment be ircksome to us.

11. If the yoke of Gods law seems heavy, and his counsels unsupportable.

12. If we find our selves lasie and listlesse to all spiritual affairs.

13. If worldly puntillios of honor and temporal respects go nearest to our
heart and affection.

14. If holy Crosses, patience and obedience seem bitter and unpleasing.

15. If we neglect and misregard, or not respect, nor esteem the advice of our
superior and ghostly Fathers.

16. If finally we carry our selves carelessly and negligently in the amendment
and correction of such faults as apparently are known to us for such.

These are all evident marks and most assured signs of evil counterfeit, and
false devotion, and naughty prayer, which we ought with all speed and industry
resolutely to amend and change.

The Litany of our Lord and divine Savior Jesus.
LOrd have merecy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.
Jesus hear us. Lord Jesus graciously hear us. God the Father of Heaven. Have
mercy upon us. God the son Redemer of the world. Have mercy etc. God the holy
ghost proceeding from the Father and the son. Have. Holy and glorious
Trinity, three persons and one God. Have mercy Jesus son of the living God.
have Jesus splendour of the Father. Jesus brightness of Eternal light. Jesus
king of glory. Have mercy Jesus the sun of justice. Jesus son of the Virgin
Mary. Jesus whose name is called wonderful. Have mercy upon us. Jesus the
mighty God. Jesus the Father of the world to come. Have mercy upon us Jesus the
Angel of the great counsel Jesus most powerful. Jesus most patient. Jesus most
obdient. Have mercy Jesus mild and humble of heart. Jesus lover of chastity.
Jesus our Love. Jesus the God of peace. Jesus the Author of life. Jesus the
example of virtues. Jesus the zealous seeker of souls, Jesus our God, Have
mercy upon us. Jesus our Refuge. Jesus the Father of the poor. Jesus the
Treasore of the faithful. Jesus the good shiphard. Jesus the true light. Jesus
the Eternal wisdom. Jesus all-infinite goodness. Jesus the way, the truth
and the life. Jesus the joy of Angels. Have etc. Jesus Master of the Apostles.
Jesus the teacher of the Evangelists. Jesus the strength of Martyrs. Jesus the
light of Confessors. Jesus the purity of Virgins. Jesus the Crown of all
Saints. Have mercy upon us. Be propitious unto us. Spear us Lord Jesu. Be
propitious unto us. Spare etc From all sin. Lord Jesu deliver us From thy
anger. From the deceipts and snaires of the Devil. From the spirit of
fornication. From perpetual death. From all neglect of thy holy inspirations.
Lord Jesus deliver us By the mystery of thy most holy incarnation. By thy
Nativity. Lord Jes. deliv. us. By thy Infancy. By thy divine life. By thy
labors and trauells. By thy Agony and Passion. By thy Cross and dereliction.
By thy unspeackable pains and languishings. Lord Jesus etc. By thy death and
burial. By thy glorious Resurrection. By thy Assention into Heaven. By thy
incomparable joys. By thy Eternal glory. Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world. Spare us Lord Jesu Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world. Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Have mercy etc.
Jesu hear us. Lord Jesu graciously hear us.
Let us pray

O Lord Jesus Christ who have said unto us, ask and you shall receive seek
and you shall find, knock and it shall be opned unto you: grant we beseech thee
upon this our most humble petition the effect of thy divine love that we may
love thee with our whole heart, and never cease from thy praises, nor from
glorifying thy holy name.

O most loving and our divine Redeemer Jesus, work in us the perpetual love,
to geather with the fear of thy sacred Humanity, which thou have anointed and
sanctified by the union of thy Deity; that we may be evermore subject and
obedient to thee, since thou do never leave those destitute of thy grace,
whom thou have established in the solidity of thy love who with the Father and
the Holy ghost lives and rayneth God, world without end Amen.

The Litany of our B. Lady of Loretto.
LOrd have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ hear us. Christ graciously hear us. God the Father of Heaven. Have
mercy upon us. God the son Redeemer of the world. Have mercy upon us God the
Holy ghost. Holy Trinity one God. Have mercy upon us. Holy Mary. Pray for us
Holy Mother of God. Holy Virgin of Virgins. Mother of Christ Mother of Divine
grace, Most pure Mother. Most chaste Mother. Undefiled Mother. Untouched Mother,
Lovely Mother Pray. Glorious Mother. Mother of our Creator. Mother of our
Savior. Most prudent Virgin. Venerable Virgin. Renowned Virgin. Powerful
Virgin. Mild and meek Virgin. Faithful Virgin. Pray. Myrrour of Justice.
Seat of Wisdom. Cause of our joy. Spiritual vessel. Honorable Vessel. Vessel
of devotion. Pray. Mystical Rose. Strong Tower of David. Solid Tower of ivory.
Goulden habitation. Arc of Covenant. Gate of Heaven. Morning starr. Pray.
Health of the sick. Refuge of Sinners. Confortresse of the afflicted, The Help
of Christians. Queen of Angels. Queen of Patriarchs. Queen of Prophets.
Queen of Apostles. Queen of Martyrs. pray. Queen of Confessors. Queen of
Virgins. Queen of all Saints. Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the
world. Spare us o Lord. Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.
Hear us o Lord Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world. Have etc.
Christ hear us. Christ graciously hear us. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ
have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.
Our Father which art in Heaven; etc.

Let us pray.

O God of unspekable mercy who has vouchsafed for our sakes to me made not
only Man, but the son of Man; and would have a woman to be thy Mother on
Earth, who from all Eternity had God to be thy Father in Heaven. Grant we may
celebrate her memory most devoutly, venerate her Maternity most syncerly, and
be most humbly subject to her most excellent dignity, who has conceived Thee
of the Holy Ghost; has brought Thee fourth of her womb; remaying a pure
Virgin; and to whom thou have most humbly pleased to be subject hear on Earth,
who art the only begotten son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, who with the
Father and the Holy Ghost lives and rayneth world whithout end. Amen.

DEfend, we beseech Thee, o Lord, by the intercession of the ever Virgin Mary,
this thy family from all adversity; and prostate before Thee with all our
hearts, protect us favorably from the snare of our enemies. Through our Lord
Jesus Christ, thy only son who lives with Thee in the unity of the Holy
Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen.

Finis.
Soli Deo Honor and Gloria. 10. May 1669.
COurteous Reader, books of this nature, not being easily permitted to be
printed at home; no diligence of the corrector can avoyde the many faults which
the Printer [not understanding our langage] must needs be very subject to
committ. His ignorance deserves your pardon, and my pains, your prayers, which
I do heartily crave. Submitting entirely all the rest to the correction of the
holy Cotholik Church. Hopeing that if this little Manuel be used wiht the like
intention, whrewith it was composed; the fruit will be not unanswerable to his
desire, who is a hearty and true well wisher of the greatest happiness to your
dearest soul.

THE DOCTORS APPROBATION.
I Under vvitten Doctor of Divinity in the University of Paris, have read over
a little book entitled a MANNVEL OF THE POOR MAN'S DEVOTION, etc. composed by
VV.C. In which I find nothing contrary to the Catholic Apostolic and Roman
faith, or good manners: but rather much that inciteth Christians to the true
practice of solid piety and Devotion. In vvittnesse vvheroff I have hereunto
set my hand, this 2. day of Feb. 1669.

F. GAGE.

Libellum Anglo idiomate scriptum a viro piissimo pariter ac Nobilissimo D. VV.
C. sacerdote Anglo compositum, optimis Instructionibus, Meditationibus, and
Orationibus plenum magna cum delectatione per legi, in quo nihil nisi valde
orthodoxum and Christianae vitae ac Religiouis profectum quaerentibus maxim
vero Neophytis vtilissunum deprehendi, sapit porro authoris sui pietatem
maximam ac vi^ae integritatem, quippe qui genetis splendorem. (quo maxim inter
Anglos fulget) virtutum suarum splendore excellere videatur. Quamobrem bono
Catholicorum Anglicanae di^ionis consulens hunc prelo dignissimum censeo ut ibi
aliquos reperiat imitatores qui omnes vbique reperiet approbatores Datum
Parisiis die 10. Decembris an, restaurarae salutis 1669.

I. MOLLONY sacrae Theologiae Facultatis Parisiensis Doctor.

A TABLE Of the chief contents in this Manuel.
A morning Exercice of holy prayer. Page 3. The Angelus Domini, for morning,
Noone, and Evening. page 14. Advertisments much conducing to Christian
perfection. page 15. An eveing Exercise for prayer before bed. page 17. King
David his 7. Penitential Psalms. With the Litaniy of the Saints. page 27. The
true end of Man. page 49. Of gratitude due to Jesus Christ. p. 51. Our maine
affair is to save our souls. page 53. Of Gods divine presence. page 54. We
ougth to distrust our selves. p. 55. Against detraction and calumny. p. 57. Of
flying the oecasion of sin. page 59. The small number of the Elect. p. 61. Of
suffering persecution for justice sake. page 63. Man's life subjct to
innumerable miseries. page 65. Reflection upon the word of Eternity. page 68.
The signification of Priestly Ornaments. And of the other Ceremonies and divine
Mysteries of the Mass. page 71. A devout Exercise for hearing Mass with true
profitt and piety. p. 103. Spiritual advises of S. Theresa conducing to live
happily with God and Man. page 131. Pious Reflections for embracing virtue, and
flying vice, which may be used as the subject of so many profitable
Meditations. page 136. Of the Sacrament of Confession. p. 175. A table of sins
helping the memory for a general Confession. page 180. An Act of Contrition.
page 196. A prayer before Confession. page 197. A prayer exciting compunction
for our sins. page 20^ An Examen of Conscience, for such as often frequent the
Sacrament of Penance. page 209. A devout prayer after Confession. page 214. Of
the Holy Communion. page 221. Prayers before the Holy Communion page 230. A
preparatory meditation hofore the holy Communion. page 238. Prayers after the
holy Communion. page 238. The Canticle of the 3. Children. page 243. The
Canticle of Zachary. page 243. The B. Virgins Canticle of Magnificat. page 247.
The Himne of S. Ambrose and S. Augustine in thanks giving to God at his
conversion. page 248. The Psalm 148. wherein all creatures are invited to
praise God. page 251. A Meditation of thanks giving after Communion. page 253.
An Exercise for practicing acts of the most necessary virtues. page 256. Holy
maxims pronounced by Jesus Christ, much different from the maxims of the world.
page 293. Devout prayers to be said at convenient opportunity, as each shall
best make choice. p. 298. Of Aspirations and jaculatory prayers. page 346. Of
Meditation. page 358. Matter of Meditation for each day in the week. page 363.
An Exercise preparatory to death. With the recommendation of the soul in
English. page 379. An abridgment of the aforesaid exercice which may be used
every day page 441. An appendix containing a touch stone of true, and false
prayer. page 444. The Litany of our Savior Jesus. page 451. The Litany of our
B. Lady. p. 465.
The faults escaped in printing the courteous Reader will easily both correct
and pardon.


