THE CONVERTED CAPUCHIN. OR, The Recantation of Father BASIL, After he had
continued nigh forty years a Friar of that Order, and persuaded many
Protestants to the Romish-Beliefe.

With his Answers to those Reports framed against him since he left his Covent
at ROUEN to be one of the Reformed Church at SEDAN.

Englished according to the French Copy.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. and are to be sold by Richard Harper, at the Sign of
the Harp in Smithfield. 1641.

BEhold here a true Convert, an Israelite indeed in whom is no guile; no
Spalata to change a petty Bishopric for a better Deanery, and lose that too to
turn again in hopes of a Cardinals Hat by the allowance of the Pope his
Schoolefellow. Here is one of Gods little Ones whom no ambition or earthly
preferment spurs forward, but a holy aim at the Kingdom of Heaven, who
having forsaken a certain being unites himself with a Church upon whose
charity depends his whole relief, with a Church which admits no Priority in
the Ministry, and therefore could have no expectances of Ecclesiastical
promotions. In his old Age after he had passed nigh forty years in the
Capuchin Order where were novices enough to have traveled for his maintenance
and have kept him warm in his Covent.

He was the Popes Missionary, whose faculties by virtue thereof were several
and notable, as hereafter are expressed. And as his eminency for them besides
his golden tongue which graced his Sermons to the admiration of his auditors
made his revolt from them the more considerable: So has he gotten store of
contumelious reports from them, who in him have lost the glory of their Order
and their Chair, and the best benefactor to their Edifices, his persuasions
prevailing more upon the devotions of the auditors, then all the rest he left
behind him.

But let their Aspersions be as many as malicious. The Church of England is
well acquainted with the nature of Popish flamme^, as in that of our sometimes
reverend Bishop King, and others: neither will our Friar beg any help in his
vindication, nor doubts but by what follows to give his Reader satisfaction.
Some way may be given his Adversaries to load him with lies, since it is not so
much fault as custom among them, and the prime weapons they use in defense of
their precious Religion, to wit, their juggling exorcismes and lying miracles,
as in the boy of Bilson, etc.

Yet because their Abuses may pass for Truths if unanswered, and my self was
told by a Friar of the same Order, that Father Basil our Converts departure was
for the love of liberty, I have translated for Thee their Calumnies and his
Answers, whereby Thou may easily discern the untruths and malice of his
Accusers.

That he was not a man of that Disorder, those of that Order would have thee
believe, surely Father Joseph, that great wit, and Confessor to the Cardinal
of Richelieu would have us think, when he solicited him by Letters to accept
the superiority of the Queens Capuchins, but his Fraternity finding him to be
of more profitable use among them, as the sequel intimates, hindered his voyage
hither.

And that his austere and exemplary life together with his elaborate preaching
gained him a rare opinion from his compatriots, those many hundreds of
Protestants he drew into the Romish folds are witnesses: for which his soul
does hourly penance, and his eyes shed rivolets of tears in prayer, for
their safe return into the bosom of the Church again.

So that if God had pleased to have wrought in him this work among us, we might
have hoped, the rest of his Order here as well as diverse of them in France,
might have become Converts through his example, besides many of our English
Renegadoes who happily might have been stopped in in their flight from their
holy Mother the Church of England to that adulterous one of Rome.

There are strong Reasons and Motives written by the same pen which engaged
this Convert upon his Resolution, more at large then here set down. And when I
shall find thou have procured an appetite to them by reading these, I shall
take some pains to make them Converts for thy fuller satisfaction.

To the Church of ROME.
Sirs,
I Make no doubt but my alteration will beget an ill interpretation of it in
them who are ignorant of the motives, and because each man will deliver
himself according to his own fancy, I desire to satisfy all by this my
Declaration, entreating them to suspend their judgments, until I have
informed them of the reasons which I am here setting down.

First, after I have humbled my self before my God, praying him, that my
unworthiness passed over, he would be pleased to illuminate my understanding,
guiding my soul and my hand so, that I may allege things conformable to his
Word, I do in his glorious presence, as before him that is my Judge, and knows
my heart, make this protestation: That I have not embraced this profession to
live at more ease, and better my worldly condition, or to lead a life of more
liberty or plenty. For in that religion whereof I erst was, under a cloak of
being poor I had store of all things, and while I so continued had wherewith
to please my self in abundance; far was I from having any cause to complain
of want, and was honored among them, and had a settled Livelihood: but by the
Religion I have now entered am reduced to an assured poverty, and deprived of
the best of my worldly conveniences, losing the good will of Millions who
highly valued me, yet this poverty and disgrace I entertain as an honor,
since it is for Gods cause, and that Jesus Christ has scored out our way
herein by his own miseries and sufferings: My life I thank my God has been
blameless, and I am provided for the convincing of those which would urge
ought to the contrary. Had I been a man profane and vicious, they would not
have allowed me the office of Superior for twelve years, which I did yet
exercise, but the last year among those of mine own Order; nor did I leave it
for any misdemeanor I had committed, but to obey the call of my gracious God,
who so knocked at the door of my conscience that I could not be quiet. I dare
without vanity say that I have been in the Church of Rome, and the Capuchin
Order of good repure, I preached vehemently against the Church of God,
wherewith I have now by the Lords great mercy ranked my self; not thinking
then that I waged war against my own Captain and Savior: and that is it,
wherein I confess with perfect sorrow, I have grievously offended his sacred
Majesty.

I had there no other book than the holy Scripture, which might be termed the
Word of God, nor was it thence I dug ordinarily the doctrine which I taught,
no more than others who preach in the Romish Church, that tie not themselves to
the interpretation of holy Writ; and when I entered into the Order, I made a vow
to keep the Rules and Institutions of Saint Francis, which bind not the Friars
to study sacred letters, but command in express terms, That those of the
fraternity which are unlearned need not to study to learn them, but ordain in
the second chapter, that they should be clad in old tayments, and that they
might piece them with sacke-cloth and other pieces on Gods blessing. Being thus
fastened to this Order, I thought with my self that in observing it, I should
do works of Supererogation, by which I supposed to do more good than God
commanded me, and so to merit a degree of glory in Paradise above that common
to the Saints, which had no more perfection here, than merely to fulfill the
Law of God.

In the interim, this persuasion dwelt in my soul, that true Religion which
leads to salvation comes from God, not humane invention: To the end therefore I
might strengthen my self in the belief of the Romish Church, and be furnished
with answers to gainsayers; I desired to know, as exactly as I might, what
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, Founders of Christian religion, taught us, as it
is contained in holy Scriptures; but in reading them, glory be to God, it
happened clean contrary to my purpose and intendment.

His Prayer upon his Conversion.
O Lord my God, and my Creator, who from all Eternity know those that are
thine own, which no power can wrench from thy holy hands; how copious has bin
thy bounty to me thy poor servant: thou have dealt with me, o Lord, according
to the greatness of thy Compassion, by reducing my soul from death, my eyes
from superstitious tears, my feet from falling Thou did suffer me to spend
near forty years in an erroneous religion, which I supposed conformable to
thy holy Word, and have as obstinately defended it, not slighting the least
occasion tending to the persecution of thy Church: But O my eternal God, it
was my ignorance did it, and I now beg thy pardon with an heart contrite and
humbled before thy glorious face. Thou have put me to the test O Lord, by a
sore disease, which I thought would have put an end to my being in this world,
but thy goodness contented it self to depresse my body, that thou might
raise up my soul in giving a good issue to my heavy trial.

I have been fully sensible of thy benefits, Oh Eternal, what shall I render
unto thee for them, that am but dust and ashes in thy Divine presence? I will
sacrifice unto thee a sacrifice of thanksgiving. I will invocate thy holy Name,
I will pay my vows in the presence of thy people, in thy Temple, and employ
the rest of my days in the service and edification of thy Church.

Give, O Father of Mercy, the same grace which thou have bestowed on me, unto
them that shall read this my Declaration; and particularly, my God and my
blessed Father, I beseech thee with tears of true sorrow, to have pity upon
those whom I have helped to err from the right way, persuading their revolt
from thy holy Church: O suffer them not to be deprived of the participation of
the blood and merits of thy Son Christ Jesus, but touch thou their hearts with
a sorrow, such as may conduce to a true repentance in them.

Have likewise mercy upon so many poor souls as go astray for want of
instruction, prick them forward with the goad of thy fear, stir in them a
desire to know thy truth by reading thy holy Word; let thy relieving hand draw
them out of the mire whereinto they are fallen by original sin; regenerate
them, O good God, unto a newness of life, by the workings of thy holy Spirit,
nor lay thou to their charge the hatred they bear me for reverencing thy holy
Name: But grant rather that they acknowledging the sanctity of the doctrine
which I have embraced, which is the very same Jesus thy Son brought from heaven
on earth, they may clearly see how they are abused, and abhor those
superstitions which inveterate wont makes them think to be none; that they may
detest the impiety of their seducers, who being blind, may else be thrown into
the pit, unless thou open their eyes by the beams of thy holy Spirit.

Let them not depend longer upon humane traditions, but receive thy Word for
the only guide of their faith, and Jesus Christ their Mediator and Sacrificer;
so that having led a life here in the confession of thy most holy Name, and the
profession of that truth contained in thy most holy Word, we may together
everlastingly bless thee in thy holy Tabernacle in Heaven, Amen.

A Refutation of calumnies which were put upon me.
I Should conclude my Declaration thus, with giving of thanks which I am bound
to render the divine goodness, for having not only taken from me the horrid
and dark veil of my blindness, and called me to his mavelous light, but
also for the courage he has given me to withstand all the assaults that
corrupt nature and humane respects could bring against my resolution, did I not
feel my self obliged to add these lines in defense of my innocence, which I
understand to be abused by the enemies of true religion.

Yet if the interest of God and his holy Church could set apart my own
interests herein, I would make it my glory to despise these disgraceful
aspersions for the love of my Redeemer, who has given me himself for an
example. But such separation not being possible, I will genuinely, and without
sharpness, represent that which may serve to wipe away these reproaches which
they have published against me, protesting that all the revenge I will take for
these injuries, is, to entreat God with a good heart for the salvation of them
which are the authors, that he would please by his goodness and the efficacy
of his holy Spirit, to break the bands of that Error wherewith they are so
strongly bound, that he would be gracious to them, as he has been to me, and
putting off that vain industry to be reputed holy among men, they may subject
themselves to the Word of God, to the end they may be saved.

The first Calumny.
I Learn by letters of my friends, that they accuse me for drawing out of the
purses of diverse persons above two thousand pound sterling* under pretext of
Pius uses, and that now I serve my own turn with it to the prejudice of them
for whom it was appointed. Answ.


The grossness of this Calumny has discovered it self so much the better;
for who is it but knows that Capuchins handle no money, nor does any body use
to offer them any, unless that craving alms at a door, unawares they put a
double in their scrip, as they would to an Eremite; but the Capuchins do never
receive it. Their Order permitting them to receive a bottle of Wine, a Capon,
or things of like kind, but not one Double or Denier, as do others who
profess poverty. If any man have received this sum of money for me, let him
declare himself, and publish the give^, let him set down the place and the
time, when and where he received it, it will be easy for me to convince him
of lying or theevery, since I for my part never handled any of it. In sooth I
have besought my good friends sometimes to gratify me with some alms, for the
building or other accommodations of the Covents whereof I had charge, but did
never misplace one single denier of their charities. Let them look upon the
registers of receipts of the Capuchins in any place where I resided, and they
shall find from point to point the receipts and disbursements of all the money
that every body has given. Had I mis-employed the money, I obtained for the
Covents where I dwelt, with what were nine hundred pounds paid for buildings at
the Capuchins of Caudebeck, while I was Superior there, and above an hundred
pounds for Chalices, and other ornaments of the Altar, which are to be seen in
their Vestry? Have I put to other use six hundred and sixty pounds assigned me
by order of the overseers of the Kings treasury in a voyage which I made to
Paris? The breast-worke of squared freestone which defends that Convent from
the power of the seas batteries, and the greater part of a Dormitory, which
were built with that money, are very visible testimonies to the contrary.

If I had kept to my self what was given for mine own sake, could the
Capuchins of Alenzon have had a large Dormitorie, which I caused to be almost
wholly set up in that year when I was their Superior? Had I then seen the
foundations of a Church, Quier and Chapels Vestry and of a second Dormitory,
and almost all the timber-frame prepared to the admiration of the inhabitants
of that City, who could not conceive whence I came by so much alms. The
Receiver knows that the Guardian who preceded me, left his Register thronged
with debts when he left the Charge; and when I parted with it, I left unto him
above an hundred pounds in Cash, and the Convent clean out of debt.

I say nothing of a rich present that a Gentlewoman of very considerable
quality, offered to assist the building, which neither would she give but upon
condition I should return to that place, for my Successor there can tell that
she gave it not, though he used the best of his power to have it, although
he did his utmost, (he being indeed a man fit only to reap the benefit of
others labors, and more prompt to consume goods implored by others, than
procure any to the Covent, and bring water to the mill by others, not his own
ingenuitie.)

The last year of the superiority I exercised in the Capuchin Order was at
Nagent Rotrou, where I caused to be built from the ground a new Dormitory: but
whosoever would judge of my uprightness in the disbursing of the coin,
whereof my self was procurer, shall find that besides what was employed in
building, when I went thence, I left to the Receiver of that Covent above
threescore and ten pounds, and gave a good account to the Chapter of that
Province, by the same token they checked me with a flout for having been too
beneficial to those Covents I had in charge.

I well knew that a Capuchin which was last year of the Convent of Alencon,
and was under me the last year in that of Nogent, spread a noise about at
Alencon, that I had carried from Rouen two chains of Pearl of good value given
to the Cove^t of Rouen by the Q. of England to trick up a little virgin Mary,
into a puppet of a piece of Oak, which the Capuchins (not without a profitable
design in it) called Our Lady of health, giving out through the town, that her
Majesty had bestowed it on them for a wodden remedy against the plague,
wherewith Rouen was then infected. But to that I answer, that as it is utterly
false that the Queen of England gave this Idol (the Capuchins giving it out
only that they might seem no less in favor with Queens than the Jesuits of
Rouen, who the same time had obtained a silver Goddess from the Queen of
France, under the title of The Lady of Peace) so, it is untrue that ever she
bestowed Pearls to dress it: but this reporter is known to be a common
traducer, as well of others, who as little deserve it from him as I, and if he
escape punishment for this fault from his superiors, I doubt not he will
receive it elsewhere.

For my last answer to what can be objected against me in this matter, I will
make Oath that I never diverted the least thing contrary to the intent of the
Donours, neither before, nor at my going thence. My present penury can
sufficiently justify me, for I am able to say with a good and sound
conscience that I brought nothing from the Convent but my habit, and that
patched for humilities sake, as our rule commands it (although it was fire
new:) and my papers: and that to come and be here, I neither had nor have any
money, but the help of one of our Churches, which affords me her charity in
my extreme necessity.

The Second Calumny.
BEsides this first accusation I have lighted upon diverse others, by
supervisall of a Letter which the Provincial of the Capuchins of Normandy
expressly wrote to an Assessor of the Kings Aides at Alencon, a man whom I
heretofore did help to revolt from the true Religion, for which I am heartily
grieved.

This Letter exhorts him not to stagger in his belief by reason of my change,
and the better to settle him, he charge me with Calumnies. After some
compliments wherein he calls my change An unthought of Blow, adds, I will
tell you this (Sir) sincerely, that this poor man a while since disposed his
fall by ways clean averse to his profession. He took to himself liberties in
things which could not be allowed by the justice of his Order which punishes
as often as it knows of them, which he foreseeing could not avoid but by flying,
and that it was which cast him into this Abyss, as the Star in the Apocalypse.

I am sure this man foresaw not this Letter should light into my hands, for
else he would either not have writ it, or concealed it, since he must needs
know I have letters he wrote unto me, which compared with this, will manifest
him one that can breathe hot and cold with the same mouth. But I reserve one
especially which a Capuchin who desired to see me here, brought (as I believe)
and got it conveyed to me, not willing to be seen in the delivery himself.

I keep it to insert with some store of pieces I have, in the reply which I
shall make to the answer of this my declaration, if they think good to frame
one. It will not be displeasing to well affected people to behold my innocence
averred by the Letters of this party, who (having abused me to the Assessor of
Alencon) loads me with commendations in that he wrote to me since, disavowing
the false reports raised upon me, and exhorts me return to my Order, giving me
his faith and word, That I shall not be less honored among them then before.
And to note that he names my going thence a blow so unexpected; if it were so,
it must follow my deeds and behavior were unreproachable; for had I lived
licentiously before, my bad deeds would have prepared their wits to have termed
this Exite a foreseen and looked for, not so unexpected an Accident.

The motive for writing this Letter makes for my Justification, for it is to
establish this Assessor whose faith was staggering. Had I lead so profane a
life, this change of mine could not have made so hard an assault upon the faith
of a man of so good a judgment, as he is to whom this Letter is addressed;
when a rascally deboist fellow strayes from the right way, the world is not
much troubled or shaken at it, but if a man conscionable in his Courses goes
away, there is much more cause of astonishment. Truly if it were behovefull for
a Provincial to pen these Letters to settle his wavering belief, for fear my
example might draw him after me, it may be yielded that my life was not so
guilty of libertinisme, and serve for argument of my honest deportment.

The Letter tells farther that I fled for fear of the rods that were laid in
Piss for me.

I do not believe that he who frames these, nor yet the four Definers who have
a deliberate voice for imposing penance upon offenders justly condemned, have
so corrupt consciences as to take it upon the Holy Evangelist that ever they
took into consideration the punishing of any crime of mine, nor that ever it
entered into their thought to pronounce sentence against any of my actions: if
to belie me be enough to beget belief, there is no innocence in the whole
world which may not be subjected to Diffamation. And for the term, Flying,
possibly this reverend Sir had wished, that ere my departure from the Cloister
I had presented my self before him to ask his leave thus: Reverend Father,
Give me your blessing, for I will leave the Church of Rome, and your
Congregation, because there I cannot accomplish my salvation. I entreat his
Reverend self to hold me excused if I tendered him not this duty, it was not
contempt caused me do otherwise.

I will not allow that for a Truth which is not universally true, to wit, That
the Justice of the Order punishes all those liberties it knows not: For I am
able to show when other occasion offers it self, that the Justice of the Order
has been conscious of many extravagancies and wicked Acts which it has let
pass unpunished, but if in me it knew any which it could not dispense withal,
why did not that Justice give me my due of punishment, being always at hand?
For I have this twelve years assisted at all the Chapters held in that
Province, and at the very last before my going away, I always had a voice
active and passive in all Elections; I personally was before the Provincial
and Definers, who at that time receive both true and false accusations which
the Religious of Covents frame against each other, and underlings against their
Superiors: I always came thence with honor, being thence sent back to be
Guardian of some Covent.

Six or seven months after the last Provincial Chapter, the same Provincial
Fathers and Definers which were principals there were assembled at the Covent
of Rouen, where I was to treat upon sundry businesses, and among the rest to
give judgment upon a Friar who was prisoner in that Covent: I appeared twice
of my own free will before them, to acquaint them what things I thought
becoming me for the discharge of my Conscience: they applauded my Zeal, and
testified of me that I had benefitted in my proceedings: so our Conference
ended, and I departed.

Presently after I was sent by the same Provincial Scribe of this goodly
Epistle, three Leagues from S. Michel with a young Friar to visit Madame de
Forests his Aunt, who is one of the Religion, but chiefly to talk with her
Minister, and this done, to visit his kindred and some of my friends: I had my
Letters of Obedience signed by his own hand, and sealed with his own Seal:
they prescribed me no term at all, yet in all I spent but six weeks. If the
Justice of the Order had known in me crimes which it could not pass by
without punishment; why did not this Provincial with whom I daily was, cause
me to be staid, instead of sending me so long a voyage, having occasions of
other nature sufficient to retain me, being engaged upon preaching in the
Pulpit of the Covent, and upon other employments that he might have well
pretended? But surely, when he sent me with so good a will, the thought of my
offenses was not in him. Certainly had I felt my self culpable, and bound to
take my heels to outrunne my punishment, I had then the key of the Fieldgate,
I had liberty to go and come, my Companion being my subject and owing me
obedience in this Voyage. I had leisure enough to treat of the means of my
Conversion with a Gentleman of the Protestant Religion, without the knowledge
of my Camarade: but not being otherwise importuned, I believed it would be
better to see the end of one Month after the work of the Lord begun in me. So
shaking this Viper off my finger, as S. Paul did that at Maltha, I call to
mind the words of our Savior in the S. of Matthew, Blessed are they, etc.

The Third Calumny.
THE third untruth is couched in the same Letter, and the words are these.

That which Pride wrought in the bad Angels, Covetousness and Despair in
Judas, and what other vices have begot in all the Desertors of the Faith;
Vanity always accompanied with all sorts of Licentiousness both dishonest and
irreligious, has wrought in this poor man, making the punishments he deserved
terrible to him, although we had not prepared for him such as were very great.

If he would have himself believed, he should specify those Actions
dishonest, etc. and the time when I began to give my self unto them. To moote
thus in General, without being able to particularize any thing, is but
tacitly to confess himself a Backbiter; if I had been guilty of all sorts
of dishonest liberties, some scandal must have risen, as unto diverse whose
Sentences are yet fresh upon the Register of the Definition of the Capuchins,
which I could relate even to the meanest Circumstances. But I cannot hinder
public babbling tongues more prone to belie then praise virtuous Actions, nor
stop the talk of these base Liberties. The silence which has been kept upon
this Subject might pass for a Miracle in the Church of Rome.

If I had been of a scandalous fame, would they have appointed me these six or
seven years Preacher upon Advents and Lents every Year, and as often to live
four or five months together out of the Covent, even the very last year? The
Provincials that have had attestation of my good manners and success of my
teaching, may serve as witnesses to the contrary.

Had I given ill example at the places where I resided, would the Communalty of
the Towns, and the Lords of the Country, who erected the Covents which I
governed, have written to the Provincial Assemblies of Fathers of the
Chapter House, Letters gratulatory for my being sent thither, and to request my
continuance there the years following: this is publicly known. I say nothing
of a Bishop in great esteem among the Capuchins, who seeing me in my way to
the Chapter, and not knowing whether I should return to the Cloister from
whence I went the year following, which was in the principal City of his
Dioces, told my Companion that the Fathers were Reverend Coxcombs if they sent
me not back, considering the advantageable progress I had made in being
Superior there.

Had I been an evil edifier by my vicious conversation, could the Provincials
have been compelled to have returned me where I had dwelt, to dry the eyes of
the better sort of that Order of the tears they so plentifully shed for my
absence in the presence of them all? I require no other testimony for this
truth then the Provincial himself. It Is reported that the Jesuits know all
to the least of things, even which pass between man and wife; if so, would
they have selected me Preacher in their Temples for above six months upon
their most Solemn Festivals, and which is more, the last year in the Church
of Rouen, if I had been held a man either dishonest or irreligious?

Had I not lived in esteem in the Capuchin Order, why should Father Joseph
(that great wit) have by sundry Letters solicited me, which I showed to this my
Defamer, to accept the Superiority of the Covent of London which is the Queen
of Englands Chapel? And albeit the opposition of this Provincial and the
Custos of the Capuchins of Normandy, it is possible I had consented, but was
willing to be judged more necessary for their Province, being then both
Guardian and Divinity Reader.

Had I not been well reputed among the Capuchins, and exemplary according to
in my Profession, would the Generals, Provincials, and Definers, who better
understood their people then any body else, have continued me above twelve
years successively in the Guardianship of the most eminent Covents, in many
whereof they placed Definers after I was gone?

If it be objected, I was not Superior when I became a Convert, I answer, I
was such but the year before, and that I could again be the next: For as the
Constitutions of the Order ordain, that a Provincial cannot continue in
office above three years, and after to be discharged for one whole year, so
is it ordered again, that a Guardian cannot be in place above six years, and
those ended, is voided of his charge for one whole year: So I had accomplished
the six years of my Superiority, and it then followed, I must be quit of my
charge by course. But I can easily make appear, notwithstanding that, I was
still in good request among them, for they assigned me for my abode the most
honorable Covent of all the Province, where the Provincial and the Custos,
the two Principallists have their constant habitations. I had there the Chair
of the Covent to Preach in all the year; and a stage ordered in a Parish of
the City where I preached every Sunday. All Rouen can tell that I was the most
employed of all the Covent. Let me give this Smut, this last touch with the
Sponge, as the most considerable. The Pope having destinated twenty Capuchins,
to send them with extraordinary authority to Preach and Confess in those parts
that had most need, and charged the Provincial to choose them with mature
deliberation, and advice of the most noted Fathers of the Province, had I not
been thought to be of good carriage, should I have been chosen to this office
without any contradiction in so complete a number, among whom Provincials,
Custos's, and Definers were my fellows? The Privileges the Pope conferred on
me by virtue of this qualification are extraordinary, and confirmed by an
express Bull, which be these.

1 To hear confessions of the faithful, as well of one as the other sex, etc.
Note that the Capuchins confess not, and I confessed all that came to their
Church at Rouen, even to the time of my going away.

2 To absolve from Heresy, Apostacy, and Schism.

3 To absolve once every one of cases reserved to the Pope, and also of cases
contained clearly and doubtfully in the Bull of the Lords Supper* provided
that the penitents were ready to quit the benefits and restore the fruits ill
gathered, (...) due to God only.
according to the will of the Holy, Holy, Holy, that is to say, the Pope.

4 To read the writings or books of Heretics and all other forbidden, with an
intention to consute them.

5 To commute for and change all simple vows.

6 To dispense with poor Priests for irregularity, proceeding of private and
hidden villainy, except wilful manslaughter, downright and real Symony and
Bigamy.

7 To celebrate Mass upon an Altar portable in the midst of the fields in
wind and rain in presence of Heretics and excommunicate persons, and likewise
upon an Altar shattered or broken.

8 To use twice a year the prayers of forty hours, and give plenary
indulgence to the confessed, and Communicants, and those who in that interim
communicate twenty times, to give the^ power for one such soul out of Purgatory
as they please best.

9 To give those penitents which came to me to confess all Saints days, and
Sundays, ten years of indulgence, with condition they come to my Sermons, and
those who communicate upon the Holidayes of the first rank, pardon fully and
wholly.

10 To grant the Penitent on their death beds, though but slightly contrite and
not receiving the Communion, plenary indulgence, that is, a passeport to go
strait from their bed to Paradise.

11 To gain for my self the same indulgence I gave to others.

12 To deliver every Monday a soul from Purgatory, or the next day, if I did
not say Mass upon the Monday for the dead.

13 To impart the same power I had to other Priests, whereof I might choose as I
would to help me in taking confessions, when there was a great concourse of
people.

I professed these privileges and performed the functions of the Missionary of
the Pope when I came from the Covent. Had I lived a life averse to what is
required of persons to whom this employment is committed, would they have
continued me in it? Or if in these offices they employ men infamous and of
foul demeanor for want of others, were to make the world believe, that if
these great bodies of Religions were opened, there would be found abundance of
filth. In a word, had I been wicked as this man writes, and had desired to live
in dishonest liberty, I should have remained whence I came rather then came
away. For having had the means to practice them among them, I should have had
much more means to continue them there, then in the condition I now am.

The Fourth Calumny.
THe last slander in the Letter aforesaid, contains the most untruth, as it is
the most outrageous, and uncivil, it is thus: If the Church and our Order in
particular used not the more purity and holiness of life, he would never have
escaped us to have cast himself into Ministerial bonds, who have furnished
him with what he sought, a glut of his sensual delights among them, and a
promise of assistance and protection in his vices.

This poor man must be pardoned, for it appears either he sins through
ignorance, or that his passion has blindfolded him. He shows you that he knew
not how I made my retreat, nor how Ministers behave themselves upon those
occasions, for he never came so near to know so much. His Sword was somewhat
of the shortest. But to show that he speaks as a man ignorant, and to instruct
them that desire to imitate me, behold here the method I kept to atchieve the
quiet of my conscience by a true conversion.

After I had a long time striven with the troubles and pricks of conscience,
which tortured and grievously afflicted my heart, and urged my departure from
the Romish Church, where I observed the Hierarchicall and Privileged ready to
devour one another, and thousands of superstitions, I addressed my self to
the Father of Lights, after whose heavenly assistance, the reading of holy
Scripture, and the books of Mr du Moulin (among the rest) his Novelty of
Popery and Buckler of Faith, gave some stay to my tired soul, and guided me in
framing my last resolution. But because I could not put it in execution without
knowing what Order I ought to keep of some one of the Religion, nor was
acquainted with any body at Rouen, to whom in this case I might address my
self, I made use of the occasion of my going to Bresse near Mount S. Michel
whereof I have spoke before. By the way I saw a Gentleman of the Religion, at
whose house I was half a day, and learned from him how to comport my self
therein, I finished my voyage, and a month after my return to Rouen, I went
from the Covent without either seeing speaking or writing to any Minister
whatsoever. True it is, that while I stayed a little at Rouen, after my going
from them, I had the honor to see two Ministers who gave me the visit at my
lodging, but our discourse was so short, that I had no leisure but to unfold my
purpose, and they to tell me I must prepare to bear the Cross of Jesus Christ
in professing the true Religion, and that if I quitted the Monastery, to find
more freedom or means to comply with evil appetites, I was very ill bestead.
I was indeed extremely comforted.

I went forth of Rouen at shutting the gate, and in day and a half arrived at
Paris, whence I am hither come in the only protection of the Almighty. Who
report me a man engaged in wenching or wiving, shall accuse themselves of this
sin next Easter. I regard not his prate, as being usual among the Papists
upon the like occasions. See how the Ministers have furnished me with what
satisfaction I sought, not of my senses, but my poor soul which sighed after
its deliverance. I would prolong the discourse to make apparent the cheats of
this Detractor, who speaks of the Ministers, as of men who have furnished me
with what I sought for among them, sensual and beastly satisfaction, and
promised protection for my vices: But because I cannot do it without I set
forth the virtues I observed in them since I frequented them, and knowing that
their modesties would not approve it, I will content my self with this only,
since it is fit something be said, That I observed nothing in their words and
actions which did not tend to my spiritual edification, and folly persuaded me
that they are altogether free from that the Romish rabble does, like it self,
injuriously put upon them; I protest I never saw any of them go from house to
house to prattle with, and court young maids, and join under pretense of
giving ghostly counsel; if Ministers go abroad, it is to visit the sick,
comfort the afflicted, treat in consistory of the means for relief of the
poor, or else somewhat very beseeming their being or their callings when they
go from home. I see them not laden with gay shows, Crosses, Agnus Dei kneaded
with relics, holy grains, mother Lewis's cross, nor Medals, nor any of that
which they call Aucupia Monachorum, Friars toils to catch those who snatch at
them, which nets they reach forth principally to those of the femall sex, as the
simpler and more inclined to superstitious devotion. They cannot complain of
Ministers, that in their common talk we never hear them use the Name of God
so vainly in good or bad, as diverse Seculars have noted in the vain discourses
of Monks, and complained thereof. Nor do we see them complement with wenches
and women three or four hours together in their portalls, as do the Friars,
but above all the begging ones. The Ministers intents of discourse with any
women, are examined; and if they give an ill example, it is not borne with. I
marvel not that the Holy Ghost infuseth into them such profound notions of
holy Writ, and that it bestows upon them such excellent illuminations in
Divinity, as the Professors of this University deliver unto all that will come
to hear them; I can never forget what I noted from one of them, who handling
in his Lecture the Commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery* I never saw so
grave a stayednesse in words, nor so much carfulness in discovering this
subject; which gave me occasion to detest the Romish Casuists, and among other
Sanchez a Jesuit, who in a sordid manner turns to and again the filth that
comes along with this uncleanness, for there is nothing foul or base in the
most execrable excesses of beastliness and sensuality which is not tossed to
and fro in his imagination, and found in his most prodigious and horrible book
of Marriage. See now what in my conscience I knew of them, in whose band, they
say, I am cast. He to whom this invective against them and my sele is written,
can judge of these impostures, and of the truth of what I assever, who forsook
the reformed Church at threescore years of age, and therefore had time enough
to be well acquainted with the behaviors of Ministers. What this reverend Sir
adds in his letter, the Huguenots of Rouen themselves say, if I had been an
honest man, I had not left the Capuchins, is a lie, by which he makes himself
a laughing stock, and abuses him he writes to, by making a baby of him. For
can any man of judgment be persuaded that he is no honest man that avoids
Idolatry and superstition to embrace a true Religion? the Reader may judge by
this sparkle the rest of the Stuff. To conclude this small apology, and to
refute what can be objected against the sincerity of my intentions in the work
of my conversion, I present unto you this last reason which deserves to be well
weighed.

Adversity is a trial whereby God is acquainted with the fidelity of his
children: I have passed by it twice since my conversion, the first* by a
feebleness of body which came upon me before I came hither; the second, by a
violent disease a while since, which brought me so low that I verily thought to
dye. It Is then or never that we should deal sincerely with God, and manifest
the true resentments of the soul. Is it credible that a man that has
separated himself from the Romish Church for no other end but to take a fuller
swinge in dishonest liberty, that he was not seized at the instant with some
terror of Gods judgments, or showed not a misrule in his conscience tormented
with remorse, by some words or deeds? But I may truly aver that I never
before felt my heart at more ease, which being filled with heavenly comfort,
seeing my self freed from papisticall heresy, and brought into a religion
wherein I could not dye ill, since that I apprehended by a lively faith the
merits of my Savior and the premises of life eternal which he has made to
all them that confess and believe his holy Name.

It is very true, that in this estate I was seized with an exceeding grief for
my life passed, and the breaches I made in the Church of God in the time of my
ignorance: I cannot think on, without great grief and discontent, the great
number of those whom I have perverted, in being the cause they deserted the
true Religion. But this confidence I have, that if they be the chosen of God,
he will raise them up from their fallen estate, and be merciful unto them.
This disease was very profitable unto me, for besides the exercise of humility
and patience under the Lords fatherly chastisements, the frequent visits of
Pastors which came to comfort and pray with me, made me sensible how sweet and
powerful are those consolations that are drawn from the doctrine of the
Gospel, in comparison of signing with the cross, anealing, and sprinkling of
holy water, among which there is not one syllable of true comfort. But the
principal effect of this trial is, that by it I was the more strengthened in
my resolution, for I find my self more stable and more resolved than ever, to
persevere in that holy religion which I have embraced freely without
constraint, with a heart void of pride, or ambition or malice. Such issues are
the undoubted marks of Gods spiritual calling. And for so much as they who
endevor to shake my stability by contumelious reports, or make me bow by
promises or flatteries, shall do better hereafter to consider their own
consciences, and speedily seek after the means to get forth from the errors
wherein they are ensnared, than to labor the change of this my unchangeable
resolution: protesting unto them that by the grace of God I will rather suffer
thousands of tortures, than break the vow I have made unto my God, to live and
dye in the confession and profession of the faith into which he has brought me
of his pure mercy.

FINIS.

