A LETTER FROM THE POPE, TO His DISTRESED SONS THE Catholics In ENGLAND.

As it was Intercepted, And now Published by S. V.

LONDON: Printed in the Year M DC LXXIV.

A LETTER from the POPE.
DEar Sons, whom now thy English Den of Heretics despise, who now are by them
made the Ludibrium hominum, who for all your cunning stratagems and heroic
Plots and Treasons, and all your learning, yet (to my sorrow I speak it) you
are likely both now to be driven out from, banished, and utterly disregarded by
these Hgonots (silly Souls:) yet I your old Father, before I take my leave of
the World and of you, which if Heretics still pursue to spit out their Malice
against you my Sons the Jesuits, and if as is reported the Penal Laws be put in
execution against you, will suddenly put a period to this my now uncomfortable
life. Yet still me thinks I ought not to despair, but wait to see our Halcyon
days, and Heretics be again brought under the rod of our holy Inquisition. You
know Sons how I have erected Seminaries, and to what end; which my enemies do
call bad Conventicles, no better then Cockatrices to hatch treason: in these I
never thought any Cost too dear, whereby either to make your Bodies fit for
travail, or to help your natures inclination with fallacious art for the
accomplishment of our purpose. And now my Sons it is high time that you fall
from contemplation to practice, or else I say all is lost: for Protestants give
out that Popery has seen its best days in England; and I hear the Parliament,
that Pope-marring Assembly, will drive you like Foxes into corners: nay, I am
informed that Heretick-like they have publicly burnt the effigies of my
Holiness; and that D. S. a leading man among these Heretics, has charged us
with, nay not only charged, but proved that Catholics are Idolaters; and that
they make no more of confuting Cardinal Bellarmine, then drinking of a glass of
Wine. Ah now what is become of all our subtilty? we are now begirt about with
our Father the Divils devises. Now therefore seeing it is thus, let none of you
scorn your Old Fathers directions: for though your younger years be riper in
Art, yet my experience may teach you what in great designs is to be affected.
English you are, whose Albion-Cliffs have heretofore seemed to my predecessors
and me like Rocks of pure Diamond, where some have rightly loved us, and from
the depth of their affection have embraced you my dearest Children: but the
greatest part now pursue me with deadly hatred, terming me no better than a
blood-sucking Cannibal, a Robber of Churches, a Patron of Heresies, a Father of
Falsehood, the Broacher of Quarrels, the Seed-man of Sedition, the Infringer
of Liberties, the Controler of Princes, the Enemy of Christ, the Monster and
Astonishment of Nature, in Chayeing Christians Souls in miserable Thraldom, and
more then Egyptian servitude.

But we expect the time when these Clouds may, nay will vanish: be not
discouraged; you know after a storm comes a calm, after Persecution liberty;
the thoughts of which is unto me as it were a Restorative, to revive my faint
and languishing Spirits: which hope does chiefly depend upon your cunning in
compassing; and cunning consists in this which follows: First, that you
work upon such as are fit to be added to our Catholic faction; and secondly,
in the manner of the performance. Those that are the likelyest to be fitted to
this frame, that is, to lend a hand when opportunity strikes alarm (I speak
not sons of those who already are devout Catholics, earnestly expect, and
heartily pray for success in our Cause) either are Malcontents whom envy or
malice may make desirous of a change; or loose professors, who have lent their
love to voluptuous delights or prodigalities, Children whom extreme want has
made desperately minded; or wanton wanderers, whom long travail has deprived
of natural affection.

And thus began Mahomet to strengthen his State, by joining himself with the
angry Soldiers of Heraclius, stirring up their minds against the Emperor, and
encouraging them in their defection; whereupon in process of time it came to
pass, that although many could not abide him, from the baseness of his Birth,
and odiousness of his former Life; yet growing from a Thief to a seditious
Soldier, and from a seditious Soldier to be Captain of a Rebellious host, his
Mahometical force began to subdue mighty people. Now as you must strike with
Mahomet while the Iron is hot, and work those with diligence whose inclination
you find pliable; so must your wisdom appear in the manner of this work,
wherein I would have you to propound to your selves the deceitfulness of the
damned wretch before named.

I would not for all the world it were known, my Sons, that you followed so
base a pattern of a cozening Knave, for an example of imitation: this Mahomet,
not only to gratify his Companions, but also the more easily to allure all
Nations, received all Religions; the pertinacy of Arrius, the error of
Nestorius, the vain invention of the Thalmudists: therefore from the Jews he
received Circumcision, from the Christians sundry washings as it were Baptism,
and with Sergius denied Christ his Divinity.

Secondly, to enlarge his Kingdom, he made such Laws as were fit to win and
allure the vilest; as to his Arabians, base wretches, accustomed to live upon
spoil, he allows Theft, and sets a Law for revenge: hurt him which hurt
you; he that kills his enemy, or is is killed by him, enters into Paradise:
he permits of having many Wives, Divorcement for trifling causes; promises
Paradise to them that give liberally, and fight for his sake.

Thirdly, mistrusting his fall, with many Bulworks has he fenced his Law, that
no way be open to subvert it; First, by commanding to kill them which speak
against his Alcoran; Secondly, by forbidding men to confer with a contrary
Sect; and thirdly, by prohibiting credit to be given to any of a contrary
Religion.

Now Sirs, why should not we prevail as well as this deceiver, whom for example
I have mentioned to you my Children? have not we as many Motives, as plausible
Rhetoricians to persuade? for First, as he to allure all Nations received all
Religions, so I your Old Father have found out such a Religion as is compounded
of all sorts, that all might be pleased; and therefore our Enemies have called
it the Cruse and Budget of heresies. Secondly, our Doctrines are as mighty to
prevail, as ever were the Laws of Mahomet. If Old Men be covetous, their young
men voluptuous, Nobles Ambitious, and the common sort Ceremonious; we have such
allurements as are also to win them: to the rich covetousness, with Craft and
Cruelty, and the rest of her factours, we have Coined a Purgatory, the fire of
our gain: to ^eed the voluptuous, our Religion admits simple Fornication, and
our practice has erected Stews: to draw on the Riotous, dissolute and idle
do-nothings, we have ordained many odd Holydays; at Rogation to carry Banners,
after Pentecost to go about with Corpus Christi, play, and other knick-naks:
nay, to encourage you in Treason or desperate undertakings, we have canonized
Garnet, and other zealous Catholics, who suffered Martyrdom for the Catholic
Cause, after that heroic, and of all good Catholics to be commended, though
unfortunate Powder Plot. To keep men from the sight of their sins, we have
taught them to mince them, and that the first motions are no sins unless they
go with consent, that some are venial, and need but an Asperge of Holy Water,
or a Bishops blessing: to win ambitious hearts, that fain would be aloft, you
must teach that my power is to give Kingdoms to such as can conquer them, and
to discharge Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance and Loyalty, as our Pius
the fifth and Gregory the thirteenth did against that Heretic (though to all
the world and to us our selves known most Virtuous) Queen Elizabeth. Further,
we give immortality to such as can pluck the Crown from the Princes head; and
tell you that (which is a most damnable lie, but no matter so long as the
Catholic cause is advanced) to murder a Hugonot, or blow up at a blast an
Heretical Parliament, are works meritorious.

If the people will know nothing, to fit their humors we teach that Ignorance
is the Mother of Devotion, That Images are books for Lay men, That knowledge of
the Scriptures makes Heresies; and not as that Heretic Dr. S. teaches, that
the Scripture ought to be the Rule of our Faith, but that it is sufficient that
their faith be folded up in our Church-belief, without understanding or knowing
what it is. Again, to please the multitude, and to draw them to our Side, we
have holy Relics (Oh most precious!) Dispensations, Indulgences, and
thousands of years of Pardon; and that Catholics must believe not what Christ
and his Apostles have taught, but what the Church believes, right or wrong; and
that they ought to pin their Faith upon the fallible Infallibility of her, and
not as Dr. S. affirms, upon (that heretical dangerous Book) the Scriptures,
which have made Heresies, as wisely said that Cardinal, when it was enquired
how so many Heresies came into the world: Why, says he, we may think our selves
for it alone: for bad we kept that dangerous Book the Bible in an unknown
Tongue, these Heresies had never sprung so thick; but now every private and Lay
heretic puts his exposition upon the Scriptures. And was not this answered
like himself, think you, my sons? Yea certainly: for now we find it, to our
woeful experience.

Lastly, lest simplicity either in Church Service or Administration of
Sacraments should breed contempt, we have added many more petty matters to make
them more commendable, more acceptable to the palate, and our followers more
devout; as in our Churches gilded Images, Altars, Super-Altars, Candlesticks,
and suchlike: In our Massings and Church Service, Golden garments, costly
Colors, strange Gestures, warbling and numbering of Beads, etc. In our
Priests, square Caps, Bald Crowns, great Hoods: In our Orders, Crossing,
Anointing, Shriving, sorswearing Wedlock, and e. In our Baptism, Washing of
hands, Salting, Spawling, Exorcising, Crossing: In Receiving, to come with
beards new shaven, and an imagination of a bodily and real presence; which
makes Catholics devoutly to receive, when they are taught and really think it
so, but in truth none is, but as the Heretics own mystically so to be. And
lastly, lest this our juggling should be espied, which I your old Father hear
begins to be too manifest, we have made as strong Fences for Papism, as ever
did that wicked Beast for Mahometism. For first, we have endeavored to bury
the Scriptures, lest by that light all our Projects, obscure designs and
darkness should be discovered; which if sudden care be not taken, I have reason
to fear it will too too suddenly. Yet fear not, the Fowler is fain many times
to follow his Game long before he can obtain it; the Angler is fain many times
to sit whole hours by the riverside, before he can persuade the silly Fish to
snap up their own destruction. We have waited long, and many of our well
designed and heroic Plots (such as was the Gun-powder-treason) have
miscarryed: but there may come a time when --

Secondly, Church Service we have thrust upon silly people in a strange
language; Sons, you know well why: for' Simon Magus was never detected, before
Christ was preached in Samaria.

Thirdly, we have forbidden our followers to confer with the Hugonots: for they
are always striking at us with the Scepter of the Word, and still cry, To the
Law and the Testimony, etc.

Further, we tell you, that any thing, though the horridest Murder or Treason
you should act, is highly meritorious, so that thereby the Catholic Cause may
be respected, and the interest of our Church (I mean, that you may fill your
own Coffers) advanced: and that as amongst the Scythians he was reputed the
bravest Gentleman that spilt most blood; so I tell you, he is Canonized for the
worthiest Catholic, that can bring most souls to confusion.

And now, what can we do more? Yet what does there else remain, but that you
use all diligence, feeding your favorites with strong hope and large promises,
standing at the Court-gates with Absalom, the lively image of Courtly
Politics, seeming to pity the peoples estate, when his ambitious humor did
greedily aspire after his Fathers Kingdom. Even so you my Sons, tell them that
their Religion is good, and how I your Father and theirs do pity them, and that
if I had the disposition of the Crown, plenty should follow the Scepter, and
peace should follow plenty. I say no more unto you, but walk closely, and keep
your selves in tenebris: For your predecessors, I know not whether to ascribe
it to angry Stars, the influence of the Heavens, neglect of opportunity, want
of secrecy, by too great security, have had so bad success, that instead of
supplanting a Kingdom, they have broke their Necks at Tyburn; and instead of
reconciling Souls to the Romish faction, they have united their Heads to a
Halter; this cruelty have they sustained for my sake, whom therefore I have
Crowned with Martyrdom, and Question not but that they have as good rewards as
they deserved. Thus hoping and expecting to hear the downfall of Heretics, I am
your tender (though by Hugonots despised) Father

CLEMENT IX.


FINIS.

