The Divine SERVICES AND ANTHEMS Usually Sung In the CATHEDRALS AND COLLEGIATE
CHOIRES IN The Church of England.

Collected by J. C.

Col. 3. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another, in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. LONDON, Printed by W. G.
and are to be sold by Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivie-lane.

1663.

BUT I have one thing to clear, which perhaps will be objected, the often
Repetitions which are marked with ii. which cannot be avoided, since the parts
cannot but be Ecchoing their sense and gracing the Music to make an harmony in
both: for which, he that understands any thing thereof, will be my Advocate: so
that this small Collection may inform the Ignorant, reform the Obstinate,
conform the Moderate, and confirm all to Communicate in the Church of God. That
all Christians may so do, is the hearty desire and daily prayer of the meanest
of the Sons of the Church.

J. C.

See here the sacred Harp with well-tuned string
Skilfully touched by a most pious King;
Of whose great Actions after Gods own heart
This is recorded too, He played his Part.
depiction of a king with harp

To the Reverend WALTER JONES Doctor in Divinity, AND Sub-Dean of his Majesty's
Chappel-Royal, etc.
SIR,
Under your able Patronage I have presumed to shelter this my weak endeavor,
which if for no other reason than the wel-meaning devotion thereof, I was sure
would not be unacceptable or troublesome to you. Be pleased therefore to
intermit awhile those Seraphical Raptures, in the excellency whereof, and your
thereto tuned Piety, you are so famously happy. And vouchsafe an ear to the
mean address of these Rudiments (as it were) of Church Music, which, like
other perfections, has suffered merely through the peoples ignorance.

To you therefore more especially do I dedicate this Essay, whose alone
compe^ent Skill and judgment in the highest mysteries of this Divine Science,
if it shall please you to descend and deign a favorable approbation thereunto,
cannot but command reception from others: since my knowledge at Oxford
(improved further at London) of your Eminency this way, cannot so far disoblige
the world as not to believe you have the supreme Mastery in religious Music;
by which, as you charm the Soul, and all its affections, no doubt you can
prevail upon and persuade public acceptance.

I submit this piece in this (howsoever rude) manner to your judgment, having
attempted, I hope, something of tendency to the Churches peace and harmony,
whereof though I am a small and an unworthy Member, yet a Mite even from such
is justly exspected: For higher works God has fitted and prepared your most
Artfull Hand, and has placed you in an Orb from whence your Melody (as of the
Spheres) of holiness and constant goodness in and for the Church, is
universally heard with joy and delight. In which happiness, God Almighty long
continue you here and late translate you to the Angelical Choire: so prays,

Reverend Sir, Your most devoted and obedient Servant, JAMES CLIFFORD.

To the READER.
IT was the glory and hitherto happiness of Rhetoric alone, of all other
Sciences, to fit and adapt it self to every capacity and understanding; and
therefore it has been said to have something more of Divinity in it than the
rest: and we have a Proverb of remark, -- The plainer the better: Considering
this, and of how near a relation Music is to Rhetoric, yea more ravishingly
vocal and moving the spirit beyond the others most violent efforts, and how
the Church of God, in which Music has been constantly used throughout all the
various forms thereof, both Jewish and Christian, (whatever the sceptick
Separatist, or any novel Schismatic shall in vain, and falslly gainsay, though
I will not make it my task, or lose so much labor as to go about to refute
them) has suffered through the unintelligency and ignorance thereof: I thought
it a duty worthy the zeal of a Christian to remove this prejudice under and by
which the Church has so long without a proportionable remedy been grieved and
afflicted. For, it is to be presumed that the most morose and quarrelsome
disapprovers of this Music in our solemn Assemblies, object neither against
the harmony it self, for there is no peevish nor discontented spirit whatsoever
which it will not appease and allay, and that it does naturally; nor for the
matter, for that is always Scripture, or deduced and taken thence, which they
will by no means reject if they knew it to be such: It remains therefore, that
it is want of information and direction; for while the Choire sings, it seems
to them, (they say) a kind of service in an unknown Tongue, not one in a
hundred able to bear a part, or understand what is sung.

I have therefore (in hopes to re^ress this evil of ignorance, and to ^ring all
to the knowledge of this Musical piety, whose comforts and ^elights when they
have once thro^owly tasted, I do not doubt but my ^abour will be thank-worthy)
printed ^ll the Anthems usually sung in any of our Cathedrals verbatim, with
the ingeminations and doubles thereof, and the pauses and rests of the same,
that the people may follow the Choire in their Devotions without any loss or
mistake, and be encouraged to learn to assist and consort in the same melody.
To which I shall use this only motive, that since it will be all and our sole
employment in Heaven, it will be wretchless and unexcusable neglect not to mind
it here on earth.

I might say something to commend these Heavenly Anthems, but they are above
humane praise, and direct us to the chiefest of all praises, Gods glory; and
his Words and Works magnify themselves and their blessed Author, from whom
they first cam^ (though written by men inspired) an^ to whom they must return.
So Reader, I will not further stay thee from the contemplation thereof, but
refe^ thee to the heavenly satisfaction tho^ shall find therein.

Vale.
^rief DIRECTIONS for the understanding of that part of the Divince Service
performed with the Organ in S. Paul's Cathedral on Sundays and Holy Days.
The first Service in the Morning.
AFter the Psalms a Voluntary upon the Organ alone. After the first Lesson is
sung the ^e Deum, i. We praise thee O God. After the second Lesson the
Bene^ictus, i. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: or the Jubilate, i. O be
joy^ull in the Lord all ye lands. After the third Collect, i. O Lord ^ur
heavenly Father, etc. is sung the first Anthem. After that the Litany, i. O God
the Father of heaven, have mercy etc. After the Blessing, i. The grace of ^ur
Lord Jesus Christ, etc. a Voluntary ^lone upon the Organ.
The second, or Communion Service.
AFter every Commandment the Prayer, i. Lord have mer^ upon us, and etc. After
the Epistle, this heavenly ^jaculation, Glory be to thee O Lord After the holy
Gospel; the Nice^ Creed, i. I believe in one God, etc. After the Sermon, the
last Anthe^
At Evening Service.
AFter the Psalms a Voluntary lone by the Organ. After the first Lesson, is
sung the Magnificat, i. My soul does magni^ the Lord. After the second Lesson,
the Nu^dimittis, i. Lord now let thou the servant depart in peace, etc.
After the third Collect, i. Light^ our darkness we beseech etc. is sung the
first Anthem. After the Sermon, is sung the la^ Anthem.
THE TABLE.
A.
IX. ALmighty and everlasting God, page 10 XXXVI. Ah helpless wretch, what 42
XLV. Almighty and everlasting God, 57 L. Almighty and everlasting God, we hu 62
LX. Almighty God, whose praise this day 72 LXI. Almighty God, which made thy
bl 73 LXXXVII. Almighty God, who through 116 LXXXIX. Almighty God, the fountain
118 XCII. Arise O Lord, why sleep thou? 121 CIV. * Almighty God, which by
the lead 137 CXXXVIII. Above the Stars my Savio 192 CXLII. All laud and praise
with heart 198 CLII. Alack when I look back upon 216 CLVIII. A new Commandment
give 224 CLXV. Awake my soul! and come aw 236
B.
XX. BEhold it is Christ, which was ord 26 XXII. Blessed be thy name, O God, 28
XXXVIII. Behold, thou have made my d 46 XLVI. Behold how good and joyful a th
58 LIX. Behold now praise the Lord all ye 71 LXXIII. Blessed are those that are
undef 92 XCIII. Blessed art thou that fear Go 122 CXII. Bow down thine eye,
O Lord, a 150 CXXII. Behold, I bring you glad tydi 164 CXXV. Bow down thine
ear, O Lord, 168 CXXIX. Blessed be the Lord God of Is 176 CXXXI. Blessed are
all they that fear 178
C.
VI. CAll to remembrance, O Lord, page 6 XLI. Christ rising again from the
dead, 50 Christ is risen again etc. 51 XLVIII. Christ our Paschal Lamb 60
LXXXI. Christ our passover is sacrifi 106 LXXXII. Christ is risen from the
dead 108
D.
XII. DEliver us, O Lord our God 14 XXXI. Deliver me from mine enemies 37 XLIV.
Deliver me O God from all 56
E.
CXLVII. EXalt thy self above the 208
G.
LII. GOdliness is great riches 64 LXXII. Glorous and powerful God 90 CIX. God
the Protector of all that 145 CXIX. Glory be to God on high, and 160 CXL. Give
the King thy judgments 194 CXLVIII. God which as on this day, 209
H.
III. HIde not thou thy face from me 3 VIII. Haste thee, O God, to deliver me 8
XXXII. Hosanna to the Son of David 38 XXXV. Hear my prayer, O God, and co 41
LIII. Hear the prayers, O our God 65 LXXXVIII. Holy Lord God Almighty 117 XCIV.
How long will thou forget me 124 CVIII. Have mercy upon me, O God 144 CXX.
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of host 162 CXXIII. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Al
165 CXXVIII. Hearken ye nations, O come 174 CXXX. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and
177 CLVII. He that has my Command 223 CLIX. Hear the voice and prayer of thy
225 CLXIV. Hearken, O God, unto a wre 234
I.
XVI. I Call and cry to thee, O Lord, 19 XVII. I will exalt thee, O Lord, for
thou 20 XXVII. I lift my heart to thee 33 XXXIX. I will praise the Lord with 48
XLVII. If ye love me, keep my Comma 59 LI. I am the resurrection and the life
63 LXVI. I heard a voice saying, in 80 LXXIV. In thee O Lord have I put 94
LXXVI. If ye be risen again with Christ 97 XCVI. I will magnify thee, O Lord,
126 CII. I beheld, and lo, a great multitude 132 CXXIV. In Bethlehem Town, O
happy 166 CXXXV. In thee, O Lord, have I 186 CXXXVI. If the Lord himself had
not 188 CL. I heard a voice in heaven, Saying 213 CLX. I have loved, for the
Lord will 226
L.
XIV. LOrd we beseech thee, give 17 XXXIII. Lift up your heads, O ye 39 XLII.
Let God arise, and let his enemies 52 LV. Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabern 67
LXX. Let us now laud and magnify 88 LXXVIII. Let God arise, and let his 100
LXXX. Let my complaint come before 104 CXIV. Lord who shall dwell in thy Ta 152
CXVII. Lord to the I make my moan 158 CXXXIX. Lord I am not high minded 193
CXLI. Lord in thy wrath reprove 196 CLXVI. Look Shepherds, look! Why, 238
M.
LXVII. MY song shall be of mercy 82
N.
LVII. NOT unto us, O Lord, not 69
O.
I. O Lord make thy servant Charles 1 II. O Lord grant the King a long life 2
IV. O Lord give thy holy Spirit 4 VII. O Lord the Maker of all things 7 X. O
thou God Almighty, Father of all 11 XI. O Lord the worlds Savior 12 XIII. O
praise the Lord all ye heathen, 16 XVIII. O Lord I bow the knees of my 22 XIX.
O God be merciful unto us and 24 XXV. O God, whom our offenses 31 XXVIII. O
Lord turn thy wrath 34 XXIX. O give thanks unto the Lord 35 XXXIV. O Lord
rebuke me not in thine 40 XXXVII. Out of the deep have I called 44 LVI. O clap
your hands together all ye 68 LXIII. O how happy a thing it is 76 LXVIII. O
Lord our Governor 84 LXIX. O Lord thou have searched me out 86 LXXI. O praise
God in his holiness 89 LXXV. O God my heart is ready, 96 LXXXIII. O Lord of
hosts, thou God 109 LXXXIV. O eternal God Almighty 110 XC. O how glorious art
thou, O God 119 XCVII. O God the proud are risen up 127 XCVIII. O glorious God,
O Christ our 128 XCIX. O how amiable are thy dwelling 129 CI. O God who through
the preaching 131 CIII. O Lord turn not away thy face 134 CV. O Lord in thee is
all my trust 138 CX. O sing unto the Lord a new song 146 CXIII. O Lord I have
loved the habita 151 CXVI. O clap your hands together all 156 CXVIII. O mortal
man! how long wilt 159 CXXVI. O God of gods, O King of ki 170 CXXVII. O God of
gods, O King of 172 CXXXII. O Lord let me know mine 180 CXXXIV. O Jesu meek, O
Jesu sweet 184 CXLIII. O Lord of whom I do depend 200 CXLVI. O sing unto the
Lord a new 207 CLI. O Lord my God in all distress, 214 CLIV. O God the King of
glory, which 220 CLXI, O Lord make thy servant 228
P.
XXVI. PRevent us O Lord in all our 32 LXII. Ponder my words, O Lord, 74 LXIV.
Praise the Lord, O my soul, 78 CXXXVII. Praise the Lord the God of 190 CXLV.
Plead thou my cause, O Lord, 204
R.
CXV. REmember not, O Lord God 154
S.
XXX. SIng joyfully unto God our 36 XLIX. So God loved the world that 61 LVIII.
Save us good Lord, waking 70 LXV. Sing we merrily unto God 79 LXXXV. Save me O
God, for thy 112 C. Sing unto the Lord, O ye Princes 130 CVI. Sing unto God,
all ye kingdoms 140 CXXI. Steven being full of the holy G 163 CLXII. Submit
your selves one to ano 230 CLXIII. Sitting by the streams that gl 231 CLXVII.
See sinful soul the Savior 240
T.
V. TEach me thy way, O Lord, and 5 XXI. The Lord bless us, and keep 27 XL.
Thou God that guidst both heaven 49 XLIII. Teach me O Lord the way of th 54
LXXVII. Turn thou us, O good Lord 98 LXXIX. Thou art my portion, O Lord 102
LXXXVI. Thou art my King O God, 114 XCI. The Lord bless us, and keep 120 CVII.
The Lord is my Shepherd, there- 142 CXI. The Lord even the most mighty 148
CLIII. The King shall rejoice in thy 218 CLVI. This is my Commandment that 222
U
CXLIV. UNto thee O Lord will I 202
W.
XV. When the Lord turned again 18 XXIII. With all our hearts and mouths 29
XXIV. Wipe away my sins, O Lord, 30 LIVE. We beseech thee Almighty God 66
CXXXIII. What Child was he whose 182 CXLIX. When as we sat in Babylon 210
Z
CLV. ZAdock the priest and Nathan 221
November. 20. 1622.
Imprimatur,

DAN: NICOLS, R. P. D. Arch. Cant. Capel* Domesticus.

ANTHEM I.
O Lord make thy servant Charles. A Prayer for the KING.
O LORD make thy servant, thy servant Charles our King to rejoice, rejoice in
thy strength; give him his hearts desire and deny not the request of his lips,
give ii of ii But prevent him with thine everlasting blessing, blessing, and
give him a long life even for ever and ever, and give him a long life even ii
and give ii for ii Amen.

Will. Bird.
ANTHEM II.
O Lord grant the King a long life.
Psalm. 61. v. 6, 7, 8.
O LORD grant the King a long life, a long life, that his years may endure
throughout all generations, all ii let him dwell before thee forever, before ii
O prepare thy loving mercy and faithfulness that they may preserve him, that ii
that ii ii preserve him, preserve him; So shall we always sing and praise thy
name, thy name; so shall we always sing and praise thy name, and praise thy
name, and praise thy name, Amen.

Thomas Weelks.
ANTHEM III.
Hide not thou thy face, etc. A Prayer.
HIde not thou thy face from us O Lord, and cast not off thy servant in thy
displeasure; for we confess our sins unto thee and hide not our
unrighteousness, for thy mercy sake, for ii deliver us from all our sins,
deliver ii for thy mercy sake, for ii deliver ii deliver ii

Amen.
Richard Farrant.
ANTHEM IV.
O Lord give thy holy Spirit, etc. A Prayer.
O LORD give thy holy Spirit into our hearts, and lighten our understanding
that we may dwell in the fear of thy name, in ii in ii all the days of our
life, all ii that we may know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent, and ii and ii

Tho. Tallis.
ANTHEM V.
Teach me thy way O Lord, etc.
Psalm. 86. v. 11, and 12.
TEach me thy way, O Lord, O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth, in ii O knit
my heart unto thee that I may fear thy name, O knit ii that I ii And I will
thank thee, O Lord, with all my heart, and ii with all my heart, with ii and
will praise thy name forevermore, and ii and ii forevermore, Amen.

Edmund Hooper.
ANTHEM VI.
Call to remembrance O Lord, etc.
Psalm. 25. v. 5, 6.
CALL to remembrance O Lord, O ii call to ii thy tender mercy and thy loving
kindness, which has been ever of old, which ii O remember not the sins and
offenses of my youth, but according to thy mercy think thou on me O Lord, but
according to thy mercy think thou on me O Lord, for thy goodness.

Richard Farrant.
ANTHEM VII.
O Lord the maker of all things. A Hymn at Evening prayer.
O LORD the maker of all things we pray thee now in this evening us to defend
through thy mercy ii from all deceit of our enemies of ii Let neither us
deluded be Good Lord with dream or fantasy, Our hearts waking in thee thou
keep, That we in sin fall not on sleep, That ii O father through thy blessed
Son Grant us this our petition, To whom with the holy Ghost always in heaven
and earth be laud and praise, in ii

Amen.
W. Mundy.
ANTHEM VIII.
Haste thee O God to deliver me.
Psalm. 70.
The first Part.
HAste thee O God to deliver me, make haste to help me, O Lord let them be
ashamed and confounded, and confounded that seek after my soul, let them be
turned backward and put to confusion that wish me evil, let them for their
reward be soon brought to shame, let ii that cry over me, There, there ii

The second Part.
But let all those that seek thee be joyful and glad in thee, and let all such
as delight in ^hy salvation say always, The Lord be praised, the ii the ii As
for me I am poor and in misery, haste thee unto me O God, thou art my helper
and my Redeemer O Lord, make no long tarrying, O Lord ii

Amen.
John Shepherd.
ANTHEM IX.
Almighty and everlasting God, The Collect for the third Sunday after the
Epiphany.
ALmighty and everlasting God mercifully look upon our infirmities, mercifully
ii and in all our dangers and necessities, and ii stretch forth thy right hand,
stretch ii stretch ii to help and defend us, to ii to ii and ii through Jesus
Christ our Lord, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

Orlando Gibbons.
ANTHEM X.
O thou God Almighty, etc. A Prayer.
O Thou God Almighty Father of all mercy, Father ^ ii Father ii Fountain of ^
pity, Fountain ii grant lord we beseech thee, grant ^ ii of thy great clemency
^ us to have mercy, grant ii ^ant ii of ii to ii to ii ^ ii

Edmund Hooper.
ANTHEM XI.
O Lord the worlds Savior, and A Hymn at Evening Prayer.
O LORD the worlds Savio^ which have preserved this day; this night also our
succor, and save us e^ we thee pray; be merciful n^ unto us, and spare us
which d^ pray to thee; our sins forgi^ Lord gracious that our da^ness might
lightened be, the sleep our mind do not o^press, do ii nor that o^ enemies us
beguile, nor the the flesh full of frailness o^ Soul and Body do desile, d^ ii
O Lord reformer of a^ things, with hearts desire we ^ray to thee, that after
our rest and sleeping, and ii We may ^ise chaste and worship thee,

Amen.
William Mundy.
ANTHEM XII.
Deliver us, O Lord our God, etc*
Psalm. 106. v. 45, 46.
The first part.
DEliver us O Lord our God* deliver ii deliver ii deliver ii O Lord our God,
and gather us from among the heathen, that we may give thanks, that ii that ii
unto thy holy name, and make our boast of thy praise.

The second Part.
Blessed be the Lord God of ^rael from everlasting, from ii ^om ii from ii from
ii and ^orld without end, and ii and ^t all the people say, Amen, ^men, and ii
Amen, Amen.

Orlando Gibbons.
ANTHEM XIII.
O praise the Lord all ye heathen
Psalm. 117.
O Praise the Lord all y^ heathen, praise him a^ ye nations, for his merciful^
kindness, for ii his merciful^ his ii is evermore and mo^ toward us, and the
truth ^ the Lord, and ii endure^ forever and ever, Amen.

Adrian Batte^
ANTHEM XIV.
Lord we beseech thee, etc. The Collect for the third Sunday ^^ Advent.
LOrd we beseech thee, ii. give ear unto our prayers, ii. and by thy gracious
visitation lighten the darkness of our hearts, by our Lord Jesus Christ, ii.
Amen.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM XV.
When the Lord turned again, etc.
Psalm. 126. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.
1. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion, then were we like to
them that dream, 2. Then was our mouth filled with laughter and our tongue with
joy, 3. Then said they among the heathen, the Lord has done great things for
them, 4. Yea the Lord has done great things for us already, ii whereof we
rejoice. Glory be to the Father, ii and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost: As
it etc. Amen.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM XVI.
I call and cry to thee O Lord, etc. A Prayer.
I Call and cry to thee O Lord, ii. give ear unto my plaint. Bow down thine
eyes and mark my heavy plight, ii and how my soul does faint, ii. for I have
many ways offended thee ii forget my wickedness, O Lord I beseech thee, ii.

Thomas Tallis.
ANTHEM XVII.
I will exalt thee O Lord, etc.
Psalm. 30. v. 1. 2, 3, 4, 11, 12, 13.
The first Part.
1. I Will exalt thee O Lord, for thou have defended me, ii and not suffered
mine enemies to have their pleasure upon me, ii 2. O Lord my God I have cried
unto thee and thou have healed me, ii 3. Lord thou have brought my Soul out of
hell, ii thou have preserved me, ii from them that go down into the pit.

The second Part.
4. Sing unto the Lord ye that be his Saints, ii and give thanks with a
remembrance of his holiness. ii 11. The Lord has heard me, and has taken
mercy upon me, the Lord is made my helper, ii. 12. Thou have turned my sorrow
into joy, ii thou have put off my sackcloth, ii and have compassed me with
gladness, ii 13. That my glory may sing to thee without grief, ii O Lord my
God, ii I shall evermore give thanks to thee, ii

Dr. Tie.
ANTHEM XVIII.
O Lord I bow the knees, etc.
These words are taken out of the Prayer of Manasses King of Judah, when he was
holden captive in Babylon.
O LORD I bow the knees of my heart, requiring mercy ii. of thee O Lord. I have
sinned and known mine iniquity, ii. forgive me and destroy me not ii. with mine
iniquities, neither do thou always remember mine evils ii. to punish them,
but save me which am unworthy of thy great mercy, ii. and I will praise thee
everlastingly, all the days of my life, for all the virtues of heaven praises
thee, and unto thee belongs all glory, world without end,

Amen.
William Mundy.
ANTHEM XIX.
O God be merciful unto us, etc.
Psalm. 67.
The first Part.
1. O GOD be merciful unto us, ii and bless u^ ii and show the light of hi^
countenance upon us, ii.

The second part.
2. That we may know the way upon earth, ii and the saving health among all
heathen, ii. 3. Let thy people praise thee O God, let all thy people praise
thee.

The third part.
4. O let the people rejoice and be glad that thou judge them righteously,
and governest all nations upon the earth, ii. 5. Let the people praise thee O
God, let all the people praise thee. 6. God even our own God give us his
blessing, that the earth may bring forth her increase. ii. 7. God bless us, ii
and let all the ends of the world fear him, ii. So be it.

This may be sung instead of the Nune Dimittis.

Dr. Tie.
ANTHEM XX.
Behold it is Christ, etc.
These words are taken out of the tenth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles,
being part of the 42, and 43 verses.
BEhold it is Christ ii. which was ordained by God ii. to be the Judge of the
quick and the dead. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name
ii whosoever believes in him ii. shall receive remission of their sins ii.

Edmund Hooper.
ANTHEM XXI.
The Lord bless us, etc. A Prayer.
^HE Lord bless us and keep us, ii. the Lord make ^s face ii. to shine upon us,
and be merciful unto ^, ii the Lord lift up his ^untenance upon us ii, and ^ve
us peace forevermore, ii. men.

Robert White.
ANTHEM XXII.
Blessed be thy name, etc. A Thanksgiving.
BLessed be thy name O G^ of our Fathers, ii. whi^ when thou art wroth shew^
mercy, and in the time trouble ii. thou forgav^ the sins of them that call up^
thee. ii.

Thomas Tall^^
ANTHEM XXIII.
^ith all our hearts and mouths.
With all our hearts and mouths we confess, ^aise and bless thee ii. God ^e
Father unbegotten, and ^ee the Son only begotten, ^ith the holy Ghost the
Com^rter, holy and unseparable ^rinity, ii to thee be glory ^r evermore. ii.
Amen.

Thomas Tallis.
ANTHEM XXIV.
Wipe away my sins, etc. A Prayer.
Wipe away my sins ^ Lord ii. which ignorantly in my youth I have done, and
give pardon to the penitent; ii. all the hope o^ my soul does only rest in thee
ii. Thou art my hope an^ my health, ii my tears do^ testify my grief, my
plaint an^ grievous groan: ii be merciful O Lord, my God of thy good will, ii.
and with thy favor look thou upon me, O Lord my God, then shall m^ heart
rejoice in thee, ii. an^ my spirit shall serve thee, ii

Amen.
Tho. Tallis.
ANTHEM XXV.
O God whom our offenses, etc. A Prayer.
O GOD whom our offenses have displeased, and with our repentance wilt ^e
appeased, we humbly beseech thee ii. with mercy to hear the prayers of thy
people, ^i. and turn from us the scourges of thy wrath ii. which our sins have
justly deserved ii. Amen.

William Bird.
ANTHEM XXVI.
Prevent us O Lord, etc. The fourth Prayer after the Communion.
PRevent us O Lord in al^ our doings with thy mos^ gracious favor, and further
u^ with thy continual help, ii. that in all our works began, continued and
ended in the^ we may glorify thy holy name* ii and finally by thy merc^ obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

William Bird*
ANTHEM XXVII.
I lift my heart to thee, etc. A prayer.
I Lift my heart to thee my God most just, ii now suffer me to pour out my
plaint, ii. my sins alas are so enlarged, that when I look up, lo! I am cast
down ii. my humble suit then for mercy is; mercy good Lord, mercy I crave, let
me thy mercy have, Amen.

Dr. Tie.
ANTHEM XXVIII.
O Lord turn thy wrath, etc. A Prayer.
The first part.
O Lord turn thy wrath away from us for thy mercy sake; ii call to mind no
more, O our God, our former sins and wickedness: ii. look down, with thy
merciful eyes, ii and see, we be thy people and thy pasture sheep. ii.

The second Part.
Bow thine ear O Lord and hear, ii let thine anger cease from us. ii. Sion, thy
Sion is wasted and brought low, Jerusalem is wasted, quite desolate and void.
ii.

Will. Bird.
ANTHEM XXIX.
O give thanks unto the Lord, etc. A Thanksgiving.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, ii. and his mercy endures
for ever. ii. O sing praises unto the Lord ii and give thanks unto him with a
remembrance of his goodness. ii God has showed his goodness ii plenteously,
and our eyes have seen their desire upon our enemies: ii the Lords name be
praised therefore from this time forth forevermore, ii.

Amen.
Dr Gyles.
ANTHEM XXX.
Sing joyfully unto God, etc.
Psalm. 81. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.
1. SIng joyfully unto God our strength, sing aloud unto the God of Jacob. ii.
2. Take the song ii and bring forth the Timbrel, the pleasant Harp, ii and the
Violl. ii 3. Blow the Trumpet in the new Moon ii even in the time appointed ii
and at our feast day. ii 4. For this is a statute for Israel, and a law of the
God of Jacob. ii

William Bird.
ANTHEM XXXI.
Deliver me from mine enemies.
Psalm. 59. v. 1, 2. and 60. 11.
DEliver me from mine enemies O God, defend me from them that rise up against
me. ii. 2. O deliver me from the wicked doers, and save me from blood-thirsty
men. ii. Psalm. 60. 11. O be thou our help in trouble, ii for vain is the help
of man. ii.

Robert Persons.
ANTHEM XXXII.
Hosanna to the Son of David.
These words are taken out of the 9th verse of the 21 Chapter of the Gospel
written by S. Matthew.
HOSANNA to the Son of David, Blessed be he that comes in the name of the
Lord, ii blessed be the King that comes in the name of the Lord, ii peace in
heaven and glory in the highest places, ii Hosanna in the highest heavens. ii.

Orlando Gibbons.
ANTHEM XXXIII.
Lift up your heads, etc.
Psalm. 24. v. 7, 8.
7. LIft up your heads O ye gates ii and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors ii
and the King of glory shall come in. ii. 8. It is the Lord ii strong and
mighty, ii even the Lord of hosts, ii he is the King of glory. ii

Orlando Gibbons.
ANTHEM XXXIV.
O Lord rebuke me not, etc.
Psalm. 6. v. 1, 2, 4.
1. O Lord rebuke me not in thine indignation, neither chasten me in thy
displeasure. ii 2. Have mercy upon me O Lord for I am weak, ii O Lord heal me
for my bones are vexed. ii. 4. Turn thee O Lord and deliver my soul, O save me
for thy names sake, ii. Amen.

William Bird.
ANTHEM XXXV.
Hear my prayer O God, etc.
Psalm. 153. v. 1, 2.
HEar my prayer O God ii and consider my desire; Hearken unto me for thy ^uth
and righteousness sake ii. And enter not into judg^ent with thy servant, for in
^hy sight shall no man living be ^ustified. ii

William Bird.
ANTHEM XXXVI.
Ah helpless wretch, etc. A Prayer.
AH helpless wretch, wha^ shall I do, Or which wa^ shall I go or run, The
eart^ bewrayes, the heavens record* The wickedness that I have done; Have
mercy Lord for Christ thy Son. ii. Alas* where shall I succor find, Both
heaven and earth does me deny, So that unto the heav'n^ above I dare not once
lift up mine eye, For I have sinned so grievously. ii. If heaven and earth
shall witness be Against my sickly soul for sin, Untimely birth (alas for me!)
A great ^eale better more had been Then heaven to lose and hell ^o win. ii.
Shall I despair, ^hou God forbid, I know that ^ercy more is thine, That if ^he
sin of all the world Were ^nit and linked unto mine. Wherefore my Soul do not
^epine ii. Despise not then ^ost loving Lord ii. The ^orm and image of thy face
ii Which thou have wrought and ^early bought ii With mercy, great goodness and
grace: ii Accept therefore my humble plaints, And grant me rest among the
Saints, Amen.

William Mundy.
ANTHEM XXXVII.
Out of the deep, etc.
Psalm. 130.
1. OUT of the deep have called unto thee (O Lord.) Lord hear my voice* 2. O
let thine ears conside^ well the voice of my complaint, ii. 3. If thou Lord
wilt be extreme to mark wha^ is done amiss, O Lord wh^ may abide it. ii. 4. For
there is mercy with thee, therefore shall thou be feared. 5. ^ look for the
Lord, my sou^ does wait for him, in his wor^ is my trust. 6. My soul flies
unto the Lord before the morning watch, I say before the ^orning watch. 7. O
Israel ^ust in the Lord, for with the lord there is mercy, and with ^m is
plenteous redemption. ^. And he shall redeem Israel ^om all his sins. Amen.

Thomas Morley.
Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM XXXVIII.
Behold thou have made my days*
Psalm. 39. v. 6, 7, 8, 13, 14. 15.
6. BEhold thou have made m^ days as it were a sp^ long; and mine age is even
^ nothing in respect of thee, an^ verily every man living is altogether vanity,
ii. 7. For man walks in a vain shadow, an^ disquieteth himself, in vain He
heapeth up riches, and ca^ not tell who shall gather them* 8. And now Lord,
what is m^ hope, truly my hope is even i^ thee. ii. 13. Hear my praye^ O Lord,
and with thine ea^ consider my calling: hold no^ thy peace at my tears. 14. For
^am a stranger with thee, and sojourner, as all my fathers ^ere. 15. O spare me
a lit^e, that I may recover my ^rength before I go hence, ^d be no more seen.
ii.

Orlando Gibbons.
ANTHEM XXXIX.
I will praise the Lord, etc.
Psalm. 9. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
1. I Will praise the Lord with my whole heart, will speak of all thy marvelou^
works. I will rejoice and b^ glad in thee. ii. 2. I will sing praises to thy
holy name O thou most high. ii. 3. For that mine enemies are drive^ back ii
they shall fall and perish at thy presence. ii. 4. For thou have maintained my
caus^ and my right, thou art set i^ the Throne and judge righ^ ii. 5. Thou
have rebuked the heathen, thou have destroye^ the wicked, thou have put ou^
their name forever. ii. Amen*

John Ward*
ANTHEM XL.
Thou God that guidest, etc. A Prayer for the KING.
THou God that guid'st both heaven and earth, On whom we all depend; Preserve
our King in perfect health, And him from harms defend: ii Conserve his life in
peace to reign, Augment his joys withal; Increase his friends maintain his
cause, And hear us when we call. ii So shall all we, that faithful be, Rejoice
and praise thy name ii O God, O Christ, O holy Ghost; ii Give ear and grant the
same, ii.

Amen.
W. Bird.
ANTHEM XLI.
Christ rising again from the dead. For Easterday in the morning.
These words are taken out of the 8th Chapter of St Paul's Epistle to the
Romans, being part of the 9, 10, and 11. verses.
The first Part.
CHrist rising again from the dead now dies not; Death from henceforth ii has
no power upon him: For in that he died, he died but once to put away sin, ii
But in that he lives, he lives unto God. And so likewise count your selves
dead unto sin, but living unto God in Christ Jesus our Lord. ii

These words are taken out of the 15 Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, verse. 20, 21, 22.
The second Part.
20. CHrist is risen again, the first fruits of them that sleep. ii. 21. For
seeing that by man came death: ii By man also comes the resurrection of the
dead; 22. For as by Adam all men do die, ii so by Christ all men shall be
restored to life. ii Amen.

William Bird.
ANTHEM XLII.
Let God arise, etc.
Psalm. 68. v. 1, 3, 4. etc.
1. LET God arise ii and let his enemies be scattered, ii Let them also that
hate him flee before him. ii. 3. But let the righteous be glad and rejoice
before God: let them also be merry and joyful. ii. 4. O sing unto God and sing
praises unto his name, magnify him that rides upon the heavens; ii. Praise
him in his name; ii. Yea, and rejoice before him. ii. Sing unto the Lord a new
song and his praise from the ends of the earth. They that go down ii to the
Sea, let them give glory to the Lord, and declare his praise ii.

John Ward.
ANTHEM XLIII.
Teach me O Lord the way, etc.
These words are the fifth Portion of Psalm. 119.
1. TEach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end.
2. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law: yea, I shall keep it with
my whole heart. 3. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments: for therein
is my desire. 4. Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies: and not to
coveteousness. 5. O turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity: and quicken
thou me in thy way. 6. O stablish thy word in thy servant that I may fear thee.
ii 7. Take away the rebuke that I am afraid of, ii. for thy judgments are good.
8. Behold my delight is in thy commandments, O quicken me in thy righteousness.
ii.

John Hilton.
ANTHEM XLIV.
Deliver me O God, etc. A Prayer.
DEliver me O God from all my foes that be, And me defend and those withstand
that rises against me: ii Deliver me also from those that wicked be; From
those that thirsts after blood good Lord deliver me: ii Mine enemies be
strong, thou Lord the same do see, Without offense upon my part they still
do trouble me. ii My self, my cause and all I do commit to thee; From traps,
from snares and bloody hands good Lord deliver me. ii Amen.

Dr Bull.
ANTHEM XLV.
Almighty and everlasting God. The Collect for the second Sunday after the
Epiphany. A Prayer.
ALmighty and everlasting God, which do govern ^ll things in heaven and
earth, mercifully hear the supplica^ions of thy people, and grant ^s thy peace
all the days of our ^ife, through Jesus Christ our Lord. ii. Amen.

Richard Price.
ANTHEM XLVI.
Behold, how good and joyful, etc*
Psalm. 133.
BEhold, how good and joyful a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in
unity 2. It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ra^ down unto the
beard, eve^ unto Aarons beard, and we^^ down to the skirts of his clothing. 3.
Like as the dew o^ Hermon, which fell upon the hi^ of Sion. 4. For there the
Lord promised his blessing, and lif^ forevermore.

Albertus Bryne*
ANTHEM XLVII.
If ye love me, etc.
John 14. v. 15, 16.
5. IF ye love me keep my Commandments, ii. 6. And I will pray the Father ii.
and he shall give you another Comforter ii even ^he Spirit of truth ii that he
^ay abide with you forever. ii

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM XLVIII.
Christ our Paschall Lamb.
These words are taken out of the 5^ Chap. of 1 Cor. 7, 8. verses.
CHrist our Paschal Lamb'^ offered up for us once for all, when he bare our
sins o^ his body ii upon the Cross* For he is the very Lamb of Go^ that takes
away the sins o^ the world: ii wherefore le^ us keep a joyful and holy fea^
with the Lord. ii.

Adrian Batten*
ANTHEM XLIX.
So God loved the world, etc.
John 3. v. 16, 18.
6. SO God loved the world that he gave his only ^egotten Son, that whosoever
^elieveth in him should not ^erish but have everlasting life. ^8. For he that
believes not ^ condemned already because ^e has not believed ii in the ^ame
of the only begotten Son ^f God. ii

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM L.
Almighty and everlasting God. The Collect for the Purification ^ St. Mary the
Virgin. A Prayer.
ALmighty and everlastin^ God, we humbly beseec^ thy majesty, that as thy onl^
begotten Son was this day presented in thy Temple in the substance of our
flesh; so gran^ that we may be presented unt^ thee with pure and clear mind^ by
Jesus Christ our Lord*

Amen.
Simon Ive*
ANTHEM LI.
^am the resurrection and the life. The Funeral Anthem.
John 11. 25, 26. and Job 19. 25, etc.
5. I Am the resurrection and the life (says the Lord:) ^e that believes in
me, Yea, ^ough he were dead, yet shall ^e live, 26. And whosoever ^veth, and
believes in me, shall ^ot die for ever. Job 19. 25, ^6, 27. I know that my
Re^eemer lives, and that I shall ^se out of the earth, in the last ^ay, and
shall be covered again ^ith my skin, and shall see God ^ my flesh, yea, and I
my self ^all behold him ii not with ^ther, but with the same eyes ii.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LII.
Godliness is great riches, etc.
1 Timothy 6. v. 6, 7. and Job 1. 21.
6. GOdliness is great riche^ If a man can be conte^ with that he has: 7. For
we brought nothing ii into this world neither may we ca^^ any thing out of this
world. ^ Job 1. 21. The Lord givet^ and the Lord takes awa^ blessed be the
name of the Lord, ii Amen.

Adrian Batten*
ANTHEM LIII.
Hear the Prayers O our God, etc. A Prayer.
HEar the prayers O our God ii of thy humble servants ii when we pray unto thee
ii in thy holy Temple, ii and when thou hear have mercy on us, for Christ
Jesus sake our Lord, ii. Amen.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LIVE.
We beseech thee Almighty God. The Collect for the third Sunday in Lent. A
Prayer.
WE beseech thee Almighty God ii. look upon the hearty desires ii. of thy
humble servants, and stretch forth ii. the right hand of thy Majesty to be our
defense against all our enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord, ii.

Amen.
Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LV.
Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, etc.
Psalm. 15. v. 1, 2, 7.
1. LORD who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, ii. or who shall rest upon thy holy
hill? ii. 2. Even he that leads an incorrupt life, ii. and does the thing
that is right, ii and speaks the truth from his heart. ii. 7. Who so does
these things shall never fall. ii.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LVI.
O Clap your hands together, etc.
Psalm. 47. v. 1, 5, 6, 7.
1. O Clap your hands together all ye people. ii O sing unto God ii with the
voice of melody. ii 5. God is gone up with a merry noise, ii and the Lord with
the sound of the Trumpet. ii 6. O sing praises unto our King. 7. For God is
King of all the earth, sing praises with understanding, ii. Amen.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LVII.
Not unto us O Lord, etc.
Psalm. 115. v. 1, 2, 3.
1. NOT unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give thy praise for thy
loving mercy and for thy truths sake. ii 2. Wherefore shall the heathen say,
where is now their God. ii 3. As for our God, he is in heaven, he has done
whatsoever pleased him. ii. So be it.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LVIII.
Save us good Lord, etc. A Prayer.
SAve us good Lord, waking and sleeping, that we may watch in Christ and rest
in peace. Preserve us O Lord ii as the apple of an eye, and protect us under
the shadow of thy wings. ii Vouchsafe O Lord to keep us this night without sin.
O Lord hear our prayers ii and let our cry come unto thee. ii Amen.

Adrian Batten
ANTHEM LIX.
Behold now praise the Lord, etc.
Psalm. 134. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.
1. BEhold (now) praise the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord. ii. 2. Ye that
by night stand in the house of the Lord: ii. even in the Courts of the house of
our God. ii. 3. Lift up your hands in the Sanctuary: ii. and praise the Lord.
ii. 4. The Lord that made heaven and earth, give ^hee blessing out of Sion. ii.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LX.
Almighty God whose praise, etc. The Collect for the holy Innocents Day. A
prayer.
ALmighty God, whose praise this day the young Innocents, thy witnesses, have
confessed and showed forth not in speaking, but in dying. ii Mortify and kill
all vices in us, ii that in our conversation, our life may express thy faith,
which with our tongues we do confess, ii through Jesus Christ our Lord. ii
Amen.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LXI.
Almighty God which made, etc. The Collect for the day of the Circumcision of
Christ. A Prayer.
ALmighty God which made thy blessed Son to be ^ircumcised ii and obedient ^o
the Law for man. ii Grant ^s the true circumcision of the Spirit that our
hearts and all our members being mortified from all worldly and carnal ^usts,
ii may in all things obey thy blessed will, through the same thy Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, ii Amen.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LXII.
Ponder my words O Lord, etc.
Psalm. 5.
1. POnder my words O Lord and consider my meditation: 2. O hearken thou unto
the voice of my calling, my King and my God: For unto thee will I make my
prayer. 3. My voice shall thou hear betimes, O Lord, early in the morning will
I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. 4. For thou art the God that
have no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with thee. ii 5.
Such as be foolish shall not and in thy sight, for thou ha^st all them that
work vanity. ^. Thou shall destroy them ^at speak leasing, the Lord will ^^hor
both the bloodthirsty and deceitful man: 7. But ^s for me, I will come into
thy ^ouse, even upon the multitude ^f thy mercies; and in thy fear ^ill I
worship toward thy holy ^emple, ii Amen.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LXIII.
O how happy a thing it is, etc.
Psalm. 133. in Meter.
O How happy a thing it i^ And joyful for to se^ Brethren together fast to
hol^ The band of amity! It call^ to mind the sweet perfume An^ that costly
ointment Which on the sacrificers head By God^ precept was spent. It wet no^
Aaron's head alone but drench^ his beard throughout: An^ finally it did run
down his ric^ attire about. And as the lowe^ ground does drink The dew o^
Hermon hill: And Sion with her silver drops The fields with fruit does fill.
Even so the lord does pour on them His ^essings manifold: Whose ^earts and
minds without all ^ile This knot do keep and ^old.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LXIV.
Praise the Lord O my Soul, and c*
Psalm. 146. 1. and 145. 2.
1. PRaise the Lord O m^ Soul, while I live will praise the Lord, ii yea as lo^
as I have any being ii I wi^ sing praises unto my God. ii Psalm. 145. 2. Every
day will give thanks to thee and prai^ thy name ii. forevermore, ii.

Amen.
Adrian Batt^
ANTHEM LXV.
Sing we merrily unto God, etc.
Psalm. 81. v. 1, 2, 3.
^. SIng we merrily ii unto God our strength. Make cheerful noise ii unto the
God of Jacob. ii 2. Take ^he Psalm, bring hither the Ta^ret, the merry Harp
with the ^ute. ii 3. Blow up the Trumpet ii in the new Moon; ii even in the
time ^ppointed, and upon our solemn ^east day, ii

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LXVI.
I heard a voice, saying in Heaven The Anthem for St. Michaels day.
These words are taken out of the 12^ Chapter of the Revelation of S^ John, v.
10. etc.
10. I Heard a voice, saying in heaven is now man salvation and strength, ii
an^ the kingdom of our God, ii and the power of his Christ ii 12. Therefore
rejoice y^ heavens, and ye that dwell i^ them. ii 10. For the accuse^ of our
brethren is cast down ^ which accused them before God day and night. 12.
Therefore rejoice, etc. 11. An^ they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, ii
and by the word of their testimony. 12. Therefore rejoice ye heavens and ye
that dwell in them. ii

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LXVII.
My song shall be of mercy, etc.
Psalm. 101.
1. MY song shall be of mercy and judgment, unto thee O Lord, will I sing. 2. O
let me have understanding in the way of Godliness. 3. When will thou come unto
me, I will walk in my house with a perfect heart. 4. I will take no wicked
thing in hand; I hate the sins of unfaithfulness: there shall no such cleave
unto me. ii 5. A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked
person. 6. Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I destroy. 7. Whosoever
has a proud look and high stomach, I will not suffer him. ii 8. Mine eyes look
upon such as be faithful in the land that they may dwell with me. ii 9. Whosoever
leads a godly life, he shall be my servant. 10. There shall no deceitful
person dwell in my house; he that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight.
11. I shall soon destroy all the ungodly that are in the land, that I may root
out all wicked doers from the city of the Lord. Glory be to the Father, and to
the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever
shall be world without and, Amen.

Will. Mundy.
ANTHEM LXVIII.
O Lord our Governor, etc.
Psalm. 8. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
1. O Lord our Governor, ii how excellent i^ thy name in all the world. i^ 2.
Out of the mouth of very Babes and Sucklings have thou ordained strength
because o^ thine enemies, that thou might still the enemy and the avenger. 3.
For I will consider the heavens, ii even the works of thy fingers, the Moo^ and
the stars which thou has^ ordained. ii 4. What is man that thou art mindful of
him, or the Son of man that thou visitest him. ii 5. Thou have made him lower
ii than the Angels, to crown him with glory and worship. ii 6. Thou make him
to have dominion of the works of thy hands, and ^hou have put all things ii in
^ubjection under his feet,

Amen.
Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LXIX.
O Lord thou have searched me out.
Psalm. 139. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8.
1. O Lord thou have searched me out and known me; thou know my down
sitting, and my uprising, thou understandest my thoughts long before. 2. Thou
art about my path, and about my bed, and spiest out all my ways. 3. For lo,
there i^ not a word in my tongue, but thou, O Lord, know it altogether. 4.
Thou have fashioned me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me. ii 6.
Whither shall I go then from thy Spirit, or whither shall I go then from thy
presence? 7. If I climb up into heaven thou art there: if I go down to hell,
thou art ^here also. ii 8. If I take ^he wings of the morning and ^emain in the
uttermost parts of the Sea. ii Glory be to ^he Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Ghost: As it was ^n the beginning, and is now, and ever shall be world
without end, ii Amen.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LXX.
Let us now laud an magnify, etc. A Thanksgiving.
LET us now laud and magnify With music of concord, ii The Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, One everliving God: ii With tuned notes that sweetly sounds To
praise our heavenly King, With cheerful hearts, with pleasant voice ii On this
wise let us sing. ii Glory be to the Trinity, One God and persons three, As it
is now and ever was, ii And evermore shall be, ii Amen.

William Mundy.
ANTHEM LXXI.
O praise God in his holiness, etc.
Psalm. 150.
1. O Praise God in his holiness, praise him in the firmament of his power. 2.
Praise him in his noble acts, praise him according to his excellent greatness.
ii 3. Praise him in the sound of the Trumpet, praise him upon the Lute and
Harp. ii 4. Praise him in the Cymbals and Dances, praise him upon the strings
and Pipe. ii 5. Praise him upon the well-tuned Cymbals, praise him upon the
loud Cymbals: ii 6. Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord. ii

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LXXII.
Glorious and powerful God, etc. A Prayer.
GLorious and powerful God, we understand thy dwelling is on high, above the
starry sky. To dwell is thy delight near hand though out of sight. Thou
dwell'st not in stone Temples made with hands, but in the flesh hearts of the
sons of men: to dwell is thy delight near hand, though out of sight. We give of
thine own hand, thy acceptance is very life and blood to all acti'ons good;
whenever here and hence our supplication, from pure and with unfeigned hearts
to thee ascend, be present with thy grace, show us thy loving face. ii O down
on us full showers of mercy send, let thy loves burning beams dry up all ii our
sins streams. Arise O Lord and come into thy rest, both now and evermore thy
name be blessed: Founder and foundation of endless habitation, ii Amen.

Orlando Gibbons.
ANTHEM LXXIII.
Blessed are those that are, etc.
Psalm. 119. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
1. BLessed are those that are undefiled in the way, and walk in the law of the
Lord. 2. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and seek him with their
whole heart. ii 3. For they which do no wickedness, walk in his ways. ii 4.
Thou have charged us, O Lord, that we shall diligently keep thy Commandments.
ii 5. O that our ways were made so direct ii that we might keep thy statutes.
6. So shall we not be confounded while we have respect unto all thy
Commandments. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost:
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end, Amen.

Thomas Tallis.
ANTHEM LXXIV.
In thee O Lord have I put my trust*
Psalm. 31. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
1. IN thee O Lord have I pu^ my trust, let me never be put to confusion,
deliver me in thy righteousness. 2. Bow down, ii thine ear to me, make have to
deliver me. ii 3. And be thou my strong Rock and the house of defense ii that
thou may save me. 4. For thou art my strong Rock and my Castle, be tho^ also
my Guide ii and lea^ me for thy names sake* 5. Draw me out of the ne^ that they
have laid privily for me, for thou art my strength. ^i 6. Into thy hands I
commend my Spirit, for thou have ^edeemed me, O Lord, thou God of truth, Amen.

Thomas Weelks.
ANTHEM LXXV.
O God my heart is ready, etc.
Psalm. 108. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.
1. O God my heart is ready (my heart is ready) will sing and give praise wit^
the best member that I have. i^ 2. Awake thou Lute and Harp* I my self will
awake right ea^ly. ii 3. I will give thank^ unto thee O Lord among the people,
I will sing praises unt^ thee among the nations. 4. S^ up thy self O God, ii
abo^ the heavens, and thy glo^ above all the earth. ii Ame^

ANTHEM LXXVI.
If ye be risen again with Christ. An Anthem for Easter day.
Col. 3. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.
1. IF ye be risen again with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ ^itteth on the right hand of God: ii 2. Set your affections on heavenly
ii things, and ^ot on earthly things. ii 3. For ^e are dead, ii and your life
^s hid ii with Christ in God. 4. Whenever Christ, which ^s our life, ii shall
show himself: ii then shall we also ap^ear with him ii in Glory.

Orlando Gibbons.
ANTHEM LXXVII.
Turn thou us, O good Lord, etc. The last Collect in the Commination* A Prayer.
TUrn thou us, O good Lord* and so shall we be turned be favorable, O Lord, be
favorable to thy people, which turn to thee in weeping, fasting and praying:
for tho^ art a merciful God, ii ful^ of compassion, long suffering, i^ and
full of great pity. ii Tho^ sparest, when we deserve punishment, and in thy
wrat^ think upon mercy. Spar^ thy people good Lord, goo^ Lord spare them,
and let no^ thine heritage be brought to confusion. ii Hear us, good Lord, for
thy mercy is great and after the multitude of thy mercies, ii look upon us,
Amen.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM LXXVIII.
Let God arise, etc.
Psalm. 68. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.
1. LET God arise, ii and let his enemies be scattered; ii let them also ii
that hate him, flee before him. ii 2. Like as the smoke vanishes, so shall
thou drive them away: and like as wax melts at the fire, so let the ungodly
perish at the presence of God. ii 3. But let the righteous ii be glad and
rejoice before God: let them also be merry ii and joyful. 4. O sing unto God,
ii and sing praises unto his name, magnify him that rides upon the heavens as
it were upon an horse, praise him in his name; yea, and rejoice ii before him.
Alleluiah. ii

Mr Cob.
ANTHEM LXXIX.
Thou art my portion O Lord, etc.
The eighth part of Psalm. 119.
1. THou art my portion, O Lord: ii I have promised to keep thy law. ii 2. I
made my humble petition in thy presence with my whole heart: O be merciful
unto me according to thy Word. 3. I called mine own ways to remembrance, and
turned my feet ii unto thy Testimonies. 4. I made have, and prolonged not the
time to keep thy Commandments. 5. The Congregation of the ungodly have robbed:
me ii but I have not forgotten thy Law. 6. At midnight I will rise to give
thanks unto thee, because of thy righteous Judgments. 7. I am a Companion of
all them ii that fear thee, and keep thy Commandments. 8. The earth, O Lord, is
full of thy mercy: O teach me thy statutes.

Henry Molle.
ANTHEM LXXX.
Let my complaint come before, etc.
The twenty second Portion of Psalm. 119.
The first Part.
LET my Complaint come before thee, O Lord: give me understanding according to
thy word. 2. O let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to
thy word. 3. My lips shall speak of thy praise, when thou have taught me thy
statutes. 4. Yea, my tongue shall sing of thy word: for all thy Commandments
are righteous.

The second Part.
5. Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy Commandments. 6. I have
longed for thy saving health, O Lord: and in thy Law is my delight. 7. O Let my
Soul ^ive, and it shall praise thee: and thy judgments shall help ^e. 8. I have
gone astray like ^ sheep that is lost: O seek thy ^ervant, for I do not forget
^hy Commandments.

Mr. Shepherd.
ANTHEM LXXXI.
Christ our passover is sacrificed. For Easter day instead of the Venite.
1 Cor. 5. 7, 8.
The first part.
7. CHRIST our passover is sacrificed for us. 8. Therefore let us keep the
feast, not with old Leaven; neither with the Leaven of malice and wickedness:
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

Romans 6. v. 9, 10, 11.
The second Part.
9. Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more; death has no more
dominion ^ver him. 10. For in that he ^ied, he died unto sin once: ^ut in that
he lives, he ^iveth unto God. 11. Like^ise reckon ye also your selves ^o be
dead indeed unto sin: ^ut alive unto God, through jesus Christ our Lord.

ANTHEM LXXXII.
Christ is risen from the dead, and ^
1 Cor. 15. v. 20, 21, 22.
20. CHRIST is risen from the dead, and becom^ the first fruits of them the
slept. 21. For since by man came death, by man came als^ the resurrection of
the dea^ 22. For as in Adam all die^ even so in Christ shall all b^ made alive.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and t^ the Holy Ghost: As it was i^ the
beginning, and is now, an^ ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

ANTHEM LXXXIII.
O Lord of hosts thou God, etc. A prayer.
O LORD of hosts, thou God of Israel, which sit upon the Cherubins; thou
art ^^e God alone of all the King^omes of the world, thou only ^ast created
heaven and earth: ^ncline thine ear, O Lord, and ^onsider; open thine eyes and
^ee. Deliver us from the hands ^f our adversaries, to the intent ^ll the
Kingdoms of the earth ^ay know that thou only art ^he Lord, ii So be it. ii

Dr. Tie.
ANTHEM LXXXIV.
O Eternal God Almighty, etc. A Prayer.
The first Part.
O Eternal God Almight^ Just and holy, who^ name is the Lord God of host^ to
thee, O Lord, we call a^ cry for mercy; ii again^ thee have we offended, ^ and
our fathers have sinne^ we have done unjustly, we ha^ committed iniquity: now
gra^ to us, O Lord, thy great merc^ ii for great is our misery. ii

The second part.
Save thy people, O Lord, and bless thine own inheritance; despise not the
works of thine own hands; because we be sinful, thou shall be called
Merciful: ii forgive us now for the glory of thy holy name, ii that we may
know that thou art more merciful than we deserve.

The third part.
We shall give thanks to thee, O Lord, and rejoice in thy laud, and praise thee
for evermore, ii Amen.

Mr. Johnson.
ANTHEM LXXXV.
Save me O God, for thy names, etc.
Psalm. 54.
1. SAve me O God, for thy names sake: and avenge me in thy strength. 2. Hear
my prayer, O God: ii and hearken unto the words of my mouth. ii 3. For
strangers are risen up against me: and tyrants which have not God before their
eyes seek after my soul. ii 4. Behold, God is my helper: the Lord is with them
that uphold my Soul. ii 5. He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: destroy thou
them in thy truth. ii 6. An offering of a free heart ii will I give thee, ii
and praise thy name O Lord, ii because it is so comfortable. 7. For he has
delivered me out of all my trouble, and mine eye has seen his desire upon mine
enemies, So be it.

Dr. Tie.
ANTHEM LXXXVI.
Thou art my King, O God, etc.
Psalm. 44. v. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
5. THOU art my King, O God: ii send help unto Jacob. ii 6. Through thee will
we overthrow our enemies: ii and in thy name ii I will tread them down ii that
rise up against me. ii 7. For I will not trust in my bow: ii It is not my sword
that shall help me. ii 8. But it is thou ii that savest us from our enemies: ii
and put them to confusion ii tha^ hate us. ii 9. We make our boast all the
day long: and will praise thy name for evermore. ii

Mr. Tomkins.
ANTHEM LXXXVII.
Almighty God who through etc. The Collect for Easter day.
ALMIGHTY God who through thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ have overcome
death, and opened unto us the gate of everlasting life; we humbly beseech thee,
tha^ as by thy special grace preventing us, thou do put into ou^ minds good
desires; so by thy continual help we may bring the same to good effect through
Jesus Christ our Lord who lives and reigns wit^ thee and the holy Ghost eve^
one God world without end*

Amen.
ANTHEM LXXXVIII.
Holy Lord God Almighty, etc. A Thanksgiving.
HOly Lord God Almighty, ii which was, and is, and is to come. ii Thou art
worthy O Lord our God ii to receive glory, honor, and power; ii for thou have
created all things: ii and for thy wills sake they are and were created. ii

Mr. Parsons.
ANTHEM LXXXIX.
Almighty God the fountain, etc. The fifth Collect at the end of the Communion
Service.
ALmighty God the fountain of all wisdom, ii which know our necessities ii
before we ask, ii and our ignorance in asking: ii we beseech thee ii to have
compassion ii on our infirmities, ii and those things, ii which for our
unworthiness ii we dare not, ii and for ou^ blindness we cannot ask. ii
Vouchsafe to give us, ii for the worthiness ii of thy So^ Jesus Christ our
Lord, ii Amen. ii

Mr. Tomkins
ANTHEM XC.
O how glorious art thou O God;
A Prayer out of the 113 Psalm.
O How glorious art thou, O God; and wonderful in all the works of thine
hands: Thou raisest the simple out of the dust, ii and liftest the poor out of
the mire, ii and placest him with princes, ii even with the princes of thy
people: O blessed be the Lord, ii Amen.

Mr. Hooper.
ANTHEM XCI.
The Lord bless us, etc.
Number. 6. v. 24, 25, 26.
24. THE Lord bless us, and keep us: ii 25 The Lord make his face to shine upon
us, ii and be merciful unto us: ii 26. The Lord lift up his countenance upon
us, ii and give us peace for evermore, ii Amen.

Mr. White.
ANTHEM XCII.
Arise, O Lord, etc.
^hese words are taken out of Psalm. 44. v. 23, 24, 26.
^. ARise, O Lord, ii why sleep thou? Awake, ^ake and be not absent from
(...) for ever. 24. Wherefore ^^dest thou thy face, and for^^ttest our misery
and trou^^e? ii 26. Help us, O God ^f our salvation, for the glory ^f thy name:
O deliver us, ii ^^d be merciful unto our sins, ^ for thy name sake.

Mr. Bird.
ANTHEM XCIII.
Blessed art thou that fear God, etc.
Psalm. 128. in Meter.
1. BLessed art thou that fe^rest God, and walke^ in his way. 2. For of thy
labor thou shall eat, happy a^ thou, I say. ii 3. Like frui^full Vines on thy
house sid^ so does thy Wife spring ou^ Thy Children stand like Oli^ buds, thy
table round about 4. Thus art thou blessed that fe^rest God, and he shall let the
see. 5. The promised Jer^salem, and his felicity. 6. The ^halt thy childrens
children see, ^i to thy great Joys increase: ^ull quietly in Israel, to pass
their time in peace.

Mr. Phillips.
ANTHEM XCIV.
How long will thou forget me, and ^
Psalm. 13.
1. HOW long wilt tho forget me (O Lord for ever? how long wilt tho^ hide thy
face from me 2. How long shall I seek council in my soul; and be so vexe^ in my
heart? how long sha^ mine enemies triumph ove^ me? 3. Consider and hea^ me, O
Lord my God: lighte^ mine eyes, that I sleep not i^ death. 4. Lest mine en^mies
say, I have prevaile^ against him: for if I be ca^ down, they that trouble m^
will rejoice at it. 5. But my ^rust is in thy mercy: and my ^eart is joyful in
thy salva^ion. 6. I will sing of the Lord, because he has dealt so ^ovingly
with me: yea, I will ^raise the name of the Lord most high. Glory be to the
Father, and to the Son, and to ^he Holy Ghost: As it was in ^he beginning, is
now, and ever shall be, world without end,

Amen.
Mr. Morley.
ANTHEM XCVI.
I will magnify thee, O God, etc*
Psalm. 145. v. 1. 2, 9, 10.
1. I Will magnify thee, ^ God, my King: ii an^ will praise thy name for eve^
and ever. ii 2. Every da^ will I give thanks unto thee ii and praise thy name
for ever and ever. ii 9. The Lord is loving unto ever^ man, ii and his mercy is
ove^ all his works. ii 10. All the works praise thee, O Lord and thy saints
give thanks unt^ thee. ii

Mr. Hoope^
ANTHEM XCVII.
God, the proud are risen, etc.
Psalm. 86. v. 14, 15.
4. O God, the proud are risen against me: and ^e assemblies of violent men ^
have sought my Soul, ii ^d have not set thee before ^em. 15. But thou (O Lord)
^t a pitiful God, ii and a ^ercifull; ii slow to anger, ^d great in kindness
and ^uth. ii

Mr. Bird.
ANTHEM XCVIII.
O glorious God, etc. A Prayer to the Trinity.
O Glorious God, ii ^ Christ our Savior, ^ Holy Ghost the Comforter^ all three
in one, and one i^ three: O glorious ii Trin^ty, we beseech thee, ii kee^ us in
unity, and in sincerity make us to worship thee the Lord of majesty.

Orlando Gibbon*
ANTHEM XCIX.
O how amiable are thy dwellings.
Psalm. 84. v. 1, 2, 13.
1. O How amiable are thy dwellings, ii thou Lord of Hosts. ii 2. My soul has
a desire and longing to enter into the courts of the Lord: my heart and my
flesh rejoice in the living God. ii 13. O Lord God of Hosts; blessed is the man
that puts his trust in thee, ii Amen. ii

Mr. Weelks.
ANTHEM C.
Sing unto the Lord, O ye Princes. A Hymn.
SIng unto the Lord, O ye princes of the people, ii O sing praises unto our
God; ii be ye sure that the Lord helps his anointed, ii and will hear him
from his hol^ heaven, ii with the wholesome strength of his righ^ hand: for they
that hate u^ are brought down and fallen but we are risen and stand up right.
Save Lord, and hear us O King of heaven, ii when we call upon thee, ii Amen*

Mr. Weelks
ANTHEM CI.
O God, who through the, etc. The Collect for St. Paul's day. A Prayer.
O God, who through the preaching of the blessed Apostle St. PAUL, have caused
the light of thy Gospel to shine throughout the world. Grant, we beseech thee,
that we having his wonderful conversion in remembrance, may show forth our
thankfulness unto thee for the same, by following the holy doctrine which he
taught, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Richard Price.
ANTHEM CII.
I beheld, and lo, a great, etc. For All Saints day.
Rev. 7. v. 9, 10, 11, 12.
9. I Beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no man could number, of all
nations and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the Throne, and
before the Lamb, clothed with white robes and palms in their hands: 10. And
they cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God ii which sits
upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb. 11. And all the Angels stood round about
the throne, and about the Elders, and the four beasts, and fell before the
throne on their faces, and worshipped God, 12. Saying, Amen: Blessing, and
glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto
our God for ever and ever, Amen.

Lawrence Fisher.
ANTHEM CIII.
O Lord turn not away thy face.
The 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6, staves of The Lamentation of a sinner.
O Lord turn not away thy face, From him that lies prostrate, Lamenting sore
his sinful life, Before thy mercy gate: Which gate thou openest wide to those,
That do lament their sin: Shut not that against me Lord, but let me enter in:
ii And call me not to mine account, How I have lived here: For then I know
righ^ well, O Lord, How vile I shall appear, I need not to confes^ my life, I
am sure thou cans^ tell, What I have been and what I am, I know thou know it
well. And can the things that I have done, Be hidden from thee then? Nay, nay,
thou know them all, O Lord, Where they were done and when. Wherefore with
tears I come to thee, To beg and to entreat, Even as the child that has done
ill, And fears to be beat. ii So come I to thy mercy gate, Where mercy does
abound, Requiring mercy for my sin, To heal my deadly wound. O Lord, I need not
to repeat, What I do beg or crave: Thou know (O Lord) before I ask, The
thing that I would have. ii Mercy, good Lord, mercy I ask, That is the total
sum: For mercy Lord is all my suite, Lord let thy mercy come.

Mr. Hooper.
ANTHEM CIV.
Almighty God, which by the, etc. The Collect for the Epiphany.
ALmighty God, which by the leading of a Star ii did manifest thine only
begotten Son to the Gentiles: ii mercifully grant that we which know thee now by
faith, ii may after this life ii have the fruition of the glorious Godhead,
through Christ our Lord, ii Amen. ii

Dr. Bull.
ANTHEM CV.
O Lord, in thee is all my trust, etc* The Lamentation.
O Lord, in thee is all my trust, give ear unto my woeful cry: Refuse me no^
that am unjust, but bowing down thy heavenly eye: Behold how I do still lament,
my sins wherein I do offend O Lord, for them shall I b^ shent, since thee to
please I d^ intend. ii No, no, not so, thy will is bent, to deal with sinner^
in thine ire: But when in hear^ they shall repent, thou grant'^^ with speed
their just desire. To thee therefore still shall I cry to wash away my sinful
crime: ^hy blood, O Lord, is not yet ^rie, but that it may help me ^ time. ii
Haste thee, O Lord, ^aste thee, I say, to power on ^e thy gifts of grace: That
^hen this life shall flit away, ^ heaven with thee I may ^ave place: ii Where
thou ^ost reign eternally, with God which once did down thee ^end, Where Angels
sing con^inually: to thee be praise ^orld without end.

Mr. Hooper.
ANTHEM CVI.
Sing unto God, all ye kingdome^ of the earth, etc.
Psalm. 68. v. 32, 33, 34, 35.
32. SIng unto God, ii al^ ye kingdoms of the earth: ii O sing praises unto the
Lord, ii 33. Who sits in the heavens over all, ii from the beginning: Lo,
ii he does send out his voice, ii yea, and that a mighty voice. ii 34. Ascribe
ye the power to God over Israel: his worship and strength, is in the clouds. ii
35. O God, wonderful art thou ii in thy holy places: ii even the God of
Israel, ii he will give strength ii and ^ower unto his people. ii ^lessed be
God. ii

Mr. Tomkins.
Mr. Stonard.
ANTHEM CVII.
The Lord is my sheepherd, etc.
Psalm. 23.
1. THE Lord is my sheephe^ therefore can I lack nothing. ii 2. He shall feed
m^ in a green pasture: and lea^ me forth besides the waters ^ comfort. 3. He
shall conve^ my soul and bring me forth i^ the paths of righteousness ii ^ for
his name sake: ii 4. Ye^ though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
dea^ I will fear no evil: for tho^ art with me, ii thy rod a^ thy staff
comfort me. ii ^ 5. Thou shall prepare a tab^ before me, against them that
^rouble me: thou have anoin^ed my head with oil, and my ^up shall be full. 6.
But thy ^oving kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, ii
and I will dwell in the house of the Lord ii for ever. ii Amen, ii

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM CVIII.
Have mercy upon me, O God, and ^
Psalm, 51. v. 1, 7, 9, 11.
1. HAve mercy upon me, ^ God, after thy great Goodness; ii and accordin^ to
the multitude of thy me^cies do away mine offense 7. Thou shall purge me wit^
Hyssope, and I shall be clean thou shall wash me, and I sha^ be whiter than
snow. ii 9. Tur^ thy face from my sins, ii and put out all my misdeed 11. Cast
me not away from thy presence; ii and take no^ thy holy Spirit from me, ii

Amen.
Adrian Batte^
ANTHEM CIX.
God the Protector of all that, etc. The Collect for the fourth Sunday after
Trinity.
GOD the Protector of all that trust in thee, without whom nothing is strong,
nothing is holy: Increase and multiply upon us thy mercy, that thou being our
Ruler and guide, we may so pass through things temporal, that we finally lose
not the things eternal: Grant this, O heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ's sake
our Lord, Amen.

Henry Molle.
ANTHEM CX.
O sing unto the Lord, a new song.
Psalm. 149.
1. O Sing unto the Lord, a new song: let the Congregation of saints praise
him. 2. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: ii and let the children of
Sion ii be joyful in their King. 3. Let them praise his name in the dance: ii
Let them sing praises unto him, ii with Tabret and Harp. ii 4. For the Lord
has pleasure in his people; and helps the meek hearted. ii 5. Let the saints
be Joyful with glory; ii let them rejoice in their beds. ii 6. Let the praises
of God be in their mouth: and a tow-edged sword in their hands. ii 7. To be
avenged of the Heathen, and to rebuke the people. 8. To bind their Kings in
chains: ii and their nobles with links of iron: 9. That they may be avenged of
the heathen, as it is written: Such honor have all his saints. ii

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM CXI.
The Lord, even the most, etc.
Psalm. 50. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
1. THE Lord, even the most mighty God has spoken: ii and called the world ii
from the rising up of the Sun ii unto the going down ii thereof. 2. Out of Sion
has God appeared in perfect beauty. ii 3. Our God shall come, ii and shall not
keep silence: ii there shall go before him ii a consuming fire, ii and a
mighty tempest ii shall be stirred up round about him. ii 4. He shall call the
heavens ii from above: and the earth that he may judge his people. 5. Gather my
Saints together unto me, ii those that have made a covenant ii with me ii with
sacrifice. ii 6. And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: ii for God is
judge himself.

Mr. Tomkins.
ANTHEM CXII.
Bow down thine eye O Lord, etc. A prayer for the King.
BOW down thine eye, O Lord, ii and behold this thy servant ii CHARLES our King
and Governor, give him a long life ii for ever and ever, ii through Jesus
Christ our Lord. ii

Mr. Mundy.
ANTHEM CXIII.
O Lord I have loved the etc.
Psalm. 26. v. 8, 9.
8. O LORD I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place where
thine honor dwells. ii 9. O shut not up my Soul ii with the sinners; nor my
life with the bloodthirsty. ii

Thomas Tomkins.
ANTHEM CXIV.
Lord, who shall dwell in thy, etc.
Psalm. 15.
1. LORD, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? ii or who shall rest upon thy holy
hill? 2. Even he that leads an incorrupt life, and does the thing that is
right, and speaks the truth from his heart. ii 3. He that used no deceit in
his tongue, ii nor done evil to his neighbor, and has not slandred his
neigbour. 4. He that sets not by himself, but is lowly in his own eyes, ii
and makes much of them that fear the Lord. ii 5. He that swears unto his
neigh^our, and disappointeth him ^ot, ii though it were to his ^wn hindrance,
ii 6. He that ^ath not given his money upon ^sury, nor taken reward against ^he
innocent. 7. Whosoever does ^hese things, shall never fall. ii Amen.

Mr. White.
ANTHEM CXV.
Remember not, O Lord God, and ^ A Prayer.
REmember not, O Lord God, our old iniquitie^ but let thy mercy speedily
pr^vent us, for we be very miserable; ii Help us, O God ou^ Savior, ii and for
the glory o^ thy name deliver us: be me^cifull, and forgive our sins for thy
names sake, ii Let no^ the wicked people say, ii where is their God? ii w^ be
thy people, and the sheep o^ thy pasture; we shall giv^ thanks unto thee for
ever: ^ from age to age we shall se^ forth thy laud and praise: To ^ee be
honor and glory ^orld without end, ii ^men.

Thomas Tallis.
ANTHEM CXVI.
O clap your hands together, and ^
Psalm. 47.
1. O Clap your hands together all ye people: ^ sing unto God with the voi^ of
melody. 2. The Lord ^ high and to be feared: he ^ the great King upon all the
earth. 3. He shall subdue the people under us: and the nations under our feet.
4. H^ shall choose out an heritage f^ us: even the worship of J^cob, whom he
loved. 5. Go^ is gone up with a merry noise^ and the Lord with the soun^ of the
Trump. 6. O sin^ paises, sing praises unto our God: O sing praises, sing
^raises unto our King. 7. For God is the King of all the ^arth: sing ye praises
with ^nderstanding. 8. God reig^eth over the heathen: God ^tteth upon his holy
seat. ^. The princes of the people ^re joined unto the people of ^he God of
Abraham: for God which is very high exal^ed, does defend the earth as ^ were
with a shield. Glory ^e to the Father, etc. As it was ^n the beginning, etc.
Amen.

ANTHEM CXVII.
Lord, to thee I make my moan* A prayer in Meter.
LORD, to the I make m^ moan, ii When dange^ me oppress; ii I call, I sig^
complain and Groan, ii Tr^sting to find release. ii He^ now O Lord, my request,
For is full due time: And let thin^ ears, aye be pressed, ii Unto the prayer
mine, ii Amen.

Thomas Weelke.
ANTHEM CXVIII.
O mortal man! how long, etc.
O Mortal man! how long will thou, remain drowed in sin. ii in danger for to
^ye? Lift up thine heart and ^rn to Christ again, with all ^eekness ii and most
humity. Beseeching aye his heaenly majesty, of faith and ^orce to fight against
the flesh, which wanders here in this ^ale of misery, ii where is none ^ut he ii
that may our silly ^ouls refresh. ii Amen. ii.

Mr. Weelks.
ANTHEM CXIX.
Gloria in Excelsis.
GLory be to God on hig^ and in earth peace, goo^ will toward men: We prai^
thee, we bless thee, we worsh^ thee, we glorify thee, we gi^ thanks to thee
for thy gre^ glory. O Lord God, heaven King, God the Father Almigty. O Lord,
the only begott^ Son Jesus Christ, O Lord Go^ Lamb of Lord, Son of the ^ther,
that take away the s^ of the world, have mercy up^ us. Thou that take away
t^ sins of the world, have me^ upon us. Thou that tak^ away the sins of the
world, receive our prayers. Thou that sit at the right hand of God the
Father, have mercy upon us. For thou only art holy, thou only art the Lord,
thou only, O Christ, with the holy Ghost, art most high in the glory of God the
Father, Amen.

Mr. Tomkins.
Mr. Jeffereys.
ANTHEM CXX.
Sanctus.
HOly, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, heaven and earth are full of thy glory.
Glory be to thee, O Lord most High.

Thomas Tallis.
Mr. Jeffereys.
ANTHEM CXXI.
Steven being full of the holy Ghost. For St. Steven's day.
Act. 7. v. 55, 56.
55. STeven being full of the holy Ghost, ii looking up steadfastly into heaven,
and saw the glory of God, ii and Jesus ii standing on the right hand of God:
56. And said, Behold I see the heavens ii open, and the Son of man ii standing
on the right hand of God.

Mr. Tomkins.
ANTHEM CXXII.
Behold, I bring you glad tidings. For Christmas day.
Taken out of the second Chapter of St. Luke, v. 10. 11, 14.
10. BEhold, I bring you glad tidings of great joy, ii which shall be to all
people: 11. That unto us a Child is born, ii unto us a Son is given, ii which
is Christ the Lord. 14. Glory be to God on high, ii and in earth peace, good
will toward men. ii

Orlando Gibbons.
ANTHEM CXXIII.
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God, etc. For Trinity Sunday.
Rev. 4. v. 8, 11.
8. HOly, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, ii which was, and is, and is to come:
ii 11. Thou art worthy, O Lord our God, to receive glory, honor, and power: ii
For thou have created all things, and for thy wills sake they are and were
created. ii

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM CXXIV.
In Bethlehem Town, O happy For Twelfth-Eve.
IN Bethlehem Town, O happy Town! In which our God himself delights, To take
man's form (unworthy form!) For such a God of might: There shined a Star, a
lightsome Star was never Star so clear; That lead life's way, which then began
to Gentiles to appear; ii The place once found, O gladsome place! ii To them
tha^ did it mind, They entered in no Tongue can tell, ii Wha^ joy they there did
find: The^ saw a King, a King of King^ upon ii a Virgins knee; The^ saw man's
God became a man for man's felicity. ii Then down they fell, ii prostrate they
fell, It did them so behove, and offered Gifts, sweet smelling gifts, ii good
arguments ii of love: Home then they went, with mirth and glee, But home
another way, Then Herod thought, O wicked thought! So sweet a Babe to slay. ii
beware we by him, learn we by them, ii Not to betray our King, ii But rather
joy, with host of heaven, ii Which at his birth did sing ii The sweetest song
that ever was: ii Peace, glory, and good will; To earth, to God, to man such
Songs, good Lord continue still, ii Amen.

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM CXXV.
Bow down thine ear, O Lord, etc. A Prayer collected out of the Psalms.
BOW down thine ear, O Lord, ii and hear me, make have ii to deliver me: ii
Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, and have mercy upon me, and hide not thy face
from me, ii for thou have been my succor: ii Leave me not, neither forsake me,
O God, ii of my salvation. O be thou my strong Rock and defense, that thou
may save me, for my hope has been in thee. O Lord I have said, Thou art my
God: ii Let me not be confounded, O Lord: ii For I have called upon thee. ii
Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, ii for thou have Redeemed me, O Lord, thou
God of truth. ii

Adrian Batten.
ANTHEM CXXVI.
O God of Gods, O King of Kings For the Kings Inauguration.
O God of Gods, O King o^ Kings! Eternal Father o^ all things; In heaven and
eart^ and every where, ii By whom all Kings their Scepters bear God of our
Sovereign (Charles) King of peace, Heavens darling Englands happiness; For him
we praise thee in this song: i^ And pray, that we may prais^ thee long, ii And
we beseec^ thee mighty Lord, To us suc^ favor to afford; ii That thi^
triumphant Festival, This holy day Imperial. ii To his Inaugring consecrated
May be so ^ten celebrated; ii That fi^lly it be not done, Till the ^eat coming
of thy Son; ii and that his health, his joys, and ^eace, May as his reign and
^ears increase: ii To the ^lmighty Trinity, Three persons in one Diety: ii All
^lorious in heaven, ii All ^raise, all thanks, all Laud be ^iven, ii With
Organs, Trum^ets and with Flutes, With Cor^ets Viols, and with Lutes, With
Harpes, with Symbals, and with Shawms, With sacred Anthems, Hymns, and Psalms;
With notes of Angels and of men: Sing Alleluia, Amen, Amen. ii

Mr. Bennett.
ANTHEM CXXVII.
O God of Gods, O King of King^ Another of the same.
O God of Gods, O King o^ Kings, Eternal Father o^ all things, In heaven above
an^ every where, By whom a^ Kings their Scepters bear: ^ Great God of Charles
our ble^sed King, ii Who peace an^ joy ii to us did bring, ii Whom thou a
chief and Roya^ guide, ii Did for our guid^ less troops provide; ii Now we
beseech thee mighty Lord To us such heavenly grace afford, That this united
Monarchy, This Empire of great Brittanie, ii To thy high pleasure consecrate,
May so long ^esse his Royal state, That fi^lly it be not done, Till the ^eat
coming of thy Son: ii ^d that his health, his joys, ^d peace, ii May as his ^gn
and years increase: ii ^ the Almighty Trinity, ^ree Persons in one Diety, ^ost
bright and glorious in ^ven ii (above,) All praise, ^ thanks, all laud be
given, ii ^ith Organs, Trumpets and ^h Flutes, ii With Cornets ^rons and with
Lutes, ii ^ith Harpes, with Symbals, and ^h Shawmes, ii With sacred ^thems,
Hymns, and Psalms, ^ With note of Angels, and ^ men, ii Sing Alleluia, ^en,
Amen. ii

Mr. Hooper.
ANTHEM CXXVIII.
Hearken ye nations, O come, and For Gunpowder Treason-day.
HEarken ye Nations, come see and hear, ^ ye that serve the Lord in tr^ and
fear, and we will she what wonders his high ha^ Has done unto our Souls, a^ to
this Land: Our King ano^ted with his blessed seed, i^ Our sacred Prophets that
^ souls do feed, ii ^ honorable Senates, Peo^ Peers, Men, Women, ^ fants of
all sorts of years, T^ day our God from Foes blo^ thirsty ire has saved as
bra^ new taken from the Fire: ^ This is the day himself made ii ^ Rejoice, and
sing ii his ^raises with a cheerful voice ii ^onsider this ye true of heart
and wise, it is Gods work and ^onderous in our eyes.: ii he ^ends his terrors
to affright, ^i not kill, as signs more of ^is pow're ii than of his will. ii O
may our Moses ^rust in him, his Tower ii and ^ll our Aarons magnify his ^ower.
ii He is our shield ii ^ay no unhallowed arm ii Touch his anointed ii nor ^is
Prophets harm. ii Record we this to all posterity, that ^hey may praise him to
Eter^ity, And join in holy fear ii with one accord, ii to keep ^his day ii holy
to the Lord ii

Mr. Hooper.
ANTHEM CXXIX.
Blessed be the Lord God of etc.
Psalm. 106. v. 46.
46. BLessed be the Lord Go^ of Israel, from everlasting, ii and world without
end: ii and let all the people say, Amen. ii

Thomas Tomkin.
ANTHEM CXXX.
Hear my prayer, O Lord, etc.
Psalm. 39. v. 13, 14, 15. etc.
13. HEar my prayer, O Lord, ii and with thine ears consider my calling: hold
not thy peace at my tears. ii 14. For I am a stranger ii with thee, and a
sojourner, as all my fathers were. ii 15. O spare me a little while, ii that I
may recover my strength ii before I go hence, and be no more seen. ii (Lam. 5.
16.) My strength has failed, ii and is gone: Woe unto me, ii woe ii. that I
have sinned. ii.

Mr. Wilkinson.
ANTHEM CXXXI.
Blessed are all they that fear etc.
Psalm. 128.
1. BLessed are all they that fear the Lord: and walk in his ways. ii 2. For
thou shall eat the labors of thy hands: O well is thee, and happy shall thou
be. 3. Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine upon the walls of thine house.
4. Thy children like the olive branches round about thy table. ii 5. Lo, thus
shall the man be blessed: that fears the Lord. ii 6. The Lord from out of
Sion shall so bless thee ii that thou shall see^ Jerusalem in prosperity all
thy life long. 7. Yea, that thou shall see thy childrens children, and peace
upon Israel. ii Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost:
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end, Amen.

Orlando Gibbons.
ANTHEM CXXXII.
O Lord let me know mine end.
Psalm. 39. v. 5, 6, 7, 8.
5. O LORD let me know mine end, and the number of my days; that I may be
certified ii how long ii I have to live. ii 6. Behold, thou have made my days,
as it were a span long: ii and mine age is even as nothing ii in respect of
thee; and verily every man living is altogether vanity. ii 7. For man ii
walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain; ii he heapeth up
riches, and cannot tell ii who shall gather them. ii 8. And now Lord, ii what
is my hope? ii truly my hope ii is even in thee. ii And now ii

Thomas Tomkins.
ANTHEM CXXXIII.
What Child was he whose etc. A Hymn.
WHAT Child was he whose birth did Angels glad, whose guide was grace, whose
youth all knowledge had? ii 'Twas Jesus Christ the Son of God ii who darkeness,
death, despair, With light, with life, ii with joys, with bliss repair. Then
let us praise him most and love him best, By whom alone we all are loved and
blessed. ii What man was he whom sin did ne redefile, whose heart, whose tongue,
whose hands ii were void of guile? 'Twas Jesus Christ: our saving health, ii
who sin and satan bound By scars, by stripes, ii by death, by bloody wounds: ii
From us all love and glory he deserves, ii Who for us love and glory thus
preserves. ii What man was he from grave his body raised, And now in heaven by
Saints and Angels praised? ii 'Twas Jesus Christ ii our Lord and King, ii that
sits at Gods right hand; before whose Throne ii shall all for judgment stand.
This Jesus Christ, grant us mercy, love and grace, ii That we in heaven with
him ii may have a dwelling place, ii Amen. ii

Dr. Giles.
ANTHEM CXXXIV.
O Jesu meek, O Jesu sweet, etc. A prayer to the Son of God.
O Jesu meek, O Jesu sweet, O Jesu Savior mine: Most gracious Jesu to my call,
thy gracious ears incline. O Jesu deer whose precious blood was shed on Cross
of Tree, Sweet Jesu for thy passions sake have mercy now on me. ii. Sweet Jesu
ii. O Jesu what is good for me is aye best known to thee: Therefore according
to thy will have mercy now on me. ii O Jesu dear, do thou with me even as thy
will shall please. ii Sweet Jesu put me where thou will ^o suffer pain or ease.
Jesu ^ehold, I am but thine, whi^her I be good or ill, ii Yet ^y thy grace I
ready am thy ^leasure to fulfill. ii Jesu; I ^m thy workmanship, most ^lessed
may thou be, Sweet ^esu, for thy mercies sake, ii ^ave mercy now on me, ii

Amen.
Mr. Morley.
ANTHEM CXXXV.
In thee, O Lord, have I put etc
These words are taken out of the 38th Psalm.
IN thee, O Lord, have I pu^ my trust; answer for me, O Lord my God: ii For I
a^ brought ii into so great misery and trouble, that I go mourning ii all the
day long ii I am feeble and sore smitten ii I have roared ii for the very
disquietness of my hear^ ii Lord, thou know m^ desire; my groaning is not
hi^ from thee. ii My heart pa^teth, ii And my strength fa^leth me: ii forsake
me no^ O Lord my God, ii be not ^hou far from me: ii have ^hee to help me, ii O
Lord God my salvation, So be it. ii

Dr. Bull:
ANTHEM CXXXVI.
If the Lord himself had not, etc.
Psalm. 124. v. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6.
1. IF the Lord himself had not been on our side, (now may Israel say:) If the
Lord himself had not been our side, when men rose up against us. If the Lord.
ii 2. They had swallowed us up quick, when they were so wrathfully displeased
at us. 3. Yea, the waters had drowned us, and the streams had gone over our
Souls. ii 5. But praised be the Lord, who has not given us over for a prey
unto their teeth. But praised ii.

^. Our soul is escaped, even ^s a bird out of the snare of ^he fowler; ii the
snare is ^roken, and we are delivered. ^i The snare ii. Glory be ^o the Father,
and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost: As it was in the beginning, and is ^ow
and ever shall be world without end, Amen.

Mr. Gibbs.
ANTHEM CXXXVII.
Praise the Lord the God of etc* A prayer for the King, and the Roya^ Family.
PRaise the Lord the God o^ might and power for all the wonders he has done, O
magnify the Son our Savior, Give laud unto that holy One ii proceeding from
the Father and the Son: With Instruments of melody ii sing praises to the
Trinity. ii The God that heaven and earth has made and all things in the world
of naught, And us from hell and darkness bought: He that our hearts has newly
wrought, with instruments of ^elody, ii sing praises to the ^rinity. ii That
Godhead with ^ese three conjoyns, ii Our ^ing, Queen, Prince preserve and
bless: Bless them all that ^pring from their loins, ii ^eep them in peace
without ^istress: ii Bear up their ^riends, their foes depress: ii ^o shall we
all sing joyfully, ii Praise to his holy Majesty, ii Amen. ii

Mr. Jefferier.
ANTHEM CXXXVIII.
Above the Stars my Savior, and c* A Hymn.
ABove the Stars my Saviou^ dwells, I love, I care for nothing else; ii. There,
ther^ he sits and fits a place, For the glorious heirs of grace. ii Dear
Savior, raise my dulle^eine, Let me but see thy beam^ divine: ii Ravish my
Sou^ with wonder and desire, ii Er^ I enjoy let me thy joys admire: ii And
wandering, le^ me say, ii. Come Lord Jesus come away. ii.

Thomas Tomkins
ANTHEM CXXXIX.
Lord, I am not high minded.
Psalm. 131.
^. LORD, I am not high minded: ii I have no proud looks. ii 2. I do not
exercise my self in great matters ii which be too high for me. ii 3. But I
refrain my soul, and keep it low, ii ^ike as a child that is weaned from his
mother: yea, my soul ^s even as a weaned child. ii 4. O Israel, trust in the
Lord ii from this time forth for evermore, ii Amen.

Henry Loosemore.
ANTHEM CLX.
Give the King thy judgments etc*
Psalm. 67. v. 1, 2. etc.
1. GIve the King thy judgments O God, and the righteousness to the Kings Son
ii 2. Then shall he judge the people ii according unt^ right, ii and defend the
poor ii Behold, O God, our Defender; and look upon the face of thine Anointed.
ii Psalm. 19. v. 14. 15. Let the word of his mouth, and the meditation of his
heart, be alwaie^ acceptable in thy sight. ii 15. O Lord our strength an^ our
redeemer. Behold O Go^ our Defender: ii and look upon the face of thine
Anointed. ii. Behold ii Amen. ii

Mr. Weelkes.
ANTHEM CXLI.
Lord in thy wrath reprove etc.
The two first staves of Psalm. 6. in meter.
LORD in thy wrath reprove me not though I deserve thine ire; Ne yet correct me
in thy rage, O Lord I thee desire. ii For I am weak, therefore O Lord, of mercy
me forbear: And heal me Lord, for why thou know my bones do quake for fear.
ii My soul is troubled very sore, and vexed vehemently; But Lord, how long will thou delay to cure my misery? ii Lord turn thee to thy wonted grace; my silly
soul up take: O save me not for my deserts, but for thy mercies sake. O save ii

John Amner.
Mr. Gibbs.
ANTHEM CXLII.
All laud and praise with etc.
Taken out of the 30th Psalm. in meter.
ALL laud and praise with heart and voice, O Lord I give to thee Which did
not make my foes rejoice, but have exalted me. O Lord my God to thee I cried,
in all my pain and grief: Thou gav'st an ear and did provide, to ease me
with relief. Of thy good will thou have called back my soul from hell to save:
Thou did revive when strength did lack and kept'st me from the grave. Sing
praise ye saints that prove and see the goodness of the Lord: In memory of his
Majesty rejoice with one accord. Sing ye, I say, unto the Lord a song of
melody: ii And let all men with heart and voice, extol his majesty. ii Praise
him always both night and day, due praises to him give: For by his mighty power
and strength we daily here do live: ii For by ii

Amen.
Mr. Weelkes.
ANTHEM CXLIII.
O Lord of whom I do depend, etc. Taken out of the humble suit of a sinner.
O LORD, of whom I do depend, behold my careful heart: And when thy will and
pleasure is, release me of my smart. release ii Thou see my sorrows what they
are, my grief is known to thee: And there is none that can remove, ii nor take
the same from me; ii And ii. But only thou whose aid I crave, whose mercy
still is pressed, To ease all those that come to thee for succor and for rest.
Wherefore this is yet once again my suit and my request, To grant me pardon for
my sin, ii that I in thee may rest. To ii. Then shall my heart, ii my tongue,
and voice be instruments of praise, And in thy Church, and house of saints,
sing Psalms to thee always. ii And ii. Amen.

Dr. Giles.
ANTHEM CXLIV.
Unto thee, O Lord, will I, etc.
Psalm. 25. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
1. UNTO thee, O Lord, will I lift up my soul, ii my God, I have put my trust
in thee: O Let me not be confounded, neither let mine enemies triumph over me.
ii 2. For all they that hope in thee, shall not be ashamed: but such as
trangress without a cause, ii shall be put to confusion. ii For ii 3. Show me
thy ways, O Lord, ii and teach me thy paths. 4. Lead me forth in thy truth and
learn me: for thou ar^ the God of my salvation, ii in thee has been my hope
all the day long. ii In ii 5. Call to remembrance, O Lord, ii thy tender
mercies and thy loving kindness ii which has been ever of old, and ii. 6. O
Remember not the sins and offenses of my youth; ii but according to thy mercies
think thou upon me (O Lord) ^i for thy goodness; but ii

Mr. Ward.
ANTHEM CXLV.
Plead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that, etc.
Psalm. 35. v. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 18.
1. PLead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me; and fight thou
against them that fight against me. 2. Lay hand upon the shield and buckler,
and stand up to help me. 3. Bring forth the spear, and stop the way against
them that persecute me: say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. 4. Let them be
confounded and put to shame, that seek after my soul let them be turned back,
and brought to confusion that imagine mischief for me. 5. Let them be as the
dust before the wind, and the Angel of the Lord ii scattering them. 6. Let
their way be dark and ^lippery, and let the Angel of ^he Lord persecute them.
7. For they have privily laid ^ net to destroy me without ^ cause; yea, even
without a ^ause have they made a pit ^or my soul. 8. Let a sudden destruction
come upon him ^nawares, and his net that he ^ath laid privily, catch himself,
that he may fall into his own ^ischief. 9. And my soul ^e joyful in the Lord:
it shall ^ejoice in his salvation. 18. So will I give thee thanks in the great
Congregation: I will praise thee among much people, ii Amen.

Mr. Weelkes.
ANTHEM CXLVI.
O sing unto the Lord a new song.
Psalm. 149. v. 1, 2.
1. O Sing unto the Lord a new song: ii let the Congregation of saints ii sing
praise unto him. ii 2. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, ii and let the
children of Sion, ii forever sing, Alleluiah. ii

Thomas Tomkins.
ANTHEM CXLVII
Exalt thy self ahove the heavens.
Psalm. 57. v. 6, 9, 10, 11, 12.
6. EXalt thy self above the heavens, ii and let thy glory be upon the earth.
ii 9. Awake my tongue, awake Viol and Harp: ii I will awake ii right early. ii
10. I will praise thee, O Lord, ii among the people: ii and I will sing unto
thee ii among the Nations. ii 11. For thy mercy is great ii unto the heavens,
ii and thy truth unto the clouds. ii 12. Exalt thy self, O God, ii above the
heavens: ii and let thy glory be upon the earth; ii Amen.

Mr. Bird.
ANTHEM CXLVIII.
God, which as on this day, etc. The Collect for White-Sunday.
GOD, which as on this day, did teach the hearts of thy faithful people, ii
by the sending to them the Light ii of thy holy Spirit: ii Grant us by the same
Spirit ii to have a right judgment in all things, ii and evermore to rejoice
in his holy comfort, ii through the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior, ii who
lives ii and reigns with thee ii in the unity of the same Spirit, ii one God
world without end, ii Amen.

Dr. Giles.
ANTHEM CXLIX.
When as we sat in Babylon, etc.
Psalm. 137. in meter.
When as we sat in Babylon, the rivers round about: And in remembrance of
Sion, the tears for grief burst out. We hanged our Harps and instruments, the
willow trees upon: For in tha^ place, men for their use, had planted many a
one. The^ they to whom we prisoners were, said to us tantingly, Now let us
hear your Hebrew* songs, and pleasant melodie^ Alas! said we, who can onc^
frame, his sorrowful heart, t^ sing, The praises of our loving God, thus under
a strange King? But if that I Jerusalem, out of my heart let slide: Then let my
singers quite forget, the warbling Harp to guide. And let my tongue within my
mouth, be tied forever fast: If that I joy before I see, thy full deliverance
past. Therefore, O Lord, remember now the cursed noise and cry, That Edoms
sons against us made, when they razed our city. Remember Lord the cruel words,
when as with one accord, They cride, On, sack, and raze their walls, in despite
of the Lord. Even so shall thou, O Babylon, at length to dust be brought: And
happy shall that man be called, that takes thy children young: To dash their
bones against hard stones, which lie the streets among.

ANTHEM CL.
I heard a voice in heaven, etc.
Rev. 19. 1, 2, 3, 7.
1. I Heard a voice in heaven, Saying, Alleluia, Salvation and glory, and
power, and praise, and thanks be unto the Lord our God. 2. For true and
righteous are his judgments. 3. And again they say, Alleluia: Come, O come and
gather your selves together unto the Supper of the great God. Come O come, ii
7. Let us rejoice and be glad and give honor to him, for the marriage of the
Lamb is come, Amen.

Albertus Bryne.
ANTHEM CLI.
O Lord my God in all distress.
This is taken out of Psalm. 7. in meter.
O LORD my God in all distress, my trust is whole in thee: Preserve me from
those deadly foes, that rise and trouble me: As thou art just, defend me Lord,
and aid me from all fear: Send me thy help, and grant my suit, and humble
prayer hear. Be thou my rock to whom I may for aid all times resort, Thy
promise is to help always, thou art my fence and sort: Save me, O God, ii from
wicked men, and from their rage and power, From men unjust and eke from them,
that would my life devour. ii Thou art my stay wherein I trust, thou Lord of
hosts art he Even from my youth I had a lust, still to depend on thee. ii For
thou have kept me since I was born, from dangers many one, ii Therefore all
praise and thank's I give, to thee O Lord alone, ii Therefore ii. Amen.

Dr. Giles.
ANTHEM CLII.
Alack! when I look back, etc.
ALack! when I look back upon my youth that is past, And deeply ponder youths
offense, and youths reward at last: ii With tears, and sighs I say, O God I not
deny, My youth through folly has deserved, with folly for to dye. ii But yet
if ever sinful man, might mercy move to ruth, Good Lord, with mercy do
forgive, the follies of my youth. In youth I ranged the field where vices all
did grow, In youth, alas! I wanted grace, such vice to overthrow. ii In youth
what seemed sweet, most bitter now I find, Thus have the follies of my youth,
in folly kept me blind. ii But as the Eagle casts her bill, whereby her age
reneu^th, So Lord with mercy do forgive, the follies of my youth. Good Lord
with mercy ii Amen.

Mr. Bird.
ANTHEM CLIII.
The King shall rejoice in thy, etc.
Psalm. 21. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 13.
1. THE King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord: exceeding glad shall he be
of thy salvation. 2. Thou have given him his hearts desire: and have not denied
him the request of his lips. 3. For thou shall prevent him with the blessings
of goodness: and shall set a crown of pure gold upon his head. 4. He asked life
of thee, and thou gave him a long life: even for ever and ever. 5. His honor
is great in thy salvation: glory and great worship shall thou lay upon him. 7.
And why? because the King puts his trust in the Lord, and in the mercy of
the most Highest, he shall not miscarry. 8. All thine enemies shall feel thine
hand: thy right hand shall find out them that hate thee. 11. For they intended
mischief against thee: and imagined such a device as they are not able to
perform. 13. Be thou exalted Lord in thine own strength: so will we sing and
praise thy power. So be it.

Radolph Jewett.
ANTHEM CLIV.
O God the King of glory, etc. The Collect for the Sunday after Ascension day.
A Prayer.
O God the King of glory, which have exalted thine only Son Jesus Christ with
great triumph into thy Kingdom of heaven: we beseech thee leave us not
comfortless, but send down the holy Ghost to comfort us, and exalt us unto the
same place whither our Savior Christ is gone before, who lives and reigns
with thee, ever one God world without end, Amen.

Randolph Jewett.
ANTHEM CLV.
Zadock the Priest and etc. For the Coronation-day.
ZAdock the Priest and Nathan the Prophet anointed Solomon King, and joyfully
approaching, they cried, they cried, God save the King for ever and ever: God
save the King. ii Alleluiah, Alleluiah.

Henry Laws.
ANTHEM CLVI.
This is my Commandment, etc.
John 15. v. 12, 13.
12. THis is my Commandment, ii that ye love one another, even as I have loved
you. ii 13. No man has greater love than this, ii to give his life even for
his friends ii No man ii.

Mr. Johnson.
ANTHEM CLVII.
He that has my Commandments.
John 14. v. 21.
21. HE that has my Commandments and keeps them, ii the same is he that
loves me: ii and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, ii and I will
love him, ii and I will show mine own self unto him. ii and he ii

Mr. Cost.
ANTHEM CLVIII.
A new Commandment give, etc.
John 13. v. 34, 35.
34. A New Commandment give I unto you, says the Lord, that ye love together
ii as I have loved you, that even so ye love one another. ii 35. By this shall
every man know that ye are my disciples, ii if ye have love one to another. ii

Thomas Tallis.
ANTHEM CLIX.
Hear the voice and prayer etc. This is taken out of the 6. Chapter of the
second Book of the Chron. A Prayer.
HEar the voice and prayer of thy servants, ii that they make before thee this
day; that thine ears may be open toward this House night and day, ii ever
toward this place: ii of which thou have said, My name shall be there. ii And
when thou hear, have mercy on them. ii That thine ears ii. Amen.

Thomas Tallis.
ANTHEM CLX.
I have loved, etc.
Taken out of Psalm. 116. etc.
I Have loved, ii for the Lord will hear the voice of my prayer: ii for he has
inclined his ear unto me, ii and in all my days I will call upon him: ii the
sorrows of death have compassed me round about, ii and the perils of hell have
entangled me: ii I have found much trouble and sorrow, ii and have called upon
the name of the Lord: ii O deliver my soul, O merciful Lord and just: our God
is merciful ii. The Lord preserves the simple, ii I was brought low ii and he
delivered me. ii Turn into thy rest, O my soul! ii For the Lord has done much
for thee, ii for he has delivered my soul from death, ii mine eyes from tears,
ii my feet from sliding, ii my feet from falling. Glory be to the Father, and
to the Son, and to the holy Ghost: As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever
shall be world without end, So be it.

Dr. Tie.
ANTHEM CLXI.
O Lord make thy servant etc. A prayer for the King, collected out of the
Psalms of David.
O LORD make thy servant CHARLES, our Gracious King, to rejoice in thy
strength: ii exceeding glad shall he be ii of thy salvation. ii Exceeding ii.
For thou shall prevent him with the blessing of Goodness, ii and shall set a
Crown of pure gold upon his head; ii His honor is great in thy salvation,
Glory and great worship shall thou lay upon him. ii As for his enemies, O Lord,
cloth them all with shame; ii but upon himself let his Crown flourish let it
flourish, O Lord, let it flourish, ii let his Crown always flourish, ii long
let his Crown flourish. As for his. ii Amen.

Mr. Cranford.
ANTHEM CLXII.
Submit your selves one to etc.
Ephesians. 5. v. 21, 19, 20.
21. SUbmit your selves one to another in the fear of God. 19. Speaking unto
your selves, in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, ii singing melody to
the Lord. ii 20. With your hearts giving thanks always for all things ii unto
God the Father Almighty, in the name of our Lord Jesu Christ. ii. Singing ii

Mr. Shepherd.
ANTHEM CLXIII.
Sitting by the streams that glyde
Psalm. 137.
1.
SItting by the streams that glyde
Down by Babel's Towering wall,
With our tears we filled the Tide,
Whilst our mindful thoughts recall
Thee, OSION, and thy Fall!
2.
Our neglected Harps unstrung,
Not acquainted with the hand
Of the skillful Tuner, hung
On the Willow Trees that stand
Planted in the Neighbor Land.
3.
Yet the spightfull Foe command's
Songs of Mirth, and bids us lay
To cumb Harps our captive hands,
And (to scoff our Sorrows) say,
Sing us some sweet Hebrew Lay.
4.
But (say we) our holy Strain
Is too pure for Heathen Land,
Nor may we our Hymns profane,
Or tune either Voice or Hand
To delight a Savage Band.
5.
Holy Salem, if thy Love
Fall from my forgetful heart,
May the skill by which I move
Strings of Music, tuned by Art,
From my withered Hand depart.
6.
May my speechless tongue give sound
To no Accent, but remain
To my prison Roof fast bound,
If my sad Soul entertain
Mirth till Thou rejoice again.
7.
In that day, remember Lord
Edom's brood; thus in our Groans
They triumphed, with Fire and Sword
Burn their City, hew their bones,
And make all one heap of stones.
8.
Cruel Babel! thou shall feel
The Revenger of our Groans,
When the happy Victor's steel
As thine ours, shall hew thy bones,
And make Thee one heap of stones.
9.
Men shall bless the hand that tear's
From the Mother's soft Embraces
Sucking Infants, and besmears
With their brains the rugged faces
Of the Rocks and stony places.
Henry Laws.
ANTHEM CLXIV.
For the time of Lent. BY The Rt Reverend Father in God, HENRY, Lord Bishop of
Chichester.
HEarken, O God, unto a wretches cries,
Who low dejected at thy footstool lies;
Let not the clamor of my heinous sin
Drown my requests, which strive to enter in
At those bright gates, which always open stand
To such as beg remission at thy hand.
Too well I know, if thou in rigor deal
I can nor pardon ask, nor yet appeal:
To my hoarse voice, heaven will no audience grant,
But deaf as Brass, and hard as Adamant,
Beat back my words, therefore I bring to thee
A gracious Advocate to plead for me.
What though my leprous soul no Jordan can
Recure, nor floods of lav'd Ocean
Make clean, yet from my Saviors bleeding side
Two large and medicinable rivers glide
Lord, wash me where those streams of life abound,
And new Bethesdaes flow from every wound.
If I this precious Laver may obtain,
I shall not then despair for any stain;
I need no Gileads balm, nor oil, nor shall
I for the purifying Hyssop call;
My spots will vanish in his purple flood
And crimson there turn white, though washed with blood.
See Lord! with broken heart and bended knee,
How I address my humble suit to thee;
O give that suit admittance to thy ears
Which floats to thee not in my words but tears:
And let my sinful soul this mercy crave
Before I fall into the silent Grave.
Composed to Music by Dr. John Wilson, Gent: of His Majesty's Chapel.
ANTHEM CLXV.
A Christmas Anthem, or Caroll. By T. P.
AWake my soul! and come away,
Put on thy best array
Lest if thou longer stay
Thou lose some minutes of so blessed a day.
Go run, and bid Good Morrow to the Sun
Welcome his safe return to Capricorn,
And that great Morn
Wherein a God was Born,
Whose story none can tell
But he whose every words a Miracle.
To day Almightiness grew weak,
The world it self was mute
And could not speak;
That Jacob's Star which made the Sun
To dazzle if he durst look on,
Now mantled ore in Bethl'hem's night
Borrowed a Star to show him light;
He that begirt each Zone
To whom both Poles are one,
Who grasped the Zodiak in's hand
And made it move or stand,
Is now by Nature, Man,
By Stature, but a Span:
Eternity is now grown short,
A King is born without a Court.
The Water thirsts, the Fountains dry,
And Life being born made apt to die.
Chorus.
Then let our praises emulate and vie,
with his humility,
Since he is exiled from Skies
That we might Rise
From low estate of men,
Let Us sing him up again,
Let each man wind up's heart
to bear a part
In that Angelick Choir;
And show his Glory high, as he was low:
Let Us sing toward men good will and charity,
Peace upon earth, Glory to God on high.
Halleluiah, Halleluiah.
Composed by Mr. William Child.
ANTHEM CLXVI.
A Dialogue for Christmass-Day. Composed by Mr. Tho. Ford.
1st Shep.
LOok Shepherds, look! Why, where?
2 d Shep. See you not yonder? there!
Lord! what a glorious light
Streams through the air?
1st Shep.
Never was Sun so bright,
Nor morn so fair,
2 d Shep. Methinks it does appear
Like Glory coming near.
1st Shep.
List'n Shepherds, listen round,
2 d Shep. Hark! hear you not a sound?
Lord! what an heavenly noise
Beats through the air?
Never was there sweeter voice,
Nor note so clear.
Chorus.
Heavenly Music, Glorious Light;
Yet more fearful than the nighr.
Angel.
Fear not Shepherds, for behold,
Better tidings nere was told;
News I bring you this same tide;
This blessed Morn,
T'you and all mankind beside
A Savior is born:
Post to Bethl'hem, post about,
Post and find the Infant out.
With these Signs you shall begin,
In a Stable in the Inn
You shall find his Mother-Mayd
Poorly friended,
And the Babe in Manger laid
Worse attended.
When you find him, loudly cry,
Glory be to God on high.
Chorus.
Glory be to God above,
Peace on earth, amongst men love:
Death and hell are now beguiled,
God and man are reconciled.
R. G.
ANTHEM CLXVII.
For Good Friday. By Dr. William Stroud.
SEE sinful soul the Saviors sufferings, see
his Blessed hands and feet fixed fast to tree:
Observe what Rivilets of blood stream forth,
his painful pierced side, each drop more worth
Than tongue of men and Angels can express:
have to him, cursed Caitiffe, and confess
All thy misdeeds, and sighing say, 'Twa's I
that caused thee thus, my Lord, my Christ, to dye.
O let thy Death secure my soul from fears,
and I will wash thy wounds with brinish tears:
Grant me, sweet Jesu, from thy precious store
one cleansing drop, with grace to sin no more.
Composed by Mr. Richard Gibbs, Oyganist of Christ-Church, in Norwich.
THE END.

