NOTES UPON Mr, Drydens Poems IN Four Letters.

By M. CLIFFORD, late Master of the Charter House, LONDON.

To which are annexed some Reflections upon the HIND and PANTHER. By another
Hand.

Et Musarum and Apollinis oede relicta,
Ipse facit versus.
Juven. Sat. 7. LONDON Printed in the Year. 1687.

THE First Letter.
SIR,
I Had passed by the gross Scurrility of your last Prologue with the same
Contempt that I have always had for the rest of your Scribbling, had not some of
my Acquaintance suggested to me, that it was unfit to suffer you any longer to
go on without Reproof. I will now therefore take you as much into my
consideration as so trifling a subject does deserve: Not at all doubting but to
kill this Tetter of yours with the ordinary Remedy of a little Ink. The Method
I purpose to use, shall be, First to expose your Faults, (I do not mean all)
for that were as Diego said of the Poor of his Parish, All the Parish. No --
you are too abundant and plentiful a Fop for any man to mis-employ so much
time upon, but enough to satisfy any man of Judgment with the Abilities of our
Poet Laureat.

And next I will detect your Thefts, letting the World know how great a
Plagiary you are; and that for all your pretenses to Wit and Judicious Censure,
you do live in as much Ignorance and Darkness as you did in the Womb: That your
Writings are like a Jack of all Trades Shop, they have Variety, but nothing of
value. And that if thou art not the dullest Plant-Animal that ever the Earth
produced, all that I have conversed with are strangely mistaken in thee.

So dull thou art, as if thou would largely quaft
All sleepy Iuyces for thy mornings draught;
Henbane and Hemlock, which man's Soul benight,
Mandrake and Poppy, etc.
For this time farewell: Within two or three days you shall hear further from me.

THE Second Letter.
I Have written to you within the Time to which I was by my promise engaged,
and you may perceive by this Letter with what care I have read over your
Conquest of Granada, a dull heavy Task, which few but my self, except some
Choice Female Spirits, and Peculiar Friends of yours at Court (as your Brother
Bays has it in the Rehearsal) would have undertaken. You have therefore, to
use one of your own Compliments, the more grand obligement to me, for going
through with a Work of that difficulty. I must confess I did not make an end of
it without twenty Stops, forty Oaths, and at least an hundred and fifty
Resolutions at every Page to give it over, and truly -- I did dare
To be so impudent as to despair -- Alman. Page ^.

that I should ever finish it. In this vexation of mind I frequently threw the
paltry Book to the ground, I scratched my Head, I rubbed my Forehead, put up my
Black Lead Pen, and expressed all the postures that men use, when they are
troubled with an Impertinent. Yet after all this, with much struggling Opus
exegi, and send you the Fruits of my Labor, to whom of right they are most
due; being beforehand assured that you will not be concerned for any thing I
say, since the common Opinion ( how unjust soever) has been to your advantage;
Preface to Almanzor.
and having swept the stakes, you can be content to sit quietly, to hear your
Fortune cursed by some, and your Faults arraigned by others. The plain and
natural construction of which words as they lie before us, is, that having
received your Money from the Door-keepers, having picked the Pockets of your
Auditors, you care not a Rush with what Contempt and Nauseousness the Judicious
speak of your Bauble; yet you grant that a severe Critic is the greatest help
to a good Wit. He does the Office of a Friend, whilst he designs that of an
Enemy; Preface.
and his malice keeps a Poet within those Bounds which the Luxuriancy of his
Wit and Fancy would tempt him to over-leap. How luxuriant your Wit and Fancy
is, will presently appear without any need of great severity in the Critic,
who has omitted at least a hundred good thumping substantial Faults, for one he
has taken notice of.

To begin with your Character of Almanzor, which you avow to have taken from
the Achilles in Homer; pray hear what Famianus Strada says of such Takers as
Mr. Dryden, Ridere soleo cum video homines* ab Homeri virtutibus strenue
declinantes, si quid vero irrepsit vitii, id avid^ arripientes. But I might
have spared this Quotation, and you your avowing: For this Character might as
well have been borrowed from some of the Stalls in Bedlam, or any of your own
hair-brained Coxcombs, which you call Heroes, and Persons of Honor. I remember
just such another fuming Achilles in Shakespeare, one Ancient Pistol, whom he
qvows to be a man of so fiery a temper, and so impatient of an injury, even
from Sir John Falstaff his Captain, and a Knight, that he not only disobeyed
his Commands about carrying a Letter to Mrs. Page, but returned him an answer
as full of contumely, and in as opprobrious terms as he could imagine. Merry
Wives of Windsor.
Let Vultures gripe thy guts, for gourd and Fullam holds,
And high and low beguiles the rich and poor.
Tester I Will have in pouch, when thou shall lack,
Base Phrygian Turk, etc.
Let Us see ever an Abencerrago fly a higher pitch. Take him at another turn
quarrelling with Corporal Nym, an old Zegri: The difference arose about mine
Hostess. Quickly (for I would not give a Rush for a man unless he be particular
in matters of this moment) they both aimed at her body, but Abencerrago Pistol
defies his Rival in these words: Fetch from the Powdring-Tub of Infamy
That Lazar-Kite of Cressids kind,
Doll Tearsheer, she by name, and her espouse: I have and I will hold
The quondam Quickly for the only she.
And pauca --
There Is enough. Does not Quotation sound as well as (...)
(...).


But the Four Sons of Ammon, the Three bold Beachams, the Four London
Prentices, Tamerlain the Scythian Shepherd, Muleasses, Amurath, and Bajazet, or
any raging Turk at the Red Bull and Fortune, might as well have been urged by
you as a Pattern of your Almanzor, as the Achilles in Homer, but then our
Laureat had not passed for so Learned a man as he desires his unlearned
Admirers should esteem him.

But I am strangely mistaken if I have not seen this very Almanzor of yours in
some disguise about this Town, and passing under another Name. Prithee tell me
true, was not this Huff-cap once the Indian Emperor, and at another time did
not he call himself Maximine? Was not Lyndaraxa once called Almeria, I mean
under Montezuma the Indian Emperor? I protest and vow they are either the
same, or so alike, that I cannot for my heart distinguish one from the other.
You are therefore a strange unconscionable Thief, that art not content to steal
from others, but do rob thy poor wretched Self too.

I have thus far made bold with you out of mere Charity; Preface.
for you say that observing your Errors is a great step to the correcting them.

But pray give me leave without any offense, to ask you why it was a Fault in
Shakespeare, that his Plays were grounded upon Impossibilities, and so meanly
written, that the Comedy neither caused your Mirth, nor the serious part your
Concernment? This you say in your Postscript, and in your Preface, you tell us,
that a Poet was not tied to a bare Representation of what is possible, but
might let himself loose: For he has only his Fancy for his Guide, which sees
farther in its own Empire, and produces more satisfactory notions.

I understand not well your meaning, but my dear Friend, thou may remember
Aristotle was of another opinion.

(...). I was about six years since a little acquainted with a Namesake and
Countreyman of yours, Essay of Dramatick Poetry.
who pilfer'd out of Monsieur Hedelin, Menardiere, and Corneille, an Essay of
Dramatick Poetry, wherein he tells us another tale, and says, a Play ought to
be a just and lively Image of Humane Nature, Representing its Passions and
Humors, etc.

-- Si sic
omnia dixisset.
You shall hear further from me e're it be long.

THE Third Letter.
WHen you have wiped off all former stains from your Reputation, I shall think
you worthy to be called to another manner of Account, but till then I will
content my self to proceed in this mild way of Correcting your Insolence which
I have begun, submitting it to the Judgment of all Men, which of us two deserve
best the Honorable Title of a Railer.

And now if you were not too peevish to endure a Question, I would make bold to
ask you the meaning of this Simile: The Brave Almanzor
Who like a Tempest that out-rides the Wind. Almanz. Act. 2. page 13.

The sense of it to my weak and shallow Understanding, is, a Tempest that
out-rides it self: And if it be so, pray resolve me Preface.
whether you be not cozened with the sound, and never took the pains to examine
the sense of your own Verses, which is a Fault you object to others in your
modest Preface.

Another of the same. Great Souls discern not when the leap's too wide, Act. 4.

Because they only view the farther side.
Turn that into Prose, and then this is the Nonsense of it; They do not discern
the distance, because they only view the distance. And if that be the best
Construction it can bear, then answer me, Whether you Preface to A^nan.
who have undertaken to write Verse without being formed by Art or Nature for
it, whether you who have written one of the worst in it, could have written
worse without it?

I think this Instance I am going to give you, would have done every jot as
well in Prose, as in Heroic Verse. LYNDARAXA.

This is my Will, and this I will have done.



Or this. None could be seen whilst Almahid was by,
Because she was to be her Majesty.


Therefore to reprehend you in your own Lofty Style, by applying an ingenious
Couplet. Either confess your Fault, or hold your Tongue;
For I am sure I am not now in the wrong.


Mr. Dryden,

THere is one of your Virtues which I cannot forbear to animadvert upon, which
is your excess of Modesty; When you tell us in your Postscript to Granada, That
Shakespeare is below * the Dullest Writer of Ours, or any precedent Age. In
which by your favor, You Recede as much from your own Right, as you disparage
Almanzor, because he is yours, in preferring Ben. Iohnson's Cethegus before
him; saying in your Preface, that his Rodomontadoes are neither so irrational
as the others, nor so impossible to be put in execution. I Will give you so many
instances to the contrary, as shall convince you, and bring you over to my
side. I Will face this storm that thickens in the Wind; Act. 2.

And with bent forehead full against it go,
Till I have found the last and utmost Foe.
If Fate weaves common Thread, he will change the doom, Act. 3.

And with new Purple spread a Nobler Loom.


But here is a dreadful one: -- My word is past,
I Will take his heart by the Roots and hold it fast.
If the proudest hard-hearted Cethegus of 'em all heard this terrible menace, I
believe -- The busy thing
His Soul would straight pack up, and be on Wing; Alman. Act. 4. p. 123.

Like parting Swallows when they seek the Spring.
He Would shuder up with cold:
as you elegantly express it in your Maiden Queen, page 60. I Will hector Kings
to grant my wild Demands. Act. 3.

Fate after him below with pain did move, Part 1. Act. 2.

And Victory could scarce keep pace above.
Caetera de genere hoc adeo sunt multa, etc.
We follow Fate which does too fast pursue.
It Is just that Flames should be condemned to Fire.


You must not take it ill, Mr. Dryden, if I suspect both those Verses to have a
strong Tincture of Nonsense, but if you will defend 'em, of all loves I beg of
thee that thou would construe them, and put them into sense: for to me, as
Parson Hugh says in Shakespeare, they seemed Lunacies, it is mad as a mad Dog,
it is affectatious.

I once thought to have ended this Letter here with a Distich of your own: Let
us at length so many faults forget,
And lose the tale, and take 'em by the great.
But if I had so concluded; I should have omitted a memorable conceit or two;
the one is in a Speech of Almanzor to his Mothers Ghost. I Will rush into the
Covert of thy Night,
And pull thee backward by thy Shroud to Light.
Or else I Will squeez thee like a Bladder there,
And make thee groan thy self away to air.
The second is a Speech of Porphyrius to Maximine, in thy Tyrannick Love.
Wherever thou stand'st, I Will level at thy face,
My gushing blood, and sprout it at that place.


THE Fourth Letter.
Charter House, July, 1. 1672.
SInce I cannot draw you to make a reply to me, assure your self that after
this Letter you shall hear no further from me. An horrid Silence shall invade
your Ear, On the Kings Restoration.

But in that Silence a fierce Tempest fear.


I intended to have made no more Animadversions upon the viciousness of your
Style, till in reviewing the several Pamphlets you have published, I found so
much good new matter of that kind, that I could not forbear to return once more
to the same subject, and reserve the the other heads for the Press.

My first observation shall be of the admirable facility of your Muse in
Similes, which allude to nothing. This your Brother Bays has before taken
notice of in the Rehearsal. But I think it not amiss to insist a little longer
on that point; referring it wholly to the Judgment of those fair Ladys, who
have hitherto been the best strength of your party, hoping there will be no
need of further pains than just transcribing, and laying them before them.

The first I light upon is an excellent Illustration of Grief. Then setting
free a sigh from her fair Eyes
She wiped two Pearls the remnant of Wild Showers, Maiden Queen. page 49.

And hung like drops upon the Bells of Flowers.


Another. My Soul lies hid in shades of grief,
When like the Bird of Night with half shut Eyes, Riv. Lad. p. 32.

She peeps and sickens at the sight of day.


A Melting Simile upon the like Occasion. As some fair Tulip by a storm oppressed
Shrinks up, Alm. p. 61.
and folds its silken Arms to rest,
And bending to the blast, all pale and dead,
Hears from within the Wind sing round its head,
So shrouded up that beauty disappears.


Upon Anger. Why will you in your breast your passion crowd
Like unborn Thunder rolling in a Cloud? Alm p. 101



Upon Famine. As callow Birds whose Mother's killed in seeking of the prey,
Ind. Emp.

Cry in their Nests, and think her long away,
And at each leaf that stirs each blast of Wind
Gape for the food which they must never find.
So cry the People in their Misery.
Pensive like Kings in their declining State. Riv. Lad.



Pray, why not like States in their declining State?

Where by the way, Mr. Dryden, if you had reserved this Davenantism till the
opportunity, you might have given the Hollanders a frump, and very honestly
have got a Clinch into the Bargain. I shall keep the fasts of Seraphims
And wake for Joy, like Nightingals in May. Maiden Queen.



Bloss me! What stuff is this? prithee* speak impartially, does not this
worthless Collection now seem to you a confused Mass of thoughts tumbling over
one another, in the Dark? as you wittily say to my Lord of Orrery in the
Dedication of the Rival Ladies?

Now I Will make bold to have a fling at that kind of thy Writing, which thou,
thy Comerades, and thy Admirers call great and noble thoughts. Now Chance
assert thy own inconstancy
And fortune fight, that thou may fortune be. Alm p. 106

-- Birds never impose. Riv. Lad.

A Rich plumed Mistress, on their feathered Sons,
But leave their loves more open yet and free
Than all the Fields of Air, their spacious Birthright.
Harsh words from her, Idem.
like blows from angry Kings
Though they are meant affronts, are construed favors.
Seas are the Fields of Combat for the Winds*
But when they sweep along some flowery Coast
Their Wings move mildly, and their rage is lost. Al p 158.

Move swiftly Sun; and fly a Lovers pace,
Leave Weeks and Months behind thee in thy race.


The Sun, honest Mr. Dryden would have done so though Almanzor had not
commanded him, and if you doubt of it, I refer you to Gadbury, Sanders, Lilly,
Rider, Poor Robin, or any of those learned Men, for your satisfaction.

Zulema. Dare you what sense and reason prove deny? Al. p. 138.


Alm. When she is in question, sense and reason lie.

Thou have within thee, without thee, and about thee a most inexhaustible store
of such Trumpery; that I must quit this and pass to another head, which is thy
dull Quarlism, or Witherism to save my own labor and my Readers (if any be so
idle to read this.) Quis leget haec? -- nemo Hercule nemo,
Vel duo, vel nemo.
Persius.

For Example. Whatever Izabella shall command, Alm. part 2. p. 113.

Shall always be a Law to Ferdinand.
To what ever service you ordain my hand
Name your request, and call it your Command* p. 89.

Imagine what must needs be brought to pass,
My Hearts not made of Marble, Or of Brass.
Orbella. Your Father wonders much at your delay. Ind Emp. p. 13.


Cydaria. So great a wonder for so small a stay?
Without delay the unlucky Gift restore, Al. p. 104. p. 89.

Or from this Minute never see me more.
Grant that she loves me not, at least I see
She loves not others, if she loves not me.



Can thou after this have the Confidence to say thy Plays are written with
more Flame than Art. I vow to thee, I cannot perceive either Art, Flame, or the
least Spark of fire in thy Poetry. I must acknowledge it has all the qualities
of another Element, I mean the Earth, it is cold, dry, and so heavy, that at the
hearing of it, the judicious part of thy company fall asleep, and one would
have thought, thou had done so too, at the writing. I foresee that this is
labor ill bestowed upon you, for when thou art reprehended for producing a
Chymerical Ninny upon the Stage, thy defense runs thus.

Who told my over wise Censors I intended him a perfect Character, or, indeed,
what necessity was there that he should be so? -- or when we quarrel at some
other fault, you straight slap us in the Mouth, and tell us, you designed it so
on purpose to make your Play go off more smartly* Which Apology how it differs
from what Bays the Laureat says, I Will make you your self Judge.

Some will say, Rehearsal.
this sense is not much to the purpose, why I grant it, I meant it so, but then
it is as full of Wit and Drollery as ever it can hold, it is like an Orange stuck
with Cloves.

I thought to have rebuked thee for thy scattering of Nonsense under another
distinct and peculiar head, but if I had entered upon that Theme, I should
never have made an end. Therefore I Will conclude with a word, or two, only of
advice, for the discharge of my Conscience, as a friend, and one that wishes
you well; though I know before hand, you are so prejudiced against me, that
you will be deaf to all I can say; yet notwithstanding your aversion I will take
the liberty of Counselling you to give over this way of mistaken Poetry, and
apply your self to some honest Calling, wherein you may, (and truly hope will)
thrive better, than at this domn'd Trade of a Play-wright. And for your
Almanzor, Porphyrius, Maximin, with the old Roman Legions the Abencerrages and
Zegrys, and the rest of your invincible Heroes, which you have already raised,
since you have now no furthur use of their service, to ease your self of the
charge of continuing them in pay, faith, even do a deed of Charity, let 'em not
lie upon your hands, but lend any one of 'em to the Dutch against the K. of
France. Who knows what an Almanzor may do? he if any Man may save the Country.
As for your Ladies, Orbella, Lyndaraxa, Almeria, Cydaria* etc. -- You know they
have already those that will take care of and provide for them. -- Longum
formose vale, vale.

Martin Clifford.

REFLECTIONS ON THE Hind and Panther.
In a Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
THE Present you have made me of the Hind and Panther, is variously talked of
here in the Country. Some wonder what kind of Champion the Roman Catholics
have now gotten: for they have had diverse ways of representing themselves; but
this of Rhiming us to death, is altogether new, and unheard of, before Mr.
Bays set about it. And indeed he has done it in the Sparkishest Poem that
ever was seen: It Is true, he has written a great many fine things; but he
never had such pure Swiftness of Thought, as in this Composition, nor such
fiery Flights of Fancy. Such has always been his Dramatical and Scenical way
of Scribbling, that there was no Post nor Pillar in the Town exempt from the
pasting up of the Titles of his Plays; Insomuch that the Footboys, for want of
skill in Reading, do now (as we hear) often bring away by mistake, the Title of
a new Book against the Church of England, instead of taking down the Play for
the Afternoon: yet if he did it well or handsomely, he might deserve some
Pardon; but alas! how ridiculously does he appear in Print for any Religion,
who has made it his business to laugh at all! How can he stand up for any mode
of Worship, who has been accustomed to bite, and spit his Venom against the
very Name thereof?

Wherefore I cannot but wish our Adversaries Joy in their New-converted Hero,
Mr. Bays; whose Principle it is to fight single with whole Armies; and this
one quality he prefers before all the moral Virtues put together: The Roman
Catholics may talk what they will, of their Bellarmin and Perrone, their
Hector and Achilles, and I know not who; but I desire them all, to show one
such Champion for the Cause, as this Drawcansir: For he is the Man, that kills
whole Nations at once; who, as he never wrote any thing, that any one can
imagine has ever been the practice of the World, so in his late endeavors to
pen Controversy, you shall hardly find one word to the purpose: He is that
accomplished Person, who loves Reasoning so much in Verse, and has got a knack
of writing it smoothly. The Subject (he treats of in this Poem) did in his
Opinion, require more than ordinary Spirit and Flame; therefore he supposed it
to be too great for Prose; for he is too proud, to creep servilly after sense;
so that in his Verse, he soars high above the reach of it; to do this, there
is no need of Brain; it is but scanning right; the labor is in the Finger, not
in the Head.

However, if Mr. Bays would be pleased to abate a little of the exuberancy of
his Fancy and Wit; to dispense with his Ornaments and Superfluencies of
Invention and Satyr, a Man might consider, whether he should submit to his
Argument; but take away the Railing, and no Argument remains; so that one may
beat the Bush a whole day, and after so much labor, only spring a Butterfly,
or start an Hedg-hog.

For all this, is it not great pity to see a Man in the flower of his Romantic
Conceptions, in the full vigor of his Studies on Love and Honor, to fall into
such a distraction, as to walk through the Thorns and Briars of Controversy,
unless his Confessor has commanded it, as a Penance for some past sins: that a
Man, who has read Don Quixot for the greatest part of his Life, should pretend
to interpret the Bible, or trace the Footsteps of Tradition, even in the
darkest Ages?

But hold, we have a Battle just coming in; and now Mr. Bays speaks as big, as
if Ten Thousand Men were really engaged; at the same time he sings in his
Verse, and puts himself into a Warlike posture; so that our Ears are at once
entertained with Music and good Language, and our Eye is also surprised with
the Garb and Accoutrements of a Controversial War: Notwithstanding, methinks
this blustering Wight is hardly strong and wise enough to demonstrate two such
untoward Points, as Transubstantiation and Infallibility; I fancy, he is as
able to Square the Circle. His Brains indeed, have been a long time used to
Chimera's, the Raptures and Visions of Poetry, gaudy Scenes, unaccountable
flights of Nonsense, and big Absurdities: consequently, he may have a good
head for the believing of Legends.

But let us see how he proves his several Positions; which for brevity and
distinction sake, I must denominate after this manner, and in this order.

1. Transubstantiation. 2. Reformation. 3. Infallibility. 4. Novelty and
Schism. 5. The passive Church.
First, Transubstantiation, he says, we must admit, -- Because Man is to believe
Beyond what Sense and Reason can conceive.


Thus Mr. Bays has subdued his Understanding, and laying aside his Sense and
Reason, is become a zealous Bigot for the Roman Faith. But God Almighty is
pleased to deal with us, as Rational Creatures; therefore no Doctrine, that
comes from him, is contrary to our Reason, neither are our Faculties to be
renounced for the sake of it; without the use whereof we should not be able to
know any thing, that relates to the Worship of God, or our own Duty: Nay, in
the very planting of the Christian Faith by Miracles, Appeals are always made
to the Reason and Sense of the Standers by: We may therefore very well suspect,
that some Cheat is to be put upon us, when they would have us receive a
Doctrine of the Council of Trent, without Sense and Reason. Thus to subdue the
Understanding to the Belief of Fictions, is to suppose, that God does not
expect, that we should make use of the Soul, which he has given us in all its
Adorations to pay him a Rational Service. But Mr. Bays has not yet left off
to expose Religion; for to feign monstrous Opinions, and then fly to
Omnipotence to make them out, is the most unjustifiable Attempt, and the
highest Blasphemy, that can be thought on. But our Poet is the same Mr. Bays
still, as He was, when he served the Stage: He did ever scorn to imitate
Nature, and was altogether given to elevate and surprise; so now he would
banish Sense and Reason out of Religion, to which he was never a Friend; but
above all, his way of managing Controversies is peculiar; it is indeed
Elevating, Charming, Rhiming, and every thing, but Thinking and Sense; as for
Instance, p. 15. The Smith Divine, as with a careless Beat,
Struck out the mute Creation at a Heat.
There Is a Rant for you; That Is a Flight of Fancy at its full Range, without
any Check and Control of Sense and Reason: Hence it is, that he has been
always wont to show such hideous, monstrous things in his Plays, that every Man
of Wit began to nauseate his swelling Stuff; so now he labors to do the same
thing in Divinity; insomuch that his new Church will find it necessary to spue
him out.

Secondly, Reformation he rallies at, as the Brat of an old, obscene, and
furious Lion; that is, Henry the 8th's Lust: This is indeed a blustering Verse,
and a bold Stroke at the Memory of That King; for thus our Hero will snub even
Kings, baffle Armies, and do what He will, without any regard to good Manners
or Justice: Nay, he shall win you above a Dozen Battles by this sort of
Impudence, one after another. But now among Friends, was there ever any thing
spoken so falsely, so maliciously, so ignorantly? He has Face enough to say or
unsay any thing, and it is his Privilege, what the School-Divines deny to be
even within the Power of the Almighty, To make Contradictions true; that an
honest, necessary, and well-grounded Reformation from gross Errors, imposed as
matters of Faith, should be the product of Wickedness and Adultery: Or that it
should begin upon a shameful Occasion, and from the Extravagance of a private
Passion: He will oppose King Henry's Divorce against what I say: But I am not
startled at that, no more than at the Fable of our Bishops Consecration at the
Nagg's-Head-Tavern, or at the Kentish-men's having long Tails for the Murder
of Thomas Becket. Such frivolous Arguments as these might have served well
enough in the Mouths of the Monks, Two Hundred Years a-go; but they will not
pass so easily in an inquisitive Age: In brief therefore, it is evident, that
King Henry VIII. did never intend to proceed to a much greater Distance from
the Roman See, than the Gallican Church maintains at this Day: There is no Man
of our Church, that looks on his Breach with the Pope, to have been a
Reformation: We only esteem it to be of the nature of those Quarrels, which
many Princes in the most Catholic Countries have managed against the Holy
Chair: The Reformation, to which we stand, is of a later Date: The Primitive
Reformers amongst us beheld the Reasons of Men tamely subjected to one Man's
Command, and the Sovereign Powers of all Christendom still exposed to be
checked and destroyed by the Resolutions of his private Will: Upon this they
arose to perform two of the greatest Works in the World, at once to deliver the
Minds of Christians from Tyranny, and the Dignity of the Throne from Spiritual
Bondage: Whatever was the Accidental, this was the real Cause of our
Reformation, and of their Separation from us, not ours from them: And this was
an Event, which must needs have come to pass near the time, in which it did,
though King Henry had never forsaken his Wise: Mr. Bays therefore ought to know,
that our Doctrine, as bad as he thinks it is, was established by Christ and his
Apostles; and that the Ceremonies of our Worship were not set up by Faction, or
by popular Fancy, but by the deliberate Counsels of Wise Men, and by the
Authority of that Power, which bears the immediate Image of God. This may be
enough to satisfy our idle Dreamer on Parnassus, as to this Point; who prides
himself in the peculiar Virulency of his Pen, and so he may say a tart thing
concerning the Reformers, and give it the Majestic Turn of Heroic Poesy; He
cares not what Obloquy he casts upon the History or the Profession of Religion.

Thirdly, Infalibility of the Pope and Council is the next Subject, which is
one of God's peculiar and incommunicable Attributes; and where is no
Omniscience, there must be Ignorance in part; and where Ignorance is, there may
be Error: And if Mr. Bays understood any thing beyond his
Drama-common-placebook, He would see, that the Doctrine of Infallibility was
not known in the Church for a Thousand Years; and it has been much disputed,
ever since it was first asserted, and will be so; let Mr. Bays affirm never so
confidently, -- That this unfailing Guide,
In Pope and General Councils must reside.
But how can this be, when if Infallibility be placed in a General Council, it
was not in the Church for the first 320 Years, so it has not been in it this
last 120 Years: It is as certain, there was never a General Council of all the
Pastors of the Church; neither has the Scripture set down any Rules, how this
Assembly should be called, who should have a right to Vote, or what Numbers
must concur to make up an Infallible Judgment. If then the Pope be not
Infallible, you have no other Judge that can pretend to it: And in what place
of Scripture is the Pope named for our Guide? If our great Master has not done
it, we must not say, he has neglected to do something, which He should have
done: Notwithstanding, He is our most perfect Savior, who has showed us a
sure way to Salvation: But still He has left us to the free use of our
Faculties, and has not provided an Infallible Preservative against Error; no,
not against Sin, which is much more mischievous. But if our Eternal Safety did
depend upon the Judgment and Direction of one Infallible Guide; it is very
strange, that neither Christ nor his Apostles should give Mankind any Notice,
whether this Infallibility was to be found in One Man, or in a Body: And it is
as strange, that in all the Controversies the Apostles had, whilst they lived,
they should never make use of any such Authority to put an end to them, as the
Conclave of Cardinals have found out.

She whom ye seek am I, is not a sufficient Warrant for the Church of Rome's
claiming an Infallibity in all her Decrees; no more than a Mountebank is to be
credited, who after a deal of Scaffold-Pageantry to draw Audience, entertains
them by decrying all others with a Panegyric of his own Orvietan Balsom. And
indeed Mr. Bays seems to be but a raw Divine, and not to understand well the
case of Religion; for Jesus Christ is the Sovereign of the Church; the Pastors
are only as Inferior Judges in Civil Affairs; if they manifestly oppose
themselves to the Scripture, which is the Law of the Christians, particular
Persons may be supposed as competent Judges of That, as in Civil Matters they
may be of the Rebellion of the Judges; and in that Case they are bound still to
maintain their Obedience to Jesus Christ. In matters indifferent, doubtful, and
of small Consequence, we are to acquiesce in the Decisions of the Church; but
if it is visible, that the Pastors teach other Doctrines, than what Christ
taught, the People may put in their Appeal to the great Judge, Christ Jesus,
the Sovereign of the Chruch.

But this being a knotty Point, Mr. Bays laid his Head close to it, with a
Snuff Box in his Hand no doubt, when he conceived these Verses, p. 39. Who
setting Councils, Pope, and Church aside,
Are every Man his own presuming Guide.


However, the use of private Judgment is not so bad, as the Effects of blind
Zeal and ignorant Superstition; witness the Wars for establishing the Worship
of Images; the Croissades against the Saracens; Princes deposed by Popes, which
lasted for many Ages; the Butcheries of the Duke of Alva, the Massacrees of
Paris and Ireland: A small Diversity of Opinion about indifferent Matters was
never the cause of such barbarous Cruelties; therefore the present State of our
Church is more desirable, than the gross Ignorance and besotted Superstition
of Italy and Spain.

Wherefore I do here admonish you, Mr. Bays, not to go on in your Censures of
this kind, as the Author of Pax Vobis has done, your Brother in Scholastic
Duncery, before you have replied to the learned and ingenious Answerer of your
Pamphlet, which you wrote in Prose in the Case of the Duchess of Y. Your sly
Reflection upon Him in this Poem will not do the Business, in which you imitate
the Hawking of the Magpye, when she huffs her Train in token of Courage and
Victory; whilst, alas! it is her fear all, and another way of crying the Hawk
Mercy; and to the end, that the Hawk finding nothing but Feathers to strike at,
she may so perhaps shelter her Body: It is very fit indeed, you should have a
Guide and a Keeper too; but Men in their Wits do believe, that God made Man a
reasonable Creature, who feels as much Pleasure, when he can give himself a
good Account of his Actions, as one that sees, does perceive, in comparison to
a blind Man who is led about; and therefore they think, that the same merciful
God would not contrive his Religion to be dark, nor place it beyond the reach
of their Faculties, when he designed it to perfect their Natures, and to raise
them to the utmost heights they are capable of.

Fourthly, the next Charge is Novelty and Schism, thus expressed, p. 66. We can
point out each Period of the Time,
When they began, and who begat the Crime;
Can Calculate how long the Eclipse endured,
Who interposed, what Digits were obscured.
Mr. Bays, you must know, was always good at Eclipses; as when he made the
Sun, Moon, and Earth act one in a Dance: But I must say, that this is a new way
of writing Controversy, to run us down with Whimsies instead of true
Reasoning, as He has been used to astonish the Spectators in the Playhouse
with Scenes, Clothes, and Dances; instead of giving Mankind a Picture of
themselves, and thereby making Virtue beloved, Vice abhorred, and the little
Irregularities of Men's Tempers, called Humors, exposed to Laughter.

But seeing He is so exact at the Calculation of Time, I would have him inform
us, how old these following Doctrines are; Transubstantiation, Purgatory, the
Merit of Works, Invocation of Saints, the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, the
Authority of the Councils, and the Infallibility of the Pope; these being the
chief Causes, for which we dissent from Rome. Surely in the beginning these
things were not so: For according to our Account, Infallibility goes no higher,
than the Scholars of Marcus in Irenaeus, or the Gnostics in Epiphanius;
Purgatory comes from Origin, or at the furthest from Tertullian, who had it
from Montanus: The Denial of Marriage to the Priesthood is derived from Pope
Calixtus: Transubstantiation is from the Lateran Council: The Half-Communion is
no older, than the time of Aquinas: Praying in an unknown Tongue may be fetched
as far as from Gregory the Great: St. Austin denies the Invocation of Saints
departed to have been in his Days; and the Supremacy of the Pope began in
Boniface the Third.

Against Transubstantiation Aquinas argues, Oper. Tom. 12. as a novel and an
impossible thing, for one Body to be locally in more places than one, and in
all at once. The witholding the Cup from the Laity is against our Saviors
Institution, who has commanded all Men to drink of this Cup, Matthew. 26. 27.
From the beginning the Holy Scriptures were perused by the People; witness the
Traditores in the Persecution of Dioclesian, who were called so from their
delivering up of their Bibles, which, before they were forced to the contrary,
they made daily use of; therefore the Hebrew Text was read Weekly to the Jews,
and the New Testament was written in Greek, because that Tongue was most known
to the Eastern World; and to pray in an unknown Tongue, is against the plain
Sense of the 14th. Chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians. Priests
also were permitted to have Wives both in the Old and New Testaments, and many
of the Blessed Apostles were Married Men: And St. Paul asserts his Liberty to
carry a Wife along with him, as well as Cephas.

These and many more Corruptions (which I could mention) in point of Practice
and Doctrine too, awakened the Christian World to look out for a Reformation;
to enquire for the old paths, and to walk therein, and to reform, what was
amiss, by what had been the Belief and Practice of the Christian Church from
the beginning. In this Search are discovered the Rise and Progress of all the
new-invented Doctrines in the Church of Rome; by what Degrees her several
Errors have been brought in: For to go no further back, than the Council of
Trent, we find new Articles of Faith, such as the Sacrifice of the Mass, the
Doctrine of Purgatory, the Invocation of Saints, the Worship of Images, and the
like, were enjoined under the Pain of Damnation: And in the Canon of the Fourth
Session of that Council Unwritten Traditions are decreed to be of equal
Authority with the Scriptures: Upon this our first Reformers consulted the
Scriptures, and the Primitive Fathers of the Church, that they might see, how
things stood from the beginning, and only separated from them who had parted
with the old and the true Religion. Therefore it is in vain for Mr. Bays to
scorn or to complain of us for leaving the Church of Rome, unless He can
convince us, that we have forsaken the Word of God, the Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles, the uncorrupted Primitive Church, the Four First General
Councils, or the Ancient Creeds. This is old Standard Faith, Mr. Bays, and
these the first plantations of the Truth of the Gospel; from the Profession
whereof we are no Schismatics: for Schism must needs be theirs, who give the
cause of Separation, not theirs, who do but separate, when the Cause is given;
and we have departed from Rome for this Reason, because she has in many
Instances departed from the Faith of Christ: Nay, had not the Pope affected a
Supremacy over all other Churches, besides his own, we never had cast off a
Yoke, which had never been put on our Necks; and so it is plain, that the
Usurper did make the Schism.

It is indeed a Glorious Design to reconcile all Churches to one Doctrine and
Communion; but then it must not be done by such Tyranny, as the Popes have
practiced to fetter Men streighter under the Bondage of fictitious Articles of
Faith; but Unity from this kind of Force is rather to be prayed against, than
wished for: God only in his own time, and by the inscrutable Methods of his
Providence, is able to range his whole Church scattered over the Face of the
Earth, into primitive Unity and Christian Order. In the mean time Mr. Bays
should lay aside his Projects of Pillories, Rods, Gibbets and Inquisitions to
make us acquiesce in his Judgment, whatever be our private Opinion: In some
parts of his allegorical Poem, one would verily believe, that the Poet himself
was turned into a Wolf, for his Speech is all howling, yelling, and barking,
that you would imagine, He would presently pull out the Throats, and suck the
Blood of all the Protestant Sheep, who are always ready to suffer, rather than
commit that Error against their Consciences, which must render them Hypocrites
to God, and Knaves amongst Men. Therefore, notwithstanding, Mr. Bays has
thought fit to pass over from one persuasion of Religion to another, yet he
might forbear to spit thrice at every Article of Religion, that he has
relinquished, or to animate his new Acquaintance, to trample upon his former
Companions; these are Usages, that can only be expected from a Renegado of
Argier, or Tunis, to overdo in Expiation, that he may gain better credence of
being a sincere Mussulman.

5. He Scoffs at the Church of England, in calling her the Passive, Church: For
Mr. Bays is resolved, seeing she would not admit him into her Preferments,
that she shall know what a Satyrist he is; for this reason he has made a
Panther, a spotted Beast of the most innocent and blameless Church; he has
accused of Pride, the humblest; of Rapacity and Covetousness, the most
inoffensive and bountiful; of Ignorance and want of Devotion, the most Learned
and Pious; of false Doctrine, the most Primitive; of ill Discipline, the most
decent Church under Heaven. And when nothing else could be said, he even
upbraids it with its Submission and Obedience. Notwithstanding all his impudent
disgraces, there remains this one comfort to the Church of England, That the
same Man who now vilifies her so basely, was thought unworthy of her Communion,
for his vicious and ill life: Besides, it is easy to conjecture at the cause
of this his harsh usage of our Church; he has but lately Apostatized from it,
and is but just entered into the Romish Faith; therefore he was resolved to give
an unquestionable proof of the Establishment thereof, by reviling the Church of
England, if any should still doubt of the reality of his Conversion: And this I
confess, he has prosecuted with all the Violence and Bigotry, which commonly
accompanies new Converts. Our Adversary knew very well, the Church of England
to be a Body, that will never Rebel against the King; therefore in derision,
he calls her the Passive Church; Thanks be to God, she is so; therefore she is
the True Church of Christ: So that, for distinction sake, we will name yours,
Mr. Bays, Armarillis, because of her Armor against all Princes that are not
of her mind; and this is now our Poets new Mistress; as a Friend of his broke
off his Match with Cloris, to marry Old Joan. But (Sir) you have not in the
least hit the Relish of the Town by this Conceit; the choicest Spirits, you
may have a value for, do despise you for it; for according to your custom, in
This you have done, what was never done before; Traduce a Church for her
unshaken Loyalty, at the same time, that you would be thought a Faithful
Subject to the Crown. For this reason, if a Test be of any use at all, it would
be to keep out such Zealots, as you are, Mr. Bays, from being concerned in
human Society; who would destroy all that stand in their way, according to the
example of that fiery Order, whose vehement Principles are distastful to Rome
its self; who are uneasy, unless they carry all before them: Our protection
against the heats of these Men, next under God, is wholly placed in our most
gracious King, who, as a true Father of his Country, does act in his Favor
and Indulgence to his People, according to the temper of our most holy
Religion, which inspires Mankind with Charity and Mercy: But we must needs have
sad apprehensions of the designs of those, who have ever used all the Arts of
Craft and Violence to extirpate the Northern Heresy, as they mis-call our
Religion, and to promote their own Interest in opposition to the ends, and the
true genius of Christianity: Our sole fence against them is his Majesty's
promise; and to Royal and Generous Minds, no Stipulations are so binding, as
their own voluntary promises; nor is it to be wondered at, if they hold those
Conditions, that they put upon themselves, the most inviolable.

Now I may Appeal to the common sense of any Reader, whether this Poem be not
one of the rankest pieces of Folly and Malice blended together, among all the
impertinent, dull, fantastical things, the Town is at this time tired with:
Yet the Author would be esteemed a solemn and a grave Person; and he may
observe in the Conversation he has lately had with the Birds and Beasts, that
the gravest are the Owl and the Ass. For sometimes this Mr. Bays is not able
to say one good thing in a whole page, if it were to save his Life; then he
lays about him, as if he were running a Muck, and had resolved to kill all that
he met: At one time he picks quarrels with the Holy Scriptures, and slights the
Readers of it with the most impertinent pratings: At another time he Roars and
Huffs against the Man in Black, with the most rude and clownish deportment; so
that all Civil Company must needs loath his ill-breeding more, than the
Buffoonry of Hostlers and Porters.

In one place, he blames Protestants for having no Treatise of Humility, but
what they have borrowed from Foreigners: So the Protestants Poets say, that Mr.
Bays could never have been an Author, without stealing from Milton, and many
others, that have been helps for his Wit to furnish out the Stage: And how many
good thoughts has he made his own, as he phrases it in the Rehearsal, by
Transprosing and Transversing: As now he hopes, these Arguments for Popery may
pass for his, because he has put them into an unusual dress, and has tagg'd
'em with Rhimes. And to speak the truth, there is very little of his own in any
Book that he has published, but the Arrogance and unparalled Censoriousness,
which he exercises over all other Writers.

But if the Credit of all Men whatsoever, be, and ought to be so well guarded,
both by Nature, Law, and Discretion, the Clergy certainly, of all others, ought
to be kept and preserved Sacred in their Reputation: For they being Men of the
same Spirit with others, and no less subject to humane Passions, it is the most
unmanly as well as base thing, to treat them with open affronts; to pelt them
with Ribaldry, and Atheistical Drollery: For all that, these Calumnies are the
grand refinements of Mr. Bays his Poem; and without these Flowers he thought
his new Religion could not be enough embelish'd or set off: Ignorant and
mistaken Proselyte! Who believes it necessary to part with any Virtue, even
common Civility, that he may cast Dirt upon the Church of England, as if that
did not require and encourage more Sobriety, more Mortification, than ever He
could be guilty of: Whereas it has always been fruitful of Men, who together
with Obedience to the best Discipline, have lived to the Envy of the Papists in
their Conversation, and without such true Defenders of the Christian Faith
could never have baffled them so shamefully, as they have done of late.
Insomuch that I fancy, they will make very few Converts by disputing, unless
they may pretend to have turned some ( as in the old Florentine Wars) by mere
tiring them out, and perfect weariness; or some such Libertines, as Mr. Bays,
who will be seemingly religious, when it is their Interest; but when it is not,
then any thing is their Duty, that contributes to their Security.

For being influenced by this Principle, our Poet is not only contented to
leave our Church, but all of a sudden he appears at the Head of the contrary
Party; which, supposing the Dispute to be just, yet in him was so mercenary,
that none would have descended to act this part, but one, who could not get a
Livelihood from the Playhouse: But so flippant He is, and forward to write
against Protestancy in general, that in despite of Sense and good Manners, He
huffs, he struts, looks big, and stares;
And all this he can do, because he dares.
And when he had cooked up these musty Collections, he recommends them with
that high Sauce, the Magnificence of Verse; but methinks he was out in his
Politics, because he has not recommended his Religion, as He was wont to do
his Plays, by Civility, Insinuation, good Language, and all That; for the
English being a goodnatur'd People, are sooner won by good Words than Blows.

It has been an odious Task to me all along to pick out the most noxious
pieces of his Satyr; therefore I shall leave many passages unsearcht, nor read
any farther upon his Swallows and Pigeons, where Mr. Bays makes the bravest
Work that ever Man saw; and This is the Bane of all such kind of Writers; the
Vulgar never understand them, and if they did, they would not be one jot the
better: No Romance can furnish us with such pleasant and worshipful Tales; they
want nothing of perfection, but that they do not begin with once upon a time;
which Mr. Bays, according to his Accuracy, if he had thought on it, would never
have omitted: And more than this, by changing some Lines, and bringing in a few
People talking in the way of Dialogue, this very Poem may serve for a Play, as
smiling and frowning are performed in the Face with the same Muscles very
little altered. But still I cannot imagine the reason, why He should make use of
these tedious and impertinent Allegories, unless he thought, that what was
solid and argumentative, being imp'd with something more light and airy, might
carry further, and pierce deeper: Unless in this time of Heat and Anger the
Roman Catholics may think fit to employ him, as being a spightful Creature, or
the good Fathers may divert themselves awhile with an Animal, that is unlucky,
mimical, and gamesom.

Yet let me tell you, Mr. Bays, your best Friends declare you a more competent
Judge of some sort of Wit and Delight, than of Religion, or any Controversy
about it; they say, you manage Rhythmes well; and that you have a good Art in
making high Idea's of Honor, and in speaking noble things: In this Debate, it
had been more edifying, if you had wrote in Prose; it would have rendered your
Speech more natural, and you would never have made so much Contention, as you
have done, between the Rhythme and the Sense. But I see, he is not in a
condition of taking Counsel, or of correcting his Vices; therefore he will
continue in defiance of all the means, that can be used to the contrary, an
endless Scribler, an empty Politician, an insolent Poet, and an idle pretender
to Controversy; so that he is resolved to Rave against us as so many vile
Heretics; just as the Italians, French, and Spaniards, have had the Vanity to
boast, that all Wit is to be sought for, no where, but amongst themselves; it
is their established Rule, that good Sense has always kept near the warm Sun,
and scarce ever yet dared to come farther, than the forty ninth degree
Northward; This is a very unaccountable Fancy; but they have the same Opinion
of Religion too, as if all Orthodoxy could not go out of the Bounds, which they
have set it.

So Mr. Bays his Controversial Writings, are unanswerable, just as some places
are impregnable, by reason of the Dirt that lies about them; and to maintain a
conflict any longer with his Reasons, were to renew the old way of fighting
with Sand-bags, the true Emblem of his unjoynted, incoherent Stuff; For if he
goes on thus in making Volumes of Controversy, his best Confuters, will be the
Grocers and Haberdashers of Small Wares, who will bind up their rotten Raisons,
and Mundungus in his Papers; and his Booksellers will dwell at the South Side
of Paul's, where his Works shall be bound up, as his Forefather William Prynnes
were, in Trunks, Hat-cases, and Bandboxes. I am

Yours, etc.

FINIS.

