THE CLERKS VADE MECVM.

OR, A Choice COLLECTION of Modern PRESIDENTS, According to The best FORMS
extant, and such as have not formerly been Printed.

Containing all sorts of Bargains and Sales, Leases, Mortgages, Grants,
Covenants, Surrenders, etc.

Useful for all persons that have relation to the Practick part of the Common
Law, or desire to be exquisitely qualified therein.

Faithfully perused by T.P. Barrister of that honorable Profession.

LONDON, Printed by T.M. for W. LEE, D. PAKEMAN and G. BEDELL, and are to be
sold at their Shops in Fleetstreet. 1655.

The PREFACE to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
ACcording to the ancient manner, upon this, and the like occasion formerly
accustomed, It is conceived a word or two in this place will not be judged
unseasonable; This solid and elaborate Piece has for diverse years past
remained in the private Study of a learned Gentleman, and by him (although not
without some importunity) Civily communicated to some entire friends, who have
imbosomed the same with as great obligation of gratitude, as with singular
approbation of Judgment: and therefore having already received an accurate
Examen of so many profound professors of the Common Law, It is Presumed a
modest and brief Appology will best suite with the gravity and merit of a Tract
upon this subject; which for variety, rarity, substance and conciseness, I
doubt not, will be found justly equal to any Book of Presidents, formerly
commended from the Press to Public View. Thus much by way of Introduction, is
conceived to be expedient in a candid manner, to satisfy the Courteous Reader,
of the occasion of imparting this work to the general benefit of all such as
desire to be furnished with this excellent Enchyridion, or Vade Mecum; which
although it be small in price, yet in the use of it will be found in value
great: It may perchance have been a lender to others in this kind, but I
believe it never was a borrower of any, It being a fair, polished, and entire
body of it self, framed by several sages of the Law, of great Integrity, and
Experience; And therefore it is heartily wished it may live in the favorable
accceptance of the Judicious, unto whom properly it does present it self, and
Craveth in their mature judgment a gentle access and benign Censure.

T. P.

ERRATA.
Page 190 and 191. Titles read A Bargain and sale made upon condition to
Feoffees in trust. p. 248 and 249 Hustings. p. 414. for An Indenture to lead
the use of a Fine. read A Bargain and sale of a M^^ng^^ for 561 ^. 596. p. 635
for A grant of an Advow^on, ^. An Indenture Tripartite of settlement by Fine
and Recovery. p. 636 lin. 28 r. alias. p. 637 lin. 9. r. Wards.

Articles of Agreement for a Carpenter.
FIrst the said A. B. does covenant, promise and grant for himself, his
Executors and Administrators, by these presents, to and with the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, in manner and form
following: that is to say, That he the said A B his Executors or Assigns, at
his, or their own proper costs and charges, shall and will before the Feast of
etc. next coming after the date hereof, pull and take down so much of the now
dwelling house of the said C D in F L, as is agreed between them to be pulled
and taken down; and as contains in length 31. foot, and in breadth 14 foot,
be it more or less: And in the same place where that part or parcel of the same
Tenement so to be pulled down, as aforesaid now stands, shall and will, at
his or their like costs and charges, before the said Feast of, etc. next
coming, erect, build and set up one good substantial and sufficient new frame
of good and sufficient, and well seasoned Timber, such and of the like goodness
and greatness, or better, as the now dwelling of J C in C L is builded withal.
And under the same frame, at his or their like costs and charges, shall and
will dig and make a convenient Cellar; and that the same Cellar shall be
walled round about with a good and sufficient wall of brick, and that the said
Cellar shall contain the like length and breadth as that part of the same
Tenement so to be pulled down is and does contain; and also, that the said
Cellar shall contain in depth six foot or thereabouts: And that the said new
frame, so to be set up, shall contain in height above the same Cellar, three
stories and a half; the first story to contain in height nine foot, the second
story to contain in height seven foot and a half, and jutty over eight inches,
the half story to contain in length four foot, from the upper side of the floor
to the upside of the Rason: And that every of the said stories and half story
shall contain two rooms.

And further, the said A B does covenant etc. to and with etc. in manner and
form following; that is to say, That he the said A B, his Executors or
Assigns, at his or their like proper costs and charges, shall and will make, or
cause to be made in the same frame four bay windows, to contain in length six
foot a piece, and such and so many other lights and clear stories as shall be
needful and convenient: and shall and will also set up, erect and build from
the ground eight Chimneyes, well and Workman-like, with good and sufficient
brick, lime and sand, near the midst of the same frame: viz. for every room a
chimney, and that the same chimneyes shall be of such breadth, as the same C D
his Executors or Assigns shall think fit, and as the same rooms will well
bear: And adjoining to the same chimneyes, shall and will make and set up one
pair of stairs of six foot square, to serve for every of the same stories and
rooms, and also one pair of stairs for the Cellar, to be set where the same C
D his Executors or Assigns shall think most fit, with a convenient, good, and
sufficient door of Oak boards to and for every of the same rooms. And shall
also well and Workman-like board and floor every of the same rooms with good,
sufficient, dry and seasonable Deal-boards. And also, That he the said A B, his
Executors or Assigns, at his and their like cost and charges shall and will,
well and Workman-like, in and by all things belonging to a Plaisterers work,
lathe, plaster and ceil the same frame, and the rooms and chambers in the
same; viz. the out sides of the walls of the same frame toward the weather,
and the ceilings of every room and chamber, and the inside of the wall ceilings
and other places within the stairs with lime and hair, and the inside of the
walls thereof with loam and straw. And shall also lathe and tile the same frame
well and Workmanlike, with good and sufficient lathes and tiles, and do, or
cause to be done all and every other thing and things whatsoever, belonging to
the setting up of the same frame, and other things aforesaid, and which the
Carpenter, Bricklayer, and Plaisterer should or ought to do. And also, that he
the same A B, his Execurors or Assigns, at his or their like costs and
charges, shall and will from time to time carry away all the earth, rubbish and
refuse which shall come or grow by reason of the pulling down of the same
building, and making and setting up of the same Cellar and frame in repect of
the said Carpenters, Brick-layers, and Plaisterers work, which said frame, and
all other thing and things whatsoever so to be made and done as aforesaid, the
said A B does covenant etc. to make, do, and fully finish before the said Feast
of S. Michael next coming; and that at the same Feast, etc. the same frame and
premises shall be Tenantable. In consideration whereof the said C D does
covenant, etc. to and with etc. that he the said C D his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be
paid unto the said A B, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at or in
etc. the full sum of One hundred pound, etc. in form following; viz. etc. And
also, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A B, his Executors
and Assigns, to have and take the old Timber of the same house so to be pulled
down, and all the loame, brick and tyle, and other things about the same (Lead,
Iron, Wainscot, and Glass excepted) and so much of the same old timber, loarn,
brick and tyle as shall be good and sufficient, and as the same C D shall like
of, to use and employ about the building and setting up of the same new frame,
and the rest to take, carry away, convert, and employ to his and their most
benefit and commodity. And also, that it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said A B, his Executors, Workmen and Assigns, at his and their wills and
pleasures at all time and times convenient, to have free and quiet ingresse,
egresse and regresse into and from the place where the said new frame is to be
set up, by and through the same now dwelling house of the said C D until the
Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel next coming, without let or interruption
of him the said C D. his Executors or Assigns or any of them.

In witness, etc.
An Award made between Executors.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing quadripartite indented of
Award shall come Sir W. Cordale Knight, Master of the Rolls sends greeting in
our Lord God everlasting. This INDENTURE quadripatitie also made the second day
of A. in the fifth year, etc. Between Sir W. Gerrard, etc. one of the Executors
of the last Will and Testament of R. Cholmeley, etc. of the first part, Sir
Tho. Offley one other of the Executors of the last Will and Testament aforesaid
of the second part, Sir Tho. Leigh, etc. one other of the Executors of the said
last Will and Testament of the third part, and Sir Hugh Cholmeley, etc. one
other Executor of the same last Will and Testament of the said R. witnesses,
That whereas the said R. by his said Testament and last Will, bearing date,
etc. amongst diverse and many gifts and legacies therein limited and appointed
to sundry persons therein named, as by the same it may appear, Has given and
bequeathed all the residue of all and singular his goods, chattels, leases, and
other things whatsoever (his Debts, Funerals, and Legacies being paid and
performed) unto the said W G, T O, T L, whom together with the said H C his
brother, he made and ordained his said Executors of his said last Will and
Testament aforesaid; and of the same he has also made and ordained the said W
C his Supervisor and overseer, as by the same his last Will also at large it
does, and may appear.

And for the avoiding all doubts, variances, controversies, suits, and strifes
that may and might ensue and grow between the foresaid parties touching the
said last Will and Testament and the true execution of the same. And for and
concerning the said residue, surplusage, and remain of the said Goods, Chattels
and other things (after the said Debts, Funerals and Legacies discharged) every
of the said parties have compromitted and faithfully promised; and further, do
severally covenant and grant to and with the others by these presents to stand
to, obey, abide, perform and fulfill the Award and Judgment of the said W C
Knight Arbitrator between them indifferently named and chosen of and upon the
premises. Whereupon the same W C taking upon him the charge and business of
the said Award, and willing and minding, as much as in him is, the true
Execution of the said Testament, and that a final peace, unity and concord
shall be had and continued for ever between the same parties for and concerning
the premises; Has and does by these presents by and with the full assent and
consent of all and every the aforesaid parties, make, publish and declare this
his present Award, Arbitrament and Judgment between the same parties touching
the premises, in manner and form as follows; that is to say, First the said W
C by these presents does award, judge and determine: and every of the parties
before named covenanteth and grants severally for himself, his Heirs,
Executo^s and Administrators, to and with the other of them, his and their
Executors and Administrators, and every of them by these presents, in manner
and form following; that is to say, That the same Executors or any of them
shall not at any time or times hereafter willingly and wittingly conceal, That
any of the Executors shall not conceal any of the Testators goods from the
other Executors.
withdraw, or keep close, or cause to be concealed, withdrawn, or kept close
from the said other Executors or any of them, or the Survivors, or the Survivor
of them, any such Goods, Chattels, Leases, Debts, Credits, or other things
whatsoever as has come, or shall happen to come to his or their, or any of
their hands, custody, possession or knowledge, that were, or did, or ought to
appertain or belong to the said R C the Testator, or his Executors, to the
intent the same, or any part thereof should not be recovered, used, ordered
enjoyed or disposed by the same Executors, to their, and every of their own
proper use, most benefit, commodity, and advan age by equal portions, in manner
and form aforesaid.

And it is further ordered and judged by the said Sir W. C. and also fully
condescended and agreed between the said parties, To execute the Testators Will
and trust reposed in them.
and every of them severally does covenant and grant for him, his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, to and with the others by these presents, that
the same Executors, and every of them, shall from henceforth, both in name and
deed take upon him the full and due execution of the foresaid last Will and
Testament, so far as only to the duty, trust and office of Executors
appertains, or ought to appertain.

And further, it is ordered, judged and awarded by the said Arbitrator; and
also covenanted, granted, and fully agreed between the said parties, That the
Executors shall bear all costs and charges of suits in executing the Testators
will equally.
and the same parties and every of them do severally covenant and grant, to and
with the other of them by these presents, That if at any time or times
hereafter it shall be found and approved that the foresaid Testator is and ought
to be charged either by Law or conscience, with any other debt or debts, sum or
sums of money or other duties or things whatsoever, then at this present is well
known and does appear unto the said executors; or if they or any of them, or
the executors of the Survivor of them, shall at any time or times hereafter
happen to be charged with any manner of suits or suit, or other charge or
charges whatsoever for or by reason of the said last Will and Testament, or the
due execution thereof, either in Law or otherwise, That then all and every the
said Executors, and the Survivor and Survivors of them, and the Executors or
administrators of such of them, which then shall be dead, shall at their equal
and indifferent costs, bear, support, pay and allow the same charges and every
of them, any thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Another form of an Award.
TO all Christian people, etc. I S Sergeant at Law, greeting, etc. Whereas
diverse variances, futes controversies, debates and demands have been heretofore
had, moved, stirred, and depending between A B etc. and C D, etc. of, for, and
concerning (Reciting the matter in controversy.) For the appeasing and
pacifying of all which suits, variances, controversies and demands, either of
the said parties by their mutual assents and consents have submitted
themselves, and stand bounden each to other by their several obligations,
bearing date, etc. in the sum of etc. the piece, with several conditions
endorsed upon either of the same several obligations, to stand to, obey,
observe, perform, fulfill and keep the Award, Arbitrament, Ordinance and
Judgment of me the said I S Arbitrator, indifferently elected, named and
chosen between the said parties, as well of, for and upon all and all manner
of Actions, as well reals as personals, suits, quarrels, debts, debates,
trespasses and demands whatsoever, had, moved, stirred, or depending, in
controversy between the said parties in any wise before the date of the said
obligations. So that the same Award, Arbitrament, Ordinance, and Judgment of me
the said Arbitrator of and upon the premises, were made, declared and yielded
up in writing on this side the tenth day of etc. as by the same several
obligations and endorsements thereupon made, more at large appears.

Whereupon I the said I S Arbitrator aforefaid taking upon me the charge of the
said award, and willing to set the said parties at a final end, peace, unity,
and concord, of, for and concerning the premises: Have called both the said
parties before me, and by good advice and deliberation have seen, heard,
examined, and perfectly understood and perceived both their Rights, Titles,
Estates, Interests, Demands, Evidences and proofs in and to the Premises; and
weighing and pondering the effects and grounds of all the said matters in
controversy, do now make, publish, give up and declare this my present award
indented between the said parties, by and with their both mutual consents and
agreements, of, for, and concerning the premises in manner and form following:
that is to say, First, I the said Arbitrator do by these presents award, order,
judge, and determine, and the said A B for his part does covenant and grant for
him, his Executors and Administrators, to and with the said C D his Executors
and Administrators by these presents, That, etc. as in other Awards reciting
the matter in variance.

Another form of an Award short.
TO all Christian people, etc. Sir Christopher Wray Lord Chief Justice of
England, greeting, etc. Whereas diverse suits, variances and controversies have
heretofore risen, grown, and yet be depending between A B etc. and C D etc. for
and concerning etc. (expressing the matters in controversy) For the appeasing
and ending whereof, and of all actions, strifes, quarrels and suits, had, moved
or depending between the said parties or any of them, any way touching or
concerning the said etc. The said parties, and every of them, have compromitted
and submitted themselves to stand to, observe, perform and keep the Award,
Ordinance, Arbitrament, Rule and Judgment of me the said C W. So that the said
Arbitrament, Order, Rule and Judgment of me the said C W were made in writing
indented and ready to be delivered to the said parties before the twelfth day
of D. etc. as by two several Obligations in that behalf had and made, each of
them bearing date etc. more at large it does and may appear.

Whereupon now know ye, that I the said Sir C W willing and minding to set the
said parties and every of them at quietness touching and concerning the
premises, do award, order, judge and determine of, for and concerning the
premises as follows. First, that the said A B shall etc.

A Lease of a Coal-Mine, or Coal-Pit.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. Between A B of etc. of the one party, and C D of
etc. of the other party, Witnesses, That the said A B for diverse good
considerations him moving, has demised, granted, and to Farm-letten, and by
these presents does for him and his heirs, demise, grant, and to farm let unto
the said C D all those his Pit and Pits, Mine and Mines of coal, as well open
as not opened, set, lying, and being of, in, upon or within all those grounds
or lands, called F within the Parish of L in the County of D, and free liberty
in every or any of them, to dig, delve, make, sink, and rid pit and pits,
and to drive, and to make Water-gates, as well for the waining of coals, as for
the avoiding of water and stith, together with free and sufficient ground leave
for the laying of all such coals as shall or may be there had or wrought; and
also sufficient way-leave in and through all the grounds of F. aforesaid. So
always that the said C D his Executors and Assigns, do not work or draw up
coals within the said demised premises, but only at one pit at one time, during
the term by these presents demised, nor work and draw up in or at any pit in
any one day above twenty score Corves or scopes of coals, every corve or scope
to contain eight pecks Land-measure, and no more. To have and to hold the said
Pit and Pits, mine and mines of coal, as well opened as not opened, and all and
singular other the Liberties, preheminences, Profits and Commodities before
demised in manner aforesaid, with their appurtenances whatsoever, unto the said
C D his Executors and Assigns from the Feast of P next ensuing the date of
these presents, unto the end and term of twenty one years from thenceforth
fully to be complete and ended. Yiedling and paying therefore yearly unto the
said A B his heirs and Assigns Twenty six Pound of etc. at two usual Feasts,
etc. by even and equal portions, etc. with a clause of reentry, as in others.

And it is covenanted, concluded and agreed by and between the said A B and C
D. And the said C D. on his part does covenant, etc. for him, his etc. to and
with etc. That he the said C D his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
shall not dig, work, get or draw any coals at any more or other pit or pits
then one at any one time: Yet nevertheless it is condescended and agreed
between the parties abovesaid, that if the said C D his Executors or Assigns,
or any of them, do or shall at any time or times hereafter during the said
term, dig, work, get or draw coals at any more or other pit or pits then one at
one time, that then the same C D, his Executors, Administrators and assigns
shall yield and pay unto the said A B yearly for and during the time that he
shall dig, work, get or draw coals at any more or other pits then one, for
every pit at the which he or they shall so dig, and shall or may draw, work,
or get coals to the number of twenty score corves or scopes a day, as
aforesaid, (every scope or corve containing eight pecks Land measure) the sum
of twenty pounds yearly, at the two Feasts of etc. aforesaid; and with and
under the like clause of re-entry for non-payment of the said rent by the said
space of 23 days after either of the said Feasts, as aforesaid. And if it so
happen that the said C D his Executors or assigns upon sinking of a new pit or
pits shall win coals, and yet cannot or may not draw up the full and just sum
of twenty corves or scopes of such quantity as aforesaid, that then he the said
C D his executors and assigns, shall satisfy and pay unto the said A B his
heirs and assigns for so many coals as he or they shall so draw up,
proportionably according to the said sum and rate of twenty pound for a pit.

And the said C D does covenant etc. to and with etc. That he the said C D his
executors, administrators and assigns, For repairing.
shall and will at all times, and from time to time keep and maintain all such
pit or pits, mine or mines, as he or they shall dig or cause to be dug fair
and in good order; and leave, or cause to be left in the same pit or pits, mine
and mines, good and sufficient pillars for the upholding and supporting of the
ground or field there, according as is used and accustomed in the lawful
working of such like coal mines: and also shall maintain and keep the
watergate or gates thereof in good and sufficient manner during all the said
term, and so at the expiration of the said term leave the same. And also that
at the end of the said term of 21 years hereby granted by the said C D his
executors and assigns, shall and will leave one pit ready sunk to the coal
unwrought. And also, that the said C D shall not at any time or times hereafter
bargain, sell, let, set or assign the premises hereby demised, or any parcel
thereof, or any other pit or pits, which the said C D at any time hereafter by
virtue of these presents shall dig or make, or cause to be dug or made, to
any person or persons other then to his wife, child, children, or next of
kindrend, unless it be by and with the special license consent or agreement of
the said A B his heirs or assigns in writing in that behalf first had and
obtained.

And the said A B does covenant, etc. That he the same C D his executors and
assigns, shall and may during the said term have such necessary and convenient
way-leave and stay-leave for the carrying and laying of such coals as shall be
dug, gotten drawn or wrought at or in any the pit or pits to be made,
dug, drawn or wrought within the grounds or lands aforesaid, as heretofore
has been used or accustomed for carriage or laying of coals there. He the said
C D his executors and assigns yiedling and paying therefore the accustomed
rents due or payable for the same.

And lastly, it is granted and agreed between the said parties to these
presents; and the said C D for him, his executors, administrators and assigns,
does covenant, promise, and grant to and with etc. That any person or persons
nominated by the said A B his heirs or assigns, shall and may from time to time
view the Coal-mines and manner of working thereof by these presents demised.
And also that neither the said C D his executors or assigns, or any of them,
shall grant or permit any water drift for conveying of water from any mines of
coal adjoining to be made in or through any of the mines by these presents
demised, or any part thereof, without the consent of the said A B his heirs or
assigns in writing first obtained.

Articles of agreement for passing a Particular, rated in Fee simple under the
Great Seal, to two Patentees, and from them to the purchaser.
WHereas the said R H has already delivered unto the said R T a Particular in
parchment already rated by the Commissioners of the Manor of R with the
appurtenances in the county of York, per Annum x l. to be passed from the
Queens Majesty by Letters patents under the great Seal of England (amongst
other things) in Fee simple, to such person or persons as patentee or patentees
in trust, their heirs and assigns for ever, as the said R T shall think fit;
and from the said patentee or patentees to F B of etc. his heirs and assigns
for ever. And whereas for the doing and finishing thereof the said F B by the
hands of the said R H has at the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
paid and delivered unto the said R T the sum of etc. in full satisfaction of
and for the clear and absolute purchase of the said Manor, and of and for all
charges for the same to be answered or paid in any wise, either to her Majesty
or any other, for the purchase of the same Manor (other then for the enrolling
of the conveyance or assurance to be made by the said patentee or patentees to
the said F B his heirs and assigns; and other then for the charges of the
procuring of the survey of the Woods growing upon the premises; both which are
to be done at the costs and charges of the said F, his heirs or assigns.

In consideration whereof, the said R T does covenant and grant for him, his
executors and administrators by these presents, to and with the said R H his
executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them in manner and form
following: That is to say, That he the said R T, his executors and assigns
shall and will at his and their own proper costs and charges, do his and their
best endeavors to procure the same Manor of R with the appurtenances to be
passed and granted from her Majesty, her heirs or successors (amongst other
things) in Fee simple, by Letters patents under the great Seal of England, to
the said patentee or patentees, their heirs and assigns for ever, before the
25 day of D next ensuing the date hereof. And the same premises so passed and
granted as aforesaid, shall and will cause and procure the said patentee or
patentees to convey and assure the said Manor of R with the appurtenances (by
deed acknowledged to be enrolled) under the said F B, his heirs and assigns
for ever, in such manner and form, and with and under such covenants and
warranties as in like cases is used and accustomed. And it is fully agreed by
and between the said parties, that if in case the said R T. his executors or
assigns cannot before the said 25 day of D next coming, procure the said Manor
with the appurtenances, to be passed and granted by Letters patents from her
Majesty, as aforesaid, That then he the said R T. his executors or assigns
shall and will within ten days next after the said 25 of D. well and truly
content and repay, or cause to be repayd unto the said F B. his executors or
assigns the said sum of 120 l. at or in etc. The said R T. his executors or
assigns then defaulking out of the said sum so to be repaid, the sum of 6 l.
etc. for such charges as the said R T. his executors or assigns shall disburse
or lay out, of, for or about the said Manor.

Articles of agreement indented, had, made, etc. between A. B. etc. of the one
party, and C. D. of the other party, for filing a book in Reversion granted by
her Majesty, as follows, viZ.
WHereas it has pleased the Queens most excellent Majesty of her gracious
favor to bestow upon the said A B a lease in Reversion without fine to his own
use, of so much of her Highness lands, tenements, etc. answerable in the Court
of Exchequer, as shall amount unto the clear yearly value of 80. l. or
thereabouts, as by a Warrant in that behalf made may appear; which said Warrant
and Lease in reversion, and all the benefit that thereof shall or may arise;
The said A B does by these presents, for the consideration hereafter expressed,
bargain and sell unto the said C D, his executors and assigns: and which said
Lease in reversion the said C D for him, his executors and assigns does
covenant and grant by these presents to fill and supply with lands, tenements
and hereditaments amounting to the value aforesaid, with as much convenient
speed as he can or may. And the said A B does by these presents for him, his
executors and assigns, covenant and grant to and with the said C D, his etc. in
form following; viz. That it may and shall be lawful to and for the said C D,
his executors and assigns, for and under the consideration hereafter mentioned,
to have, take and enjoy to his and their own proper use and behoof the said
Warrant and Lease in reversion, and all the benefit, profit and commodity which
shall arise, come, grow or be upon the same, or for, by means or in respect
thereof. And that he the said A B, his, etc. or some of them, shall and will
with all convenient expedition, after that the same value is so filled up and
engrossed in parchment, and ready to be signed, at his or their own costs and
charges procure her Majesty to sign the same; and the same Bill so signed
shall deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said C D, his executors or
assigns: which said Bil so signed and delivered to the said C D as aforesaid,
he the said C D, for him, his executors and administrators, does covenant and
grant at his or their own proper cost and charges, with as much convenient
speed as he or they can or may, to pass from her Majesty under the Signet,
privy Seal and great Seal. And further, the said A B does by these presents
covenant and promise, for him, his executors and administrators, to and with
the said C D, his executors and assigns, that if the said Lease in reversion
shall be granted from her Majesty in the name or names of them the said A B, E
F, or any of them, or of any other person or persons by his appointment, or to
or for his use; That then they the same patentee or patentees to whom the same
Letters patents shall be so granted, their executors or assigns, shall and will
(at the costs and charges in the Law of the said C D, his executors or
assigns) within ten days next after the said Lease in reversion shall be
passed under the great Seal of England as aforesaid) convey or cause to be
conveyed the said Lease in reversion, and all and every the several parcels of
lands, tenements and hereditaments thereby demised and granted, and all their
estate and interest in and to the same, unto the said C D, his Executors or
assigns, or to such other person or persons as he the said C D, his executors
or assigns shall nominate and appoint, in such sort, manner and form as in
like cases is used. In consideration whereof, the said C D does covenant,
promise and grant for himself, his etc. by these presents, To and with the said
A B, his etc. and every of them in manner and etc. That if the same premises
shall be passed and granted from her Majesty under the great Seal of England
for the term of twenty years, that then he the said C D, his etc. shall and
will pay or cause to be paid unto the said A B, his etc. so much lawful money
of England as the premises which shall be passed and granted from her Majesty
by Letters patents as aforesaid, shall amount unto, after the rate of eleven
years fine. And that if the same premises shall be passed as aforesaid, for
the term of thirty years, that then the said C D, his etc. shall pay or cause
to be paid unto the said A B, his etc. so much lawful money of England as the
same premises shall amount unto after the rate of thirteen years fine. And
that if etc. (reciting at length every rate and fine accordingly, paying for
every ten years increase two years fine.) And that all such sum and sums of
money as shall arise or be payable after the rate aforesaid, shall be paid at
or in etc. The one moity thereof within ten days next after the sealing of the
said Letters patents; and the other moity thereof within three months then next
following.

In witness, etc.
Articles of agreement for passing a Lease in Reversion.
FIrst, Whereas the said E F has already delivered unto the said C D a
Particular in parchment under the hand of I H Auditor of the County of C. of a
message or tenement called D, in the same County, parcel of the Manor of S.
and parcel of the possessions of the Bishopric of Ely, of the yearly rent of
4 l. of lawful money of England: The said C D for him, his executors and
administrators does covenant and grant to and with the said E F, his executors
and assigns by these presents, That the same C D shall and will do his best
endeavor, with as much convenient speed as he can or may, to procure and get
the same premises with their appurtenances to be passed and granted at the
rent aforesaid (amongst other things) in reversion from her Majesty by Letters
patents under the great Seal of England, for such term of years as her
Highness shall be pleased to grant.

In consideration whereof, the said E F for him, his executors and
administrators, does covenant and grant to and with the said C D, his executors
and assigns by these presents in manner and form following, viz. That if the
same premises shall be granted from her Majesty by Letters patents as
aforesaid, for the term of 21 years in reversion, That then he the said E F,
his etc. shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said C
D, his etc. so much lawful money of England as the premises aforesaid shall
amount unto after the rate of thirteen years fine; and if for thirty years,
then after the rate of fifteen years fine: and if for forty years, then after
the rate of seventeen years fine: and if for fifty years, then etc. (as before
ratable.) And that all such sum and sums of money as shall arise and grow due
after the rate aforesaid, shall be paid unto the said C D, his etc. at or in
etc. in manner and form following; that is to say, The one moity thereof within
ten days after the ensealing of the Letters patents aforesaid, and the other
moity thereof (together with the ordinary cost and charges for the passing of
the premises) within ten weeks then next following. Upon the payment of which
first moity, the said C D does covenant and grant for him, his executors and
administrators by these presents, to and with the said E F, his executors and
assigns and every of them, That the patentee or the patentees to whom the same
premises shall be so passed by Letters patents as aforesaid, shall and will
(at the costs and charges in the Law of the said E F, his executors or
assigns) convey and assure all and singular the same premises above
mentioned, and every parcel thereof with the appurtenances, unto the said E F,
his etc. or to such other person or persons as he or they shall nominate or
appoint, clearly discharged of all incombrances done by the said patentee, in
such manner and form, and with and under such covenants, clauses, and
agreements as in like cases is used; The said E F, his etc. then making and
giving unto the said C D, his etc. such good and sufficient security for the
payment of the other moitie of the said sum and sums of money, and costs and
charges aforesaid, as the said C D, his etc. shall then like of and accept.

In witness, etc.
Covenants to set up a grate of Iron to be placed about a Tomb.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted,
condescended and agreed between the said parties; and the said A B does
covenant etc. to and with the said C D etc. in manner and form following; that
is to say, That he the said A B his executors, administrators or assigns, at
his or their own proper costs and charges, shall and will make, set up, and
fully finish, in all manner of stuff and workmanship, one grate of iron to be
set and placed about the Monument or Tomb of the Right Honorable etc. deceased
and intombed in the side Isle of King Henry the VIIths Chapel of Westminster,
and that the same Grate shall contain in length etc. and in breadth five foot
and eight inches of assize, and in height the bars shall coutain etc. of
assize: and that the workmanship of the said Grate, shall be made, performed
and finished in all proportions and fashon like, and according to the grate
already placed in the said Isle about the Tomb of etc. differing nothing from
the same, but only to lack six vanes, and a garnishing of Perculesses and
Roses, which be about the same Grate. And that there shall be 34 bars in either
side of the said Grate so to be made, over and besides three main pillars, and
twenty bars at each end thereof, and the same bars to be of the same bigness as
the said bars of the other grate. And that the said Grate shall be made and set
up in the place aforesaid, and well, workman-like, and fully finished in all
things in manner and form aforesaid, according to the plain meaning of these
presents before the 14 day of etc. without fraud or covin.

In consideration whereof, the said C D has paid, and by these presents, for
himself, his executors and administrators, does covenant and grant to pay, or
cause to be paid unto the said A B, his executors, administrators or assigns,
the sum of 35 l. of etc. in manner and form following, that is to say. at the
ensealing hereof 15 l. of which said 15 l. etc. and on or before the said tenth
day of etc. upon the finishing of the said grate, to be made and set up as
aforesaid 20 l. etc. at the Tomb of the said Countess, etc. in full payment
and satisfaction of the said sum of 35 l.

In Witness etc.
Covenants to hew and make an Alablaster Tomb.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted,
promised, condescended, agreed, and fully concluded between the said parties,
for the one, to and with the other of them, their heirs, executors and
Administrators, and the heirs, etc. of every of them, in manner and form
following; that is to say, that the said A B shall before the Feast of etc.
well and truly; workman-like, and surely, to the best of his power, cunning and
knowledge, in good and Artificial order, cunning and knowledge, hew, cut, work,
carve, make up and finish, of Alablaster, Sussex Marble, Kentish stone and
Touch one Tomb or Sepulcher, according to the length, breadth, and fashion of a
Pattern drawn by the small foot, brought and shown by the said A B subscribed
with the hand of the said C D, and to the counterpaine of this same Indenture
(remaining with the said A B.) annexed, in all points as comely and cunningly,
and with as much work as the same pattern does purport and signify. And the
same Tomb so made and finished as aforesaid, the same A B shall cause to be
safely carried and conveyed to the Church of B in the County of S. at the costs
and charges of the said C D, and there before the Feast etc, set up, place, and
fully finish the same.

In consideration of the doing, whereof the said C D his executors,
administrators or assigns, shall well and truly content and pay, or cause to be
contented or paid unto the said A B, his executors, administrators or Assigns
the full sum of etc. in manner and form following, that is to say, before the
ensealing hereof 20 l. whereof etc. and thereof, etc. and on the tenth day of
etc. 10 l etc. at or within etc and at and upon the setting up and finishing of
the said Tomb, before the said Feast etc. other 20 l. in full satisfaction and
payment of the said sum of 50 l of etc. without fraud or covin.

In witness, etc.
A Lease of a Ferry.
THis INDENTVRE made etc. Between, etc. Witnesses, That the said I L for and
in consideration of etc. has demised, granted, and to Farm letten, and by
these presents does etc. unto the said I H his executors or assigns the moyty
of the passage, ferry, standage and battalage of P in the county of etc.
together with all easements and commodities thereunto belonging, in as large
and ample manner and form as T H or his assigns has heretofore had or enjoyed
the same, or might, or ought to have had and enjoyed the same: To have and to
hold the said moyty of the said passage and Ferry, and all other the premises
by these presents mentioned to be demised, and every parcel thereof with the
appurtenances unto him the said I H, his executors, administrators and assigns,
from the Feast of etc. unto the end and term of etc. Yiedling and paying etc.
(with a clause to make the Lease void for non payment of the rent.) And the
said I H does covenant etc. that he the said I H, his executors, administrators
or assigns, at his and their own proper costs and charges, shall from time to
time during the said term, maintain and keep boat or boats, and all other
things meet and convenient for the moity of the aforesaid passage, and other
the premises, as has been heretofore commonly accustomed, and thereof shall
from time to time during the said term, acquit, discharge, or sufficiently save
harmless the said I L, his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns. And
that he the said I H his executors or assigns shall from time to time during
the said term carry over, or cause to be carried over the Ferry-place
aforesaid, from P to F, the said I L and his wife, and their heirs, servants,
children, horses and stuff, when and so often as the said I L, his wife, and
their heirs, children, or any other of his family shall require to have
themselves, their servants, horses or stuff to be carried over the said Ferry
from P to E aforesaid, without demanding, taking or asking any thing therefore
of the said I L, his heirs, children or family.

And the said I L does covenant etc. That he the said I L his heirs, executors,
administrators or Assigns shall at all times hereafter and from time to time
during the said term, Discharged of quit-rent.
acquit and discharge, or sufficiently save and keep harmless, as well the
said moyty of the said passage or ferry, and all and singular the before letten
premises, and every part thereof, as also the said I H his executors and
assigns, of, for and from all and all manner of quitrents whatsoever, which in
respect of the said demised premises during the said term shall grow due or
payable to our said sovereign Lady, the Queens Majesty, her Heirs, Successors
or Assigns, or to any other person or persons whatsoever, excepting the said
yearly rent of 3 l. before by these presents reserved. And that he the said I L
and his heirs, the said moyty of the said passage and ferry, and all other the
before letten premises with the appurtenanees unto the said I H his executors,
administrators and assigns for the rent above rehearsed to be paid in manner
and form abovesaid, shall warrant and defend during all the said term of xxxi
years.

In witness, etc.
A Deafeazance of an obligation forfeited.
THis INDENTVRE made etc. between T I etc. of the one part, and R N etc. and
Sir George Farmer etc. Witnesses, That whereas the said R N and G F by their
obligation bearing date etc. did become bound unto the said T I in the sum of
one hundred Marks etc. with condition thereupon indorsed, that if the said R N
and G F or one of them, their executors, administrators or assigns, or any of
them did well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said T I, his
executors, administrators or assigns, at or in etc. the sum of xxxvi l. etc.
on the 20 day of etc. next ensuing the date of the same obligation, that then
etc. as by the same obligation and condition appears; which said sum of xxxvi
l. nor any parcel thereof was paid at the day and place of payment aforesaid.
By reason whereof the said recited Obligation is forfeited to the said T I. And
whereas also the said R N has (the day of the date hereof) paid unto the said
T I the sum of 6 l. etc. in part of payment of the said sum of 36. l. whereupon
the said T I is contented and pleased, and does by these presents covenant,
promise and grant for himself, his heirs, executors and admistrators, and every
of them to and with the said R N and G F, and either of them, their, and either
of their heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, and to and with every of
them, that if they the said R N and G F, or either of them, or the heirs etc.
of them or either of them, do well and truly content and pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said T I his etc. the full sum of 20 l. etc. on the etc. next
ensuing the date hereof, at the place of payment aforesaid, that then the said
recited obligation, etc.

In witness, etc.
A Defeazance of a Statute and Obligation.
THis INDENTVRE made etc. Witnesses, That whereas the said A B by one
Recognizance in the nature of a statute staple taken and acknowledged before
etc. bearing date etc. stands bounden unto the said C D in the sum of M l. of
etc. payable, as by the same Recognizance more at large appears. And whereas
also the said A B by his single obligation or deed obligatory, bearing date,
etc. with condition thereupon indorsed, for the true payment of 500 l on the
etc. at or in etc. as by the same obligation and condition appears. It is
nevertheless covenanted, granted, concluded, condescended and fully agreed, by
and between the said parties to these presents, and the said C D does covenant,
promise, and grant for himself, his heirs etc. to and with the said A B, his
heirs etc. and every of them, That if he the said A B his heirs etc. do well and
truly satisfy, content and pay, or cause to be etc. unto the said C D his
executors, etc. the full sum of 500 l. of etc. on the etc. at or in etc. That
then as well the said recited Recognizance of 1000 l. as also the said recited
obligation of 500 l. and either of them shall be utterly void, frustrate, and
of ^one effect, or else etc.

In witness, etc.
Assignment of a Judgment upon an Attachment in the Mayors Court.
TO all Christian people, etc. A B of etc. greeting, Whereas I the said A B in
the Queens Majesty's Court, commonly called the Lord Mayors Court of London,
have attached in the hands of C D the sum of xx l. of etc. as money by him due
and owing unto E F Citizen etc. And furthermore, whereas I the said A B have
judgment in the said Court, to recover against the said C D, the said xx l in
his hands as aforesaid attached, as by the Record of the same Court being
recorded in the time of S T then Lord Mayor of the City of London, more at
large it does and may appear. Now know ye, that I the said A B for diverse good
causes and considerations me hereunto moving, have granted, assigned and set
over, and by these presents do fully, freely, and absolutely grant, assign,
and set over unto W C of etc. his executors, administrators and assigns, to the
only proper use and behoof of the same W C, his executors, administrators and
assigns, as well the said sum of xx l of etc. before mentioned, and the said
Judgment thereupon had, as aforesaid, as also all such benefit, profit,
commodity, advantage, and demand whatsoever, which I the said A B my executors,
administrators or assigns may or can have or claim, of, in or to the same
premises, or any part thereof, by force and virtue of the said Attachment and
Judgment thereupon had, or any of them.

And I the said A B do covenant, promise and grant for my self, my heirs,
executors and administrators by these presents, to and with the said W C, Not
to release the same.
his heirs etc. and every of them, in manner and form following; viz. That I
the said A B or my assigns, have not released nor discharged, nor that I my
heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, nor any of us, at any time or
times hereafter, shall release, acquit or discharge the said Attachment, sum of
money or judgment thereupon had or made, or benefit, profit or commodity
thereupon had or obtained, or any Suit thereupon commenced or to be commenced,
except it be by and with the special assent, consent and agreement of the said
W C, his executors, administrators or assigns, in writing first had and
obtained in that behalf, under his or their hands and seals.

And that I the said A B my etc. shall at all times hereafter, do such further
reasonable acts and things, for the granting, Further assurance.
assigning and assuring of the premises, as by the said W C his executors or
assigns at their proper costs and charges shall be advised or required; and
that all sums of money which shall be obtained by reason of the premises,
shall be to the only proper use and behoof of the said W C his executors and
assigns.

And for the more sure performance of the Covenants, grants, articl^^ and
agreements before herein mentioned, A Bond to perform the Covenants.
I the said A B do surely bind my self, my heirs, etc. by these presents unto
the said W C in the sum of c. l. of etc. to be paid to the said W C. his
executors, administrators and assigns.

In witness etc.
An Assignment of a Statute, with a Letter of Attorney.
TO all Christian people, etc. H B of etc. greeting, Whereas R I of etc. by his
Recognizance in the nature of a Statute Staple bearing date the etc. taken and
acknowledged before etc. is and stands bounden unto me the said H B in the
sum of 200 l of etc. with a certain pair of Indentures of Defeazance thereupon
made, bearing date the etc. for payment of 100 l of etc. on the etc. at or
within etc. as by the same recited Recognizance and Indenture of Defeazance
more at large appears. Now know, that I the said H B, for diverse good causes
and considerations me in this behalf especially moving, have assigned and set
over, and by these presents do assign and set over unto W G of etc. his
executors, administrators and assigns, as well the said recited Recognizance or
Statute and Indenture of Defeazance thereupon made, and all and every sum and
sums of money in them or either of them contained; as also all and every
benefit, profit, commodity and advantage whatsoever thereupon and thereby to be
recovered, obtained, gotten, perceived or had.

And further, I the said H B do by these presents make, ordain, constitute,
substitute and appoint the said W G to be my true and lawful Deputy and
Attorney irrevocable for me, and in my name, nevertheless to the only proper
use and behoof of my said Attorney, his executors, administrators, and assigns,
to take, levy, recover, sue for, receive and demand of the said R I his etc. or
some or one of them, at the day and place aforementioned for payment thereof,
the said sum of 100 l. in the said Indenture of Defeazance mentioned, and for
non payment thereof, the said sum of 200 l, being the penalty of the said
recited Statute or Recognizance. Giving, and by these presents granting unto my
said Attorney by the tenor hereof my full and whole power, right, To prosecute
Actions.
strength, and lawful authority in execution of the premises the said R I his,
etc. and such of them as shall fail and make default of payment of the said
sum of 100 l. at the day and place aforesaid, to arrest, sue, implead,
imprison, and out of prison to deliver, and to sue for the execution and
executions, extent and extents of and upon the said recited statute and pleas,
and prosecutions for me and in my name to sustain and maintain in whatsoever
Court or Courts, and before whatsoever Judge or Justices the matter shall be
brought, as precisely as the Law will it permit or suffer, and upon receipt or
recovery thereof, acquittances, or other sufficient discharges on that behalf
for me and in my name to make, seal and deliver, and one Attorney or more
under him to constitute, substitute, and at his pleasure to revoke. And
finally, to do, affirm, conclude and finish all and whatsoever my said
Attorney, or his Deputy or Deputies shall think meet to be done in or about the
premises by these presents, as fully and largely as I my self might do if I
were then and there personally present, without any account to me or any other
to my use to be made, or any allowance to be given: and I shall and will
ratify, confirm and allow all and whatsoever ever my said Attorney or his
sufficient Deputy or deputies, shall do or cause to be done in or about the
premises by these presents.

And I the said H B, for me, my heirs, etc. and every of us, do covenant,
promise, and grant by these presents to and with the said W G, For avowing
Actions.
his etc. in manner and form following; viz. That I the said H B my heirs etc.
and every of us shall and will from time to time at the proper costs and
charges of the said W G, his, etc. avow, justify and maintain all and every
such lawful Action and Actions, Suits, Plaints, Pleas, Processes, Judgments,
Extents and Executions, as he the said W G his etc. shall attempt, commence,
bring, prosecute or sue forth in the name or names of us, or any of us, of,
for, upon or by reason of the aforesaid Statute or Indenture of Defeazance, or
any sum or sumes of moin them or either of them contained, without being
nonsuit or otherwise discontinuing, delaying or hindering the same or any of
them, except it be by and with the special license, assent, consent and
agreement of the said W G, his executors, administrators or assigns in writing
in that behalf under his or their, or some or one of their hand and seal, or
hands and seals first had and obtained.

And that I the said H B have not done, nor wittingly or willingly suffered,
nor that I, Not to release or revoke.
my heirs, etc. nor any of us shall do, procure, or consent to be done any
manner of act or thing whatsoever, whereby, or by reason whereof the said
Recognizance or Statute, or any sum or sums of money therein, or in the said
Indenture of Defeazance contained, or any Suit, Judgment, Execution or Extent
thereupon to be commenced, sued forth or had, shall, or may be in any wise
discontinued, delayed, barred, defeated, discharged, released or hindered, nor
shall or will at any time or times hereafter revoke, recall, dis-annull, repeal,
countermand or make void this present Letter of Attorney, or any Power, License
or Authority, herein or hereby given or granted, except it be by and with the
like assent and agreement, as is aforesaid. And that all and every such sum and
sums of money as shall be recovered, obtained or gotten by reason of the
executing of these presents, shall be to the only use and behoof of the same W
B his executors and assigns.

And further, that I the said H B, my executors and administrators shall and
will upon the reasonable request, To make further assurance or Letter of
Attorney.
and at the like costs and charges of the said W G his executors or assigns,
make, seal and deliver unto him, them, or some or one of them, all such
further, lawful and reasonable Letters of Attorney, and Indenture of Assignment
for the assigning or setting over of the Land to be delivered upon extent, if
any be, touching the premises, as by the said W C his executors or assigns
shall be reasonably demised. So that in the said Letters of Attorney and
Indenture of Assignment, or either or any of them, there be not contained any
other or further warranty or warranties then only against me the said H B and
my heirs, nor any covenant for discharge of encumbrances other then for any act
done by me.

And also that he the said W G his etc. or some of them do from time to time,
pay, bear and discharge all such costs and charges as shall grow or be To
discharge the Assignor from costs of non-suits and mispleading.
for or by reason of the executing of these presents. And also do and shall
clearly acquit and discharge, or sufficiently save and keep harmless me the
said H B my heirs etc. goods, chattels, lands, tenements, possessions and
hereditaments, and every of them, off and from all such costs, losses and
damages, and other Detriments as shall or may at any time hereafter happen,
arise or grow by reason of any Nonsuit, discontinuance, mispleading or
misprision of any Process, Action or Execution to be commenced or sued forth by
virtue hereof, or any power or authority hereby given or granted, willingly,
wittingly, or negligently to be suffered, committed or done by the said W G his
etc. or by his or their Attorney, Counselor or Solicitor, or any of them.

In witness, etc.
A Lease of Tithes.
THis INDENTURE made etc. between A B and C D etc. for diverse good causes and
considerations, him in this behalf specially moving, Has demised, granted, and
to farm letten, and by these presents does etc. unto the said C D. all those
Tithes of corn, grain, and hay, yearly and from time to time growing, coming or
renewing within the Towns, fields, parishes or hamblets of F and E in the
County of G, parcel of the Rectory of F in the same County, and all profits and
commodities whatsoever to the said Tithes belonging or appertaining, or with
them or any of them usually occupied, reputed or enjoyed; and also all that
close of sand and pasture with the appurtenances at S, and one barn thereupon
builded, called the tithe lathe, with their rights and appurtenances, and also
all and singular houses, edifices and buildings, barns, stables, dove-houses,
yards, orchards, gardens, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures,
profits, commodities, advantages, emoluments and hereditaments whatsoever to
the said tithes, and other the premises by these presents demised, or to any of
them belonging, or appertaining, or with the same usually demised, let,
occupied or enjoyed. To have and to hold the said tithes of corn, grain and
hay, close, barn, and all and singular other the premises hereby demised and
granted, and every parcel thereof with the appurtenances, unto the said C D his
executors and assigns from the Feast of M last past before the date hereof,
unto the end and term of 21 years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended. Yiedling and paying therefore yearly during the said term,
unto the said A B his heirs and assigns the sum of C l of etc. at two Feasts or
Terms in the year most usual; viz. at the Feasts of L. and M. or within 40
days next after any of the same Feasts by even and equal portions, at or in
the now, etc.

And the said C D does covenant, promise, and grant for himself, his etc. by
these presents, to and with the said A B his heirs, To distreine. Nomine poenae.
etc. and every of them, that if it happen at any time hereafter the said
yearly rent of 100 l. to be behind unpaid in part or in all by the said space
or 40 days next over or after either of the said Feasts at or in the which the
same ought to be paid as aforesaid, being lawfully demanded at the place of
payment aforesaid, That then, and for every six days after the said 40 days,
that the same yearly rent of C l. or any part thereof shall be so behind
unpaid, he the said C D his executors, administrators or assigns, shall and
will forfeit, lose and pay unto the said A B his heirs or assigns 20 s of etc.
(nomine poenae) for every such default. And also that then it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said A B his heirs and assigns, or any of them, into all
and singular the premises by these presents demised, and into every or any part
and parcel thereof, to enter and distreine, as well for the said yearly rent of
C l. or so much thereof as shall be behind unpaid, contrary to the true meaning
of these presents, as for the said 20 s. so to be forfeited (nomine poenae) as
aforesaid, and the arrerages of the same, if any be, and the distress and
distresses then or there so taken, to lead, drive, bear, take and carry away,
and with him or them to detain and keep until the said yearly rent of C l, or
so much thereof as shall be behind unpaid, and the said xx s so to be forfeited
for every six days (nomine poenae) as aforesaid, and all arrerages thereof be
unto the said A B his heirs or assigns, fully satisfied and paid.

And the said C D for himself his, etc. and every of them does covenant,
promise and grant by these presents to and with the said A B his heirs etc. and
every of them. For Reparations and fencing.
That he the said C D his, etc. and every of them, shall and will at their own
proper costs and charges, during the said term of 21 years, when and as often
as need shall require, well and sufficiently keep in repair, uphold, maintain
and amend the said Barn called the Tithe-Lathe, and all other houses, edifices,
and buildings before demised, and every part and parcel thereof with the
appurtenances, in, with and by all and all manner of needful and necessary
reparations in as good sort, maintenance and repair, as they and every of them
be at the date hereof; and the hedges, ditches, fences and enclosures of, and
belonging to the premises well and sufficiently hedge, fence, ditch, scowre,
cleanse and make from time to time when and as often as need shall require. And
the same premises so being well and sufficiently repaired, upholden,
maintained, kept, hedged, fenced, ditched, scowred, cleansed, and made, in the
end, or other determination of this present Lease, shall and will leave and
yield up unto the said A B his heirs or assigns.

And the said A B for himself his heirs etc. covenanteth, promises and
grants by these presents to and with the the said C D his etc. and every of
them, that he the said C D his, For quiet enjoying.
etc. and every of them paying the said yearly rent of C l in manner and form
aforesaid, and performing the covenants, grants, articles, clauses and
agreements, by and in these presents reserved on his and their parts and
behalfs to be done, performed and kept, shall or may from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, according to the true meaning of these presents, peaceably
and quietly have, hold, use occupy, possess and enjoy the said tithes of corn
and hay, tithe barn, close, and all and singular other the premises hereby
demised and granted, and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances,
without the lawful let, trouble, interruption or disturbance of him the said A
B, his heirs or assigns, or of any other person or persons whatsoever by his,
their, or any of their means consent or procurement.

And also, that he the said A B his heirs and assigns, or some of them shall
and will from time to time, For discharging Quit-rents.
and at all times during the said term of 21 years hereby granted, pay, bear
and discharge all and all manner of Fee-farm rents, and quit rents due or
payable, or to be due and payable to our said Sovereign Lady Eliz. the Q.
Majesty, her heirs etc. for or in respect of the premises. And also all and
all manner of duties and payments which during the said term shall grow due or
be payable to the Parson, Curate or Vicar there, for or in respect of his
serving of the same Cure there, and wherewith or whereby the said premises by
these presents demised, or any part or parcel thereof, or the said C D, his
etc. in respect thereof shall or may in any wise be charged or chargeable at
any time hereafter during the said term of three years by these presents
granted. The said yearly rent of C li. hereby reserved for the premises only
except and foreprised.

In witness, etc.
A Lease of a Message, with an increase of rent paid quarterly, in the name of
a fine or income.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Witnesses, That the said H H, as well for and in
consideration of the sum of three hundred l. of etc. in the name of a Fine or
Income, to be paid unto him the said H H, his executors, administrators or
assigns, by the said P L his executors, administrators or assigns, at or
within the etc. in manner and form hereafter in these presents particularly
expressed and set down: as also for diverse other good causes and
considerations him the said H H in this behalf especially moving, Has demised,
granted, and to farm letten, and by these presents does etc. unto the said P L,
all that his message or tenement, late in the tenure, farm and occupation of
him the said H H; and before that, in the tenure or occupation of P C, to him
the said P sometime demised or letten by R N, set, lying, and being in Chancery
lane in the parish of etc. And also all cellars, sollers, yards, back-sides,
ways, entries and easments whatsoever, with the appurtenances unto the said
message or tenement belonging or used, demised or occupied as part or parcel
of the same, or reputed or taken as part or member thereof: which said message
or tenement before demised, the said H H has and holds for diverse years yet
enduring, exceeding the term of one and twenty years herein and hereby granted,
by force and virtue of an Indenture of Lease dated the second of M. in the
fortieth year of etc. made and granted by Miles Dodding Esquire to him the said
H H. To have and to hold all the said message or tenement, and all and
singular other the premises with the appurtenances herein before demised and
granted unto the said P L, his etc. from the feast of etc. next coming after
the date hereof, unto the end and term of one and twenty years from thence
next ensuing, fully to be complete and ended: Yielding and paying therefore
yearly during the said term, unto the said H H his, etc. the yearly sum of four
pound of etc. at four usual feasts or terms in the year. viz. at the Feast of
B. Saint M. L. and T. by even and equal portions.

And if it happen the said yearly rent of four li. to be behind or unpaid in
part or in all, by the space of twelve days next after any of the said usual
Feasts in which it ought to be paid as aforesaid, To forfeit for nonpayment of
rent.
said, being lawfully demanded, That then and from thenceforth this present
Demise, Lease and Grant of the premises, and all and every covenant, grant,
article and agreement herein contained on the part and behalf of the said H H,
his etc. or any of them, to be performed or done, shall cease, determine, and
be utterly void, frustrate and of none effect. This Indenture, or any thing
herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And the said P L does covenant, promise and grant for himself, his etc. by
these presents, For reparations.
to and with the said H H, his etc. and every of them, in manner and form
following, viz. that he the said P L, his etc. shall and will at all times
hereafter, and from time to time, at his and their own proper costs and
charges, well and sufficiently repair, support, sustain and maintain the said
message or tenement, and all other the afore-letten premises, in, with and by
all and all manner of necessary reparations, when and as often as need shall
be, during the said Term; And also all and every the pavements, sieges and
widraughts of or belonging to the same premises, shall at his and their like
costs and charges well and sufficently pave, make and amend, purge, cleanse,
scour and make clean, when and as often as need shall be, during the said term
by these presents granted, and the same premises so well and sufficiently
repaired, supported, paved, scoured, cleansed, sustained and maintained in the
end, or other determination of this present Lease, shall and will leave and
yield up unto the said H H, his etc.

And further, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said M D and H H
or either of them, For viewing reparations.
or the heirs, etc. of them or either of them, twice every year during the
continuance of this present Lease, to come and enter into the said demised
premises, and into every or any part or parcel thereof with two or three
others, to view and search what reparations shall be needful there to be done;
and if any default or lack of reparations shall there happen to be found, That
then and so often he the said P L his etc. at his and their own proper costs
and charges within two months next after notice and warning thereof given,
shall well and sufficiently repair, amend and make the same from time to time,
during the said term of one and twenty years, and that in and by all things,
when and as often as any such lack or default of reparations shall be so found.

And further, the said P L does etc. That he the said P L, For payment of a
Fine or income quarterly.
his etc. or some of them, shall well and truly content and pay, or cause to be
contented or paid unto the said H H, his etc. or some of them, the said sum of
three hundred li. of etc. being the Fine or Income of the premises, in manner
and form following; viz. in or upon the Feast day of N. next coming after the
date hereof, or within twelve days next after the same Feast day, at or within
etc. the sum of 130 li. of etc. On the Feast day of S. then next ensuing, or
within twelve days next after the same Feast day, at the place of payment
aforesaid, other 130 li. etc. And and so afterward at every of the said Feasts
of the N. S. the B. and T. which shall happen during the said term of 21 years,
or within 12 days next after every of the same Feasts, the sum of 125 li. of
good etc. at the place of payment aforesaid, for and in full discharge,
satisfaction and payment of the said sum of 300 li. of good etc. of and for the
said Fine or Income to be paid as aforesaid.

And moreover, that neither he the said P L, Not to grant any estate without
the license of the donor.
his executors, etc. nor any of them, nor any other person or persons claiming
any thing in or to the demised premises, or any part thereof, by, from or
under the said P L. shall at any time or times hereafter during the natural
lives of the said H, and A his Wife, and the life of the longest liver of them,
grant, alien, assign or set over his or their said interest or term hereby
granted, or any part thereof, of or in the said demised premises, or any part
or parcel thereof, to any person or persons that shall use the Trade or
occupation of a S. or any noisome Trade, except it be by and with the consent
and agreement of the said H, his executors etc. in writing under his or their
hands and seals in that behalf first had and obtained.

And further, the said P L does etc. To deliver implements of household.
That he the said P L, his executors, administrators or assigns, or some of
them, shall at the end or other sooner determination of the said term of one
and twenty years, leave, yield up and deliver, or cause to be left and
delivered to the said H, his heirs or administrators, all such implements of
household stuff, wainscot and other things as are mentioned and expressed in a
schedule indented, to these presents annexed, in as good case as the same now
are and be, reasonable wearing thereof only excepted.

Provided always, That if it shall happen at any time hereafter during the
said term of 21 years herein before granted, Re-entry for nonpayment of a fine
or income quarerly.
any of the said quarterly payments of 4 li. or any of them, or any part or
parcel of them, or any of them to be behind and unpaid by the several times and
spaces above limited to be paid after every or any of the said Feasts, contrary
to the form aforesaid, and contrary to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, being demanded at the place of payment before limited and appointed
for payment thereof. That then and at all times after every or any such default
of payment, so made of the said quarterly payment of iiii l. it shall and may
be lawful to and for the said H. his executors, administrators and assigns, or
any of them, into the said Demised premises, and every parcel thereof with the
appurtenances, to re-enter, and the same to have again, enjoy and repossede, as
in his or their first and former estate; this Indenture, or any thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

A Lease of a manor.
THis INDENTURE etc. Witnesses, That the said E R. for and in consideration of
the sum of C l. of etc. to him in hand, at and before the ensealing and
delivery of these presents by T C well and truly contented and paid, whereof
and wherewith the said E acknowledges himself fully satisfied and paid, and by
and at the request of the said T C, has demised, granted, betaken, and to farm
letten, and by these presents does etc. unto F I and C D the Site of the House
of etc. And also all etc. (Reciting the parcels of Land) together with all
houses, edifices, buildings, barns, stables, dove-houses, yards, orchards,
curtilages, gardens, land, ground and hereditaments lying and being within the
site and precinct of the said house etc. (recite the parcels of land.) And also
all commons of pasture, commodities, profits and emoluments to the site of the
said house etc. and to all the said premises or any of them in any wise
appendant, belonging or appertaining, or had, used or occupied to or with the
same, or any of them, or as belonging or appertaining to them or any of them;
And also all other the messuages, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures
commons and hereditaments whatsoever, set, lying, and being in H.E. and H, and
every or any of them, in the said County of Middlesex, of or in which the said
E R has or had any estate of inheritance, either by the common Law, as
Freehold, or Coppy-hold; or by the custom of any Manor or Manors: And the
Reversion and Reversions whatsoever of all and singular the said site,
messuages, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and other the premises herein
before mentioned to be demised and granted, and of every part and parcel
thereof with the appurtenances: And also all and singular rents and yearly
profits whatsoever, reserved upon any demise, lease or grant heretofore made or
granted of the premises, or of any part or parcel thereof. Except and always
reserved unto the said E R free liberty to sell, fell and carry away all great
Trees, Woods and Underwoods, growing or being of, in or upon the premises, or
any part or parcel thereof. To Have and to hold the said site of the etc.
house, the said mese or tenement called etc. and all and every the other
messuages, lands, tenements, lanes, meadows, feedings, pastures, commons and
hereditaments, and all and singular the other premises herein before mentioned
to be demised and granted, and every part and parcel thereof with the
appurtenances (except before excepted) unto the said F I and C D their
executors, administrators and assigns, from the Feast of etc. last past before
the date hereof, unto the end and term of 21 years from etc. and fully etc.
Yiedling etc.

And if it shall happen the said yearly rent of 20 l. or any part or parcel
thereof to be behind and unpaid in part or in all by the said space of 28 days
next after either of the said Feasts in which it ought to be paid as aforesaid,
being lawfully demanded, To distreine.
that then it shall be lawful to and for the said E R his heirs and assigns
into all and singular the said premises, with the appurtenances, and every part
and parcel thereof to enter and distreine; and the distress or distresses so
taken, to bear, lead, drive, carry away and impound, and in pound to detain and
keep the same until that all the arerages of the said rents and yearly payments
or any of them be fully satisfied, contented and paid, any thing in these
presents contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And the said E R does covenant etc. in manner and form following; viz. That it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said F I and C D, To take house-boot and
fire-boot.
their executors, administrators, tenants and assigns and every of them, to
have and take, in and upon the premises growing, competent and sufficient
house-boot, hedg-boot, fire-boot, plough-boot and cart-boot to be spent and
occupied in and upon the premises and not elsewhere, during the said term of
21 years by these presents granted.

And the said F I and C D do covenant, etc. That they the said F and C their
heirs or assigns, For discharging Rents and Fee-Farmes.
or some of them, shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time to time,
discharge or save and keep harmless the said E R his heirs etc. and every of
them against all and every person and persons whatsoever of and for all rents
and fee-farms, wherewith the premises are or may be charged, so long as they
the said F I and C D, their etc. shall or may enjoy the premsses by virtue of
this present Lease, without any manner lawful let, trouble, interruption or
disturbance of him the said E R, or his heirs or assigns, or of any other
person or persons by his assent, means, consent, interest or procurement.
Blunden.


A Lease of Land.
THis INDENTURE, etc. Witnesses, That the said W C for diverse good causes and
considerations him in this behalf especially moving, has demised, granted, and
to Farm letten, and by these presents does etc. unto the said R T. all those
several parcels of Land, Meadow, pasture and wood-ground hereafter expressed,
being parcel of the Demesnes of the Manor of R in the Parish of H, in the
County of M, as the same are now enclosed and divided: that is to say, one
close etc. (reciting all them by their several names) one other close, field,
or parcel of ground called P. All which said premises herein before mentioned
to be demised and granted contain together by estimation 100 Acres, viz. lx
Acres of plain ground, Land, Meadow and Pasture, and xxx Acres of Wood-ground;
and also all woods and underwoods whatsoever, growing, or being of, in, or upon
the premises, or of, in or upon any part or parcel thereof; and also, all
gates, ways, passages, commons, profits, commodities, emoluments and
appurtenances whatsoever to the demised premises, or to any part or parcel
thereof belonging or appertaining, or with the same premises as part and
parcel thereof belonging or appertaining, used, occupied, reputed or enjoyed.
To have and to hold the said several parcels of ground, land, meadow, pasture
and wood, and all and singular other the premises hereby demised and granted,
or meant, mentioned, or intended to be demised and granted, and every of them,
and every part and parcel thereof, with their, and every of their
appurtenances, unto the said R T his etc. from the Feast of etc. unto the end
and term, and for and during the whole term of one and twenty years from
thence, etc. Yiedling and etc. with a clause of re-entry for non-payment of
rent.

And the said R T does covenant etc. in manner and form following; viz. That he
the said R T etc. his etc. or some of them, For erecting a house.
at his or their own proper costs and charges, shall and will within the space
of five years next ensuing the date hereof, erect, build and set up, or cause
etc. in or upon some part or parcel of the demised premises, a convenient
dwelling house, and other houses of Office, and in and about the same building
shall bestow the full sum of 200 l. of lawful etc. at the least; and the fame
so builded, during the said term, in and by all things needful, shall and will
repair, maintain, and in good reparations keep.

And the said A. does covenant etc. That he the said A. his executors, etc.
shall within seven years next ensuing after the commencement of this present
Lease, For erecting a tenement with three stories.
at his or their own proper costs and charges, make, frame, erect, set up and
fully finish, in or upon the ground or place where the said message or
tenement before mentioned to be demised does now stand, one strong,
substantial, and workmanlike frame, fit, convenient, and sufficient for one
dwelling house or more, of three stories and an half at least in height above
the ground, of good, strong, substantial and well seasoned Oken Timber, every
story to be of sufficient and convenient height one above another, and the
forepart of the same frame to be well and workmanlike wrought, plained, carved
and juttied over, with a convenient and sufficient number of chimnies of brick,
bay-windows, cleer-stories, vaults, privies, doors, stairs, partitions, cellar
or cellars, and whatsoever else is or shall be necessary for such a dwelling
house or houses. The same frame to extend and contain in length and breadth at
the ground so far at the least as the said message or tenement aforementioned
to be demised does now extend and contain every way.

And the said A does for himself, his executors etc. covenant etc. To and with
etc. That it shall and may be lawful ^o and for the said Wardens and
Comminaltie, For viewing of reparations.
their Successors, Renter-certain, Attorney and Assigns, and every or any of
them, with such artificers, workmen and other persons as they or any of them
shall name or appoint, twice in every year yearly during the said term, at
their liberty and pleasure to enter and come into the said demised premises,
and into every or any part or parcel thereof, there to view, search and see
what defaults or lacks of or in reparations shall be found, and needful or
necessary to be repaired or amended in or upon the demised premises or any part
thereof, and to give monition and warning unto the said A, his etc. or to the
occupier or occupiers of the same premises for the time being, to repair and
amend the same. All and singular which defaults and lacks of reparations so
from time to time to be found, the said A for him, his etc. and for every of
them, covenanteth and grants by these presents well and sufficiently to
repair and amend from time to time within three months next ensuing every such
warning given, without fraud or further delay.

An assignment of a lease, and bond to perform the covenants of the same lease.
THis INDENTURE made etc. witnesses, That whereas our said Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth the Queens Majesty that now is by her Highness Letters Patents
under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at etc. did deliver, grant, and
to farm let unto her well beloved servant A T. Landresse for her Highness
body, and Wife of her Highness servant H T, for certain several terms of
years, and for several yearly rents in the said Letters patents mentioned and
expressed (amongst other things) All those Water and Wind-mils with their
appurtenances, and the toll of the same, situate, lying, growing, coming or
renewing within the Lordship of K. in the County of etc. and all the Toll of
the Markets and Faires within the Town of K. aforesaid and the rents, issues
and profits yearly from time to time coming, growing and arising of the Tolls
aforesaid, with all appurtenances. And all that House in K. aforesaid called S
etc. (as in the Letters Patents) and also all and singular houses, edifices,
buildings, barnes, stables, dove-houses, orchards, gardens, demesne Lands,
Lands, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Commons, Wastes, Heathe, Furze, Waters,
Watercourse, Streams, Banks, Pooles, Fish Ponds, Tolls, Customs,
Suitesocken, and mulctures of Tenants, Fishing-places, Fishings, Profits,
Commodities, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever to the said premises, or
to any of them any way belonging or appertaining; or with the same or any of
them theretofore usually for or under the several yearly rents by the said
first mentioned Letters Patents for the same reserved, demised, set, used or
enjoyed with all their appurtenances; Except as in and by the said recited
Letters Patents to the said A T made, and granted as aforesaid, are or have
been excepted. And whereas also the said H T and A his said wife by their
Indenture of Lease, bearing date, etc. for the considerations in the same
Indenture expressed, have for certain several Terms, and for diverse several
yearly rents, in the same reserved, mentioned and expressed, demised, granted,
and to Farm letten, unto the said I F. the said Water and Wind-mills, with the
appurtenances and the Toll of the same, situate, lying, growing, coming or
renewing within the said Lordship of R in the said County of etc. and all the
said Toll of the Markets and Fairs within the Town of K. aforesaid, and the
rents, issues and profits yearly from time to time coming, growing and arising
of the Tolls aforesaid, with all their appurtenances. And all the said house,
etc. (ut in Literis Patentibus) and also all and singular other the premises
before recited, and in or by the said Letters Patents dated the 2 day of M.
etc. to the said A T demised and granted as aforesaid (except before excepted)
as in and by the same Indenture of ^^^e dated the 21 day of S in the said 39 of
etc. amongst diverse other covenants, grants, articles and agreements therein
contained more plainly at large does and may also appear. The said I F now, for
and in consideration of a certain sum of good, etc. to him in hand, at and
before the ensealing and delivery hereof by the said I S well and truly
contented and paid, whereof and etc. and thereof, and etc. (ut in aliis) Has
granted, bargained, sold, aliened, assigned, and set over, and by these
presents does fully, clearly and absolutely etc. unto the said I S as well the
said recited Indenture, dated the said 21 of S. in the said 39 year of, etc. as
also all the estate, right, title, interest, possession, term of years,
reversion, claim and demand whatsoever, which he the said I F has or had, or
may, might, or ought to have, or claim, of, in or to the said water and
wind-mills, and the said Toll of the same Faires, Markets, Tolls, Site of the
Manor, Demesne Lands, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Commons,
Profits, Commodities, Emoluments, Hereditaments, and all and singular other the
premises before recited, and to him the said I F in or by the said recited
Indenture of Lease mentioned to be demised and granted, and of, in and to every
part and parcel thereof with the appurtenance, by force and virtue of the same
Indenture of Lease, dated the 21 day of S, or any thing therein contained, or
otherwise. To have and to hold the said Water and Wind-mils, and the said Toll
of the same Fairs, Markets, Tolls, site of the Manor, Demeasne Lanes, Lands,
Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Commons, Profits, Commodities,
Emoluments, Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises herein
before mentioned, meant or intended to be granted, bargained, and sold, and
every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances (except as before
excepted) and also all the said estate, right, title, interest, possession,
term of years, reversion claim, and demand whatsoever of him the said I F, of,
in and to the same premises before recited, and of, in and to every part and
parcel thereof, with the appurtenances, unto the said I S his, etc. from the
day of the date of these presents, for and during, and unto the full end and
accomplishment by course of time of all the said several term and terms of
years mentioned to be demised, or granted to him the said I F in or by the said
recited Indenture of Lease, dated the said 21 day of- S. and that in such like,
and in as large, ample and beneficial manner and form to all intents and
purposes, as he the same I F has or had or may or ought to have and enjoy the
same premises by force and virtue of the said recited Indenture of Lease, to
him the said I F made and granted as aforesaid, or any thing therein contained,
together with the same Indenture.

And the said I F does covenant etc. in manner and form following; viz. That he
the said I F has not at any time heretofore done or committed, That the
Assignor has not done any act to incumbe the estate.
neither shall or will at any time hereafrer do or commit any act or acts,
thing or things, whereby the estate, right, interest or term of years of him
the said I F in or to the premises or any part thereof, is or shall be
troubled, charged or encumbered; the rents, covenants, conditions and agreements
in the said recited or mentioned Indenture, (dated the said 21 day of S. in the
said 39 year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lady, and hereafter to be
done and performed) only excepted and fore-prized.

And that he the said I S, his, etc. and every of them, shall or may at all
times hereafter, and from time to time, For quiet enjoying void of encumbrances
for and during all the rest and residue yet to come and unexpired of the said
several terms of years mentioned, to be demised or granted to him the said I F
in or by the said recited Indenture of Lease dated the said 21 day of S.
peaceably and quietly, have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said
Water and Wind Mills, Tolls, Fairs, markets, site of the Manor, Demeasne Lanes,
Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, and all and singular other the
premises herein before mentioned to be granted, bargained, sold, assigned and
set over, and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances (except
before excepted) clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise upon reasonable
request, suffered, saved and kept harmless of and from all bargains, sales,
gifts, grants, Leases, assignements, mortgages, forfeitures, re-entries, rents,
arerages of rents, statutes, recognizances, judgments, extents, executions,
and of and from all other charges, titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever
had, made, committed or done by him the said I F, or by any other person or
persons by his means, assent, or procurement. The several yearly rents and
covenants reserved and comprised by and in the said recited Indenture of Lease,
which on the Tenants or Farmours behalf from henceforth for and in respect of
the premises hereby mentioned to be bargained and sold, are or ought to be
paid, done or performed, only except and fore-prized.

Of which said rents and covenants concerning only the premises, the said I S
does covenant, promise and grant for himself his executors, administrators and
assigns, and every of them, at all times hereafter, and from time to time,
upon reasonable request clearly to acquit, exonerate and discharge, save or
keep harmless the said I F his executors and administrators, and every of them
against the said H T and A, their executors, administrators, and assigns, and
every of them.

And whereas also the said H T, by the name of H T of E, etc. and one A B of,
Assignement of an Obligation.
etc. by their Obligation, bearing date the 21 day of S. in the said 39 year of
her Majesty's Reign, are and stand jointly and severally holden and bound unto
the said J F, in the sum of 300 l. of etc. with condition for the performing,
observing, fulfiling and keeping of all and every the covenants, grants,
articles and agreements, which on the part of the said H T, his heirs,
executors, administrators, and assigns are or ought to be performed, observed,
fulfilled, and kept, mentioned and comprised in the said Indenture of Lease,
bearing date the said 21 day of S. made between the said H T and A his wife of
the one part, and the said I F of the other part, as by the same Obligation and
Condition more plainly likewise does and may appear.

Now the said J F for the consideration aforesaid, does by these presents grant
and set over unto the said I S his executor^ and assigns the said recited
Obligation, and the penalty and sum of 300. l. therein contained. And also
does hereby make, assign, Letter of Attorney.
depute, and constitute the said I S to be his true, sufficient and lawful
Attorney and Deputy irrevocable for him, and in his name to ask, levy, recover
and receive of the said H T and A B their heirs, executors or Administrators,
the said sum of 300 l. of etc. And further the said I R does by these
presents grant unto the said I S full power and authority in execution of the
premises, the said H T and A B their heirs, executors and administrators, and
every or any of them, at the only costs, expense and charges of the said I S
his executors, administrators or assigns, to arrest, sue, implead, imprison,
condemn and out of prison to deliver, and pleas and prosecutions for and in the
name of the said I F his executors or administrators to sustain and maintain
in whatsoever Court and Courts, and before whatsoever Judge or Justices the
matter shall be brought, as precisely as the Law will it permit and suffer; and
at the like costs, expenses and charges of the same I S his etc. to recover and
receive upon receipt or recovery thereof Acquittance and Acquittances, or other
sufficient discharges, for and in the name of the said I F, his Executors or
Administrators, to make, seal and deliver, and one Attorney or more under him,
to constitute, substitute, and at his pleasure to revoke; and at the like
costs, expenses and charges of the said I S, his etc. all and every other thing
and things whatsoever, which the said I S his etc. in or about the premises
shall think needful or necessary to be done, to do execcute, follow and finish
as fully, wholly and largely in every thing as the said I F might or ought to
do, if he were then and there personally present, without any account to him
the said I F his etc. to be made, or any allowance to be given. And he the said
I F shall and will and does ratify, confirm and allow the same by these
presents.

And the said I F does further covenant, etc. in manner and form following;
viz. Not to release the penalty in the obligation.
That he the said I F has not released, acquitted or discharged, nor that he,
his etc. at any time or times hereafter shall or will without the assent of the
said I S his etc. had thereunto in writing under his or their hand and seal,
release, acquit, or discharge the said recited obligation, or the penalty, or
sum of money therein contained, nor any the person or persons therein mentioned
of or from the same.

And also, that he the said I F his etc. and every of them shall and will from
time to time, For avowing of Actions.
at the reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said
I S his etc. avow, justify and maintain, permit, suffer and allow all and
every such lawful action and actions, suits, plaints, pleas, processes,
judgments, and executions concerning the premises, as the said I S his etc.
shall attempt, commence, prosecute or bring, or cause to be attempted,
commenced, prosecuted or brought in the name or names of him the said I F his
etc. without being willingly or wittingly nonsuit or other delaying,
discharging, barring or hindering the same willingly and wittingly, except it be
by and with the special assent, consent and agreement of the said I S his etc.
in writing in that behalf first had and obtained, or by his or their, or some
of their means or act.

And further, he the said I F his etc. at he like request of the said I S, his
etc. shall and will from time to time and at all times hereafter when need
shall require, To make further Letters of Attorney.
at the costs only and charges and expenses of the said I S his etc. make or
cause to be made unto the said I S his etc. all such further Letter or Letters
of Attorney or other power or authority concerning the said recited obligation,
and the recovery of the said sum of 300 l. as by the said I S his executors or
assigns, shall be reasonably devised or advised and required. And that all and
every such sum and sums of money, or other benefit or commodity as shall be
recovered, obtained or gotten by reason of the said recited obligation, or of
these presents, shall be to the only use and behoof of the said I S his, etc.
and to no other use, intent, or purpose.

And the said I S does covenant etc. That he the said I S, his executors and
administrators, or some of them, To discharge the Donor of all damages and
suits in Chancery.
shall and will at all and every time times hereafter acquit, exonerate and
discharge, or otherwise upon reasonable request sufficiently save and keep
harmless the said I F his heirs etc. and every of them of and from all costs,
losses, sums of money, troubles, charges, damages, and hindrances whatsoever,
which the said I F, his executors, administrators or assigns, or any of them
shall be charged or chargeable withal, by reason of any such actions or suits,
so to be commenced, sued, or brought as aforesaid, and of and from all suits
in Chancery, or in other Courts of Equity to be brought against the said I F
his executors or administrators for or by reason of the said Bond, and of and
from all costs, losses, damages of all and every such suit or suits. Blunden.


In Witness, etc.
To give an Acquittance upon Receipt of Rent.
For and upon every quarterly payment of which said yearly rent, in form
aforesaid to be paid, it is agreed between the said parties, that the said A B
his executors or assigns shall deliver, or cause to be delivered unto such
person or persons, as shall from time to time pay the same rent, an Acquittance
testifying the payment and receipt of every such quarterly payment, if any
acquittance shall be at every such time demanded.

An Assignment of diverse Obligations and Bills.
THis INDENTVRE Witnesses, etc. That the said W A and T I for diverse and
sundry good causes and considerations them thereunto now especially moving,
has granted, bargained, sold, delivered, assigned, and set over, and by these
presents do fully, clearly and absolutely grant, bargain, sell, deliver, assign
and set over unto the said W W, all and all manner of obligations, deed or
deeds, or writings, obligations, bonds, bills, covenants, promises and
contracts whatsoever, wherein or whereby A D of etc. L W etc. R L of etc. and H
D of etc. or every or any of them, by any name, addition of names, or place or
places whatsoever they, or any of them are called or known, stand jointly or
severally, or in any manner of wise holden or bounden unto the said A W and T
I, or to either of them, or to any person or persons whatsoever, to or for
their, or either of their use, benefit or commodity, and all the sum and sums
of money, penalties, forfeitures, debts, duties and demands whatsoever in them,
or any of them contained, and all the right and interest that the said A W and
T I or either of them has or may, or ought to have of, in or to the same; and
all such benefit, profit, interest, estate and execution whatsoever, which
they, or either of them, or any other by them, or either of their means or
procurement, may or can have or obtain, by reason of the premises, or any suit
thereupon commenced, sued or brought, or to be commenced, pursued or brought.
And further, the said A W and T I do by these presents for the consideration
aforesaid, make, ordain, nominate and appoint etc. the said W W to be their
true and lawful Attorney. Blundey.
( ut in fol. 57)

And further, that they the said A W, and T J, or either of them, or the heirs,
executors, administrators or assigns of them or either of them, To acknowledge
satisfaction.
shall and will at all and every time and times hereafter, upon request,
acknowledge satisfaction, and make such general or special Acquittances,
Releases and Discharges, of and upon the premises and every part thereof to
such person and persons, and in such manner and form as by the said W W his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns or any of them at their or some of their
own proper costs and charges, shall be reasonably demised, advised or required.

And the said A W and T J do by these presents further covenant, etc. That at
all and every time and times after the death of the said W W, To make further
Letters of Atturny to the Executor of the Donee.
they the said A W and T J, and either of them, their, and either of their
Executors and Administrators shall and will upon every reasonable request in
that behalf to be made, make, seal and deliver, as his and their, and every of
their act and acts, the like writing and writings, containing every article,
matter and thing, as this present writing contains, unto the Executors or
Administrators of the said W W, or such other person or persons, as they or any
of them shall name or appoint, according to the true intent or meaning hereof.
Blundey.


A Lease of a Message, and of Lands.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between L C of the one party, and I C of etc.
Witnesses, That the said L C for and in consideration of the sum of etc. to
him in hand paid at the ensealing hereof by the said I C, whereof he the said L
C acknowledges himself fully satisfied, contented and paid, Has demised,
granted, and to farm letten, and by these presents does etc. unto the said I C,
all that his Message or Tenement with all the houses and buildings thereunto
belonging, and also all and singular those his Lands, Meadows and Pastures
with all and singular their appurtenances unto the said Message or Tenement
belonging and appertaining, containing in them by estimation 110 Acres, be it
more or less, to be had and lying together in R. aforesaid, in the said County
of E. and called or known by the name of R. in the said County, and being now
in the tenure or occupation of the said I C, and of his Assigns, and also
certain other fields called or known by the name of G fields, lying and being
in the Parish of R. aforesaid, and sometime in the tenure or occupation of the
said I C. Except always to the said L C, and to his heirs reserved out of this
present Demise and Grant, all wood and under-woods, great trees and
timber trees, with way and fall for the same, now growing, and which shall grow
and be in and upon the premises and every part thereof during the said term.
To have and to hold all and singular the said Message or Tenement, Lands,
Meadows and Pastures before rehearsed with their appurtenances (except before
excepted) unto the said I C his executors, administrators and assigns, from the
Feast of etc. last past, before the date hereof, unto the end and term of 21
years from thence next ensuing fully to be complete and ended. Yiedling and
paying etc. ut in aliis.

And the said I C does covenant, etc. That he the said J C, his executors and
assigns shall and will at his and their own proper costs and charges, For
Reparations.
from time to time, when and as often as need shall require during the said
term, well and sufficiently repair, sustain, uphold, maintain and amend all
the said Message and Tenement, and all other the houses in and by these
presents demised, and buildings to the same belonging, which be now builded and
founded with groundsel, and every part of them in all manner of needful and
necessary reparations whatsoever, timber only excepted, and shall and will
likewise at his and their own proper costs and charges, during the said term,
keep and maintain the Lands and grounds before demised well and sufficiently
hedged, fenced and ditched, and the said Message or Tenement, and the Lands,
Meadows and Pastures, and all other the premises before letten, being well,
sufficiently and Tenant-like repaired, fenced, ditched, scowred and amended,
into the hands of the said L C his heirs or assigns shall leave and yield up
at the end and determination of this present Lease.

For and toward the reparations, and keeping of which said premises the said
L C does covenant, To allow timber for reparations.
etc. That he the said L C. his heirs and assigns, or their Bailiffe of the
said Manor for the time being, shall upon request of him or them to be made by
the said I C his executors or assigns, assign and appoint from time to time
during the said term, when and as often as need shall require, within the said
Manor sufficient timber for the making, repairing and amendi^ (...) the said
houses and buildings before letten; the same to be felled, hewed and carved at
the costs and charges of the said I C his executors and assign^.

And moreover, that it shall and may be lawful for the said I C his etc. for
the enclosure, For enclosure and fencing.
hedging and fencing of the premises during the said term, to fell, cut down,
and take at all times in the year, making no voluntary waste nor spoil, such
sufficient bushes, edders and stakes as shall be necessary and sufficient for
the hedging and fencing of the lands and grounds before demised, the same to
be spent and occupied there, and not elsewhere.

And further, that it shall and may be lawful for the said J C his etc. at all
seasonable times in the year, To take Fire-boot and Plough-boot.
making no voluntary waste nor spoil, to take and cut down sufficient and
necessary cart-boot, hedg-boot, gate-boot and plough-boot; and that it shall
and may be further lawful for the said I C his etc. for his and their necessary
Fire-boot to lop and top, and shrove in the seasonable time of the year) making
no spoil nor waste) such trees as are standing and growing in and upon the
premises, and likewise to take and cut down for his said fire-boot such
hedgrows or coppice wood, as is growing within the premises, the said J C his
etc. keeping the said coppice and springs well fenced and preserved, the said
fire boot to be spent and occupied within the Tenement and houses before letten
and not elsewhere.

And the said I C does further covenant, promise and grant, for him, his etc.
to and with etc. Not to lop or top but for plough-boot and reparations.
That he the said I C his (...) shall not fell, cut down, lop or top, or cause
to be felled, cut down, lopped or topped in and upon the premises during the
said term, any the woods and underwoods, and timber or trees thereupon growing
or standing, other then such as he shall take for his and their necessary
hedg-boot, plough-boot, cart-boot, gate-boote and fire-boot, and the timber for
his and their necessary reparations which is to be taken and felled at the
assignment of the Bailiffe of the said Manor for the time being; but shall to
his and their uttermost of their power, keep and preserve all the said woods
and coppices of woods, and to see that the coppices and springs thereof be well
fenced, defended, and kept from utter destruction and spoil of cattle. And
moreover, For preserving of springs or young coppices.
shall yield and leave up one Acre of the said coppice of woods of six years
growth, and the residue of the woods of three years growth at the least in the
end of the said term.

And further, that all the corn and blades, which during the said term shall
grow in and upon the Lands before demised, To lay the straw and blades growing
for compost upon the Land.
or the more part thereof yearly, within the barnes, there to in-house and
inbarne, and the residue upon the said soil by these presents demised; and all
the dung and offal coming of the said blades and straw, after they shall be
trodden with cattle, to the Lands before demised, and to no other place to
carry: and there for compost to bestow and spread, excepting the last year of
the 21 years by these presents expressed, in which year he shall leave the said
dung within the ^^rd or backside.

And moreover, that he the said I C his executors and assigns, shall not by
any manner of means, give, grant, That the Lessee shall not sell or set over
his Lease.
bargain, sell, assign, put over, or otherwise alien and dispose to any other
person or persons this his Lease or term of years, or any part or parcel of the
Lands before, in or by these presents demised, other then to the wife of the
said I C, or to his child or children, or to his brothers or sisters, or to the
use of them or any of them, without the special license, consent and agreement
of the said L C, or of his heirs first had and obtained in writing.

And the said L C does covenant, etc. That it shall and may be lawful, to and
for the said I C his etc. to carry away his or their corn or hay, That the
Lessee may carry his corn and hay from the Lands the last year of his Lease.
growing, or that shall grow in, of, and upon the premises, the last year of
this present Demise, to any place or places, at his or their will and pleasure,
any Article or covenant herein contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And the said I C does covenant, etc. That it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said L C his heirs and assigns, That the Lessor shall carry away his
household stuff, left in the Tenement demised.
at all and every time and times hereafter during the said term of 21 years,
to have, take and carry away at his and their will and pleasure, all and every
the household stuff, bed-steeds, implements, planks, wainscots, bords and other
things which now be, or remain at or within the said Message, Tenement, and
other the premises before demised, being the goods of the said L C, without
gainsaying or interruption of him the said I C, his executors, administrators
or assigns, or any of them, or of any other by his means or procurement.

In witness whereof, etc.
A Lease of Lands in exchange.
THis INDENTURE made etc. between T C of etc. and W L of etc. and A now wife of
the said W L, and late wife of R B late of etc. of the other part: That where,
in and about the 17 day of August now last past there were certain agreements
had and made between the parties to these present Indentures, for and
concerning the exchange of diverse parts and parcels of their Lands, Leyes,
Meadows, Pastures and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances, lying and being
in S and VV. and in either or one of them in the said County of York, as
hereafter is expressed: First, That where the said VV L had, and was seized in
the right of the said A his wife, for and during the term of the natural life
of the same A, of diverse Arable Lands, Leyes, Meadows, Pastures, Hads, Flats,
and Hereditaments, lying and being dispersed in the Town and fields of S. and
W. aforesaid, or in one of them, commonly accounted to be and contain 200
Acres, be they more or less, now or late in the tenure or occupation of the
said W L, or of his assigns, it was agreed between the said parties by the
agreements aforesaid, That the said T C, his executors, administrators and
assigns, should have and enjoy for and during the term of sixty years, if the
said W L and A now wife of the said W L, should so long live together (Yiedling
therefore yearly 1. d.) all and every the said Lands, Meadows, Pastures,
Leyes and Hereditaments before mentioned, of them the said W L, and A his wife
in S. fields, and W aforesaid, or in either or any of them in the said County
of Y. (except as hereafter is excepted) and that in consideration thereof the
said W L, and A his wife, and their Assigns, should have and enjoy for and
during the term of three score years, if the said VV L and A his wife should
so long live together, all the Arable Lands, Leyes, Meadows, Pastures and
Hereditaments with their Appurtenances, containing by estimation two hundred
Acres, be they more or less, lying or being in the North-field of S aforesaid,
in the said County of Y. as the same was then measured, dowled, and staked out
by F M Gentleman, and I B, then appointed by the said T C, only Surveyors of
the said Manor, and also all those nine Acres of Meadow, etc. by estimation,
lying and being in S aforesaid, etc. It is now therefore fully concluded and
agreed by and between all the said parties to these present Indentures, that
the same premises shall be demised and letten in Exchange, in manner and form
hereafter following; that is to say.

The said W L and A now his wife, have demised, granted, and to farm let in
Exchange, Exchange.
and by these presents do demise, grant, and to farm let in Exchange unto the
said T C, all those their, and either of their arable Lands, Leyes, Meadows,
Pastures, Hadds, Flats, and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, set, lying,
and being within the three several fields of S. aforesaid, called etc. or in
any of them in the said County of Y. containing by estimation two hundred
Acres, be they more or less, now or late in the occupation of the said W L, or
of his Assigns, which late were the Inheritance of R B now deceased, and the
Inheritance whereof after his death descended and came unto I B, as son and
heir of the said R B; except and out of this present demise and grant, always
reserved unto the said W L, and A his wife, as heretofore he or they have
usually had and enjoyed, for and in respect of all the premises, or as
appurtenant to the same, To have and to hold the said Arable Lands, Leyes,
Meadows, Pastures, Hadds, Flats and Hereditaments, and all other the premises
before mentioned to be demised and granted by the said W L and A now his wife
as aforesaid, with their, and every of their appurtenances (except before
excepted) unto the said T C his executors, administrators and assigns, from
the Feast of M next coming after the date hereof, for, during and until the
full end and term of sixty years from thence next etc. if the said W L and A
now wife of the said W L, do or shall so long live together. Yiedling and
paying therefore yearly during the said term by these presents granted unto the
said W L and A his wife, and their assigns 1 d. of good etc. at the Feast of
M. only, if it be lawfully demanded.

In consideration whereof the said T C has demised, granted, and to farm
letten in exchange, and by these presents does demise, grant, and to farm let
in exchange unto the said W L and A his wife, all and every the said Arable
Lands, Leyes, Meadows, Pastures and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances of
him the said T C, containing by estimation 200 Acres, be they more or less,
lying and being in the N. field of S. aforesaid, as the same is now measured,
dowled and staked out by the said F M and I B; and also all those nine Acres
etc. in a place there al sotted and set out amongst other for the cottages
there as aforesaid. To have and to hold all the said Arable Lands, Meadows,
Pastures and Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises before
mentioned to be demised and granted in exchange by the said T C aforesaid, with
their, and every of their appurtenances, unto the said W L and A his wife, and
their assigns etc. for, during and until the full end and term of sixty
years from thence etc. if the said W L, and the said A, now wife of the said W
L do or shall so long live together. Yiedling and paying, etc. ut antea.

And the said W L does by these presents covenant, etc. in manner and form
following; that is to say, Discharged of former estates and encumbrances.
etc. That they the said W L and A now his wife, the executors, administrators
and assigns of the said W L, or some of them, shall and will at all times from
henceforth, for and during the said term of threescore years, if the said W and
A now wife of the said W L, do or shall so long live together, clearly acquit,
exonerate and discharge, or otherwise save and keep harmless, and
indempnified, as well the said T C, his heirs, executors, administrators, and
assigns, and every of them, as also the said premises before mentioned to be
demised and leased in exchange by the said W L and A his wife to the said T C,
and every part and parcel thereof, of and from all and all manner of former
estates, charges, encumbrances, chief-rents, troubles and demands whatsoever,
had, made, committed or done by him the said W L and A his wife, or either of
them, or by any other person or persons lawfully claming by, from or under
them, or either of them, whereby or wherewith the same premises, or any part
thereof, shall or may be charged or evicted, or whereby the said T C his etc.
shall or may be charged, encumbered or dampnified, of or by reason of the same
premises, or any part thereof, except before excepted.

And likewise that he the said T C his heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns, shall and may at all times hereafter, For quiet enjoying.
and from time to time during the said term of 60 years, if the said W. and A.
now wife of the said W. L. do or shall so long live together, peaceably and
quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy and all and every the premises to him the
said T C, demised and granted in exchange as aforesaid, and every part and
parcel thereof with the appurtenances, except before excepted, without any
manner of lawful let, trouble interruption or disturbance of them the said W L
and A his wife, or other of them, or of any other person or persons lawfully
claiming by, from or under them or any of them.

And the said C T does covenant for himself, ut W L antea mutat. mutand.

And whereas it was intended and meant by and between all the parties to these
presents, That the said I B to whom the right of Inheritance of the premises
mentioned to be demised to the said T C, as aforesaid does belong and
appertain (being now in his minority) should have made, and granted a lease in
exchange unto the said T C of all the said Lands and premises to him the same T
demised as aforesaid (by the said W L and A his wife) for the term of four
score and nine years, and for the yearly rent of 1 d. And that likewise in
recompense, satisfaction and exchange thereof, the said T C should have granted
in exchange unto the said I B a like Lease for the like term of fourscore and
nine years, and for the yearly rent of 1 d. of the said Lands and premises,
demised or granted to the said W L and A his wife, in exchange as aforesaid.
And for that, neither of the same Leases can be more perfectly made and
finished. Therefore it is now further covenanted, concluded and fully agreed
upon by and between all the said parties to these presents in form following;
viz.

And the said W L does by these presents covenant etc. That he the said W L
shall do his best endeavor that he may or can, That an Infant shall seal a
lease at his full age of 21 years.
to procure and get the said I B by his Deed indented to make, seal, and
deliver as his Deed to the said T C, his Heirs or Assigns within three
months next after that he the same I B shall accomplish his full age of 21
years, a sufficient demise, lease and grant in exchange of all and every the
said Lands, Leyes, Meadows, Pastures and Hereditaments and premises with
their appurtenances to him the said T C, as aforesaid, demised for the term of
89 years, and for the yearly rent of i. d. and with, and under such like, and
the same Covenants, clauses and agreements, as before in these presents are
limited, expressed and set down on the part and behalf of the said W L to be
performed and done.

And in consideration thereof, the said T C does covenant etc. that if the said
I B or his heirs do and shall make, seal and deliver as his deed unto the said
T C, his heirs or assigns, the said demise, lease and grant in manner and form
as is aforesaid, by the said I B to be signed, sealed and delivered to the use
of the said T C his heirs or assigns in the presence of three credible
persons, whose names shall be subscribed or endorsed upon the same, that then
he the said T C or his heirs at or upon the receiving of the said Lease and
Grant, shall and will (being thereunto required) make, seal and deliver in
exchange unto the said I B, or his assigns, a like lease of all and every the
premises to the said W L and A his wife granted as aforesaid, for such like
term and number of years, and with and under such rent and covenants as shall
be contained and specified in the said Lease so to be made by the said I B to
said T C as aforesaid.

In witness, etc.
A Grant of an Annuity or rentcharge.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Witnesses, That the said A B, for and in
consideration of a Marriage already had and solemnized between the said C D and
E A, and for the greater good will, love and affection which he has, and
bears unto the said E A, and for diverse other good causes and considerations
him moving, he the said A B has given, granted and confirmed, and by these
presents does give, grant and confirm unto the said C D and E A one Annuity,
yearly payment or rentcharge of lx l. of lawful money of England to be
issuing, payable, chargeable and going out of all that the Manor of etc. To
have, hold, enjoy, and yearly perceive, receive, and take the said Annuitie or
yearly rentcharge of three score pound unto the said C D, and E A their
heirs and assigns, immediately from and after the decease of him the said A B
for and during the natural life of the said E A to be paid at the Feasts of
etc. or within ten days etc. by even portions, at or within, etc. The first
payment thereof to begin, and to be made at such of the same Feasts, as shall
first or next happen to come, or be after the death of the said A B.

And the said A B does covenant and grant for himself etc. to and with the said
C D and E A etc. To distreine nomine poenae.
That if it shall happen the said Annuity or yearly rentcharge of 60 l. to be
behind and unpaid in part or in all, contrary to the form above limited for
payment thereof as aforesaid, That then and so often it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said C D and E A their heirs and assigns into the said
Manor with the appurtenances, and into every part and parcel thereof to enter,
and distrein, as well for the said yearly rent so being behind, as for 40 s.
(nomine poenae) for non-payment of the same rent at every of the said Feasts;
and the distress and distresses there so taken to lead, drive, bear, carry
away and impound, and so in pound to detain and keep, until they be answered
of the said annuitie or yearly rent of 60 li. and every part and parcel
thereof, and of the said forty shillings (nomine poenae) with the arrerages of
the same annuitie, and of every part thereof (if any be;) together with all
such costs and charges as the said C D and E A their heirs or assigns shall in
that behalf sustain and bear, be fully satisfied and paid.

And the said A B does covenant etc. to and with the said C D etc. in manner
and form following: Discharged of encumbrances.
that is to say, That the said Manor and every part and parcel thereof, with
the appurtenances, now is and so shall be, remain and continue clearly and
fully acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved and
kept harmless of and from all and all manner of former bargains, sales, gifts,
grants, jointures, dowers, leases, statute merchant, and of the staple,
recognizances, judgments, executions, rents charge, rents seck, and of and from
all other charges, titles, troubles, impediments whatsoever, the rents and
service thereof only excepted. And that he the said A B. at the time of the
ensealing and delivery hereof, is lawfully and rightfully seized of the said
Manor with the appurtenances, and of every part and parcel thereof in his
Demesne as of Fee simple, without any condition, limitation, use, remainder or
reversion therein, for the altering, changing or incumbring of the same. And
that he the said A B has full power, good right, true title, just and lawful
authority to charge the said Manor with the appurtenances, and every part
thereof in manner and form aforesaid. And that they the said C D and E A their
heirs and assigns shall be from time to time duly, justly, and truly paid the
said yearly rent for and during the natural life of the said E A. at the days
and times by and in these presents limited and appointed, according to the
tenor and true meaning of these presents. And also there shall not be any let,
disturbance, hinderance or disquietation had, made or done to or against the
said C D and E A their etc. for and in the taking of any distress at any time
for the said yearly rent so being behind, or any part thereof. And further, the
said A B has put the said C D and E A in possession of the said yearly rent of
60 l. as aforesaid granted, by the delivery of six pence of etc. to them etc.
at the ensealing and delivery of these presents.

In witness etc.
Assignment of an Annuity or Rentcharge.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Witnesses, That whereas A B by Indenture bearing
date etc. for the considerations therein mentioned and expressed, has granted
and confirmed unto the said C D and A his Wife, one Annuitie or yearly
Rentcharge of xx l. of lawful money of England, to be issuing, payable, and
going out of all that the Manor or Lordship of etc. and out of all and singular
the Messuages, Lands and Tenements whatsoever thereunto belonging or
appertaining, or being part, parcel or member thereof, situate, lying and
being, etc. To have, hold, perceive and enjoy the said Annuity or yearly rent
of xx l, unto the said C D and A his wife, their executors, administrators or
assigns, from the Feast day of etc. last before the day of the date of the said
Indenture, unto the full end and term of 34 years, from thenceforth next and
immediately following fully to be complete and ended, the said yearly rent of
xx l every year yearly to be payable at two Feasts and terms in the year; that
is to say, at etc. at or within etc. with a clause of distress to be taken
within the said Manor of etc. for non-payment of the said Annuity or yearly
rent of xx l. or any part thereof by the space of 14 days next after any of
the said Feasts in which the same ought to be paid as aforesaid. As also one
other clause of distress, nomine poenae, of 30 s. for every default of
payment, which shall happen or be within 24 days next after any or either of
the said Feast days in which they ought to be paid, as in and by the same
Indenture, amongst diverse other covenants, grants, articles and agreements
therein contained more plainly at large it does and may appear.

Now the said C D, for and in consideration of the sum of 60 l. of good etc.
to him in hand, at and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents by
the said E F, well and truly contented and paid, whereof and wherewith, etc.
and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does clearly acquit,
exonerate and discharge the said E F, his executors and administrators by these
presents. Has given, granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by
these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely give etc. unto the said E F,
his executors and assigns, the said Indenture before mentioned, and the said
Annuity or yearly rent of xx l. with the appurtenances, clauses of Distress
and nomine poenae thereby granted and confirmed; and all the estate, right,
title, interest, power and authority, property, claim and demand whatsoever,
which he the said C D and A his wife have, has or had, or may, might, should
or of right ought to have or claim, of, in or to the said Annuity or yearly
rent of xx l. by the same Indenture reserved and granted, and confirmed as
aforesaid, by force and virtue of the same Indenture, or any thing therein
contained, or otherwise howsoever; together with all other deeds, evidences,
writings and immuniments touching, or in any wise concerning the same Annuity
or any parcel thereof. To have, hold, levy, and yearly perceive, receive, take
and enjoy the said Annuity or yearly rent of xx l. unto the said E F, his
executors, administrators or assigns from the day of the date hereof for and
during all the rest and residue yet to come and unexpired of the said term of
34. years by the said recited Indenture granted, at such days, times and
places, and in such like, and in as large, ample, beneficial manner and form to
all intents and purposes, as he the said C D and A his wife, or either of them
have or has, or had, or may, might, should, or of right ought to have, or
yearly receive take and enjoy the same.

And the said C D does covenant, etc. to and with the said E F his, etc. and
every of them, For quiet enjoying discharged of Encumbrances.
in manner and etc. That he the said E F his, etc. and every of them shall or
may from time to time, and at all and every time and times hereafter, for and
during the rest and residue yet to come and unexpired of the said term of four
and thirty years by the said Indenture granted, peaceably and quietly have,
hold, leavie, and yearly perceive, receive, take and enjoy to his and their own
proper use and behoof the said Annuity, yearly rent or sum of twenty pound of
good etc. and all distresses, arre^rages nomine poenae, and other benefit,
profit or commodity whatsoever which for or in respect, or by reason thereof
shall come, grow, happen, accrue or be due, without any manner of let, trouble,
interruption, gainsaying or disturbance of them the said C D and A his Wife or
either of them, their or either of their executors, administrators or assigns,
or by any other person or persons whatsoever by their or any of their assent,
means, consent, title, interest, or procurement, or claiming in, by, from or
under them or any of them, free, clear and clearly acquitted, exonerated and
discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved and kept harmless of and from all
former bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, assignements, mortgages,
statutes, recognizances, forfeitures, joyntures, dowers, judgments, extents,
executions, and of and from all other charges, titles, troubles and
encumbrances whatsoever had, made, committed, suffered or done, or hereafter to
be had, made, committed, suffered or done of them the said C D and A his wife
or either of them, their or either of their executors, etc. or by their or
either of their assent, means, consent, title, interest, act, sufferance, or
procurement.

And also that they the said C D and A his wife, their and either of their etc.
and every of them, To avow distresses and actions.
shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, when and as
often as need shall require, at the request, and at the costs and charges in
the Law of the said E F, his executors or assigns, avow, justify and
maintain all and every such lawful entries, distresses, actions, suits,
plaints, pleas, processes, judgments, extents and executions, as the said E F
his executors or assigns shall make, take, attempt, commence, prosecute and
bring in respect of the premises, upon or by reason of the said Indenture, or
any thing therein contained, without being nonsuit or otherwise releasing,
discharging, delaying, discontinuing, barring or hindering the same or any of
them, except it be by and with the special assent, consent and agreement of the
said E F, his etc. in writing in that behalf first had and obtained.

And the said C D has by these presents made, ordained, constituted and
appoined the said E F his true and lawful Attorney irrevocable, to ask, levy,
Letter of Attorney.
recover and receive to the only use of the said E F, his executors,
administrators and assigns, without any account-making to the said C D his
etc. the said Annuity or yearly rent, or sum of xx l. of etc. every year
yearly from time to time, as it shall grow due during the said term mentioned
in the said Indenture, and for default of payment of either or any of the said
several sums at the days and place aforesaid in which they ought to be paid,
to distrain, and the distresses so taken, to lead, drive and carry away, and so
to detain until he or they the said E F, his etc. shall be fully satisfied of
the said rent charge or sum of money so due as aforesaid, giving and granting
by these presents to his said Attorney, his full power and lawful Authority in
the premises, and in all causes incident or appertaining to the same, as well
Acquittances, as other discharges to make, seal, and deliver upon the receipt
of any or every of the said several sums, as they shall grow due yearly as
aforesaid, which shall be a sufficient and lawful discharge to the said A B,
his executors and assigns, against him the said C D and A his wife, their and
every of their executors, administrators and assigns: and to do all and every
other act and acts, thing and things in or about the same, and to finish,
accomplish, determine and end, as fully and wholly to all intents and purposes,
as he the said C D might do if he were personally present, and as if these
presents had never been made, etc.

A Covenant of further assurance.
ANd the said A B does covenant etc. to and with the said C D etc. That he the
said A B his etc. shall and will from time to time, To save the Assignor
harmless of the covenants in the Original lease, and to perform the same
covenants.
and at all times hereafter, well and sufficiently save and keep harmless the
said C D his executors and administrators, and every of them, of, for and
concerning all and singular the covenants, grants, articles, exceptions and
agreements, comprised, and specified in the said recited Indenture of Lease
made by the said E F to the said C D as aforesaid, which on the part and behalf
of the said C D, his executors, administrators and assigns, or any of them,
for and in respect of the premises, are or ought to be observed, performed,
fulfilled, and kept, during all the said term of fourteen years, and by and
during all the same term of fourteen years, shall well and truly observe,
perform, fulfill and keep all and singular the same Covenants, Grants, Articles,
Promises and Agreements in all things, according to the tenor and true meaning
of the said former recited Indenture, The several yearly rents as well in
money as in sheep in and by the same Indenture reserved, and one covenant in
the same Indenture contained touching the letting and alienating of the
premises only except.

And the said A B does covenant etc. to and with etc. in manner and form
following; that is to say, Not to plough meadow ground
That he the said A B, his Executors, administrators nor assigns, nor any of
them shall break up, plough, are, or put to tillage any of the meadows or
grounds reserved for meadow or pasture within four years next before the
determination of this present lease, unless it be by and with the assent,
consent and agreement of the said C D his executors, administrators or assigns
first had and obtained in writing under his or their hand and Seal.

A Covenant to pay money yearly during a man's life.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Witnesses, that whereas the said A B for the
consideration hereafter in these presents expressed, has at the enfealing and
delivery of these presents, absolutely paid and delivered to the said C D, the
sum of one hundred l. of, etc. by him the said C D, to be retained, employed
and enjoyed, to and for his own only use for ever, without any manner of
Account, or other reckoning thereof, or therefore to be made or given by the
said C D, his executors, administrators or assigns, unto the said A B his,
etc. for the same or any part thereof. It is now covenanted, granted, concluded
and fully agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents, and the
said C D for and in consideration of the said sum of one hundred l. to him
paid and delivered as aforesaid, does covenant and grant for himself, his, etc.
and for every of them to and with the said A B his, etc. by these presents,
that he the said C D, his etc. shall and will from henceforth, for and during
the natural life of the said A B well and truly content and pay, or cause to be
contented or paid unto the said A B or his assigns the yearly sum of, etc.
on the feast day of, etc. or on the tenth day next ensuing either of the same
Feast days, by even and equal portions, at or within etc. without fraud or
covin.

In Witness, etc.
And the said C D does covenant, etc. to and with the said A B etc. in manner
and form following, That there shall be sufficient goods always to be found
upon the lands to be distreyned for answering the annuity.
etc. that there shall be from time to time, and at all times hereafter
remaining and being in and about the said messuages, lands and tenements and
other the premises before mentioned and expressed, sufficient goods, Chattels,
implements of household stuff and other things there ready to be found, had,
taken for the answering, satisfying, paying and discharging of the said annuity
or yearly rent of fifty l. and every parcel thereof, and all arrerages of the
same, when and so often as the same annuity, or yearly rent of fifty l. or any
parcel thereof, or any the arrerages of the same shall happen to be behind and
unpaid, contrary to the meaning of these presents. And that he the said A B his
heirs, executors and administrators shall and will at all times hereafter, To
discharge the Grantor against all persons in respect of his executorship.
from time to time for ever clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge, or
otherwise sufficiently save and keep harmless the said C D his executors,
administrators and assigns and every of them, against all and every person and
persons whatsoever, of, for, touching and concerning the executorship of the
last Will and Testament of E B deceased, and of and from the accounts, suits,
costs, charges, losses, damages and demands whatsoever which shall or may at
any time or times hereafter come, grow, or be to or against the said C D his
executors, administrators or assigns, for, by reason or in respect of the same
executorship.

In Witness, etc. By Counsel.
A Forfeiture, if the lessee be outlawed or attainted of Felony or Treason, or
for breach of any Covenant.
Provided nevertheless, that if the said C D his executors, or assigns, or
any of them shall break, and shall not perform any the covenants, grants and
agreements, in these present Indentures contained, which on his and their, and
any of their parts are to be observed and kept, or shall at any time hereafter
be attainted by out-lawry, verdict, or confession of any Treason, Felony or
murder, or any other offense, whereby he or they, or any of them shall deserve
loss or forfeiture of life, lands or goods; that then this present Lease to
end and be determined, and that then and all times after it shall be lawful to
and for the said A B, his executors, administrators, and assigns into all and
singular the premises to re-enter, and the same to have again, any thing herein
etc.

And in the end of the said term shall yield and pay to the said A B or his
heirs or assigns, To pay an heriot at the death of the lessee, and to do suit
to Court.
as abovesaid his best beast, for and in the name of an heriot, and also shall
yield and pay the like heriot at the death or change of every Tenant of the
premises above demised, according to the custom of the Manor of W. aforesaid;
and also that he the said C D, and the Assignee and the Assigns of him, being
Tenant or Tenants of the premises, shall and will at all times hereafter
during the term abovesaid, do his suit of Court to the Court Baron of the said
B his heirs or assigns, in W aforesaid, as often as there shall be any Court
there holden or kept, upon lawful warning thereof first given.

And that he the said C D his executors and assigns being Tenants or Tenant in
possession of the premises by virtue of these presents, For suit to Court.
shall and will upon reasonable warning, do his or their suit and service to
the Law-dayes and Courts of the said A B, and his heirs, of and for his Manor
of W aforesaid, and there stand to, and abide such reasonable orders and
compositions as by the Steward and Homage there shall from time to time be
taken for the good order and government of the Inhabitants there living, in
such manner and sort as heretofore such like Tenants have bin used and
accustomed there to do.

An assignment of rent reserved by a Lease, granted in consideration of service.
TO all Christian people, etc. A B
greeting etc.
Whereas I the said A B by my Indenture of Lease, bearing date, etc. did for
the term of lx years, commencing from the Feast of etc. and for the yearly rent
in money of v. l. of etc. demise, grant, and to farm let unto etc. all that his
Manor of V. and Parsonage of S etc. as by the same Indenture more etc. Now know
ye, that I the said A B, in consideration of the good and faithful service to
me heretofore done by C D, and for diverse other good and reasonable
considerations me in this behalf especially moving, have given, granted and
confirmed, and by these presents, do etc. unto the said C D the said yearly
Rent of five li. in money reserved in and by the said Indenture, together with
all my right, estate, interest, reversion, benefit, profit and demand
whatsoever which I etc. now have of, in or to the said Rent of etc. before
recited, and every part and parcel thereof. To have, hold, perceive, receive,
take and enjoy the said yearly rent of five li, unto the said C D. for and
during so many years as be yet to come and unexpired of the said term of sixty
years in and by the said Indenture mentioned and reserved, if he the said C D
shall so long live. And further, I the said A B do by these presents make,
ordain and constitute, and in my stead and place put and authorize the said C D
his etc. to ask, leavie, recover and receive of the tenant or tenants, occupier
or occupiers of the premises before recited, the said yearly rent of 5 l.
reserved in money in and by the said Indenture as aforesaid, to the only use
and behoof of the same C D, his executors and assigns, without any account or
other reckoning therefore to be made to me the said A B. my heirs or assigns.
And further, I the said A B do covenant and promise by these presents for me
etc. that I have not released, nor that I the said A B. mine etc. at any time
hereafter shall release or do any act whereby the said yearly Rent of etc. is
or shall be released or discharged, or the said C D touching the recovery or
receiving thereof barred or hindered.

In witness etc.
A clause to avoid the Survivorship of a man's Wife.
NOw I the said W W fully minding the advancement and preferment of A W my son,
so far forth as the said Lease to me and my said Wife in form aforesaid
granted, amounts unto. And for that by the order and course of the Common
Laws of this Realm, the said E my Wife (in case she survive me) is to have
to her own use the whole Lease and term for years to us of and in the
premises as aforesaid granted, which at the time of such my decease, of and in
the same premises shall be to come and not expired, if in my life time I do
not foresee and prevent the same. And further, considering with my self this
present life, how fickle and uncertain the same is to all living creatures; And
also considering with my self, that in case I should fortune to decease before
the end of the said term of years to me and my said Wife granted as aforesaid,
and my said Wife fortune me to survive, That then she my said Wife having the
whole Lease and interest by way of Survivor, might by way of marriage or
otherwise, as manifest examples are daily before our eyes, contrary to my
meaning and intent, utterly defeat my said son A W for having any benefit of
and in the same Lease and premises, and dispose the same at her own free will
and pleasure. For avoiding of all which inconveniences, and for performing of
my said intent and meaning, I the said W W, not meaning at any time hereafter
by virtue of the said Lease, to claim any thing of, and in the same premises,
have given, granted, etc. and by these presents do, etc. the said Indenture of
Lease made as aforesaid, between etc. And also all the whole right, estate,
title, interest, use, possession, term for years to come and demand that I the
said W W have, or ought to have, of, in, or to the said Viccary and other the
premises to me the same W. and E my wife, by and in the said Indenture granted
as aforesaid, or of, in or to any part or parcel thereof, by force and virtue
of the same Indenture, or any thing therein contained. To have and to hold the
said Viccary, and other the demised premises with the appurtenances, together
with the same Indenture of Lease, Estate, Interest, term for years to come, or
demand aforesaid, and every of them, unto the said A W my son, his executors
and assigns, to his and their own use and behoof, in as large ample and
beneficial manner and form in all respects, and to all intents and purposes,
as I the said W W and E my wife, or either of us, have, or has, or ought to
have and enjoy, if these presents had never been had nor made.

In witness, etc.
An Assurance devised in a very rare form. Penned by Mr. Atkinson Counselor.
THis INDENTURE made etc. between etc. Witnesses, That it is covenanted,
granted, condescended and agreed between the said parties for them and their
heirs in manner and form following; that is to say, That the said E B shall
within one year next ensuing the date within written, levy and acknowledge a
Fine in due order of Law, Annuity entailed to diverse.
before the Queens Majesty's Justices of the Common Pleas at Westminster in
the County of Middlesex, unto the said I H and C S, and to the heirs of the
said I H, of and in thirteen Messuages with the appurtenances, set and being
etc. as by the said I and S, or the heirs of the said I shall be demised. And
it is further covenanted and agreed between the said parties to these presents,
That the said Fine, and all other Fines, to be levied within the space of one
year next after the date hereof, by the said E B or his heirs, of the premises
or any parcel thereof, by what name or names soever, either of the premises,
or of the said parties, or of any of them the Fine or Fines so to be levied, or
had immediately from the levying thereof shall be; and that the said I H and C
S, and the heirs of the same I shall stand and be seized of the said premises
with the appurtenances to the several uses hereafter expressed, and to none
other use or uses; that is to say, to the use of the said E B for and during
the term of seven years to be accounted from the feast of etc. if the said E B
and M his Mother shall so long live; and after the expiration of the said seven
years, or death of the said B and M or either of them. Then to the use of the
said E and his heirs, so long as the said E and his heirs and Assigns shall
well or truly pay, or cause to be paid unto P P of London scrievner, or his
Assigns, at, or within etc. one annuity or yearly rent, pension, or sum of
twenty pounds of lawful money of England, at four usual feasts in the year, viz.
at the feast of etc. or on the eight and twentieth day next after every of the
same feasts by even portions, for and during the term of twenty and one years
then next after, if the said P P shall so long live: And in default of payment
of the said annuity etc. or any part thereof in manner aforesaid, Then to the
use of R P, third son of the said P P, and of his heirs for ever. And if the
said annuitie of etc. be truly paid in manner and form aforesaid to the said P
P or his assigns, during the said one and twenty years, if the said P P do so
long live, Then after the end and expiration of the said twenty one years or
death of the said P, to the use of the said E B and his heirs so long as the
said E, his heirs or Assigns shall truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said
R P or his Assigns, at or within etc. and at the four feasts aforesaid, or on
the twenty eighth day next ensuing every of the same feasts one annuity etc. by
even portions for and during the life natural of the said R. And for, and in
default of such payment of the said last mentioned annuity etc, to be truly
paid to the said R P, or his assigns during his natural life in manner
aforesaid, that after the decease of the same R, to the use of the said E B, or
his heirs for and during so long time as the said E B, or his heirs shall
truly pay, or cause to be paid unto E P, second Son of the said E P, or to
his Assigns at or in the place aforesaid, and at the four feasts aforesaid,
or on etc. one annuity, yearly rent, pension or sum of twenty pounds of etc.
by even portions, for and during the natural life of the said E P, surviving
the said R P; and for and in default of payment of the said last mentioned
annuity, yearly rent, portion or sum of twenty pounds in manner aforesaid, then
to the use of the said E P, and of his heirs for ever. And if the said last
mentioned annuity, yearly rent, portion or sum of twenty pounds be truly paid
to the said E P, during his life as aforesaid, then to the use and behoof of
the said E B or his heirs shall truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said
I P Son and heir of the said P P, surviving the said R and E, for and during
the natural life of the said E, at or in the place of payment aforesaid and at
the four feasts aforesaid, or on the three and twentieth day next etc. one
annuitie, yearly rent, pension, or sum of twenty pound of etc. by even
portions. And for and in default of payment of the said last Annuity etc. Then
to the use of the said I P, and of his heirs for ever. And if the said last
mentioned annuity be truly paid ut antea, Then after the death of the said I P
to the use of the said E B and his heirs for ever. And it is further
covenanted, concluded and agreed between the said parties to these presents
for themselves and their heirs, That if the said R C, and I P fortune to
decease and depart this life before the end and expiration of the said seven
years; and if then the said E B his heirs and Assigns do not pay, or cause to
be paid unto the said P P, his executors or Assigns, at, or in the place of
payment aforesaid the sum of one hundred pounds of etc. on the Feast day of
the Nativity of Saint John Baptist, which shall be in Anno Domini 1585. That
then the said Fine so to be levied and acknowledged, and all other Fines
hereafter, within the said one year, by the said A B or his heirs of the said
premises, or any part thereof to be levied, shall be to the only use and
behoof of the heir or heirs apparent of the said P P and to their heirs for
ever, and to none other use, uses or intents, any thing in these presents
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
A Lease of a Mill.
THis INDENTVRE made etc. between Sir T C Knight, and Lord B. and Lady D. his
wife etc. of the one party, and T A etc. of the other party. Witnesses, That
he said T, and Lady D, his wife, as well for the consideration in a certain
Covenant hereafter in these presents mentioned on the part and behalf of the
said T A his executors and assigns, to be performed touching the repairing,
amending, and new building of the Mill aforesaid, to the effect in the same
Covenant at large expressed: As also for and in consideration of the yearly
rent hereafter in and by these presents reserved, and for diverse other
reasonable considerations them moving; Have demised, granted and to farm
letten, and by these presents do demise, grant, and to farm let unto the said T
A. all that the said Greest-mill or Water-mill with the appurtenances commonly
called or known by the name or names of Downkarie Mill, situate, lying and
being in etc. sometimes in the tenure or ocupation of one E C, and now, or late
in the tenure or occupation of N C, or of his assigns, and the ground and
Soil whereupon the said Mill now stands, containing by estimation, one
fourth part of an Acre, be it more or less. And also all the site of Mill, as
well customary as conventionary of all the Tenants of the Manor of Downkary in
the said County, and all the Tol and Custom for grinding of all the Corn and
Grain whatsoever, as well of all the Tenants and under-tenants of the said
Manor, now being, or which hereafter at any time shall be during the term by
these presents demised, as of all the inhabitants now dwelling and abiding, or
which hereafter shall dwell or abide within the said Manor of Downkarie in the
foresaid County of S. And also all and singular hedweres, and the soil whereon
the said hedweres do stand and are builded, and all hedweres hereafter to be
builded and the soil thereof, Mill-dams, Banks, Ponds, streams, water,
watercourse, rivers, fishings, fishing-places, ways, paths, passages,
easements, profits, commodities, advantages, emoluments and appurtenances
whatsoever to the said Mill, and other the premises by these presents demised
and granted, or to any of them, or to any part or parcel thereof incident,
belonging or appertaining, or with the same now, or at any time heretofore let,
used, occupied, had, taken, reputed or enjoyed. To have and to hold the said
Mill, and the ground and soil thereof, with the appurtenances, and the said
site of Mill of all the Tenants of the said Manor, and the said Toll and Custom
of grinding of all the corn and grain of the said Tenants and Inhabitants
aforesaid; and the said Mill-dams, banks, rivers, streams, ways, passages,
fishings, and all and singular other the premises herein before mentioned or
intended to be hereby demised and granted, and every part and parcel thereof
with the appurtenances, unto the said T A his executors, administrators and
assigns immediately from and after the expiration, surrender, forfeiture, or
other determination of the said lease and estate before recited, made to the
said N C as aforesaid, unto the full end and term, and for and during the whole
term of thirty and one years from thence next ensuing and fully to be complete
and ended. Yielding and paying therefore from the commencement and beginning of
the said term yearly during the said term, the yearly rent or sum of ten
shillings of lawful money etc. at two Feasts or terms in the year: That is to
say, at the Feast of the etc. by equal portions; the first payment thereof to
begin at that Feast of the Feasts aforesaid which first and next shall happen
after the beginning of this present Lease (with a clause of re-entry.)

And the said T A for himself etc. does covenant, promise and grant, to and
with the said L B and L D their and either of their heirs and assigns by these
presents in manner and form following; That is to say, That he the said T A
etc. shall and will from time to time during the said term of thirty one years
hereby granted, do and make his and their suit and service for and in respect
of the premises, to the Court and Courts of the said L B and L D and their
heirs, to be kept and holden within the said Manor of Downkary, upon such
reasonable warning as there is given or used; or else in default and neglect
thereof, shall and will yearly during the said term pay or cause to be paid to
the said L B and L D and their heirs the sum of six pence etc. if it be
demanded.

And the said A T etc. does covenant and grant etc that within the space of
three years next after that the said Mil, and other the premises, and every
part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances shall either by virtue of this
present grant, or other composition or assignment, to be had or made with the
said N C for and concerning the said interest and estate therein, attain and
happen to the actual and quiet possession, use, or occupation of the same; he
the said T A his etc. or some of them, shall and will, at his or their proper
costs and charges, build and erect two new Griest Mills under one Roof, where
the said Mill is now situate, in sufficient and competent manner in that
behalf requireable according to the true intent and meaning hereof. And also,
that further, he the said T A his etc. or some of them, shall and will at his
and their proper costs and charges, well and sufficiently repair, amend,
maintain and uphold the said Mills, so to be newly erected as aforesaid, and
all other the premises in, with, and by all needful and necessary reparations,
when, and as often as need shall require, during the said Term; and the same
Mills, and other the premises so being well and sufficiently repaired, upholden
and amended, in the end, or other determination of this present Lease, shall
and will leave and yield up unto the said L B, and L D their heirs and Assigns.

And the said T. L B. does covenant etc. That it shall and may be lawful to,
and for the said T A. his etc. to pull down the said Mill, now standing in,
and upon the said premises, at any time within the space of the said three
years before mentioned and appointed for the now erecting of the said new
Mills, in or upon the premises.

And further the said T. L B, does covenant etc. that in case any the Tenants
or inhabitants of the said Manor of Downkarie, shall or do at any time during
the said term hereby granted, withdraw, or surcease to do suite of mill to the
said Mill, or to bring and carry, or cause to be brought their cron and grain
whatsoever to the said Mill by these presents demised, there to have the same
ground; or shall carry the same to any other place or places, or to any Mill or
Mills to be grinded, then the Steward or Stewards of the said Manor of
Downkarie, for the time being shall and will upon all and every presentment and
presentiments thereof made, set and impose upon every such Tenant and Tenants,
and Inhabitants so withdrawing or not doing his or their suit or suits of Mill
to the said Mil or to the said Mils so to be erected as aforesaid, such lawful
and reasonable amercements from time to time as in such cases is lawful and
usual.

Recital of an original lease.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Witnesses, That whereas A B etc. by his Indenture
of Lease bearing date the eighth day of etc. has demised, granted, betaken,
and to farm letten, unto one C D of etc. for the term of sixteen years,
commencing from the Feast of etc. then next ensuing the date of the same
Indenture, and for the yearly rent of four pound quarterly to be paid, all that
corner Message or tenement, etc. (use the words of the Indenture) as by the
same Indenture with diverse other covenants, grants and agreements therein
contained more at large appears.

And whereas also the said C D by his Indenture of Assignment bearing date the
nineteenth of etc. has bargained, sold, aliened, granted, Of an assignment.
assigned, and set over unto one E F etc. as well the said Indenture of Lease,
the said Corner Message or Tenement, or other the premises with their
appurtenances thereunto belonging, or in any wise appertaining, as also all the
estate, tight, title interest, demand, use, possession and term of years then
to come, which he the said C D had, should or ought to have had, of, in, or to
the said corner message or tenement, or other the premises with their
appurtenances thereunto belonging or appertaining, by virtue, force or means
of the said Indenture of Lease and Demise, together with the same Indenture of
Lease, then being in full force, safe and uncancelled, as by the same Indenture
of Assignment with diverse covenants, grants, articles and agreements therein
contained, more at large also does and may appear. The interest, estate and
term of years of which said E F of, in and to the premises, the said G H now
has by force of one Indenture of Assignment to him made by the said E F
bearing date the fourth day of etc. as by the said Indenture of Assignment more
plainly also appears. Another.
Now the said G H for the consideration hereafter in these presents expressed
and specified, has bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, and by these
presents etc. unto the said I K as well the said Indenture of Lease, and the
said several Indentures of Assignment and every of them, as also all the
estate, right, title interest, terms of years and demand whatsoever, which he
the said G H has, or may, or ought to have or claim, of, in or to the said
Message or Tenement, and other the premises, and of, in and to every or any
part or parcel thereof by force of the said Indenture of Lease and Indentures
of Assignement, or any of them, or any thing in them or any of them contained:
To have and to hold the said Indentures and every of them, and all the said
estate, right, title, interest, term of years, and demand of him the said G H,
of, in and to the said Tenement and other the premises with the appurtenances,
unto the said I K. his executors, administrators and assigns, to the only use
and behoof of the same I K. his executors, administrators and assigns, in as
large, ample, and beneficial manner and form as he the said G H has, or may
or ought to have and enjoy the same by force of the said Indenture of Lease,
and Indentures of Assignment, or any of them, or any thing in them or any of
them contained.

And the said G H covenanteth and grants etc. to and with the said I K. his
executors etc. in manner and form following, Discharged of encumbrances.
that is to say, That he the said G H his executors, administrators or
assigns, shall or will at all times hereafter, and from time to time clearly
acquit, discharge, save or keep harmless the said Message or Tenement, and
all other the premises with the appurtenances and every part and parcel
thereof, of and from all former bargains, sales, gifts, grants, titles,
charges, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed or done by
the said G H, or by any other person or persons by his means, consent or
procurement. The rents, covenants and agreements in and by the said Indenture
reserved, and Indentures of assignment, or any of them contained, and from
henceforth to grow due to be paid or performed, only except and foreprized.

And further, that he the said G H his Executors and administrators, shall, and
will at all times hereafter, and from time to time permit and suffer the said I
K his executors, administrators, and assigns, to take, To sue the Assignor for
the nonperformance of the Covenants.
attempt, sue, commence, and prosecute in the name, or names of the said G H,
his executors, or administrators, all such lawful actions, suits, plaints,
pleas, process, Judgments and executions as the said I K his executors,
administrators, or assigns shall think meet to be attempted, taken, pursued
commenced prosecuted or had against the said E F his, etc. for upon, or by
reason of the breach or nonperformance of all and every or any of the
covenants, grants, and articles contained in the said Indenture of assignment
made from the said E F to the said G H. Or upon or by reason of one obligation,
or deed obligatory bearing date with the said recited Indenture of assignement
wherein the said E F is, and stands bounden unto the said G H in the sum
of, etc. of, The bond for the same.
etc. for the sure performance of all and every the covenants, promises and
agreements in the said Indenture contained and which on the part and behalf of
the said E F his, etc. are or ought to be performed.

And that neither he the said G H has released nor that he the said G H his,
etc. shall at any time hereafter remise, Not to release the Assignor of his
covenant or bond to perform the same.
release, or discharge the said covenants, grants, articles and agreements, and
the obligation aforesaid, and the sum of money therein contained or any of them,
or any part or parcel of them, or any of them, nor shall wittingly or
willingly do, or procure to be done any act or thing whatsoever whereby or by
reason whereof the said actions, suits, plaints, pleas, processes and the
judgments and executions of the same, or any of them, shall or may be hindered,
barred, released, or discharged, except it be by or with the special assent,
consent, and agreement of the said I K his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns. And that he the same I K his Executors and Administrators shall and
may have, take, receive, hold, convert and employ to his and their own proper
use and behoof for ever, all such sum and sums of money, costs, damages and
other benefit whatsoever as shall be recovered, obtained, or gotten in, upon,
or by reason of the said actions, suites, plaints, judgmnts, executions or any
of them without the let, trouble, interruption, contradiction or denial of the
said G H and his etc.

And the said I K does covenant etc. to and with etc. That he the said I K, his
Executors or Administrators, To save the Assignor harmless for actions brought
by the Assignee, against the lessor.
shall at all times hereafter, and from time to time save and keep harmless the
said G H his Executors, administrators, and every of them, as well of, from,
and concerning all costs, charges, damages, and demands which shall arise, or
grow to or against the said I H his Executors or administrators for or by
reason of the said actions, suits, plaints, judgments, and executions or any of
them, as also of, from, and concerning all and every the covenants, grants,
articles and agreement which on the part and behalf of the said G H, his
Executours, or assigns, or any of them from henceforth shall grow due to be
paid, performed, kept comprised and specified in the said Indenture of
assignment made by the said E F to the said G H as aforesaid.

For, and in consideration of which said grant, bargain, sale, and assignment,
the said I K has paid, Several days of payment.
and by these presents does covenant and grant for himself, his executors,
administrators and assigns, to and with the said G H his executors and
administrators, and every of them, to pay, or cause to be contented or paid to
the said G H, his executors, administrators, or assigns, the full sum of a
hundred pounds of etc. in manner and form following, that is to say, at the
ensealing and delivery of these presents forty pounds, of which said Sum of
forty pounds, he the said G H acknowledges himself fully satisfied and paid,
and of the same sum of forty pounds, and of every part and parcel thereof, he
clearly acquitteth and discharges the said I K, his executors, administrators
and assigns, and every of them for ever by these presents. And on the twenty
fifth of etc. next coming after the date hereof, at, or within etc. twenty
pound, and on the etc. then next ensuing at the place aforesaid five pounds,
and on the etc. then next following at the place aforesaid five pounds etc. in
full satisfaction and payment of the said sum of a hundred pounds.

Provided always, that if the said I K his executors, administrators or
assigns, do not well and truly content and pay, or cause to be contented and
paid to the said G H, his executors, administrators, or assigns the said sum of
an hundred pounds of etc at the days, times, and place aforesaid, and in such
manner and form as before in these presents is limited and expressed, but
shall make default in payment thereof or of any parcel thereof contrary to the
form aforesaid, that then, and from thenceforth this present Indenture of
bargain and sale, or assignment, and all and every covenant, grant, article
and agreement herein contained, on the part and behalf of the said G H, had,
made, and to be performed, shall be utterly void, frustrate and of none effect,
to all intents and purposes, any thing before mentioned in these presents to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness whereof, etc.
A lease with two rents reserved.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Witnesses, That the said A B for certain
considerations him in this behalf especially moving, has demised, betaken,
granted, and to farm letten, and by these presents etc. unto the said C D, all
that message, farm or tenement, commonly called or known by the name of L.
Farm with the appurtenances, and all the lands, tenements, meadows, feedings,
pastures, commons and other commodities whatso^ver to the said Message or
Farm belonging or appertaining, late in the tenure or occupation of etc. or of
his assigns, situate, lying and being in the parish of etc. in the County of
etc. Except, and always reserved out of this present Demise unto the said A B
his heirs and assigns all and all manner of woods and underwoods, together
with the herbage of the same, and the hedg-rowes, and all and every the trees,
growing, being or renewing in and upon the premises, or any part thereof, To
have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, and all other the demised
premises with the appurtenances (except before excepted) unto the said C D his
executors, administrators and assigns, from the Feast of etc. unto the end and
term of etc. Yiedling and paying therefore yearly unto the said A B his heirs
or assigns during the first two years of the said term of one and twenty
years five pounds of, etc. at the Feasts of, etc. by even portions, and after
the two first years ended, then yiedling and paying therefore yearly unto the
said A B, his heirs or assigns for and during the residue of the said term
of one and twenty years, ten pounds of, etc. at the said Feasts of, etc.
(Clause of Distress, etc.)

Provided always, that if at any time hereafter during the said term, it shall
seem good and convenient unto the said A B, That the Lessee shall yield up his
Lease at the request of the Lessor.
his heirs or assigns, to resume, have and take again the said message, and
all other the premises or any part or parcel thereof into his and their own
hands, occupation and possession, and so shall from time to time during all the
said term keep, occupy and hold all the same in his or their own hands and
possession, and thereof shall give notice and knowledge at the said message
unto the said C D his executors or assigns, or to any his or their servants,
or other person or persons occupying the same. That then immediately from and
after the end of one whole year next after such notice or warning given, this
present demise, lease and grant, shall be utterly void, frustrate and of none
effect. And also that then and from thenceforth the estate, title, term and
interest of the said C D and his assigns, of, in and to the premises and every
part thereof, shall cease, be void and clearly determined, any sentence, thing,
clause or article in these presents contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided also that if the said C D his executors, administrators or assigns,
shall commit, For making wast.
do or suffer, or cause to be committed, done or suffered, any wast or spoil
in or upon the premises, or any part thereof, or fell or cut down, or cause to
be felled and cut down any great Trees or timber Wood upon the same at any time
during the said term, that then and from thenceforth presently this lease
shall be utterly void, and the estate of the said C D and his assigns shall
clearly cease and be determined.

And the said A B does covenant etc. to and with the said C D, etc. That he the
said C D his, To allow fire-boot.
etc. shall have during the term of years by these presents granted, all the
fuel of the dead hedges to his and their own use without appointment, and dead
hollow trees by the appointment and assignment of the said A B his heirs or
assigns toward his fire-boot in and upon the premises.

And the said C D does covenant etc. to and with etc. That neither he the said
C D, Not to alien or suffer any recovery without the consent of the Lessor.
nor his executors or administrators, shall let, alien, assign or set over the
premises by these presents demised, or any part or parcel thereof to any
person or persons, neither for the whole space or term aforesaid; neither for
any part or parcel of the same years, neither shall do, suffer, or cause to be
suffered or done by any fraud or covin whatsoever any conveyance, assurance,
recovery, execution, act or acts, thing or things whereby the said demised
premises or any part thereof shall, may or ought to come to the hands, use,
possession or occupation of any other person or persons during any part or
parcel of the said term of years, then of the said A B his heirs or
administrators, without the special license consent and agreement of the said A
B in writing under his or their hands or seals first had, obtained and gotten.

And the said A B does covenant, promise and agree for himself etc. to and with
the said C D, The Lessor to allow the Lessee for yiedling up, his lease not
expired.
his etc. That if it shall happen the said A B his heirs or assigns at any
time during the possession and interest of the said C D or his assigns, by
force of this present Lease, to resume, have and take again the premises into
his and their own hands and possession, according to the true intent of these
presents; Then the said A B his heirs or assigns within three months after
such entry made into the premises, and reasonable request to be made by the
said C D or his assigns, shall pay or cause to be paid at the said Message or
Tenement, unto the said C or his assigns, so much lawful English money at one
whole and entire payment, as the years which shall be then to come and
unexpired of the said term of One and twenty years shall amount unto, rating
and allowing for every year that shall be so to come and unexpired, six
shillings eight pence of etc.

In witness whereof etc.
A Lease of a Tenement with good Covenants.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Witnesses, that the said A B, for diverse
considerations him thereunto moving, Has set and to farm letten unto the said
C D all his Tenement or Cottage etc. To have and to hold the above recited and
letten premises, with all and singular the appurtenances, to the said C D his
executors and assigns, from the Feast of etc. next ensuing, for and during the
full end and term of Ten years from thence next ensuing fully to be complete
and ended. Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the
said A B his heirs and assigns the sum of etc.

And the said C D for himself, his heirs etc. does covenant etc. to and with
the said A B etc. That he the said C D his executors, To discharge the land and
lessor of quitrents.
administrators and assigns and every of them, at his and their own proper
costs and charges, shall yearly pay, bear and discharge, and always during the
said term save harmless the said A B his heirs, executors and assigns and
every of them, and all and every part and parcel of the letten premises, of
and from all and all manner of chief and quit-rents, of old time due and going
out of the premises, and every or any part thereof during the said term of Ten
years.

And also that he the said C D, his heirs, executors or assigns nor any of them
shall demise, let, set, give, grant, The lessee not to let his land but to the
lessor, his Executors, etc.
alien or otherwise put away or depart with the premises before by these
presents letten, or any part or parcel thereof, to any person or persons
whomsoever, without the assent and consent of the said A B his heirs,
executors, or assigns; except to his said Wife, child, or children of the
said A B, or to his or their executors or administrators, or to the tenants of
the said A B dwelling in S. aforesaid.

And further, that he the said C D, his executors and assigns, according to
the reservations, That the lessee shall keep the possession of it.
covenants and agreements in these present Indentures expressed, shall and will
from time to time during the said term, continue the possession of the premises
as true tenant and farmour of the same premises to the said A B his heirs and
assigns, without any voluntary attournment or leaving the possession of the
premises to any other person or persons pretending or claiming any right,
title or interest in the premises, or any part thereof, other then by, from or
under the said A B his heirs or assigns; and other then by any lawful
eviction or recovery of the possession of the premises by ordinary course of
Law, against the said C D or his assigns; to which said suit the same A B
shall be made privy from time to time by the said C D, his heirs, executors or
assigns, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents.

And he the said A B, for him, his heirs, executors and administrators does
covenant, Quiet enjoying the possession.
promise and grant etc. That he the said C D his etc. shall or may lawfully
from time to time during the said term, continue the possession and take the
profits of the letten premises, under the aforesaid reservations, articles and
agreements discharged, or upon reasonable request to the said A B, his heirs
and assigns by the said C D his etc. saved harmless of and from all and all
manner of encumbrances had and done by the said A B, or any other person or
persons lawfully claiming any right or title in or to the premises before by
these presents letten, by, from or under the said A B. his heirs or assigns.

And also that he the said A B. his heirs and assigns shall and will from time
to time, The lessor to defend the lessee from actions brought against him for
the land demised.
so often as any suit in law shall be lawfully commenced against the said C D,
his heirs etc. for or concerning the possession or occupation of the premises
or any part thereof before mentioned to be letten; the said C D his etc. in
convenient time giving notice of such suit, actions or plaint commenced by or
against the said C D his etc. at the proper costs and charges in the law of the
said A B his etc. maintain and defend the said C D his etc. and satisfy and
content all and all manner of judgments, condemnations and executions which may
grow or be given against the said A B, his etc. by reason of any the aforesaid
suits.

And the said C D does covenant etc. to and with etc. That he the said C D his
executors, That the lessee shall not suffer any judgment by default.
administrators or assigns nor any of them, shall not wilfully nor willingly,
nor by his or their assent, nor by his or their commandment, in any suit or
suits to be had or commenced against the said C D his executors or assigns, for
the possession or taking of the profits of the premises before letten, or any
of them, suffer any judgment by default or verdict to be taken against him or
them, or by any other ways or means suffer any discontinuance, or Retraxit, or
any other thing or matter to prejudice the said A B his executors or assigns,
or his or their title to or in the premises, without the assent or consent of
the said A B his executors or assigns first had and given to the said C D his
executors or assigns, or their lawful Atturneys or Solicitors in the Law, in
writing, under the hand of the said A B, his etc.

And that the said C D his executors and assigns shall by themselves or their
servants upon every distress taken upon any part of the letten premises, The
lessee to give the lessor notice of all distresses and process served.
or any process served in the County, within convenient time after any such
distress taken or process served, give notice thereof to the said A B, his
heirs and assigns: And from time to time after such notice given, travel to
such ordinary place as shall be necessary in the said County, either to take
replevin or enter into bond for appearance of arrests, or to execute and do
such lawful acts as shall be advised or devised from time to time by the said
A B his heirs or assigns in such the said suits: The said A B, his heirs or
assigns bearing all and all manner of charge in the Law in and about the
premises.

A demise of a Lease forfeited for non-payment of Rent.
THis INDENTVRE etc. witnesses, that whereas the said A B and C his wife, by
their indenture of Lease, bearing date the 30 day of M. 1595. and in the fourth
year of the etc. did for the term of etc. beginning from the feast day of etc.
then last past, before the date of the same recited Indenture of Lease and for
the yearly rent of twenty eight pounds, grant and to Farm let unto one D E etc
his executors, administrators and assigns, all that moitie, or one half of
the Rectorie of the Parish Church of etc. and the moitie of all the houses,
edifices, glebe-lands, tithes, oblations, obventions, profits, commodities and
emoluments whatsoever, to all the said Rectorie belonging or appertaining. In
and by which said Indenture of Lease before recited, there is a proviso or
condition contained to this or the like effect following, viz. That if it
should happen the said yearly rent of twenty eight pounds, or any part thereof
to be behind unpaid in part, A recital of a caluse of Reentry.
or in all, by the space of twenty eight days next after either of the Feasts
of the Annunciation of etc. and St. Michael the Archangel, at the then dwelling
etc. of etc. that then, and from thenceforth the said recited Indenture of
Lease should be void; and that then, or at any time after, it should and might
be lawful to and for the said A B and C. his wife, their heirs, executors,
administrators or assigns, into, and upon all and singular the premises and
every part thereof, with the appurtenances wholly to reenter, and the same to
have again, retain and repossede as in their former estates, and the said D
E, his executors, administrators and assigns, and all other occupiers thereof,
from thence utterly to expel, put out, and amove; any thing in the same recited
Indenture to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding, as by the same
recited Indenture of Lease amongst diverse covenants, articles, and agreements
therein contained, more plainly at large appears.

The half years rent being 14 l. reserved and to be paid for the half years
rent ended at the Feast of S. Micahel, etc. last past before the date hereof,
for and in respect of the premises, was not paid at the said feast of St.
Michael, etc. nor on the twenty eight day next after the same feast, according
to the tenor of the said Proviso, although the same rent was demanded at the
place of payment limited and expressed in the said Proviso, By reason whereof
the said Recited Lease is now become frustrate and void.

Whereupon now this Indenture witnesses, that the said A B, and C his wife,
for and in consideration of the surrender, and delivery up of the said Lease so
made and granted to the said D E as aforesaid, and for other good and
reasonable considerations them in this behalf specially moving, have demised,
leased, and to farm letten and set, and by these presents does, etc. unto the
said F G, all that their moity of the Rectory, etc. (ut antea) To have and to
hold all the aforesaid moiety of the said Rectory, and all and singular other
the premises herein before mentioned to be demised, and granted, and every
parcel thereof, with the appurtenances unto the said F G, his executors, etc.
from the 27 day of September now last past before the date hereof, unto the end
of, etc.

Yiedling and paying therefore yearly during the said term unto the said A B
and C his Wife, and to the heirs etc. of the said A B 28 li. of etc. at or in
etc. at two usual Feasts or terms in the year: viz. etc. fourteen li. of which
said sum due for one half year at the Feast of St. M. etc. last past before the
date hereof, the said A B. and C. his wife acknowledge themselves to have
received, and to be thereof fully satisfied. And the second payment, to be paid
on the Feast day of etc. the annunciation of our etc. and so from thenceforth
every half year yearly, one consequently following the other, during the said
term of 38 years 14 li. of good etc. at every of the Feasts aforesaid: To the
end and intent that the said A B. and C his wife, and the heirs and assigns
of the same A B may have always one half years rent to him, her or them
beforehand paid.

Recital, where the Lease may not be seen.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Whereas the said A B at the day of the date hereof
(amongst other things) by virtue of a Lease or demise thereof to him made by
one E C for many years yet enduring, is possessed of one Tenement sometimes in
the tenure of one I K, etc. set, lying or being at or toward the South end of
etc. in the parish of etc. Now the said A B, for diverse good considerations him
moving has by virtue of a license or authority License from the lessor to the
lessee to let and set his estate.
in that behalf had and obtained of and from the said E C. under his hand and
seal bearing date the 16 day of M. in the said 40 year of her Majesty's Reign,
demised, granted, etc.

A Lease upon Condition in Mortgage, for Collateral Security.
THis INDENTVRE tripartite witnesses, That whereas the said T C and R A at the
request and desire, and for the only debt and duty of the said I B, together
with the same I B, are and stand jointly and severally holden and bound in and
by two several Obligations or Deeds obligatorie, each of them bearing date the
day of the date of these presents; viz. in the one whereof to R W. etc. in the
sum of 800 li. of etc. with condition thereupon made for the payment of 413 li.
16 s. 4 d. of like etc. on the fourth day of etc. next coming after the date of
these presents, at or within etc. And in the other whereof unto one W C of etc.
in the sum of 200 li. of etc. with condition thereupon made for the payment of
104 li. 4 d. on the said fourth day of etc. next coming after the date hereof,
at or within etc. As by the same several Obligations, and the several
conditions thereupon endorsed more plainly at large does and may appear. Now
the said I B, as well for the indempnitie and saving harmless of the said T C
and R A and either of them, of, for and concerning the said recited
Obligations, and sums of money in them or either of them contained; as for
diverse other good and reasonable causes and considerations him the said I B in
this behalf specially moving, has demised, granted and to farm letten, and by
these presents does, etc. unto the said T C, and R A all that the Manor of B.
in the Parish of B. in the County of L. with the rights, appurtenances, and
members thereof whatsoever. And also all and singular Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Feedings, Meadows, Pastures, Rents, Reversions, Services,
Hereditaments, etc. whatsoever to the said Manor or Lordship by any means
belonging or appertaining, or as member, part or parcel thereof, now or at any
time heretofore being had, known, accepted, used occupied, reputed, or enjoyed,
with all and singular their and every of their appurtenances, To have and to
hold the said Manor or Lordship, messuages, lands, tenements, hereditaments,
and all and singular other the premises herein before mentioned to be demised,
and granted, and every parcel thereof with the appurtenances unto the said T C,
and R A, their executors, administrators, and assigns, from the feast of etc.
last past before the date hereof, unto the end and term of 99. years from
thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended. Yiedling and paying
therefore yearly during the said term unto the said I B, his heirs, and
assigns, etc. at the Feasts of, etc. by even and equal portions.

Provided always, and it is nevertheless covenanted, conditioned and agreed
by and between the said parties to these presents; And the said T C, and R A do
by these presents covenant, promise, and grant, for themselves, their, and
either of their heirs, executors, and administrators, to and with the said I B
his heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, and every of them, that if
he the said I B, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, or any of
them, do well and truly content and pay, or cause to be contented or paid, as
well unto the said R W, his executors, etc. the said sum of 416 l. 13 s. 4 d.
of etc. on the said fourth day of June next coming after the date hereof, at
the place before limited and appointed for payment thereof: as also unto the
said T C his executors, administrators, or assigns the said sum of 104 l. 4
d. of etc. on the said fourth day of June next coming at the place before
limited, and appointed for payment thereof as aforesaid, for and in full
satisfaction, payment and discharge of the said several recited obligations,
and of the sum and sums of money in them or either of them contained. That
then, and from thenceforth this present Indenture of demise lease and grant,
and all and every article and agreement herein contained, shall cease,
determine, and be utterly void, frustrate, and of none effect, as if these
presents had not been had, nor made: This Indenture or any thing herein
contained to the Contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And that then upon full payment had and made of the said several sums of
416 l. 13 s. 4 d. and 104 l. 04 d. in manner and form as aforesaid, The said T
C, That the Lessee upon payment of a sum of money, shall yield up his lease to
be cancelled.
and RA, their executors, administrators, or assigns shall well and truly
deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said I B his executors,
administrators or assigns making payment thereof, the two counterparts of
these present Indentures whereunto the said I B has severally put his hand and
seal, to be cancelled and made void.

And the said I B does covenant, etc. for himself, his etc. by these presents,
to and with the said T C, For quiet enjoying upon default of payment by the
Lessor.
and R A, their, and either of their executors, etc. That they the said T and
R, their executors etc. shall and may immediately from and after default of
payment had or made of the said several sums of 416 li. -- 13 s. -- 4 d. and
104 li. -- 4 d. or of either of them, contrary to the form, tenor and true
meaning of these presents, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use, occupy and
enjoy the said Manor or Lordship and all other the premises before demised, and
every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, for and during the said
term of 99 years, under the rent aforesaid, without any manner of trouble,
let, interruption or disturbance of him the said I B, his heirs or assigns, or
any of them, or of any other person or persons whatsoever lawfully having or
claiming any estate, interest or title in or to the same Manor or Lordship, or
in or to any part thereof, in, by, from or under them or any of them.

In witness etc.
To repay money if the Lessee be put out of possession.
ANd the said A B does covenant etc. for himself, his heirs, executors and
administrators, to and with the said C D, his executors, administrators and
assigns, and every of them, by these presents, That if the said C D his etc.
or any of them shall or be at any time hereafter lawfully avoided, expulsed or
kept from the possession or occupation of the said Rectorie or other the
premises, by reason or force of any Lease, Demise or Grant made or granted, or
to be made or granted by our said Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty; to any
person or persons, of the said Parsonage and other the premises, between the
feast of etc. which was in the year of our Lord God 1571. and the day of the
date of the said Letters Patents to the said A B granted as aforesaid, That
then he the said A B his etc. shall and will within twenty days next after
notice and knowledge thereof given, at or within etc. well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the said C D his etc. the sum of etc. at or within etc.

And the said A B does covenant etc. for himself, his executors and assigns,
and for every of them, To receive rents, and to give an Account thereof yearly.
to and with the said C D, his executors, administrators and assigns by these
presents, That he the said A B, his executors and assigns, shall and will
yearly, during the term aforesaid, do as much as in him or them shall lie,
without suit in Law, to gather, collect and leavie all the rents, revenues,
fines, amercements, and all other yearly profits which shall happen to arise,
come, grow or be due to the said C D, his heirs etc. at any time during the
said term, within the Manors of etc. and the rents and other profits yearly
coming thereupon shall pay and deliver every half year to the said C D, his
heirs or assigns, and shall yearly once in the year make a just account of his
or their Receipts, and thereof make true payment to the said C D his heirs or
assigns, at or within etc. without any manner of fee, allowance or wages to be
demanded for the collection or gathering of the same.

And shall also yearly at the proper costs and charges of the said A B, his
executors and assigns, find, To provide meat for the Steward.
allow and provide sufficient, good, decent, convenient and wholesome meat,
drink, and lodging for the stewards, surveyors, or other officers of the said C
D, his heirs, and assigns, and their four servants, horse-meat, stubble, room,
and litter for their horses, repairing thither once in a year for the keeping
of Courts, or to survey, or otherwise to do there, for the space of two whole
days, and two whole nights yearly, during the said Term.

The recital of an Indenture, and Covenants of a Lease for term of lives.
THis INDENTURE quadripartite, made between A B of etc. C D of etc. E his wife
of etc. and F G his son of etc. witnesses, That whereas the said A B, has by
his deed indented, bearing date etc. for diverse good considerations therein
recited, demised, granted, and to farm let to the foresaid C D. E his wife,
and the said F his son, All that the site of the Manor of Crainford St. John's
in the County of etc. with all houses, buildings, barnes, etc. to have and to
hold the said site of the said Manor, and all other the premises with all and
singular their apurtenances (except before excepted) unto the said C D. E his
wife, and F their son, during their natural lives, and to their Assigns, and
to the survivor and survivors of them, and to the assignee and assigns of the
survivor and survivors of every of them, yiedling and paying therefore yearly,
during the said Term to the said A B his heirs and assigns, ten l. of etc. at
the feasts etc. by even and equal portions. And where the said C D. E his wife,
and F their son, for them, and every of them, their, and every of their etc.
did by that Indenture covenant, promise, and grant to and with the said A B his
heirs and Assigns in manner and form following, viz. That the said etc.
(reciting the Covenants for reparations and for discharging of quit-rent, and a
covenant to provide meat for the steward, verbatim, as in the original Lease.)
And the said A B for him, his heirs, executors, and administrators, did by the
said Indenture covenant, promise, and grant to and with the said C D. E his
wife, and F their Son, and every of them, their, and every of their Executors,
administrators and assigns by these presents, that it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said C D. E his wife, and F, and every of them, their, and every
of their Assigns, during the said Term, to take, sell, etc. (reciting the
covenant for taking house-boot, fire-boot, etc. verbatim, ut antea.)

Provided always, that if it shall fortune the said yearly rent of 10 l. or
any part thereof to be behind unpaid in part or in all, by the space of eight
days next after either of the said feasts in which it ought to be paid as
aforesaid, and the same being lawfully demanded, that then, and at all times
from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. his etc.
into the said site, Reentry
and all other the premises before by the said Indenture demised, and every
part thereof to reenter and the same to have again, and repossesse as in his or
their former right. The same Indenture, or any thing therein contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And that the said A B for him, his
executors and administrators did further in the same indenture, covenant etc.
(reciting the Covenant for quiet enjoying at large etc.)

And forasmuch as the aforesaid C D and E his wife, and F their Son have
surrendered all their estate, right, title and interest of, in and to all and
singular the above recited premises, to the said A B, upon diverse good
considerations, and chiefly upon this confidence, that the said A B should
presently assure all and every the premises to the said C D, E his Wife, and to
the aforesaid F, to them and to their assigns, and to the assignee and assigns
of every of them, during their lives, and the longer liver of them, according
to the tenor, purport and true meaning of the said former Indenture, in such
sort that none of the Lessees or Grantees should be able to hinder or prejudice
any of the other Grantees or Lessees, neither by grant, surrender, or
forfeiture whatsoever.

The said A B, for the favor and good will, and careful zeal which he bears
to the parties aforesaid, and in consideration of a Marriage to be had between
the said F and H, A lease for term of three lives.
does by these presents demise, grant, and to farm let unto the said C D, and E
his wife, and to the said F, all that the Site of the Manor of Crainford S.
John's, in the County of etc. To have and to hold the said Manor and all other
the premises, with all and singular their appurtenances (except before
excepted) unto the said C D, E his wife, and F, during their natural lives,
and to their assigns, and to the survivor and survivors of them, and to the
assignee and assigns of the survivor and survivors of every of them. Yiedling
and paying etc. (with the like covenants and proviso of re-entrie as before;
but with this condition following.) Nevertheless, the said A B does by these
presents covenant, grant, and agree for him, his heirs and assigns, that after
such cause of re-entrie, he, his heirs nor assigns neither will nor shall take
any benefit of such re-entrie, but only against the person willingly falling
into that danger; and shall and will suffer the next person named in this
present Lease, which has not committed any such forfeiture, quietly to enter
and take possession during all his or her life, and so from one person to
another, not giving such cause of re-entrie, so long as they shall live, or
their interest does endure, so that they pay their rent and farm at all time
and times due, or within ten days next after etc. And it is likewise agreed
between the said A B, and all other the parties aforesaid, That if any the
parties do grant away his or her estate, term or interest in the premises, or
in any part thereof, or charge the same in prejudice of the other joint Lessees
or Grantees, that then it shall be lawful to that person or persons which
should have the next possession and sole profits of the same land, to enter and
take the profits thereof, as if the parties working that prejudice were dead,
or had nothing to do therein. (A Covenant for quiet enjoying as before, with
this Letter of Attorney.)

And this Indenture further witnesses, That the said A B has made, ordained,
constituted, deputed, Letter of Attorney to deliver possession.
and in his place and stead by these presents has and does put his welbeloved
I K and L M etc. to be his very true, lawful and sufficient Atturneys, jointly
and severally, for him, and in his stead and name, to enter in and unto all and
singular the aforesaid Site, Lands, Tenements, and other the premises before
mentioned to be demised, with the appurtenances, or in or unto some part or
parcel thereof in the name of the whole, and full and peaceable possession and
seisin thereof, or of some part or parcel thereof in the name of the whole,
and for him and in his stead and name to have and take. And after such
possession and seisin thereof, for him, and in his stead and name so had and
taken; then for him, and in his stead and name to deliver full possession and
peaceable seisin of all and singular the same premises with the appurtenances,
unto the said C D, E his wife, and F, or unto one of them, or unto their
certain Atturnie or Atturnies in that behalf, to the use and behoof of them and
every of them, according to the tenor, form, effect and true meaning of these
present Indentures, ratifying, affirming and allowing all and every Act and
Acts, thing and things whatsoever that his said Attorney or either of them, for
him, and in his stead and name shall do, cause or procure to be done in and
about the premises or any of them by virtue of these presents.

In witness, etc.
Forfeiture for non payment of rent, or not doing of reparations after notice
given thereof by the lessor.
Provided always, and it is nevertheless expressly conditioned by and between
the said parties to these presents, that if it shall happen the said yearly
rent of 50 li. to be behind and unpaid in part or in all, over or after any of
the Feasts aforesaid, in which the same ought to be paid, by the space of 21
days after any of the Feasts aforesaid, the same being lawfully demanded. Or
if all and every the default and defaults for want of reparations of or in the
premises, that at or upon any such view and search as is aforesaid shall be
found, and whereof notice or warning in writing shall be given or left to
repair and amend the same in manner and form aforesaid, shall not be well and
sufficiently repaired and amended from time to time during the said term of 21
years, always within the said space of 6 months next after every such notice
or warning in writing given or left as is aforesaid; That then, and at all
times from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A B,
Reentry.
his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns and every of them, into the
said Message or Tenement and other the premises by these presents mentioned
to be demised, with all their appurtenances wholly and fully to re-enter, and
the same to have again, retain and repossede as in their former estate, Any
thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

A lease for lives with Fine and Recovery, per Blunden and alios.
THis Indenture Tripartite made etc. Between the E of E, and F his wife, and
the E of R, and E his wife of the first part; and T VV of etc. of the second
part; and H L and T S of the third part, Witnesses, That for and in
consideration of the sum of five hundred pounds of etc. by the said T W well
and truly contented and paid unto the said E of E, and F his wife, of which
sum the said E of E and F his wife do by these presents acquit and discharge
the said T W, his executors and administrators. And in consideration also of
the sum of 1000 li. of etc. to the said E of R and E his wife, by the said T W
well and truly contented and paid, and whereof also they the said E of R and E
his wife do by these presents acquit and discharge the said T W, his etc. And
in consideration also that the said T W has surrendered, Surrender recited.
and by these presents does surrender unto the said E of E and F his wife, E of
R and E his wife, all such estate for years as he has in the Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments hereafter specified, now in the tenure and occupation of the
said T W, or of his Assignee or Assigns, which surrender they the said Earls
and Countesses do by these presents accept. And also for diverse other good
considerations them the said Earls and Countesses moving, they the said E of E
and F his wife, and E of R and E his wife do by these presents covenant, grant
and agree, for them, their heirs and executors, to and with the said T W. his
executors and assigns, That they the said E of E and F his wife, and E of R
and E his wife, shall and will before the Feasts of etc. next ensuing the date
hereof, By Fine sur conuzance de droit come ceo qu' ils ont de lour done, in
due form of Law to be levied with Proclamation, according to the form of the
Stat. in that case provided, in the Court of our Sovereign Lady the Queens
Majesty, her heirs and successors, of Common pleas, between the said T W
Compl', and the said E of E and F his wife, E of R and E his wife Deforceants,
acknowledge and recognize by some name or names in the said Fine and Writ of
covenant, whereupon the said Fine shall be levied, all that the Manor of Easton
in the County of etc. and all other Messuages etc. with their appurtenances, to
be the right of the said T W, as those which the said T W shall have of the
gift of the said R E of E and F his wife, E of R and E his wife, and the same
shall remise and release from them and their heirs, to the said T W and his
heirs, with several warranties of the said E of E. and F his wife, to the said
T W and his heirs, against him the said E of E, and the said F, and with like
warranties of E of R, and E his wife, against themselves and the heirs of the
said F and E. which fine so as aforesaid to be levied, in whatsoever form the
same shall be levied, and all fines to be had or levied by, or between any of
the said parties of the premises, or any part thereof within one year next,
shall be, and shall inure, and shall be construed, adjudged, expounnded, and
taken to be, and to inure to the use and behoof of the said T W and his heirs,
to the intent and purpose, that the recovery herafter mentioned, may be had and
executed in due form of law against the said T W, then being tenant of the
premises. And further, it is granted and agreed, by and between the said
parties. And the said R E of R, and E his wife, do further covenant, grant, and
agree for them, their heirs, executours and administratours, to, and with the
said T W his heirs, excutors, and administratours, that they the said E of R,
and the said E his wife, shall and will permit and suffer the said H L and T S.
or the survivor of them by writ of entry per disseisinam in le post, to be sued
forth by them out of the high Court of Chancery, and returned into the said
Court of Common pleas, to recover to them and their heirs against the said T W,
then tenants of the premises with the appurtenances in due form of Law,
according to the course of common Recoveries for assurances of Lands and
Tenements, the said Manor of Easton, with the appurtenances etc. In which writ,
and the proceedings upon the same, the said E of R in his proper person and the
said Countess of R in her proper person, and by her sufficient Gardiens shall
appear and make defense, and vouch over the common vouchee And that they the
said E of R, and the said E his wife, and the sufficient gardiens of the said
E, shall do and suffer all and every thing and things fit and requisite for
the suffering and executing of a good and perfect recovery in the Law, as shall
be required by the said T W. his executors and assigns, or any of them. And
that the said recoverie shall be had and perfected in due form of Law, and
shall be executed by the Queens Majesty's writ of habere facias seisinam. And
it is fully concluded, the said Recoverie, so as aforesaid, or in whatsoever
form to be had and executed, and the full force and virtue thereof, shall be,
and shall inure, and shall be construed, adjudged, and taken to be, and to
inure to the several uses and limitations, and in manner and form following;
that is to say, As, to, of, for, and concerning all that the site, capital
Mansion house, and demeasnes of the said Manor of Easton etc. (reciting all
the land particularly, except the woods etc. and also except etc) To the use
and behoof of the said T W and his assigns, for, and during the Term, and by
all the Term of 99 years, next ensuing the date hereof, if the said T W. R C of
etc. and I R of etc. or any one of them, shall so long live, yielding and
paying therefore yearly unto the said E of E, and the C. his wife, for, and
during the term of so many years of the said Term, as the said C of E shall
live, and after her decease, to the said E of R, and the C his wife, and to the
heirs of the said C of R the yearly rent or sum of fourteen pound of etc. at
the feasts of etc. by even and equal portions; and also yielding and paying
yearly from henceforth during all the said Term unto the said E of R and the
said C his wife, and to the heirs and assigns of the said C the yearly rent or
sum of twenty eight l. of etc. at the Feast of etc. by even and equal
portions. And that the said recovery, so as aforesaid had and suffered, as
touching and concerning the residue of the said Manor, and other the premises,
and the reversion and remainder of all and singular the premises, and for the
said rents (the foresaid estate and term of the said T W always saved) shall
be and shall inure, and shall be adjudged, construed and taken to be to the
uses and behoofs before mentioned. That is to say, one third part thereof to
the use and behoof of the said R E of E, and F his wife, for and during the
life of the said F, and after her death, then to the use and behoof of the
said E of R, and the said E his wife, and of the heirs of the said E of R for
ever. And for the reversion, remainder, and residue of the premises, to the use
and behoof of the said E of R, and E his wife and the heirs and assigns of
the said Lady E for ever.

And if it happen any of the said yearly rents, or any of them, or any part or
parcel thereof, Forfeiture for non-payment of rent where no sufficient
distress may be found.
to be behind and unpaid by the space of twenty eight days, next after either
of the said Feasts, in which the same are or ought to be paid, being lawfully
demanded, and no sufficient distress to be found in and upon the before
mentioned premises, limited by these presents to the use of the said T W, his
executors and assigns, for and during the said term of 99 years, if the said
T W, the said R C, and G R, or any of them so long live, that then immediately
the said estate of the said T W for 99 years, shall cease and be utterly void,
any thing in these presents contained, or the said fine or recovery
notwithstanding.

And the said T W, etc. does covenant etc. in manner and form following, That
he the said T W his executors and assigns, To allow the Lords Stewards
entertainment.
shall from time to time find, give and allow unto the Steward, Surveyor,
Receivor, and other officers of the said R E, and F his wife, R R and E his
wife, and their heirs, and assigns, and their servants, and such as shall be
necessary to come with them, such sufficient, meet and convenient meat,
drink, beds, and lodgings as shall be meet for such persons. And also
stable-roome, hey, provender, and litter for their horses, and geldings, once
or twice in the year, by the space of two days, and two nights together at
every time, when they, or any of them shall come thither to keep the Courts,
Leets, and Law-daies, or to survey the Manor, or any part thereof, or for Wood
sales, or for any other cause touching the Lords affairs; so that it exceed
not above twice in the year, and so they exceed not above twelve persons at
any one time. And shall pay and deliver unto the said Officers, or to one of
them 6 s. 8 d. yearly fee, as have usualy been paid by the farmor or farmors
of of the premises there heretofore. Blunden.


Assurance of a Jointure by Fine and Recovery.
THis INDENTVRE tripartite made etc. between T W of etc. on the first part; G E
of etc. and T W of etc. of the second part; and W C of etc. of the other part,
Witnesses, that the said T W, for ^^vers good considerations him especially
moving, and for the making and assuring of a competent Jointure unto Jane
Watson, now wife of the said T W, one of the Daughters of Richard Egiocke of
etc. and Sister unto the said G E, and Niece unto the said W Comb. It is
covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed unto, by and betwetn all the said
parties to these presents, for them, and every of them, and for the etc. of
them, and of every of them, in manner and form following. That is to say, that
he the said T W shall and will one this side, and before the feast of etc. now
next coming after the date hereof, at the costs and charges of the said T W,
before the Queens Majesty's Justices of her Highness Courts of common Pleas at
Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, by fine Sur conusance de droit come
ceo qu'ils ont de lour don in due form of Law to be levied with proclamations
according to the Statute in that behalf provided, recognizee and acknowledge all
that principal message, or tenement etc. (recite all the lands particularly
etc.) or by such other name and names, and in such sort, manner and form, as by
the said T W, or by his Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised, advised and required, at the costs and charges in the law of the said
T W, to be the right of the said G E and T W, as those which the said G E and T
W shall then have of the gift of the said T W; and the same shall remise, and
quit claim from him the said T W, and his heirs, to the said G E and T W and
to the heirs of the said G E. And further the said T W shall grant by the same
fine, for him and his heirs, that they shall warrant the said messuages,
lands, tenements, hereditaments, and other the premises, with their, and every
of their appurtenances, unto the said G E, and T W, and to the heirs of the
said G E, against him the said T W and his heirs for ever, which fine so to be
levied, and all other fines to be levied of the premises or of any part or
parcel the eof, by and between the said parties to these presents, or any of
them, at any time or times before the said feast of etc. now next coming, shall
be, and shall be judged, esteemed, and taken to be. And the said conusees in
the said fine, or fines to be named, and their heirs, and every of them shall
stand and be seized of all and singular the premises, and of every parcel
thereof, to the only use and behoof of the said G E and T W, and of their etc.
for ever. And yet nevertheless upon confidence and trust, and to the only
purpose and intent, that they the said G E and T W shall and will, after the
said fine, in form aforesaid levied, and before the feast of etc. next coming
after the date hereof, permit and suffer the said W C to sue out and prosecute
one writ of entry Sur disseisin in le post returnable before the Justices of
the Common Pleas at Westminster in the County of Middlesex, against them the
said George E, and T W, of the said principal message or tenement, and the
laws thereto belonging, with their appurtenances in B. aforesaid, and of all
and singular other the said messuages, lands, tenements, rents, hereditaments,
and all other the premises, with their and every of their appurtenances before
mentioned, by such name and names, and in such sort, manner and form, as by the
said T W, or his Council learned in the laws shall be reasonably devised or
advised. In and upon which writ of entry Sur disseisin in le post so to be
brought, the said G E and T W shall appear, and vouch over to warrantie the
said T W, who likewise shall appear and vouch to warrantie the Common vouchee,
who after his entry into the warrantie and imparlance thereupon had, shall make
default, to the end a perfect common recovery shall and may thereof be had and
prosecuted in all things according to the usual order and form of common
Recovery for assurances of lands, tenements, and hereditaments in such case
used and accustomed; and that the said recovery shall and may also in due form
of law be executed by writ of habere facias seisinam accordingly; which
recovery so to be had and prosecuted, and all other recoveries, conveyances and
assurances to be suffered, had and prosecuted of the premises, or any part
thereof, by and between the said persons, or their heirs, or any of them at any
time after the said fine levied, and before the feast of etc. next etc. and the
full force, effect and execution of them, and every of them shall be adjudged,
esteemed and taken to be. And the said W C and his heirs, and all and every
other person and persons then standing or being seized, or which at any time
from henceforth shall stand or be seized of or in the said principal message
or tenement; and all and singular other messuages, lands, tenements and
hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises, or of, or in any part
or parcel thereof, shall at all times and time after the said recoverie had and
executed, stand and be seized of and in the same, and every part thereof, to
the uses, purposes and intents hereafter in these presents mentioned, expressed
and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose. That is to say, to the
use and behoof of the said T W and the said Jane his wife, and the heirs and
assigns of the said T W for ever, and to none other use, intent or purpose.

And further it is agreed, covenanted, granted, condescended and fully agreed
between the said parties to these presents, that the said W C and his heirs,
shall from and after the same Recovery so had and executed, stand and be seized
of the said Messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments, and other the
premises with their appurtenances to the sole and only use and behoof of the
said T W and I his wife, and the heirs and assigns of the said T W for ever.

In witness, etc. Blunden.

And the said A B does covenant etc. to and with C D etc, that if it shall
happen the said yearly rent of eight pound, That the Lessee shall pay twenty
shillings Nomine poenae, for not payment of his Rent.
or any parcel thereof to behind and unpaid by the said space of forty days,
next after either of the said feasts, in which the same ought to be paid as
aforesaid, being lawfully demanded at the place of payment before mentioned,
that then he the said A B his executors or administrators shall forfeit, lose,
and pay unto the said C D his heirs, and assigns for every month next after
the same forty days ended in which the same yearly rent, or any parcel
thereof shall be so behind or unpaid, the sum of twenty shillings of lawful
etc. (nomine paenae) for every such default.

Assignment of an extent, and the land thereby extended.
THis INDENTURE etc. between etc. F C Administrators of the goods, debts, and
chattels of Sir R C deceased Knight, of the one party, and I H etc. witnesses
that where R S of etc. by his recognizance in the nature of a Statute staple,
bearing date etc. taken and acknowledged before etc. did acknowledge himself to
be indebted unto the said Sir R C in the sum of 4000 l. as in and by the same
statute or recognizance more at large appears.

And where also her Highness writs of extent bearring date etc. were awarded out
of her Highness Court of Chancery, the one of them being directed to the then
Sheriff of the county of York; and the other to the then Sheriff of the County
of Lincoln, by virtue of which writ so directed into the County of Y. the same
then Sheriff, did amongst other things, extend all that the Manor of S with the
appurtenances, and diverse lands, tenements, and hereditaments to the said
Manor belonging, situate, lying, and being in the Parish of S. in the said
County of Y. As in and by an inquisition thereof had, and taken by the said
Sheriff, at E in the said County of Y. bearing date etc. annnexed to the said
writ of extent, and remaining of Record in her Majesty's said Court of Chancery
more at large does and may appear.

And where also afterward, Sir H C Knight, Sheriff of the said County of Y. by
virtue of her Majesty's writ of (liberate) likewise directed to the said
Sheriff, has amongst other things delivered possession and seisin of the said
Manor, and other the premises with the appurtenances, lying in the said
County of Y. unto the said F C and to his assigns, to have and to hold the
said recited premises amongst other things in the said writ mentioned to him
the said F C and his Assigns as his freehold until the said debt of four
thousand pounds with the costs and damages should be of the said lands extended
and delivered, and of other lands likewise in the County of L. extended and
delivered, fully satisfied, contented, and paid; as in and by the said writ of
liberate remaining of Record in the said honorable court of Chancery more
plainly at large appears.

Now this Indenture further witnesses, that the said F C for and in
consideration of a certain sum of etc. to him in hand paid by the said I H,
whereof and wherewith the said F C acknowledges himself fully satisfied,
contented and paid, and thereof and of every part or parcel thereof, does
clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge the said I H his executors,
administrators, and assigns, by these presents; has given, granted,
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully and
absolutely give etc. unto the said I H his executors, administrators and
assigns, all his estate, right, title, interest, claim and demand whatsoever
which he the said F C has, may, might, or ought to have of and in all that the
said Manor of S, and all the rights, members and appurtenances thereof,
situate, and being in the said Parish of S. in the said County of Y. and of and
in all the messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments with the appurtenances
whatsoever to the said Manor of S. belonging or appertaining by force and
virtue of the said recited extent, inquisition, and liberate, as aforesaid, to
have and to hold, occupy, perceive, receive, take and enjoy the same premises
with their and every of their appurtenances, profits, rents, commodities and
advantages whatsoever unto the said I H and his assigns, to the only proper
use and behoof of the said I H and his assigns, for and during the term and
continuance of the said extent, until the said sum of four thousand pounds,
with the costs and damages be of the said Manor of S. and other the premises
extended, fully satisfied, contented and paid as is aforesaid.

And the said F C does for him, his heirs, executors and Administrators
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I H his executors and assigns
in manner and form following; that is to say, Quiet enjoying discharged of
encumbrances.
that he the said F C is now lawfully and solely possessed of and in the said
Manor of S. and all the premises thereunto belonging, with the appurtenances,
in the said County of Y by virtue of the said extent, and has good power and
authority to assign and set over unto the said I H the same extent thereupon in
manner and form aforesaid, notwithstanding any act done by him; and that he
the said I H his executors, assigns, shall or may, according to the true
meaning of these presents, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess,
receive, perceive, take and enjoy all and singular the same premises before
mentioned, with the appurtenances, and all and every the rents, revenues,
issues, and profits of all and singular the same premises, with their
appurtenances, discharged or saved harmless by the said F C his executors and
administrators, or some of them, of and from all and all manner of former
statutes, surrenders, forfeitures, assignments, suspensions, charges, titles,
troubles and encumbrances whatsoever heretofore had, made, committed, or done,
or hereafter to be had, made, committed, or done by him the said F C his
executors, or assigns, or by any other person or persons, by his assent, means,
consent or procurement. And that neither he the said F C nor his assigns has
not, nor hereafter shall do, procure or suffer to be done any act, deed or
thing whereby the interest of the said extent, for or concerning the premises
by these presents meant to be assigned, be or shall be determined or undone.

In witness, etc.
Assignment of an extent, upon a statute forfeited to the Queen.
THis INDENTVRE made etc. witnesses, that whereas W C. the seventeenth day of
M. in the twentieth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord, King Henry
the 8th, before Sir T S Mayor of the Stalpe at Westminster, and Constable of
the same by his recognizance in the Nature of a statute staple, knowledged
before the said Sir T S the said 17 day of M in the said 20 year of etc.
acknowledged himself to stand and be indebted unto one T A Esquire in the sum of
2000 marks, to have been paid to the said T on the feast of P then next
following, as in and by the said Statute more at large it does and may appear.
After the knowledgment of which said recognizance, the said T A in the time of
the late King Ed. the 6. was attainted of felony, by the the name of T A Kr. by
reason of which attainder, as well the said debt of 2000 marks, as also all the
goods, chattels, rights, debts, and credits which were the said Tho. Arundels,
to the said K. Ed. the 6. did appertain and belong, and so by his death, and by
the death of the late Queens Majesty, the same debt of 2000 marks due by the
recognizances, became due to our Sovereign Lady Eliz. the Queens Majesty that
now is.

And whereas also afterward, our said Sovereign Lady Eliz. the Queens
Majesty that now is, by her Highness Letters patents, under the great Seal of
England, bearing date etc. for the consideration in the said Letters patents
expressed, did give and grant to the said Rob. Zinzan, alias Alexander, all,
and all manner of Recognizances, debts, and penalties forfeited to our said
Sovereign Lady, by reason of the attainder of any person or persons, and from
her Highness concealed, and before the date of the said Letters patents
unjustly detained, to the number of 30 such persons attainted of Felony, as the
said To. Z. or his assigns should name, within two years after the date of the
said Letters patents, unto the Lord high-Treasurer of England, or to the
Chancellor of the Exchequer for the time being. And further granted to the
said R Z by the same Letters patents, that it should be lawful to and for him,
as well in her Majesty's name, as in the name of the said R, to implead,
condemn, and put in execution any person or persons which ought to yield and
pay any such sums of money, debts, recognizances and forfeitures, and to take
execution thereof to his and their own use, as by the same Letters patents,
amongst other things appears.

And whereas also within the said two years, next after the ensealing of the
said Letters patents; that is to say, the fourth day of J. in the said one and
twentieth year of the reign of etc. the said R Z did nominate to the Right
Honorable Sir W M. Kr. then Chancellor of her Majesty's said Exchequer, the
foresaid Sir. T A. attainted of felony according to the form in the said
Letters patents specified. And whereas also the said 2000 Marks in the foresaid
recognizance specified, were concealed from the late K. E. the 6. Q. M. and
from our sovereign Lady the Qu. that now is. And whereas thereupon also our said
sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty that now is by her writ of (extend' fac')
issuing out of her Majesty's high Court of Chancery upon a certificate made
into the said Court, by the clark of the statute for the time being, did
command the Sheriff of the foresaid County of S. that by the oaths of good
and lawful men of this Bayliwick, he should diligently inquire what lands and
tenements the foresaid WC had within his said Bayliwick, at the foresaid day of
the date of the foresaid recognizance, or at any time after, and of what yearly
value the same were of, and that he should extend all the said lands and
tenements, and should seize them to the use of her Majesty, to the end the
same might be delivered to the foresaid R. until he should be fully satisfied
of the said 2000 Marks according to the form of the statute at Westminster,
made for the recovery of such debts.

And whereas also afterward the said Sheriff made return into the said court
of the said writ as follows, viz. That the foresaid W C the said 17 day of M.
was seized in his demeasne as of fee, of, and in the Manors of T F etc.
(recite all the land) with the appurtenances in the said county of S. and that
the foresaid Manors of T F etc. are worth, by the year in all issues above
reprize, 15 l. and that the foresaid Manors of C and D with the appurtenances
etc. are worth etc. (ut antea) and that he the said Sheriff did by virtue of
the same writ seize and take into her Majesty's hands all the said Manors and
other the premises whatsoever with the appurtenances, as by her Majesty's said
writ he was commanded, and that the foresaid W C had no other or more Manors,
lands, or tenements within the said county, which might be extended for the
said debt, or seized to the use of her Majesty, as by the return of the said
writ, remaining upon the files of the said court of chancery, more at large
appears.

And whereas also afterward her Majesty by a writ of liberate issuing out of
the said court of chancery, did command the Sheriff of the said county of S
that he should deliver unto the said R Z and his assigns, the foresaid lands,
Manors, and tenements, and other the premises with the appurtenances, if
according to the said extent he should receive them. To hold to him the said R
Z and his assigns as his and their freehold, until he should be satisfied the
said sum of 2000 marks, together with his costs and charges, in that behalf
reasonably sustained; which said Sheriff afterward returned, that he the
third day of M etc. did deliver unto the said W C, attorney and assignee to the
said R Z lawfully authorized, the said Manors, lands, tenements, and other the
premises in the said County of S. with their appurtenances, to hold to the
said R Z and his assigns, as his and their freehold until he or they should
be fully satisfied of the foresaid 2000 marks, together with his costs and
charges in that behalf reasonably sustained, as also by the said writ and
return thereof remaining on the files of the said Court of Chancery also
appears.

And whereas also the Qu. Majesty, by an other writ of extent, issuing out of
the said high Court of Chancery, upon the certificate aforesaid, directed to
the Sheriff of the county of Dorset, did command the said Sheriff of the said
county of Dorset, that likewise by oaths and testimonies of good and lawful men
of the said county, he should diligently inquire what lands and tenements the
foresaid W C had within the said county of D. at the aforesaid day of the date
of the foresaid recognizance, or at any time after, and for what yearly value
the same were of. And that he should seize to the use of her Majesty, all and
singular the foresaid Manors, lands, and tenements, that they might be
delivered to the said R Z, until he should be fully satisfied of the foresaid
debt of 2000 marks, according to the form of the statute at Westminster. for the
recovering of such debts, made and provided.

And whereas afterward also the said Sheriff made return of the said writ, in
the said Court, that the foresaid W C the foresaid seventeenth day of March was
seized in his demesne, as of Fee, of and in the Manor of Ilond, with the
appurtenances, and of and in etc. and that the foresaid Manor etc. are worth
by the year 26 l. etc. And that he had seized the said Manor etc. and all
other the premises, with the appurtenances, in the said County of D, to the use
of her Majesty, as by the said writ he was commanded. And that the foresaid W
C had no other Manors, Lands, or Tenements, within the said County which for
the debt aforesaid, might be extended, or seized to the use of her Majesty, as
by the return of her Majesty's said writ, remaining upon the Files in the
Chancery, more at large appears.

And thereupon her Majesty, by her writ of liberate, did command the said
Sheriff of the said County of D, that he should deliver unto the said R Z,
the foresaid Manor of Ilond, with the appurtenances, and the etc. in the said
County of D, if according to the aforesaid extent he should receive them, To
hold to him, and his assigns, as his Freehold, until he should be fully
satisfied of the foresaid debt, together with his costs and charges in that
behalf reasonably sustained.

And whereas also afterward the said Sheriff of the said County of D, did
return into the said high Court of Chancery, That by virtue of her Majesty's
writ to him directed, upon the eighth day of A etc. he did deliver unto the
said W G, Attorney to the said R Z, lawfully authorized, the said Manor of
Ilond, and other the premises in the said County of D with their
appurtenances, to hold to the said R Z, etc. (ut ante) as by the several writs
aforesaid, and the returns of them remaining in the said High Court of
Chancery, more at large appears, by reason whereof the said R Z, and W G or
one of them, now is, and stands seized of, and in all the premises with their
appurtenances, accordingly.

Now the said Z, alias Alexander, and W G for diverse good causes and
considerations them thereunto moving, have demised, granted, and to farm letten
unto the said T I, his executors and assigns, all his said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and other the premises, with their appurtenances (except always to
the said W G his executors, etc. one tenement etc. in the said County of D) To
have, and to hold all the said Manors, lands, tenements, and other the
premises with all and singular their appurtenances, (except before excepted)
unto the said T I his etc. from the feast day of the Annunciation of etc. for,
and until the full end and term of sixty years, from thence next ensuing and
fully to be complete, ended, and determined, if the said manors, lands, and
other hereditaments shall or ought so long to continue in extent, by force of
the execution aforesaid, for the debt aforementioned.

Yiedling and paying therefore to the said W G, his executors and assigns,
yearly during three years of the said term, which shall begin immediately
from, and after the said T I, his executors, or assigns shall have possession
of the premises before mentioned to be demised, two hundred pounds of good etc.
at the feast of etc. by even portions, or within twenty days next after etc.
at or in, etc. and yiedling, and paying therefore to the said W G his heirs or
assigns for the fourth years which shall ensue next after the said T I his
executors or assigns shall have possession of the foresaid demised premises,
sixty pounds of good etc. at the said Feasts etc. And yiedling and paying unto
the said W G, his executors, or assigns, yearly during the residue of the
said Term, one pepper-corn always at the feast of etc. at the place aforesaid,
if it be demanded upon any part or parcel of the aforesaid demised premises.

Provided always, and it is nevertheless covenanted, granted, condescended
and agreed by and between all the said parties to these presents, that if the
said yearly rent of 200 li. or the said yearly rent of 60 li. or any part or
parcel thereof shall happen to be behind and unpaid by the space of etc (Clause
of reentry) ut in Aliis.

Provided also, and nevertheless it is meant, mentioned, and intended between
the said parties to these presents, The Lessee to pay his Rent, so long as he
may enjoy his Lease.
that the payment of the several rents abovesaid, or any part thereof shall
not continue, or that the said T I, his executors or assigns shall be
chargeable in any action of debt or otherwise with the payment thereof, or of
any part thereof, for any more years then so many years only of the said
term of sixty years as the said T I, or his assigns shall or may lawfully
have, hold, occupy and enjoy the premises above by these presents demised, or
meant or intended to be by the true meaning of these presents demised unto the
said T I, by the said R and W, but shall be acquitted and discharged against
the said W, his executors, and assigns, of and from the payment of any farm,
or rent for all such and so many years of the said term, as he the said T I or
his assigns shall not, or ought not lawfully to have hold and enjoy the said
premises, and every part thereof, (except before excepted) according to the
true meaning of these present Indentures.

And the said T I for himself his etc. does covenant and grant to and with the
said W G his etc. by these presents, That if the owners of the said manors,
lands, tenements and hereditaments above mentioned to be delivered in extent,
shall within the space of 4 years next after the said T I shall have the
possession of the same demised premises (except before excepted) well and truly
satisfy and pay, or cause to be well and truly satisfied and paid unto the
said T I his etc. the sum of 2000 marks, for which the said manors etc. and
other the premises are extended as aforesaid, or otherwise compound with the
said T I his etc. that then he the said T I his etc. shall and will well and
truly content and pay or cause to be etc. unto the said W G etc. the full sum
of 1000 marks of etc. or so much lawful money of England as shall then at the
time of payment of the same remain or rest unpaid of the sum of 1000 marks
above by these presents reserved to be paid to the said W G for the farm of the
premises, and to be paid within 16 days after such receipt of the said sum
of two thousand Marks, or within 16 days after such composition as aforesaid.

And the said R Z for himself, his etc. does covenant etc. to and with the said
T I his etc. by these presents, that he the said R has not at any time
heretofore received or had the said sum of 2000 marks nor any part thereof, nor
has at any time heretofore acquitted, released, discharged, or otherwise
extinguished the said statute and debt, neither shall or will at any time
hereafter receive, or take into his or their hands the said sum of 2000 marks
or any part or parcel thereof without the consent and agreement of the said
Thomas I, his executors, or assigns first had thereunto and obtained in
writing ( The like Covenant for W G.)

In witness, etc.
A Confirmation of a Lease, short.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, A B of etc.
sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Where one R W of etc. by his
indenture of Lease bearing date etc. has demised, granted and to farm letten
unto one C D of etc. all that tenement etc. for the term of 40 years, from the
date of the same Indenture, if the said C D should so long live, as by the same
Indenture it may more at large appear. Now know ye, that I the said A B do by
these presents ratify, affirm, confirm and allow the said Indenture of Lease
and all things therein contained, and the estate Interest, term of years and
demand of the said C D in and to the said tenement, and other the premises, and
in and to every parcel thereof with the appurtenances.

In witness, etc.
A Confirmation to the assignee of a Lease to him assigned from the chief Lord.
TO all Christian people etc. A B of etc. greeting etc. where I the said A B by
my deed Indented or Indenture of lease bearing date etc. made between me the
said A B of the one part, and C D and E his wife of the other party, have
demised, granted and to farm letten unto the said C D and E his wife all that
message or tenement, with the appurtenances etc. (reciting the Indenture
truly) to have and to hold the said message, etc. and all other the premises,
with their appurtenances, unto the said C D and E his wife, their executors
etc. from the feast of etc. unto the end and term of twenty one years from
thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended: yiedling and paying
etc. as by the same Indenture (wherein diverse other covenants, grants, articles
and agreemens be contained) more at large it does, and may appear. The
interest, estate term of years, and demand, of which said C D and E his wife,
of, in and to the said message etc. and other the premises, and of, in and to
every part and parcel thereof, R M of etc. now has by lawful means and
conveyances in the Law. Now know ye, that I the said A B, as well for and in
consideration of a certain sum of lawful English money to me in hand at the
ensealing and delivery of these presents by the said R M well and ^^ly paid, as
also for diverse other good and reasonable causes and considerations me in this
behalf especially moving, do not only by these presents remise, release and
quit claim unto the said R M his executors and assigns, all and all manner of
forfeitures and re-entries, titles and causes of re-entry and forfeiture in any
wise or for any cause or thing whatsoever, of and concerning the premises or
any parcel thereof had, made, caused, committed or grown: But also by these
presents, for me my etc. the said Indenture of lease, and all and every thing
therein contained, as also the estate, right, title, interest, term of years
and demand of the said R M of, in and to the same message etc. and all other
the premises with their appurtenances, and of, in and to every part and parcel
thereof, together with the same premises unto the said R M his etc. do ratify,
demise, affirm, confirm and allow, to have and to hold unto the said R M his
etc. from the day of the date hereof for and during, and unto the full end and
accomplishment of the said term of 21 years, for the years aforesaid and rent
aforesaid, and according to the tenor and purport of the said Indenture of
Lease.

In witness, etc.
A Grant from the Queen, of the goods of one that is outlawed.
ELizabeth etc. To our Treasurers, Chamberlaines, and Barons of our Exchequer
for the time being, and to all and singular other our Judges, Justices,
Officers and Ministers whatsoever, greeting. Whereas A W, late of R etc. now
lately deceased, in contempt of us and of our Laws and Statutes, of this our
Realm in his lifetime did incur the danger and forfeiture of his goods, and
cha^^els, and the issues and profits of his lands tenemen^^ and hereditaments,
by reason of diverse and sundry Utlagaries in personal actions commenced; and
sued against him at the suits of diverse of our Subjects by the order and course
of the common Laws and Satutes of this Realm, and so died outlawed. Know ye,
that we of our special grace, and mere motion, and certain knowledge have given
and granted and by these presents for us, our heirs etc. do give and grant to
our well beloved Subjects W A widow, late wife of the said W A, and to R P all
and singular such sum, and sums of money, goods, chattels, leases, debts,
duties, obligations, bills, escripts, writings, Indentures, forfeitures,
profits, advantages and commodities whatsoever, which we our heirs and
Successors, or any of us, or any other, to our use, or in our name, can or may
have, take, recover and enjoy by reason means, or occasion of any Utlagary or
Utlagaries pronounced against the said W A in any action, personal or mixed at
the suite of any of our Subjects. To have, hold, perceive, take, leavy,
receive, recover and enjoy the said sum and sums of money, goods, chattels,
leases, debts, duties, obligations, bills, escripts, writings, Indentures,
forfeitures, profits, advantages and commodities, and all and singular other
the premises with their appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof to the
said W A and R P their etc. to their own use and uses, freely, absolutely and
clearly without any manner of account, pressed reckonings or recompense therefore
for or any part or parcel thereof to be rendered, yielded, had or made to us our
heirs or successors, or any of us in as large and ample manner and form to all
intents and purposes, as we our heirs or successors or any of us, or any other
in our or their names, or to our uses had, or may have, receive, enjoy, take or
recover the same, or the whole sum or sums of money, penalties, forfeitures,
fines, issues, profits, commmodities and advantages due for the same, or any
part or parcel thereof by any ways or means whatsoever. And further know ye,
that we of our special grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, have given
and granted, and by these presents, for us, our heirs and successors, do give
and grant to the said W and R their executors, administrators and assigns, and
to every of them, that they and every of them, shall and may from time to time,
and at all times hereafter have, perceive, receive, leavy, take and enjoy to
their own proper use and uses the said sum and sums of money, goods,
chattels, debts, duties, leases, obligations, bills, escripts, writings,
indentures, forfeitures, profits, advantages, and commodities whatsoever that
are so forfeited and due to us by reason or means of any of the said
Utlagaries, according to the effect of this our grant, as well at the hands of
any of our officers and Ministers, as also, at and by the hands of any other
person and persons; and this our Letters patents, or the inrollment thereof,
shall be from time to time, and at all times hereafter, a sufficient warrant
and discharge, as well to all Judges, Barons of our Exchequer, and all other
our officers and Ministers, and to all other persons whatsoever, for the
payment, allowance, and delivery of the premises by these presents granted, or
any part thereof, without any further warrantie to be made or sued from us, our
etc. to them, or any of them. And further, of our special grace, certain
knowledge, and mere motion, for us, our etc. we give and grant unto the said W
and R their etc. and to every of them, at all time and times hereafter for the
better executing of this our grant, full power and authority to enter into the
said leases, and take, seize, leavie, receive, have and enjoy by themselves, or
by any other, their Ministers, deputy or deputies in any place or places
whatsoever, within th^s our Realm the said sum or sums of money, goods,
chattels, debts, duties, obligations, bills, escripts, writings, indentures,
forfeitures, profits, advantages, commodities, and other the premises
whatsoever of any person or persons according to the due order and course of
our laws. And moreover, of our special grace, mere motion, and certain
knowledge for us our heirs and successors, we do give and grant unto the said W
and R their etc. and every of them, full power, and lawful authority, as
absolutely, wholly, and freely, as we our selves, our etc. may or can do, to
compound or agree with any person or persons whatsoever for the said sum or
sums of money, goods, chattels, debts, duties, obligations, bills, escripts,
writings, forfeitures, profits, advantages and commodities, and other the
premises before, by these presents to them granted. And that the said W. and
R. their executors, administrators, and assigns, and every of them, shall have
full power and authority to release, acquit, and discharge all and every
person and persons whatsoever, their heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns, their lands, tenements, hereditaments, goods and chattels for the
said ready money, goods, chattels, debts, duties, obligations, bills, escripts,
writings, indentures, forfeitures, profits, advantages and commodities before
by these presents granted, and that the said composition, agreement, release,
acquittance, or other discharge so made or done by the said W and R, their
executors, administrators or assigns, or by any other shall be a sufficient
and lawful bar, discharge, acquittance, and exoneration against us, our
heirs, or successors to be pleaded or sued by any person or persons which shall
at any time hereafter be impleaded, sued, molested, or vexed by us, our heirs,
or successors, or by any other person or persons, by any grant, assignment, or
appointment, by us, our etc. of or for the same, in as large manner and
strength as the same were made or done by us, our etc. or by any of us. And
further, of our special grace etc. for us, our heirs, and successors, we do
give and grant to the said W and R. their etc. and every of them, full power
and authority in the name of the said W and R, during their lives, or in the
name or names of their etc. after their decease, or otherwise, to sue for,
implead or recover, prosecute, demand, leavie, perceive, take, put in due
execution (and the said sum and sums of money, goods, chattels, debts, duties,
obligations, bills, escripts, writings indentures, forfeitures, profits,
advantages and commodities, and all other the premises, and every of them, to
have) against any person or persons whatsoever according to this our grant, in
any of our Court or Courts of Record, or in any other place or places within
this our Realm, according to our laws and statutes, at the will and pleasure
of the said W and R. their etc. and every of them. And further of our special
grace etc. for us, our etc. we do give and grant unto the said W and R their
etc. and every of them, full power and authority, or in the name of us, our
etc. or in the name or the names of the said W and R their etc. to redeem,
have and enjoy all and every lease and leases, term and terms of years
indentures and indenture which the said W A in his lifetime did mortgage,
convey or assure to any person or persons upon any condition or conditions for
the payment of any sum or sums of money on his part to be paid, in as large and
ample manner and form, as we, our etc. or any other in our or their names or to
their uses, can or may redeem, have or enjoy the same by any ways or means
whatsoever, although express mention of the certainty of the premises, or
any of them, or of any other gifts or grants by us or any of our progenitors to
the said W A before this time made in these presents, be not expressed or
declared: any statute, act, law, ordinance, provision or proclamation of the
contrary hereof, had made, ordained or provided, or any other thing cause or
matter whatsoever to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness etc
Witness our self at Westminster. etc.
A grant of the forfeiture of a recognizance, acknowledged before two Justices
of the peace, to the Queens use.
ELizabeth etc. Greeting, whereby a recognizance taken and acknowledged at
Metham etc. before I L and E B Justices of our peace in the said county, the
nine and twentieth of etc. W L and C B did come, and undertook as pledges or
sureties for T W. That is to say, every of them severally for himself, under
the penalty of ten pounds; and the foresaid T W under the penalty of an
hundred pounds, to be taken and leavyed of the lands, tenements, hereditaments,
goods and chattels of them, and every of them, to the use and behoof of us, our
heirs and successors, under the condition hereafter following, viz. That if the
said T W did personally appear before our justices of Peace, at the next
general Sessions of the Peace, to beholden at M. to do and to receive that
which by the Court he should be enjoined, and ^^at he should not depart thence
without license of the said Court; and in the mean time, that he the said T W
and all his said servants should keep the peace against us, and our liege
people, and especially against W R and I R and the servants of them both, and
that they should not procure or cause to be procured or done unto ^he said W R
and I R and their servants, or to any other our liege people any bodily hurt,
or any other thing tending to the breach of our peace, that then the said
recognizance to be void, or else to stand in full strength and virtue, as by
the same recognizance and condition there underwritten more plainly appears.
And whereas at the Sessions of the Peace, holden at M. in our said county of K.
for their city of K being the next Sessions there holden after the
acknowledging of their recognizance on the etc. before R M and T R and others
our Justices of the peace within the said county. At which time, the said T W
made default contrary to the tenor of the condition aforesaid, by reason
whereof, the said recognizance is forfeited to us, our heirs and successors.
Now know ye that we of our special grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion,
have given and granted, and by these presents do give and grant by our well
beloved servant A B the said Recognizance and penalty of an hundred and twenty
pound of etc. To have, hold, enjoy, receive, and take the said recognizance,
and sum of an hundred and twenty pounds in the same specified and contained,
and all the commodities and profits of the same recognizance, unto the said A B
his etc. without any thing therefore to us, our heirs, or successors to be
yielded, and without any account to us, our heirs or successors to be made.
Know ye further, that we of our etc. have given and granted, and by these
presents do give and grant to the said A B. That he, his etc. all and all
manner of actions, suits or executions whatsoever, of or upon the said
recognizance in his own name, shall sue or follow, and all profits, commodities
and emoluments thereof to his own proper use to receive and convert, without
any account, or other thing whatsoever to us, our heirs or successors, to be
yielded or done.

In witness, etc.
Witness our self etc.
An Indenture for Marriage.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between E P of etc. of the one part, And P V of etc.
of the other part, Witnesses, That it is covenanted, concluded, condescended,
and fully agreed upon by and between the said parties to these presents, for
them, their several heirs, executors and administrators, That he the said E P.
shall and will before the Feast of etc. next, marry and take to wife Mary one
of the Daughters of the said P V, if she the said M shall thereunto consent
and agree, and the Laws of the holy Church shall permit and suffer the same.
And the said E P, for and in consideration of a certain sum of good and
lawful money of England to be to him paid by the said P V, as a Marriage
portion for the advancement of the said M. and for the love and affection which
the said E P bears toward the said M, and for a competent Jointure to be
made to the said M, in recompense of all title and pretense of dower that she
the said M. shall or may claim out of all or any the Manors, Lands, Tenements
or Hereditaments of the said E P, his heirs or assigns, or any of them; Does
for him, his heirs, executors and administrators, and for every of them,
covenant and grant to and with the said P V, his heirs, executors and
administrators and every of them by these presents, That he the said E P and
his heirs shall and will from henceforth stand and be seized of and in all that
the Manor of etc. in the County of etc. and of all and singular houses of etc.
to the uses, intents and purposes herein mention^d and expressed, and to no
other: That is to say, To the use of him the said E P and his heirs, until the
said Marriage shall be had and solemnized between them the said E P and M; and
after the solemnization of the same Marriage, then to the use of the said E P
for the term of his life; and afterward to the use of the said M for term of
her life; and afterward to the use of the said E P, and the heirs etc. of the
said E P for ever. And the said E P, for him, his heirs and assigns does
covenant etc. to and with the said P V, his heirs and assigns, That he the said
E P at the ensealing and delivery hereof, is, and so shall continue until the
said intended marriage shall take effect, lawfully and rightfully seized of the
said Manor and premises in his demesne as of Fee, of a good, rightful, absolute
and indefeasable estate of Fee-simple; And that the same now are and so shall
continue to the said M for term of her natural life (if the said intended
marriage shall take effect) of the clear yearly value of etc. above all charges
and reprizes. And that he the said E P and his heirs shall and will from time
to time and at all times during etc. next after the said Marriage shall be had
and solemnized, make, do, acknowledge, execute and suffer, or cause to be made,
done, acknowledged, executed and suffered all and every such further act and
thing for the further and better assurance, surety and sure making of the said
Manor etc. to the uses abovesaid, according to the true meaning of these
presents, at the cost of the said P V or his heirs, as by the said P V or his
heirs, or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or
required. Per Nich. Hide Council.

In witness etc.
A Mortgage of Letters patents, and the Land thereby granted.
THis INDENTUERE made the etc. Witnesses, That whereas our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth the Queens Majesty that now is, by her Highness Letters patents
under the Great Seal of England bearing date etc. for the considerations
therein mentioned and expressed, Has betaken, granted, and to farm letten unto
the said A B all that the Site and capital Message of her Highness Manor of
H. etc. (Reciting the Laud as in the Patent etc.) as in and by the same Letters
patents (amongst diverse covenants, clauses, conditions and agreements therein
contained) more at large it does and may appear. Now the said A B as well for
and in consideration of the sum of etc. to him in hand at and before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents by the said C D, well and truly paid;
whereof and wherewith etc. As also for diverse other good causes and
considerations him in this behalf specially moving, Has granted, bargained,
sold, aliened, assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully, clearly
and absolutely grant, bargain, sell, alien, assign and set over unto the said
C D, as well the said recited or mentioned Letters patents to him the said A B
granted, as aforesaid, and the said Site and capital Message of the said
Manor of H. Lands, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Demeasne Lands, Stock, and all
and singular other the premises thereby mentioned to be demised and granted,
and every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances; As also all the
estate, right, title, interest, term of years yet to come and unexpired,
reversion, possession, property, claim and demand whatsoever, which he the
said A B now has or had, or may, might, should or of right ought to have, or
can or may claim and demand of, in or to the said Site and Capital
Messuage-Lands, and all and singular other the premises with the appurtenances,
and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof, By force and virtue of the
same Letters parents to him the said A B made and granted as aforesaid, or any
thing therein contained, or otherwise howsoever: To have and to hold the said
Site and capital Message of the said Manor of H. Lands, Meadows, Feedings,
Pasture, Demesne Lands, and all and singular other the premises before recited,
and in and by the said Letters patents to him the said A B mentioned to be
demised and granted, and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances,
(except before excepted) and all the said estate, right, title, interest, term
of years yet to come and unexpired, reversion, possession, property, claim and
demand whatsoever of him the said A B of, in and to the said premises, and of,
in and to every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, unto the said
C D his etc. to the only proper use and behoof of him the said C D, and of his
executors, administrators and assigns, from the ensealing and delivery of
these presents, for, during and until the full end and accomplishment of all
the rest and residue yet to come and unexpired of the said term of 21 years by
the said recited Letters patents to him the said C D granted as aforesaid,
together with the same Letters patents.

And the said A B, for himself, his heirs, executors and administrators, and
for every of them, does covenant, promise and grant by these presents,
Discharged of encumbrances.
to and with the said C D. his executors, administrators and assigns, and to
and with every of them, That the said Site and capital Message of the Manor
of H, Lands, Meadows, Feedings, Pasture, Demesne Lands, and all and singular
other the premises herein before mentioned to be granted, bargained, sold,
assigned and set over, and every part and parcel thereof with the
appurtenances, now are and be, and on the fifteenth day of etc. shall be, and
so from thenceforth from time to time and at all times for and during all the
rest and residue yet to come and unexpired of the said term of one and twenty
years, shall be and remain and continue unto the said C D. his excutors,
administrators and assigns, free, clear and clearly acquitted, exonerated and
discharged, or upon reasonable request saved and kept harmless of and from all
and all manner of bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, assignements,
mortgages, forfeitures, re-entries, rents, arrearages of rents, statutes,
recognizances, judgments, extents, executions, and of and from all other
charges, titles, troubles and encombrances whatsoever, had, made, committed or
done, or hereafter to be had, made, committed or done by him the said A B. his
executors or administrators, or by any other person or persons whatsoever
claiming any thing in the premises in, by, from or under him, them or any of
them, or by his, their or any of their assents, means, consents, titles,
interest, act or procurement. The said yearly rent of seventeen pounds, and the
covenants, clauses, conditions and agreements by and in the said recited
Letters patents, contained or mentioned, which for or in respect of the
premises on the part and behalf of the said A B his executors, administrators
or assigns, from and after the said fifteenth day of etc. shall grow due, and
ought to be paid, done and performed, only except and foreprized.

And further A B for himself, his etc. does covenant, promise and grant to and
with the said C. D his etc. and to and with every of them by these presents in
manner and form following; To pay the rent and show acquittance testifying the
payment thereof.
that is to say, that he the said A B his executors, administrators and
assigns or some of them, shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be paid
unto our sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty that now is, her etc. the said
yearly rent of 17. l. of etc. reserved, due and payable in and by the said
recited Letters patents at the feast of St M. etc. at the receipt of her
Highness Exchequer at Westminster. or to the hands of the Bailiffes or receivers of
the premises for the time being, or within thirty days next after either of
the same feasts by even portions. And also he the said A B his executors or
assigns, shall and will at either of the said feasts, or within the said
thirty days then next after, deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said C
D his executors or assigns, at or etc. a Talley or acquittance testifying the
due payment and receipt of the said rent accordingly.

And moreover the said A B for himself, his heirs, executors and
administrators, does covenant, Not to commit any wast, or do any act to make
the Letters patents void.
promise and grant to and with the said C D his executors, administratours, and
assigns, and every of them in manner and form following, that is to say, that
neither he the said A B his executors, administrators or assigns nor any of
them shall or will at any time or times hereafter do, cause, commit or suffer
to be done any manner of wast or spoil upon the said site or capital message
and other the premises by the said Letters patents demised or any parcel
thereof; nor do, cause, commit or suffer to be done any act, demise or thing
whatsoever, which shall or may be prejudicial or hurtful to the said Letters
Patents, or the demise of the premises thereby made, or to the said term of
years thereby granted or any of them, or whereby, or by reason whereof the
said Letters Patents shall or may become void or frustrate, except it be by and
with the special license, consent and agreement of the said C D, his Executors
or Assigns, or some of them in writing in that behalf first had and obtained
under his or their hand and seal, or hands and seals.

And also that he the said A B his executors, administrators and assigns and
every of them shall and will at all times hereafter, To perform the Covenants
in the Letters patents.
and from time to time until the said fifteenth day of etc. well and truly
observe, perform, fulfill and keep all and every the Covenants, clauses,
conditions and agreements which on his and their parts and behalves are or
ought to be observed, performed, fulfilled and kept, contained, mentioned, and
expressed in the said recited Letters patents; and that in and by all things
according to the tenor and true meaning of the same Letters patents.

Provided always, that if the said A B his heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, or any of them do well and truly pay etc. (as in other provisoes for
payment of money) without covin, that then, and from thenceforth this present
indenture, and the bargain, sale, and assignment of the premises hereby made,
and all and every covenant, grant, article and agreement herein contained on
the part and behalf of him the said A B his executors or administrators to be
performed and kept, shall cease, determine and be utterly void, frustrate and
of none effect.

And further, he the said C D does by these presents covenant, promise and
grant for himself his executors and administrators to and with the said A B his
executors and administrators and every of them, To redeliver the Letters
patents and Indenture upon payment of the money.
that at and upon full payment had and made of the said sum of etc. on the
said fifteenth day of etc. and at the place of payment aforesaid, he the said
C D his etc. or some or one of them shall and will redeliver, or cause to be
redelivered unto the said A B his etc. making payment thereof, the said recited
Letters patents safe, whole, and uncancelled, together with that part of these
presents whereunto the said A B has put his hand and seal.

And also that he the said A B his executors and assigns shall or may at all
times hereafter, For quiet enjoying until the day of payment.
and from time to time until default of payment be had or made of the said
sum etc. conrary to the true meaning of the said proviso or condition,
peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said site and capital
message, lands, meadows, feedings, pastures, stock, and all and singular
other the premises hereby granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and
every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, and the rents, issues and
profits thereof have, receive and take to his and their own proper use and
behoof, without the let, trouble, interruption or disturbance of him the said C
D his executours or assigns, or of any other person or persons by his assent,
means, consent or procurement.

And furthermore, the said A B does covenant etc. in manner and form
following; that is to say, That if the said A B his executors, To depart from
the tenement mortgaged, and to deliver possession to the mortgagee after
default of payment.
administrators and assigns, shall fail and make default of payment of the
said sum of etc. or any parcel thereof at the day and place before limited
for payment thereof, contrary to the true meaning of the said proviso or
condition before mentioned, that then he the said A B his executors,
administrators and assigns, and every of them and his and their servants,
being thereunto required, shall and will immediately avoid, depart and go from
the site and capital message, lands, meadows, feedings, pastures and all and
singular other the premises with their appurtenances herein before mentioned,
to be hereby granted, bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof,
and leave the use and occupation of the same, and be no longer tenant or
tenants, farmours or occupiers thereof or of any parcel thereof, by virtue of
the said recited Letters patents, so to them granted as aforesaid, and then and
there deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the said C D his executors,
administrators or assigns full, peaceable and quiet possession of and in the
same site and capital message, and all and singular other the premises with
the appurtenances, and of and in every part and parcel thereof, to hold to him
the said C D his executors and assigns, according to the true meaning of these
presents.

And also, that he the said C D his executors, administrators and assigns, and
every of them, For quiet enjoying after default of payment made.
for the said yearly rent of etc. and under the covenants, clauses, conditions
and agreements by and in the said recited Letters patents reserved or mentioned
on the tenants or farmors behalf, or in respect of the premises to be paid,
done and performed, shall or may from time to time and at all times from and
after default of payment had and made of the said sum of etc. contrary to the
true meaning of the proviso or condition aforesaid, for and during all the rest
and residue which shall be then to come and unexpired of the said term of one
and twenty years, by the said recited Letters patents granted, peaceably and
quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said site and capital
message, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures, and all and singular
other the premises herein before mentioned, to be granted, bargained, sold,
assigned and set over, and every part and parcel thereof with the
appurtenances; and the rents, issues, revenues and profits thereof, from time
to time have, receive and take without the let, trouble, interruption,
gainsaying, denial or disturbance of him the said A B his executors,
administrators or assigns, or of any other person or persons whatsoever,
claiming any thing in the premises, in, by, from or under him, them, or any of
them, or by his, their or any of their assents, means, consents, title,
interest, act, sufferance or procurement.

And lastly, the said A B for himself, his heirs, executors and
administrators, does further covenant, For further assurance, after default of
payment.
promise and grant to and with the said A B his executors, administrators and
assigns, and to and with every other person and persons now having or
claiming, or which at any times hereafter during the term of 21 years shall or
may have, claim, or pretend to have any manner of estate, right, title or
interest of or into the said site and capital message and other the premises,
or any parcel thereof, in, by, from or under them or any of them, shall and
will at all times and from time to time from and after default of payment had
and made of the said sum of etc. in the said proviso or condition mentioned,
contrary to the true meaning of the said proviso or condition, for and during
all the rest and residue which shall be then to come, and unexpired of the said
term of one and twenty years, at the request, and at the cost and charges in
the law of the said C D his executors or assigns, make, do knowledge and
execute, or cause and suffer to be made, done, knowledged and executed all and
every such further lawful and reasonable acts, things and devises in the law
whatsoever, be it by deed, conveyance, assurance, surrender, release,
confirmation, or otherwise howsoever, for the further, better and perfecter
assurance, surety, sure making and conveying of all and every the premises with
the appurtenances unto the said C D his executours Administratours and Assigns
to the only proper use and behoof of him the said CD his executors and
assigns for and during all the rest and residue, which at the time of such
request shall be come and unexpired of the said term of one and twenty years,
by the said recited Letters patents granted, as by the said C D, his executors
or assigns (at their charges) or their, or any of their learned Council, shall
be reasonably devised, advised or required.

In witness, etc.
A Bargain and sale to the Queen of Lands, upon a Condition for the
Redemption thereof.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between the same our Sovereign Lady the Queens
Majesty of the one party and RT etc. of the other party, Witnesses, That the
said R T, for and in consideration of a certain competent sum of Lawful
English mo^y, to him in hand before the ensealing thereof paid; and for diverse
other good causes and considerations him in this behalf specially moving, has
granted, bargained, sold and confirmed, and by these presents does grant,
bargain, sell and confirm unto our said Sovereign Lady the Queen all those his
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Commons, and
Hereditaments, with all and singular their, and every of their appurtenances
situate, lying and being in C and F and B, and in every or any of them in the
County of etc. and which late were the inheritance of F A or W A or of S D of
high Treason Attainted, or of any of them. And also all and singular messuages,
houses, edifices, buildings, barnes, stables, dove-houses, yards, orchards,
gardens, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures, commons, fishings,
wastes, heaths, furzes, moors, marshes, Court leets, liberties, profits of
courts, and leets, privileges, jurisdictions, profits, commodities,
emoluments, and hereditaments whatsoever to the said manors, messuages, lands,
tenements, hereditaments, and other the premises, before mentioned to be
granted, bargained, or sold, or to any of them by any means belonging or
appertaining, or with the same, or any of them, now, or at any time heretofore
being, dedemised, let, used, occupied or enjoyed, or as member, part, or parcel
of them, or of any of them, had, taken, accepted or reputed. And the reversion
and reversions, remainder and remainders whatsoever of all and singular the
said manors, messuages, lands, tenements, hereditaments and other the premises
herein before mentioned to be granted, bargained, and sold, and of every part
and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances. And also all the estate, right,
title, interest, claim and demand whatsoever, which he the said R T has or
had, or may or ought to have or claim of, in and to the said manor, message,
lands, tenements, and other the premises herein before mentioned to be granted,
bargained, and sold, and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof, with the
appurtenances, To have and to hold the said manors, messuages, lands,
tenements, hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises herein before
mentioned to be granted, bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof,
with the appurtenances, unto our said Sovereign Lady the Queen her heirs,
successors and assigns for ever. To the only proper use and behoof of the same
our Sovereign Lady the Queen her heirs, successors and assigns for ever,
Provided always, that if the said R T, his heirs, executors, administraters
or assigns or any of them do or shall at any time or times hereafter well and
truly content and pay, or cause to be contented or paid unto our said Sovereign
Lady the Queens Majesty, her heirs or successors, the sum of one hundred
marks of etc. at one entire payment, at or in the receipt of the Exchequer of
our said Sovereign Lady, her heirs or successors at Westminster, That then,
and immediately from and after such payment so had and made, this present
Indenture and the grant, bargain and sale of the premises, and all assurances
and inrolements thereupon had or made, shall cease, determine and be utterly
void, frustrate and of none effect, to all intents, constructions and purposes,
as if these presents had not been had nor made. And that then, and from
thenceforth it shall or may be lawful to and for the said R T his heirs and
assigns into the said manors, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and all other
the premises herein before mentioned to be granted, bargained, and sold, and in
every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances, wholly to re-enter, and
the same to have again, enjoy and repossede, as in their or either of their
first and former estate. This Indenture or any thing therein contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
A Grant of an annuity for the maintenance of an Almshouse, or of an Hospital.
THis INDENTVRE made the etc. Between the Right honorable the Lord Burleigh of
the one part, Edward Bushey etc. Francis Brown etc. Robert Winkfield etc.
Thomas Cave etc. Henry Hall etc. John Wingfield etc. William Bedendyn etc.
Thomas Harrington etc. Adam Claypole etc. and Matthew Robinson etc. on the
other party, Witnesses, that whereas the said Lord B, of his honorable and
charitable disposition for the relief and sustentation of poor and needy
people, Is minded, and by Gods grace does intend, at or before the feast of
etc. next ensuing, to build and provide one hospital or Almshouse at or near
the South end of S in the County of etc. which said hospital, or almshouse the
said Lord B does ordein and appoint to be called or known by the name of
Burgleighs Almshouse, and in the said Hospital, or Almshouse, there shall be
maintained and relieved by Gods grace for ever 13 poor persons, whereof one to
be the warden over the rest, which said 13 persons shall be from time to time
chosen, placed, found, sustained and relieved in the same house with certain
sums of money weekly to be paid to them according to such directions, rules
and ordinances, as by the said Lord B in writing under his hand and seal shall
be in that behalf made, prescribed or appointed. Now the said Lo. B having had
honorable considerations of convenient and sufficient maintenance of the said
persons to continuance for ever, Has for the consideration aforesaid, and for
the trust and confidence which he has and reposeth in the aforesaid E B, F B,
R W, T C, H H. I W, W B, T H, A C and M R and their assigns hereafter
mentioned; Given and granted, and by these presents (for him, his heirs and
assigns) does give, grant, and confirm unto the said E B, F B etc. their heirs
and assigns, one Annuitie or yearly Rentcharge of One hundred pounds of
lawful money etc. To be issuing, payable, going out, and yearly to be had,
perceived, received and taken out of or upon all those the Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments in the Park lately disparked, called Cliffe park,
with the rights, members and appurtenances thereof in the County of M. And out
of or upon all and singular Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings,
Pastures and Hereditaments whatsoever to the said Messuages, and Tenements
within the said Park, belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or which are
occupied or used to or with the same as part or parcel thereof, or esteemed or
taken as any part, parcel or member thereof, and out of or upon every or any
part or parcel thereof. To have, hold, leavie, receive and enjoy the said
Annuitie or yearly rent of One hundred pounds of lawful money of etc. unto the
said E B etc. their heirs and assigns for ever, at four usual Feasts or terms
of the year; That is to say, at the Feasts of etc. by even portions to be paid,
to such person and persons, and at such place as the said Lo. B. shall in the
Ordinance for the said Hospital in writing-subscribed with his hand, name and
appoint. And the said Lord B. for more certainty and assurance for the true
payment of the said Annuity or yearly rent, in manner and form aforesaid, Does
by these presents grant for him and his heirs, That if it shall happen the said
Annuity or yearly rent to be behind unpaid in part or in all at the place
aforesaid by the space of forty days next after or over any Feast day of
payment thereof aforesaid in which the same ought to be paid, That then and so
often the said Lord B his heirs and assigns shall forfeit and pay to the said
Ed. B. etc. their heirs or assigns the sum of four Marks of etc. (nomine
poenae) for every such default. And that then and at all times after it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said Edw. B. etc. their heirs and assigns
into the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and other the
premises with the appurtenances, and every or any part or parcel thereof to
enter and distreine, as well for the said Annuity or yearly rent, as for such
sum and sums of money so to be forfeited, (nomine poenae) if any shall be so
forfeited as aforesaid, and the distress or distresses there had or taken, to
lead, drive and carry away, and the same with them to detain and keep until
the said Annuity or yearly rent, or sum of money so forfeited (nomine poenae)
if any such shall be, and all arreages thereof shall be fully satisfied and
paid. Of which said Annuitie or yearly rent the said Lo B. has put the said E
B etc. in full possession and seisin by the payment and delivery unto them of
twenty shillings in the name of seisin, and in part of payment thereof, at the
ensealing and deliverie of these presents, upon trust and confidence
nevertheless. And every of the said E B etc. severally for himself, his heirs
and assigns does covenant and grant to and with the said Lo. B, his heirs and
assigns by these presents, That they the said Ed. B. etc. their heirs and
assigns from time to time, and at all times hereafter for evermore shall and
will permit and suffer, and upon reasonable request, as he shall require,
sufficiently authorize the Bailiffe of the Lord B, or of his heirs or assigns
of his Manor of S. in the County of N. for the time being, or such other
person or persons as by the said Lord B. in or by any the said Rules or
Ordinances by him to be made or set forth in writing under his hand and seal as
aforesaid, shall be thereunto nominated, assigned or appointed; or in default
thereof, such persons as the Vicar of St. M. in S. aforesaid for the time being
shall name and appoint: To demand, leavie and receive the said Annuitie or
yearly rent, and all and every sum and sums of money so to be forfeited
and paid (nomine poenae) as aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof from
time to time, as the same shall grow or become due and payable; To the intent
and purpose that the said Bailiffe, or such person or persons for the time
being, as in or by the said Orders or Ordinances shall be nominated, assigned
or appointed: Or in default thereof, such persons as shall be nominated by the
said Vicar, shall and may dispose, employ and pay the said Annuitie or yearly
rent, sum or sums of money aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof,
for and toward the sustentation and maintenance of the said Almes-house, and
such poor persons as from time to time shall be elected or appointed to be
harbored and relieved in the same as aforesaid, in such sort, manner and form
as in and by the said Orders or Ordinances shall be prescribed, limited or set
down, and to none other use, intent or purpose.

Excepting always, That the money that shall be due (nomine poenae) shall be
paid to the said Bailiffe, or other persons appointed to receive the fame, for
his pains in distreining for the same.

And also every of the said E B, etc. severally for himself, his heirs and
assigns, does covenant and grant to and with the said Lord B. his heirs and
assigns by these presents, That they the said E B. etc. their heirs and
assigns or any of them shall not at any time or times hereafter make, do,
commit, procure, cause, or assent to be done any act, deed, demise or thing
whatsoever, whereby or by means whereof the said Annuity or yearly rent, sum
and sums of money aforesaid, or any of them shall or may be avoided,
surrendered, extinguished, or in any manner encumbered; or whereby or by means
whereof the same or any part or parcel thereof shall not or may not be
disposed, employed and paid in manner and form aforesaid, according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents.

And further, the said Lord B. does by these presents grant and agree for him
and his heirs, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Warden
with the twelve persons for the time being, on every first Sunday of every
quarter of a year, when the said Lord B or his heirs, or the Lady B Wife of
the Lord B, or the Heir apparent of the Lord B shall keep his or her
residence at B, to go to the Manor house of the said Lord B, called B, in the
said County of N. after the Feast of etc. now next coming, yearly, from
thenceforth for ever: And there on every such first Sunday of every quarter
shall dine together at one Table in the Hall, where they shall have two mess
of meat, every mess of two dishes, one of pottage and boiled meat, and the
other of roast, if it be no fasting day: And if it be a fish day, then they
shall have two like messes of white meat and fish, at the charges of the Lo. B
or of his heir, if the Lo. B or his heir, or his wife or heir apparent shall
be then there. And moreover the said Lo. B for the more certainty and assurance
for the continuance, employing and disposing of the said annuity or yearly rent
according to his honorable intent and meaning herein expressed, does by these
presents further ordain and appoint, and does repose his trust and confidence
in all and every the person and persons aforesaid, their heirs and assigns,
and every of the said E B etc. for himself his heirs and assigns, does
covenant and grant severally to and with the said Lo, B, his heirs and assigns,
that from time to time hereafter when it shall happen that 5 or 6 of the said E
etc. or 5 or 6 of any other person or persons to whom the said annuity or
yearly rent shall at any time or times hereafter be granted, conveyed or
assigned according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, shall be
deceased or departed out of this mortal life, that then, and so often all such,
and so many of them as shall so happen to survive, shall and will by sufficient
and lawful conveyance and assurance in the law, upon the request of any the
heirs of the said Lo. B or of etc. or of any one of them, grant, convey and
assign, or cause to be granted, conveyed and assigned the said annuity or
yearly rent to so many other able, sufficient and worthy persons, inhabiting in
the Countys of etc. to be named by the said persons surviving, or the more part
of them as shall supply the number of the said grantees so deceased, To have
and to hold to them, their heirs and assigns, to the use of the said persons
surviving and of the others so named, and their heirs and assigns, upon such
trust and confidence, and in such set manner and form to all intents and
purposes as the said persons so surviving, and the others so named, their
heirs and assigns shall or may from time to time for ever succeed and be
inhabited in the stead and place of all such and so many of the persons so
deceasing, and together with the others of them surviving, to have, hold,
receive, perceive, employ and dispose the said annuitie or yearly rent, and
every part and parcel thereof according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, and of the said ordinances.

In witness, etc.
A bargain and sale of land mortgaged made from the mortgagee and the morgagor,
before the day of redemtion, to another.
THis INDENTVRE made etc. between H B and R H etc. and M C. of etc. of the one
party; and R S of etc. of the other party, witnesses, that whereas our said
Sovereign Lady Elizabeth the Queens Majesty that now is, by her highness
Letters patents under the great seal of England bearing date at Westminster
etc. for the considerations therein mentioned and expressed, has betaken,
granted, and to farm letten unto the said M C all that the site and capital
message of her Highness Manor of Hardwich, with the rights, members, and
appurtenances whatsoever, situate, lying and being within the Lordship of
Chertsey, in her Highness County o^ Chapter etc. and all etc. (the words verbatim
in the Letters patents with the Habendum and Reddendum recited) as by the same
Letters patents amongst diverse covenants, clauses and agreements therein
contained more at large it does and may appear. And whereas also the said M C
by her Indenture of assignment bearing date etc. for the considerations therein
mentioned and expressed, Has granted, bargained, sold, aliened, assigned and
set over unto the said H B and R H as well the said recited or mentioned
Letters patents to her the said M C granted as aforesaid, and the said Site and
capital Message of the said Manor of H, lands, meadows, feedings, pastures,
demesne lands, stock, and all and singular other the premises thereby mentioned
to be demised and granted, and every part and parcel thereof, with the
appurtenances: As also all the estate, right, title, interest, term of years
then to come and unexpired, reversion, possession, property, claim and demand
whatsoever which she the said M C has, or had, or may, might, should or ought
to have, or can or may claim, challenge or demand of, in or to the said Site
and capital message, meadows, feedings, pastures, demesne lands, stock, and
all and singular other the premises with the appurtenances, and of, in and to
every part and parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the same Letters patents
to her the said M C made and granted as aforesaid, or any thing therein
contained or otherwise howsoever: To have and to hold the said Site and
capital message, etc. (as in the Indenture of Mortgage) unto the said H B and
R H, their executors, administrators and assigns, to the only proper use and
behoof of them the said H B and R H, their executors, administrators and
assigns, from the ensealing and delivery of the same Indenture of Assignment,
for, during, and until the full end and accomplishment of all the rest and
residue then to come and unexpired of the said term of 21 years by the said
recited Letters patents to her the said M C granted as aforesaid, together with
the same Letters patents.

In which said Indenture of Assignement, there is a certain proviso or
condition contained in these words, or to this effect following; That is to
say, Provided always, that if the said M C, her heirs, executors,
administrators or assigns, or any of them do well and truly content and pay,
or cause etc. (verbatim as in the Assignement) as by the same Indenture of
assignement (amongst diverse other covenants, grants, articles, clauses and
agreements therein contained) more at large also it does and may appear. Now
this Indenture further witnesses, That for and in consideration of the sum of
650 pounds of good etc. to her the said M C in hand, at and before the
ensealing and deliverie of these presents by the said R S well and truly paid,
whereof and wherewith she the said M C, and the said H B and R H acknowledge
themselves fully satisfied and paid; and thereof etc. they the said H B and R H
have bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents do etc. unto
the said R S. the said recited Letters patents, and all the said Site and
capital message of the said Manor of H. Lands, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures,
Demesne lands, Stock, and all and singular other the premises with the
appurtenances thereby mentioned to be demised and granted to the said M C, and
every part and parcel thereof, as also all the estate, right, title, interest,
term of years yet to come and unexpired, reversion, possession, property, claim
and demand whatsoever, which they the said H B and R H or either of them have,
or has, or may, might, should or ought to have of, in or to the said Site or
capital Messuages and other the premises with the appurtenances, and of, in
and to every part and parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the said
Indenture of assignment before rehearsed, or any thing therein contained,
together with the same Indenture of Assignement. To have and to hold the said
Letters patents, and the said Site and capital message of the said Manor of
H, lands, meadows, feedings, pastures, demesne lands, stock, and all and
singular other the premises by the said Letters patents demised, and every part
and parcel thereof with the appurtenances (except before excepted) and all the
said estate, right, title, interest, term of years yet to come and unexpired,
reversion, possession, property, claim and demand whatsoever of them the said
H B and R H and of either of them, of, in and to the same premises, and of, in
and to every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, unto the said R S
his etc. in such like, and in as large and ample manner and form, to all
intents and purposes as they the said H B and R H or either of them have or
has, or may or ought to have and enjoy the same premises, by force and virtue
of the same Indenture of Assignement to them the said H B and R H made and
granted as aforesaid, or any thing therein contained; together with the same
Indenture of Assignment.

And also the said M Cook, for the consideration aforesaid, Has granted,
bargained, sold, aliened, assigned and set over, and by these presents does
fully, clearly and absolutely grant unto the said R S the said recited Letters
patents to her the said M C made and granted as aforesaid, and the said Site
and capital message of the said Manor of H, Lands, Meadows, feedings,
pastures, demesne Lands, stock, and all and singular other the premises by the
same Letters parents mentioned to be demised and granted, and every part and
parcel thereof with the appurtenances: And further the said M C for the
consideartion aforesaid, Confirmation.
does by these presents for her, her etc. ratify and confirm the said bargain,
sale and assignment, hereby made of the premises by the said H B and R H to the
said R S as aforesaid, and the estate and interest of the said R S in and to
the same and every parcel thereof. And also remise, release and quit claim unto
the said R S his etc. the said proviso or conditon before mentioned in the said
Indenture of assignment contained, Release.
concerning the redemption of the premises from the said H B and R H as
aforesaid, and all and every covenant, clause, article and agreement touching
the same; and also all the estate, right, title, interest, term of years yet to
come and unexpired, reversion, possession, property, claim, condition, entry,
benefit and demand whatsoever which she the said M C has or had, or may,
might should, or of right ought to have, and can or may claim of, in or to the
said site and capital message of the Manor of H, lands, meadows, feedings,
pastures, demeasne lands, stocks, and all and singular other the premises by
the said Letters patents mentioned to be demised and granted, and in and to
every or any part or parcel thereof with their appurtenances whatsoever by
force and virtue of the same Letters patents or of the said indenture of
assignment, or the said proviso or condition therein contained, or either of
them, or by any other ways or means whatsoever, or otherwise whatsoever; To
have and to hold the said Site and capital Message of the said Manor of H.
lands, etc. and all and singular other the premises in and by the said Letters
patents to her the said M C mentioned to be demised and granted, and every part
and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances (except before excepted) and all
the said estate, right, title, interest, term of years yet to come and
unexpired, reversion, possession, property, claim and demand whatsoever of
her the said M C, of, in and to the same premises, and every part and parcel
thereof with the appurtenances unto the said R S, his executors, administrators
and assigns, to the only use and behoof of him the said R S, his executors,
administrators and assigns, from the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
for, during, and until the full end and accomplishment of all the rest and
residue yet to come and unexpired of the said term of twenty one years by the
said recited Letters patents granted, absolutely without any manner of
condition, proviso or redemption, or other reclaim or demand whatsoever.

And the said H B, for himself, his heirs, executors and administrators, does
covenant, For quiet enjoying discharged from encumbrances.
promise and grant to and with the said R S etc. and to and with every of them
by these presents, In manner and form following; That is to say, that he the
said R S his executors and assigns, and every of them, for and under the rent,
covenants, clauses and agreements in and by the said Letters patents for the
premises reserved and mentioned on the part and behalf of the said M C, her
executors and assigns, to be paid, done and performed, shall or may at all
times hereafter, and from time to time for and during all the rest and residue
yet to come and unexpired of the said term of one and twenty years by the said
Letters patents granted, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use, occupy,
possess and enjoy the said Site and capital Message, etc. and all and
singular other the premises herein before mentioned to be granted, bargained,
sold, assigned and set over, and every part and parcel thereof with their
appurtenances, without the let, interruption or disturbance of him the said H
B. or of any other person or persons by his means or procurement. And that the
same premises and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances now
are and be, and so at all times hereafter, and from time to time shall remain
and continue unto the said R S. his executors and assigns, free and clearly
acquitted, exoncrated and discharged, saved and kept harmless of and from all
and all manner of former bargains etc. had, made, committed or done by him the
said H B. or by any other person or persons by his assent, means or
procurement. The rents, covenants, clauses and agreements in and by the said
Letters patents before recited, reserved or mentioned, which on the part and
behalf of the said M C. her executors or assigns from henceforth for or in
respect of the premises are or ought to be paid, done and performed, and the
covenants, clauses and agreements in the said recited Indenture of assignment
expressed and contained, which on the part and behalf of the said H B and R H.
their executors etc. or either or any of them are or ought to be observed,
performed, fulfilled and kept, only except and foreprized. The like for R H.

And the said R S does covenant, etc. To and with the said H B and R H, their
executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them, at all times
hereafter, For discharging the rent to the Queen.
and from time to time clearly to acquit, exonerate, and discharge, or
otherwise sufficiently to save and keep harmless the said H B and R H, their
executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them, as well against our
said Sovereign Lady the Queen, her heirs and successors, as against all and
every person and persons whatsoever, of, for and concerning the said rents,
covenants, clauses and agreements before mentioned and excepted, and of and
from all actions, suits, charges, troubles, encumbrances and demands
whatsoever, which for or by reason thereof at any time or times hereafter, can
or may come, grow or be to or against the said H B and R H their executors,
administrators or assigns, or any of them.

(A Covenant for quiet enjoying discharged of encumbrances from M C as from H
B. Another Covenant from R S to M C for discharging the rent to the Queen, as
is last before to H B and R H.)

And lastly, the said M C does covenant etc. to and with the said R S etc. That
she the said M C her executors and administrators, shall and will at all time
and times hereafter for and during the space of two years next ensuing the date
hereof, For further assurance.
at the reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said
R S his executors or assigns do, make and execute, or cause to be done, made
and executed all and every such further lawful and reasonable acts, things and
devises in the law whatsoever for the discharge of any covenant, clause or
agreement in the said recited indenture of assignment, mentioned and contained,
wherewith the said R S his executorr or administratours, as assignee or
assigns, of, o^ to the said H B and R H, or either of them, can or may be
charged, or chargable, and for the extinguishing of the said proviso or
condition in the said indenture of Assignment contained, and of all such estate
and interest as she the said M C her executours or administratours now has or
shall, can or may by any means have, claim or pretend to have in or to the
premises, or any parcel thereof; and for the further, better and more perfect
assurance, surety, sure making and conveying of the said site and capital
message and other the premises and of every part and parcel thereof unto the
said R S his executors and assigns, for and during all the rest and residue of
the said Term of one and twenty years, which at the time of the making of any
such further assurance, or doing any such act, shall be to come and unexpired,
as by the said R S his etc. or his or their learned Council shall be reasonably
advised or required. Godfrey.

In witness, etc.
A Bargain and sale upon condition made to Feoffees in trust.
THis INDENTURE tripartite, made etc. between Sir H H etc. of the first part, R
L and G L of the second part; and E T and G B of the third part, Witnesses,
that the said Sir H H, R L and G L, for the considerations herein after
mentioned, have granted enfeoffed and confirmed and by these presents do
fully, clearly and absolutely grant, enfeoffe, confirm and deliver unto the E T
and G B, all that the Manor or Lordship of E in the County of L with all and
singular the other rights, members and appurtenances of the same. And also all
and singular the messuages, cottages, lands, tenements, meadows, pastures,
feedings, rents, reversions, services, heaths, moors, commons, closes, Woods,
underwoods, wastes, waifes, straies, escheats, wards, Court-leets, perquisites
of Courts, royalties, profits and hereditaments, with the appurtenances to the
same Manor or Lordship belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or which now be
or at any time heretofore within the space of thirty years now last past have
been used, reputed, accepted, known, occupied, let or set, as part, parcel,
right, or member of the said Manor or Lordship. And also, all and singular
other the Manors, messuages, lands, tenements, rents, reversions, services, and
hereditaments, situate, lying and being in E and E in the County of L, or in
either of them, which at any time heretofore were the possession or inheritance
of Sir J H deceased, Father of the said Sir H. And also, all that the Advowson
and Patronage of the Parish Church of E aforesaid, And all and singular the
rents and yearly profits whatsoever, reserved upon any demise or grant
heretofore made or granted of the premises, or of any part or parcel thereof.
And the reversion and reversions whatsoever of all and singular the same
premises and of every parcel thereof. And also the said H H R L and G L for the
considerations herein after mentioned have granted, assigned and confirmed, and
by these presents do etc. unto the said E T and G B all the estate, right,
title, interest, use and possession whatsoever, which they the said Sir H R and
G and every or any of them have or has, or may, might, should, or of right
ought to to have or claim, of, in or to the said Manor or Lordship, and all
other the premises herein before mentioned to be granted, enfeoffed, assigned
and confirmed, and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof with the
appurtenances, Together with all and all manner of deeds, evidences, charters,
writings, escripts and minuments, which they and every or any of them have or
has touching or concerning only the premises or only any part or parcel
thereof. To have and to hold the said Manor, or Lordship of E, Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, Hereditaments and all
and singular other the premises herein before mentioned to be hereby granted or
conveyed, and every parcel thereof with the appurtenances unto the said E T and
G B and their heirs, to the only uses, intents, provisoes, conditions and
limitations hereafter specified and declared, and to none other use intent or
purpose, That is to say, to the only use and behoof of the said R L and G L and
of their heirs and assigns for ever, with, and upon the condition herefafter
specified and declared: that is to say,

Provided always, that if the said Sir H H etc. do well and truly satisfy,
content and pay or cause to be contented, satisfied or paid unto the said R L
and G L etc. the full sum of four thousand eight hundred li. of good etc. at
or within etc. at or upon the 2 day of M. 1601 without fraud or covin, that
then from and after the said payment so made, the use and uses in or by these
present Indentures, had, made or limited to the said R L and G L, their and
either of their heirs, and assigns. And also all and every estate which
hereupon or by reason hereof or any thing herein mentioned is or shall be
limited, vested or executed in or to the said R L and G L their heirs and
assigns or any of them, shall cease, determine and be utterly void and of none
effect, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding. And that then and immediately from and after the said
payment had or made to the said R L and G L their or either of their heirs,
executors, administrators or assigns or any of them of the said sum of 4800
li. of etc. in manner and form as is before expressed, declared and apppointed,
the said grant, feoffement, conveyance and assurance and all and every other
act or thing which after the date of these presents, and before the said second
day of June 1601 shall be had or made by or unto any of the said parties, or by
their or any of their means or privity, or whereunto they, or any of them shall
be party or parties, shall be, and shall be deemed and taken to be. And the
said E T and G B and their heirs and and all and every other person and
persons, and their heirs that then shall stand and be seized of the said Manor
and other the premises, or any of them shall stand and be seized thereof, and
of every part and parcel thereof to the only proper use and behoof of the said
Sir H H and of his heirs and assigns for ever, and to none other use, behoof,
intent, or purpose.

And it is further agreed by and between the said parties to these presents,
That the said Sir H H does covenant etc. to and with etc. that if the said Sir
H H Knight, his heirs, The Indenture and use therein limited to be absolute for
non payment* of the money mentioned in the proviso.
executors, administrators, or assigns nor any of them, do not pay nor cause to
be paid to the said R L and G L their nor either of their executors,
administrators or assigns nor to any of them the said sum of 4800 li. and
every part thereof in manner and form abovesaid, but shall make default in
payment of the sum, or any part thereof, That then and from thenceforth this
present grant, feoffement and conveyance of the premises, and the said use
before herein and hereby limited to the said R L and G L and their heirs shall
stand, remain and be; and that then also, and at all times from thenceforth all
the said Manors, lands, tenements, hereditaments and all other the premises,
with all and singular their appurtenances shall be and remain for ever, to them
the said R L and G L their heirs and assigns absolutely, without any
condition or other limitation.

And the said R L and G L for themselves their and either of their etc. and for
every of them do covenant, Not to do any act to hinder the rising of the use
limited in the Indenture, and for quiet enjoying, and making further assurance
upon payment of the money mentioned in the proviso.
promise and grant by these presents to and with etc. in manner and form
following, that is to say, that neither they the said R L and G L nor any of
them, their nor any of their heirs, nor any of them, nor any other person or
persons, by their, or any of their procurement, means or assent, shall or will
do, commit or wittingly and willingly suffer any act or thing whereby, or by
means whereof there shall or may ensue or happen any let or hinderance to the
rising or vesting of the said use herein limited to the said Sir H H and his
heirs by the payment of the said four thousand eight hundred pounds, according
to the intent, purport and true meaning of the said condition or proviso. And
that in case the said Sir H H his heirs, executours, administratours or
assigns, or any of them do well and truly satisfy, content, or pay, or cause
to be satisfied, contented or paid unto the said R L and G L or either of them
or the heirs, executours, administratours of assigns of them or either of
them the said sum of 4800 l. at or upon the said second day of M. 1601.
according to the true intent and meaning of the said proviso or condition, that
then the said Sir H H his etc. and every of them, shall or may from thenceforth
for ever have, hold, and enjoy all the said Manor or Lordship, lands and
tenements, with all and singular their appurtenances to his and their own
proper use and behoof, without any let, trouble, encumbrance or interruption
of or by the said R L and G L or either of them, their, or either of their etc.
or any of them, or of any other person or persons by or with their, or any of
their means, act, assent or procurement.

And that then also the said R L and G L their and either of their heirs and
assigns, and all others which then and at any time then after shall have, For
further assurance.
or rightfully claim to have any lawful estate, right, title or interest of, in
or to the said Manor or Lordship, lands, tenements and hereditaments, or any
part or parcel thereof, by, from, or under the said R L and G L or either of
them, shall and will at all and every time and times, from and after such
payment had and made to the said R and G, or either of them, or the executors,
administrators or assigns of them, or of either of them of the said sum of
four thousand eight hundred pounds of etc. in manner and ^^me as aforesaid,
for and during the space of three years then next ensuing, at and upon
reasonable request to them, or either of them to be made, and at the only
costs and charges in Law of the said Sir H H his heirs or assigns, or some of
them, make, do, acknowledge, suffer and execute in the cities of L. and W or
either of them unto the said Sir H H his heirs or assigns for ever, all and
every such further lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things,
assurance and assurances, conveyance and conveyances in the law whatsoever,
with warrantie only against themselves and their heirs, or else without
warranty, for the better, more perfect, sure, and absolute making and assuring
of all and singular the said Manor or Lordship, lands, tenements,
hereditaments and other the premises with the appurtenances unto the said Sir
H H his heirs and assigns, be it by fine, feoffment, recovery or recoveries,
deed or deeds, enrolled or not enrolled enrollment of these presents, release,
confirmation, or by all or any of them, or otherwise by any other lawful and
reasonable act or demise, as shall be reasonably devised or advised by the
Learned Council of the said Sir H H his heirs or Assigns.

And also that he the same Sir H H his executors, That the mortgager shall
enjoy the issues and profits of the lands, until the day of payment.
administrators and assigns, and every of them, doing nor committing any
voluntary waste above the value of ten pounds of etc. shall or may at all
times from henceforth, until the second day of M. 1601. without the let,
trouble, vexation or interruption of or by them the said R L and G L or either
of them, their or either of their heirs or assigns or of any of them, or of
any other rightfully claiming from, by or under them or any of them, peaceably
and quietly have, take, receive, perceive and enjoy the rents, issues and
profits of all and singular the said Manor or Lordship, lands and tenements and
other the premises before herein mentioned to be hereby granted and conveyed,
and every part and parcel thereof without any account to be made or yielded
unto the said R L and G L or either of them, their or either of their heirs
etc. of or for the same. This indenture, or any thing therein contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And that neither the said R L and
G L, their heirs or assigns, nor any of them, shall nor will take any of the
rents, issues, revenues or profits of any the premises, or any part thereof
which shall grow, arise or come in or out of the premises, or any part or
parcel thereof before the said second day of M. 1601.

And it is further covenanted, concluded and agreed by and between the said
parties to these presents, That the Mortgagee shall pay more for the clear
purchase of the land so mortgaged and being forfeited.
and the true intent and meaning of the same parties to these presents is, and
the said R L and G L do by these presents fruther covenant etc. to and with
etc. that if the said Sir H H Knight, his heirs nor assigns, nor any of them
do not pay nor cause to be paid unto the said R L and G L their heirs,
executors, administrators or assigns, nor to any of them the said sum of 4800
l. of etc. in manner and form as is before limited and appointed for the
payment of the same, whereby the said estate of the said R L and G L shall
become absolute, that then the said R L and G L their etc. or some of them,
shall and will well and truly content and pay, or cause to be paid unto the said
Sir H H his etc. or some of them at or in etc. the sum of one thousand pounds
of etc. at or upon the second day of M. 1601. as the residue and full
satisfaction of the clear and absolute purchase of the said manor or Lordship,
lands, tenements and other the premises (without fraud, covin, or further
delay) unto them the said R L and G L their heirs and assigns to the proper
use and behoof of them the said R and G their heirs and assigns for ever.

And the said Sir H H does covenant etc. to and with the said R L and G L etc.
that if he the said Sir H H his heirs, executours, administrators nor
assigns, To relinquish possession after default of payment of the sum
contained in the proviso.
nor any of them do not well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said R
L and G L nor to the heirs, executors, administrators or assigns of them nor
any of them the said sum of 4800 pounds of etc. before mentioned in manner and
form as aforesaid, according to the intent and true meaning of the said proviso
or condition before herein expressed, that then he the said Sir H H Knight,
his tenants, farmours, and assigns, and every of them (other then such as be
hereafter excepted) shall and will deliver, leave, yield up and relinquish unto
the said R L and G L their heirs or assigns, or the survivors or survivor of
them the peaceable and quiet possession of the said Manor or Lordship, and of
all other the premises with the appurtenances, without any let, trouble,
contradiction or gainsaying, and that then also he the said Sir H H his heites
and assigns, and Dame R his wife, Further assurance.
and all and every other person and persons now having, or rightfully claiming,
or which at any time or times hereafter shall or may lawfully have, claim or
pretend to have any manner of estate, right, title, use, interest, condition or
possession of, in or to the said Manor or Lordship, and other the premises, or
any part thereof, other then such person and persons, whose estates, interests
and terms are excepted in one former Indenture, bearing date etc. made between
the said Sir H H of the one party, and the said R L and G L on the other
party, for and in respect only of their leases and terms by and in the said
last mentioned indenture excepted, shall and will at all and every time and and
times, from and after such default of payment had or made of the said sum of
four thousand eight hundred pounds, for and during the space of seven years
thence next ensuing, at and upon reasonable request to him, her or them to be
made, and at the only cost and charges in the law of the said R L and G L or
any of them, or the heirs or assigns of them, or of one of them, make, do,
etc. (as in other like covenants etc.

And that the said R L and G L, their and either of their heirs and assigns
and every of them, For quiet enjoying.
and all and every person and persons which at any time or times after the said
default of payment of the said sum of four thousand pounds of etc. had and made
as aforesaid, shall have any estate, right, title or interest, of, in or to the
said Manor or Lordship, manors, lands, tenements or other the premises or any
part thereof, by, from or under the said R L and G L their heirs or assigns or
any of them, shall or may at all times from and after the said default of
payment of the said sum of etc. had or made, for ever peaceably and quietly
have, hold, occupy and enjoy all the said manors or Lordship, manors, lands,
tenements and other the premises without any let, trouble, vexation or
interruption of or by the said Sir H H his heirs or assigns, or any of them,
or of or by any other person or persons whatsoever, (except as in and by the
said indenture of bargain and sale bearing date the said etc. made between the
said Sir H H of the one party, and the said R L and G L of the other party,
for and in respect only of the estates and interest in and by the same
indenture excepted.)

And lastly, the said R L and G L do by these presents further covenant etc. to
and with the said Sir H H etc. that in case the said Sir H H his heirs, To
deliver up a statute upon payment of the money mentioned in the proviso.
executors, administratours or assigns, or any of them, do well and truly pay,
or couse to be paid unto the said R L and G L or one of them, or to the heirs,
executors, administrators or assigns of them, or of one of them the said sum
of 4800 l. of etc. on the said second day of M. 1601 at or etc. according to
the purport, intent and true meaning of the said proviso or condition without
fraud or c^vin, that then they the said R L and G L or one of them, their or
either of their heirs, executors administrators or assigns, or some or one of
them, shall and will within convenient time, after the said payment so had and
made, deliver or cause to be delivered to the said Sir H H his etc. at or etc.
one writing obligatorie or recognizance in the nature of a statute staple,
bearing date etc. taken, sealed and acknowledged before etc. wherein the said
Sir H H is and stands bound unto the said R L in the sum of etc. to be
cancelled and made void.

And further the said Sir H H Knight, R L and G L have made, ordained,
constituted, A Letter of Attorney to deliver possession.
and in their stead and place by these presents have put and authorized A B and
C D their true and lawful atturnies jointly and severally for them, and in
their names to enter into the said Manor or Lordship, and other the premises,
and into every or any part thereof in the name of the whole, and possession and
seisin thereof, or of every or any part or parcel thereof in the name of the
whole, in their names and to their use, to take, and after such possession and
seizen thereof and of every or any parcel thereof so had and taken, to deliver
full and peaceable possession and seisin thereof to the said E T and G B, To have
and to hold to the same E T and G B according to the limitations, uses,
provisoes and conditions before herein expressed, and according to the tenor,
purport, effect and true meaning of this present indenture tripartite, holding
firm and stable all that and whatsoever their said atturnies or either of
them, shall do or cause to be done in or about the premises by these presents.

In witness, etc. Forster.

And that the said fourth day of M. in the etc. peaceable and quiet possession
and seisin of the manors, Delivery of possession.
messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments in E and F within specified was
taken, had and delivered by the atturnies within named, to the within named E T
and G B, according to the tenor and true meaning of this present Indenture, to
the uses, provisoes, conditions and limitations mentioned in the same
Indenture, in the presence of those whose names be subscribed.

Memorand. likewise, that the day and year abovesaid A B. C D. E F. etc. did
agree to this present grant within written, and did severally atturn tenants to
the said E T and G B according to this present grant in the presence of those
whose names are subscribed; Atturnament.


and in witness thereof the said A B. C D. E F etc. have hereunto set their
hands. Forster.

An Indenture of bargain and sale absolute.
THis Indenture made etc. between Sir R M of etc. of the one party, and R L
and G L of the other party, Witnesses, that the said Sir R M for and in
consideration of the sum of six hundred pound etc. to him in hand at and before
the ensealing and delivery of these presents by the said R L and G L. well and
truly paid, whereof and wherewith he acknowledges himself fully satisfied and
paid, and thereof and of every part and parcel thereof does clearly acquit,
Forster council.
exonerate and discharge the said R L and G L their and either of their heirs
executours and administrators and every of them for ever by these presents has
given and granted, bargained, sold and confirmed, and by these presents does
fully, clearly and absolutely give grant, bargain, sell and confirm unto the
said R L and G L their heirs and assigns for ever, all that the manor and
Lordship of C. in the County of Not. with all and singular the rights,
members, liberties, privileges, royalties and appurtenances thereof
whatsoever. And all that the rectory and parsonage of C aforesaid with all
glebe lands, tithes of corn, grain and hay, oblations, obventions, fruits,
profits and commodities whatsoever, of what nature, kind, or quality soever
they be, or by whatsoever name or names they are called or known to the said
Rectory and parsonage incident, belonging, or appertaining, or reputed or known
to be part or parcel, or member thereof, or to or with the same now or at any
time heretofore usually occupied or enjoyed, coming, growing, renewing, and
increasing within C and S in the County of N, and the advowson, gift, free
disposition and right of patronage of the Vicarage and Church of C aforesaid
with the appurtenances in the said County of N.

And also all and singular messuages, General words.
mills, houses, edifices, buildings, barnes, stables, dovehouses, yards,
ortchards, gardens, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures, leasowes,
commons, wast grounds, heathes, furzes, moors, marshes, woods, underwoods,
ways, waters, fishings, fishing places, streams, rivers, banks, ponds, rents,
reversions, services, courts and leets, view of frank pledge, perquisits and
profits of Courts and leets, and all that to court leets, and view of frank
pledge does belong or appertain, goods and chattels wayved and estraied, goods
and chattels of felons and fugitives, felons of themselves, and of persons
outlawed, fees, wards, marriages, escheats, reliefs, herriots, fines,
amerciaments, liberties, privileges, and all other profits, commodities,
advantages, emoluments and hereditaments whatsoever to the said Manor and
Lordship, rectory and other the premises herein before mentioned, meant, or
intended to be hereby given, granted, bargained and sold, and to every or any
of them by any means belonging or appertaining, or with the same or any of
them, as part, parcel or member thereof, now or at any time heretofore being
devised, let, used, occupied, reputed or enjoyed with all and singular their
appurtenances; and also all and singular messuages, lands, tenements, rents,
reversions, services and hereditaments whatsoever of him the said R M in C and
S aforesaid, and in H and S in the said County of N and in every or any of
them. And also all and singular Rents and yearly profits whatsoever, reserved
upon any demise, lease or grant, demises, leases or grants heretofore made or
granted of the premises, or of any part or parcel thereof. And the reversion
and reversions, remainder and remainders of all and singular the premises and
of every part and parcel thereof. And also the said R M for the consideration
aforesaid, has granted, bargained and sold, and by these presents does fully
and clearly grant, bargain and sell unto the said R L and G L their heirs and
assigns for ever, all the estate, right, title, interest, use, possession,
reversion, remainder, property, condition, claim and demand whatsoever which
he the said R M has or had, or shall, should, may, might, or of right ought to
have or claim of, in or to the said Manor and Lordship of C. Rectory,
advowson, messuages, lands, tenements, hereditaments and all and singular other
the premises with the appurtenances before in and by these presents granted,
bargained and sold, or of, in or to any part or parcel thereof. Habendum.
To have and to hold all the said Manor and Lordship, Rectory, Advowson,
messuages, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures, commons, rents,
reversions, fines, hereditaments and all and singular other the premises herein
before mentioned, meant or intended to be hereby given, granted, bargained and
sold and every part and parcel thereof, with all and singular their rights,
members and appurtenances unto the said R L and G L their heirs and assigns to
the only proper use and behoof of them the said R L and G L and of their heirs
and assigns for ever. And the said R M and his heirs the said Manor etc.
Warranty.
(ut in aliis warrant. etc.)

In witness, etc.
An Indenture of Covenants to the former Indenture, whereupon a Recovery is
passed.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. Between Sir R M of etc. of the one part, and R L
etc. and G L of the other party. Whereas the said R M by an Indenture of
Bargain and sale bearing date hereof and sealed and delivered with these
presents, for the consideration in the said Indenture mentioned and expressed,
give, grant, bargain, sell and confirm unto the said R L and G L their heirs
and assigns for ever, all that the Manor and Lordship of C etc (So reciting
the Lands verbatim all to the general words) and diverse other lands and
tenements, Leave out the general words.
as by the same Indenture of bargain and sale amongst other covenants, grants,
and agreements therein contained, more at large it does and may appear. Now,
this Indenture witnesses, that the said R M for the consideration in the said
Indenture of bargain and sale mentioned has bargained and sold, and by these
presents does bargain and sell unto the said R L and G L their heirs and
assigns for ever, All and all manner of deeds, evidences, charters, writers,
For delivery of Evidences.
escripts Court Rolls, books of survey, books of account, rentals, counterpart
of Leases, terrors, boundaries and minuments whatsoever, any ways touching or
concerning the said Manor and Lordship, Rectory, Advowson, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and other the premises with the appurtenances, or any part or parcel
thereof. All which the said deeds, evidences, charters, writings, escripts,
common rolls, books of survey, books of account, rentals, counterparts of
leases, terrors, boundaries, and minuments before mentioned, or so many of them
as now be in the hands, custody or possession of the said R M, or of any other
person or persons to his use, or by his delivery, or which he knowing where
they are, may lawfully get or come by without suit in the Law, together with
true copies of all deeds, evidences, writings, and minuments, as do touch or
concern the premises or any part or parcel thereof, jointly with any other
lands and tenements, the same copies to be written and copied out ^t the cost
and charges of the said R L and G L their etc. The said R M for himself his
etc. does covenant etc. To and with the said R L and G L, their and either of
their heirs and assigns, and every of them by these presents, to deliver or
cause to be delivered unto the said R L and G L their heirs and assigns, or
to some of them, on this side and before the Feast of etc. whole, safe and
undefaced. And the said R M does Covenant etc. in manner and form following
viz. For being seized.
That he the said R M at the time of then sealing and delivery of these
presents, is and stands, and so until a good and lawful estate shall be
vested and executed in the said R L and G L and their heirs according to the
intent and true meaning of these presents, shall be and stand and be the very
true, sole, lawful and perfect owner, and rightfully and absolutely seized of
the said Manor and Lordship, and of all and singular other the premises with
the appurtenances in the said Indenture mentioned, meant or intended to be
thereby given, granted, bargained and sold in his demeasne, as of fee simple,
in fee tail general, to his own proper use and behoof without any manner of
condition or any limitation of any use or uses, to alter, change, or determine
the same. And that there is not, No reversion in the King.
nor before the executing or vesting of the said estate shall there be any
reversion or remainder thereof or of any part or parcel thereof in our said
Sovereign Lord the King, or in any other person or persons. And also that he
the said R M now has, and until the executing and vesting of the said estate
shall have full power, lawful and rightful authority to convey and assure the
said Manor and Lordship, rectory, advowson, messuages, lands, tenements,
hereditaments, and all and singular the above mentioned bargained premises with
the appurtenances unto the said R L and G L their heirs and assigns for ever
in form aforesaid. And also that the said Manor and Lordship and other the
premises nor any part or parcel thereof are holden of our said Sovereign Lord
the King his heirs or successors in Capite. And the said R M does covenant etc.
that the said Manor and Lordship, Rectory, Discharged of encumbrances.
Advowson, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and all and singular other the premises
before by the said Indenture given, granted, bargained and sold, or meant,
mentioned or intended to be thereby given, granted, bargained and sold, and
every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances at the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, are and be, and so at all times hereafter for ever
shall be, remain and continue unto the said R L and G L their heirs and
assigns free and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or otherwise
well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless of and from all and all manner
of bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, joyntures, dowers, annuities,
statutes merchant and of the staple, recognizances, uses, wills, entalles, fines
for alienation without license, post-fines, rents charge, rents secke,
arrearages of rents, amerciments, intrusions, primer szisins, condemnations,
judgments, extents, executions, claims, duties, debts of record, debts to the
Kings Majesty, and of, and from all other charges, estates, titles, troubles,
encumbrances and demands whatsoever had, made, committed, suffered or done, or
hereafter to be had, made, committed, suffered or done by Sir I M deceased,
great Grandfather of the said R M his etc. or by W M deceased, Grandfather of
the said R M, his heirs or assigns or by the said R M his heirs or assigns
or any of them, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, having or
rightfully claiming or pretending to have, or which at any time or times
hereafter shall have or rightfully claim or pretend to have any lawful estate,
right, title, interest or demand, of, in and to the said Manor and Lordship and
other the premises, or of, in or to any part or parcel thereof, in, by from or
under them or any of them, or by their or any of their assents, means,
consents, title, interest, act, sufferance, or procurement. The chief rent and
services from henceforth to grow due to the chief Lord, or Lordship of the Fee
or Fees of the premises for and in respect only of his or their seigniory and
seigniories only except and foreprized. And also except etc. And also except
one lease etc. whereupon the yearly rent of ten pounds is reserved and shall
or may be yearly from and after the fifteenth day M etc. due and payable unto
the said R L and G L their heirs and assigns during the continuance of the
same excepted Lease.

Provided always that if the said R M, his heirs, executors, administrators
or assigns or any of them do well and truly pay or cause to be contented and
paid unto the said R L and G L their or either of their executors, Proviso.
administrators or assigns the full sum of 800 li. of etc. on the etc. at or
etc. That then as well this present Indenture, as the said recited Indenture of
bargain and sale and either of them, and every covenant, grant, article, clause
and agreement in them and either of them contained on the part and behalf of
the said R M his heirs, executors or administrators to be performed and kept,
shall immediately from thenceforth cease, determine and be utterly void
frustrate and of none effect. And that then also and from thenceforth it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said R M his heirs and assigns into the said
Manor and Lordship, Rectory, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and
other the premises with the appurtenances and into every or any part or parcel
thereof to re-enter, and the same to have again, enjoy and repossede as in his
and their first and former estate; any thing in these presents contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And further the said R M does covenant etc. that if default shall be made of
the payment of the said sum of eight hundred and fourscore pounds upon the
said 15 day of etc. at the place of payment aforesaid, For quiet enjoying after
default of payment.
That then and from and after such default of payment so thereof or of any part
or parcel thereof had or made, they the said R L and G L their heirs and
assigns and every of them shall and may from time to time and at all times for
ever according to the tenor, purport and plain meaning of these presents,
peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Manor and
Lordship, Rectory, Advowson, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and and
all and singular other the premises with the appurtenances and every part and
parcel thereof without any manner of let, trouble interruption, eviction,
expulsion or disturbance of him the said R M his etc. or of any other person or
persons whatsoever lawfully claiming by, from or under him the said R M, or by,
from or under the said I M great Grandfather of the said R M. or by, from or
under the said I M. or by, from or under the said R M, father of the said R M
(except before excepted.)

And the said R L and G L do covenant etc. That he the said R M. his heirs
executors, That the mortgager may receive the profits of his lands until the
day of redemption.
administrators and assigns, and every of them shall or may without the let,
trouble, vexation or interruption of the said R L and G L their heirs or
assigns, or of any other rightfully claiming, from, by or under them or either
or any of them, peaceably and quietly have, hold, perceive, receive, take and
enjoy the rents, issues and profits of all and singular the said Manor and
Lordship, rectory, messuages, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and all and
singular other the premises before mentioned to be given, granted, bargained
and sold by the said recited indenture, and of every part and parcel thereof
with the appurtenances until the 16 day of etc. without any account to be made
or yielded unto the said R L and G L their etc. of or for the same recited
indenture, or any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding. And
that neither the said R L and G L their etc. nor any of them shall or will take
any of the rents, issues, revenues or profits of any of the premises or of any
part thereof, or which shall grow, arise or come in or out of the premises, or
any part or parcel thereof before the said fifteenth day of etc.

And furthermore, the said R M does covenant etc. That if he the said R M his
etc. For further assurance after default of payment.
or some, or one of them do not well and truly pay, or cause to be contented
or paid unto the said R L and G L their, or either of their executors,
administratours or assigns the said sum of 800 l. and 400 l. before
mentioned, according to the true intent and meaning of the proviso or condition
before herein expressed; that then he the said M and Dame W his wife and their
heirs, and all and every other person and persons now having or claiming, or
which at any time or times hereafter shall or may lawfully have, claim, or
pretend to have any estate, right, title, use, interest, condition or
possession of, in and to the said manor and lordship, rectory, advowson,
messuages, lands, tenements, hereditaments and other the premises, or any part
or parcel thereof, other then the persons before excepted, for and in respect
only of the said annuities, leases and terms before excepted, shall and will
from time to time and at all times from and after default of payment made as
aforesaid for and during the space of seven years next ensuing, at and upon
reasonable request, and at the only costs and charges in the law of the said R
L and G L their heirs or assigns or of some of them, do, make, knowledge,
execute and suffer, or cause to be done, made, knowledged, executed and
suffered unto the said R L and G L, their heirs and assigns for ever, all and
every such act and acts, thing and things, assurance and assurances, conveyance
and conveyances in the law whatsoever, for the better, more perfect, sure and
absolute conveying and assuring of all and singular the said manor and
lordship, rectory, advowson, messuages, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and
all other the premises with the appurtenances by the said recited indenture
mentioned or intended to be granted, bargained and sold unto the said R L and G
L their heirs and assigns for ever absolutely, without any manner of
condition, mortgage or Redemption, be it by fine, feoffment, recoverie or
recoveries with single or double voucher or vouchers, deed or deeds enrolled or
not enrolled, inrolment of this present Lease, confirmation, or by all or any
of them, or otherwise by any other lawful and reasonable act and devise with
warranty of him the said R M and his heirs, against all men: or otherwise
without warranty, if it be so required, as shall be reasonably devised or
advised by the learned Council of the said R L and G L, their heirs or assigns,
or some or one of them.

And it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between all the
said parties to these presents, For passing of a Recovery.
That T H and W B, by writ of Entry sur disseisin in le post, to be by them
sued forth at the costs and charges of the said R L and G L, out of the Kings
Majesty's Court of Chancery, and to be returned into the Kings Majesty's Court
of Common Pleas before the Justices there, against them the said R L and G L,
then in possession of the said premises, shall recover the said Manor and
Lordship, Rectory, Advowson, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Herediditaments, and
other the premises mentioned, meant, or intended in or by the said recited
Indenture to be bargained and sold, with their rights, members and
appurtenances, in due form of Law, against the said R L and G L then being
Tenants of the said premises with the appurtenances, by some name or names in
the said Writ and Recovery to be contained, and upon the said Writ and
proceeding thereupon the said R L and G L after appearance shall vouch over to
warrantie the said R M, and that the said R M shall thereunto appear, and vouch
over to warrant the common vouch; and that each of them the said R L and G L,
and the said R M shall do and suffer all and whatsoever to them and either of
them in that behalf shall belong and appertain, for the suffering of a good and
perfect recovery of all the said Manors, Lordships, lands, tenements, and other
the premises mentioned in the said Indenture to be thereby given, granted,
bargained and sold unto the said R L and G L, according to the course of common
Recoveries and assurances of lands, tenements, and hereditaments; and that the
said recovery shall in due form of Law be executed by the Writ of our said
Sovereign Lord the King, of habere facias seisinam, accordingly.

And it is by these presents likewise fully concluded, agreed and declared by
and between all the parties to these presents, To lead the use of the recovery.
That the said Recovery and all other Recoveries whatsoever had, made,
acknowledged, leavied, executed or suffered, or to be had, made, acknowledged,
executed or suffered of the premises, or of any percell thereof by or between
the said parties or any of them, and the full force and execution of the same
and every of them, shall be and inure, and shall be had, taken, construed,
esteemed and adjudged to be and to inure to the only uses, provisions,
conditions and limitations before herein mentioned, and the true intent and
plain meaning of the said Indenture and of these presents, and to no other use,
behoof, intent or purpose.

And it is further covenanted, For payment of a more sum of money for the
absolute purchase of the land mortgaged.
conditioned, concluded and fully agreed by and between the said parties to
these presents, and the true intent and meaning of the same parties to these
presents is, And the said R L and G L do covenant, etc. That if neither the
said R M, his heirs, executors, administrators, nor any of them do pay or
cause to be paid unto the said R L and G L, their executors, administrators or
assigns, nor to any of them the said sum of eight hundred pounds etc. at the
day and place of payment thereof above mentioned, but shall make default of
payment thereof, or of any part or parcel thereof, according to the true
meaning of the said Proviso or Condition, whereby, or by reason whereof the
premises and every parcel thereof shall become absolute to the said R L and G
L, their heirs and assigns, according to the true intent and plain meaning of
these presents, that then they the said R L and G L, their heirs, executors,
administrators or assigns or some of them shall and will pay or cause to be
paid unto the said R M, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, at or
etc. The full sum of etc. in manner and form following: That is to say, on the
eighteenth day of etc. the sum of 120 pounds; and within one whole year next
ensuing the day of the death of the said R M the Father, the sum of one
thousand pounds; at the end of one other whole year then next following 1000;
and at the end of one other whole year also then next ensuing, one other
thousand pounds in full satisfaction of and for the clear and absolute purchase
of the said Manor and Lordship, rectory, advowson, messuages, lands, tenements,
hereditaments, and of all and singular other the premises, in the said
Indenture mentioned to be thereby given, granted, bargained and sold, and of
every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances. Forster Council.

In witness, etc.
A covenant to surrender Copyhold lands, etc.
ANd the said D S, for the consideration before in these presents expressed,
does further covenant, promise and grant for her self, her heirs, executors and
administrators, and for every of them, to and with the said I P. his heirs and
assigns by these presents, That she the said D S or her heirs shall and will on
this side and before the Feast of etc. at the charges in the law of the said I
P his etc. make and suffer, or cause to be made and suffered a good and
sufficient surrender in law to the use of the said I P, his heirs etc. for
ever, according to the custom of the Manor of C. of one field and close of
Pasture etc. (and so recite the land verbatim) and of every part and parcel
thereof with the appurtenances, being parcels of the said Manor of S. and which
were late the Copie-hold inheritance of T C deceased, according to the custom
of the said Manor.

And the said D S does covenant etc. That the said Copie-hold lands at the time
of the making and perfecting of the said surrender, shall be, Discharged of
encumbrances.
and so at all times for ever hereafter shall continue unto the said I P his
heirs and assigns clearly discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved and kept
harmless of and from all former charges, estates, titles, troubles,
surrenders, forfeitures and encumbrances whatsoever, made, committed, suffered
or done by the said T C deceased, his heirs or assigns, or by the said E S his
heirs or assigns, or by the said D S. or by any other person or persons by or
with their and every or any of their means, assent, title, interest, act,
sufferance or procurement.

And the said D S does covenant etc. That the said Copie-hold lands and
premises before mentioned to be granted and assigned as aforesaid, That the
lands are of a certain value per Annum.
now are of the clear yearly worth and value of twenty pounds by the year,
above all rents, charges, and reprizes; and are and now be well worth to be so
let or set. And that the same close shall from time to time hereafter so
remain, be and continue of the value aforesaid unto the said I P. his heirs
etc. during the term and continuance of the said several mentioned or recited
Leases and either of them.

A Bargain and Sale of Swans, and a Swan mark.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, A B of etc.
greeting etc. Know ye, that I the said A B. for diverse good causes and
considerations me in this behalf especially moving, have given and granted, and
by this my present Writing do give, grant and confirm unto C D of etc. all
those my Swans and Signets, and game of Swans and Signets both white and gray,
marked with the Ragged staff, swimming, remaining and being in, upon, and
about the River of W. in the County of L. or in, upon or about any other
rivers, brooks, waters or places within the same County of L, or elsewhere
wheresoever: And all rights, royalties, privileges, preheminences, profits,
commodities whatsoever to the same Swans and Signets, and game of Swans and
Signers or any of them in any wise belonging, incident or appertaining;
Together with the Swan mark aforesaid. To have and to hold the said Swans and
Signets, and game of Swans and Signets, and Swan mark aforesaid, with their
rights and appurtenances whatsoever, unto the said C D his heirs and assigns
for ever, in as large, ample and beneficial a manner and form as I the said A
B or any my Ancestors ever have had, held or enjoyed, or might or ought to have
had, held or enjoyed the same.

In witness etc.
A Bargain and sale of Underwood.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between etc. Witnesses, That the said A B. for and
in consideration of the sum of etc. whereof etc. Has bargained and sold, and
by these presents does bargain and sell unto the said C D all and singular
Woods and Underwoods growing and being within the Grove called W. Grove, and
the hedge of the same containing by estimation 26 Acres, be it more or less,
lying and being in the parish of D, in the County of H. and also all the lopps
and shreds of all such trees being within the said Grove called W. as have been
usually lopped at the felling of the Underwood growing within the said Grove.
Except, and always out of this present sale reserved unto the said A B, his
heirs and assigns, all manner of Trees whatsoever, other then underwood now
growing or being in or upon the same Grove or any parcel thereof: To have and
to hold the said underwood, lopps and shreds before by these presents bargained
and sold (except before excepted) unto the said C D. his executors and
assigns, to his and their only proper use and behoof. And the said A B does
covenant etc. That he the said C D. his executors and assigns at his and their
liberty and pleasure shall or may peaceably and quietly have, hold, take,
occupy and enjoy, and enter into the said Grove and every part and parcel
thereof, there to fell, hew, cut down all and singular the said woods and
underwoods and hedgrowes at all seasonable times in the year, from the day of
the date hereof, until the etc. and the same so felled, hewed and cut down,
with his and their or any of their horses, carts and carriages to bear, lead,
carry and convey from thence to any other place or places, at his and their
liberty and pleasure, at all time and times during the space of three years,
by all convenient ways thereunto now used und accustomed, without any lawful
let, contradiction, etc. And the said C D does covenant etc. That he the said C
D. his executors or assigns shall and will at every felling which he or they
shall make of the said woods, underwoods and trees, leave standing and growing
in and upon the premises so many competent and sufficient standards, studdles
and stories as by the laws and statutes in that case provided, is or ought to
be left. And also shall and will at his and their own proper costs and charges
make all the hedges and fences of the young Springs of the said Wood, for the
safe keeping thereof from hurt and spoil of beasts and cattle, according to
the custom of the Country there.

In witness etc.
A sale of a ward or a wardship.
THis INDENTVRE made etc. between etc. witnesses, that the said A B for and in
consideration of the sum of etc. whereof etc. has given, granted, bargained
and sold, and by these presents does etc. unto the said C D his executors and
administrators, the wardship, custody and marriage of E F son and heir of G
F deceased and unaffyed and uncontracted to or with any woman; and all his
right, estate, title, possession and interest of and in the said custody and
marriage, together with the Letters patents of our Sovereign Lady the Queens
Majesty that now is, made to the said A B of and concerning the same; and all
annuities, rents, payments, allowances, interests, profits and commodities,
advantages and benefits which by the said Letters patents be, in any wife
given, granted, allowed, assigned or appointed to the said A B. to have,
possess, and enjoy the same wardship, custody and Marriage of the said E F
unaffyed and uncontracted as abovesaid, and all other the premises to the said
C D his executors, administrators and assigns to the proper use and behoof of
the same C D his executors, administrators and assigns.

And the said A B for the considerations abovesaid, covenanteth and grants by
these presents for himself his etc. to and with etc. in manner and form
following viz. that the foresaid wardship, custody and marriage, and other the
premises before by these presents bargained and sold, stand and be at the time
of the making of this present indenture clear and clearly discharged,
exonerated and free of and from all manner of former bargains, sales, grants,
promises, titles, charges, demands, and encumbrances had, made, committed,
grown, done or suffered by the said A B or by his means or assent.

And further, that he the said C D his executors, administrators and assigns,
shall or may by virtue of these presents immediately have, take and enjoy the
said wardship, custody and marriage, and all other the premises by these
presents, bargained, granted and sold to the said C D as abovesaid, without any
eviction, expulsion, let, disturbance or interruption of him the said A B his
etc. or any other person and persons. And further, that he the said A B at the
time of the making of these present Indentures, has lawful authority and
power in the law to grant, bargain and sell the aforesaid wardship, custody
and marriage, and all other the premises to the said C D his executors and
administrators, in form above mentioned.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of a Ward.
THis INDENTURE made etc. witnesses, that whereas our said Sovereign Lady the
Queens Majesty that now is, by her Highness Letters patents under the great
Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster the etc. has given and granted
unto the said R F one annuity or yearly rent of etc. to be appointed by the
Master and Council of her Highness Court of Wards and Liveries, out of, and in
the Manners of C with the appurtenances in the County of W. and of and in five
messuages etc. (and so recite the Letters patents as far as is requisite) as by
the same Letters patents more at etc. Now the said R F with the counsel,
license and agreement of the said Master and Council of the said Court first
obtained and had, for diverse causes him especially moving, Has granted,
bargained, assigned, put over and sold, and by these presents does fully and
clearly grant, bargain, assign, put over and sell unto the said I S the said
custody, wardship, and marriage of the said H P her Majesty's Ward, and all
his right, title, interest and claim which he the said R F now has, may,
might, should or ought to have, of, in, or to the said Wardship and marriage of
the said H P. or hereafter may have of and in the Wardship and marriage of the
next heir male of the same H P. and so from heir male to heir male, being
within age, until the said I S his executours or assigns have taken the
effect of the said marriage of the one of them without disparagement, together
with the said annuity or yearly rent of twenty shillings to be paid yearly to
the said I S his executors or assigns in manner and form as in the said
Letters patents is declared and expressed: together also with the same Letters
patents and one indenture bearing date etc. made between our Sovereign Lady
the Queens Majesty on the one party, and the said R F on the other party,
touching the premises. And the said R F does covenant etc. That the said
wardship and custody of the said H P and of other the heirs aforesaid, for and
during the minority of the same H P and of other the heirs aforesaid, and all
and every such profits, availes and commodities belonging and appertaining, and
which by any manner of ways may arise, grow or come by reason of the wardship
of the said H P and of other the heirs abovesaid, (together with the said
yearly annuity or exhibition above specified) may be, and during and by all the
minority of the said H and of other the said heirs, shall be discharged or
otherwise saved and kept harmless of and from all former bargains, sales,
grants or other encumbrances whatsoever, had, made or done by the said R F. the
covenants, clauses, conditions and agreements in the said indenture contained
and expressed always excepted. And the said I S does covenant etc. that he the
said I S his etc. and every of them shall well and truly obey, observe,
perform, fulfill and keep all and every the covenants, clauses, conditions and
agreements specified, comprised and mentioned in the said indenture which on
the part and behalf of the said R F stands bounden to our said Sovereign
Lady the Queens Majesty for the performance thereof and of all actions, suites,
forfeitures, penalties, judgments, condemnations, extents, executions, charges
and encumbrances for or touching the said covenants, clauses, conditions,
agreements, obligations and writings obligatory, or for or touching every or
any of them, shall or will sufficiently save or keep harmless the said R F his
etc. and every or them from time to time and at all times hereafter.

In witness, etc.
A Deed of gift upon condition to be void upon the the tender of 5 s.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, A B of etc.
greeting.
Whereas I the said A B the day of the date hereof am indebted unto C D etc. in
diverse great sums of money as by bonds and bills of debt under my hand, may
plainly appear. And also unto E F etc. in the sum of ten shillings, and to
diverse and sundry other persons, certain other several sum and sums of money
which I have not at this time presently to pay, and to that intent and purpose
that the said C D and E F may be truly satisfied and paid their said several
sum and sums of money. Know ye that I therefore the said A B for the
considerations aforesaid, have given and granted, and by these presents do
give, grant, and confirm unto the said C D and E F all and singular my goods,
chattels, leases, term and terms of years, plate, jewels, housholdstuff,
corn, cattle, horses, mares, geldings, sheep, lambs, wool, debts, sum
and sums of money, and other things whatsoever they be, moveable and
unmovable, as well quick as dead, of what nature, kind, quality or condition
soever they be, and in whose custody or possession, or in what place or
places soever they be or remain, or may be found within the City of London, or
elsewhere wheresoever, within the Realm of England, and of the Remain thereof
(if any be) to make and yield an account to me, my etc. To have and to hold all
and singular the said goods, cattels, leases, plate, jewels, household stuff,
corn, cattle, horses, mares, geldings, sheep, lambs wool, debts, sum and sums
of money, and other things whatsoever, unto the said C D and E F their
executors and assigns, as his and their own proper goods for ever: Provided
always, that if I the said A B do at any time hereafter during my natural
life, tender, offer or pay, or cause to be tendered, offered or paid unto the
Mr. of the Rolls of her Majesty's high Court of Chancery the sum of five
shillings etc. that then and from thenceforth these presents and every
sentence, word, clause and agreement herein contained shall be utterly void,
and had for naught, as if these presents had not been had nor made.

In witness etc.
A sale of Billets, and wood, or timber.
THis INDENTURE made etc. between T C. R W and G M etc. and I B and R W etc on
the other party, Witnesses, that the said etc. for the consideration
hereunder mentioned, have bargained and sold, and by these presents do fully
and clearly bargain and sell unto the said etc. ten thousand load of good
merchantable and lawful Western Billet, at and after the rate and price of
three shillings six pence the load: And also five hundred load of good
merchantable, sound and well squared Oaken Timber, accompting fifty foot to
every load, at and after the rate and price of eleven shillings the load, with
such deductions and defalcations out of the same several pieces as is here
under expressed; and the same billets and Timber to be delivered at such places
and times, and in such manner and form as is here under mentioned, and the
said etc. to and with etc. that they the said T R and G or some of them their
etc. shall and will well and truly deliver, or cause to be delivered to the
said etc. all and every the said ten thousand loads of Billets, and 500 loades
of Timber, of the kind and goodness aforesaid, to the proper use of them the
said etc. free and discharged of all manner of charges and encumbrances
whatsoever, as well by water as by land, water carriage only excepted, At and
upon some wharf or wharfs in Henly upon Thames and Shiplack in the County of O.
and at and upon some wharf or wharfs in S and R and the wharf nearest Kent-wood
in the County of Berks in manner and form following, that is to say; Three
hundred loades of the same billet, and one hundred loads of the same Timber, at
or before etc. And between that and the day of etc. three hundred more of the
same billet, and two hundred loads of the same Wood-Timber. And between the
same day of etc. and the day etc. four thousand loads more of the same billets
and two hundred loads more of the same Timber, residue and in full delivery and
satisfaction of the said ten thousand loads of Billets, and five hundred loads
of Timber: And also that they the said T R and G their etc. shall not only
deliver or cause to be delivered all and every the said Billets, and Timber at
the waterside, or some Wharf or Wharfs in some, or any the Towns and places
above mentioned for and to the use, and in form aforesaid limited, clear of
all charges and encumbrances whatsoever; But shall also from time to time and
at all times from henceforth save and keep harmlese the said Billets and
Timber, and every parcel thereof to the said etc. from and against the
purveying to her Majesty's use, and against all and every the purveyor and
takers of or for her Majesty's Woodyard and of her heirs and Successors. Or
else shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the use aforesaid to the said
etc. at the places of delivery aforesaid, or at some of them in recompense of
and for such of the said Billets and Timber as shall be so taken, so much more
in stead thereof, at the rates and prices aforesaid before the etc. in part of
payment of and for all which Billets and timber to be delivered as aforesaid,
the said I B and R W have truly paid unto the said T C R W and G M before the
ensealing hereof the sum of etc. of which said sum etc. the said T C R W and
G M acknowledges themselves fully satisfied and paid, and thereof etc. And in
other part of the sum and sums for the said Billets and Timber, amounting
to the sum of etc. the said etc. Covenanteth and grants etc. to and with
etc. well and truly to pay or cause to be paid to the said etc. upon the said
etc. next after reasonable request thereof to be made and given in writing to
the said etc. at or within etc. after the delivery of so much of the said
Billets and Timber as after the rates aforesaid shall amount to the sum of
etc. or more, the said seven hundred pounds to be paid at or within etc. And it
is agreed between the said parties, That whereas the rate of the said Billets,
and Timber as aforesaid to be deliverd, do amount to the sum of etc. over
and above the said sum of etc. already paid, and the said sum of etc. in form
aforesaid Covenanted to be paid. It is agreed between the said parties in
respect of the Carriage by Water, of the said Billets and Timber, that is to
say, for so many thereof as shall not be delivered at H S aforesaid so much
money as the Carriage of the same by water not delivered at H S aforesaid shall
amount unto; and from any other place appointed by these presents, for delivery
thereof unto any one of the said places of H and S aforesaid or either of them,
the said etc. shall have allowance and defalcation out of the said sum of
etc. for every load of Billets as aforesaid to be delivered at S four pence;
and for every load of Timber etc. and for every load of Billets to be delivered
at R eight pence, and for every load of Timber sixteen pence; and for every
load of Billet to be delivered at the wharf nearest Kentwood twelve pence, and
for every load of Timber two shillings, And the said etc. for them etc. to and
with etc. to pay and satisfy to the same etc. upon reasonable request so much
of the said sum of etc. as shall amount and remain over and above the
allowance and defalcation in respect of the water charges aforesaid. And in
like manner the said T C, R W and G M for them etc. to and with etc. That if
the said allowance for carriage as aforesaid shall amount to more then three
hundred twenty five pounds, That then they the said etc. shall well and truly
pay or cause to be paid to the said I B and R W their etc. upon reasonable
request, so much money as the same allowance shall surmount the said fumme of
etc.

In witness etc.
An Indenture for limitation of uses and estates.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. Between R L of the one party, and A B C D and E F
of the other party, Witnesses, that the said R L for and in consideration of
the mutual love, zeal and affection which he the said R L does bear unto G L
third Son to the said R and to M his daughter, and to other the parties
hereafter in these presents mentioned, and for the better continuance (for so
long time as it shall please Almighty God) of all and singular his Messuages,
Lands, Tenements and hereditaments, in his Kindred and blood, as hereafter is
limited and expressed; And for diverse other good causes and considerations him
the said R L thereunto moveing, It is Covenanted, granted, concluded,
condescended and agreed between the said parties to these present Indentures
and every of them.

And the said R L for himself and his heirs does covenant and grant by these
presents to and with the said A B C D and E F and every of them, and the heirs
of them, and every of them, That he the said R L his heirs and assigns, and
all and every other person and persons and their heirs and assigns that now
stand and be seized, or that at any time hereafter shall stand or be seized of
and in all and singular the Manors, messuages, parsonages, lands, tenements,
tithes, meadows, feedings, pastures, marshes, as well fresh as salt rights,
jurisdictions, franchises, liberties, fruits profits, commodities and
hereditaments whatsoever of the said R L, with all and singular their
appurtenances, situate, lying, being, coming, arising, happening, renewing,
growing or increasing within the towns, parishes, hamblets or fields of E and M
or in either of them within the Isle of S in the County of K or elsewhere in
the said Isle, whereof the said R L is or stands seized of any estate or
inheritance in possession, reversion, remainder or use, shall at all times from
and after the feast of etc. next ensuing the date hereof, stand and be seized
of all and singular the same premises, and of every part and parcel thereof to
the several uses, behoofs, intents and purposes hereafter expressed, limited
and appointed, and to none other use, intent, behoof or purpose: That is to
say, to the use and behoof of the said R L for and during the term of his
natural life, without impeachment of any manner of wast. And from and after the
decease of the said R. then of all and all manner of tithes, yearly, and from
time to time coming and renewing and growing of all and every the lands,
tenements and hereditaments in the said Parish of E, heretofore conveyed and
assured for the jointure of A now his wife, to the use and behoof of the said A
for term of her life, and after the decease of the said R L of all and
singular the said messuages, lands, tenements, hereditaments and all other the
premises with the appurtenances, except the said Tithes. And after the decease
of the said A, of the tithes to the use and behoof of G L for and during the
term of the natural life of the said G, and after his decease then to the use
and behoof of the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten; and for default of
such issue, then to the use and behoof of M daughter of the said R L and of
the heirs of her body lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue to the
use of the right heirs of the said R L for ever.

Provided always, and the intent and meaning of these presents and of the
parties to the same and every of them, A Proviso to make Leases, etc.
is, and it is fully covenanted and agreed between the same parties and every
of them, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R L during his
natural life by his deed or deeds indented under his hand and seal, to
demise, grant, let, limit, express or appoint the premises or any part thereof
at his will and pleasure to any person or persons whatsoever for such term and
terms of years, life or lives or otherwise in, possession or reversion, and
for such yearly rent and rents, or without rent, as to him the said R L shall
seem good.

Provided also, and the intent and meaning of these presents, and of the
parties to the same and every of them is, and it is fully covenanted and agreed
by and between the same parties and every of them, that it shall or may be
lawful to and for the said G L and the heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten; and for default of such issue, to and for the said M and the heirs
of her body lawfully begotten, by his, her or their deed or deeds indented,
under their, or any of their hands and seals, to demise, grant, let, limit,
express or appoint the premises or any part thereof at his or their will or
pleasure to any person or persons whatsoever for term of three lives in
possession, or for one and twenty years in possession, so that upon every such
lease, grant and estate to be made for life, lives and years as aforesaid,
there be reserved the old and accustomed yearly rents or more. And so that the
same lessees and grantees or their assigns do well and truly content and pay
or cause to be paid the same rents so to be reserved, or mentioned to be
reserved in and by their said Indentures of Lease, unto such person or persons
for the time being unto whom the reversion or reversions, remainder or
remainders immediately depending upon the same leases and grants, by the true
intent and meaning of these presents shall, or ought to appertain, at the
days in their writings limited and mentioned, upon demand or demands of the
same rents to be made, in such manner and form as by the law are requisite in
demands of rents and services, or within one month next after such demand or
demands.

And that also it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R L during his
life, and after his decease to and for the said G L and the heirs males of his
body lawfully begotten, by his or their deed or deeds indented, at his or
their will and pleasure, to demise, grant, limit, declare, express, assign or
convey the premises or any part thereof to such woman, wife or wives, as the
same I L or such of his sons as is, or shall be his heir apparent, shall
happen to marry, during the natural life of such woman, wife or wives, for or
in the name of her jointure, without any rent by her to be yielded or paid for
the same; Provided always, that no former estate or estates, lease or leases
shall be avoided or impeached by such limitation to any such wife or wives.

Nevertheless, it is always provided and fully covenanted, granted,
concluded, condescended and agreed by and between the said parties to these
present Indentures and every of them, That if the said G L and M. or any of
them, or any of the heirs of their several bodies lawfully begotten, to whom
any use or uses, estate or estates, of or in the said Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments herein before mentioned, or any part or parcel thereof is before
in or by these presents limited, declared or appointed, being of the age of one
and twenty years, or above, shall at any time hereafter advisedly, wittingly,
willinly, determinably and effectually procure or assent to or for any act or
acts, thing or things for any bargain, sale, discontinuance, alienation,
exchange or forfeiture to be had or made of the said lands, tenements and
other the premises before mentioned, or of any part or parcel of them or any
of them, to him, them, or any of them as is aforesaid said by these presents
limited, declared or appointed in use or possession, whereby any estate of the
premises, or of any part thereof in use or possession mentioned, limited,
declared or appointed by these presents, may, should or might in any wise, or
by any means be undone, discontinued, barred, determined, or forfeited. And
the same bargain, sale, discontinuance, alienation, exchange or forfeiture, or
any other open or effectual thing or act toward the same effect, shall
attempt, cause, procure, or wittingly or willingly assent unto, or suffer to be
attempted or gone about to be executed, performed, prosecuted or put in ure by
the knowledging of any note or notes, of or for any fine or fines to be levied,
or by knowledging any warrantie or warranties of attorney or atturnies for any
recoverie or recoveries to be prosecuted, or enter into any warranty or
warranties by any means whatsoever, or by knowledging any warrant for the
same, or by any purchase of any writ or writs by them or any of them, or by any
other, by their or any of their assent, consent by appearance or otherwise, to
any writ or writs of the premises, or any part or parcel thereof, or to any
thing in them, or any of them contained, or by knowledging any deed or deeds,
writing or writings to be enrolled, or by any other effectual act or acts,
thing or things whatsoever whereby and wherewith any bargain, sale,
discontinuance, alienation, change or forfeiture shall or may ensue. That then
immediately from and after the time of such procuring, accepting, causing,
commanding, wittingly assenting, suffering or going about in manner and form
as is aforesaid; and before any such bargain, sale, discontinuance,
alienation, exchange or forfeiture perperfected, executed, committed or done,
The said use and uses, estate and estates, limited, declared and appointed in
these presents unto him or them, and to as many as so shall attempt, cause,
procure, command, willingly assent or suffer any such act or acts, thing or
things to be prosecuted, executed, performed, done or put in ure, or gone
about to be prosecuted, executed, performed, done or put in ure, in manner and
form before declare, whereupon any bargain, sale, discontinuance, alienation,
exchange or forfeiture shall or may ensue, contrary to the true meaning of these
presents, of and in so much of the said lands, tenements and hereditaments,
with the appurtenances, for the which, any thing or things as aforesaid shall
be so attempted, caused, procured, commanded, assented or suffered to be
executed, performed, done or put in ure, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, shall cease only as in respect and having regard
unto such person and persons so attempting, procuring, causing, commanding,
willingly assenting unto, suffering, or going about any such act or acts, thing
or things aforesaid, as if such person or persons so attempting, causing,
commanding or procuring were naturally dead, and no otherwise. And that then,
and in such case, it shall be lawful to and for such person and persons to
whom the use and possession thereof should come, grow, or be, by the true
intent and meaning of these presents, to enter and enjoy the same, as if such
person or persons that so shall procure or assent to or for any such act or
acts, thing or things to be done were naturally dead. And of such and the like
estates, and in like manner and form, and to all intents and purposes, and
with like remainder in use, over and with like limitations and conditions, as
the same should have come, grown or been, if the same person or persons, that
so shall procure or assent to or for any such act or acts, thing or things to
be done at or immediately before the time of such procuring or assenting, were
naturally dead, and no otherwise.

Provided always, and it is covenanted, granted, concluded, condescended and
fully agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, and their
heirs and every of them, That if the said R L do at any time hereafter during
his natural life by his writing to be subscribed with his own proper hand,
and to be sealed with his Seal, and to be enrolled in any the Courts of Record
of the Queens Majesty, her heirs or successors, signify or declare that his
will and pleasure is, that the uses and behoof limited and expressed in these
presents, shall be void, and of none effect, touching or concerning all the
said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and other the
premises, or touching some or any part or parcel thereof, That then, and at
all times from thenceforth all the states, behoofs, intents and limitations
conveyed, raised or contained by or in these presents, touching or concerning
all the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the
premises, whereof or in the which the uses or hehoofs limited or expressed in
or by these presents, shall be so signified and declared to be void and of
none effect, touching or concerning such, or any part or parcel of the same
premises whereof or wherewith the uses or behoofs limited or expressed in
these presents shall be so signified or declared to be void and of none effect,
shall cease, determine, and be utterly void and of none effect. And that then
and at all times from thenceforth the said R L and his heirs, and all and
every other person and persons and their heirs that now stand and be seized,
or that at any time hereafter shall stand or be seized of or in the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and other the premises, or
of or in such or in any part, parcel or member of the same, or of or
concerning the premises, in which the said estates, uses or limitations shall
be so signified or declared to be void and of none effect, shall from
thenceforth stand and be seized of and in the same premises and every part
thereof, of or in the which the uses, intents or behoofes limited or expressed
in these presents, shall be so signified or declared to be void and of none
effect, to the use and behoof of the said R L and of his heirs and assigns
for ever, and to no other use etc. And that then also and from thenceforth it
shall be lawful unto and for the said R L and to his heirs into the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and other the premises,
whereof, or in the which, the uses, intents or behoofs limited or expressed in
these presents shall be so signified or declared to be void and of none effect,
to enter, and the same to have again and enjoy as in his or their first or
former estate. This Indenture or any limitation of use in the same, or any
clause, sentence, covenant or agreement contained in these presents to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness etc.
A deed of Revocation, very large.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come, Sir W C
greeting. Whereas I W C in and by an Indenture bearing date etc. made between
me the said W C on the one party, and R C. E H. and F B on the other party;
as well for and in consideration of the natural love and affection which I had
and did bear unto E V, Lady B V and S V, daughters of the Right Honorable E
Earl of O, and of the late Lady A his wife, daughter of me the said VV C; and
for the better stay and maintenance of living of them the said Lady E V, Lady
B V, and Lady S V; and for diverse and sundry other good causes and reasonable
considerations me the said W C then especially moving, I the said W C did by
the fame Indenture for me, my heirs and assigns covenant, promise and grant to
and with the said R C, E H and F B, their heirs and assigns, and every of them,
That from and after the ensealing and delivery of the same Indentures, I the
said W C and my heirs and assigns, and all and every other person and persons
that then were, or that then after should be seized of the Manor or Farm
called K. with the appurtenances in K. in the County of M. and of all other
etc. (reciting the land) with all and singular their and every of their
appurtenances, or of any part or parcel thereof, of any estate of inheritance,
or of the reversion or reversions, remainder or remainders or inheritance of
the said premises, or of any part or parcel thereof, shall stand and be
seized of the said Manors, Lordships, lands, tenements and hereditaments, with
all and singular their appurtenances, consent (...) reversion and reversions,
remainder and done, (...) ^nders, and inheritance of the same premises, far
every part, parcel and member thereof; To (...) use, uses, intents and
limitations, and under the conditions and provisoes in these presents limited,
expressed and declared, and to none other use, purpose or intent. That is to
say, to the use and behoof of the said W C for and during his natural life,
without impeachment of waste: and afterward to the use of the said E V, B V
and S V, and the heirs of their bodies lawfully to be begotten; and afterward
to the use of the said Sir R C, and of the heirs of the body of the said R C
lawfully begotten; and afterward to the use of the right heirs of me the said
W C for ever.

Provided always, and it is covenanted, granted, concluded, condescended and
fully agreed between the said parties to these presents, That all and every the
said uses, and limitations of uses and estates limited, appointed, raised,
conveyed, or intended or meant to the said E V, B V and S V, and to the heirs
of their bodies, or to any of them, or to any others that shall or may claim
by, from or under them or any of them, shall stand and be upon the limitations
in these presents expressed: That is to say, that if the said E V or any of the
heirs of her body, or the said B V or any of the heirs of her body, or the
said S V or any of the heirs of her body, or any other person or persons
except the said Lo. W C, that has, or shall have any estate, right or title in
the premises or any part thereof by the true intent and meaning of these
presents, at any time or times hereafter, shall consent or attempt to do,
knowledge or suffer any act or thing whatsoever which upon the still execution
thereof shall or may be any bar, alteration, forfeiture, determination or
discontinuance of any part of the entail before limited in and by these
presents, or of the freehold or inheritance of the premises or any part
thereof, or whereby any use or uses by these presents, limited, intended or
appointed, or any the estate or estates, or right that shall arise or come by
reason of these presents, shall be altered, determined, undone, debarred,
forfeited or discontinued, or shall by any means charge o^ incumber the same
premises or any part thereof with any rent or rents, or other estates, charges
or encumbrances, to the prejudice, hurt or detriment of any person or persons
to whom the premises or any part thereof shall descend, revert, remain or come
by the true intent and meaning of these presents, or whereby the true intent
and meaning of these presents may not or cannot take place or effect: That then
and from thenceforth and immediately from and after the time of such consenting
and attempting, and before any such bar, alteration, forfeiture, determination
or discontinuance had, made, suffered or done, all and every the use and uses,
estate and estates limited and declared in and by these present Indentures, to
her or them only which shall content or attempt to or for any such act or
acts, thing or things to be had, done, knowledged or suffered, contrary to the
true intent and meaning of these presents, of and in such and so much of the
premises whereof any such consent or attempt shall be, shall cease and
determine only as in respect, and having regard to such person and persons so
attempting or consenting, in such sort, degree, quality and condition as if
such person or persons so attempting or consenting were naturally dead, and not
otherwise. And that then and from thenceforth from time to time such and so
much of the premises whereof any such consent or atttempt shall be so had,
made or done, shall be immediately to such person and persons to whom by
limitations of the uses aforesaid the same should have remained, come or been,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, of and in such
estate, degree and condition as in these presents is expressed, limited,
intended or mentioned, and with such remainders thereof over, and with such
limitations, proviso and conditions as are thereof in these presents expressed
or limited, as if such person or persons that so should assent or attempt to or
for any such act or thing to be done at or immediately before such assenting or
attempting, had been naturally dead, and not otherwise. And that the said W C.
his heirs and assigns, and all and every other person and persons that now
be, or hereafter shall be seized of the said Manors, lands, tenements,
hereditaments and other the premises, or of any part or parcel thereof, of any
estate of inheritance, shall from henceforth for ever, and from time to time
hereafter stand and be seized of and in such part, and so much of the said
Manors, lands and hereditaments for or concerning the which any of the said
acts, matters or things aforesaid shall be tempted, practiced, procured, caused
or commanded to be done, or else assented or willingly suffered to be attempted
or gone about by any open act or deed to be executed, done, performed or put in
ure as is aforesaid; To such and the same use and uses, and to such and the
same person and persons as by force of these presents, after the decease of
such person so attempting to do any such act or deed, ought to have and enjoy
the same; and in such and the same manner, form, quality and condition, to
every intent, construction and purpose as if the same person and persons and
every of them that so should assent, attempt or go about by any open act or
deed to do, cause or suffer any such thing to be done, were then dead. And as
though the said devises, acts, matters and things had never been done,
attempted, procured caused, had, made or suffered to be done, Any thing in
these presents contained, or any other matter or cause whatsoever, to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. Provided nevertheless, and it is
Covenanted, condescended and agreed by and between the said parties to these
presents, that if it shall fortune such one of the said persons that has or
shall have any estate, right or title in the premises, or any part thereof by
the true intent or meaning of these presents, as shall have no issue in being,
born and alive, of his or her body lawfully begotten, at any time then after,
to assent, suffer, procure, commit or do any thing or act, or assent to or for
any thing or act to be done whereby any use or estate by these presents, to her
or them limited shall end, discontinue, be void or of none effect by the
proviso last aforesaid, That yet nevertheless as soon as such one of the
persons aforesaid, that has or shall have any estate, right or title in the
premises, or any part thereof by the true intent or meaning of these presents,
as having no issue born alive of her or his body lawfully begotten, shall
fortune or happen at any time hereafter to assent, suffer or procure, commit or
do any thing or act, or assent to or for any thing or act to be done, whereby
any use or estate by these presents to him limited shall end, determine, be
void and of none effect by the proviso last aforesaid, shall then happen to
have issue of his body lawfully begotten, That then and immediately after the
birth of such issue the use and uses vested upon any the Acts in the proviso
last aforesaid, shall cease; And that then and from thenceforth the use and
uses of and in such and so much of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and
premises, for, and concerning the which any of the things aforesaid, mentioned
in the said proviso, shall be attempted, caused, procured, commanded, assented
or sufferd to be executed, performed, done or put in ure; or gone about to be
executed, performed, done or put in ure by the father or mother of such child,
contrary to the true meaning of these presents, shall be to such child and the
heirs of the body of the same child lawfully begotten; and for default of such
issue, to the use and behoof of every such person and persons as at any time
hereafter be heir of the body of such one of the persons that has or shall
have any estate, right or title in the premises or any part thereof, by the
true intent and meanining of of these presents, as having no child in being,
born or alive, of his or her body lawfully begotten, shall fortune at any time
hereafter to assent, suffer or procure, commit or do any act or thing, or
assent to, or for any act or thing to be done whereby the use in these presents
to him limited shall end, determane be void or of none effect by the proviso
aforesaid touching the same, with the remainders thereof over in use in manner
and form before expressed and limited. Provided always, and nevertheless it
is condescended and agreed between the said parties to these presents, That if
the said W C at any time or times hereafter during his life, by writing or
writings by him subscribed, and sealed with his seal, do signify and declare
that his will, mind and pleasure is, that the several uses and intents, and
limitations of uses and estates in these presents declared, limited or
expressed, or any of them, shall be void and of none effect, either touching or
concerning all the foresaid Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments and
other the premises before in these presents mentioned, or touching or
concerning any part or parcel of them, or any of them, That then and from
thenceforth all and singular the said uses, intents and limitations of uses or
estates so specified or declared by writing as is aforesaid to be void, shall
cease determine and be utterly void and of none effect, only touching all such
and so much of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and other the premises
whereof, or for, or concerning the which the said uses, intents and limitations
of uses or estates before in these presents declared, limited or expressed,
shall be so signified or declared by writing, as is aforesaid, to be void and
of none effect. And that then and from thenceforth the said W C his heirs and
assigns, and all and every other person and persons that now are or at any
time hereafter shall be seized of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and other the premises, or of any part or parcel thereof, of any
estate of inheritance, shall from thenceforth for ever stand and be seized of
and in such and so much of the said manors, lands, tenements, hereditaments and
other the premises with the appurtenances, concerning the which and whereof
such signification or declaration shall be so made for the ceasing and
determining of the said uses, or any of them, To the only use of the said W C
his heirs and assigns for ever. Any thing in these presents mentioned, or any
other matter or thing whatsoever, to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. Revocation.
Now know ye that I the said W C, for diverse good causes and considerations me
in this behalf especially moving, do by this my present writing by me
subscribed and sealed with my seal of Arms, signify and declare that my will,
mind and pleasure is, that the several uses and intents, and limitations of
uses and estates in the said recited Indenture, declared, limited or expressed,
and all and every of them shall be void and of none effect, touching or
concerning all the aforesaid manors, lands, tenements and hereditaments and
other the premises in the said recited Indenture mentioned, or every part
thereof. And I do also by these presents repeal, revoke and determine all the
said uses and estates in the said Manors and other the premises, and do
signify and declare that the same uses, intents, limitations and estates in
the said recited Indenture expressed, declared or limited, of and in all and
singular the premises, shall from henceforth for ever be utterly void,
determined, revoaked, adnulled and of none effect, to all intents,
constructions and purposes, The said recited Indenture or any thing therein
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And further I do
by these presents absolutely limit, signify, declare and appoint, that all and
every person and persons whatsoever and their heirs that now stand and be
seized of or in the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and
premises before recited, or of, or in any part or parcel thereof, shall
immediately from henceforth, and at all times hereafter for ever stand and be
seized of, and in all and every the said manors, lands, tenements,
hereditaments and all other the premises, and of and in every part and parcel
thereof with the appurtenances, to the only proper use and behoof of me the
said W C, my heirs and assigns for ever, and to none other use, intent or
purpose. Any thing in the said recited Indenture mentioned, or any other matter
or thing whatsoever to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
A Revocation very short.
BE it known unto all men by these presenrs, That I A B etc. do by this my
present deed or writing sealed with my seal, and signed with my hand in the
presence of etc. Repeal, revoake and determine, and do declare to be repealed,
revoaked and determined all and singular the uses and intents mentioned in the
Deed Indented hereunto annexed, of and for all and singular the Lordships,
Lands etc. mentioned in the said deed, and of and for every part and parcel
thereof. And does by these presents absolutely limit, determine and appoint
that all and singular the feoffees, and parties mentioned in the said Deed
Indented, and their heirs and assigns shall immediately from henceforth stand
and be seized of and in the Lordships etc. mentioned in the said Deed Indented,
and of every part and parcel thereof to the only use and behoof of me the said
A B my heirs and assigns for ever, in pure and absolute estate, in fee
simple, and to none other use, intent or purpose.

In Witness, etc.
An Indenture between executors.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. between R H of etc. and A his wife, one of the
executours of the last Will and Testament of B etc. deceased, of the one
party; and T D of etc. Son and heir, and the other executor of the said B D
of the other party; That where the said B D did make his last Will and
Testament in writing, bearing date etc. and thereof did constitute and make the
said T and A his executours, and did in and by the same his last Will and
Testament, give and devise unto the said A the now wife of R H the sum of one
thousand pound of etc. amongst other things in the said Will mentioned. Of
which said sum of one thousand pounds, the said R H and A his wife do
acknowledge the receipt, and themselves thereof well and truly satisfied,
contented and paid, and thereof and of every part and parcel thereof do
clearly acquit and discharge the said T D his heirs, executors and
administrators and every of them by these presents. And where also the said B D
did in and by his said last Will and Testament give and devise unto the said T
D the sum of 1500. l. of etc. to be paid unto him when he should accomplish the
age of one and twenty years, of which said sum of 1500 l. the said T D does
acknowledge the receipt accordingly, and himself thereof well and truly
satisfied, contented and paid, and thereof, and of every part and parcel
thereof does clearly acquit and discharge the said R H and A his wife, and
either of them their heirs, executours and administrators and every of them by
these presents. And whereas also the said B D did in and and by his said last
Will and Testament give and devise unto his Son R D the sum of three hundred
pounds of etc. to be paid unto him at his age etc. and willed in and by his
said last will, his executor of his said will, and his loving friends W P and H
B should in good and frugal sort, let out and employ according to their best
discretion for the further benefit and increase of the said sum and stock so
bequeathed, unto the said R until he should come to the age of 24 years, and
out of the profits and increase of the said stock of 3000 l. to give and allow
unto the said R such yearly allowance for his maintenance, as should be fit by
the consent and good liking of his very good friend H M. And that if it should
happen the said R to decease, before he came to the age of four and twenty
years, being unmarried at the time of his such decease before his age of 24
years, then he willed that the said portion of 300 l. and the increase
thereof, defalking the maintenance of the said R in the mean time, should be
and remain to all his Sons then living, to be equally divided amongst them,
to be paid at the accomplishment of their several ages of four and twenty
years. And did likewise by the said Will give and bequeath unto H B and I D the
younger Sons of the said B D the father, the sum of two hundred pounds a
piece to be paid unto them at their several ages of four and twenty years, and
not before; which said sums he also willed that his said executors and the
said W P and H B should in good and frugal sort let and employ etc. as before
for R D as in and by the said last Will and Testament more at large it does and
may appear.

Now this Indenture witnesses, that the said R H and A his wife, have
surrendered, relinquished and yielded up, and by these presents do surrender,
relinquish and yield up unto the said T D all their, and either of their right
of executorship and right of executors concerning the said portions which they
or either of them have or has, by reason or in respect of the last Will and
Testament of the said B D the father, or otherwise howsoever. And further also,
That he the said T D has received and had the said several legacies and
sums of money devised by the said B D the Testator to his four younger Sons
as aforesaid.

And the said T D for himself etc. does covenant etc. to and with the said R H
and A his wife, their and either of their executors and administrators and
every of them by these presents, that he the said T D his heirs, executors and
assigns, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter until
such time as the said R D. H D. B D. and John D. the Sons shall accomplish
their said several ages of four and twenty years, in convenient manner employ
all the said several portions and sums of money given or devised to the said
four younger Sons of the said B D the Father by his said last Will and
Testament as aforesaid, according to the true intent and plain meaning of the
said Will and Testament. And also, that he the said T D his executors,
administrators and assigns, That one of the executors shall employ the portions
to the best benefit for the children, and discharge the other Executours of the
same, and from all actions and damages.
and every of them shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, clearly acquit and discharge, or otherwise at or upon reasonable
request well and sufficiently save and keep harmless the said R H and A his
wife, and either of them, their, and either of their executors and
administrators, of and from all and all manner of lawful actions, suits,
troubles, charges and encumbrances whatsoever, which shall or may be had,
brought, commenced or prosecuted by the said R D. H D. B D. and I D the said
four younger sons of the said B D the father, or any of them against the said
R H and A his wife, or either of them, their or either of their executors or
administrators, for or in respect of the said several portions, legacies or
sums of money given or devised by the said B D the father by his said last Will
and Testament, to his said four younger Sons as aforesaid, or any of them,
or any part or parcel of them, or of any of them, or for the increase or
profit that shall or ought to grow, or rise thereby as aforesaid, and of and
from all actions which shall (without fraud or covin of the said R and A or any
of them, or of the executors of the said A) be brought against the said
parties to these presents or any of them, or the executors of the said A as
executors or executor, or as executor of the executor of the said B D the
Testator, and of and from all costs, damages and charges of and concerning the
same.

And the said R H and A his wife do covenant and grant for themselves and
either of them, That one of the executors shall not intermeddle or dispose of
any portions given by the Testator.
their heirs, executors and administrators, to and with the said T D his
executours and administrators and every of them by these presents, That neither
they the said R H and A his wife, nor either of them shall or will at any time
or times hereafter deal or entermeddle with any of the legacies, portions or
sums of money devised, given or limited to the said four younger Sons of
the said B D the Father, or any of them in or by the last Will and Testament of
the said B D the Testator, nor with the increase or proceed thereof or of any
of them. And that he the said T D his executours and assigns shall and may
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, until the full ages of the
four younger Sons respectively, have the custody, disposition, use and
occupation of all the said several portions and sums of money mentioned to be
given or devised to the said R D. H D etc. or any of them, in or by the last
Will and Testament of the said B D the Father, and of the profit, increase and
proceed that shall grow due, of or by the same or any of them without any let,
trouble or interruption of or by the said R H and A his wife, or either of
them, their or either of their executors or administrators, or any of them, or
of or by any other person or persons whatsoever by or with their or either of
their means, assent, consent or procurement.

And it is further covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between the
said parties to these presents That in case any sum or sums of money, That
the Testators debts shall be satisfied of his goods, or else equally paid by
the executors.
debt or damages shall at any time or times hereafter (without fraud or covin)
be had or recovered against the said parties to these presents, as executors of
the said last Will and Testament of the said Testator, that the same shall be
satisfied of the goods and chattels which appertained unto the said Testator at
the time of his decease, and for and in default of assets thereof, the same
shall be indifferently borne and paid by the parties to these presents, part
and part like. And further, For equal divisions of the Testators goods between
the executors.
that all the rest and residue of the goods, chattels, rights and credits which
were the said B D the Fathers, or due or appertenant unto him at the time of
his decease, and not by him bequeathed in and by his said last Will and
Testament (his Funeral charges defraied, legacies performed, and his debts
satisfied and paid) shall be equally divided between the said R H and A his
wife, and the said T D viz. the said R and A to have the one moitie thereof,
and the said T D the other moitie thereof without fraud or guile.

And it is further covenanted and agreed by and between the said parties to
these presents and every of them, That the one executor shall do no act to hurt
the other executor.
That they, nor any of them shall or will at any time or times hereafter
directly nor indirectly do, make, cause nor wittingly or willingly suffer or
commit any act or acts, thing or things, to the intent or whereby the said
parties or any of them shall or may be charged, prejudiced or encumbered touching
or concerning any action or suit to be brought against them or any of them as
executors or executor of the last Will and Testament of the said Testator.

In witness, etc. Blunden.

The form of a Will
IN the name of God amen: The twenty fourth day of I in the 43d year of the
Reign of our Sovereign etc. and in the year of our Lord God one thousand six
hundred and one I VV R of etc. being sick in body, but (thanks be to almighty
God) of good and perfect memory, do make and ordain this my last Will and
Testament in manner and form following, that is to say, First and principally I
commend my Soul to Almighty God my Creator and Redeemer, trusting by his
Infinite mercy and the blood of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus to be saved.
And my body to be Buried in the Parish Church of S in such decent manner as my
Executrix hereafter named and other my good Friends shall think fit, there to
remain in Christian Burial until the Resurrection of all flesh, which I
believe and expect. And my will and mind is that all such due Debts and sums
of money as at the time of my death shall justly appear to be due and owing by
me to any person or persons, be by my Executrix of this my present last Will
and Testament (hereafter named) well and truly paid. And as touching the
disposition of my Temporal things, First, I give and bequeath unto my Nephew,
etc. Item, I give and bequeath etc. (And after all Legacies and portions given)
The residue of all and singular my goods, chattels, debts, leases, jewels,
plate, housholdstuff and sums of money and other things whatsoever, not hereby
given or bequeathed, willed or appointed (my debts and Legacies being paid and
Funeral discharged) I wholly give and bequeath to my executrix hereafter named.
And I do by these presents make and ordain my well beloved Wife I R Sole
Executrix of this my present last Will and Testament to see the same truly
performed. And I do also hereby make and ordain my said Loving Brother in Law
I W of etc. and my loving Friend Master H B of etc. Overseers of this my last
Will and Testament. And do give and bequeath unto the said H B for his labor
and pains in that behalf the sum of ten pounds of etc. And I do hereby
ordain and appoint that my said Executrix shall in all things touching the
execution of this my last Will be ruled and governed by my said overseers, or
the survivor of them; and that all doubts arising in any thing contained in
this my Will be ordered, discussed and determined by my said overseers, or the
Survivour of them: and whatsoever they, or the Survivor of them shall so order
and discuss, I will shall be as my Will. Blunden.


In witness whereof I have hereunto subscribed my name, and set my Seal the
day and year above written. Sealed, published and delivered as the last Will
and Testament of the above named W R in the presence of. (...)

To sue forth a writ of Entry of a Manor.
THis INDENTVRE made etc. Witnesses, that it is covenanted, granted,
condescended and fully agreed by and between the said parties to these
presents, And the said H E does covenant etc. to and with etc. That he the said
H E or his heirs before the Feast of etc. at the proper costs and charges in
the Law of the said W G his heirs or assigns, shall permit and suffer A B and
C D to bring and sue out of the Queens Majesty's high Court of Chancery one
writ of Enter sur disseisin in le post against the said W G. teturnable before
the Justices of the Common pleas at a certain day before the said Feast. By
which writ the said A B and C D shall demand against the said W G all that
Manor of S etc. by the name of etc. or by any other name or names whatsoever,
whereunto the said W G shall appear before the said Justices, at the said day
of return to be contained in the said writ, in his own proper person, or by his
Attorney sufficiently Authorized by the Law for the same, upon which appearance
the said A B and C D shall declare against the said W G according to the nature
of the same writ, And that he the said E shall permit and suffer the said W G
to make defense, and to vouch over to warranty the said H E, and the same H E
by himself or his Attorney sufficiently authorized by Law for the same, shall
vouc^ over to warrant the common vouchee, and thereupon imparle, and after the
same imparlance in the same Term shall make default and depart, in contempt out
of the Court, to the intent a perfect Recovery and judgment in the said writ
may be had against the said W G of the said Manor and Lordship, and all other
the premises according to the order and course of common Recoveries in such
cases used. And further, that the said Recovery and the Judgment and execution
thereupon, so as is aforesaid to be had and pursued by the said A B and C D
shall be to the only use and behoof of the said W G and of his heirs and
assigns, and to none other use intent and purpose. (A Covenant for
encumbrances.)

In witness, etc.
To sue forth a Recovery in the Hastings Court, London, upon a writ of Right.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between etc. Witnesses, that whereas T H did by his
deed of feoffement late give and grant unto the said I N and A his wife, and E
N all those his four messuages etc. to have and to hold the said four messuages
etc. to the said I M. to the use and behoof of the said I A and E and of the
heirs and assigns of the said I for ever. It is therefore covenanted,
condescended and agreed between the said I A and E, and the said I for him, his
heirs and assigns, does covenant etc. to and with the said E his heirs and
executors by these presents, That before the Feast of etc. a Recovery shall be
had and suffered by the said I N, A his wife, and E N. of the said four
messuages and other the premises with their appurtenances in a writ of right
patent in the Hastings pleas of L. against the said T H and A his wife and the
said E, by such person and persons as by the said I A and E shall be named: And
that after such Recovery thereof sued and had, the same recoverour and
recoverours shall stand and be seized of the said four messuages etc. to the
use of the said I and A his wife during their two lives, and the longest liver
of them. And after their decease to the use of the said E. and of the heirs of
his body lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue of the body of the
said E, to the use of the heirs and assigns of the said I for ever.

In witness, etc.
An other for a Recovery to be passed.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between etc. Witnesses, that it is covenanted,
condescended and agreed between the said parties to these presents, in manner
and form following, viz. That he the said A shall and will permit and suffer
the said C D to recover against him the said A by one writ of Enter sur
disseisin in le post, with vouchers after the order and course of common
recoveries, all those three Marshes, etc. All which premises the said A now
purposes and intends to convey to himself and to his heirs in fee simple,
and to extinguish, and to destroy all such estate as he now has in the same,
with all such remainders as be thereupon depending. And also that he the same A
shall and will permit and suffer the said C D to execute the said Recovery,
which said recovery so to be had, knowledged and executed, shall remain and be
to the only use and behoof of the same A and of his heirs and assigns for
ever, and to none other uses or intents. And further it is covenanted, granted
condescended and agreed between the said parties to these presents, That the
said C D and his heirs shall from and after the said recovery so had and
executed, stand and be seized of the said Marshes, and other the premises with
their appurtenances, to the sole and only use and behoof of the said A his
heirs and assigns for ever, and to none other use, uses or intents.

In witness, etc.
For a Recovery passed.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between etc. Witnesses, that whereas the said A B
and C D in the Term of St. Hylary holden at Westminster, in the two and
twentyeth year of her Majesty's Reign, by force of a writ of Enter sur
disseisin in le post have recovered to them and their heirs for ever against
the said E F and his heirs one message etc. as by a Recovery exemplified
under the Seal of her Majesty's Court of Common pleas at Westminster more at
large appears. Now be it known that the intent and meaning of the said
parties were and so be, and the said A B and C D do Covenant etc. That the said
Recovery was and is, and for ever hereafter shall stand, continue, remain and
be to the only proper use and behoof of the same E ^ and of his heirs and
assigns for ever, and to none other use or intent: And that the said
recoverers and their heirs shall stand and be seized of the said premises in
the said Recovery specified to the only proper use and behoof of the said E F
and of his heirs and assigns for ever, and to none other use or intent.

In witness, etc.
A Release of a Proviso, or condition for payment of money reserved upon an
Indenture of Bargain and Sale.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come A B greeting
etc. Know ye that I the said A B have the day of the date of this present
writing, received and had of C D etc. at or in etc. The full sum etc. of
lawful money etc. to me due and payable on this present etc. in the etc. by
force and virtue of one proviso or condition contained in one Indenture of
bargain and sale, bearing date etc. made between me the said A B of the one
part, and the said C D of the other part, for, touching and concerning certain
messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments lying in etc. in the County of
etc. which said sum of etc. so by me received as aforesaid, is in full
discharge, satisfaction and payment of 500 l. of etc. And is for the full and
absolute bargain and sale of that message etc. by me the said A B mentioned to
be bargained and sold, as in and by the same Indenture more at large appears.
Of which said sum of two hundred pounds so by me the said A B received as
aforesaid, I acknowledge my self fully satisfied, contented and paid, and
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof do clearly acquit, exonerate and
discharge the said C D, his executors and administrators and every of them for
ever by these presents.

And further know ye, That I the said A B have remised, released and quit
claimed, Release of his estate.
and by these presents do remise, release and quit claim unto the said C D,
b^ing in his full and peaceable possession and seisin of the premises, and to
his heirs and assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of the said C D his
heirs and assigns for ever, All the estate, right, title, interest, claim,
condition, entry, benefit and demand whatsoever which I the said A B have, or
had, or may, might or ought to have or claim of, in or to the said Message,
etc. (reciting the land) and of, in and to all and singular other the
premises, with all and singular their appurtenances: So that neither I the
said A B my heirs or assigns nor any of us, nor any other person or persons
for us, or in our names, or in the name of any of us, shall or will at any time
or times hereafter ask, claim, challenge, or demand to have any manner of
estate, right, title, interest or demand of, in or to the said premises or any
part or parcel thereof: But that we and every of us shall be thereof, and of
every part and parcel thereof from henceforth utterly barred and excluded for
ever by these presents.

And I the said A B and my Heirs, all and singular the said premises with the
appurtenances, against me, my heirs and assigns, and every of us, VVarranty.
unto the said C D his heirs and assigns for ever, shall and will warrant and
for ever defend by these presents.

A Release where three have a Joint estate of Inheritance.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between T C and H L of the one party; and Sir G M
of the other party, Witnesses, That whereas the said G M, T C and H L are and
stand jointly seized to them and their heirs of an absolute estate of
Inheritance in Fee-simple of the Manor and Lordship of E. etc. (Reciting the
land at large) which the said G M, T C and H L have by any manner of Conveyance
or Assurance by or from R V. etc. as by the Conveyance and Assurance thereof
made by the said R V, unto the said G M, T C and H L more at large it does and
may appear. And which T C and H L have by sufficient Conveyance and Assurance
in Law conveyed and assured, remised, released and confirmed all their and
either of their estate, right, title and interest in and to the same Manor and
premises with the appurtenances, unto the said G M and his heirs for ever; and
so he the said G M is thereof now solely and absolutely seized in his Demeasne
as of Fee. Also the conveyance and estate of the premises so as aforesaid made
unto the said G M, T C and H L and their heirs, was to them made by the
direction and appointment of the said G M, and at the only charge and costs
every kind of way, as well for the assurance thereof as otherwise, and was
meant and intended for the good of the said G M and his heirs, and to be at his
and their only disposition. Now therefore the said T C and H L, as much as in
them is or lies, Have remised, released, quit claimed and confirmed, and by
these presents for and from them and either of them, their and either of their
heirs, do remise; release, quit claim and confirm unto the said G M. now
being in his full and peaceable possession of the premises, and to his heirs,
all the estate, right, title, interest, possession, claim and demand, which
they the said T C and H L have by any manner of conveyance or assurance, of, in
or to the premises or any part or parcel thereof: And do by these presents
further deliver and confirm the premises with the appurtenances, and all their
and either of their said estate, right, title, interest, possession, claim or
demand of, in and to the same premises with the appurtenances, and of every
part and parcel thereof, unto the said Sir G M. his heirs and assigns. To
have and to hold the said Manor, messuages, lands, tenements, hereditaments
and all and singular the premises with the appurtenances, unto the said Sir G M
Knight, his heirs and assigns for ever, to the only use and behoof of the said
G M. his heirs and assigns for ever: To hold of the chief Lords of the Fee, by
the rents and services for the same heretofore due and accustomed, etc. (with
warranty as in others.) Blunden.


In witness etc.
A Release of an assignment made upon condition.
TO all Christian people to whom these etc. J O greeting etc. Whereas M C by
his Indenture bearing date the etc. day of etc. did for the consideration
therein mentioned, bargain, sell, assign and set over to me the said J O. my
executors, administrators and assigns all his estate, right, title, interest,
term of years and demand of and in all that capital Message etc. and diverse
other lands, and hereditaments in L. in the said County of E. in the said
Indenture mentioned: Upon condition nevertheless, That if T R etc. his
executors or assigns or any of them did well and truly pay or cause to be paid
to me the said J O, my executors or assigns the sum of two thousand pounds of
lawful etc. at or etc. on the Feast day of etc. without fraud or covin; That
then and at all times from thenceforth the said Indenture of assignment made by
the said M C. and every covenant, grant, article and thing therein contained,
should determine, and be utterly void and of none effect; and then also etc.
(Reciting the Covenants verbatim as in the Assignement) As in and by the said
Indenture of Assignement to me made by the said M C. amongst diverse other
covenants, clauses, articles and agreements therein contained more at large it
does and may appear. Now know ye, that I the said J O have had and received,
and by these presents do testify, acknowledge and declare to have received and
had of the said T R, at and upon the said Feast day etc. in the said Proviso or
Condition in the said recited Indenture contained. Of which said sum of two
thousand pounds so by me received as is aforesaid, and of every part and
parcel thereof, I the said J O do acknowledge my self justly satisfied and
paid; and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, and of all and all
manner of interest, title and demand in or to the premises, or any of them, do
clearly exonerate, acquit, and for ever discharge the said M C and T R, and
either of them, their and either of their heirs, executors and administrators
and every of them by these presents. Blunden.


In witness etc.
A Release of a Manor.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come, J R greeting
etc. Know ye, That I the said J R, for diverse good causes and considerations me
in this behalf especially moving, Have remised, released and quit claimed, and
by these presents do for me and my heirs remise, release and for ever quit
claim to T C. and M. his Wife, (in their full and peaceable possession and
seisin being) and to the heirs and assigns of the said T C, to the only proper
use and behoof of them the said T C, and M. and of the heirs and assigns of the
said T C for ever, all the estate, right, title, interest, use, possession,
reversion, remainder, property, claim and demand whatsoever which I the said J
R have, or had, or that I, my heirs or assigns or any of us, at any time or
times hereafter shall have, or may, might, should or ought to have or claim of,
in, and to all that the Site of etc. (Recite the land as in the Indenture of
Bargain and Sale) and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof; and of,
in, and to the reversion and reversions whatsoever, of all and singular the
premises herein before mentioned to be remised and released, and of every part
and parcel thereof with the appurtenances. And of, in and to all and singular
Woods, Underwoods and Trees growing and being of, in or upon the premises or
any part or parcel thereof; and of, in and to the ground and soil of the same
Woods, Under-woods and Trees; and of, in and to all and singular the Rents and
yearly profits whatsoever reserved upon any Demise, Lease or Grant heretofore
made or granted of the premises, or of any part or parcel thereof. To have and
to hold the said Site etc. the said message or tenement called the B. the said
tenement called the C. and all and every other the said messuages, lands,
tenements, meadows, feedings pastures, commons, hereditaments, and all and
singular other the premises herein before mentioned to be remised, released,
and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances; Together with the
said estate, right, title, interest, use, possession, reversion, remainder,
property, claim and demand whatsoever of me the said I R and my heirs, of, in
and to the same premises, and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof with
the appurtenances; unto the said T C. and M his Wife, and to the heirs and
assigns of the said T C. to the only proper use and behoof of them the said T
C and M. and of the heirs and assigns of the said T C for ever. So that neither
I the said I R nor my heirs, nor any of us, nor any other person or persons for
us or any of us, or in the name or names of us or any of us, shall or will at
any time or times hereafter ask, claim, challenge or demand to have any manner
of estate, right, title, interest or demand, of, in or to the said Site etc.
lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures, hereditaments and other the
premises, or any part or parcel thereof, and of and from every part and
parcel thereof from henceforth utterly b^rred and excluded for ever by these
presents ( with Warranty against I R and his heirs.

In witness etc.
A Release of a Rent reserved in a pair of articles of agreement.
TO all Christian people to whom etc. W F greeting etc. Whereas I H being
possessed of and in one Lease, for diverse years yet enduring, of and in diverse
messuages, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, mentioned and contained in one
pair of Indentures dated etc. had and made between him the said I H of the one
party, and H A of the other party, did by the said recited Indenture assign
and set over unto the said H A the said original Lease, and all and singular
the lands, tenements and hereditaments therein contained. All which the said H
A has sithence by his several Grants or Assignments granted, assigned and set
over unto G K, to have to him, his executors and assigns for and during all
their estate, title, term, interest and number of years which they had of, in
or to the premises, as by their several Grants or Assignments more at large
appears. To this intent, meaning and purpose nevertheless, and upon trust and
confidence the same should be to the use, benefit and behoof of D N, W F and R
M. equally amongst them. And whereas by a certain pair of Articles of
Agreement indented, bearing date the etc. made between the aforesaid W F on the
one party, and the said D N of the other party: It was agreed between them
the said D N and W F, and the said VV F did for himself, his executors,
administrators and assigns covenant, grant and agree, to and with the said D M
his executors and assigns, That he the said D N his executors or assigns
should and might at all time and times from thenceforth during the said term,
have and enjoy to his only use and behoof, all the estate, title, term,
interest, number of years, use and commodity whatsoever which he the said VV
F, his executors, administrators or assigns had, should or might have of, in
or to one full third part in three parts to be divided, of all and singular the
premises, and all the estate, title, term, interest, use, benefit and number of
years, and commodity which he the said VV F has of, in or to the premises or
any part thereof. In consideration of the premises, the said D N his executors,
administratars or assigns should yearly pay or cause to be paid unto the said
VV F his executors, administrators or assigns two hundred pounds during the
said term; Te same to be paid etc. (as in the Articles of Agreement) as by the
same Articles of Agreement may appear. Now know ye, That the said VV F for
and in consideration of the sum of ten thousand pounds etc. to him in hand at
and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, by the said D N well
and truly paid, does by these presents for him, his heirs, executors and
administrators, freely, clearly and absolutely acquit, discharge, grant,
remise, release and for ever quit claim unto the said D N his heirs, executors
etc. the said yearly rent or sum of 200 li. of etc. so as aforesaid
mentioned, reserved or covenanted to be paid in and by the said Articles of
Agreement as aforesaid, and all and every the covenants, conditions and
agreements touching the same rent; and also all and all manner of actions,
suits, cause and causes of actions and suits, trespasses, reckonings, rents,
arrearages of rents, accounts, executions, sum and sums of money and demands
whatsoever which at any time heretofore ever he the said VV F has or had, or
that he, his heirs, executors etc. or any of them at any trme or times
hereafter can or may have, claim or challenge to have to, for or against the
said D N his heirs, executors or administrators, or any of them, for or by
reason of the said yearly rent of 200 li. or any of the Articles of agreement
concerning the same or any of them, or any other the covenants in the said
several Writings contained, or either of them. And further know ye, That the
said W F does by these presents remise and release unto the said D N his
executours and administrators all and all manner of other actions, suits and
demands whatsoever which at any time heretofore he has had, or at any time
hereafter shall or may have to or against the said D N his executors or
administrators, for or by reason of any other matter, cause or thing
whatsoever, from the beginning of the world until the sixth day of ^. 1600.

In witness etc.
A release of a Condition in an Indenture of bargain and sale, with the proviso
recited.
TO all Christian people to whom etc. T C and R W etc. greeting etc. Whereas
the said T C and R W by their Indenture of bargain and sale bearing date etc.
as well for and in consideration of the sum of 1000 l. etc. then in hand paid
to E E by M B, as for 20. s. paid unto the said T C and R W, and for diverse
other good causes and considerations them thereunto especially moving, did
bargain and sell, enfeoff and confirm unto the said M B his etc. for ever all
that their Park of N etc. (verbatim, as in the Indenture of bargain and sale)
as by the same recited indenture amongst diverse other grants, covenants
provisoes, clauses and agreements therein contained more plainly at large it
does and may appear. In and by which Indenture before recited, there is a
condition or proviso contained in these words, or to this effect following;
that is to say, provided always that if the said M B etc. (reciting the
proviso or covenant truly.) Now know ye that we the said T C and R W for
diverse good and reasonable causes and considerations us in this behalf
specially moving, Have remised, released and quit claimed, and by these
presents do for us and our etc. remise, release and for ever quit claim unto
the said M B being in his full and peaceable possession and seisin of the
premises, and to his heirs and assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of
him the said M B his etc. for ever, the said proviso and condition, and all and
every article, matter and clause concerning the same, and all the state, right,
title, interest, claim, condition, entry, benefit and demand and every of them
whatsoever which we the said T C and R W or either of us, have or has, or
may, or ought to have, or claim of, in or to the said Park called N. lodges,
lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures, woods, underwoods, waters,
fishes, fishings, wast grounds, hereditaments and all and singular other
liberties, profits and commodities whatsoever mentioned, expressed or intended
to be granted, bargained or sold in or by the said recited Indenture, dated
etc. and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, So
that neither we etc, (as in other before, with warranty as aforesaid.)

In witness, etc.
A release of an annuity.
TO all Christian people to whom etc. A B greeting etc. Whereas the said A B by
his deed etc. (reciting the grant of annuity.) Now the said A B in
consideration etc. has granted, remised, released and quit claimed, and by
these presents does grant, remise, release, and for ever quit claim unto the
said R O being the true and lawful owner of the said Manor of K. and in
possession of the same at the sealing and delivery hereof, The said annuity or
yearly rent of thirteen pounds etc. and all the arrerages thereof, if any be,
and all the estate, right, title, interest, benefit, claim and demand
whatsoever of him the said A B in and to the said annuity or yearly rent of
thirteen pounds or any arrerages, distress or distresses, entry or forfeiture
had or taken, or which may or can be had, taken or claimed for or concerning,
or by reason of the said annuity or yearly rent, or arrerages thereof, if any
be.

In witness, etc.
A release of the condition and other covenants in an Indenture of mortgage,
with a confirmation from the mortgagor to the mortgagee.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. between Sir H H etc. of the one party, and R L
and G L of the other party; Whereas the said Sir H H by one Indenture bearing
date 1 J. etc. as well for and in consideration of the sum of four thousand
pounds then already paid unto the said H H before the ensealing and delivery of
the said Indenture, as also for and in consideration of the sum of one
thousand pounds etc. to be paid unto the said H his executors or assigns at
such day, time and place, and in such manner and form, as in the said recited
Indenture dated 1. J. were set down and expressed, Has given, granted,
bargained, sold, confirmed and delivered unto the said R L and G L their heirs
and assigns for ever, all that the Manor or Lordship of E in the County of L
etc. (as in the Indenture) and sithence the said Sir H H and R his wife have
levied a fine of the said Manor or Lordship, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
of other the premises, or of the greatest part thereof unto the said R L and G
L and to the heirs of one of them. And sithence a Recovery in and by a writ of
Enter sur disseisin in le post has been had of the premises or of the most
part thereof against the said R L and G L. who vouched therein to warrantie the
said H H. who thereupon entered into warrantie, and vouched over to warrantie
the common vouchee, in and by all things according to the usual order and form
of common recoveries with double voucher for assurance for Lands and Tenements;
which recovery has been executed by writ of habere facias seisinam
accordingly; which said fine and recovery, and all other fines and recoveries
whatsoever, sithence the date of the said Indenture, had, levied or suffered by
or between any of the said parties to the same Indenture or any of them, of the
premises or of any part or parcel thereof, were had, levied and suffered to the
only use of the said R L and G L and their heirs upon the condition contained
in the same Indenture, and according to the intent and true meaning of the same
Indenture dated the said first day of J. and to no other use, intent or
purpose. In which said Indenture, dated the said first of J. there is a proviso
or condition contained in these words or to this effect following, that is to
say, Provided always etc. (reciting the proviso) and in which said recited
Indenture dated the said first day of J. there is a covenant contained in these
words, or to this effect following; that is to say, And the said R L and G L do
covenant and grant etc. (reciting the Covenant, that the Mortgagor may have and
receive the issues of the land mortgaged til the day of payment) etc. And in
which said recited Indenture dated the said first day of J. there is also
contained a covenant in these words or to this effect following, viz. In
consideration whereof, the said R L and G L for themselves, their heirs,
executors and assigns and every of them do covenant and grant to and with etc.
by these presents, That if the said H H his heirs or assigns nor any of them,
do pay the said sum of four thousand pounds etc. to the said R L and G L their
etc. nor to any of them, according to the intent and true meaning of the said
proviso or conditions before herein mentioned, That then they the said R L and
G L their etc. or some of them shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be
paid unto the said H H his etc. or some of them at the said etc. the sum of
one thousand pounds etc. at or upon the second day of M. etc. as the residue
and full satisfaction of the clear and absolute purchase of the said Manor or
Lordship, Lands, Tenements, and other the premises without fraud, covin or
further delay as in and by the said recited Indenture, dated the said first day
of J. amongst diverse other covenants, grants, articles and agreements therein
contained more plainly at large, does and may appear. Now this Indenture
witnesses, that the said H H for diverse good and sufficient causes and
considerations him the said H H especially moving, has remised, released and
quit claimed, and by these presents does for him and his heirs remise, release
and for ever quit claim unto the said R L and G L, in their full and peaceable
possession and seisin being of the premises, and to their heirs and assigns,
to the only proper use and behoof of them the said R L and G L their heirs and
assigns for ever, The said proviso and condition, and all and every article,
matter and clause concerning the same, and every or any the said covenants
before herein recited, and every article, sentence and clause concerning the
^ame and every or any of them, and all the estate, right, title, interest,
claim, condition, entry, benefit and demand whatsoever, which he the said H H
has, or may, might, should or ought to have or claim of, in or to the said
Manor or Lordship of E. Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Services etc. and all other profits, liberties, commodities,
hereditaments and other the premises with their and every of their rights,
members and appurtenances whatsoever mentioned, expressed or intended to be
given, granted, bargained and sold in or by the said recited indenture, dated
the said first day of J. and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof with
the appurtenances, and all manner of conditions, covenants, articles for
conditions broken, and demands whatsoever of, touching, or in any wise
concerning the said Manor or Lordship, Lands, Tenements, and other the
premises, or any part or parcel thereof, so that neither he the said H H nor
his heirs, or any of them, or any other person or persons for him, them or any
of them or in his or any of their name or names, or in the name or names of
them, or of any of them, shall or will at any time or times hereafter, ask,
claim, challenge, or demand to have any manner of estate, right, title,
interest or demand of, in or to the said Manor or Lordship and other the
premises, or any part or parcel thereof other then such estates, terms and
interests as are in the former recited Indenture excepted. But that he, they
and every of them (except before excepted) shall be thereof, and of and from
every part and parcel thereof from henceforth uttterly barred and excluded for
ever by these presents.

And further, the said H H does for him and his heirs, confirm the estate of
the said R L and G L of and in the said Manor or Lordship, Messuages, A
Confirmation.
Lands, Tenements, and other the premises, to have and to hold all the Manor
or Lordship, Lands, Tenements, and other the premises to the said R L and G L
their heirs and assigns for ever, absolutely without any manner of condition
whatsoever, to the only proper use and behoof of them the said R L and G L
their heirs and assigns for ever. And the said H H and his heirs, the said
Manor or Lordship, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and all and singular other
the premises with their and every of their appurtenances unto the said R L and
G L their heirs and assigns, to the only use and behoof of them the said R and
G their heirs and assigns for ever against all men, shall and will warrant,
and for ever defend by these presents. And the said H H does also by these
presents remise, release and quit claim unto the said R L and G L their heirs
and assigns, all manner of errors, writs of errors, and personal demands
whatsoever.

In witness whereof, etc.
A release of errors in passing a fine and recovery and other assurance.
TO all Christian people, etc. A B. C D and E F. etc. greeting, Whereas I the
said A B by one Indenture bearing date, etc. and by one fine pursuing the same,
levied in her Majesty's Court of common pleas held a Westminster in Easter Term
in the same 24 year of etc. did convey and assure unto the said C D and E F
and to the heirs of the said C D amongst other things, All that the Manor etc.
or either of them, of, or in which I the said A B or any other as Farmer or
Tennants, of or to L B my late Father, has or had any estate, right title or
interest, or then, or late did hold, enjoy, perceive or take the rents, issues
or profits thereof, and all the lands etc. Since which time the said Manors and
other the premises, have for certain sums of money to me the said A B and to the
said C D and E F by G H of etc. paid etc. been bargained and sold by me the
said A B and the said C D and E F to the said G H and his heirs. And whereas
for his further assurance thereof, I the said A B and N my wife did in Hilary
Term in the thirty third year etc. levy one fine to the said G H in the said
Court of Common pleas of, and concerning the said Manors of etc. with the
appurtenances. And further one common Recovery was had in the Court of Common
pleas in Michaelmas Term in the thirty third year etc. by W G and I D
Gentlemen, against the said G H of, and for the said Manor of etc. In which
recovery the said G H did vouch to warranty the said C D and E F who vouched
over me the said A B and one other common Recovery, was had in the said Court
of Common pleas in Michaelmas Term, which was in the 33 and 34 years etc. by
the said W G and one I B Gentlemen against the said C D and E F. of, and for
the said Manor etc. with the appurtenances, In which Recovery the said C D and
E F did vouch to warranty me the said A B. Now know ye that I the said A B do
by these presents remise, release and for ever quit claim for and from me and
my heirs to the said G H and his heirs, and to all others to whom it may
appertain, All and all manner of Errors, Defects and misprisions whatsoever,
which have been or may have been committed in the levying or p^^suing of the
said Fines, or either of them, or in the pursuing of the said several
Recoveries, or either of them, or in any writs, process or other matter
whatsoever touching or concerning the same, And all manner writs of error which
may be brought by me the said A B or my heirs, for the avoiding, reversing or
disanulling of the said Fines or Recoveries, or any of them; And all the right,
title, interest, challenge and demand which I the said A B or my heirs, have,
or may have either for the bringing or pursuing of any such writ, or writs, or
otherwise into, or concerning the said Manor, and other the premises, or part
or parcel of them, or any of them. So as I the said A B and my heirs shall or
will be excluded, barred and foreclosed of and from any challenge, title, right
or demand thereunto for ever. And I the said A B and my heirs shall and will
warrant and defend the said Manors, and other the premises, to the said G H his
heirs and assigns against all persons. And we the said C D and E F do
likewise for and from us, and our heirs remise, release and for ever quit
claim to the said G H his heirs and assigns and to all other to whom it may
appertain all and all manner of Errors, Defects and Misprisions whatsoever,
which have been, or may have been committed in the suing or prosecuting of the
said several recoveries; or either of them, or in any writs, process or other
matter whatsoever, touching or concerning the same; And all manner writs of
Error, which we or either of us, or either of our heirs may bring or be
entitled to sue for the avoiding, reversing or disanulling of the said several
recoveries, or either of them, And all the right, challenge, title, interest
and demand which we the said C D and E F, or either of us, or either of our
heirs, have or may have, either for the pursuing of any such writ, or writs,
or otherwise, into or concerning the said Manors and other the premises, or any
of them, so as we and our heirs shall and will be thereof excluded and barred
for ever.

In witness, etc.
A Conveyance out of a Letters patents.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between A B of the one party, and C D and E F on the
other party, Witnesses, That the said A B as well for a certain sum of good
and lawful money of England, unto him beforehand by the said C D and E F well
and faithfully paid, whereof he confesses himself to be fully satisfied and
paid, and them the said C D and E F their heirs, executors and administrators
and every of them thereof does acquit, and for ever discharge, by these
presents. As for the discharge of the trust and confidence in the same A B, by
the said C D and E F reposed, as also for other causes and considerations, has
given, granted, bargained, sold and confirmed, and by these presents for him
and his heirs does give, grant, bargain, sell and confirm to the said C D and
E F all that Tenement etc. And also all and singular messuages, mils, houses,
buildings, structures, barnes, stables, dove-houses gardens, orchards, tofts,
crofts, curtelages, lands, tenements, meadows, feedigns, pastures, rights,
jurisdictions, franchises, privileges, liberties, fruits, profits,
commodities, advantages, emoluments and hereditaments whatsoever, with their
appurtenances, by what names or additions of names they are called, reputed,
named or known, situate, lying and being, arising, increasing, or growing
within the Villages, fields, places, parishes or hamblets aforesaid, or within
any of them, to the said tenement and other the premises, above by these
granted, bargained and sold, or to any of them in any wise belonging or
appertaining, or as member, part or parcel thereof, at any time heretofore
accepted, known, occupied, used or reputed. As also the reversion and
reversions whatsoever, of all and singular the said tenements, lands and other
the premises, above by these presents granted, bargined and sold, expectant and
depending of, in and upon any demise or grant, demises or grants, for term or
terms of life, lives or years, or otherwise made of the premises or any part
thereof. And also all and all manner of woods, underwoods and trees whatsoever
of, in and upon all and singular the premises above by these presents granted,
bargained and sold, or upon any part or parcel thereof growing or being, and
all the reversion and reversions thereupon whatsoever, As also the rents and
yearly profits whatsoever reserved upon any demise or grant of the premises by
these presents before bargained and sold, or of any parcel thereof made: And
the rents and yearly profits of all and singular the premises above by these
presents granted and of every parcel thereof, As fully, freely and entirely and
in as large and ample manner as the late King etc. by his Letters patents under
the great Seal of England made, does etc. the same, all and singular the
premises above by these presents granted etc. with the appurtenances (amongst
others) to him the said A B his etc. for ever, lately has given and granted
the same, as by the same Letters patents (amongst others) more fully appears.
Excepting nevertheless always, and out of this present grant reserved, all
Advowsons, Donations, free dispositions, and right of patronage, of all and
singular Churches, Vicarages, Chapels and other benefices ecclesiastical
whatsoever to the said premises above by these presents granted etc. or to any
parcel thereof belonging or appertaining. To have, hold and enjoy the aforesaid
tenement etc. and all and singular other the premises above by these presents
granted etc. with all their appurtenances, and the reversion and reversions
whatsoever of all and singular the premises and every of them (except before
excepted) to the said CD and E F and to the heirs of the body of E F. the
remainder thereof to the right heirs of the said C D for ever, To be holden of
the said late King his heirs and successors as of his Manor of East Greenwich
in the County of Kent by fealty only, in free and common Sockage, and not in
chief nor by Knight Service: and the aforesaid A B and his heirs, the said
tenement and all and singular other the premises above by these presents
granted etc. with all their appurtenances to the aforesaid C D and E F and to
the heirs of the body of the said E F lawfully begotten, the remainder thereof
to the right heirs of the said C D for ever, to the only proper uses and
behoofs aforesaid, against him the said A B his etc. will warrant, and for ever
by these presents defend. And also the said A B does covenant and grant for him
his etc. by these presents to and with the said C D and E F their etc. and with
every of them, That he the said A B his heirs etc. as well all and singular the
premises above by these presents granted etc. with the appurtenances and every
parcel thereof, as the aforesaid C D and E F their etc. and every of them, of,
and from all statutes merchant, and of the staple, recognizances, former
bargains, leases, grants, and other charges, and encumbrances whatsoever by him
the said A B, or by any other person, or persons, by the assent, consent,
commandment, or procurement of the said A B, before the sealing, and delivery
of these presents, in any manner had, made, acknowledged, or granted, (besides
the services and charges, by, or in the said Letters Patents, for the premises
reserved, or mentioned) at all times hereafter will for ever acquit, exonerate,
and keep har^^esse, by these presents

And lastly, the aforesaid A B, has made, ordained, constituted, and in his
place, by these presents, put F G, and L M Gentlemen, his true and lawful
Attorneys, jointly and severally to enter in his stead, for him, and in his
name, into the aforesaid, etc. and other the premises by these presents
granted, or into any, or some part, or parcel thereof in the name of the
whole; And full and peaceable possession, A Letter of Attorney to deliver
Seisin.
and seisin of and in the premises with the appurtenances, for him, and in his
name to take, and after such possession, and seisin so thereof taken, and had,
to deliver full and peaceable possession, and seisin, of and in the same
premises with the appurtenances, or of some parcel hereof, in the name of the
whole, to the said C D, and E F, or either of them or to their certain Attorney
or Attorneys in that behalf, according to the form and effect of this present
Indenture, to them thereof made: Ratifying and confirming all and whatsoever
his said Attorneys shall do, or either of them do in the premises, or in any
part thereof, by these presents. In witness, etc.

A Surrender to the King of a Lease for years.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come, P E of, etc.
sends greeting, etc. Whereas our Sovereign Lord King Charles, by his Letters
Patents under the Great Seal of England, dated at Westminster, etc. for the
considerations in the same Letters Patents expressed and specified; Has
demised, granted, and to farm let, to the aforesaid P E (amongst other things)
All that his manner of L, with all the rights, members, and appurtenances
thereunto, in his County of I. and all Houses, etc. (as in the said Letters
Parents) And also the reversion, and reversions whatsoever of the said Manor,
Lands, etc. and all and singular other the premises, with all their
appurtenances, and every parcel thereof; All and singular which premises with
the appurtenances, to the late Monastery of X then dissolved, did heretofore
belong, and appertain, and were parcel of the possessions thereof, to have and
to hold all the said manor, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures,
rents, reversions, services, Courts Leete, view of Frankepledge, perquisites of
Courts, and all and singular other the premises above recited, and by the same
Letters Patents demised and granted, with all their appurtenances (except as in
the said Letters Patents are excepted) to the said P E, his executors and
assigns, from etc. until the full end and term of, etc. then next ensuing,
and fully to be ended: Rendering yearly to our said late Sovereign Lord the
King, his heirs and successors, of and for the said Manor, with the
app^rtenances, etc. of lawful English money, at the feasts of, etc. to the
hands of our Bailiffs, or Receivers of the premises for the time being, by
equal portions payable during the term aforesaid thereout by the said Letters
Patents above recited, granted, as by the same Letters Patents more fully
appears: Now know ye, me the aforesaid P E, for diverse good and reasonable
causes, and considerations me in this behalf especially moving: To have given,
granted, surrendered, and confirmed; and by these presents, for me and mine
heirs, to give, grant, surrender, and confirm to our said Sovereign Lord,
King Charles, etc. All my right, estate, title, term of years, interest, and
demand of me the said P E which ever I have had, have, or in any wise hereafter
may have, of, or in all and singular the messuages, houses, buildings, lands,
tenements, hereditaments, meadows, feedings, pastures, commons, rents and all
and singular other the premises, situate, lying, and being, coming, growing,
or arising in X aforesaid, in the said County of I, and of, and in every
parcel thereof, with all their appurtenances to the said late Monastery of X
heretofore belonging, or appertaining, by virtue, or color of the aforesaid
Letters Patents above recited; To have, hold, and enjoy the aforesaid
messuages, houses, buildings, lands, tenements, hereditaments, meadows,
feedings, pastures, commons, rents, and all and singular other the premises,
with all their appurtenances in X aforesaid, in the said County of I. and all
my right, estate, title, term of years, interest, and demand of me the said P
E, of and in the same premises in X aforesaid with their appurtenances, to our
said Sovereign Lord King Charles, his heirs and successors, to do therewith at
his and their will and pleasure.

In witness, etc.
A Surrender of a lease for lives to the King.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come, W D, etc.
greeting.
Whereas our Sovereign Lord King Charles, by his Letters Patents, under the
Great Seal of England, dated at Westminster, etc for the considerations in the
said Letters Patents mentioned and expressed, Has given, granted, and to farm
letten, to me the said W D, M H, and A L, all those Tenements, etc. And all and
singular houses buildings, structures, storehouses, stables, chambers, shops,
cellers, solars, ways, void grounds, springs, easements, lands, meadows,
feedings, pastures, commons, profits, commodities, advantages, emoluments, and
hereditaments whatsoever, in W, or elsewhere to the premises by the said
Letters Patents before demised, or to any of them, in any manner belonging; or
appertaining, or thereout growing, or arising, or with the same, or any of
them, then heretofore, for the several rents by the same Letters Patents
reserved, demised, disposed, used, or occupied, being either as part, parts, or
parcels of the premises had, known, or reputed; Except, nevertheless always,
and to our said Sovereign Lord, his heirs, and successors, altogether
reserved, all great trees, woods, underwoods, mines, and quarries in the
premises, To have and to hold all and singular the premises by the said
Letters Patents demised, with all their app^rtenances, (except before excepted)
to the aforesaid W D and his assigns, for the term of his life, and after his
decease, surrender, or forfeiture, Then our said Sovereign Lord wills, and
grants by the same Letters Patents, that all and singular the premises by
the same Letters Patents demised, with all their appurtenances (except before
excepted) should wholly remain to the said M H and his assigns, for the life
of him the said M H: And after the decease, surrender, or forfeiture of both
the said W D, and M H, then our said Sovereign Lord the King has willed and
granted, by the same Letters Patents, that all and singular the premises
thereby demised, with all their appurtenances, (except before excepted) should
wholly remain to the said A L and his assigns for the term of his life:
Rendering yearly to our said Sovereign Lord the King, his heirs and successors,
of and for the aforesaid Tenement, etc. of lawful English money, at the
fe^sts, etc. at the Receipt of the Exchequer, or to the hands of his Bailiffes,
or Receivers of the premises, for the time being, by equal portions, to be
paid during the several terms aforesaid: And after the decease of each of
the said W D, M H, and A L deceasing, Tenants in possession of the premises,
then rendering and paying to our said Sovereign, his heirs and successors,
sixty shillings of lawful, etc. of him who should so die, in the name of a
Herriot. And whereas in the same Letters Patents a certain Proviso is contained
amongst others: That if the said W D at any time during his life, would
surrender the said Letters Patents, and all his right, estate, and interest of
and in the premises, by his Writing, sealed with his seal, to our said
Sovereign Lord the King, his heirs and successors in Chancery. That then and
from thenceforth, the estate and interest of the said M, and A and either of
them, of and in the premises should cease, and from thenceforth the said
Letters Patents should be void, and of none effect in law, any thing in the
said Letters Patents to the contrary thereof, notwithstanding any Statute, Act,
Ordinance, provision, proclamation, or restriction to the contrary thereof,
then before had, made, published, ordained, or provided, or any otherthing,
cause, or matter whatsoever, in any wise notwithstanding, as by the same
Letters Patents amongst other things more fully appears. Now know ye me the
said W D, for diverse good causes, and considerations me at this present
especially moving, To have given, granted, and surrendered, and by these
presents, To give, grant, and surrender, to our said Sovereign Lord the King,
his heirs and successors the aforesaid Letters Patents, and all my right,
estate, title, claim, term of life or years, interest, and demand whatsoever
which I have had, have, or in any manner may, or ought to have, of and in the
aforesaid Tenement, etc. and of, and in all and singular the lands, tenements,
and hereditaments by the said Letters Patents demised, and of and in every part
thereof, by virtue or color of the said Letters patents to me the aforesaid W
D, and the aforesaid M H, and A L, (as aforesaid) made, To have and to hold to
our said Sovereign Lord the King, his heirs and Successors to do therewith at
his said Majesty's good will and pleasure for ever.

In witness whereof, etc.
A Grant of Indenization to Aliens borne.
CHarles by the Grace of God etc.
to all to whom etc. Greeting,
Know ye, That we of our especial grace, certain knowledge and mere motion for
us, our heirs, and successors have granted to our beloved servant P V of etc.
born in lower Germany, I V his wife of etc born in the Earldom of Flanders,
That they and either of them, during their lives, and the lives of either of
them, may be Subjects and true lieges of us, our heirs, and successors: and
that they as lieges of us, and of our heirs, and successors, during their
lives, in all things may be treated, reputed, had, holden, and governed as our
faithful lieges, and either of them during his life, and the lives of either
of them, may be treated, reputed, holden, and governed as a faithful liege of
us our heirs, and successors, as if they or either of them were born within
our Kingdom of England, and not otherwise, or in any other manner. And that
they the said P V and I during their lives, and the lives of either of them,
all Actions real, personal, and mixed in all our Courts and Jurisdictions, and
of our heirs and successors may have, exercise, and them use, and enjoy, and
therein implead, and be impleaded, answer, and be answered, defend and be
defended, and either of them, so may, in all, and by all things as our
faithful lieges born in our said Realm of England. And moreover, That the said
P V and I during their lives, and the lives of either of them may, and may be
able to purchase, receive, take, hold, and possess lands, tenements,
reversions, and hereditaments, and other things whatsoever within our Realm of
England, and within our other Dominions, in see-simple, see tail, for term of
life, or lives, for term of year, or years, or any other way at their pleasure,
and at their pleasure of either of them, and them use, and enjoy, in as large
and ample manner as any other of our lieges within our Realm of England may,
and be able to do, and them demise, give, sell, alien and engage to any person,
or persons to whom they shall please, lawfully and freely as any of our lieges
born within our Kingdom of England may, or be able to do. And that they the
said P V and I from henceforth hereafter during their lives, and the life of
either of them by virtue or power of any Act, Statute, Ordinance, or grant
made, or to be made be no otherwise bound or compelled, or either of them bound
or compelled, to pay, do or bear to us, or to any of our heirs or successors
or to any other, any other Taxes, tallages, subsidies granted or to be granted
by Act of Parliament to us, our heirs, or successors, or any other customs,
impositions, or charges whatsoever for their things, Chattels, debts, goods,
lands, or persons or either of them, but only such and so much as other our
faithful lieges born within our Kingdom of England for their things, Chattels,
debts, goods, lands or persons pay, give, do, or bear, or have been commonly
used to do or bear, and not otherwise, or in any other manner. But the
aforesaid P V and I may have and possess all, and all manner of liberties,
franchises, and privileges whatsoever, and them may use and enjoy within our
Realm of England, and our Jurisdictions as freely, quietly, entirely, and
peaceably as other our faithful lieges born within our said Kingdom of England
may use or enjoy the same without let, molestation hinderance, vexation, or
disturbance of us, our heirs, or successors, Justices, Escheators, Sheriffs,
Bayliffes, Customers, or other officers or ministers whomsoever and by what
Acts of Parliament of us, our heirs, or successors Ordinances, Proclamations,
provisions, or any other matters made, or to be made to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding. And further of our more abundant grace, certain
knowledge, and mere motion, We grant for us, our heirs, and suceessors to the
said P V and I that from henceforth it shall and may be lawful to the said P V
and I, and to either of them from time to time, and all times during their
lives, and the life of either of them, at his free will, to go and depart out
of this our Realm of England, or other our Realms into any parts beyond the
Seas whatsoever, and there to stay and remain, and at his and her will
pleasure, and at his and her will and pleasure to return into our kingdom of
England when and and as often as they shall please during their lives, without
prejudice, stop, fine, impediment, forfeiture or grievance whatsoever of us,
our heirs, or successors, or of any of our officers, or ministers of us, our
heirs, or successors, as fully, freely, and absolutely as the said P V and I,
or either of them may, or might do whiles they were Aliens. We will also, and
by these presents grant, that the said P V and I shall have these our Letters
made unto them without fine or see, great or small, for our use, or otherwise
for the premises to be paid or given, any statutes, ordinances, or
proclamations in our Parliament; or of our Predecessors, or out of Parliament
to the contrary heretofore made or proclaimed, or hereafter to be made or
proclaimed, or for that the said P V and I were borne in the parts beyond the
Seas, and out of our allegiance, or for any other cause or matter whatsoever
notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
A Deed of Gift of Land without Indenture.
TO All, etc. Know ye me the said A B, for and in consideration of the sum
of etc. of good and etc. to me by C D, etc. well and faithfully paid, whereof
I confess, etc. and the said C D his heirs, executours, and administrators
thereof acquit, and for ever discharge by these presents: To have given,
granted, and by this my present Writing confirmed to the said C D, All that
message, etc. which said message, etc. I lately had to me and my heirs for
ever, of the gift and grant of E F, etc. as by the said Deed dated, etc. more
fully appears: To have and to hold the said message, and all and singular
the premises, with all and singular the appurtenances to the said C D, his
heirs and assigns, to the only use and behoof of the said C D, his heirs and
assigns for ever, to be holden of the chief Lord of the Fee, by the services
due, and of right accustomed: And I the said A B, and mine heirs, the said
message, etc. and all and singular the premises with the appurtenances to the
said C D his heirs and assigns, to the only, etc. against all people will
warrant, and for ever defend by these presents. Moreover, know ye me the said
A B to have constituted, etc. (A Letter of Attorney.)

In witness whereof, etc.
A Deed of Feoffment for a Wives Jointure.
TO All, etc. Know ye me the said A B, in consideration of a marriage, between
me and M L, daughter to C D to be solemnized; To have given, granted, and by
this my present Writing confirmed to C D, and E F, All that my Lordship and
Manor of, etc and all houses, etc. (granting the land at large) amounting in
the whole to the clear yearly value of forty pounds: To have and to hold the
said Lordship or manor, and all other the premises, with all their
appurtenances to the said C D and E F their heirs and assigns, to the only
proper use and behoof of the said C D and E F their heirs and assigns forever:
To be holden of the chief Lords of the Fee, by the services there from due and
accustomed: Upon this condition nevertheless; That the said C D and E F their
heirs and assigns, or any of them, when they shall be thereunto required by me
the said A B, my heirs or assigns, shall reinfeoffe me the said A B, and the
said M L in the said Manor, and in every part thereof, etc. To have and to
hold to us the said A B and M, and to the heirs and assigns of me the said A B
for ever, to the use of us the said A B and M, and the heirs and assigns of me
the said A B for ever. And I the said A B (A warranty:) Moreover know ye me the
said A B to have constituted, etc. (A Letter of Attorney, as in others:)

In witness, etc.
A Refeoffment upon the same.
TO All, etc. Know ye, that we the said C D and E F in Complement and
performance of a certain Writing dated, etc. to us by A B etc. made and sealed,
To have, given, granted, and by this our present Writing confirmed to the said
A B and M his Wife, all that Manor, etc. (as above:) which premises with the
apurtenances, we lately had to us and our heirs for ever, of the gift and grant
of the said A B, under a certain condition, as by the said Writing more fully
appears: To have and to hold the said Manor, etc. to the said A B, and M his
wife, and to the heirs and assigns of the said A B, to the proper use and
behoof of the said A B and M, and to the heirs and assigns of the said A B for
ever: To be holden of the chief Lords of the Fee, by the services there from
due and of right accustomed: And we the said C D and E F, and our heirs the
aforesaid Manor, etc, to the said A B and L, and to the heirs and assigns of
the said A B to the uses aforesaid, against us and our heirs, will warrant, and
for ever defend by these presents: (A Letter of Attorney, as above in others:)

In witness, etc.
A Grant of an Annuity for life.
TO All, etc. Know ye me the said A B, in consideration of the good and
faithful service unto me by my beloved servant C D, heretofore bestowed, and
hereafter to be bestowed, To have g^ven and granted to the said C D, a certain
Annuity, or yearly rent of ten pounds, of lawful English money to be issuing
out of my Manor, etc. in the County of S. with all and singular the rights,
members, and appurtenances thereof. To have, enjoy, and yearly receive the said
Annuity, or yearly rent of ten pounds to the said C D and his assigns during
the natural life of the said C D, at two terms in the year, that is, at the
feasts, etc. by equal portions, the first payment thereof to begin at the
feast of the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary next ensuing the date, etc
And if it shall happen, the said Annuity or yearly rent of ten pounds (in form
aforesaid to be received) to be arreare and unpaid in part, or in all, after
any of the feasts in which (as aforesaid) it ought to be paid; That then and as
often, it shall and may be lawful to, and for the said C D and his assigns,
into the said Manor and premises, with the appurtenances, or into any part
thereof to enter, and distreine; and the distresses so taken and had, lawfully
to carry, lead and drive away, and to retain, until he shall be of the said
Annuity, or yearly rent, and of the arrerages thereof, if any be, fully
satisfied and paid: Of which said Annuity, or yearly Rent of ten pounds in
form aforesaid, to be received, during the natural life of the said C D, I
have put the said C D in full possession, by the payment unto him of one penny
sterling, which I have paid and delivered to the said C D the day of the date
of these presents in the name of seisin as in part of payment of the said
Annuity or yearly Rent.

In witness, etc.
An Assignement of an Apprentice.
TO All, etc. Whereas T H, etc. by his Indenture dated, etc. has put R H his
son, an apprentice to me the said A B, to learn my Art, and in manner of an
Apprentice to dwell with me, and serve from the feast of, etc. unto the end and
term of seven years thence next ensuing, and fully to be ended, as in the said
Indenture more fully appears: Know ye me the said A B to have granted, and by
these presents sold unto C D Citizen, etc. all my estate and term of years
which I have in the said R H my apprentice now to come; To have and to hold to
the said C D, from the day of the making of these presents unto the end and
term of all the said years now to come, he finding to the said apprentice
meat, drink, apparel, linen, woollen, shoes, bedding, and all other
necessaries, during the said Term, and teaching and informing him in the Art
aforesaid, as I the said A B am obliged and bound according to the tenor of
the said Indenture:

In witness, etc.
A Covenant to make an Acquittance upon payment of money.
ANd the said R P, and A S covenant and grant for them, their heirs, etc. to
and with the said I T Knight, his heirs, etc. That they the said R P, and A S
and their heirs, and every of them, at all times after the last payment of the
said sum of six hundred pound, (in form aforesaid expressed and limited) had
and made to the said A P, and A S, or to either of them, their executors or
assigns, according to the true intention of these presents, at the reasonable
request, and costs and charges of the said I T, his heirs or assigns, shall
make or cause to be made to the said I T his heirs, and assigns such
sufficient release and acquittance in the law, testifying the true payment and
receipt of the said sum of six hundred pound in form aforesaid, to be made as
by the said I T, his heirs, or assigns, or their Council learned in the law,
together with the Council learned in the law of the said R P and A S, their
heirs and assigns shall be reasonably advised and required.

An Indenture of Bargain and Sale.
THis Indenture made, etc. witnesses, That the said A B as well for, and in
consideration of the sum of 700 l. of lawful money, etc. to him before hand,
by the said C D well and faithfully paid, whereof he confesses himself fully
satisfied and paid; and the said C D, his heirs, executors, and administrators
and every of them, thereof does acquit, and for ever discharge by rhese
presents, as for the sum of 700 l. to be paid by the said C D his executors,
or assigns the twentieth of November next ensuing the date hereof, at, or in,
etc. Has given, granted, bargained, and sold, and by these presents for him
and his heirs does give, grant, bargain, and sell to the said C D his heirs and
assigns for ever. All that house or manor of, etc. (Reciting all the land)
and also all and singular messuages, granges, mills, houses, buildings,
structures, barnes, stables, dove-houses, gardens, orchards, shops, sellers,
solars, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures, commons, demean lands,
wastes, heathes, moors, marshes, woods, underwoods, tithes of sheaves, corn,
grain, and hay, wool, linen, hemp, and lamb, and all other tithes whatsoever,
as well great and small oblations, obventions, fruits, profits, waters,
fishings, suite, soke, mulcture, warrens, mines, quarries, rents, reversions,
services, rents secke, as well of free as customary Tenants, works of tenants
fee-farmes, annuities, knights-fees, wards, marriages, escheats, reliefs,
herriots, fines, amercements, Courts-leet, view of franke-pledge, assizes and
assize of bread, wine, and ale, chattels waived, strayes, villeyns, nefes, with
their sequels, estaners, and commons of estaners, fairs, markets, tolles,
customs, rights, jurisdictions, franchises, liberties, privileges, profits,
commodities, emoluments, and hereditaments whatsoever, with all their
appurtenances of what kind or nature, or by what names, or additions of names
they be known, reputed, esteemed, or taken, situate, lying, and being,
arising, or growing within the Towns, fields, places, parishes and hamlets of,
etc. or in any of them to the said house, manor, and other the premises above
by these presents granted, or to any of them, in any wise belonging or
appertaining, or had, known, reputed, taken, or used as member, part, or
parcel of the said Manor and other the premises by these presents before
granted, or any of them: And also all, and all manner of woods, underwoods, and
trees whatsoever, of, in, and upon all and singular the premises above by
these presents granted, bargained and sold, or upon any parcel thereof; And
all the ground, soil, of the said woods, under-woods and trees, and the
reversion, and reversions whatsoever of all and singular the premises, by
these presents granted, and of every parcel thereof: As also the rents, and
yearly profits whatsoever, of all and singular the premises above by these
presents granted, or of any and every part thereof; as fully, freely, and
entirely, and in as large, and ample manner as the said A B lately had and
purchased, All and singular the same premises with the appurtenances, to him
and his heirs for ever, in fee-farm, by grant, bargain and sale from G H of,
etc. by Indenture dated, etc. as by the said Indenture, Enrolled of record
(amongst other things) in his said late Majesty's high Court of Chancery more
fully may appear: And as fully, freely, and entirely, and in as large and ample
manner as his said late Majesty by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal of
England sealed, dated at W. etc. the same, all and singular the premises above
by these presents granted, with all their appurtenances, did give and grant the
same, to the said G H, his heirs and assigns for ever; To the only proper use
and behoof of the said G H, his heirs and assigns for ever, as by the said
Letters Patents more fully appears: To have, hold, and enjoy the said House, or
Manor of, etc. and other all and singular the premises above by these
presents granted, bargained, and sold with all their appurtenances, to the said
C D, his heirs and assigns, to the only use and behoof of the said C D his
heirs and assigns for ever: To hold the said manor of, etc. and all and
singular other the premises above by these presents granted of his said late
Majesty his heirs and successors in Chief, by the service of, etc. rendering
yearly to his said late Majesty, his heirs and successors of and for the said
Manor, and other the premises belonging to the said Manor 20 l. of, etc. at
the receipt of his said Majesty's Exchequer at W. or to the hands of the
general Receivors of his said Majesty, his heirs and successors of the
premises for the time being, at the feasts of, etc. yearly to be paid for all
other services, rents, duties, charges, suits, and demands whatsoever therefore
due. The Warranty
And the said A B and his heirs, the said house and manor of, etc. and all
other the premises above by these presents granted, with all their
appurtenances, to the said C D his heirs and assigns, to the only use of the
said C D his heirs and assigns for ever, against him the said A B, his heirs
and assigns will warrant, acquit, and for ever defend by these presents.

And the said A B does Covenant, Discharged of Encumbrances.
etc. that he the said A B, his heirs executors, and administrators, as well
and all and singular the premises above by these presents granted, with the
appurtenances and every part thereof, as the said C D his heirs executors, and
administrators and every of them, of and from all statutes merchant, and of the
staple, recognizances, former bargains, leases, lases, grants, demands,
jointures, dowers, and other charges, and encumbrances whatsoever by him the
said A B, or by any other person, or persons, by the assent, consent, or
procurement of him the said A B, before the sealing and delivery of these
presents in any manner made, had, known, or granted, or to be had, known, or
granted, except the rents and services to our said late Sovereign, and his
heirs, and successors by the said Letters Patents as aforesaid reserved, and
hereafter to be due, from henceforth will acquit, and save harmless by these
presents.

Forfeiture for default of payment of the said sum, etc.
Provided always, That if it happen default of payment to be made of the said
sum of, etc. or of any part thereof at the day above expressed, for the payment
thereof, contrary to the form of this present Charter, That then and from
thenceforth this present grant, bargain and sail of the said house and manor,
and other the premises, and of every part thereof, and the estate, and seisin
thereof made, or to be made, shall be utterly void and of none effect; And that
then and from thenceforth it may be lawful for the said A B, his heirs, and
assigns into the said house and Manor, and all other the premises, by these
presents above granted, and into every part thereof to re-enter, and the same
to have again and repossesse as in his former state, and the said C D and all
others thereout to expel and amove, any thing in these presents contained to
the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

For the sealing of an Acquittance upon payment of the said money.
And the said A B does Covenant, etc. that he, his executors, or administrators
upon payment of the said sum of, etc. according to the form of these
presents, will seal, and as his deed deliver to the said C D, his executors and
administrators at the request of the said C D, his executors, or
administrators, such acquittance for the discharge of the said his heirs and
executors, of and from the said sum, and every part thereof, and also for the
releasing of any condition of reentry, and demand in this present Charter
mentioned, as he the said C D, his heirs, executors, or administrators shall
devise, at his and their costs and charges. And that the said A B, his heirs,
and executors, upon request of the said C D, his heirs, or executors will
acknowledge the said writing before one of the Masters of the Chancery of our
said Sovereign Lord, his heirs and successors as his Deed, to be Enrolled of
Record in the said Court.

And moreover, For making better Assurance.
the said A B and his heirs from time to time, during the space of, etc. from
the making hereof, the said A B, or his heirs being thereunto required by the
said C D, his heirs or assigns, and at the costs and charges of the said C D,
his heirs or assigns, will make, or cause to be made whatsoever shall be
reasonably advised by the Council learned of the said C D, his heirs, or
assigns, for the better securing and assurance of the premises to the said C
D, his heirs and assigns; be it by Feoffment, Deed, or Deeds Enrolled,
inrolment of these presents, fine, or recovery, or otherwise with Warranty
only against the said A B, his heirs and assigns, and all others, claiming
from, or under the title of the said A B. And that all and singular
Conveyances, assurances, and estates of the said house and Manor, and all
other and singular the premises above by these presents granted, and of every
part thereof after the date hereof made, or to be made by the said A B, or his
heirs, or by any other, or others seized of the premises, or of any part
thereof, to the use of the said A B, immediately from and after the making of
these presents shall be; And the parties to whom any such assurance conveyance,
or estate shall be made, and their heirs shall stand and be for ever seized, of
and in the said House and Manor, and other the premises above mentioned, to
the only use and behoof, and according to the intentions above in these
presents limited, and expressed, and not to any other use: And it is agreed
between the parties aforesaid, That neither the said A B, nor his heirs shall
go for the making or executing of such further Assurance to any other place,
but the cities of London, or Westminster.

And the said C D does Covenant, To discharge the bargainor of the Rent to the
King.
etc. That he, his heirs, executors, or administrators, or some of them, from
time to time for ever will well and sufficiently acquit, and keep Indemnified
the said A B, his heirs, executors and administrators, and every of them,
against our said late Sovereign, his heirs, and successors, or assigns,
officers, and ministers of our said late Sovereign, his heirs, and successors,
of and from the said services, rents, and charges above mentioned and
expressed, and every part thereof, and of and from all charges, encumbrances,
and demands whatsoever, for the same premises in any wise hereafter growing,
or happening.

In witness, etc.
A Sale of an Apprentice his Indenture, and term of years.
TO all Christian people to whom, etc. A B of, etc Greeting, etc. Whereas C D
of, etc. by his Indenture dated, etc. Has placed C D his son, an Apprentice
to me the said A B, to learn the trade which I now use, and to dwell and serve
with me in the way of an Apprenticie, from the feast of, etc. now last past,
until the full end and term of 7. years thenceforth next ensuing, and fully
to be ended, as by the said Indenture more fully appears. Know ye me the
said A B to have granted, and by these presents sold unto F G Citizen, etc. of
London, as well the said Indenture of Apprentiship above recited, as all my
estate and term of years, which I have in my said Apprentice now to come. To
have and to hold to the said F G from the making hereof unto the end and term
of all the said years now unexpired, he finding to my said Apprentice meat,
drink, clothing, linen, woollen, shoes, bedding, and all other such
necessaries for him, during all the said term, and he teaching and informing
him diligently in the said trade, as I the said A B am bound and obliged,
according to the tenor of the Indenture aforesaid, and faithfully to perform
and keep all and singular matters in this present Writing contained and
specified:

In witness, etc.
A Release from one Patentee to the other.
TO all Christian people, etc. H B of, etc. Greeting: Whereas his late Majesty,
by his Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, made, and dated at
Westminster. etc. for the considerations therein expressed, Has given and granted
unto one R E of, etc. and me the said H B, our heirs and assigns for ever, All
those Lands, etc. (reciting the land truly, as it is granted in the Patent,
till you come to the general words) as by the said Letters Patents (amongst
other things) more fully appears. Now know ye me the said H B for a certain
sum of good and lawful English money unto me before hand, by the said R E
well and faithfully paid, wherewith I confess my self to be fully satisfied,
and the said R E, his heirs, executors, and administrators and every of them,
thereof do acquit, and for ever exonerate by these presents, To have remised,
released, and altogether for me, and mine heirs for ever quite claimed to the
said R E in his full and peaceable possession, and seisin of the premises
being and to his heirs and assigns for ever, all the right, estate, title,
interest, claim, use, possession, reversion, remainder, and demand of me the
said H B whatsoever, which I ever had, have, or hereafter may have, or my
heirs, or assigns, or any other, or others in, by, or under my name, right, or
title, or to my use has had, now has, or hereafter may, or ought to have, in
all the said lands, (reciting the land) and of, and in every, or any part
thereof, and of, and in all and singular houses, buildings, etc. (all the
general words now) and hereditaments whatsoever to the said messuages,
cotages, lands, tenements, and other the premises above recited and expressed,
or to any of them in any wise belonging or appertaining, or heretofore had,
known, accepted, used, or reputed as member, part or parcel of them, or any of
them; and of and in the reversion, and reversions of all and singular the
premises, and every of them, by virtue or color of the said Letters Patents,
dated at Westminster. as aforesaid, made as abovesaid to the said R E and me the
said H B, To have, hold, and enjoy all and singular the said messuages,
cotages, lands, tenements, rents of assize, and hereditaments, and all other
and singular the premises above recited and expressed, and by these presents
remised, and released with all their appurtenances, to the said R E, his heirs
and assigns, to the only use and behoof of the said R E his heirs, and
assigns for ever: so that neither I the said H B, nor my heirs, nor any other,
or others by us, for us, nor in our names, nor in the name of any of us, or by,
from, or under us, or any of us, any right, estate, title, interest, claim,
use, possession, reversion, remainder, or demand of, or in the messuages,
cotages, lands, tenements, and other the premises above recited, and expressed
with the appurtenances, or of, or in any parcel thereof henceforth may claim
or challenge, or any of us, or our heirs ought in any wise to claim, or
challenge at any time hereafter, but that we and every of us for ever be
altogether excluded from all action, right, estate, title, interest, claim,
use, possession, reversion, remainder, and demands by these presents.

And I the said H B, and my heirs, the said messuages, Warranty.
cottages, lands, tenements, and all other and singular the premises above
expressed, and specified with all their appurtenances to the said R E his
heirs, and assigns, to the use of the said R E his heirs and assigns for
ever, against me the said H B, my heirs and assigns will Warrant, and for ever
defend by these presents.

In witness, etc.
A Release from one Purchaser to another.
TO all Christian people, to whom, etc. A B of, etc. Greeting: Whereas his late
Majesty, etc. by his Letters Patents, under the great Seal of England, made and
dated at Westminster. etc. for the considerations therein expressed, Has given and
granted to H B, and R H, of, etc. their heirs and assigns for ever (amongst
other things) all that the site, etc. (reciting all the land, as it is
granted, and all the general words at large) and his hereditaments whatsoever,
withal their appurtenances, by what names they may be known, reputed, or
named, situate, lying, and being, arising, and growing in H aforesaid, or
elsewhere in the said County of, etc. to the said site of the late Monastery
of H in any wise appertaining, incident, or appendant, or as member, part, or
parcel of the said site, of the late Monastery of H aforesaid, ever
heretofore had, known, accepted, occupied, used, or reputed, and the reversion,
and reversions whatsoever of all and singular the premises, and also all, and
all manner of woods, underwoods, and trees whatsoever, of, in, and upon all and
singular the premises, or any part thereof, growing, or being; And all the
ground and soil of the same woods, underwoods, and trees as by the said Letters
Patents (amongst other things) more fully appears: All and singular which
premises above recited and expressed, with all their appurtenances, the said H
B, and R H lately have given, granted, bargained, and sold to me the said A B,
and one C D of, etc. our heirs and assigns for ever, as by their Indenture
thereof dated, etc. and Enrolled of Record in the high Court of Chancery at
large appears. Now know ye me the said A B for and in consideration of a
certain competent sum of lawful English money to me before hand, by the said
C D well and faithfully paid, whereof I confess my self to be fully satisfied
and paid, And the said C D, his heirs, executors, and administrators and every
of them do thereof acquit, and for ever discharge by these presents, and for
diverse other good causes and considerations, etc. to have remised, released and
absolutely from me and mine heirs for ever quite claimed to the said C D in his
full and peaceable possession and seisin of the premises being, and to his
heirs and assigns for ever, All that right, estate, title, interest, claim,
use, possession, reversion, remainder, and demand of me the said A B
whatsoever, which I ever had, have, or in any wise hereafter may have, or my
heirs, or assigns, or any other, or others in, by, or under my name, right, or
title, or to my use ever had, have, or in any wise may or ought to have
hereafter, of, in, and to the said site, etc. (reciting all the land only)
and of, and in other, all and singular the premises above by these presents
recited and expressed, with all their appurtenances, and of, and in every part
and parcel thereof; To have, hold, and enjoy the said site, circuit, and
precinct to the said late Monastery of H, the said messuages, lands, tenements,
meadows, feeding^s, pastures, woods, underwoods, Courts leet, view of
franke-pledge, profits, commodities, emoluments, and hereditaments, and all
other and singular the premises above recited and expressed, and by these
presents mentioned to be remised and released, and every part thereof, with all
their appurtenances, heretofore belonging, or appertaining to the said C D his
heirs and assigns for ever. So that neither I the said A B, nor my heirs, nor
any other, or others by us, for us, or in our names, or in the name of any of
us, or by, from, or under us, or any of us, any right, estate, title, interest,
claim, use possession, reversion, remainder or demand of, or in the said
site, etc. and other the premises, with the appurtenances, or of, or in any
part thereof hereafter, may hereafter claim, or challenge, or any of us, or
our heirs, may or ought in any wise claim, or challenge; But that we and
every of us, from all action, right, estate, title, interest, claim,
possession, reversion, remainder, and demand shall be for ever totally
excluded, and barred by these presents: And I the said A B and my heirs, etc.
as in the next president.

A Warranty, etc.

In witness, etc.
A feoffment with a letter of Attorney upon condition expressed in an Indenture.
TO all Christian people to whom etc. R M of etc. Greeting: Know ye me the said
R M for a certain sum of lawful English money unto me before hand by G W of,
etc. paid, to have given, granted, bargained, sold, and confirmed, and by this
my present writing do give grant bargain, sell, and confirm to the said G W his
heirs and assigns, all that Tenement (reciting the land at large) and also
all and singular houses, buildings, structures, stables, gardens, orchards,
tosts, croft, curtilages, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures,
commons, wastes, heath, moors, marshes, profits, commodities, emoluments, and
hereditaments whatsoever to the premises above mentioned belonging, or
appertaining, or had, known, accepted, used, or occupied as member, part, or
parcel of the premises with all and singular the appurtenances, which
Tenement, and one yard land with the appurtenances I the say R M lately had
and purchased (amongst others) to me, and mine heirs to the only use of me
the said R M my heirs and assigns for ever in fee farm by the names of all
that Tenement, and one yard land etc. (word for word as the are granted in the
Letters patents) And the moity of which close etc. I the said R M also lately
had and purchased to me, my heirs, and assigns as is above mentioned,
together with another moity of the same close by the name of all that close
etc. late in the Tenure of etc. of the gift and grant of his late majesty etc.
as by his Letters patents made under the great seal of England dated at G more
fully appears: To have and to hold the said Tenements, and all and singular
the said houses, buildings etc. and all and singular other the premises above
by the presents granted with all their appurtenances to the said G W his heirs
and assigns to the only use of the said G W his heirs and assigns for ever:
Upon the condition and intention expressed and specified in certain Indentures
dated etc. and made between me the said R M on the one part, and the said G W
on the other part, touching the premises, To be holden of his said late majesty
etc. Rendering yearly to his said majesty his heirs and successors of and for
the said Tenement etc. 15 shillings, and of and for the moity of the said close
12 pence of lawful English money at the Receipt of his said majesty's
Exchequer, his heirs and successors, or to the hands of the Bayliffes or
receiver general of the premises for the time being at the feasts etc. by
equal portions, to be paid for all other rents, services, exactions, suites
and demands whatsoever therefore in any manner to be paid or done to his said
majesty his heirs and successors.

And I the said R M and my heirs the Tenement aforesaid etc. and all and
singular other the premises above by these presents granted with all their
appurtenances to the said G W his heirs and assigns, Warranty.
to the only proper use of the said G W his heirs and assigns for ever under
the condition and intention aforesaid against me the said R M my heirs and
assigns will Warrant; and for ever defend by these presents: Moreover know ye
me the said R M to have made etc. (A Letter of Attorney:)

In witness, etc.
A Feoffment upon condition of payment of money.
TO All Christian People to whom etc. Greeting. Know ye me the said A B for
the sum of etc. of lawful English money to me the said A B at the ensealing
and delivery of these presents by the said C D well and truly paid, wherewith
I confess my self fully satisfied and contented, and him the said C D his
heirs, executors, administrators and every of them thereof acquitt and for
ever discharge by these presents, To have given, granted, infeoffed, and
confirmed, and by this my present to give, grant, infeoffe and confirm unto the
said C D his heirs and assigns all that field and pasture with the
appurtenances called W etc. lying and being in the parish of A, in the County
of, etc. now or late in the tenure or occupation of me the said A B or my
assigns, and all and singular the lands etc. To have, hold, and enjoy the said
field and other the premises above by these presents given and granted with
all their appurtenances to the said C D his heirs and assigns, to the proper
use of the said C D his heirs and assigns for ever; To be Holden of the chief
Lords of the fee by the rents, and services therefore due, and of right
accustomed: Provided always nevertheless, that if I the said A B shall pay,
or cause to be paid, or my heirs or assigns pay, or cause to be paid to the
said C D his executors or assigns 300 pound of lawful English money upon the
feast day of Saint Michael which shall be in the year of our Lord etc. between
the hours of one, and five in the afternoon of the same day at or within etc.
That then and immediately after such paymenr made in manner and form aforesaid,
This present writing and possession and seisin thereupon had and taken, or to
be had, shall void, and of no force, and effect, and shall be accounted for
null any thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding.

And I the said A B and my heirs the said field etc. and all other and
singular the premises above by these presents given and granted with all their
appurtenances to the said C D his heirs and assigns to the use aforesaid,
Warranty:
and upon the condition aforesaid against me the said A B my heirs and assigns
will warrant, and for ever defend by these presents: Moreover know ye (a
Letter of Attorney.)

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney to receive possession and seisin.
KNow All men by these presents, me C D. of etc. To have made, ordained,
constituted, deputed, and in my place by these presents put my beloved in
Christ E F my true and lawful Attorney to receive for me, in my name, and
stead of A B of etc. or of his certain Attorney, or Atturneys in that behalf
full and peaceable possession and seisin of and in all that field and pasture
called W with the appurtenances lying and being in the parish of A in the
County of etc. now in the tenure or occupation of the said A B, and of and in
all and singular other lands, tenements, meadows, pastures and hereditaments
whatsoever, with all their appurtenances to me the said C D my heirs and
assigns by the said A B given and granted by a certain Indenture dated etc.
according to the tenor, force, form and effect of the said Charter indented,
hereby ratifying and confirming all and whatsoever my said attorney shall do in
the premises by virtue of these presents.

In witness, etc.
A Feoffment in part of performance of Covenants in a certain Indenture.
TO all Christian people to whom etc. A B of etc. greeting etc. Know ye, me
the said A B as well for the sum of etc. of lawful etc. to me beforehand,
before the ensealing and delivery of these presents by C D of etc. well and
truly paid; as also in part of accomplishment and performance of certain
Covenants, grants and agreements, in certain Indentures expressed, bearing
date etc. and made between me the said A B on the one part, and the said C D
on the other part, to have given, granted, infeoffed, and by this my present
writing confirmed to the said C D all and singular Shops, Cellers, Solars,
Chambers, Rooms, Easements, Commodities and Hereditaments hereafter in these
presents expressed and specified with their appurtenances; that is to say, one
shop with a back room, two chambers and two garrets over the said shop, and the
back room now or late in the tenure or occupation of etc. or his assigns, one
kitchen with one chamber over the said kitchen, and one cellar or wood-house,
adjacent to the said kitchen, late in the tenor or occupation etc. And also
all and singular other tenements, chambers, buildings, structures, rooms,
easements, commodities, lights, watercourse and hereditaments, with all their
appurtenances situate, and being between the house or tenement now or late in
the tenor or occupation of T M on the West part, and the land or yard etc. And
also the reversion and reversions of all and singular the premises above by
these presents granted, and of every part thereof, to have, hold, and enjoy the
said Shops, Chambers, Rooms, Hereditaments, and all other and singular the
premises with all their appurtenances to the said C D his heirs and assigns
for ever. To be holden etc. (with a clause of Warranty etc. and a Letter of
Attorney etc.)

A Proviso for payment of moneys.
PRovided always, that if neither the said L R his heirs, executors,
administrators or assigns pay or cause to be paid, nor any of them pay or
cause to be paid unto the said A B his executors, administrators or assigns
the sum of etc. of good etc. in or upon the etc. now next ensuing the date of
these presents, at or in the now mansion house of the said A B situate, and
being etc. but shall make default in the payment thereof, contrary to the true
intention of this present writing, that then, and immediately from thenceforth
this present grant, bargain and sale of the premises, and every covenant,
grant and agreement therein contained and specified of the part of the said A B
his heirs or assigns to be performed, shall altogether cease, be void, and of
none effect. And that then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A B
his heirs and assigns into the premises to reenter, and the same to have
again as in his former estate, any thing in these presents above contained to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive an Annuity.
KNow all men by these presents, me A B etc. to have, made, constituted, and
in my place see my beloved in Christ C D and E F etc. my true and lawful
Attorneys jointly and severally to ask, levy, recover and receive in my stead,
for me, and in my name, but to the proper use and behoof of the said C D and E
F their executors and assigns, of T B etc. his executors and assigns a
certain yearly rent or annuity of forty pounds etc. during the term of sixty
years, specified in certain indentures dated etc. and made between me the
said A B on the one part, and the said T B on the other part, at the feasts and
places of payment in the same Indenture limited; and upon receipt thereof, to
make, seal and deliver acquittances or other discharges in the premises in my
stead and name, and other Atturnies one or more under them to constitute, and
at pleasure to revoke; giving, and by these presents granting to my said
atturnies and every of them my full and whole power and authority touching the
premises, to act, prosecute, implead, arrest, imprison, condemn, and out of
prison to deliver the said T B his executors and administrators; as also to
do, execute and finish all other and singular matters which shall be
necessary and expedient in my stead and name, as fully and wholly as I could or
might if I were personally present, hereby ratifying and confirming all and
whatsoever my said atturnies or either of them in my stead and name, shall do
in the premises, or in any of them by virtue of these presents.

In witness, etc.
A Grant of the presentation to a Vica^age.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, I P of etc.
true and undoubted patron of the Vicarage perpetual, of the Parochial Church
of M in the County of E. of the diocese of London, greeting. Know ye, me the
said I P to have given, granted, and by this my present ^riting confirmed to my
beloved E L of etc. his executours and assigns, the first and next advowson,
donation, collation, nomination, presentation, and free disposition of the said
Vicarage perpetual, of the said Parochial Church of M. willing, and by this my
present writing granting that it shall be, and may be lawful to the said E L
his executors and assigns to the said Church, when it shall first and next
happen to be void, whenever, howsoever, or by what means, whether by death,
resignation, privation, cession, permutation, demise or howsoever, to present
some one true, fit, honest and learned man to the Ordinary of that place or any
other, having lawful authority, and to perfect all other things which belong
to the duty and office of a Patron, for such first and next avoidance only, as
fully and wholly as I my self in that behalf could do, if this my present
writing had never been made.

In witness, etc.
A grant of a representation, reciting a former gift: Extrordinary.
TO all Christian people etc. A B of etc. greeting: Know ye, me the said A B.
for diverse good, true, and lawful causes and considerations me in this behalf
especially moving, To have given, granted, confirmed, and for me my heirs,
executors and administrators, To give, grant and confirm to my beloved servants
C and D. their executours, administratours and assigns, jointly and severally,
the first and next advowson, nomination, donation, presentation, free
disposition and right of patronage to the rectory or Church-parochiall of B. in
the Diocese of Norwich for one turn, and the next avoidance of the same Church
only, lately given and granted to me the said A B my executors, administrators
and assigns by W D of etc. true and undoubted Patron of the Rectory or
Church-parochiall of B aforesaid, as by the writing or deed thereof unto me
dated etc. more fully appears: So that it shall and may be lawful to the
said C and D, their executours, administratours and assigns, and every of them
jointly and severally as aforesaid, to nominate and present any person fit and
meet, to the said rectory or parochial Church of B. when by death, surrender,
resignation, grant, dismission, permutation, privation or amotion, or by any
other way, the same shall first and next after the date of these presents,
become void, or happen to fall to the Ordinary of that place and Diocese, who
for the time being, shall institute and invest the person so nominated and
presented into the said Parochial Church of B, and shall induct the person so
presented into the real, actual, and corporal possession of the same Church,
with all the rights and appurtenances thereunto belonging, and to do and
execute all other and singular things in that behalf necessary, or any ways
requisite, as fully, freely and absolutely, and in as large and ample manner
for one turn, and the next avoidance only of the same Church, as I my self
might or could do and execute, if this my present gift or grant had not been
made. And if it happen such gift of the said parish Church of B (in respect
perhaps of any former gift or grant thereof made, or in any other manner
without the fault or neglect of the said C and D. their executors,
administrators and assigns) not to obtain his intended effect, then and in
such case I will grant, That this my gift extend to the second, and in the like
case to the third and fourth avoidance of the said Parochial Church of B. So
that the right of patronage of the same Church, shall not return to me the
said A B my heirs, executours or administrators until such person so nominated
and presented by virtue and authority of these presents, shall duly and
effectually obtain and procure the lawful and corporal possession of the said
Church for one avoidance only.

In witness whereof, etc.
A Gift of ones interest in an advowson.
TO all, etc. to whom etc. (reciting the gift as etc.) Know ye, me the said A
B for diverse good and reasonable causes and considerations me in this behalf
especially moving, to have given, granted, and by this my present writing to
have confirmed to my beloved in Christ, C D. E F. and G H. Gentlemen, jointly,
and to every of them severally and in the whole, their executours and assigns
the said first avoidance etc. and the said writing and grant thereof made to me
as aforesaid; and all my right, title, claim, interest and demand of and in the
said rectory and parish Church of C for the said one turn and next avoidance
only, to have and enjoy the said rectory, and all my right, estate, title,
interest and demand of and in the said etc. jointly, and to every of them by
himself severally and in the whole, their executors and assigns, when the same
Rectory shall first and next happen to become void; as fully and wholly as I my
self by virtue and force of the said grant thereof to me made, or by any other
ways or right, have, or might have the same.

In witness etc.
A Presentation by the King.
THe King etc.
To the Reverend Father in Christ W. by divine permission, Bishop of (...) or
in his absence to his Vicar general in causes Ecclesiastical, sends
greeting.
We present unto you our beloved A B Clerk to the parish Church of L. in your
Diocese, now vacant by the death of the last Incumbent there, and belonging
unto our Gift in right of our Duchy of Cornwall; commanding you to admit the
said A B to the said Church, and to institute him Rector in the same, with all
the rights and appurtenances thereunto; and that you will with favor do and
accomplish all other things with expedition, which in this behalf do belong
unto your pastoral function.

In witness etc.
Another Presentation by the King.
JAMES etc.
To the Reverend Father in Christ J. by Divine permission Bishop of H. or to
his Vicar general in Spiritualities, or Commissary, or to any one having power
to receive this our Presentation, Greeting.
We present unto you our beloved subject A B. Clerk, to the Rectory and
parochial Church of C in your Diocese, now vacant, and by full right
belonging to Our Presentation and disposition; commanding you to admit the said
A B to the said Rectorie, and to institute and invest him Rector in and to the
same, with all the rights and appurtenances thereunto; and that you will with
favor do and perform all such other things as in this behalf do belong to your
pastoral Office: hereby revoking all former Presentations to the said Rectory,
heretofore made by us.

In witness etc.
A Presentation by a common person to a parsonage.
TO the most Reverend Father in Christ, and Lord M. by Divine grace Archbishop
of York, Primate and Metropolitan of England, or to his Vicar general in
Spirituals. Your humble and devout C D of etc. true and undoubted Patron of the
Rectorie and parish Church of L. in the county of York, sends greeting etc.
I present unto your most Reverend Father-hood my beloved in Christ G B Master
of Arts, to the said Rectorie and Church of L. in your Diocese, now by etc.
being vacant, and by full right belonging to my Presentation and disposition,
humbly beseeching and devoutly requiring you to admit the same G B to the said
Rectorie and parish Church, and to institute and invest him Rector in and to
the same, with all the rights and appurtenances: and that you will with favor
do and fulfill all other things which in this behalf appertain unto your
Pastoral Office.

In witness etc.
A Confirmation from the King of a Presentation.
JAMES, etc. To whom these present Letters patents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas the parish church of C. of the Diocese of Coventry and Lichfield, for
diverse months last past has been and is full of the person of H S clerk,
Master in Arts, by the presentation of A B Esquire, late Patron of that church
for one Turn only (as well by force of a certain Grant of the next avoydance
by J S true Patron of that church, as of Letters of Assignation in that behalf
granted.) Know ye, That We, of our certain knowledge and mere motion, and by
our Regal and Ecclesiastical Authority, wherewith We are invested, (in as
much as in Us is) Have ratified, confirmed and approved, and for Us, our Heirs
and Successors by these presents do ratify, confirm and approve the said
Presentation, Institution and Induction of the said H S into the said church of
C, and the possession thereof, and into all the right, estate, title,
presentation, interest and demand of the said H S. of and in the premises and
every part thereof. And moreover, We (of our abundant grace, certain knowledge,
and mere motion) do grant by these presents, for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, to the said H S, that he, during all his life, may retain,
receive, perceive, leavie, collect, and to his proper use enjoy the said
church, and all issues, profits, fruits, tithes, oblations, commodities and
emoluments whatsoever thereout arising, growing or renewing, or belonging to
them or any of them, as lawful Incumbent and Rector of the same Church,
notwithstanding any title of presentation to the said church, devolved or
otherwise accrued to Us, or any of our Progenitors or Ancestors by lapse of
time, or by any other title, right or interest whatsoever belonging to Us, or
any of our Ancestors or Progenitors.

In witness etc.
A Gift of an advowson from the King.
JAMES etc. To all to whom etc. Greeting. Know ye, that We of our especial
grace, certain knowledge and mere motion, Have given and granted, and by these
presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant unto our beloved
subject A B etc. the first and next Avoidance, Donation, Collation,
Presentation, free disposition and right of patronage to the Vicarage perpetual
of the Parish Church of S in the County of D and Diocese of Exon for the first
and next avoidance only, to have and to hold the said first and next advowson,
donation, ^ollation, presentation, free disposition and right of patronage to
the said Vicarage of S. to the said A B and his assigns for the first and next
avoidance of the same only. So that it may and shall be lawful to the said A B
and his Assigns to nominate and present any meet person to the said Vicarage,
to the Diocesan of that place, or to any other, having power in that behalf,
when the said Vicarage shall happen to become void by death, resignation,
privation, cession or any other way whatsoever, first and next after the date
of these presents, and to do and perform all and singular other things
necessary touching the premises, as fully, freely and wholly as we our selves
might do, if this our present grant to the said A B had not been made.

In witness, etc.
Another Grant from a Bishop.
R. By Divine permission, Arch Bishop of Y. Primate, and Metrapolitane of
England. To all to whom etc. Greeting, Know ye, we to have given granted and by
this our present writing confirmed unto A B etc. his executors and assigns,
the first and next avoidance, right of patronage and free disposition of the
Archdeaconrie of Cleaveland in the Metrapolitane Church of Y. for this one and
next turn only: So that it may, and shall be lawful to the said A B his
executors and assigns, whenever, or howsoever the said Archdeaconrie shall
happen to be void, after the date of these presents, to nominate and present a
fit person unto us, or our successors, to be Instituted into the Archdeaconrie
aforesaid, for this one time only, and not otherwise, and to do all other
things in that behalf requisite, and of right accustomed, until the person so
presented be Instituted and inducted into the full and peaceable possession of
the said Archdeaconrie.

In witness, etc.
A License for none Residence. A Qualification.
MAy it appear to all men by these presents, that I Io. Earl of W. have
received, and admitted A B Clark Rector of the parish Church of S in the County
of B to be one of my domestic Chaplains according to the tenor, form and
effect of a Statute and Act of Parliament, made and provided in the one and
twenty year of King Henry the 8th for Chaplains in that behalf: Exhorting and
requiring all and singular persons whom in this behalf it concerns, that you
neither vex, disturb nor any wise grieve the said A B my Chaplain, in any
manner whatsoever.

In witness, etc.
A License for the admission of a Chaplain into Service.
TO all Christian people etc. I L etc. Greeting. Know ye that I I L, have this
day received and accepted, and by these presents do receive and accept my
beloved in Christ A B Clark, to be my familiar, and household Chaplain,
according to the form of a late act of Parliament in that behalf Authorizing
me: earnestly desiring and requiring all, and every of you in the Lord, that
you in no sort disturb, molest or otherwise vex the said A B this my Chaplain
the bearer of these presents, contrary to the tenor of the said Statute.

In witness, etc.
A Grant of the Office of keeping a great House, and a Park.
TO all Christian people etc. A B of etc. Greeting. Know ye, me the said A B
out of my heraty and benevolent affection, and also in consideration of the
good and faithful service which E D my servant heretofore has bestowed, and
hereafter intends to bestow upon me, and my heirs, To have given, granted
and by this my present writing confirmed, and by these presents do give, grant
and confirm to the said C D the Office of keeping of my Capital mansion house,
and Park of A in the county of N, and also the Office of Bailiff, and
Bailiffship of my Manor of A in the said County. And I do by these presents
make, ordain and constitute the said C D keeper of my said Mansion house, and
Park, and Bailiff of the said Manor of A, to have, occupy, enjoy and exercise
the said office of keeper of my Mansion house and Park aforesaid, and also the
said Office of Bailiff or Bailiffship to the said C D to be exercised by him,
or by his sufficient deputy or deputies for the term of the natural life of the
said C D, in as large and ample manner as any other or others before these
times, had, occupied, enjoyed and exercised the said Office, or any of them.
And moreover, know ye, me the said A B for the consideration aforesaid, to have
given, granted and by this my present writing confirmed to my said servant,
during his life for the exercise and occupation of the said Offices, a certain
Annuity, or yearly rent of 6 li. yearly issuing and to be paid out of my
Manor of A with the appurtenances, that is to say, for the said Office of
keeper of my Mansion house and park forty shillings by the year, and for the
said Office of Bailiff, four pound yearly, to have, enjoy, levy and yearly
receive the said annual rent of six pound to the said C D during his natural
life, out of the issues and profits of the said Manor of A at two Terms in the
year, viz. And moreover, out of my more abundant affection, and in
consideration of the good, true and faithful service which my said servant has
hitherto, and during his life intends to bestow upon me, and my heirs, and
for diverse other good causes and considerations me at present especially
moving. Know ye, me the said A B for me and my heirs, To have given, granted
and confirmed, And by these presents to give, grant and confirm to the said C D
one other annuity or yearly Rent of four pound, for the better sustentation
and livelihood of the said C D. yearly to be taken, levied and perceived out
of the said Manor with the appurtenances, and out of the issues and profits
thereof; To have, enjoy, levy and yearly perceive the said annuity or yearly
rent of four pound to the said C D and his assigns, during the natural life of
him the said C D. at two Terms in the year: that is to say, at etc. And if it
happen the said annuity or yearly rent of six pound, or the said other annuity
or yearly rent of four pound or either of them, or any part thereof to be
behind and unpaid in part, or in all, by the space of etc. that then etc. (A
clause of distress as in others before.) And moreover, KnoW ye, me the said A
B for the consideration aforesaid to have put the said C D my servant in full
and peaceable possession of the aforesaid several annuities or Rents charge by
the payment of 6 d. which upon the day of the date of these presents I have
given unto him in the name of seisin thereof.

In witness, etc.
A Grant of the goods of a Person outlowed.
CHARLES etc to all to whom etc. Greeting. Whereas N B of etc. and HB of etc.
by their writing obligatory sealed with the seals of them the said N and H
bearing date etc. and the same day and year acknowledged before T R Knight,
chief Justice of our Court of Common Pleas, according to the form of the
statute for recovering of debts, provided and ordained in Parliament, holden in
the three and twentieth year of the Reign of the late King H. 8. stand bound,
and are obliged unto W C of etc. in 6000. l. and 3000. l. payable to the said
W. upon the feast of etc. And whereas the said N B and H B by one other their
writing obligatory, sealed with their seals bearing date etc. and the same day
and year acknowledged before the said T R according to the form of the said
statute, are also, and stand bound to the said W C in two thousand pounds
payable to the said VV in and upon the said feast of etc. And whereas the said
VV C for that that he did not appear before our Justices at VV. to answer R T
of a plea, why with force and arms he made an assault upon him the said R at
L, and did beat, wound, and evil entreat him, and also that he disposed of his
life, and offered him other enormities, to the grievous damage of the said R,
and against our peace, was put into the exigent, in the Hastings of the City of
L. to be outlawed, and upon that occasion he was afterward outlawed, as by
the record and process the said outlawry, remaining in our Court of Common
pleas at VV. more fully appears; by virtue of which outlawry, the aforesaid
writings obligatory, and the said sums of money, as also all and singular other
goods and chattels and debts which the said VV. had at the time of the
publication of the said outlawry, or at any time after were forfeited unto us,
and are well known of right to belong and appertain unto us. Know ye therefore
that we in consideration of the good, true and acceptable service heretofore
done unto us, by our beloved and faithful servant C H, of our especial grace,
certain knowledge, and mere motion, have given and granted, and by these
presents for us, our heirs and successors, do give and grant to the said C H
his executors and assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of the said C H
his etc. as well the said writings obligatory and recognizances, as the said
six thousand pounds, and three hundred pounds, and the said two thousand
pounds, and all other sums of money and debts whatsoever, any ways due by
the said N B and H B or either of them, to the said W C, and forfeited unto us
by reason of the said outlawry, or any other ways whatsoever. And also all
actions, suites, executions and demands which we, our heirs or successors by
reason of the said recognizance or writings obligatory, or any of them, or for
the said debts or sums of money by these presents granted, or any of them, or
any parcel thereof, against the said N B and H B or either of them, or the
heirs, executors or administrators of them, or either of them in any wise, now
have, or hereafter may have without any account to be given or made unto us,
our heirs or successors for the premises or any part thereof: for that
express mention etc.

An Indenture of allotment of several parts of Land.
THis INDENTURE sextipartite made etc. between W C on the one part, E D and D
his wife on the second part, P N and E his wife on the third part, R P and M.
his wife on the fourth part, W C and T his wife on the fifth part, and T L and
F his wife on the sixth part, Witnesses, That where diverse and sundry.
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Service and Hereditaments with
the Appurtenances late the Inheritance of the late Lady I B deceased, sometimes
wife of the Right honorable Sir E B Knight deceased likewise, set, lying and
being in diverse and sundry Counties, Shires and places within the Realms of
England, by and after the death of the said Lady I B did lawfully descend and
come, and of right ought to descend and come unto the said W C. E D. and D. his
wife, P H and F his wife, R P and M his wife, W C and E his wife, T L and F his
wife, that is to say, to the said W C as cousin, and one of the co-heires of
the said Lady I B; That is to say, Son of the Lady A C deceased daughter of
the said Lady I B, by G C Knight, Lord C late husband of the said Lady A now
likewise deceased, lawfully begotten: To the said D C and D his wife in the
right of the said D one other of the daughters and Coheires of the said Lady I
B: To the said P H and F his wife in the right of the said F. one other of the
daughters and co-heires of the said Lady I B: To the said R P and M his wife
etc. one other of the daughters and coheirs of the said Lady I B. To the said
VV C and E his wife, as in the right of the said E, one other of the daughters
and co-heires of the said Lady I B. And to the said T L and F his wife, as in
the right of the said F one other of the Daughters and Co-heires of the said
Lady I B. by reason whereof, the said VV G. E C. etc. into the said Manors,
m^ssuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances entered,
and were thereof seized in coparcionary; That is to say, the said VV C in his
own right, and the said E G. R P etc. and their said Wives in the right of
their wives, and they being thereof so seized, of their will and mutual
assents and agreement the seventh day of February last past before the date
hereof, did make partition thereof in manner and form following; that is to
say, they did grant and indifferently divide and sever all the Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their Appurtenances to them
descended and come as is aforesaid, and which be hereafter expressed in six
several parts, and agreed that every of the said six several parts should be
severally written and mentioned in a scroule of paper by it self, and that
afterward every of the said six several scroules of paper should be by an
indifferent man thereunto appointed by their mutual assents, severally
enclosed and covered in and with wax, made like little balls, of like bigness
and weight, so as no man may see any of the scroules, and that then the said
little balls of wax should be put in a Bonnet to be kept in the hands of an
indifferent man thereunto appointed by their mutual assents, and that the said
VV C being heir unto the eldest daughter of the said Lady I B, or his deputy,
thereunto sufficiently authorized should first put in his hand into the said
Bonnet, and should first take and choose out of the same Bonnet, one of the
same balls, and that he should have and hold to him and to his heirs for ever
for his part, portion and purport of the premises, only those of the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments that should be mentioned and
written in the scroule, enclosed and covered in and with the ball of wax, that
he or his said deputy for him shall take and choose; and that he the said VV
C having married the said E. being the second daughter of the said Lady I B.
or his deputy thereto sufficiently authorized, should for him the said W and
the said E, his wife, being the second daughter of the said Lady B. secondly
put in his hand etc. and should secondly take and choose etc. one other of the
said balls: And that the said W C and E his wife, should have, hold, and enjoy
to them, and to the heirs of the same E for ever, as in the Right of the said
E of the premises, only those. And that the said P H etc. (as W C mutatis
mutandis and so the other, all which was done accordingly. The said W C putting
in his hand first into the said bonnet, and taking and choosing out of the said
Bonnet, one of the said six balls, wherein was one of the six scroules, in
which was written and mentioned the Manor of W. with the appurtenances, late
belonging to the said Lady A B, and all the Lands, Tenements, Meadows,
Feedings, Pastures, Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments with their
Appurtenances, which were of the said Lady B in W. Mountford, and W. Hastings
in the County of VVerwick, the Manor of T etc. The said VV C. putting in his
hand secondly into the said etc. The said P H etc. The said R P etc. The said E
C by his deputy etc. The said T L etc. Know ye, that the said parties, and
every of them do and does by these presents for him, her, and them, and his and
their heirs, assent to the said partition of the premises so between them
hereof made and had as aforesaid. And that every of them does, and do for them,
he and him, and his and their heirs, accept and take the part, portion and
purport to him, her and them, happened and allotted as is aforesaid, in full
recompense of his, her and their part, portion and purport of all the Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to him, her or them and any of them
descended or come from the said Lady B. And that every of the said parties does
and do for him, her or them, and his heirs and their heirs, ratify and
confirm the said partition, and also, that every of the said parties, does and
do for him, her and them, and for his, her and their heirs, ratify and
confirm to the other of them and their heirs, the Manors, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments to the other of them allotted and happened by virtue of such
partition as is ^foresaid; as also all the estates and interests with the other
of them, has therein. And to the intent, that no dissension or variance should
hereafter happen or arise between the said parties to these presents, their
heirs or assigns, or any of them, for, touching or concerning the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments with their appurtenances or any
part or parcel thereof, It is covenanted, granted, condescended, concluded and
fully agreed between the said parties to these presents, their heirs and
assigns for every of them, in manner and form following; that is to say,
first the said VV C covenanteth and grants for him, his heirs, executors and
administrators by these presents, to and with the said C D and D his wife, and
the heirs and assigns of the said D. and to and with the said P H and F his
wife, and the heirs and Assigns of the said F; and to and with the said R P
etc. and the heirs and assigns of the said R. etc. and to and with the said W
C. and the said etc. and to and with the said T L. and the said etc. severally
for their parts, portions and purports of the premises, That he the said W C.
his heirs and assigns and every of them at all times hereafter, and from time
to time whenever he the said W C his heirs or assigns or any of them shall be
thereunto reasonably required by the said E or D his wife, or either of them,
or the heirs or assigns of the said D, for the said part, portion and purport
of the said D, of and in the premises, and by the said P H etc. and by the said
R P etc. and by the said W C etc. and by the said T L etc. To make, do and
knowledge, and suffer to be done, made and knowledged all and every act and
acts, thing and things for the further and better assurance, and more sure
making in the Law, unto the said E D. and D his Wife, and to the heirs and
assigns of the said D, of the said part, portion and purport of the premises
allotted and fallen unto the said E C. and C his Wife as is aforesaid: And unto
the said P H etc. and unto the said R P etc. and unto the said W C etc. and
unto the said T L. As by the said E C. and D his Wife, and the heirs and
assigns of the said D. or by their or either of their learned Council in the
Law, and at their or any of their costs and charges of the Law for their said
part, portion and purport of the premises, and by the said P H etc. and by the
said R P etc. and by the said W C etc. and by the said T L etc. shall be
reasonably advised: Be it by Fine, Feoffment, Recovery with voucher or
vouchers, Deed or Deeds enrolled, Inrolment of these presents, Release,
Confirmation, and by all these ways or means, or by any of them; or otherwise
with warrantie or warranties against the said W C. his heirs and assigns
only, or without warrantie, at the election and pleasure of such as shall
require the same as is aforesaid. And that the said VV C his heirs and
assigns shall at all times hereafter from time to time exonerate, acquit,
discharge, or otherwise save harmless as well the said E C. and D his Wife,
and the heirs and assigns of the said D; the said P H etc. the said R P etc.
the said VV C etc. and the said T L etc. as also their said parts, portions,
and purports of the premises, of and from all and all manner of former
bargains, sales, jointures, dowers, uses, Wills, Statutes merchant, Statutes
staple, Recognizances, Judgments, Executions, Issues, Fines, Amerciaments,
Intrusions, Alienations without license, Rents charges, Rents seck, arrearages
of Rents, and of and from all other charges, encumbrances and demands
whatsoever they be, had, made or done by the said VV C. (The like several
Covenants for all the rest one after another, Mutatis mutandis.) And the said W
C. and E. his Wife, P H and D his Wife, R P and M his Wife, and T L and F his
Wife covenant and grant for them, their heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns by these presents, to end with the said W L C. his heirs and
assigns, That if the said Manor of VV. Mountford shall happen at any time
hereafter to be charged, chargeable, or extendable by reason of any Statute,
Recognizance, or otherwise, for any sum or sums of money before the said
seventh day of P. last past due or payable by any act done or acknowledged by
any other then the said W L C, that then the said E L C and D his Wife etc. P H
and etc. R P and etc. W C and etc. T L and etc. their heirs, etc. shall equally
at their indifferent charges bear and pay five parts in six parts to be divided
of such sum and sums of money, for which the said Manor of W. Mountford
shall be so charged, chargeable, or extendable etc.

In witness etc.
To avoid the Title of Survivorship, where lands are granted to two.
THis INDENTVRE made etc. Between etc. Witnesses, etc. (Recite the Lease) the
said A B and C D. of and in the said Indenture of Lease and term of years
therein contained, title and interest of, in and to the said Manor or Tenement
and other the premises aforesaid with the appurtenances, and every of them
jointly are possessed. And for as much as either of the said parties are
willing and desirous that the survivor or over-liver of them shall not at any
time hereafter take any commodity or advantage of the premises or any parcel
of them by way of survivor or over-liver, according to the course and order of
the common Laws of this Realm, by reason of the joint title, estate and
interest which they have in and to the premises by virtue of the Indenture of
Lease aforesaid: Therefore it is fully covenanted, concluded, condescended and
agreed upon between the said parties in manner and form following: viz. First,
the said A B does etc. to and with etc. That if it do fortune or happen the
said A B to survive and over-live the said C D. in avoiding the said Title of
survivorship in and to the premises, That he the said A his executors,
administrators and assigns should quietly and peaceably permit and suffer the
executors, administrators and assigns of the said C D. being then deceased, to
have, occupy and enjoy to their own proper use and uses, and to the proper
use of any of them, in common or in severaltie, immediately after the death of
the said C. at his or their will and pleasure, All that the moitie, part and
purport of the said C. in and to the premises, and every of them into two equal
parts to be divided, during the residue of all the term of years of the term
above mentioned, which then at the death of the said C should be to come and
unrun, without let or disturbance of the said A. his executors or assigns, the
Title of Survivor of and in the premises in any wife notwithstanding. And also
the said C D does covenant etc. to and with A B etc. in avoiding of the said
Title of survivor in the premises, That if it do fortune or happen the said C
to survive and over-live the said A B. That he the said C D (ut supra, mutat.
mutand.) And the said A B does covenant etc. to and with etc. in manner and
form following: viz. That he the said A. his etc. or one of them shall pay the
moitie and one half of the said yearly rent of etc. unto the said T B his heirs
and assigns in the Indenture of Lease forementioned, and also shall bear and
discharge half of all the covenants, reparations, and charges th^rein
contained, which on the part of the said A B and C D are to be observed and
done in the said Indenture of Lease comprised. And further, that the said A B
his etc. shall well, truly and safely keep the said Indenture of Lease
unsurrendred, uncancelled, undefaced, and whole sealed, to the defense; saving
and preservation as well of the interest, title and term of the said A B, as
also of the title, interest and term of the said C D in and to the premises
during the term aforesaid. ( The like Covenant for C D. mutat' mutand.

In witness etc.
An Indenture where two have joint estate, upon condition that either of them
may have an equal part in the land or money lent, taking no benefit by
Survivorship.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between A B of the one part, and C D on the other
part. Witnesses, That where E F by a certain Indenture dated etc. for the
consideration therein expressed, did fully and clearly bargain, sell, give and
grant unto the said A B and C D their heirs etc. for ever, All that Manor etc.
( as it is recited in the Sale, unto the Habend, then say) with diverse other
covenants etc. therein contained; amongst which there is a certain proviso
contained, and by the same proviso it is provided and agreed, that if the said
E F (Recite the Proviso) as by the same Indenture it does and may appear. And
for as much as by the order of the common Laws of this Realm, if either the
said A B or C D should fortune to decease before payment of the said sum, or
if default be made in payment of the said sum etc. Then as well the said
sum of etc. should wholly remain to the Survivor etc. and for default of
payment thereof, the Survivour and his heirs should wholly possess the said
Manor etc. according to the tenure of the said Indenture, and to the only use
of the said Survivor and his heirs, contrary to the meaning of the said
parties. For avoiding of which inconvenience, and to the intent that either of
the said parties his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators shall be duly
answered of the premises accordingly, it is therefore covenanted and agreed
between the said parties to these presents, and he the said B does covenant and
grant for him, his heirs, executors and administrators by these presents, to
and with the said C D his heirs, etc. in form following; that is to say, that
if the said E F his executors, administrators or assigns do pay or cause to be
paid to the said A B or his heirs the said sum of two hundred pound at the
day and place limited for payment thereof in the said Indenture. That then the
said A B his executors or assigns, shall not only pay or cause to be paid to
the said C D his heirs, executors or assigns within one Month next after the
day of payment of the said sum, the sum of one hundred pounds, being the
moiety of the said two hundred pounds, but also shall deliver or cause to be
delivered unto the said E F his heirs or assigns, all such evidences as he or
his assigns shall have received by force of the said former Indenture, and
therefore shall acquit and discharge the said C D his heirs, executors or
assigns. And further that the same A B his executors or assigns, shall not at
any time hereafter do, knowledge, cause, procure or suffer to be done any act or
acts, deed or thing whatsoever, which shall or may in any wise debar, avoid,
delay or hinder the tenor, strength, form or effect of the same Indenture, or
any covenant, grant or article contained in the said Indenture, or of any
assurance, estate or conveyance to be made of the premises, or any parcel
thereof to the said A B and C D or either of them, their heirs, or assigns, or
of any bond made, or to be made for the performance of any of them, without the
consent or agreement of the said C his heirs or assigns first obtained in
writing for the same. And further the said A B covenanteth and grants etc.
and if default be made in the payment of the said sum of two hundred pounds
by the said E F his executors and assigns, in part or in all, contrary to the
form aforesaid, That then the said A B and C D and their heirs shall stand and
be seized of and in the moiety and one half of the premises, to the use of the
said C D and of his heirs and assigns for ever. And that he the same A B and
his heirs and all other claiming by him at all times after shall do and suffer
to be done, all such act, and acts, thing and things in the Law as shall be
advised, devised and required by the said C D his heirs or assigns or the
learned Council etc. for the better assurance of the same etc. to the said C D
etc. with warranty against A B and his heirs, and discharged of encumbrances
done by him, or any claiming by him etc. And the said C D does covenant and
grant ut supra, mutat. mutand. et tunc.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture of partition.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between etc. Witnesses, that whereas the said R P
and T B hold jointly for term of certain years, yet enduring the parsonage of
F in the county of Y, and all houses, stables, etc. (Take the words of the
lease) thereto in any wise belonging or appertaining of the demise or grant of
one W C etc. Yiedling therefore yearly unto one R W or his assigns fifty five
pounds of etc. at two Terms of the year, equally during the said Term, As by
the Indenture thereof bearing date etc. more plainly may appear. Now the said
parties, by the advice of honest friends, and with their full and whole consent
and agreement, have made division, and partition, between them of the said
parsonage, Tithes, and other the premises, in manner and form following, viz.
That the said R P shall have the one equal moity or half part of all the said
Parsonage, houses, glebe-lands, tithes and other the premises, in full
recompense of his due part and portion, of, and in the same. And that the said
T B shall likewise have the other moity or half part of the said Parsonage and
of all and singular the premises, in full recompense of his due part and
portion of and in the same. To have and to hold to either of the said parties
their executors and assigns severally as is abovesaid, from the day of the
date hereof, unto the end of the said Term of years yet to come. And also it
is agreed, covenanted and granted between the said parties, That the said
yearly rent of fifty five pound to be due to the said R W or his assigns, and
other charges shall be equally paid and born between the said R P and T B their
etc. Tenants of the said Personage, and other the premises, from time to time
during the said Term, viz. either of them for their part and portion allotted
as is aforesaid: And for the true meaning, performance and keeping of all and
singular the said partitions, covenants, conditions, payments, agreements and
articles either part binds himself his etc. to the other by these presents in
the sum of 20 li. etc.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture between Partners.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between etc. Witnesses, that the said A and B are
become partners, and parting-fellowes in all manner of barterings, buyings and
sellings, and in all other businesses as well for and concerning retayle of
merchandise, within the Realm of England, and the dominions of the same, or
elsewhere in any part, or parts beyond the Seas, and to that intent either of
the said parties have jointly made a Stock of 300 li. whereof the said A for
his own part, laid into the said Stock 150 li. And the said C for his own part
likewise laid in 150 li. the residue of the said Stock, which sum of money, and
every parcel thereof are to be employed by them, and either of them in the best
and substantiallest manner they can, for the best and most profit, gain and
advantage. And it is covenanted, granted and agreed between the said parties to
these presents, that all manner gains, winnings and profits coming by reason
of the said Stock, occupying and trade, shall be indifferently, and by even
portions divided and parted between the said parties, and in like semblable
manner: That all such losses as shall happen by reason of the said trade, shall
be born, and sustained equally between the said parties. And moreover it is
covenanted and agreed between the said parties, that this compact for the
Traffic and feat aforesaid, to be jointly had between the said parties, in
manner aforesaid, shall continue from the day of the date hereof during the
space and term of three years next ensuing the date of these presents: So that
once every year, yearly during the said Term, that is to say, at the feast of
the Birth of our Lord, or within 8 days next after or before the same Feast
day, either of the said parties upon request of the other, make, or cause to be
made unto the other a full true and clear account as well of the said Stock and
of all the gains and profits coming and growing of the same, as of all the
losses happening of the same, if any such be. And moreover it is covenanted,
granted and agreed between the said parties by these presents, That they and
either of them at the end of the said Term of 3 years, shall make together a
true, just account and reckoning, as well of the said Stock of 300 li. and of
all the gains, profit and commodities coming and growing of the same, as of
all losses which have chanced at any time during the said Term of 3 years,
next proceeding. And that upon such account made, all such things as shall
remain in the hands of either the said parties, or of any other by their
delivery, or to the use of either of them, shall be equally divided and
delivered to the said parties their etc. Further it is covenanted, granted and
agreed between the said parties to these presents, That either of the said
parties at his own proper costs and charges, shall undergo, sustain and bear
all such costs and charges as well of meat, drink, keeping of house and
household apparel, play, and giving of servants wages and all other expenses
which he shall by any means spend during the said Term. Provided always, and
it is fully covenanted, granted and agreed between the said parties, That if it
fortune either of the said A and B before the end of the said Term of 3 years
to decease and depart this world, that then the said survivor of them, his etc.
shall within one month next after his decease, make, or cause to be made a
true and just account and reckoning, with the executors of the deceased, in
such manner and form as the said A and B ought to have done if they had been
both living, and upon such account made, that as well all such of the said
stock as of all the gains and profits thereof coming (the losses being
deducted if any be) shall be equally divided, parted and delivered between
the said survivor and the etc. of the deceased, and that all such sums of
money as by the said account shall be found due or owing by any person or
persons to the said A and B, shall upon the recovery thereof by the survivor
his etc. be divided, and the entire half thereof (the costs and charges in the
law being deducted) shall be by the said survivor, his executors or assigns,
delivered and paid to the executour of the said deceased within one month next
after the recovery thereof, without fraud or covin. And further, it is agreed
etc. That neither of them without consent of the other shall become surety or
bound for any person or persons, by bond, promise or otherwise for any debt,
sum of money, performance of any bargain or otherwise during the said term
of three years, nor do any other kind of act or thing concerning the premises,
without the consent of the other in writing, which shall be hurtful to the
other in any wise; and finally, that either of the said parties shall accept in
part of payment of his portion of the premises all such debts and credits as
he shall trust or deliver wares for, without the consent of the other, any
thing abovesaid to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture where three have purchased Land jointly, that upon sale thereof,
all sums of money shall be equally divided amongst them.
THis INDENTURE made etc. between T B of the first part, and A K of London on
the second part, and E D of London Gentleman on the third part, where the said
parties before the date hereof, jointly together at their equal costs and
charges have paid, disbursed and laid our diverse sums of money, for the full,
clear and absolute purchase of etc. (recite the land) the state whereof
remains in the said E and one M G Gentleman the day of the date hereof to be
assured to such person or persons, as the said etc. shall name or appoint. Now
this Indenture witnesses, that it is fully covenanted, granted, condescended
and agreed between the said etc. and every of them covenanteth and grants
for himself, his heirs, executors and administrators to and with the other,
his heirs, executors and assigns, that the whole benefit, commodie and
profit, and the sum and sums of money which at any time hereafter shall be
had or received, as arising, coming, growing and renewing of, for or concerning
the Lands before expressed and specified, and every part and parcel thereof by
the said etc. or any of them, or any of their heirs, executors, etc. or any of
them, or any other person or persons by their or any of their means or
procurement, shall be equally and indifferently distributed between every of
them the said etc. in such sort, as every of them, their, and every of their
heirs, executors, administrators and assigns shall have their equal part and
portion, without any manner of fraud or covin. And also it is further agreed
between the same parties, That in case any of them happen to decease at any
time hereafter, That then the benefit and profit of the premises shall not be
perceived or taken by any of the parties for or by reason of any survivorship.
And moreover it is fully agreed between the said etc. that they, not any of
them shall at any time hereafter, bargain, sell, grant, convey, assure or
alien, nor suffer to be conveyed or aliened by or from them, or any of them
the said Messuages, lands, tenements, etc. or any part or parcel thereof, or
any his or their estate, right, title or interest of in or to the same or any
of them, to any person or persons whatsoever, unless it be by and with the
consent, privity, knowledge or agreement of such of the said other parties to
these presents as then shall be living under his or their hands and seals in
writing first had and obtained.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture where a Lease is granted to three joint lessees, that every of
them is to pay his part of the rent, and equal part in the charge of
repairing, and other charges.
THis INDENTURE tripartite, made etc. Witnesses, That where the parties are
and stand possessed of and in the Message, tenement or Inn, called the Ship,
set, lying, and being in the parish of St. Clement Danes etc. and of one field
etc. and of, in and to all and sigular houses, buildings, barnes, stables,
shops cellars, sollars, wast grounds, entries, issues, ways, and all other
commodities, rents and profits to the same belonging or appertaining; that is
to say, every of them a full third part of all and singular the premises into
three equal and even parts to be divided for and during the several terms
hereafter mentioned; that is to say, for and during the term of fourteen
years mentioned and granted in and by a certain Indenture of Lease bearing
date etc. made by one M N etc. to the said A B. of and touching the premises,
which Term did commence at the feast of etc. then last past before the date of
the same Indenture, and for and during the term of thirty years mentioned and
granted in and by the Letters patents of our sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty, under the great seal of England, bearing date etc. granted by our
said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, unto etc. of and in the premises, as
by the said indenture of lease and Letters patents aforesaid more at large
appears. It is now covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between
the said parties to these presents, and every of them, and every of them does
severally covenant and grant to and with the other of them severally by these
presents, that they and every of them, and the executors, administrators and
assigns of every of them, for his her and their, and every of their parts,
shall not only well and truly content and pay, or cause to be contented or paid
the full third part and portion of all and singular such yearly rents as are
reserved in and by the said Indenture of lease and Letters patents aforesaid,
and either of them, at the days, times and place limited and appointed for the
payment thereof, and that from time to time for and during the said several
estates and terms of years before mentioned; But also shall at all times
hereafter, and from time to time for and during the terms aforesaid, pay,
bear, allow and disburse the full third part and portion of all such sum and
sums of money and other charges whatsoever, as shall grow due or payable, or
be convenient or necessary to be borne or paid for the reparations of the
premises, or for the recovery or defense of the title thereof, or of any
parcel thereof; and shall also condescend and agree to all and every such
action, suit, and other act and acts which shall be necessary or convenient to
be attempted, prosecuted or done, for, touching and concerning the premises
or any parcel thereof, tending to the profit or benefit of the said parties;
and shall not do, procure or cause to be done any act or acts, thing or things,
whereby, or by reason whereof the estate, interest or title of the said
parties, or any of them, shall, or in any wise may be impaired, hindered,
determined or avoided, except it be by and with the assent, consent and
agreement of the other of them in that behalf first had and obtained. And
further, the said A B does covenant etc. That the said C D his executors and
assigns, and every of them, shall have, occupy, use and enjoy all such
easements, ways, and liberties and passages, and shall quietly have free
egress, ingress and regress into, and from the said Inn, tenement, field, and
other the premises, for the using and occupiing of a full third part of the
premises, without let or disturbance of the said A B his etc. in such manner
and form as the said M N has heretofore had, occupied, used and enjoyed the
same premises. (The like Covenant to E F, and the like from C D to AB and OF,
and the like from E F to A B and C D mutat. mutand. et tunc.)

In witness, etc.
An Indenture for an under Sheriff.
THis INDENTURE made etc. between R L etc. and I C etc. Witnesses, that where
the Kings Majesty by his Letters patents, under the great seal of England
bearing date the etc. has appointed and made the said R L high Sheriff of his
County of Surrey and Sussex, The said R L has by these presents ordained,
deputed, constituted and made the said I C his deputy and under Sheriff of the
said Counties of S and S. To have, enjoy and exercise the said office of under
Sheriffwick by himself, his deputy and deputies during such time as the said R
L shall continue and be High Sheriff of the said Counties, by virtue of the
said Letters pattents made unto the said R L as is aforesaid, without let or
interruption of the said R L or any other person or persons by his means or
procurement, giving unto him the said I C his atturnie, deputy and deputies,
by these presents full power and authority to receive, and take to his and
their own use and uses, all manner of profits, commodities, fees, advantages,
and all other casualties whatsoever belonging, or in any wise appertaining to
the said office of Sheriffwick, growing, coming or happening by reason of
exercising and using the said office. Nevertheless excepting and always
reserving unto the said R L and his assigns, the nomination, appointing and
returning of all such Juries and pannels in any writs of attaint, and of all
other writs which during the time aforesaid, by any manner of means shall come
to the hands of the said R L or I C. wherein the Kings Majesty is or shall be
party, or shall concern any Nobleman or Gentleman; all which Juries or
pannels, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R L for to appoint and
return at his pleasure; and in default of such return or appointment to be
made, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said I C for to return the
said writ or writs. In consideration whereof, the said I C for him, his heirs,
executours and administratours does covenant and grant etc. That he the said I
C his executours and administratours shall and will from time to time, and at
all times hereafter discharge, acquit or save harmless the said R L his etc.
and every of them, and his and their goods, chattels, lands, tenements etc.
against our said Sovereign Lord the Kings most Excellent Majesty, his heirs
and successors, and against all and every other person and persons whatsoever,
of and from all and all manner of Actions, Suits, Charges, Amerciaments, Fines,
Impositions, Condemnations, Damages, Losses and troubles whatsoever, which
shall happen or come, ensue, or be imposed to or upon the said R L his etc. or
any of them by reason of any warrant, returns, executions, returning or making
of any pannels of Juries, assessing of Fines, Amerciaments, Collections, escape
or escapes of any prisoner or prisoners apprehended, arrested or attached by
the said I C within the said County of S. at any time during the continuance
of this deputation, and within the said County of S. at any time before the
said prisoner or prisoners shall be committed to the Jail, or by reason of any
other escape or escapes of prisoner or prisoners, which shall happen by the
negligence or means of the said I C. or of any of the Bailiffs of the said
Counties, or either of them, or any of his servants or factors, or by reason of
the not returning of any Writ or Writs, or by making any insufficient or false
Return, or by reason of any other thing or things whatsoever they be that shall
be done, procured, made or suffered by the said I C. or any other his Deputy
or Deputies, Bailiff or Bailiffs, or by any other his servants or factors.

And the said I C does covenant etc. That he the said I C his heirs, executors
or assigns at his and their proper costs and charges, within two years next
following the discharge of the said R L from the Office or Sheriffwick
aforesaid, shall make for and in the name of the said R L a true, just and
perfect account in the Kings Majesty's court of Exchequer, of all such issues,
profits, fines, amerciaments, sum and sums of money, and other fees, d^^ies and
charges as shall be collected, levied and received by the said I C. his deputy
or deputies, or any of them, by reason of the said Office, or wherewith the
said R L shall or may be lawfully charged as Sheriff of the counties aforesaid;
the said R L his executors etc. upon such account discharging and keeping
harmless and indempnified the said I C his etc. of all writs or pannels as
shall be returned or executed by the said R L without the notice of the said I
C, his deputy or deputies as is aforesaid: and after such account made as is
aforesaid, shall obtain, procure and get for the said R L his etc. a good,
lawful and sufficient discharge and quietus est within the said two years.

And the said R L does covenant etc. That he the said R L shall and will permit
and suffer the said I C and his Deputies, Atturnies, Bailiffs and other
Officers, to have and take to his and their own use and uses all profits,
commodities, fees and advantages appertaining and belonging to the said Office,
without any let or interruption of the said R L. or any other person or persons
by his means or procurement.

And further, the said R L does covenant etc. That he the said R L his
executors etc. shall avow and maintain all and all manner of actions and suits
which he the said I C his etc. or any of them, at his or their own proper costs
and charges shall at any time hereafter lawfully take, commence or pursue in
the name of the said R L as High Sheriff of the said Counties of S and S.
against any person or persons for any matter or cause touching or concerning
the said office of Sheriffwick, such bond and bonds, and other assurances as
shall be made to the said R L by any Jailor or Jailors within the said Counties
of S and S and such bond and bonds as shall be made with condition for the
performance of the covenants and agreements of these presents only excepted.
And that he the said R L shall make no release or other discharge of any such
action so to be taken or sued, without the agreement or consent of the said I
C: the said I C his executors etc. saving and keeping harmless the said R L
his heirs etc. of and from all costs, sums of money and damages as shall be
taxed, imposed or adjudged upon or against the said R L his etc. by reason of
any suits hereafter to be commenced in the name of the said R L his etc. and of
all dangers and losses which he the said R. his executors or administrators
shall sustain by reason thereof.

And moreover, the said R L covenanteth etc. to deliver unto the said I C. or
his assigns seven several obligation bearing the date of these presents,
wherein the said I C, VV H and T P etc. stand bound in the sum of 100. l. with
several conditions upon them indorsed for the performance of the covenants,
grants, articles and agreements of these Indentures, to be cancelled and made
void at the pleasure of the said I C. his executors or assigns, within 3
months next after the deliverie of the quietus est of the said R L. his heirs
etc. if the said Obligations shall not in the mean time be forfeited, and the
said R. not indempnified; that if that the said I C his executors or
administrators do upon the deliverie of the said Obligations enter into one
other Obligation to the said R L. in the sum of 200 li. for the saving and
keeping harmless of the said R L. his etc. and every of them of and from all
and every the sum and sums of money wherewith the said R L shall be charged by
reason of the said Office of Sheriffwick, and shall fall out not to be answered
upon the accounts; and of and from all action and actions, plaint and plaints,
debt or debts that shall be commenced against the said R L. his etc. by reason
of any escape or escapes committed of any prisoner or prisoners arrested within
the said County of S. not committed to the common Jaile of that county, or
afterward by the act or negligence of the said I C, or any the Bailiff or
Bailiffs, of any his servants or deputies.

And the said I C does covenant etc. That he the said I C shall not execute or
serve any writ or writs of Execution, or make any warrant out of the same
writs, exceeding the sum of 100 li. in any one writ; nor yet execute any
Letters or other commandments from any the Lords of his Majesty's Privy
Council without the privitie and notice of the said R L thereunto first had and
obtained. And yet nevertheless the said I C shall have and perceive to his own
life, the benefit and advantage of all the ordinary Fees growing or arising of
or by reason of any such Execution, or by reason of the returning of any Juries
before in these presents reserved to the said R L as aforesaid.

In witness etc.
A Warrant to the Auditors for making particulars from the Lo. Treasurer.
AFter our hearty commendations. Whereas we with other his Majesty's
Commissioners for sale of his Highness Mils, have agreed on his Majesty's
behalf, That Sir T V Knight, P V of London Merchant, and etc. contractors for
the Mils, lands and other things hereafter mentioned, In consideration of
certain sums of money by them paid and to be paid to his Highness use, shall
have and pass from his Majesty to them, their heirs and assigns, in Fee farm,
in Soccage tenure, such and so many of his Majesty's water corn mils, fulling
mils, wind mils, horse mils, and all other mils, of what kind or nature soever,
with their appurtenances, as well within the survey of the Exchequer, as of the
Duchy of Lancaster, or within the Isle of Wight; and all mil-houses and other
necessary houses belonging to the same, and all lands, and houses thereupon
built, which now are, and usually heretofore have bin demised with the same, as
belonging to the same, as shall amount to the yearly value of 1500 l. per an.
or thereabouts. Provided that the same be not parcel of the possessions of the
Duchy of Cornwall, or belonging to the Manor of Lanceston in the county of
Cornw. or belonging to the Manor of etc. in the county of Denbigh. These are
therefore to will and require you to make forth and send unto us fair written
in parchment, under your hands such and so many particulars within your
several offices as shall amount unto the said yearly value of 1500 li. per an.
in Mils, with their lands and appurtenances, as the said Contractors or any for
them shall from time to time come to require the same; and that you certify to
us what number and quantity of acres belongs to every such Mill; and that
you put into every particular (if it be so required) so many several things as
shall amount unto the sum of 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. so as the same several things do
lie with one Audit, taking only but one fee for the same particular, as if it
had been for one thing only. And further, we will and require you to permit and
allow the said Contractors, their deputies, agents and assigns, to have a sight
of and to peruse all such your books and records as they shall have need, or
require for their better instruction, and furtherance of their business in
that behalf: and withal, that you forbear to make forth any particulars of any
the mils or lands of that nature to any person or persons whatsoever, for any
lease or leases upon surrender or in reversion, or for any grants in Fee farm,
or in Fee simple or otherwise, but only to and for the use of the said
Contractors, their agents and assigns, for the supplying and filling up of the
value of 1500 li per ann. other then for the places before excepted: Whereof
fail you not, as you tender his Majesty's service, and will answer the contrary
at your perils.

To our loving Friends, the Auditors of his Majesty's Revenues within the
survey of his Highness Excheque and Duchy of Lan. and to their sufficient
Deputies in their absence, and to every of them, and to the Auditors of the
Principality of Wales, and Earldom of Chester, and to all others his Majesty's
Officers of the said Courts.

A Letter of Attorney to take possession of a Patentee.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, G M and H L
of London Esquires send Greeting etc. Know ye, that we the said G M and H L
have made, ordained, constituted, and in our stead and place have put and
Authorized our well beloved I VV and S D and either of them, our true,
sufficient and lawful Atturnies, jointly and severally to take and receive for
us and in our names, places and steads of R N, A P T VV and J VV Atturnies for
our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, authorized, constituted and ordained,
jointly and severally by his Highness Letters patents, bearing date etc. under
as well his Highness great Seal of England, as under the Seal of his Majesty's
Duchy of Lancaster, or of some of them, full and peaceable possession and
seisin of and in the several Parks hereafter mentioned. That is to say, of and
in the new Park of Wakefield in the County of York; and of and in the Park of
Hungerford with the appurtenances in the County of Berks; and of and in the
Park of VVicks with the appurtenances in the County of Essex; and of and in all
and singular the Parks, houses, buildings, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings,
pastures and hereditaments with their appurtenances, which are mentioned to be
given and granted in and by the said Letters patents of the Kings most
excellent Majesty that now is, to us the said G M and H L made; Sealed as well
with the great Seal of England, as with the Seal of his Majesty's Dutchey of
Lancaster, bearing date, as in and by the same more at large appears. Or of,
or in any part or parts, parcel or parcels thereof, in the name of all, or as
much thereof as they, or either of them shall think good; and Atturnment and
Atturnments of the Farmors and Tenants of the said several Parks, for life,
lives, years or in Fee, or otherwise, and of every of them for and in our
names, places and steads, to take, and seisin of their, or any of their rents
and services, or any of them to receive, to and for us and our use, according
to the meaning of his most Excellent Majesty, expressed in his Higness said
Letters patents, in and by which said Letters patents his Highness has
Authorized, made, ordained, constituted and specially appointed the said
Reignald N. A P. T VV and J VV and every of them as a foresaid, his Highness
true and lawful Atturnies, jointly and severally to enter for and in his
Highness name, into the said Parks, and other the premises, specified and
expressed in the said Letters patents, and possession thereof, and of every, or
of any parcel thereof in his Highness name to take, and after such possession
and seisin so had, to deliver for him, and in his name, to us the said G M and
H L or either of us, or to our certain Atturnie or Atturnies in that behalf
full possession and seisin, of, and in the premises, or any of them. To have,
hold or enjoy the same, to us the same G M and H L our etc. according to the
form and effect of the said Letters patents thereof to us made, holding firm
and stable, all and every act and thing whatsoever, as our said Atturnies, or
any of them shall do in or about the premises by these presents.

In witness, etc.
A Warrant from the King, for a Lease in reversion.
RIght trusty, and right welbeloved Cousin, and Councellor, and right trusty
and welbeloved Counselors, we greet you well. Letting you wit that in
consideration of the good and acceptable service heretofore done unto us, by
our welbeloved servant A B. We are contented and pleased to grant to him, and
his assigns a Lease in reversion for 21 years without fine, of such, and so
much of our manors, lands tenements and hereditaments, as well within the
survey of our Exchequer as of the Revenue of our Duchy of Lancastar, as
together shall amount unto the clear yearly value of 100 li. or thereabouts.
Wherefore we will and command you, that when our said servant, or any other for
him shall bring unto you any note or notes of any such our manors, lands,
tenements or hereditaments usually letten, or meet to be letten to the yearly
value aforesaid, or thereabouts, ye give him means to have the just
particulars thereof at the hands of our Auditors. And thereupon cause a Book to
be drawn in due form of Law, concerning a Lease to be made by us to the said A
B and his assigns for the term and number of years before expressed.
Reserving unto us, our heirs and succssors the yearly rent now reserved upon
the premises, And with such other clauses and covenants as in like cases are
used and accustomed, and the same Lease fair written in parchment, and by you
subscribed to send to us to pass our Signature and Seals as appertains. And
these our Letters shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge in that behalf.

Given under our Signet at etc.
To our trusty and welbeloved Cousin and Counselor the Earl of Dorset Lord
high Treasurer of England, and to our trusty and right welbeloved Counselors
Sr. John Fortescue Knight, Chansellor of our Duchy of Lancaster, and Sr.
George Howme Knight, Lord of Barwick, Chancellor of our Exchequor.
The fees and Charges for passing a book of fifty pound per Annum in the Kings
general sale, at every Office etc.
TO Mr. Atturnie for his fees being 3 s. 4 d. in the pound 8 li. -6 s. -8 d. To
his man for drawing and engrossing the book, for every leaf of paper 2 s. (
Note if the Solicitor draw the Book, his fee is 3 s -4 d in the pound, and Mr.
Atturny but 20 d.)
To his man for his pains viz. for engrossing the book 20 s, or 10 s. To Mr.
Solicitor for his fees being 20 d in the pound 4 li. -3 s. -4 d. To his man for
his pains in examining the book 20 s.
At the Court
To Mr. Windenbank for getting the Kings hand 40 s. To the Clarke of the
Signet, for the Fee of the Seal 3 li. -6 s. -8 d. To him for engrossing every
skin a piece 20 s. To his man for writing every skin a piece 10 s. (Note that
if the Patent be above fifty pound value, then all these Fees are double.)
To the Clark of the Privy Seal, for the Fee thereof 2 s. -8 d. To himself,
and his man for writing every skin, as for the Signet: And if the book exceed
the value, then all the Fees double as before. 30 s. To the Chamber keeper at
Court voluntarily, having no Fee allowed but in Courtesy 3 s -4 d. The Fees of
the great Seal 2 li. -01 s. -8 d. The signing of the Docket 2 s. The divident
and inrolement of every skin 40 s. The Seal, examination and laces 5 s. The
vellome and flourishing every skin 5 s. The Chafe wax 2 s. -6 d. To the Clark
for writing every skin a piece 20 s. To Mr. Pit the teller in the Exchequer
for every acquittance of the first payment 12 d. for the second 2 s. To him for
his certificate for the whole book 10 s. To his men then 05 s. For the Talley
and Constat 7. s. To the Auditor of the rates for his certificate 10. s To his
man then 5. s To Mr. Cartwright for his certificate for bonds to be taken for
the woods. 2. s
The Charges at Mr. Osbornes office, and Mr. Fanshawes office for suing out a
bond entered for Wards, in the sale.
In Mr. Osbornes office
FOr the warrant and signing thereof 4. s For filing the warranty 1. s For
making the commission 6. s. 8. d For the Master of the Office his fee 6. s. 8.
d For inrolling the bond 6. s. 8. d For a copy of the bond 2. s
In Mr. Fanshawes Office.
TO Mr. Fanshaw for his fee 7. s For entering the Judgment 3. s. 4. d To the
Attorney and his Clerk 7. s. 8. d
The Signet, and the manner of passing thereof.
TO our well beloved and faithful Counselor etc. greeting: We command you that
under our Privy Seal, for the time being remaining in your custody, you cause
to be made our Letters to be directed to our Chancellor of England, we
commanding him that under our great seal of England he cause to be made our
Letters patents in form following: The King to all etc.

The Privy Seal.
JAMES by the Grace of God etc.
to our well beloved and faithful Counselor T. Lord Ellesmere our
Chancellor of England, greeting:
We command you that under our great Seal of England, being in your custody,
you cause to be made our Letters Patents in form following: The King etc.

The Privy Seal to the Chancellor of the Duchy.
JAMES by the grace of God etc.
to our beloved and very faithful Counselor Jo. F. Knight Chancellor of our
Duchy of Lancaster, greeting:
We command you, that under our Seal of our said Duchy, being in your
custody, you cause to be made our Letters patents in form following: The King
etc.

The charge of the Duchy Seal.
The Chancellors fee for the Seal only, for every Manor that passes, is. 8.
l. 9. s. 4. d And for every quillet 40. s
The charge for drawing, are as to the Kings Attorney or Solicitor.
To Mr. Gerrard, Clarke of the Duchy for every Manor or entire thing that
passes. 7. li. For every quillet 40. s.
A Letter of Atturnie to deliver a Lease upon the ground for trial of an
Ejectment.
TO all Christian people etc. I A B etc.
greeting etc.
Know ye, that I the said A B have ordained, constituted, appointed, and in my
place put my trusty and well beloved in Christ C D and E F my true and lawful
atturnies jointly and severally for me and in my name, and to my use to enter
into all that cottage etc. or into any part or parcel of the premises in the
name of the whole, and possession thereof, or of any part or parcel thereof in
the name of the whole to my use, to take, and after such possession thereof, or
of any part thereof in the name of the whole so had and taken for me, and in my
name, and as my deed, to deliver unto G H of etc. that part of an Indenture
bearing date etc. purporting to be made between me the said A B of the one
party, and the said G H of the other party, which is sealed with the seal, and
subscribed with the name of me the said A B. but not as yet delivered as my act
and deed, and purporting a demise to be thereby made of the premises by me the
said A B unto the said G H for the term of certain years mentioned in the same
Indenture. And I the said A B do by these presents Ratify and allow all and
whatsoever my said atturnies jointly, or either of them severally shall do or
cause to be done in or about the premises.

In witness, etc.
Forster Council.

An indorsement upon the same.
MEmorandum that C D and E F by virtue of a letter of attorney to them made, by
the within named A B did the etc. day of etc. in the 44 year of etc. enter into
one close or parcel of land, called or known by the name of etc. parcel of the
lands and tenements within mentioned, in the name of the lands and tenements
within mentioned, and thereof for and the name of the whole did take possession
for and in the name, and to the use of the said A B, and then and there did
deliver this present Indenture as the deed of the said A B unto the within
named G H in the presence of those whose names are subscribed.

Forster.

A Letter of Attorney to take possession.
TO all Christian people etc. T P greeting etc. Know ye that I the said T P
have made, constituted, ordained, and in my place by these presents, have put
and authorized my well beloved friend A B my true sufficient and lawful
attorney, to receive and take for me and in my name of S R of etc. full and
peaceable possession and seizen of and in all that the Manor of S with the
appurtenances in the County of H. and of and in all lands, tenements and
hereditaments with their appurtenances whatsoever in S. aforesaid in the said
County of H to the said Manor by any means belonging; and of and in all that
the Rectory of the Parish Church of S. aforesaid, and of and in all Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, Oblations, Tithes, Obventions and profits to the
said Rectory by any means belongi^g, and of and in all and singular other
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, with the appurtenances expressed
and specified in a certain pair of Indentures of demise bearing date with
these presents, made between the said S K of the one party, and me the said
T P of the other party, of and concerning the premises for the Term of
twenty and one years, from the feast of etc. last past, and for the yearly
rent of fifty shillings, and of and in every parcel thereof with the
appurtenances. And further, for me and in my name to take, receive and do all
and every such other thing and things in or concerning the premises, as to my
said Atturnie shall be thought meet or convenient, and that as fully and
effectually, as I my self might do if I were then and there personally
present. Holding etc. at antea etc. Blunden Conc.


A Letter of atturnie to make composition for letting and setting of Lands.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, A C Esquire
se^deth greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know ye, that I the said A C for
diverse good causes and considerations me in this behalf especially moving, do
by this my present writing assign, make, ordain and constitute, and in my
stead and place put and authorize my well beloved friend R R Gentleman, my
true, sufficient and lawful attorney and deputy for me and in my name into
the Manor of E and L with their appurtenances in the County of C, and into
every or any part or parcel thereof, to enter, and with all, every or any the
Tenants, Farmers or occupiers thereof, or any parcel thereof, or any other
person or persons, for me and in my name, and to my use, to common take,
compound, conclude and agree, of, for and concerning the demising, letting or
setting of the said Manor and premises and every or any parcel thereof to the
same Tenants, Farmors or Occupiers thereof, or the said other person or persons
for the term of three lives or otherwise, at and for the yearly rents and
services therefore heretofore due and accustomed, and for such fine or fines to
me the said A C for the same premises or any of them to be paid as the said R
R shall think fit and convenient: and compositions and agreements with the same
Tenants, Farmours or occupiers of the same premises, or any the said other
person or persons, and every and any of them for the same premises or any part
thereof for me and in my name, and to my use, to that end, and in that behalf
to make, and the same compositions and agreements, or such of them as the said
R R shall think fit for me, and in my name to make, and as my deed or deeds to
deliver, and the counterpart thereof for me and in my name and my use to take;
and to do, execute and finish the same, and all and every other ^ct and thing
needful and necessary to be done for and concerning the premises, as fully,
wholly and effectually as I my self might do if I were then and there
personally present; and all and whatsoever the said R R for me, and in my
name, and to my use as aforesaid, shall do, or cause to be done in or about
the premises, or any of them by virtue of these presents, I the said A C shall
and will stand to, justify, confirm, and allow by these presents.

In witness, etc.
A General Letter of Atturnie to enter into, and to let and set lands.
TO all Christian people etc. A B etc.
sends greeting etc.
Know ye, that I the said A B have made, ordained, constituted, authorized,
appointed, and in my place and stead by these presents, have put my well
beloved C D and E F of etc. my true sufficient and lawful atturnies, jointly
and severally, as well to enter for me, and in my name into all and singular
my messuages, Lands, Tenements, Woods, Underwoods, and all other my possessions
and hereditaments whatsoever with all and singular their appurtenances in C in
the said County of etc. as also to ask, gather, leavy, recover and receive for
me, To receive rents.
and in my name, and to the use of my said Atturnies of all and singular my
Tenants and other the premises, or of any parcel thereof, all and singular
Rents, Profits and arrerages of rents whatsoever, thereof arising, coming or
growing, and the Tenants and Occupiers of all and singular my said Messuages,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and other the premises with the
appurtenances and every or any of them, To distrain for non-payment of Rents.
for nonpayment of their said Rents, issues and profits, to take and distraine,
and the distresses there so had and taken lawfully to lead, drive, carry away
and impound, and detain, withhold and keep the same, until the said rents,
issues and profits, and arrerages thereof (being behind) be fully satisfied and
paid; and if need be, all and singular the same goods so distrained to sell and
put on sale, and the money thereof coming in the hands of my said Atturnie to
retain, hold and keep, as the Law in that behalf does or shall permit; and
also all and singular the same my Tenants, Farmours, and other Occupiers of the
premises, not well and truly paying their rents at the accustomed days and
Feasts, and not well and truly observing, performing, fulfilling and keeping
all such covenants, grants, customs and charges as they ought to do, observe,
perform and fulfill by virtue of their leases, grants, or upon any other
reasonable cause or causes whatsoever at the discretion of my said Atturnie,
from their Farms and Tenements to expel and amove, and the same premises,
and every or any parcel thereof to other Farmors, Tenants and occupiers in my
name to demise, grant and let to Farm to my most profit and commodity, for the
term of one and twenty years or under, by deed or deeds, or otherwise in my
name, and this as often and when as need shall require, at the discretion of my
said Atturnies; and also for me and in my name to sell and put upon sale all
and singular my Woods, Under-woods, and Trees whatsoever, or any parcel
thereof growing, or being of, in or upon the foresaid messuages, lands,
tenements and hereditaments and other the premises, or any parcel thereof, to
any person or persons, as to my said Attorney shall be thought meet and
requisite; and the money thereof coming and growing for me and in my name to
ask, take and receive to the only use of my said Atturnies; and also all and
every writing and writings in this behalf requisite and necessary, in my name
to make, seal, and deliver, and also to appoint and allow unto the said
Tenants, Lessees, Farmers and occupiers sufficient Timber trees as often as
need shall be, for the necessary reparations of all and singular their several
Farms, houses and tenements: And to ask, gather, levy, recover, receive and
take for me, and in my name, and to the use of my said Atturnie, of all and
singular my Auditors, Bailiffs, Receivers, Farmors, Tenants and other Occupiers
whatsoever of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and other the premises, or
of any parcel thereof, all and singular Farms, Rents, Services, Arrearages,
profits and sums of money whatsoever, which are or shall be to me in any wise
due, or to be due; and account or accounts of them, and of all other my
Officers, Ministers, Servants and other Accomptants whatsoever, or of any of
them to require and take for me and in my name; and allowances for their
accounts to allow or disallow as the cause requires, and as to my said
Atturnies shall be thought meet and convenient: And also the same Auditors,
Bailiffes, Receivers, Officers, Ministers, and Servants whatsoever, or any of
them, upon any reasonable cause or causes, at the discretion of my said
Atturnies to displace and put out of service and office, and to receive and put
other in their, every, or any of their places, or service, office or offices;
and this as often as it shall be thought requisite to my said Atturnies. And
finally, for me and in my name to do, follow, exercise, speed, expedite,
accomplish and finish all and every other thing and things, act and acts
whatsoever touching or concerning the foresaid premises or any parcel thereof
as fully and wholly as I might, should or ought to do, if I were then and
there personally present; holding firm and stable all and every thing and
things whatsoever which my said Atturnies shall do, or procure to be done for
me and in my name, in or about the premises, or any of them. Provided always,
That immediately from and after that my said Atturnies or either of them shall
have had and received by virtue of these presents the sum of eight hundred
pounds of etc. That then and from thenceforth this present Letter of Atturnie,
and all and every power and authority thereby given, shall utterly cease, be
void and of none effect.

In witness etc.
And further, That the said A C. his executors and administrators shall clearly
acquit, discharge, or sufficiently save harmless the said A B. his heirs,
executors, administrators, his and their lands, tenements, goods and chattels,
and every of them, of and from all and all manner of costs and damages, and
other detriments as shall or may chance or grow by reason of any nonsuit or
discontinuance of any process, action or execution to be commenced by virtue
of this authority, by the negligence of the said A C. his executors or
administrators, or any of them, or by the Attorney, Councellor or Solicitor of
any of them.

In witness etc.
The Grant of a Keepership of a Park.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come, A B etc.
sends, greeting. Know ye, Me the said A B. for and in consideration of the
good and faithful service by my servant E R to me heretofore done, and
hereafter to be done: To have given and granted, and by these presents to give
and grant unto the said E R. the Office of Keeper of my Park at Y. called B
Park, in the County of C. and also his habitation and dwelling in the Lodge
belonging to the same Park, with the going and pasturing of one Gelding and six
Kine yearly within the same Park.

And further, know ye, Me the same A B to have given and granted, and by these
presents do give and grant to the said E R. allowance of meat and drink for
himself within my house at Y. aforesaid, daily and yearly, at all times, and
by so long space as any hospitality or household shall be kept there. To have
and to hold, occupy, exercise and enjoy the said Office of Keeper, and other
the premises unto the said E R. for term and during the life natural of the
same E R. Together with all manner of Fees, Rewards, Veiles and Advantages to
the same Office customarily belonging, incident, or appertaining.

And furthermore, know ye, Me the said A B to have given and granted, and by
these presents do give and grant unto the said E R for the exercising of the
said Office of Keeper, so long as he shall truly and faithfully exercise the
same, one annuitie or annual rent of four pound of etc. To have, hold,
perceive and enjoy the said annuitie, or yearly rent to the said E R. and his
assigns, from the etc. during the life natural of the said E R. at two
several terms of the year etc. viz. etc. by even portions yearly, to be paid
by the Receiver of my Rents and Revenues, the Steward of my house, or such
other Officer for the time being, as I shall appoint for the payment of the
rest of my servants their wages yearly etc.

In witness, etc.
A Deputation of a Bailiff or Receiver.
TO all Christian people etc. A B. Bailiffe and Collector of the Rents, Farms
and Revenues of his Majesty's Manors of G and E. and of all and singular lands,
tenements, courts, leets, liberties, fines, issues, amerciaments, reliefs,
heriots, waifs, strayes, and other possessions and hereditaments whatsoever, to
the said Manors belonging, with their members and appurtenances, in the county
of etc. parcel of the lands and possession of W. late M. of Northton, Greeting
etc. Know ye, that I the said A B have constituted, deputed and appointed, and
by these presents do etc. C D of etc. to be my lawful and sufficient deputy
for me and in my behalf, to occupy and exercise the said Office of Bailif, and
Collector, and to exercise, execute, accomplish, receive and do, and to cause
to be exercised, executed, accomplished, received and done, all and every such
act and acts, thing and things, as in, about, touching or concerning the said
office shall be necessary or requisite to be done. To have, hold, exercise and
enjoy the said office unto the said C D, as deputy of me the said A B for and
during the will and pleasure of me the said A B. in as ample manner and wise,
as I the said A B ought, or might exercise, execute, receive, accomplish and do
in the same, if I the said A B were, might or should be present at the
exercising, executing, accomplishing, receiving or doing thereof.

In witness etc.
The grant of a Stewardship, or keeping of Courts.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between A S of S in the County of S Gentleman, of the
one party, and R K of L in the County of B Gentleman of the other party,
Witnesses, that whereas our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty that now
is, by his Highness Letters patents under the Seal of his Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, bearing date at Westminster the eleventh day of October in the 20th
year of his Majesty's Reign, has amongst diverse other things therein
contained, assigned and appointed the said A S to the Office and Offices of
Steward, and keeper of Courts, and Leets of the Manor of L and also of the
Manor of B in the County of S, during his Majesty's pleasure, as by the same
Letters patents amongst diverse other things therein contained, more plainly
appears. Now the said A S for diverse good causes and considerations him in
this behalf especially moving, has made, ordained, constituted and appointed,
and by these presents does make, ordain, constitute and appoint the said R K
to be his deputy, to exercise and execute the said office and offices of
Stewardship, and keeper of Courts, and Leets of the said Manor, and to seize
and take all Heriots, and to take and receive all profits of Courts and Leets
which are or shall grow due within the said Manor or any of them, To have,
enjoy, hold, exercise and occupy the same Office and Offices to the said R K
during the will and pleasure of the said R S. and to perceive, receive and take
the wages, fees, allowances, profits and commodities therefore of right due,
accustomed, belonging and appertaining; and the said R K does covenant, promise
and grant for himself his executors and administratoas by these presents, to
and with the said A S his executors, administrators and assigns and every of
them in manner and form following, viz. that he the said R K his executors or
assigns shall and will from time to time well and truly pay or cause to be
paid unto the said A S his executors or assigns all such wages, fees,
allowances, sum and sums of money, heriots, profits of Courts and Leets, and
other profits and commodities, as for or in respect, or by reason of the said
Office and Offices of Stewardship or keeping of Courts and debts within the
said Manor, and every or any of them, shall grow due or be payable, or as he
the said R K by reason or in respect of the exer^ising or executing thereof,
shall from time to time receive, perceive, take or make. And also that he the
said R K shall not, nor will not at any time or times hereafter, do, commit or
suffer to be done any manner of act or thing whatsoever, which shall or may be
in any wise prejudicial or hurtful to the said Letters patents before
mentioned, or to the said A S his duputie or deputies in exercising or
executing the said patent or any the Office or Offices of Stewardship, or
keeping of Courts or Leets, or any power or Authority thereby given or granted,
or any thing therein contained.

In witness, etc.
The form of an Award yielded up.
TO all Christian people etc. A B and C D of etc. send greeting etc. Whereas
certain suits, controversies and debates have heretofore been had and moved
between E F and G H of etc. for the appeasing of which said suits, strifes and
controversies, the said E F for himself and one I K of etc. for and on the
behalf of G H by their Recognizances bearing date etc. taken and acknowledgled
etc. stand bounden either to the other in the sum of etc. That they the said
E F and G H shall stand to, abide and obey the order, end and award of us the
said A B and C D; so that the same Award were by us the said A B and C D made
within fourteen days then next after, as by the same may appear. Whereupon
know ye, that we the said A B and C D willing to set the said parties at
quietness and amity touching the premises, do make, declare and give up our
Award as follows viz. First we do award, order and determine, That from
henceforth the said parties and each of them shall for his part surcease all
such suits and controversies, moved, or as are now depending between the said
parties, and that etc. And finally we the said Arbitrators do award, order and
determine, that this present writing Indented of award, and all other writings
concerning the same, shall be had, made and written at the only costs and
charges of the said E F.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of License from Creditors, to Debtors.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing of License and safe
conduct shall come. We A B and C B, all Creditors unto E G and I G, Greeting
etc. Whereas the said E G and I G are at this present, truly indebted unto us
their said creditors in diverse several sums of money, which they are not
presently able to pay, nor by any likelihood shall be able in time to come,
without our License and respite of time be to them given in that behalf. Know
ye therefore, that we all and every the said Creditors, have given and granted,
and by these presents every one of us severally, for himself his executors and
administrators gives and grants unto them the said E G and I G, our sure and
safe conduct and special license, that they the said E G and I G their
executors, administrators, servants and assigns, with all their wares, money
and merchandise, at all and every time and times hereafter from the day of the
date hereof, until the full end and Term of three whole years from thence next
ensuing, shall and may safely, quietly and peaceably come and go, repair,
return, sojourn, dwell and abide within, to and from the City of London, and
all and every other place and places in this Realm of England to the intent
they or he may come to talk and confer with us about the satisfaction of our
said debts, in such sort, as upon view of their estates we shall think them
able, without any let, trouble, vexation, arrest, attachment or other
disturbance, wittingly or willingly of or by us or any of us, or by the
executors, administrators or assigns of us, or any of us, or any other for us,
or in our names, or for, or in the name of any of us to be had, made, moved,
stirred or procured against the bodies of the said G E and I G. their
executors, administrators, servants, goods or debts, for, or by reason of any
debt, duty or sums of money now growing due or owing by them, or either of them
to any of us. And we, all and singular the said Creditors for us, and every of
us our executors and administrators do by these presents covenant, promise and
grant to and with the said E G and I G their etc. That if contrary to any part
or clause of the tenor of this our grant and License it at any time shall
happen, the said E G or I G their, or either of their executors,
administrators, servants, goods, chattels or debts at any time or times during
the said Term of three years to be wittingly or willingly let, troubled,
sued, attached or arrested by us or any of us, or by the consent or procurement
of us or any of us, for or concerning the said debt or debts, or any part or
parcel thereof now grown due or owing by them the said E G and I G, or any of
them toward us, or any of us; That then, and at all times after, these
presents shall be unto, and for the said E G and I G their etc. against us and
every of us, our etc. by whom or through whom and whose debt or means it shall
happen the said E G and I G their executors, administrators, servants, goods,
chattels or debts so to be attached, arrested, let or sued by any order of
Law, A clear, sufficient, general and absolute acquittance and release for
ever, of and for all actions, suits, debts and demands, that any such of us by
whom, or by whose debt or means it shall fortune the said E G and I G their
executors, servants, goods, chattels or debts so to be attached, arrested, sued
or troubled as aforesaid, shall or may have, claim, challenge or demand, of or
against them the said E G or I G their etc. or any of them.

In witness, etc.
A License to pass over Sea.
JAMES etc. to all and singular our Justices, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables,
Customers, Controlers, Serchers, and to all and singular other our Officers,
Ministers and Subjects to whom in this case it shall appertain, Greeting. We
let you wit, that we of our grace espicial, for certain considerations us
moving, have Licenced, and by these presents do grant, and give License unto
our trusty and welbeloved Subject T M Esquire, That he the said T with four
Servants and twenty pound in money shall and may pass out of this Realm of
ours, and other dominions, into any foreign Country or nation, being in amity
with us, there to remain so long as he shall think good and expedient, for the
recovery and accomplishment of his health, Wherefore our will and pleasure is,
that according to this our free license, and Letters of pasport, ye, and every
of you, permit and suffer him with all and singular the premises, to pass by
you without any manner of your let, restraint or impeachment: Taking the
transcript hereof for your discharge, and leaving still these our Letters of
pasport in his custody for his discharge hereafter.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster the 20 of October in the
tenth year of our Reign.
A License for a Buck and a Do during the life of the grantee.
We E D etc. for diverse good causes and respects us moving, Have given and
granted, and by these presents for us and our heirs, do give and grant unto
our welbeloved servant C D our Secretary during his life, one Buck in season in
Summer, and one Do in season in Winter, to be had, taken, hunted and killed,
at, or within our Park of B in the County of W either with Dog or Bows, by
the same C D or his assigns, at his or their free liberty, commodity and
pleasure during his said life: wherefore we will and command you, and every of
you our keeper or keepers there, or your deputy or deputies for the time
being, upon the sight hereof or of the true Copy hereof signed by the proper
hand of the said C D, that you and every of you do peaceably and quietly permit
and suffer the same C D and his assigns during his said life yearly from
henceforth to have, kill and take, at or within the said Park the said Buck in
Summer, and the said Do in Winter, according to the tenor of this our gift and
warrant dormant, any restraint or commandment heretofore had, made, or given to
the contrary hereof notwithstanding. And this our warrant signed and Sealed
with our proper hand shall be unto you and every of you, a sufficient warrant
and discharge against us and our heirs at all times in this behalf, given
under our Seal and sign Manuel, etc.

A License to transport Beer.
TO all Majors, Sheriffs, Customers, Controlers, and to all other the Queens
Majesty's Officers, Ministers and Subjects whatsoever, and to all and every of
them. We T Lo. B and Sir I F Knight Chancellor and under Treasurer Greeting.
Know ye, that we by virtue of the Letters patents of our Sovereign Lord the
King, under the great Seal of England, bearing date etc. To us in that behalf
directed, have given license, liberty and authority, and by these presents do
give license, liberty and authority to B C of D to buy, and provide within the
City of L and the Suburbs of the same City, and to transport from the Port of
L out of this Realm of E to Emden in F. and to such towns in the Low-Cuntries
as are in amity with his Majesty, the number of one hundred Tuns of Beer,
paying for the License, Custom and Impost of every tun thereof 20 s. of etc.
to the hands of the Customer, or Collector of the custom, or his deputy of
the port of the said City of London to his Majesty's use, and putting in
sufficient bonds to his Majesty's use in the said office of the Custom House
to transport the said 100 tuns of Beer to Emden, and to such towns in the
Low Countries as are in amity with his Majesty, and not to any the territories
or Countries of the King of Spain or Pope. Provided, that true indorsement be
made upon this our license of every tun of Beer from time to time required to
be passed by the said A B and his Factors, that there pass no more then 100
tuns of Beer, by virtue hereof. And this our license shall be to you, and to
the said A B and his Factors, and to all other to whom it shall or may
appertain a sufficient warrant and discharge, for and concernning the premises.

In witness whereof we have set our hands and Seals to these presents the 2d
of M etc.
A Certificate for payment of the Subsidy.
We whose names are here underwritten, Commissioners of our Sovereign Lord
the Kings Majesty, amongst others within the City of London, for the
taxation, levying, assessing and collection of the first Subsidy, of the three
Subsidies granted to his Majesty in the Parliament holden at Westminster in
the etc. year of his Highness Reign, do certify unto the Right honorable Sir
I F Knight, Chancellor of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, The Lord chief
Baron and other the Barons of the said Court, and to all other his Majesty's
Commissioners and officers to whom it shall appertain, that A B of etc. is
taxed and assessed to pay to our Sovereign Lo. the Kings Majesty for the said
first subsidy, and has paid the sum of 26 s. -8 d. after the rate of ten
pounds in goods, amongst the inhabitants of the Parish of etc. in the ward of
etc. at which place the said A B was resident with his Family at the time of
the taxation of the said subsidy. Given under our hands and Seals etc.

A License to a Butcher to sell Flesh.
FOR as much as it has been always heretofore graciously allowed and
permitted that some honest persons should provide, kill, sell and retail flesh
victual during the Lent season, to any of his Highness Subjects, sick, weak
and impotent persons. These are to will and require you to allow and suffer
this bearer A B of etc. Butcher, by himself or his servant to provide, kill,
sell and retail flesh victual within the Parish and County of etc. by, and
during all the time of Lent now ensuing, without any of your restraints, denial
or disturbance. Whereof fail you not. Dated etc.

Your very loving friend etc.

To all Justices of the peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all
other his Majesty's Officers, Ministers and Subjects to whom it does appertain,
and to every of them.
For an Undersheriff a Condition.
THe condition etc. That whereas our Sovereign Lord etc. the Kings Majesty
that now is, by his Highness Letters patents under his Majesty's great Seal of
England, bearing date the etc. in the fourth year of his Majesty's Reign, did
appoint and make the within named R K high Sheriff of his Highness county of
S. which said R K afterward by his Indenture bearing date etc. in the said 4th
year etc. did ordain, depute, constitute and make the within bounden I H his
deputy and Under-sheriffe of the said County of S. as by the same Indenture
more plainly at large does and may appear; If the said J H. his heirs etc. and
every of them do at all times hereafter, and from time to time for ever clearly
acquit, exonerate and discharge, or otherwise sufficiently save and keep
harmless the said R K his heirs, executors and administrators, and every of
them, and his and their goods, chattels, lands, tenements, possessions and
hereditaments and every of them, of and from all and every the sum and sums of
money wherewith the said R K shall be charged by reason of the said Office of
Sheriffwick, and shall fall out not to be answered upon the accounts; and of
and from all action and actions, plaint or plaints of debt or debts that shall
be commenced against the said R K. his etc. by reason of any escape or escapes
committed of any prisoner or prisoners arrested and not committed to the common
Jail of the said County, or afterward by the act or negligence of the said J.
or any the Bailiff or Bailiffs, or any his servants or deputies; and of and
from all actions, suits, costs, losses, damages, hindrances and demands
whatsoever which shall or may at any time or times hereafter come, grow or be
to or against the said R K. his etc. or his or their goods, chattels, lands,
tenements, possessions and hereditaments, and every or any them, for or by
reason of the premises or any of them, etc.

To surrender lands.
THe Condition of this Obligation etc. That if the above bounden A B. or his
heirs do, or shall within one year next ensuing the date hereof, at the
reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the abovenamed
C D. his heirs or assigns, sufficiently surrender to the use of the said C D.
his heirs and assigns for ever, according to the customs of the Manors of R
and B. in the County of S. all such Copie-hold lands as late were the
Copie-hold inheritance of E C etc. and before that, of J C of etc. and
purchased by the said A B, set, lying and being in A etc. (reciting the
parcels) being parcel of the said Manors of R and B. And also if the said
Copie-hold lands at the time of the making and perfecting of the said surrender
or surrenders, shall be, and so shall continue clearly discharged, or otherwise
sufficiently saved and kept harmless of and from all former charges, estates,
titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, made, committed or done by the
said A B. That then etc.

To cure a Disease, or to repay the money.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the within named A B.
the day of the date within written, has delivered and given the within bounden
C D the sum of eight pound in consideration that the said C D should on this
side, and before the third day of J. next coming after the date within written
cure and make whole the said A B. of the disease or diseases wherewith the said
A B is now grieved: If therefore the said C D do before the said 3d day of J.
next well and sufficiently and safely cure and make whole the said A B of the
said diseases: And also in case the said A. at any time after, and before the
fourth day of M. next following be grieved or vexed with the said diseases or
any part thereof, or that the said disease or any part thereof do before the
fourth day of M. issue or grieve upon any part of the body of the said A B.
Then if the said C D. his executors or assigns within twenty days next after
the said fourth day of M. do well and truly repay or cause to be repaid unto
the said A B. his executors, administrators or assigns the said sum of eight
pound without fraud or covin, This present Obligation to be void etc.

To stand to an Award.
THe Condition of this Obligation etc. That if the within bounden A B. his
heirs, executors and administrators, and every of them do stand to, obey,
observe, perform, fulfill and keep the Award, arbitrament, order, rule and
judgment of E F, Arbitrator indifferently elected, named and chosen, as well on
the part of the said A B, as on the behalf of the within named C D, to
arbitrate, award, ordain, judge and deem, as well for and upon the right,
title, claim, possession and interest of one close containing by estimation
twelve acres of land, be it more or less, with the appurtenances, lying and
being in G in the County of F, as of, for, and upon all and all manner of
actions, suits, quarrels, debts, debates, bargains, contracts, trespasses,
claims, controversies and demands whatsoever they be, had, moved, stirred, or
depending between the said parties at any time before the date hereof: So that
the same arbitrament, ordinance and judgment of the said Arbitrator, of and
upon the premises, be made and yielded up in writing indented under his hand
and seal on this side and before the Feast of N. next coming after the date
within written, That then etc.

So as the Award etc. be given up before the etc. next ensuing (as before:) and
if in case the said Arbitrators cannot nor do not before the said etc. make an
award of and upon the premises in manner and form aforesaid, Umperage after
Award.
Then if the said C D. his heirs, executors etc. and every of them do well and
truly stand to, abide, obey, observe, perform, fulfill and keep the final end,
judgment, umperage and determination of G H Umpire, and indifferently elected
and chosen to end and determine of and upon the premises, That then etc. So
that the same umperage etc. of the said C D be had, made and given up in
writing indented under his hand and seal, and ready to be delivered to the
said parties, of the date hereof has lent, disbursed and delivered or to such
of them as shall require the same before the tenth day of etc. That then etc.

Not to sell Lands had by Marriage.
THe Condition etc. That if neither the within bounden A B his heirs,
executors, administrators nor assigns, nor any of them do at any time nor
times hereafter give, grant, bargain, sell, demise, let, set nor otherwise do
away all or any of the Lands, Tenements, Woods, Under-woods, Possessions or
hereditaments, or any part or parcel thereof which he the said A B now has and
enjoys, or is possessed of at this present day by reason of a marriage late
had and solemnized between him the said A B and J now his wise etc. lying and
being in the Towns, Parishes, Hamlets and fields of S. and H in the county of
C. or else where within the Realm of England, to any manner of person or
persons without the special license, will, consent, and agreement of the
within named C D his executors or assigns first had and obtained in writing
for the same. That then etc.

To assure a sum of money in consideration of a marriage.
THe condition etc. That whereas the within bounden A B intends by Gods grace
shortly to marry and take to his wife one C D sister of the within named E F.
if the said A B do by his last will and Testament, or otherwise without any
fraud or covin (in case the said C D shall after marriage had between them
survive the said A B) lawfully give and assure to the said C D the sum of 500
l. etc. or else goods and chattels to the value or worth of etc. over and
besides such chains, bracelets, jewels and apparel which the said C D shall
fortune to have at the day of the death of the said A B. which said sum of 500
l. or else the said goods and chattels which then shall be worth the said sum
of five hundred pounds, and the said chains, bracelets, jewels and apparels,
the said C D her executours, administrators and assigns shall and may at all
times from the day of the death of the said A B peaceably, quietly and lawfully
have, use, give, set and enjoy at her and their pleasure, without any let or
interruption of the said C B his executors, administrators or assigns, or of
any other person or persons, by his or their means, assent or procurement.
That then, etc.

To repay money had with an Apprentice.
THe Condition etc. That whereas A B daughter of etc. by her Indenture of
apprentiship bearing date with these presents, has put her self Apprentice to
the within bounden C D and E F his wife, and with them to dwell and serve as
their Apprentice, from the feast of etc. unto the end and term of seven years
from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, as by the same
Indenture of apprentiship more at lage appears. And whereas also the within
named G H the day (...) to the said C D the sum of twenty pounds etc. to use
and occupy as a stock, during the said term: If therefore the said C D his
etc. or any of them, do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said A
B her etc. the sum of twenty pounds etc. at the full end of the said term of
seven years, or at the day of the marriage of the said A B, which of them shall
now first and next happen, fall out or be, after the date hereof without fraud
or covin: And in case it fortune the said A B to decease before the end and
expiration of the said term of seven years, Then if the said C D his etc. or
any of them do well and truly repay, or cause to be repaid unto the said G H
his etc. all the said sum of twenty pounds etc. at the full end and
expiration of the said term of seven years, at or within etc. if the same be
then and there lawfully demanded of the said C D his etc. And further, if at
any time hereafter during the said term of seven years it shall appear to the
parents of the same A B or to the Chamberlain of the City of London for the
time being, that the said A B shall not be sufficiently instructed and taught in
the science, trade or art of a etc. which her said Mistress now uses, or that
the said A shall want convenient and sufficient meat, drink, good education,
lodging or apparel, or any of them, or that she the same A shall be by any
means hurt or not well used as an Apprentice ought to be by her said Mistress,
or by any other by her assent, sufferance or procurement, That then etc.

Not to demise lands without license.
THe Condition etc. that if the within bounden A B do not at any time or times
hereafter resign permit, exchange, give, grant, bargain, sell, alien, demise,
set, let, charge, incumber or otherwise do away the rectorie etc. set, lying
and being in etc. or any part or parcel thereof, to any person or persons
without the special license, will, consent, and agreement of the within named C
D and E F or either of them, or the heirs or assigns of the said C D before had
and obtained in writing under their hands and seals for the same. That then etc.

To pay money yearly, during the life of the obligee.
THe Condition etc. That if the within boun- A B and C D or either of them or
the heirs etc. of them, or either of them, do well and truly content and pay,
or cause to be paid unto the within named E F and E his wife, or one of them,
or their assigns yearly every year, during the natural life of the said G the
sum of ten pounds etc. at or within etc. at two terms of the year; that is to
say etc. or within twelve days next after every of the said feasts, by even
portions, without fraud or covin. That then etc.

To assure an estate.
THe condition etc. That if the within bounden A B and C D his wife, and either
of them, and their heirs (at the proper costs and charges in the Law of the
said E F. his heirs and assigns) at all times within the space of two whole
years next ensuing the date hereof, do make, assure and convey, or cause to be
made and conveyed unto the said E F and his heirs, or to such other person or
persons and their heirs, as the said E F and his heirs shall name and
appoint, to his and their proper uses and behoofs, such a good, lawful,
sufficient and perfect estate or estates, assurance or assurances in the law,
of and in all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, with the
appurtenances, both free and copy, which late were G F's deceased, father of
the said E F, set, lying and being in B in the County of C, be it by deed or
deeds enrolled, fine, feoffment, recoverie, surrender or surrenders, release
with warrantie against the said A B and C his wife and either of them and their
heirs as by the learned council of the said E F his heirs or assigns shall be
reasonably advised or devised; the same premises, then to be clearly
discharged of and from all former bargains, sales, gifts, grants and all other
charges, titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever they be, had, made or
done by the said A B and G his wife or either of them in the mean time. That
then etc.

To procure a surety to enter bond by a day.
The condition etc. That if the within bounden A B do on this side, and before
the tenth day of June next etc. cause, procure and get, or cause to be procured
and gotten, one sufficient and able person that shall be liked of, and thought
meet by C D etc. to enter bond, and be bound with the said A B by their
writings obligatorie, sufficient in the law, unto the within named C D in the
sum of an hundred pounds etc. with condition thereupon endorsed for the sure
payment of fifty pounds etc. to be had and made unto the said C D his
executors, administrators or assigns on the etc. at or within etc. That then,
etc.

To pay money upon the obtaining a lease from the Queen.
THe condition etc. That whereas the within named A B has undertaken and
promised to do as much as in him shall lie and be, to obtain and procure at
the Q. Majesty's hands a sufficient demise, lease and grant by Letters patents
under the Seal of her Highness Court of Exchequer, for and in the proper name
of the said C D of and in all that message etc. situate, lying and being in E
in the county of F now or late in the tenure or occupation of E F. or of his
assigns, being of the yearly rent of twenty shillings, and parcel of the
possession of the late dissolved Monastery of G for the term of 20 years: If
therefore the said C D his etc. after the obtaining of the said Lease, and upon
request to him the said C his etc. made by the said A B his etc. do well and
truly pay etc. unto the said A B his etc. the full sum of ten pounds etc.
over and above all other ordinary charges, as shall be paid, laid out and
disbursed in and about the obtaining, procuring and passing of the said Letters
patents, and lease to be procured; so that the same Letters patents be obtained
and passed under seal as aforesaid, before the feast of E next coming after
the date within written. That then etc.

That the lessee shall not carry away any wainscot or windows at the end of
his lease.
THe condition etc. That where the within named A B by his Indenture of lease
bearing date etc. has demised, and to farm letten unto the within bounden C D
all that tenement with the appurtenances etc. now in the occupation of the said
C D for the term of certain years yet enduring, as by the same Indenture more
plainly may appear. If therefore the said C D etc. do not at the end of the
term of years mentioned in the said Indenture of lease before recited, carry
away any of the wainscot, settles and cubards standing and being in the etc. or
the keys and locks being upon the doors and cubbards of wainscot aforesaid, of
and within the said tenement, or yet take away any of the windows now
standing, appending or appertaining to the said tenement, but do permit and
suffer them there to remain at his departure in as good case as now they are,
reasonable wearying only excepted. That then etc.

That the deputy atturny shall pay costs and charges for all actions unlawfully
prosecuted by him in the name of the grantor.
THe condition etc. That whereas the within named A B has deputed and
appointed the within bounden C D his deputy, for the recoverie and receiving
of certain penalties forfeited by reason of certain statutes expressed in his
deputation, granted to the said A B by the Queens Majesty, as by the same
deputation bearing date etc. it does more at large appear: If in case the said
C D his etc. do at any time hereafter sue, procure or cause to be sued, any
person or persons, by virtue of the said deputation, and that without any
lawful cause, whereby any sum or sums of money for costs and charges shall be
awarded to be paid by the said A B to any such person or persons by any the
Judges of the Court where such suit shall be, then if he the said C D his etc.
do pay or cause to be paid all such sum and sums of money as so shall be
assessed or recovered upon or against the said A B his etc. for wrongful
vexation as aforesaid, or else do thereof and of every parcel thereof at all
times, and from time to time sufficiently save and keep harmless the said A B
his etc. and every of them. That then etc.

To procure a lease for years, in consideration of a sum of money.
THe Condition etc. That where the within bounden A B has before the ensealing
and deliverie of these presents received and had of the within named C D the
sum of 100 l. etc. if therefore the said A B etc. in consideration thereof do
before the first day of M next coming, after the date within writtten, procure,
obtain and get of C F etc. in his own name, a good lawful lease and grant in
the law, of and in one Tenement etc. and of all that pasture, lease, interest
and term of years, as the said H B has obtained, or before that time shall
obtain, procure or get of the said C F of and in certain tenements etc. in G
etc. in such manner and form, as by the Council learned in the law of the
said C D. at the costs etc. of the same C D his executors etc. shall be
reasonably advised or devised; and if in case the said tenements and other the
premises so to be conveyed to the said C D his etc. shall at any time after
such conveyance had and made, be evicted or recovered out of, or from the
possession or occupation of the same C D his executors etc. before the end and
expiration of such term of years as shall thereof be granted to the same A B.
or if the said C D his etc. shall not or cannot by force of such lease,
conveyance and assurance as shall thereof be made in manner and form
aforesaid, quietly and peaceably have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said
tenements, according to the tenor of the same conveyance, Then if the said A B
his executors etc. do within ten days next following such eviction, recoverie
or interruption well and truly content and repay, or cause to be repaid unto
the said C D the said sum of 100 l. etc. abating deducting and defaulking out
thereof for every year that the said C D his executors etc. shall have, hold
and occupy the said tenement, and other the premises only six pounds ten
shillings of etc. That then etc.

To save one harmless of a bail in the Kings Bench.
THe condition etc. That if the within bounden A B his etc. do at all times
hereafter, and from time to time clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge or
otherwise sufficiently save and keep harmless the within named C D his heirs,
executours, etc. and all and singular his and their goods, chattels, Lands,
Tenements and hereditaments whatsoever, as well against E F of L etc. his
executours etc. and every of them, of, for and concerning one assumpsit, bail
or recognizance, wherein and whereby the said C D at the special instance and
request, and for the mere and only cause of the said A B is and stands
bound as pledge and surety of and for the said A B in his Majesty's Court etc.
at Westminster, as by the Records thereof, it does and may appear; as also of,
for and from all and all manner of actions, suits, troubles, costs, damages,
judgments, extents, executions and hindrances whatsoever, which shall or may at
any time or times hereafter happen, come, grow or be unto, upon or against the
said C D his heirs, executours etc. goods, chattels, lands, tenements,
possessions or hereditaments of him the said C D for or by reason of the said
assumpsit, bail or suretiship as aforesaid. That then etc.

To acknowledge satisfaction upon a judgment in an information.
THe condition etc. That where an information was exhibited by A B etc. for and
in the name of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty that now is, against C D
of etc. in his Highness Court at Westminster, called etc. for and concerning
the transporting of gold and silver out of this Realm of England, into parts
beyond the seas, contrary to the laws and statutes in that behalf made and
provided, whereupon judgment was given with the Kings Majesty, and the sum of
fifty pounds recovered against the said C D, and thereupon a fieri fac' awarded
and directed to the Sheriff of the said County of S for the leavying of the
said sum of fifty pounds: and where the said C D by the hands of the within
named E F has paid to the within bound A B the sum of forty five pounds in
full satisfaction and payment of the cause aforesaid, and of the sum of
fifty pounds, and of the execution thereupon to be had; If therefore there be
a sufficient and lawful acknowledgment of satisfaction had and made in due
form in the said Courts called etc. of and for the said sum of fifty pounds in
such sort as the said C D and the sureties of the said C D standing bound in
the said Court for and ^^^cerning the same and every of them, and the (...)
etc. of them, and of every of them, and th^^s and every of their goods,
chattels, Lands, Tenements and hereditaments shall be utterly discharged
thereof before the fourth day of M. or of this present term of etc. And in the
mean time, if the said C D and his said sureties, and also the now Sheriff of
the said County of E and his undersheriff and every of them be well and
sufficiently saved and kept harmless, ^s well against our said Sovereign Lord
the Kings Majesty, as against the said A B and all other person and persons,
of, for and concerning the foresaid judgment, execution and sum of fifty
pounds, and of every part and parcel hereof. That then etc.

For delivery of wool.
THe condition etc. That if the within bounden A B his etc. in consideration of
the sum of fifty pounds etc. to him at the ensealing and deliverie of these
presents, by the within named C D well and truly paid, do well and truly
deliver or cause to be delivered unto the within named C D his executours etc.
the number and quantity of fifty todde of Wool good and merchantable,
without any manner ot refuse whatsoever, of the growth of the county of N. of
the like goodness and finenesse as any one man shall have of this years
growth, and grown within five miles of C. at or within the house of etc.
between the 14th day of A and the fourteenth day of I. next ensuing, frank and
free without any thing thereof to be given or paid by the said C D his
executors, administrators or assigns, Tha^ ^^e^ etc.

That the Lessee shall pay the rent reserved by his Lease.
THe Condition etc. (reciting the demise of the Lease and the Reservation of
the Rent of etc.) as by the same Indenture of Lease, more plainly at large it
does and may appear. If therefore the said C D his executors etc. or any of
them do at all times hereafter, for, and during so long time of the said term
of 20 years before mentioned, as he the said C D his executors etc. or any of
them, shall or may lawfully and peaceably have, hold, occupy, possess and
enjoy the said premises, and every part thereof, so mentioned to be demised by
the said Indenture of Lease as aforesaid, well and truly pay or cause to be
paid to the said A B his etc. or any of them, the said rent of etc. reserved to
be paid by the said Indenture of Lease as aforesaid, according to the purport,
tenor and true meaning of the said Indenture of Lease. That then etc.

To make and deliver a release, by a day at a certain place.
THe condition etc. That if the within bounden A B do on this side, and before
the tenth day of F next coming after the date within written, by his Deed or
Deeds in writing, remise, release and quit claim unto the within named C D and
E F of etc. and to either of them, and to the executors and administrators of
them, and of either of them, all and all manner of actions, suits, quarrels,
debts, debates, reckonings, sum and sums of money, promises, condemnations,
judgments, executions, trespasses and demands whatsoever, which at any time
before the date, within written, the said A B has, or had, or might, should or
ought to have or claim against the said C D and E F or either of them, or the
executors etc. of them or of either of them, for or by reason of any matter,
cause or thing whatsoever, from the beginning of the World until the day of the
date within written, and the said Deed, or Deeds do on the 10th day of F next
etc. deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said C D his executors etc. at
or within etc. That then etc.

The obligor to pay money for wares delivered in trust, to another that shall
make default of payment.
THe Condition etc. that whereas the within named A B has delivered upon trust
unto one C D certain Wines amounting to the sum of 100 li. until the Feast of
etc. if in case the said C D his etc. do not before, or at the said Feast of
etc. pay or cause to be paid unto the said A B his executors etc. the said sum
of 100 li. but shall make default of payment thereof, or of any part thereof;
then if the within bounden E F and G H or either of them or the etc. of them,
or either of them, do well and truly content and pay, or cause to be paid unto
the said A B his executors etc. the said sum of 100 li. or so much thereof as
at the said Feast of etc. shall happen to be behind unpaid. That then etc.

To assure lands after recovery had by the means of C D.
THe condition etc. That whereas the within bounden A B pretends title to
certain lands, tenements and hereditaments situate lying and being in H S and M
or in any of them in the County of G, which late were of the Inheritance of E B
deceased, and from him the said A B by E F and others unjustly withholden; for
the recovery whereof, the within named C D has promised to do as much as in
him shall lawfully lie and be, to be a means for and on the behalf of the said
A B. If therefore the said A B and his heirs do within 4 months next after
the obteining and recoverie of the said lands, tenements and hereditaments, or
any parcel thereof, and that he the said A or his heirs shall or may be in the
quiet possession thereof, or of any parcel thereof, and upon the request, and
at the costs and charges in the law of the said C D his heirs and assigns
make or cause to be made to the same C D his heirs and assigns to the only
use and behoof of the same C D his heirs and assigns, a good, lawful and
sufficient conveyance and assurance in the law, in fee simple, of and in the
moiety and one half of the said lands, tenements and hereditaments, or of, and
in the moiety or one half of so much thereof as from time to time so shall
happen to be obtained and recovered, of and in the Arreareages of the same
moiety and one half of the premises, in such manner and form as by the Council
learned in the law of the said C D his heirs or assigns shall be reasonably
advised or devised, clearly discharged of all and all manner of bargains,
sales, charges and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed or done, or to
be had, committed or done by the said A or by any by his assent, means,
interest, title or procurement. That then etc.

To deliver writings to be cancelled at a day certain, and place.
THe Condition of this etc. That if the within bounden AB his etc. do before
the second day of S next coming after the date within written, deliver or cause
to be delivered to the within named CD his etc. at or within etc. All such
Indenture, leases, counterparts of Indentures and writings, as he the said A B
or any other by his delivery, has, or have touching the Manors of S etc. which
were made and written before the 11th day of S last past, without fraud or
Collusion, That then etc.

To repay money upon misliking of a bargain in Communication.
THe Condition of this present obligation is such etc. That where there has
been Communication between the within bounden A B and the within named C D for
and concerning a Farm called S in the County etc. now in the occupation of the
said A B to be granted by the said A to the said C D for the term of 40 years,
if in case the said C D shall mislike to proceed in the same, and of such
mislikeing do give notice to the said A before the foruteenth day of S at the
message of the said Farm. Then if the said A B his etc. do within 20 days
next after such notice of misliking given, well and truly pay or cause to be
paid to the said C B etc. not only the sum of 6 li. of lawful money of
England, to him the said A B delivered at the ensealing hereof, but also to pay
and satisfy etc. unto the said C D all such sums of money and other charges as
the said C D etc. has, or before that time shall have paid or be at, for the
sowing or manuring of the said Farm, or any part thereof. That then etc.

To save one harmless for delivery of an Indenture.
THe Condition etc. That where the within named A B has the day of the date
within written delivered unto the within bound C D one deed Indented bearing
date etc. made from E F to G H of etc. of certain Lands in I. If therefore the
said C D, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns do at all times
hereafter, and from time to time discharge, save and keep harmless the said A
B, his heirs etc. against G H of etc. and all and every other person and
persons whatsoever, of, for or concerning the deliverie of the said Deed, and
of, for and concerning all manner of matters and indempnities which may by any
means accrue or be unto or against the said A B etc. for or by reason of the
same. That then etc.

For a Purveyor of wheat for his Majesty.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden A B. purveyor of Wheat, or his
Deputy, at all times hereafter do take and receive to his Majesty's use and
behoof all such Wheat as by his place of purveyorship from time to time he
shall be appointed, or thought convenient to receive out of diverse Shires
within his charge, and for the same do make due and ready payment, according
to the usual prices of the same, unto all and every his Majesty's subjects of
whom the said Wheat shall be received, or to the High Constables or petie
Constables in his said charge, to pay the said several prizes; and that he do
his and their endeavor to deliver, or cause to be delivered unto his Majesty's
Garners the self same Wheat which he or his Deputies shall receive, both sweet
and good, meet for the expenses of his Majesty's house; and that he deliver the
self same Wheat which he or his Deputies shall so receive, without either
changing or mingling the same or any part thereof; making withal a true and
just account of all such sum or sums of money as he or his Deputies shall
at any time receive, or the within named C D or his Deputies: And that he do
discharge and save harmless as well the Kings Majesty, his heirs and
successors, as the said C D his heirs, executors etc. against all manner of
persons and causes whatsoever, touching his said room or place of Purveyorship
of Wheat etc. That then this etc.

To seal a lease by a day, according to a draught thereof already made.
THe Condition of etc. That if the within bounden A B, his heirs etc. or some
of them, do on or before the fourteenth day of M. next ensuing the date hereof,
at or within the now etc. make, seal and deliver as his or their Deed before
sufficient witness, unto the within named C D, his executors etc. at his and
their own proper costs and charges, One good, sure, sufficient and lawful
Lease, Demise and Grant to be made and engrossed in parchment, and that in and
by all things, according to the form, effect and true meaning of a certain
paper book already thereof made and drawn, and remaining in the custody of the
said C D. whereunto the said A B has subscribed his name. That then etc.

To procure lands to be passed in Fee-simple from his Majesty and the
Patentee, to convey it to the Obliligee by a day, he then paying the Patentee
a sum of money.
THe Condition etc. is such, That where the within named S W. the day of the
date within written, has delivered to the within bounden A B. one particular
of certain Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, situate, lying and being in C.
parcel of the Manor of W. in the County of O. and in the Borough and Parish
of L, in the said County of O, of the yearly rent of etc. under the hands of I
T and I S, Auditors and Surveyors of the same County, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, to the intent the same may be granted and passed amongst some
other things, from the Queens Majesty, her Heirs or Successors, by her or
their Letters patents under the Great Seal of England, unto the right
Honorable Robert Earl of Leicester, his heirs and assigns in Fee-simple for
ever. If therefore the said Earl of Leicester, or his heirs, within one month
next after the date of the said Letters Patents, by which the premises shall be
granted unto him the said Earl, his heirs and assigns, sufficiently grant,
convey and assure unto the said I, his heirs and assigns, or to such other
person or persons, and their heirs or assigns, as the said S. shall name and
appoint, to the only use and behoof of the said S. his heirs and assigns
for ever; All and singular the said lands, tenements and hereditaments, and the
woods, under-woods and trees standing, growing and being in and upon the same
premises; In as large and ample manner and form as the same shall be granted
in and by the Letters Patents aforesaid, and in such manner and form, and by
such conveyance assurance in the Law, as by the said S. his heirs and
assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the Law, and at the costs and
charges in the Law of the said S, his heirs or assigns shall be reasonably
advised or devised, and the said S etc. within the time aforesaid required: So
that the said Earl or his heirs be not required to travel to any place
distant above two miles from the place wherein he shall be at the time of such
request to be made for the making of such assurance, and that there be not any
other or further warrantie therein contained, then only against the said Earl
and his heirs, and all person and persons claiming from, by, or under the
interest, means or title of the said Earl, or his heirs. The said S his etc.
well and truly paying unto the said Earl, or his heirs or assigns, at and
upon the making of such assurance, the sum of six hundred pounds of lawful
money etc. for the full and clear purchase of the premises. That then etc.

To pay a sum of money upon the passing of lands from his Majesty in Fee: and
to procure a survey of the woods, and to pay for them.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That where T L Esquire, is minded to
do as much as in him is, to obtain, procure and get of our Sovereign Lord the
Kings Majesty a grant in Fee farm, to him, his heirs and assigns, or to such
other person or persons and their heirs as he shall nominate and appoint, the
Manor of R. with the appurtenances in the County of L, the same to pass under
the Great Seal of England, in due form, according to a particular thereof made
by the Auditor of the same county, if in case the said T R or such as he shall
appoint, shall procure the said Manor with the appurtenances to pass from his
Majesty by Letters patents according to the said Particular: If then the
within bounden etc. shall well and truly content and pay, or cause to be
contented and paid unto the said etc. the sum of etc. in manner and form
following, viz. At or within etc. within one month next after the same Letters
patents shall pass under the Great Seal of England the sum of etc. and within
two months then next ensuing the sum of etc. in full satisfaction and payment
for the said purchase of the said Manor. And also do within three months next
after the date of the said Letters patents procure a perfect survey of all the
woods and under-woods growing in and upon the said Manor: and also do pay or
cause to be paid to our said Sovereign Lord the King, his heirs and successors,
all such sums of money as the same woods and the soil thereof shall be
surveyed unto, and certificate by the surveyor of the woods. That then etc.

To make an assurance of land.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the above bounden R L his
executors etc. do or shall on or before the second day of F. now next ensuing
the date hereof, at his or their own proper costs and charges make, seal and
deliver, or cause to be made, sealed and delivered unto the above named W G.
his executors or assigns such a good, lawful and sufficient grant, bargain,
sale and assignment of all such estate, right, title, interest, term of years,
possession, reversion, claim and demand whatsoever which the said R now has,
or may, might, should or ought to have, or can or may claim of, in and to all
that Farm etc. with the appurtenances whatsoever, called or known by the name
of Wragby, or by any other name or names whatsoever, situate, lying and being
in W. in the county of Y. and of and in every part and parcel thereof, by
force and virtue of the last Will and Testament of J L Gent. deceased, father
of the said K, or by any other way, means, conveyance or assurance whatsoever
or howsoever, in such sort, manner and form, and with and under such covenants,
clauses, warranties and agreements as by the said W G. his executors or
assigns, or his or their learned Council in the Law shall be reasonably
devised and advised or required, That then etc.

A bond for non-residency.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas A B etc. of etc. in the
county of etc. at the request of the within named C D. has lately presented
the within bounden E F to the Vicarage of etc. If therefore the said E F do
and shall at all times hereafter be Resident in and upon the said Vicarage of
etc. and there personally read Divine service, and diligently preach and
administer the sacraments in decent and orderly manner, according to the Laws
of this Realm, for and during all such time as he the said E F or his
assigns shall enjoy the said Vicarage, or receive the profits thereof: And
also, if he the said E F during such time as he shall enjoy the said
Vicarage, do, and shall diligently teach and instruct within the Town of etc.
in the said county of etc. ^00. Scholars of the nomination of the said C D. and
his heirs, in all such manner of Grammar learning, and other good Learning and
Education as he the said E F can or may to his uttermost endeavor do and
perform, and thereunto faithfully and diligently apply himself, he the said C
D his heirs or assigns paying him the said E F for teaching the same 00.
Scholars in manner as aforesaid, the sum of etc. yearly, That then etc.

An Indenture of Annuitie.
THis Indenture made the one and twentieth day of etc. in the etc. Between I S
of Skipton, in the county of York Esquire, of the one party; and Charles P.
of London Esquire, on the other party, Witnesses, That the said I S, for and
in consideration of the sum of etc. to him before the ensealing and delivery
of these presents well and truly contented and paid, whereof and wherewith he
the said I S does acknowledge and confess himself to be fully satified; and
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof does clearly acquit and
discharge the said C P. his heirs etc. and every of them for ever by these
presents: Has given, granted and confirmed, and by these presents does give,
grant and confirm, Grant.
for him and his heirs, unto the said C P. his executors and assigns, one
Annuitie or yearly Rent charge of 200 pounds of lawful money of England, to be
issuing and gowing out of all those the Manors and Lordships of Staunton, etc.
with all and singular their rights, members and appurtenan es in the said
County of York; and out of all and singular messuages, cottages, houses,
edifices, buildings, barns, stables, orchards, gardens, lands, tenements,
meadows, feedings, pastures, commons, moors, marshes, rents, reversions,
services, profits, commodities, emoluments and hereditaments whatsoever, with
the appurtenances to the said several Manors or any of them belonging, or in
any wise appertaining, or as part, parcel or member of the said Manors or any
of them, had, used, reputed, occupied or enjoyed: And also out of all other the
lands, tenements and hereditaments whatsoever of the said I S. within the said
County of York. To have and to hold, perceive, receive and take the said
Annuitie or yearly Rentcharge of etc. unto the said C P. his executors and
assigns, from the day of the date of these presents, for and during the full
term and time of forty years now next ensuing, and fully to be complete and
ended, if the said C P, and R P Esquire, Nephew to the said C P, or either of
them shall so long live: To be paid at four most usual Feasts or terms in the
year; That is to say, At the Feast of etc. by even and equal portions, at or
in the Church porch of the Parish Church of etc. The first payment thereof to
begin on etc.

And the said J S. for himself, his heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns, A Covenant to pay forty shillings for every day after default of
payment of the rent, and to reenter.
and for every of them does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said C
P his etc. that if it shall happen the said yearly rent of etc. to be behind,
and unpaid in part or in all, over or after any of the said Feast days in
which the same ought to be paid, being lawfully demanded by the true intent and
meaning of these presents, That then he the said J S. his heirs and assigns
shall and will not only forfeit and lose unto the said C P. his executors or
assigns, for and in the name of a pain or penalty, the sum of forty
shillings of lawful money of England, for every day that the same yearly rent
shall happen to be behind, and unpaid in part or in all, over or after any of
the said Feast days wherein the same ought to be paid as is before mentioned;
But also that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said C P his
executours and assigns. And to and for every of them, from time to time, from
and after every of the said feast days, wherein the said yearly rent or any
part thereof should or ought to be paid as before is mentioned, into all and
singular the said Manors, and into every of them, and into all other the lands,
tenements and hereditaments to the said Manors or any of them belonging, and
into all other the premises, with all and singular their appurtenances, and
into every or any part or parcel thereof, at his or their, or any of their
free wills and pleasures, to enter and distrain, as well for the said yearly
rents, as for the said sum or sums of money which shall or may happen to
become, forfeited or lost for or in the name of a pain as is aforesaid; and
for the arrerages of them, and either of them, if any shall happen, and the
distress and distresses so there had and taken, to lead, drive, bear and
carry away. And the same with him, them, or any of them to keep, impound and
detain, until the said yearly rent and penalty, and the arrerages of them,
and either of them (if any shall happen to be) shall be unto the said C P his
executors or assigns fully satisfied, contended and paid. And the said I S for
himself, A covenant that be is seized in the fee and has power to charge the
premises with the annulty.
his executours etc. That he the said I S at the time of the ensealing and
deliverie of this present indenture, now is solely, rightfully and absolutely
seized in his demeasne as of fee-simple to his own proper use and behoof,
without any manner of condition, or limitation of any use or uses, to alter,
change and determine the same, of and in the said Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other the premises above named with their
appurtenances, and of every part and parcel thereof. And that he now has
full power and lawful authority to charge all and singular the same premises
with the appurtenances, and every part thereof to and with the said annuity or
yearly rent of etc. in manner and form above declared; and also, that the
same Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and all other the premises, now are,
and so from time to time and at all times for and during the said term of
forty years, (if the said R and C or either of them shall so long live) shall
and may remain and continue liable, sufficient and overt to and for the
distress and distresses of the said A and of his executours and assigns, as
the cause in that behalf shall require, for and concerning the said yearly
rent, and other the premises, and every parcel thereof. And the said I S for
himself etc. That he the said I S his executours and assigns, For further
assurance.
shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, for and during
the space of five years next ensuing the date hereof, at the reasonable
request of the said C P his executours and assigns, or any of them, at his or
their, or any of their proper costs and charges in the law, do make,
knowledge, suffer, cause and procure to be done, made, knowledged and
suffered, all and every such further lawful and reasonable act and acts,
thing and things, devise and devises in the law whatsoever, for the further,
more perfect and better assurance, surety and sure making of the said annuity
or yearly rentcharge of etc. to the said C P, his executours or assigns for
and during the said term of forty years, if the said C and R or either of
them do so long live, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, as by the said C P his executours, administratours or assigns, or by
any of them, or by any of their council learned in the Law, shall be
reasonably devised, advised or required. In witness whereof, the parties
aforesaid to these present Indentures, have not only interchangably set their
etc. But also the said I S has given and delivered unto the said C P ten
shillings current English money in the name of seizen of the aforesaid annuity
or yearly rentcharge etc. before mentioned, dated the day and year first
above written.

An Indenture of Bargain and Sale of a Manor, with necessary Covenants.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. between I W of etc. of the one part, and R D of
etc. and B his wife of the other part, Witnesses etc. Has granted, aliened,
bargained and sold, and does by these presents fully, clearly and absolutely
grant, alien, bargain and self unto the said R D and B his wife, their heirs
and assigns, all that the Manor of Herberge with his appurtenances in the
County of Essex, and all Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments with the
appurtenances whatsoever, by what name or names soever the same or any of them
be known or called, now in the tenure or occupation of W E or his assigns,
together with all and singular his Lands, Tenements, Profits, Commodities and
Hereditaments to the said Manor of H belonging, or in any wise appertaining,
or with the same at any time heretofore demised, used or occupied; or reputed,
taken, accepted or known as any part, parcel or member thereof; and all other
his Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, lying and being
in the parishes of etc. or in any of them in the said County of Essex, and all
and singular the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders of them and
every of them, and all rents reserved upon any demise or lease of them, or any
part of them. And also all the estate, right, title or interest, inheritance,
use, possession claim and demand whatsoever, which he the said I W now has,
may, might, should or in any wise ought to have of, in and to all and singular
the bargained premises or any part thereof, together with all and singular
evidences, deeds, escripts, charters, writings, court rolls, terrors, books of
survey and muniments whatsoever, as be now in the hands, custody and
possession of the said I W. or in the hands, custody or possession of any other
person or persons whatsoever, to his use, by his delivery, or which he may
lawfully get and come by without suit in law. The said I W does covenant,
promise and grant for himself, his heirs, executors and administrators, and for
every of them, to and with the said R D and B his wife, their heirs and
assigns, upon reasonable request to deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the
said R D and B or either of them, their or either of their heirs or assigns
at or before the feast day of St. Michael the Archangel, next ensuing the date
of these presents, and true copies of such evidences and writings as concern
the said Lands, to be written at the costs and charges of the said R and B or
either of them their heirs and assigns: To have and to hold all and singular
the said Manors of H. Lands, Habendum.
Tenements, and all other the aforesaid premises, with all and singular their
appurtenances in and by these presents bargained and sold, and every part and
parcel thereof unto the said R D and B his wife, their heirs and assigns for
ever, to the only proper use and behoof of the said R D and B his wife, their
heirs and assigns for ever. And the said I W for himself, his heirs,
executors and administrators does covenant and grant to and with the said R D
and B his wife, their heirs and assigns, by these presents, in manner and
form following, That is to say, That he the said I W at the time of the
ensealing and deliverie of these presents, is, That he is seized in fee, and
has power to grant.
and stands lawfully and sufficiently seized of such a good, perfect, lawful
and indefeizible estate of inheritance, in fee-simple, or fee-taile, and no
reversion or remainder thereof in the Kings Majesty, and to his and their own
use and uses, without any manner of condition or limitation of any other use or
uses, to alter, change or determine the same estate of and in the said Manors,
Lands, Tenements and hereditaments, and all other the aforesaid premises,
before, in and by these presents mentioned or intended to be granted, aliened,
bargained and sold, as he the said I W can and may lawfully and sufficiently
grant, convey and assure all and singular the said Manors of H. Lands,
Tenements and hereditaments, and all other the aforesaid premises, with all
and singular their appurtenances unto the said R D his heirs and assigns for
ever, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents. That the
premises are discharged of encumbrances.
And also the said I W for himself etc. does covenant promise and grant to and
with the said R D and B his wife, and either of them, their and either of their
heirs and assigns by these presents, That all and singular the said Manor of
H, Lands, Tenements, and all other the aforesaid premises with their
appurtenances before, in and by these presents granted, aliened, bargained and
sold, and every part and parcel thereof, at the time of the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, are and be, and at all times hereafter shall be,
remain and continue clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged or otherwise
upon request sufficiently saved and keep harmless of and from all and all
manner of former bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, rents and charges, and
arrerages of rents, titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made,
committed, suffered or done, or to be had made, committed, suffered or done by
the said I W his heirs or assigns or by any other person or persons
whatsoever, by his or their means, acts, titles, consents and procurements,
except one lease etc. And also, that they the said R D and B his wife, and
either of them their heirs and assigns, and every of them shall and may at
all times hereafter, and from time to time for ever according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents, peaceably, lawfully and quietly have,
hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy, all and singular the said Manor of H.
Lands, Tenements and all other the before bargained premises, with all and
singular their appurtenances, before, in, and by these presents mentioned to be
granted, aliened, bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof without
any manner of lawful let, suit, eviction or disturbance of the said IW or his
assigns, or of any person or persons whatsoever, claiming or lawfully having,
or which shall hereafter have or claim any manner of estate, right, title,
charge or interest of, in or to the said Manor, and all other the premises, or
of, in or to any part or parcel thereof, by, from or under the said I W his
heirs or assigns; (All such persons as do claim by force of the Leases before
excepted, only excepted.)

And furthermore that the said Manor of H and all other the foresaid premises,
That the premises are not holden in capite.
nor any part or parcel thereof are not holden of his Majesty in capite,
whereby any license of alienation shall be needful to be had, or sued forth,
for the bargain, sale, conveying and assigning of the said Manor, and other
the premises to the said RD and B their etc. Nor that the said R D his etc.
shall at any time or times hereafter, be ward or wards unto our said Sovereign
Lord the Kings Majesty his heirs or successors, for, or in respect of the
said Manor of etc. and all other the premises or any part or parcel thereof.
And also the said I W for himself, his etc. does covenant etc. That he the said
I W and M now his Wife, and the etc. of the said I, and all and every other
person and persons whatsoenow having or lawfully claiming, or which shall
hereafter rightfully claim any manner of right, title or interest, of, in or to
the said Manor, and of all other the aforesaid premises, or any part or parcel
thereof, by, from or under the said I W his heirs or assigns (except such
persons as shall claim by force of the Lease before excepted) shall and will at
all times hereafter, for and during the Term of three years next ensuing the
day of the date of these presents, do, make, knowledge, execute and suffer, or
cause to be made, done, knowledged, executed and suffered all and every such
lawful act and acts, thing and things, device and devices, conveyances and
assurances in the Law whatsoever, with warranty against him the said I W and
his heirs, for the further, and more assurance and sure making of the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements and of all and singular other the premises with the
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, to be had and made sure unto
the said R D and B their heirs and assigns for ever, absolutely, without any
manner of condition, or other limitation, be it by fine or fines, with
Proclamation, with warranty against him the said I W his heirs and assigns.
Recovery, with double or single Voucher or Vouchers, Deed or Deeds enroled, the
enrolement of this present Feoffement with warrantie against him the said I W
his heirs and assigns, release with confirmation, with the like warrantie, or
without warrantie, or by any, or as many of the devcies, ways and means
aforesaid, as by the said R D and B or either of them, their heirs etc. as by
their or any of their Council learned in the law shall be reasonably devised,
or advised and required, at the only costs and charges of the said R D and B
their heirs and assigns, so that the said I nor M his Wife be not compelled
to travel out of the C and City of M about the same assurance. If he be
lawfully evicted within 12 years the bargainor to pay 5 li an Acre.
And moreover the said I W. for himself his heirs, executors, and
administrators does covenant promise and grant to and with the said R D and B
and either of them, and to and with the heirs and assigns of either and every
of them by these presents, in manner and form following. (That is to say,) that
if it shall fortune at any time within twelve years next after the date
hereof, the said R D and B and either of them, their or either of their heirs
or assigns to be lawfully evicted of, or from the said Manor or any of the
lands, tenements or other the aforesaid premises, without any fraud or covin of
the said R D and B or either of them, their heirs or assigns, by reason of
any right, title, estate or interest to be had or made by R VV the Grandfather,
or I VV the Father of the said I, or the said I, or by any other person or
persons claiming in, by or under their or any of their estates, titles or
interests, That then he the said I his heirs, executors or administrators, or
some of them shall and will within six months next after such eviction so to
be had of the same Manor, or of any other the premises, or any part or parcel
thereof upon reasonable request to be made at or in etc. well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the said R D and B their heirs and assigns for every
Acre five pound, and so after that, rate and rate like; And that without fraud,
covin or further delay.

In witness whereof the parties abovenamed, etc.
An Indenture to lead the use of a Fine.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between F B of etc. on the one party, and R W of etc.
on the other party, Witnesses, That whereas it is condescended and agreed
between etc. That the said F B and his heirs shall from time to time during 2
years next ensuing these Indentures, do, cause, suffer and make such assurance
of his Manor of M and S in the County of D, and of the advowsons of the Church
of A. and of all his lands, renements, rents, reversions, services and
hereditaments whatsoever in M and S in the County of D in such manner and form
as by the said R W his heirs and assigns, or his, or their Council learned in
the Law shall be devised, at the costs and charges in the law of the said R VV.
Now the said R VV has devised that the said F B at the Utas of S Hilary next
ensuing the date above written, shall levy and acknowledge a fine of the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Advowsons and all o^^er the premises to the said R W
and his heirs after the due form of Law: which Fine so to be had, levied and
executed touching and concerning the said Manor of etc. and all the lands,
tenements, meadows, leasowes, pastures and hereditaments with the
appurtenances to the Manor of M belonging. The said F B for him and his heirs
does covenant and grant to and with the said R VV by these presents, to stand
and be to the use of the said F B during his life, without impeachment of
wastes, and after his decease then to the use of R W and N his Wife, and of the
heirs of the said R, and of the bodies of the said R and N lawfully begotten;
and for default of such issue to the right heirs of the said R W for ever; and
which fine so to be levied and executed, touching and concerning all the
residue of the premises, The said F B for him and his heirs does covenant and
grant to and with the said R W by these presents, that the said fine shall
stand and be to the use of the said F B and I now his Wife, and of the heirs
of the said F upon the body of the said I begotten; and for default of such
issue then to the use of the said R W and N. of the bodies of the said R and N
between them lawfully begotten; and for dafault of such issue, then to the
right heirs of the said R W for ever.

In witness whereof etc.
A Patent made to be Keeper of a Park with a grant of an Annuity.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, H N Knight
Lord A. sends Greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know ye that I the said H
N for and in consideration of the good and faithful service done to me by my
servant R M. and for diverse and sundry good causes and considerations me
hereunto especially moving, have given and granted, and by these presents do
give and grant unto the said R M the Office of Keeper and Rangership, with the
appurtenances, of all my Park or walk commonly called or known by the name of
B. walk, within my walk or forest commonly called W. within the County of
South-Hampton. And him the said R M does by these presents Constitute, Ordain
and make keeper of the said walk, to have and to hold, use, exercise and enjoy
the Office of Keeper to him the said R M for the term of his natural life. And
further for the considerations aforesaid, and for the better exercising of the
said Office, I have by these presents given and demised unto the said R M one
house called a lodge there standing and being. And also running, pasturing and
feeding yearly of twenty Bullocks, and two Geldings within the walk; And also
sufficient fire-boot to be spent yearly upon the premises: To have and to hold
the said Lordship, Pasture and premises, with the appurtenances unto the said R
M and his assigns, for the term of his life. And finally I the said Lord A for
the considerations before rehearsed, have given and granted, and by these
presents, for me, my heirs and assigns, do give and grant unto the said R M
and his assigns, one annuity, or yearly rent, of four pounds by the year,
issuing and going out of all my Manors, Lands and Tenements in the said County
of South-Hampton, To have, perceive, receive and take the said annuity or
yearly rent charge of etc. by and during the term of the natural life of the
said R M, payable yearly at two Feasts or Terms in the year most usual, (that
is to say) at the Feasts of etc. next ensuing the date of these presents etc.
and if it shall happen the said annuity or yearly rent of 4 pounds to be
behind and unpaid, in part, or in all, by the space of ten days next over or
after any of the said Feast days, or days of payment aforesaid, on which the
same ought to be paid, being lawfully demanded, That then, and from thenceforth
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R M and his assigns into all
and singular my Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, in the
County of S aforesaid to enter and distrain, And the distress or distresses,
then and thereof so found, lawfully, peaceably and quietly to lead, drive,
bear, take and carry away, and the same with him and them to detain, and keep
until the said annuity or yearly rent of etc. with the arrearages thereof, if
any such shall happen to be; shall be unto the said R M or his assigns fully
satisfied, contented and paid.

In witness whereof etc.
An Indenture of Division between two Joint Purchasors, with a Rehearsal of
their Grant.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between A B of etc. on the one party, and C D of the
other party, Witnesses, That whereas by Indenture bearing date the etc. made
between the Right Honorable I. Lord M and K his Wife on the other party, and
the said A B and C D on the other party. The said Lord M and Lady K for and in
consideration of the sum of etc. well and truly contented and paid unto the
said Lord M and the said Lady K his Wife, by the said A and C did bargain,
sell, give and grant unto the said A and C, all those twenty six messuages or
tenements adjoining near together wherein I L. S W. L T. P O etc. now or
lately, severally dwell, or inhabit, situate and being in M in the County of
G, and all those messuages or tenements, cal^ed or known by the name of P. And
all and all manner of Gardens or Garden-places to the said Messuages or
Tenements near adjoining, and now belonging or appertaining, Together with all
and singular Deeds, Charters, Escripts and Muniments concerning only the said
premises, or any part or parcel thereof, To have, hold and enjoy all and
singular the said Messuages or Tenements, and all other the premises, with all
and singular the said appurtenances unto the said A B and C D their heirs and
assigns for ever. As by the said Indenture more fully and at large it does and
may appear. For as much therefore as the said sum of etc. was paid unto the
said Lord M and Lady K his Wife by the said A B and C D at their equal charges
and expenses, And for that the said A B and C D do, and have always purposed
and intended, that both of them and their several heirs and assigns should
have and take like profit, benefit and commodity of all and singular the
premises, And that the right Survivor should not take course and place between
the said A B and C D. It is now, to the end an equal and indifferent partition
and division should be had, and made between them of all and singular the
premises above mentioned, covenanted, granted, concluded, condescended and
agreed by these presents between the said A B and C D in manner and form
following. (that is to say) First, the said A B for him, his heirs, executors
and administrators, covenanteth, grants and agrees to and with the said C D
his executors, administrators and assigns, and to and with every of them by
these presents, That he the said C D shall have, Habend. of C D his portion.
hold and enjoy to him, his heirs and assigns in severalty to the only proper
use and behoof of the said C D his heirs and assigns for ever, One Message
or Tenement, with the appurtenances, and one Garden or Garden-place to the same
adjoining, wherein one I P now dwells, And one other message or tenement,
with the appurtenances, and one Garden or Garden-plot to the same adjoining,
wherein etc. ( And so name all the parcels belonging to the said C D) All which
premises before limited unto the said C D his heirs and assigns, are parcel of
the premises bargained and sold by the said L M and Lady K to the said A B and
C D as is before recited. And further, the said C D for him, his heirs,
executors and administrators, covenanteth and grants with the said A B his
heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, and to and with every of them
by these presents, That he the said A B shall have, hold and enjoy to him, his
heirs and assigns, in severalty, to the only proper use and behoof of the
said A B his heirs and assigns for ever, One message or tenement with the
appurtenances, and one Garden or Garden-place to the same adjoining, and now in
the tenure or occupation of I K, and one other message or tenement, with the
appurtenances, and a Garden etc. ( And so name all the parcels belonging to the
said A B) all which premises last before mentioned unto the said A B, are
parcel of the premises bargained and sold by the said Lord M and Lady K to the
said A B and C D, as is before recited. And for the further coroboration,
establishing and performing of the said partition and division, the said A B
does by these presents Remise, Release and quit claim from him and his heirs,
unto the said C D his executors and assigns, All his Estate, Right, Title and
Interest, of, in and to all the said Messuages, Gardens and Garden-places
before by these presents limited, assigned and appointed to be had in
severaltie unto the said C D his etc. And in like manner the said C D does by
these presents remise, release, and for ever quit claim from him and his heirs
unto the said A B his heirs and assigns, all the estate, right, title and
interest of the said C D. of, in and to all and singular the said Messuages,
Gardens, and Garden-places with the appurtenances before by these presents
limited, assigned and appointed to be had in severalty unto the said A B his
etc. as aforesaid. And further the said A B for him, his heirs, That the
premises are discharged of incumbrancs done by A B. and C D.
executors and administrators and every of them covenanteth and grants to and
with the said C D his etc. and to and with every of them by these presents,
That as well the said C D his etc. as all and singular the said premises, with
their appurtenances before in these presents limited to be had in severalty to
the said C D his heirs and assigns, shall at all times hereafter be freely
and clearly discharged, or otherwise saved harmless of, and from all manner of
former bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, conveyances, alienations,
charges and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, caused or procured by the said
A B. or by any other person or persons claiming from or under the estate,
right, title or interest of the said A B. And the said C D for him, his heirs,
executors and administrators and every of them, does covenant promise and grant
to and with the said A B his etc. and to etc. ( As in the last covenant from A
B to him)

In witness whereof etc.
A Lease of a house in London.
THis INENTURE made etc. Between R C etc. on the one party, and N D Citizen
and etc. on the other party, Witnesses, That the said R R, for diverse causes
and reasonable considerations him thereunto especially moving, has demised,
granted, betaken, and to farm let unto the said N D. all that message or
tenement with the appurtenances, Demise.
situate, lying and being in Fleet Street, in the parish of St. Dunstane in the
West London, between a message or tenement called the Falcon, now in the
occupation of P G. Merchant-Tailor or his assigns on the East side; and the
message or tenement now in the tenure or occupation of one A M. widow on the
West side; and abutting upon the Garden adjoining to the Temple Church toward
the South, and upon the high street toward the North. Together with all and
singular Shops, Cellers, sollers, chambers, rooms, ways, entries, yards,
back-sides, houses, buildings, gutters, watercourse, easements, profits and
commodities whatsoever to the said message or tenement belonging or in any
wise appertaining; and also all manner of wainscot, glass-windowes, doors and
locks in and upon the said Message or Tenement and other the premises before
mentioned to be demised and granted: All and singular which said message, and
all other the demised premises are now in the tenure or occupation of the said
N D. To have and to hold the said message or tenement, shops, cellars,
sollars, and all other the aforesaid premises, with all and singular their
appurtenances before in and by these presents demised, or mentioned to be
demised, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said N D, his executors,
administrators and assigns, from the Feast day of etc. unto the full end and
term of one and forty years from thence next ensuing and fully to be complete
and ended. Yielding and paying therefore yearly during the said term unto the
said R R his heirs and assigns 26 pound of etc. at four Feasts or terms in the
year; Reddend.
That is to say, at the Feast of etc. by even and equal portions. And if it
shall happen the said yearly rent of etc. Clause of reentry for non payment of
the rent.
to be behind and unpaid in part or in all, by the space of etc. next over or
after any of the said Feasts in which the same ought to be paid as aforesaid,
being lawfully demanded, That then, and from thenceforth, and at all times
afterward it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R R. his heirs and
assigns, and every of them, into the said message or tenement and all other
the aforesaid premises, with all and singular the appurtenances before by these
presents demised, or mentioned to be demised; and into every part and parcel
thereof wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, enjoy and re-possede,
as in his or their first and former estate: and the said N D, his executors,
administratours and assigns, and all other the occupiers and possessours
thereof thereout and from thence utterly to expel and amove, any thing herein
before specified to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And the said N D. for himself, his executors, administrators and assigns, and
for every of them, does covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said R R.
his executors, administrators and assigns, For new Building.
and to and with every of them by these presents, in manner and form following:
viz. That he the said N D. his executors, administrators or assigns or some
of them, at his and their own proper costs and charges, shall and will within
the time and space of three years next ensuing the date of these presents,
expend and bestow in or about the new building, repairing, or bettering of the
premises hereby demised, the full value or sum of etc. of lawful money of
England at the least: And also shall and will at his and their like proper
costs and charges well and sufficiently repair, support, uphold, sustain,
maintain and amend, and keep the said message or tenement and new buildings to
be erected, and all and singular other the premises with the appurtenances,
and every part and parcel thereof, in, by and with all and all manner of
needful and necessary reparation whatsoever, from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, when and as often as need and occasion shall require during
the said term hereby granted: and also all the pavements, garrats, cellars,
sinkes, privies, siedges and widraughts to the said message or tenement
belonging, shall cause to be paved, scowred, purged, and made clean as often
and when as need shall be during the said term of etc. by these presents
granted. And the same premises so well and sufficiently repaired supported,
maintained, purged, paved, scowred, made clean and amended; together with the
locks, keys, bolts, staples, latches, catches, hooks, hinges, windows, doors
and glass of the same premises sufficiently made, glazed and amended, in the
end of the said Term of etc. or other sooner expiration or determination of
this present Lease, shall leave and yield up unto the said R R. his heirs and
assigns. And also that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R R his
heirs, executors, To view reparations.
administrators and assigns, and every of them, four times or oftener in every
year yearly, during the said term, to enter or come into the said Message or
Tenement, and all other the premises with the appurtenances, and into all and
every part and parcel thereof, there to view, search and see what defaults for
want of reparations there shall be found defective and necessary to be done in
and about the demised premises, in any part thereof: And of all such defaults
for want of repartions then and there found, to give or leave notice,
admonition or warning in writing to and for the said N D. his executors,
administrators or assigns, for the repairing or amending thereof. And further,
that he the said N D. his heirs etc. or some of them shall and will within one
month next ensuing such admonition or warning well and sufficiently repair and
amend the same: And shall also discharge and pay all Church-duties, For
Church-duties.
Scavengers wages, watches, wardings, and all other taxes, impositions dutes or
charges which shall or may at any time hereafter during the said term, be
charged or imposed upon him the said N D. his etc. for or by reason of the
premises hereby demised. And lastly, the said R R. for himself, his heirs etc.
That he the said N D, his heirs, etc. and every of them, for and by the payment
of the yearly rent aforesaid, above and by these presents reserved, and under
other the covenants, grants, articles and agreements in these presents
contained, shall and may, for and during all the said term of etc. by these
presents granted, lawfully, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use, occupy,
possess and enjoy the said house, message or tenement, and all and singular
other the premises with the appurtenances by these premises demised, or
mentioned to be demised, and every part and parcel thereof, without any manner
of lawful let, suit, trouble, disturbance or eviction of the said R R. his
heirs or assigns, or of any other person or persons whatsoever by his means,
assent, consent, right, title, or procurement.

In witness, etc.
A Deed of Gift made to one, to save harmless from all Bonds.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come, I J P of etc.
send greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know ye, that I the said J P. as
well for the indempnitie, discharge, and saving harmless of R B of etc. his
heirs, executors and administrators and every of them of and from all and all
manner of bonds and writings obligatory whatsoever, wherein the said R B is and
stands bound for me the said J P in any sum or sums of money to any person
or persons whatsoever; as also for diverse other good causes and considerations
me hereunto especially moving, Have given, granted, bargained and sold, and by
these presents do give, Grant.
grant, bargain, sell and confirm unto the said R B. all and singular my
leases, goods and chattels whatsoever, as well real as personal, of what
kind, nature, quality or condition soever the same are or be, and in what
place or places soever the same are or be, and in what place or places the same
shall or may be found, as well in my own custody and possession, as in the
hands, custody and possession of any other person or persons whatsover, To
have and to hold all and singular the said leases, goods and chattels, and all
other the premises with the appurtenances to the said R B. his heirs,
executors, administratours and assigns to his and their own proper use and
behoof for ever. And I the said I P and my heirs, all and singular the said
goods and chattels, and other the premises unto the said R B his executors,
administrators and assigns, to the use aforesaid, shall and will warrant, and
for ever defend by these presents. Provided always, That if I the said I P my
executors, Proviso to save harmless.
administrators or assigns, or any of us do and shall from time to time and at
all times hereafter clearly acquit and discharge, or otherwise sufficiently
save and keep harmless the the said R B his etc. and all his and their goods,
chattels, lands, tenements etc. and every of them, of and from all and
singular bonds and writings obligatory, whatsoever, wherein or whereby the said
R B at the request, and for the debt of me the said I P is, and stands bound
to any person or persons whatsoever in any sum or sums of money, and of and
from all manner of actions, suits, charges, troubles, expenses and demands
whatsoever, which shall or may in any wise hereafter, arise, happen, come, grow
or be to or against the said R B his executors or administrators or any of
them for or by reason or means of the same obligations or writings obligatory,
or any of them, or any thing in them, or any of them mentioned or contained,
That then this present deed or grant, and every thing herein contained, shall
be utterly void and of none effect, any thing herein before specified to the
contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
A lease of a house and certain lands made in consideration of a certain sum
of money, the fee-simple being in the lessor.
THis INDENTVRE made the etc. between M C of etc. Gentleman, and A C now wife
of the said M on the one part, and T E of etc. Esquire on the other part,
Witnesses, that the said M C and A his wife, for and in consideration of the
sum of etc. of lawful money of England, to them in hand paid, before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents by the said T E. whereof and wherewith
they the said M C and A do acknowledge themselves to be fully satisfied,
contented and paid, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof do
clearly acquit and discharge the said T E his etc. Have demised etc. unto the
said T E all that his manor house, with the rights, members and appurtenances
thereof, situate, lying and being in A in the parish of W in the County of
Warwick, and all that close of pasture commonly called or known by the name of
etc. containing by estimation forty acres, be it more or less. And also all
that close of pasture commonly called, or known by the name of the
middle-pasture, containing by estimation twenty acres, be it more or less, and
all that close of pasture etc. all and singular which said closes, and other
the premises, are or late were in the tenure or occupation of the the said M or
of his assignee or assigns, and are situate, lying and being in A aforesaid in
the said County of W. and also all other the messuages, houses, edifices,
buildings, dove-houses, ortchards, gardens, tenements, meadows, pastures,
feedings, woods, underwoods, commons, wast grounds, moors, marshes, rents,
reversions, services, profits, commodities and hereditaments whatsoever of them
the said M C or A C or either of them, situate, lying and being in A aforesaid,
or W. or in either of them in the said County of Warwick: To have and to hold
the said Mansion house, closes, of meadow, pasture and arable, and all and
singular other the premises, Habendum
with their and every of their appurtenances before by these presents demised
or mentioned to be demised, and every part and parcel thereof unto the said T
E his executors, administrators and assigns, from the feast day of etc. last
past before the date hereof, unto the full end and term of etc. from thence
next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, yiedling and paying therefore
yearly, Reddendum.
during the said term unto the said M C and A his wife, and their heirs and
assigns, one pepper corn at the feast of etc. if the same shall be lawfully
demanded. And the said M C for himself, and for the said A his wife, That he is
seized in fee, and has power to demise.
their heirs, executors and administrators, and for every of them does
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said T E his etc. and to and with
every of them by these presents in manner and form following; that is to say,
that he the said M C at the time of the ensealing and deliverie of these
presents, stands, and is lawfully seized in his demeasne as of fee, of and in
the said mansion house, several closes, and of and in all other the premises
before by these presents demised, or mentioned to be demised with their and
every of their appurtenances, without any manner of condition or limitation of
use or uses, to alter, change and determine the same; and that they the said M
C and A or one of them now have or has full power and authority to demise and
grant the said mansion house, and other the premises with their appurtenances,
and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said T E his executors,
administrators and assigns in manner and form as aforesaid. And also the said
mansion house, closes, and other the premises before by these presents demised
or meant, mentioned, or intended to be demised, and every part and parcel
thereof now are to be, and by and during the said term of etc. by these
presents granted, shall be, remain and continue unto the said T E. his
executors, administrators and assigns of the clear yearly value of etc. at the
least over and above all charges and reprises. That the premises are of the
yearly value of etc.
And further, that he the said T E his Executours, administratours and
assigns, under the rents, covenants, grants and agreements in these presents
contained, For quiet enjoying freed from encumbrances.
shall and may at all times hereafter, and from time to time, during the term
hereby granted and demised, or meant, mentioned or intended to be granted or
demised, quietly and peaceably have, hold, use, occupy and enjoy the said
mansion house, closes and all other the premises, and every part and parcel of
them with their and every of their appurtenances, and the rents, revenues and
profits thereof shall or may receive, perceive and take to his and their own
proper uses, and behoofs clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged of and
from all and all manner of former bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases,
jointures, statutes merchant, and of the staple, recognizances intrusions,
judgments, executions, rents-charge, rents-seck, arrerages of rents, debts and
duties to the Kings Majesty, and of and from all other charges, titles,
troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, done or suffered by
the said M C and Anne, or either of them, their heirs or assigns, or by any
other person or persons whatsoever. And moreover, the said M C for himself,
and for the said Anne his wife, their heirs, For further assurance.
executors and administrators, and for every of them, does covenant, promise
and grant to and with the said T E his executours, administrators and assigns,
and to and with every of them by these presents, that he the said M C and Anne
his wife, their heirs and assigns shall and will at all times hereafter, and
from time to time during the time and space of five years next ensuing the
date hereof, upon all and every reasonable request and requests to him and
them, or any of them to be had or made by the said T E his executours,
administrators or assigns or any of them, and at the costs and charges in the
law of him the said T E his executors or assigns, or some of them, do make,
knowledge, execute and suffer, or cause to be done, made, knowledged, executed,
and suffered all and every such lawful act and acts, thing and things, devise
and devises in the law whatsoever, for the better confirmation of these
presents, and for the better and further assurance, surety, sure making and
conveying of the said mansion house, closes, and other the premises, and every
or any of them, with their and every of their appurtenances, for and during
the said term of years hereby granted or mentioned to be granted unto the
said T E his executours, administrators and assigns, according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents, as by the said T E his executors,
administrators or assigns, or by his or their Counsel learned in the law shall
be reasonably devised etc.

In witness, etc.
An assignment of the same lease and premises to a third person in trust, upon
condition, that if the money be not paid, the assignment to be void.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. between T E Esquire on the one part, and T C of
etc. on the other part, Witnesses, That whereas M C of etc. Gentleman, and A C
then wife of the said M. by their Indenture of lease, bearing date the etc. for
the considerations therein mentioned, did demise grant and to farm let unto the
said T E his etc. all that his mansion house, with the rights, members and
appurtenances thereof situate, lying and being in A. in the parish of W. in the
County of W. and all that close of pasture, commonly called or known by the
name of the great close, containing by estimation forty acres, be it more or
less. And also, all that close of pasture, commonly called or known by the
name of the middle pasture, containing by estimation twenty acres, be it more
or less, and all that close of meadow etc. All and singular which said closes,
and other the premises, then, or late were in the tenure or occupation of the
said M. or his etc. and are situate, lying or being in Arlescot aforesaid in
the said County of W. And also, all other messuages, houses, edifices,
buildings, dove-houses, ortchards, gardens, tenements, meadows, pastures,
feedings, woods, underwoods, commons, wastgrounds, moors, marshes, rents,
reversions, services, profits, commodities and hereditaments whatsoever, of
them the said M C and A C or either of them, situate, lying and being in A
aforesaid, and W. or in either of them in the said County of VV. to have and
to hold the said mansion house, closes of meadow, pasture and arable, and all
and singular other the premises, with their and every of their appurtenances,
by the said Indenture of lease demised, or mentioned to be demised, and every
part and parcel thereof unto the said T E. his executors, administrators and
assigns, from the feast of etc. then last past before the date of the same
indenture of lease, unto the full end and term of etc. from thence next
ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended. Yiedling and paying therefore
yearly, during the said term, unto the said M C and A his wife, and to the
heirs and assigns of the said M. one pepper corn only at the feast of etc. if
the same shall be lawfully demanded, as in and by the same indenture of lease
amongst diverse other covenants, grants, articles and agreements therein
contained more fully and at large it does and may appear. Now this indenture
further witnesses, That the said T E for and under the proviso conditioned
hereafter, in these presents mentioned and expressed, has bargained, sold,
assigned and set over; and by these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely
bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the said T C his etc. all the estate,
right, title, interest, property, possession, term of years, claim and
demand whatsoever, which he the said T E now has, may, might, should or in any
wise ought to have or claim of, in or to the said mansion house, closes of
land, and other the premises with the appurtenances by the said Indenture of
lease, demised, and in and to every or any part or parcel thereof by force and
virtue of the said recited indenture of lease. Provided always, that if the
said T C his etc. or some of them, shall not well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said T E his etc. without fraud etc. That then this present
Indenture, and all and every covenant, grant article and agreement therein
contained, shall be utterly void, frustrate and of none effect, any thing
herein before specified to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
A morgage of a lease for imdempnity of certain sureties bound in an obligation
made to another in trust for their use.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. between H H of etc. Gentleman, on the one part;
and R M of etc. I W and R D of etc. Gent. on the other part, Witnesses, That
whereas etc. as in and by the said indenture of lease amongst other things more
fully and at large appears. Recital.
And whereas the said I W and R D at the request, and for the debt of the said I
H together with him in and by one obligation, with condition indorsed, bearing
date with these presents, are, and stand jointly and severally bounden unto R S
of etc. in the sum of etc. for the true payment of etc. on the etc. at or in
the etc. as in and by the said recited obligation and condition thereof more at
large it does and may appear. Now this Indenture further witnesses, that he
the said H H for the indempnitie, discharge, and saving harmless of the said I
W and R D their etc. and every of them, of and from the said recited
obligation, and all sum and sums of money therein mentioned and contained, and
from all actions, suits and demands concerning the same, has given, granted,
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents does fully,
clearly and absolutely give, grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the
said R M his etc. as well the said message or tenement, and all and singular
other the premises with the appurtenances, and every part thereof, by the said
indenture of lease demised, and every part and parcel thereof, as also the
estate, right, title, interest, property, term of years, claim and demand
whatsoever, which he the said H H his etc. now have, has, may, might, should,
or in any wise ought to have or claim, of, in and to the said message or
tenement, and other the premises with the appurtenances, and every or any part
or parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the said recited Indenture of lease,
or any thing therein contained, or by any other ways or means whatsoever,
together with the said recited indenture of lease: To have and to hold the said
message or tenement, indenture of lease, estate, right, title, interest, term
of years, and all and singular other the premises with the appurtenances,
before by these presents bargained, or sold, or meant, mentioned or intended to
be hereby given, granted, bargained, sold, assigned or set over, and every
part and parcel thereof unto the said R M his etc. from the ensealing and
delivery of these presents forward, for, during and until the full end and
accomplishment of all the residue of all the said term of etc. now to come and
unexpired, granted by the said recited Indenture of lease, in as large, ample
and beneficial manner and form, to all intents, constructions and purposes as
he the said H H now has, may, might, should, or in any wise ought to have and
enjoy the same by force and virtue of the said recited indenture of lease, or
any thing therein contained or o herwise howsoever. Nevertheless upon special
trust and confidence, That he the said R M his etc. and every of them, shall
stand and be interessed and posse^sed of and in the said message or tenement,
and all o her the before bargained premises with the said appurtenances, and
every part and parcel thereof, to the only proper uses and behoofs of the said
I W and R D their etc. and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. And
the said H H for himself, his etc. does covenant, promise and grant to and with
the said R M his etc. and to and with every of them by these presents in manner
and form following, (that is to say) That the said recited indenture of lease,
That the lease is a good lease.
at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is a good,
perfect, sure and indefeizible lease in the law, of or for the said message or
Tenement and premises thereby demised, and so shall stand, remain and continue
unto the said R M his etc. to the uses before mentioned, for and during the
term of years thereby granted and unexpired. And that he the said H H now has
full power, good right, true title and lawful authority to give, grant,
bargain, And that he has power to demise.
sell and set over the same premises and every part thereof unto the said R M
his etc. to the uses aforesaid, in manner and form above mentioned, according
to the true intent and meaning of these presents. (A covenant for quiet
enjoying, and from encumbrances.) Provided also and always, that if the said H
H his etc. or any of them, Proviso.
do truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said R S his etc. the said sum of
etc. on the etc. at the place aforesaid, for and in full and clear discharge of
the said recited obligation and condition above mentioned, that then this
indenture to be void and of none effect. This indenture or any thing herein
contained to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
A Bill of sale.
KNow all men by these presents, That I W G of etc. for and in consideration of
the sum of etc. of lawful money of England to be to me in hand paid by I S of
etc. Goldsmith, at and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
wherewith I confess my self to be fully satisfied and paid by these presents,
have bargained and sold, and by these presents do fully, clearly and absolutely
bargain and sell unto the said R S in plain and open market, within the City
of London, one chain of gold, with round links unsoothered, weighing twenty
ounces of gold weight, and one gold ring enameled, set with a small Table
Diamond, To have and to hold the said chain of gold and ring to the said R S
his etc. to his and their own proper uses and behoofs for ever. And I the said
W G my etc. and every of us, the said chain and ring unto the said R S his etc.
against all people, shall and will warrant, acquit, and for ever defend by
these presents. Provided always, That if the said W G my etc. or any of us do
well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said R S his etc. the full
sum of etc. on the etc. at or in the etc. without fraud or covin, that then
this present bill, and the bargain and sale of the said chain and ring shall be
utterly void, and of none effect, or else to stand and abide in full force and
virtue.

In witness, etc.
A release of lands mortgaged.
THis INDENTVRE made the etc. between A W of etc. Esquire on the one part, and Sir
N H of etc. Knight on the other part, Witnesses, That the said A W by his
indenture bearing date the etc. for and in consideration of the sum of etc. by
I H of etc. well and truly to be paid in manner and form as in and by a
proviso contained in the said Indenture is mentioned, limited and declared, did
bargain and sell unto the said I H and to his heirs and assigns for ever all
that his grange or farm of etc. with the appurtenances in the parish of A in
the County of S. parcel of the possessions of the late dissolved Monastery of W
in the County of etc. and all other his Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Woods, Leets, Courts, Liberties, Franchises and
Hereditaments whatsoever they be, with all and singular their appurtenances,
si^uate etc. which said premises, the said A W late bought and purchased to
him and his heirs of the said I H. together with all and singular messuages,
houses, buildings, barnes, stables, dove-houses, ortch-yards, gardens, lands,
meadows, feedings, pastures etc. and hereditaments whatsoever they be to the
said Graunge or Farm of etc. and other the premises before mentioned, or any
part thereof belonging or in any wise appertaining, or accepted, reputed, taken
or known as part, parcel or member thereof heretofore, used, occupied, demised,
letten posessed or enjoyed. To have and to hold all and singular the premises
to the said I H. and his heirs for ever. In which said Indenture, there is a
proviso contained, that if the said I H his heirs, executors, administrators
or assigns or some of them, should fail in the payment of the sum of etc.
unto the said A W her executors or administrators at the days or places in the
said Indenture specified, That then the said conveyance should be void, as in
and by the said Indenture more at large it does and may appear. And whereas
the said I H has conveyed and assured all and singular the premises unto the
said Sir N H and his heirs, before the ensealing and delivery of these
presents. Now this Indenture witnesses, that the said A W for, and in
consideration of the sum of etc. to him the said A W in hand, well and truly
satisfied and paid by the said N H before the ensealing and delivery of these
presents: And also in consideration of the full discharge and release of the
condition, and proviso aforesaid, and at the special instance and request of
the said I H. Has remised, released and quit claimed and by these presents
does for himself and his heirs remise, Release
release and quit claim unto the said Sir N H and to his heirs for ever, The
condition and proviso above mentioned, and also all the estate, ^ight, title,
interest, claim, reversion, condition, proviso and demand whatsoever, which he
the said A W now has, or by any manner of ways or means hereafter shall, or
may have, of, in and unto the said Grange or Farm, and all and singular other
the premises with the appurtenances, or of, in, or unto any part or parcel
thereof. And also of, in and unto all and singular the Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments which the said A W has at any time purchased to him and his
heirs of the said I H. To have and to hold the said Grange or Farm, Habendum.
and all and singular the premises, with the appurtenances unto the said Sir N
H his heirs and assigns for ever, to the only proper use and behoof of the
said Sir N H his heirs and assigns for ever, absolutely without any condition
or limitation whatsoever. And the said A W for himself, his heirs, executors,
administratos and assigns, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the
said Sir N H. his heirs and assigns by these presents, in manner and form
following (viz.) That he the said N H his heirs and assigns, shall and may
from time to time and at all times for ever hereafter, peaceably and quietly,
have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Grange or Farm, and all and
singular the premises, with the appurtenances conveyed and released, or meant,
mentioned or intended to be conveyed, or released by these presents without the
let, suit, trouble, disturbance or eviction of the said A W his heirs or
assigns, And without the lawful let, suit, trouble, disturbance, molestation
or eviction of any other person or persons, lawfully claiming any estate,
right, title or interest, in, out of or into the premises or any part thereof,
from, by or under the said A W his heirs or assigns, or by his, their or any
of their means, act, consent, assent, privity, agreement or procurement, other
then of the said I H his heirs and assigns, claiming from the said A W by
virtue of the assurance aforesaid. And also that all and singular the premises
and every part and parcel thereof, shall and may from time to time, and at all
times for ever hereafter, continue and remain unto the said Sir N H his heirs
and assigns free and clear, and freely and clearly exonorated and discharged,
of, and from all, and all manner of former and other gifts, grants, bargains,
sales etc. had, made done or committed by the said A W his heirs or assigns,
or by his, their, or any of their means, act, assent, consent, privity,
agreement or procurement (except before excepted.) And the said A W does
further for himself, his executors etc. That he the said A W his heirs and
assigns shall and will from time to time and at all times before the feast of
etc. next ensuing the date hereof, at the proper costs and charges in the law
of the said Sir NH. do and execute, or cause to be done and executed all and
every such further act and acts, thing and things, device and devices, as shall
be reasonably devised, advised or required by the said Sir N H his heirs and
assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the law, for the better
assuring and sure making of all and singular the premises, with the
appurtenances unto the said Sir N H his heirs and assigns, according to the
true intent and meaning of these presents, be it by Fine or Fines, Feoffement
or Feoffements, Deed or Deeds Inroled or not Inroled, Recoverie or Recoveries,
with double or single Voucher or Vouchers, release, confirmation, warranty or
by any other ways or means whatsoever.

In witness whereof etc.
A Deed of Revocation.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, R R of London
Esquire sends Greeting. Whereas the said R R in and by two several
Indentures, or Deeds bearing date the etc. whereof the one is made between the
said R R and G W of etc. and I H of etc. Gentlemen on the other party: And the
other of them is made between the said R R of the one part, and the said G W
and I H of the other part, whereupon a Fine was afterward in due form of Law
acknowledged by the said R R and A his Wife, in and by which said several
Indentures the said R R did assure and entail unto the said W R and to the
heirs of his body lawfully begotten, with certain remainders over amongst
other things, All those Lands, Meadows, Pastures and Hereditaments, with their
appurtenances in N in the County of etc. containing of estimation etc. lately
purchased by the said R R. of one etc. and then in the tenure of etc. or of his
assigns; And in and by the same several Indentures did likewise assure and
entaile unto the said R R and to the h^^res of his body lawfully begotten, with
certain remainders over, amongst other things, All that the Manor of Lindgate,
with the Royalties, Rights, Members and Appurtenances thereof whatsoever, in N
and A in the County of etc. And all Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to the
same Manor then or late appertaining, or as part, parcel or member thereof,
then before had, known or reputed, with the appurtenances in N and A aforesaid
or either of them, containing by estimation etc. then lately purchased by the
said R R. of one etc. as in and by the said several Indentures, or Deeds
indented (amongst other things therein contained) more at large it does and may
appear. In which said several Indentures, there is contained a Proviso in
these words following, That is to say: Provided always that if the said R R
during his natural life, shall by his Deed or Deeds, of Revocation under his
hand and Seal, testified by two Witnsses or more, Revoke, annihilate and make
void, or declare that he does revoke, annihilate and make void all or any the
uses and estates, in and by these presents limited or raised, of or upon all or
any of the said Manor, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
whatsoever, in the said Fine to be contained and in these presents mentioned,
That then and from and after the ensealing of such deed and deeds of
revocation, all or any the uses and estates specified and mentioned in either
of these Indentures, and which by any such deed or deeds of revocation, shall
be declared to be revoked, shall cease and be utterly void, frustrate and of
none effect: And that then the said Fine of such parcel to be revoked, shall be
to the only use of the said R R and his heirs for ever; Any thing before in
these presents contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding,
as in and by the said proviso in the said several Indentures, mentioned and
contained, more plainly may appear. Now know ye that the said R R. as well in
consideration that the uses and estates of and in the Manor, lands, tenements
and hereditaments hereafter in these presents mentioned, and contained in the
foresaid Indentures of entaile, may remain and be (touching the said uses and
estates) revoked, and continue unto the said R R his etc. to be disposed of at
his or their pleasures. And also for diverse other good causes and
considerations him hereunto especially moving, and by virtue of these presents
and of the said proviso contained in the said several Indentures above recited
or mentioned, has revoked, annihilated and made void, and by this present deed
of revocation does revoke, annihilate and make void the several uses and
estates in and by the said Indentures or either of them raised or limited, of
or upon all the said Manor of L with the roialties, rights, members and
appurtenances thereof whatsoever in N and A aforesaid, or either of them in the
said County of etc. and of all the said lands, tenements and hereditaments to
the said Manor of Lindgate now or of late appertaining or belonging, or as
part, parcel or member thereof heretofore had, known or reputed, with the
appurtenances in N and A aforesaid, or either of them, containing by estimation
etc. late purchased by the said R R of etc. And further, the said R R. for the
consideration aforesaid, and by virtue of the said Proviso contained in the
said several Indentures, and otherwise, Has revoked, annihilated and made
void, and by this present Deed of Revocation does revoke, annihilate and make
void the several uses end estates in and by the said Indentures or either of
them raised and limited, of or upon one close of land and pasture called K
close, containing by estimation etc. and of or upon one other close of land and
pasture with the appurtenances, containing by estimation etc. in N. aforesaid:
and of or upon two acres of arable land by estimation etc. in N. aforesaid, now
in the occupation of etc. or of his assigns.

In witness etc.
A Grant and Sale of the Reversion of certain Lands.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between R VV of etc. of the one part; and C D of
etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That the said R VV for and in consideration
of the sum of etc. Has granted, bargained and sold, Grant.
and by these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely grant, bargain and
sell unto the said C D. his heirs and assigns for ever, All that his right,
use, interest, reversion or remainder of and in all and singular etc. now or
late in the tenure or occupation of etc. which said message and other the
premises with the appurtenances, he the said R VV has, should, or ought to
have by and after the decease of A VV mother of the said R. which said message
or tenement, barn, ortchard etc. with the appurtenances R VV deceased (late
father of the said R VV, party to these presents) by his last Will and
Testament devised, willed and bequeathed unto the said A VV, the immediate
reversion or remainder thereof to the said R VV and his heirs for ever:
Together with all the Deeds, Evidences, Charters, Escripts, Writings and
Muniments which he the said R W, or any other to his use, or by his consent or
delivery have or has, touching or concerning the said message or tenement and
other the premises, or any part or parcel thereof. All and singular which said
Deeds, Evidences and Charters etc. the said R W has already delivered at and
before the ensealing and deliverie of these presents. To have and to hold the
said Reversion and Remainder, Habend.
estate, right, title, interest and other the premises with the appurtenances
before by these presents bargained and sold, or meant, mentioned or intended to
be hereby granted, bargained and sold, and every part thereof, immediately from
and after the decease of the said A VV the mother, unto the said C D. his heirs
and assigns for ever, to the only proper use and behoof of the said C D. his
heirs and assigns for ever. And the said R W for himself, his heirs etc. That
he the said R W. on the day of the date of these presents That he is lawfully
seized in reversion.
is lawfully and solely seized of and in the Reversion and Remainder of the
said message or tenement, and of other the premises with the appurtenances
immediately from and after the decease of the said A VV. of a true and full
estate of inheritance in the law, in Fee, to his own use, without any manner of
condition, mortgage or redemption. And further, that the said reversion or
remainder of the said message or tenement, and other the premises with the
appurtenances, from, by, and after the decease of the said A VV the mother, at
the day of the date hereof, are and be, and so at all times from henceforth
shall be and continue free, clear and clearly acquitted, exonerated and
discharged, and saved harmless by the said R W. his heirs, executors and
administrators, of and from all and every former bargains, sales, gifts,
grants, leases, statute merchant, and of the staple, recognizances, joyntures,
dowers, wills, entails, intrusions, rents charge, rents seck, arrearages of
rents, and of and from all other charges, titles, troubles, encumbrances and
demands whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered or done, etc.

In witness etc.
An assignment of a Recognizance with very good Covenants therein inserted.
THis Indenture made etc. Between T P. of etc. Gent. of the one part, and C D
and R D etc. on the other part, Witnesses, That whereas VV P of etc. son and
heir apparent etc. by one recognizance acknowledged in his Majesty's high Court
of Chancery, bearing date etc. Has acknowledged himself to owe and stand
indebted unto the said T P in the sum of etc. payable to the said T, or to his
certain Attorney, his etc. in manner and form as by the said Recognizance,
together with a certain condition thereunto subscribed in the said Court of
Chancery enrolled and remaining of Record, now at large it may appear. Now the
said T P. for diverse causes and considerations him moving, Has bargained,
assigned and set over, Grant
and by these presents does etc. unto the said C D and R D, the said
Recognizance, and all and every sum and sums of money therein contained, and
all the profits, benefit, advantage and commodities which shall or may in any
wise hereafter grow, be had, gotten, arise, accrue or come to the said T P. or
to his executors etc. upon or by reason of the same Recognizance, or any thing
therein contained. And also the said T P does by these presents authorize and
appoint, constitute, ordain and make the said C and R, their executors,
administrators and assigns and every of them, the lawful Atturnie and
Atturnies irrevocable of and for the said T P, his executors and etc. and in
his or their name or names to sue and prosecute all and every such lawful
action, execution, process, actions, executions, processes as shall or may be
commenced, sued or tried, in, upon or concerning the said Recognizance, or any
sum of money, debts, duties or demands whatsoever in the same contained,
comprised or specified, or by reason thereof to be had or obtained: and other
Atturnie or Atturnies for or under them or any of them, or in their or any of
their behalfs to substitute, make and ordain, and the same to disallow, change
and remove when and as often as they the said C and R. and their executors,
administrators or assigns or any of them shall think good: And the same sum
and sums of money, profits, commodities and demands, and every of them, or any
other thing in satisfaction thereof, to receive, have, take and enjoy to the
only proper use and behoof of the said C and R, their executors,
administrators and assigns, or any of them; and therefore or for the same to
make composition, agreement or discharge, whatsoever they the said C and R.
their executors etc. or any of them shall think good. And also the said T P.
for himself etc. That he the said T P. his executors, That he shall permit him
to sue.
administrators and assigns shall and will quietly permit and suffer the said
C and R. their executors etc. and every of them, at their or some of their own
proper costs and charges, to prosecute, sue, implead and attempt at any time or
times, and from time to time hereafter, all and every such lawful and
reasonable action, execution, suit, process and demand whatsoever in the name
or names of the said T P. his executors, administrators or assigns or any of
them, which he the said T P. his executors etc. or any of of them may, might,
should or ought to have, upon or by force or means of the said Recognizance, or
touching or concerning any sum of money, duty or demand whatsoever concerning
the same, or any thing therein contained, comprised or specified, or any thing
thereupon to be had and obtained. And that he the said T P. his executors,
administrators and assigns shall and will at every time and times hereafter,
and from time to time, upon the reasonable request, and at the costs and
charges of the said C and R. or one of them, their or one of their executors,
administrators or assigns, avow, justify and maintain all the said actions,
suits, processes and demands. And that neither he the said T P. nor his
executors or administrators shall at any time hereafter revoke, That he shall
not release without consent
discontinue, discharge, release or otherwise wittingly and willingly hinder or
delay any such action, execution, suit, process or demand whatsoever as shall
be so attempted, pursued or had as is aforesaid, or any of them, without the
consent of the said C D and R D, their executors, administrators or assigns or
any of them first had and obtained in writing under their hands and seals. And
also that neither he the said T P at any time heretofore has received the said
sum of etc. nor any part thereof; nor has released, extinguished, determined,
or in any wise discharged the said recognizance, or has at any time done or
committed, or shall hereafter (without the special consent of the said C and
R. their executors etc. or some of them first had and obtained in writing)
willingly do or commit any act or thing, whereby, or by reason whereof any such
action, execution, suit, process or demand whatsoever as shall be so
attempted, pursued or had by the said, C and R. their executors, administrators
or assigns, or any of them, in the name or names of the said TP. his executor
or administrators, upon, concerning or by reason of the said Recognizance, or
any thing or demand thereupon to be had, shall or may be discharged, released
or barred. And also that the said C D and R D. their executors, administrators
and assigne^ and every of them shall or may at all times hereafter have,
receive and take to their own proper use and behoof, the whole execution,
benefit and commodity, and all and every sum and sums of money and other
thing and things whatsoever as at any time hereafter shall fortune to be
recovered, had and obtained by reason of the said Recognizance, or any such
action, suit, extent or execution as shall or may be commenced, had, used or
obtained as is aforesaid, without any let, charge, hindrance or interruption of
the said T P. his executors, administrators, or any other person or persons
whatsoever, by his or their assent, consent, title, means or procurement, and
without any account therefore to them or any of them to be yielded or made. And
also the said T P. for himself, etc. That he the said T P. his etc. and every
of them, at all time and times hereafter, upon or within convenient time after
every reasonable request and warrant to him or them to be made or given, and at
the costs and charges of the said C D and R D. their executors, administrators
or assigns or some of them, shall do, knowledge, and suffer to be done all and
every such lawful warrant, and reasonable act and acts, thing and things,
device and devices; as by the said C and R. or one of them, their or one of
their executors, administrators or assigns or some of them, their or some of
their Council learned in the law shall be reasonably devised or required,
either for the clear acquitting, cancelling or discharging of the said
Recognizance, or for the better obtaining, having, holding or assuring to them
the said C and R, their executors or administrators and the survivor of them,
the said Recognizance, and every or any sum or sums of money therein
mentioned; and of all, every or any goods, chattels, lands, tenements,
hereditaments, and other thing and things whatsoever, to which he the said T P.
his executors etc. now is, are or any of them is, or at any time hereafter
shall be entitled unto, by force or concerning the said Recognizance, or any
execution, matter or thing thereupon to be had, used or made, at the election
or choice of the said C and R D. their executors administrators or assigns, or
any of them: and likewise shall not release or discharge the said recognizance,
or any execution, matter or thing thereupon to be had, or any part thereof.

In witness etc.
A general Release.
KNow all men by these presents, That I J D Gentleman, have remised, released,
and for ever quit claimed, and by these presents do, for me, my heirs,
executors and administrators and every of us clearly and absolutely remise,
release and for ever quit claim unto I R. etc. his etc. all and all manner of
actions, suits, quarrels, debts, duties, bonds, bills, writings obligatorie,
reckonings, accounts and demands whatsoever, which against the said J R ever I
have had, now have, or which I, my executors or administrators or any of us at
any time hereafter shall or may have for or by reason or means of any matter,
cause or thing whatsoever from the beginning of the world, until the day of
the date of these presents.

Witness my hand etc.

A Release unto one that has lost the Counterpart of his Lease.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, H B of etc.
Greeting. Where T S of etc. in and by one indenture of lease bearing date the
etc. for the considerations therein expressed, did demise, grant, betake and to
farm let unto me the said H B my etc. (reciting the grant.) In which said
Indenture of lease, there are diverse covenants, grants, Recital.
articles and agreements on the part and behalf of the said T S. his
executors, administrators and assigns to be observed, performed and kept, as
by the same indenture of lease, amongst diverse other thing and things therein
contained, more at large appears. Now know ye, that he the said H B for
diverse other good causes, and etc. have by these presents remised, released,
and always of and for me, my etc. for evermore quit claimed unto the said T S
his executors, administrators and assigns, all and singular the covenants,
articles, provisoes, conditions, clauses, sentences and agreements whatsoever
in the said Indenture of lease mentioned or contained, which on the part and
behalf of the said T S his executors, administrators or assigns, are, or ought
to be observed, performed and kept. And also all manner of actions, quarrels,
benefits, commodity and advantage that shall or may happen to arise or grow by
reason or means of them, or by the breach and not performing of all and every
the said covenants, grants, articles, clauses and agreements, and every or any
of them. And also I the said H B have remised, released, surrendered, assigned
and set over, and by these presents does remise, release, surrender, assign
and set over from me my executors, administrators and assigns to the said T S
his executors, administrators and assigns, all the state, right, title,
interest, term of years, property, claim and demand whatsoever, which I the
said H B now have, or that I my etc. or any of us ought to have or claim of, in
and to all and singular other the premises to me the said H B in and by the
said Indenture of lease demised as aforesaid, and of and into every part or
parcel thereof.

In witness, etc.
A release of fines and forfeitures due to the King and the informer, upon the
statute of recusancy.
TO all Christian people, to whom this present writing shall come, I A S of
etc. send greeting. Whereas I the said A S in or about the first day of etc.
did exhibit and prefer unto the Kings Majesty's Court of common pleas at Westminster.
one bill of information touching and upon the statute of recusancy against F M
of etc. for the supposed christning of a child of the said F. contrary to the
said statute and the laws of this Realm, as by the said information now
depending and remaining in the same Court of Common pleas more at large
appears. Now know ye, That I the said A S for and in consideration of a
certain sum of lawful etc. to me in hand paid by the said F M before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, have remised, released and quit
claimed, and by virtue of one Indenture to me made and granted from the Right
honorable R. Lord Evre, and E of Morley, for the prosecution, ending and
compounding for all matters concerning the said statute, do remise, release,
and for ever quit claim unto the said F M his executors and administrators, all
and all manner of actions, and causes of actions, suits and troubles, now or at
any time heretofore by my means or procurement prosecuted and depending in his
Majesty's Court of Common pleas or elsewhere, against the said F M touching the
statute before mentioned, and all fines, forfeitures, penalties, sum and sums
of money and demands due, or which of right ought to be due and payable, either
to our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty that now is, his heirs or successors,
by reason, means or suspicion of the breach or non performance of the said
statute, or to me the said A S. my executors, or administrators by virtue of
the Indentute aforesaid, or of any information in that behalf exhibited, or
otherwise howsoever. And I the said A S my executors and administrators and
every of us shall and will at all times hereafter for ever, well and
sufficiently maintain and uphold, make good and defend this present release,
to the said F M his executors and assigns, and every of them, against all
persons that shall or may at any time hereafter deny, oppose or contradict the
same, To save harmless
and also save harmless the said F M his executors and administratours and
every of them from all actions, suites, charges and troubles, that shall or may
arise, be prosecuted or brought against the said parties by any other person or
persons whatsoever concerning the premises.

In witness, etc.
A Resignation or release from one used in trust of all the benefit he might
claim by virtue of any Covenants in the Indenture.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, I I B of etc.
send greeting: whereas by one Indenture bearing date the etc. made between R O
of etc. of the one party, and the said I B and E H of etc. on the other party.
He the said R O for himself, his etc. and every of them did covenant and grant
to and with me the said I B and the said E H our etc. That the said R O should
and would within the space of etc. next ensuing the date of the same Indenture,
convey and assure, or cause to be conveyed and assured, the said H O and E H
daughter to R H. with whom the said R O was then to be espoused, and to the
heirs of their bodies lawfully begotten, lands, tenements and hereditaments of
the full and clear yearly value of 100 l. at the least. And if it should happen
the said R O or some of them within one year next after the death, etc. should
convey and assure to the said E H and the heirs of her body, begotten by the
said R O. if the said E. shall be then living. And if the said E were then also
dead, to the heirs of the body of the said R and E. lands, tenements and
hereditaments of such full and clear yearly value of three pounds at the least,
aforesaid, as by the said Indenture and covenant therein contained (amongst
diverse other things) more at large appears. And for the performance thereof,
according to the said covenants the said R O by his obligation dated etc.
became bound with sureties to us the said I B and E H in the sum of etc. as by
the same bond may also appear. In which said Indenture and bond the name of me
the said I B was only used in trust for the benefit and behoof of the said E
H. Now therefore know ye, that I the said I B in the discharge of the trust in
me reposed, and at the request of the said E H. have remised, released,
surrendered, resigned and set over, and by these presents for me, my executors
and administrators do freely and absolutely remise, Release of the trust.
release, surrender, resign and set over unto the said E H his executors and
assigns, all the state, right, title, interest, use, trust, benefit,
privilege and demand whatsoever which I the said I B have or may have or claim
of, in or to any sum of money or other matter or thing whatsoever in the said
Indenture, covenant and bond, contained, mentioned or expressed, or in any of
them, so as neither I the said I B my executors or administrators or any of us
at any time hereafter shall or will ask, claim, challenge or demand any
interest, use, benefit, trust, privilege or other thing in any matter
whatsoever, by reason or means of the said indenture, or any covenant therein
specified, or in or to the said bond, or any sum of money therein mentioned; but
thereof and therefrom, and from all actions, suits and demands which I my etc.
may have concerning the same shall be utterly secluded and for ever debarred by
these presents.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture for justifying of actions, upon setting over a statute.
THis INDENTVRE made the etc. between R W etc. on the one part, and T S of etc.
on the other part, Witnesses, That whereas I H of etc. in and by one stat. of
eight hundred pounds now appertaining to the said R W as executor of the last
Will and Testament of the said etc. Now the said R W for diverse good
considerations him especially moving, has given, granted, assigned and set
over, and by these presents does fully, clearly and absolutely give, grant,
assign and set over unto the said T S his executors, administrators and
assigns, as well the said statute staple aforesaid, as also all the debt of
etc. in the same statute mentioned or contained to the only proper use and
behoof of the said T S his executors, administrators and assigns for ever. And
further the said R W covenanteth etc. That he the said R W his heirs and
executors and the administrators that hereafter shall happen to be of the
goods, chattels and credits of him the said R W and every of them, at all times
and from time to time hereafter upon request made, shall maintain, justify
and allow all and every such action and actions, writs, suits, bills, plains,
executions and demands whatsoever, as the said T S his executors or the
administrators shall commence, purchase, pursue or make in the name or names of
the said R W his executors, or the administrators that hereafter shall be of
the goods, credits, chattels and debts of the said R W. or in the name or names
of any of them, and that it shall be lawful to the said T S his executors,
admininistrators and assigns, and every of them, to take, receive, have, hold
and enjoy for ever, to the only use of the said T S his heirs, executors,
administrators and assigns all and every such sum and sums of money, costs and
damages, satisfactions, commodities, profits and advantages whatsoever, which
shall be gotten, recovered, obtained or had by reason of any the actions,
writs, bills, plaints, executions and demands aforesaid, or by reason or means
of any of them, without any impediment, denial or contradiction of the said R W
his etc. or the etc. that hereafter shall be of the goods, chattels or credits
of the said R W or any of them.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture between the Scavengers and the Raker, for cleansing the streets.
THis INDENTVRE made the etc. between R C S P and T R Citizens of L. Scavengers
of and for the parish of etc. on the one part, and E D etc. on the other part,
Witnesses, That the said E D in consideration of the sum of etc. to him to be
paid in such form as hereafter in these presents is expressed, Consideration.
covenanteth, promises and grants for himself etc. in manner and form
following, That is to say, that he the said E D his executors, To cleanse the
streets three times in a week.
administrators or assigns, shall and will at his and their own proper costs
and charges, cleanse and make clean, or cause to be cleansed or made clean the
said Parish of etc. and all the Streets, Lanes, Alleyes and other places
whatsoever, within the said parish of etc. as the same has been heretofore
used and accustomed to be cleansed and made clean by any Carter or Raker in
that behalf appointed, from the Monday next after the feast of Epiphany, of
our Lord God commonly called, Twelfth day, next ensuing the date hereof, until
the Monday, next after the Epiphany of our Lord God, which shall be in the
year etc. weekly, three times in every week weekly, to wit, on every Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturdy in every week weekly, during the said term; and also at
all other such times and days as the Lord Mayor of the City of London, for the
time being, the Alderman of the Ward, his Majesty's privy Council, or the
Common Council of the said City of London, or any of them shall appoint or
command the same, and from thence shall carry away and convey all such Channel
dirt, filth, seacole-ashes, sweeping of houses and lanes, streets, alleyes and
other places of and within the said parish of etc. unto some convenient
Lay-stall, for the same to be provided by the said E D his etc. at his or their
proper costs and charges (all rubbish and rushes as shall happen to be laid out
of the Parish Church etc. during the said term only excepted.) And further,
that he the said E D his etc. shall and will from time to time and at all times
during the said term clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge and save and keep
harmless the said etc. and every of them respectively and their successors in
the said office of Scavengers being, To save harmless the Scavengers.
duri^g the said term of etc. and from all and all manner of costs, charges,
imprisonment, expenses and damages whatsoever by them or any of them to be had
or sustained, or otherwise put into during the said Term, for or by reason of
any negligence or default of the said E D his etc. in the premises or any part
thereof. And they the said etc. do covenant (for payment of the money at the
days agreed on etc.)

In witness etc.
A Condition to pay a sum of money at two several payments.
THe Condition of this obligation is such, that if the ^bove bounden I C his
heirs, executors, administrators or assigns or any of them, do well and truly
pay or cause to be paid unto the above named R M his executors, administrators
or assigns, at or in the now dwelling house of the said R M situate etc. the
full sum of eight pound and twelve shillings of lawful money etc. in manner and
form following; That is to say, on the last day of May next ensuing 4 li.
thereof, And on the etc. next etc. the other 4 li. and 12 s. thereof, being the
full remainder of the said sum etc. without fraud or covin, That then this
present obligation to be void and of none effect. But if default shall happen
to be made in either of the payments aforesaid, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, That then etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive a debt, and give discharge.
KNow all men by these presents, that I E T of etc. Gentleman, have assigned,
ordained and made, and in my stead and place by these presents put and
constituted my trusty and welbeloved friend F M of etc. to be my true and
lawful Atturnie, for me and in my name, and to my use to ask, sue for, levy,
require, recover and receive of I W of etc. Esquire, all and every such debts
and sums of money, which are now due unto me, by any manner of ways or means
whatsoever. Giving and granting unto my said Atturnie my whole power, strength
and authority in and about the premises, and upon the receipt of any such debts
or sums of money aforesaid, acquittances or other discharges for and in my name,
to make, seal and deliver, and all and every such act and acts, thing and
things, devise and devises whatsoever in the Law, for the recovery of all or
any such debts or sums of money as aforesaid, for me and in my name to do,
execute and perform, as fully, largely and amply in every respect, to all
intents, constructions and purposes, as I my self might or could do, if I were
there in my own person present, ratifying, allowing and holding firm and stable
all and whatsoever my said Atturnie shall lawfully do, or cause to be done, in
or about the execution of the premises, by virtue of these presents.

In witness etc.
A Letter of Atturnie General, for the receiving of Rent, and moneys due from
time to time.
KNow all men by these presents, that I A W of etc. Esquire, have assigned,
ordained and made, and in my stead and place put and constituted my trusty and
welbeloved friend H H of etc. to be my true and lawful Atturnie, for me in my
name and to my use to ask, sue for, levy, require, recover and receive of all
and every person and persons whatsoever, all and every such debts, rents and
sums of money as are now due unto me, or which at any day or days, time or
times hereafter shall be due, owing, belonging or appertaining unto me by any
manner of ways or means whatsoever, giving and granting unto my said
Atturnie, by the tenor of these presents, my full and whole power, strength and
authority, in and about the premises, and upon the receipt of any such debts,
rents and sums of money aforesaid, Acquittances or other discharges for me and
in my name, to make, seal and deliver, and all and every other act and acts,
thing and things, devise and devises in the law whatsoever, needful and
necessary to be done, in and about the premises, for the recovery of any such
debts, rents and sums of money, as aforesaid, for me and in my name, to do
execute and perform, as fully, largely and amply in every respect to all
intents, constructions and purposes, as I my self might, or could do, if I
were personally present, ratefying, allowing and holding firm and stable all
and whatsoever my said Atturnie shall lawfully do or cause etc. ut antea. In
witness etc.

A General release.
KNow all men by these presents, that I A G of etc. Gent. have remised,
released and for ever quit claimed, and by these presents do for me my etc and
every of us, clearly and absolutey remise, release and for ever quit claim unto
G C of etc. Gentleman, his etc. all and all manner of actions, cause and causes
of actions, suits, quarrles, debts, duties, bonds, bills, writings obligatorie,
reckonings, accounts and demands whatsoever, which against the said G C ever I
have had, now have, or which I, my executors etc. or any of us at any time
hereafter shall or may have, for or by reason or means of any matter, cause or
thing whatsoever, from the beginning of the world until the day of the date of
these presents.

In witness etc.
A short Letter of Atturnie to receive money due upon Bond.
KNow all men by these presents that I T A of etc. have assigned, ordained and
made, and in my stead and place by these presents put and constituted my trusty
and welbeloved friend I B of etc. my true and lawful Atturnie, for me, in my
stead and name, and to the use and behoof of him the said I B to ask, recover
and receive of W S of etc. G T of etc. and L M of etc. the sum of etc. due unto
me for non-payment of the sum of etc. of like money. One the 20th day of etc.
last past before the date of these presents, as by one obligation, with
condition thereunder written bearing date etc. In the year etc. more plainly
appears. Giving, and by these presents granting unto my said Atturnie my full
power, and lawful authority in the premises, to do, say, perform, conclude
and finish, for me and in my name as aforesaid, All and every such act and
acts, thing and things, devise and devises in the law whatsoever for the
recovery of all the debts aforesaid, as fully, largely and amply in every
respect as I my self might or could do, if I were personally present. And upon
the receipt thereof, acquittances or other discharges for me and in my name, to
make, seal and deliver, Ratifying, allowing and holding firm and stable all
and whatsoever my said Atturnie shall lawfully do or cause to be done, in or
about the execution of the premises by virtue of these presents.

In witness whereof etc.
A Form of an award.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come T M of etc.
sends Greeting. etc. whereas diverse controversies and debates heretofore have
been had, moved, and yet are depending between H D etc. of the one party, and
L O etc. of the other party; for the appealing and determining whereof the said
parties have submitted themselves and are become bound each of them to other by
their several obligations dated etc. in the sum of etc. with conditions upon
the same obligations indorsed, for the performance of all and every the Award,
arbitrament, determination and judgment of me the said T M Umpier,
indifferently elected and chosen, as well on the part and behalf of the said H
D as on the part etc. to award, arbitrate, determine and judge of, and
concerning all and all manner of actions, suits, judgments, executions,
strifes, variances, quarrels, controversies and demands whatsoever, had, made,
moved, stirred or depending between the said H D on the one part, and the said
L O on the other part, from the beginning of the world until the day of the
date of these presents: So always, as the said Award etc. of me the said
Umpier, for and concerning the premises, be made and put in writing Indented
under my hand and Seal, on, or before the etc. as by the said several
obligations and their several conditions, more plainly appears. Now know ye,
that I the said T M Umpier, as aforesaid, taking upon me the Charge of the said
Award, and arbitrament, and having heard and viewed the sayings and allegations
of either of the said parties, concerning the premises, and minding to set an
unity and friendship concerning the same, do thereupon make and put in writing
this mine Award, arbitrament, determination and judgment between the said
parties for and concerning the premises in manner and form following; That is
to say, first I do Award, arbitrate, determine and judge by these presents,
That the said H D his executors, administrators or assigns shall well and
truly pay etc. And I the said Umpier do also Award etc. that he the said H L
shall on the etc. at the Shop of etc. Seal, and as his absolute deed deliver to
the said L O or to his use, a release, acquittance and discharge of and for all
and all manner of actions, suits, judgments etc. from the beginning of the
World until the day of the date hereof.

In witness etc.
A Lease made in consideration of the Surrender of a former Lease, for a longer
time, if three live so long, with good Covenants.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. Between I B of etc. and I D of etc. on the one
party, and T W of etc. on the other party, Witnesses, That the said I B. C D
and I D. as well for and in consideration of the surrender of one former Lease
dated the etc. made from the said I B. C D. and I D to H VV Brother to the said
T W. as also in consideration of the sum of etc. to the said I B in hand paid
before the ensealing and delivery of these presents by the said T W, his
Executors etc. Have demised, granted and to farm letten, and by these presents
do demise, grant and to farm let unto the said T W all those two messuages or
tenements with the appurtenances, and three Yard land to the same belonging,
situate, lying and being in the Parish of etc. late in the several tenures of
the said H W deceased, and A P Widow, and now in the occupation of the said T W
and the aforesaid A P. Together with the lopps, tops, shreds of all the
hedg-rowes and hedges growing in and upon 11 hads of land in a field called
Arzons field, in a furlong called B furlong: And also the lopps and topps of
one hedge growing in and upon a Close called H Close, from the gate of the lands
fide there, unto Garsington field: And together likewise with Common of Pasture
for 12 kine, and 120 Sheep in the commons and fields of D aforesaid. And all
other fields, pastures, lands, meadows, feedings and grounds whatsoever with
the appurtenances of them the said I B. C D. and I D. which late were in the
occupation of them the said I B. H B and A P. or either of them in D aforesaid,
and together also with all houses, edifices, buildings, barnes, stables,
orchards, gardens, back-sides, courts, ways, easements, profits, commodities
and advantages whatsoever to the said two messuages and other the premises
belonging or appertaining (except and always reserved out of this demise and
grant, the bodies of all trees of Oak, Ash and Elm now growing, or which
hereafter shall grow and be in and upon the premises, or in and upon any part
or parcel therereof; And also except one barn, called the great barn, and the
yard wherein the same stands, which late were in the possession or occupation
of G B.) To have and to hold the said two messuages or tenements, three Yard
land, houses, buildings, barnes, stables, orchards, gardens and all other the
premises with their appurtenances, before by these presents demised or
mentioned to be demised, and every part and parcel thereof (except before
excepted) unto the said T W his etc. from the feast day of etc. before the date
of etc. unto the full end and term of etc. from thence next ensuing and fully
to be complete and ended, if T W Son of the said T W party to these presents, G
W and A W or any of them shall so long live. Yiedling and paying therefore
yearly during the said term, unto the said I B his etc. the sum of etc. at two
most usual feasts or terms in the year; That is to say, At the feast of the
Nativity of S. etc. by even and equal portions. And if it shall happen the said
yearly rent of etc. to be behind and unpaid, in part or in all after either of
the said feasts, in any year during the said term, in which the same ought to
be paid by the space of 28 days being lawfully demanded, and no sufficient
distress to be had or found in or upon the demised premises, that then and at
all times afterward it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said I B his
Heirs and Assigns and every of them, into all and singular the said demised
premises and every part thereof wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again
and enjoy, as in his and their former estate; And the said T W his etc. from
thence utterly to expel and put out: this Indenture or any thing before
specified to the contrary notwithstanding. And further etc. that he the said T
W party to these presents his etc. shall and will from time to time and at all
times hereafter during the continuance of this present lease, For Reparations.
at his and their own proper costs and charges well and sufficiently repair,
uphold, sustain, maintain and keep the said message or tenement and all
other the said demised premises, in good and sufficient reparations, and the
same so being well and sufficiently repaired, upholden and kept, in the end of
the said term, or other sooner determination of this Lease, shall leave and
yield up unto the said I B his heirs or assigns, the said T W from time to
time having, and taking by the assignment and appointment of the said I B his
heirs or assigns sufficient Timber upon the said demised premises, for the
reparations of the same, if any such Timber be there to be had, otherwise the
said Timber to be found and reparations done as aforesaid at the proper
provision and charges of the said T W party to these presents, his executors
or assigns, And that neither the said T W his executors or assigns, or his
and their under-Tenants shall commit or do any wast, or strip any trees,
hedges, quicksets, mounds or fences upon the premises. And the said I B for
himself etc. That the two messuages or Tenements, three Yard land, and all
other the fore demised premises, with the appurtenances, That the premises be
discharged of encumbrances.
and every part and parcel thereof now are, and be, and so from henceforth
during the continuance of this present Lease shall be and continue clearly
acquitted, exonorated and discharged, of and from all and all manner of former
bargains, sales, gifts, grants, joyntures, dowers, leases, annuities, rents,
arrearages of rents, statute merchant and of the staple, recognizances,
judgments, executions, wills, entailes, legacies, titles, troubles and
encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered or done, or to be made,
had etc. by the said I B. by the said G B deceased his Father, I B his
Grandfather, and R B his Uncle, or by any of their heirs etc. or by any other
person, or through their or any of their means, act, title, consent or
procurement (One lease heretofore made by the said G B of one message or
tenement, and other things parcel of the premises before by these presents
demised unto the said A P for and during the natural life of the said A P.
whereupon the yearly rent of etc. is reserved and shall be from henceforth
during the continuance of the same lease due and payable unto the said T W
party to these presents, his executors, administrators and assigns only
excepted and foreprised.) And further the said I B for hinself his heirs, To
exchange a life within ten years.
executors and administrators does covenant etc. that if at any time hereafter
during the space of Ten years next ensuing the date of these presents, the
said T W or his assigns shall be minded to exchange and put in one other life
in the stead and place of any of them, the said T W the son, G. and A W. the
party put out being then living, that then within three weeks next after
request in that behalf made, and payment of etc. to the said I B in
consideration thereof, he the said I B his heirs or assigns shall and will at
the costs and charges of the said T W. party to these presents, his executors
or assigns, make, seal and deliver in due form of law, unto the said T W
party to these presents, his executors and assigns, one other good and
sufficient lease for the residue of the said term which shall be then to come
(if any two of the persons before named, and such other persons as shall be
then nominated and put in shall so long live, and under the like rents,
covenants and conditions as in these presents is expressed (mutat. mutand.) And
further, that the said T W party to these presents, his executors,
administrators and assigns, For quiet enjoying.
and every of them under the rents and covenants herein before mentioned, shall
or may peaceably and quietly have, hold, possess and enjoy the said two
messuages or tenements, three yard land, and all other the fore-demised
premises with the appurtenances, and every part thereof during the whole term
hereby granted (if the said T W the son, G VV. and A VV or such other person as
shall be herafter named with two of them, in the stead and place of any of them
so dying or exchanged, shall so long live) without the lawful let, trouble,
eviction, expulsion or contradiction of the said I B his etc. or of the etc. of
the said G B deceased, or of any other person or persons whatsoever (except
only the said A B for her lease before mentioned.)

That the premises are discharged of Encumbrances.
And the said C D and I D for themselves and either of them severally and
respectively, and not the one for the others, nor the others act, and for their
several etc. do covenant, promise and grant to and with the said T VV party to
these presents, his etc. That he the said T VV his etc. and every of them
shall and may according to the tenor and true meaning of these presents
peaceably and quietly have, hold and enjoy all the said demised premises with
the appurtenances, and every part thereof free and clear, freely and clearly
acquitted and discharged of and from all and all manner of former bargains,
sales, gifts, grants, leases, joyntures, dowers, uses, wills, intailes,
statutes, recognizances, judgments, extents, executions, and from all other
estates, titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever had, made, committed,
suffered or done by them the said C B and I D or either of them, or by any
other person or persons by their or either of their means, act, title or
procurement. And lastly, the said I B for himself etc. That he the said I B his
heirs and assigns and every of them, shall and will at all times hereafter,
and from time to time upon request made, For further assurance.
and at the costs and charges in the law of the said T VV party to these
presents, his executors or assigns, or some of them, make, do and execute or
cause to be made, done and executed all and every such further and other
reasonable act and acts, thing and things whatsoever for the further and better
assurance, surety, more sure making and conveying of the said demised premises
with the appurtenances and every part thereof unto the said T VV party to these
presents, his etc. during the term aforesaid, and in such manner and form upon
such rents, covenants and conditions as is before herein mentioned according to
the effect and true meaning of these presents, as by the said T VV his etc. or
by his or their council learned in the law shall be reasonably devised or
advised and required.

In witness, etc.
A grant of an extent penned by Mr. Tho. Bromely then Solicitor.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. between I D of etc. and VV D of etc. on the one
part, and T P and T O of etc. on the other part, Witnesses, That whereas the
right Honorable E Lord S. by the name of E S Esquire by one recognizance bearing
date etc. taken, knowledged and sealed before Sir R D Knight, Lord chief
Justice of England, according to the form of the statute for the recovery of
debts in that case provided, stands bound to the said I D in the sum of etc.
payable etc. as by the same recognizance etc. And where also the said I D has
extended and to him delivered in execution the Manor of N. with the
appurtenances in the County of etc. at the yearly rent of etc. for non-payment
of the said sum of etc. Now the said I D for diverse good causes and
considerations him hereunto especially moving, has granted, assigned and set
over unto the said W D. T B. G B. and T O all his estate, right, title,
interest and demand which he has by reason of the said extent, of, in and to
the Manor of N. with the appurtenances; and of, in, and to every part and
parcel thereof; and of, in and to all and singular messuages, lands, tenements,
meadows, leasowes, pastures, rents, reversions, services and hereditaments,
with the appurtenances so extended and delivered in execution as aforesaid, and
the said I D for himself etc. That he the said I D his executors;
administrators or assigns at any time or times hereafter shall not do any act
or acts, thing or things whereby the said extent and extents, or the estate,
title or interest of the said W D etc. or any of them, or of the executors or
administrators or assigns of them, or any of them by reason of the same
extent, may be in any wise hurt, hindered, impeached, discharged, undone or made
void. And further, that he the said I D his heirs, executors and
administrators, shall and will at the reasonable request, costs and charges in
the law of the said W D or any of them, do and suffer to be done, made and
acknowledged all and every such lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and
things, devise and devises in the law whatsoever for the further assurance,
surety, sure making and conveying of the premises for and during all the term
and time of the said extent and execution, unto the said W T. B. G B. and T O.
as by the learned council of them, or any of them shall be reasonably devised
or advised and required.

In witness, etc.
The copy of a recognizance taken by a Justice of Peace, for the appearance of
certain persons at the Sessions.
BE it remembered, that the twentieth day of etc. T D of etc. came before me T S
Esquire one of the Justices of the peace of our said Lord the King in the said
County assigned to keep etc. and did acknowledge himself to owe to our said Lord
the King 40 l. of lawful etc. to be made and leavyed of his goods, chattels,
lands and tenements, to the use and behoof of our said Lo. the K. And W and R F
of etc. likewise came and undertook for the said T D each of them in the
penalty of 20 l. of their goods, chattels, lands and tenements also to be
raised and leavied to the use and behoof of our said Lo. the King, if the said
T D shall make default in the condition ensuing etc.

The condition etc. That if the above bounden TD do be, and personably appear
before his Majesty's Justices of the Peace and general Gaol delivery to be
holden within the said County, then and there to answer such matters, as on
his Majesty's part and behalf shall be objected against him touching the
suspicion of the felonious stealing of a gray Mare of the goods and chattels of
a man unknown, and not depart thence without the license of the Court. That
then etc.

A surrender of the captainship of a Castle.
KNow all men, Me. P T etc. to have surrendered to our most excellent Prince and
Lord James, by the grace of God etc. the office of keeping and captainship of
the Castle of C in the County of S. and the office of keeping of the waters of
C and P in the said County, and the vails and fees of two shillings of lawful
etc. by the day for the execution of the said office, and all other things
which our said Lord the King by his Letters Patents dated at Westminster. etc. in the
year of his Reign etc. has granted unto me, as fully and wholly as they
were all granted to me: with this intention nevertheless, that our said Lord
the King by his other Letters patents would vouchsafe to grant all and singular
the premises unto R B of etc. for the term of his life.

In witness, etc.
An assignment of a bond for performance of Covenants.
TO all Christian people etc. I I of etc. sends greeting etc. Whereas R D of
etc. by his obligation bearing date etc. became bound unto the said I I in the
sum of etc. conditioned for performance of covenants, contained in one pair
of indentures of bargain and sale of the Inn called the K. in C. in the etc.
with certain lands thereunto belonging, which Inn and premises are now by
the said I I bargained and sold unto M W of etc. his etc. Now the said I I for
the better enjoying of the said Inn and other the lands and tenements thereunto
belonging, has as much as in him is, assigned and set over, and by these
presents does fully, clearly and absolutely assign and set over unto the
aforesaid M W his heirs, executors and assigns, the said recited obligation,
and all sum and sums of money therein mentioned, and the benefit and advantage
to be thereof had and made.

And the said I I for himself etc. That he the said M W his etc. shall and may
in lawful manner, at his and their costs and charges in all things from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, sue for, leavy, recover and enjoy all sum
and sums of money, benefit and advantage whatsoever which shall or may be
gotten by virtue, force or means of the said recited Obligation in the name of
the said I I. his executors or administrators, without any manner of nonsuit,
release, trouble, denial or interruption of the said I I. his executors or
administrators, unless it be by consent of the said M VV his heirs or assigns
in writing first had and obtained. And the said M VV. for himself etc. does
covenant etc. That he the said M VV. his executors or administrators shall and
will from time to time and at all times hereafter, save and keep harmless the
said I I his executors and administrators and every of them, of and from all
and all manner of costs and charges to arise by means of any suit upon or by
reason of the same Obligation.

In witness etc.
A Release of an annuity.
TO all Christian people etc. We N B and A B of etc. send greeting. Whereas Sir
J B of etc. by his Deed ^indented bearing date etc. for the considerations
therein mentioned did give and grant unto W L and R P of etc. one Annuitie or
yearly rent of etc. to be issuing and going out of all and singular the
Manors, Messuages, Lands and Tenements called H and L. within the parish of
etc. and out of all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments with the
appurtenances in H and L. within the said parish of etc. in the said County of
etc. To have, hold, perceive and enjoy all the said Annuitie or yearly rent of
etc. to the said VV L. and R P. their executors and assigns, for and during
the natural life of the said A B. The said Annuitie or yearly rent of etc. to
be payable and paid to the said VV and R. their executors or assigns during
the life of the said A. at two Feasts in the year, viz. at the Feast of etc. At
or in the etc. as by the same Deed indented thereof made, more at large it does
and may appear: sithence which time the said VV L is dead, and the said R P him
survived. And whereas also the said R P by his Deed indented bearing date etc.
for the considerations therein mentioned, did demise, grant, bargain and sell
unto the said N B. his executors and assigns, the said Annuitie or yearly rent
of etc. and every part thereof; To have and to hold unto the said N B. his
executors and assigns, from etc. and immediately ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended, if the aforesaid A B should so long live; as in and by the
said Deed last mentioned more fully and at large it does and may appear. Now
know ye, That we the said N B and A B. for and in consideration of a certain
competent sum of lawful money of England to us in hand paid at and before the
ensealing etc. by G S. and R G of etc. Esquire; Consideration.
whereof and wherewith etc. Have remised, released, and quit claimed, and by
these presents for us and either of us, our and either of our executors and
assigns, and every of us, do fully, clearly and absolutely remise, release,
and for ever quit claim unto the said G S and R G. their heirs and assigns
and every of them, in their, or some, or one of their full and peaceable
possession being, as well the said Annuitie or yearly rent of etc. before
mentioned, and every part and parcel thereof, and all rents, arrerages of
rents, penalties, forfeitures, (nomine poenae) and distresses whatsoever at any
time or times heretofore due or forfeited, by reason of the non-payment of the
said annuity or yearly rent of etc. or of any part or parcel thereof, as also
all the estate, right, title, interest, property, term and terms of life,
lives and years, reversion, claim and demand whatsoever, which we the said N
B and A B or either of us, our, or either of our executors or assigns, now
may, might have or claim of, in and to the said annuity or yearly rent of etc.
above mentioned, or any part thereof by force and virtue of the said several
deeds indented, above recited or mentioned or either of them, or otherwise
howsoever: To have and to hold the said annuity or yearly rent of etc. estate,
right, title, interest and all other the before mentioned premises with the
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof unto the said G S and R G
their heirs and assigns for ever, so as neither we the said N B and A B or
either of our executors or assigns, or any of us shall or will at any time
hereafter ask, claim, challenge or demand any estate, right, title, interest in
or to the said annuity or yearly rent of etc. or any part thereof. But thereof
and therefrom, and from all actions, suits, titles and demands concerning the
same, shall be utterly secluded, and for ever debarred by these presents.

In witness, etc.
A short lease of certain Tithes, to commence immediately after the expiration
or determination of a lease in being.
THis INDENTVRE made the etc. between Sir E S of etc. on the one part, and M D
of etc. on the other part, witnesses, That the said Sir E S for diverse good
causes and considerations him moving, and especially for the good opinion he
has, and conceives of the said M D. has demised, granted, Grant.
betaken and to farm letten, and by these presents does etc. unto the said M D
and his assigns, all the tithes of corn, grain and hey yearly coming,
renewing and growing within the township of etc. within the Lordship or etc. in
the County of G. and now held by E L of etc. by force and virtue of a lease
thereof granted by the right Honorable the Earl of D. deceased, To have and to
hold, perceive, take and enjoy all the said tithes of corn, Habend.
grain and hey unto the said M D and his assigns immediately from and after
the expiration, surrender, forfeiture or other determination of the said lease
thereof granted by the late E of D as aforesaid, unto the full end and term of
one and twenty years from thenceforth next ensuing, and fully to be complete
and ended, and that in as large and ample manner as the said E L now has and
enjoys the same, yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said term
unto the said Sir E S his etc. the sum of etc. at the feast of etc. at one
whole entire payment. And if it shall happen the said yearly rent of etc. to
be behind and unpaid in part, or in all by the space of etc. next following
the said feasts (being lawfully demanded) that then for every such default, A
nomine paenae for non payment of the rent.
the said M D or his assigns shall forfeit and pay unto the said Sir E S his
etc. the sum of etc. over and besides such arterages, as then shall happen to
be behind and unpaid. And the said Sir E S. for him, his heirs, executours and
administrators, does Covenant etc. that he the said M D his executors and
assigns shall and may at all time and times from and after the expiration of
the lease aforesaid, during the said term hereby granted, peaceably and quietly
have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy all the said tithes of corn, grain
and hey, paying the rent before reserved, without any manner of lawful let,
eviction, disturbance or contradiction of the said Sir E S. his etc. or any
other person or persons, by his or their means, consent or procurement.

In witness, etc.
A deed of gift in English.
TO all people, to whom this present writing shall come, I A B of etc. send
greeting etc. Know ye, that I the said A B. for and in consideration of the sum
of etc. which I the said A B do owe and am indebted unto T S etc. have given,
granted and sold, and by these presents do fully, clearly and absolutely give,
grant, bargain, sell and confirm unto the said T S all and singular such my
goods, chattels and implements of household and commodities whatsoever that are
contained and specified in a certain schedule hereunto annexed; To have and to
hold all and singular the said goods, chattels, implements of household and
commodities whatsoever, as aforesaid, to the aforesaid T S his executors,
administrators and assigns, to his and their own proper uses and behoofes for
ever, thereof and therewith to do, use and dispose at his and their will and
pleasure; as of his and their own proper goods and chattels, without any manner
of challenge, claim and demand of me the said A B or of any other person or
persons, for me, in my name, by my cause, means, consent or procurement. And
further, know ye, that I the said A B have put the said T S in full possession
of all and singular the aforesaid premises by the delivery unto him (at the
ensealing hereof) one go^^ei of silver in name of all the said goods.

In witness etc.
Another deed of gift.
TO all people etc. I B C etc. send greeting. Know ye, that I the said B C. as
well for and in consideration of the natural zeal, and brotherly love which I
have and do bear unto my well beloved brother P C of etc. as also for diverse
other good causes and considerations me at this present especially moving, have
given and granted, and by these presents do give, grant and confirm unto the
said P C all and singular my goods, chattels, leases, debts, ready money, plate,
jewels, rings, household stuff, apparel, utensills, brass, pewter, bedding,
and all other my substance whatsoever, moveable and immovable, quick and dead,
of what kind, nature, quality or condition soever the same are or be, in what
place or places soever the same be or shall or may be found, as well in my own
custody or possession as in the possession, hands, power and custody of any
other person or persons whatsoever. To have and to hold all and singular the
said goods, chattels, leases, debts, Habend.
and all other the aforesaid premises, unto the said P C his executors,
administrators and assigns, to his and their own proper uses and behoofs for
ever, freely and quietly, without any manner of challenge, claim or demand of
me the said B C or of any other person or persons whatsoever, for me, in my
name, by my cause, means or procurement, and without any money or other thing
therefore to be yielded, paid or done unto me the said B C my etc. And I the
said B C all and singular the aforesaid goods, Warrant.
chattels and premises to the said P C his executors, administrators and
assigns, to the use aforesaid, against all people, shall and will warrant, and
for ever defend by these presents. And further know ye, that I the said B C
have put the said P C in quiet and peaceable possession of all and singular the
aforesaid premises, by the delivery unto him at the ensealing hereof,
Possession.
one coined piece of silver, commmonly called twopence, f^ied on the seal of
these presents.

In witness, etc.
A deed of gift.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, I C of etc.
greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know ye, me the said J C for my especial
natural favor which I bear toward W C my beloved son, and for diverse other
good causes and considerations me to these presents espeally moving, to have
given and granted, and by this my present writing to give and grant unto the
aforesaid W C all and singular my goods and chattels whatsoever, moveable and
immovable, as well living as dead, of what kind, condition or nature soever
they be, and wheresoever they shall or may be found, as well in my own proper
possession, as in the possession, power, hands or custody of any other person
or persons, which for the present are, or for the time to come shall happen to
be; together with all and singular debts, and sum or sums of money which are
detained from, or owing to me, from any person or persons, or at any time
hereafter shall happen to be detained from, or owing to me. To have and to hold
all and singular the goods, chattels and debts to the said W C his executors
and assigns freely and quietly for ever, without any challenge, claim or
demand, or any account in any manner to be given, paid or made to me the said J
C. And I the said J C all and singular the goods, chattels and debts to the
foresaid W C his etc. and to his use and behoof aforesaid, against all sorts of
people will warrant, and for ever by these presents defend.

In witness, etc.
A Release of Dower.
TO all people to whom this present writing shall come, Dame Dorothie Williams,
late the Wife of Sir David Williams Knight, deceased, one of his Highnesses
Justices of his Pleas, before his Highness to be holden, assigned, sends
Greeting etc. Know ye, that the said Dame Dorothie W for and in consideration
of the performance of a former agreement had, Consideration.
and made between the said Dame Dorothie W and the said Sir D D her late
husband before this enter-marriage, has remised, released and for ever quit
claimed, and by these presents does clearly and absolutely remise, release and
for ever quit claim unto Sir H W Knight, T W and R W Sons of the said Sir D W.
and to every of them, all and all manner of Dower, and right and title of Dower
whatsoever which she the said Dame Dorothie VV now has, may, might, should or
of right ought to have or claim, of, in or out of all and every the Manors,
messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments whatsoever which were the said
Sir D VV's at any time during the Coverture between him and the said Dame
Dorothie, situate and being in the County of etc. or in any or every of them,
and all and all manner of actions, and writs of Dower whatsoever, so as neither
she the said Dame Dorothie VV or any other for her, or in her name, any manner
of Dower or writ, or action of Dower, nor any manner of right or title of dower
of or in the said Manors, lands, tenements and hereditaments, nor of or in any
part or parcel thereof, at any time hereafter shall or may have or claim, or
prosecute against the said Sir H VV. T VV and R VV. nor any of them, their nor
any of their etc. but of and from the same shall be utterly debarred and for
ever excluded by these presents.

In witness, etc.
A Release from one that has lost his Articles of agreement.
Be it known unto all men by these presents, that I E VV of etc. have remised,
released and quit claimed, and by these presents do for me, my heirs,
executors, administrators and assigns, and every of us fully, clearly and
absolutely, remise, release and for ever quit claim unto J O of etc. all and
all manner of accounts, suits, plaints, pleas, process and demands whatsoever
which against the said I O I ever had, now have, or at any time hereafter shall
or may have by reason or means of any grant, covenant, contract, promise,
bargain, clause, sentence or thing mentioned, contained, expressed or declared,
in, or by certain Articles of Agreement Indented bearing date etc. made
between the said I O on the one party, and me the said I E on the other party,
touching or concerning the procuring of the lease of a field, or parcel of
ground, arable, meadow or pasture, called the etc. of the yearly rent of etc.
lying etc. which said Lease I do hereby acknowledge is procured and passed by
the said I O according to my mind and desire: And of and from all bonds, hills,
and writings obligatorie, and all and every penalty, sums of money in them, or
any of them mentioned or contained, wherein, or whereby the said I O is, and
stands bound unto me, for the performance of the covenants, grants, articles
and agreements in the said Articles mentioned or contained.

In witness etc.
A Form or preamble of a Will.
IN the name of God, Amen. The tenth day of etc. I A B etc. sick in body, but
of good and perfect Memory, thanks be to Almighty God, and calling to
remembrance the uncertain estate of this transitory life, and that all flesh
must yield unto death, when it shall please God to call, Do make, constitute,
ordain and declare this my last Will and Testament, in manner and form
following, revoaking and adnulling by these presents, all and every Testament
and Testaments, Will and Wills heretofore by me made and declared, either by
word or by writing; And this to be taken only for my last Will and Testament,
and none other. And First, being penitent and sorry from the bottom of my
heart for my sins past, most humbly desiring forgiveness for the same; I give
and commit my Soul unto Almighty God, my Savior and Redeemer, in whom, and by
the Merits of Jesus Christ, I trust and believe assuredly to be saved, and to
have full remission and forgiveness of all my sins, and that my soul with my
body at the general day of Resurrection, shall rise again with joy, and
through the Merits of Christ's death and passion, possess and inherit the
Kingdom of heaven, prepared for his elect and chosen; and my body to be buried
in such place where it shall please my executors hereafter named, to appoint.
And now for the settling of my Temporal estate, and such goods, chattels and
debts as it has pleased God, far above my deserts to bestow upon me; I do
order, give and dispose the same, in manner and form following: That is to say,
First, I will, that all those debts and duties that I owe in right or
conscience to any manner of person or persons whatsoever, shall be well and
truly contented and paid, or ordained to be paid by my executors hereafter
named, within convenient time after my decease. Item, I give and bequeath etc.

In witness etc
An assurance of a Jointure to the Wife, with remainders in tail.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between H V of etc. on the one party; and L L. etc. G
L. etc. on the other party; Witnesses, that as well for and in consideration
of a Marriage had and solemnezed between the said H U and A now wife of the
said H U. and Sister of the said H L and G. as also for the great good will,
love and affection which the said H has and bears to the said A his Wife,
and to the intent that the messuages, lands and tenements hereafter in these
presents expressed, mentioned and declared, may come, descend and remain unto
the heirs of the bodies of the said H V and A between them lawfully begotten
(if any such shall be.) It is covenanted, granted, condescended, concluded and
fully agreed by and between the said parties to these presents in manner and
form following; And the said H U. for the considerations aforesaid does
covenant, promise and grant for himself etc. To and with the said L L and G L
their etc. by these presents, That he the said H U his heirs and assigns for
ever, and all and every other person and persons whatsoeever, shall stand and
be seized of and in all and singular those his messuages, lands, tenements,
meadows, leasows, pastures and hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular
their appurtenances in the Parish-Town and field of C aforesaid, in the said
etc. which late were parcel of the possessions of the late dissolved Monastery
of etc. and now be, or of late were in the several Tenures or occupations of
etc. and their assigns, and of and in the reversion or reversions of the
premises, and every part and parcel thereof, to the uses, purposes and intents
hereafter in these presents expressed and limited, and to none other purpose
and intent: That is to say, to the use and behoof of the said H U for the term
of his natural life, without impeachment of wast, and after his decease, to the
use and behoof of the said A U now Wife of the said H U for the term of her
natural life; and after the decease of them the said H and A his Wife, Then to
the use and behoof of etc. between them lawfully begotten, as the said H by his
last Will and Testament or other writing to be signed and subscribed by the
said A in her lifetime shall limit nominate and appoint, and to the use of the
heirs of his body lawfully begotten: and for etc. to the use of the right
heirs of the said H for ever: and if no such limitation, nomination or
appointment shall be made by the said A in her lifetime, then to the use of the
heirs of the bodies of the said H and A between them lawfully begotten; And
for etc. to the use of the right heirs of the said H for ever. And further the
said H U for himself etc. does covenant etc. to and with the said L L and G L
their heirs etc. that he the said H V his heirs and assigns shall and will
permit and suffer the said H V and all and every other person and persons, to
whom the said message, lands, tenements and other the premises, or any part or
parcel thereof shall happen to come, or of right ought to come, by reason of
these presents, peaceably and quietly to have, hold, occupy and enjoy all and
singular the said messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments before by these
presents expressed and mentioned, without any manner of let, trouble, eviction,
disturbance, suit, vexation, or expulsion of the said H V his heirs or
assigns, or any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully having, claiming
or pretending to have any estate or title from, by or under the said H V his
heirs or assigns, according to the intents, form and true meaning of these
presents.

In witness, etc.
A Lease of a Farm-house, and certain Lands with necessary covenants.
THis INDENTURE made etc. Between C B of etc. on the one party; and T W of etc.
on the other party, Witnesses, that the said C B for sundry good
considerations, him to these presents especially moving, has demised,
Consideration.
granted and to farm let unto the said T W his executors, administrators and
assigns, All that his message, tenement or Farm-house called W with the
appurtenances, and all houses, edifices, buildings, barns, stables, orchards,
gardens, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, profits and commodities
whatsoever to the said message, tenement or farm-house now belonging or
appertaining, and being now in the tenure or occupation of the said T W or of
his assignee or assigns, situate, lying and being in the Parish of etc.
(except and always reserved unto the said C B his etc. All and all manner of
woods, under-woods, Exception.
hedg-rows and Timber Trees now standing, growing and being, or which hereafter
shall stand, grow or be in and upon the demised premises, or in and upon any
part or parcel thereof: And always excepted, and always reserved unto the
said C B, his etc. by the space, and for the term of one whole year, next
before the end and expiration of the term of seven years, and one half year
hereunder granted, the said message, tenement or Farm-house, and one Close, or
parcel of ground called W. containing etc. be it more or less: Together with
free liberty of ingresse, egresse and regresse, abiding and dwelling, into,
out of, from and upon the said message, tenement and Farm-house, and one Close
called B. by and during the said space and term of etc.) next before the end
and expiration of the said Term of etc. To have and to hold the said Message,
Habendum.
Tenement or Farm-house, houses, edifices, Buildings; Barns, Stables, Orchards,
Lands, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures and other the demised premises, and every
part and parcel thereof (except before excepted) unto the said T W. his
executors, administrators and assigns, from the feast day of etc. for and
during the term of etc. and fully to be complete and ended. Yiedling and paying
therefore yearly during the said term unto the said C B his executors and
assigns the rent of etc. at four Feasts or Terms in the year most usual, That
is to say, Reddendum.
At etc. by even and equal portions: And if it shall happen the said yearly
rent of etc. or any part or parcel thereof to be behind and unpaid, by the
space of etc. next over or after any of the said Feast-daies, in which the same
ought to be paid, being lawfully demanded, That then and from thenceforth,
Re-entry for non payment.
and at all times after it shall and may be lawful to and for the said C B his
executors, administrators and assigns into the said message, tenement or
Farm-house, houses, edifices, lands, meadows, pastures and all the demised
premises, with the appurtenances, and into every part and parcel thereof wholly
to re-enter, and the same to have again, repossede and enjoy, as in his and
their former estate; and the said T W. his executors, administrators and
assigns and all other the Tenants and occupiers of the said demised premises
or any part or parcel thereof, thereout and from thence utterly to expel; a
move and put out, this Indenture or any thing therein contained in any wise
notwithstanding. And the said T W for himself does covenant etc. in manner and
form follwing, For reparations, hedging, ditching and fencing.
that is to say, that he the said TW his etc. at his and their own proper costs
and charges, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
during the said term of etc. by these presents granted, when, and as often as
need shall require, well and sufficiently, repair, support, sustain, maintain
and amend the said Message, tenement or farme-house, and all the houses,
edifices, buildings, barns and stables thereunto belonging or appertaining with
the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, in, by and with all and
all manner of needful and necessary reparations whatsoever, and also shall and
will at all times hereafter, and from time to time during the said term, at his
and their like costs and charges, well and sufficiently hedge, fence, ditch,
enclose and amend all and singular the hedges, fences, ditches, enclosures,
belonging to the said demised premises, in, by and with all and all manner of
hedging, fencing, ditching and enclosures, when; and as often as need shall
require, during the said term, and as well the said message, tenement or
farme-house, houses, edifices, buildings, barns and stables with the
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof so well and sufficiently
repaired, as also the hedges, fences, ditches and enclosures aforesaid, well
and sufficiently supported and amended in the end of the said term or other
determination of this present lease, shall leave and yield up into the hands
and possession of the said C B his etc. And the said T W for himself his etc.
does covenant etc. For the lesser to permit a man to plant an ortchyard.
That he the said T VV his etc. shall permit and suffer one I H and his
assigns, to plant and make in and upon some convenient place of the demised
premises, an ortchyard with such store of fruit trees, as the said I H or his
assigns shall think meet, and the same ortchyards and fruit trees so made and
planted, shall fence, preserve, and keep, so much as in him shall be, from
spoil and hurt of cattle, and from all other harm and destruction. And further,
that he the said T VV his executors, administrators and assigns shall at all
times hereafter, and from time to time during the said term of etc. find and
allow unto G H widow, mother unto the said I H. competent and sufficient meat,
To find lodging and diet, and apparel convenient for a widow, during the term
and thereof to exonerate the lesser.
drink, lodging, apparel, and all other necessaries whatsoever, meet and
convenient for her degree, and shall from time to time, and at all times
clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge the said C B his etc. and every of
them, of, from and concerning the keeping of the said G H. during all the said
term of etc. before by these presents granted. Not to plow up the meadow.
And lastly, the said T W for himself etc. that he the said T VV his etc. nor
any of them shall not at any time or times hereafter during the term before, in
and by these presents granted, plow up, or otherwise deface or spoil the meadow
ground, belonging to the said demised premises, or any part or parcel thereof.
And also that he the said T W. his etc. shall and will in the end of the said
term of etc. before by these presents granted, or other determination of this
present lease, deliver and yield up the quiet and peaceable possession of all
and singular the before demised premises, and of every part and parcel thereof,
unto the said C B his etc. And the said C B for himself etc. does covenant etc.
in manner and form following, viz. that he the said T W. his executors,
administrators and assigns, and every of them for and under the yearly rent
before by these presents reserved, and other the covenants, grants, articles
and agreements in these presents contained, shall or may peaceably, lawfully
and quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy all and singular the
said message, tenement, or farm-house, houses, edifices, lands, meadows,
ortchyards, gardens, and all other the before demised premises, and every part
and parcel thereof (except before excepted) for and during the said (...) of
etc. before by these presents granted, without any manner of lawful let, suit,
trouble, eviction, disturbance or contradiction of the said C B his etc. or any
of them, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, by his, their, or any of
their means, act, title or procurement. Provided always, and it is mean^ and
intended by and between the said parties to these presents, Proviso.
That this Indenture, or any thing herein contained, shall not extend to charge
the said C B his etc. by or with any action of covenants, or other action
whatsoever, saving only for such estate and interest, as the said C B or any
other, claiming by, from o^ under him, now have, or may have, of, in or to the
demised premises or any part thereof, and not for any other better or former
estate right or title which shall or may proceed, or extinguish the grant by
th^se presents made.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment of two several obligations.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, F D of etc.
Gent. sends greeting. Whereas R D of etc. Gent. in or by one obligation or
writing obligatory with condition thereupon endorsed bearing date etc. Now know
ye, that the said F D for diverse good causes and considerations him to these
presents moving, does fully, clearly and absolutely bargain, sell, assign, and
set over unto R B of etc. his etc. as well the said two obligations, as also
the said several sums of money in them, and either of them mentioned or
contained, to the only proper use and behoof of the said R B his etc. and
without any account or other thing therefore to be yielded, paid or done unto
the said F D his etc. or to any of them. And the said F D for himself, his
heirs, executors and administrators does covenant, promise and grant to and
with the said R B his executors, administrarors and assigns by these presents
in manner and form following; that is to say, that he the said R B his etc. and
every of them shall and may at all times hereafter and from time to time
peaceably and quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy all and
singular the sum and sums of money whatsoever contained in the said several
obligations, and also the benefit, commodity, penalty and advantage
whatsoever which shall or may happen, come, grow, or be by reason of the said
several obligations or writings obligatory above recited or mentioned, without
any manner of let, suit, trouble, gainsaying, means, consent or procurement of
the said F D his etc. or any other person or persons whatsoever.

In witness, etc.
An Assignement of two Apprentices, and their years to come.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come, I A N,
Citizen and etc. send Greeting in our Lord God everlasting: Whereas my
Apprentices I S and G R have certain years yet to come, Recital of the
Indentures.
and unexpired of their several Apprentiships, to wit, the said I S one whole
year and a half, from the feast of, etc. last past, and the said R G, the space
of two years and a hal^, from the said feast, as by their several Indentures
thereof unto me the said A N made and sealed, at large, it does and may
appear. Now know ye that I the said A N for diverse good causes and
considerations me especially moving; Consideration.
And the rather for that it stands with the good liking and pleasure of my said
Apprentices, Have given, granted, assigned, and set over, and by these presents
do fully, and absolutely give, grant, assign, and set over unto my well
beloved friend R H Citizen and H of London, all such right, title, duty, term
of years to come, claim, interest, apprentiship, services, and demands
whatsoever, which I the said I N have of, in, and to the said I S, and R G my
said Apprentices, or which I might, or ought to have of, and in them, or either
of them, by force and virtue of the above recited Indentures of Apprentiships,
(that is to say) the true and faithful service of I S, for and during the time
and space of one whole year and a half, from, etc. as aforesaid; And the like
honest and dutiful service of R G, for and during the time and space of two
whole years and a half, etc. from the Feast day as is before declared; Giving
and by these presents granting unto the said C B my full power and lawful
authority for the having, Grant of these Terms.
keeping, and enjoying of my said Apprentices during the time before mentioned,
and not expired. And moreover, the said A N does by these presents Covenant,
promise, and grant to and with the said C B, his executors and assigns, that
the said I and G my Apprentices shall during their several times well and
truly serve the said C B as their Master, and his commandments lawful and
honest every where shall do, and from the service of him, they nor either of
them shall not absent, or prolong himself by day or night during the said
several Terms of their aforesaid Apprentiships yet ^o come and unexpired;
provided that the said C B their Master shall well entreat and use the said I
and G as becomes Apprentices in such case to be used, finding unto them, and
either of them, meat, drink, linen, woollen, hose, shoes, and bedding, and all
other necessaries, during the said Term.

In witness, etc.
A Proviso, that if the Lessor be minded to surrender his grand Lease, to take
a further estate in the premises, then the demise to be void.
PRovided always, and be the demise under and upon Condition, That if the said
A B, his executors, administrators, or assigns shall at any time during the
demise be minded to surrender his grand Lease, by which he has, and holds
the aforesaid demised premises, amongst other things, to the intent to get a
new Lease, or any larger, or further estate of, in, and to the same, and
thereof shall give, or leave notice in writing to and for the said A B,
executors, administrators, or assigns at the the said Mansion house, that then
at the day and time of such notice given, and from thenceforth for ever this
demise, grant, and term of years shall cease, determine, and be utterly void,
and of none effect, to all intents and purposes; Any thing herein contained to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding, And the said, etc. That he
the, etc. or Assigns, the surceasing, and determination of this demise, grant,
and term of years of the said A S to be had, claimed, and enjoyed, as
aforesaid, shall and will not only peaceably and quietly permit, and suffer
the said A S, his executors, administrators and assigns to have, hold, and
enjoy the said demised premises, under the yearly rent aforesaid, by and
during the term of three months, and before the end and expiration of the
same, shall at his and their own proper costs and charges make, seal, and
deliver, or cause, etc. sufficiently tendered at the said demised premises, or
Mansion house unto the said A S, his executors, or assigns, a new Lease, or
Grant in writing, of all the said demised premises, for so much of the said
time of, etc. as shall be then to come, and unexpired, and for and under such
r^nts, covenants, and conditions as are contained in this present Lease.

A Letter of Attorney to enter upon Lands, and to deliver a Lease made to
Another.
KNow all men by these presents, That I R R of, etc. have made, ordained,
constituted and appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain constitute and
appoint T C of, etc. my true and lawful Attorney, for me, and in my stead, and
name to enter and come into, and upon the f^rme and lands of T in the Parish
of, etc. now in the tenor or occupation of R T, or of his assigns, or upon any
part thereof, then, and there, for me and in my stead, and name to deliver as
my Act and Deed unto H M of, etc. or to his assigns, one Indenture whereunto I
have already sealed and subscribed my name, bearing date, etc. made between me
the said R R of the one part, and the said H M of the other part, purporting a
Lease of the said Farm and Lands unto the said H M, his executors,
administrators, and assigns for the term of four years next ensuing etc. as
in, etc. by the said Indenture more at lage appears; which Indenture after
the same shall be so delivered by my said Attorney, I the said R R do promise
by these presents shall be my effectual Deed in Law, to all intents,
constructions, and purposes as I the said R R had sealed and delivered the same
then, and there my self:

In witness whereof, etc.
A Letter of Attorney to enter upon Lands, and to deliver a Lease.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come, We T A and R
M of, etc. send greeting. Whereas we the said T A and R M have signed and
sealed to one Indenture, bearing date with these presents, purporting a Lease,
demise, or grant unto I H of, etc. of all that our Manor or Farm of L, etc
with the house, barn, stables, orchard, gardens, etc. And of all that one
Site of the Rectory or Parsonage of L in the said County of, etc. Together
with the demesne lands to the said Manor or Farm belonging, or appertaining,
To hold from the ensealing and delivery of the same Indenture, for the term of
three years then next ensuing, as by the same Indenture at large appears.
Letters of Attorney.
Now know ye, that we the said T A and R M have made, ordained, constituted and
appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain, constitute, and in our steads
and places put and appoint our trusty and well beloved friend I H etc. our
true and lawful Attorney, and assign for us, and in our steads and names, to
enter and come into and upon all that the said etc. And other the lands
aforesaid, or into some part thereof; And then and thereafter such entry made,
to deliver unto the said I H as our very Act and deed, the said Indenture of
lease above mentioned, to hold according to the tenure of the same Indenture;
And further to do and execute all, and every such further thing, and other Act
whatsoever as shall be needful to be done and performed in that behalf in as
large, ample and effectual manner, as we our selves might, or could do if we
were personally present.

In witness, etc.
An Assignment from Patentees of part of their Grant.
TO all people to whom this present writing shall come, we R W and D L gent.
send greeting: Whereas our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty that now is, by
his highness Letters Patents under the great seal of England bearing date etc.
for the considerations therein mentioned, Has given and granted unto us the
said R W and D L etc. Recital of the grant.
Reciting the grant, as in and by the said Letters Patents, amongst diverse
other provisions, liberties, power, privileges and things therein contained,
and to us granted, more fully at large, it does and may appear. Now know ye,
that we the said R W and D L, for, and in consideration that the said Letters
Patents have been and were procured and gotten unto us, by and through the
great charges, Labor, Industry, and solicitations of H R of L. Gent. and for
other good considerations, us hereunto moving, have given, and granted, and by
these presents do give and grant unto the said H R his executors,
Administrators, and assigns, full power and authority to bargain for,
procure, or buy, or cause to be bought, procure, or bargained for, by his or
their factors, Agents, or assigns the fifth part of the said 3000. barrels of
B, aforesaid in five parts to be divided from year to year, and every year,
yearly during the said Term of 21 years, and the said B, not exceeding a fifth
part of the said 3000 barrels in five parts to be divided as aforesaid, yearly
and every year during the said term freely and lawfully ship, lade transport,
and carry, or cause to be shipped, laden transported, and carried by way of
Merchandise out of, and from any City, or Port, in the City of Bristoll, and
Barnstable, Cardiffe and Chapter or out of, or from any of the creeks, members or
places to the same ports, or any of them belonging, or out of any other ports
or creeks; whatsoever within Southwales to any of the Ports beyond the Seas,
being at the time of any such transportations in League or Amity with the
Kings Majesty his heirs or successors and the same here from time to time to
utter, sell, dispose, or put away at his and their free wills, and pleasure, to
make thereof his and their best advantage, to his and their own proper use and
behoof; And we have, and do by these presents make, ordain and appoint the
said H R his executors, administrators, or assigns an Agent for, that purpose
for, and concerning that fifth part, and for his more full, and absolute
assurance in that behalf we have assigned and set over, and by this presents do
fully, clearly and absolutely give, grant, assign, and set over unto the said
H R his executors, administrators, and assigns, one and the full fifth part of
all and every sum, and sums of money, gain, profit, benefit, commodities,
increase and advantage whatsoever, which shall or may during the said term of
21. years, be yearly from time to time had, made gotten, or obtained by reason
or means of the said fifth part before to him by these presents granted, or
assigned, and also one full fifth of the benefit, privileges, preheminences,
forfeitures, seizures, profits and commodities which shall, or may be obtained,
or gotten by force and virtue of the said Leters Patents before mentioned, or
of any liberty, privilege, power, or authority thereby granted, or by reason
or means of the yearly buying, bargaining for, procuring, transporting, lading,
venting and shipping of the said etc. into the parts beyond the Seas, in such
form as in the said Letters Patents is Limited, set down and expressed, in as
full and ample manner and form to all intents and purposes, as we the said R W
and D L have, Habend.
shall, or have by virtue of the said Letters Patents. To have and to hold the
said fifth part of etc. and the power and liberty to transport the same as
aforesaid, and all other the premises with their appurtenances, before by
these presents given, granted, assigned and set over, or meant, mentioned, or
intended to be etc. and every part and parcel thereof unto the said H R his
executors Administrators and assigns, to be done and executed to him and them,
and every of them, or by his, or their, or any of their factors, servants,
Agents and assigns, and also for, and during the whole term of 21. years
granted, and by the said recited letters Patents, in as large, ample and
beneficial manner and form, to all intents and purposes, and in every
condition and degree, as we the said R W and D L, or either of us our, or
either of our executors, Administrators, or assigns, or any of us, may, or
could do by force and virtue of the said recited letters Patents, That he shall
quietly enjoy a fifth part of the premises.
or any thing therein contained; And we the said R W and D L for us, and either
of us, our, and either of our executors etc. That he the said H K his executors
and Administrators, shall and may lawfully and peaceably, and quietly, have,
take and receive and enjoy the said first fifth part of the said etc. so to be
yearly transported as aforesaid; And the said power and liberty to transport
the same, and all other the premises with their appurtenances before by these
presents mentioned to be hereby given, granted, assigned, or set over to his,
and their own proper uses and behoofes, during the term aforesaid, by the said
letters Patents granted, without the let, trouble, denial, hinderance,
revocation, countermand, or contradiction of the said R W and D L, or either of
them, their executors Administrators or assigns, or of any other person, or
persons whatsoever, and free and clear without paying, allowing, or disbursing
any sum of money, or other charges, other then the allowance and payment of 2
shillings reserved to his Majesty by the said letters Patents for every barrel
so to be transporred as aforesaid, for the same, and in as large, and ample
manner in every condition and degree to all intents and purposes as we the said
R W and D L or either of us, our executors or assigns might or could have, and
enjoy the same by virtue of the said letters Patents or any power, grant,
privileges, or things therein contained.

In witness, etc.
A condition to pay money within four days after, if the parties bound in an
obligation pay it not at the day.
THe condition of this obligation is such; That whereas W H and R B by their
obligation, or writing obligatory bearing date etc. are and stand jointly, and
severally bounden unto the within named I L in the sum of etc. with condition
endorsed and (at large appears,) now if the said W H and R B their executors
Administrators, and assigns shall make default in payment of the said sum of
etc. the said etc. in with the same ought to be as aforesaid; That if so be the
within bounden L L his heirs executors Administrators or assigns or any of
them do within four days next, and immediately ensuing the said etc. well and
truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said I L his executors, administrators
or assigns the sum of etc. or so much thereof as shall be unpaid in, or upon
the said etc. At or in etc. without fraud or covin, that then this obligation
etc.

A short Assignment to a third Person.
THis Indenture made etc. Between H P etc. of the one part, and W C etc. on the
other part witnesses, that whereas G M etc. and M, Recital.
his wife etc. in and by their three several Indentures of lease bearing
equal date the etc. for the several considerations therein mentioned, did
devise, grant, and to farm let unto the said H P all that their three several
third parts, in three parts to be divided, or all that their message or
Tenement situate, lying and being in etc. then or late in the time or
occupation of one R G or of his assign, or assigns, with all Shops, Cellers,
Sollers, Chambers, Rooms, lights, easements, buildings and commodities
thereunto belonging, with their appurtenances together withal their several
third parts in three parts to be divided of, and in such goods, wainscot,
implements of household, necessaries and things as were specified and contained
in three several schedules or Inventories Indented, and to the same Indentures
annexed; Habend.
To have and to hold all their said three several third parts, in three parts
to be divided of, and in the said message or Tenement, and all and singular
other the said demised premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and
parcel thereof unto the said H P his executors, Administrators, and assigns,
from the feast day of, etc. then next coming after the date of the said
several Indentures of Lease, unto the end and term of etc. from thence next
ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, yielding and paying therefore
during the said term of etc. unto the said G M and E, his wife, and to the
heirs and assigns of the said E, etc. and to the said H B and H, his wife,
and to the heirs and assigns of the said H etc. and to the said T P and M,
his wife, and to the heirs and assigns of the said M etc. At four feasts or
Terms in the year (that is to say) at the feast of etc. by even and equal
portions, as in and by the said three several Indentures of Lease, amongst
diverse other covenants, grants, Articles, agreements, and things therein
contained more fully and at large, it does and may appear, now his Indenture
further witnesses; That the said H P for, and in consideration of the sum of
etc. to him in hand paid by the said W C before the ensealing and delivery of
these presents, whereof he the said H P does acknowledge the receipt thereof,
and thereof and every part and parcel thereof, does clearly acquit and
discharge the said W C his executors and Administrators, and every of them for
ever by these presents has granted, bargained, sold, assigned, and set over,
and by these presents does clearly and absolutely, grant, bargain, sell,
assign, and set over unto the said W C his executors, Administrators, and
assigns, as well the said message or Tenement and all other the said premises
with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, as also all the
estate, right, title, Interest, Term of years to come, possession, claim and
demand whatsoever, which he the H P now has, may, might, should, or in any
wise ought to have, of, in, or to the said message, or Tenement, or premises,
or of, in, or to any part, or parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the said
three several recited Indentures of Lease, or any or either of them, or other
wise howsoever, Habend.
together with the said three several Indentures of Lease; To have, and to
hold the said message or Tenement, the said several Indentures of Lease,
estate, right, title, Interest, and all, and singular other the premises
before by these presents bargained, or sold, or mentioned, or intended to be
hereby bargained, sold assigned, and set over, and every part and parcel
thereof unto the said W C his executors, Administrators, and assigns, for and
during all the rest and residue yet to come and unexpired of the said Term of
one etc. in the fame Indentures of Lease granted in as large and ample manner
and form to all intents and purposes as he the said H P now has, may, might,
or in any wise ought to have, and enjoy the same, by force of the same
Indentures of Lease aforesaid, or otherwise howsoever; And the said H P does
covenant, promise and grant, for h^mself his executors, administrators, and
assigns, and for every of them, to and with the said W C his executors, and
assigns, by these presents in form following, that is to say, that he the said
W C his executors, Administrators, and assigns, and every of them, under the
rents, Covenants, provisoes and agreements in the said several recited, or
mentioned Indentures of Lease contained, shall, or may, for, and during all the
rest and residue now to come and unexpired of the said term in the said
several Indentures of Lease, granted, lawfully, peaceably and quietly have,
hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said message or tenement, and all
other the premises with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof
without the let, trouble, interruption, molestations, or contradiction of him
the said H P his executors Administrators or assigns, or of any other person,
or persons, whatsoever claiming from, by, or under him the said H P his
executors or assigns, discharged also of, and from all and all manner of former
and other bargains, sales, gifts, grants, surrenders, forfeitures, Reentries,
cause and causes of forfeiture and Reentry, rents, arrerages of Rents, charges,
titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever had, made, committed, suffered or
done by the said Henry Peighen his executors Administrators, or assigns, or
any of them, or by any other person, or persons whatsoever, claiming from, by
or under him, them, or any of them, or by his, their, or any of their means,
Act, title, consent, or procurement, The rents covenants and conditions and
agreements in the said several recited or mentioned Indentures of Lease
contained, which from henceforth on the tenants part, and behalf are, or ought
to be paid, performed and kept excepted, and always foreprised.

In witness, etc.
A Condition to pay a sum of Money to Children at their several ages,
according to the Will by which it was given, the Bond made to the Executors.
THe Condition of this obligation is such, That whereas the within named A B by
his last Will and Testament, bearing date, etc. did amongst other Legacies and
bequests give and bequeath, to the children of his late brother G B deceased,
to every one of them that should be living at the time of his death, to be
delivered unto them by equal portions at their several ages of twenty one
years, forty pound a piece, and to G B by name, one of his said brothers
children, the sum of ten pound, over and besides the said XL pound, formerly
to him given, as aforesaid; And did ordain, that the said several sums so
bequeathed to his said brothers children, should be delivered to their mother,
his sister in law, for the use and behoof of the said children, she putting
insufficient security to his executors for the payment of the said sums at
their several ages above mentioned, as by the said last Will and Testament of
the said A B may plainly appear. And whereas the executors of the within named
A B have now paid and delivered unto the within bounden E W, the mother of the
said children, the sum of, etc. of, etc. for the several Legacies of such of
the same children, as are yet under the age of 21 one years, (that is to say)
C. pound for the use of the above named G B, according to the bequest thereof
to him made, as aforesaid: forty pound more for the use of G B, forty pound
more for F B, and forty pound more A B, all children of the said G B deceased,
to he paid unto them at their several ages as abovesaid; If therefore the
above bounden E B her heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, or any of
them do, and shall well and truly pay, or cause to paid, unto every of the said
children before named respectively (viz) to G F, and A their said several
sums or Legacies above mentioned, at every of their several and respective
ages of 21 years, according to the effect and true meaning of the said Will,
without fraud, or covin, That then, etc.

A Condition for payment of Money to a Child when he comes to age, and in the
mean time to find it, and bring it up.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bounden T C, his heirs, executors, etc.
do well and truly deliver and pay, or cause to be paid and delivered unto T M,
son of I M late of, etc. the son of, etc. within one month next after that
the said T shall attain and come to his full age of 21 years; And also
carefully and honestly, according to his calling and degree keep, educate, and
bring up the said T, during his non^ age, with necessary and convenient meat,
drink, learning, and apparel. And if it happen the said T M to die, or depart
this life before he shall attain his said age of 21 years, Then if the said T C
his executors, etc. do within one year next after the decease of the said T M
pay, or cause to be paid unto the within named, etc. his executors, or
assigns, to the use of the children of the said I M which shall be then
living, the said sum, etc. to be equally distributed, and divided amongst
them; That then, etc.

A Grant of an Advowson from the King.
James, etc. Know ye, that we for certain good causes and considerations us at
present especially moving, of our especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere
motion, have given and granted, and by these presents do for us, our heirs, and
successors, give and grant to our beloved W H Knight, the first and next
Advowson, donation, collation, nomination, and right of Patronage to the
Rectory and Church parochial of, etc. in our County of H, with all the rights,
members and appurtenances for one and the next Turn only, now, or late in the
possession of G D, Professor of sacred Divinity Incumbent there; To have, hold,
and enjoy the said first and next avoidance only, when and as soon as the same
Rectory first and next shall happen to become void by death, resignation,
privation, cession, permutation, or by what other way soever, or right, or
title whatsoever; So that it may and shall be lawful to the said W H, his
executors, and assigns by force of these presents as aforesaid, when and as
soon as the said Rectory shall first and next become void; for the first
avoidance only to give and confer the said Rectory to our beloved S W, etc.
and to none other, and to the Bishop, or Ordinary of the same place and
Diocese, to nominate and present, and to cause him to be instituted and
inducted into the real, and corporal possession of the same Rectory, with all
his rights, members, and appurtenances, and to do, finish, and perform all and
singular other things, which shall be fitting or necessary, in or about the
premises; As fully and wholly as We, our Heirs, or successors could, or might
do, if this our present Gift, and Grant thereof had not been made:

Witness, etc.

A Sale of a Moity of a Rent reserved by Lease.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between R B of etc. Executor of the last Will and
Testament of R R, late of etc. deceased, and P K C etc. on the one part, and A
G C etc. on the other part witnesses, That whereas the said P K being
interressed and possessed by Lease, dated the etc. made and granted unto him
the said P K by, and from one W T, of etc. of all that Message, Tenement, or
Inn, called or known by the name or Sign of the black Bell, situate in
Fleetstreet in the Parish of St. Dunstans, etc. And of all Cellars, sollars,
rooms, barnes, stables, hay-lofts, gate-houses, liberties of passages, Courts,
Yards, windows, lights, watercourse, racks, plancks, mangers, and all other
the appurtenances whatsoever to the said message or tenement belonging, or
appertaining (except as in the said Lease, made to the said P K of the
premises is excepted) And whereas the said P K did afterward by his Indenture
of Lease, bearing date etc. for the considerations therein expressed demise,
grant, and to farm let, unto T R, Citizen etc. his executors, administrators,
and assigns, all those rooms, chambers, lodgings, Cellars, and easements
hereafter particularly mentioned, being parcel of the said message, tenement,
or Inn called etc. and then in the tenure of the said P K, or of his Assigns
(that is to say) one Cellar lying under the shop, then, and yet in the
occupation of the said T R, in Fleet. London, one room or chamber toward the
street, called the Crown, being part over the said shop, and part over the said
gate, or way leading into the said message, tenement, or Inn called the black
Bell, one other little dark room, or chamber called the faggot chamber, lying
backward behind part of the said room or chamber called the Crown on the same
floor, with liberty to make and contrive convenient light, or lights from the
yard of the said message, tenement, or Inn aforesaid, to serve the said room,
called the Fag. room, and the same so made to enjoy, during the said Lease; one
other room, chamber, or lodging toward the street, called the Angel, direct
over the said chamber, called the C. One other chamber or lodging, commonly
called the two-bed chamber, lying backwards behind part of the said room, or
chamber called the A. on the same floor, and also one piece or parcel of the
lower room, then in the Occupation of the said P K, or of his assigns, to
contain by estimation etc. next behind the West end or side of the said shop,
then in the occupation of the said T R toward the North, for the making and
contriving of a pair of stairs to lead from the said shop unto the said
demised premises, and also from thence to make and contrive a convenient way
or passage to lead into the Cellar before mentioned, Together with all lights,
ways, easements, commodities, and appurtenances to the said premises
belonging, or appertaining, To hold to the said T R his executors,
administrators or assigns, from the feast of etc. then next coming after the
date of the said Lease last recited, to the end and term of etc. from thence
next ensuing and fully to be complete and ended, and for and under the yearly
rent or reservation for the first two years and one quarter of the same term,
of one pepper corn, and afterward during the whole term, for and under the
yearly rent of etc. payable as in and by the said Indenture of Lease made to
him the said T R. (amongst diverse other covenants, grants, articles, and
agreements therein contained more fully and at large it does and may appear)
And whereas afterward the whole estate, Recital.
right, title, interest, term of years, property, claim, and demand of the
said P K in and to the said premises before mentioned, or recited by good and
sufficient conveyances in that behalf made) came into the hands and possession
of the said R R, who died thereof lawfully possessed, and by, and after whose
decease the said Indenture of Lease first mentioned Term of years, and
premises aforesaid, was lawfully vested and settled in the said R B, as
Executor of the last Will and Testament of the said R R. And whereas the said R
B being of the premises so possessed as aforesaid, by his Indenture, or Deed
indented, bearing date etc. for the considerations therein mentioned, did
grant, bargain, sell, assign, and set over unto I C C, etc. his Executors,
administrators, and assigns the moity, or one half part of the Message,
Tenement, or Inn called the black Bell aforesaid, and the moity of all and
singular shops, cellars, sollars, rooms, barnes, stables, hay-lofts,
gate-houses, liberties of passages, courts, yards, windows, lights,
watercourse, racks, plancks, mangers, and all other the appurtenances
whatsoever, to the said message, tenement, or Inn belonging or appertaining,
and the moity of all houses, edifices, and buildings, then standing; and being
upon the premises, or any part thereof, and the moity of all and singular
other the premises whatsoever mentioned to be demised in, and by the Indenture
of Lease first mentioned, (except as in the same Indenture is excepted) to hold
the said moity of the said message, tenement, or Inn, called the etc. of all
other the premises aforesaid (except before excepted) unto the said I C his
executors, administrators, and assigns from thenceforth, during the residue
then to come and unexpired of the whole term granted by the said Indenture of
Lease first mentioned, made to the said P K, as aforesaid, as in, and by the
last Indenture, or Deed indented, (amongst other things also more at large it
does and may appear. Now this Indenture witnesses. That the said R K and P K
for, and in consideration of the sum of etc. to him the said P K, by the
direction and appointment of the said R B well and truly paid before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, by the said A G, whereof they the
said R B and P K do acknowledge themselves to be fully satisfied, contented,
and paid, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, do clearly acquit
and discharge the said A G, his executors, and administrators by these
presents, Have granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these
presents do clearly, and absolutely, grant, bargain, sell, assign, and set
over unto the said A G, his executors, administrators, and assigns, all that
the moity, or half part of all and singular the said rooms, chambers, lodgings,
cellars, ways, lights, liberties, passages, commodities, and appurtenances,
and of all other the premises demised to the said T R by the said P K in, and
by the said Indenture of Lease before recited, and of every part and parcel
thereof, together with the moity or one half part of the said yearly rent of
etc. reserved by the said Indenture of Lease, and full liberty, power, and
authority, to receive, and take the same from time to time, at such feasts, and
days as the same shall grow due, and payable by the said Lease, during the
whole term thereby granted, To have and to hold the said moity of all and
singular the said rooms, chambers, lodgings, rents, and other the premises
with the appurtenances before by these presents mentioned, to be granted,
bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, and every part, and parcel thereof
with liberty, power, and authority, to receive, and take the said rent, as
aforesaid, unto the said A G his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns from
the ensealing and delivery of these presents for, and during all the rest and
residue of the said term of twelve years to him the said T R granted as
aforesaid now to come and unexpired in such like, large, and ample manner, to
all intents and purposes, as they the said R B, and P R or either of them
might, should, or in any wise ought to have, take, and enjoy the same; And the
said R B and P K, for themselves, and either of them, their, and either of
their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and for every of them, do
covenant, promise, and grant, to, and with, etc. That is to say, That they the
said R B, and P K, or one of them, at the time of the ensealing and delivery of
these presents are, and stand, or one of them is, and stands so lawfully and
absolutely possessed of the premises, as that they the said R B, and P K, or
one of them, now have, or has, good right, full power, and lawful authority
hereby to grant, bargain, sell, assign, and set over the said moity of the
said several rooms, chambers, lodgings, and other the premises, with the
appurtenances before by these presents mentioned, to be granted, bargained,
sold, assigned, and set over, and every part, and parcel thereof unto the said
A G, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form aforesaid.
And further that he the said A G, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
and every of them, shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during
the rest, and residue of the said term of twelve years, granted to the said T
R, as aforesaid, peaceably, and quietly have, hold, and enjoy the moity of the
said rooms, chambers, lodgings and other the premises with the appurtenances
before mentioned, to be demised, to the said T R. by the Indenture of Lease
above recited, and every part thereof, and the moity of the said yearly rent of
etc. by the same Indenture reserved shall, or may receive, take, and enjoy from
time to time, as the same shall grow due, during the said term, without the
let suit, trouble, disturbance, interruption, or eviction, of them the said R
B and P K or either of them, their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or
any of them, or of any other person, or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming
by, from, or under the said R R deceased; And also acquitted, and discharged
of, and from all, and all manner of former Grants, bargains, sales, leases,
statute merchants, and of the staple, recognizances, judgments, executions,
surrenders, forfeitures, reentries, and of, and from all other titles, troubles
charges, and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, or done by the said
P K, and I B, and R R deceased, or any of them; or to be had, made, committed,
or done by the said P K, and R B, their executors, or any of them, or by their,
or any of their means, act, title, interest, default, consent, or procurement.

In witness, etc.
A Mortgage of Lands.
THis Indenture made the etc. between the Right honorable E E of Bedford the
Lady Lucy his wife Countess of B. the Right honorable the Lord M. Baron of R.
in the County of, etc. Sir F G of, etc. and E W of, etc. on the one party and
J W of, Consideration.
etc. on the other party witnesses; That in consideration of the sum of, etc.
to the said E, Earl of Bedford, and the Lady Lucy Count. of etc. in hand paid
by the said J W before, then sealing and delivery of these presents whereof
they do acknowledge the receipt, and thereof, and of every part, and parcel
thereof, do hereby clearly and absolutely acquit exonerate and discharge the
said J W his heirs executors, administrators, and assigns, and every of them,
for ever by these presents; They the said W, Lord M, Sir F G and E W, at and by
the special direction and appointment of the said E, Earl of Bedford, and the
Lady Lucy, Countess of Bedford, Have, demised granted, Grant.
bargained and sold and by these presents do demise, grant, bargain, and sell
unto the said J W his executors, administrators and assigns, all those Closes
and grounds hereafter particularly named situate lying and being in the ham
let, parish, or field of Burley in the County of R, That is to say one close
of pasture, and meadow ground commonly called or known by the name of new cow
close contained by estimation 110 acres now in the Tenure or occupation of R, I
Gent. or his assigns one other close of pasture called Nether Austrop
containing by estimation 170. acres at least now in the tenure or occupation of
W D. or his assigns two closes of pasture etc. Together with all and singular
the ways, passages profits, commodities, advantages, and appurtenances
whatsoever to the said several closes and grounds, and every or any of them
belonging or in any wise appertaining or with them, or any of them, now or
heretofore usually occupied, demised, or enjoyed, or accepted, reputed, taken
or known, for, or as part, or parcel of them, or any of them, And the
reversion, or reversions, remainder and remainder rents, and yearly profits
whatsoever, of all, and singular the said closes and premises before
mentioned, and of every of them; To have, Habend.
and to hold the said closes, fields, grounds, hereditaments, and all, and
singular other the premises with their, and every of their appurtenances
before by these presents demised or mentioned to be hereby demised, granted,
bargained, or sold, and every part, and parcel thereof, unto the said I W his
executors, administrators, and assigns, from the etc. day of, etc. next
ensuing the date of these presents, Reddend.
unto the full end and term of ninety and nine years from thence next ensuing,
and fully to be complete and ended, yielding and paying therefore yearly unto
the said W Lord M Sir F G and E W, their heirs or assigns, one pepper corn
only, At the etc. if the same be demanded. Provided always, and it is fully
agreed between the said parties to these presents, Proviso.
and every of them, that if the said E, Earl of Bedford, the Lady L. Countess
of Bedford, W Lord M. Sir F G, and E W or any of them, their, or any of their
heirs executors, administrators, or assigns, or any of them do, and shall
well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said I W his executors,
Administrators, or assigns the sum of, etc. In or upon the etc. At or in the
etc. between the hours of, etc. That then this present demise, grant, bargain,
and sale, shall be utterly void, frustrate, For payment of the money.
and of none effect; Any thing herein before contained to the contrary thereof
in any wise notwithstanding. And the said E, Earl of Bedford, the Lady Lucy
Countess of B W Lord M Sir F G and L W do by these presents, covenant,
promise, and grant, that they or some of them, their or some of their heirs,
executors, administrators, or assigns, shall, and will well and truly pay, or
cause to be paid unto the said J W his executors, administrators, or assigns
the said sum of, etc. in or upon the etc. at, or in the place aforesaid, And
between the hours of, etc. According to the true intent and meaning of these
presents; And further that the said closes, grounds, and other the premises
before in, and by these presents mentioned to be demised, granted, bargained,
and sold, now are, and be, and so during the whole term of, etc. hereby
granted, shall be, remain and continue of the clear yearly value of etc. over
and above all charges and reprises, For quiet enjoying the premises upon
default.
And moreover if default be made in payment of the said sum of etc. herein
before in the said Proviso mentioned, or any part thereof, at the day time, and
place before limited and mentioned for the payment thereof; That then the said
I W his executors, administrators, and assigns, and every of them, shall, and
may from time to time, and at all times during the said Term of etc. peaceably
and quietly have hold, occupy, possess, and enjoy the said grounds, Lands,
Tenements, hereditaments, and all other the premises herein before mentioned,
to be demised, granted bargained, or sold, withal and singular their and every
of their appurtenances and every part thereof, without the let suit trouble
denial disturbance expulsion, or interruption of the said E, Earl of Bedford,
the L Lucy etc. W Lord M Sir F G and E W and of all and every other person, and
persons whatsoever, and discharged of, and from all other bargains, sales,
gifts, grants, leases, statutes, recognizances, extents, judgments, and all
charges, estates, titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, had made,
committed, suffered, or done or to be had etc. by the said E E, of Bedford, the
Lady Lucy Countess of etc. W Lord M, Sir F G and E W or any of them, or by any
other person, or persons whatsoever; And further that if default be made in
payment of the said sum of etc or any part thereof, For further assurance upon
default.
at the day time, and place aforesaid, That then the said E E of Bedford, the
Lady Lucy C of B W Lord M, Sir F G and E W their heirs executors,
administrators, and assigns, and all, and every other person, or persons
lawfully having claiming, or pretending to have any manner of estate, right,
title, Interest, claim, or demands whatsoever, of in, or to the said closes,
grounds, hereditaments, and premises, or any part thereof, shall, and will
acknowledge, suffer, cause, or procure to be done, made, acknowledged, suffered
and executed: All and every such, further lawful and reasonable Act, and Acts,
thing, and things, devise, and devises in the Law whatsoever, for the further
better, and more perfect assurance surety, sure making and conveying of the
said closes, grounds, and premises with the appurtenances, and every part
thereof, to be conveyed unto the said J W his executors, administrators, and
assigns during the said term of lxxxix. years according to the intent and
meaning of these presents; As by the said I W his executors, or assigns, or by
his, or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, or
advised and required: And the said W Lord M, Sir F G and E W for themselves
severally, and not jointly, nor one of them, for each other their several
heirs executors, administrators, and assigns, and for every of them
respectively do covenant, promise, and grant to, and with the said J W his
executors, administrators, and assigns, and every of them by these presents,
that if default of payment be made of the said sum of etc. or any part thereof,
at the day time and place aforesaid; That then the said J W his executors,
administrators, and assigns shall, or may from time to time, and at all times
during the said term of etc. peaceably, and quietly, have hold, possess and
enjoy the said closes, grounds, and oath premises before mentioned to be
hereby demised, granted, bargained, or sold, without the lawful let, suit,
trouble, denial disturbance expulsion eviction or interruption of them, the
the said W Lord M. Sir F G and E W, severally their and every of their several
respective heirs and assigns, or any of them, or of any other person, or
persons lawfully claiming in, by, from under them, or any of them respectively
as aforesaid; And discharged and clearly acquitted of, and from all former
bargains, sales, gifts, grants, statutes, recognizances, extents, Judgments,
and of, and from all other charges estates, titles, troubles, and encumbrances
whatsoever had, made committed suffered or done by the said W Lord M Sir F G
and E W or any of them respectively their or any of their several heirs
executors, administrators, or assigns or any other person, or persons
claiming, or to claim in, by from or under them or any of them severally and
respectively their or any of their several estate act, title, means consent
and procurement.

In witness, etc.
A Covenant that after default of Payment the possession of lands in mortgage
shall be delivered to the mortgage, and also all Deeds and writing concerning
the same.
ANd the said A B for himself etc. That he the said A B his heirs and
assigns, shall and will upon reasonable request to him, or them to be made
after default shall happen to be made of, or in any of the payments aforesaid
(if) it shall happen so to fall out, deliver or cause to be delivered unto the
said C B his heirs executors, administrators, or one or some of them, and the
quiet and peaceable possession and feison of all and singular the before
bargained premises; And shall then also after such default of payment within
one month next ensuing, deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said C D his
heirs and assigns, as well all and singular the Letters Paents deeds,
evidences, writings, Escrips and minuments before by these presents bargained,
and sold, as also all the true copies of all such other deeds and writings; As
do touch and concern the before bargained, premises or any part thereof;
Together with any other Lands Tenements, or hereditaments not before mentioned,
the said copies to be written at the costs of the said D, his heirs or assigns.

A Letter of Attorney upon Covenants.
TO all Christian people etc. J O B of etc. son and executor of etc. whereas by
one Indenture bearing date etc. made between A B on the one part and C D of
etc. on the other part, there are diverse Covenants contained on the part and
behalf of the C D his executors, and administrators, to be kept and observed
touching a Lease granted to the said O B by the dean and chapter of the
Collegiate Church of etc. of a certain Tenement lying in the precincts of Saint
Martins le grand in London, and covenanted to be transferred over by the said O
B to the said C D as by the same Indenture whereunto relation being had more at
large may appear; Now know ye that I the said O B for diverse good
considerations, me moving: and especially for that it apeareth by the said
Indenture, that the name of my said Father was used only in trust for the
benefit of E D wife of the said C D and their issue have made ordained,
constituted, and in my stead and place, put and appointed my welbeloved friend
E H of etc. to be my true and lawful Attorney for me, and in my stead and name
(if need require) to sue, implead and prosecute the said G D, his executors, or
Administrators, for or upon the breach or not performance of all, or any the
said Covenants, in the said Indendure specified, and to have, receive and take
for the use aforesaid, all such benefit, sum and sums of money, commodity,
and advantage whatsoever, which shall be recovered or gotten by means of any
such suits, Actions, or proceedings to be brought or commenced concerning the
same, And all and every other Act, and Acts, thing and things whatsoever, which
shall be needful to be done in and about the premises the same for me and in
my stead ^and name to do execute and perform in such like large and ample
manner and form to all intents and purposes as I my self might, or could do if
I were there personally present; And whatsoeve'r lawful Actions, suits,
process, and proceedings shall be hereafter commenced, sued, or prosecuted by
the said E H, or his assigns against the said C D his executors, or
administrators, touching the premises I promise to allow maintain justify and
confirm firmly by these presents without releasing or discharging of the said C
D his executors, or administrators of the covenants aforesaid, or any of them,
or of any suits, process for proceeding thereupon to be brought or commenced.

In witness, etc.
A Condition of Arbitrament, general and special.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden R C, and R A their etc. and
every of them do, and shall for their, and every of their parts, and behalfs in
all things well and truly stand to, abide, obey, observe perform, fulfill,
and keep the Award, arbitrament, order, rule, determination, and judgment of
etc Arbitrators indifferently elected, named, and chosen, as well on the part,
and behalf of the said R C, and R A, as on the behalf of the within named I S
the elder, and I S the younger, to Arbitrate, award, order, rule, deem, and
judge of, for, upon, touching, and concerning all Actions, suits, doubts and
variances, concerning the tithes of corn, grain, and hay, herbage, coming,
growing, renewing and arising out of the Manor of L, in the Parish of W, in
the County of etc now in question, and controversy between the said parties;
And also for, touching, and concerning all, and all manner of other Actions,
suits, quarrels, debts, debates duties, bonds, specialties, controversies,
transgressions, offenses, strifes, contentions, reckonings, accounts,, and
demands whatsoever, which between the said R C and R A on the one part, and the
said I S the elder, and the said I S the younger, and diverse other persons on
the other party, at any time from the beginning of the world until the date of
these presents have been had, moved, stirred, or in any wise depending; So
always as the same award, arbitrament, or determination, and judgments of the
parties in, and upon the same premises be made, and given up in writing
indented under their hands and seals, ready to be delivered to the said
parties, at, or in etc. on, or before the etc. That then, etc.

A Condition for the truth of an Apprentice, and to restore the value of all
such goods as by proof shall appear he has embezelled.
THe Condition etc. That whereas I D son of etc. by his Indenture of
Apprentiship, bearing date etc. has put himself Apprentice to the within named
W G, with him to dwell and abide from the Feast of etc. from thence next
ensuing and fully to be complete and ended, as in, and by the said Indenture
more at large appears. If therefore the said I D the Apprentice, do, or shall
at any time, or times hereafter, during the said term of etc. wilfully wast,
steal, ^^beazell, consume, spend, or make away (or otherwise deliver, or lend
upon trust without ready money to any person, or persons without the consent of
the said W G his Master) any of the goods, wares, money, or merchandise of the
said W G his executors, or assigns; Then if the above bounden L M his
executors, or assigns, or any of them do, or shall within two months after
request made, and notice thereof given from time to time, during the said
term, well and truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said W G, his executors,
or assigns the full sum and value of all such goods, wares, money, or
merchandise as by just and due proofs shall appear the said I D to have spent,
imbezelled, wasted; consumed, or lent, without consent, as aforesaid, to the
hurt or hindrance of the said W G his executors, or assigns without fraud or
coven, That then etc.

A Condition to acknowledge satisfaction upon a Judgment.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden P I his executors or
administrators, or any of them do at, or before the end of Easter Term now
next coming after the date within written, by himself, or by his, or their
lawful Attorneys in the Kings Majesty's Court of Common Pleas confess and
acknowledge satisfaction of all such Judgments and Executions as the said I P
has recovered in the said Court against W L of etc. Gent. That then this etc.

A Condition to save harmeless of a Bail.
THe condition of this obligation is such. That if the within bounden R S, his
heirs, ex. administrators, or assigns, or any of them, do at all times
hereafter, and from time to time clearly acquit, exonerate, and discharge, or
otherwise sufficient^y save and keep harmel^sse the within named I E and W C,
and the heirs, executors etc. or either of them, against our Sovereign Lord
the Kings Majesty within written, his heirs, successors, officers, or assigns,
and against all and every other person, and persons wha^soever, of, for, or
concerning all and every recognizances, bails, writings obligatory whatsoever,
wherein, or whereby the said I E and W C at the Instance and request of the
said R S stand bound for the said R to our Sovereign Lord the King, in his
Highness Court of Kings Bench, and also of, and from all, and all manner of
costs, charges, suits, troub es, and expenses whatsoever, which shall, or may
happen, come, grow, or be to the said I E and W C or either of them, or to the
heirs, executors, or administrators of either, or one of them, for, or by
reason of the same Recognizances, or writings obligatory, or bails, or any sum,
or sums of money in them, or any of them mentioned, or contained, That then
this etc.

A Condition to make Assurance upon Request.
THe condition of this obligation etc. that if the within b^und H S, or his
assigns, shall, or will at ^ll times hereafter, upon reasonable request, and
at the costs and charges of the within named I F, his heirs, or assigns, by
such lawful Act, and Ac^s, thing, and things, conveyances, and assurances in
the law whatsoever, as by the said F N, his heirs, or assigns, or his, or
their Council learned in the law, shall be reasonably devised, or required,
lawfully, and sufficiently give, grant, convey, and assure unto the said I F,
his heirs, and assigns for ever, All that message, or tenement with the
appurtenances, sometimes being two Tenements, together with an Orchard, and a
Garden-plot thereunto belonging, set, lying, and being in the Town and Parish
of I, in the County of D, now in the tenure, or occupation of one W C, or his
assigns, clearly acquitted, and discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved,
and kept harmless, of, and from all, and all manner of former bargains, sales,
charges, titles, troubles, and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed,
or done by the said H S, or by any other person, or persons whatsoever, That
then this etc.

An assignement of Lands extended to certain uses.
THis Indenture made the etc. Between W K of etc. on the one party, Recital of
the Sentence in the Star Chamber.
and I P of etc. on the other part. Whereas by Sentence given and pronounced in
the Court of Star Chamber, the 14. day of etc. by the then Lords and others of
the said late Kings Privy Council W K of F in the etc. for an offense by him
committed and perpetrated, was censured, and judged, and sentenced to pay for
the same offense by him committed unto the late King the sum of 31000 pound
for a Fine, as by the sentence of the said Court of Star Chamber appears. And
whereas upon the said estreated in the Court of Exchequer, process and extent
was awarded out of the said Court, for the levying of the said Fine or debt of
etc. whereupon it was found by diverse several Inquisitions, in due form had,
and taken, That the said W K was then seized of an estate in Fee-tail, of, and
in the Mansion house, or Site of the late Monastery, or Priory of Finshead,
and of the Lands, and Tenements thereunto belonging with the appurtenances in
the said County of N, being of the yearly value of etc. above all reprizes, All
which said premises amongst other lands of the said W K, whereby the then
several Sheriffs, in the County aforesaid, seized and extended at the several
yearly values aforesaid, as by the same several Inquisitions returned into the
Court of Exchequer may at large appear, upon which seizures there has been
levied and paid unto the late King the sum of etc. in part of the said rent, or
sum of etc. and then remained due unto etc. the sum of etc.

And whereas our Sovereign Lord the King, Recital of the Letters Patents.
by his Highness Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing date
at Westminster. the etc. (for the considerations therein mentioned) did for him, his
heirs, and successors give, grant, and assign unto C V Gent. one of the Pages
of the Kings Majesty's Privy Chamber, his executors etc. All the said residue
and remainder of the said debt and fine of etc. And also the said extent, or
extents, and all benefit, commodities, and advantages that may, might, or ought
to come, grow, and renew, (...) belong unto his Majesty, his heirs, or
successors, for, or by reason, or means of the said remainder of the said fine
and extents, or any of them; And further, for him, his heirs and successors did
give, grant, and demise unto the said C V his etc. (amongst other the lands of
the said W so extended) all that the said Mansion house, or Site of the said
late Monastery, or Priory, situate, lying, and being in the said County of N,
All which said premises above mentioned, were parcel of the lands, and
possessions of the said W K, and late were in his Highness hands, as taken and
seized for the said debts, or fine of etc. Together with the several yearly
rents, issues, mean profits, and arrerages of the said land, and premises,
mentioned to grow, or which shall, or ought to be to his said Majesty then
before, or at any time then after satisfied, contented, and paid for, or by
reason of the said extent, or extents, or seizure, or seizures, or any of them,
and all and singular houses, edifices, buildings etc. to the said premises, in
any wise belonging; And also all rents, and other yearly profits whatsoever,
reserved upon any leases, or grants, then to fore made, and granted of the
premises, or any part thereof, To have and to hold all and singular the said
premises with their, and every of their appurtenances unto the said C V, his
etc from the Feast day of the etc. then last past, for and during such term,
and time as the same ought, or should have remained in his Highness hands, or
in the hands of his heirs, or successors for, or by reason of the said extent,
or extents, or any of them, and in as large and beneficial manner as his said
Majesty might, should, or could have had, held, or received the same, if the
said grant had not been made, and until the residue and remainder of the said
debt or fine of etc, unsatisfied be contented and paid, with such power and
authority as in the said recited Letters Patents is contained, And for, and
under the yearly rent of etc. to be yearly paid into his Majesty's receipt of
Exchequer at the Feast of etc. yearly during the said term, as by the ^ame
Letters Patents, whereunto relation being had more at large it does, and may
appear; The state, right, title, interest, power, privilege, property, term
of years, claim and demand whatsoever, of which said C V, as well of, in, and
to the said Manor, Mansion house, or Site of the said etc. and the lands and
tenements thereto belonging, And of, in, and to the Manor of E etc. and the
lands etc. As also of, in, and unto all those three closes called etc He the
above named W K now has, and holds, and thereof is and stands now lawfully
and absolutely estated and possessed (amongst other things) by virtue and force
of one Indenture of Assignem nt, to him thereof made by the said C V, bearing
date etc. as in, and by the said Indenture of Assignement, whereunto relation
being had etc. Now this Indenture witnesses that the said W K for, and in
consideration of the great love and affection which he the said W has, and
bears to the said I P and to his Issue lawfully begotten, and to be begotten
of E his now wife, the natural sister of him the said W K And to the intent
and purpose that the said Manors, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, and all
other the premises with the appurtenances herein before mentioned, or recited
shall, and may from, and after the decease of the said W K, during the whole
time and term of the said extent, or extents above mentioned then to come and
unexpired) remain, continue and abide in the blood of him the said W K, and
also for, and in consideration of the sum of etc. to be paid by the said E P
his etc. unto F M now wife of G M Gentleman, and to E L, now wife of E L Gent.
two other sisters of the said W K, (viz.) to each of them etc. in such sort as
hereafter in these presents is set down and expressed, And for diverse other
good causes and considerations him the said W hereunto especially moving, Has
granted, bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, Grant.
and by these presents does fully, clearly, and absolutely grant, bargain,
sell, assign, and set over unto the said I P all the estate, right, title,
interest, property, possession, term of years to come, power, privilege,
benefit, reversion, claim, and demand whatsoever, which he the said W K now
has, might, should, or ought to have, or claim, of, in, and to the said
Mansion house or Site of the said late Monastery or Priory of etc. with the
said Manor of E, and all, and singular the lands, tenements, and hereditaments
to them or either of them belonging or appertaining, and also of, in, and to
the said etc. and all other the premises, with their, and every of their
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, by force, virtue, or means
of the said recited Letters Patents, and Indenture of Assignement aforesaid, or
either of them, or by any other ways, or means whatsoever, together with the
same Indenture of Assignement to the said W K, made of the premises as
abovesaid; To have and to hold the said Mansion House, or Site of the
Monastery or Priory aforesaid; The said Manor of K; The said three Closes etc.
and all and singular other the premises, with their, and every of their
appurtenances, and all the said estate, interest, and term of years of him the
said W K in, and to the same premises, and every part thereof, unto the said I
P his etc. to the only use and behoof of him the said I P, and of such
children as he now has, or hereafter shall have of the body of the said E his
now wife immediately after the decease of the said W K, for, and during all such
time, and term as shall be unexpired, and then to come of the extent, or
extents aforesaid, In as large and ample manner to all intents and purposes, as
he the said W K now has, might, should, or ought to have, and enjoy the same
by virtue of the said recited Letters Patents, and Indenture of Assignement, or
either of them, or otherwise howsoever. For quiet enjoying
And the said W K for himself etc. That he the said I P his etc. and every of
them shall, or may, after the decease of the said W K, during the whole term
before mentioned, under the rents, covenants, and reservations in the said
Letters Patents mentioned, peaceably, and quietly hold, have, and enjoy all and
singular the before bargained premises with the appurtenances, and every part
thereof to the uses before mentioned, without the let or interruption of the
heirs etc. of him the said W K, or any other person, or persons by their, or
any of their means, act, title, or procurement. And the said I P for himself
etc. That he the said I P his etc. or some of them shall, and will within the
space of three years next after the premises aforesaid shall come into the
possession of him the said I P his etc. by force and virtue of this present
grant, or assignment well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said M F
and E L the sum of etc. (viz.) unto each of them, which shall be then living at
the time of such possession had as aforesaid, the sum of etc. without fraud, or
covin,

In witness, etc.
A Release taken from one used in Trust.
TO all to whom etc. R M of etc. whereas C C and T T for, and in consideration
of a certain sum of money to them paid by I L of etc. by their Indenture of
bargain, and sale, bearing date etc. did grant, bargain, and sell unto the said
I L and R M their heirs and assigns for ever; All that their third part, in
three parts equally to be divided, Recital.
of all that their message, or Tenement called, etc. with the appurtenances
situate etc. late in the tenure of etc. And also all, that their third part,
in three parts equally divided of all that their mine of coals opened, or to be
opened, or to be gotten, or dug within the grounds, or lands to the said
message, or Tenement, called the etc. belonging or appertaining, or in any
part or parcel thereof, As by the same Indenture amongst diverse other
covenants, and agreements more at large, it does, and may appear; All which
premises in the said Indenture specified, so sold, and granted unto the said I
L, and R M as aforesaid, was before, and at the sealing of the said Indenture
Indented, and meant to be to the only use and behoof of the said I L and his
heirs, now know ye, that I the said R M for, and in regard of the trust and
confidence in me reposed by the said I L, have remised, released, and quite
claimed, and for, and from me, and my heirs do by these presents, remise,
release, and for ever quite, claim unto the said I L and his heirs all my
right, Interest, estate, title, and demand which heretofore I have, had, or now
have, of, and in the said premises in the said Indenture specified, or in any
part, or parcel thereof.

In witness, etc.
A Bond taken by the Sheriffs of London for ones Appearance.
KNow all men by these presents, etc. To be holden, and etc. to the Sheriffs
of the City of London in 100. pound of goods, etc. To be paid to the said
Sheriffs, or either of them, their executors etc. for the true payment whereof
well and truly to be made I bind, etc.

The Condition.
THe Condition of this obligation is, That if the above bounden A B shall
personally appear, before the Justices of our Lord the King, at W, in the
Octaves of Saint Mar in to answer C D, and E F, of a Plea, that he render unto
them 200. pounds, that then this present obligation to be void, or otherwise to
stand, etc.

A Condition to find one his Diet by the year.
THe Condition etc. That if the within TW his executors, or assigns do, and
shall at his and their costs, and charges, find, provide and allow unto I B or
any one other servant of the within named I B for the time being, good,
wholesome, and sufficient diet, and victuals meet and convenient in such sort,
as is now by him allowed for the time and space of one whole year from the
Feast of the N^tivity of etc. next ensuing etc. At or in the now etc. And if at
any time the said I B, or other servant of the said I B so to be dieted for the
time being shall be absent, from his said commons by the space of six weeks or
more, together at any time during the said term, if then, and so often as he
shall so be absent, the said T W his executors, or assigns do and shall find
and allow diet, and victuals for the said I B for so long time after the end of
said term, as they shall have been absent as aforesaid, According to the true
meaning of these presents, that then, etc. Or else etc.

A Letter of Attorney to enter upon Lands and to deliver a lease made to
another.
KNow all men by these presents that I R R, of etc. Gent. have made, ordained,
and constituted TC of, etc. my true and lawful Attorney for me, and in my
stead, and name to enter and come into, and upon the farm, and lands of T, in
the Parish of etc. now in the tenure or occupation of R T, or of his assign,
or assigns, or upon any part thereof, then, and there for me and in my stead
and place, to deliver as my deed unto H M of etc. or to his assigns, one
Indenture whereunto I have already sealed, bearing date, etc. made between me
the said R R on the one part and the said H M, on the other importing a lease
of the farm, and lands unto the said H M, his executors, Administrators, and
assigns for the term of four years next etc. as in and by the same Indenture
more at large appears, which Indenture after the same shall be so delivered
by my said Attorney, I the said R R do promise by these presents, shall be my
effectual deed in Law to all intents, constructions, and purposes as if I the
said R R had sealed and delivered the same then and there my self.

In witness whereof, etc.
A defeasance upon a Bond sued to A Judgment.
THis Indenture made the etc. between W R, of etc. on the one part, and I P and
G H of, etc. on the other part witnesses, That whereas the said I, and G,
together with one E A of etc. by one obligation bearing date etc. became
jointly and severally bounden unto the said W R in the sum of, Recital of the
Bond.
etc. with conditions thereupon made for the payment of etc. As by the same
obligation, and condition thereof at large appears; which said sum of, etc.
or any part thereof, or any thing in lieu of the same was not paid unto the
said W R, in the said etc. nor any at time before or sithence, by means
whereof the said obligation became merely forfeited. And whereas the said W R
has brought several Actions of debt in the Kings Majesty's Court of Commons
Pleas at Westminister, upon the said obligation, against the said I P, and C A
upon which said Actions several Judgments are had in the said Court, Yet
nevertheless the said W R is contented, and pleased, and does covenant that he
the said W R, Not to take out execution until etc.
his executors, nor administrators, nor any of them, shall at any time before
etc. take out any execution, or executions upon the said Judgments, or either
of them, And further the said W R does etc. That if the said I P, and G A or
either of them etc. do pay, etc. That then he the said W R his executors, or
administrators, shall upon request made, and at the charges of the said I P and
G A etc. shall not only acknowledge satisfaction upon Record of, To acknowledge
satisfaction etc. upon payment.
and for the said several Judgments, but shall also deliver unto them the
said etc. the said obligation to be cancelled, and the said I P and G A to be
thereof, and of the said Judgments discharged. In witness whereof etc.

A Recognizance from one to one.
A B. of H. in the County of S before our Lord the King in his Chancery
personally being acknowledged to owe to P W, of etc. 200. pounds of etc. to be
paid to the said P W his executors etc. in the feast of etc. after the date of
^his Recognizance, and unless he do it, he wills and grants for him, his
heirs etc. that the said sum of money may be levied and recovered of his
goods, Chattels lands, tenements, and hereditaments to the use, and behoof of
the said P W his heirs etc. for ever, wheresoever they shall be found within
the Kingdom of England: witness our Lord the King at W, etc.

A Recognizance from two to one.
W I, of etc. and I H of etc. being personally before our Lord the King in his
Chancery, did acknowledge themselves, and each of them did acknowledge himself
to owe to I B, of lawful money of England, to be paid to the said I B or his
Attorney certain, his exe. etc. upon the feast of Saint Michael the Archangel
next ensuing the Date of this Recognizance: And except he do it, he wills and
grants for himself, his heirs, etc. and either of them, that the said sum of
money should be leavied and recovered of his goods, chattels, lands, tenements,
and hereditaments, to the use and behoof of him the said I B, his heirs, etc
and assigns for ever, wheresoever they shall be found within the Kingdom of
England. Witness our said Lord the King at Westminister the 20. day etc. In
the year of the reign our said Lord Charles by the Grace of God of England etc.

A surrender of a Lease for obtaining a New Lease.
TO all people etc I A S, etc send greeting, etc. whereas I the said A, now am
and stand lawfully possessed of a lease for term of my life to me, made and
granted by etc. bearing date etc. of and in etc. All which premises are
situate etc. and are of the yearly value of etc. As by the said etc. Now know
ye, That I said A, have granted and surrendered unto the said etc. his heirs
und assigns, the said message etc. demised by the said etc. to me the said
A. by the said recited indenture of lease as aforesaid, and all the estate,
right, title, interest, term for live and demand whatsoever of me the said A.
of, in and to the said message and other the premises with the appurtenances,
and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the
said recited Indenture of lease or otherwise whosoever, together also with the
said Indenture of lease, to the intent nevertheless that the said etc. may by
his Indenture of lease, make a new demise and grant of the premises to I H and
C his wife, and N their son for term of their natural lives, and the life of
the longest liver of them successively, or otherwise, as shall be thought
convenient, and for and under the accustomed yearly rent, and under such
provisoes, covenants and articles as shall be thought fit therein to be
comprised.

In witness, etc.
A revocation of a suit.
TO all people etc. I A B sends greeting etc. whereas an action has been
brought at the common law in my name against P F upon a bond wherein the said P
F and one D W. became bound unto me in the sum of etc. with condition to pay
etc. at or in etc. on the etc. as by the same obligation etc. Now know ye,
that I the said A B do by these presents revoke and withdraw the said action
and suit brought against the said P F upon the said abligation, and all
proceedings thereupon had in my name, and do also countermand all letters of
atturnie, and other authorities whatsoever by me heretofore made or given to
any person or persons for the prosecuting of any action or suits upon the said
bond: and do also signify and declare that my will and pleasure is, that no
action or suit shall at any time hereafter be brought or commenced against the
said P F and W D nor either of them, nor their, nor either of their heirs etc.
upon the said obligation.

In witness, etc.
An Indenture of partition.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. between I H etc. on the one party; and J M etc.
on the other party, Witnesses, that whereas the said J H and J M are and do
now stand seized in their demeasn as of fee in common undivided, of and in one
message or tenement and one yard land thereunto belonging, now or late in the
tenure etc. situate etc. It is (now to the end a perpetual partition and
divison shall be had and made between the said parties of and in the said etc.
and other the premises aforesaid) covenanted, concluded and agreed by and
between the said parties to these presents in manner and form following. And
first, the said J H for himself etc. that the said J M his heirs and assigns,
shall from thenceforth have, hold, and peaceably enjoy in severalty to him, and
to his heirs for ever, to his and their own proper use and behoof, of the said
premises (reciting his partition) And that he the said J H nor his heirs shall
from henceforth claim or demand any right, title, use, possession in or to the
same or any part thereof, but that the said J H and his heirs and assigns
shall at all time and times hereafter from all actions, right, title and demand
thereof or thereunto, be utterly excluded, and for ever debarred by these
presents. And the said J M for himself etc. that he the said J H his heirs and
assigns shall from henceforth have, hold and peaceably enjoy in severalty to
him the said J H his heirs and assigns for ever to his and their own proper
use and behoof the aforesaid etc. And he the said J M nor his heirs shall not
from henceforth claim etc. (ut supra.) And in consideration of the said
portion, and for as much as the part and portion by these presents allotted and
assigned to the said J H and his heirs were at the ensealing thereof, of more
and greater value then the said part and portion before allotted and assigned
to the said J M and his heirs, he the said J H has at the ensealing of these
presents well and truly paid to the said I M the sum of etc. whereof etc.

In witness, etc.
A grant of a rent, reserved by lease.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. Witnesses, that whereas W B etc. (reciting the
lease) as in and by the same recited Indenture of lease etc. Now this indenture
further witnesses, Considerat.
that the said W B for and in consideration of a certain competent sum of
etc. has demised, granted, and to farm letten, and by these presents does
demise, grant, Demise.
and to farm let unto the said A B the reversion and remainder of the said
shop, warehouse, chambers, and other the premises, by the said Indenture of
lease demised, together also with the said yearly rent of etc. thereby
reserved, and the counterpart of the same Indenture of lease, under the hand
and seal of the said etc. To have and to hold, possess and enjoy the said
reversion and rent of etc. and every part thereof unto the said A B his
executors, Habendum.
administrators and assigns from the day of the date of these presents forth
wards, for and during all the residue of the aforesaid term etc. yet to come
and unexpired. Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, Reddend.
during the said term, unto the said W B his etc. at the feast of etc. only one
pepper corn (if the same shall be lawfully demanded.) And the said W B for him,
That he is lawfully seized, and has power to demise.
his etc. That he the said W B. at the time of the ensealing and delivery of
these presents is very true, perfect and lawful owner and possessor of the
said demised reversion and rent, and is at the ensealing and delivery of these
presents lawfully and absolutely possessed thereof. And that he the said W B
has full power, and right, and just and true title and lawful authority to
demise and grant the said reversion and rent of etc. unto the said A B his
executors, administrators and assigns for and during all the rest and residue
of the said term of etc. in manner and form aforesaid, according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents. And furthe^ that he the said W B his
heirs, executors and administrators and every of them from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, during the said term, shall and will clearly exonerate,
acquit, discharge, say and keep harmless as well the said, A B his executors,
To discharge the premises from encumbrances.
administrators and assigns, as the said demised reversion and rent, of and
from all former bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, forfeitures, titles,
claims, demands and encumbrances whatsoever. And moreover, the said W B for
him etc. that the said yearly rent of etc. shall continue, remain, and be from
henceforth, during the rest and residue of the term yet to come, before
mentioned, due and payable unto the said A B his executors, administors and
assigns, according to the said Indenture of lease, and the tenor, effect and
true meaning of these presents.

In witness, etc.
Note, that the tenant must atturn, or nothing passes.

A Letter of Atturnie upon a specialty being not due, with covenants to
justify Actions.
TO all etc. to whom this present writing shall come, Sir T R etc. sends
Greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas H G of etc. Gen^^eman, in and by
one obligation, with condition thereupon endorsed, bearing date the etc. is and
stands bound unto the said Sir TR in the sum of etc. of lawful etc.
conditioned for the true payment of etc. on the etc. next etc. at or in the
etc. as in and by the same obligation and condition thereof at large appears.
Now know ye, that the said Sir T R. for diverse good considerations him moving,
has assigned, ordained and made, and in his stead and place put and
constituted his trusty and welbeloved friend R D Citizen etc. his true and
lawful Atturnie, for him and in his stead and name, and to the only proper use
and behoof of the said R D to ask, require and receive of H G his executors,
administrators or assigns the said sum of etc. on the etc. next coming, and
if default be made in payment of the said sum of etc. at the said day and
place aforesaid. Then he the said T R does by these presents make, ordain,
constitute and appoint the said R D to be his true and lawful Atturnie, for
him, in his name, and to the only use of the said R D to ask, leavie, recover,
demand and receive of the said H G his executors and administrators the sum
of etc. so forfeited unto him the said T R for non-payment of the said sum of
etc at the day, time and place aforesaid: Giving, and by these presents
granting unto his said Atturnie his full power and lawful authority in the
premises; and for non-payment of the said sum of etc. or any part thereof,
the said H G his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns or any of them,
to arrest, sue, implead, imprison, and out of prison to deliver, and pleas and
prosecutions against them and every of them, to sustain and maintain according
to all the course of the law; and upon the receipt thereof, or of any part
thereof, acquittances or other discharges for him and in his name to make,
seal and deliver, and one Atturnie or more under him to substitute, and at his
pleasure to revoke. And all and every other act and acts, thing and things,
device and devices in the Law whatsoever, needful or requisite to be done, in
or about the premises, for him, and in his name, to do, execute and perform as
fully, largely and amply in every respect, as he himself might or could do if
he were personally present. Ratifying, allowing and holding firm and stable all
and whatsoever his said Atturnie, To maintain all.
or his substitute lawfully Authorized shall lawfully do, or cause to be done
in or about the execution of the premises by these presents. And the said Sir T
R his heirs, executors and administrators and every of them at all time and
times hereafter upon reasonable request, or notice to him given, and at the
costs and charges in the law of the said R D his executors, administrators or
assigns or some of them shall and will maintain, justify and avow with
effect, all and every such action and actions, writ or writs, pleas, process,
judgments and executions whatsoever, which by the said R D his executors,
administrators or assigns shall at any time hereafter be lawfully sued,
commenced, had or brought in his name against the said H O. his heirs,
executors or administrators, or any of them upon or by reason of the obligation
above mentioned, or of any sum or sums of money therein mentioned or
contained. And also, that he the said Sir T R has not at any time heretofore,
neither that he, his executors, administrators or assigns, or any of them at
any time hereafter, shall or will remise, Not to release without consent.
release, or otherwise discharge the said G H his heirs, executors or
administrators, or any of them of the said obligation above rehearsed, nor yet
of any sum or sums of money therein contained, without the special
license, consent, or agreement of the said R D his executors, administrators or
assign^s, or some of them thereunto first had and obtained in writing, under
his or their hands or seals. And that all the benefit and commodity that
shall be recovered, obtained or gotten by means of any such action, suit,
plaint, judgment and execution shall redound, come, and be to the only use and
behoof of the said R D his executors, administrators and assigns, without any
account or other thing therefore to be yielded or done unto the said Sir T R
his executors, administrators or assigns, or any of them.

In witness, etc.
A Let. of atturny upon an extent, for the King to enter on certain lands, and
to grant leases thereof.
TO all people to whom etc. T M Esquire sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting.
Whereas our sovereign Lo. the Kings Majesty that now is by his Highness
Letters patents, sealed with the seal of his Highness Court of Exchequer
bearing date etc. for the considerations therein mentioned, did deliver, grant
and to farm let unto the said T M all that the Manor of L B with the
appurtenances in etc. in the County of B. in the tenure of T B Knight. or of his
assigns, and also diverse other lands, tenements, closes, pastures, woods,
underwoods and hereditaments in the said County of etc. parcel of the said
lands of the said Sir T B. Knight. and taken and seized into the hands of our said
sovereign Lo. the K's. Majesty the third day of etc. last past, before the
date of the said Letters patents, by reason of a writ of extent of 500 l. due
by one obligation dated the etc. being found to be of the several yearly rents
in the said Letters patents mentioned, as in and by a certain inquisition
indented, taken at little B. in the said County of B. the said third day of
etc. last past, before Sir E T Knight, then Sheriff of the County of etc. by
force of a writ of extent out of the Court of Exchequer returned, and there now
remaining in the custody of his Majesty's remembrancer, more plainly may
appear (except as in the said Letters patents are and be excepted.) To have and
to hold all and singular the premises by the said Letters patents demised, with
their rights, members and appurtenances whatsoever (except before excepted) to
the said T M his etc. from the making of the said Letters patents, for so long
as the same premises in the hands of our said sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty
his etc. shall remain or happen, or ought to be and remain by reason of the
extents aforesaid, as in and by the said Letters patents, amongst diverse other
covenants, grants, articles, provisoes and agreements therein contained, more
fully and at large appears. Now know ye, that I the said T M for diverse good
considerations, me to these presents especially moving, have made, ordained,
constituted, and in my stead and place put my trusty and well beloved friend R
K of etc. my true and lawful attorney, for me, and in my name to enter and
come into and upon the said Manors, lands, tenements and hereditaments with
their appurtenances in or by the said Letters patents mentioned to be demised,
or into or upon any part or parcel thereof in the name of the whole, for me,
in my name, and to my use to take and receive, detain and keep, and after such
possession and seisin thereof or of any part or parcel thereof in the name of
the whole, for me, in my name, and to my use, to take, receive, detain and
keep, and after such possession and seisin so thereof had and taken, then to
make, seal or grant leases or estates of and in the premises, and of and in
every or any part or parcel thereof, unto any person or persons whatsoever to
and for my most and best benefit and advantage during the continuance of the
foresaid lease, by the said Letters patents. Giving and granting unto my said
attorney by the tenor of these presents, my full power and authority for me
and in my name to do, say, execute, finish and perform all and every act and
acts, thing and things whatsoever needful and necessary to be done in and
about the premises, as fully, wh^lly and firmly, and in as large and ample
manner and form in every condition and degree, to all intents, constructions
and purposes, as I my self might or could do if I were personally present:
ratifying, allowing and holding firm and stable, all and whatsoever my said
atturny shall lawfully do, or cause to be done in or about the execution of the
premises.

In witness whereof, etc.
A Covenant for the leavying of a fine.
AND the said C B for himself etc. that he the said C B and his heirs shall
and will at and before the etc. at the proper costs and charges of the said C B
in the etc. according to the usual course of fines and recoveries used and
accustomed, and according to the form of the said court, leavy one lawful or
sufficient fine, and suffer a lawful and sufficient recovery to be had and made
against him the said C B and his heirs unto the said W W and F W and their
heirs or the survivors of them, or to such other person or persons, as the said
W and F or the survivors of them, or their heirs shall nominate and appoint of
all that message etc. (naming the lands) with all and singular their
appurtenances, situate, lying and being in C. aforesaid in the said County of
B. which said fine or fines, and all other assurances and conveyances to be
had, made, leavyed, acknowledged or executed of the premises, or any part
thereof, by the name or names, or in any other manner or form shall be. And
the said W W and F W. and their heirs, and all and every other person or
persons, and the survivors of them, and his heirs to whom the said fine shall
be leavyed or acknowledged as aforesaid, shall stand and be seized of all and
singular the premises, and every part thereof, to the only proper use and
behoof of the said W and F and their heirs for ever, to the intent a lawful
and sufficient recovery may be had of all and singular the premises, and of
every part and parcel thereof, according to the true intent and purpose of
these presents: which said recovery shall be, and shall be always deemed,
adjudged and taken to be to the only use and behoof of the said C B and A P and
of the heirs males of their bodies to be begotten; and for default of such
issue, then to the use and behoof of the said C B and of his etc. for ever.

In witness, etc.
A Covenant to surrender at the next Court.
ANd the said etc. That at the next Court holden at the Manor of E in the said
County of W. the said R I and his wife shall come and personally appear in the
face of the said Court of the Manor aforesaid, and in the open face of the said
Court, according to the custom of the said Manor, shall into the hands of the
Steward of the said Court, or his deputy, surrender, resign and yield up to
the said use of T S his etc. all that their right, estate, title, interest and
demand which they now have, or by any means may have of and in the said
copyhold, lands and tenements with the appurtenances called or known by the
said name or names of etc. or any other lands, tenements, etc. which are
claimed to be holden of him by copy of Court Roll of the said Manor of W. or
to the same, or to any part or parcel of the same belonging, or so reputed,
esteemed or taken.

A covenant for further assurance.
ANd the said L M for himself, his etc. That he the said L M and A now his
wife, and the heirs of the same L. and all and every other person or persons
whatsoever, having or claiming, or which shall or may have, claim or pretend to
have any manner of right, interest or other thing, into or out of the before
mentioned premises, or any part or parcel thereof, by, from or under the said
L M, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, upon every
reasonable request, and at the cost and charges in in the law of the said etc.
his heirs or assigns, do make, knowledge, suffer and execute, or cause to be
done, made, knowledged, suffered and executed all and every such lawful act and
acts, thing and things, devise and devises, conveyances and assurances in the
law whatsoever, for the further, better and perfecter assurance, surety, more
sure making and conveying of all and singular the said messuages, lands,
tenements and hereditaments, and all other the premises aforesaid, and every
part and parcel thereof, unto the said L B his etc. for ever, be it by fine or
fines, with proclamation, recovery or recoveries, with double or single voucher
or vouchers, deed or deeds enrolled, the enrollment of these presents, release,
confirmation with warranty against all and every person and persons; or without
warranty, or by all, any, or as many of the ways, means and devises aforesaid,
or by any other ways or means whatsoever, as by the council learned in the law
of the said LB best may or can be devised or required, so as the said I A for
the making etc. be not enforced to travel above twelve miles from his dwelling
place.

A Covenant, that the Premises are discharged of encumbrances.
ANd the said A B for himself, etc. That the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Meadows, Leasowes, Pastures, Woods, Rents, Reversions, Remainders, Services
and Herediments, and all and singular other the premises with the
appurtenances before in and by these presents given, grantted, bargained and
sold, and every part and parcel thereof, at the time of the ensealing and
delivery of these presents are, and so at all times hereafter for ever from
time to time shall be, remain and continue unto the said T B his heirs and
assigns clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved and
kept harmless, of and from all, and all manner of former bargains, sales,
gifts, grants, leases, joyntures, dowers, uses, wills, intails, rents charge,
rent-seck, arerages of rents, fines for alienation, statutes, recognizances,
judgments, extents, seizures, intrusions, executions, and of and from all and
singular other charges, titles, troubles, encumbrances and demands whatsoever,
had, made, knowledged, consented unto, procured, done or suffered, or to be
had, made, knowledged, consented unto, procured, done or suffered by the said A
B his heirs or assigns, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, (the
rents and services from henceforth to be due to the chief Lord or Lords of the
Fee or Fees, whereof the premises are holden, only excepted.)

A Covenant, that he is lawfully seized, and has power to demise.
ANd the said G H for himself etc. That he the said G H at the time of the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, is and stands lawfully seized of an
indefeizible estate of inheritance in Fee-simple or Fee-taile, of and in all
and singular the before demised premises with the appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, without any manner of condition or limitation of use
or uses, to alter and change the same; and also that he the said G H now has
full power, true Title, and absolute Authority to demise, grant etc. the said
Message, Tenement or Farm, and all other the demised premises with the
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof unto the said I P his
executors, administrators and assigns, for the term of etc. in manner and form
as in and by these presents is mentioned, limited and expressed.

A Covenant, That the Lessee shall not commit waste, cut nor sell the trees,
without the consent of the Lessor.
AND the said T H for himself etc. That he the said T H his executors,
administrators and assigns nor any of them, shall not at any time hereafter
during the said term commit, cause, procure or wittingly suffer to be done, any
manner of wilful waste or destruction in and upon the premises or any part
thereof, nor shall cut, sell, take, or carry away, or cause, procure, or
wittingly or willingly suffer to be cut, felled, taken or carried away any of
the woods, under-woods, or trees growing, standing and being, or which
hereafter shall stand, grow or be in or upon the premises before demised, or
in or upon any part or parcel thereof, without the License, consent or
agreement of the said V R his heirs or assigns in writing first had and
obtained.

A Liberty to make Leases.
PRovided always, and the true intent etc. That it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said I P at any time hereafter during etc. to lease, demise, or
grant the said Manor, Lands etc. or any part or parcel thereof to any person or
persons whatsoever, for the term of etc. and under such Covenants Articles and
Agreements, and to such use and uses as to the said I P shall be thought meet
and convenient, any thing before in these presents contained to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

An Indenture of Covenants for passing of a Recovery in the Common Pleas to cut
off an Intail.
THis INDENTURE made etc. between E C of etc of the one part, and W O and I H
of etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted,
concluded and agreed by and between the said parties to these presents: and
the said E C shall and will permit and suffer the said W O and J H to purchase
and bring out of the Kings Majesty's High Court of Chancery a Writ of Entry,
Sur Disseisin in le post, returnable before the Justices of the Common Pleas at
Westminster, at some certain day of Return in Easter Term next coming, by
which Writ the said VV O and I H shall demand against the said E C all that
Message, Tenement or Farm with the appurtenances, situate, etc. late in etc.
and also all that close of Pasture ground, commonly called etc. containing etc.
and all that close of Pasture, etc. and also all and singular Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Reversions, Services, Commons, Profits, Commodities, Emoluments and
Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular the appurtenances to the
premises, or any part or parcel thereof belonging or in any wise appertaining,
by such name and names, and in such manner and form, and by such number and
quantity of acres, as by the said W O and I H or the Survivors of them, or the
Counsel learned of them shall be demised. To which Writ the said E C shall
appear personally, or by Attorney in the said Court of Common Pleas, and enter
into the said warranty and imparle, and shall not after depart in contempt of
the Court, so as a good and perfect recovery shall and may be had in due form
and order of Law, of the said Messuages, Land etc. and all other the premises
with the appurtenances, according to the usual course of common recoveries for
assurances of Lands and Tenements in the said Court of Common Pleas. And that a
Writ of Habere fac' seifinam shall be thereupon awarded, executed and returned
accordingly. And it is further condescended and agreed by and between all the
said parties to these presents, That as well the said recovery so to be had and
executed as aforesaid, as also all and every other recovery or recoveries,
conveyances and assurances whatsoever, which before the Feast of etc. shall be
had and executed by and between the said parties to these presents or any of
them of the said Messuages, Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, and all and
every other the premises with the appurtenances, or of any part or parcel
thereof, by what name or names soever the same shall be so had and executed,
and the full force and execution of them and every of them, shall enure and be,
and shall be construed, adjudged, and taken to be and enure unto the said VV O
and I H, and the Survivors of them, and the Heirs of the Survivors of them;
shall for ever from thenceforth stand and be seized thereof, and of every part
thereof, to the only use and behoof of the said E C. his heirs and assigns for
ever, and to no other use, intent or purpose.

In witness, etc.
A Defeazance for payment of 100 l. per annum, for a certain time.
THis INDENTVRE made etc. between W W of etc. and W W the younger, son and heir
etc. on the one part, and R M etc. on the other part, Witnesses; That whereas
the said W W the elder, and W W the younger, in and by one Recognizance or
writing obligatory of the nature of a Statute Staple lately made and provided
for the recovery of debts, bearing date etc. It is now nevertheless
covenanted, granted, concluded and fully agreed upon by and between the said
parties to these presents and of the parties thereunto is; and the said R M is
contented and pleased, That if W W and W W the elder, or either of them, their
or etc. do and shall every year yearly, from and after the etc. next ensuing the
date of these presents, for and during the term of etc. from thence next
ensuing and fully to be complete and ended, well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said R M his etc. at or in etc. one annuity or yearly sum of C l.
of lawful etc. at two days or terms in the year; that is to say, on the etc.
and the etc. from time to time every year, yearly, one next and immediately
ensuing the other, by even and equal portions during the said term of etc.
before mentioned; the first payment thereof to be made and begun on the etc.
now next coming without fraud or covin, that then the Statute or Recognizance
above recited or mentioned, shall be etc. otherwise etc.

In witness, etc.
An assignment of an annuitie.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come I I VV of etc.
Gentleman, send Greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas I G Citizen etc.
by his Deed indented bearing date etc. for the considerations therein
mentioned, did give, grant and confirm unto me I W one Annuity or yearly rent
of etc. for the term of the natural life of him the said I G, Recital.
if S L Wife of M L. Citizen and etc. shall so long live; As in and by the said
Deed Indented (amongst diverse other covenants, grants, articles and agreements
therein contained) more fully and at large, it does and may appear. Now know
ye, that I the said I W for good considerations me moving, Consideration.
have assigned and set over, and by these presents do assign and set over unto
the said S L the said Annuity or yearly pension of etc. To have and to hold
the said Annuity or yearly rent of etc. aforesaid unto the said S L and her
assigns, in as large and ample manner and form, as I the said I W may or ought
to have and enjoy the same, by force of the said Deed Indented or any thing
therein contained, together with the Deed Indented or any thing herein
contained.

In witness whereof etc.
An Indenture of Defeasance for the making void of all former Statutes, payment
of the money, and performance of covenants.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. Between A B of etc. on the one part; and A E of
etc. on the other part, Witnesses, That whereas the said E A in and by on
Recognizance or writing obligatorie, of the nature of a Statute staple lately
made, and provided for the recovery of debts bearing date etc. taken, sealed
and acknowledged before Sir T R Lord Chief Justice of England, is, and stands
jointly and severally bounden unto the said A B in the sum of etc. payable as
in and by the said recognizance or writing obligatory of the force of a Statute
staple, more fully and at large it does and may appear. It is now
nevertheless covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed, by and between the
said parties to these presents, and the true intent and meaning of these
presents, and of the parties thereunto is, and the said A B is contented and
pleased, that if the said E A his heirs, executors and assigns do or shall,
at or before the etc. discharge and duly make void, upon Record as well all
and every Statutes merchant and of the staple, as also all recognizances
heretofore acknowledged, and entered into by the said E A either by himself
alone, or jointly with any other person or persons (the Statute above recited
only excepted) and thereof bring, deliver and leave Certificates under the
hands of the Clarks of the said several Offices, or their deputies in that
behalf, at or in the etc. to and for the said A B his executors or assigns, at
or before the said etc. day of etc. next ensuing; And also if the said E A his
heirs, executors, administrators or assigns or any of them do well and truly
pay or cause to be paid unto the said A B his heirs or assigns or to some one
of them, the full sum of etc. at, or in etc. in manner and form following:
That is to say, on the etc. in full satisfaction and payment of the said sum
of etc. And also if the said E A his heirs, executors and assigns do and
shall well and truly observe, perform, fulfill, accomplish and keep all and
singular the covenants, grants, articles and agreements, which on his and their
parts and behalf are, and ought to be observed, performed, fulfilled,
accomplished and kept, comprised and specified in one pair of Indentures,
bearing date etc. made beeween the said A B of the one part, and the said E A
on the other part, According to the true intent and meaning of the said
Indentures: That then the said Recognizance, or writing obligatorie above
recited or mentioned, shall be utterly void and of none effect: otherwise the
same shall stand and abide in full force.

A Bond to Churchwardens, conditioned to pay 4 li. per Annum, to the poor of
the Parish, and upon the death of any surety to put another in his stead.
We A B. G G. etc. to be ho^^en to R M and T C etc. now Gardians of the goods
and ornaments of the Parish Church of Saint etc. in C etc. The condition of
etc. that whereas R D late of the Parish of etc. deceased, by his last Will and
Testament bearing date etc. did amongst diverse other Legacies and bequests,
give and bequeath to the Poor of the said Parish the sum of one hundred
pounds to be divided and distributed at the discretions of the Churchwardens
of the same Parish, for the time being, as follows: viz. one fifty pounds
thereof to and amongst the poor dwelling within the three precincts of the
streets side of the said Parish, and the other fifty pounds to and amongst the
poor of the same Parish, dwelling in Chancery Lane, as by the said last Will of
the said R D (amongst other things) may more at large appear. And whereas upon
the motion of the right honorable Sir Julius Caesar Knight. Master of the Rolls,
and with the liking and consent of the Common Council, and other Ancients of
the said Parish of etc. aforesaid, the abovenamed R M and T C Churchwardens of
the said Parish have delivered and paid on the day of the date of these
presents, unto the above bounden A B and G G etc. the sum of 50 li. of lawful
English money, parcel of the 100 li. above mentioned, To the intent and purpose,
that they or their assigns, and such other person or persons to whose hands
and custody the said 50 li. shall hereafter happen to come, shall every year,
yearly, truly distribute and give to and amongst the poor of the said Parish
dwelling in Chancery Lane, within the liberties of the Rolls in the County of
Middlesex, the sum of 4 l. of current English money, reserving the said 50 li.
whole as a continual Stock, to be from time to time so imploid to the use of
the poor of the said Parish and place aforesaid. If therefore the said A B. G G
etc. or some of them do, and shall form henceforth every year, yearly, for
ever, on the etc. for every year well and truly give, pay, disburse and
distribute to and amongst the poor of the said Parish of etc. dwelling in
Chancery Lane within the liberties of the Rolls, in the County of Middlesex, by
the advice, direction and assistance of the Churchwardens of the said Parish
for the time being, and their successors, the yearly sum of 4 li. of etc.
according to the purport and true meaning of these presents: the first payment
and distribution thereof to be made and performed on the etc. which shall be
etc. And also if it shall happen the said A B. G G etc. or any one or more of
them, to die and depart this life, or shall otherwise be reputed to be decayed
and insufficient in estate: Then if the Survivor or Survivors of such person or
persons so dying, or the rest of them which shall remain sufficient, and not
decayed, or some of them do and shall within etc. next after request in that
behalf made unto them or any of them by the Churchwardens of the said Parish
for the time being, or either of them, procure, or cause one other or more
sufficient and able person in the place or stead of him, or them so dying or
decaying as aforesaid, to become bound unto the Chuch-wardens of the Parish
aforesaid for the time being, or to such other persons as they or the Common
Council, and ancients of the said Parish shall nominate and appoint to take the
same, in one other sufficient obligation of the like penalty of 100 li. and
with condition of the like just and true payment and distribution of the sum of
4 li. to, and amongst the poor of the said Parish, and of the place aforesaid,
as is before in these presents limited and expressed (mutatis mutandis.) That
then etc.

A Discharge of an apprentice from his service.
TO all Christian people etc. I F VV of etc. send Greeting. Whereas I N by his
Indenture bearing date etc. did put himself Apprentice to me for the term of
etc. commencing etc. as by the same Indenture may appear. Now know ye, that I
the said F VV for good considerations me thereunto moving, do by these
presents, clearly and absolutely discharge and set free the said I N of, and
from my service, so as neither I, nor any for me, shall or may at any time
hereafter, ask, claim or demand any service of the said I N by virtue of the
said Indenture, or otherwise. And also I do hereby remise and release unto the
said I N all actions, causes of actions, service and demands whatsoever, which
I now have, or hereafter may have against him by reason of any act whatsoever,
from the beginning of the World until the day of the date of these presents.

In witness etc.
A Condition for passing a Fine.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, that if the within bounden W E and A
now his Wife, and the heirs of the same W. at the costs and charges in the law
of the within named R W his executors etc. before the Feast of St. J. B, next
ensuing the date etc. do and shall levy one fine at the common law of one
message or tenement mentioned to be demised to the said R M in and by one
Indenture of Lease bearing date etc. made between the said W E on the one part,
and the said R M on the other part, according to due course of Law, by such
name and names, and in such manner and form, as by the said R M his, etc. or
their Council learned in the Law, shall be devised or required, as well for the
barring of the said A from her title of Dower, in the premises, as for the
better assuring and confirming of the premises unto the said R M his executors,
administrators and assigns for and during the several terms by the said
Indenture of Lease, granted under the rent, in and by the same Indenture
reserved against the said VV E his heirs and assigns, according to the true
meaning of the said Indenture, that then this present etc.

A condition to save harmless of a Recognizance taken, for ones appearing.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden I R his etc. do at all times
hereafter, and from time to time shall clearly acquit and discharge, or
sufficiently save and keep harmless the within named G S. and N B or either of
them, their etc. against our Sovereign Lord the King, and all others of and
from etc. where etc. or either of them, stand charged or bound to our said
Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, for the said I R, or for his personal
appearance in his Majesty's Court of Record, called the Kings Bench at Westminster.
in Trinty Term next, to answer all such matters as then and there shall be
objected against him, and of and from all and every sum and sums of money,
matter, thing and things whatsoever in the said Recognizance and Recognizances,
and every of them, mentioned and contained, and of and from all actions etc.
that shall or may arise or grow touching the same or any of them in any manner
of wise, That then etc.

An Indenture of Apprentiship.
THis INDENTURE Witnesses, That E B son of I B late of etc. of his free and
voluntary will has put himself Apprentice to R B. C. and etc to the Science
which he now uses to be taught, and with him after the manner of an Apprentice
to dwell and serve from the Feast of etc. from thence next ensuing, and etc.
unto the full end and term of etc. by all which term of etc. the said
Apprentice, the said R B well and faithfully shall serve, his secrets keep
close, his commandments lawful and honest every where he shall gladly do, hurt
to his said Master he shall not do, nor suffer to be done to the value of xii d
or more by the year, but shall let it if he may, or else immediately admonish
his said Master thereof; the goods of his said Master he shall not waste, nor
them to any body lend; at Dice, nor at any other unlawful games he shall not
play, whereby his Master may incur any hurt; Fornication in the house of his
said Master nor elsewhere he shall not commit; Matrimony he shall not contract;
Tavernes he shall not frequent; with his own proper goods or any others during
the said term, without the special license of his Master; he shall not absent
himself from the service of his said Master day nor night; he shall not absent
or prolong himself, but in all things as a good and faithful Apprentice shall
bear and behave himself toward his said Master and Mistress, and all his
during the term aforesaid. And the said R B to his said Apprentice the Science
which he now uses, shall teach and inform, or cause to be taught or informed
the best way that he may or can, after a due manner of chastisement; and also
shall find to his said Apprentice, meat, drink and bedding, and all other
necessaries meet and convenient, for and during the term aforesaid.

In witness etc
A Condition to repay all such charges as the Tenant shall be at by reason of
the payment of his rent, there being controversy concerning the Title of the
house.
THe Condition etc. That whereas there is a controversy or question between
the above bound E H and others touching their several rights or interests to
the now dwelling house of the abovenamed T T, situate near Holborne Bridge
London, and whereas upon an Agreement between the said E H and T T, the said T
T is contented to pay the Rent of his said house, being 5 l. per Annum, unto
the said E H as the same shall grow due according to his Lease; if therefore
the said E H her Executors or Assigns do and shall well and truly pay or cause
to be repaid unto the said T T, his Executors and Assigns all such rent, sum
and sums of money, charges and damages whatsoever as shall by due proceedings in
the Law be adjudged or decreed, or both, against him the said T T his
executors, etc. and all other costs and damages whatsoever which he the said T
T shall sustain or be at by reason of any Actions, Suits or Forfeitures
whatsoever, which shall or may happen to be unto the said T T his etc. by
reason or means of the payment of the said rent, or any part thereof unto the
said E H her Executors, Administrators or Assigns, That then this, etc.

A Condition to discharge the Churchwardens and Parishioners of a child born in
the Parish.
THe Condition etc. That whereas one M P has of late been delivered of a
man-child within the Parish of etc. within written; to which child the within
bound H G by his own voluntary confession, does acknowledge himself to be the
fathet: If therefore the said H G his heirs etc. and every or any of them do
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, fully and clearly acquit,
discharge and save harmless, as well the within named I B and H L churchwardens
of the Parish Church of etc. aforesaid, and their Successors for the time
being, and every of them, and also all the Inhabitants and Parishioners of the
said Parish, which now are, or hereafter shall be, for the time being, and
every of them, of and from all and all manner of costs, charges and expenses
whatsoever, which shall or may in any manner of wise at any time hereafter
arise, happen, come, grow or be imposed upon them or any of them, for or by
reason or means of the birth, education, nourishing and bringing up of the
said child, and of and from all other Actions, suits, charges, troubles,
impeachments and demands whatsoever, touching or concerning the same. That then
etc.

A condition for the surrender of copyhold lands, and to cause him to be
admitted Tenant.
THe condition etc. That if the within bounden I K. and his heirs, do, and
shall at the next Court to be holden for or within the Manor of H. within the
County of E. sufficiently, and in due form of law, surrender and yield up
unto, and for the use and behoof of the within named L M his etc. or of such
other person or persons, and their etc. as the said L M shall nominate and
appoint, all that his copyhold, tenement or message and lands thereunto
belonging, containing by estimation sixteen acres, be it more or less, now or
late in the tenure or occupation of N O or of his assigns, parcel of the
Manor of H aforesaid, with all and singular outhouses, easements, commodities
and appurtetenances to the same belonging, clearly acquitted, and discharged of
all dowers and title of dowers whatsoever; and do also then and there procure
and cause the said LM or such other person or persons by him to be nominated as
aforesaid, to be only and lawfully admitted tenant of the same premises so to
be surrendered, according to the custom of the same Manor. That then this etc.

Another for quiet enjoying.
THe condition etc. That if the within named R I his etc. and every of them
shall or may lawfully, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy the
Manor of S with the appurtenances in the County of O, with all lands,
tenements, pastures, feedings, rents, court leets and advowsons, woods,
underwoods, and all other hereditaments thereunto belonging or appertaining,
without the let, trouble, suit, eviction, disturbance or contradiction of the
within bound Sir VV G Knight. Sir M G Knight. and L G Esquire or any of them, their, or any
of their etc. or any of them, or any other person or persons whatsoever,
having, claiming, or pretending to have any manner of right, title, interest
and party, or claim or demand, of, in or to the said Manor and premises
aforesaid, or of, in or to any part or parcel thereof, by, from or under the
said Sir VV G. Sir M G. and R G. or either, or any of them according to the
tenor, purport, effect and true meaning of one indenture of assignment bearing
date the etc. made and sealed by the said Sir VV G unto the said R I. of the
premises aforesaid, as by the said Indenture may appear. That then etc.

Another for the assurance of land.
THe condition etc. that if the within bound W B shall upon reasonable request
to him to be made, by the within named T H his heirs or assigns on this side
and before the feast day of etc. next ensuing the date within written, convey
and assure unto the said T H his executors and assigns for ever, one close of
pasture, containing by estimation one acre, abutting upon F toward the South
etc. all which premises are situate, lying and being in the parishes, towns
and fields of N and O, or in some other, or one of them in the County of B. by
such conveyance and assurance in the law, as by the said T B his heirs or
assigns, or by his or their Counsel learned in the laws of this Realm, shall
be reasonably devised or advised and required, discharged of all encumbrances
whatsoever, (the chief rents and services only excepted:) And also if the said
VV B his etc. and every of them do, and shall until the said conveyance and
assurance shall be made and passed as aforesaid, quietly permit and suffer the
said T H his heirs and assigns, to have, receive, perceive, and take to his
and their own proper uses and behoofs, the rents, issues and profits of all and
singular the premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, without any
manner of let, suit, trouble, disturbance or contradiction of the said N B his
etc. or any of them, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, by his,
their, or any of their means, right, title, interest or procurement. And
without any account or any other thing therefore to be yielded, paid or done
unto the said VV B his heirs (...) assigns, or to any other person or persons
whatsoever. That then this present etc.

A condition to pay a sum of money, after ten pounds per centum, if the party be
living at the day of payment, if dead, to abate the interest, and some of the
principal.
THe Condition of etc. That if the within bounden R S or his assigns, at or in
the now dwelling house of etc. the sum of 110 l. of etc. one the etc. next
ensuing the date within written (if the said D S shall be in and upon the same
day bodily living.) And if it shall happen the said D S to depart this
transitory life before the said tenth day of etc. aforesaid, then in that case,
if so be the said R S his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, or any
of them do well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the etc. of the said D S
on the said etc. next, and at the place aforesaid, only the sum of 90 l. of
lawful money of England, without fraud or covin, that then this present
obligation to be void, and of none effect, or else to stand and abide in full
strength, force and virtue.

A Condition to lend a sum of money at a certain day nominated for a certain
time then following, without interest.
THe condition of etc. That if the within bounden Sir I VV Knight, and N Y or
either of them do and shall on the tenth day of etc. next ensuing the date
within written, deliver and lend unto the within named E P at or in the etc.
the full sum of etc. of lawful money of England, upon the single bond of the
said E P until the nine and twentieth day of etc. then next ensuing, without
loan, interest, or other consideration to be had for the same. That then etc.

Another for payment of an annuity.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bound T R and T P or either of them,
their, or either of their etc. or any of them do and shall every year yearly
from and after the feast day of etc. next ensuing the etc. for and during the
term of etc. then next ensuing, well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto
the within named I S his etc. one annuity or yearly rent or sum of etc. of
lawful money of England by the year, at four usual feasts or terms in the
year; that is to say, on the feast days of etc. by even and equal portions,
the first payment thereof to be made on the feast day of etc. next ensuing etc.
that then this obligation to be void and of none effect; but if default shall
happen to be made of or in the payment of the said annuity or yearly rent, or
sum of etc. at any of the said feast days, in which the same ought to be paid,
and at any time during the said term of etc. contrary to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, That it shall stand and abide in full force,
strength and virtue.

Another to pay a certain sum of money at a day, and then to put in other
Sureties for payment of another sum at a day then following.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden J G, his etc. or any of them do
well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the within named C D. his etc. the
full sum of etc. at or in the etc. on the etc. and then also do, and shall
procure and cause one other sufficient surety to become bound with him the said
J G. his executors etc. unto the said C D. his executors etc. by their
obligation in due form to be made, in the penalty of etc. for the true payment
of etc. more of etc. then next following, and which shall be in the year of our
Lord God 1636. at the place aforesaid, without fraud. That then etc.

A Condition for performance of an Award
THe Condition of etc. That if the within bounden W L his executors or
administrators do for his and their parts and behalf in all things well and
truly stand to, observe, perform, fulfill and keep the Award, Arbitrament,
Order, final end, determination and judgment of A B of etc. C D etc. and E R
Arbitrators indifferently elected, named and chosen, as well on the part and
behalf of the said W L, as on the part and behalf of the within named R. B. I.
to arbitrate, award, order, judge, determine, and a final end to make of or
upon, touching and concerning all and every action and actions, suits,
variances, sum and sums of money, claims and demands whatsoever, had, moved,
depending, stirring, or having been, or now being in question, suit, trouble or
controversy between the said parties, for or by reason or means of any manner
of Cloth or Clothes by the said C I. or his servants or assigns, for J M.
Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, and the said VV N. or either of them,
during the continuance of the late Copartnership, or the supposed Copartnership
had between them the said VV and J. touching only the said Copartnership, in
any manner of wise; so as the same Award, Arbitrament, final end,
determination and judgment of the said Arbitrators of and upon the premises or
any part thereof be made and put in writing under their hands and seals ready
to be delivered to the said parties on or before the etc. next ensuing the etc.
That then etc.

A Condition to save harmless of a Recognizance taken for ones appearance.
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden J R. his heirs etc. do at all
times hereafter, and from time to time clearly acquit and discharge, or
sufficiently save and keep harmless the within named G S and B N and either of
them, their or either of their heirs, executors and administrators, against our
Sovereign Lord the King and all others, of and for all and every such
Recognizances or Recognizance, wherein and whereby they the said G S and B N.
or either of them stand charged or bound to our Sovereign L. the Kings Majesty
for the said I R or for his personal appearance in his Majesty's Court of
Record called the Kings Bench at VVestminst' in Trinity Term next, to answer
all such matters as shall be objected against him, and of and from all and
every sum and sums of money, matter, thing and things whatsoever in the said
Recognizance and Recognizances and every of them mentioned or contained, and of
and for all actions, suits, costs, losses, troubles, extents and damages that
shall or may arise or grow touching or concerning the same, or any of them, in
any manner of wise. That then etc.

A Condition to save harmless for the bailing of one at two several actions.
THe Condition etc. That whereas the within named J D. at the special instance
and request of the within bound A B. has mainprised and taken to bail the said
A B in the Sheriffs Court holden in the Counter in Woodstreet London, of and
for two Actions; the one of Trespass, damages 20 li. at the suit of etc. and
the other of Debt, upon the demand of etc. at the suit of etc. as by the
Records of the same Court may appear. If therefore the said A B. his executors
etc. and every of them do at all times hereafter and from time to time shall
clearly acquit and discharge and otherwise sufficiently save and keep harmless
the said J G. his etc. and every of them, and all his and their goods and
chattels, and every parcel of them, against all persons whatsoever, of and for
the mainprising and taking to bail of the said A B. and of and for the several
actions aforesaid; and of and for all actions, suits, costs, troubles, damages,
executions and demands whatsoever, that shall or may arise or grow, touching
and concerning the premises or any of them in any manner of wise; That then
this present obligation to be void and of none effect, or else etc.

Another for payment of money if a man be non suited.
THe Condition etc. that whereas one E G of etc. is admtted to sue in forma
pauperis in his Majesty Court of etc. against W W and A B for the recovery of
certain lands and tenements in the County of etc. if the said E G shall be
nonsuited in the said Action, or that the same Action shall pass against him
by verdict, or otherwise; then if the above named R R or the said E G their
etc. or any of them do and shall truly pay or cause to be paid all and singular
such costs, charges and sums of money, as by any of the Judges of the said
Court, shall in that case be thought convenient, or awarded, without fraud.
That then etc.

Another for to pay a sum of money at a day, and then to put in other security
for the payment of another sum, at a day then following.
THe Condition etc. that if the within bounden A P or either etc. do well and
truly pay etc. unto the etc. at or in the etc. and also if the said H P his
etc. do or shall on the said etc. day of etc. next, at the place aforesaid,
become bound with good and sufficient sureties to the likeing of the said etc.
her etc. by their obligation in due form of law, to be made and delivered unto
the said etc. her executors, administrators and assigns in the sum of etc.
unto the said Dame etc. her etc. in the etc. next etc. at or in the etc. That
then etc.

A Condition for performance of covenants.
THe Condition etc. that if the within bounden H W his etc. and every of them
do well and truly observe, perform, fulfill, accomplish and keep all and
singular the covenants, grants, articles, clauses, conditions and agreements
whatsoever, which on his or their parts and behalves are or ought to be
observed etc. mentioned and comprised in one pair of Indentures of Lease
bearing date the within, written, made between the within named E W of the one
part, and the said H M of the other part, according to the tenor, effect and
true meaning of the same Indentures. That then etc.

An Indent. of covenants concerning a bargain and sale of a Manor, with a
Proviso.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. Between W P of etc. on the one part; and etc. on
etc. Witnesses, That whereas the said I H and R B by their writing or deed
Indented bearing date the very day and year of these presents, for the
considerations therein mentioned, Have granted, bargained, sold, assigned and
set over, and confirmed unto the said W P his heirs etc. for ever; Not only
one indenture of lease bearing date etc. in the etc. made by T H Father of the
said I H for the Term of threescore years, unto him the said I H. Commencing
from the date of the same Indenture of Lease (If he the said T H should so long
live) of all those three Yard-land with the appurtenances in W aforesaid being,
or being accounted to be the ancient demeasne Lands of the Manor of W
thentofore purchased by T H. of R S Esquire, and all that his Yard and half of
Land lying in W aforesaid, lately purchased of one H H, with all Hads, Leyes,
Banks, Lot-grasse, Commons, ways, easements and commodities thereunto
belonging; And all that Dove-house, Close or new Orchard in W aforesaid, to the
said three Yard-land belonging or appertaining, or therewith used, occupied or
enjoyed (All and singular Tithes, then after to grow due for, out of, or in
regard of the premises, excepted and foreprised) as by the said Indenture of
Lease more at large appears, but also the remainder of all and singular the
said Manor of W, were it a Manor indeed, or reputed; And also of all that the
Capital Message of W in the County of O aforesaid, wherein the said T H then,
and yet dwells; Together with the said three Yard-land purchased of the said
R S as aforesaid, and called and known by the name of the ancient demeash lands
of the Manor of W. and also of and in the said I H lying and being in W
aforesaid (the advowson of the Church of W excepted) as by the said writing or
deed Indented, acknowledged to be enroled in his Majesty's high and Honorable
Court of Chancery, to which reference being had, more at large it will and may
appear. Now this Indenture further witnesses, that the said I H for the
consideration in the said Indenture specified: has bargained and sold, and by
these presents does bargain and sell unto the said W P his etc. all and
singular Deeds, Evidences, writings, Charters, Letters patents, counterparts of
Leases, exemplifications, Escripts and Muniments whatsoever touching or
concerning only the said bargained premises, or only any part or parcel
thereof, which he the said R H now has, or which he may or can come by without
suit in Law. And true copies of all such other Deeds, Evidences, Writings,
Charters, Letters Patents, Counterparts of Leases, exemplifications, Escripts
and muniments as he the said I H now has, or can come by without suite in law,
touching the premises or any part thereof, only; together with any other
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments; the same Coppies, and
every of them to be coppied out at the costs and charges of the said W P his
heirs or assigns: All which said Deeds, Evidences, Writings, Charters, Letters
Patents, counterparts of Leases, Exemplifications, Escripts or Muniments
touching or concerning the above bargained premises or any part or parcel
thereof, together with the Copies aforesaid, to be Coppied out as aforesaid:
The said I H does for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators
covenant, promise, grant and agree to and with the said W P his etc. by these
presents, to deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the said VV P his etc.
before the Feast Day of etc. next ensuing, whole, safe uncancelled and
undefaced. And the said I H for himself, his etc. and for every of them
covenanteth and grants to and with the said W P. his etc. by these presents,
That they the said I H and R B. or one of them, at the time of the sealing and
delivery of these present Indentures, is, and until the time of the first
estate to be made and executed, according to the intent and meaning of these
presents, shall be the very true, sole and rightful Owner of the said Manor,
messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments, and of all and singular other
the premises before in the said recited Indenture of Bargain and Sale mentioned
to be thereby granted, bargained, sold, assigned, set over and confirmed, with
all and singular their appurtenances, and of every part and parcel thereof;
and now is, or at the time of the sealing, delivery and acknowledging of the
said recited Deed indented was solely, rightfully and absolutely possessed
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, in manner and form as in the
said recited Deed indented is mentioned and expressed, without any condition or
limitation, use, trust, defeazance, to alter, change, or determine the same
estates or any of them. And that they the said I H and R B. or one of them now
have, or has, and at the time of the first estate to be made and executed, as
is before mentioned, shall have good right, full power, and lawful authority
to bargain, sell, assign, convey and assure the said Manor, message, lands,
tenements and hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises before in
the said Indenture mentioned to be thereby granted, bargained, sold, assigned,
set over and confirmed, with all and singular their and every of their
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said W P. his heirs
and assigns, to the sole and proper use and behoof of the said W P. his heirs
and assigns for ever, according to the true intent and meaning of the said
recited Indenture. And the said J H. for him, his heirs, executors and
assigns, and for every of them, does further covenant etc. to and with the
said VV P. his etc. by these presents, That he the said W P. his heirs and
assigns, to his and their own use and behoof, shall or may from time to time
and at all times from henceforth lawfully, peaceably and quietly have, hold,
occupy, possess and enjoy the said Manor, messuages, lands, tenements and
hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises before in the said
Indenture mentioned to be bargained, sold, assigned, set over and confirmed,
and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, as well without any
manner of let, resistance, disturbance, eviction, molestation, recovery or
interruption of them the said J H and R B. or any of them, their heirs etc. as
also without any lawful let, resistance, disturbance, eviction, molestation,
recoverie or interruption of any other person or persons whatsoever, freely and
clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged of and from all and singular
former and other bargains, sales, gifts, grants, joyntures, dowers, title of
dowers, Statutes merchant and of the staple, recognizances, bonds to the Kings
most excellent Majesty, judgments, executions, condemnations, fines, issues,
amerciaments, intrusions, rents charge, rents seck, arrearages of rents, and of
all and from all other charges, titles, troubles, and encumbrances whatsoever:
(The chief rents and services from henceforth to grow due to be paid and done
to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the premises, for and in
respect only of his or their Seigniory or Seigniories, only excepted and
foreprized.)

And the said J H. for him, his etc. and every of them further covenanteth and
grants to and with the said W P his heirs and assigns by these presents,
that he the said I H and his heirs, and all and every other person and
persons, and their heirs, having or claiming, or pretending to have, or which
shall or may have claim, or pretend to have any lawful estate, right, title or
interest, into or out of the said bargained premises, or into or out of the
said parcel thereof, shall and will from time to time, and at all times from and
after the etc. next ensuing the date of these presents, upon every reasonable
request, and at the cost and charges in the Law of the said W P his heirs and
assigns, do, make, acknowledge, suffer or execute, or cause to be done, made,
acknowledged, suffered or executed, all and every such act and acts, thing and
things, devise and devises, assurance and assurances in the Law whatsoever, for
the better and further assurance, surety, and sure making of all and singular
the premises with the appurtenances, unto the said W P his heirs and
assigns, to the sole and proper use and behoof of the said W P his Heirs or
Assigns, for ever. Be it by Fine, feoffment, recovery, with double or single
voucher or vouchers over, deed or deeds enrolled or not enrolled, the
inrollment of this present release, confirmation with warranty against all men,
or otherwise with like warranty, or without warranty, or by any other ways or
means whatsoever: as by the said W P. his heirs or assigns, or by his or their
Counsel learned in the Laws of this Realm, shall be reasonably devised or
advised, and required; and the said VV P for him his etc. and every of them
covenanteth and grants to and with the said I H his etc. and every of them by
these presents, That he the said VV P his etc. and every of them shall and will
permit and suffer the said I H his, etc. notwithstanding the said recited
Indenture of bargain and sale, and these presents, or any thing therein
contained, peaceably and quietly to hold, have, possess and enjoy the said
Manor, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and premises with the
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, from time to time, and at all
times hereafter until breach shall happen to be made of the proviso and
condition hereafter mentioned, and to receive, perceive and take to the proper
use and behoof of him the said J H his etc. all such rents, issues and profits
as now are, or hereafter shall happen to arise, grow due, or become payable,
for or by reason of the premises, or of any part or parcel thereof until such
time as breach shall happen to be made of the proviso or condition hereafter
mentioned, without the let, trouble or interruption of the said VV P his etc.
and without any account to him or them therefore, or any part thereof to be
tendered or given; and also, that he the said VV P his heirs etc. or some of
them, upon and after full payment made of the sum of etc. according to the
form and effect of the Proviso and Condition hereafter mentioned, shall and
will upon reasonable request unto him or them to be made in that behalf, convey
and assure an estate of all and sigular the said premises, with all and
singular their and every of their appurtenances, unto the said I H his etc. at
his and their costs and charges in the Law, to the use of the said I H his etc.
during the term of etc. with warranty only against him the said VV P, and his
heirs, and against all persons, any thing claiming in, by, from, and under the
said VV P; and also deliver up unto the said I H his etc, all such deeds,
evidences and writings concerning the premises, as he the said W P has
received the same, without being defaced or impaired by the act or means of
him the said VV P his etc. And the said W P for him his etc. and for every of
them, does further covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said I H his
etc. by these presents, in manner and form following; viz. That if so be, that
the said W P his etc. shall not leave notice in writing at the capital
Message, in W aforesaid, that he or they will refuse the said Lands and
Tenements, and give warning there, that he or they will have 140 l. paid unto
them at the day and place limited for payment thereof, in and by the Condition
hereafter mentioned, That then the said W P his etc. or some or one of them
(notwithstanding any forfeiture) shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to
be paid to the said I H his etc. or some or one of them, at or in the now
dwelling house etc. the full sum of etc. in full payment of the said Purchase,
which said sum of etc. is agreed between the said parties, to be the full
price and value of the said Manor and premises. Provided always, and it is
nevertheless conditioned and agreed by and between the said Parties to these
presents, that if the said W P, his etc. shall be minded hereafter to refuse
the purchase of the tenements aforesaid, and to have their or his money again,
and do and shall for that purpose by writing under his or their hand or hands
express and signify the same, and at and before the etc. next ensuing the
date hereof, deliver and leave the said writing or notice of his or their mind
and purpose, at or in the capital Message of W. aforesaid, that then if the
said I H his etc. or any of them, do or shall well and truly pay, or cause to
be paid unto the said W P etc. at or in the common Dining Hall etc. the full
sum of etc. then and from thenceforth, as well the said recited Indenture of
Bargain and Sale, as also this present Indenture, and every clause, article and
argreement in the said Indentures or either of them contained, this present
proviso or condition, and the covenants in these presents expressed, on the
part and behalf of the said W P his heirs and assigns for re-assurance of the
premises unto the said I H his heirs and assigns, (if the Proviso and
condition in these presents expressed shall be performed, only excepted) shall
cease, and be utterly void, frustrate and of none effect to all intents,
constructions and purposes, any thing in these presents contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding:

In witness etc.
A Grant of Receivorship from a Noble man.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall come, R. Earl of E.
and E. Viscount of H etc. Know ye, that I the said E. for diverse good causes
and reasonable considerations me moving, have granted and given, and by these
presents confirmed unto my servant R S of etc. the Office of Receivorship of
all and singular my Lordships, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions and
Hereditaments whatsoever, within the County of etc. And the same R S, Receivor
of all and singular the premises for me the said E and my heirs do make and
constitute by these presents, giving and granting unto the said R S my full
power and authority in all things touching the Receipt and Receipts aforesaid;
and to make lawful and sufficient Acquittances or Discharges unto all and every
person and persons touching the premises, and that in as large and ample
manner and form as any other Receivor or Receivors of me the said Earl at any
time heretofore have used to do, within the several Counties of etc.

In witness, etc.
A short Letter of Attorney for the setting over of a bond.
KNow all men by these presents, that I H H of etc. Have made, ordained,
constituted and appointed, and by these presents do make, ordain, constitute
and appoint my trusty and well beloved friend W M of etc. to be my true and
lawful Attorney for me and in my stead and name, and to his own use to ask,
levy, recover, demand and receive of T M and N L of etc. Gentlemen, and either
of them, their executors and administrators the sum of etc. which they have
forfeited, and from me unjustly do detain and keep, for non-payment of the sum
of etc. at a certain day past, as by one Obligation with condition thereupon
endorsed bearing date, etc. more at large it does and may appear; giving, and
by these presents granting unto my said Attorney my full power and authority in
all things touching this my present business, and in my name to commence and
prosecute any Action or Actions, Suit or Suits for the recovery and getting of
the said sum of etc. and every or any part thereof; and Attorney or Atturneyes
in that behalf to constitute and make; and upon receipt thereof, or of any part
thereof, Acquittances, or other lawful discharges in my stead and name, to
make, seal and deliver; ratifying and allowing by these presents, all and
whatsoever my said Attorney or his Assigns shall (for obtaining and recovery
of the said sum of etc. or any part thereof,) do or cause to be done in my
stead and name. And also I the said H H do covenant and promise by these
presents, That I the said H H have not released, nor will not release the said
T M and N etc. of the said Bond, nor of the penalty therein contained, nor
countermand this present Letter of Atturny, nor the Authority thereby granted,
nor any suit, act or proceeding at any time hereafter, by virtue of these
presents to be done.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney, to receive a sum of money out of the Exchequer, being
parcel of a greater sum given to me by the King, by Privy Seal.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, I L one of
the Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber of our Sovereign Lord, King Charles, that
now is, sends greeting. Whereas our said Sovereign Lord the King, by his
Highness Letters of Privy Seal, dated at Westminster the etc. directed to his
Highness Commissioners for the Office of his Majesty's High Treasurer of
England, has given unto me I L the sum of etc. to be paid unto me or my
Assigns out of the Treasury, remaining in the receipt of the Exchequer
(arising out of the Fines and Forfeitures for his Majesty's bounty, to be
distributed to his Highness well deserving servants, in reward from time to
time as shall seem good unto his Majesty, and to be taken as his Majesty's
free-gift, as in and by the said Letters of Privy Seal more at large may
appear. And whereas I the said I L by Obligation bearing date etc. do stand
bound unto R S etc. in the sum of etc. as by the said Obligation may appea^.
Now know ye, That I the said I L for and toward the discharge of the said Debt
of 600 l. due to the said R S, have made, ordained, constituted and appointed,
and by these presents do make, ordain, etc. the said R S to be my lawful
Attorney and Assignee for me, and in my name, and to his own proper use to
have, take and receive out of the first moneys that shall be received by
virtue of the said Privy Seal, the sum of etc. of etc. Giving and granting unto
the said R S, as full power touching the premises, as I my self might or
could do, if I were personally present, ratifying and allowing hereby
whatsoever the said R S shall do, or cause to be done touching the premises,
as if the same were done by my self.

In witness, etc.
A Condition of Arbitrament General.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above bounden T A his executors and
administrators, and every of them, do for his and their parts and behoofs, in
all things well and truly stand to, abide, obey, fulfill, perform, and keep the
Award, Arbitrament, order, determination and judgment of E L Esquire, and R M
Gentleman, Arbitrators indifferently elected, named, and chosen, as well on the
part and behalf of the above named T A. to award etc. of, for, upon, touching
and concerning all and all manner of Actions, and causes of Actions, Suits,
Debates, Controversies, debts, duties, bonds, bills, writings obligatory,
reckonings, accounts, and demands whatsoever, which between the said T A of the
one part, and the said E G on the other part, at any time from the beginning of
the world until the date of these presents have been had, moved, stirred or in
any wise depending; so also that the same Award, Arbitrament, Determination and
Judgment of the said Arbitrators, in and upon the premises, be made, and put
in writing under their hands and Seals, ready to be delivered to the said
parties, on or before the twenty fourth day of this instant month of December
above written, That then etc.

An annuity given for ones advice in the Law.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. between T B of etc. Gentleman, on the one party;
and F L of etc. Gentleman on the other party; Witnesses, That the said T B in
consideration of the counsel and advice in the Law of the said F L to him the
said T B heretofore given, and hereafter to be given, has given, granted and
confirmed, and by these presents does give, grant and confirm unto the said F
L, one Annuity or yearly pension of etc. of lawful etc. to be paid yearly unto
the said F L at or in the etc. at two Feasts or terms in the year most usual;
that is to say, at the Feast days of etc. by even and equal portions. To have,
hold, perceive, receive and take the said Annuity or yearly pension of etc.
unto the said F L from the feast day of etc. next ensuing the date of these
presents, for and during the joint and natural lives of the said T B and F L.
Provided always, That if the said F L shall at any time hereafter discontinue,
and leave the study and practice of the Laws as aforesaid, this present grant,
and all and every thing therein contained shall cease, determine and be
frustrate to all intents and purposes, as if the same had never been had or
made.

In witness, etc.
A conveyance in fee simple of a house and lands etc.
THis indenture made the etc. between G C of etc. on the one part, and H H of
etc. and S. his wife on the other part, Witnesses, that the said G C for and
in consideration of the sum of etc. to him at and before the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, well and truly in hand paid by the said H H and S
his wife; whereof and wherewith he the said G C does acknowledge himself etc.
has granted, aliened, bargained, sold and confirmed, and by these presents
does fully, clearly and absolutely grant, alien, bargain, sell and confirm
unto the the said H H and S his wife, all that message; or tenement in T in
the County of S. now in the occupation of the said G C. or of his assignee or
assigns, and three acres of land or thereabouts, lying in the backside of the
said house, be it more or less, and all barns, stables, orchyards, gardens,
buildings, and other hereditaments to the same belonging or appertaining, or
with the said house or tenement, commonly used, occupied or enjoyed, or which
are accepted, reputed or taken to be part, parcel or member of the same, and
now in the tenure or occupation of him the aforesaid G C his assignee or
assigns, with all commons whatsoever to the same belonging: and also all those
two cottages or tenements in T aforesaid, standing together, adjoining to the
said message or tenement, and one parcel of ground adjoining to the said
cottages; which said cottages and parcel of ground last mentioned, do contain
by estimation on that side toward the Kings high street, twenty yards of
ground, or thereabouts, and on that side toward the garden, now or late of the
said G C thirteen yards of ground or thereabouts, and do contain by estimation
from the Kings high street, twenty yards of ground or thereabouts, and now are
in the several tenures or occupations of WI and F L. and the reversion and
reversion, remainder and, remainders, rents and yearly profits whatsoever, of
all and singular the said premises, and of every part and parcel thereof;
together with all and singular deeds, evidences and writings touching or
concerning only the premises or any part thereof. To have and to hold the said
message and tenement and three acres, of land aforesaid, and the said two
cottages or tenements, and the said parcel of ground adjoining to the said
cottages, and other the premises with their appurtenances, before by these
presents bargained and sold, or mentioned, or intended to be hereby granted,
aliened, bargained, sold and confirmed, and every part and parcel thereof, unto
the said H H and S his wife, and to the heirs and assigns of the said H H to
the only proper use and behoof of the said H H and S his wife, and of the
heirs and assigns of the said H H for ever. And the said G C for himself etc.
that he the said G C for and notwithstanding any act done to the contrary by
him the said G C. That he the said G C at the time of the ensealing and
delivery of these presents is, and standdeth lawfully and rightfully seized in
his demeasn, as of fee simple in his own right, and to his own use without any
condition, limitation or other use or trust to alter, change or determine the
same estate of and in the messuages, lands, tenements, cottages and premises
before mentioned, to be hereby granted, bargained and sold, and of and in
every part and parcel thereof. And that he the said G C (for and
notwithstanding any act done by him to the contrary) now has, and at the time
of the first estate to be had and executed, according to the intent and true
meaning of these presents, shall have full power, and right and lawful authority
to grant, bargain and sell the same, and every part and parcel thereof with
the appurtenances, unto the said H H and S and the heirs and assigns of the
said H H in manner and form as in these presents is before expressed; and that
the same message or tenement, lands, tenements, cottages and premises, and
every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, shall from henceforth for
ever, remain and continue unto the said H H and S his wife, and to the etc. of
the said H H freely and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged of and
from all and all manner of former bargains, sales, gifts, grants, dowers,
jointures, leases, rents charges, rents seck, arrerages of rents, annuities,
uses, intails, statute merchant, and of the staple, judgments, forfeitures,
executions, intrusions, and of and from all other charges, titles, troubles and
incumbranees whatsoever, had, made, committed or wittingly or willingly
suffered or done by the said GC. or by any other person or persons whatsoever,
lawfully claiming by, from or under him the said G C or by his means, assent,
privity or procurement, the rents and services from henceforth to grow due to
the chief Lord or Lords of the fee or fees of the premises, for, or in respect
of his or their seigniorie or seigniories only excepted and foreprized. And
further, that he the said G C and his heirs shall and will at all time and
times hereafter, within the space of five years next ensuing the date of these
presents, and upon the reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the
law of the said H H and G his wife, and of the etc. of the said H H. make,
suffer, do, acknowledge and execute, or cause to be made, done, acknowledged,
suffered and executed, all and every such further lawful and reasonable act and
acts, thing and things, devise and devises, conveyances and assurances in the
law whatsoever, for the further, more perfect and better assuring, and sure
making of the premises before mentioned, to be hereby bargained and sold, and
of every part and parcel thereof unto the said H H and S. his wife, and to the
etc. of the said H H for ever, be it by fine, feoffment, recovery with single
and double voucher or vouchers over, deed or deeds enrolled, the enrollment of
these presents, release, confirmation with warranty of the said G C and his
heirs only, against him the said G C and his heirs, or otherwise, or without
warranty, or by all or any of the said ways or means, as shall be by the said
H H or by his or their Council learned in the laws of this Realm, reasonably
devised or advised and required, so as the same do not contain or extend unto
any further warranty then against him the said G C his executors or assigns,
or any further act then as aforesaid, so that he or they that make such further
assurance be not compelled to travel further then the Cities of London and
Westminster, for the doing, making and executing of such further, assurances
and conveyances aforesaid.

And lastly, it is agreed by and between the said parties to these presents,
That all and every the said assurances and conveyances so as aforesaid
hereafter to be had of the premises, shall be, and shall be esteemed and taken
to be to the only use of them the said H H and S. his wife, and of the etc. of
the said H H for ever, and to no other use, intent or purpose, any thing in
these presents contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.
A condit. not to revoke a let. of atturny, but to justify all actions to be
brought for the recovery of the debt.
THe condition etc. That whereas the above bounden H H by his writing or Letter
of atturnie bearing date the etc. has made, authorized and appointed the above
named L B to be his true and lawful attorney for him, in his name, and to the
only use and behoof of him the said L B. to ask, demand, leavy, recover and
receive of M M of etc. his executors or administrators, or some of them the
sum of an hundred pounds of etc. due and owing unto the said H H by virtue of
one obligation forfeited, bearing date etc. as by the said writing or letter of
atturny more at large appears. If therefore the said H H his etc. do not at
any time hereafter revoke, annihilate and make void the said writing or letter
of atturnie above recited, nor release or otherwise discharge the said M M. his
heirs, executors or administrators or any of them of and from the said
obligation above mentioned, or any sum or sums of money therein expressed or
contained, but do and shall quietly permit and suffer the said L B to ask,
demand, recover and receive the debt or sum above mentioned, according to the
contents of the said recited letter of atturnie, and also do and shall
justify, maintain and avow unto effect, all and every such lawful action and
actions which hereafter shall be had or brought in the name of the said H H by
the said L B against the said M M his executors and administrators for the
recoverie of the debt and sum aforesaid. That then this etc.

A Condition to save harmless a Tenant by reason of the payment of his rent.
THe condition etc. That whereas there is a controversy or question between
the within bounden N C and one E H. widow, touching their several rights or
interest to the now dwelling house of the within named T T and other tenements,
situate, near Holborn bridge, London. And whereas upon a full persuasion that
the right and rent of and in the said house, does belong to the said N C of
etc. the said T T is contented to pay the rent of his said house (being five
pounds per annum) unto the said N C his executors, administrators, or assigns.
If therefore the said N C. his executours and administratours do and shall at
all times hereafter, and from time to time upon request to him or them to be
made; or notice left in writing, at or in the now dwelling house etc. clearly
acquit, exonerate and discharge, or otherwise sufficiently save and keep
harmless the said T T his executors and administrators, and every of them, and
all his and their goods and chattels, and every part and parcel thereof,
against all persons whatsoever, of, for, from, touching and concerning all and
all manner of actions, suites quarrels, costs, damages, troubles and
encumbrances whatsoever, which shall or may happen, arise, come, grow, or be
unto the said T T his executors and administrators etc. for or by reason or
means of the payment of the said rent, or any part thereof, unto the said N C
his executours and administrators. That then etc.

An assignment of the moity of a house and goods.
TO all Christian people to whom etc. R B of London etc. executor of the last
will and testament of R R late of London deceased, and P K citizen etc. send
greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas WITH of etc. by his indenture of
lease dated the etc. for the consideration therein mentioned did demise etc.
And whereas the said WITH by one other etc. And whereas the said P K by deed Roll
dated etc. for the considerations etc. did demise etc. the said last mentioned
Indenture etc. and all his estate etc. unto the said R R. the estate and
interest of which said R R of, in, etc. did after come to the said R B as
executor of the last Will and Testament of the said R R. And the said R B being
thereof possessed by the means aforesaid, did by Indenture, dated the etc. for
the considerations etc. grant, bargain etc. the moiety of the said Inn etc.
unto I C etc. And the said I C and W C Citizens etc. by deed poll dated the
etc. did make over the moiety of the said etc. unto A B In-keeper, and the
other moiety of and in the same etc. now remaining in the said R B and P K or
one of them, Together with the whole right, title etc. Now know ye, that we the
said R B and P K for and in consideration of etc. Have given, granted,
bargained, sold, assigned and and set over, and by these presents etc. unto the
said R M as well the said Message and Tenement with the appurtenances, called
the G. and one moiety of, in and to the Capital message etc. with one moiety
of, in and to the goods and chattels before mentioned, thereunto belonging, and
every part and parcel thereof: As also all the estate, right, title, interest,
term and terms of years, property, claim and demand whatsoever, which we the
said R B and P K or either of us now have, may, might, should or in any wise
ought to have and enjoy, of, in or to the said message or tenement called etc.
and of, in or to the moiety of the said goods and chattels thereunto belonging,
Together with all writings, leases, counterparts of leases, escripts and
muniments, touching and concerning the same premises, in as large and ample
manner, as we or either of us now have, or may hold the same by force and
virtue of the said several Indentures before mentioned or any thing therein
contained, or otherwise howsoever. To have and to hold all and singular the
before bargained premises with their appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof unto the said R M his etc. to his and their own proper uses and
behoofs, as fully and in as large and ample manner and form, as we the said R B
and P K or either of us, now have, may, might, should or ought to have and
enjoy the same. And we the said R B and P K for us and either of us, our and
either of our heirs etc. and for either of us do covenant, promise etc. that we
the said R B and P K or one of us (at the time of the ensealing and delivery of
these presents) are, or is the very true and rightful Owners and possessors, or
Owner or possessor of the premises hereby before mentioned to be bargained and
sold, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, for and during
all the rest and residue of the said several Terms, yet to come and unexpired
in the said several recited Indentures of Lease; and that we or one of us,
have or has full power, and good right, true title and absolute authority, to
give, grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over the said premises, hereby
bargained and sold, with their and every of their appurtenances unto the said R
M his etc. in manner and form aforesaid, and also that all and singular the
said premises hereby mentioned to be bargained and sold with their and every of
their appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof at the time of the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, are, and be, and so at all times
hereafter from henceforth during all the rest and residue of the said several
terms, in and by the said several recited Indentures of Lease granted, shall
be, remain and continue unto the said R M his etc. free and clear, freely and
clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged or otherwise sufficiently saved
and kept harmless, of, and from all and all manner of former bargains, sales,
gifts, grants, leases, fines, forfeitures, rents, arrearages of rents, cause
and causes of forfeitures and re-entry, and of and from all other titles,
troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, heretofore had, made, committed, suffered
or done by us the said R B and P K or either of us, our executors etc. or any
of us in any manner of wise, during all the rest and residue of all and so many
years as are yet to come and unexpired of the said several terms, in and by
the said several recited Indentures of lease granted, according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents, (The several rents, payments, covenants
and agreements in the said several recited Indentures of Lease, respectively
comprised and specified, which from henceforth on the Tenants or Leasees parts
and behalfs are or ought to be observed, performed and paid fulfilled and kept,
according to the true meaning of the said several recited Indentures of Lease,
and the moiety or one half part of the yearly rent of etc. reserved for
certain Rooms and Chambers belonging to the Inn etc. now in the occupation of
etc. which moiety of the said rent is formerly sold and released unto the said
T R his etc. only excepted and foreptized,) any thing in these presents
contained etc.

In witness etc.
A Release of Lands in performance of Articles.
TO all Christian people etc. E I etc. sends greeting in our Lord God
everlasting: Know ye, that I the said E I as well in part of the performance of
certain covenants and agreements mentioned and expressed in one pair of
indentures bearing date the etc. last past etc. made between me the said E I on
the one part, and etc. As also for diverse other good causes and considerations
etc. have remised, released and for ever quit claimed, and by these presents do
for me my etc. and every of us freely, clearly and absolutely remise, release
and for ever quite claim unto the said H W his heirs and assigns for ever
(in his and their full and peaceable possession and seisin being) all the
estate, right, title, interest, possession, reversion, claim and demand
whatsoever which I the said E I now have, may, might or ought to have, and
which I or my heirs at any time hereafter shall or may have or claim, of, in
or to all those the Rectories of B and L. and also of, in and to all and
singular messuages, mills, lands, tenements etc. to the said etc. belonging or
appertaining. To have and to hold the said Rectories etc. unto the said Si H VV
his etc. to his and their own proper uses and behoofs for ever: So as neither I
the said E I nor my heirs shall or may at any time hereafter, ask, claim,
challenge or demand any right, title, interest, claim or demand whatsoever, of,
in or to the premises before mentioned, or of, in or to any part or parcel
thereof. But thereof and therefrom shall be utterly debarred and for ever
secluded by these presents. And I the said E I and my heirs, the said
Rectories, and all and singular other the premises above mentioned with their
appurtenances, unto the said Sir H VV his heirs and assigns to the uses and
behoofs aforesaid against me the said E I and my heirs, and against my Father
I I. and W E my Uncle, their and either of their heirs or assigns, or of any
other person or persons whatsoever, claiming from, by or under me, them or any
of them, shall and will warrant and for ever defend by these presents.

In witness, etc.
A Condition for the delivery of certain writings by a day to be cancelled.
THe condition of etc. That whereas the within named S M by Indenture dated the
etc. in the etc. for the considerations therein mentioned did demise, grant and
to farm let unto the within bounden J T by the name of J T of etc. Esquire, his
etc. certain closes and meadow ground in little S and P in the County etc.
which the said S held (amongst other things) of the president and Scholars of
etc. (except as in the said Indenture is excepted) for a certain term, and for
the rent of etc. as in etc. And whereas the said S M by an obligation of the
date of the said indenture, stands bound unto the said J T in the sum of
etc. conditioned for the performance of the covenants, grants and agreements in
the said indenture expressed, as in and by the said recited obligation etc.
which premises the said J T by indenture dated the etc. in the etc. did demise
etc. unto H L of etc. his etc. (to which Indenture, the said S M is also a
party with the said H L) all the said closes and meadow of etc. (except as in
the said last mentioned) for a certain term, and for the yearly rent of etc.
payable, as in and by the said etc. And whereas it is agreed between the said
I T and S M. That the said indenture and bond for performance of covenants
sealed by the said H L and S M shall be delivered up to be cancelled. If
therefore the said J T his etc. do and shall on this side, and before the etc.
next etc. deliver or leave to etc. for the use and behoof of the said S M his
etc. at or in etc. the said Indenture and bond sealed by the said S M as
aforesaid. And the said counterpart of the Indenture sealed by the said H I.
and S M to be cancelled, without fraud or further delay. That then etc.

A Feoffment.
TO all Christian people etc. T H etc. greeting etc. Know ye, me the said T H
for and in consideration of etc. unto me by N W well and truly paid, whereof I
confess my self well and truly satisfied, and the said N W his etc. To have
given, granted, and by these presents confirmed to the said N W all that
message or tenement, garden, ortchyard and croft with the appurtenances
situate etc. in A in the County of VV. All and singular which premises with the
appurtenances, now are in the tenure or occupation of the said T H. To have and
to hold the said message, and all and singular the premises with their
appurtenances to the said N VV and his heirs, to the only use and behoof of
the said N VV his heirs and assigns for ever, To be holden of the chief Lord
or Lords of the fee by the services therefore due, and of right accustomed. (A
general warranty against all men.)

In witness, etc.
A letter of atturny upon a bond.
KNow all men etc. That I T A of etc. have assigned, ordained and made, and in
my stead and place by these presents put and constituted my trusty and well
beloved friend A B of etc. my true and lawful atturny for me and in my stead
and name, and to the use and behoof of him the said A B to ask, recover and
receive of etc. the sum of etc due unto me for non-payment of the sum of etc.
on etc. as by an obligation with condition thereunder written bearing date etc.
more plainly appears, giving, and by these presents granting unto my said
atturnie, my full power and authority in all things touching this my present
business, and in my name to commence and prosecute any action or actions, suit
or suits for the recovering or getting of the said sum of etc. and every or
any part thereof, and atturnie or atturnies in that behalf to constitute and
make, and upon receipt thereof, or any part thereof, acquittances, or any other
lawful discharges in my stead and name to make, seal and deliver, ratifying,
allowing and holding firm and stable, all and whatsoever my said atturny shall
lawfully do or cause to be done in or about the execution of the premises. And
also I the said T A do covenant and promise by these presents, That the said T
A have not released, nor will not release the said etc. his etc. of the said
bond, nor of the penalty therein contained, nor countermand this present letter
of atturnie, nor the authority thereby granted, nor any suit, act or proceeding
at any time hereafter to be had by virtue of these presents.

In witness, etc.
The form of a deputation of a Patent.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, G VV of etc.
Esquire sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas our Sovereign Lord
the Kings most excellent Majesty that now is, by his Highness Letters
patents, sealed with the great seal of England bearing date at Westminster the
etc. has given and granted unto me the said G VV the office and offices of
Receiver general of the issues and revenues or all and singular his Majesty's
Honors, Castles, Lordships, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, and other
Hereditaments whatsoever, with their rights, members and appurtenances, parcel
of the lands and possessions of M. late Earl of L and M. his wife, in the said
County of Y. and in all Cities, Towns and places whatsoever, as well within
liberties, as without, within the precincts, limits and circuits of the
foresaid County of etc. and him the said G VV Receivor general of all and
singular the premises the Kings Majesty by his Letters patents aforesaid,
has made and ordained to exercise, execute, and do any thing touching or
concerning the said office. And further, whereas our Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty has by the Letters patent, given and granted unto the said G VV the
office and offices of Steward and keeper of all and singular Court-leets, and
view of frank-pledge, of all and singular the said Honors etc. ut supra, in the
said County of etc. To have, enjoy, exercise and occupy the said several
offices, and either of them to the aforesaid G W by himself, or by his
sufficient deputy or deputies, unto the term, and for the term of the life of
the said G W. together with all profits, commodities, advantages, authorities
and preheminences whatsoever to the same several offices or either etc.
belonging or appertaining. And further, whereas our said Sovereign Lord the
Kings Majesty, has by the said Letters patents, given and granted unto the
said G W. for the exercising of the office of Receiver General of all and
singular the lands and possessions aforesaid, with the appurtenances, the wages
and fees of thirteen pounds etc. by the year, and for the exercising of the
office of Steward, and keeping of the courts, leets, and view of frankpledge of
all the lands and possessions aforesaid, with the appurtenances, the wages and
fees of etc. by the year, and also twenty shilligs for the portage of every 100
l. of money paid by the said G W out of the issues of his said offices, or
either of them, at the receipt of his Majesty's exchequer, his heirs or
successors, or otherwise to be paid by warrant from his Majesty, his heirs or
successors, or by warrant from the Lord High Treasurer of England for the time
being: To have and yearly receive the aforesaid several wages and fees in form
aforesaid unto the said G W during his life out of the issues and rents of the
foresaid Honors, Castles and other the possessions aforesaid, at the feasts of
the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary and Saint Michael the Archangel,
by even portions to be paid; together with all other wages, fees, allow^^ces,
liveries, diet, profits, commodities and preheminences to the said offices or
either of them by right due, accustomed, belonging or appertaining, as by the
said Letters patents (amongst other things therein contained more plainly may
appear.) And whereas our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty by other his
Letters patents under the Seal of his Highness Court of Exchequer bearing date
at Westminster. the etc. has assigned and appointed the said G W unto the office
and offices of surveyor General of all his Majesty's Honors, Castles, Lordships
etc. in the County of Northumberland, and in all Cities, Towns, Hamblets etc.
as by the said last recited Letters patents etc. Now know ye, that I the said
G W for special causes etc. have made, constituted and appointed, and by these
presents do make, constitute and appoint my loving friend R M of etc. my true
and lawful deputy irrecoverable to exercise and execute all and every the
offices aforesaid, in as large and ample manner, to all intents and purposes,
as I my self may, might or ought to do by force, virtue or means of the several
Letters patents above recited, or either of them; that is to say, the office of
Receiver General, and office of Steward of all the Honors, Castles, Manors
an^ other the possessions, of the said late Earl and Countess of Lenox, for and
during the natural life of me the said G W. and the office of Surveyor General
of all his Majesty's possessions within the county of Northumberland, during
his Majesty's pleasure. And I the said G W do hereby also give, grant, assign
and appoint unto the said R M my deputy, for exercising and executing of the
said several offices, the several yearly wages and fees above mentioned, given,
granted, assigned unto me by the several Letters patents above recited; that is
to say, for the said office of Receiver General, the sum etc. for the said
office of Steward and keeping of Courts, the sum of etc. and for the said
office of Surveior General of the said county of Northumberland, the sum of
etc. at the feasts of etc. and St. etc. by even portions, to be had and
received in such set manner and form by my said deputy, as I the said G W may,
might or ought to have had and received the same, if this present deputation
and grant of several fees aforesaid had never been made. And I do also give,
grant and assign unto my said deputy all other wages, fees, allowances,
portage money, livery, diet, profits and commodities whatsoever, to the several
offices aforesaid, or any of them incident, belonging or appertaining, with
liberty to and for the said R M my deputy at any time hereafter to surrender
the several Letters patents or either of them unto the Kings Majesty his heirs
or successors, and to take a new grant or grants of the said offices, in his
own name, or in the name of any other person or persons without the let,
trouble or contradiction of me the said G W or any claiming by, from or under
me.

In witness, etc.
An assignment of a lease, in trust whereof, the assignor is to take a further
estate in the premises.
THis INDENTURE made etc. between Sir A C of etc. on the one part, and E H and
C D of etc. of the other part, Witnesses. That whereas Sir I D etc. by his
Indent. of lease bearing date the etc. (Reciting the grant and the habend.) as
in and by etc. Now this Indenture further Witnesses, That the said Sir A C for
and in consideration of the trust hereafter mentioned, and for diverse other
good causes and considerations him thereunto mo^^ng, has bargained, sold and
set over, and by these presents does assign etc. unto the said E H an^ C D
their executors and administrators and assigns, and to the survivors of them
the said E H and C D. and to the executors, administrators and assigns of the
survivor of them, all etc. (mentioning all that is assig ed and set ^ver) To
have and to hold the said Lordship and etc. and all other the premises, with
all and singular their appurtenances, before by these presents bargained, sold,
assigned or set over, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said E H and
C D their Executors, Administrators and assigns, and to the Survivor of the
said E H and C D. and to the executors and assigns of the Survivors of them.
Nevertheless upon his trust and confidence in them and every of them reposed,
That the said E H and C D or the Survivor of them, or the executors etc. of the
Survivors of them shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time to time
upon reasonable request to them or any of them to be made, and at the costs and
charges in the law of the said Sir A C his executors etc. reassigne, convey and
assure all and singular the before bargained premises, and every part and
parcel thereof unto such person or persons, their executors etc. as the said
Sir A C his executors etc. shall nominate and app^int, in such manner and form
as by the said Sir A C his etc. o^ his, or their Council learned in the Law,
shall be reasonably devised or advised and required; and upon further trust and
confidence that they and every of them shall and will upon like request to be
made, do and perform all and every lawful act and acts, thing and things
whatsoever, for the extinguishment o^ this present bargain, sale and assignment
of the premises above mentioned, As by the said Sir A C his executors etc. or
by his or their Council learned in the law, shall be reasonably devised or
advised and required.

In witness etc,
An assignment of a Judgment.
THis INDENTURE made the etc. Between M M etc. of the one part; and R T Citizen
etc. on the other part; Whereas the said M M has recovered a Judgment in his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster in Hillary Term, Anno etc.
against E G for twenty pound debt, besides costs of suit, as by the Records of
the said Court, more at large may appear. Now the said M M for good
considerations him moving, has bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by
these presents does bargain, sell, assign and set over unto the said R T his
executors etc. as well the said Judgment, and all and every sum and sums of
money therein mentioned and contained, as also all benefit and advantage, which
shall or may be had, obtained or gotten, by reason or means of the said
Judgment, or any process or execution thereupon to be had, sued out or
executed. To have and to hold the said Judgment, sum and sums of money, benefit,
advantage and other the premises aforesaid unto the said R T his etc. to his
and their own proper uses and behoofs in as ample manner as he the said M M his
executors or assigns, might, or could have and enjoy the same, if these
presents had never been had or made. And the said M M his executors etc. shall
and will justify, maintain and avow all and every lawful act and thing that
shall be done in or about the premises, without releasing or discharging the
same, so as there be no further benefit taken then only the due debt, interest
and charges; and that all the benefit which shall de obtained or gotten upon
the said Judgment, shall wholly remain and be unto the said R T his executors
etc. to his and their own proper uses and behoofs, without any account or other
thing to be therefore yielded or done unto the said M M his etc.

In witness etc.
A Release for wast done.
TO all Christian people to whom these presents shall come, W S Prebend of the
prebendary commonly called T in the County of M sends greeting etc. Whereas I
S of etc. being possessed of a Lease for diverse years yet enduring, of and in
one parcel of Wood, or Wood-ground commonly called etc. situate etc. containing
by estimation etc. beng parcel of the possessions of the Prebendary of etc.
aforesaid: And where the said R S. for the better advantage to himself, and for
the increase of his own yearly profit to be made of the same Wood, and for the
better and more profitable mannurance of the said ground, has for that
purpose, cut down and grubbed up diverse trees in and upon the said parcel of
Wood-ground, and has converted the said ground into tillage, whereby a far
greater annual rent or profit is, and will be made thereof, then if the same
should continue Woody-ground, which in time to come will turn to the better
benefit and advantage of the said Prebend and his successors, after the end and
determination of the said Lease made to the said R S. Yet notwithstanding the
said R S is subject and liable to be questioned and troubled, by actions to be
commenced against him, both for the wast he has committed in cutting down the
same Woods, and grubbing up the same by the roots, and for not preserving of
the same Woods according to the covenants comprised in his said Lease. Now know
ye, That the said W S now Prebend of the said Prebendary, as aforesaid, for
diverse good causes etc. has, as much as in him is, for himself remised,
released and quit claimed, and by these presents for himself, does clearly and
absolutely, remise, release and quit claim unto the said R S etc. all and all
manner of actions of wastes, and any manner of suits for wastes or spoils done or
committed by him the said R S in the said Wood and Wood-ground, called S W.
aforesaid, until the date of these presents, and all and all manner of actions
of covenants and other actions, suits and demands concerning covenants,
promises or agreements, for not cutting down or grubbing up the same Woods or
Under-woods heretofore cut and grubbed up.

In witness, etc.
A Letter of Attorney to enter upon Lands, to deliver a Lease made to another.
TO all Christian people etc. We T A and R M etc. send greeting. Whereas we the
said T A and R M have signed and sealed to one Indenture, bearing date with
these presents, purporting a Lease, Demise, or Grant unto one W M etc. of all
that our etc. and all the houses, barnes, stables, orchards, Gardens, Easements
and Commodities thereunto belonging; and of all that our etc. together with the
Demeasne Lands to the said etc. belonging or appertaining: To hold from etc. as
by the same Indenture more at large appears. Now know ye, that we the said T
A and R M have ordained, constituted and appointed, and by these presents do
make, ordain, constitute, and in our stead and place put and appoint our
well-beloved Friend I H of etc. to be our true and lawful Attorney and Assignee
for us, and in our stead, name and place to enter and come into and upon the
etc. before mentioned, or into any part thereof, and then and there (after such
entry made) to deliver as our act and deed unto the said W M the aforesaid
Indenture of Lease, so by us signed and sealed as aforesaid, to hold according
to the tenor and effect of the same Indenture; and to do and execute all and
every such other act and thing whatsoever, as shall be needful in this behalf
to be done and performed in as ample and effectual manner as we our selves
might or could do if we were in person present.

In witness whereof etc.
A Condition to save harmless Sureties bound for the Behavior.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named I H and W T at the request
of the within bounden I I. together with him, in and by one Recognizance or
Bail, bearing the date within written, taken before Sir R H one of the
Justices of his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, stand jointly and severally
bounden unto our sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors in the
sum of etc. of etc. that he the said I I should be of good behavior against
our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, and all his liege people, as by the
said Recognizance or bail at large appears. If therefore the said I I his
heirs, executors, and administrators and every of them do and shall at all
times hereafter, and from time to time clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge,
save and keep harmless the said I H and T W. their executors and
administrators, and every of them, and his and their goods, chattels, lands,
tenements and hereditaments, as well against our said Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty, his heirs, successors, officers and assigns, as against all and every
other person or persons whatsoever, of, for or concerning the said Recognizance
or Bail above mentioned, and of and from all and singular costs, charges,
suits, troubles and expenses, which shall or may happen, come, grow, arise or
be unto the said I H and W T, their Executors, administrators or assigns, or
any of them, by reason or means of the said recognizance or bail above
mentioned, or any sum or sums of money therein mentioned, That then etc.

A Condition concerning Marriage.
THe Condition etc. That whereas there is a marriage (by Gods grace) intended
to be had and solemnized between the above bounden A B and E D daughter of F D
late of G in the County of etc. Gentleman, deceased; if therefore after the
said marriage shall be solemnized between the said parties, it shall happen
that the said A B shall dye, and her the said E shall survive, Then if the said
A B shall at the time of his death leave unto the said E the sum or value of
etc. of lawful etc. in money, goods and chattels, to be freely had, taken, used
and disposed of by her the said E, her executors, administrators and assigns,
at her or their own wills and pleasures, without any claim, challenge, suit,
trouble, disturbance, contradiction or demand, of, for in or to the said sum
or value of etc. or of any part or parcel thereof thereunto to be made by the
Executors, Administrators or Assigns of the said A B, or by any other person
or persons whatsoever, That then, etc.

Another concerning marriage.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas there is a Marriage (by Gods grace) intended
to be had and solemnized between the within bounden A B and E D daughter of F
D late of etc. in the County of etc. Gentleman, deceased; if therefore after
the said Marriage shall be so solemnized between the said parties, if it shall
happen that the said E shall dye (leaving the said A) without issue of her body
lawfully begotten, during the said coverture, then if the said A B his
Executors or Assigns, shall pay or cause to be paid within six months next
after the decease of the said E (so dying without issue of her body) unto such
person or persons as the said E in her life time shall limit and nominate
(either by word of mouth, or by writing) such sums of money not exceeding the
sum of etc. as she the said E shall will or bequeath the same by word of mouth
or otherwise in her life time, without fraud etc. That then etc.

A Condition for the resignation of a Prebendary upon Request.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within bounden G G, Doctor of Divinty,
has heretofore resigned: to the Right Reverend Father in God M etc. the
Prebendary of H belonging to the collegiate Church of W in the County of S. If
therefore it shall hereafter appear that any further right touching the said
Prebendary shall acc^^^e unto the said G G notwithstanding the said
Resignation, then if the said G G do and shall upon r^quest to him to be made
by the within named C ^, and at the cost and charges of the said C, make, seal,
and deliver in due form of Law, so far forth as he the said G G shall have
power, such other resignation of the said Prebendary, as by the Counsel learned
in the Laws of the said C C shall be reasonably devised or advised, and
required, so as the said G G be not compelled to travel for the doing thereof,
further then the place of his abode, at the time of such request to him made,
That then etc.

An Indenture Tripartite, of Mortgage of several Tenements in London, and a
Recovery thereof, had in the Hustings Court, and the uses specified.
THis INDENTURE Tripartite, made, etc. between T P of D in the County of D
Gentleman, and S his wife, on the first part, and W P C. on the second part,
and T H and G H of etc. on the third part, Witnesses, That the said T P and S
his wife, for and in consideration of the sum of etc. to them or one of them in
hand paid at or before etc. have given, granted, bargained and sold, and by
these presents do fully, clearly and absolutely give, grant, bargain and sell
unto the said etc. his heirs etc. for ever, all those their fourteen messuages
or tenements, with their and every of their appurtenances, in the several
tenures or occupations of W G, H C, R E, D P, R F, R W, R C, etc. or of their
assigns, situate, lying and being in the Parish of St. Mary Aldermanbury etc.
Together also with all and singular Shops, Cellars, Sollers, Chambers, Rooms,
Edifices, Buildings, Yards, Back-sides, Gardens, void grounds, lights, ways,
easements, watercourse, profits, commodities and hereditaments whatsoever to
the said fourteen messuages or tenements, and every or any of them, or any part
or parcel of them, or any of them respectively in any wise belonging or
appertaining, or to and with the same or any of them, or any part or parcel of
them, or any of them at any time heretofore used, occupied, demised, letten,
held or enjoyed, or as part, parcel or member thereof, accepted, taken, known
or reputed; and the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders
whatsoever of all and singular the premises; and also all rents, payments,
issues and yearly profits whatsoever, reserved or arising out of, upon or by
any Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises, Grant or Grants made of the premises
before by these presents bargained and sold, or of any part or parcel thereof:
And also all the state, right, title, interest, possession, and use, benefit,
property, claim and demand whatsoever of the said T P and S his wife, of, in
and to the premises and every or any part or parcel thereof. And also the said
T P. for the consideration aforesaid has bargained and sold, and by these
presents does etc. unto the said VV P. all and every the Deeds, Evidences,
Charters, Counterparts of Leases, Escripts, Writings and Muniments whatsoever
concerning the premises or any part or parcel thereof, which the said T P. or
any other person or persons by his delivery or to his use have or has, and
which the said T P may come by without trouble or suit in Law. To have and to
hold all the said fourteen messuages etc. and all and singular other the
premises with their appurtenances before by these presents given, granted,
bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the said etc. his
etc. to the sole and proper use and only behoof of the said VV P. and of his
heirs and assigns for ever. And the said T P. for himself, his etc. That the
said T P. at the time of the sealing and delivery of these presents, is the
true and lawful owner of all and singular the premises whatsoever with their
and every of their appurtenances before by these presents given, granted,
bargained and sold, and is thereof and of every part and parcel thereof seized
of good, sure, perfect, lawful, absolute, and indefeizable estate in Fee
simple, to the only proper use and behoof of the said T P. and of his heirs
for ever, without any manner of condition, mortgage, defeasance or limitation
of any use or uses, to any person or persons, to alter, change, determine or
defeat the same. And also that the premises above by these presents given etc.
are not, nor any part or parcel thereof is holden of our Sovereign Lord the
Kings Majesty by Knights service or in Chief; nor of any other person or
persons by Knights service. And the said VV P and T P for themselves severally,
and not jointly nor one for another, and for their several heirs etc.
respectively do and does covenant etc. to and with the said T H and G H. their
heirs etc. by these presents, That the said VV P shall and will permit and
suffer the said T H and G H at the proper costs and charges of the said T P and
his heirs, before the Feast day of etc. next ensuing the date of these
presents, to commence and prosecute the Kings Majesty's writ or writs of right
patent to the Mayor and Sheriff of the City of London, to be directed against
the said W P in the Court of the Husting of London, of pleas of land to be
holden in the Guild hall of the same City, whereby they shall demand against
the said W P all and singular the said messuages or tenements and premises with
their appurtenances, by any name or names whatsoever: unto which writ or writs
the said W P shall appear in proper person, or by his Attorney or Atturneys
lawfully and sufficiently authorized, according to the custom of the same
City, and shall vouch to warrantie the said T P and S his wife: And that the
said T P and S his wife shall appear upon the said voucher in proper person, or
by their Attorney or Atturnies lawfully and sufficiently authorized according
to the custom of the said City; and shall vouch to warrantie the common
vouchee, and that the common vouchee shall appear and imparle, and afterward
make default, whereby a perfect judgment for judgments may be had and given to
the Demandants in the said Writ or Writs against the said W P. for the recover
of all and singular the said etc. and that execution or executions thereof may
be had and taken accordingly, according to the custom of the same City, and
after the manner and course of the common Recoveries in such cases used.

And it is concluded, condescended, and fully agreed by and between all the
said parties to these present Indentures, for themselves severally, and for
their several heirs, and every of the said parties does hereby severally, for
himself, and his several heirs covenant, grant, conclude and agree to and with
the others of the said parties to these presents, severally, and to and with
his and their several heirs, that the said Recoverers and their heirs shall
from and immediately after the acknowledging, suffering and obtaining and
perfecting of the said Recovery or Recoveries, stand and be seized of all and
singular the said Messuages etc. and of every part and parcel thereof; and that
the same Recovery or Recoveries, Judgment or Judgments, and Execution or
Executions, and every other matter and thing thereupon proceeding; and all
other Recoveries to be had and suffered of the premises aforesaid, or of any
part or parcel thereof by or between the said parties or their heirs, or any
of them, before the said Feast of etc. shall be and enure unto and for the
uses, intents and purposes hereafter declared, and under and according to the
conditions hereafter in these presents expressed, and unto and for none other
use, intent and purposes whatsoever, viz. unto, and for the proper use and
behoof af the said T P. and of his heirs and assigns for ever; upon condition,
and so as that the said T P his heirs etc. or any of them do well and truly
pay, or cause to be paid unto the said W P his etc. at or in etc. the sum of
etc. in manner and form following; viz. on the third day of December which
shall be etc. 70 l. On the sixth day of December which shall be etc. 70 l. On
the seventh day of December which shall be etc. 70 l. On the eighth day of
December which shall be etc. 70 l. On the ninth day of December which shall be
etc. 70 l. On the tenth day of December which shall be etc. 70 l. On the
eleventh day of December which shall be etc. 70 l. On the twelfth day of
December which shall be etc. 70 l. On the thirteenth day of December which
shall be etc 770 l. residue, and in full payment or satisfaction and discharge
of the said sum of etc. without etc. But if the default shall happen to be
made of or in the payment of the said sum of etc. or of any part or parcel
thereof, contrary to the form aforesaid, that then, and from thenceforth the
said Recovery or Recoveries, Judgment or Judgments and Execution or Executions,
and every other matter and thing thereupon proceeding, and all other Recoveries
whatsoever be had or suffered by or between the said parties, or their heirs
or any of them, of the premises aforesaid, shall be and enure, and shall be
deemed, construed, reputed, esteemed, and taken to be, and to enure to the only
use and behoof of the said W P, and of his heirs and assigns for ever, and to
and for none other use, intent and purpose whatsoever; any thing whatsoever in
these presents expresed to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And the said T P for himself his etc. does covenant etc. to and with the said
VV P and to etc. That all and singular the premises with their appurtenances
hereby given etc. and every part thereof shall and will from time to time, and
at all times from and after default shall happen to be made of or in the
payment of the said sum of etc. or any part or parcel thereof, contrary to
the form aforesaid, continue, remain and be unto the said VV P his Heirs and
Assigns for ever by the said T P his etc. fully, freely and clearly acquitted,
exonerated, discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved and kept harmless of
and from all and singular former and other bargains, sales, leases, gifts,
grants, mortgages, statutes, recognizances, extents, judgments, executions
condemnations, fines, feoffments, joyntures, dowers, entails, rents, services,
arrerages of rents and services, forfeitures, issues, amerciaments, intrusions,
wills and testaments, uses, warrants, tithes and conditions, and of and from
all other troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, the rents and services to be
from thenceforth due and payable, and to be due to the chief Lord or Lords of
the Fee or Fees of the premises excepted. And except the Leases formerly made
by I P late Uncle of the said T P, unto the Tenants of the premises above
mentioned. And moreover, that the said T P and S his wife, and either of them,
and the heirs of the said T P and all and every person or persons, and their
heirs lawfully having, claiming or pretending to have, or which shall have,
claim, or pretend to have any lawful estate, right, title, interest, reversion,
remainder, dower, claim or demand whatsoever, of, in, or to the premises above
mentioned to be hereby given, granted, bargained and sold, or of, in or to any
part or parcel thereof, by, from and under him the said T P. shall and will
from time to time, and at all times after default shall happen to be made, of
or in the payment of the said sum etc. or any part or parcel thereof, contrary
to the form aforesaid, at and upon every reasonable request, and at the proper
costs and charges in the Law of the said VV P, his heirs or assigns, or any of
them, make, do, acknowledge, execute and suffer and procure, or cause to be
made, done, acknowledged, executed and suffered against them and every of them,
all and every such further lawful and reasonable act and acts, devise and
devises, assurance and assurances, thing and things in the Law whatsoever, for
the further, better, and more perfect assurance, surety and sure-making,
having, holding and enjoying all and singular the premises before by these
presents given, granted, bargained and sold, with their appurtenances unto the
said W P his heirs and assigns for ever, and to the only proper use and
behoof of the said VV P and of his heirs and assigns for ever, be it by deed
or deeds nrolled or not enrolled, Inrolement of these presents, Fine,
Feoffment, Release or Confirmation, or by all, any, or as many of the ways,
means or devises aforesaid or otherwise as by the said VV P his heirs or
assigns, or any of them, or by his, their or any of their Counsel learned in
the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised and required. Provided always
nevertheless, and it is agreed by and between the said parties to these
presents, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T P his heirs and
assigns from henceforth quietly and peaceably to receive, take, have, hold and
enjoy to his and their own proper use and uses, all the rents, issues, profits
and commodities whatsoever reserved or arising out of, upon or concerning the
premises by these presents bargained and sold, until default be made of or in
the payment of the said sum of etc. or any part thereof, contrary to the form
aforesaid, any thing in these presents whatsoever expressed to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And whereas all the deeds, evidences, and
writings whatsoever concerning the premises hereby bargained and sold are by
the mutual consent of the said T P and W P before the first day of etc. to be
brought to the Haberdashers Hall in London, there to be safely kept as in an
indifferent place; Now it is thereupon fully concluded and agreed by and
between the said T P and VV P, for themselves and their heirs, and each of the
said parties for himself and his several heirs, does hereby covenant, promise,
grant and agree to and with the other of the said parties and his heirs, that
in case the said T P his heirs or assigns shall well and truly pay or cause to
be paid unto the said VV P his etc, the sum of etc. in manner and form as is
above expressed or mentioned; That the said VV P his heirs or assigns shall
and will cause and procure all and every the deeds, evidences and writings to
be redelivered unto the said T P his heirs or assigns, whole, safe,
uncancelled and undefaced; But if default shall happen to be made of or in the
payment of the said sum of etc. or of any part or parcel thereof, contrary to
the form aforesaid, that then the said T P his heirs or assigns shall and will
cause and procure all and every the deeds, charters, writings, escripts,
evidences and muniments whatsoever in any wise concerning the premises hereby
bargained and sold, or concerning any part and parcel thereof, to be delivered
unto the said VV P his heirs or assigns, whole, safe, uncancelled and
undefaced without any manner of fraud or delay. And finally it is concluded and
agreed by and between the said VV P and T P for themselves, their heirs and
assigns by these presents, That the said VV P his executors and administrators
shall and will at the costs and charges of the said T P his heirs or assigns,
upon the payment of every of the particular payments aforesaid, upon reasonable
request, seal and deliver in due form of Law a sufficient Acquittance or
Discharge, testifying the receipt of every the said particular sums, which
shall be truly paid, according to the true meaning of these presents.

In witness, etc.
A Condition, to pay a sum of Money at a time after the day of Marriage, or hour
of death, which shall first happen.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above bounden A R his, etc. or any of them do
well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the above named R S his etc. at or
in the etc. the full sum of etc. of lawful etc. within the time and space of
etc. next ensuing after the day of Marriage, or hour of death of him the said A
which shall first happen after the date above written without fraud or covin,
That then, etc.

A Release of Errors in a Fine.
LEt all men know, That whereas we A and C B, this instant Term of St. Hillary
have acknowledged and levied one Fine unto I B and his heirs of one Message
etc. to the only use and behoof of the said I B for ever; we the said A and B
at the request of the said C, and the said C do for us and every of us and our
heirs, release unto the said I B his heirs and assigns, all errors,
mis-enterings, raisures and and all other defects whatsoever in the said Fine,
or in the Writ of Covenant thereof, and all other demands whatsoever for or
concerning the said Message and premises, or any part thereof.

In witness, etc.
A release of all right etc. in Lands to him in possession.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, I T. Mills of
Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, send greeting in our Lord God
everlasting. Know ye, that I the said T M for diverse good causes and
considerations me hereunto especially moving, have remised, released, quit
claimed and confirmed, and by these presents for me and my heirs do fully,
freely, clearly and absolutely remise etc. unto R H Citizen and G. of London,
and M his wife, and the heirs and assigns of the said R. to the only proper
use and behoof of the said R H and M his wife, and the heirs and assigns of
the said R H for ever, in his, her and their full and peaceable possession and
seisin being, all such estate, right, title, interest, property, possession,
reversion and reversions, claim and demand whatsoever, which I the said T B or
my heirs have, should, may, might or of right ought to have and claim by force
and virtue of one indenture of bargain and sale, enrolled in his Majesty's high
Court of Chancery, bearing date the 8 day of J. in the seventh year of the
Reign of our now Sovereign L K. Charles, made between I B of Westminster. aforesaid,
Brewer, of the one part, and me the said T M of the other part; or by any other
ways or means whatsoever, to, of and in all that etc. with all and singular
the rights, commodities, privileges, ways, easments, passages, profits,
advantages, emoluments and hereditaments whatsoever, with their and every of
the appurtenances to the said site and other the premises or any part or parcel
thereof belonging, or in any wise appertaining, and to, of and in the reversion
and reversions of the same, and all rents and yearly profits reserved upon any
lease or leases made thereof, or of any part thereof; all which premises with
the appurtenances, the said R H and M his wife by indenture of bargain and
sale, bearing date the seventh day of M. last past before the date of these
presents, bought and purchased to them the said R H and M. and the etc. of the
said R for ever, of the said I B. as in and by the said last mentioned
Indenture, may more fully and at large appear. To have and to hold all and
singular the aforesaid premises and every part thereof with the appartenances,
unto the said R H and M. and the etc. of him the said R. to the only proper use
and behoof of him the said R H and M his wife, and the etc. of the said R for
ever, so always that neither I the said T M nor my heirs nor any other for us,
or in the name or names of us or any of us, any right, title, interest,
possession, reversion, claim and demand, to, of and in the premises with the
appurtenances or any part or parcel thereof at any time or times hereafter shall
ask, pretend, claim, challenge or demand, but from all and all manner of
actions, suites, estates, rights, titles, intents, claims and demands to, of
and in the same premises, to be asked, claimed or demanded, we and every of us
are thereof clearly excluded and barred for evermore by these presents. And I
the said T M and my heirs all and singular the aforesaid premises with the
appurtenances, unto the said R H and M his wife, and the heirs and assigns of
the said R. to the only proper use and behoof aforesaid, against me the said
T M and my heirs, and all and every person and persons, and their heirs,
lawfully claiming by, from and under us or any of us, shall and will warrant
and defend for ever by these presents.

In witness, etc.
A grant of an advowson.
THis INDENTURE tripartite, made the fifth day of January in the fifteenth
year of the Reign etc. between the Right Honorable Robert Earl of E. and E
Viscount L. Sir C N of the honorable order of the Bath, Knight, R G Citizen
and Alderman of London, W R and H H of London Esquire and H J of London Gentleman,
of the first part; and T S of W. in the County of S. Gent. son and heir of T S
late of W. aforesaid Gentleman deceased, of the second part; And I G of the
inner Temple London, Esquire, J M. T. C. and J D of London Gentlemen, on the
third part, Witnesses, That the said T S. for and in consideration of the
sum of one thousand, two hundred and fifty pounds of lawful money of
England to him the said T S by the said Earl etc. at and before the ensealing
and delivery of these presents well and truly paid; the receipt whereof he the
said T S acknowledges by these presents, and himself to be therewith fully
satisfied, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does clearly,
fully, and absolutely acquit, exonerate and discharge them the said Earl,
Viscount etc. their heirs etc. and every of them for ever by these presents.
And for and in performance of certain articles of agreement made between the
said T S on the one part, and the said Viscount etc. on the other part, bearing
date the 20th of December last past before the date hereof, and for diverse
other good causes and valuable considerations him the said T S thereunto
moving, he the said T S has given, granted, remised, released and confirmed,
and by these presents does for him and his heirs fully, clearly and absolutely
give, grant etc. unto the said Robert Earl etc. all that the Manor or Lordship
of W. alias W. with the rights, members and appurtenances thereof, whatsoever,
in the County of Sussex, and also all other the messuages, lands, tenements and
hereditaments situate, lying and being in the Towns, Villages, Parishes and
Hamblets of W alias W. H, H, and D, Brightling, Hellings, Westfield over
against Rye, Watling and How over against Hastings in the said County of
Sussex, which were some^imes by N P Esquire, bargained and sold to one H P and
by the said H P granted and conveyed to T S Esquire, deceased, Grandfather to
the said T S party to these presents. And all that Capital Message or Mansion
house, with the appurtenances commonly called or known by the name of I house,
with all barns, stables, stalls, gate-houses and other houses and buildings
thereunto belonging and adjoining, situate and being within the Parish of W
alias W aforesaid, or D. or one of them, in the said County of Sussex, and all
those Gardens, Orchards, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Ponds,
Pitts, Stews and waters, with diverse other lands by particular names, contents
and abuttals, and also all and singular messuages, houses, buildings, cottages,
mills, gardens, orchards, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures,
leasows, rents, reversions, services, moors, marshes, heaths, commons, common
of pasture, wast-grounds, woods, underwoods and trees; and the ground and soil
of the said woods, underwoods and trees, waters, fishings, fishing-places,
ponds, pools, pitts, stews, Court Leets, view of frank-pledg, perquisites and
profits of Courts and Leets, and all that to Courts Leets and view of
Frank-pledg does belong; Advowsons of Churches, Awards, Marriages, Escheats,
Releases, Heriots, Fines, Amerciaments, Tithes, Fruits, Profits, Mines,
Quarries, Rents Charges, Rents Seck, and rents and services as well of free as
of customary tenements; and all other rights, royalties, liberties and
commodities, advantages, emoluments and hereditaments whatsoever in the said
County of Sussex to the said Manor or Lordship, Capital Message and Messuages,
or Tenements, Lands, Woods and other the premises, herein before mentioned or
intended respectively to be granted, bargained and sold, and to every or any of
them, or to any part and parcel thereof belonging or appertaining, incident or
appendant, or as member, part and parcel of them or any of them; or of any part
or parcel thereof, now or at any time heretofore, being had, known, used,
occupied, accepted, leased, reputed or enjoyed, with all and singular their and
every of their appurtenances, and the reversion and reversions, rents, services
and other yearly profits of the said Manor, messuages, lands and other the
before bargained premises, and of every part and parcel thereof thereunto
incident or in any wise appertaining: And also all the estate, right, title,
interest, use, trust, possession, reversion, remainder, claim and demand
whatsoever which he the said T S or any for him now have, or has, or had, or
may, might, or ought to have, of, in or to the Manor, Farms, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments before mentioned, and every, or any part or parcel thereof:
To have and to hold the said Manor or Lordship, Capital message, farms,
messuages, lands, tenements, woods etc. unto the said Earl etc. and unto the
use of them for ever. And this Indenture further witnesses, that to the end
all estates and rights and all remainders in tail, made heretofore and now in
being, or which may be claimed by the said T S or his issue, or by any other
person or persons, of, in or to the said Manor and premises or any part
thereof, may be from thenceforth barred and extinguished. And to the end a
perfect and indefeazeable estate and assurance of and in the same premises in
Fee Simple may be had, made and settled to the use of the said Earl etc. It is
hereby Covenanted, granted and agreed by and between all the parties to these
present Indentures for them and their heirs, That they the said Earl etc.
before the term of Saint Hillary now next coming, shall and will at the costs
and charges of the said Earl etc. in due form of Law leavie and acknowledge
before the Justices of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster in
the County of Middlesex, one or more Fine or Fines (Sur Conuzance de droit come
ceo Qu'ils de son don) unto the said T C. and I D. whereupon proclamation shall
be had in due form of law according to the Statute in that case made and
provided, of and upon the said Manor or Lordship, houses, farms, lands and
other the premises before mentioned to be bargained and sold, by such name and
names, number of tenements, and number and quantity of Acres, and in such
manner and form as by the Learned Council in the law of the said Earl etc.
shall be reasonably devised or advised, which said fine so, or in any other
manner or form to be levied, had and executed, shall be and enure. And the said
T C and I D and their heirs, shall, after the leavying and perfecting the said
fine or fines, stand and be seized of and in the said Manor, lands and
premises, and every parcel thereof, with the appurtenances, to the use of the
said T C and I D etc. to the intent and purpose, That the said T C and I D etc.
shall or may stand and be adjudged perfect tenants of the free hold of the said
Manor, etc. and premises, until that a perfect and common recovery shall and may
be lawfully had and executed of the said Manor and premises by and in the names
of the said J G. and against the said T C and J D. according to the order and
course of common recoveries in such cases used, with such voucher and vouchers
over as by the said Earl etc. or their heirs or their or sum of their Council
Learned in the law shall be advised or required. And thereupon it is further
covenanted, concluded and agreed by and between all and every the parties to
these presents, for them their heirs and assigns, And the said T S for him, his
etc. does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said Earl etc. That the
said T S shall and will permit and suffer one writ of Enter sur disseisin in le
post, after the Manor and course of Common recoveries, to be sued forth out of
his Majesty's High Court of Chancery, in the names of the said John Goodwin,
and James Mayo, demandants returnable, before the end of the said Hillary term
next coming, against the said T C and I D then tenants of the said Manor and
premises before the Kings Majesty's Justices of his Highness said Court of
Common pleas at Westminster. demanding thereby the said Manor, Lands and premises
with their appurtenances, by such name and names, and in such manner and form,
as by the Council learned in the law of the said Earl etc. shall be devised,
whereunto the said T C and I D shall appear in proper person, and after
declaration upon the said Writ made, according to the nature and form thereof:
The said T C and I D shall vouch to warrantie the said T S. who likewise shall
personally appear and immediately enter into warrantie, and after declaration,
shall vouch to warrantie the Common vouchee, who likewise shall enter into
warrantie and after declaration shall imparle, and after shall depart in
Contempt of the Court and make default, whereupon Judgment shall be given,
that the said I G and James Mayo shall recover the premises against the said T
C and I D; and the said T C and I D over in value against the said T S. and the
said T S over in value against the common vouchee: And thereupon a Writ of
Execution and seisin shall be awarded, sued forth, returned and filed,
according to the order and course of Common Recoveries, in such like cases
usually had and suffered. And it is covenanted, granted, concluded,
condescended and fully agreed by and between the said parties to these presents
for them and every of them, their and every of their heirs and assigns, and
the true intent and meaning of these presents and of all the parties thereunto
is, that as well the said recoverie so or in any other manner to be sued out,
had and executed, and the said Fine or Fines in manner aforesaid, or in any
other manner, levied, had and executed, from and after the perfecting of the
said recovery; As also all other fines, recoveries and other assurances
herafter to be had, made and executed, in, of or upon the said Manor, lands and
premises, or any part thereof by and between the parties to these presents, or
any of them, and the full force and execution of the same, shall be and enure,
and shall be adjudged, esteemed and taken to be and to enure; and the said
Recoverers and Conusers and their heirs, and the Survivors and Survivor of
them, and his and their heirs shall stand and be seized of the same Manor and
premises with the appurtenances to the only proper use and behoof of the said
Earl etc. and of their etc. for ever, and to none other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever. And further the said T S for him, his etc. does covenant, promise
and grant to and with the said Earl etc. their heirs and assigns by these
presents, that he the said T S and his heirs, and all and every other person
and persons which do or shall lawfully claim any estate, right, interest, rent,
reversion or demand of, in, unto or out of the said Manors, lands and premises
above herein warranted, and to be defended by the said T S party to these
presents, and his heirs, or any part thereof, from, by or under him the said T
S or his heirs, or from, by or under the said T S Father of the said T S,
party to these presents, the heirs or assigns of them, or any of them, or
under, or by means of any act or acts, or title derived from them or any of
them (excepting such person or persons to whom the said T S party to these
presents, has granted one or two of the next Avoidances of the Church of W and
presentations thereunto) shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter at and upon the reasonable request and at the costs and charges in
the Law of the said Earl etc. their heirs or assigns, do, make, acknowledge,
leavie execute and suffer, or cause or procure to be made etc. all and every
such further act and acts, thing and things, devise and devises, assurance and
assurances in the Law whatsoever for the further, better, more perfect, sure
and absolute granting, assuring and conveying, quiet and clear having, holding
and enjoying of the said Manors, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and all other
the before bargained premises, and of every part and parcel thereof with the
appurtenances, unto the said Earl etc. their etc. and to the survivor of them
and their heirs, be it by fine, feoffment, recovery, or by any other ways or
means whatsoever, with such warranty, and in such manner and form, as by the
learned Council in the law of the said Earl etc. their heirs or assigns
shall be reasonably advised, devised or required. And lastly, the said T S
party to these presents, for him, his heirs, executors and administrators,
does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said Earl etc. their etc. by
these presents, in manner and form following; that is to say, that they the
said Earl etc. their heirs and assigns, and every of them shall or may from
time to time, and at all times for ever hereafter peaceably and quietly have,
hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Manor or Lordship, message,
lands and premises above herein mentioned to be warranted and to be defended by
the said T S party to these presents, and his heirs, and every part and
parcel thereof with their and every of their appurtenances freed and
discharged of and from all and all manner of former bargains, sales, gifts,
grants, leases, intails, joyntures, dowers, rents, charges, statutes,
recognizances, judgments, extents, executions, claims, duties, debts of record,
and to the Kings Majesty, fines, issues, amerciaments, ouster le mains,
liveries, and of and from all other charges, estates, titles, troubles and
encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, done, or wittingly and willingly
suffered by the said T S party to these presents, and the said T S the Father,
or any of them, or the heirs and assigns of them, or any of them; or by any
other person or persons lawfully claiming, or to claim, by from or under them,
or any of them. (Except all and singular such grant and grants of avoidances,
and of presentations to the Church of VV aforesaid, when the same shall become
void, not exceeding the number of two of the next presentations thereunto,
heretofore made and granted, and by the said T S to one J B Clark, or to some
or one for him.)

In witness, etc.
A Clause to insert, after the Reddend. that if the rent be unpaid, after the
day, the lease to determine.
AND if it shall happen the said yearly rent of etc. or any part thereof to be
behind and unpaid in part, or in all, after any of the feasts aforesaid, in
which the same ought to be paid (being lawfully demanded) within the time and
space of one and twenty days, that then, and from thenceforth this present
demise, grant or lease, and every clause, article and covenant in the same
contained, to be utterly void, frustrate, and of none effect. And that then
also it shall and may be lawful to and for the said VV T his executors,
administrators and assigns, into the aforesaid demised premises, and into
every part thereof to enter, and the same to have again, repossess and enjoy as
in his and their first and former estate, any thing herein contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise not withstanding.

An assignment and release.
THis INDENTURE made etc. between A D of London Gentleman, of the one part;
and H C of London, yeoman of the other part; Witnesses, that whereas E V Esquire
and M B by their deed indented, dated the etc. for the considerations herein
expressed, have freely and absolutely granted, bargained, sold, assigned, and
set over unto the said A and H their executors and assigns, all the estate,
right, title, interest, term of years, claim and demand of them the said E and
M. of, in and to all that new message or tenement with the appurtenances
lately built, sometimes in the occupation of G C deceased, and late in the
occupation of the said M B. situate, and being in Chancery Lane, in the County
of Middlesex, by force of one Indenture of lease, to them the said ^ V and M B
thereof made and granted by J R of etc. and M E of etc. bearing date etc. for
diverse years then and yet enduring, as by the same several Indentures,
whereunto relation being had, more at large appears. Now these presents do
further witness that the said A D, for diverse good causes and considera ions
him thereunto moving, has by these presents given, granted, released,
surrendered, assigned and set over unto the said H G his etc. all the estate,
right, title, interest, term of years, claim and demand whatsoever, that he the
said A D has or may have in and to the said message or tenement with the
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, To have, hold and enjoy the
same, and every part thereof to the said H C his etc. for and during all the
term of years yet to come and unexpired, and mentioned to be granted by the
former recited Indentures. And the said A D does by these presents covenant and
grant for him, his executors and administrators, to and with the said H C his
executors, administrators and assigns, that he the said A D solely by himself,
and whereunto the said H C is not party and privy, has not at any time
heretofore done any act whereby the said message or tenement, or any part
thereof is or shall be encumbered, but that the said H C his executors,
administrators and assigns shall and may peaceably and quietly enjoy the same
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents. And further, that
he the said A D his executors and administrators shall and will at all times
hereafter, upon reasonable request to him or them to be made by the said H C
his executors, administrators or assigns, make any further and better
assurance of the premises to the said H C his executors, administrators or
assigns, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents.

In witness, etc.
FINIS.
An exact Table, as well Alphabeticall, as methodical; for the preceding
Treatise.
A
Apprentice, see Discharge. 569
Articles.
Articles of agreement for a Carpenter page 1 Articles of agreement for passing
a Particular, rated in Fee simple under the great Seal, to two Patentees, and
from them to the Purchasor. 16 Articles of agreement Indented etc. between A B
of etc. and C D of etc. for filing a book in reversion, granted by her
Majesty. 18 Articles of agreement, for passing a Lease in reversion. 21
Assignment.
An Assignment of a Judgment, upon an assignment of a Satute, with a Letter of
Attorney. 32 An Assignment of a Lease, and bonds to perform the Covenants of
the same Lease. 51 An Assignment af diverse obligations and bills. 60 An
Assignment of an annuity 77 An Assignment of rent reserved by a lease, and
granted in consideration of service. 87 An Assignment of a lease, with diverse
very good Covenants therein. 98 An Assignment of an Extent, and the land
thereby extended. 134 An Assignment of an extent, upon a Statute forfeited to
the Queen. 138 An Assignment of a Ward 214 An Assignment of an Aprentice 287 An
Assignment of a Lease to a third person in trust, upon condition that if money
be not paid, the assignment void 432 An Assignment of a Recognizance, with very
good Covenants therein inserted 447 An Assignment of a Bond for performance of
Covenants 476 An Assignment of two several obligations 495 An Assignment of two
Apprentices, and their years to come 497 An Assignment from Patentees of part
of their grant 502 A Short Assignment to a third person 507 An Assignment of
lands extended to certain uses 533 An Assignment of an annuity 564 An
Assignment of the moity of a house and goods 603 An Assignment of a Lease in
trust whereof the Assignor is to take a further estate in the premises 614 An
Assignment of a Judgment 616 An Assignment and release 644 An Attachment in the
Mayors Court 30
Assurance.
An Assurance devised in a very good form, penned by Mr. Atkinson Councellor 91
An Assurance of a jointure by fine and recovery 130 An Assurance of a Jointure
to the Wife, with remainders in tail 488
Award.
An Award made between Executors 5 An Award in another form. 9 An Award in
another form short 11 An Award yielded up, and the form thereof 368 An Award
and the form thereof 465
B
Bargain and Sale.
A Bargain and sale to the Queen of lands, upon a condition of Redemption. 166
A Bargain and sale of land from the Mortgagee and Mortgager to another 175 A
Bargain and sale upon condition made to Feoffees in Trust. 183 A Bargain and
sale absolute 195 A Bargain and sale of Swans, and a Swan-mark. 210 A Bargain
and sale of Underwood 211 Of a Wardship 213 Of Billets, Wood and Timber 218 Of
a house and lands 597
A Bill of Sale. 438
Bonds.
A Bond taken by the Sheriffs of London for ones appearance, and the condition
thereof. 540 A Bond to Churchwardens, conditioned to pay four pounds per
annum to the poor of the parish, and upon the death of any surety, to put
another in his stead. 566
C
A Certificate for payment of the subsidy. 374 A Clause to insert after the
Reddend. that if the rent be unpaid after the day, the release to determine.
643 A Clause to avoid survivorship of a man's wife 89
Condition.
A Condition for an Under Sheriff. 376 A Condition to surrender lands. 377 A
Condition to cure a disease, or to repay the money. 378 A Condition to stand to
an award. 378 A Condition not to sell lands had by marriage. 380 To assure a
sum of money in consideration of a marriage. 380 To repay money had with an
Apprentice. 381 Not to demise lands without a license. 383 To pay money yearly
during the life of the obligee. 383 To assure an Estate. 384 To procure a
surety to enter bond by a day. 385 To pay money upon the obtaining of a Lease
from the Queen. 385 That the lessee shall not carry away any wainscot, or
windows, at the end of his Lease. 386 That the Deputy Atturnie shall pay costs
and charges for all actions unlawfully prosecuted by him in the name of the
grantor. 387 To procure a Lease for years, in consideration of a (...) sum of
money. 388 To save one harmless of a bail in the Kings Bench. 389 To
acknowledge satisfaction upon a Judgment in an Information. 39 For delivery of
wool. 391 That the Lessee shall pay the rent reserved by his Lease. 392 To
make and deliver a release by day, at a certain place. 393 The obligor to pay
money for wares delivered in turst to another, if he make default of payment.
393 To assure lands after recovery had, by the means of C D. 394 To deliver
writings to be cancelled at a day certain, and place. 395 To repay money upon
mislikeing of a bargain in communication. 396 To save one harmless for
delivery of an Indenture. 396 For a Purveyor of wheat for his Majesty 397 To
seal a Lease by a day, according to a draught thereof already made 398 To
procure lands to be passed in Fee simple from his Majesty, and the Patentee to
convey it to the obligee by a day, be then paying the Patentee a sum of money
399 To pay a sum of money upon the passing of Lands, from his Majesty in Fee
and to procure a survey of the woods, and to pay for them 401 To make an
assurance of land 402
A Condition for non residency 403 A Condition to pay a sum of money at two
several payments 461 A Condition to pay money within four days after, if the
parties bound in an obligation, pay it not at the day 506 A Condition to pay a
sum of money to children at their several ages, according to the will by which
it was given, the bond being made to the executors 511 A Condition for payment
of money to a child when he comes to age, and in the mean time to find it, and
bring it up 512 A Condition of arbitrament, general and special 529 A Condition
for the truth of an Apprentice, and to restore the value of all such goods as
by proof shall appear he has embezeled 530 A Condition to acknowledge
satisfaction upon a judgment 531 A Condition to save harmless of a Bail 531 A
Condition to make assurance upon request 532 A Condition to find one his diet
by the year 540 A Condition for passing a Fine 569 A Condition to save one
harmless of a Recognizance taken for ones appearing 570 580 A Condition to
repay all such charges as the Tenant shall be at, by reason of the payment of
his rent, there being controversy concerning the title of the house 572 A
Condition to discharge the Churchwardens and Parishioners of a child born in
the Parish 573 A Condition to surrender Copi-hold lands, and to cause him to be
admitted Tenant 374 Another for quiet enjoying, and for the assurance of land
575 A Condition to pay a sum of money after 10 l. per cent. if the party be
living at the day of payment, if dead, to abate the interest, and some of the
principal 577 A Condition to lend a sum of money at a certain day nominated,
for a certain time then following, without interest 577 Another for payment of
an Annuity 578 Another to pay a certain sum of money at a day, and then to put
in other sureties for payment, of another sum at a day then following 579 A
Condition for performance of an Award 579 A Condition to save harmless for the
bailing of one at two several actions 581 Another for payment of money if a man
be nonsuited. 582 Another for to pay a sum of money at a day, and then to put in
other security for the payment of another sum at a day then following 582 A
Condition for performance of Covenants 583 A Condition of Arbitrament General
595 A Condition not to revoke a Letter of Atturnie, but to justify all actions
to be brought for the recovery of the debt 601 A Condition to save harmless a
Tenant, by reason of the payment of his rent 602 A Condition for the delivery
of certain writings, by a day to be cancelled 608 A Condition to save harmless
sureties bound for the Behavior 620 A Condition concerning marriage 621
Another concerning marriage 622 A Condition for the resignation of a Prebendary
upon request 622 A Condition to pay a sum of money at a time after the day of
marriage, or hour of death, which shall first happen 632
Confirmation.
A Confirmation of a Lease short 146 A Conformation to the assignee of a Lease
ibid A Confirmation from the King of a Presentation. 314 A Conveyance out of
Letters patents. 270
Covenants.
Covenants to set up a grate of iron to be placed about a Tomb 23 Covenants to
hew and make an alablaster Tomb 24 A Covenant for further assurance 82 557 A
Covenant to pay money yearly during a man's life 84 A Covenant to repay money
upon eviction 118 A Covenant to surrender Copyhold lands 209 A Covenant to sue
forth a writ of Entry of a Manor 247 A Covenant to sue forth a Recovery in the
Hustings Court London, upon a writ of right 248 Another for a Recovery to be
passed 249 Another for a Recovery already passed 250 A Covenant to make an
acquittance upon payment of money 287 Covenant to avoid the title of
Survivorship where lands are granted to two. 329 Covenant, that after default
of payment the possession of lands in mortgage shall be delivered to the
mortgagee, and all deeds concerning the same 526 Covenant for levying of a Fine
555 Covenant to surrender at the next Court 556 That the premises are
discharged of encumbrances. 558
Covenant, that he is lawfully seized, and has power to demise. 559 that the
Lessee shall not commit waste, cut nor sell the trees without the consent of
the Lessor. 559

D
Deeds.
A Deed of Revocation very large, and very short. 230 238 442 Deed of Gift upon
condition to be void upon the tender of five shillings. 216 Deed of gift of
lands without an Indenture 282 Deed of feoffment for a wives Jointure 283 Deed
of gift made to one to save him harmless from all Bonds 426 Deeds of gift 481
482 484
Defeasance.
A Defeazance of an obligation forfeited 28 A Defeazance of a Statute and
obligation 29 A Defeazance upon a bond sued to a judgment 542 A Defeazance for
payment of 100 li. per Annum for a time 563 Defeazance, see Indenture 565
A Demise of a lease forfeited for non-payment of Rent 112 A Discharge of an
Apprentice from his service 569 A Deputation of a Bailiffe, or receiver 365 A
Deputation of a Patent, and the form thereof 611
E
Extent, see Assignment 134 13^
F
A Feoffement with a Letter of Atturnie, upon condition expressed in an
Indenture 301 A Feoffement upon condition of payment of money 303 A Feoffement
in part of performance of Covenants in a certain Indenture 305 A Feoffement
with a general warranty 609 Fees for passing a book of 50 li. per An. etc. 352
Fees Touching Wards. 354 355
G
A Gift of ones interest in an advowson 311 A Gift of an advowson from the King
315 Another from a Bishop 316
Grant.
A Grant of an annuity or Rentcharge 75 A Grant from the Queen of the goods of
one that is outlawed. 148 A Grant of the forfeiture of a Recognizance,
acknowledged before two Justices of the peace to the Queens use. 153 A Grant of
an annuity for the maintenance of an almshouse, or of an Hospital 169 A Grant
of indenization to aliens born 279 A Grant of an annuity for life 285 A Grant
of the presentation to a Vicarage 308 A Grant of a Presentation riciting a
former gift, Extraordinary 309 A Grant from the King of the goods of a person
outlawed 320 A Grant of the Office of keeping a great House, and a Park 318 A
Grant of a Keepership of a Park 364 416 A Grant of a stewardship 366 Of the
reversion of certain lands 445 Of an extent, Penned by Tho. Bromley Solicitor
473 Of an advowson from the King 513 Of a rent reserved by Lease 548 Of a
Receivorship from a Noble man 591 Of an annuity for a man's advise in Law 596

I
Indentures
An Indenture for marriage 155 An Indenture of Covenants, for the passing of a
Recovery 198 An Indenture for limitation of uses and estates 221 An Indenture
between Executors, with diverse Covenants amongst themselves 239 Indenture of
bargain and sale 288 Indenture of allotment of several parts of lands. 322
An Indenture where two have a joint estate, upon condition that either of them
may have an equal part in the land, or money lent, taking no benefit by
Survivorship 331 Indenture of partition 333 Indenture between partners 335
An Indenture where three have purchased land jointly, that upon sale thereof,
all sums of money shall be equally divided amongst them 338 An Indenture where
a Lease is granted to three joint Lessees, that every of them is to pay his
part of the rent, and equal part in the charge of repairing, and other charges
339 Indenture from an Undersheriff to the high Sheriff 342 Indenture to sue
forth a writ of entry of a Manor 247 Indenture of an annuity 404 Indenture of
bargain and sale of a Manor, with necessary Covenants 408 Indenture to lead
the use of a Fine 415 Indenture of division between two joint purchasors, with
a rehearsal of their Grant 418
An Indenture for justifying of actions, upon setting over a Statute 458
Indenture between the Scavengers and the Raker, for cleansing the Streets 459
Indenture of partition 546 Indenture of Covenants for passing of a recovery to
cut off an intail 561
An Indenture of defeazance for the making void of all former Statutes, payment
of the money, and performance of Covenants 565 Indenture of Apprentiship 571
Indenture of Covenants concerning a bargain and sale of a Manor, with a Proviso
583
An Indenture Tripartite of Mortgage of several Tenements in London, and a
Recovery thereof had in the Hustings Court, and the uses specified 623 An
Indenture Tripartite of settlement by Fine and Recovery 635 Joyntures see
Assurance 430 488
L
Leases.
A Lease of a Cole-mine, or Cole-pit 12 Of a ferry 26 Of Tithes 36 Of a
message with an increase of rent paid quarterly in the name of a Fine 40 Of a
Manor 45 Of land 48 Of a message and of lands 63 Of lands in Exchange 68 Of a
mill 94
A Lease with two rents reserved 104 Of a Tenement with good Covenants 108
A Lease upon a condition in mortgage, for Collateral security 115 For three
lives, with a Recital of a former lease and several Covenants 120 For lives,
with fine and recovery 125 Of a house in London 422 Of a house and certain
lands in consideration of a sum of money, the Fee simple being in the Lessor 428
A Lease made in consideration of the surrender of a former Lease for a longer
time, if three live so long, with good covenants 467 A short Lease of certain
tithes, to commence after the expiration of a lease in being 480 Of a
Farm-house, and certain lands, with necessary covenants 490

Letters of Atturny
A Letter of Atturnie to receive possession and seisin 304 To receive an
annuity 307 To take possession of a Patentee 349 To deliver a Lease upon the
ground, with an Indorsment thereof 356 To make composition for letting of lands
358
A general Let. of Attorney to enter and let lands. 360 A Letter of Attorney to
take possession 357 To receive a debt and give a discharge 462 To receive rent
and money from time to time. 463 To receive money due upon a bond 464 To enter
upon lands and deliver a lease. 500 501 541 619 upon covenants 527 upon a
specialty not due, with covenants to justify actions 550 upon an extent, to
enter and make leases 553 for setting over a bond 592
Another to receive a Pension out of the Exchequer. 593
Licenses.
A Letter of License from creditors to debtors 369 A License for non Residence,
a Qualification. 317 for the admission of a Chaplain into service. 318 to pass
over sea 371 for a Buck and Do for the life of the grantee. 372 to transport
Bear 373 to a Butcher to sell flesh 375
A Liberty to make Leases 560
M
A Mortgage of Letters patents, and the lands thereby granted 157 A Mortgage of
a lease for Indemnity of certain sureties bound in an obligation made to
another in trust for their uses 435 A Mortgage of lands 521
O
Obligation see Bond.
P
Presentations by the King, and others to benefices 312 313 A Proviso for
payment of moneys 306 Proviso that if the Lessor be minded to surrender his
grand lease to take a further estate in the premises, then the demise to be
void 499

R
A Recital where the Lease may not be seen 114 Recital of an Indenture and
Covenants of a lease for lives. 120 A Recognizance from one to one 543 from two
to one 544 taken by a Justice of peace for appearance 474
A Refeoffment upon a deed of feoffment for a wives Jointure. 384
Release.
A Release of a proviso or condition for payment of money reserved upon an
indenture of bargain and sale. 251 A Release where three have a joint estate of
inher. 253 of an assignment made upon condition 255 Of a Manor 256 of a rent
reserved in a pair of articles of agreement 258 of a condition in an Indenture
of bargain and sale, with the proviso recited 261 of an annuitie 262 Of the
condition and other covenants in an indenture of Mortgage, with a confirmation
from the Mortgager to the Mortgagee 263 Of errors, in passing a Fine and
Recovery, and other assurance 267
A Release from one patentee to another 296 From one purchasor to another 298
Of lands mortgaged 439
A general Release 452, 464 A Release to one that has lost the counterpart of
his Lease 452 Of fines and forfeitures due to the King, and the Informer upon
the Statute of Recusancy. 454 From one used in trust of all the benefits he
might claim by virtue of any covenants in the indenture 456 Of an annuitie 477
Of a Dower. 485
A Release to one that has lost his articles of agreement 486 A Release taken
from one used in trust 539 Of lands in performance of articles 606 For waste
done 617 Of Errors in a Fine 632 Of all right etc. in lands to him in
possession. 633
A Revocation of a suit. 545
S
A Sale of an apprentices Indenture and term of years. 295 A Sale of a moity of
rent reserved by lease. 514
Surrender.
A Surrender to the King of a Lease for years. 274 Of a lease for lives to the
King 276 Of the Captainship of a Castle 475 Of a lease, for obtaining of a new
lease 544

W
A Warrant to the Auditors for making particulars from the Lord Treasurer 347 A
Warrant from the King for a lease in reversion. 351 A Will, and the form and
preamble thereof 487
FINIS.

