THE CHARACTER OF A London-Diurnall: With several select POEMS:

By the same Author.

Optima and novissima Editio.

Printed in the Year MDCXLVII.

THE CHARACTER OF A London-Diurnall.
A Diurnall is a puny Chronicle, scarce pin-feather'd with the wings of time:
It is an History in Sippets; the English Iliads in a Nut-shell; the
Apocryphal Parliaments book of Macca bees in single sheets. It would tire a
Welch-pedigree, to reckon how many aps it is removed from an Annall: For it is
of that Extract; only of the younger Horse, like a Shrimp to a Lobster The
original sinner in this kind was Dutch; Galliobelgicus the Protoplast; and the
modern Mercuries but Hans-en-Kelders. The Countess of Zealand was brought to
bed of an Almanac; as many Children, as days in the year. It may be the
Legislative Lady is of that Lineage; so she spawnes the Diurnalls, and they at
Westminster, take them in Adoption, by the names of Scoticus, Civicus,
Britanicus. In the Frontispice of the old Beldame-Diurnall, like the Contents
of the Chapter, sits the House of Commons judging the twelve Tribes of Israel,
You may call them the Kingdoms Anatomy before the weekly Calendar: For such is
a Diurnall, the day of the month, with what weather in the Commonwealth. It Is
taken for the Pulse of the Body-Politique; and the Emperick-Divines of the
Assembly, those spiritual Dragooners, thumb it accordingly. Indeed it is a
prity Synopsis; and those grave Rabbis (though in point of Divinity) trade in
no larger Authors. The Countrey-Carrier, when he buys it for their Vicar,
miscalls it the Vrinall: yet properly enough; For it casts the water of the
State, ever since it staled blood. It differs from an Aulicus, as the Devil
and his Exorcist; or as a black Witch does from a white one, whose office is to
unravell her enchantments.

It begins usually with an Ordinance, which is a Law still-borne, dropped, before
quickened by the Royal assent: It Is one of the Parliaments liaments by-blowes,
(Acts only being legitimate) and has no more Sire, then a Spanish Gennet,
that is begotten by the wind.

Thus their Militia (like its Patron, Mars) is the issue only of the mother,
without the concourse of Royal Jupiter.

Yet Law it is, if they vote it, though in defiance of their Fundamentalls;
like the old Sexton, who swore his Clock went true, what ever the Sun said to
the contrary.

The next Ingredient of a Diurnall is plots, horrible plots; which with
wonderful Sagacity it hunts dry-foot, while they are yet in their Causes,
before Materia prima can put on her smock. How many such fits of the Mother
have troubled the Kingdom, and (for all Sir Walter Earl looks like a
Man-Midwife) not yet delivered of so much as a Cushion? But Actors must have
their Properties; And, since the Stages were voted down, the only Playhouse
is at Westminster.

Suitable to their plots are their Informers; Skippers and Taylours; Spaniells
both for the Land and the Water: Good conscionable Intelligence! For, however
Pym's Bill may inflame the reckoning, the honest Vermyn have not so much for
lying, as the Public Faith.

Thus a zealous Botcher in Morefields, while he was contriving some Quirpo-cut
of Church Government, by the help of his outlying Ears, and the Otacousticon
of the Spirit, discovered such a plot, that Seldom intends to combat
Antiquity, and maintain it was a Tailors Goose, that preserved the Capitol.

I wonder my Lord of Canterbury is not once more all-to-betraytor'd for dealing
with the Lions, to settle the Commission of Array in the Tower. It would do
well to cramp the Articles Dormant, besides the opportunity of reforming those
Beasts of the Prerogative, and changing their prophaner names of Harry and
Charles, into Nehemiah and Eleaz^r.

Suppose a Corne-cutter, being to give little Isa^c a cast of his Office,
should fall to paring his Brows, mistaking the one end for the other; because
he branches at both. This would be a plot; and the next Diurnall would furnish
you with this Scale of Votes.

Resolved upon the Question, that this Act of the Corncutters was an absolute
Invasion of the Cities Charter, in the representative Forehead of Isaac.
Resolved, that the evil Councillors about the Corncutter are Popishly
affected, and Enemies to the State. Resolved, that there be a public
Thanksgiving for the great deliverance of Isaac's Brow-antlers; and a solemn
Covenant drawn up, to defy the Corn-cutter, and all his works.

Thus the Quixotes of this Age fight with the Windmills of their own heads;
quell Monsters of their own creation, make plots, and then discover them; as
who fitter to unkennell the Fox, then the Tarryer, that is a part of him.

In the third place march their Adventures; the Roundheads Legend, the Rebels
Romance; Stories of a larger size, then the Ears of their Sect; able to
strangle the Belief of a Soli-fidian.

I Will present them in their order; and first, as a Whiffeler before the show,
enter Stamford, one that trod the Stage with the first, traversed his ground,
made a leg and Exit. The Countrey-people took him for one, that by Order of
the Houses was to dance a Morice through the West of England. Well, he is a
nimble Gentleman, set him but upon Banks his Horse in a Saddle Rampant, and it
is a great question, which part of the Centaure shows better tricks.

There was a Vote passing to t^^nslate him, with all his Equipage into
Monumentall-Gingerbread; (...) it was crossed by the Female-Committee,
alleging that the v^^our of his Image would bite their Children by the
Tongues.

This Cubit and an half of Commander, by the help of a Diurnall, routed his
enemies fifty miles off: it is strange you will say, and yet it is generally
believed, he would as soon do it at that distance, as nearer hand. Sure it was
his Sword, for which the weap^n-salve was invented: that so wounding and
healing, like loving Correlates, might both work at the same removes.

But the squibbe is run to the end of the Rope. Rome, for the Prodigy of
Valor, Madam Atropos in breeches; Wallers Knighterrantry: and, because every
Mountibanke must have his Z^ny, throw him in Haslerigge, to set off his story:
these two like Bell and the Dragon, are always worshipped in the same Chapter:
they hunt in their Couples, what one does at the head, the other scores up at
the heel.

Thus they kill a man over and over, as Hopkins and St^rnhold murder the
Psalms, with another to the same; one chimes all in, and then the other
strikes up, as the Saints-Bell.

I wonder, for how many lives my Lord Hoptons Soul took the ^ease of his Body.

First, St^mford slew him: then Waller out-killed that half a ^^rre: and yet
it is thought the sullen corpse would scarce bleed, were both these Man-slayers
never so near it.

The fame goes of a Dutch Heads-man, that he would do his office with so much
ease and dexterity, that the Head after execution should stand still upon the
shoulders: pray God Sir William be not Probationer for the place. For, as if he
had the like knack too, most of those, whom the Diurnall has slain for him, to
us poor Mortals seem untoucht.

Thus these Artificers of Death can kill the man, without wounding the body,
like Lightning, that melts the Sword, and never singes the Scabbard.

This is the William, whose Lady is the Conqueror; This is the Cities
Champion, and the Diurnalls Delight; he, that Cuckolds the General in his
Commission: for, he stalks with Essex, and shoots under his belly, because his
Oxcellency himself is not charged there. Yet in all this triumph there is a
whip and a bell; translate but the Scene to Round-way-downe: Th^re Hasleriggs
Lobsters were turned into Crabs, and crawled backwards; there poor Sir William
ran to his Lady for a use of consolation.

But the Diurnall is weary of the Arm of flesh, and now begins an Hosanna to
Cromwell, one that has beat up his Drums clean through the Old Testament: you
may learn the Genealogy of our Savio^r, by the names in his Regiment: The
Muster-master uses no other List, then the first Chapter of Matthew.

With what face can they object to the King the bringing in of Forraigners,
when themselves entertain such an Army of Hebrews? This Cromwell is never so
valorous, as when he is making Speeches for the Association, which
nevertheless he does somewhat ominously, with his neck awry, holding up his
ear, as if he expected Mahomets Pidgeon to come, and prompt him: He should be
a Bird of prey too, ^y his bloody b^ake: his nose is able to try a young Eagle,
whither she be lawfully begotten. But all is not Gold that glisters: What we
wonder at in the rest of them, is natural to him, to kill without bloodshed:
For, most of his Trophies are in ^ Church-Window; when a Looking-glass would
show him more Superstition: He is so perfect a hater of Images, that he has
defaced Gods in his own Countenance. If he deal with Men, it is when he takes
them napping in an old Monument: Then down goes dust and ashes: and the
stoutest Cavalier is no better. Obrave Oliver! Times Voyder, Sub-sizer to the
Worms; in whom Death, that formerly devoured our Ancestors, now chewes the
Cud: He said Grace once, as if he would have fallen aboard with the Marquess
of Newcastle: Nay, and the Diurnall gave you his Bill of Fare; But it proved
but a running Banquet, as appears by the Story. Believe him as he whistles to
his Cambridge Teeme of Committee Men, and he does Wonders. But Holy men (like
the Holy language) must be read backwards. They ri^le Colleges, to promote
Learning; and pull down Churches for Edification. But Sacrilege is intailed
upon him: There must be a Cromwell for Cathedralls, as well as Abbeyes: A
secure sinner, whose offense carries its pardon in its mouth: For, how can he
be hanged for Churchrobbery, which gives it self the benefit of the Clergy?

But for all Cromwells Nose wears the Dominicall Letter, yet compared with
Manchester, he is but like the Vigills to an Holy Day. This, this, is the man
of God; so sanctified a Thunderbolt, that Burrowes in a proportionable
blasphemy to his Lords of Hosts, would style him the Archangell, giving Battle
to the Devil.

Indeed, as the Angels, each of them makes a several Species; so every one of
his Soldiers is a distinct Church. Had these Beasts been to enter the Arc, it
would have pazled Noah to have sorted them into paires. If ever there were a
rope of Sand, it was so many Sects twisted into an Association.

They agree in nothing, but that they are all Adamites in Understanding: It is
the sign of a Coward, to wink, and fight; yet all their Valor proceeds from
their Ignorance.

But I wonder whence their Generals purity proceeds; it is not by Traduction:
if he was begotten Saint, it was by Equivocall Generation: for the Devil in
the Father, is turned Monk in the Son; so his godliness is of the same
Parentage with good Laws; both extracted out of bad Manners; and would he
alter the Scriptute, as he has attempted the Creed, he might vary the Text,
and say to Corruption, Thou art my Father.

This is he, that has put out one of the Kingdoms eyes, by clouding our
Mother-University, and (if the Scotch mist further prevail) will extinguish
this other: He has the like quarrel to both; because both are strung with the
same Optic Nerve, knowing Loyalty. Barbarous Rebel! who will be revengd upon
all Learning, because his Treason is beyond the Mercy of the Book.

The Diurnall as yet has not talked much of his Victories: but there is the
more behind: For the Knight must always beat the Giant; That Is resolved. If
any thing fall out amiss, which cannot be smothered, the Diurnall has a help
at Maw; It is but putting to Sea, and taking a Danish Fleet; or brewing it with
some success out of Ireland, and it goes down merrily.

There are more Puppets, that move by the Wyre of a Diurnall; as Brereton and
Gell; two of Mars his Petty-toes, such snivelling Cowards, that it is a favor
to call them so; was Brereton to fight with his teeth, as in all other things
he resembles the beast, he would have odds of any man at the weapon; O he is a
terrible slaughterman at a Thanksgiving Dinner, had he been a Canniball to
have eaten those that he vanquished, his gut would have made him valiant.

The greatest wonder is at Fairfax, how he comes to be a Babe of Grace?
Certainly it is not in his personal, but (as the State Sophies distinguish) in
his Polotique Capacity; regenerated ab extra, by the zeal of the House he sat
in, as Chickens are hatched at Grand Cairo, by the adoption of an Oven.

There is the Wood-Monger too, a feeble crutch to a declining cause, a new
Branch of the old Oak of Reformation.

And now I speak of Reformation, vous avez Fox, the Tinker; the liveliest
Emblem of it that may be; For what did this Parliament ever go about to
reform, but Tinker-wise, in mending one hole they made three.

But I have not ink enough to cure all the Tetters and Ringwormes of the State.

I will close up all thus. The Victories of the Rebels are like the Magical
combat of Apuleius; who, thinking he had slain three of his Enemies, found
them at last, but a Triumvirate of Bladders. Such, and so empty, are the
Triumphs of a Diurnall: but so many impostumated Fancies, so many Bladders of
their own blowing.

FINIS.
POEMS.
Square-Cap.
COme hither Apollo's bouncing Girl,
And in a whole Hippocrene of Sherry
Let Us drink a round till our brains do whirle,
Tuning our pipes to make ourselves merry:
A Cambridge-Lasse, Venus-like, borne of the froth
Of an old half-fill'd Jug of Barley broth,
She, she is my Mistress, her Suitors are many,
But she will have a Square-cap if ere she have any.
And first for the Plush-sake the Monmouth-cap coms,
Shaking his head like an empty bottle;
With his newfangled Oath, By Jupiters thumbs,
That to herhealth he will begin a pottle:
He tells her that after the death of his Grannam,
He shall have -- God knows what per annum:
But still she replies, good Sir La-bee,
If ever I have a man, Square-cap for me.
Then Calot- Leather-cap strongly pleads,
And feign would derive the pedigree of fashion:
The Antipodes wear their shoes on their heads,
And why may not we in their imitation?
Oh, how this football noddle would please,
If it were but well tossed on S. Thom^^ his Lees.
But still she replied, etc.
Next comes the Puritan in a wrought-Cap,
With a long-wasted conscience toward a Sister,
And making a Chapel of Ease of her lap,
First he said grace, and then he kissed her.
Beloved, quoth he, thou art my Text,
Then falls he to Use and Application next:
But then she replied, your Text (Sir) I Will be,
For then I Am sure you will never handle me.
But see where Sattin-Cap scouts about,
And feign would this wench in his fellowship marry,
He told her how such a man was not put out,
Because his wedding he closely did carry.
He Will purchase Induction by Simonie,
And offers her money her Incumbent to be.
But still she replied, god Sir La-bee,
If ever I have a man Square-cap for me.
The Law^er's a Sophister by his round cap,
Nor in their fallacies are they divided;
The one milks the pocket, the other the tap,
And yet this wench he feign would have brided.
Come leave these threadbare Scholars, quoth he,
And give me livery and season of thee:
But peace Iohn-a-Nokes, and leave your Oration,
For I never will be your Impropriation.
I pray you therefore good Sir La-bee;
For if ever I have a man Square-cap for me.
Mark Anthony.
WHen as the Nightingall chanted her Vespers,
And the wild Forrester couched on the ground,
Venus invited me in th'Evening whispers,
Unto a fragrant field with Roses crowned:
Where she before had sent
My wishes complement,
Unto my hearts content,
Played with me on the Green.
Never Mark Anthony
Dallied more wantonly
With the fair Egyptian.
First on her cherry cheeks I mine eyes feasted,
Then fear of surfeiting made me retire:
Next on her warm lips, which when I tasted,
My duller spirits made active as fire.
Then we began to dart
Each at another heart,
Arrows that knew no smart:
Sweet lips and smiles between.
Never Mark, etc.
Wanting a glass to plate her amber tresses,
Which like a bracelet rich decked mine arm;
Gawdier then Juno wears, when as she graces
Jove with embraces more stately then warm,
Then did she peep in mine
Eyes humor Chrystalline;
I in her eyes was seen,
As if we one had been.
Never Mark, etc.
Mystical Grammar of amorous glances,
Feeling of pulses the Physic of Love,
Rhetorical cour^ings, and Musical Dances;
Numbering of kisses Arithmetic prove.
Eyes like Astronomy,
Straight limbed Geometry:
In her hearts ingeny
Our wits are sharp and keen.
Never Mark, etc.
The Authors Mock-Song to Mark Anthony.
When as the Night-raven sung Pluto's Mattins,
And Cerberus cried three Amens at a houle,
When night wandering Witches put on their pattins,
Midnight as dark as their faces are foul:
Then did the furies doom
That the nightmare was come;
Such a misshapen Groom
Puts down Su. Pomfret clean.
Never did Incubus
Touch such a filthy Sus,
As this foul Gypsy Queen.
First on her goosberry cheeks I mine eyes blasted;
Thence fear of vomiting made me retire
Unto the blewer lips, which when I tasted,
My spirits were duller then Dun in the mire.
But then her breath took place,
Which went an ushers pace,
And made way for her face;
You may guess what I mean.
Never did, etc.
Like Snaks engendring, were plated her tresses,
Or like the ^limy streaks of ropy ale;
Uglier then Envy wears, when she confesses
Her head is perewigg'd with Adders tail.
But as soon as she spoke,
I heard a harsh Mandrake:
Laugh not at my mistake,
Her head is Epicoene.
Never did, etc.
Mystical Magic of conjuring wrinckles,
Feeling of Pulses, the Palmestry of Haggs,
Scolding out belches for Rhe^orick twinckles;
With three teeth in her head like to three gaggs,
Rainebowes about her eyes,
And her nose weather-wise;
From them the Almanac lies,
Frost, Pond, and Rivers clean,
Never did, etc.
Upon an Hermophrodite.
SIr, or Madame, choose you whether,
Nature twist'd you both together:
And makes thy soul two garbes confess,
Both Petticoat and Breeches dress.
Thus we chastise the God of Wine,
With water that is Feminine,
Until the cooler Nymph abate
His wrath, and so concorporate.
Adam till his rib was lost,
Had both Sexes thus ingrost:
When Providence our Sire did cleave,
And out of Adam carved Eve,
Then did man 'bout Wedlock treat,
To make his body up complete:
Thus Matrimony speaks but Thee
In a grave solemnity.
For man and wife make but one right
Canonical Hermophrodite.
Ravell thy body and I find
In every limb a double kind.
Who would not think that head a pair,
That breeds such faction in the haire^
One half so churlish in the touch,
That rather then endure so much,
I would my tender limbs apparel
In (...) his nailed barrel:
But the other half so small,
And so amo^ous ^ithall,
That Cupid thinks each hair does grow
A string for his invis'ble Bow.
When I look babies in thine eyes,
Here Venus, there Adonis lies.
And though thy beauty be high noone,
Thy Orb contains both Sun and Moon.
How many melting kisses skip
'Twixt thy Male and Female lip?
'Twixt thy upper brush of hair
And thy nether beards despair.
When thou speak, I would not wrong
Thy sweetness with a double tongue:
But in every single sound
A perfect Dialogue is found.
Thy breasts distinguish one another;
This the ^ister, that the brother.
When thou joyn'st hands, my ear still fancies
The Nup^iall sound, I John take Frances:
Feel but the difference, soft, and rough;
This a Gantlet, that a Muffe:
Had sly Ulysses, at the sack
Of Troy, brought thee his Pedlers pack,
And weapons too to know Achilles
From King (...) Phillis,
His plot had failed; this hand would feel
The Needle, that the warlike steel.
When Music does thy pace advance,
Thy right leg takes thy left to dance.
Nor is it a Galliard danced by one,
But a mix^ dance, though alone:
Thus every he^eroclite part
Changes gender, but thy heart.
Nay those which modest can mean,
And dare not speak, are Epicoene;
That Gamester needs must overcome,
That can play both Tib and Tom.
Thus did Natures mintage vary,
Coining thee a Philip and Mary.
The Authors Hermaphrodite, made after M. Randolphs death, yet inserted into
his Poems.
Problem of Sexes; must thou likewise be
As disputable in thy Pedigree?
Thou Twins-in-one, in whom Dame Nature tries
To throw less then Aumes-ace upon two Dice:
Were thou served up two in one dish, the rather
To split thy Sire into a double father?
True, the worlds scales are even: what the maine
In one place gets, another quits again.
Nature lost one by thee, and therefore must
Slice one in two, to keep her number just:
Plurality of livings is thy state,
And therefore mine must be impropriate.
For, since the child is mine, and yet the claim
Is intercepted by another name,
Never did steeple carry double truer,
His is the Donative, and mine the Cure.
Then say my Muse (and without more dispute)
Who it is that fame does superinstitute.
The Theban Wittall, when he once descries,
Jove is his rival, falls to sacrifice:
That name has tipped his horns: see, on his knees,
A health to Hans-en-Keldar Hercules.
Nay sublunary Cuckolds are content
To entertain their Fate with complement:
And shall not he be proud, whom Randolph daignes
To quarter with his Muse both Arms and Brains?
Gramercy Gossip; I rejoice to see
Shee'th got a leap of such a Barbary.
Talk not of horns, horns are the Poets Crest:
For since the Muses left their former nest,
To found a Nunnery in Randolphs quill,
Cuckold Pernassus is a forked hill.
But stay, I Have wak't his dust, his Marble stirs,
And brings the worms for his Compurgators.
Can Ghost have natural sons? say Ogg, is it meet,
Penance bear date after the winding sheet?
Were it a Phoenix (as the double kind
May seem to prove, being there is two combined)
It would disclaim my right: and that it were
The lawful Issue of his ashes, swear.
But was he dead? did not his soul translate
Her self into a shop of lesser rate?
Or break up house, like an expensive Lord,
That gives his purse a sob, and lives at board?
Let old Pythagoras but play the Pimp,
And still there is hopes 't may prove his bastard imp.
But I Am profane; For grant the world had one,
With whom he might contract an union,
They two were one: yet like an Eagle spread,
In The body joined, but parted in the head.
For you my brat, that pose the Porph'ry Chair,
Pope John, or Joan, or whatsoere you are,
You are a nephew; Grieve not at your state,
For all the world is illegitimate.
Man cannot get a man, unless the Sun
Club to the act of generation.
The sun and man get man; thus Tom and I
Are the joint fathers of thy Poetry.
For since (b^est shade) this Verse is Male, but mine
O ^h weaker (...), a Fancy Foeminine:
(...) the child, and yet commit no slaughter,
Sword^ shall (...) be thy Son, and yet my Daughter.
Upon Phillis walking in a morning before Sunrising.
THe sluggish morn as yet undrest,
My Phyllis brake from out her East;
As if she would made a match to run
With Venus, Usher to the Sun.
The trees, like Yeomen of her Guard,
Serving more for pomp, then (...),
Ranked on each side with loyal duty,
Weave branches to enclose her beau^y.
The Plants, whose luxury was lopt,
Or age with crutches underpropt;
Whose wooden carkases are grown
To be but coffi^s of their own;
Revive, and at her general dole
Each receives his ancient soul.
The winged Choristers began
To chi^p their Mattins: and the Fan
Of whistling winds, like Organs, played,
Until their Voluntaries made
The wakened earth in odours rise,
To be her morning-Sacrifice.
The flowers, called out of their beds,
Start, and raise up their drowsy heads:
And he that for their color seeks,
May find it vaulting in her cheeks,
Where Roses mix: no civil war
Between her York and Lancaster.
The Marigold, whose Courtiers face
Echoes the Sun, and does unlace
Her at his rise, at his full stop
Packs, and shuts up her gaudy shop;
Mistakes here ^ue, and does display.
Thus Phyllis antidates the day.
These miracles had cramp't the Sun,
Who thinking that his kingdom's won,
Powders with light his frizled locks,
To see what Saint his luster mocks.
The trembling leaves through which he played,
Dapling the walk with light and shade,
Like lattice-windowes, give the spy
Room but to peep with half an eye;
Least her full Orb his sight should dim,
And bids us all goodnight in him,
Till she would spend a gentle ray,
To force us a new-fashion'd day.
But what religious Palsie's this
Which makes the boughs divest their bliss?
And that they might her footsteps straw,
Drop their leaves with shivering awe.
Phillis perceives, and (least her stay
Should wed October unto May;
And as her beauty caused a Spring,
Devotion might an Autumn bring)
Withdrew her (...), yet made no night,
But left the Sun her Curat^ light.
Upon a Miser that made a great feast, and the next day dyed for grief.
NOr escapes he so: our dinner was so good,
My liquorish Muse cannot but chew the cood:
And what delight she took in the invitation,
Strives to taste over again in this relation.
After a tedious Grace in Hopkins r^^hme,
Not for devotion, but to take up time,
Marched the train'd-band of dishes ushered there,
To show their postures, and then As they were.
For he invites no teeth, perchance the eye
He will afford the Lovers gluttony;
This is a Feast, a muster, not a fight;
Our weapons not for servie, but for fight.
But are we Tantaliz'd? is all this meat
Cooked by a Limner, for to view, not eat?
The Astrologers keep such Houses when they sup
On joints of ^aurus, or their heavenly Tup.
Whatever feasts he made are su^'d up here,
His table vyes not standing with his cheer.
His Churchings, Christ'nings, in this Meal are all,
And not transcribed, but in the Original.
Christmas is no Feast movable: for lo
The selfsame dinner was ten years ago:
'T will be immortal if it longer stay,
The Gods will eat it for Am^rosia.
But stay awhile; unless my whinyard fail,
Or it inc^^nted, I Will cut off th'intaile.
Sa^nt George (...) England then: have at the mutton,
When the first cut calls me (...) gl^tto^:
What d^ax with ^is anger quodl'd (...)
Killing a sheep thought (...) slain:
The (...); wounding his roast,
I (...) up mine host.
Such (...) is with (...)
Makes him an Eunuch, when it carves his (...).
Cut a Goose-leg, and the poor so^le for moan
Turns Creeple too, and after stands on one.
Have you not (...)
A Lan^aster Grand (...) will report?
The soldier with his Morg^y watched the Mill,
The Cats they came to feast when lust^e Will
Whips off great Pusses leg, (...) by so^e charm
Proves the next day such an old wom^ns arm:
It Is so with him, who cark^se never '^capes,
But still we slash him in a thousand sh^^es.
Our serving-men like Spaniells range^ ^o spring
The foul which he has clockt (...) his wing.
Should he on Widgeo^, or on Woodcock feed,
It were (Thyestes-like) on his own breed.
To porke he pleads a supersti^n d^e,
But not a mouth is muzled by the ^ew.
Sawces we should have none had he his wish,
The Oranges in the margent of the dish
He with such Hucsters tells them over and over,
The Hesperian Dragon never watched them more.
But being eaten now into despair,
Having naught else to do, he falls to prayer:
As thou did once put on the form of Bull,
And turn'st thy lo to a lovely Mull,
Defend my rump great love; grant this poor beef
May live to comfort me in all this grief.
But no Amen was said: See, ^ee it comes,
Draw boys, let Trumpets sound and strike up Drums.
See how his blood does with the gravie swim,
And every trencher has a limb of him.
The Ven'sons now in view, our Hounds spend deeper,
Strange Deer, which in the Pasty has a Keeper
Stricter then in the Park, making his guest
(As he had stoln't alive) to steal it dressed:
The scent was hot; and we pursuing faster,
Then Ovids pack of dogs e're chased their Master,
A double prey at once may seize upon,
Actaeon and his case of Venison:
Thus was he torn alive. To vex him worse,
Death serves him up now as a second coorse.
Should we, like Thratians, our dead bodies eat,
He would have lived only to save his meat.
A young Man to an old Woman Courting him.
PEace Beldam Eve; surcease thy suit:
There Is no temptation in such fruit.
No rotten Medlers, whilst there be
Whole Orchards in Virginity.
Thy stock is too much out of date
For tender plants t'inoculate.
A match with thee thy bridegroom fears
Would be thought Interest in his years,
Which when compared to thine, become
Odd money to thy Grandam sum.
Can Wedlock know so great a curse
As putting husbands out to Nurse?
How Pond and Rivers would mistake,
And cry new Almanacks for our sake?
Time sure has wheeled about his year,
December meeting laniveere.
The Egyptian Serpent figures time,
And stripped, returns unto his Prime:
If my affection thou would win,
First cast thy Hieroglyphick skin.
My modern lips know not (alack)
The old Religion of thy smack.
I count that primitive embrace,
As out of fashion as thy face,
And yet so long it is since thy fall,
Thy Fornication's Classical.
Our sports will differ: thou may play,
Leer^, and I Alphonso way.
I Am no Translator; have no vein
To turn a woman young again:
Unless you will grant the Tailor's due,
To see the forebodies be new:
I love to wear clothes that are flush,
Not prefacing old rags with plush:
Like Aldermen, or Monster-Sheriffs,
With Canvas Backs, and velvet Sleeves.
And just such discord there would be
Betwixt thy Skeleton and me.
Go study Salve and Treacle, ply
Your tenants leg, or his sore eye;
Thus Matrons purchase credit, thank
Six penni-worth of Mountebank.
Or chew thy cood on some delight
Thou take in thy Eighty Eight.
Or be but bedrid once, and then
Thou Wilt dream thy youthful sins again.
But if thou needs wilt be my Spouse,
First hearken, and attend my Vows.
"When Aet^na's fires shall undergo
"The penance of the Alps in snow,
"When Sol at one blast of his horn
"Posts from the C^ab to Capricorn,
"When the Heavens shuffle all in one,
"The Torrid with the Frozen zone;
"When all these contradictions meet,
"Then (Sybill) thou and I will greet.
"For all these similies do hold
"n my young heat and thy dull cold;
"Then if a Fever be so good
"A Pimp, as to inflame thy blood,
Hymen shall twist thee, and thy Page,
The distinct Tropicks of Man's age.
Well (Madam Time) be ever bald,
I Will not thy periwig be called.
I Will never be, 'stead of a Lover,
An aged ^hronicles new cover.
To Mrs. K. T. who asked him why he was dumb.
STay, should I answer (Lady) then
In vain would be your question.
Should I be dumb, why then again
Your asking me would be in vain.
Silence nor speech (on neither hand)
Can satisfy this strange demand.
Yet since your will throws me upon
This wished contradiction,
I Will tell you how I did become
So strangely (as you hear me) dumb.
Ask but the chap-falne Puritan,
It Is zeal that tongue-ties that good man:
For heat of conscience, all men hold,
Is the only way to catch that cold.
How should loves zealot then forbear
To be your silenced Minister?
Nay your religion which does grant
A worship due to you my Saint,
Yet counts it that devotion wrong
That does it in the vulgar tongue.
My ruder words would give offense
To such an hallowed excellence;
As The English Dialect would vary
The goodness of an Ave Mary.
How can I speak, that twice am checked
By this and that religious Sect?
Still dumb, and in your face I spy
Still cause, and still Divinity.
As soon as blessed wit^ your salute,
My manners taught me to be mute:
For, least they cancel all the bliss
You signed with so divine a kiss,
The lips you feale must needs consent
Unto the tongues imprisonment.
My tongue in hold, my voice does rise
(With a strange E^la) to my eyes;
Where it gets Bail, and in that sense
Begins a newfound Eloquence.
Oh listen with attentive sight
To what my prattling eyes indite.
Or (Lady) since it is in your choice,
To give, or to suspend my voice,
With the same key set open the door
Wherewith you locked it fast before;
Kiss once again, and when you thus
Have doubly been miraculous,
My Muse shall write with Handmaids duty
The Golden Legend of your Beauty.
He whom his dumbness now confines,
But means to speak the rest by signs.
I. C.
A fair Nymph scorning a black Boy Courting her.
Nymph. STand off, and let me take the air;
Why should the smoke pursue the fair?

Boy. My face is smoke, thence may be guest
What flames within have scorched my breast.

Nymph. The flame of love I cannot view,
For the dark Lantern of thy hue.

Boy. And yet this Lantern keeps loves Taper
Surer then yours, that is of white paper.
Whatever Midnight has been here,
The Moonshine of your light can clear.

Nymph. My Moon of an Eclipse is 'fraid,
If thou should interpose thy shade.

Boy. Yet one thing (sweetheart) I will ask,
Buy me for a new false Mask.

Nymph. Yes: but my bargain shall be this,
I Will throw my Mask off when I kiss.

Boy. Our curled embraces shall delight
To checquer limbs with black, and white.

Nymph. Thy ink, my paper, make me guess,
Our Nuptial bed will make a Press;
And in our sports, if any came,
They Will read a wanton Epigram.

Boy. Why should my Black thy love impair?
Let the dark shop commend thy ware:
Or if thy love from black forbeares,
I Will strive to w^sh it off with tears.

Nymph. Spare fruitless tears, since thou must needs
Still wear about thee mourning weeds:
Tears can no more affection win,
Then wash thy Ethiopian skin.

Upon the death of M. King drowned in the Irish Seas.
I Like not tears in tune, nor will prize
His ar^^ficiall grief that scanns his eyes:
(...) weep down pious beads; but why should I
Con^ine them to the Muses Rosarie?
I am no Poet, here my pen's the spout
Where the raine-water of my eyes runs out,
In pity of that name, whose fate we see
Thus copied out in griefs Hydrographie.
The Muses are not Mermaids, though upon
Thy death the Ocean might turn Helicon.
The Sea's too rough for verse; who rimes upon it,
With X^^xes, str^ves to fetter the Hellespont.
My tears will keep no channells, know no laws
To guide their streams, but like the waves, this cause
Runs with disturbance, till they swallow me,
As a description of his misery.
But can his spacious virtues find a grave
Within the impostu^'d bubble of a wave,
Whose learning if we sound, we must confess
The Sea but shallow, and him bottomless?
Could not the winds, to countermand thy death,
W^^ their whole Chard of lungs, redeem thy breath?
Or some new Island in thy rescue peep,
To heave thy resurrection from the deep?
That so the world might see thy safety wrought
With no less miracle then thy self: Most thought
The famous Stagyrite, which in his life
Had Nature as familiar as his wife,
Bequeathed his widow to survive with thee,
Queene-Dowager of all Philosophy,
An ominous legacy, that did portend
Thy fat^, and predcessors second end.
Some have affi^m'd that what on earth we find,
The Sea can parallel for shape and kind.
Books, A^ts, and (...) were wanting, but in thee
Neptune has got an Universitie.
We Will dive no more for pearl, we hope to see
Thy sacred relics of mortality.
We Will welcome storms, and make the Seaman prize
His shipwreck now, more then his merchandise.
He shall embrace the w^ves, and to ^y tomb,
As to a royaller Exchange shall come.
What can we now expect? Water and Fire,
Both Elements of ruin, do conspire;
And that resolves us which does us compound,
One Vatican was barnt, another dr^wn'd.
We of the Gown ou^ L^braries must toss,
To understand the great (...) of our loss;
Be pupills to our grief, and so much grow
In learning, as our sorrow^s overfl^w
When we have^ filled the R^^d^ets of our eyes,
We Will send it forth, and ven^ such ^^egies:
So that our tears shall (...),
We floating Islands, living (...).
A Dialogue between two Zealots, upon the etc. in the Oath.
SIr Roger, from a zealous piece of Freeze,
Raised to a Vicar of the Childrens threes;
Whose yearly Audit may, by strict account,
To twenty Nobles, and his Vailes amount;
Fed on the Common of the femal charity,
Until the Scots can bring about their parity;
So shotten, that his soul, like to himself,
Walks but in Querpo: This same Clergy Elfe,
Encount'ring with a Brother of the Cloth,
Fell presently to Cudglels with the Oath.
The Quarrel was a strange misshapen Monster,
etc. (God bless us) which they conster,
The Brand upon the buttock of the Beast,
The Dragons tail ti'd on a knot, a neast
Of young Apocryphaes, the fashion
Of a new mental Reservation.
While Roger thus divides the Text, the other
Winks and expounds, saying, my pious Brother
Hearken with reverence; for the point is nice,
I never read on it, but I fasted twice,
And so by Revelation, know it better
Then all the learned Idolaters o'th Letter.
With that he swelled, and fell upon the Theme,
Like Great Goliath with his Weavers beam:
I say to thee etc. thou li'st,
Thou art the curled lock of Antichrist:
Rubbish of Babell, for who will not say
Tongues were confounded in etc.?
Who swears etc. swears more oaths at once
Then Cerberus out of his Triple Sconce.
Who viewes it well, with the same eye beholds
The old half Serpent in his numerous foulds.
Accursed etc. thou, for now I scent
What lately the prodigious Oysters meant.
Oh Booker, Booker, how came thou to lack
This sign in thy Prophetic Almanac?
It Is the dark Vault wherein the infernal plot
Of powder against the State was first begot.
Per^^e the Oath, and you shall soon descry it
By all the Father Garnets that stand by it.
Against whom the Church, whereof I am a Member,
Shall keep another fifth day of November.
Yet here is not all, I cannot half untruss
etc. it is so abominous.
The Trojan Nag was not so fully lined,
Unrip etc. and you shall find
Og the great Commissary, and which is worse,
Th'Apparatour upon his skew-bald Horse.
Then (finally my Babe of Grace) forbear,
etc. will be too far to swear:
For it is (to speak i^ a familiar style)
A Yorkshire Wea-bit, longer then a mile.
Then Roger was inspired, and by Gods-diggers,
He Will swear in words at large, and not in figures.
Now by this drink, which he takes off, as loath
To leave etc. in his liquid Oath.
His brother pledged him, and that bloody wine,
He swea^s shall ^eale the Synods Cataline.
So they drunk on, not offering to part
Till they had quite sworn out th'eleventh quart:
While all that saw and heard them jointly pray,
(...) ^ribe were all etc.
Smectymnuus, or the Club-Divines.
SMectymnuus? The Goblin makes me start:
In The Name of Rabbi Abraham, what art?
(...)? or ^rabick? or Welsh? what skilt?
Ap all the Bricklayers that Babell built.
^ome Conjurer translate, and let me know it:
'Till then it is fit for a West Saxon Poet.
But do the Brotherhood then play their prizes,
Like Mummers in Religion with disguises?
Out-brave us with a name in Rank and File,
A Name which if 'twere trained would spread a mile?
The Saints Monopoly, the zealous Cluster,
Which like a Porcupine presents a Muster,
And shoots his quills at Bishops and their Sees,
A devout litter of young Maccabees.
Thus Jack-of-all-trades has devoutly shown,
The twelve Apostles on a Cherry-stone.
Thus Faction's All-a-Mode in Treasons fashion;
Now we have Heresy by Complication.
Like to Don-Quixots Rosary of Slaves
Strung on a chain; A Murnivall of Knaves
Packt in a Trick; like Gypsies when they ride,
Or like Colleagues which sit all of a side:
So the vain Satyrists stand all a row,
As hollow teeth upon a Lute-string show.
The Italian Monster pregnent with his Brother,
Natures Diaeresis, half one another,
He, with his little Sides-man Lazarus,
Must both give way unto Smectym^uus.
Next (...) is Smec's; for lo his side
Into a ^ive-fold Lazar's multiplied.
Under each a^me there is tuckt a double Gizzard,
Five faces lu^ke under one single vizzard.
The Whore of Babylon left these brats behind,
Heirs of Confusion by Gavell-kind.
I think Pythagoras's soul is rambl'd hither,
With all the change of Raiment on together:
Sm^c is her general Wardrobe, she will not dare
To think of them as of a thorough-fare;
He stops the Gossopping Dame; alone he is
The Purlew of a Metempsuchosis.
Like a Scotch Mark, where the more modest sense
Checks the loud phrase, and shrinks to thirteen pence:
Like to an Ignis fatuus, whose flame
Though sometimes tripartite, joins in the same:
Like to nine Tailors, who if rightly spelled,
Into one man, are monosyllabled.
Short-handed zeal in one has cramped many,
Like to the Decalogue in a single penny.
See, see, how close the Curs hunt under a sheet,
As if they sp^nt in Quire, and scanned their feet;
One Cure and five Incumbents leap a Truss,
The title sure must be litigious.
The Sadduces would raise a question,
Who must be Smec at the Resurrection.
Who cooked them up together, were to blame,
Had they but w^re-drawn, and spun out their name,
'T would make another Prencices Petition
Against the Bishops and their Superstition.
Robson and French (that count from five to five,
As far as nature fingers did contrive,
She saw they would be Sessers; that is the cause
She cleft their hoof into so many claws)
May tire their Carret-bunch, yet never agree
To rate Smectymnuus for Polemonie.
Galigula, whose pride was Mankinds Bail,
As who disdained to murder by retaile,
Wishing the world had but one general Neck,
His gl^tton blade might have found game in Smec.
No Echo can improve the Author more,
Whose lungs pays use on use to half a score.
No Fellon is more lettered, though the brand
Both superscribes his shoulder and his hand.
Some Welch-man was his Godfather; for he
Wears in his name his Genealogy.
The Banes are asked, would but the time give way,
Betwixt Smectymnuus, and etc.
The Guests invited by a friendly Summons,
Should be the Convocation, and the Commons.
The Priest to tie these Foxes tails together,
Moseley, or Sancta Clara, choose you whether.
See, what an offspring every one expects?
What strange pluralities of Men and Sects?
One says, he will get a Vestery; another
Is for a Synod: Bet upon the Mother.
Faith cry S. George, let them go to it, and stickle,
Whether a Conclave, or a Conventicle.
Thus might Religions caterwaule, and spite,
Which uses to divorce, might once unite.
But their cross fortunes interdict their trade;
The Groom is Rampant, but the Bride displayed.
My task is done; all my hee-Goats are milkt;
So many Cards in the stock, and yet be bilkt?
I could by Letters now untwist the rabble,
Whip Smec from Constable to Constable.
But there I leave you to another dressing,
Only kneel down, and take your Fathers blessing.
May the Queen Mother justify your fears,
And stretch her Patent to your leather-ears.
The Mixed Assembly.
FLeabitten Synod: an Assembly brewed
Of Clerks and Elders ana, like the rude
Chaos of Presbyt'ry, where Laymen guide
With the ^ame Woolpack Clergy by their side.
Who asked the Banes 'twixt these discolored Mates?
A strange Grottesco this, the Church and States
(Most divine tick-tack) in a pye-bald crew,
To serve as table-men of diverse hue.
She that conceived an Ethiopian heir
By picture, when the parents both were fair,
At sight of you had borne a dappl'd son,
You checquering her imagination.
Had Jacobs flock but seen you sit, the dams
Had brought forth speckled and ringstreaked lambs.
Like an Impropriators Motley kind,
Whose Scarlet Coat is with a Cassock lined.
Like the Lay-thiese in a Canonick weed,
Sure of his Clergy e're he did the deed,
Like Royston Crows who are (as I may say)
Friars of both the Orders Black and Gray.
S^ mixed they are, one knows not whether's thicker,
A Layre of Burgess, or a Layre of Vicar.
Have they usurped what Royal Judah had?
And now must Levi too part stakes with God?
The Scepter and the Crosier are the Crutches,
Which if not trusted in their pious Clutches,
Will sail the Criple-State. And were it not pity
But both should serve the yardwand of the City?
That Isau might stroke his beard, and sit
Judge of (...) and Elegerit.
Oh that they were in chalk and charcole drawn!
The Misselany Satyr, and the Fawn,
And all th'Adulteries of twisted nature
B^t faintly represent this ridling feature,
Whose M^mbers being not Tallies, they will not own
Their fellows at the Resurrection.
Strange Scarler Doctors these, they will pass in Story
For sinners half refined in Purgatory;
Or parboyl'd L^bsters, where there jointly rules
The fading Sables and the coming Gules.
The flea that Faistaff^ damned, thus lewdly shows
Tormented in the flames of Bardolphs Nose.
Like him that wore the Dialogue of Cloaks,
This shoulder (...) a Styles, that John a Noaks.
Like Je^es and Christians in a ship together,
With an old Ne^k verse to distinguish either.
Like their intended Discipline to boot,
Or whatsoever has neither head nor foot:
Such may these stript-stuffe hangings seem to be,
Sacrilege matched with Codpeece Symonie;
Be sick and d^eam a little, you may then
Fancy these Linsie-Woolsie Vestry-men.
Forbear good Pembroke, be not over-daring,
Such Company may chance to spoil thy swearing:
And these Drum-Major oaths of Bulk unruly,
May dwindle to a feeble By my truly.
He that the noble Percyes blood inherits,
Will he strike up a Hotspur of the spirits?
He Will f^ght the Obadiahs out of tune,
With his u^circumcised Algernoon.
A name so stubborn, it is not to be scanned
By him in Gath with the six fingered hand.
See, they obey the Magic of my words.
Presto; their gone. And now the House of Lords
Looks like (...) withered face of an old hagg,
But with three teeth like to a triple gagg.
A Jig, a Ji^: And in this antic dance
Fielding, and doxy Marshall first advance.
Twiss blows the Scotch pipes, and the loving brase
Puts on the traces, and treads ^inque-a-pace.
Then Say and Seal must his old Hamstrings supple,
And he and ru^pl'd Palmer make a couple.
Palmer's a fruitful girl, if he will unfold her,
The Midwife may find work about her shoulder,
Kimbolton that rebellious Boanerges,
Must be content to saddle Doctor Burges.
If Burges get a clap, it is never the worse,
But the fifth time of his Cmpurgators.
Nol Bowls is coy; good sadness cannot dance
But in obedience to the Ordinance,
Her Wharton wheels about till Mumping Lidy,
Like the full Moon, has made his Lordship giddy.
Pym and the Members must their giblets levy
T'incounter Madam Smec, that single Bevy.
If they two truck together, 'twill not be
A Childbirth, but a Goale-deliverie.
Thus every Gibeline has got his Guelph,
But Seldom, he is a Galliard by himself,
And well may be; there is more Divines in him
Then in all this their Jewish Sanhedrim:
Whose Canons in the forge shall then bear date,
When Mules their Cosin-Germanes generate.
Thus Moses Law is violated now,
The Ox and Ass go yoked in the same plough.
Resign thy Coach-box Twisse; Brook's Preacher, he
Would sort the beasts with more conformity.
Water and earth make but one Globe, a Roundhead
Is Clergy-Lay Party-per-pale compounded.
The Kings Disguise.
ANd why so coffined to this vile disguise?
Which who but sees, blasphemes thee with his eyes.
My twins of light within their pent-house shrink,
And hold it their allegiance to wink.
Oh for a State-distinction to arraigne
Charles of high Treason against my Sovereign.
What an Usurper to his Prince is wont,
Cloister and shave him, he himself has don't.
His muffled fabric speaks him a recluse,
His ruins prove it a religious house.
The Sun has mewed his beams from off his lamp,
And Majesty defaced the Royal stamp.
Is It not enough thy Dignity's in thrall,
But thou wilt transcribe it in thy shape and all?
As if thy Blacks were of too faint a dye,
Without the tincture of Tautologie.
Flay an Egyptian for his Cassock skin,
Spun of his Countries darkness, lin't within
With Presbyterian budge, that drowsy trance,
The Synods sable, foggie ignorance;
Nor bodily nor ghostly Negro could
Rough-cast thy figure in a sadder mould:
That privie-chamber of thy shape would be
But the Close-mourner to thy Royalty.
Then break the circle of thy Tailors spell,
A Pearl within a rugged Oyster-shell.
Heaven, which the Minster of thy Person owns,
Will fine thee for Dilapidations.
Like to a martyred Abbeys courser doom,
Devoutly altered to a Pigeon room:
Or like the College, by the changeling rabble,
Manchesters Elves, transformed into a Stable.
Or, if there be a profanation higher,
Such is the sacrilege of this attire,
By which thou art half deposed, thou look like one
Whose looks are under Sequestration:
Whose Renegado form, at the first glance,
Shows like the selfe-denying Ordinance.
Angel of light, und darkness too, I doubt,
Inspired within, and yet possessed without.
Majestic twilight in the state of grace,
Yet with an excommunicated face.
Charles and his Mask are of a different mint,
A Psalm of mercy in a miscreant print.
The Sun wears Midnight, Day is beetle-brow'd,
And Lightning is in Keldar of a cloud.
(...) of fate!
(...) Eagle shrunk into a Bat?
(...) what Magic vapor can it be
That shri^ks his rays to this Apostasy?
It is no subtle film of (...) air,
No Go^-web vizard, such as Ladies wear,
When th^^ are veiled, on purpose to be seen.
Doubling their luster by their vanquished skreen:
Nor the false scabberd of a Princes tough
Me^all, and three-pil'd darkness, like the (...)
slough
Of an imprisoned flame, it is Faux in grain^,
Dark (...) to our high Meridian.
Hell belcht the damp, the Warwick-Castle Vote
Rang Britains Curfeu, so our light went out.
Thy visage is not legible, the letters,
Like a Lords name, writ in fantastic fetters:
Clothes where a Switzer might be buried quick,
Sure they would fit the Body Politic.
False beard, enough to fit a stages plot,
For that is the ambush of their wit, God wot.
Nay all his properties so strange appear,
You Are not in the presence, though the King be there.
A Libell is his dress, a garb uncouth,
Such as the (...).
Hue and Cry once purged at mouth.
Scribbling Assasinate, thy lines a^^est
An eare-mark due; Cub of the blatant Beast,
Whose breath before it is syllabled for worse,
Is blasphemy unfledged, a callow curse.
The Laplanders, when they would ^ell a wind
Wafting to hell, bag up thy phrase and bind
It to the Barque, which at the voyage end
Shifts Poop, and brings the Colic in the fiend.
It to the barque, which at the voyage end
Shifts Poop, and breeds the Colic in the fiend.
But I Will not dub thee with a glorious scar,
Nor sink thy Skuller with a Man of War.
The black-mouthed Siquis, and this slandering suite,
Both do alike in picture execute.
But since we are all called Papist, why not dare
Devotion to the rags thus consecrate.
As Temples use to have their Porches wrought
With Sphynxes, creatures of an antic draught,
And puzling Pourtraitures, to show that there
Riddles inhabited, the like is here.
The black offender, should he wear his fin
For penance, could not have a darker skin.
But pardon Sir, since I presume to be
Clarke of this Closet to Your Majesty:
Methinks in this your dark mysterious dress
I see the Gospel coucht in Parables.
The second view, my pur-blind fancy wipes,
And shows Religion in its dusky types.
Such a Text Royal, so obscure a shade
Was Solomon in Proverbs all arrayed.
Now all ye brats of this expounding age,
To whom the Spirit is in pupil age;
You that damn more then ever Sampson slew,
And with his engine, the same jaw bone too:
How is it Charles escapes your Inquisition free,
Since bound up in the Bibles Liverie?
Hence Cabinet-untrussers, Picklocks hence,
You that dim Jewels with your Bristoll-sense:
And Characters, like Witches, so torment,
Till they confess a guilt, though innocent.
Keys for this Cipher you can never get,
None but S. Peter's opes this Cabinet.
This Cabinet, whose aspect would benight
Critic spectators with redundant light.
A Prince most seen, is least: What Scriptures call
The Revelation, is most mystical.
Mount then thou shadow royal, and with haste,
Advance thy morning star, Charles's overcast.
May thy strange journey contradictions twist,
And force fair weather from a Scottish mist.
Heavens Confessors are posed, those star-ey'd Sages
To interpret an Eclipse, thus riding stages.
Thus Israel-like he travels with a cloud,
Both as a Conduct to him, and a shroud.
But oh! he goes to Gibeon, and renewes
A league with moldy bread, and clouted shoes.
The Rebel Scot.
HOw! Providence! and yet a Scottish crew!
Then Madam nature wears black patches too.
What? shall our Nation be in bondage thus
Unto a Land that truckles under us?
Ring the bells backward; I am all on fire,
Not all the buckets in a Country Quire
Shall quench my rage. A Poet should be feared
When angry, like a Comets flaming beard.
And where is the Stoic? can his wrath appease
To see his Country sick of Pym's disease
By Scotch invasion? to be made a prey
To such Pig-wiggin Mirmidons as they?
But that there is cha^me in verse, I will not quote
The name of Scot, without an Antidote;
Unless my head were red, that I might brew
Invention there that might be poison too.
Were I a drowsy Judge whose dismal Note
Disg^^geth halters, as a Juglers throat
Does ribbands: could I (in Sir Emp'ricks tone)
Speak Pills in phrase, and quack destruction:
Or roar like Marshall, that Gen^vah-Bull,
Hell and damnation a Pulpit full:
Yet to express a Scot, to play that prize,
Not all those mouth-Grandoes can suffice.
Before a Scot can properly be cursed,
I must (like Hocus) swallow daggers first.
Come keen lambicks, with your Badgers feet,
And Badger-like, bite till your teeth do meet.
Help ye tart Satyrists, to imp my rage,
With all the Scorpions that should whip this age.
Scots are like Witches; do but when your pen,
Scratch til the blood come; they will not hurt you then.
Now as the Martyrs were enforced to take
The shapes of beasts, like hypocrites, at stake,
I Will bait my Scot so; yet not cheat your eyes,
A Scot within a beast is no disguise.
No more let Ireland brag, her (...) Nation
Fosters no Venom, since the Scots Plantation:
Nor can ours feigned Antiquity maintain;
Since they came in, England has Wolves again.
The Scot that kept the Tower might have shown
(Within the gra^e of his (...) ^rest alone)
The (...) Panther; and ingrost
What all those wild Collegiats had cost
The honest High-shoes, in their Termly Fees,
First to the salvage Lawyer, next to these.
Nature her self does Scotch-men beasts confess,
Making their Country such a wilderness:
A Land, that brings in question and suspense
Gods omnipresence, but that CHARLES came thence.
But that Montrosse and Crawfords loyal Band
Atton'd their sins, and christ'ned half the Land:
Nor is it all the Nation has these spots;
There is a Church, as well as Kirk of Scots:
As in a picture, where the squinting paint
Shows Fiend on this side, and on that side Saint.
He that saw hell in's melancholy dream,
And in the twilight of his Fanc^e's theme,
Scar^d from his sins, repented in a fright,
Had he viewed ^cotland, had ^urn'd Proselite.
A Land, where one may pray with cursed intent,
O may they never suffer banishment!
Had Cain been Scot, God would have changed his doom,
Not forced him wander, but confined him home.
Like Jews they spread, and as Infection fly,
As if the Devil had Ubiquitie.
Hence it is, they live at Rovers; and defy
This or that place, Rags of Geographie.
They Are Citizens o'th World; they are all in all,
Scotland's a Nation Epidemicall.
And yet they ramble not, to learn the Mode
How to be dressed, or how to lisp abroad,
To return knowing in the Spanish shrug,
Or which of the Dutch States a double Jug
Resembles most, in Belly, or in Beard:
The Card by which the Travelers are steard.
No; the Scots-Errant fight, and fight to eat; their Estrich stomachs make
their swords their meat.
Nature with Scots as Tooth-drawers has dealt,
Who use to hang their teeth upon their Belt.
Yet wonder not at this their happy choice;
The Serpent's fatal still to Paradise.
Sure England has the Hemerods, and these
On the North Posterne of the patient seize,
Like Leeches: thus they physically thirst
After our blood, but in the cure shall burst.
Let them not think to make us run o'th score,
To purchase Villanage, as once before,
When an Act past, to stroke them on the head,
Call them good Subjects, buy them Ginger-bread.
Nor gold, nor Acts of Grace; it is steel must tame
The stubborn Scot: A Prince that would reclaim
Rebels by yielding, does like him, (or worse)
Who sadled his own back to shame his horse.
Was it for this you left your leaner soil,
Thus to lard Israel with Aegypts spoil?
They are the Gospells Lifeguard; but for them,
The Garrison of new Jerusalem,
What would the Brethren do? the Cause the cause!
Sack possets, and the Fundamental Laws!
Lord! what a godly thing is want of shirts!
How a Scotch-stamack, and no meat, converts!
They wanted food, and raiment; so they took
Religion for their Seamstresse, and their Cook.
Unmaske them well; their honors and estate,
As well as conscience, are sophisticate.
Shrive but their Titles, and their money poize,
A Lord and Twenty pence pronounced with noise,
When const^ued, but for a plain Yeoman go,
And a good sober twopence; and well so.
Hence then you proud Impostors, get you gone;
You Picts in Gentry and Devotion:
You scandalls to the stock of Verse! a race!
Able to bring the Gibbet in disgrace!
Hyp^^^olus by suffering did traduce
The Ostracisme, and shamed it out of use.
^he Indian that Heaven did forswear,
Because he heard the Spaniards were there,
Had he but known what Scots in hell had been,
He would Erasmus-like have hung between.
My Muse has done. A Voider for the nonce!
I wrong the Devil, should I pick the bones?
That dish is his: for when the Scots decease,
Hell, like their Nation, feeds on Barnacles.
A Scot, when from the Gallow-Tree got loose,
Drops into S^yx, and turns a Solun-Go^se.
Rupertismus.
O That I could but vote my self a Poet!
Or had the Legislative knack to do it:
Or, like the Doctors Militant, could get
Dubbed at adventures Verser (...)!
Or had I Cacus trick to make my Rimes
Their own Antipodes, and (...) the times:
F^ces about, says the Remonstra^^ (...);
Allegiance is (...):
(...)-Colt,(...) Recorder,
Might be a (...) Order:
Had I but Elsing's gift (that splay-mouth'd Brother)
That declares one way, and yet means another:
Could I but write a-squint; then (Sir) long since
You had been sung, A great and glorious Prince.
I had observed the Language of the days;
Blasphemed you; and then Periwigg'd the Phrase
With Humble Service, and such other Fustian,
Bells which ring backward in this great Combustion.
I had reviled you; and without offense,
The Literal, and Equitable Sense
Would make it good: when all fails, that will do it:
Sure that distinction cleft the Devils Foot.
This were my Dialect, would your Highness please
To read me but with Hebrew Spectacles;
Interpret Counter, what is Cross rehearsed:
Libels are commendations, when reversed.
Just as an Optique Glass contracts the sight
At one end, but when turned does multiply't.
But you're enchanted, Sir; you're doubly free
From the great Guns, and squibbing Poetry:
Whom neither Bilbo, nor Invention pierces,
Proof even against the Artillery of Verses.
Strange! that the Muses cannot wound your Maile;
If not their Art, yet let their Sex prevail.
At that known Leaguer, where the Bonny Besses
Supplied the Bow-strings with their twisted tresses,
Your spells could never have fenced you: every arrow
Had launc'd your noble breast, and drunk the marrow:
For beauty, like white powder, makes no noise;
And yet the silent Hypocrite destroys.
Then use the Nuns of Helicon with pity,
Lest Wharton tell his Gossips of the City,
That you kill women too; nay maids: and such
Their General wants Militia to touch.
Impotent Essex! is it not a shame,
Our Commonwealth, like to a Turkish Dame,
Should have an Eunuch-Guardian? may she be
Ravished by Charles, rather then saved by thee.
But why, my Muse, like a Green-sicknesse-Girle,
Feed'st thou on coals and dirt? a Gelding-Earle
Gives no more relish to thy Female Palate,
Then to that Ass did once the Thistle-Sallat.
Then quit the barren Theme; and all at once
Thou and thy sisters, like bright Amazons,
Give RUPERT an alarm, RUPERT! one
Whose name is wits Superfoetation.
Makes fancy, like Eternities round womb,
Unite all valor, present, past, to come.
He, who the old Philosophy controules,
That voted down plurality of souls,
He breaths a grand Committee; all that were
The wonders of their age, constellate here.
And as the elder sisters, growth and sense
(Souls Paramount themselves) in man commence
But faculties of reasons Queen; no more
Are they to him who were complete before.
Ingredients of his virtue thread the Beads
Of Caesar's acts, great Pompey's, and the Sweads:
And it is a bracelet fit for Rupert's hand,
By which that vast Triumvirate is span'd.
Here, here is Palmestry; here you may read,
How long the world shall live, and when it shall bleed.
Whatever man winds up, that RUPERT has:
For Nature raised him of the Public Faith.
Pandora's Brother, to make up whose ^^ore,
The Gods were feign to run upon the score.
Such was the Painters Brieve for (...);
Item an eye from Jane, a lip from (...)
Let Isaac and his Cit'z-^lea off the ^lace
That tips their Antlets for the (...);
Let the zeale-twanging Nose that wants a ^idge,
Snuffling devoutly, drop his silve^ bridge:
Yes, and the Gossips spoon (...) the sum,
Although poor Cal^b lose his Christ^ndome:
Rupert out-weighs that in his Sterling-selfe,
Which their selfe-wants paies in commuting pelf.
Pardon, great Sir, for that ignoble crew
Gains, when made bankrupt, in the scales with you.
As he, who in his Character of light
Styled it Gods shadow, made it far (...)
By an Eclipse so glorious, (light is ^im,
And a black nothing, when compared to him)
So it is illustrious to be Ruperts Foil,
And a just Trophee to be made his spoil.
I Will pin my faith on the Diurnalls ^^eeve
Hereafter, and the Guild Hall Creed believe;
The Conquests, which the Common Counsel hears
With their wide listening mouth, from the great Peers
That ran away in triumph: such a Foe
Can make them victors in their overthrow:
Where providence and valor meet in one,
Courage so poised with circumspection,
That he revives the quarrel once again
Of the Souls throne, whether in heart or brain;
And leaves it a drawn march: whose fervor can
Hatch him, whom Nature poach'd but half a Man,
His Trumpet like the Argells at the last,
Makes the soul rise by a miraculous blast,
'Twas the Mount Athos c^rv'd in shape of man
(As 'twas defined by the Ma^edonian)
Whose right hand should a populous Land contain,
The left should be a Channel to the Maine:
His spirit might inform the Amphibious figure;
Yet straight-lac'd sweats for a Dominion bigger:
The terror of whose name can out of seven,
(Like Falstaffe's Buckram-men) make fly eleven.
Thus some grow rich by breaking; Vipers thus
By being slain, are made more numerous.
No wonder they will confess no loss of men;
For Rupert knocks'em, till they gig again,
They fear the Giblets of his train; they fear
Even his Dog, that foure-legg'd Cavaleere:
He that devoures the scraps, which L^ndsford makes,
Whose Picture feeds upon a child in stakes:
Who name but Charles, he comes aloft for him,
But holds up his Malignant leg at Pym.
Against whom they have several Articles in souse;
First, that he barks against the sense o'th House.
Resolved Delinquent; to the Tower straight;
Either to the Lions, or the Bishops Grate.
Next for his ceremonious wag o'th tail:
But there the Sisterhood will be his Bail,
At least the Countess will, Lust's Amsterdam,
That lets in all religious of the game.
Thirdly, he smells Intelligence, that is better,
And cheaper too, then Pym's from his own Letter:
Who Is doubly paid (fortune or we the blinder?)
For making plots, and then for Fox the Finder.
Lastly, he is a Devil without doubt;
For when he would lie down, he wheels about;
Makes circles, and is couchant in a ring;
And therefore score up one for conjuring.
What can thou say, thou wretch? O quarter, quarter!
I Am but an instrument, a mere S. Arthur.
If I must hang, o let not our Fates vary,
Whose office it is alike to fetch and carry.
No hopes of a reprieve, the mutinous stir
That strung the Jesuit, will dispatch a cur.
Were I a Devil, as the Rebel fears,
I see the House would try me by my Peers.
There lowler there! ah Iowler! st! it is naught
What e're the Accusers cry, they are at a fault;
And Glyn, and Maynard have no more to say,
Then when the glorious Strafford stood at Bay.
Thus Labells but annexed to him we see,
Enjoy a copyhold of Victory.
S. Peter's sh^dow healed; Ruperts is such,
'Twould find S. Peter's work, yet wound as much.
He gags their guns, defeats their dire intent,
The Cannons do but lisp and complement.
Sure Jove descended in a leaden shower
To get this Perseus: hence the fatal power
Of shot is strangled: bullets thus allied
Fear to commit an act of Paricide.
Go on brave Prince, and make the world confess,
Thou art the greatest world, and that the less.
Scatter th'accumulative King; untruss
That five-fold fiend, the States SMECTYMNUUS;
Who place Religion in their Velam ears;
As in their Phylacters the Jews did theirs,
England's a Paradise, (and a modest Word)
Since guarded by a Cherubs flaming Sword.
Your name can scare an Athiest to his prayers;
And cure the Chin-cough better then the Bears.
Old Sybill charms the Toothache with you: Nurse
Makes you still children; nay, and the ponderous curse
The Clownes salute with, is derived from you;
(Now RUPERT take thee, Rogue; how do thou do?)
In fine, the name of Rupert thunders so,
Kimbolton's but a rumbling Wheel-barrow.
Epitaphium Thomae Comitis Straffordii, etc.
Exurge Cinis, tuumque s^lus qui potis es, scribe Epitaphiu^:
Nequit Wentworthi non esse facundus vel Cinis,
Effare Marmor: and quem coepisti comprehendere,
Macte and Exprimere.
Candidus meretur urna, quam quod rubris
Notatum est literis, Elogium.
Atlas Regiminis Monarchici hic jacet lassus,
Se^unda Orbis Britannici intelligentia:
Rex Politiae, and Prorex Hiberniae,
Straffordii, and Virtutum, Comes:
Men's Jovis, Mercurii ingenium, and lingua Apollinis;
Cui Anglia Hiberniam debuit, seipsam Hibernia.
Sydus Aquilonicu^, quo sub rubicunda vespera occidente,
Nox simul and dies visa est: dextroque oculo flevit,
Laevoque laetata est, Anglia.
Theatrum Honoris, itemque Scena calamitosa virtutis
Actorib us, morbo, morte, invidia,
Quae ternis animosa Regnis non vicit tamen,
Sed oppressit.
Sic inclinavit Heroes (non minus) Caput
Belluae (vel sic) maltorum Capitum:
Merces favoris Scotici, praeter pecunias,
Erubuit ut tetigit securis,
Similem quippe nunquam degustavit sanguinem.
Monstrum narro: fuit tam infensus Legibus,
Ut prius Legem, quam nata foret, violavit:
Hunc tamen non sustulit Lex,
Verum Necessitas, non habens Legem.
Abi Viator, caetera memorabunt posteri.
Additionall Poems by uncertain AUTHORS.
The Scots Apostasy.
Is It come to this? what? shall the cheeks of Fame,
Stretched with the breath of learned Lowdons name,
Be flag'd again? and that great piece of Sense,
As rich in Loyalty, as Eloquence,
Brought to the Test, be found a trick of State?
Like Chemists tinctures, proved adulterate?
The Devil sure such language did atchieve,
To cheat our un-fore-warned Grandam Eve,
As this Impostor found out, to besot
Th'experienc'd English, to believe a Scot.
Who reconciled the Covenants doubtful Sense!
The Commons Argument, or the Cities Pence?
Or did you doubt, Persistance in one good
Would spoil the fabric of your Brotherhood,
Projected first in such a forge of sin,
Was fit for the grand Devils hammering?
Or was it ambition, that this damned fact
Should tell the world you know the sins you act?
The infamy this super-treason brings,
Blasts more then murders of Your sixty Kings.
A crime so black, as being advis'dly done,
Those hold with this no competition.
Kings only suffered then, in this does lie
The Assasination of Monarchy.
Beyond this sin no one step can be trod,
If not t'attempt deposing of your C^d.
Oh were you so (...), that we ^ight see
Heavens ang^y lighting (...) your ears to slay,
Till you were ^^rivel'd (...) dust; and your cold Land
Parcht to a drought, beyond the Lybian sand!
But it is reserved; and till heaven plague you worse,
Be Objects of an Epidemick curse.
First, may your Brethren, to whose viler ends
Your power has bawded, cease to count you friends;
And prompted by the dictate of their reason,
Reproach the Traitors, though they hug the treason.
And may their Jealousies increase and breed,
Till they confine your steps beyond the Tweed.
In foreign Nations may your loathed name be
A stigmatizing brand of Infamy;
Till forced by general hate, you cease to rome
The world, and for a plague go live at home:
Till you resume your poverty, and be
Reduced to beg, where none can be so free
To grant; and may your scabbie Land be all
Translated to a general Hospital.
Let not the Sun afford one gentle Ray,
To give you comfort of a Summers day.
But, as a Guerdon for your traitorous War,
Live cherisht only by the Northern Star.
No Stranger deign to visit your rude Coast,
And be to all, but banished Men, as lost.
And such, in height'ning of th'infliction due,
Let provoked Princes send them all to you.
Your State a Chaos be, where not the Law,
But Power, your Lives and Liberties may awe.
No Subject among you keep a quiet breast,
But each man strive through blood to be the best;
Till, for those miseries on us you have brought,
By your own sword our just revenge be wrought.
To sum up all -- let your Religion be,
As your Allegiance, masked hypocrisy:
Until, when CHARLES shall be composed in dust,
Persum'd with Epitheres of GOOD and JUST;
HE saved; incensed Heaven may have forgot
T'afford one act of mercy to a Scot;
Unless that Scot deny himself, and do
(What Is easier far) renounce his Nation too,
Epitaph on the Earl of Strafford.
HEre lies Wise and Valiant Dust,
Huddled up 'twixt Fit and Just:
STRAFFORD, who was hurried hence
'Twixt Treason and Convenience.
He spent his Time here in a Mist;
A Papist, yet a Ca^vinist.
His Prince's nearest Joy, and Grief;
He had, yet wanted all Relief.
The Prop and Ruin of the State;
The People's violent Love, and Hate:
One in extremes loved and abhorred.
Riddles lie here; or in a word,
Here lies Blood; and let it lie
Speechless still, and never cry.
On the Archbishop of Canterbury.
I Need no Muse to give my passion vent,
He brewes his tears that studies to lament.
Verse chymically weeps; that pious rain,
Distilled with Art, is but the sweat o'th brain.
Who ever sob'd in numbers? can a groan
Be quaver'd out by soft division?
It Is true; for common formal Elegies,
Not Bushells Wells can wash a Poets eyes
In wanton waterworks: he will tune his tears
From a Geneva Jig up to the Spheres.
But when he mournes at distance, weeps aloof,
Now that the Conduit-head is our own roof:
Now that the fate is public, we may call
It Britains Vespers, Englands Funeral.
Who has a Pensill to express the Saint,
But he has eyes too, washing off the paint?
There is no learning, but what tears surround,
Like to Seths Pillars, in the deluge drowned.
There is no Church, Religion is grown
From much of late, that she is increast to none;
Like an hydropick body, full of Rheumes,
First swells into a bubble, then consumes.
The Law is dead, or cast into a trance,
And, by a Law dough-bak'd, and Ordinance.
The Liturgy, whose doom was voted next,
Died, as a Comment upon him the Text.
There Is nothing lives; life is (since he is gone)
But a Nocturnall Lucubration.
Thus you have seen deaths inventory read
In the sum to^all -- Canterburie's dead.
A sight would make a Pagan to baptize
Himself a Convert in his bleeding eyes.
Would thaw the rabble that fierce beast of ours,
(That which Hyaena-like weeps and devoures)
Tears that ^low brackish from their souls within,
Not to repent, but pickle up their sin
Mean time no squallid grief his look defiles,
He guilds his sadder fate with noble smiles.
Thus the worlds eye with reconciled streams
Shines in his showers as if he wept his beams.
How could success such villainies applaud?
The S^ate in Strafford fell, the Church in Laud:
The twins of public rage adjudg'd to dye,
For Treasons they should act by Prophecy.
The f^cts were done before the Laws were made,
The trump turned up after the game was played.
Be dull great spirits and forbear to climb,
For worth is sin, and eminence a crime.
No Churchman can be innocent and high,
It Is height makes Gran^ham steeple stand awry.
On I. VV. A. B. of York.
SAy, my young Sophister, what think of this?
Chimae^ra's real; Ergo falleris.
The Lamb and Tiger, Fox and Goose agree,
And here concorp'rate in one Prodigy.
C^ll an Ha^uspex quickly; let him get
S^lphur and ^orches, and a Laurel wet,
To P^^^fie the place; for sure the Harms
This Monster will produce, transcend his Charms.
It Is Na^ures Masterpiece of error, this:
And redeems whatever she did amiss,
Before, from wonder and reproach; this last
Le^i^imateth all her by-blowes past.
Lo here a General Metropolitan,
An Arch-Prelat^que Presbyterian.
Behold his pious Garbs, Canonique Face,
A z^alous Episcopo-mastix Grace;
A fa^^e blew-apron'd Priest, a Lawn-sleev'd Brother,
One leg a Pulpu holds, a Tub the other.
Let Us give him a fit name now, if we can,
And make th'apostate once more Christian.
Protaeus we cannot call him; he put on
His change of shapes by a succession;
Nor the Welsh Weathercock; for that we find,
At once does only wait upon the wind:
These speak him not, but if you will name him right,
Call him Religions He^maphrodite.
His head in the sanctified mould is cast,
Yet sticks the abominable Miter fast;
He still retains the Lordship and the Grace,
And yet has got a reverend Elders place.
Such acts must needs be his, who did devise
By crying Altars down, to sacrifice
To private malice; where you might have seen
His conscience holocausted to his spleen.
Unhappy Church! the Viper that did share
Thy greatest honors helps to make thee bare,
And void of all thy Dignities and store:
Alas! thy own Son proves the Forrest-boare.
And like the Dam-destroying Cuckoo, he,
When the thick-shell of his Welsh Pedigree,
By thy warm fost'ring bounty did divide
And open, straight thence sprung forth parricide:
As if 'twas just, revenge should be dispacht
In thee, by th'Monster, which thy self had hatched.
Despair not though: in Wales there may be got,
As well as Lincolnshire, an antidote,
Against the foul'st venom he can spit, though's head
Were changed from subtle gray to poisonous red.
Heaven with propitious eyes will look upon
Our party, now the cursed thing is gone;
And chastise Rebels, who naught else did miss
To fill the measure of their sins but his;
Whose foul unparalled apostasy,
Like to his sacred character, shall be
Indelible; when ages then of late
More happy grown, with most impartial fate,
A period to his days and time shall give,
He by such Epitaphs as this shall live.
He Yorks great Metropolitan is laid,
Who Gods Anointed, and his Church betrayed.
THE END.

