Cocker's Morals, OR, THE MUSES Spring-Garden, Adorned with many Sententious
Disticks and Poems, In ALPHABETICAL ORDER. Fitted for the Use of all Public
and Private Grammar and Writing Schools, for the Scholars of the first to turn
into Latin, and for those of the other to Transcribe into all their various and
curious Hands.

Omne Bonum, Dei Donum. By Edward Cocker, Practitioner in the Arts of Writing,
Arithmetic, and Engraving, and published for the benefit of Learners.

London, Printed for Thomas Drant at the Ship in St. Mary Axe, and T. L. at the
Golden Lion near the Meal-Market in Southwark Stationer, 1675.

To my Honored FRIEND Mr. ELEAZAR WIGAN That Famous Writing-Master; Living at
the Hand and Pen on Great Tower Hill, LONDON.
TO you, you rare Commander of the Quill,
Whose Wit, and Worth; deep Learning and high Skill,
Speak you the Honor of Great Tower Hill.
How said I, Honor of Great Tower Hill?
Yea, all Great London, all the World, your Skill,
Will with excessive admiration fill.
To You, the ensuing Verses I present,
Whose great Employments, prudent Management,
Proclaims your Skill, and Conduct, Excellent.
Crown them with Rays of your auspitious Sight;
Survey them first; then let them take their flight,
For every Learner's profit and Delight.
Thus, round the World, you will Urania send;
Thus will her spreading Wings your Fame extend;
And thus, you will endear your real Friend
Edward Cocker.

To the Reader.
IF here you meet with any worthless Line,
Humanum est errare Stamps it mine,
But if you find here any Worthy Line,
It from a Fountain flows that is more Divine.
So Read, as to commit to Memory,
All Sentences worthy that Treasury.
And so remember all, as that you may,
In season practice them; and so display
Their Influence, as Honor may redound
To GOD, and you may be with profit crowned.
AGAIN,
SOme in compendious Epigrams show forth,
With charming Artifice, their Wit and Worth.
Some with rich Lines and Emblems, well designed,
At once affect the Readers Eye and Mind.
Some, in Soul-pleasing Pastorals do prove
How Coridon did Amarillis love.
Some high flown Brains in lofty Strains indite
The amazing terrors of some horrid Fight.
Some with Satyrick lashes of the Pen,
Anatomize the vicious Lives of men.
Some with Historick Lines their Readers please:
Relating Feats and Fights, on Land and Seas.
Some with high Raptures, fitted to the Lyre,
Ingenious Readers well-pleased Souls inspire.
Some with Heroic Strains of noblest kinds,
And choicest Theams, inflame their Readers Minds.
Some, which beyond the rest, deserve the Bays,
Wisely exalt their great Creators Praise.
With many more, whose varions, rare Inventions,
Delight their own and others Apprehensions.
But I, the last and least, strive to teach Youths
Good Manners, and enrich their Minds with truths.
Edward Cocker.

A
A Christians noblest Ensign is the Cross,
And all things, to belief in Christ, are dross.
Alas! what are the Best of Human Race,
Till their rude Natures are improved by Grace.
All Arts by powerful Industry are gained,
And by continued Exercise retained.
Affection make your Servant, Will your Slave,
Passion your Drudge; you are then a Prince most brave.
A love to Learning is the unfailing Clue,
That leads us Learnings Rarities to view.
Advance your Plumes; be bold, yet humbly wise,
Thus high you may stand firm, and low arise.
A faithful Friend is as the Phoenix rare,
And who can find where two such Creatures are?
Action and Virtue, if we separate,
They both into the Air evaporate.
Abhor to Navigate in troubled Seas,
And hate the Company of Sloth and Ease.
A good Effect may spring from a bad Cause,
Both cross to Reasons, and to Natures Laws.
Accept a Courtesy at first Rebound,
And wait not till a second may be found.
Arithmetic, scorning all Bounds and Bars,
Transcends Earths Sands in numbers, and Heavens Stars.
As by degrees ill Customs have been taken,
So by degrees they best may be forsaken.
Ascend not Honors Alps, the price is small;
Tempt not the danger of a dreadful Fall.
Although we know our Steps would lead to Woe,
We find it hard not in those steps to go.
Action, thou Queen of Virtues, what high Praise,
What Trophies to thy Honor shall I raise?
It far transcends Man's skill thy Worth to rate,
All those who Love not Thee, their own Souls hate.
All famous Monuments beneath the Sky,
Thy Excellence commend and magnify.
A healthful Temper you may best advance
By Moderation, and wise Temperance.
At other Men's enjoyments to Repine,
What augmentation will it prove to thine?
As Tygres vexed, their Spots more plain appear,
So Men provoked, their Passions Domineer.
Amendment of concernment is to all,
Virtues vast Columns but for this would fall.
A Surety is a sure tie; he is most sure,
Who is from Bonds and Surety-Ship secure.
Ambition and Presumption mount Men high.
But if they fall, the more's their misery.
Abstain from Creature Comforts all you can,
And that is the way to prove a happy Man.
Amazing heights fondly aspire not to,
Fools mount and fall, the Wise walk safe below.
Act nothing but what you may safely own,
And what you need not blush at being known.
At smallness of Estate never Repine,
He that has less, would gladly change for thine.
Artists invested with rare Skill and worth,
Scorn that their Tongues the same should trumpet forth.
Always with Honor, Fear, and Reverence,
Meditate on the Immense Omnipotence.
Adorn your Place, if entertained in Trust,
By being Impartial, Diligent, and Just.
All you that in fair Writing would excel,
How much you write regard not, but how Well.
A Gift with a sweet violence entrance makes,
And the deceived Receiver Captive takes.
At Board, accept what your Friend's pleased to Carve,
Observe not hastily your self to serve.
A man would strange to view the distances
Of Promises and their Performances.
A Tongue that is now rough as the coursest File,
Can, in a moment, be more smooth than Oil.
Always contend not; do not always strive,
For sometimes to Retreat, is to Retrive.
All Scholars these three Lessons much concern,
Grace, and good Manners, with a will to learn.
A Christian, contemplating things Divine,
Enjoys a Pasgah-Sight of Palestine.
Assume a noble Resolution, strain
Your Faculties, rare Sciences to gain.
Amorous Embracements, and Adulterous fires
Abhor and quench; hate all but chaste desires.
Arithmetician, make your Art appear,
Compute your Sins Sum-Total for a Year.
All rare Projections sink, though nobly high,
Projectors wanting Chink for their supply.
All our Designs in this vain World should tend
To future-Hopes; this Life will quickly end.
Affection with Instruction and Direction,
Are the Renowned Handmaids of Perfection.
Against that time, when Death and Time must die,
Resigning all up to Eternity;
Most solemnly prepare, that you may stand,
Amongst the ever blessed, on Christ's right hand.
All God's Commandments are Divinely pure,
By keeping them, men keep their Souls secure.
Art rarifies the Mind, and various ways
Improves dull Nature to JEHOVA's Praise.
All things are mutable beneath the Sky,
And nothing constant but Inconstancy.
A lofty Countenance, a Soul far more sublime,
God gave Man Heaven to view, and its vast height to climb.
All you that would Write fair, mind this Design,
Still to improve in every Word and Line:
Here have makes wast, of Paper, Ink, and Time,
And something, in Opinion, more Sublime,
The All-commanding Coin; and who would wast
All these at once, by making too much have.
Aim at Arts Altitude; aspire, ascend,
Acquire, assume, accomplish, and amend.
Actions Superlatively Excellent,
Render their noble Authors Eminent.
Arithmetic let a Man understand,
And after that, Geometry command.
Then let him turn Astronomer, and prove
How many Stars are fixed, how many move.
Next a Geographer Earths Globe survey,
The long-sought, unfound Longitude Display.
Apollo's Lyre next let him take in hand,
And all the high Soul-charming Aires command.
Yea, let him have all Arts, all are but Smoke
To him that has no money in his Poke.
B
BY sad Experience this is known to some,
Who hate Instruction, to Destruction come.
Bad Company, as Pestilential Air,
You Would shun, did you but know how bad it were.
Brave and Heroic are the Acts of those,
Who no man better than themselves suppose.
Before you undertake, consider well,
And then resolve, next in Dispatch excel.
Be wise betimes, and strive in all that is thine,
That evermore the Golden Mean may shine.
By Pen or Pensil, who to mortal Eye
Can represent Immense Eternity.
By squeesing Wax, and their Names writing, some
From wealth to want ( cavete) soon have come.
Brave Virtues Emanations charm the Eyes
Of all that are sincerely Good and Wise.
Best Precepts are Examples; for some teach
By words, what their best Actions cannot reach.
Yet, though like Trumpeters, they do not fight,
They others to the Battle do excite.
Beware of that sly Sycophant's Dogg-Tricks,
Who, like a Spanniel flatters, fawns, and licks.
But small, though seeming great, will prove the prize
That is obtained by Falsities and Lies.
By verbal sounds, who makes his small parts famous,
But proves himself the greater Ignoramus.
Before Time calls to the dark silent Grave,
What we can do does our Attention crave.
Behave your self neither too low, nor high,
But so, as best Suits with your Quality.
But Thirty and two Points the Seaman finds
Upon his Compass: thousands have Men's minds.
Be good to all Men; to the best be best;
Court Peace, with no contentious Men contest.
Beasts by their Horns, or Ears are taken, when
More to their harm, Men by their Tongues take Men.
Boast not of Features, or a smooth clear skin,
But make your Gallant mind fair Virtues Inn.
Be still a Lover of ingenious Pains,
For still the working hand the Penny gains.
Best of Examples, with the best Direction,
Bring Learning-Loving-Learners to perfection.
Boreas tall Cedars buffets, but low Shrubs,
Secure below, defy his furious rubs.
By all Ingenious Men this is confessed,
The way to Write best, is to Read the best.
Be not like him, who so far vainly strays,
That he is ashamed to leave his wicked VVays.
But here and there we find a hopeful Lad,
That has no Inclination to be bad.
But here and there grows an Ingenious Plant,
That minds his Learning, knowing Learnings want.
But what Arithmetician can compute,
The thousand part of Plants that bear no Fruit?
Blind Ignorance clear Informations need,
Let doubtful minds sound confirmations heed.
Brave Spirits, when their Fortunes lowest run,
Should greatest seem, like the declining Sun.
Baccus his Cheeks with laughing are full blown,
To see Men to such height of Folly grown,
By drinking others healths, to lose their own.
But Sure the Great Creator of the Vine,
Never intended his heart-chearing Wine,
On purpose to transform Men into Swine.
Before you, Set those brave Examples, which
The Crystal Mirrours of the world appear:
By imitating Them, your Self Enrich,
And prove another Star in Virtues Sphere.
This is the way base Vice to trample down,
And gain those Virtues which may gain Renown,
By Diligence we gain Intelligence;
Experience follows, Source of Excellence.
Behold how Fortunes billows curle and swell,
Mounting to Heaven, then plunging down to Hell.
Birth rears Man's Fabric of Flesh, Bones and Skin:
But Breeding furnishes the House within.
Beyond the Golden Mean, strive not to go:
His wants are boundless whose desires are so.
C
COunt that day lost whose low-descending Sun,
Views from your hand no noble Action done.
Clear-sighted Reason, and Sublimest Sense,
Submit their Crowns to Wisdoms Influence.
Contend not with a Man of greater power:
By Land and Sea the Great the Less devour.
Crown the Donations of thy Friends with Praise:
On thy own Donatives no Trophies raise.
Censure none rashly; for not even the best,
Can humane Nature of her Faults divest.
Contend with none, hotly with none debate,
But that a short War may long Peace create.
Compendious Sentences in those may breed
To Virtue love, who cannot Volumes read.
Can you believe it? Scarce unless you see it,
That a man's Tongue should bind his hands and feet.
Could we our passions and our vain Affections bridle;
We should not, as we are, be so extremely idle.
Constancy brings forth Custom; Custom grows
Into a habit, from whence Wisdom flows.
Close Secrecy, and wary Subtilty,
Both Handmaids are to humane Policy.
Contaminated Minds mind Mundane things,
But Minds Serene mount with Celestial wings.
Common it is for men to loose their Reins
To pleasures, till those pleasures prove their pains.
Count God's Eternal WORD thy noblest Treasure;
Which read, and practiced, yields Eternal pleasure.
CHRIST's Rules of Life will your Life's life improve,
With Faith, Truth, Zeal, Humility and Love.
Could blind Ambition Honors fate foresee,
She would with gladness, court a mean Degree.
Contentment's an Exhaustless Mine of Treasure,
Which Pens cannot compute, no Lines lengths measure.
Chances and Changes Spring from providence;
Not from Vtopian Fortunes Influence.
Content who lives with Competent Estate,
Needs not to Court men's Love, nor fear their hate.
The Worlds Grandees in higher Spears do move;
Yet he is more safe below, than those Above.
Half what he has, may, with Contentment, Serve;
While some, in midst of Store, contentless, starve.
Cares seldom prove our Cures; care, not to care,
Cares often prove Introductions to despair.
Clemency, diffring Natures reconciles;
And melts down Grim Morosity, with Smiles.
Courteous Behavior, and Expressions prudent,
Speak a young Man, in Virtues School, a Student.
Columens, who cannot raise; nor lofty Towers,
May Something build, according to their powers.
Could we behold fair Virtues lovely Face,
And the Celestial Beauty of true Grace,
We should be All Enamored; but we are
Blind to all Heavenly Objects; and our Care,
And the main Tendency of our Employments,
Is the possession of Earths vain Enjoyments.
D
DElight makes Man so light, that he supposes,
When on sharp thorns he treads, he trips on Roses.
Did Learners know how learning might advance
Them, they would love it, and hate Ignorance.
Diligence gains Intelligence, and they
Experience gain, to all rare Arts the way.
Despise not the least piece of Art that may
In usefulness its Excellence display.
Divine success, thy Votaries we are,
How soon thy smiles resucitate from care!
Do nothing rashly; Rashness nume'rous ways
The rash Attempter to Contempt betrays.
Despair Damnation leads in Chains, and brings
Thousands of Scorpions, with Soul-vexing stings.
Depressed Virtue, like the Palm, oppressed,
Raises more high, her Heaven saluting Crest.
Dangers lie dormont often, till circumspection
Be lost, and then reduce us to subjection.
Divine Contentment's an exhaustless store,
He that is content, complains not that he is poor.
Despise not Mortals of a mean Estate,
Since ignorant you are of your own Fate.
Destruction gapes for those who hate Instruction,
But love to Learning's Wisdoms Introduction.
Drink, Dice and Drabs, three dange'rous Dees, do call
For a fourth D, which fourth is worst of all,
Depend on others promises with hope,
When you of Sand can make a Cable Rope.
Did we but know our nearness to the Grave,
What Thoughts, what Cogitations should we have.
Defer not till to morrow to Essay,
What worthy Acts you can perform to day.
Did all men, by consent, give Peace her Soveraigntie,
Such, as the Emperial Heaven, this lower world might be.
Disdain not such as are with Virtues crowned,
They are, or shall, or ought to be renowned.
Dispraise cannot depress; nor Commendations
Mount wise men's constant Minds above their Stations.
Directions and Instructions, of the wise,
Beyond fine Gold, or choicest Jewels prize.
Discretion, Engines, and choice Rules prepares,
Whereby to regulate your just Affairs.
Desire is a vast, boundless Ocean,
Which still is boiling, still in motion found;
And all the Lines, made since Sol's Race began,
Spliced into one, would prove too short to sound.
This bottomless, and shoreless Sea: few here
Do Navigate, that by the Compass Steer.
E
Extremes produce Extremes: Extremes avoid,
Extremes without Extremes are not enjoyed.
Exalted Notions, mounted on Wits wings;
With florid Strains, are acceptable Things:
But solid Reason, and sound Sense, the wise,
Beyond Youth-pleasing, Airy Trifles, prize.
Encomiums sweet, or fourest Calumnies,
Alike are, to the Virtuous and Wise.
Embrace all opportunities to day:
Time, Tide, and Carriers, will for no man stay.
Even then, when Age Death's summons must obey,
Most greedily the Dust hoards up the Clay.
Exalted thought on Contemplations Wings,
Soar up to the Sublimitie of Things.
Experience is the Clue, whereby we may,
Find thorough Arts puzling Labyrinths, the Way.
Expand your Souls rare Faculties, that all
May honor their Immense ORIGINAL.
Earths Quintessence we in contentment find,
Contentment is a Kingdom to the Mind.
Easier, and sooner, Learning's lost than gained,
If by fresh Applications not maintained.
Every swift-wing'd moment in the day,
Carries its length of our short Life away.
Extremely much that man himself forgets,
Who, by new wrangling, thinks to pay old debts.
Estates to gain, men toil and break their Rest;
But Competency with Content is Best.
Endeavor so to live, and so to dye;
As to enjoy a blessed Eternity.
Easy it is to write, but to write well
Is very hard; much harder to Excel.
Envy and Emulation are two things,
For Emulation Spurs, but Envy Stings.
Extremes produce Extremes; the Brood of Vice
Can multiply to Legions in a trice.
Eumenes would to no man yield the praise
Of Valor, while his Arm his Sword could raise.
Endeavor to suppress Domestic Jars,
For Civil, are the most uncivil Wars.
Envies cursed brood their own Tormenters are:
While those most envied, still the better fare.
Endeavor still, that your Capacious Mind,
May with the most Essential parts be lined.
Eternal Happiness is gained in Time:
For when Time's Sand shall totally be run,
Then will there be no Virtues Hill to climb;
Acts of Repentance cannot then be done.
O, therefore All your Strength, and Might apply,
In time, to gain a blessed ETERNITY.
F
FRom God to Adam, did choice Knowledge flow:
Which still descends to all his Sons below.
For Toys and Trifles we contend, and fight;
And out Concerns far more Substantial Slight.
For were it better to be ignorant,
Than to be learned, and true Grace to want.
Fix not your mind on Features, Lips or Eyes;
But only love the Virtuous and Wise.
Fair, Modest, Wise, let my Beloved be,
And let me live deserving such a She.
Few need restraining Curbs in Virtues Race:
But most want Spur's to make them mend their pace.
Friends, Books, a cheerful heart, a Conscience clear.
Are the most choice Companions we find here.
From a Foul heart, assends to lying Lips
A little Demon, and from thence he skips.
From glozing Adulation keep your Tongue;
A smooth desembler cheats you with a Song.
Fair Wrighting then to Excellence does rise
Most, when the Pen is most in Exercise.
Fools, even at Schools, Squander their time away,
As if they went only to learn to Play.
Fresh prosperous Gales their duty may perform,
Yet leave us to the mercy of a Storm.
For Profit, and for Pleasure, those great Ends,
The wiser sort delight in Books, and Friends.
Fondly affect not a vain minutes breath;
But Wisely, before Death, prepare for Death.
From Labor, Wine gives the hands liberty;
And sets the head on work most furiously.
Find Meat and Drink, that will all Palates please,
My Lines shall Please all humors with like ease.
Fame of the noblest kind, springs from these Sources;
Good Life; Behavior fair; discreet Discourses.
Fierce Disputations, Transportations prove,
And Disputants from sense, and Truth remove.
From Orb, to Orb, a wise man can remove;
So cannot Planets which command above.
For Virtues sake; now in your youthful prime
Be a good Husband of your precious Time.
Make Action Mistress of your best Affections,
Court her, She Is beautiful, beyond objections.
She Crowns her Lovers with the best of things,
And gains them favor with the best of Kings.
For hopeful Youths, that would be happy Men,
There lies a plenteous Portion in the Pen;
Which being by ingenious pains, drawn forth,
Will show, to admiration, it is vast worth.
Pen, Ink, and Paper, therefore soon provide,
And let them be Ingeniously applied.
Fair Writings Famous Universal Art,
The Pen5, the Hand4, the Eye3, the Head2, and Heart1,
Conceives1, Promotes2, Views3, Moves4, and does Impart5.
G
GRace, with a Heavenly hand, tunes Natures Harp,
And makes that Note a Mean, which was a Sharp.
Gold makes an Adamantine Conscience soft,
And a soft Conscience turns to Flint, as often.
Great Debts require the greater care to pay;
Wise men provide against the accompting day.
God in your thoughts retain with Reverence;
Whose works are all stupendous and Immense.
Go, Run, Ride, Swim, use every honest way,
Rather than Poverties Commands obey.
God distributes his Gifts as he sees fit;
He others gives more Wealth, and thee more Wit.
God, Men's desires denies them often, that they
May be more happy in his heavenly way.
God's Register, the Conscience, notes down all
Our Actions just, or unjust, great or small.
God Essence gave to Heavens Expansed Frame,
And still sustaines, maintains, and rules the same.
Give him leave (or he will take it) to be Stout,
Who is with heaps of Riches fenced about.
God's a true Spirit; Truths pure Fountain; He
In Spirit, and in Truth will worshipped be.
Geographie the Worlds vast Compass styles,
Twenty one thousands, and six hundred miles.
God provides Grass, and other Meats for Beasts,
And with those Beasts, Man, their Commander Feasts.
Greatness and Goodness make a man complete:
But few there are, that are both good and great.
Gamesters still gape for Gain; but how can those,
That lose be Gainers, since even Gainers lose.
God's Mercy finds best opportunity,
When Man groans under worst of Misery.
Grace, Virtue, Prudence, and productive Parts,
May bid defiance to grim Envies Darts.
Gorgons, nor Goblins, can their Minds affright,
Who trust in God, and in his Word delight.
Give a true estimation of the worth,
Of All that under Heaven, the Earth brings forth.
Then think what you shall gain, to buy the whole,
At the dear price of your Immortal Soul.
O wonder! this vast world, and All therein,
Cannot All balance with one Mortal Sin.
Gracious is God, to offer Means of Grace;
The only means to climb to Glories Mount.
Which before time has run his long-spun Race
Embrace; that you may give a just account,
When Time shall be no more; and then may stand
With ever-blessed Souls, at CHRIST's right hand.
H
HE well begins to run in Virtues Race,
Who separates the Noble from the Base.
He that would learn to be an honest Man,
Let him view all the vicious ways he can;
And note their various windings and their Ends;
This sure, will make him one of Virtues Friends.
He that begins to run in Virtues Race
Must not look back, but strive to mend his pace.
Him I esteem a man of the first Rate,
Who lives contented with a mean Estate.
He who Time's Golden Sand does well apply,
Lays Earnest for a blessed Eternity.
He Is truly wise, he is a right honest Lad,
Who rightly can distinguish Good from Bad:
And having made this nice Distinction right,
Does hate the bad, and in the good delight.
His mind feels Pangs of Death and pains of Hell,
Wherein Divine contentment hates to dwell.
He bravely all Calumnious Baseness scorns,
Whose unstained mind true Honesty adorns.
How wise are they, by whom the Dies are thrown,
To know, if their own Money be their own!
How soon might he, that is a mere Dunce by Nature,
By Industry become another Creature!
He Is truly learned whose tenatious Brain,
The Quintessence of Wisdom can retain;
And can, both for his own, and others Use,
In season the rare Fruits thereof produce;
But who loves Ignorance before choice Knowledge,
A Doctor may commence in Gotham College.
How many by wise management of Time,
From low Degrees, have mounted to sublime!
How happily should we vain Mortals live,
Could we good Council take, as soon as give!
He that the most his own will can deny,
With Gods most holy will may most comply.
How pleasantly they have the World at will,
Who can their Bags with Gold and Silver fill;
His ripe Discretion always is in season,
Who can his Passions balance with right Reason.
He to some height of Knowledge does advance,
Who knows how to conceal his Ignorance.
Hear, See, and say the best; for that is the way,
To live in peace, as wise men know and say.
He that receives a Courtesy, remains,
Till his Retaliation, bound in Chains.
Health before Wealth prefer; Wealth commonly,
Is Vassal to ingenious Industry.
How will he answer't on the Reckoning day,
Who runs in Debt, and takes no care to pay?
Husband your Time well; Squander not away,
The precious patrimony of a day.
How many thousands please themselves to Death!
Whose Viands, choice and rare, obstruct their Breath.
He that is exalted on the Wings of Praise,
Is wise, if humbly, he himself surveys.
How many beauteous, Face-affecting Lasses,
Neglect their Graces, to attend their Glasses.
How dark's the Lesser Worlds sad Winters Night,
When Reasons radiant Rays do not enlight.
Having a Conscience uncontaminate,
Mind not what vulgar Tongues of thee may Prate.
He that all others Business lets alone,
Has the more time wherein to mind his own.
Hope's that Alexipharmical, whose rare,
And Sovereign Virtue antidotes Despair.
Have thou wronged any Man? make satisfaction:
And scorn to Stoop to an Ignoble action.
How quickly Learners would by too much Play,
Learn to forget the business of the Day!
Here the four Virtues Cardinal advance;
Fortitude, Prudence, Justice, Temperance.
Hope not to rectify another Tongue,
Since for your government your own's too strong.
Happy's the man, that is from Heaven endu'd,
With Prudence, Justice, Temperance, Fortitude.
He Is a wright noble Soul, who bravely can forsake,
His pleasure, when therein he might most pleasure take.
He whose Inheritance is only Time,
Must manage that, with an ingenious Care;
For Arts, and Parts, though never so sublime,
Without our times improvement will impair.
Your precious moments squander not away;
To the Industrious, every Month is May.
He that is injurious to another, he
At the same time, so to himself must be.
He that for Pleasure, forfeits his Estate,
Has bought repentance at too dear a Rate.
How joyful is a man, what satisfaction
He reaps, having performed some noble Action!
How many have been totally destroyed,
For want of being honestly employed.
He that contends with uncontrouled Tongues,
May lose his Reason, and consume his Lungs.
He that loves Labor, courts immortal Fame;
But Sloth is always waited on by Shame.
Hate Sensual Love; Love Love that may advance
The Lover, to Loves bles'd Inheritance.
Honors may leave their Owners; Riches may
Assume swift wings, and quickly fly away:
But Learning, and the knowledge of rare Arts,
That man the most enjoys that most imparts.
Endeavor that your Breast and Brain,
The best of Learnings Treasures may retain.
I
IF but one hour in every day you move
Virtues Course, 'twill great advancement prove.
Innumerable Losses men sustain,
By greedily endeavoring to gain.
Immense Pecunia, with Imperious hand,
All the Earths best Enjoyments does command.
In vain, vain Man desires still to enjoy
Those Things, which were but lent him to employ.
Innumerable Sins inflame our Score:
What should we do were not God's Mercies more?
If for my Friend I nineteen favors do,
All Is naught, if I do not the twentieth too.
The Ingenious Youth's Resolution.
I Will Write so fair, that every Line shall be
A sparkling Jewel for the World to see:
And every word shall be a radiant Gem
Such as the noblest Souls shall not contemn.
All various Shapes of Beasts, Birds, Fish and men,
Shall Run, Fly, Swim, and march from my Swift Pen.
If you esteem a Noble Reputation,
With Sons of Virtue have your Conversation.
In your Discourses be brief, sound and clear;
Let no Impertinences grate the Ear.
If the free Air could be confined and Sold,
Those would live longest who produce most Gold.
If to excel the Best you Emulate,
The most-excelling Patterns Imitate.
And when your Pen, your Pensil, or your Graver
Has equaled those, strive to produce still braver.
Thus well resolved, and keeping constant pace,
You may prove first in Arts renowned Race.
In Hells out-courts that wretched Soul appears,
Who lives a Slave to Jealousies and Fears.
If worse than we, should prove our Generation,
Abomination will turn Recreation.
In dubious Matters prudent Counsel choose,
This, Solomon himself, would not refuse.
If we gain Arts with industry, it is fair:
But to come, see, and overcome, it is rare.
If thy own Country be for thee too small,
Begin betimes to Travel over Earth Ball.
Employ your Wisdom, all your powers apply,
In time to gain a blessed ETERNITY.
If thy Friend flinches, let that Friend therefore,
Come to thy Bosoms Cabinet no more.
Injustice offer not unto the just;
God will revenge, they trust, in whom they trust.
If every idle word requires account,
To what will Oaths and Blasphemies amount.
If some Lines want such Wit as you could wish,
Know, we are not bound to Sauce you every Dish.
In this Worlds Maze thousands of ways men run,
With full speed to undo, or be undon.
If other men with Arts, and Parts outvie;
Strive to transcend them all in Industry.
If Elegantly how to Write you would know;
Read such Composures, as are written so.
If men, by sinning, any Good could win,
They would not want it, for the want of Sin.
If to be cheated you no Stomach have,
Men's Deeds, not words, your best attention crave.
In hot Disputes men strain, Mouth, and rant high;
Striving for Victory, not VERITY.
In greatest Calms, for greatest Storms prepare,
Wisdom's Grand Admonition, is, Beware.
If our Life's Glass could thousand Ages run,
Yet, at the last those thousands would be don.
If Portion, to thy parts Proportion bears,
Give Thanks to him, who gives to all their Shares.
In his own presence no man's Praise proclaim,
Nor In his absence any one defame.
If your hand works not to procure a Stock,
It Is ten to one, but it your Mouth will mock.
If you would conquer your Souls Mortal Foes,
To armed Vices, Virtues armed oppose,
In Choice and Judgment he Extremely errs,
Who Strangers, before well-known Friends prefers,
Employment prove Improvement of our parts:
And Practice gains Experience in all Arts.
Into Arts Labyrinths, or Natures Pry,
Be bold Beneath, but not above the Sky.
Is your State low? would you to Riches soar?
Abandon all those ways that made you Poor.
If you intend to help a Friend at Need,
Do it with all Imaginable Speed.
If by fair Promises you Friends do gain,
Let fair performances those Friends maintain.
If Industry produces Excellence,
We multiply't to Quantities Immense.
It is not for the want of Negligence,
That many thousands want Arts Excellence.
If Nature gives Proportion, and rare Beauty,
To match them with good Manners is your Duty.
If you Proportion want, and are not fair,
Let Grace, and Manners their defects repair.
Ill Will never speaks well; cursed Spleen and Spite,
Were never Cordial Friends to Truth and Right.
If you so nobly cannot Act, as you see another man do;
Boldly and bravely quit your self, by doing what you can do.
If the wise Gardener lays aside his Knife,
His Plants will riot in a vicious Life.
K
KEep Company with Virtues true Relations,
Of uncontaminated Reputations.
Knowledge that puffs up the Possessor's mind,
Is evermore of a pernicious kind.
Knowing the way, courageously advance:
And shun Converse with Sons of Ignorance.
Know how to time your Business; this Concern
Puts thousands to a loss that are to Learn.
Know thy self first, and then begin to Scan,
The imperfections of another Man.
Keep Company with Virtues true Relations:
Of uncontaminated Reputations.
Know all Mechanics, that for Riches strive,
To mind your Business is the way to thrive.
Keep up the Top-sail of your Reputation,
Let none out-sail you in your Occupation.
Knew you the worth of the Pens Excellence,
And how its Lovers it does Recompense,
And of what high Account Accounts do make
Knowing accomptants; then you Pains would take
Both Night and Day (play should aside be thrown)
To make these profitable Arts your own.
Knaves commonly for Fools do prove Providers.
Riches like headstrong Horses, throw their Riders.
Keep Peace in thine own Breast, who keeps this Road,
May bid defiance to all Wars abroad.
Know you not this vain Worlds Imperious Minion,
It is that All-commanding Queen, Opinion.
Kindle no Flames of Strife: he that loves Strife,
Hates peace; the Comfort of a Christian Life.
Knaves are the Bane of their own Reputation:
The Pest, and Caterpillars of a Nation.
Kind hearts are unkind, only to themselves;
Whose Barks often split on their own Rocks and Shelves.
Kidds may grow Goats; so young Sins may grow old,
If you with Satan's Baits dare be too bold.
Kick not, nor Spurn at Government; Inferiors
Must live in due obedience to Superiors.
Keep at a distance from the Sons of Vice:
Once known, endanger not your Souls health twice.
Knock hard at Mercies Gate, and think no pains
To hard, nor time too long for such blessed Gains.
Kindred in Friendships Orb, but rarely move,
So certainly, as Strangers, linck'd in Love.
Keels ballasted with Gold, from Ophir came;
To enrich wise Solomon, and gild his Fame.
Kingdoms, to Heavens Immensitie, appear
As Birds Neasts small, compared to Kingdoms here.
Kill growing Vices; for if they Control,
They will destroy your Body and your Soul.
L
Lovers of Learning learned soon will prove,
The halfway house to Learning is their love.
Let brave examples your prompt mind inspire,
To imitate what others most admire.
Learn so to live, as not to fear to dye;
That you may dye to live Eternally.
Let us not soar too high, nor sink too low,
But every one his proper Station know.
Let Order, Measure, and Proportion make
All Actions noble which you undertake.
Labor proves light, where true Delight attends,
Where Love begins, Industry bravely ends.
Let no vain Pleasures your clear Reason blind,
And hate to seek what you abhor to find.
Love covers multitudes of Faults; but hate
Old Faults discovers, and does new create.
Let Us not desirous be to live here long,
Or once to Act our old Sins over again:
As we grow weak, Diseases grow more strong;
And we complain, because Complaints in Vain
Fly from our troubled Breast; O therefore let
Us Earth discard, and Heavens Assurance get.
Let all wild Worldlings, this, unto their Sense apply,
They most themselves enjoy, who most themselves deny.
Love distant Climes, unites; in this we find,
It is not where the Man is, but the Mind.
Let Esculape's wise Son, who heals thy Wound,
Be with the Garland of thy Praises Crowned.
Life lives in Temperance; Intemperance,
Most of all Sins, Death's Standard does advance.
Life's noblest Theory good Precepts are,
Examples show Life's practick part most rare.
Let Moderation your requests commend,
By thus demanding yo command your Friend.
Lines worded well, and seasoned well with Sense,
Have, on Ingenious Minds, great Influence.
Leave Youths to their own Conscience, and then
How soon, think you, would they prove Learned Men.
Learning, and the choice Documents of Truth,
Should be infused into us in our Youth.
Like Tares with Wheat, most Men's Expressions be,
Complements mixed with small Realitie.
Learning, the Learned, before Gold prefer,
Learning, not Gold, defies the Plunderer.
Long are we gaining of a small Excellence,
Which, in short time, is lost by Negligence.
Let me be just to all, though I sustain
Some Loss thereby, that Loss will turn to Gain.
Looseness to Fastness is an Introduction,
Men Rant and please themselves into Destruction.
Learn now in your Minority, those things,
That may in Age, lend your Discretion Wings
Let not the choicest Creature Comfort have,
The Power to denominate thee Slave.
Lament wild Youth, your loss of Blooming Prime;
Lament your Parents pains, their Cost and Care.
Lament the vain mis-spending of your time.
Lament the unhappy State wherein you are.
Lament, Lament, because your Lamentation,
(Except you timely turn, and that even now)
Can firmly promise you no Restoration,
Of these lost Pearls, whose price you do not know?
M
MEn that are generous, humble, just and Wise,
The Pageantry of the vain World despise.
Man's mind, as Master should right reason have,
And evermore hold Passion as a Slave.
Men for this Worlds poor Riches are at strife,
Neglecting those of everlasting Life.
Merchants who plow the Foaming Main, their main
Concerns must mind, nor slight the smallest Gain.
Most, who are Rich, and Great, and can command,
Command Inferiors with Imperious hand.
Men Ignorant, ascribe that Influence
To Fortune which proceeds from Providence.
Men's promises by their performance measure,
Like Gypsies Knots they are fast or loose at pleasure.
Men often at Banquets more advantage gain,
Than at those Battails where are thousands Slain.
Misfortunes seldom come alone, but have
Their followers, as Wave rowls after Wave.
Many have vain Loquacitie lamented;
But none their prudent Silence have repented.
Mount, mount brave Soul, assend above the Spheres
Of common reason, and inferior Sense:
Court Arts, improve thy parts, till there appears
The Quintessence of their prime Excellence.
Many mean Persons might become Brave Gallants,
If prudently they would employ their Talents.
Men, who in verbal Sounds do least abound,
Are always found to be the most profound.
Millions of Inconveniences Surprise
Us, because we are our own Enemies.
Man's little, little World, transcends the Greater,
It Is strange, that this Compendium's the Compleater.
Man is a thing of naught, yet from above,
There dart upon him such strong Rays of Love,
Like Sol's refulgent Beams, that they refine
His Rubbish Nature to a Golden Mine.
Much Reading, much the insight does improve,
The Ey-sight, too much Reading does not Love.
My Admonitions to my Loving Friend,
Shall for no End begin, and have no End.
Men fain would be thought Virtuous, though they
Still Steer their Course the quite contrary way.
Men promise fair, perform not; in this Sense,
Exuberance is turned to Indigence.
Man's greatest Wealth lies in contempt of Wealth;
And next to that, his greatest Wealth is Health.
Mars his bold Son is for the Field or Sea.
An Academy is the Scholar's share.
The Tradesman in the City loves to stay.
The Country has the Husband-mans chief Care.
The Mariner is for a Ship, or Port:
And the gay Gallant glisters in the Court.
Might we assend to Excellence sublime,
Without a careful management of Time,
Thousands would then to Excellence attain,
That are unworthy of one Dram or Grain.
But Excellence is seated on a Throne,
Above the reach of every Dunce and Drone.
Meum and Tuum, backed with hopes and Fears
Have thousands set together by the Ears.
More confidently none themselves advance,
Than the unworthy Sons of Ignorance.
N
NAture to Reasons School comes to be taught,
All the most curious works that can be wrought.
Nor Gold, nor Pearls, nor Gems of highest rate,
Can equalize a Self-conceited Pate.
Notional knowledge is of slender use:
That Is best which we to Practice can reduce.
Nectar, Ambrosia, and the Thespian Spring,
May all avaunt, for Money is the Thing.
Nor Fume, nor Fret, nor Stamp at things amiss;
That Is not the way to mend them; Patience is.
No Rule, no Line found out, since time began,
Could Gauge, or Fathom the vast heart of Man.
Nothing can more to my improvement tend,
Than the reprovement of a loving Friend.
Never do well, that ill may come thereon.
Never do bad, that good may thence accrue.
Never do ill, that ill may thereupon,
A cursed Effect from a cursed Cause ensue.
But evermore do Good, that Good from thence
May Spring, and Magnify Heavens influence.
Noblest Examples with good Education,
Of Virtues Fabric are the firm Foundation.
None others more defame, or more advance
Themselves, than the blind Sons of Ignorance.
Nimble Prevention from a danger flies;
But dull delay proves Slave to the Surprise.
None mourn the loss of transitory things,
But such, as never heard that wealth has Wings.
No wonder if the best Men sometimes fail,
Since all are Mortal, and their Natures frail.
Not many Words, but few, expressed in season,
Proclaim the Noble strength, and force of Reason.
No kind so unkind to their Kind we find,
As Mankind unto Mankind is unkind.
No Crosses can so much our Passions move,
As those that Cross us in the Things we love.
Nor Bears, nor Boars, nor Wolves, nor Tygres can
Be more sharp Foes to Man, than Man to Man.
No Chains so strong has Fortune, as can bind,
The inclinations of a Noble Mind.
Now Bend your mind fair Writing to attain,
Your present pains will prove your future Gain.
No Charm so powerful was ever known,
As Love, to make another heart your own.
Not Riseing early, nor our Working late,
Will do it, there is in things a secret Fate.
Not for dull, (gentle Readers) but for those
Who Read, and practice, we these Lines compose.
O
OThers to Virtue Poets do excite,
By intermixing profit with Delight.
Of Mischief he shuns many a Rock and shelf
Who learns betimes to learn to know himself.
One thing there is, for which all men contest
From Age to Age, that is, Self Interest.
On this Worlds Stage a wise man would not stay
Longer than he can Act his part of the Play.
One moments pleasure brought an Inundation,
On all mankind, of pain and lamentation.
One minutes Shower of penetential Brine
Transcends the Treasures of a Golden Mine.
Omission of good Works, and the commission
Of bad, involve Men in a sad Commission.
One small Dram of good Life excells a Pound
Of humane Learning, though the most profound.
Our chearin Sun, our Glory and Delight,
Are soon inveloped in shades of Night.
Old Friends to trust, old Gold to keep, old Wine
To drink; are a solacious good old Trine.
Only these two Intelligences move
True Friendships Sphere; Civility and Love.
On the Worlds Stage, so let me act my part,
That the wise Head of Solomon, and Heart
Of David, may both seem to Crown my Art.
Opinion is an Empress; and Fame says,
At least three quarters or the World she sways.
Our Faults, our Friends, and our Instructions, we
Are strangely subject to forget those Three.
Of bad Examples, Satan's Baits, beware;
And shun them, as a Pestilential Air.
Our choicest Flowers we smell to most, and they
Soon breath their last; their Glories first decay.
Of a quick Friend, and a slow Enemy
Beware, and glozing Adulators fly.
Only those Noble Souls are truly free,
That can deny themselves their Liberty.
One great part of our life is swallowed by Death's brother,
Our Meals and Recreations, do devour another.
That part which we employ in worthy Works is small;
But smaller's that, wherein we serve Him, who gives all.
Opinion guides our Passions, and Affections,
And all our Fancies follow her Directions.
Our Time, our Wit, our Strength, we spend our Coin to gain,
And spend our Strength, Wit, Time, to spend that Coin in vain.
O, that I could invent some powerful Rhyme,
To make all Learners learn to prize their Time.
Of all the Birds whose Wings divide the Air,
Arabias Phaenix is the only Rare:
She, from the Ashes of her fragrant Urn,
Another Glorious Phaenix does return;
Which shows a supernatural Perfection,
And Typifies Man's happy Resurrection.
P
PRofess not what you know, you know not, for
All knowing Men will such a Man abhor,
Proportion is the Golden Rule, whence you
May learn what is fit to do, and not to do.
Pride and Ambition lend men Spreading wings
To Act the most ridiculous of Things.
Praise others, but deny your self, and then
Your Company will please Ingenious Men.
Procrastination dangerous was found,
Where quick-dispatch might the Event have Crowned.
Philosophers those thriving Seeds Sow, which
More than their own, do future Times enrich.
Presume not on Futuritie; Vexation
Most commonly attends Procrastination.
Pass not thy judgment on another end,
But inward look, and know, the Best may Mend.
Pity it is so many should enjoy
Learning, and yet their Talents not Employ.
Parents would have their Children Richly learn,
But Masters poor Rewards pinch that concern.
Praise some desire, when they dispraise deserve:
Thus worthless Fools their own vain humors serve.
Presume not on Life's length, Death, a young Lam
Bears to his Fold, as soon as an old Ram.
Praise or applause which from without we win,
Signifies nothing, if not Crowned within.
Pride, when her Plumes are spread in Pomp and Glory,
Forgets her Gallantry is transitory.
Prize, beyond western Gold, or Eastern Spice,
The Sole-advancing Treasures of advice.
Practice gives Motion to the Pen-mans hand,
Fair Writings Excellencies to command.
Pelion on Ossa, Sin on Sin we heap,
Yet though we sow so, so we would not Reap.
Philosophy Divine, court and recourt; She can
As man's above a Beast, mount man above a Man.
Prodigious Products from men's Acts we see;
From not fore-thinking what the Events might be.
Pity it is, that Heaven-born Charity,
Is grown of late so great a Rarity.
Poor Worms-meat, Soar not to the hight of State:
Humility is honors Palace Gate.
Pure Temperance a pure good Temper breeds;
But Gluttony all noysom Humors feeds.
Perform thy promise; keep within Faiths Bounds,
Who breaks his Word, his Reputation wounds.
Patience Disquiet calmes; charms Discontents;
And arms men's Minds against the worst events.
Prosperity first greets them with her Smiles,
And in the End, her Proselytes beguiles.
Praise, and dispraise, the Wise esteem alike;
One cannot Stroke them, nor the other Strike.
Prudence commands, that Silence we should break,
When we, than that can Something better Speak.
Pity it is, so many go to learn,
Who not so much as think of that Concern.
Q
QUickly are all those Sublunaries go^
Which we vain Mortals so (...)
Quickly therefore, their ^mpting (...)
Since they must go from us, or we from (...).
Questions profound, and dark Enigmas tend,
To exercise men's Brains, but to no end,
Qualms, qualms succeed; like as our Stomachs, so
Our Minds have Crudities that breed our Woe.
Quaint Outsides win on most Spectators Eyes:
Whilst real worth (ill clothed) neglected lies.
Quarles, quondam Poet, for rare Lines Divine,
Still wares fresh Laurels, still his Tapers shine.
Quintus Curtius Embalmed great Alexander's name,
Whose Pen from Age to Age, perpetuates his Fame.
Quintilian's Tongue, as in Fames Rolls appears,
Lead his admiring hearers by the Ears.
Quash Calumnies, defame the Defamations
Darted from Envious Tongues, at your Relations.
Quills into curious Pens are made, from whence
Letters flow, which make words, and words make sense.
Quilt Earth's vast Ball with Numbers, all imply
But Ciphers, to Immence Eternity.
Quotidian Practice may make this Employment,
Of Sublunary Things, your best Enjoyment.
Question not, but wise management of Time,
Will make your humble Fortunes more sublime.
Quoth Will, I am resolved revenged to be;
Quoth Wit, have patience, and be ruled by me.
Qualifications Virtuous and Pious,
Should be beloved, honored, and sought for by us.
Quit this Worlds Stage you must, when your part's played,
Get Earnest, timely, for a better laid.
Quarrelsom Natures meet their unkind Kind:
And commonly, what such Men seek, they find.
Quadrate with none whose Acts pronounce them base,
No Goodness springs from an ungodly Race.
Quadrunities high-priz'd, I wish these mine,
Good parts, good Books, good Friends, good store of Coin.
Quinsay, China's chief City, even Immense;
An hundred Miles is in Circumference.
Quote, in the Folio, of your best Affections,
Him, that is a faithful Friend without Objections.
Quality often for Sovereignty contends
With quantity, and her vast Bulk transcends.
Quietness, and Serene Contentment, are
The best Companions in this Mundane Sphere:
No Golden Fear, no heart-consuming Care,
Dare in their charming presence to appear;
All is sweet, safe, and sound within their Bounds;
No noise their Rest, no War their peace confounds.
R
RAnge the worlds VVildernesses; and you can
Find no such Beast of Prey, as man to man.
Rashness draws crooked, and un-artful Lines:
And is a Remora to brave Designs.
Reason and Learning much concern his pate,
Who from his Cradle is Illiterate.
Rouse up my flaming Genius, Heaven inspire
My Soul, with something of Etherial Fire.
Let all brave English Youths, who read these Lines,
Be even enchanted with my good Designs.
Let these their brave Heroic Spirits raise
To practice Virtue, and give Him the praise:
From the Influence of whose great Providence,
The Excellent derive their Excellence.
Reports, sometimes, which sland'rous Tougues have spread,
Have caused a difference 'twixt the Ears and Head.
Resolve; Revolve; Involve: Inform; Reform:
But keep God's Fort, your Conscience, from a Storm.
Rather depend upon your Fingers Ends,
Then fix your Expectations on your Friends.
Read Books, Men, Manners, Times, and you will confess,
That the World's Supreme Virtue is, Success.
Reason, Wit, Knowledge, all your parts present,
To Him, by whom they were but only lent.
Rather than be quite broke, wisely submit and Bend:
It Is mighty folly with the mighty to contend.
Religion is the Soul of Innocence,
Moving in an unspotted Conscience.
Rare ARTS with Care, and Pains, obtain and keep:
Into men's mouths they drop not, as they sleep.
Reason's the Pole Star, which directs the way,
To Navigate in this Worlds troubled Sea.
Rare Virtues Emanations far transcend the price,
Of the West Indies Gold, or the East Indies Spice.
Rich men are Poor, in covetous Conditions;
Poor men are Rich, in envious Dispositions.
Refuse to Act to Day, what may to morrow,
Procure your Torment, or at least your Sorrow.
Rage breaks down Reasons bounds; keeps no decorum:
Passions and Rage tumble down all before 'em.
Remuneration, like soft April Showers,
In Virtues May, produces Gallant Flowers.
Ransack the treasuring Casket of each Rock,
And keep the Key of that exhaustless Stock.
Let every Sun, still view the more Renowned,
Till thou the Worlds Grand Emperor art Crowned:
Then take thy Shadows length; see how much more
Its Mensuration exceeds that before.
S
SEcrets of Art by Industry are found,
Industrious Pains with noblest Gains are crowned.
Such as exalt themselves above the Skies,
In wise men's Thoughts, appear extremely wise.
Soul-saving Knowledge make thy grand Inquest,
What Signifies all Knowledge if not blessed?
Stars, Sands, and Sins, vast Numbers are, yet are
But Ciphers when God's Mercies we compare.
Such as delight in others Debts to run,
Have pleased themselves, till they have been undon.
Stars govern Men, but God sets Bounds and Bars,
To glorius Phoebus, Luna, and the Stars.
Some Lines Embryoder'd are, and some more plain:
Which shows that Mercury does not always reign.
Soul-plaguing Fears, Jealousy, and suspicion,
Reduce a man into a strange Condition.
Small Commendation serves to crown that Friend
Who is a Friend for Ends unto the end.
Sweeter than Civet smells industrious sweat:
Who takes no pains, he should no Panis Eat.
Suffering for Sin should breed no Discontent,
Since many have proved chaste by Chastisement.
Since every Meeting must a parting have,
Soul, soar to Heaven; sink Body to the Grave.
Since Riches, Honors, Pleasures, All we see,
Are but Enjoyments here, pro Tempore;
Let my poor Soul fix nobler hopes Above;
Where streams of Glory mix with Light and Love.
Soar not too high in Sublunary things,
For fear, lest yours should prove Icarian Wings.
Satan Imploys all Instruments he can,
To bring to ruin that poor Thing called Man.
Skie-scaling Groans from Contrite hearts ascend,
In favor to their never-ending End.
Sloth, without armed Armies, can Suprize,
All the Souls powers, and noble Faculties.
Sleep is Death's Picture, to the Life drawn forth,
Who sleeps too much, loses both wit and worth.
Small Friendship; less Reality is found,
Where fawning, feighing Complements abound.
Some, by the constant hands of Industry,
Outstrip the Wings of Ingenuity.
Sin's pleasure, like a flash, is quickly past,
But who can tell how long the Pain may last?
Sleep renders Nature brisk and brave, and tends
To the refreshing of Man's five best Friends.
Show me the man that has no Faults, and I
Will teach him, in the Air soon how to fly.
Some, by their Tongues accumulate such wrongs;
That they could after wish they would had no Tongues.
Sound sense in a short sentence, often we find,
More than high Raptures, to inform the Mind.
So live in every Station and Relation,
As that Salvation is your expectation.
Silver and Gold, though best Times scorned to own 'em,
Are of this last, worst Age, the Summum Bonum.
Still acquiesce in Providence Divine:
What Is not to day, to Morrow may be thine.
Sins Sinners minds enslave; blind the Souls Eyes:
But in God's Service perfect Freedom lies.
Sleep, though a kind of Death, Life's Life appears:
Revivifies the Brain, the Spirits chears.
Since a close Mouth makes a wise Head, do you,
Hear others talk, while you think what to do.
Some dare not live for fear of Death, and some
Dye to prevent the Evils that may come.
Such as their Minds to Curious Arts address,
Lay Earnest for the Worlds Chief happiness.
Strive to raise Monuments of lasting Fame:
And scorn that worthless Works should soil your name.
Saying, with those but little can persuade,
Who to believe by seeing, cannot be made.
Some think, and think so long what they would do,
That they lose both their thoughts and Actions too.
Small Pain constrains us to complain, but while
Contentment Smiles upon us, we can Smile,
So many men, so many Minds we find;
And every mind as fixed as the Wind.
Since Words the Minds most noble Clothing are;
And Words are best Embroydered with sense.
And Sense is best that shines with Eloquence;
And Eloquence is then most Rich and Rare,
When Tropes and Figures show its excellence.
With glittering Metaphors which beam from thence
These properties, let my Minds Vesture share.
T
TRuth's lucid Paths the sacred Scriptures show:
Who tread not them, trace Labyrinths of woe.
Time's but the short duration of a VVink,
When on Immence Eternity we think.
The want of sleep, which wildest Creatures tames,
Men to the height of Madness often inflames.
The noblest of examples imitate;
And let contentment crown thy blessed Estate.
To day we laugh and frolic, and to morrow,
We Grunt and Groan upon the Bed of sorrow.
It Is dangerous to be Great: proud Cedars bow,
With Storms which move not humble Shrubs below.
T'insult, or exsult over Misery,
Shows baseness mixed with inhumanity.
Those Lines which some may think impertinent,
By others will be thought most Excellent.
Time, Tide, and Carriers, with the flying Sun,
Will stay for no man, till their Race is run.
Think humbly of your self; no Commendation
Can mount you then, above your proper Station.
Time past who has forgot; neglects the present;
And fears the future, has lost all things pleasant.
The Serpents wiles to save your self, embrace;
And others not to harm give the Dove place.
The sacred Rules of Virtue bear small price,
With the unbounded, sordid Sons of Vice.
This is an observation true, though plain;
Those who most feast the Belly, starve the Brain.
The Soul's the Salt, which does the Body season,
And keep alive; and the Soul's Salt is Reason.
Though God be Omnipresent, men dare swear:
Were the King near them, they would then forbear.
The Life of Nature's given, that we might trace,
The happy footsteps to the Life of Grace:
Which Life of Grace, will crown those who persever,
Faithful till Death, with Glories Life, for ever.
Then your desires have reason to be crowned
With what you ask, when Reason is their Ground.
It Is not how many Arts, or curious Parts we have,
But how well we improve the Talent that God gave.
To none the secret Counsels of your mind
Communicate, for can you hope to find
One that has Will, and Power to do for you
What for your self, you your self could not do.
The Immaculate Fountain of all holiness,
Those most, who most resemble Him, will bless.
The Pen all curious Instruments transcends;
And, in its usefulness, it self commends.
No need of swelling, high Encomiums, then
To Trumpet forth the praises of the Pen:
This does, like Virtue, its own Trophies raise,
Sublimely high, beyond the reach of praise.
Times change, and we in them: both Men and Nations
Their Zeniths have, before their Declinations.
The Youth's Letter from the Writing School, etc.
These, honored Parents, are but small Effects,
Of your great Love, and manifold Respects.
These few unpolished Lines cannot express,
The thousand part of my due thankfulness
For your least favors; yet if these you grace,
W^ ^cceptation; I, in Writings Race
Shall run more swift, by that encouragement,
And, in short time, some nobler Piece present.
There is no virtue in the rarest Pen,
Which VVriting to Perfection can Produce:
Nor in the hand; that member, which to men,
Is in all works, of admirable use.
Though each of these in Writing, bears his Part,
Yet the grand Fountain whence it flows, is Art.
V
VIrtues Celestial, Soul-refreshing Light,
Vice may Ecclips, but not extinguish quite.
Valor, for Honor; Grace, for Glory calls:
Brave Heroes Fames survive their Funerals.
Vain Mortals, it becomes you not to move,
Your Tongues, concerning what is decreed above.
Violence, when full Growth she does acquire,
Leaps forth, like Thunder, wrapped in Balls of fire.
Virtue, though clad in Rags, may challenge more,
Than Vice adorned with Silks, in midst of store.
Unto your Sense this Sentence still apply,
That there is no Poison like bad company.
Use Prudence, Temperance, and Moderation:
Shun Commendation, and hate Ostentation.
Virtues heroic Sons will act their Parts;
Not fearing thousands of cursed Envies Darts.
Vices, which with their tempting Smiles invite,
Conceal their Teeth, wherewith they after bite.
Virtues Tryumphant Chariot (which now groans
Under Oppressures) shall break Envies Bones.
Vainly we Dream, as vainly Act our Dreams;
And vainly think we parallel Supreams.
Voluptuous, course, Sensual Delights,
Obstruct the winged Souls Celestial Flights.
Vane in our heads, and in our hearts too, vain;
We like not Things, however good, if Plain.
Virtue and Truth are amicitial Mates;
Virtue all postures of Impostors hates.
Valiant he does approve himself, and wise,
Who with a brave disdain, slights Injuries.
Virtue hates Fucos, Patches and perfumes,
Dust, mixed with Sweat; that painting she assumes.
Vain Glories Emblem is a blazing Taper;
Whose short-lived Snuff ends in a noysom vapor.
Virtue that is her own Noble Satisfaction,
Is allways busied in the Shop of Action.
Vices, which seem to lie within concealed,
Are, by our words and Actions, soon revealed.
Virtues vast worth transcends all Earths best Treasures,
She Is Honors honor, and the Soul of pleasures.
Vanish beneath my thoughts; vain worldly Toys:
Mount, mount my Soul, to Heavens Eternal joys.
Vexation makes a Man by transformation,
The strangest Creature in the whole creation.
Untamed youths, for want of good Tuition,
Plunge into Shoreless, Soundless, Seas of Vice.
But to Ingenious Lads, Learnings Fruition,
Is a Soul-chearing, fruitful Paradise.
The one produces naught but weeds and Tares;
All delectable Fruits, the other bears.
W
WIsdom descends from the bright Orbs above,
To Teach her Children how to live in Love
Whose, where, and what thou art, consider well
And think on Death and Judgment, Heaven and Host.
When Pleasing Zephyrus-salutes us, we
For Blustering Boreas should preparing be
Who Writes, or Paints, or Carves; or, and quid non;
Where is the Man that thinks himself out-gon?
Who Idolize themselves, themselves desame;
And when they gape for Honor, meet with Shame.
What signife vast piles of well-wrote Books,
To him that on them, but not in them looks.
Why vainly Learn we what we must unlearn,
And mind Concerns, which do not us concern.
Who waits for others Shoes (it is well known)
Had need to keep a Coblar for his own.
Who mind their Business well, may spare with ease,
Some hours for Recreation, when they please.
Who gives thee Learning, acts a Nobler Deed,
Than he that does thy Body Cloth and feed.
Who in their Youth refused to be taught,
To numerous Endammagements are brought.
Who Is, ab origene, a faithful Friend,
Honor commands to hold out to the End.
What we can suffer for that Friend is small,
Who once was pleased to suffer for us all.
Well to consider how ill Husbands fare,
Would make a man bad husbandry forswear.
When Friends we need not, than our Friends abound;
But when we want Friends, then few Friends are found.
While here Mortality does us invest,
The best of Men will prove but men at best.
Why should the Drunkard strive his Acts to smoother,
Drink runs but from one Hogshead to another.
Wine, Women, Cards and Dice, with Hawks and Hounds,
Reduce men's vast Estates to Lesser bounds.
When Men make Presents to the best of Kings,
They wisely should present the best of Things.
Wealth pampers Pride and Luxury, till they
Their liberal Master to the Grave betray.
When to the World you others faults make known,
Ingeniously reflect upon your own.
What would Poor man without Gods mercies be?
Alas! but a sad Map of Misery.
When I a Servant had, I had one then:
When two, I had but half a one; and when
I had three Servants, I had none at all.
Thus was I served, by one, two, three, and all.
Why hope you for your Friend's large Legacy,
He makes his Will; but not his will to dye.
What Difficulty can we undertake,
Where true Affection will not conquest make?
What signify the VVarrier's daring Pains,
If prudence keeps not what his Valor gains.
Who makes his Mark the Moon, much further he
May Shoot, than he that levels at a Tree.
Who knows how soon an interposing Cloud,
May from our view, our smiling Sunbeams shroud.
What Things by studious care a man does find,
In curious Arts, lodge longest in the mind.
When Lands and Friends are gone, and wealth takes wing,
Then Learning's prized, then Learning's a brave thing.
Where Beauty, Virtue, and true grace do meet,
The harmony is admirably Sweet.
Worth, too base minds is Envies propagation:
But in Heroic Souls, gains Emulation.
Who would build honors Temple, large and high,
Must, for foundation, take Humility.
Wealth, Pleasure, Life it Self, all move beneath,
The Sphere, where Fames perfumes their Glories breath.
Where Reason, Will, and Power, all comply
With heavenly wisdom, there is rare Harmony.
Where Education does adorn
The Minds of Children Nobly Born,
They seem of an Angellick Race.
But where good Education wants,
To be Engrafted in young Plants,
It renders them extremely base.
Who of his Business makes a Recreation,
Is in the way of Wealth and Reputation.
But who a Business makes of Recreation,
May bid a dew to Wealth and Reputation.
What without Care and Pains can we effect,
Whose Excellency may deserve respect.
X
XEnophon writes, that even the Gods above,
Delight with men, in Friendships Orb to move.
Xerxes, from a steep Mountains lofty Brow,
Surveyed his hundred thousand Men below;
And wept, to think that in an Age they All
By the impartial hand of Death must fall.
But, after this vast Army did Engage,
Few days dispatched the Business of an Age.
Xenocrates did prudently divide,
Into proportionable parts, each day;
Which parts particularly, he applied;
And One, wherein to study what to say
He did assign; which gives us information,
VVisely to use mature Premeditation.
Y
YOu Parents, who your hopes on Children place,
Teach them betimes to run in Virtues Race.
Your precious Time wisely to day employ,
Who knows what he to morrow may enjoy?
You want what you desire, but let this serve,
That you enjoy far more than you deserve.
Your Tallent came from a Celestial Donor:
Endeavor to improve it to his Honor.
Your want of high-flown Ingenuity,
By constant Care, and Industry supply.
You Will find, when you their Vizor-Masks remove,
Such as are shameless, seldom blameless prove.
Yield not to sleeps intoxicating Charms;
Rowze up, and vanquish him by force of arms.
Your Conscience, keep serene, and fear not then,
The most Calumnious, Envious Tongues of men.
Your Tongue command, to the command of Reason:
Know when to speak, and when to spare, in Season.
Your Memory store with Philology,
And all the various sorts of History.
You Mammonists, in what plight shall we find you,
When Death says, Come, and leave your Bags behind you,
You Parents, who a happy Crop would Mow;
Betimes, in Children, Virtues Seeds must Sow.
Your Friend, at first to Council deaf; do you
That worthy Office, to persuade, renew.
Yet Providence presents fair Opportunities,
Which you may take and Live, and Thrive, if you be wise.
Your Memory with choicest Treasures Store:
Thieves cannot make the Rich in knowledge, poor.
You that lie wind-bound in the port of Sorrow,
May be set free, by a fresh Gale, to morrow,
Young Impudence, suffered to run to Seed,
Will spoil the Stock, and poison all the Breed.
You must account for it, it is to be presumed,
Who have in pass-time you time past consumed.
Your Arts, your Parts, your Wisdom and your worth,
Are out of Fashion; Coyne's the God of the Earth.
Your Body, Feed, Cloth, Comfort, and supply;
Yet let your Soul maintain the Sovereignty.
Youthful Discretion is a true presage,
In most, of Learned, honorable Age.
Young men, have ever more a special Care,
That Feminine Enchantments prove no Snare.
You here, our choicest Monograms may scan,
Where man is fairly pictured forth to Man.
Yesterdays Loss, strive to repair to day;
Let your swift Will run equal to your power:
A Traveller that rides out of his way,
Loses two hours, in riding but one hour.
And if he turns not, by Directions force,
He may lose more, and tire himself and Horse.
Your prudent providence let Ants engage:
In Summer, mind the VVinter of your Age.
Z
ZEno, by Silence, made the Follies known
Of others, and thereby concealed his own.
Zeal without Knowledge does the Judgment taint;
Although the Zelot thinks himself a Saint.
Zenobia reigns as Empress over choice Wits,
On Arts resplendant Throne Eugenia Sits.
Zealously run for Virtues Crown of Bays:
Which having gained, present to Heaven the praise.
Zant, an Ionian Isle, us Currants sends,
With which we please our Palats and our Friends.
Zones, Lines and Tropicks the great World can bound;
But for the less no Limits can be found.
Zeuxes, was rare at Colors, and at Shapes;
So rare, that Birds peckt at his painted Grapes.
Zephyrus, now our Roses has full blown,
And now their fragrant Glories forth are flown;
And now to the wide world they shall be known.
Zeal mounts the Soul above the rapid Spears;
And, even the Invisible, to Faith, appears.
Zenith's the highest point of Fortunes wheel;
From whence her Favorites must fall that reele.
Zealously prove true honesty's true Friend,
For that will prove best Policy in the End.
Zeal for the Public Good made me Engage,
Thus to new file this rusty Iron Age,
Zoylus, and Momus, with their numerous Train,
Will view these Operations, and complain.
That Ink, which might have drawn forth Nobler Lines,
Should be employed in these, so mean Designs.
Let Zoylus carp; let Momus bark; let all
Their vast Retinue spit their Spleen and Gall:
While Sun, and Moon, the day and Night command,
These Lines their Authors Monuments shall stand.
FINIS.

