A FRUITFUL AND USEFUL DISCOURSE TOUCHING The Honor due from Children to
Parents, and the duty of Parents toward their Children.

WHEREIN, Both the Respective duties of Children to Parents, and of Parents to
Children, are cleared from Scripture, together with what may either further or
hinder the same; And the failings and sins of either against the other;
together with the manifold causes thereof, are discovered; which are
accordingly applied and pressed.

By Thomas Cobbet Minister of the Word at Lyn in New England.

Ephesians. 6 2 Honor thy Father and thy Mother (which is the first Commandment
with promise.)

Verse. 3. That it may be well with thee, and that thou may, live long upon
the earth.

Verse. 4. And ye Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath but bring them up
in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

Levit. 19. 3. Ye shall fear every man his Mother, and every man his Father. --

LONDON, Printed by S. G. for John Rothwell, at the Bear and Fountain in
Cheap Side. 1656.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THis discourse was at first intended only for the private use of our own
Congregation; but by the request of some, it is now coming into public view,
and so to thy hand. When the seed was first sown here, the Lord was pleased to
give a blessed hansell of his grace, and some sprinklings of first fruits
thereof: may he now please to bless the produce of that seed, which now is
scattering in a large field, with a more plentiful harvest-blessing in thy
heart in special, and in hearts of many others, by thy means, the unworthy
seeds-man shall account himself well appayed, and abundantly rewarded.
According as the subject persons firstly concerned in the discourse, are all
sorts of persons, standing in the relation of children, and so children in
years also, as well as persons of riper Age, so the style and phrase is
familiar and plain: children needing no such high-flown, quaint, and new-coyned
words as are even too much in use, now adays, both in Press and Pulpit; but
rather the plainest expressions, and easiest to be understood. Only remember
also, Courteous Reader, that under the notion of children, in the discourse,
are understood, all such as are in the relation of children, whether Adult
persons, or children in Age; thou may also, Christian Reader, frequently
meet with the very same Scriptures quoted in the discourse, but let not that
offend thee, since for thy benefit, those rich veins of spiritual mine, are
but further searched into, to find out yet more and more treasure, according as
there is various need, and use thereof; and those lively Oracles of God are
often consulted withal, to see what further of the Lords mind they hold forth,
in variety of Cases. The main heads also of the discourse, they are obvious to
every eye, touched upon by diverse expositors upon the Commandments, and hinted
also in many worthy Catechises: but neither let this be any stumbling block to
thee, but peruse this discourse also, and read it over with a teachable heart;
and thou may find (I trust, through grace) some peculiar blessing superadded
by the Lord, even upon this discourse also. Who knows not, that man's dull and
deceitful heart, will not oftimes be moved with generals, and common heads of
holy doctrine, or practice, lightly touched upon, but when drawn out into
particulars, and those being distinctly handled, wisely applied, and strongly
urged and pressed upon the conscience, the strong holds of sin and Satan, in
man, come to be thrown down, through the power of God accompanying the same;
every deceitful reasoning of man's heart is met withal, and refuted; and every
high thing in man, which did formerly exalt it self against Christ, is, by
grace, captivated and subdued. Surely, if the plain matters herein discoursed
of, may have that privilege, in reference to the soul, which meats of more
common and ordinary use have, in respect to the body, namely to nourish most,
and to breed the best blood, the discourse will attain one special end
thereof. The subject of this discourse (Christian Reader) it is, in the naturo
thereof, Oeconomicall, respecting the Family, specially; but in the
consequences and concernments thereof, it may not be unfitly termed.
Political, yea Ecclesiastical; as that, namely which very nearly respects,
and concerns the welfare of State and Church. The glorious creator of all
things, having abundance of Spirit, he could at first, and at once, have made
millions of people, who might presently have constituted civil states and
Churches also: but he chose that course rather, to lay the foundations both of
State and Church, in a family, making that the Mother Hive, out of which both
those swarms of State and Church, issued forth. And as he begun both State and
Church Entitative and Essential, in Adams Family; so, when God himself would
institute a more complete and Organick Church, and Commonwealth, he laid the
foundations of both in the Family of Abraham, and Isaac, especially of Jacob;
the Original Family of all, consisting of Parents and Children, firstly; then
of Masters and Servants nextly. The original then of State and Church being
the Family, they are both, in that respect, concerned in it; yea as the Family
is an Original to States and Churches, in their Essentials, so also in their
Morals, in their manners. As that Nursery is better or worse, and the plants
thereof of more or less worth, so are both the Orchards of State and Church,
(Cantic. 4. 12.) which are thence stored with Trees, better or worse, and their
fruits more or less wholesome; if that School be but well ordered, and the
lesser Scholars in it well principled and grounded, (Prove. 4. 4.) those which
afterward come to be made use of, for more eminent use and service, in State
and Church, they will be the more precious ornaments to them both; if that
lesser Artillery Company of Trained Persons (Genesis 14. 14.) be but well looked
after and managed, the Commanders, and File-leaders, which issue thence, into
those greater Armies of State, (Job. 29. 25.) and of Church, (Cantic. 6. 4.)
they commonly prove more famous in their Achievements and exploits. As the
waters at that wel-head of State and Church, are more or less pure or wholesome,
bitter or sweet, so are they usually of like sort, in those streams of State
and Church, which borrow their Original and supply from that spring, Numb. 24.
7. And Oh that the Lord would so far bless this discourse, that it might become
isntrumental to the healing of any naughty waters, of any such springs; as
sometimes he did of that at Jericho, by means of Elishas casting of Salt
thereinto, (2 Kings 2. 21, 22.) that there might be no more such spiritual
death and barrenness, as is chiefly occasioned in Church and State, by
corruptions in the Family, in these declining and degenerating days.
Something, no doubt, is amiss in parents, something in Children; both may hence
have healing, if the Lord but speak the word; with him therefore I leave this
my poor endeavor, and unto him and to his grace I commend thee, Christian
Reader, resting,

Thine in him, THOMAS COBBET.
Lyn in New England, this 1. of November. 1654.
The heads of the Chapters; the particular Contents whereof stand in the Margin
of the Book, at their proper places they refer to.
Chap. 1. Of the Explication of the fifth Commandment.
Where 1. The Terms of the fifth Commandment are explaned: and it is showed
that by Father and Mother are principally intended, all natural parents, in
general; and such who are in covenant and Church estate, in special; and
that, By Honor is understood both Honor in general and Honor in special,
both in a direct way, as honor of Respect, of Reverence, of Obedience, of
Recompense.
in a reflect way: in being such, and carrying of it so, as makes for parents,
especially good parents, honor.

2. The weight of the duty of honor of parents is showed.

Chap. 2. Of Honor in general due to Parents.
Where Is showed Negatively: what honor is not due to parents. Affirmatively:
what Honor is due to parents.
Use is made for Reproof Of Childrens dishonouring of parents: instancing in 7.
ways whereby it is done, and 4. mischiefs attending it. Of Parents undermining
that their honor: and that 7. ways. Of corrupters of youth.
Examination, where are 5. marks given of due honor given to parents.
Exhortation To parents, to further this their honor: and that 7. ways. To
Children, to give parents that honor, where are Motives 6. Helps 7.




Chap. 3. Of Honor of Respect due to Parents.
Where It is set forth as consisting in eight things. Use is made for- Reproof
Of Childrens unnaturalness to Parents. Of parents too much occasioning the
Alienation of their childrens hearts from them; and that 5. ways.
Exhortation To children to cherish due respects to parents; where are
propounded Motives. 3. Helps. 5. Cautions.
To parents to carry it so as may win respect from Children: and that 5. ways.



Chap. 4. Of Honor of Reverence due to parents.
Where Is set forth -- The outward Reverence due, in 7. things. The inward
Reverence due, in 7. things.
Use is made for Reproof Of Childrens Irreverence to parents. Of parents
undermining that Filial Reverence: 4. ways,
Exhortation To Children to Reverence parents, where are Motives 3. Helps 3.
To parents to further filial Reverence; and that six ways.



Chap. 5. Of Honor of Obedience due to Parents.
Where It is set forth as consisting in 5. things. The manner of it is showed
in 5. particulars. Three Reasons are given for it, Use is made for Reproof Of
Childrens Merely pretended Obedience, Disobedience.
Of parents occasioning childrens disobedience: and that 3. ways.
Examination: where are given 6. marks of true and due filial obedience.
Exhortation To parents to further due filial obedience; and that six ways. To
Children to yield that obedience: where are Motives 6. Helps 5.




Chap. 6. Of Honor of Recompense due to Parents.
Where It is set forth as consisting especially in 5. things. The manner of it
also is showed. 4. Reasons of it are given, Use is made for Reproof, of
Childrens ingratitude in General, 4. Particulars.
Exhortation To Parents, to further that Filial gratitude; and that 5. ways,
To Children, to recompense Parents gratefully: where are 3. Motives. 2. Helps.
3. Cautions. 3. Marks.




Chap. 7. Of Honor in a reflect way due to Parents; or of childrens being
such, and carrying of it so, as makes for even Godly Parents Honor.
Where It is set forth as consisting in 10. things: the two later whereof are
most urged. 2. General Reasons are given thereof: in which are sundry
particulars. Use is made for Reproof Of Parents, too much furthering Childrens
dishonorable carriages and courses, and that 6. ways. Of Childrens reflecting
dishonor upon Parents, yea and godly Parents; yea and some of those Children
formerly hopefully good, which is done many ways, the last of them, namely
degeneration of the Children of the godly being largely urged: wherein are
showed The Evils attending such degeneration: and those both Of Sin and In
Children of the godly in general, and that in 6. things In hopeful ones in
special, and that in 8. things.
Of sorrow: where respecting the Former sort are 7. Later sort are 5.



Exhortation To Parents to further their Childrens being an honor to them in
the chiefest ways thereof, which parents do, five ways; but the first is most
insisted upon, namely good Education of Children, -- where are Rules 7. Motives
4.
To Children to strive to be such an honor to parents in the best way --
Herein are Motives 3. Helps 3.




AN EXPOSITION OF THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT SHOWING The principal duties of
Children to Parents, firstly therein intended: and what God also requires, in
regard thereof, from Parents toward their children.
CHAP. I.
OF the weight of the duty of Childrens Honoring of their Parents. Exodus 20.
12. Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee. The words which I have Read, are obvious to
every common eye, and intelligible by every ordinary understanding, and
therefore time need not be spent in any large opening of any obscurity of
phrase in them. The parts of the Text also are as plainly manifest to be two:
First, a Precept, Honor thy Father, and thy Mother] Secondly, a promise
encouraging to obey that precept: that thy days may be long in the Land which
the Lord thy God gives thee.] In the precept you have, First, the duty it self
enjoined, Honor,] Secondly, the persons to whom the duty is enjoined, even the
children to these Fathers and Mothers; yea each Child, of what rank or
condition soever, who is yet in the Land of the living, is required to perform
this duty to living Father and Mother: and therefore it is put in the second
person singular; Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, that thy days may be long,
etc.] Thirdly, the persons, who by divine command are to be honored by each
Child, namely, each Child's Father, yea, and as well, each Child's Mother: Honor
thy Father, and thy Mother.] The main terms then to be further considered of
are, First, that of Father and Mother. Secondly, that of Honor; and then we
shall briefly explain the promise. By Father and Mother, most interpreters
understand all superiors. First, such as are above others, yet without
Authory, properly, over them; as such as are others superiors, by much, in
years; as are Ancient men and women, to those that are young, 1 Timothy 5. 1. or
such as are others betters, by much, in eminency of parts, powesse, experience,
bounty, grace, etc. Genesis 45. 8. Job. 31. 18. 1 Chronicles. 4. 14, 21. 2 Rings 13.
14, 15. Secondly, such as are others superiors, having Authority over them,
whether private: And that either by the Law of nature, as natural Fathers Who
are firstly here intended by Father and Mother: even natural Parents.
and Mothers, who are principally here intended: Or by way of private contract,
as Husbands who are wives superiors: specially Masters, whether in the Family,
2 Kings 5. 13. or in the School, and College, 2 Kings 2. 12. who are as Fathers
to to their Servants, Scholars, and Pupils. Or Secondly public: even such as
have more public Authority over others; either in the Commonwealth, as civil
Rulers, Esaias 22. 21. 1 Samuel 24. 12. or in the Church, as Church officers
teaching and ruling, Acts 22. 1. Judge. 18. 19. 2 Kings 6. 21. Now though with
Musculus, I will not restrain the meaning of the 5th Commandment, as only
intending natural Fathers and Mothers, and the honor due to them from their
Children; yet because it is undeniable to all, that these are principally
intended here, and the other only in a second place and respect, I shall
therefore, (God willing) in the ensuing discourse, attend to that, as firstly
and mainly aimed at here, and plainly, and simply expressed in the very letter
of the Text.

Touching the other word, Honor: It is to be What is meant by Honor Even,
considered both in general, and in a restrained sense. All meet honor, and
every kind of regular honor, being due from Children to Parents, The Lord does
not say, love thy Father, and thy Mother, or fear them, or obey them, or
recompense them, or be an honor to them: any one of these being too narrow, to
reach so large a duty, as parentall relations call for from their children, and
each of these being separable from the other, and may be in other relations,
where all the other are not so properly requisite; yet no one of these are
excluded, but all, and every of them included in the notion of Honor. Filial
Honor is the center wherein they all meet, and whence again they are all drawn
out to their respective objects, Father and Mother. Filial honor must season
them, each must savor of Honor. Filial Honor must regulate them all; they
must go so far as that goes, and no further. Filial honor Honor in the
General, and Honor in special, both
must be their common stamp, the impression whereof, each must bear. Due Filial
honor must be their touchstone, by which they must receive their trial.

Honor then in the General is Parents due from their children. So is Honor
in special; whether that which is more direct, or that which is in a more
reflect way.

Honor in a direct way is, in Scripture language, 1. Direct,
fourfold; even Honor, First, of Respect, Secondly, of Reverence, Thirdly, of
Obedience, Fourthly, of Recompense; and are all and each of them included in
this general term, Honor.

1. Honor of high Respect and love is understood as 1. Honor of Respect.
in that, Psalm. 15. 4. He honors them that fear the Lord: that is, he highly
esteems, and respects, he most dearly loves and affects them. 1 Timothy 5.
17. The Elders that Rule well, count them worthy of double Honor, i. e. of
respect, as well as that of Recompense. 1 Pet. 3. 7. Giving Honor to them, as
to the weaker vessels, i. e. having a tender respect to them. 2 Samuel 6. 22. Of
them shall I be had in Honor, i. e. highly esteemed, respected, and entirely
beloved. So here, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, i. e. highly prise and
respect, and most dearly love thy Father and thy mother, yea so as it be in a
way of Honor to them as Parents, and not barely as others, not so nearly
related.

2. Honor is taken in Scripture for Honor of Reverence and fear. So when God
speaks of 2. Honor of Reverence.
his Honor, as to a Master, he calls it fear, Mal. 1. 6. if I am a Master,
where is my fear? or Honor as a Master; hence that of Saul to Samuel, 1 Samuel
15. 30. Yet Honor me before the people; or let the people see that thou do
reverence me. Hence that Levit. 19. 32. honor the face of the old man, i. e.
reverence it. So here, Honor thy Father and thy Mother i. e. reverence and awe
them, in an honorable way to them as Parents, and not as others merely, not so
nearly related.

3. Honor is taken in Scripture, for Honor of 3. Honor of Obedience.
Obedience. So Mat. 1. 6 if I am a Father, where is my Honor? i. e. of
obedience. It being spoken to those, Respectless, Awless, and also disobedient
Priests and People there mentioned. So Ephesians. 6. 1. to prove that Children should
obey their Parents in the Lord, the Apostle brings in the fifth Commandment,
v. 2. Honor thy Father and thy Mother: because if to Honor Father and Mother
then to obey them, for obedience is, in part, the honor due to them; only they
are to obey them, so as Honor of Parents may be seen, and read, as in large
Characters, in all the Acts and passages of that obedience.

4. Honor is taken in Scripture, for Honor of 4. Honor of Recompense.
Recompense, and thankfulness. Numb. 22. 37. cannot I Honor, or recompense
thee Honorably (says Balack to Balaam) It is the same Hebrew word with this
in Exodus 20. 12. Judge. 13. 17. That when this is come to pass, I may Honor
thee, (i. e.) make thee some grateful recompense. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Count them
worthy of double Honor, i. e. that of Recompense, as well as that of respect.
So here, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, 2. Reflect Honor, or being an
Honor to them, and carrying of it so, as makes for Parents Honor.
i. e. as they need, and as thou art able, and have opportunity, make them
thankful recompense, only so as all may be as Honor to them, as Parents, and
not in the least savouring, or holding forth any dishonor to them.

Honor in a Reflect way, is to be such, or to carry it so, as may redound to
another Honor, whom we are bound to Honor. 1 Samuel 15. 30. Honor me before
the people, i. e. carry it so before them, as may not redound to my disgrace,
but honor. So in that also: if I am a Father, where is my Honor? Mal. 1. 6.
i. e. why are not you, as my Children, an Honor to me, and not such a
dishonor to my name, that my holy name and ordinances suffer reproach, and
contempt by you; or why do not you carry it more honorably, so as may make for
my honor, and not so basely, as makes for my great dishonor. Ester. 6 6. The
man whom the King will honor, (i. e.) enact and do something, making for his
Honor. Judge. 13. 17. that I may do thee Honor, i. e. do something, making for
thine Honor. It is the same Hebrew word, and in the same conjugation with this
verb in Exodus 20. 12. So here, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, i. e. be an
honor to them, carry it so, as may redound to their honor, and no way to
their disgrace.

The promise follows, [That thy days The promise explained.
may belong in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee] this further
declares who are firstly concerned in the precept; namely, such whose God the
Lord is in special sort, such like as the Jews, to whom this land was first
solemnly promulged, as in Exodus 20. is expressed: who were a people in
especial Covenant with God, children of God, and of the Church, and of the
Covenant: who professed to look, not for a Portion in this world, so much as by
that Land of promise to be led to a more spiritual and heavenly Canaan and
rest, of which that earthly Canaan was but a shadow, Heb. 4. though this Law
being given to Adam in innocence, and engraven in his heart, and the rootstep,
and impression of it being yet left in the hearts of all men, by nature, and
being one of Gods Moral Laws, it binds all and every Child of man, one or
other, in general and in particular. In this promise, he does not say, that thy
life may be long in the world, but that thy days may be long in the Land which
the Lord thy God gives thee; which to the Jews was the Land of Canaan, to
others, the Land of their possession, wherein, if honourers of Parents,
children shall live long, if good for them; or if ordered by God to live less
while, they shall have the blessing of long life. And so much for explication
of the words; the doctrine which we shall (through divine Assistance) prosecute
is this.

That children Honor their Parents; It is a duty The main doctrine. The weight
of the duty of Honor of Parents proved.
of greatest moment and concernment.

Let us first evince the weightiness of this duty, and then more fully handle
the duty it self.

Four reasons, amongst many, may be given to prove the weight of this duty,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother.

1. Because it is placed by the Lawgiver himself 1. Because next in order to
the Commandments of the first Table, and before the Commandments of the
second Table.
immediately next to the commandments of the 1. Table, as next in order to
them, and before all the other Commandments of the 2. Table, as in order of
duty, and dignity, preceding the same. It is made a sweet closure, bond, and
sementing to both Tables, binding and fastening each to other inviolably, and
inseparably. As this is more fast or loose; so are men's spirits more girt to
the duties of both Tables, or more loose from them. He that conscientiously
honors his Parents, he is assuredly conscientious of honoring of God, in
the first place, and his Parents for conscience sake unto the Lord* Piety to
Godward, as a cause, precedeth, in him, to this blessed duty, piety toward
Parents, as to its effect. And therefore the Lord does not without cause style
the duty of Children to Parents, by the name of piety, 1 Timothy 5. 4. let them
learn of show piety to them at home, and to requite their Parents; Piety being
in the root, it is piety in the fruit, yea this blessed fruit, is a furthering
means also, to promove all the acts of piety, which spring out of that root; if
Children honor their Parents fully, and as they ought, they will, in
observance of their Parents counsels and commands, be more careful of
whatsoever God commands, respecting the first or second Table: hence that for
the first Table, Levit. 19. 3. Ye shall fear every man his Mother, and every
man his Father, and keep my Sabbaths, where under the notion of Gods Sabbaths
kept, not alone the observation of the Sabbath it self is understood, but, as
in Scripture language, the whole worship of God is meant; So Esaias 56. 4. the
Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, i. e. observe my whole worship; so Ezekiel. 44.
24. so Ezekiel. 20. 24. despising and polluting his Sabboths, is despising and
polluting his worship: hence that is there added -- and their eyes are toward
their Idols. Observable it is also, that in Levit. 19. 2. God says, be ye
holy, as I am holy, and then adds verse 3. ye shall fear every man his
Mother, and his Father; From that piety, originally springs this: yet again
annexeth to this, ye shall keep my Sabbaths. In the Decalogue, that is first,
Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath: and then, Honor thy Father, and thy
Mother. Here it is, Fear every man his Mother, and his Father, and keep my
Sabbaths; that Radical piety being laid in the heart, now this other piety,
exceedingly furthereth the exercise of particular acts of piety toward God;
one pious toward Parents, will be careful of all natural worship, to call
upon God, to love him, to fear him, and to put his trust in him, required in
the 1. Commandment; he will conscientiously observe all Gods instituted
worship, avoiding all worship of men's inventing, according to the tenor of the
2. Commandment; he will reverently, and faithfully improve Gods attributes,
titles, words, and works, avoiding the contrary abuse thereof, as it is
enjoined in the 3. Commandment; he will also as faithfully, and fruitfully
sanctify the Lords days, resting from the works of his calling, and
especially from vain sports, which is that which the 4. Commandment requires:
the like may be said of the Commandments of the 2. table, which will all be
duly attended, if this duty of the fifth Commandem. be faithfully observed;
both are employed in that place (of which we shall make much use in this
discourse) Genesis 18. 19. I know Abraham, that he will command his children, --
and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do judgment and justice; if
Abraham's children honor his parentall Authority, so that they are at his
command, then they keep the way of the Lord, then they do judgment and
justice; whatsoever path, God chalketh out for them to walk in toward God, or
toward men, they will be keeping in it. And indeed, who better servants, in
that relation, to Masters, then those that were good children to Parents? who
more obedient subjects to lawful Authority, and Fathers of the Commonwealth,
then such as learned and practiced filial obedience to Parents, at home? who
more respective to Ministers, then those that were, and are conscientiously
respective to good Parents? who more tender of their own, and others lives and
healths, of their own and others chastity, of their own and others estates and
names, avoiding the contrary evils, to a very sinful motion looking that way,
then such as have been Conscientious honourers of their Parents? hence, on the
contrary, dishonor of Parents is made a Ring-leading sin, a very spring and
root of manifold wickedness. Ezekiel. 22. 7. when the Prophet would charge upon
all sorts in Jerusalem, their most notorious crimes, he begins thus, In thee
have they set light by Father and Mother: and then goes on, in the midst of
thee have they dealt by oppression with the stranger, in thee have they vexed
the fatherless and widow. Ibid. thou have despised mine holy things, and have
profaned my Sabbaths, verse 8. In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood,
verse. 9. In verse. 10. 11. he charge them with horrid fleshly filthiness, in
verse. 12. with Bribery, Usury, Extortion, etc. if therefore the bond of the
fifth Commandment be broken, men rush upon breach of the sixth Commandment,
witness their bloodiness mentioned, v. 9. upon breach of the seventh
Commandment, witness their filthiness instanced in verse. 10. 11. upon breach
of the eighth Commandment, witness their oppression, usury, bribery,
extortion, v. 12. upon breach of the nineth Commandment, witness their
carrying of tales to shed blood, v. 9. yea upon breaches of all the
Commandments of the first Table, witness their despising the holy things of
God, and profaning his Sabbaths, v. 8. Deuteronomy. 21. 20. the Parents are brought in
complaining, This our Son is stubborn, he will not obey our voice, he is a
glutton and a drunkard. It is no wonder that children who honor not Parents,
are given to those, or to any other vices, to which loose and lewd companions
will readily draw them. Surely it is justly to be feared, to be too much our
case in New England, where many of the youth grow so rude and profane, so
regardless of Superiors, in the family, as masters, in the State, as
Magistrates, in the Church, as Elders: where many of them are so vainly given,
so loose in their company, so proud, and supercilious in their carriages, so
newfangled in their fashions, and ruffianly in their hair, nay jearers, many
of them, at the best persons and things, in a word, where is so little yet
appearing of God, or good, in too many of them; I say it is justly to be
feared, that children here are not honourers of Parents. Here Parents are
commonly put more to it, to make use of their childrens hands and help, and so
children here being naturally apt to count too much upon what they do for
Parents, they are as apt to set the more light by them, and by their
instructions, and admonitions, and so an open way is made thereby to any other
wickedness amongst them. Hence also malefactors, when at the Gallows they have
made their dying Confessions, they have laid on hardest upon this sin, as the
rise of those which brought them at length to that sad end, that they regarded
not their Fathers, they despised their Mothers, were unruly, and disobedient
Children to their Parents; Ah, will some then say, the good counsels which our
fathers, or our mothers gave us, but, wretches that we were, we would never
hearken to them, nor regard them. Let all good people take warning by us, and
let all young men or women that hear us, for ever take heed, by our example,
how you despise your Parents, or slight their Counsels, or rebukes.

The second reason is taken from the law and 2. Because this is made of such
weight by the Law and light of nature and of nations
light of nature and nations, which have put a like weight upon this duty of
Honor of Parents, making it as next to the honor of God himself. Pythoragus,
having given the priority to the worship of the Gods (as the poor Pagan calls
them, (...), and so goes on speaking of their divine worship: and then
immediately adds, (...) -- It is in short but thus. First, honor nour God, as
by the Law is appointed, then hothy Parents. And mind his speech, that he
makes this by Law appointed: even by the Law of nature and nations; For no
other Law had these Heathens. So Phocyllides, in his admonitory Poem also
says, (...), First honor God, and after that thy Parents. So Plato in his
book of Laws, first he provideth for the worship of God, and in the next
place for the Honor of Parents. So Aristotle, Eth. l. 8. c. 16. He joyneth
Honor of Parents next to that of God: and says, That to neither, can
sufficient honor be given, only he that according to his utmost ability
honors them, he is (says he) the truly pious person to God, and to Parents.
So Isocrates, in his Admonitory Oration to Demonicus, counsels and charge
him thus, (...). Fear God, honor also Parents. Aelian in his 3. book, c. 21.
tells a story, that when the Greeks took Troy, pitying the miseries of their
captives, they caused it to be proclaimed, that every free Citizen should carry
out some one principal thing which they should most desire: hereupon Aeneas
neglecting other matters, carried out his Gods (as they call them) the Greeks
liking well his piety, permitted him to take some other thing which he should
most desire: he then takes up his aged Father, and carries him out next upon
his shoulders: with which act they were so affected, that they gave him all his
goods and treasures also: thus by the dim light of corrupt nature, the poor
Pagan is directed to place Parents honor next to Divine. But our glorious Lord
and Lawgiver to show the great weight of this duty, he will not leave it to be
enforced by natures Law or light only, but he will add his moral sanction of
it, as his own promulged Law, and he will not do it in more obscure terms, or
so as only to be drawn by Consequence, but this shall be expressed in so many
words; It shall be written as in Capital Letters, that every one that runs
may read it, and none may plead excuse or exemption; yea the Command it self
shall be expressed in so few and so familiar words, that the least Child, who
can remember any thing, shall be able to remember this, and even with its milk,
almost, drink in this principle of Honor of Parents.

3. Because the Lord annexeth no particular promise to any other of the ten
Commandments, 3. Because a promise is added only to this Commandment
but to this. In which sense the Apostle speaking of this Commandment says,
It is the first Commandment with promise, Ephesians. 6. 2. Its a sign then that
this duty above many others, is of great account with God, and of greatest
concernment unto man, and that the blessings of promise are wont more
manifestly, and plentifully to follow, the obedience to this Commandment, then
to any of the rest of the Commandments of the second table at least, which
have no promise at all 4. Because the blessings promised to this, are of
greatest moment.
annexed to them, neither general or special.

4. Because the blessing here promised, and made as the Argument to move to
obedience to this Commandment, is of so great moment and concernenent; as
being life it self, and the continuance of it, and blessing upon it. And what
more desirable, of all temporal blessings, then life? Skin for skin, and all
that a man has, will he give for his life. What more useful a blessing then
this? whereby a man has so much opportunity afforded and continued to him, to
get and to do the best and the most good, and to bring in the most glory to
God? What more delightful a blessing then this, the very notion whereof is
used in Scripture, to express the glorious and transcendent joys and
delights, as of the kingdom of grace, here, so of that of glory, hereafter? so
in Deuteronomy. 30. 15, 19. I set before thee life. Romans 8. 6. To be spiritually
minded is life. Act. 11. 18. Repentance unto life. Psalm. 36. 9. With thee is
the fountain of life. John. 3. 36. He shall not see life.

CHAP. II. Of Honor in general due to Parents.
HAving explained the words of the 5. Commandment, and shown the weight of the
duty therein enjoined to Children; we now come to make further inquiry into the
duty it self, which we shall consider of, in the method propounded. 1. More
Generally. 2. More particulaly. First then of Honor of Parents in a general
consideration, wherein we shall, 1. Consider what kind and manner of honor,
this honor of Parents, so generally considered, must be. 2. Make some uses
thereof. To the first inquiry we answer, 1. Honor not due to Parents which is,
1. In way of dishoner to God.
Negatively, what Honor is not due to Parents; 2. Affirmatively, what manner
of Honor is due; In a negative way we say the Honor of Parents

1. It must not be in any way of dishonor to God, either by sins of Omission
or of Commission. Children must not so respect, esteem, and love Father or
Mother, as to love, and prefer them in their respects to the Lord. He that
loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me, says Christ, Matthew.
10. 37. Children may not be so transported with affection to Parents, as
thereby to be hindered from a call of Christ, or attending upon it. As he in
Luke 9. 65. when called to follow Christ, would have gone first and buried his
Father, but verse. 60. is answered by Christ, Let the dead bury their dead, but
go thou and preach the Kingdom of God; or as the other in Luke 9. 61. that
would engage to follow Christ, but he would first bid farewell to those at
home, namely, Parents, Kindred, etc. But Jesus Christ accounts such
inordinacy of affection, in those who profess to set their faces toward
heaven, to be a looking back to the world, and the like, and therefore verse.
62. Jesus said unto him, No man having put his hand to the Plough, and looking
back, is fit for the Kingdom of God. Children may not have such carnal
affection to Parents, or be so glued to them, as not to be able to part with
them, and forsake them, and deny themselves in them, for the sake of Christ,
when they are thereunto called. The Spouse of Christ, Solomon's Antitype, must
forget her Kindred, and Fathers house, for her Lords sake, and nearer Communion
with him, Psalm. 45. 10. Children may not so love Father or Mother, as out of
respect to them, to forsake Christ's truth, or faith, or to embrace any thing
contrary to the faith or truth of Christ, (a sin too common amongst the
Children of Papists and other Heretics and Opinionists) this is also to love
them more then Christ. Better that the Daughter, in such a case of Christ's
faith and truth, be at variance against the Mother, that she contend, even with
her, for Christ's truth, for the faith once delivered to the Saints, that she
beat down with all her might the Mothers errors and evils. In which case also,
Christ says, Matthew. 10. 35. He comes to set a man at variance against his
own Father, and the Daughter against her Mother. He that more desires after
his Parents presence, then after the Lords, or more delights in them, then in
the Lord himself, or is more moved in their causes, then in the Lords, or is
more troubled for them, and their disgrace, then for the Lords dishonor, or
the like, he does not honor his Parents according to Gods mind and heart; yea,
he that comparatively, and where the love of Father or Mother, and the love of
Christ, are not compatible, where the condition and case is so qualified, that
love to Parents, and love to Christ, become flat contraries, and must one give
place to the other, one or the other must be laid aside, in such a case, He
that hates not his very Father and Mother, cannot be Christ's Disciple, Luke
14. 26. In such a case Godly zealous Levi is commended, Deuteronomy. 33. 9. Who said
to his Father and his Mother, I have not seen him. The like might be said in
that honor of Reverence and Fear; Children may not be so afraid of Parents, or
of their frowns, or blows, or distastes, or disinheritings, etc. as not to be
afraid of Gods displeasure, but to adventure that in some way of sin, rather
then run the hazard of ^ Fathers or Mothers displeasure. Christ (...) his
Mothers displeasure or rebuke, so as* (...) her sake to omit any duty to God
his Father, or to neglect his heavenly Fathers business. (...), in answer to
that check of Mary's, Luke 2. 48. Son, why have thou thus dealt with us?
behold, thy Father and I have sought thee sorrowing, he says verse. 49. Wist ye
not that I must be about my fathers business? (...) was a notable speech of
that Pagan Priest, C^r^alus, being to sacrifice, and at the same time required
to come away to his Father, he boldly answered, He must first dispatch the
duties of public Religion, or of Religion which was of public Concernment,
and after that those of private piety to Parents. Children must indeed honor
their Parents Counsels and Commands with the honor of obedience and
observance, yet not so as in a way of dishonor to God, to neglect what he
requires, or to do any thing which he forbideth. Ahaziah King of Judah is
branded for this, 2. Chron. 22. 3. That he walked in the ways of the house of
Ahab, for his Mother was his counselor.

2. It must not be in way of Inaequality to either Parent. The Father is not to
be preferred 2. With In equality to either Parents.
by the Child as a Child, before the Mother; or the Mother more loved,
reverenced, obeyed or recompensed then the Father. The Parents are equally
Parents, and equal causes of the Children, and so by the law of nature, as
Parents, they are to share equally in the honor of such isntrumental causes
of the be ing of their Children. Hence though in Exodus 20. 12. [Honour thy
Father and thy Mother] the Father is set before the Mother, yet in Lev. 19. 3.
(which is an exposition of the 5. Commandment) the Mother is set before the
Father [Yee shall fear every man his Mother, and every man his Father] to show,
that the Father being set before the Mother, for honor, which comprehends
fear; and the Mother being set before the Father, for fear, which is a special
branch of honor; they are both alike for honor in the general, and for fear
in special. This, Willet in his sixfold Commentary upon Leviticus; and
Ainsworth in his notes upon Levit. 19. 3. They both do note from Maimony. So
Musculus in his common places, and exposition of this fifth Commandment, he
notes; that Gods command is for honoring, not the Father only, but the
Mother: God says not, Honor thy Father, but adds, and thy Mother; the
Mother indeed is the Fathers inferior, according to the Law of conjugall
subjection, and likewise she is by nature, and Sex, the weaker vessel; but the
Child is not thence to draw an argument, that he must think the more despicably
of his Mother; for that difference that is made in wedlock, betwixt the
husband, and the wife, appertains not to him, but he must look to that
relation, which is betwixt Mother and Son; what ever she be, in respect of her
husband, to thee she is a Mother, and together with thy Father to be equally
honored; since that for this, that thou might be born, she did equally
cooperate, yea rather much more; for who can weigh sufficiently, what a heap of
troubles, the womb big with Child brings along with it? how great are the
sorrows of bringing forth? how many and great are the perils? so that it is not
in vain said, in sorrow shall thou bring forth. Lastly how cumbersome is the
suckling of the Child, and the care of it, whilst in the Cradle? so that they
greatly sin, which transfer all the Honor due in common to their Parents, unto
their Father only, and care not how they set by their Mothers, so they can but
gratify their Father; thus far Musculus; and verily in Prove. 1. 8. Both are
given in equal charge: My Son, hear the instruction of thy Father; and forsake
not the Law of thy Mother; so in Prove. 6. 20. My Son, keep thy Fathers
Commandments; and forsake not the Law of thy Mother. And why else is there an
equal reward, even long life, equally promised to the Honor of Mothers, as to
that of Fathers, if the Honor of the one be not equal to that of the other?
or why else is the dishonor of the Mother, as well as of the Father, equally
put under the same curse? Deuteronomy. 27. 16. Cursed be he that sets light by his
Father, or his Mother, and all the people shall say, Amen. Or why is the same
punishment of Justice to be equally inflicted for smiting the Mother, as well
as the Father, being made equally death, Ex. 20. 15. or for cursing the Mother,
as well as the Father, or for stubbornness, in not obeying the Mothers voice,
as well as the Fathers, being also equally made deaht, Exodus 24. 17. Deuteronomy. 21.
18, 19, 20, 21. If the Honor of the Mother, by the Child, be not equal to
that of the Father? where there is, by God himself, one and the same reward of
grace equally promised, as to the Honor, and the same punishment of Justice
equally threatened, as to the dishonor, as well of the Mother, as of the
Father, there is the same Honor equally due, by the will of God, to the
Mother, as is to the Father; but to the former Scriptures show, that God
equally promises the same reward of grace to the Child's Honor, and equally
threatens the same punishment of Justice, to the Child's dishonor, as well of
the Mother, as of the Father; therefore the Honor due, according to God, from
the Child as a Child, to his Mother, as is to his Father, is equal and equally
due.

3. It must not be a bare pretended, and formal 3. Merely formal and in
pretense only.
kind of Honor of Parents. Such was that in Absalom, who feignedly pretends
such Honor of respect to his Father, that he had rather die, then not to be
reconciled to his Father, and enjoy his Fathers favor, 2 Samuel 14. 32.
Wherefore (says he to Joab,) am I come up from Geshur? It had been good for me
to have been there still: now therefore let me see the Kings face, and if there
be iniquity in me, let him kill me; but his devilish plot so soon after,
against his Father (Chap. 15. 7. 10.) showed, that all that, was but bare
pretense, and not reality of respect to his Father. So in that young man,
professing to Christ, that he had kept all the Commandments, and so the fifth,
instanced in Matthew. 19. 19, 20. and that from his youth up, he had begun the
practice of Honor of Father and Mother betimes, and to that day continued it;
but the issue showed, that he never conscientiously, sincerely, and really,
Honored his Father and Mother, but in a mere formal, and outside way and
manner, even in the same sort, as he kept the other Commandments, being never
the nearer entrance into heaven, notwithstanding all that, like him, in the
parable of the two sons, Matthew. 21. 28. 30. that pretends Honor of obedience
to his Father: for when his Father says to him, Son, go to work to day in my
Vineyard; he readily, and humbly (in show at least) answers, I go Sir, but
went not. It was only pretense, and dissimulation.

4. Look that it be not a base selfish, self-ended 4. Merely Selfish.
Honoring of Father, or Mother, for hope of gain by them, and so making much
of them, whilst some requests, or desires of the Child are answered, his ends
furthered, or fulfilled; some large Portions gotten out of their hands, or
large fleeces gained out of their outward estates; like the younger Son in the
parable, that will be giving his Father's Titles of Honor, whilst he has
fingred his Portion (as he calls it,) Luke 15. 12 [Father] give me my
Portion; but verse. 13. not many day after, he gathers up all he has, and
leaves his Father. Now his Father is not in such request with him; the Text
says, he took his journey, but not a word of this, that he asks his Father
leave, or asks his Fathers advice that way: Father shall I take such a
journey? no verily, let his Father like it, or dislike it, he now cares not,
he has gotten what he looked for from him, and now fare him well, he cares to
be under his Fathers watch no more, he regards neither his Company, nor his
Counsel, etc. so Absalom, Oh! his Fathers face and presence, it is all in all
to him, he cannot live without it, one would think, if he speak his heart, 2 Samuel 14. let me see the Kings face -- or if iniquity be in me, let him kill me,
and verse. 33. when permitted to come into his Fathers presence, he boweth
himself on his very face to the ground before him; what would you have more in
a Son? ah! but all this was for base and by ends. Absoloms ambitious designs,
reaches, and ends, could not so well be furthered by living as retired, and
exiled from the Court, though come to Jerusalem; but at the Court, and near the
place of judicature, whither the subjects from all parts of the Kingdom repair
frequently for Justice, there he has opportunity to lay his trains, 2 Samuel
15. 2. without suspicion of any, he sits by the gate, the place of
judicature and resort, and he asks each one, of what tribe art thou? ver. 3.
and bids them, look that thy matter be good and right: (As if he were very
sollicitous of Right twixt man and man:) but withal tells them, there is
none deputed by the King to hear thee. Now he begins closely to scatter
seeds of prejudice, and discontent in the subjects against the present
government set over them: then verse. 4. wishes in their hearing, Oh that I
were Judge in the Land, that every man which has any suit or cause, might come
to me, and I would do him Justice: now he speaks a good word for himself to
be thought of, and put in some chief place in the state, and verse. 5. every
subject that comes near him must have his hand, he must take him, he must
embrace him, and kiss him; and no wonder that now he has, as v. 6. even
stolen away the hearts of the men of Israel; Oh thinks every one, what a
worthy and hopeful Prince is this, how sollicitous that every man do right,
and have right done him! how mavelous kind, and condescending to the meanest
subject, he would surely make us, in time, a very good King, etc. Now Absalom
has played his game well thus far, it remains only that Absalom, in pretense
at least, give his Father the Honor of going by his leave to Hebron; a place
fittest to hatch the Treason against his Father, which he has been all that
while brooding, and where that fire may flame out best, which he has been
kindling; this leave is easily gained from his Father, verse. 7, 8, 9. he has
200 men to attend him to Hebron, and when thither come, Achitophel is sent for,
the conspiracy is ripened, and numbers of Associates daily increase, and good
David soon perceives his mistake in his Sons pretended submission and
obeisance. Yea but the fifth Commandment would cut off all such Attractives to
selfish Honor of Parents, and therefore says, Honor thy Father and thy
Mother, namely poor or rich, high or low, as well I that has nothing to give,
and leave thee, as that has never so much: hence when Christ would show upon
what, as upon their bottom and basis, all the commands of God, either
respecting God or men, do hang and depend, he says, Matthew. 22. 37, 38. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all tby heart; this is the first and great
Commandment, and verse. 39. the second is like to this; Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, and verse. 40. On these two Commandments hang all the
Law, and the Prophets; those are the two wel-springs of all obedience to the
Law and word of God; and therefore all the particulars are reducible to those
two heads; if the Honor of respect, reverence, or obedience, which we give to
God, be not from love to our selves, or to our own ends, but to himself, then
it is honoring of God indeed; so if our honor, which we give to our Parents,
be not from love to our selves, but it is from entire love to them, that we
show forth such respect, or reverence, or obedience, or thankfulness to them,
now it is Honor of Parents indeed. Again, as it must not be Honor of Parents
from self-love, as opposed to entire love of Parents, so it must not be from
self-love, as opposed to love of God; the love of whom especially, should put
Children upon Honoring the Image of his Father-hood, in their Parents; hence
in that, Levit. 19. 3. Ye shall fear every man his Mother and Father, why so? I
am the Lord thy God; and so thy Father in Covenant, and Covenant-mercies and
privileges, a Father of mercies promised and offered to them, etc. therefore
out of love to me, Honor, every one of you, his Parents. And as Childrens
honor of Parents must not be selfish, in reference to love of self-profit, and
preferment, or the like, so neither in reference to love of self-ease, or mere
immunity from punishments, or corrections, in any contrary way of dishonor;
whether from Parents privately, or the civil Magistrate, publicly; if
Childrens Honor of reverence, and obedience, which they outwardly hold forth,
should be extracted chiefly from the force of Parents austere carriage, or
threats, or blows, or the dread of the correction from civil Authority, or the
like, it is a slavish, and not a filial Honoring of them; when Paul would
express, in a word, that Timothy served with him in the Gospel, neither
formally, nor feignedly, nor selfishly, nor slavishly, nor forcedly; but
freely, sincerely, and regularly; he expresses it thus, Phil. 2. 22. As the
Son with the Father, he has served with me in the Gospel; the Honor then of a
Son to the Father is, or should be, neither feigned, formal, selfish, nor
slavish.

2 In an affirmative way, we say the Honor Honor of Parents must be 1.
Cordial.
of Parents,

1. It must be cordial; not alone God, as a Father, must have each of his
Childrens hearts, in all the Honor they give him, as his Sons and Daughters,
but Solomon, as a Father, may groundedly say, as Prove. 23. 26. My Son, give me
thy heart: namely, as that which must crown all the Honor, which thou my Son
must give me as thy Father; thus Timothy serves with Paul in the Gospel, as
with his Father, by grace, as an ingenious Son with his Father at any other
work; namely, with all his heart, Phil. 2. 22.

2. It must be constant; as long as the relation 2. Constant.
holds firm twixt Parent and Child, which is as long as they Coexist in this
world, and till one of the Relates are taken away by death, Parents from
Children, or Children from Parents; they must obey this moral precept, which
binds semper and ad semper, always and to all times; Honor thy Father and
Mother, has no prefixed time set to it. It is not Honor thy Father and Mother
whilst a little one, whilst a youth, whilst so or so old, whilst in a
single condition, or with the like limitations, no; but it is without restraint
and limitation to ages, sexes, conditions, places, relations, callings,
employments; it is for term of life, and that to which each one, Male or
Female, younger or elder, married or unmarried, learned or unlearned, godly or
ungodly, high or low, Prince or Peasant, rich or poor is bound unto, hence also
that, Prove. 23. 22. despise not thy Mother when she is old: when she was young,
yea, when she was middle aged, or the like, thou prisedst, and respectedst, and
did reverence and obey her, do it as well when she is old; hold on doing of
it, to the last. Age may wear and waste a Mothers beauty, strength, parts,
senses, limbs, estate, etc. but her relation of a Mother is as the Sun, when he
goes forth in his might, for the ever of this life, that is always in its
meridian, and knows no evening; the person may be gray headed, but her
Motherly relation, is ever in its flourish. It may be Autumn, yea, Winter with
the woman, but with the Mother, as a Mother, it is always Spring. Look as that
precious daughter Ruth said, even to her Mother in Law, Naomi, whither thou
go, I will go, and where thou lodgest, I will lodge, thy people shall be my
people: and thy God my God; the Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but
death part thee and me, Ruth. 1. 16, 17. so, and much more, if more may be,
would become every Son and Daughter, even to engage themselves, and that for
term of life, to Honor their own Fathers and Mothers, both in way of direct
Honor, by sharing with them, in doing and suffering, and by being tenderly
respective, and observant of them, and useful, and serviceable to them,
wherever they become, or into what condition soever the Lord may cast them; and
in a way of reflect Honor, by personal, and real owning of their Godly
Fathers and Mothers, God and people, that they shall be theirs. And as Ruth
fulfilled actually what she so solemnly engaged, that way; so should any one
Son or daughter much rather, be to their own Father and Mother better every way
than seven Sons, Ruth 4. 15. Joseph also did not only Honor his Father when
he was a youth, but continued honoring of his Father to the last, so long as
he had a Father left to Honor, albeit long after he was married, and so highly
exalted, witness that Genesis 46. 29. and 47. 31. and 48. 12.

3. It must be complete and full, not alone outwardly, 3. Complete.
but inwardly, not in some lawful and good things or way, but in all, and that
in all places, and upon all occasions: yea every part of them, which is capable
of giving Honor to Parents, must do their part of filial homage, and
contribute their share to this common treasury of Honor in general due to
Parents; Parents have been Fathers of the Childrens bodies, and preparatory,
and effective instruments of the being of their souls in their bodies; so that
head, tongue, eyes, cares, hand and knee, feet, and the like bodily parts in
their way, and likewise the mind in its thoughts, the understanding and
judgment in its conceptions, and apprehensions, dictates, and esteem: the
heart and will in its dispositions and affections, etc. All and each of these
must render their proportions of due Honor to the instruments of their being;
hence that before mentioned of Solomon to his Son, Prove. 23. 26. My Son, give
me thy heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways: heart and eyes, soul and
body, must join in filial homage of his Son, to him, as his Father.

4. It must be impartial, without respect to 4. Impartial.
them as rich only, or otherwise great in the world, or the like; for if very
poor, their Honor from their Children must be never a whit the less; if Mary
the Mother of Christ, be the espoused wife of Joseph, a poor Carpenter, it is
all one to Christ, as if she had been a Princes spouse, he is subject to them,
as a child, Luke 2. 51. he went down with them to Nazareth, and was subject to
them; the command of God knows no persons, distinguishes not of such a
Father, or such and such a Mother, but charge the Child, Honor thou thy
Father and thy Mother, be he, or she, poor or rich, noble or ignoble, high or
low, of meaner parts or of more accomplished abilities, comely and personable,
or deformed and in stature more despicable; yea be they of better and sweeter
tempers, or be they of a more harsh, hasty, and rigid disposition, yet as
servants must be subject to their Masters, with all fear, not only to the good
and gentle, but also to the froward, 1 Pet. 2. 18. so must Children much rather
give Honor to their Parents, whether of better or worser tempers.

5. It must be in a way of eminency: being such 5. In a way of eminency.
Honor as is next in order to that Honor due to God himself, the Hebrew word
(...) applied to persons, or things, in a way of good, most frequently
signifies to make weighty in honor, or glory, or to give some eminent and
transcendent measure of Honor and Glory; hence that phrase, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
weight of glory: Speaking of that surpassing -- glory of heaven; the same
Hebrew verb, which is used in my Text, is sometimes used for magnifying of God,
Psalm. 22. 23. Magnify him all ye seed of Jacob (as the Geneva translation well
rendereth it;) or make him great, ponderous, weighty in glory; but by our New
translation, it is commonly rendered, glorisie, or make glorious, or eminently
Honor. So Psalm. 86. 9. they shall glorify thy name; and verse. 12. I will
glorify thy name; and Psalm. 50. 23. he glorifies me, Levit. 10. 3. I will be
glorified. So. Ezekiel. 28. 22. The same verb here made use of to express the
Honor of Parents, as is to express the glory of God; It shows evidently,
that it is no ordinary measure of Honor, which Children owe to their Parents;
the very name and relation of a Father and Mother, is a glorious thing, and
has glory and excellency in it; the word derived from this verb (...) in the
Text is used to denominate, and point out peculiar excellency, as Exodus 28. 2.
Aarons garment must be made (...) for glory, or garments of peculiar
excellency, Genesis 45. 13. show him all my glory (...) my eminency of Honors,
Authority, Respect, and the like; and the verb it self is made such use of Esaias
43. 3, 4. thou have been honorable, or glorious, as others render it, or most
eminent in Honor, in Hebrew (...); and Psalm. 87. 2. (...) glorious things, or
matters of transcendent, and renouned excellency, are spoken of thee; now the
same word used here must needs note peculiar eminency of Honor of Parents to
be due from their Children.

Let us now make application of what has been spoken.

The use serves, 1. For Reproof, and that, 1. Use of Reproof. 1. Of Children
for dishonor of Parents.
1. Of Children; for their dishonouring, slighting, and despising of their
Fathers and Mothers. It was of old reproved sharply in those of Jerusalem, in
Ezekiel. 22. 7. Formerly mentioned, In thee they have set light by Father and
Mother. Solomon brandeth the fool, or unregenerate person for this, as his vile
property, Prove. 15. 20. the foolish man despises his Mother; this is point
blanck cross to the fifth Commandment. It is highest injustice not to give
even your Parents their due; one should think none should cut their Parents
short of their right; now this Honor is their right: and therefore it is
highest injustice in any Child, to debar them of their right. The word in Ezekiel.
22. 7. (...) is directly opposite to the Hebrew word used in my Text, And it
signifies to make lighter, or to make abatement of due weight, or measure of
any thing; as say of Honor, of credit, of commodities, or the like. It is used
in Jonah 1. 5. For the Mariners lightning their ship, by casting out the good
wares in it, as forced by a storm to do that, which had they done in another
case, it had been manifest wrong, and injustice to the owners; of all others,
Parents should not be scanted and pinched, and that by you, their own Children,
of their just weight and measure, but rather have it upheaped, or pressed down,
or running over; if God in other cases, would have no unrighteousness in
meteyards, in weight, or in measure, but have just balances, just weights, a
just Ephah, and a just Hin, Levit. 19. 35, 36. Much more would he have no
unrighteousness in weight or measure here. And if in other matters the scant
measure be so abominable to God and good men, Mic. 6. 10. Much more is a scant
measure of filial Honor. But that we may the better meet with this sin in all
sorts: Here is to be reproved

1. Childrens slighting their Parents instructions, 1. By slighting Parents
instructions or rebukes.
directions, reproofs, or corrections; this is made a black brand of a person
yet unregenerate, Prove. 15. 5. The Fool (or unregenerate person) despises his
Fathers instruction. Know it therefore, who ever you are, be your pretenses to
Religion whatsever they may be, yet you are graceless persons, who Honor not
your Parents Counsels, or instructions, but slight and undervalue them; this is
made also the very trick of a scorner, and that is somewhat worse, Prove. 13. 1.
a scorner hears not rebuke-namely, not of his own Father; for it is opposed
to that, A wise son hears his fathers instructions. Yea this is made a very
brutish sin, Prove. 12. 1. he that hates reproof, is brutish. And if the
rejecting others just reproof, be so inhumane, so unreasonable a sin, verily
the contempt of parentall reproofs is so much rather. I had almust said it is
worse then brutish; For the brute creatures, as, say, young birds, or beasts,
they do not slight the hints which the old ones give them, of what they should
shun, or what they should desist from, or what way they should take, or the
like; (as experience witnesses in many particulars, I need not instance) yea,
it is a deadly token of a person, either already given up to hardness of heart,
and so to be ruined, or of one that is at the brink of such a pit. 1 Samuel 2.
25. It is said of Elias Sons, whom he had even too gently reproved for their
gross sins; notwithstanding they harkned not unto the voice of their Father,
because the Lord would destroy them; such persons do but even despise their own
souls, and their peace and welfare here and hereafter, Prove. 15. 32. he that
refuses instruction, despises his own soul; which if true of refusing others,
much more of refusing Parents good instructions; one may safely say to any such
Son or Daughter, surely thou carest not what becomes of thy soul; but let all
such despisers of Parents counsels, instructions, or reproofs, especially in
matters respecting their souls, I say let all such know and tremble to consider
it, that all those despised instructions, and reproofs, will one day be as so
many stings of Adders in your hearts, the venom whereof will even drink up your
spirits; they will be as so many viols of oil to the flame, in your fired
consciences, here, or in hell, or both, which will make your tormenting flames,
more raging, lasting and tormenting. See in Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13. in the deboist
youngster, that never cared a pin for any counsels, or rebukes, which Parents,
Friends, Masters, or Ministers gave to him, when in his ruff of vanity, but
when under Gods dreadful hand, and his conscience withal awakened, then this
is that, in special, which galleth him, that he has not inclined his ears to
them which instructed him (and so not to his very Parents also.) -- And thou
mourn at the last, when thy flesh, and thy body are consumed, and say, how have
I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof, and have not obeyed the
voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them which instructed me. 2. By
slighting their Commands.


2. It reproves Childrens slighting Parents injunctions or commands, Prove. 30.
17. The eye that despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the valley shall
pick it out; that is, some sudden, strange, shameful and remarkable Judgment
of God, in ways, and by means unlikely, shall befall them, and they that
whilst living, would not honor Parents, but despise them, when they are dead,
they shall not be honored, as other men, but like beasts rather then men, they
shall be cast out in contempt, as not deserving the common Honor of rational
persons, when dead, to be buried. As their sin is more unnatural; and inhumane,
so shall their usage be, when dead.

3. It reproves Childrens sleighting their Parents watch and government, like
the younger 3. By slighting their watch.
Son in the parable, Luke 15. 12, 13. (often made use of upon diverse occasion,
in this discourse) they must needs be for themselves, and before they are
fitted for it, or called to it, they will leave their Fathers: but you may be
reckoned, with that prodigal, to be persons that while besides your selves: as
the effect proved in him; for he slighting his Fathers presence, guidance and
provision, he was blasted in his way, and soon took such loose courses, as
brought him low enough; and the like will befall all such like youngsters, in
their way of flighting their Parents watch and government; if Dinah paid so
dearly for that little gadding fit of hers from her Fathers house, as to fall
under such sin and shame, of being deflowred by a stranger, Genesis 34. 1, 2. What
will be the sin and shame of such Sons or Daughters, of whom we are now
speaking? It may be said of Children, who out of some lust of pride, or
discontent, will be leaving of Parents, and forsaking their watch and tuition,
when they are not called to it, (...) in Prove. 27. 8. As a bird that wandreth
from her neast, so is a man that wandereth from his place; the fittest, best,
and safest place for the young bird, is her neast, where the old ones will be
providing well for it, and watching carefully of it, that it come to no hurt,
but when the young bird, before it be fitted to fly abroad with safety and
strength, to watch over it self, or shift for it self, yet will needs be
hopping out of its neast, and wandering thence, it becomes a prey to every
bird of prey, and commonly comes by some means or other to ruin by it.: So
if young persons will needs be leaving their Fathers house, which is their
neast and place, before they are called to it, or fitted for it, mischief is
commonly the issue of it. As it is said of Cain in his case, going out from his
Fathers house, that he went out from the presence of God; so it may be said of
Childrens leaving Parents houses in such a way of dishonor of Parents, they go
from Gods presence: and let not any such Children ever look for Gods gracious
presence with you in any such way, but the terrifying presence rather of his
justice and displeasure pursuing you, as it did wandering Cain, who therefore
could not long rest in any place wheresoever he came. It may be also said of
such like Children, as of him in Luke 13. that in this way left his Fathers
house, that he was lost and dead; and so are these among the number of persons
spiritually dead, and if ever, by grace, they come to themselves, as it is said
of him in the parable, Luke 15. 17. Surely they will lay on hard upon this sin
of dishonor of Parents above all other sins, as he did: whence that speech
thereupon: Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no
more worthy to be called thy Son.

4. It reproves Childrens less honoring, or 4. By slighting Parents when
aged, or decayed.
slighting of Parents, when they are old, or decayed in strength, estate, or
the like: contrary to that express charge of God, Prove. 23. 22. despise not thy
Mother when she is old. It was the sin of Samuels Sons, that when he was old,
they cared not for his counsels, or checks, or imitation of his godly course,
witness that, they walked not in the steps of their Father, then, 1 Samuel 8. 5.
So Adonijah, when his Father was old and decrepit, he without regard to his
Fathers mind, counsel, or leave, is ready to leap into his throne, 1 Kings 1.
5. but these had dishonor from others, as their punishment, for this dishonor
of their Parents, which was their sin. The people as little regard Judge
Samuels Sons, 1 Samuel 8. 5. as they did their Father. And Adonijah, whose sin it
was not to Honor his Father when he was old, in way of punishment, has not
the Honor of a Brother, much less of an Elder Brother to Solomon, but is
brought to an untimely and dishonorable end. That Son or daughter, who
despises Father, or Mother, when old, seldom lives to be old.

5 It reproves the guile of Children, in pretending 5. By bare semblances of
Honor of them.
to Honor Father or Mother, when in heart they slight them; like Absalom
(formerly mentioned) pretending to Honor his Father, but intending by -- and
base ends -- or like him in that parable forementioned, Matthew. 21. 30. When his
Faither says, go and work in my vineyard to day, he says, I go Sir, but went
not. Who will such be true to, if you be not true to your own Parents? Hence,
when the sin of dishonor of Parents abounds, here and there, that is
accounted a perfidious time and place. And God in judgment will order it, that
none shall trust such, as have been perfidious dishonourers of Parents, albeit
they may have never such promising qualifications, or relations, in other
respects. Mic. 7. 5. Trust ye not in a friend, put not confidence in a guide,
keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom: why so? for the
Son Honors not the Father, the Daughter rises up against her Mother.

6. It reproves Childrens disgracing, or any 6. By disgracing Parents.
way reproaching of their Parents: You are ill birds, which thus defile your
own nests. It was a vile sin in Absalom, secretly to disgrace his Fathers
government, as if careless in it, and neglective of what concerned him to look
after, 1 Samuel 15. 3. there is no man deputed of the King to hear thee, (says
that Sycophant) this was Chams sin to discover his Fathers nakedness to his
reproach, Genesis 9. 22, 25. Cham the Father of Canaan, saw his Fathers nakedness,
and went and told his brethren without (namely in a reproachful way) but
Absalom, and Chams stories show, that they had reproach for reproach in the
issue: and God will assuredly mete out to such like Children, like reproach,
either from their Children in after times, or from others, as a just punishment
of their reproaching their own Parents.

7. It reproves persons younger or elder, having 7. By railing against Parents.
Parents living, that you now at any time, or formerly, use railing, reviling,
girding, taunting, or upbraiding speeches to them, or of them, Prove. 30. 11.
There is a generation that curses their Father, and does not bless their
Motber; but such are so odious and inhumane, that God singleth out Children of
that sort, to be cut off by the hand of civil Authority, Exodus 21. 17. Levit.
20. 9. He that curses Father, or Mother, let him die the death, which command
of God, Christ himself vindicateth from the Pharisees undermining traditions,
Mark. 7. 9, 10. Or if such a sin pass the cognizance, or vengeance of earthly
Judges, yet the Lord himself will not suffer such to escape his hand, Prove. 20.
20. who so curses Father, or Mother, his Lamp shall be put out in obscure
darkness. He shall come to a loathsome, noisome, dishonorable, and untimely
end, as a Lamp, or Candle, that might have burned and shined much Mischiefs
attending dishonor of Parents.
longer, but is suddenly put, or blown out, and that with a stinking Savor
left. And that Children of all sorts, sexes and Ages, may more deeply consider,
and lay to heart, this sin of dishonor of Parents, let them look wistly and
advisedly, upon the mischiefs also which attend this sin.

1. It makes way in you, for all other sins. In 1. It makes way for other
sins.
Cain, this let in fratricide, in Absalom, who also regarded not Parents, or
their guidance or Counsels, it let in parricide, intentionally, 2 Samuel 17. 3,
4. He never cordially honored his Father, and when he thought he had an
opportunity, he as little regarded his Fathers life. Adrammeleck and Sharezer,
were, no doubt, such as had been traded in a way of dishonor of their Father
Senacherib, that they durst lay their bloody hands upon him, to take away his
life, who had, instrumentally, given them theirs, 2 Kings 19. 37. No doubt, but
from this root of dishonorable thoughts of Jacob, sprung Rubens incest, Genesis
49. 5. else the very reverence of a Father, had deterred him from it. As the
Prodigal in the Parable, he first breaks this bond of Honor of Parents, and
so sins against his Father, and then he is at liberty to commit the vilest
acts of riot, excess, filthinest, etc. that youngster in Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13,
14 Who confesses that it was his sin, to disregard any thing that Parents of
others said to him, he also confesses, that even in the midst of the
Congregation, openly, and where the best means were to the contrary, he was
almost in all evil.

2. It brings Parents just curses, and Gods 2. It brings a curse.
curse also upon you, and upon your posterity. As Genesis 9. 22. 25. It brought
upon Cham, and his posterity, by Canaan. Cham himself being no more exempted
from that curse, albeit his Fathers curse light especially upon his posterity
by Canaan, than Sem himself is exempted from his Father Noah's blessing, though
he were also blessed in his posterity, especially by his Son Eber, and so
Terah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Yea this sin puts you under the dint of
the imprecation of the Church and Saints of God, Deuteronomy. 17. 16. Cursed be he
that sets light by his Father or his Mother, and all the people shall say,
Amen. Ah miserable case of such as you are, who are, by Gods command, to be
cursed by all the people of God!

3. It brings the exclusion of you, and of your 3. It brings exclusion from
Gods Church.
posterity, from the Church of God, and the privileges thereof Cham, a
dishonor of his Father, is, in that respect, as an outlary, and God will not
have his Church to have any near civil, much less Sacred and Church Communion,
with his posterity by Canaan, Deuteronomy. 7. Cain, who flung off his Fathers
Counsels, commands, rebukes, and watch, and went from his Fathers house like a
very vagrand, Genesis 4. 16. His posterity are, in opposition to those of the
Church, styled the sons and daughters of men, not of God. Ishmael who regarded
not his Father Abraham's displeasure, witness his mocking at his dearly beloved
Son Isaac, he and his are cast out, and aftewards left out, as outlaries from
the Church of Abraham. Esau likewise, who honored not his Parents, witness his
cross matching against their minds, he, and the Edomites which came from him,
are excluded Church privileges. The Moabites, and Ammonites, of Lots
daughters, who so vilely dishonored their Father Lot, were also, by Gods
command, excluded Gods congregation, for many generations.

4. It brings commonly with it, the vilest 4. It brings vilest outward
conditions.
outward conditions: either for reproach, under which such Children, by Gods
just hand, do lie; Shame is the portion of such who resuse instruction,
especially of Parents, Prove. 13. 18. Or for poverty; poverty and shame shall be
to him that refuses instruction, ibid. Like as to him in the Parable, Luke 15.
Who was brought to less than a morsel of bread, to husks and draff: Or for
extremest and basest servitude; like that prodigal scornful Son, that would
have been glad of the meanest hired servants place with that Citizen, Luke 15.
15. And is set about as mean employment, to feed his swine, and as for his
food, he must either eat with the swine, or fast and sterve, verse. 16, 17. Thus
Cham in his posterity by Canaan (the beginner, in that vile act of dishonor,
to Noah,) he is destinated to become the vilest of servants, or a servant of
servants, Genesis 9. 2^. Prove. 17. 2. a wise servant shall have rule over a Son
that causes shame. A Son that any way dishonors, or reproacheth his
Parents, shall be put under the rule of a servant, made a servant of a servant.
Or finally, this brings vilest conditions, in respect of hasty, and vilest
deaths and ends, following the same, as was hinted before from Prove. 30. 17.
and as is manifest in Absoloms end, 2 Samuel 18.

2. This use serves for reproof of Parents, who 2. Reproof of Parents
undermining this Honor of theirs. 1. By bad examples of theirs.
any way undermine this Honor, in general, which is due to them from their
Children. And that,

1. By giving them bad examples of dishonor to their own Parents. So did Cain
to his posterity, and thence also was it, that they were so bad every way both
to Godward, and likewise to man-ward: their measure of sin was full, Genesis 6.
5. And so the flood swept that whole generation away; yea the posterity of
Seth, did the like at that time, witness their taking wives of all that they
themselves liked, not Honoring their Parents with their proper right, namely
to choose wives for their Sons, when fit to be disposed in marriage, Genesis 6. 1,
2. And no wonder that their Children begotten in that 120. years space of Gods
patience, verse. 3. they prove no better than those their Parents: for a little
before the very entrance of Noah into the Ark, Noah only is seen righteous, of
all that generation, Genesis 7. 1. and all the rest of the generation, Fathers and
Children, perished. Cham, the Grandfather, and Canaan the Father of the cursed
race of the Canaanites, were both derisive spectators and informers of old
Noah's nakedness: and thence also the Canaanites, their cursed posterity, they
became in after times so notorious and shameless, in that very way and sin of
dishonor of Parents, -- for hence is it that Levit. 20. 9. When God had
forbidden Cursing of Father and Mother, and verse. 11. The uncovering of a man's
own Fathers wifes nakedness, or that of a man's own Mothers Sisters nakedness,
verse. 9. verse. 23. He charge the Jews not to walk in the manners of the
Nations, which he casts out before them (namely the Canaanites) for they
committed all these things, namely, which were mentioned from verse. 9. to 22.
Amongst which were those Acts of highest dishonor to Parents', even now
instanced in: for which the Lord abhorred and rejected the Canaanites. The like
might be said of the posterity of Ishmael and Esau; like Parents for exemplary
dishonor to Parents, like Children, and posterity, or rather each posterity,
successively, worse that way than their Fathers. As it was in Jobs case, that
Father, or chief ruler, sometimes of the people, he was had in derision of some
younger men, Job 30. 1. And no wonder, for verse. 8. he says, they were
Children of fools, and of base men, who were more vile than the earth; their
Parents therefore being as vile in their manners, as in their outward estates,
no wonder that their Children had their civil Father in derision. So if
Parents are vile toward their own natural Fathers and Mothers, their Children
commonly prove as bad that way also, as themselves. And it were good for
Parents, when, to their grief, they see their Children are ready to curse, or
slight, or any way dishonor them, to consider, whether they themselves have
done as much to their Parents, and so beside the evil example, which they
possibly set before their very children, that way, they have thereby provoked
God to mete out to them, by their children, according to that measure of
dishonor, that their Parents had from them. According to that word of Christ,
Luke 6. 37, 38. With the same measure that ye mete withal, it shall be
measured to you again. And like as Solomon tells Masters, when they hear that
their servants dishonor or curse them, that oftentimes their own hearts know,
that themselves likewise have cursed others (even that were their Masters also)
Eccles. 7. 21. And so they might the less wonder at such hard measures from
their servants: the like might be said to Parents, in cases of their dishonor
from their Children, that if your hearts know, that you have been faulty that
way toward your Parents, it is no wonder that you are paid in your own Coin,
from your own Children.

2. By bringing any just blast upon their Children 2. By bringing some blast
upon their Children.
and posterity, through some other daring sins against God or man, so that even
their posterity, in Gods just Judgment, become every way the worse, even in
the matter of sin also against the first and second Table; thus also God
visits the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and
fourth generation, according as is threatened for sins, against the second
Commandemandement. As we see also in that fearful example of the Jews,
rejected together with all their posterity, and left unto all manner of
wickedness against God or man, for the Parents rejecting of Christ, Romans 11.
20. 1 Thessal. 2. 14, 15, 16. So God threatens, Esaias 14. 20. That the seed of
evil doers shall never be renowned; and so not honored so much before God or
men, as to become true honourers of Parents. So Esaias 9. 13. 16. That for the
peoples stubborn going on in sin, threfore he will have no delight in their
young men, verse. 17. The posterity of Cain, Cham, Ishmael and Esau, are
dreadful examples of such a judicial blast of posterity, even in their very
morals, for the high-handed sins of their Ancestors.

3. By neglect of good and pious education of 3. By neglect of pious education.
children; when Parents bring up their Children rudely and profanely, carnally,
and carelessly, or to mere world and the like, it causes all kind of disorders
in them, it corrupts them in their morals; and you may thank your selves, if
you have unnatural, irreverent, disobedient, or ungrateful Children of them;
hence in the old world, when good education had been long neglected, in the
very Families which came of Seth, who were of the Church, Sons of God, they
also care not for their Parents Authority, or Authoritative interests in their
disposal in marriage, but they took them wives of all that they themselves
liked, albeit those Wifes were of the Daughters of men, of Cains brood,
outlaries from the Church, as in Genesis 6. 1, 2. often occasionally mentioned. So
in Sodom, when good education was neglected, see how base the younger sort also
were, Genesis 19. 4. from the youngest to the eldest they came to have forced
those strangers (as they took them to be) at Lots house, and v. 14. Lots grave
and godly Counsel to his Sons in Law, who had espoused his Daughters, It is
derided by them. Hence in that sad time of the Apostasy of Judah, when the good
man was perished out of the earth, and there was none upright amongst men, and
so none (in comparison) that made conscience of that Parentall duty of good
education of Children, then was the time when as the Son dishonored the
Father, and the Daughter rises up against her Mother, as is expressed, Mic. 7.
comparing v. 2. and 6. together.

4. By foolish humouring of their Children in their lusts: either in their
Pride, or voluptuousness, 4. By humouring Children in vanity.
or the like. Isaac himself smarted for it, for suffering his Son Esau, to give
himself more to his sport in hunting, than any other better Employment; for
afterward Esau slighting his Father and Mothers Authority and peculiar right
in the matter of the choice of a Wife for him, as for their own Son, he without
them chooses himself a Wife, yea, two wives, and that of the a cursed brood of
the Hittites, which were a grief of mind to Isaac, and to Rebeckah, Genesis 25.
27. Compared with Genesis 26. 34, 35. How many in greater Cities, by such foolish
humouring of their Children, have them prove deboist?

5. By discontented, harsh, and rigid carriages, 5. By harshness to them.
before, or at least toward Children. When the Apostle had charged Children to
honor Parents, Ephesians. 6. 2, 3. he adds, And ye Fathers provoke not your
Children to wrath; namely, by your harsh and austere carriages toward them:
For that will undermine Parents honor of respect from their Children, by
alienating their hearts more from their Parents; and likewise their honor of
Reverence, hardening their hearts against their Parents threats or blows, so
that they will grow more regardless of that displeasure and anger of their
Parents, which they see so readily, so frequently, and sometimes in a manner so
causelessly to be expressed: and likewise their Honor of Obedience, and
therefore in Col. 3. 20. When Paul had charged Children to obey their Parents,
verse. 21. Fathers (says he) provoke not your Children to anger, lest they be
discouraged, or wax heartlesse, and hopeless to do or to set about any thing
you require of them, so as to give you content: and so grow regardlesse,
whether they do or neglect to do what you command them; perceiving that it is
all one, their Fathers will he froward, hasty, harsh and rigid toward them,
when they have many times done their best for them, and they can be no worse
(think they) if we do lesser, if we do nothing, yea, if we do contrary to their
Command: And this will also undermine Parents honor of recompense from their
Children, which remembering Parents harsh carriages toward them, when they were
young, may have strong temptations to do the less for them in their age, or
decaies, when they need their Childrens help. But more of this possibly when we
come to particulars.

6. By discords, and uncomfortable breaches, 6. By discord betwixt Parents
themselves.
hard speeches, cross carriages, and discontents, betwixt Fathers and Mothers;
hence, Prove. 19. 13. those two are joined, A foolish Son is the calamity of his
Father, and the contentions of a Wife are a continual dropping; where there
are waearing and wasting contentions, ever and anon, betwixt Wife and Husband,
there will be also such a foolish Son, of such a Husband and Wife, who will be
a calamity to his Father. Such miscarriage betwixt Father and Mother
undermineth your Wisdom, Gravity, and Authority, in your Childrens eyes, who
behold the same, and even tempts them, the more to disrespect you and your
Authority.

7. By suffering Children too much to have 7. By leaving their Children to
their own wills.
their wills, and not seasonably and frequently to break them of their own
headstrong wills, and to cross them, in their own wilful desires, or designs,
Pro. 29. 15. A Child left (in this sense also) to himself (to have his own will
and lust) brings his Mother to shame: proves so stubbon and rude, that he is
very a disgrace to her that bare him, who of the two Parents, is the most ready
and apt to let her Child have its will too much.

3. This use reproves such also who either by 3. Reproof to all Corrupters of
Youth.
distilling corrupt principles into the younger sort or by any lewd counsels,
or the like, do intentionally or actually withdraw Children from due Honor of
their Parents; of the former sort are such like as those false teachers among
the Jews, who taught the Sons who had Fathers and Mothers living and needing
their help, that yet they needed not to relieve them, or to give ought to them,
but instead thereof, either to give something to the Corban, or treasury, for
temple-uses, and that would exempt them and excuse them from the other work of
relieving their Parents: and so teaching them to deny to their Parents the
Honor of recompense due to them, they made the 5 th. Commandment, Honor thy
Father and Mother, void, and of no force and Authority, or place, as Christ
reasons, Mark. 7. 9. to 14. There are too many such like corrupters of
Children, not aloue amongst Papists, who hold forth the same in substance,
which is there instanced in, as might be showed in their Principles, who would
have men give away their whole estates to Religious uses (as they call them)
and so dis-enable themselves to relieve their Parents, in what need soever they
may stand thereof: they would also have young Men and Women without Parents
Consent, to become their Votaries, and when once such, no way to Minister to
their Parents any more, though sick, or otherwise needing their Childrens help:
but I fear there are too many other petty Antichristian Spirits, in these
days, who by other erroneous tenants, wherein they pretend to be for Christ,
but are indeed against Christ they leaven their Disciples, and such as they can
subtly draw after them, with a Spirit of Alienation, even from their own good
Parents, if they will not be of their corrupt Judgments and opinions; but as
those seducers among the Jews, notwithstanding their goodly pretenses to
Religion; are branded by Christ to be Hypocrites, according to that of Solomon,
Prove. 11. 9. The Hypocrite with his mouth (or the corrupt principles and
persuasions uttered by his mouth) destroys his Neighbor: And as Christ
charged them to be such bold and high-minded sinners, as by those corrupt
speeches of theirs, did, what in them lay, make void the Commands of God, so
doubtless are such like seducers to be justly charged with the like guilt of
prevailing and ruling Hypocrisy, and rebellion against the Lord. And Jesus
Christ, who when on earth did doctrinally charge and impeach them in such sort,
will assuredly at the last day Judicially sentence men and Angels for the same
wickedness, if they seasonably, seriously, and sincerely repent not of the
same. As for others, who by their Counsels as well as scandalous examples, are
Corrupters, as of others, so of youth also, and as in other matters, so in this
which respects the honor which they ow to their Parents, these show
themselves to be the Children of Belial, or of the very Devil, as of one who
is amongst all yoaks, in Church, or State, or Family; they were Children of
Belial, in 1 Samuel 10. 26, 27. who despised Saul, that Father of the
Commonwealth of Israel: and they are no better, who act or teach contempt of
Fathers of Families. As Elies Sons, those ringleaders in such ways of
dishonor of Fathers of Families, 1 Samuel 2. 25. they are called men of Belial,
verse. 12. Such Corruptors of youth, in the matter of Honor due to Parents, be
their profession of Religion what it may be, or give they never such good hopes
of the truth thereof, as one while Achitophel did, who was David's equal, all
one heart with him (as he thought) his guide, his most intimate acquaintance,
one with whom he took sweet Counsel, in sacred, as well as Civil things, and
walked to the house of God in Company with him, Psalm. 55. 13, 14 Yet if a
Counselor to Absalom, a Son, in way of high dishonor to David, his own
Father, as he was in that Counsel he gave Absalom, to defile his Fathers bed, 2 Samuel 17. 20, 21, 22, 23. and to seek his Fathers very life, as well as throne,
2 Samuel 17. 1, 2, 3, 4, 21. I say such a vile Counselor of Children any way to
dishonor their Parents, he is no doubt a desperate Apostate, ripe for the very
Imprecation of a godly Parents, as in David's case, 2 Samuel 15. 31. Lord turn the
Counsel of Achitophel into foolishness. Such Corrupters of youth also, as well
of others, you are surely impenitent, obdurate persons, persons of a seared
Conscience, past hope of good, and refuse persons in Gods sight, Jer. 6. 28,
29, 30. They are Brass and Iron, they are all corrupters, the bellows are
burnt, the Led is consumed of the fire, the Founder melts in vain, for the
wicked are not plucked away; reprobate silver, shall men call them, because the
Lord has rejected them. You are soulmurtherers, Prove. 12. 5, 6. The Counsels
of the wicked are deceit: The words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood:
even the very souls of men, Prove. 11. 9. An Hypocrite with his mouth (or with
the words, Counsels, and principles uttered by his mouth) destroys his
Neighbor: even his Neighbors soul also, and shall such bloody and deceitful
men, such crafty soul-murtherers escape? no Assuredly. If sowing discord
amongst brethren, be singled out from the rest, as one special thing which is
an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 6. 16, 19. compared; O how abominable is this
unto the Lord, for you, by your vile corrupting speeches, tenants, or Counsels,
to lay the seeds of Alienation of Childrens hearts from their own dear Parents.
As the City (or civil polity and society) is too often overthrown, by the mouth
(or corrupt speeches, principles, and Counsels uttered by the mouth) of the
wicked, Prove. 11. 11. So is the Family also. And shall such enemies to mankind
escape unpunished? no assuredly, Prove. 17. 20. He that has a perverse tongue
(to give such like, or any other perverse Counsel) falls into mischief, Prove.
13. 2. As a man (a good man) shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth (or by
the good words, principles, or Counsels, proceeding from his mouth) so (by way
of opposition) the soul of the transgressors shall eat violence: they shall be
paid in their own coin, and reap the fruit of all the cursed speeches or
Counsels which proceeded from their mouths. Prove. 10. 31. The mouth of the just
brings forth wisdom (namely in those whom they instruct, rebuke, persuade,
or Counsel) but the froward tongue (which utters naughty counsels and
tenants, etc.) shall be cut out. And commonly such bad Counselors of Sons or
Daughters, unto any ways of dishonor to their Parents, they come to
dishonorable and vile, if not desperate ends, as did that bad Counselor,
Achitophel, who dyed by a halter, but which was worst of all, he was his own
hangman, 2 Samuel 17. 23. And O! that all bad Counselors of Children against
their Parents, might in time take warning by that, and many other dreadful
examples, mentioned in Histories, of the sad ends of such like Counselors.

A second use of the point may serve for examinaon, whether any have or do
rightly Honor their Parents. This is the rather to be considered, in that
there is a formal Pharisaicall Honor of Parents: there is an Honor of
Parents common not alone to Hypocrites, but to very Pagans also, who from mere
natural principles have done much this way in Honor of Parents, and have been
very eminent and famous therein. But to pass them by at present, and instance
in others. Paul before his conversion was an exact Moralist, touching the
letter of the Law, and so of the 5th Commandment, he was blameless, Phil. 3.
6. So that young man, in his sense, had kept all, and o the 5th Commandment,
according to the letter of it, Mark 10. 19, 20. Yet a mere unregenerate person.

Now if persons, in the relation of Children rightly honor their Parents, it
may be discerned Marks of due honor of Parents.
by such marks as these.

1. If Conscience to God, and to his command 1. If from a good conscience.
has the greatest stroke, in the Honor given to Parents, by their Children.
If rightly honored, they are honored in the Lord, as in that branch of this
Honor, it is said, Ephesians. 6. 1. Children obey your Parents in the Lord. So it is
true in Honor in general, or in any other particular of Honor due to
Parents, they must be respected, reverenced, and recompensed, etc. in the Lord.
Or so as it be from a good Conscience, and may stand with a good Conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 5. the end (or scope) of the Commandment (even of the whole Law
specially that of the second Table, and particularly this of the fifth
Commandment also) is Love (to whom Matthew. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40. all the duties
of the Law are referred as to their head) out of a pure heart, and a good
Conscience, and faith unfeighned. True it is, the Law of nature and Nations
also, may and must have a strong hand in the Honor of Parents by their
Children, but must not have the chief hand therein; respect may and must also
be had, to the blessing of life, and that it may be well with us, Ephesians. 6. 2, 3.
Honor thy Father and Mother, that thou may live long, and that it may be
well with thee: We may and must aim at this, that it may be well with us in
our souls, bodies, estates, names, occasions, relations, changes, prosperity,
adversity, life, death, and after death; but yet conscience to God, and his
command, together with chief respect had to the glory of God, must be the great
wheel, which carries us on in this good way Paul thought to gain eternal
life, by his Moral Righteousness, and that set him so hard to this, and other
works of the Law, Ph. 3. 6, 7. The young man's question, intimates what was
uppermost in his heart, in all his keepings of the Law, namely, the getting of
eternal life only, Mark. 10. 17, 19, 20. And therefore these were notright in
any of their acts of obedience to this fifth Commandment, or to any of the
rest of the ten Commandments.

Now if this Honor to Parents be indeed from a good conscience, it will be
also from faith unfeigned: This is discerned if from Faith,
for they are joined, 1 Timothy 1. 5. When the interest which children have in the
Lord, and in his gracious covenant and promises, is a main ground of the Honor
of Reverence, or of any other Honor, which persons as in the Relation of
Children, do give unto their Mother, or to their Father, this is suitable to
Gods mind, Levit. 19. 3. Ye shall fear every man his Mother, and every man his
Father; why so? or what should move them to that? it follows: I am the Lord
your God. Because they believe him to be their blessed Covenant Father in the
Messiah, they are therefore the rather to put all the Honor they can upon the
Image of his Father-hood in their Parents. Now it is as God would have it. So
when persons as in If from love of God.
the relation of Children do respect, prise and love their Christian Parents
the more, because they love the Lord, who requires this at their hand, now it
is well a so; or when an holy fear attends them, lest not alone their good
Parents hearts, If from fear of Sin.
but lest the Lord also, and his Spirit, should any way be grieved, or
displeased by their expressing, or carrying it toward them in any way contrary
to due Honor of Parents; they are afraid to carry it irreverently,
disobediently, disrespectfully, or ingratefully toward them, even when some
way tempted thereto, lest the eyes of Gods glory should thereby be provoked,
now also it is well. Or when at any time they epsy any dishonorable If kindly
broken and Abased when the contrary in them is discerned.
thought, or stirring in their minds, or spirits, or take notice of some
speech, or carriage of theirs, savouring of dishonor to Father, or Mother, and
this melts their hearts kindly before the Lord, and makes them ready to
confess the same ingenuously to living Parents, as well as to the Lord, and
that in all the aggravations thereof; yea when a very shadow of such dishonor
of Parents, or the remembrance of any passages savouring thereof, though past
long ago, and possibly before God touched their hearts effectually, as well as
since that, these also are matters of heart Abasings, breakings, and bitter
complaints before the Lord: this argues a good conscience in this particular
also. When they also do watch their spirits and hearts, to keep them to the
Rule, as well as over If watching over their spirits also so that end.
their speeches, gestures, and actions, to keep them as close as may be to that
rule, Honor thy Father and thy Mother: this also argues Honor of Father If
there be no outward thing frighting or chiefly drawing to it.
and Mother from a good conscience. In a word, when there is no other thing of
an inferior nature, either to affright and force them to it, or on the other
hand, to bribe them to it (as say riches, preferments, patrimony, or the like
humane Attractives) and yet they are inwardly moved, and strongly, and
prevailingly carried out, in a way of Honor of Parents: All these do
undoubtedly evince, that now at least there is a blessed Spirit, and habit of
Honor of Parents wrought in such Children by the special efficacy of the Holy
Ghost, from which such do now at least Act, in matters respecting their Parents
Honor, and that now at least, a good conscience, and conscience to God and to
his Command, does set them about this blessed work.

The clearing of this first mark, which indeed is the main of all, might
satisfy us, but for further help in this discovery, let us add three or four
marks of Honor rightly given to Parents.

A second mark then hereof is, when Children 2. If holding up Parents Honor
when aged, and decayed.
are conscientiously careful to hold up Parents Honor, when they are Aged,
yea, and when through infirmity, Parents some way miscary. As Sem and Japhet
were cordially sollicitous to hold up their Aged and miscarrying Father Noah's
Honor; yea though tempted by their brother Chams derisive tale about their
Father, to have disrespected him: yet see their conscientious care of
maintaining their respect, and reverence to their Father, in avoiding any
occasion (as sight of his nakedness) which might have drawn on contempt of him,
in them, Genesis 9. 22. And Ham, the Father of Canaan, saw his Fathers nakedness,
and told his two brethren without, verse. 23. And Shem, and Japhet took a
garment, and laid it upon their shoulders, and went backwards, and covered the
nakedness of their Father, and their faces were backward, and they saw not
their Fathers nakedness.

3. When good Children do even thirst after 3. If Children thirst after Parents
souls welfare.
their carnal Parents souls welfare and peace, above others, and are ever and
anon contriving which way to help on that also. Thus did Abraham, what in him
lay, to help out his Idolatrous Father Terah, from his course and way: as might
be showed by comparing Acts 7. 3, 4. with Genesis 11. end, and 12. 1. and John 24.
2, 3.

4. When they are as willing and joyful to Honor 4. If as willing to Honor
them as to be Honored, or rewarded by others.
Parents, all the just ways of Honor of them, as they are to partake of any
benefit of their parentall respects or bounty, as they are to have it be well
with them here or hereafter, as they are to live long upon the earth, or as
they are to have the like due honor put upon them by children, which they already
have, or may come to have themselves.

5. When they do not so soon forget their Parents after they are dead and gone.
Sarah was 90. years old, when she bare Isaac, Genesis 17. 17. And lived 37. years
after. For she died when she was 127. years old, Genesis 23. 1. then Isaac was 37.
years old: he was 40. years old, when he married Rebeckah, Genesis 25. 20. Which
was three years after his Mothers death: and when he married, or took Rebeckah
to wife, then it was that Isaac was comforted after his Mothers death, Genesis 24.
67. For three years space then, this pious Son was ever and anon mourning in
thoughts of his good Mothers death, and God made this his sweet companion
Rebeckah, a special comfort to him against that trouble about his Mothers
death.

A third use is of exhortation: and that, to Parents, 3. Use. Of exhortation,
1. To Parents to further this their due Honor. 1. By preventing their being
either corrupted, or dismayed in matters of Religion.
to endeavor what in you lies, to help forward your Children, in their
Conscionable performance of this their duty of Honor of Parents; and for this
end,

1. Take very special care, to prevent whatsoever, either may corrupt them, or
any ways discourage them in the matter of the Honor of God himself, or of his
word. For if they grossly fail in the matter of the Honor of God and of his
word, they will as grossly fail in the matter of Honor of Parents; As we see in
Elies Sons, who were vilely corrupt in the matters of Religion, as those of
common honesty, 1 Samuel 2. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 22. and verse. 25. they were
as vile transgressors against the fifth Commandment, requiring Honor to
Parents: they hearkened not to the voice of their Father. Imitable therefore is
that care of the Godly Fathers of the two Tribes and half, to remove occasions
of discouraging their Children, from the fear or worship of God, Josh. 22. 25,
26, 27, 28. And if we have not rather done it (built this Altar of witness)
saying, in time to come, your children (say they to the Fathers of the ten
Tribes there met) may say to our Children, what have you to do with the God of
Israel? ye have no part in the Lord: so shall your Children make our Children
cease (or be discouraged and Apostatise) from fearing (or worshipping) the Lord.
Oh! that Christian Parents would the rather keep out Anabaptistical principles
and doctrines, as from their own hearts, so as much as may be from the ears
and minds of their Children, lest being told thereby, that they have nothing to
do with the God of Israel, and they have no part in the Lord; they are made
thereby to cease, or be discouraged, from the fear, or worship of the Lord; but
that by the way.

2. Redress what in you lies, (if you did not 2. By redressing disorders in
them one toward another
prevent) disorderly carriages of your Children toward one another; for if
they are inured to carry it badly one toward another they will also carry it
dishonourably toward Parents, Genesis 37. 23, 24. Jacobs Sons, who, before their
conversion, carried it so unworthily toward Joseph, they carried it as
malepertly toward their Father, Genesis 34. When verse. 30. their sorrowful
Father had expressed his fears of the ruin of him and of his house, which
might be occasioned by his Sons Murder of the Shechemites, they saucily answer
verse. 31. Should he deal with our Sister as with an Harlot? Absalom that will
carry it so cruelly and perfidiously toward his brother Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. 28,
29. He proved as very a perfidious and cruel wretch toward his own Father not
many years after. Cap. 15. Rebeckah's care therefore was imitable, to prevent,
or remove the continual discords, and jarrs, and mischiefs, which might arise
from that heart-grudge between Esau and Jacob, which because she could not
heal, she sends away Jacob from Esaus company, Genesis 27. 42, 43, 44, 45.

3. Labor to be fearers and honourers of God your selves, as an heavenly
Father, and then you 3. By being fearers of God themselves.
have the advantages of the promises of God, that your Children shall be
blessed also, and consequently furnished with this spiritual blessing, a
spirit of Honor of Parents, Psalm. 112. 2. The generation of the upright shall
be blessed, that they shall be a comfort to you, as Vine-branches issuing from
the wombs of your wives, yielding in time grapes of Consolation to Parents, in
the ways of due honor to God, or Parents, etc. Psalm. 128. 1. Blessed is every
one that fears God, etc. And verse. 2. happy shall thou be, and it shall be
well with thee. And verse. 3. Thy wife shall be as a fruitful Vine by the sides
of thine house, thy Children as Olive-plants round about thy Table: which is
not barely a promise, that their wives shall have Children, or many Children,
as if that made them so peculiarly, happy as is promised they should be: for
ungodly persons are full of Children, Ps. 17. 14. They send forth their
Children like a flock, Job 21. 11. No, but its a promise of making the fearer
of God happy in the qualification of his Children, that they shall be, such as
shall yield wine of consolation to them, in what they shall be to God, and to
their Parents, and to others: as the Vine-branches do yield the grapes, which
yield the chearing wine to man's heart: and that they shall be such, as shall be
an honor to their Parents, by their manner of walking toward God, Parents and
others, as Olive-plants yield that oil of Olive, which makes man's face to
shine. I forbear to instance in other promises.

4. Pray much and plead earnestly with God 4. By praying and pleading with God
much for Children.
for your Children, that God would write his Law (and so the Law of the fifth
Commandment also) in their hearts: ingrave the Law of grace in them, to
dispose and enable them to obedience to all his Commandments.

5. Act your faith upon the promises of God, 5. By acting faith in Gods
promises for Children.
undertaking for your Childrens best welfare, as Esaias 61. 9, and 65. 23. Genesis
17. 7. Acts 2. 38, 39. Esaias 59. ult. cap. 44. 3, 4. Which as they are made to
the whole Church, as an homogeneall whole, so to each part of which that whole
consists. If the woman of Canaan can believe. And for her daughter, she may
have not only that mercy of disposessing the devil, but what she will for her,
Matthew. 15. 28. Oh woman, great is thy faith: be it to thee as thou will. If
that man in Mark. 9. 21, 22, 23, 24. Can believe that Christ can help his Son,
at that or any other dead lift, all things are possible to him that believes:
even to a Parent believing for his Child. Eveu that could believe for her very
babe, whom out of faith she called Seth: for God said she, has appointed me
another seed, (or good and godly Child) instead of Abel, whom Cain slew: she
faled not of what she believed for him: for he proved a most worthy man to God
and man-ward. So did Noah prove, of whom his father, when born, could believe,
and therefore in faith called him Noah, saying, this Son shall comfort us,
concerning our work and toil of our hands, etc. Genesis 5. 29. So did Moses prove
a man eminent, not alone for honor of God, but for honor of Parents, witness
those Acts of Honor to his very Father in Law Jethro, mentioned Exodus 4. 8.
and cap. 18. 7. and Numb. 10. 31, 32, 33. Concerning which Moses, when he was a
very babe, his own Parents acted their faith, and from that faith used that
means to become an instrument of special honor, Heb. 11. 23. They in Psalm.
102. That believed for their Children, that their Children should continue,
verse. 28. The Children of thy servants shall continue, must needs believe for
their help and grace to obey the fifth Commandment, which is made by God
himself a very special means of continuing and living long in the Land, which
the Lord thy God shall give them. 6. By good education of Children.


6. Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, hence those two
joined, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3. Children are charged with this: Honor thy Father and
thy Mother: Parents with their duty, in lieu thereof, and as a means to further
it, verse. 4. Likewise ye Parents provoke not your Children to wrath, and that
way hinder your children in it, but bring them up in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord, and that way further your Children in it. Isaac that was so well
educated by his Father, in what a high degree does he honor his Father, with
this Honor of obedience, when at his Command, though being in the flower of
his youth, about 30. years old, he could easily have escaped his old Fathers
hand, yet is content to let him bind him to be offered up as a sacrifice unto
God? Genesis 22. 9. So Noah's, Shem, and Japhet, whom he had educated well (though
Cham proved a wretch, yet) they proved eminent examples of Honor of Parents,
witness their act formerly mentioned, Genesis 9. 23, 24. So Solomon who was so
well educated, and instructed, both by his Father David: witness the Records
which he kept of the principle things his Father instructed him in, mentioned,
Prove. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and of his Mother Bathsheba,
witness his Records of some special, Patheticall Counsels of her to him,
mentioned Prove. 31. 1. to 10. How eminent he proved in this way of Honor of
Parents, let that act of his toward his Mother, mentioned, 1 Kings 2. 19.
declare, though a King upon his throne, yet the King rose up to meet her, and
bowed himself to her, etc. the like might be said of Jacob's Joseph so well
educated by his Father, witness the earliness of grace in him, Genesis 37. 1, 2,
3, 4, etc. How eminent he was in this way of Honor of Parents, his story
shows, Genesis 47. 12. be nourished his father, etc. And cap. 48. 12. and Joseph
bowed himself (viz. to his Father) with his face toward the earth. But
concerning Parents education of Children, we shall speak largely to it God
willing afterward.

7. It is good also, that as Manoah in that case 7. By advising with best
Ministers what is best for that end.
inquired of the Angel concerning their Son Sampson Judge. 13. 8, 12. How they
should order the Child, and how they should do to live, so let Christian
Parents be taking the best advise, and help they can, of their able and
faithful Ministers, how they should order their Children, as may be for the
best, every way for Gods glory, and their Honor 2. Use, Exhortation, To
Children 2. To Children to give Parents such due Honor. Motives to it.
to endeavor to give this Honor in general due by the Command of God from you
to your Parents; for which consider, 1. Of some Motives to it, And 2. Of some
helps and means to this duty; only remember I speak to the Children of the
Godly, to the Children of the Church, though not altogether excluding others.
Motives to this duty are such as these.

1. In that God has placed the image of his father 1. Gods image in Parents.
hood upon parents, therefore honor them: he that honoreth God, will honor an
especial Image of any divine excellency of his, the father-hood of God is a
choice, relative, divine excellency of his, witness that name of honor, not
alone respecting us his adopted Children, yea, his begotten ones by grace, but
respecting his only beloved Son, and only begotten by nature, let this Image
hereof in the parents of our Persons be the rather venerable and honorable in
our eyes. Hence that Argument of God, Mal. 1. 6. A Son Honors his Father; If
I be a Father, where is my Honor? my Fatherly Image is Honored by a Son in
his Father, and will not you, who are in a sense, my Sons, Honor my own
father-hood, whereof that in others is but 2. Childrens Covenant Interest by
their good Parents.
an Image.

2. In that God takes Children into his Covenant, even from the respect he
has to their Godly Parents; and if God honor parentall relations so much in
his way, will not you honor them in your way, Deu. 4. 2. Because he loved thy
Fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them, to one and the same persons
belong the glory and the Covenants, To. 9. 4. to whom belong the glory, and the
covenants: if Gods and the Churches covenant be long to Children, the glory
belongs to them, take away Covenant and church privileges, ye take away their
glory, as the Israelites did, when they would have dealt with the little ones
of Judah, as if they had rather been Pagans and out-Lawes, than fellow-brethren
in covenant-respects; so they purposed to have kept sons and their daughters
under, as bondmen and women, 2 Chro. 28. 8, 9, 10. They might only have of the
heathen for bondmen and women, Le. 25. 44. but not any of their brethren the
Children of Israel, they might not rule over them with rigor, as over bond men
and women, v. 46. though waxen poor they must not be compelled to serve as
bondservants, ver. 39. Yea, but for Israelites to take that course they
intended, was to make them as the heathen, and so to take away their glory of
Covenant and Church-privileges, as Junius expounds that, Mi. 2. 9. Of late my
people are risen up as an enemy, etc. and from their children have ye taken
away my glory for ever: he refers it in this way to that story, 2 Chro. 28.
8, 9, 10. Now if by good Parents Children come to shame in such Honor and 3.
Childrens lifts to their faith by means of good Parents.
glory, they may well in way of grateful retribution Honor their good Fathers
and Mothers.

3. In that Children have a mighty lift to their very faith, in what ever
concerns their welfare, outward, or inward, and that in all cases and
charges, from the covenant of God with their Parents, therefore honor your
Christian Parents: hence, Exodus 32. 13, 14. In that almost desperate case of
Israel, Moses exercises his faith, and thence pleads the Covenant with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, remember says he, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc.
Mic. 7. 20. The Prophet sets his faith on work for himself and people upon
that Covenant, Thou will (says he) perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy
to Abraham, which thou have sworn to our Fathers from the days of old; and
this his faith therein was the ground of that which he believed, verse. 29. He
will turn again, he will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our
iniquities, and thou will cast their sins into the depths of the Sea, 2 Chro.
33. 12, 13. Manasseth that notorious miscreant, When in his affliction he
besought the Lord his God (viz. His God in the Covenant of his Father Hezekiah)
And humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, And prayed to live,
and he was entreated of him, he then prayed in faith, for he prevailed with
God, but here was his hold and prop, God was his God in the Covenant of his
Father and Ancestors, and therefore he will wrestle strongly with him for
mercy, even to surh a notorious sinner, as he now sees and feels himself to
be. Solomon's hold and bottom of his prayer in his case, is this, Let thy
promise unto David, my Father, be established, etc. 2 Chro. 1. 9, 10, 11. So
Kings 8. 25, 26. And now Oh Lord God of Israel, let thy word I pray thee be
verified which thou spakest to thy servant David my Father. David twice pleads
his Mothers interest in God, Psalm. 86. 16. Save the Son of thy handmaid, Psalm.
116. 16. Truly Lord, I am thy servant, and the Son of thy handmaid, thou have
loosed my bonds, Prove. 14. 26. In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence,
and his Children (viz.) The Children of him that fears God, shall have place
and refuge: No case so sad, or so bad, which such Children of fearers of God,
whose eyes and hearts God opens in some measure to see, and be sensible
thereof, but they have an asylum to fly too, they have the Covenant and
promises made, and ratified in Christ, to their Godly Fathers and Mothers, to
repair too, and to keep up their faith at the deadest lift, lift up Parents
then high, in Honor by whose Covenant Interest your faith may in saddest cases
have such lifts.

4. In that Children are many ways blessed and bettered by occasion of their
Parents 4. Blessings of Children by good Parents.
prayers, pleas, Covenant-interests, etc. therefore Honor them, Genesis 49. 26.
The blessings of thy Father have prevailed above the blessings of my
progenitors. Every godly Ancestour adds something to the Common stock of
blessings of grace, laid up for their posterity, the latter still superadding
somewhat more than the former left, Psalm. 115. 14. The Lord shall increase you
more and more, you and your Children; Psalm. 102. 1, 2, 3. The generation of the
upright shall be blessed; Psalm. 103. 17. Gods righteousness (or faithfulness
in his Covenanted mercies) is unto Childrens Children. Deuteronomy. 4. 40. Thou shall
therefore keep his Statutes, that it may go well with thee, and with thy
Children after thee: So cap. 12. 28. If God then Honor you with such blessings
for your good Parents sakes, you may well Honor your Parents, yea, sometimes
the very worst Children, who had been many a time debased as low as hell, by
the destroying judgments of God, yet are not, out of Gods respect to their
Parents, or Ancestors, Covenant-interests: God would not destroy the house of
David, in wicked Jehoram's time, because of the Covenant which he had made with
David, 2 Chro. 21. 6, 7. And so the very worst might be provoked to Honor
their good Parents, for had it not been for their sakes, its likely such had
been in the lowest hell ere this; let children of good parents know that by
grace through your Parents instrumentally, you have God for your God, if not
rejecting your interest, if having hearts to improve the same for your help, to
Honor God and them, Genesis 17. 7.

5. In that it is the ready way for Children to be Honored by others, to
Honor their Parents; 5. Childrens honor from others thereby
and therefore Honor them. Ruth 4. 14, 15. The good women say of Obed Ruth's
Son, that his name shall be famous in Israel, and add that as an encouraging
Argument to Naomi his Grandmother, and he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy
life, and a nourisher of thine old age, a very observant and grateful
Grandchild, and no wonder then if his name would be so Honorable in Israel.
God records it in Scripture in honorem, in the eyes of God, Angels, and men,
concerning Sem, Japhet, Joseph and others, that they were such Honourers of
Parents. The very Pagan Grecians honored Aeneas his piety, to his aged Father,
so as that they honorably rewarded it with the gift of all his other estate,
which else was the Conquerers right.

6. In that it is the ready way for Children to be 6. Blessings upon posterity
thereby.
blessed in their Children and posterity: as Shem was thereby in his posterity,
and Japhet in his, Genesis 9. 23, 26, 27. Yea, its the way to have like Honor
meted out to you from your Children, therefore the rather Honor Parents. Do to
them as you would have others in like relation to do to you, Matthew. 7. 11.

2. Consider of some helps and means to this Helps to it. Avoid Causes of
dishonor to Parents, as, 1. Self-conceit.
duty.

1. Take heed of all and every of the causes of Childrens dishonor of their
Parents: As 1. Self-conceitedness, as in Absalom, who thought himself fitter to
rule then his Father, 2 Samuel 15. 3, 4. there is none deputed of the King to
hear thee, Oh that I were Judge, I would do every man justice; hence that state
of high dishonor to his Father, and treachery against him, 2 Samuel 15. 7. to
12. Like the younger Son in the Parable, Luke. 15. 12, 13. Who thought himself
fitter to manage his Portion then his Father, and thence slighteth and so
leaves his Father's watch, guidance and presence.

2. Over-weaned conceits of what you do for 2. Conceit of what Children do for
Parents.
Parents, when indeed you can never do enough for them, who under God gave you
your being, like the Elder son in the Parable, Luke 15. 28, 29. Who is ready to
talk great things to his Father of his serviceableness to his Father, so that
when his Father entreated him, who might have commanded him to come in, he
slights his Father's entreaties, he is angry with his Father, finds fault
with his Fathers kindness to his prodigal Brother, whereas he that had
deserved more kindness from his Father, never had the like from him, for so he
answers his Father, Lo these many years do I serve thee, neither at any time
transgressed I thy Commandment, and yet thou never gave me a kid, but as
soon as this thy Son is come, which has devoured thy living with harlots, thou
bast killed for him the fatted Calf: and it is to be feared to be the case of
too many Children in N. E. where Parents are put hard to it, to make more use
of their Children, for their work and business, that they poring too much upon
what they do for their Parents, and not seriously weighing what their Parents
have done for them, they slight them in their hearts.

3. Curiosity and an inordinate desire of liberty. 3. Curiosity.
The young man, Eccles. 11. 9. He must needs walk in the ways of his own
heart, and sight of his eyes, and so cares not for Honoring God or man. Like
the Prodigal Son in the Parable, he must needs abroad to see fashions? what
should such a spark as he do always at home, to be there held in as he is? he
would rather be at liberty, and therefore, let his Father do as he will, he
broad from him.

4. A discontented spirit, a spirit of unsettledness, 4. Discontent.
which sometimes, is the very blast of God upon young men for some other foul
sin: as that wandering spirit was upon Cain for his, but then Cain must away
from home, from his parents, though thereby he goes from the presence of God:
like the Prodigal Son in the Parable, not content with his Fathers finding,
but he will be for himself; though after some bought experience of his, he
afterward finds that the meanest case and place of the lowest in his Fathers
house, be far better then his.

5. Ambition and eager desire of man in outward 5. Ambition;
respects then is meet for you; this also makes many slight their Parents, and
seek to shake off their Parentall watch and rule. This made Absalom turn a vile
traitor to his Father, 2 Samuel 15. and this also put on Adonijah very far that
way, 1 Kings 1. 5, 6.

6. Envy at just respects showed by Parents, to 6. Envy.
fellow Brethren or Sisters, like the elder Son in the parable, out of envy of
his Fathers kindness to his younger Brother: this makes him fly out so
unreverently against his Father, and to charge him closely with injustice and
partiality, Luke 15. 28, 29. Thus Jacobs Sons, envying that their Father
respects young Joseph so much, they are resolved to make some hand of him,
though they know thereby they shall rob their Father of a great part of his
comfort, if not undermine his life; they regard neither, and so their Father is
set light by that while.

2. Take heed of bad company and counsel, 2. Avoid bad company.
which is apt to mislead you, even to dishonor your Parents. When Solomon,
Prove. 19. 26. had told his Son the sad doom, of a Son that wastes his Father,
and chaseth away his Mother, he then gives his Son this counsel, as an
Antidote against any such like sin, verse. 27. Cease my Son to hear the
instruction that causes to err from the words of knowledge: hence is it, that
the boon companion, who is a glutton and a drunkard, is also wont to be so
stubborn, as not to hear the voice of his Parents, Deuteronomy. 21. 20. Such as
contrary to that advice, Psalm. 1. 1. Do walk in the counsel of the ungodly,
and stand in the way sinners, they came to sit also in the seat of the
scornful, to scorn at any, none excepted, no not Parents themselves, Prove. 30.
17. there is an eye that mocketh at his very Father, and despises to obey his
Mother; better therefore were it for younger persons to company and counsel
with wise youth, who conscienciously Honor their Parents, and that will be
verified, Prove. 13. 20. That he that walks with the wise, shall be wise, when
as a companion of fools shall be destroyed.

3. Take heed of poring upon any failings in Parents, 3. Avoid poring upon
Parents failings.
which may tempt you to slight your Parents. Children in such cases, must be as
not seeing the failings, they do see in Parents carriages sometimes, and as not
hearing their failings in expressions sometimes which they do hear: ingenious
Shem and Japhet will not see their Fathers nakedness, Genesis 9. 23, 24. And so
continue to Honor their Father Noah, whereas Cham that will needs look so
wistly, and take such notice of his Fathers nakedness, comes to despise him,
and deride him. Let Children remember that God the Lawmaker, and the fifth
Commandment, their Law and Rule they must walk by, is without spot or failing,
and therefore They must Honor Father and Mother.

4. Listen not to unworthy reports or whispers, 4. Listen not to whisperers.
which ungratious persons, set on work by Belial, may suggest to you, any away,
against your Parents; Shem and Japhet would not listen to their Brother's tale
in that vile way he told it, but if ought be a miss, to provoke them to slight
their Father, they will cover it rather: when one told Teleuchus how ill his
Father spoke of him, says Teleuchus, if my Father has spoken so bad of me,
Plutarch
surely he knows cause enough to do so, else he would not have done it; an
imitable example of an heathen, but ingenious Child to his Father.

5. Improve choycer seasons of getting good, 5. Improve seasons of soul-good.
that you may come to be true Honourers of God, and then no doubt but you will
be Honourers of Parents: make God only to be your God first, worship him
aright, and sanctify his name, etc. and then you will Honor Father and
Mother, Levit. ^9. 2. Be ye holy, says God, as I am holy, and then verse. 3.
charge, fear yea every man his Father and his Mother, be pious to God-wards,
and you will be pious toward Parents, the fear of God is the beginning of such
wisdom also, Prove. 10. 5. As he that sleeps in harvest, (the season of
reaping good, soul-good also) is a Son that causes shame (to Parents also) so
by rule of opposition, he that gathers in summer is a wise Son, or one that
will cause Honor to Parents, as well as himself or others.

6. Set often before your eyes, studdy much, and 6. Eye good examples this way.
make utmost improvement of choycer Scripture examples, of persons eminen t for
honor of parents, as that of Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, yea, Jesse
himself, Luke 2. 51.

7. Inure your selves betimes to Honor Fathers and Mothers without Authority;
as Aged persons, 7. Honor aged persons.
Levit. 19. 32. Honor the face of the Old man. Teleuchus being asked, why at
Sparte the younger Plut arch.
sort use to rise up before the aged? answered, that by giving Honor to
others, they might learn to Honor their own Parents.

CHAP. III. Of Honor in special due to Parents, and that in a direct way, and
therein of Honor of respect and love due to Parents.
HAving spoken of Honor in general, required by the 5. Commandment, from
Children to Parents, we come now to speak of Honor in special due to them:
and first of that which is in a direct way: and therein according to the Method
propounded in the first Chapter. 1. Of Honor of respect and love due to
Parents; that Honor is so taken in Scripture we there gave Scripture
instances, That honor of respect to Parents is due, proved.
and need not now repeat them: we may then note as a branch of the general
point, That Children are bound to Honor their Parents, with the Honor of
choycest respect and love. Honor thy Father and Mother, says Exodus 20. 12.
But having them in choycest respect and love is Honoring of them, say other
Scriptures, therefore Children must most highly respect and love their Parents.
For our better handling of this branch of Honor, let us only show wherein this
commanded respect and love to Parents does consist, or what is required of
Children in this, that they are required so highly to respect and love their
Parents, and then afterward apply it by way of use.

To the former we answer, that Children,

1. They are to be delighted greatly in their This respect consists 1. In
delighting Parents.
Fathers presence, to be much affected with the very sight of a Father or
Mother. See how Joseph plotteth to have his Father near him, when he could not
be so near his Father, Genesis 45. 10. Thou shall be near to me, etc. And when he
comes to the sight of his Father, after some years enforced absence of his
from his Father, he is even overjoyed (as we say) to see him: He is as one
transported, for he falls on his Fathers neck, having first humbly presented
himself to him, Genesis 46. 29. And he wept (for very ecstasy of joy) on his neck
a good while; his heart was so overcome with strength of affections, that for a
good space he can silently weep, but not utter a word, that we read of till
afterward: till his good old Father first brake that deep silence, verse. 30.
and then Joseph also speaks, verse. 31. As Children are to their Parents, the
desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, their Sons and
their Daughters, Ezekiel. 24. 25. So should Parents be to Children. Jacob had
enough if his Son Joseph be alive and well, he is content to die if God so
pleased, Genesis 46. 30. Let the sight of absent, long absent Parents, be to
Children, even as dear and precious, and delighting, as their very lives, if
not more: as it is in that precedentall love and respect of the genuine
Children of the Father of Spirits; Oh the sight of his face, the enjoyment of
his presence, especially after some space of the want of his blessed presence,
what is it not to such Childrens hearts? Such for the nature at least of our
respect and love, should be Childrens love to their Parents.

2. They are not forward to part with 2. Backwardness to pa^^ w^^h them.
their Parents, but as urged and in a sort forced by any special call or
providence of God; and if sometimes called, to be absent from them for a time,
yet to be longing (in a moderate and regular way) after their Company again.
Both these paticulars are clear in instances, the former in Ruth, when her
Sister Orpha left her Mother with tears in her eyes, (Ruth 1. 14. And they lift
up their voice and wept again, and Orpha kissed her Mother in Law, but) Ruth
clave to her, yea, when urged by Naomi to return after her Sister-in-Law, verse.
15. Yet says she, verse. 19. Entreat me not to leave thee, for whither thou
go I will go, and where thou lodged I will lodge: She will share with her in
wealth and woe, and nothing but death shall part them, verse. 17. 2 King. 19.
20. Elisha must needs go and kiss his Father and Mother, and then he will
foolow Elijah: God will have the poor captive Woman, when her Master likes
her for his Wife, yet to bewail her Father and Mother for a Month, Deuteronomy. 21.
13. Such loathness God will have Children to express to part with dear Parents,
as Parents are wondrous loath to part with their Children, living or dying,
unless urged by Gods Call: like good old Jacob first, Genesis 42. 38. My Son
(says he of Benjamin) shall not go down with you, for his Brother is dead, and
he is left alone, if mischief befall him by the way ye go, then shall ye bring
down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave, and Cap. 43. 22, etc. And their
Father Israel said, if it must needs be so, then do this, etc. So should
Children not part with their Parents, till they must needs, till God some way
calls them from them: as the genuine Children of God, such is their love to
him, that it is as death to part with him, though but for a time; Oh if it
might be their Fathers pleasure, they would never be from him, nor have him
from them. So in the nature of our love to Parents, should it be expressed to
them; if God should take them away from us, yet our love should be expressed in
our greatest trouble and grief for them, as Isaacks was to his Mother, for
three years space after, as was showed from Genesis 24. 63. compared with other
Scriptures. When David would express his great grief for his very afflicted
enemies, as if his friends or Brethren, I bowed down heavily (says he) as one
that mourns for his Mother, a Mother-Iess Child's mourning then, for a
deceased Mother, is the saddest of mournings; Hence it was of old a good
Neighbourly Custom, to give a consolatory Cup, to such as mourned for Father
or Mother, as such whose grief was deemed so great, that they needed some
cheering; hence the contrary threatened in judgment, Jer. 16. 7. Edward the
first, having his Father Henry the 3. newly deceased, and withal one young
Prince, his own Son, dead also, he made light of his Sons death in comparison
of his Fathers, saying, He might come to have more Sons, but he should never
have any more Fathers, now this was gone. As for the other expression of
Childrens love to Parents, in longing after them, we see it in Jacob, witness
that part of his plea, Genesis 28. 21. So that I come again to my Fathers house in
peace, and Gen 31. 30. Laban took notice that Jacob longed sore after his
Fathers house; as in that pattern of love of Gods Children, they show in
longing sore after him, and of their Communion with him, Psalm. 42. 1, 2, 3. and
62. 1, 2, 3, etc. So it is in Childrens love to their Parents: only, this
longing after them, must not exceed the bounds of particular calls and callings
or relations, as of Husbands, Wifes, Servants, Ministers, Magistrates, etc. But
in such a way and season, as it may not break any other bonds of God.

3. Children are many ways to deny themselves, 3. In denying themselves for
them
for their Parents choice good, any way, as when Children in their Parents
wants or weaknesses, are called to be stays to their Parents, allbeit it might
be more to their outward advantage to be else where, yet they must be willing
to suffer and lose somewhat with them, and for them, rather then forsake them
in such a case: as Ruth seeing her aged Mother-in-law, who had been full of
outward blessings, but now is empty and very poor, she will not leave her
though a younger Woman and likely to do better for the outward man other where,
Ruth. 1. 16, etc. she will work hard for her, stoop low to become a poor
gleaner, to bring in supplies to her Mother-in-law, Cap. 2. and how long did
Jacobs Sons employ themselves, in the Managing their Fathers estate and outward
affairs and supplies? not alone before their Marriage, Genesis 30. 35. but after,
witness that Genesis 37. 12, 14 and 42. 1, 2, 3. and 43. 15. and 47. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Yea, Children are to be willing to run very great hazards or hardships, for
their Parents sakes, rather then to endanger them, in their persons and names,
or the like. Notable is that example of good Judah, Genesis 44. 33, 34. having
said, v. 30. That his Fathers life was bound up in the Lads life, so that as v.
31. If he see not him return, he will die, and so they shall bring their Fathers
gray hairs with sorrow to the grave; now therefore, says Judah, let thy
Servant abide instead of the Lad, bondman to my Lord, and let the Lad go up
with his Brethren, for how shall I go up to my Father, and the Lad be not with
me? lest paradventure, I see the evil that shall come to my Father; Judah had
rather live and die a bondman, if thereby he might lengthen out his Fathers
days, by Benjamins return, or prevent his sorrowful end, by the detaining
Benjamin in Egypt. Memorable is that story recorded by Pausanias l. 10. writing
of the Catanensiaus, says, that when Catana, a City bordering upon Aetna, was
set on fire by it, they made nothing of their Silver or Gold, but as they fled
out, one takes up his Mother upon his shoulders, another his Father, but
because they hasted not, being so laden, the fire compassed them, the flame
suddenly passing on, yet would they not lay down their Parents, wherefore they
report, that the flames parted as in two, and passed over both the young men
and their Parents, without mortal hurt of them, whence in his time, honorable
memorials were assigned by them to the Catanenses: God honored those acts of
high respect to Parents, with a notable deliverance, and men honored them with
honorable monuments thereof. And indeed, what did not the pattern of filial
respect to his Father, the Son of God, hazard and undergo for his Fathers sake
and honor? and what will not any genuine Child of his, by his help under go,
rather then hazard his name or cause, and there is a proportion of the like, in
the Children of men's love to their Parents. Parents many ways denied and
hazarded themselves for Children, and they may well do as much for Parents.

4. They are to be exceedingly affected with 4. In being affected with Parents
favor or frowns.
their Parents true love to them, or grounded and just displeasure against
them, in the speaking expressions of either of them: Solomon kept the Records
thereof, in his case, as that he took special notice of, and was much affected
with, and God himself took it so well, that he orders it to be a piece of
Sacred Writ, Prove. 4. 3. I was (says he) my Fathers Son, tender, and only
beloved in the sight of my Mother: When Ruben saw that Joseph was missing, in
fear of his Father distaste thereof, says, Genesis 37. 30. The Child is not; and
I, whither shall I go? Absalom would be feigning a genuine filial respect to
his Father, in this particular, that his Fathers favor is all in all to him as
a Son, and his life does him no good, whilst under his displeasure, 2 Samuel 14.
32. He would have Joab say on his behalf to the King his Father, wherefore am I
come up from Geshur? now therefore let me see the Kings face, and if there be
any iniquity in me, let him kill me: but he was a very Counterfeit in this: God
himself alludeth to the case of the displeased Father, in Miriams case, Numb.
12. 14. If her Father (says he) had spit in her face, should she not be
ashamed seven days? look as it was in Christ's deep affections, to the
expressions of his Fathers love or anger; or as it is with Gods other Children,
that nothing more affects them, then the sense of their Fathers love one way,
or that of his displeasure the other way; So it is with ingenuous Children, in
a like respect of affectionatnesse with Parentall favor or anger.

5. They are to prize very much Parents good 5 In prizing Parents instructions
and reproofs.
and savoury Counsels and instructions, yea, their very rebukes: Carefully
remembering and recording their most useful sayings. Thus Solomon takes this
as David's charge to him, Prove. 4. 4. Let thine heart retain my words: and the
choicer passages thereof he records verse. 5. such as those, get Wisdom, get
Understanding, and other like golden Counsels, verse. 6, 7, 8, etc. He gives
the like in charge to his Son, verse. 21. My Son, attend unto my words, keep
them in the midst of thine heart. See the like Prove. 3. 1. and 2. 1. and 6. 21.
Cap. 7. 1, 2, 3. Herein Gods Childrens honor of respect and love to their
heavenly Father is expressed, that they make so much of his words, and keep
them as their treasure: It is the like in the case of the Children of men
toward their Parents.

6. They are to prize and cleave to their good 6. In prizing Parents friends
and Children.
Parents special friends, Prove. 27. 10. Thy Fathers friend forsake not: but
especially they are to cleave to Brethren and Sisters of the same Parents, 1
Pet. 3, 8. Love as Brethren (says he in Saints cases) but it is borrowed from
that which is natural to Brethren of the same Parents, which is to love each
other dearly, its else a dishonor to the Image of their Parents, which is as
one Common stamp upon them all, so that if they love the one, they must love
the other, whence also that, by the same allusion, when speaking of love to
Gods Children, 1 John 5. 1. And every one that loves him that begat, loves
him also that is begotten, he that loves the Father begetting, will love his
Image in his begotten. Moses thought it was a sufficient antidote against any
thing contrary to love, to those two Israelites, that they were Brethren of one
house; yea of one Father, even God, why should they strive or, wrong each
other, Acts 7. 26.

7. They are meekly and wisely to use all faithful 7. In diswading Parents
from soulevills and dangers.
endeavors, to dissuade Parents, and to take them off, from whatsoever might
in danger their very souls welfare, for that is love indeed.

Hence by allusion of such Children, Hos. 2. 2. Plead with your Mother, plead
says God to the good Children of the Church: Children may in such a way, and
must plead with their very Mothers. Good Jonathan did wisely deal with his
Father, and said to him, 1 Samuel 19. 4. Let not the King sin against his
servant, against David, because he has not sinned against thee, and because
his works have been to thee-ward very good, etc.

8: They are cordially to symphathize with 8. In sympathising with Parents.
their Parents in their joys or sorrows, Ge. 44. 34. How shall I go up to my
Father and the Lad not with me, lest peradventure I see the evil that shall
come on my Father, Genesis 37. 35. All Jacobs Sons and Daughters rose up to
comfort him. Use 1. Of Reproof of Childrens unnaturallness to Parents.


1. Use of reproof. 1. It serves to reprove such wretched Children who even in
these very days of Gospel Light, are without natural affection to their
Parents: You have this charged upon the Heathen, Romans 1. 31. That they were
(...), but the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 3, 5. Charge it upon Christians also, who
had a form of godliness, and I wish too many such were not to be found amongst
Christians, and such as would be thought some body for Religion. Some indeed
restrain this in 2 Timothy 3. 3. To Parents unnaturallness to Children, which yet
upon Romans 1. 31. expound it of Childrens unnaturallnesse to Parents: but there
is no need to restrain it to either only Parents, or only Children, the word
is the same, in the Greek in both places: and its well known that the word
(...), signifies most properly that affection of love, whereby either Parents
respect their Children, or Children again respect their Parents: And (...),
are persons without that affection, whether they be Parents or Children, and so
in the Bible put out by the late synod, they well note upon that, Romans 1. 31.
That the sin there taxed by the Apostle, did reign among the Gentiles, who
sacrificed in some places their aged Parents, and sometimes their Children,
unto their Idols: exposed them to ruin, and destroyed them, though not guilty
of any capital crimes, and they refer to 2 Timothy 3. 3. as the same in sense:
but that part of unnaturalness which we here deal withal, is that of the
Children to the Parents, though we acknowledge, that all the aggravations of
this sin, deduceable from those two Scriptures are appliable as well to
unnaturalness in Parents, with which I deal not at present, as to
unnaturalness in Children, of which I am now speakiag.

But that we lose not our bottom for the reproof, are there not too many
Children of Christians, who are as those spoken of, 2 Timothy 3. 3, 4. Heady and
unruly Children to their Parents? Fathers and Mothers cannot, shall not, now
rule Signs of it.
them, their words they care not for, and their blows they as little regard,
are not these void of natural affection to their Parents? Some there are who
are treacherous to their very Parents also, Traitors they are called as, 2 Timothy
3. 3, 4. Such as Parents know not how to trust with their Counsels, Secrets,
Estates, or occasions, they are so false to them: as Micah complained in his
time, Micah 7. 5, 6. and have these genuine affection to their Parents? Some
will cunningly draw their very Parents into some sinful snares, as some Sons
and Daughters do Parents into errors, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. or as Lots Daughters, who
drew him first to drink too much of their wine, and then drew him into incest,
Genesis 19. 33, 35. but do such love, or are not they rather baters, grand-enemies
to their Parents? Some there are who rise up against their good Parents, and
even for their goodness: Some neglect to do for them in their needs: Some there
are who are ready to give reviling speeches to their Parents, Exodus 21. to
strike at them, ibid. or to scoff at them, Prove. 30 17. or to imbesil or wast
their estates, Pro. 19. 26. or at least to wast their farthers (viz. their
Spirits) hasten their end, by their lewd courses: and care not though they know
what cross courses they take, do even break their Parents hearts, yet will on:
But do any such as you are, honor Parents with the Honor of respect and love?
Surely no, you are (...)* without filial affection: what ever your form of
godliness may be, to be sure it is without power, 2 Timothy 3. 3, 5. Such as you
are make the times perilous, verse. 1. and you carry a very black Evils of it.
brand of persons given up to a reprobate mind; for persons given up to a
reprobate mind, Romans 1. 28. they are noted out to be without natural
affection, verse. 31. But woe be to all such unnatural wretches, as you are,
your ruin hastes; let unnatural Absolom's end be a warning to all such.

2. It serves to reprove Parents, who by your 2. Of Parents some way
occasioning alienation of Childrens hearts from them.
own sins lay stumbling blocks in your Childrens way, to tempt them to
unnaturallness in affection, or alienation of affection, or any abatement of
that Honor of respect and love, which they owe to you: for though it be the
Child's great sin, to be so alienated in affection to Parents, yet you that are
Parents may do too much to occasion the same, as,

1. By committing some heinous sin against God, against your Parents, or
against others, and 1 By some gross sin of theirs against God.
so bring this as a curse upon your Children to be so unnatural; as we showed
in the unnatural sins of the Canaanites, mentioned, Lev. 20. 9, 12, etc. to
the 23. as a just fruit of the curse upon Canaan, and upon Cham his Father: It
was unnaturallness in Absalom to take up the sword against his own Father, and
to defile his Father bed openly before all, 2 Samuel 15. 16. but it is no more
then God by Nathan threatened David with for his Murder and Adultery, that he
would raise up evil to him out of his own house, 2 Samuel 12. 9, 10, 11.

2. By unnatural carriages toward your 2. By too unnatural carriages toward
Children.
Children; (for there are too often) too many of such also found, even amongst
professing Parents) or too many Churlish, harsh and strange carriages, bitter
and reviling speeches, unmercifull and cruel correctings, and punishings of
them: any of these are apt to sour Childrens Spirits, and to breed alienation
of heart from you that are Pareets, as Labans Daughters said of their Father
Laban, in some heat of Spirit, Genesis 31. 14, 15. Is there yet any portion in our
Fathers house, (they care not how soon they are gone farther from him) are we
not counted of him strangers?

3. By too much greediness after the world, 3. By Covetous pinchings
making thereby your Children more like slaves for your profits, then Children,
and as basely putting them off, when you have served your turns by the^: this
made Labans Daughters speak more harshly of their father, and took off their
hearts somewhat from him, Ge. 31. 14, 15. He has sold us, say they, and has
quite devoured our money, Prove. 15. 27. He that is greedy of gain troubles
his own house, this way also as well as other ways by breeding disturbances
and distances, even twixt them and their Children, and their Children and
themselves.

4. By breaking just promises made, respecting 4. By breaking just promises
with Children
your Children, especially, in matters of disposal of them in marriage, as
when Laban basely breaks his promise of Rachel to Jacob, Ge. 29 18, 19, 25.
his daughters hearts could not get clear of these old matters, Ge. 31. 14, 15.
He that sold us, etc. what portion have we in his house? when children are
crossed in their just desires, as when Merab Saul's daughter is promised to David,
1 Samuel 28. 17. just when she was to have had him, then she is given to Adriel,
v. 19. This must needs breed ill blood; yea, when Parents will force Children
to break strongest engagements of love, lawfully made, to those they would have
had, as when Michal Saul's Daughter loves David and is given to him, 1 Samuel 18.
27, 28. and yet afterward given to Phalti, 1 Samuel 25. 44. or when Sampsons Wife
is given away by his Father-in-Law to another, Judge. 15. 2. this provoked him
to seek revenge of that wrong, verse. 3. 6. Or when you that are Parents will be
forcing of matches for sinister and low ends upon your Children, cross to the
very bent of their minds; as Saul to cause his Daughter Merab to have Adriel,
when she was to have had David; sad have been the mischiefs of this, in
unnatural acts of Children against very Parents, stirred up therein by such
cross acting of Parents. One de Sales a Frenchman stifled his Father, a grave
Counselor in Tholous in France, because he would not consent to his marriage
with one de la Hay. So in Fidelia and Caelestina too Italian Ladies, who
crossed by their Father in their matching to their minds, they conspire his
death, and got him murdered.

5. By misplacing your respects upon unworthy 5. By mispleacing affections upon
unworthy Children.
Children, as Isaac upon Esau, who proved one that little respected his Father,
witness his cross matchings to the grief of his Fathers heart, Genesis 25. 28.
Isaac loved Esau, because he eat of his venison, Cap. 26. 34, 35. Esau took
Judith and Balhshema, which were a grief of heart to Isaac and Rebeckah. David
misplaced his respect upon Absalom, and loved him too well, and more than other
his Children; and he proved the most unnatural wretch to him of them all, 2 Samuel 15. Cristina a Switzer, she inordinately affected her Son Maurice, would
hardly believe any evil report against him, though never so true, and this
Fellow afterward turned a paricide, and by a wile drew his Mother to look into
a deep well, and there threw her in, where she perished. Use 2. For exhortation.


A second use of this branch of the general point is for exhortation.

1. To Children, to cherrish, strengthen, and enlarge 1 To Children to cherish
natural respects of love to Parents.
your respect and love to your Parents: wherein I may say as Aristotle does in
his Ethics, l. 8. Cap. 16. speaking of the honor due to God and Parents,
(...), No man can give them the honor whereof they are worthy: only he that to
his utmost does endeavor to give them highest respect, he may be called pious.
Children are never able to aequalize, Motives to it.
or match Parents love to their Children; Parents love to Children, is as to so
many pieces of themselves, but Childrens love to Parents, is as of those who
come from them: So that Parents love to Children descends, as from springs or
Fountains to the streams issuing from them, and therefore runs down more
strongly, freely, and uncessantly: but Childrens love to Parents is ascending,
and therefore moves more slowly and gently, and needs more help in its
motion: Aristotle observes well, that of which any thing is generated, is by a
greater and more forcible necessity nearly knit to that which is generated of
it, than that which is born and generated is to that which begot it, Eth. l. 8.
Cap. 14. Parents love also has the start of time to that of their Childrens,
for Parents love their Children as soon as they are born, but Children love
their Parents and respect them, when they come to understanding and are of some
years: Parents prevented Children in their love, Children can never overtake
them therein, only must follow them as hard in the way of love as they can:
Children, when little Children have nothing to give Parents, to be a temptation
to bribe their affections to them, nor are they of any power to curb them any
way, to enforce respects to them, and so they are more pure: Whereas in both
these regards, Childrens respects to Parents may be leavened: Yea, Parents, as
Parents, are instruments in Gods hands, of their Childrens Souls being in their
bodies, and so of the faculties of their Souls, and so of their natural
affections in them, and of that affection of love and fear amongst the rest,
and therefore they may well challenge the honorable improvement of them to
themselves, so far as God allows the same.

To conclude, Children will never honor Parents, with the honor of Reverence,
Obedience, or Recompense, or the like, unless they give the honor of respect
and love due to them, therefore give them this their due. Now that Children may
be helped and furthered in doing this. Helps to it. 1 Dread of the vile sin of
unnaturalness.


1. Possess your hearts with a deep sense and dread of the heinous nature of
the sin of unnaturalness, which is wont to be accompanied with the vilest sins
against God and Man: as by comparing Romans 2. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. and 2 Timothy 3.
2, 3, 4. may be discerned: Such persons who are without natural affections,
commonly proving Blasphemous against God, ungrateful to God and men, unholy,
truce and Covenant-breakers, whisperers, back-biters, false accusers of others,
they are commonly given to uncleanness, and wantonness, they are fierce and
furious, of a cruel Salvage, unmercifull and implacable spirit, they are
despisers of those that are good, they are even haters of God: they are haters
of other men, of a spightfull, malicious, quarrelsome, and envious Spirit, in a
word, They are full of all unrighteousness, and deceit themselves, and
inventors of evil things, evil opinions, evil practices, ringleaders in sin,
authors of sin to others. If sundry of these scandalous persons in old and new
England were closely searched into, they would be found to be persons, who have
been and are unnatural to their Parents.

2. Take heed of any leading causes which breed and feed unnaturalness, and
undermine natural 2. Avoiding causes of unnaturalness of affection as, 1.
Ignorance.
affection to Parents: such as are,

1. Ignorance of God, and of his word, and of the matters of Religion, Rom 1.
31. without understanding, without natural affection; if without
understanding, what wonder if without natural affection?

2. Self-love, for they that are so full of self-love, 2. Self-love.
have never a due proportion of love left for God or man, for Parents or
others: 2 Timothy 3. 2. For men shall be lovers of themselves, and verse 3.
without natural affection.

3. A worldly, covetous Spirit, ibid. Covetous, 3. Covetousness.
without natural affection: a Spirit of the love of the world will eat out, as
the love of the Father of our Spirits, John 2. 15. so that of the Father of our
flesh also, whose Fatherhood is an Image of that in God: Such, if they show
respect to Parents, it is but for their own advantage and gain, and if the
respect to them may not stand with their gain, or must be to their outward
loss, then adieu respect to Parents.

4. A proud Spirit, 2 Timothy 3. 3, 4. Without natural affection, high-minded.
Absalom who was so Pride.
high-minded, what wonder is it if he prove so unnatural to his Father?

5. A Voluptuous Spirit, ibid. Without natural affection, lovers of pleasures
more then lovers of God: Voluptuousness.
They that respect their pleasures so much, they never respect God as they
should, nor their parents. Esaus inordinatenesse of affection to his hunting,
brings him to that, Genesis 25. that he despises his birthright, as his Fathers
eldest Son, and therein virtually despises his Father, and his voluptuous
desires after the Canaanitish women, make him careless of grieving his Father
and Mother, and so far unnatural to them, Genesis 26. 3. Getting their hearts
truly turned to the Lord.


3. Labor to get your hearts turned to God effectually, and in love with him
as a Father, and then whatsoever alienations of heart there were in you from
your Parents before, yet then Childrens hearts will be also turned fully to
your good Parents Ma. 4. 6. Jo. Baptist (its said) by the blessing of grace
upon his Ministry, turning persons to the Lord, to the faith, to the wisdom
of the Just, (as Luke has said it, Luke 1. 17.) he shall turn the hearts of
the Children to their good Fathers, which whilst the Children were wicked,
they could not well abide to be controuled, reproved, curbed and corrected, as
they were by them, and so their good Fathers also, whose hearts were much taken
off from those Children for their vileness should be turned toward their
Children, or as some say, the unnatural distances bred betwixt Parents and
Children, by many sects and opinions, too rife among the Jews, when by sound
doctrine they were brought to rights, and to the truth, those alienations
should be healed. Only Cautions about Childrens love to Parents. 1. Not such as
to approve sin in Parents.
in the love of Children to Parents, let these cautions be observed,

1. Look that it be not such as to approve of the evil saiyings, principles,
or practices of your ungodly, or of your seducing or seduced Parents. Its
blamed in them, Psalm. 40. 13. their posterity approve their sayings, Jer. 7.
18. The Children gather wood, and the Fathers kindle a fire, and the women
knead the dough, to make Cakes to the Queen of heaven. 2 King. 15. 13. Asaph
loved his Mother well, as his Mother, but he hates her Idol, he destroys and
burns it. Abraham loves his Father Terah well, but will not go after his way
of Idol-worship,, Josh. 24. 2, 3. God commends it in the Son, who sees all
his fathers sins, and considers and does not such like, Ezekiel. 18. 14.

2. Let it not be such, as to follow their evil Of 2. Such as to follow their
sinful Counsel,
Counsel in any thing, as Ahaziah who walked in the ways of Ahab, for his
Mother was his Consellour, 2 Chronicles. 22. 3. And as Herodias who being before
instructed of her Mother, said to Herod, give me here John Baptists head in a
charger, Mat. 14. 8.

3. Let it not be so as to keep their dangerous Or 3. Such as to keep their
sinful Counsel
and wicked Counsel, in any way of wickedness, but rather seasonably to reveal
it; Michol Saul's Daughter, did well in this, to tell her husband David, of her
Fathers Saul's bloody design against him, so that he escaped, 1 Samuel 19. 11, 12.
The like did Jonathan to David, Cap. 20 3, 4.

4. That it be not so, as when you are called of Or 4. Not to bear seasonable
witness against their evils.
God to it, then not to bear seasonable witness against their sin, as in case
of Parents seducing Children from the Lord and his worship, In case of gross
Idolatry, or the like: then zealous Levi says to his Father and to his Mother,
I have not seen him, Deuteronomy. 33. 9. And Asaph an highest Civil Ruler, called to
do justice without respect of persons, he removes Maacha his Idolatrous Mother
from her Regency, 1 King. 15. 13.

5. That it be not so, as when you are called Or 5. Such as for them, to
neglect just respects to others
to married conditions, then for Parents sakes, to neglect just respects to your
spouses, and regard to your Families welfare, Genesis 30. 30. in that case Jacob
will say to Laban his Father-in-Law, when shall I provide for my house, and
that Law, Genesis 2. 24. takes here place, for this cause shall a man forsake
Father and Mother and cleave to his Wife.

2. Of exhortation to Parents to carry it so, 2. To Parents to carry it so as
may win respect.
as may even win and gain such respect and love from your Children, which is
due from them; as for instance.

1. Be frequently instructing your Children in the best things, in their
Soul-matters: this won Solomon's heart the more to his Father David, insomuch
that he keeps a honorable record of his Fathers instructions, Prove. 4 4, 5,
6, etc. The bond of love is doubled, when natural Fathers, by Gods blessing
upon their instructions and admonitions, become spiritual Fathers of their
Children, and a twofold cord is not easily broken.

2. Be ever and anon encouraging your Children 1. By encouraging them in good.
in any good thing; hence that Allusion, Isa. 66. 13. as on whom his Mother
comfort: which as they are more abundantly encouraged by them, so enlarged
also in affections to them. Famous is the example of William Hunters Mother, as
he was leading to the stake for Christ; Son William, (says she) I think thee
as well bestowed, as ever any Mr. Fox Acts and Mon.
Child that I bare in my womb: and that example of the Mother of that little
Child, which was Martyred with Romanus, who stood by encouraging her Child, and
when all others almost wept to see the Child's tortures, she stood by rejoicing:
and when that fatal act of cruelly was to be done upon the Child, to take away
its Head, after she had taken her Child and kissed it, she stood by singing,
All laud and praise, with heart and voice, O Lord we yield to thee, To whom the
death of all thy Saints, We know most dear to be: bidding the Child also to
remember the children of Bethlehem, who were martyred for Christ.

3. Be ready to defend, and vindicate Children 3. By defending them in a just
cause.
in any just cause, as Joash did his Son Gedeon, against those that complained
of him for throwing down Baals Altar, Judge. 6. 29, 30, 31. and Joash said to
them, will ye plead for Baal, will ye save him? he that will plead for him,
let him be put to death, if he be a God, let him plead for himself: the
blind-mans Parents did not thus, who out of a base fear, put off all to their
Son, he is old enough, let him answer for himself, John 9. 21. yea let Parents
vindicate their children from unjust slanders as the Father of the wronged
Damsel was to do, Deuteronomy. 22. 13. to 9. this must needs win love.

4. Be conscionable, sollicitous of your childrens 4. By care of their outward
weal.
outward welfare, as was Jacob of his Sons, Ge. 37. 14. and Jesse of his Son, 1 Samuel 17. 17. this also much gains upon childrens hearts.

5. Carry it toward your children with much 5. By Compassionatness toward them.
tenderness and bowels, as need and prudence requires, Numb. 11. 12. Carry
them in thy bosom, as a nursing Father the sucking child, Psalm. 103. 13. as a
Father patieth his children, Mal. 3. 17. as a Father spares his Son that
serves him: this, as it breaks every way-ward heart of a child, so it
wins the Son; as it is in the fruit of Gods bowels expressed to his
children, so in men's to theirs.

CHAP. IV. Of Honor of Reverence due from children to Parents.
WE have handled that first branch of Honor of Parents, in a direct way, we
now proceed to the second, which is the Honor of Reverence: for so Honor is
taken, as we showed in the 1. Chapter. Observe then as a second branch of the
general point, that,

Children are to Honor their Parents with the Honor of Reverence, Levit. 19.
3. Ye shall fear Honor of Reverence due to Parents.
every man his Mother and every man his Father, Heb. 12. 9. the Fathers of our
flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them due reverence. For the better
handling of this part of Childrens duty, we shall first show wherein this
Reverence of Parents consists and is expressed, and 2. Make use of it.

Touching the first we say: this Reverence due to Parents, is either outward or
inward.

1. Then outward Reverence is due from children 1. Outward, as
to Parents: and so, 1. Children are to rise up and to stand bare before their
Parents, when they come to them, or speak to them: for if of Fathers in age,
God says, Rise up before the hoary head, and Honor the face of the old man,
Levit. 19. 31. [Rising to Parents,] he surely requires it of children to their
own Parents: Henre the excuse of Rachel, though a married woman, from
unavoidable necessity, as reason why she rose not up to her Father Laban, Genesis
31. 35. And Rachel said to her Father, Let it not displease my Lord, that I
cannot rise up before thee, for the custom of women is upon me; it must be
some avoidable necessity that must be a just reason that children rise not up
before their Parents, else Parents have just reason to be displeased, when
Achsah daughter to Caleb, is to request a thing of her Father, she keeps not
her posture of sitting, in which she was before, but lights off the beast she
rode upon, and then speaks her mind to her Father, Judge. 1. 13, 14, 15. It
stands not with Parents Honor, for children to sit and speak, but rather they
should stand up when they speak to Parents.

2. If Parents be coming toward children, they 2. To meet parents coming.
are to prevent them, and meet them, 1 Kings 2. 19. Bathsheba went to Solomon,
to speak for Adonijah, and the King rose up to meet her.

3. They are to bow to them, so Solomon, 1 Kings 3. To bow to them.
2. 19. he bowed himself to his Mother, So Joseph, Genesis 48. 12. and Joseph
brought them out from between his Fathers knees, and he bowed himself with his
face to the earth. So Moses to his Father-in-Law did obey sance: and all these
their Sons, were great men, yet not too great or high to stoop in way of Honor
of Reverence to Parents.

4. They must speak Reverently both to their 4. To speak to them and of them
reverently.
Parents, and of them to others. To them: thence those titles of Honor
expressed in childrens speeches to Parents: as in Rachels to Laban, Genesis 31.
35. let not my Lord be displeased: So in Isaac's to Abraham, Genesis 22. 7. my
Father, etc. So in David's to Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 11. moreover see my Father, etc.
And cap. 26. 28. wherefore does my Lord thus pursue after his Servant? etc. So
in speaking of them, Prove. 31. 28. her children rise up, aad call her blessed.
5. To attend duly to their counsels.


5. They are to attend reverently to their counsels, or instructions, Prove. 4.
1. hear ye children he instruction of a Father, and attend to know
understanding, and verse. 20. My Son, attend to my words.

6. They must meekly and humbly subject 6. To subject to their Corrections.
themselves to their seasonable corrections, Heb. ^2. 9. if Fathers of our
flesh correcting us, we gave them reverence, shall we not much rather be in
subjection to the Father of Spirits (correcting of us) and live?

7. To express filial shame and blushing to Parents, 7. To blush and be ashamed
of faults.
upon occasion of faults and sins against them, especially when Parents deal
with children for the same: the Greek word in Heb. 12. 9. we gave them
reverence, it is (...), which properly signifies, we turned away our face, by
reason of shame. Numb. 22. 14. if her Father had spit in her face, should she
not be ashamed? Hitherto belong humble confessions to Parents, with shame and
blushing of unworthy acts of children against them especially. Like the
Prodigal in the parable, who, Luke 15. 21. says to his Father, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son: in this sense is the Greek word (...) used, Company not with them that
they may be ashamed, even outwardly also confess, and take holy shame for their
scandals: So Tit. 2. 8. that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed,
having no evil thing to say of you.

2. Inward Reverence is due from Children to Or inward. as inwardly to fear.
Parents, Levit. 19. 3. ye shall fear every one his Mother and his Father; and
so Children

1. They are inwardly to own the very persons 1. Their persons.
and parentall relations, and Authority of their Parents: ye shall fear every
man his Mother and Father, (that is) their very persons, relations and
Authority.

2. They are inwardly to awe the command^ 2. Their words.
reproofs, threats and corrections of Parents: thi^ is filial and not slavish
fear, Jer. 35. 6. Jonadab's posterity, even when tempted to do otherwise, yet
the awe of his commands, made them not to dare to transgress them.

3. They are inwardly to fear to lose parents favor, 3. To lose their favor.
or to incur their just displeasure, by giving them any just offense, as Jacob,
Genesis ^7. 12. My Father peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a
deceiver, and I shall bring a curse upon me and not a blessing.

4. They are to fear to cross any weighty intents, 4. To cross their just
intents.
purposes, or desires of parents, especially when in sacred matters: so Jephtah
his daughter, Judge. 11. 36. and she said, My Father, if thou have opened thy
mouth unto the Lord, do to me according to that which has proceeded out of thy
mouth.

5. They are to fear that trouble or heart-grief 5. To grieve them.
should be occasioned to parents, if they can prevent it. So Saul, 1 Samuel 9. 5.
Come, let us return, lest my Father leave caring for the Asses, and take
thought for us. So Judah, Genesis 44. 34. how shall I go to my Father, and the Lad
be not with me, lest peradventure I see the evil that shall come upon my
Father.

6. They are to fear to fall short of their blessing, 6. To fall short of their
blessing.
and benefit of parents prayers, and of their godly parentall wishes and
Counsels; hence when Joseph heard that his Father Jacob was so sick, he made
such haste to him, carrying his sons with him, that he and they might not miss
of Jacobs blessing: even rude Esau was amazed, when he heard that his Father
had blessed his brother instead of him, Genesis 27. 34. hence that bitter cry,
Bless me, even me also O my Father.

7. They are also to be inwardly, as well as outwardly 7. To be inwardly also
ashamed of faults before them.
ashamed, that parents have just cause of distaste against them at any time; so
giving reverence to parents, Heb. 12. 9. may according to the Greek word used
there, be rendered, being ashamed before them; hence the derivative from that
verb is used, 1 Cor. 6. 5. and 15. 34. to signify shame inward and outward; as
there, I speak this to your shame; even of heart also. So here the Awful
child, like that prodigal, occasioning just distaste in his Father against
him, he is inwardly ashamed of it, and therefore confesses his sin against his
Father, and unworthiness to be called his Son. All which is clearly seen in the
presidentiall filial fear of Gods children to their heavenly Father: they
inwardly fear his Fatherhood and Fatherly Authority, his commands, reproofs,
threats, and corrections, the loss of his favor and incurring of his
displeasure, by their offending of him at any time: they are afraid to cross
his mind in any thing, or to grieve his Spirit themselves, or that it should be
grieved by others, they are afraid to fall short of his Fatherly blessing, and
are inwardly ashamed, and even confounded that at any time they offend,
displease, grieve, or provoke him.

The use of this branch of the point serves, Use 1. For reproof 1. Of
childrens irreverence.
1. For Reproof, 1. Of Children, for all that rudeness, and irreverence of
yours toward your parents, as if you had forgotten that you were children: or
as if principles of piety, yea of morality, were extinct in you; And this alas
how common an evil is it in children, even of professors? how rudely do they
sit before their parents, and how irreverently do they carry it, in their
gestures before them? how loud will too many be gabling laughing and flouting,
even in their parents presence? how forward are they to prevent or interrupt
their parents in speaking, or to answer them again if rebuked by them? whereas
those in Job* time, even Princes and Nobles, refrained talking* in his
presence, or whilst he as a civil Father of the state was speaking, Job 29.
9, 10. and verse. 22. after his words they spoke not again. Elihu, when in the
presence of Fathers to him in Age, is afraid to speak, much more to interrupt
them whilst speaking, Job 32. 4, 6, 7. And dare children word it so before
their parents? Again, how over-familiar do too many children make themselves
with their parents? as if hail-fellow well met (as they say) and no difference
twixt parent and child; yea too many there are, who carry it proudly,
disdainfully and scornfully toward parents, and its well if their very parents
escape their flouts; but what the end of such graceless children will be, we
have showed from Prove. 30. 17. Again, how are many children ready to chop it
with their parents, and (as we say) to chop logic with them? it may be so
daring are they as to bid their very parents hold their tongue, as some
profaner ones have done; or how ever, if not going so high, yet giving to
parents very cross, curt, and cursed answers. As Jacobs sons did sometimes to
him, Genesis 34. 31. should he deal with our sister, as with an Harlot? like the
elder son in the Parable, who even chideth, and checketh his Father, for
entertaining his younger brother better then him, Luke 15. 29. Again how
frowardly and discontentedly do many children carry it to their Parents no
diet, no clothing, no lodging and the like, which parents can provide for them,
will content them, but as if parents were beholding to them, or that they had
wronged their children, and must seek to please them, if they knew how. Like
the Elder son in the Parable, which finds fault with his usage by his Father,
as so much below his serviceableness to him. And are there not too many
children, who are ready to mutter and grumble at their parents counsels,
commands, just threats, rebukes, or corrections? yea will not some plainly
contest and contend with their parents? as Rebecka's daughters-in-Law; who by
such like unreverent carriages made her even weary of her life, Genesis 26. 35.
with 27. 46. they were a grief of mind (...) the septnagint renders it (...),
such as did contend, or were contentious, or rebellious; how little also do too
many children dread their parents commands, counsels, prohibitions, reproofs,
or corrections? how little do they fear the loss of their favor or blessing,
or the incurring of their just displeasure or curse? how little care they
whether they be contented and comforted in them, and in what they say or do, or
otherwise be troubled and discouraged? and in all how shameless are they? but
all such as you are do proclaim to all the world, that there is no fear of God
before your eyes, as it is evident in Cain, Hophni, and Phinebas, and other
such graceless children, whose just doom will be, to be as Cain, and as is
threatened to graceless persons, that they shall be in fear, where no fear, or
cause of fear, is, Psalm. 53. 5. shall flee, when none pursues them, Prove. 28.
1. and for the want of this due fear of parents, if you repent not, eternal
dread and horror will be your portion in another world.

2. It serves to reprove parents, who any way 2. Of Parents undermining this
their Honor -- 1. By contemptible carriages.
undermine this filial awe and Reverence which your children owe unto you: and
that,

1. By carrying it any way contemptibly, and unbeseeming your selves in your
childrens sight; as did Noah, first by being drunk, and then by uncovering his
nakedness, within view of others: this gave occasion to Chams unreverent
speeches of him unto his brethren, Genesis 9. 21, 22, 23. Cham saw the nakedness
of his Father, in his tent, and went and told his brethren without; when
parents are frothy, slighty, foolish, or any way ridiculous in their gestures,
speeches, or actions, before their children, this breeds, or feeds contempt
and irreverence in their children. Look as the very conceit of unseemly
behavior in David, that Father of the state, made Michol despise him her
heart, and speak unreverently of him with her lips, 2 Samuel 6. 16, 20, 21. How
glorious (says she scoffingly) was the King of Israel to day, who uncovered
himself to day, in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the
vain fellows shamelessely uncovereth himself! the like will any real
discovery, of moral, or spiritual nakedness before the Family, become an
occasion to children and servants to despise the Father of the Family.

2. By being too fond of your children, or too familiar 2. By overmuch fondness
and familiarity.
with them at sometimes at least, and not keeping constantly your due distance;
such fondness and familiarity breeds and causes contempt and irreverence in
children. Good Abraham was somewhat too fond of Ishmael, as appears by his
overlooking the promise of Isaac, and going on to urge God, that Ishmael might
live in his sight. Isaac was too fond of Esau, when he loved him so for his
venison, Genesis 25. 28. David was too fond of his Absalom, that when he was
justly banished for his wilful fratricide, and deserved death rather for it,
yet David's soul longed (or was in a wasting plight, as it is in the Hebrew) to
go forth unto Absalom, 2 Samuel 13. 39. but what unreverent children all these
proved to their Parents, their stories show.

3. By complying too much with any vain motions 3. By sinful compliance with
children.
of your children: this was a sin in the Mother of James and John, who had so
ambitious a motion to make to Christ, Mark. 10. 35. that she would move it for
them, Matthew. 20. 20, 21. she comes desiring that her two Sons may sit, one at
his right hand, the other at his left hand, in his kingdom. David would never
cross Adonijah in his desires or doings, he never displeased him at any time,
in saying, why have thou done so? 1 Kings 1. 6 but Adonijah cares not to cross
his Father in his mind, of one to succeed him in his throne, even Solomon, and
yet Adonijah knew well enough, it had been publicly, and sufficiently declared
formerly, as in 1 Chronicles. 23. 1. and 28. 5. yet 1 Kings 1. 5. he exalts
himself and says, I will be King, and verse. 7. he conferreth with Joab and
Abiathar about it for their help therein.

4. By reproachful and reviling speeches to 4. By railing upon children.
your children, in rashness of anger and fury, or by any other uncivil, or
unseemly expressions of rage against them, as flinging things at them, which
might endanger life or limb, or the like; this provoked Jonathan to say and do
somewhat savouring of unreverence to a Parent, 1 Samuel 20. 30. thou son of the
perverse and rebellious woman (says Saul his Father to him) and v. 33. he cast
a Javeling at him; and v. 34. Jonathan arose from the Table in fierce anger;
some unwise Parents, at some times will be over-familiar with their children,
and at other times as much too harsh and fiery against them, and by such an
unequal carriage, come to be slighted by them.

The second use serves for exhortation, and 2. Use for exhortation. 1. To
children to Reverence Parents.
that 1. To children:

Do you then strive, what in you lies, to give this Honor of Reverence, both
outward and inward, which is due to your Parents. And for this end consider, 1.
Of some Motives. 2. Two or three helps.

Motives. 1. It will breed and feed in you due Motives to it. 1. It furthereth
reverence to other superiors.
Reverence to all other superiors; hence in the fifth Commandment, Honor of
Parents, and therein Honor of Reverence of them, is put for the like Honor of
Magistrates, Ministers, and Masters, from their subjects, people, and servants;
if the one be in persons in truth in the former relation, it will be in them in
the latter.

2. It will be a notable means to prevent many other 2. It preventeth other sins.
sins of yours, which would be dishonorable to parents. Moses having rehearsed
many abominable practices of the Canaanites in Levit. 18. and in the last verse
said, ye shall not commit any of those abominable customs, Chap. 19. 3. he
charge them to fear every man his Mother and his Father; and verse. 4. also
adjoyneth, that they should not turn to Idols, etc. or apostatise from God and
his worship: Surely then that Reverence unto Parents, is inserted as a help,
both against the former, and against the later evils and scandals; and woeful
experience evinceth this, that where this hedge of childrens Reverence and awe
to Parents is broken down, there is a free inlet of vilest and most scandalous
3. The power of Parents to bless, or curse children.
courses.

3. There is in your Parents some paternall power, if justly used, to bless and
to curse you, Genesis 49. is a record of Jacobs blessing of his Sons; and in an
ordinary way, there is a proportion thereof in other Parents, and therefore the
rather Awe your Parents.

Helps this way may be such as these. Helps to it. 1. Awe of God.


1. Labor for a filial awe of God, as your Father, and so of his Fatherly
commands, and consequently of this his command, as his command, and of his
displeasure against you, if it be not attended and observed.

2. Labor you for more holiness of heart. It 2. Holiness.
is profaness of heart Godward, which breeds and feeds irreverence to
Parents; and so contrariwise, the more holy Godward, the more awful of
Parents. Levit. 19. 2. be ye holy for I am holy, and verse. 3. yea shall fear
every one his Mother, etc.

3. Present your Parents so to your minds, as 3. Eye the Image of God in Parents
bearing the Image of Gods Father-hood, and that also will help on your filial
awe and Reverence to them.

2. It serves for exhortation to Parents, to carry 2. Exhortation to Parents,
to further filial Reverence in their children. 1. By your piety.
it so as may gain Reverence and awe from your children; for which end.

1. Carry it very piously in your places, for that will gain awe in your
inferiors, children or others. Job 29. 7. when I prepared my seat in the
street (says holy Job) the young men saw me and hid themselves, verse. 8. let
but any other Godly man come suddenly where rude persons are met, how does the
very sight of him, oftentimes appale them? as experience witnesses; the Image
of Gods holiness in any is venerable.

2. Season your children betime with principles 2. By right principling of them.
of religion, of their duty to God, to Parents, to others; so did Eve her Seth,
and Seth his Cainan, and Cainan his Mahaleel, etc. and all of them proved well
to God and man-ward.

3. Bring them often to Gods aweful and awing 3. By inuring them to holy
Assemblies.
Assemblies, where they will hear and learn Reverence to God or men. Deuteronomy. 31.
12. gather men, women and children, that they may hear, and learn, and fear the
Lord thy God, and observe to do all the words of this Law: even this of the
fifth Commandment also. Honor Father and Mother with the Honor of Reverence.

4 Correct them wisely and seasonably, as for 4. By correcting irreverence in
them.
other sins, so for those which savor of irreverence to Parents; this by the
Lords blessing will help on filial Reverence; hence those two joined, Heb. 12.
9. we had Fathers of our flesh, who corrected us, and we did them Reverence;
there is a great deal of folly, and so a bundle of irreverence also, in a
child's heart naturally, but God says, the rod of correction shall drive it far
from him, Prove. 22.

5. Acquaint your Children ever and anon 5. By minding children often of Gods
judgments.
with Gods more awing and dreadful providence, especially respecting
Children, which gave not their Parents reverence, as of Cham, Absalom, and
others. The punishment of a stubborn Son, by man's hand, must be so as all
Israel may hear and fear, Deuteronomy. 21. 21. So let all our Children hear of Gods
hand this way, that they may fear the sins of dishonor of Parents.

6. Inure them to awful subjection and obeisance 6. By inuring them to filial
subjection.
to you as Parents, betimes; early practicing of filial Reverence, will
strengthen and stablish a very habit of it; hence the requisite in Church
officers, or elders and deacons, 1 Timothy 3. 4. 12. having their children in
subjection with gravity or honesty; they must see they be inured to reverence,
and seemly carriages toward them, and before them, and then others that come
to their houses will find this, to the Elders Honor.

CHAP. V. Of Honor of Obedience due to Parents.
NOw we come to the third branch of direct Honor of obedience due to parents.
Honor, namely Honor of obedience; for so Honor is taken in Scripture as we
showed before.

Observe then as a third branch of the general point, that children are to
Honor their Parents with the Honor of obedience. Honor thy Father and
Mother, says Exodus 20. 12. but obeying them is Honoring of them, say other
Scriptures (as we showed, Chap. 1.) therefore children are bound to yield
obedience to their Parents.

For the fuller handling of this particular, we shall inquire,

1. Wherein this Honor of filial obedience It consists,
consists. 2. What manner of obedience it is which must be yielded. 3. Why
children must yield it. 1. In childrens being content to be set about meanest
employments.
4. What use is to be made of this branch of Honor of Parents.
To the first I answer, that filial obedience consists,

1. In childrens being content to be set about meanest employments, even as
though they were servants, their Parents so requiring it, hence that Mal. 3.
17. his son which serves him. Neither Rebekah, nor Rachel, though of able
Parents, thought much to keep their Fathers sheep, Genesis 24. and Chap. 29.
neither did Christ himself refuse to be subject to his Parents in their meaner
employments, Luke 2. 51. Matthew. 13. 55. his reputed Father Joseph, was a
Carpenter, of a very mean Trade: hence that, Is not this the Capenters Son? but
Mark. 6. 3. these neighbors and Countrymen of Christ, as man, who had most
cause to note his usual employments, they say of him, Is not this the
Carpenter, the Son of Mary? surely then he learned and commonly practiced that
mean Trade with his reputed Father, and so was therein also subject to his
Father and Mother. Look as Gods children, yea look as Jesus Christ himself, the
pattern of all true filial obedience to Parents, refused not to stoop to the
meanest offices and services, in obedience to the Father of Spirits: so must
children carry it in like sort to their Parents. All know how many mean and
despicable offices Parents do about their children, whilst babes and little
ones, and when sick, etc. And there is no cause for any child to think much of
the meanest office and service, which Parents may call for from their hands.
Parents Authority is of no mean descent, the rise or original of it is from
God: even the greatness of the greatest in other respects, does not alter, much
less make null, filial relations. If any be ashamed of the Lords words, of him
will he be ashamed another day, Mark. 8. 38. Now this, Children obey your
Parents in the Lord, (according to the Lords will and word) is one of the Lords
words, Ephesians. 6. 1. Let none therefore be ashamed of obedience to Parents in
meanest 2. In their being content to be crossed in their wills.
things.

2. In Childrens being content to be crossed in their own desires or ways, and
to yield to and obey Parents minds and wills, in matters lawful, although the
particulars seem to be very harsh to their own sense or reason, as in that
instance, Genesis 48. 17. At first it displeased Joseph to see his Father lay his
right hand upon Ephraims head, and he held up his Fathers hand to remove it to
Manasses his head, and v. 18. Joseph said, not so my Father, for this is the
first born, put thy right hand upon his head, v. 19. And his Father refused,
and said: I know my Son, I know it, he also shall become great, but his brother
shall be greater then he. And so he gave Ephraim the younger Son the priority in
his blessing; and Joseph said no more, but rested satisfied therein. If Jacobs
Sons are enjoined by their Father to feed their flock even in Shechem, in the
very mouth of danger, by reason of the late slaughter of the Shechemits by
their hands, yet they are contented with it, and do not mutter, or object
against it, Genesis 37. 14. nor do they object against the hazzards of that long
Journey into Egypt, but if required by their Father to go, they contentedly
obey, Genesis 42. 23: It was contrary to dictates of flesh, and blood, and reason,
for Isaac to yield to be offered up in Sacrifice by his Father, but it was
first no doubt made known to him by his Father to be Gods mind, and seconded by
his Fathers command, and he quietly yields to his Father therein, Genesis 22. 9,
10. So in case of a daughters vow unto the Lord, in something which is lawful,
and which she earnestly desires should be done before the Lord, if the vow be
not heard by her father when it was made, and after dissallowed by her Father,
God will have her, even in this case, to sit down contentedly, resigning her
will to her Fathers, although she cannot perform what she vowed and desired,
and God himself passes it by, because it was not her Fathers mind, that she
should perform it, Genesis 30. 5. Gods children are a pattern to men's children
herein, who resign and submit their will to his will; children are to look at
good Parents, as Gods Oracles unto them, such, by means of whom he imparteth
his counsel to them, and makes wiser then themselves, in matters respecting
their occasions and changes. Obedience to Parents, in this way, is to be as to
Superiors, yea as to the mind and Authority of the highest, in their mandates;
which also is implied in that speech, Ephesians. 6. 1. Children obey Parents in the
Lord, yea even in all things, as is expressed, Col. 3. 20. namely which are
meet and lawful: so to obey them, it is welpleasing to God, albeit in doing of
it, children often displease themselves. David is blamed, that he never
displeased Adonijah his Son, 1 King. 1. 5, 6. surely then Adonijah had been too
blame, if he had not yielded to his Fathers mind, in things displeasing to
himself.

3. In yeedling espccially to Parents minds in the matter of marriage. So Isaac
matcheth with Rebekah, 3. In marrying according to good Parents minds.
according to his Fathers mind, Genesis 24 6, 7. 63. compared; So Jacob marries
Labans daughter, according to the mind of his Parents, Isaac and Rebekah, Genesis
28. 1, 2, 3. compared with Chap. 29. the like was done by many others mentioned
in Scripture.

4. in obeying chiefly in things of God, as enjoined 4. In obeying in things of
God.
to children, in Gods name, by their Parents; whether respecting the knowledge
of God in Christ, mortification, or in any other means, or parts of the souls
welfare. In which especially Solomon's Son must keep his Fathers Commandment,
and not forsake the Law of his Mother, Prove. 6. 20. and 1 Kings 2. 3. David
charge Solomon his Son, to keep the charge of the Lord his God, and to walk
in his ways, and Chapter 3. 3. Solom. loved the Lord, walking in the statutes (or
according to the statutes and commands) of David his Father. David charged him
also with all the work of Gods Temple, which he duly and diligently performed,
1 Chro. 22. 11. build the house of the Lord thy God, which he has said of
thee; and he did so, as 2 Chr. 5. and cap. 6. shows; if Abraham command his
children, the Lord concludes they shall keep the way of the Lord, as in that
place often referred to, Genesis 18. 19. I know Abraham that he will command his
children, and they shall keep the way of the Lord. Hence Joshuah is so
confident of his house, and so of his children, Josh. 24. 15. but I and my
house, we will serve the Lord: he requiring it of them, he is confident that
they will do it. Jonadabs posterity, in living so in Tents, like pilgrims and
strangers, in refusing to drink wine, or strong drink, they lived a mortified
life, a weaned life from the world, but they did it because so enjoined by
their Father Jonadab, and so by their next Parents successively; as we see in
that place often, occasionally, referred to in this discourse, 1 Jer. 35. 6, etc.
In such a way God as a Father is especially honored, and no wonder that there
is his secret blessing and grace conferred, to enable to such like obedience to
Parents commands. As in Genesis 18. 19. now mentioned, Abraham will command his
children, and they shall walk in the way of the Lord. It strengthens the bond
of childrens obedience to Parents commands, when Parents show such soul-love to
children, and entire love, and faithfulness to God, as to improve their
parentall Authority thus for God; which is also included in that speech, Ephesians.
6. 1. Obey your Parents in the Lord: especially injoyning what the Lord
requires.

5. In childrens yielding humbly, meekly and 5. In submission to parents just
corrections.
quietly to Parents just reproofs and corrections, Heb. 12. 9. The Fathers of
our flesh corrected us and we gave them reverence, even in way of awful
subjection to them therein; whence this is added, shall we not much more be in
subjection to the Father of Spirits and live? for what are such actings of
Parents, but fruits of their obedience to God their Fathers eommands? who
charge, Prove. 19. 18. Chasten thy Son, while there is hope, and Prove. 23. 13.
withhold not correction from the child, and v. 14. thou shall beat him, and
Prove. 29. 17. Correct thy Son, and he shall give thee rest; yea they are fruits
o^ Parents love to their children, Heb. 12. 6, 7. Prove. 13. 14. he that loves
his Son, chasteneth him betimes. What are they but Gods ordinance, and
appointed means to rescue children from sin and ruin? Prove. 23. 13. if thou
beatest him, he shall not die. v. 14. thou shall beat him, and deliver his soul
from Hell. Prove. 22. 15. foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child, but
the rod of correction shall drive it out. Prove. 29. 15. the rod and reproof
give wisdom, but a child left to himself brings his Mother to shame: and in
a word, it would be greatest folly and danger to Children, not to yield, and
obedientially to hearken to such rebukes. Prove. 15. 8. A fool despises his
Fathers instruction, and v. 10. Correction is grievous to him that forsakes
the way: and v. 32. He that refuses instruction, despises his own soul.

To the second query, with what manner of This obedience must be
obedience are children to obey Parents: I answer more briefly.

1. With a kind of universal and unlimited obedience 1. Universal.
falling under the compass of lawful things: so Col. 3. 20. Children obey your
Parents in all things, one as well as another, being all lawful: there is no
exception, or limitation made.

2. With a Sedulous obedience: Phil. 2. 22. Paul 2. Sedulous.
alluding to this, says of Timothy, as a Son with the Father he has served
with me in the Gospel, i. e. very diligently: so Jacobs sons followed their
Fathers business diligently, sparing no pains to remove their flock hither, and
thither, for his best advantage, Genesis 37. 17.

3. With a ready and cheerful obedience. Genesis 3. Cheerful.
37. 13. Come, I will send thee to thy brethren, says Jacob to Joseph; here am
I says Joseph, he is as ready to do it, as his Father to command it. So in a
like case David enjoined by his Father Jessai, 1 Samuel 17. 20. He arises early
in the morning, and leaving his sheep with a keeper, he took and went as Jessai
had commanded. Genesis 42. 2. Get you down into Egypt to buy us corn, says Jacob
to his Sons, v. 3. And Joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt, and
Chap. 47. 31. swear unto me, says Jacob to Joseph, and he swear unto him: such
ready obedience yielded they to their Father.

4. With a resolute obedience. Children are not 4. Resolute.
to be diverted from lawful obedience to Parents, either by frowns, or
flattering persuasions of others: if Jeremiah a man of God, will set before
Rechabs Sons pots of wine, and bid them drink it, Jer: 35. 5. such a tempting
and trying of them, will not prevail with them, verse. 6. but they said, we will
drink no wine; for Jonadab the Son of Rechab, our Father, commanded us saying,
you shall drink no wine, neither you nor your Sons for ever.

5. With a conscientious obedience, namely to 5. Conscientious.
parentall Authority as of God, and as to Gods command requiring it of you to
Honor Father and Mother, with such Honor of obedience; and injoyning children
to obey their parents in all tbings, Col. 3. 20.

To the second query, why children must give Reasons of it.
this Honor of obedience to Parents, I answer also briefly: they must do it,

1. Because it is pleasing to God; Gal. 3. 20. 1. It is welpleasing to God.
Children obey your parents in all things, for this is well pleasing to the
Lord. Its an encouragement to children, to do such or such things for Parents,
when they know it will please them very well: but most of all when they
understand, that God himself is well pleased therewith. God himself is very
well pleased with filial obedience to Parents, as seeing therein his own Image
of Fatherhood Honored; his own authority and command requiring this, attended
and Honored, and a ready way hereby made in children to all other obedience to
the Lord himself: And who would not endeavor that they might thus, at once,
Crown the Lord himself, and their Parents, with their due Honor, and be
crowned, not so much with parentall, as divine acceptance?

2. Because this is right, or just, or meet, Ephesians. 2. It is just and right.
6. 1. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right: in the Greek
it is (...), just, due by the Law of God, of nature, and of nations: Its a due
debt: children owe obedience to their Parents as a debt, and must be paying it
all their days. Children who have received their whole man soul and body,
instrumentally from their Parents, ow the service of both, in an obedientiall
way to their lawful commands. Its not a matter of liberty, or courtesy, but
due debt, which is daily due to be paid in part. Justice which requires to
give every other person his due, requieth children to give Parents also their
due, of which this is part, even filial obedience.

3. Because manifold blessings and benefits do 3. Many blessing attend it.
attend due and true filial obedience unto Parents. Children obey your parents
in the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 1. and v. 2. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, and v. 3.
that it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on earth. Giving
this Honor of filial obedience, as it is a means of long life, as Prove. 4. 4.
10. Keep my Commandments, says David to Solomon, and live, and verse. 10. Hear
O my Son, and receive my sayings, and the years of thy life shall be many: and
as it is a means of bodily health, Pro. 4. 22. Parents lawful and gracious
commands observed by Children, are health to all their flesh: and sickly times
often befall the younger sort, as here with us, where filial obedience and
observance is too much wanting: But I say besides, that the Apostle inlargeth
the benefit thereof in that expression, that it may be well with thee, namely
not alone in matter of bodily health, but in that of name also, of estate, of
family relations, of personal callings and occasions, of general calling as
Christians, and as members of the Church: yea also in those spiritual matters
of their souls in the things and comforts of God and of his word, and seals and
services, etc. The way to have body and soul to do well and prosper, yea the
way to have God himself shining and smiling upon children, to have Gods
blessing upon childrens reading, hearing and meditating of the word, to have
God answering even their prayers, to have God ordering all things for good to
them which befall them, to have God to be with them, and bless all they do take
in hand, to do well by them in life and death; is to yield due and true
obedience to Parents. Prove. 15. 5. is verified in obedientiall harkening to
Parents counsels or rebukes: the ear that hears reproof, abides among the
wise. It is amonst the number of them, else that care or person would not
hearken, but which is more, it abides among them, such an one does not
apostatize from the company and condition of persons truly wise. I fear, if the
bottom of the Apostasy of many promising professors now a days were searched
into, this would be found there, they were, or are disobedient children to
their parents, but as for the obedient, God is so well pleased with them, that
he thinks he can never deal well enough with them.

Now in the third place, we shall make use of 1. Use of reproof of childrens.
this branch, even of siliall obedience, the use whereof serves, 1. For
reproof, and that first of children.

1. Of such who in show express obedience to 1. Pretended obedience.
your Parents commands, but in reality do it not; like the Son in the Parable,
who when bid by his Father, to go and work in his Vineyard, he says, I go Sir,
but went not: Matthew. 21. 30. Or if you do any thing, which for the matter of it
is enjoined by your Parents, yet formally and properly its not filial
obedience, but rather yielding obedience to some lust of your own, which
bids you do such and such things which Parents enjoin. As when a covetous lust
will put you on to do your Fathers will and work, that you may have the gain of
it, or the like: or if you do at length what Parents require in a better
manner, yet it may abase you, that you did it not more readily, and seasonably,
you first were too disobedient in your carriage, like the Son in the parable,
that said at first he would not, Matthew. 21. 28, 29. Afterward indeed he
repented and went, and so at last did the will of his Father. But it was to
him, and by proportion should be to you, a ground of penitent shame and sorrow,
that at first you were so disobedient.

2. Of such children who are plainly disobedient 2. Disobedience to parents.
to your Parents, and persist in it, or at least continue too long in it,
without repentance for the same. Some there are, that when their Parents do
even stoop somewhat below themselves, and not command so much, as entreat them
to do this or that lawful thing at their request, yet will boldly deny their
parents desires, like the Elder Son in the Parable, who when his Father comes
out to him, and entreats him to come in, will not come in, Luke 15. 28, 29.
Some when their Parents would have them of an honest calling, or course of
life, as more fit for that, and such as may be more serviceable to God and men
in it, yet will not be ruled, no they must take to some other course, that
their foolish hearts like better, or else their Parents cannot be in quiet:
like Adonijah, that contrary to God and his Father David's mind, would needs be
a King, when yet he was no way fitted for it, 1 King 1. Some will like those in
Genesis 6. 2. be matching, but as themselves only foolishly fancy, and Parents
cannot be at rest for them, but they must needs have such a one, like Sampson,
Judge. 14. 2. He came and told his Father and Mother, saying, I have seen a
woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines, now therefore get her for
me to wife: and when his Parents wisely and faithfully replied, verse. 3. Is
there never a daughter among all my people, that thou go to take a wife of
the uncircumcised Philistines? Sampson says to his Father, get her for me, for
she pleases me, or, is right enough in mine eyes. Some children are grown to
such an height of disobedience, as they are grown stubborn, resolute and wilful
in their disobedience, they are long habituated in it, they will not now be
counseled, commanded, reproved, or corrected by Parents; they are above that,
they are past that, they will be no longer curbed, or controlled, not they, by
Mother or Father either: but little do you consider what a black brand you do
carry herein, upon your selves, of your reprobation, and as a token thereof of
your judicial hardening. It was said of Esau, Esau have I hated, (or in my
counsel rejected) Romans 9. and what a grief of mind, was he to his Parents, by
disobedient carriage in his matches? Genesis 26. When God has a mind to ruinate
Elies Sons, as men of Belial, whom he abhorred, 1 Samuel 2. 25. Its said, they
hearkened not to the voice of their Father (they would on in their course, say
the old man, what he will to the contrary) because the Lord would slay them.
Their counsels, commands, checks, rebukes, yea and corrections too are not
hearkened to but all slighted, to make way for the fatal ruin of children
devoted and destinated to saddest ends, either by the hand of some enemies, as
in the case of Hophni and Phineas, 1 Samuel 2. 25. compared with Chap. 4. 11. or
by the hand of civil justice, as Deuteronomy. 21. 20, 21. they bring out their
stubborn Son, that will not be ruled by them, and he is stoned to death:
sometimes by some more immediate hand of God, as that disobedient young man,
which would none of the voice of his teachers, parents, or others, he hated
their reproofs, etc. He is smitten by dreadful horror of conscience inwardly:
whence that doleful mourning at last, when it is too late, Prove. 5. 11, 12,
13. and with loathsome diseases outwardly, he even rotteth above ground, and
pineth away, his flesh and body is consumed: ibid. And hence we might give
instances of very dreadful examples of the lives and deaths of stubborn and
disobedient children: and what other can be expected when they are in that
black roll of persons given up of God to a reprobate mind, Romans 1. 28. He gave
them up to a mind void of judgment, to do those things which are not
convenient, being filled with all unrighteousness, v. 29, etc. disobedient to
parents, v. 30.

2. It serves to reprove parents, who any way 2. Of parents occasioning
childrens disobedience. 1. By abusing their Authority.
occasion disobedience in children.

1. By abusing their authority in giving out unjust commands to them, which the
more provokes and exciteth them to reject your authority, even in lawful
commands: such a parent was Laban, who put Leah his daughter upon that
unlawful course of deceiving her sisters spouse of his expected conjugall
communion, and defiling her self and him by it, Genesis 29. 23. such a Parent was
Saul, who would have his daughter break her conjugal covenant with David, and
betake her self to an adulterous bed with Phalti, 1 Samuel 25. 44. such a parent
was Herodias, who enjoyneth her daughter to make that bloody salvage request,
for John Baptists head, Matthew. 14. 8.

2. By your own rebellion against Gods commands, 2. By thelr rebellion against
God.
for which God in judgment leaves children to be rebellious against you; as
in the case of David, and Absalom, 2 Samuel 12. 9. thou have despised the
Commandment of the Lord, v. 10. Now therefore the sword shall not depart from
thy house, v. 11. I will raise up evil against thee out of thine house, and
fulfilled in Absaloms open rebellion, 2 Samuel 13.

3. By being too indulgent to them, when you 3. By sinful indulgence
perceive your children do not follow your charge in this or that particular:
This made Hophni and Phineas the worse, that their Father Eli was so over
indulgent to them, 1 Samuel 2. Hence Eli is blamed for it -- ye have kicked at my
sacrifice (says God to Eli) Prove. 29. 15. the rod and reproof gives wisdom,
but a child left to himself (without seasonable reproof, or correction for his
faults) brings his Mother to shame, namely by his desperate folly and
disobedience: as the opposition of the later part of this proverb to the former
shows.

A second use serves for discovery, whether A second use is for examination.
Marks of due obedience to parents. 1. If in way of repenting for former
disobedience.
children in that relation of children, did, or now do come up to that filial
obedience required in the fifth Commandment; which is known to be so,

1. If in way of cordial repenting for any former expressions of disobedience
to Father or Mother, you did, or now do the rather, and the more obey your
Parents injunctions. Like that Son in the Parable, Man. 21. 29. who repenting
of that stubborn answer to his Father, in saying, when he bade him go, that he
would not, but after he repented and went, and verse. 31. this of the two Sons,
was he that did the will of his Father: or like the Prodigal Son, who in way
of repenting of his sin against his Father, and against heaven, now offers his
utmost service to him, which he shall enjoin him, and that in the meanest way
of service, Luke 15. 18, 19, 21. The Son said to his Father, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son, make me as one of thy hired servants.

2. If when you are tempted to disobey your parents 2. If obeying when tempted
to the contrary.
commands, yet you overcome the temptations, and obey your parents lawful
injunctions notwithstanding, as the Rechabites, though urged to drink wine by
Jeremi the Prophet, yet would not, and that in obedience* to Rechabs command,
or because he had charged his Sons successively to look that they drank no
wine, Jer. 35. 5, 6. 3. If doing it in matters unpleasing to the flesh.


3. If you that are children, in the relation of children, obey your Parents
command, in matters unpleasing to flesh and blood, and which cross you in
matters of carnal delights, preferments, profits, or ease, and which rather
tend to mortification of the lusts of youth, to holy weanedness from the world,
etc. thus it was with the injunctions first of Rechab to his next sons, who
observed his command themselves, and left the same upon their next children,
and they again upon theirs successively, unto the very time of Jeremiah, that
they should live like strangers and pilgrims, in tents; forbearing the use of
carnal delights, etc.

4. If Children are habituated in a way of filial 4. If habituated in it.
obedience to your Parents lawful commands. It is not some single act that
way, nor some sudden pang, and fit of obedience, but like that of obedient
Rechabites lasting all your days.

5. If in that relation of children, you do so well relish 5. If propagating it
to their children.
filial obedience, that you endeavor to propagate conscientious filial
obedience to your posterity, when you are Parents. So did these good Rechahites
propagate filial obedience from Jehues time to Josiahs.

6. If you are filially obedient to parents lawful 6. If doing it ^o parents
in meaner conditions.
injunctions, when your parents are in a far meaner estate, than you your
selves are, Genesis 47. 12. Jacob was as one nourished by his Son Joseph, who was
next to Pharaoh in place and honor, yet Joseph is as obedient to his Fathers
command, as ever, when at home under his Fathers tuition, v. 31. swear now to
me, says Jacob to Joseph, and be swear to him. Mordecai was to his cosen
Hester, as a Father to bring her up after her own Fathers death, Est. 2. 7.
Ester is made great Ahasuerus his Queen, v. 16. and v. 20. Ester did the
commandment of Mordecai, like as when she was brought up with him.

A third use is for exhortation. 1. To Parents. Third use of exhortation. 1. To
parents to. further this due obedience: as, 1. By their own repentance and
peace made with God.


Do you so carry it as that you may every way further this honor of obedience
due to you from your children; for which end,

1. Make your peace with God through faith in Jesus Christ, and exercise of
repentance, in regard of any former ways of your disobedience to God, or unto
parents, so far as you are privy and conscious to your selves thereof, Job 22.
21. Acquaint thy self with God, and be at peace with him, thereby good shall
come to thee: what good? it follows, v. 23. If thou return to the Almighty,
thou shall be built up, (not only stored with estate again, but with children,
as Ruth. 4. 11. Rachel and Leah built up Isreal's house; or filled it with a
numerous posterity) and thou shall put away iniquity from thy Tabernacle, or
household, children, or servants, so Job 11. 14. Let not wickedness dwell in thy
Tabernacle, that is not alone with thy self in particular, but not with any
children, or servants in thy house; so that Job acquainting himself with God in
the Mesiah, and repenting, shall not only have a numerous family of children
restored to him, but when he has them, shall remove the iniquity of children
also, in their relation, (as is disobedience and irreverence, etc.) as well as
that from himself, in his, or his servants, as theirs.

2. Be you exemplary in ways of filial obedience, 2. By being examples of
filial obedience to parents.
and observance of your parents: David did not alone teach Solomon filial
obedience, as Solomon says of him, Prove. 4. 3, 4. I was my Fathers Son, and he
taught me also saying, keep my Commandments and live, but v. 10, 11. He
records other words of his Father, saying thus, I have taught thee in the way
of wisdom, and so in this of filial obedience, as verse. 4. I have led thee in
the right paths: and how obedient a Son Solomon proved, let his works declare,
in his exact observing all his Fathers mind, in that of building and furnishing
of the Temple, 1 Chro. 22. and Chap. 29. with 2 Chro. 5. and 6. and in that
solemn charge of his to him, touching exemplary justice upon Joah and Shimei, 1
King 2. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. which he accordingly executed, v. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35,
36. 44, 45, 46. and in the great charge of his Father, to keep the Lords
charge, etc. v. 3. and Chap. 3. 3. Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the
statutes of David his Father. The Rechabites parents, which first yielded
filial obedience to their Father Rechab, and taught their children practically
as well as preceptively filial obedience, had a posterity successively by that
means of parents doing the like from parent to child, famous some ages after
for filial obedience. 3. By inuring children to obedience to God.


3. Inure your children to ways of obedience unto the Lord, and be you
frequently curbing their disobedience to Gods commands. Abraham who was famous
for the Lords attestation of his care to improve his authority this way, in
laying his command upon his household, to walk in the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.
19. as he had an obedient household of his servants in the relation of a master,
Genesis 14. 23, 24. Not one of them offers to plunder to the worth of a
shooe-latchet, Abraham having vowed to the contrary; so had he as obedient a
child to him, in the relation of a Father, who laid down his neck to the very
block, is willingly bound to become Gods sacrifice at his Fathers command, Genesis
22. 9, 10. Jonadab who laid the weight of his parentall authority, upon his
children, in matters savouring of an heavenly, weaned, and mortified Spirit,
had a most obedient posterity. Parents are enjoined to lay out the weight of
thelr authority this way, Deuteronomy. 32. 46. You shall command your children to do
all the words of this Law. This was David's practice, 1 Chro. 28. 9. And thou
Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect
heart, etc. And so 1 King. 2. 3. and Prove. 4. 5, 6, 7. he said to me, get
wisdom, get understanding, etc. Jos. 24. 25. I and my house will serve the
Lord: Josuah dares undertake it, God has given Josuah experience, what
parentall and masterlike commands also can do that way, to bring them under
obedience and service to the Lord, and so to him also as a Father of the
Family, injoyning, and requiring such serving of God.

4. Use holy wisdom in giving your parentall 4. By using pathetical words in
giving out commands to them.
commands to your children, namely in the most moving expressions, which may
help on affectionate attendance and observance thereof: thus good Bathshebah,
when she would draw Solomon to follow her gracious directions, even in his
place of a King, to which he was devoted, see how she circleth him with her
pathetical expressions? Prove. 31. 1. etc. The prophecy which his Mother taught
him, v. 2. What my Son! and what the Son of my womb! and what the Son of my
vows! hence that parenthesis in Jacobs charge to his Son Joseph, Genesis 48. 7.
And as for me, when I came from Padan Aram, Rachel (Joseph's deer Mother) died
in the Land of Canaan, in the way, when yet there was but a little way to come
to Ephrath, and I buried her there in the way of Ephrath, etc. He would in a
holy wise, insinuate, and get within Joseph's heart hereby, And then his ears
and heart will be open to all he has to give him in charge.

5. Do you readily yield to the just desires even 5. By yielding to childrens
just desires.
of your children, and it will notably prevail with your children most readily
to yield to any just commands of yours: As Caleb who gives to his daughter
Achsah the upper and nether springs at her request, Iud. 1. 15. As it was good
counsel given to that Father of the Commonweal, Rehoboam, 2 Chro. 10. 3, 4,
7. to be kind to his people, to please them, and speak good words to them, in
way of answer to their request, and they would be his servants for ever. So is
it in this case of Fathers of Families: wise and seasonable condescendencies
sometimes in parents to children, It wins their hearts, and ingageth them to
constant obedience.

6. Do you also sometimes hearken to the good 6. By hearkening sometimes to
childrens good advice.
advice, which even your children do seasonably, and in a suitable manner give
to you, and this also will exceedingly win your childrens hearts to an
obedientiall submission to your just commands. Thus did Terab, Abraham's Father,
yield to Abraham's advise, in the matter of his remove from Vr, in Mesopotamia,
to Haram, toward Canaan, as Act. 7. 1, 2, 3, 4. compared with Genesis 11. 31, 32.
and 12, 1. shows. So did Rahabs parents follow her advice; they repaired to
her house when Jericho was besieged by Josuah, and being there, they stirred
not out of doors, according as the spies had Counseled Rahab her self, to look
that it might be so done, Josh. 2. 18, 19. compared with Chap. 6. 23. 2.
Exhortation to Children to yield such obedience.


2. This use serves for exhortation to Children, that you would be stirred up
to the duty of honor of filial obedience to your parents: else all other
outward expressions of respect to them, are but bare Complements: this is in
special sort a real honoring of them. As it is in the children of God in
reference to their heavenly Father. It is more than all formalities of offering
sacrifices to him, or the like: as he said to Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 22. Behold, to
obey is better then sacrifice, and to harken then the fat of Ramms. As the
contrary, disobedience is as iniquity and Idolatry, verse 23. So is it in the
case of the Children of men; their obedience to Parents is all in all; their
disobedience and stubbornness to Parents is vilest iniquity.

Now the better to further Children in giving this honor of filial obedience,
we shall Motives to obedience to Parents.
propound 1. Some motives. 2. Some helps to it. As for motives thereunto, let
it be considered,

1. That the Lord himself does highly honor such as honor their parents, by
honor of obedience, 1. God and Men honor such as yield it.
and he orders for them special honor from others, Prove. 1. 8, 9. The
instruction of a Father, and the Law of a Mother harkened unto, (he says)
shall be an ornament to a Sons head, and as precious chains about his neck, a
badg and pledge of honor in the eyes of his people, Prove. 13. 18. He that
hearkneth to reproof (of a Parent especially) shall be honored. Hence God
causes so honorable a Record to be kept, in Scripture, of the Acts of
obedience to Parents, in Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and others: Memorable is that,
Jer. 35. 18, 19. Where God charge Jeremiah to tell the Rechabites, Because
you have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your Father, and kept all his
precepts, and done according to all that he has commanded you; therefore thus
says the Lord, the God of Israel, Jonadab the Son of Rechab shall not want a
man to stand before me for ever: namely so long as that state and Church of
Judah should stand, as they should not he rooted out, (as Jer 31. 36. There is
the like phrase, in a like sense) so they should be be honorably employed,
according to that phrase in a like sense, Jer. 33. 17, 18.

2. That the Lord sometimes takes occasion 2. God manifests great things to
such in such a way.
to manifest such special grace to children, whilst in this way of filial
obedience, as, either was not at all, or not in that measure showed to them
before: Observable is that in Jacob, whose journey to Padan Aram, is put upon
the account of his filial obedience, even by his malicious Brother Esau, Genesis
28. 7. now as he in his obediential way, journyed from Bershebah toward Haran,
v. 10, 11. there he sees, the ladder set upon the earth, and the top of it
reached to heaven, and behold, the Angels of God ascending and descending upon
it; and behold the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaac, thy Father, the land whereon thou lie will I give it to
thee, and to thy seed, v. 12, 13. and verse. 14. He promises to multiply his
seed, and that in him and his seed all the families of the earth shall be
blessed, and verse. 15. Behold I am with thee, says God, and I will keep thee
in all places whither thou go, and will bring thee again to this land, for I
will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of,
and verse. 16, 17. Jacob awoke, and said, Surely the Lord is in this place, and
I knew it not, this is none other then the house of God, this is the gate of
heaven. Never had Jacob, that we find, before this time so glorious a
manifestation of the promised Messiah, to be God and man in one person, as that
one Ladder with its top reaching to heaven, and its bottom on earth; to be as
a blessed Medium and Mediator, by which God and Man, heaven and earth should be
joined together, as by a Ladder set on earth, yet reaching up to heaven; to be
he by whom the Angels minister unto us, and by whom all graces and spiritual
blessings descend upon us, and our hearts and spirits, our prayers, praises,
and other holy services, yea, and our whole persons one day, ascend up to
Heaven: Never had Jacob such glorious promises of blessing upon him and his
seed before; Never was he in such a Corner of Heaven before: And who then would
not be encouraged to filial obedience, and to be found in the way there of,
wherein others have found more of God and Christ than ever before?

3. That Gods special presence and blessing 3. Gods special presence and
blessing is with such.
is with you in a way of filial obedience to your parents: so in this Scripture
mentioned, Jacob had Gods gracious promise of his presence with him, and
preservation of him, in all places whither he went, and that his seed with him
should be blessed. 4. Promises made to children with their parents come by that
means to be fulfilled.


4. That it tends to the ratification and accomplishment of the promises made
to you in your godly parents. As to Abraham's children in case of their
obedience of his godly commands, Genesis 18. 19. I know Abraham, that he will
command his Children and household after him: And they (in obedience to his
command) shall keep the way of the Lord, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham
(even in his children after him) that which he has spoken of him, even his
promises respecting him and his seed. Deuteronomy. 32. 46. Set your hearts to all the
words which I testify among you this day, which you shall command your
children to observe to do all the words of this Law, verse. 47. For this is not
a vain thing for you: because it is your life, and through this thing you shall
prolong your days in the land which ye go to possess. Albeit God had made so
many promises of their enjoyment of Canaan, and many blessings of grace,
protection, peace, and the plenty there upon them and their posterity, yet the
means of accomplishment of all must be,

1. That parents themselves must set themselves to obey all Gods Commands.

2. They must lay their authority upon their Children, to require of them also
obedience to all Gods Commands.

3. The Children, in obedience to their parents commands, under God, they must
observe to do all the words of that Law. 1 King. 2. 1, 2, 3. David charge his
Son Solomon saying, Keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in all his
ways, etc. that (by keeping this charge of God, as given in charge by me thy
Father according to God) thou may prosper in all thou do, and verse. 4.
that the Lord may confirm his word which he spoke concerning me, (namely in
respect to my Children) saying, If thy Children take heed to their way to walk
before me in truth with all their heart and soul, there shall not fail thee,
said he, a man on the throne of Israel.

5. That your examples of filial obedience, in 5. It will be a means of the
like obedience in other Children.
you, may be a means to work somewhat, at least, upon other Children, yea,
even upon disobedient ones, as Jacobs did upon Esau, Genesis 28. 6, 7, 8. He never
considered his disobedient course of matching with Canaanites against his
parents mind: But when he saw that Isaac his father had blessed Jacob, and
sent him away to Padan Aram, to take him a Wife from thence, and not to take a
Wife of the Daughters of Canaan, and that Jacob obeyed his Father and Mother,
and was gone to Padan Aram, and Esau seeing the Daughters of Canaan pleased not
Isaac his father, verse. 9. Then went Esau to Ishmael, and took Mahalath the
daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's Son to wife; Now he thought his matching thus
unto the family of Abraham, might better please his Father, and so did it.

6. In that else, in a contrary way of dishonor 6. The contrary will expose
the very place where they are to Gods curse.
of parents, you will, what in you lies, expose the very place where you are
to Gods curse. Hence that of Mal. 4. 6. It is prophesied, that by the presence
and blessing of God in John Baptists ministry, parents hearts which were ever
alienated from their stubborn and wicked children, and theirs as much from
their good parents, not enduring to be at their Beck, the Children shall be so
effectually changed to holy obedience to God, and them according to God, that
the Children shall win parents hearts, and the parents shall have their
Childrens hearts (lest otherwise) I come, says God, and smite the earth with a
curse: And oh that all Children would consider this, and become obedient
according to God, lest otherwise God be provoked to blast and crush the very
place where they are, as he is wont to blast that very place and country where
dishonor and disobedience to parents becomes the common and prevailing sin
thereof.

Now for the helps unto honor of filial obedience, Helps to it.
they are such as these,

1. Take heed of such things as hinder filial obedience, and breed and feed
stubbornness in you 1. Avoid all hindrances to it.
to your parents; such as self-conceitednesse, self-willednesse, over weaned
conceit of what Children have formerly done at their Parents command,
curiosity, discontent, ambition, envy at fellow Brethren and Sisters, bad
company and counsel, poring upon parents meanness, infirmities, failings, and
the like, of which you may see more in the 2. Chapter, in the helps there
proposed to further Children in giving that honor in general which is due to
parents.

2. Labor to see the evils of your former disobedient 2. See the evil of
former disobedience.
carriages toward your parents, and to bewail the same, and humbly to confess
the same, as to God, so to your wronged parents, if yet living: As in the
Parable of the prodigal youngster, who cast off the yoke of his Father: when
he comes to himself, and is now sensible of that mad course and spirit of
his, he goes to his Father, and confesses it, with that aggravation, that he
has so sinned against him, that he is no more worthy to be called his Son,
Luke 15. 17, 18, 19, etc. so should you do in the case of your disobedient
carriages to parents, and as you also will then be willing to yield to the
meanest acts of obedience, to be as hired servants.

3. Make an holy and fruitful improvement 3. Improve Gods Word and providence
which in special awaken thereunto.
both of any special words of God in the ministry or Scriptures, and other
good books tending to quicken you up to filial obedience to your parents, and
of any special afflictions, which you meet with in a way of disobedience to
parents: for God uses to be breathing in the word sometimes in Childrens
hearts, obediential workings and purposes, as experience witnesses, and as
that place Mal. 4. 6. even now opened, shows: yea, and in his providence
also crossing stubborn and dissolute Children in their way, he gives them a
loud call, to alter their course of disobedience and dissoluteness: like that
penury and misery which God made use of to awaken the dissolute Son in the
parable, from his course, and to bring him back again under his Fathers
government, Luke 15. 16, 17, 18. Only when at any time God is stirring that
way in your hearts occasionally, either from any awakening word or providence
of his, look to it that you do not stifle those movings, nor suppress those
workings of heart, nor procrastinate and put off the real practicing of such
counsels of God, as at such times are presented to you, but forthwith, without
further delay, set about the course directed and hinted, and urged upon you,
lest otherwise, as too often it falls out, those good motions in your hearts,
not being attended and cherished, they die and come to nothing, but rather like
that dissolute Son in the parable, so soon as ever he was moved inwardly to
consider his perishing condition in the way he was and had been, since he
wretchedly brake away from under his Fathers watch and rule, and how well it
might be with him to return to his Fathers house, in Luke 15. 17, 18, 19. He
resolves of his course, that he will home again, and submit himself to his
Father, and verse. 20, 21. his purposes died not, but presently he performed
what he so had purposed, and do you likewise. That example of the Psalmist is
imitable in this case of Children, as well as in other cases, who says, Psalm.
119. 59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies: and
verse. 60. to show that he did lose no time therein, he says, I made have and
delayed not to keep thy Commandments.

4. Yield to your parents their due honor 4. Yield to Parents honor of repect
and reverence.
both of respect and of reverence, and you will assuredly yield them their due
honor of obedience; My Son, says Solomon, (as a Father also to his Child)
give me thine heart; and let thine eyes observe my ways, Prove. 23. 26. If a
Father have his Child's heart, love, and awe, he has been undoubtedly at his
command: as, if Children of God indeed, then loving and standing in awe of him,
and if so, then surely keeping his commandments, then departing from forbidden
evils, so is it in the case of the Children of men, loving and reverencing
their parents, they are ready to obey them, they are fearful to offend them.

5. Do you herein also, as well as in other acts of honor of Parents, set
before your eyes 5. Herein also good examples; and the evils of the contrary.
the examples of persons eminent for filial obedience; as Isaac, Jacob, Joseph,
and Jesus Christ, who also was subject to his Parents, Luke 2. 51. Yes set
before you the contrary miserable lives and deaths of Children that were
disobedient and stubborn to their Parents, and see if by the blessing of God
upon such meditations, God will not exceedingly quicken you up to filial
obedience, and shame you or deter you from disobedience to Parents. God makes
accout that exemplary punlshing of one disobedient Son, even by man's hand,
should cause all other to hear and fear, Deuteronomy. 21. 20, 21, This our Son will
not obey the voice of his Father or of his Mother: and all the men of the City
shall stone him with stones, that he die; and all Israel shall hear and fear.

CHAP. VI. Of Honor of Recompense or thankefulness due to Parents.
WE have handled three branches and parts of direct honor of parents enjoined
in the fifth Commandment: namely honor of respect, of reverence, and of
obedience. We come now to the fourth, and that is honor of Recompense, for so
honor is taken in Scripture language, for honor of recompense, as was showed
in the first Chapter. Observe then as a fourth branch of the point in general;
that children are to honor their parents with the honor of thankfulness or
Honor of recompense to be given to Parents, proved.
thankful recompense. Christ himself ratifieth this as commanded of God, and as
enjoined also virtually in the fifth Commandment, and that if a Son do nothing
for his Father and his Mother in their need, they break that Commandment, and
such as are -- instruments to hinder them from it, they make the word of God of
none effect, Mark 7. 10. Moses said, honor thy Father and thy Mother, verse.
12. and ye suffer a man no more to do ought for his Father or Mother, verse. 13.
making the word of God of none effect, 1 Timothy 5. 4. But if any Widow have
Children, or Nephews, let them, that is the Adult Children of such ancient
widows, learn to show piety; (or kindness) at home, and to requite their
parents: that this is the meaning, is evident from the scope of the Apostle,
who is speaking of what Widows are to be honored and owned by the Church,
employed and maintained by the Church, viz. such as are Widows indeed, verse.
3. namely as verse. 5. expounds, every way desolate, not only in respect of
want, or deprivall of an husband to provide for her, but of Children or near
kindred to take care of her, or minister supply to her. As for any other
Widow, as verse. 4. expresses, who has Children or Nephews to provide for
her, the Apostle would not have the Church charged with them, but injoyneth it
from God as the Childrens duty (if such be living) or near kinsfolks duty, to
show piety or kindness to them, and especially the Children, they must learn to
show piety to them at home, and to requite their parents. And its observable,
that the Holy Ghost says not, let them only show piety and requite Parents,
but let them learn to do it: there is an holy skill and art of doing it, to
know wherein, and how, and when, and for what ends to do it: every one knows
not the right art of doing it. And he that has any holy skill that way, may be
a daily proficient in it, there is some mystery in it, and it would be learned
by all: every one must be teachable, and willing, and desirous to understand
his duty this way, and to know it more and more: and the more each one
practices, according to the Rules of God, this commendable art, the better
artist, no doubt, he will prove therein.

I shall endeavor, according to that small measure which I have received, to
give some few directions, which may be of some use this way.

Let us then first consider wherein, or in what way this filial grateful
recompense is to be made to Parents.

2. Why it is to be made.

3. Make such use of it, as may both discover any thing contrary to it, or any
hinderance in it: and likewise what may any way further either the Theorie or
Practice of it. In all which we shall make much use of that fundamental notion
(as I may call it) which the Holy Ghost gives us for this end, in the very
phrase he uses to express the duty it self, 1 Timothy 5. 4. (...), and vicem
rependere, as Beza and others render it, parentibus; or to progenitors, as it
is in the Greek: whether next parents, or Grandfathers, and Grand-Mothers, or
the like: there must be a thankful retaliation, as much as may be, though
perfectly and fully it cannot be; for parents have given their children their
beings (under God,) and their very life and existence: which the children can
never do to them; but as much as may be they must repay them like for like.
Touching the first thing propounded, in what way children must recompense
parents; I answer.

1. In way of grateful serving of them, and It consists in childrens 1.
Grateful serving of their parents.
their good, as thereunto called of God: Paul alludeth to this in Phil. 2. 22.
for as a Son with the Father has he served with me in the Gospel, Mal. 3. 17.
his Son that serves him. In case especially of parents meanness, (as with us
generally in New England) there is need, that some of their children at least
should even work for them. Jesus Christ, when on earth, he wrought hard with
his reputed Father, for the maintenance of his poor Mother, Mark 6. 3. Is not
this the Carpenter, say they, the Son of Mary? And I say, in way of grateful
serving of parents, they must do that in a way of gratitude, which their
parents, in way of parentall love, did for them; they must vicem reddere, (as I
said the phrase is in Tim. 5. 4.) give like for like. How did parents work and
labor Working for them out of love to them.
for them? Answ. 1. They did it with much tender respect and affection to
children, for love of them rather than themselves; they had many a bowel-pang,
and thought of their children, carrying them on to, and in their toils and
labors. Alas, thought they, many and many a time, if we take not such and such
pains, if we use not such and such diligence in our callings, our poor helpless
babes, our poor children will want this and that for the back, and for the
belly, etc. As Jacob said, Genesis 30. 30. when shall I be for mine own house
also? He looks not so much to provide for himself, as for his wives as an
husband, for his children as a Father: children do you like for like. If
servants in some cases will continue serving their Masters, because they love
them, whence that boring of such a servants ear, Exodus 21. 5, 6. then do you
children much more, out of respect to your parents: this serving of parents,
and laboring for them, and that out of respect to them, is all but due debt on
your part. You have reason to look backward to what is past, and lies already
in banck on your parents part, and what Bills or Bonds on their part, which
requir greater disbursments this way than ever you can make, if you should
serve them all your days. And if you pay in now a little, and then a little,
as you are able, and as your parents needs call for it, yet may you very well
have low thoughts of all such petty payments, as yet are so exceedingly short
of that vast sum of service, and ministration, which is due to your parents.

2. Parents did what service of love they did for their children, with a great
deal of Alacrity With alacrity.
and freeness, with heart and good will (as we use to say) Children, do you the
like for them; even servants are to serve their Masters with good will, Ephesians. 6.
7. and to do what they do for them, ex animo, heartily, Col. 3. 23. Much more
should children do so, in what you do for your parents. Farents [good hearts!]
they did nothing they did for children, grudgingly, though never so harsh to
flesh and blood, though very toilsome, no, it never deared them (as we say)
knowing that their poor children should have the benefit of it, more ways than
one. Oh that children would think of it, and do like service of love for them;
then would there never be such grumbling with children, as there is with too
many, as if every thing were too much, or too harsh, which they are put to do
for supply of parents wants. Parents never needed urging, or forcing, no nor
their childrens calling upon them, to be doing for them and their good; let
children do like for like: let none, parents, or others, need to urge you with
many arguments, or compel you by blows or mulcts, to be doing this
compensatory service, but let it be as a very natural fruit, arising freely,
from an innate principle and root within. Parents needed no eye of man, of
their children, or of others, to look after them, and see that they were
diligent in their service of love for their children, no, when none were by, as
well as when any were present, still they plied it hard for the supply of their
childrens wants, for their childrens welfare: let children do like for like;
very servants to Masters, should not do eye service, Col. 3. 22. and it would
be a shameful and loathsome thing most of all in children, to do eye service
for parents.

3. Parents were constant, and unwearied, in Constantly and unweariedly.
their labors, for their childrens good; they thought nothing they did, or
could do, too much, or scarce enough, for their childrens good; Oh that
children would but give like for like to parents! then would there never be
such counting upon so much, and so much, which children have done for parents;
Many a poor honest parent has even worn out themselves, and wasted and
exhausted their very strength, in their service of love for their children; and
it would be a monstrous thing, if children should not now do all that ever they
can to maintain these their decayed, decrepit, exhausted parents; I had almost
said servants.

4 Parents in their service of love, on behalf of their children, condescended
to meanest offices, and employments, such indeed they were, especially when
their children were little, were diseased, or many ways bodily distempered and
ill at ease, that none else but tender hearted parents, Fathers and Mothers,
would have done for them; let children do like for like for parents, as they
may have use, or stand in need of them. As in the parable (often made use of in
this discourse) the Son, when come to rights, he was willing to be as his
Fathers servant, yea the meanest of servants, as his hired servant, Luke 15.
17, 18, 19. 2. In being a comfort to them in their sorrows and sufferings.


A second way of such grateful recompencing of parents, is, by being a comfort
to them against their sorrows, and sufferings. As when parents meet with any
sad losses, crosses, reproaches, persecutions for Christ's sake, when exiled,
imprisoned, or the like; let children cheer them up all they can, Genesis 5. 29.
Lamech called his Sons name Noah, saying, this Son shall comfort us, concerning
our work, and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord has
cursed. Let children be as so many Noah's, comforts, and comforters, against
whatsoever miseries, or calamities which may befall their parents, Ruth 4. 15.
this shall be a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher of thy old age; the
grandchild Boaz, must be his grand-mothers cherisher, succourer, and
supporter, under God, against all her faintings, sinkings, and troubles of her
elder times; when that sad news of Joseph's supposed death came to Jacobs ears,
All his Sons and daughters rose up to comfort him; Children are branches of
their Parents, as of a Vine, Psalm. 128. 3. (thy wife shall be as the fruitful
Vine by thy house side) whose branches yield such grapes, such fruit, from
which choycest wine is made, whereby man's heart is cheared, quickened and
enlarged: let children then yield such chearing, quickening, strengthening and
enlarging fruit to their parents, when sad, when their Spirits are ready to
fail, and sink within them, through troubles inward or outward. As other wine,
or fruit of the Vine, is for those that are of a heavy heart, Prove. 31. 6. So
children, as children, as receiving a being from their parents, as of the Vine
of which they came, are to yield comforting fruit, especially to their
sorrowful parents; children should carry it so, and be such to sad and
suffering parents, as they may make up many other losses, and crosses, to them.
As it was said of Ruth (whose story is often, occasionally, made use of, in
this discourse) Ruth 4. 15. for thy daughter-in-Law, which loves thee, which
is more to thee than seven Sons, has born him. Naomi had lost her two dear
Sons, yea but Ruth is such a succourer, and supporter, and comforter to her,
that she is instead of many Sons that way to her. Eve loses her hopeful Son
Abel, and her wound is the greater, in that his brother Cain murdered him; yea
but Seth is given her, as one appointed of God to be another seed to her,
instead of Abel, whom his brother Cain slew, Genesis 4. 25. she looks for all
that good and comfort from him, which Abel might have ministered to her; and so
doubtless she found it made good to her; children, in this also, must vicem
rependere, pay and give in like for like. Ah the bowels of parents toward
children! when any evil, or calamity befalls them, when any way ill at ease,
when sad through-outward, or inward troubles, or pressures, they put their
souls in their souls stead, they would not suffer them to lie grieving, and
wasting themselves with grief, if with all their wisdom, and grace and ability
they had, inward, or outward, they could redress the same: when their children
were little, such comforts, and cordials were parents unto them, and when their
children are adult, they were the same to them: let children then repay like
for like to their grieved afflicted parents; If to him that is melting away
with trouble (as that Hebrew word in Job 6. 14. signifies) such expressions of
sympathy should be showed from a friend to his friend, much more from a child
to a parent; if a brother be born for adversity, Prove. 17. 17. Is it not one
end of a child's being born from his parents, to be a help, and succor to them
in adversity? Children should be as eyes to their dim-sighted parents, as
strength to them when weak, Feet to them when lame, nourishers to them when in
need of meat and refreshment, sweet melody to them to make their very hearts
dance within them, and a very flaffe to their age, as it is said, that Scipio
Africanus was unto his Father. If Christ himself account so of each of his
Disciples, who do the will of his Father, to be his Brother, Sister, and
Mother, not alone in the faithful respects and service of the love of such to
him-ward, but in respect of his own respects and services of love, succor, and
sympathy toward them, as of a child toward a Mother, and of a Brother or
Sister toward a Brother or Sister, especially when afflicted, Esaias 63. 9. and
Mark 3. 35. It will be a Christ-like part, and an Image of his indeared, and
self-denying respects to us, who have done to him any services, and offices of
love, that gracious children, be as children indeed, in way of holy
recompenses, by all due respects, succor and sympathy of love, to their
afflicted Mothers or Fathers, for all those greater services, succors, and
sympathies of their love toward them.

3. Let children recompense parents by being 3. In being very sollicitous of
parents good and safety in hazzards and straits.
effectually sollicitous of their parents outward safety and good in times of
danger and straits; thus David, fearing the malicious rage of Saul against his
parents, for his sake, secureth them with the King of Moab, whom he requested,
saying, 1 Samuel 22. 3. Let my Father and Mother, I pray thee, come forth and be
with you, till I know what God will do for me, and verse. 4. he brought them
before the King of Moab, and they dwelt with him all the time that David was in
the hold. So Jesus Christ, that unparalleld example of thankful recompense of
parents, see Joh. 19. 26, 27. how sollicitous he is, and what effectual order
he takes for his poor Mother, even then, when he hung bleeding upon the Cross
[when Jesus saw his Mother, and the disciple standing by whom he loved, he
says unto his Mother. Woman behold thy Son, then he says to the Disoiple,
Behold thy Mother] or take her, and use her, love her, tender her, look to her,
do for her, as for thy own Mother; and so indeed John understood Christ's
speech, and therefore it is added, [And from that hour that Disciple took her
unto his own home.] When a Lion intercepteth Sampson, and his Father and
Mother, in their journey, Judge. 14. 5, 6. Sampson interposeth twixt danger and
his parents, adventureth his own life, and slaieth the Lion; when danger was
impending upon Jericho, and a bloody storm was gathering over it, Rahab will
not be saved alone, but must have her Parents and Kindred also preserved, Josh.
2. 13. That ye will save alive my Father and my Mother, and my Brethren and
Sisters, and all that they have, and deliver our lives from death. And indeed
parents are the head of the Family; and as it is in the body natural, every
member is ready to rescue the head from hurt, and rather expose it self to
hazard, than endanger the head: so should it be in the body oeconomicall; the
children especially should take all effectual care that may be, to preserve
their parents from hazard, or harms; like those young men of Catana (of whom
we spoke before) which adventured the very flames, to preserve their parents
from burning. Scipio Africanus, when the consul Scipio Cornelius his Father,
had almost lost the day to Hannibal, and was now both sorely wounded, and
surrounded by the enemy, he being then but 17 years old, boldly and undauntedly
breaks through the surrounding enemy, and rescueth his Father from that
danger; as Livy reports; young Manlius Son to Lucius Manlius, a young man of
rare abilities, and sit for public services, but put by his Father to live an
obscure life, in too mean employments, for which amongst other faults his
Father was to be impeached by Pomponius the Tribune, which young Manlius
perceiving, he repaireth early to the Tribunes Chamber, who supposing he came
to help on the intended impeachment of his Father, he caused all to depart the
room, but young Manlius having a sword privily under his coat, threatened the
Tribune with present death, unless he would swear to desist wholly from
prosecution of his Father, and as Valerius Maximus reports, he did so, and so
rescued his Father from that danger, overlooking all unkind passages mentioned
of his Father toward him; when the Son of Craesus, who was formerly dumb, saw
a Persian Soldier ready to run him through, though to him unknown who he was,
it is said, that this young man that for a time had lived mute, for himself,
then for the safety of his Father he obtained power to speak, for he cried out
to the Persian Soldier: Oh do not kill King Craesus my Father, as also Val.
Max. l. 5. reports. Such strange effects even in poor Pagans has their
sollicitous care of their parents safety produced; and let not the children of
Christians be behind hand therein. Herein also must children vicem reddere, pay
and give in like for like. Oh the many sollicitous thoughts, and most serious
endeavors of parents, about their childrens safety, and outward good, when
time was! when they were but in any likelihood of any harm come to them, when
they were little, if they were but missing a while from home, and their parents
not knowing where they were, like Joseph and Mary, when Jesus being then 12
years old was missing, they sought him sorrowing, Luke 2. 48. So have dear
parents many a time done the like for their children; if looking but a little
more pale than usual, or not eating their meat, as at other times, Ah the
fears, and heart-akes of tenderhearted parents about them, lest they should
fall sick: or if any way hurt, or in pain, or sick, Oh the sorrowful days and
nights, which parents that while pass over, fearing lest they should miscarry,
and how many castings about, and contrivings, and inquiries are made by
parents, what way, or course, or means might be seasonably used, which is most
likely to ease, or heal, or revive their dear children, and to rescue them from
the Jaws of death; let children repay unto parents like for like. How many
hazzards, how many sufferings, have parents formerly exposed themselves unto,
for childrens good and safety? Like Moses his parents, Heb. 11. 23. through
faith hiding Moses, when an infant, from the mischief of Pharaohs Butchery, not
fearing the Tyrants bloody edict, which was, that each male child of the
Israelites should be slain; or like David, who understanding that wife and
children, and all are captived by the Amalekites, he will adventure a thousand
hazzards, but he will rescue them. Many a tenderhearted Mother will expose her
self to be some way mischiefed, by a bear, or bull, or dog, or the like, to
save and rescue her child from being hurt by any of them, when they are in
imminent danger thereof; She will be ready to thrust her tender hand into the
very fire, to pull or snatch out her little child, from being burnt or scorched
by it. Now let children repay them like for like.

4. Let children, in way of recompense, improve 4. In improving their utmost
interests in God or men fot their good.
their best interests either in God, for their good, inward, or outward,
through exercise of their faith in prayer, or otherwise for that end; or in
men, by entreaties, or otherwise, to further the same parentall good. As Hester
did for her Uncle Mordecai, who had been a very Father to her, Hester 2. 7.
she sends him word, Chap. 4. 16. that she and her maids will solemnly fast
(and consequently pray too, on his, and his peoples behalf) and so I will
(says she) go in to the King, which yet is not according to the Law, and if I
perish, I perish; she will then improve her utmost interest in heaven and
earth, come what will come of it, but she will, if possible, help out Mordecai
and the rest, at this dead lift. So Joseph, he improved his interest in Pharaoh
for his Father Jacobs welfare, Genesis 47. 1. he told him, that his Father, and
all his, and all he had were come, and were in the Land of Goshen, etc. upon
which Pharaoh, v. 6. bids Joseph to place them there. Rahab improved her
interest, not alone in the spies, to procure her parents and kinreds safety and
welfare, as well as her own, Josh. 2. 12, 13. but in the Lord himself also, for
the same end; for this action and success is ascribed also to Rahabs Faith, in
Heb. 11. 31. with 5. In supplying their outward wants: yet so as it be
honorably, plentifully, readily, and freely, to their content, out of the very
best, and in some cases before themselves.
Josh. 2. We heard but now also what improvement David made in the King of
Moab, on behalf of his parents, and what use Christ the Son of David made of
his interest in John the Apostle, for his Mother; verily, good parents did as
much with God and men too, many and many a time, on the behalf of their
children, as might be showed in Scripture examples, and children cannot do less
than repay unto them like for like.

5. [Which especially we shall press, in this part of the discourse.]

Let children in way of grateful recompense, communicate to their parents, of
the blessings of this life, which God vouchsafes them, according as their
parents at any time may need the same. Paul in 1 Timothy 5. 4. does in special
sort look at this, as one way of grateful requital of parents: when, as for
instance, the childrens Mother is some poor Ancient helpless widow, one that
might have charged the Church, but that God had given her Children, as well as
Nephews, and they in the first place must learn the grateful art of
maintaining her, and of supplying of such a Mother-widdows wants; for which end
mind we the Apostles words: [But if any widow have children or Nephews; (not
let her, as if speaking of a Mothers duty to children or kindred, but) let them
learn (as speaking of the children firstly, and nextly of the Nephews) to show
kindness at home, and to requite their parents. The word (...), is in the
plural number, and so not agreeing with (...) the widow, which is the
singular, but with (...) children rather, being plural; which clearly
evinceth, that the scope of the place is to show, not what is the
Mother-widdows duty to their children, but what is the childrens duty to the
Mother-widdow: namely as verse. 16. To relieve the Mother-widdows; and by the
light of the word, (...) used for relieving parents, v. 16. and that in v. 4.
(...) used for requiting parents, we may have much help, to clear this
particular now in hand; the word (...) signifies let him abundantly supply
their wants, or let him minister enough to them, or what is sufficient for
them, or that which is to just content; according also, as in Greek Authors
that word is used; but I forbear instances. In Scripture the simple verb (...)
is used, Joh. 14. ^. for [it sufficeth] show us the Father, and (...) [it
sufficeth] and 2 Cor. 12. 9. my grace (...) is sufficient for thee; and Matthew.
25. 9. lest (...) there be not enough for us and you. In Heb. 13. 5. (...) is,
[Let us be content with what we have;] and the like use of it is in other
Scriptures; and this word used in 1 Timothy 5. 16. for the Churches relief of
their officed widows, shows that it must be honorable: for so in v. 3. Its
said: Honor them that are widows indeed. It is then such a relief as is in
honorem, in way of honor of the widows; and if each good and christian child
(...) must in such sort relieve his Mother-widdow, then they must do it
honorably, or in honor of them, as a part of this, Honor thy Father and thy
Mother, in an honorable way; yea they must do it abundantly, sufficiently, and
to their just content, but more happily of these by and by, in the manner of
doing it. Hitherto also some interpreters refer that, 1 Timothy 5. 8. who so
provideth not for his own, and especially them of his own house, has denied
the faith, and is worse than an infidel; as a threat, and so forcible argument,
to sway, that such should not be maintained upon the Churches charge, which may
be maintained by their own; referring this, not so much to the wanton widows,
which waste that which should maintain them and theirs; as to the children of
their widdow-Mothers, whose children should take care to provide for them, as
their own, lest they incur this sad censure, of persons denying that faith
which they do profess, and of persons, who are worse than infidels. And here
the force of (...) takes place. Parents took pains and care, night and day,
and all that ever Gods providence otherwise cast in upon them, all still was,
that their house, especially children, might be comfortably and sufficiently
provided for, and that to their just content: as Father Jacob said, Genesis 30.
30. When shall I provide for my own house? Let children then, in parents
shiftless conditions, vicem rependere, take their turn of repayment of like for
like to Parents. Parents, according to their childrens needs and wants, and
their own ability, did supply their children with Food, Raiment, Physic,
Housing, Lodging, Attendance, and the like, In sickness as well as health. In
all their bodily ails and infirmities, their persons and estates were
subservient to them; yea sometimes when through infirmity they were froward,
and distempered in their spirits; let children do the like for parents; let
them provide for their own parents especially, what is meet for them in all
respects. Parents did seasonably provide all needful supplies for children,
and did not procrastinate, but took the first opportunity to do it for them;
let children do as much for parents, when they need their help and supply.
Parents did all cheerfully and freely; they grudged their children nothing they
had, nothing they did for their succor and supply; Oh that children would
repay parents herein also like for like; do what they do for them, according as
they need them, freely and cheerfully, without the least regreeting thought.
Parents, in many respects, denied themselves, for their childrens sakes: fared
the harder, that they might have food enough, sometimes spared it from their
own bellies, that their children might have it; they went meanly and coarsely
clad, that the children might have the better apparel; especially those little
children that were more shiftless that the rest, they should be sure to have of
the best they could get for them. Let children also in many respects deny
themselves for their more shiftless parents sake. It was not cost their parents
stood upon, according to their abilities and rank, they would willingly
sequester of the best of their estates, so their children might have what was
fit for them, for back, or belly, for their education to literature, or other
employments as they were thereof more capable, let children repay like for like
in this, to spare no cost for them: and to let parents partake of the best of
what God gives them, and not of the refuse thereof, for their supply. It was
an ingenious Act of Reuben, who finding a thing better than ordinary, a
Mandrake, he brings and gives it to his Mother Leah, Genesis 30. 14. And
Sampson, if he meet with honey and hony-combe, his Father and Mother shall have
part of it, Judge. 14. 9* And Joseph sends his Father, not of the refuse, but
of the good things (or better sort of things) of Egypt, Genesis 45. 23. And when
he comes to Egypt, he does not put him into some wast building, or into some
blind and old hole, and barren out-corner of the Land, but he procures him and
his household to be placed in Goshen, in the best part of Egypt, Genesis 45. 13.
compared with Chap. 47. 6. And what though children should be fain to spare
somewhat from themselves, for such like needful supplies of their parents, out
of their best things? yet they must do like for like, their parents having done
as much and more for them, as we said even now. It is a good speech of
Aristotle, Ethic. l. 9. cap. 2. (...). Children seem in special fort to be
bound as debtors, to supply their parents with things necessary for their
provision. And it is more comely to supply necessaries, to the causes of our
being, than to our selves. And then he adds that speech, (...), and we must
give honor to them, even as it were to Gods; see in what a plentiful way, by
the light of nature this heathen Philosopher sees, children ought to minister
to their parents, even in all things they stand need of; and in what a
self-denying way, Judging it meetest for children to prefer their parents, in
such supplies, before themselves; and in what an honorable, awful and
conscientious way (as I may call it) all should be carried, even as if they
were offering some Sacrifice to God himself. And how justly all this is due,
from children to parents, its not a matter left to their own courtesy, and
will, whether they will do it, or not do it; nor is it a matter of mere
charity, as alms to other poor, but children are bound thereto, as debtors; and
no wonder, he says its meeter we provide for the causes of our being, than for
our selves; For he makes children (and that rightly) parents debtors, (as he
does elsewhere in his Ethics) and debtors we know, must, in case, take care
to pay their Creditors, and to Live of the rest; as the Prophet advised her, 2
Kings 4. So must children, in case, spare it from their own selves, that
parents may Reasons why recompense is due to parents are taken 1. from
Childrens state as Children: being Gods rewards.
be supplied.

Now let us briefly give some reasons of this duty.

The 1. Reason may be taken from the Condition, and state of children, as
children: they are, or should be made up of recompense, be all recompense: they
are given of God to their godly parents as rewards, Psalm. 128. 3. The fruit of
the womb is his reward; God intends them as rewards; if they prove otherwise
than such every way, they do what in them lies, to frustrate Gods ends; so are
they an heritage of the Lord, Ibid. Not alone such as God will improve for his
own honor, and possess for his own use, but such as should, by the blessing of
God, Minister a blessed income of comfort, succor, support, and supply to
their parents, as from the Lord by them; according as they may stand in need
thereof.

2. Reason may be taken from the nature of such 2. From the nature of such
recompense, it is piety.
grateful recompense; it is counted, and called of God by the name of piety, 1 Timothy 5. 4. Let them learn (...) to exercise piety toward their own house, or
to requite their parents. In some cases it is preferred before giving to
religious uses, as to the Corban, for Temple uses, Mark 7. 10, 11, 12, 13.
Christ condemns the giving to the Corban, that which should have been rather
sequestered for parents supply by their Children.

3. Reason, from the justice, and equity of it; 3. From the justice and equity
of it.
children have received their very essence, and existence, instrumentally, from
parents, and that is more than all that which children can Minister to them, as
Christ said in another case, Is not the life more than meat, and the body than
raiment? and so I might say here; and what then can children return to parents
in lieu thereof, besides all the cares, fears, exercises, and troubles of
parents in behalf of their Childrens outward, and inward welfare, for which
children can never make them amends? 4. From the benefits coming by parents.


4. Reason, may be taken from that blessed fruit which children of good parents
reap, even in outward blessings, by their Prayers, blessing,
covenant-interests, and the like. A good man leaves an inheritance to his
childrens children respecting the outward, as well as the inward man, Prove. 20.
7. the just man's children are blessed after him, in outward matters, so far as
is good for them, as well as in spiritual things, Psalm. 112. 1, 2, 3. The seed
of fearers of God, have Gods promise of becoming mighty upon the earth, and
the generation of the upright shall be blessed: blessed indefinitely, and so
every way blessed, blessed in their bodies, blessed in their spirits, blessed
in their names, in their labors, in their estates, in their relations, in
their undertakings, in their choices and changes, blessed in their protections,
provisions, plenty, and the like. And surely children are then bound in regard
of so much good which comes by their parents, to communicate to them in all
the good blessings of God, which for their sakes they the rather received.

Let us now make some use, and application of what has been said; the use
serves

Use 1. For reproof, and conviction to all Use of reproof. 1. To ungrateful
Children.
children, who are ungrateful to your parents; to be unthankful to any man,
is made one of the carachters of a man, who though he may have a form of
godliness, yet he denies the power of it, and from whom Churches should turn
away, have nothing to do with them, if not reject them from them, if any such
be membors of them, 2 Timothy 3. 2. 5. Unthankful, having a form of godliness,
but denying the power of it, from such turn away; and if so with ungrateful
persons to other men, its much The great evil of it and in it.
more so with ungrateful children. Its noted as a vile part in that
ungrateful Butler, one upon whom Joseph had such compassion, when he was sad,
of whose dream Joseph had given so good, and effectual an interpretation, Genesis
40. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 21. that as v. 23. yet did not the chief
Butler remember Joseph, but forgate him; how much viler a thing is this for
children, not to remember their afflicted parents, when they themselves are
enlarged? The Prophet by way of allusion, comparing the Church to a Mother, and
her members to Children, brings it as a very monstrous thing, Esaias 51. 18.
There is none to guide her among all the Sons she has brought forth, neither
is there any that takes her by the hand, of all that she has brought up, so
that it were a very monstrous thing, if a natural Mother having many children,
should have none to become her guide, her staff, and stay, in her misery, and
afflicted estate; what is a more cutting, and killing blow to your parents
hearts, than to see you their children prove ungrateful to them? David made
nothing of Shemies cursing him, in comparison of Absalom, a Son out of his own
bowels to rise up against him, 2 Samuel 16. 11. your parents groundedly expect it
from you their children, that surely you would be helpful to them in their
age, sickness, weakness, wants, and the like, and if hope deferred makes the
heart sick, Prove. 13. 12. what does hope disappointed? Oh it wounded Jobs
heart, when in his affliction, it was, as Job 19. 14. my kindred (says he,)
failed me, and my familiar friends forgot me, verse. 15. they that dwell in my
house and my maidens count me for a stranger, I am an Alien in their sight.
Verse. 16. I called my servant, and he gave me no answer: I entreated him with
my mouth, verse. 17. my breath is strange to my wife, though I entreated for the
childrens sake of my own body, and what a gash would such like ingratitude in
his children, if they had been living, have given unto his troubled spirit? it
was sad enough to the man to meet with so much trouble, and affliction, both
inwardly, and outwardly, Psalm. 88. but that was as the very core in his wounds,
verse. 16. that Lover and friend was put far from him; and much more is this
ingratitude in children, an intolerable grievance to your afflicted parents,
as it is an abominable wickedness also in the children; If he said of other
ingratitude, Ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris, call me unthankful, and call me
any thing, surely it may be much more verified here: he that may justly be
termed ungrateful to parents, may be termed any thing that has wickedness in
the notion of it; he is one ungrateful to God, ungrateful to man, he is one
that is unnatural, inhumane, unfaithful, unmercifull, hard-hearted, proud,
covetous, destitute of grace, of a good conscience, of godly wisdom, and the
knowledge of God, of faith, and hope in God, of love of God, and the fear of
God, each of which might be fully made good against such a one, if I should
enter that task; but it shall suffice to name the same.

But to come to some particulars to be here reproved.

Let this abase such of you, as have been, and 1. It reproves in special 1.
Such as are a very grief to parents.
still are a very heart cut, and grief, to your parents, by your lewd courses,
and carriages. Like Esau, and his wives, of whom its said, Genesis 26. 35. they
were a grief of mind unto Isaac, and Rebeckah, namely by their vile speeches,
and carriages, and the like; hence also that speech of Rebeckah, Genesis 27. 46. I
am weary of my life, because of the daughters of Heth. Hence, Prove. 10. 1. a
foolish, or ungratious Son, (says Solomon) is the heaviness of his Mother, and
Prove. 17. 25. A foolish (or ungracious) Son is a grief to his Father, and
bitterness to her The evil and vileness of this.
that bare him; but as Moses said to those ungrateful Children of God of old,
Deuteronomy. 32. 6. So may I, by way of allusion, say to all such Children of men, do
you thus requite your parents, O foolish Children, and unwise? you should be
the joy of your parents, and such as make their hearts glad, Pro. 23. 25. And
do you make them sad? you should be as Vine branches, Psalm. 128. 3. yielding
sweet cheering clusters of grapes, and are your grapes (as it is said of them,
Deuteronomy. 32. 32.) grapes of gall, and are your clusters bitter? or as v. 33. Is
your wine the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venim of Aspes, manifestly
indangering the very lives of your parents? have your parents wept so often for
you, when you were sick, or in pain, or any way ill at ease, or in any supposed
danger of limb, or life, and is this your requital, to draw yet more tears
from their eyes, and sighs from their grieved, oppressed hearts by your
miscarriages? have they joyed so often, so much, in your birth, in your growth,
in your education, expecting that you would have been Abshaloms, your Fathers
peace, Cains, your parents portions, and are you rather Benonies, your Mother,
and Fathers sorrows? have not your parents enough otherwise to grieve them, in
respect of their many inward ails, and wants, in respect of many temptations,
heart burdens, in respect of outward cumbers, and crosses, persecutions,
reproaches, etc? but must you be adding to their afflictions? if God took that
so ill from the heathen, that when he was but a little displeased with his
people, they helped forward the affliction? Zeph. 1. 15. will he not be sore
displeased (as he says here) with you who thus help forward your Parents
afflictions? Have your parents given marrow to your bones, and will you thus
dry up their bones? Prove. 17. 22. A broken Spirit dries the bones; they gave
you breath, and will you by such grief, break their wind (as I may say) bring
them to that pass, as they cannot stir up stairs, or down, (as we say) but
they have almost lost their breath; make them go up and down panting, and
blowing for want of breath, scarce able to speak a few words to God or men, but
they must make pawses ever and anon to recover breath they are so spent? Prove.
15. 13. by sorrow of heart the spirit is broken, that is, as Junius notes upon
that place, Veluti Anhelus, and suspiriosus efficitur homo, and respiratio ejus
interscinditur, A man is made as one that is broken-winded; your parents many a
time have carried you in their Arms, and born the burdens of your educations,
and the like, and will you now break the very back of their hearts, and
spirits, which should help sustain and bear up all other burdens, by your
continual grieving of them? Prove. 12. 25. heaviness in the heart makes it
stoop, as an heavy load weighs down the body; now the spirit of a man is that
which sustaineth his infirmity, Prove. 18. 14. and how do you dis-inable poor
parents to hold up head, and heart, under other burdens of theirs? your dear
Mother underwent sorrows in her conceiving you, and bearing you in her womb,
and in your birth, and both Father and Mother met with many sorrows in your
bringing up, from the womb to your ripe age, and will you now make them go
sorrowing to their graves, by your lewdness; or by your vile courses,
carriages, and speeches, bring their gray hairs with sorrow to their graves?
shall they pay so dearly for your pleasures, your gains, your merry bouts,
your excess and riot, etc? does it not suffice the drunkard, to drink so much
of the blood of the grape, and the spirits of the vine, but he must also
swallow down so many drams of the blood and spirits of his dear Father, and
tenderhearted Mother? whilst you, as disolute Children, are making your beds,
(as you suppose) with Roses, in your voluptuous, and vile courses, you are
filling your Fathers beds with Briars, and stuffing their pillows with thorns;
and what restless nights must your poor parents have that while? Children
should be restorers of their parents lives, Ruth 4. 15. (he shall be to thee a
restorer of thy life) and will any of you be so inhumane, and brutish, as by
such grief, which you cause to your parents, to shorten their days, impair
their lives, and hasten their going out of the world? well, let me tell such,
that this is a degree of paricide. God who in the 6th Commandment says, thou
shall not kill, requires to save life, to preserve, and cherish life: and if
not to save life be to kill, Mar. 3. 4. then not to cherish parents, so as to
help to preserve their lives, is to kill them: he that forbids also killing
another, forbids all means tending to shorten another days, as its evident
heart griefs do, Prove. 12. 25. and 5. 13. and 17. 22. Surely then, you that by
your vile courses cause such grief to your parents, as dries their bones,
makes their hearts stoop, breaks their very spirits, you are so far forth
guilty of paricide; and shall Murderers of Fathers, and Murderers 2. Such as
minister not suitably and seasonably to parents wants.
of Mothers escape? surely no, 1 Timothy 1. 9. the Law, and all the punishments,
and curses thereof, are for such, in special sort.

2. It serves to abase such among you, as minister not suitably and seasonably
to parents wants, or the like, when they need succor, and help, in age, in
poverty, in sickness, in lameness, or the like; now not to guide them, not to
help them, not to take them (as it were) by the hand, (as that phrase is in
Esaias 51. 18. Its most loathsome in you. If God would not have them, Esaias 58. 7.
to hide themselves from their own flesh, brethren of the same stock of Israel;
surely much less, to hide themselves from them that gave them their flesh, and
blood, and lives; if the Brother fallen into decay with an Israelite, he must
relieve him, yea though he be a stranger, or a sojorner, that he may live with
him, Levit. 25. 35. much more must be done to a parent by a child; and if who
so has this worlds good, and sees his brother has need, and shuts up this
bowels of compassion from him, the love of God dwells not in him, 1 John 3.
17. surely much less can there be any love of God in that Child, that so
ingratefully shall neglect his needy parent; 1 Timothy 5. 8. who so provideth not
for his own, etc. is worse than an Infidel: which as was said, is to be
referred to Childrens neglect of providing answerable supplies unto parents
needs, and so, such are worse than Infidels. Notable is that example which
Valerius Maximus in his 5th Book and Chap. 4th mentions: A certain grave
woman condemned to die by the Roman Praetor, and delivered to one of the
Triumviri that she might be strangled in the Prison, the Keeper of the Prison
moved with pity to the woman, deferred her strangling, and thought to let her
die of famine rather, and suffered her daughter to visit her sometimes, only
searched her, that she brought no food with her for her Mother: but wondering
at length, that the grave Matron lived so long, and watching more narrowly, at
length espied the young woman suckling her Mother, with her breasts, and
examining her about it, she confessed, she had so done all the while her Mother
had been a Prisoner, whereupon the Keeper acquainting the Triumvir, and he the
Praetor, and he the Consulls, the condemned Matron was pardoned, and so escaped
death, whereupon says Valerius Maximus, Quo non penetrat, aut quid non
excogitat pietas? where will not piety toward parents make entrance, and what
will not that invent, which can find out a new way to preserve the life of a
Mother in Prison? and the like story he has there of the like course that a
young woman took, to preserve the life of her Father Cimon, condemned to a like
end. Says Tully, it is a most heinous thing not to nourish parents. Solon made
a Law, that he that does not nourish his parents, let him be infamous; yea such
are worse than the brute creatures, the Storks, as Pliny, and other natural
Historians report, they carry their old ones betwixt two of them, and feed them
by turns, whence the Law amongst the very heathens for nourishing of parents,
is called (...) the Law of piety, after the manner of Storks; and in the Hebrew
phrase, the Stork has his name of piety, Jer. 8. 7. Psalm. 104. 17. The Hebrew
word for Stork is (...) from (...) pious, gracious, kind, bountiful, etc. the
very Dormise, (as Pliny tells us, in his Not Hist. lib. 9. Chap. 57.) they
also nourish up the old ones when spent with age, and shiftless; besides, in
professed Christians, its to deny the faith, which men hold forth, and profess,
not thus to provide for their own; for the faith which they profess to believe,
the doctrine of piety, teaches them otherwise, tho they hereby deny to
practice it; and the faith whereby they believe (at least profess so) that
assuredly would teach otherwise; hence that Emphasis in the Apostles
exhortation to piety toward parents, 1 Timothy 5. 16. If a man, or woman [that
believeth] has widows, and Mothers by his own, or wives side (or the like)
Let him relieve (or Minister sufficiently to) them: besides this sin
invalidateth, what in you lies, the 5th Commandment, Mar. 7. 10, 11, 12, 13.
Moses says, Honor thy Father, and Mother, but you will not suffer a man to do
ought for his Father, or Mother, and so make the word of God of none effect;
nor will any pretenses (as there are) for need of what parents should have, for
religious uses, for the Corban, and that by bestowing the same upon such uses,
parents will have benefit enough, and the like, not such, nor any other
pretense whatsoever will pass with God, why children should neglect, or omit so
weighty a duty of ministering to their parents. If Job say, if I have seen any
poor without covering, if his loins have not blessed me, then let my arm fall
from my shoulder blade, etc? Job 31. 19, 20, 21. Surely much less could he
charge himself with any such sin as this is we are speaking of; and lest any
pretend ignorance of parents straights, and wants, verily you must look after
that, and make sure of that, that they do not lack any suitable supply, as 1 Timothy 5. 8, 16. Evinceth; and let men take heed they delude not themselves this
way. I may say as Solomon said in another cause, Prove. 24. 12. If thou say,
behold, we knew it not; Does not he that pondereth the heart consider it, and
he that keeps thy soul does not he know it, and shall not he render to every
man according to his works? if Christ be so severe against neglect, and
omission of supply of ministering to his other needy, sick, or imprisoned ones,
as Matthew. 25. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, verse. 42. For I (namely in my members, as verse. 46.
expounds it) was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave
no drink, verse. 43. I was a stranger, and ye took me not in, naked, and ye
clothed me not, sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not: How dreadfully
will he speak to all and every one of you who are unnatural, ungrateful
Children, who have suffered your Christian Parents to want such supply, and
help, as you might have ministered, but did it not?

And here also as subordinate to this particular reproved in children, we might
reprove deboist youngsters, who by their dissolute courses wast their estates,
whereby they might have ministered to Parents wants afterward, but by their own
prodigality come to be disinabled: But we shall leave them to consider of 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. and Prove. 23. 20, 21, 29. to the end, and Isa. 5. 22. and verse
11. unto verse 18. and such other Scriptures.

3. It serves to abase such of you, as any way 3. Such as steal away or wast
Parents estates.
impair your Parents outward Estates, by stealing from them, as Prove. 28. 24.
Who so robs his Father or his Motber, and says it is no transgression, is
the Companion of a destroyer, or a destroying man, Heb. a Highway-side robber
or associate to them: inuring himself to pilfer smaller matters from Parents,
Imagining or at least pretending to himself or others, that there is no hurt,
no great fault in that; he learneth the trade of thieving, and at length is an
open practitioner thereof, and is a destroying man to himself at last: comes
to the Gallows. This (as I may say) is the Genesis of such a youngsters
course, and many a wretch at the Gallows, has made an answerable Analysis of
his lewd course, till he has brought it up to this as the very head and
beginning of it, they first began to pilfer this and that from their Father and
Mother, else had never come to this sad end. Michas thieving and stealing from
his Mother received indeed a stop, Judge. 17. 1, 2. But he occasioned his
Mothers curse, ibid. and so many such like acts occasion the like from other
Parents. But say, you wast not your Parents estates this way, if you do it by
secret excess in Drinking and Feasting, or in gaming, or company-keeping, it
is an evil requital to your Parents, for all their care and pains, to lay up
somewhat to mantain their children comfortably and honorably, and you thus
basely cast it away, Prove. 16. 26. He that wastes his Father, and chaseth away
his Mother, is a Son that causes shame. Mothers, who, of the two, are the most
tenderhearted toward their Children, yet even their hearts are alienated from
children by such vile courses. Such profuse mispending of Fathers Estates, even
chaseth away a tender hearted Mother. But oh how far does it estrange the
heart of the Lord himself, from any such miscreants as you are?

4. It serves to abase such of you as are cruel, 4. Such as are hard-hearted
to their Brethren.
or hard-hearted to your fellow brethren or sisters, like Edomites to the
Israelites their kindred, not only looking on upon them in their Affliction,
without succouring of them, but spoiling of them themselves, Obad. 12. 13, 14,
etc. For which, the vengeance of God was then threatened, and afterward
executed upon them. Now such ungrateful, unkind dealings with your Brethren,
it is unkind requital of your Parents, in Gods account. As Abimelech and the
men of Shechem, raging so against his seventy Brethren, Judge. 9. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Its called wickedness done by Abimelech to his Father, and God accordingly
avenged the same, by making Abimelech and the Shechemits, which were
fellow-actours in that Inhumanity, to be mutual executioners of divine
Justice, each upon other, Judge. 9. 56. Thus God rendered the wickedness of
Abimelech which he did unto his Father in slaying his seventy Brethren.
Unkindness to Children being ever reckoned, as unkindnesse offered to Fathers.
As the Edomites unkindness to the Israelites, is unkindness to Edoms Brother
Jacob, Obad. 10. 11, etc. So when Joash dealt so unworthily with Zecheriah,
good Jehoiadahs son, Its said of it, 2 Chronicles. 24. 22. Thus Joash the King
remembered not the kindness which Jehoiada his Father had done to him, but slew
his Son, etc.

5. Let it abase all such of you as in any unnatural 5. Such as are
treacherous, or inhumane to parents.
way either betray your good Parents to persecutors malice: of which, Matthew.
13. 12. The Children shall cause the Parents to be put to death; which must
needs be a double death to them (in a manner) as in a sort that was to Christ,
to be betrayed by one of his own Children (as it were) One of you (says he to
his Disciples) shall betray one, Matthew. 26. Or if you be any other ways
inhumane toward your Parents, by striking them, though not mortally: which God
makes death to such monsters of mankind, Exodus 21. 15. He that strikes Father
or Mother shall die. And what then will be the doom of paricides, who strike
them mortally? Absalom would have done it, ^ Sam. 16. 11. He sought his Fathers
life, and Senacheribs sons did it, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch
his God, they smote him with the sword, 2 King. 19. 37. Surely the Law, even
all the Curses and Judgments of the Law must needs be the portion of such
Paricides, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who so ill requite their tenderhearted Parents and
causes of their lives.

A second use serves for exhortation, 1. To 2. Use of exhortation.
Parents.

Do you what lies in you, to further, and look 1. To parents to further this
gratitude in their Children. 1. By leaving them the choycer blessings of God.
that you no way do any thing to hinder your children in this duty of grateful
recompencing of Parents; for which end,

1. Take special care to leave your children the good blessings of God,
respecting their souls welfare; for this will lie as a strong engagement upon
your childrens hearts, the rather gratefully to recompense you, their Parents.
Thus God required of them of old, that they should so carry it, that they might
leave the Land of Canaan, (a Type of blessings of an higher nature) for an
inheritance to their Children for ever. The like is charged; 2 Chronicles. 28. 8.
This was the gracious care of the Fathers of the two tribes and half, to detain
their children in the way of Gods worship and fear, and to prevent whatsoever
might hinder or discourage their posterity from the same, Josh. 22. 25, 26, 27,
28. And if we have not rather done it for fear of this thing, saying, in time
to come your children might speak to our Children, saying, what have you to do
with the Lord God of Israel? ye have no part in the Lord; So shall your
Children make our Children cease from fearing the Lord. Therefore we said, let
us now prepare to build us an altar, not for burnt offerings, nor for
sacrifice: but that it may be a witness between us and you, and our
generations after us, that we might do the service of the Lord before him, etc.
This was Joshuah's care also for his, Josh. 24. 15. But as for me and my house,
we will serve the Lord, And this was Abraham's care, Genesis 28. 29. I know him
(says the Lord) that he will command his Children, and household after him,
and they shall walk in his ways, that God may bring upon Abraham, (namely in
his posterity) what he has promised him.

2. Use all lawful means, industry, and providence to leave your Children in
such places, and 2. By leaving them inabling means and ways for it.
in such callings, and (if it may be) with such portions, that they may not
alone be the more engaged, but enabled also (in an ordinary way of providence)
to discharge such a duty of filial recompense to the utmost. Thus Jacobs care
was to provide for his house, Genesis 30. 30. and he had children solicitous and
industrious to provide for him, in his straits, in that time of famine,
witness, their journeyes for that end into Egypt, Genesis 42. and 43, and 44. But
in a most eminent way it was seen in his Son Joseph: whose great care was that
way, Genesis 45. 9. Thus says thy Son Joseph, Come down to me and tarry not, and
verse. 10. Thou shall dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shall be near to me,
thou and thy Children, and thy Childrens Children, and thy flocks and herds,
and all that thou have, verse. 22. and there will I nourish thee (for yet there
are five years of Famine) lest thou and thy household, and all that thou have,
come to poverty. 3. By distilling into Children principles of gratitude to
others, and curbing the contrary in them.


3. Distill into your children principles of gratitude to others, especially
unto progenitors: So did Ruth into Obed her Son, whence that prophetical speech
of good women present at Obeds birth, which they spoke to his Grandmother
Naomi, Ruth 4. 15. He shall be to thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher
of thy old age: for thy Daughter-in-law, which loves thee, (and therefore will
be instructing him that way) has born him. And if Parents perceive any
expressions of an ungrateful Spirit in their Children, though toward others,
let them be sure to rebuke their children for it, and seasonably to root up
such sprouts, of so bad a Spirit. So did good Jethro in his Daughters, when
they told him what kindness Moses had done to them, Exodus 2. 19, 20. says he
to his Daughters, and where is he? why is it that ye left the man? call him,
that he may eat bread.

4. Be you exemplary to your Children, in this 4. By being examples thereof to
Children.
grateful recompense of your Parents. Hence also their Argument concerning
Obed, that he would prove such a pious child to his Grandmother Naomi, Ruth 4.
15. He will be a nourisher of thy old age; For thy Daughter which loves thee,
which is better to thee then seven sons (and in her exemplary piety toward
thee) has born him. If children are continually taught by Parents examples of
piety to their parents, as well as by their Instructions, to be thus pious,
they will assuredly learn (as Paul's phrase is,) 1 Timothy 5. 4. to show piety at
home, and to requite their Parents.

5. Be it far from you to be so ungracious toward 5. By avoiding any thing
favoring of unnaturalness to them.
your godly children, as not to shield off blows from them, what in you lies:
like the Father and Mother of the blind man, leave him to shift for himself,
with He is of years, let him answer for himself, John 9. 21, 22. So did not
Joash; who in that honest cause of his son Gideon, stood in his defense, Judge.
6. 31. Joash said to all that stood by him against his Son, will you plead for
Baal? will you save him? he that will plead for him let him be put to death
whilst it is yet morning, if he be a God, let him plead for himself, because
one has cast down his Altar. But much less, let any Parent requite good
children so ill, as themselves to undermine their childrens safety or liberty,
Luke 21. 16. Ye shall be betrayed by Parents, etc.

2. It is of exhottation to children. 2. Exhortation to Children gratefully to
recompense Parents. Motives to it.


Be you stirred up to piety, and grateful recompense to your Parents. And that
you may be stirred up hereunto, besides that it is honorable in the sight of
God, Angels and Men so to do, whence such Records kept of grateful Children,
in honorem, as of Joseph, and others, Consider,

1. That by the very light of nature, it has been 1. Natural light.
strongly urged, and exemplarily practiced, as we have hinted before.

Plato in his 8. Book de Republica, shows, that a Child owes to the Father,
all things respecting his outward maintenance and comfort, as a recompense for
his Birth and Education: and Tully says, We are not born for our selves, but
partly for our Country, partly for our Parents, and partly for our Children,
etc.

2. Consider, that those that are not grateful to 2. Else not grateful to
ones Country.
their Parents, will never be grateful to their country, or self-denying for
its good. Hence that also of Tully, It conduces much to the welfare of our
country, that Children be pious to their Parents.

3. Consider, that therefore the Lord inableth 3. Childrens abilities given for
this end.
you the rather with bodily strength, with gifts and parts, with Estates, with
advantageous places and callings, that you may be fit for such a service of
grateful recompense of your Parents. That blessed man Joseph concludes thus
of all his great Preferments and Abilities, which God brought him to in Egypt,
that it was all for this very end, Genesis 45. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. God sent me before
your face (says he to his Brethren) to preserve you a posterity in the earth,
etc. So then it was not you that sent me hither, but God; and he has made me a
Father to Pharaoh, and Lord of all his house, and a Ruler throughout all the
Land of Egypt; Haste you, and go up to my Father, and say to him, thus says
thy Son Joseph, God has made me Lord of all Egypt: Come down to me and tarry
not, etc. And there will I nourish them, etc.

4. Consider, that there is nothing lost by what 4. Nothing is lost by it
you do deny your selves in, out of gratitude to your Parents, but much gained
every way thereby, 2 Timothy 5. 4. And to requite their Parents, for this is good
and acceptable before God: Its good with the goodness of advantage, as well as
honesty, or honor before God: It is acceptable before God, and therefore
surely most beneficial from Helps. 1. Serious meditations of what Parents
have done for them.
God to Children. And for your helps this way, It were good for you to think
very much and often, and that with much seriousness of intention of mind, upon
the many unexpressible, invaluable, irrecompensible benefits and kindnesses
which you have from your Parents. O when the people thought of that service of
love of Jonathan to them all, and should any discourtesie be offered to such a
one, no by no means, 1 Samuel 14. 45. Shall Jonathan dye, who has wrought this
great Salvation in Israel? God forbid. So in like sort the thoughts of what
good Parents have been instruments of to Children, they will crush temptations
to ingratitude, and provoke to gratitude. Besides, be you conscious in giving
your Parents 2. Give their other honor of Respect, Reverence, and Obedience.
their due honor of Respect, Reverence, and Obedience, and then there is no
doubt, but you will be put upon it, to give them this other part also of direct
Honor, even the Honor of Recompense; Cautious. Let it be with greatest 1.
Bowels.
only look to it, that what you do this way in grateful Rccompence to Parents,

1. That it be with greatest bowels and tenderness: Parents did so in
ministering to you what you wanted, do you repay them like for like.

2. That it be with greatest meekness and patience, 2. Meekness.
bearing with frailties, and waywardness of age; as Parents did with
waywardness, in ministering to you in infancy and childhood, so repay them like
for like.

3. That it be with much humility, stooping to the meanest offices of love for
them: as Parents did 3. Humility.
for you, whilst little, do you herein repay them like for like.

To conclude, Children may also discern their Marks of right doing it.
conscientious piety to Parents.

1. If when you your selves are in disconsolate, 1. If when Children in saddest
conditions are cordially sollicitous of Parents help.
yea desolate conditions, yet you are then very cordially careful of your
Parents outward welfare: as David of his Parents safety with the King of Moab,
2 Samuel 22. when himself is as an outlaw, or as it was with the Son of David,
when upon the Cross, in all that sorrow and pain, etc. yet how careful was
he, that his poor Mother be provided well for? Joh. 19. 26, 27. Man (says he
to John) behold thy Mother.

2. If your effectual care of your parents 2. When careful this way in
married conditions.
comfortable beeings, be not alone in your single conditions, whilst
unmarried, but flourish when you are married. So it did in Joseph, in David, in
Ruth and others.

3. If when you are in a very high and more honorable 3. When careful this
way in highest conditions.
place than parents, then you be nourishers of them, yea if you are persuaded
in your very hearts, that God the rather exalted you thus for your parents
sakes, that in their straights, you might have abundantly and sufficiently to
supply them withal, and the rather do it. Thus it was in Joseph's case, he
thought that God made him a Lord in all the Land of Egypt, to preserve his
Father, and his household alive, in that time of famine, and upon that ground
sends to him to come to him, promising to nourish him, Genesis 45. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. and accordingly he did it, Genesis 47. 12. And Joseph nourished his Father,
and his brethren, and all his Fathers household, with bread, according to their
Families. To conclude this with that memorable speech of Cyrus mentioned by
Plutarch in his Apothegms; he used to say (and that which is the truth) he is
not fit to rule over others, who is not profitable to his parents.

CHAP. VII. Of Honor in a Reflect way due from Children unto Parents.
HAving dispatched the direct Acts and ways of Honor of parents, we come now
to that Honor of Parents, which is due to them in a Reflect way. For so
honoring another is taken in Scripture, for being such, or carrying it so
toward another, whom men are to Honor, as it may make for such an ones
Honor: as we showed in the 1. Chapter. So here in the 5th Commandment this
indefinite word, Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, takes in Honoring of
parents in a reflect way, and binds Children to be such to their parents, and
to carry it so, as may redound to their Honor, especially being such parents
as the covenant Jews were, in Church State, and many of them godly, to whom
this Law of the 5th Commandment, was first solemnly promulged, and to whom it
was more solemnly established. -- Whence note, That its the duty of children,
Children of good Parents, especially bound to be such, and to carry it so, as
makes for their Parents Honor, and that, 1. By minding, prising, and storing
up parents instructions.
especially the children of godly parents, and such as are in covenant and
Church Estate, to be such, and to carry it so, as may redound to their parents
honor. Now here also let us show,

1. How this is to be done.

2. Why it must be so.

And 3. Apply and make use of this so weighty a point. Concerning the first,
such children especially are bound,

1. To be observing, minding, prising, and treasuring up such parents good
speeches, as so many oracles of God: which will evidence to all, that their
Children honor them; Job 15. 18. which wise men have told from their Fathers,
and have not hid it; a sign then, that those wise Children, minded well, and
stored up their godly Fathers counsels; so Psalm. 44. 1, 2. We have heard with
our ears, Oh God, our Fathers have told us, what thou did in their days,
etc. So Psalm. 78. 2, 3. I will utter mysterious sayings of old, which we have
heard and known, and our Fathers have told us. Prove. 4. 3, 4. For I was my
Fathers Son -- he taught me also and said to me, retain my words, keep my
Commandments and live, Get wisdom, yet understanding, etc. To which purpose
also, children must in case of any difficulty, or doubt arising to them, repair
firstly to their godly parents for counsel and resolution. How often is that
mentioned, when thy Son asks thee in time to come, saying, what mean the
Testimonies, and the Statutes which the Lord our God has Commanded you? then
thou shall say thus and thus to thy Son, etc. Deuteronomy. 6. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
So Exodus 13. 14. Josh. 4. 6, 21. This reflecteth much Honor upon parents
wisdom and ability, that they are able to give forth Gods mind to their
children; and upon their piety and fidelity, that they make conscience to do
it; and upon their holy industry and vigilance, that they are ready to take all
occasions to help on their Children in the things of God.

2. To acquaint parents, in the first place, with 2. By acquainting them with
their secrets.
all their Secrets, which are of weight. Its employed in Sampsons speech,
speaking of his Riddle, Judge. 14. 16. I have not told my Father, nor my Mother,
and should I tell it thee? This evidenceth, that Children magnify their
parents wisdom and fidelity above others, that their breasts shall be the only
prime Cabinet of the Childrens Secrets.

3. To ask leave of their parents, at least whilst 3 By asking their leave for
what they do.
Children are under their tuition, for what they do. Ruth. 2. 2. Let me go I
pray thee (says Ruth to Naomi) to glean in his field, in whose eyes I shall
find favor, and she said, go my Daughter. Exodus 4. 18. Let me go (says Moses
to Jethro) and return to my brethren which are in Egypt, and see whether they
be yet alive: and Jethro said to Moses, go in peace. 2 Samuel 13. 26. Let my
brother Ammon go with us (says Absalom to David, though out of a bad end;) and
Chap. 15. 17. Let me go I pray thee, and pay my vow unto the Lord in Hebron,
says Absalom to his Father, though out of a base end. If Dinah (as its
probable) did without leave from her parents, go, to see the daughters of the
Country, then was it no wonder that being out of her way, she so miscarried, as
Genesis 34. 1, 2. Shechem saw her, took her, and lay with her, and defiled her.
This also redounds to the Honor of the Parents Authority, that Children show
thereby that they dare not attempt any thing, without their likings; yea and
their wisdome-fidelity is hereby honored, that they know better what is meet
for Children to do, than themselves, and will order their ways better than
they can do themselves.

4. To set forth to parents praise, what is good in 4. By setting forth the
praise worthiness in parents.
them, as occasion requires: and to maintain their names, even when they are
dead, all they can, Prove. 31. 28. Her Children rise up, and call her blessed.

5. To vindicate any wrongs, injury, or dishonor 5. By vindicating parents
wrongs.
done to parents, so far as it lies in the compass of Childrens calls, places:
thus Amaziah, 2 Kings 14. 5. as soon as confirmed in his Kingdom he slew his
servants, who had slain Jehoash his Father.

6. To do parents all the honor they can at 6. By honoring them at their
death.
their death, Genes. 25. 9. Abraham's Sons, Isaac and Ishmael, buried him in the
Cave of Machpelah; So Genesis 35. 29. Isaacs Sons Esau and Jacob buried him, Genesis
50. 8. And Joseph went up to bury his Father, and with him went up all the
servants of Pharaoh, and all the Elders of his house, and all the Elders of
Egypt, and all the house of Joseph, and his Brethren, and his Fathers house,
only they left their little ones, their flocks, and herds, in the land of
Goshen, they and their wives also went so 7. By thankful rendering notable
mercies showed to parents.
great a journey, to solemnize the old Fathers Funeral, and to do him Honor
there.

7. To maintain a thankful remembrance of remarkable mercies extended to
parents, or Ancestors, Esaias 38. 19. The living, the living, he shall praise
thee, as I do this day, (says Hezekiah, when he recovered from so great a
death) the Father to the Children, shall make known thy truth: God would have
them of old to perpetuate their Ancestors deliverance out of Egypts bondage,
Exodus 13. 8, 9, 10. From the slaughter of their first born there (which to the
succeeding posterity were also Fathers,) Exodus 12. 25, 26, 27. So Est. 9. 21,
22, 23, 24, 26, 27. Care was taken for the perpetuation of a thankful
remembrance succesfully for their Ancestors delivery from the mischiefs of
Hammons bloody plot. And if our Fathers had more Honor put upon them in our
thankful solemnizing the memorial of their deliverance from the horrid
mischief of that devilish Powder Plot, in the year 1605. it might do well.
Surely it redoundeth to parents Honor, if they are of so high esteem and
respect in their Childrens eyes, that any notable mercy extended to them, shall
be for ever kept in thankful remembrance by their posterity.

8. To improve godly persons interest in the 8. To make best improvement of the
holy interests.
Lord, and in his Covenant, by faith, and to plead them in their prayers; this
act of Children redoundeth exceedingly to parents Honor, holding forth their
parents to be persons so highly honored of God, as to be deeply interested in
him, and in his Covenant and Grace: and to be of such faith in God, and in his
Covenant; thus did David twice, Psalm, 116. 16. Truly Lord I am thy servant,
the Son of thy handmaid, Psalm. 86. 16. give thy strength to thy servant, and
save the Son of thy handmaid. In the former, he, in a holy wise, glories in
his Mothers interest: in the latter he pleads her interest in the Lord, 1
Kings 8. 25, 26. Therefore now Oh Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant
David, my Father, that which thou promis'dst him. So Jacob pleaded his
Grandfathers, and his Fathers interest, Genesis 32. 5. And Jacob said, Oh God of
my Father Abram -- God of my Father Isaac, etc.

9. To imitate all that good of grace, as of faith, 9. By imitating all that
was truly good in them.
love, and holiness, righteousness, patience, meekness, courage, constancy,
humility, zeal of Gods glory, holy fervency, diligence, fidelity and the like,
which children have beheld and seen in their parents. Prove. 4. 12. Says David
to Solomon, I have led thee in the right paths: even by holy example also, Joh.
8. 39. If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham; if they
were genuine children of Abraham, they would show it, by the honor they really
put upon him, by making him an holy exemplar, and pattern to themselves, how to
walk before the Lord, and to be upright.

It was a noble speech of a good daughter-in-Law, to her Mother Naomi, a godly
Matron, Ruth. 2. 16. Thy God shall be my God, and thy people my people, she
would honor all that was honorable in her, her Religion, her faith in God,
and worship and service of him, and obedience to him, as also her union and
communion with the Church, and love to them and the like.

10. Not to suffer themselves to be drawn aside, 10. By cleaving to their good
ways without degenerating and Apostatising.
or to Apostatise, or degenerate from that of God and Christ, and his grace,
truth, worship and ways, which their Parents have held forth to them, in word
and deed, precept and practice, and have frequenrly given in charge to their
children. This is charged upon children, Prove. 6. 20. My Son, keep tby Fathers
Commandments, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother. And Prove. 4. 2. Forsake
you not my Law, Prove. 1. 8. My Son, hear the instructions of thy Father, and
forsake not the Law of thy Mother. This was commended in those of Judah, the
posterity of godly Ancestors, Hos. 11. 12. Judah rules yet with God, and,
(comparatively to Israel) is faithful to the Saints, viz. their godly
Ancestors, who delivered their faith to their successors to be kept, and
carried, and conveyed to posterity successively, according as they had taught
them by precept and practice. Its faithfulness to Ancestors, and so honors
Ancestors, when posterity continues to hold out what was most honorable in
them, and does not degenerate them-from: Hence that also, Jer. 35. 13, 14. will
you not hearken to my words? says the Lord, The words of Jonadab, the Son of
Rechab, that he commanded his Sons, are performed, for unto this day, they
drink no wine, but obey their Fathers Commandment. As if he had said, they put
this Honor upon their Ancestors, from Jonadabs time, who first practiced it,
and gave it in charge to his children, who also left it as their practice, and
precept to their Children, and so successively from Parent to Child it has
been observed without alteration to this day, nor will they by any temptation,
or trial, even of Jeremiah himself, be drawn aside, from that their mortified
practice of weanedness from the worlds delights, and contentments: but you will
not Honor me so much, as to follow the Counsels and godly examples of my
Prophets, by whom time after time, I have called upon you to ways of holy
obedience.

These two last ways of Reflect Honor of Parents, by their Children, being
the main, we shall therefore, in the prosecution of the point, chiefly attend
them.

The Reason hereof may be taken, from the titles Reasons hereof from childrens
Titles calling for it.
given to Children in Scripture, which hold forth as much, that in Gods
appointment, Children as child. should be an honor to their parents.

1. Hence they are called Parents and Ancestors Crowns, Prove. 17. 6. Childrens
Children are the Crown of old men. A badge and pledge of their holy royalty,
dignity, and excellency: as Crowns are to Princes heads; and Hos. 9. 11. They
are called Parents glory: their glory shall flee away, (viz. their Children)
from the birth, womb and conception, v. 12. I will bereave them of their
Children, which they bring up.

2. They are called Stars, Genesis 37. 9, 10. The glory of the firmament where
they are, the Families where they are, albeit not of equal glory to the Father
and Mother of the Family, which are theirs, as the Sun and Moon, as Jacob and
his wife, and eleven Sons, are in Joseph's dream, the Sun, Moon, and eleven
Stars.

3. They are Parents rewards from God, and so appointed to be as rewards are to
others, for their Honor; so are they in Gods intent, godly Parents heritage:
and heritages redound to the possessors Honor.

4. They are in Gods appointment, to be as Olive plants about their Table, a
badge and pledge of Honor to their Parents, such as from whom comes that
which will make their parents faces to shine: as Oyle-olive will a man's face.
They are as Arrows in the hand of a Giant, which become instrumental, to many
an honorable Trophe and Laurel Crown of theirs, such as Parents need not
beashamed of, but glory in, even in despite of envy, and malice it self, Psalm.
127. 4. 5. As Arrows are in the hand of a Giant, so are Children of youth:
happy is the man, that has his quiver full of them, they shall not be ashamed,
but they shall speak with the enemies in the Gate.

5. Children are in Scripture account builders -- (...) from (...) he has
built, Isay 49. 17. Genev. Transl. not only in respect of holding up the Family
and the like: but in that their work is to contrive, compose, advance, adorn,
replensh, or occasionally to repair that goodly piece, their Parents Honor, as
well as safety, comfort, peace, prosperity, or the like.

6. Children are in Scripture account as polished stones of a Palace, Psalm.
144. 22. redounding much to the Honor of Parents, who instrumentally formed
and framed them.

Reason 2. May be taken from Parents, they are 2. From Times of Parents in
Scripture.
their Childrens glory, Prove. 17. 6. and the glory of Children are their
Fathers: and if good Parents are such an Honor to their Children, Children
should be a glory and Honor to their godly Parents; yea the Honor put upon
Parents, redounds to their Children, the more glory is upon the Parent, the
more is upon the Children, whose glory their Fathers are: so that the more
Honor Children are to Parents, and the better they carry it in way of Honor
to their Parents, the more Honor they put thereby upon themselves.

The use of this point serves, first for reproof: Use 1. For Reproof, and that,
and that first of Parents, who are many of you, too guilty of your Childrens
dishonorable courses and carriages, namely.

1. When you unadvisedly expose your Children 1. Of Parents too much furthering
Childrens dishonorable carriages and courses.
to dishonorable practices, or temptations thereunto; as Genesis 19. 8. I have
two daughters (says Lot to those beastly Sodomites) which have not known man,
let me I pray you bring them out to you, and do ye to them as is good in your
own eyes, etc. and verse. 33. 34. they bring him into that snare In exposing
rhem to temptations to them.
of Incest: and they made their Father drink wine, and the first night the
Elder, and the next night the younger daughter went in and lay with her Father.
The like was the failing of the good old man, Judge. 19. 23, 24. behold here is
my daughter (says he to those Sodomiticall Benjamites) I will bring her out to
you, and humble her, etc. Levit. 19. 29. Do not prostitute thy daughter to be a
whore, lest the land fall to whoredom, and the land become full of wickedness:
Such a blast of God follows upon such sinful acts of Parents. And the like
may be said of other evils, of oppression, pride, etc. when Parents professing
Religion, will put on your Children upon taking of oppressing wages and prices,
upon newfangled fashions, such a generation commonly proves degenerate, and
the shame of their Fathers houses.

2. When you will be engaging of your Children, 2. By rash engagements, laid
upon them.
in ways, which tend to insnaring of them, as too many amongst Papists do
their Children, in vows of virginity, when not being able to contain, they are
ensnared in ways of unnatural pollutions, and other filthy practices in
secret: and too often of horrid Murders of the fruit of their bodies: in this
way Jephtah was to blame, who rashly vows, Judge: 11. 31. That whatsoever
comes out of his house to meet him, returning in peace from the Children of
Ammon, shall surely be the Lords, even the Lords votaries (if they be persons)
or that he would offer it up for a burnt-offering, namely, if it were a meet
thing to be offered: for so the particle (vau) is to be read disjunctively for
(or) and not conjunctively for (and) and so it is in the Margin of your larger
Bibles of the New Edition; and a little to digress for the clearing of this
place, Shindler, Junius, Mr. Perkins, and others, do so render and understand
this vow of Jephtah's and the words of that Scripture. And its usual in
Scripture, so to take the particle (vau) disjunctively, as Genesis 26. 11. He that
touches this man (vau) or (not and) his wife, shall die; Ex. 20. 10. thou
shall not do any work, thou, (^) or thy Sons (^) or thy daughter, etc. Exodus
21. 15. he that smites his Father, (^) or his Mother, shall dye; if he smite
not his Father, yet if he smite his Mother, its death; Exodus 12. 5. ye shall
take your Lamb out from the sheep (^) or from the goats: It is not (and
conjunctively) as if there were to be taken a Lamb from the Sheep, and a Lamb
from the Goats, and so two Lambs; Deuteronomy. 17. 1. ye shall not sacrifise to the
Lord any Bullock (^) or Sheep, wherein is blemish; It is disjunctive, though
they should not sacrifise a Bullock that is blemished, yet if a blemished Sheep
be sacrifised, its culpable. God had indeed provided a remedy in the law, as
for a Male Person, so for a Female Person, which any man had by vow devoted to
God: he was to pay in lieu of her 30. Sheckels, Levit. 27. 2, 4. And so Jephtah
might have redeemed his daughter from this vow of virginity: but he either was
ignorant of it, or in his rashness attended it not, and therefore says, as
verse. 35. that he has opened his mouth to the Lord, and cannot go back, which
his daughter crediting, yields to his rash vow, v. 36. if so (says she) do
to me according to that which proceeded out of thy mouth, and v. 37. Let me go
two months up and down the mountains, I and my fellows, and bewail my
virginity: She says not let me go and bewail my life; as indeed she had
greatest cause, if her Father had been so bereft of all humanity, as to intend
to offer her up for a burnt-offering, or so grossly haereticall, as to think
that any such forbidden unnatural Murder might have been as a Sacrifice to
God.

But let me go and bewail my Virginity: to which she was now devoted, and
wherein she was offered to the Lord, to be only sequestered to him, and never to
marry and have Children, (which to them was a great reproach) and hence verse.
40. The Daughters of Israel went out yearly (namely to the house where she
lived without the City, apart from all company) to talk with her, so it is in
the margin of the greater Bibles (though rendered to Lament.) And so it is in
Arias Montanus his interlineary Bible, ad confabulandum, to talk together. So
Buxtorfius in his Hebrew Lexicon, renders, it and quoteth Kimchi, for it also,
as rendering this word (...) ad confabulandum, and so Judge. 5. 11. the same word
in the same conjugation, is rendered there (...) confabulabuntur, they shall
rehearse together the righteous acts of the Lord; not they shall lament those
acts.

3. When you are too neglectfull of your holy 3. By neglecting their holy watch
over them.
watch over your Children, to keep a wise and straight hand over them, and that
in time, before your Children are grown too stiff and inflexible: or too much
hardened in ways tending to their Parents reproach: when you carelessly leave
your Children too much to themselves: if they will pray, or read the
Scriptures, or hear the word, or attend unto it, or give account of what they
heard or read, well, but if they will not, you do not much regard it. If your
Children are affected with their natural state, with things of Christ, with
their need of Christ, so: if otherwise, you do not much inquire into it. If
your Children be secretly naught, if they be company-keepers, scoffers at
purity, and the like, you look not narrowly after those things; and so leave
your Children in a manner to themselves, and what wonder then, if as, Prove. 25.
11. A Child left to himself, brings his Mother to shame.

4. When you provide not seasonably and suitably 4. By not providing seasonably
for them in marriage.
for your Children in Marriage, or possibly having consented to the disposal
of your children in marriage, will rashly assay to cross your Children, and
break their conjugall Engagements, which, with your consent, they have made;
How frequently do reproaches arise to Parents from dishonorable consequences
thereof in their Children? Lot was too blame, that he looked not out seasonably
for some fit matches for his two daughters, which had formerly minded marriage
(witness the contract between them and two men in Sodom, called therefore for
his Sons in Law, which had married his daughters, Genesis 19. 14.) for they seeing
no man like to come in to them in a conjugall way, as v. 30. there is no man to
come in to us, after the manner of all the earth: then they plotted that
incestuous course, whereby their Father was so highly dishonored, v. 32. come
therefore, let us make our Father drink wine, and we will come and lie with
him, that we may preserve seed of our Father. So in Tamars case, from Judahs
neglect of bestowing his Son Shelah upon her, according to his own promise and
consent, (pretended at least) Genesis 38. 11. and verse. 14. When Tamar saw that
Shelah was grown, and she was not given to him to wife, then she went and sat
in the way, where Judah should come, with her veil, as if she had been some
strumpet: and verse. 26. Judah confesses it as his fault, that such incest was
committed to the shame indeed of his, and of his Fathers house. She has been
(says he) more righteous than I: because I gave her not to Shelah my Son.
Hence the Apostles counsel to Parents, to dispose seasonably of their Virgins
in marriage, 1 Cor. 7. 36. If any man thinks that he behaveth himself
uncomely toward his virgin, if she pass the flower of her age, and need so
requires it, let them marry.

5. When you lay up ill gotten goods, as gain 5. By laying up ill gotten goods
for mem.
of oppression, deceit, violence, or any injustice, this lays your Children
open to reproachful courses to themselves and you, even by the just hand of
God against such injust gain, Hab. 2. 9, 10. Woe to him that coveteth an evil
covetousness to his house, verse. 10. Thou have consulted shame to thine own
house.

6. When, Christian, you suffer others, yea it 6. By suffering their judgments
to be corrupted.
may be too forward your selves to be distilling into them corrupt principles
of Religion, or furthering them in the practice thereof: but Oh how
dishonorable must this needs prove to your selves, by the sad and sorrowful
consequences thereof in your Children? like that sad effect of Idolatry in
those Children, Jer. 17. 2. Whilst (verse. 2.) the Children remember their
Fathers groves and altars, or like Ahaziah, 2 Chro. 22. 3. He walked in all
Ahabs ways: for his Mother was his counselor to do wickedly: Thus Micahs
Mother put him upon making that Idol, Judge. 17. 2, 3, 4, etc. and Oh that in
these Apostatising days, the seed of the degenerating of the posterity of
Godly Ancestors, and of all their loose and scandalous courses, to the shame of
their Fathers houses, had not been first laid in them, by their own Parents
leavening them with corrupt opinions.

2. It serves for reproof unto Children, or 2. It reproeth children,
especially those of good parents.
persons in the relation of Children: especially the Children of godly parents,
the Children of the Church, that even you are every way a dishonor to your
parents, and reflect and put much dishonor upon them, and so sharply reproves,

1. Such of you as scoff at, and deride such of 1. For deriding their good
brethren or sisters.
your godly Brethren, or Sisters, whom your Parents most respect; or do any
wrong to your Brethren, or Sisters, of one, or both Parents; of the former sort
was Ishmael, Abraham's Son by Hagar the Egyptian, whom Sarah saw mocking of
Isaac, that beloved Child of the promise, Genesis 21. 9. Of the Latter sort were
Joseph's brethren, who before their conversion, envied godly Joseph, (who
brought their evil report unto Jacob, Genesis 37. 2.) because Jacob loved him
above them, verse. 3, 4. and because God had showed him in two several dreams,
that he would so highly exalt him above them, verse. 8. And out of Envy sold him
afterward into Egypt, Acts 7. 7. Such an one was Abimelech, Gedeons Son, who
slew his 70. Brethren; and the Holy Ghost reckons it as a wicked and vile
fact, done to his very Father, Judge. 9. 56. Genesis 42. 36. Jacob tells his
Sons, that they had bereaved him of his Children. Joseph is not, Simeon is not,
and you will take away Benjamin, all these things are against me. Such who
trample upon, and rend away good Children, they trample upon, and rend away
their Fathers Crown, and Glory, for such are Children unto Parents, Prove. 17.
6. Hos. 9. 11, 12. Such reflect dishonor upon their godly parents wisdom, and
zeal, as if they did misplace their respects, upon those Children who deserved
not the same; But God has been wont to abase such proud, envious, malicious
Spirits, and to put as much, or more dishonor upon them. Ishmael, and his
whole posterity, was cast out of the Church for it, Genesis 21, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Jacobs Sons were brought very low, inwardly, and outwardly, when so roughly
handled in Egypt, and for a time imprisoned, Genesis 72. 17, 30, 33. Abimelech
came to a vile, and dishonorable end, by a Stone hurled upon him from a Tower,
by the hand of a woman, together with his Armour-bearers sword, Judge. 9. 57.
and 56. Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did unto his
Father, in slaying his 70. Brethren.

2. Such Children of Christian Parents, who neglect the best time of your good,
under the good 2. For neglecting their opportunities of good whilst with their
good parents.
education of your Parents, under a godly Ministry, of whom it may be said, as
Jer. 8. 20. The Harvest is past, the Summer is ended, and they are not saved;
now such a Son, that sleeps in that blessed Harvest time of reaping so much
soul-good, is a Son that causes shame, even to his very Parents also, as well
as to himself, Prove. 10. 5. Others who know you, will be ready to censure, or
at least to suspect, that your Parents were not so conscionable, in this matter
of their education did not pray enough, or not so seriously for you, and so
your Parents names suffer by such unprofitable burdens of the Church as you
are; but let me tell you, that it very frequently happens, that those who get
no good, under the Tuition of their godly Parents, they are left to vilest
courses, and that without recovery. Its more rare if they come to good, who had
not some godly seeds thereof in their godly Parents Families, if bred up to
adult age there; nor Cain, nor Cham, nor Esau, nor Nadab, nor Abihu, nor
Abimelech, nor Hophni, nor Phineas, nor Ammon, nor Absalom, nor Adonijah, nor
such like, which were not good, nor had seeds of good in them, whilst under
their good Parents wing, were ever good after. And you must dearly answer one
day, for those Talents of good education, and opportunities of good in your
Parents Families. God will say as in another case, Prove. 17. 16. wherefore was
there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, since he had no heart to
it? And all those helps and seasons of good which you had in such Families,
will be as oil to make your tormenting flames burn the more fiercely, and as
pricks to stir up that raging, vexing, gnawing worm within you, as in that poor
forlorn young man, in awakenings of his conscience, listen what it is that he
howleth and roareth over, 1 Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13. Oh it is the instruction which
he has had from Parents, and others, but hated; and thou mourn at last,
saying, how have I hated instruction?

It is the reproof he has had but despised, how has my heart despised
reproof? it is the voice of his teachers, which he has heard, but not obeyed,
I have not obeyed the voice of my Teachers. If one might lay ones ear in the
other world, at the mouth of the bottomless pit, one should hear many such
desperate moans, and yellings out such complaints; so that though poor Parents
suffer by such wretches as you are, at the present, yet a time will come, when
you your selves shall thus clear them, and condemn your selves.

3. Such Children of Christian Parents, who take to deboist company, and take
up any Ruffianly 3. For deboist company and courses.
customs or courses, in your hair, in your garb, in your jovialling, and
rioting, Prove. 17. 2. A wise servant shall have rule over a Son that causes
shame, a deboist Son, who is not fit to be trusted with any business of his
Fathers, puts shame even upon his Father and Family, as well as upon
himself. Christians are spiritual Priests unto God, 1 Pet. 2. 5. and truly as
it was of old, Number* 21. 9. the daughter of any Priest, if she profane her self,
she profaneth her Father, so it is here, such profane Children as you are, you
do even profane your very good Parents. Or as it is in the case of Elders of
Churches, its put upon their account of blame, if their Children be accused of
Riot, or are unruly: and therefore its said, Tit. 1. 6, 7. If he be blameless,
having Children not accused of riot, or unruly: for a Bishop must he blameless,
etc. So is it true of other godly Parents, some blemish and blame reflecteth
upon them, when their Children are so culpable, such scandalous Children of the
Church as you are. It is no wonder that you get no good by your Education, if
given to such loose companions, and their Counsels: this is the cause of the
other; as it was in Rehoboam; when those young blades gave him that boisterous
counsel, 2 Chronicles. 11. 4. He slighted the grave counsel of those Ancient
Fathers of the State: so it is here: hang it, will such companions say, what
needst thou care what the old man says? nor is it likely that ever such a Son
should be better so long as knit to such comrades, Prove. 9. 6. Forsake the
foolish and live, and go in the way of understanding; yea but first those
companions must be cashiered; yea this also is the cause of the first branch of
dishonor cast upon your Parents, by deriding of their good Children. Psalm. 1.
1. There is a gradation.

1. A man walks in the counsel of the ungodly.

2. Then he stands in the way of sinners, and then,

3. He takes up his chair, he sits in the seat of the scorners; such snares
are there in the way of the froward, to others, as well as to themselves, Prove.
22. 5. And so true is it, that evil communication corrupts good manners.

4. Such Children as match dishonourably to 4. For matching dishonourably.
your Parents, even to your Christian Parents profession, and gracious
interests; so did that posterity of Seth, the Children of the Church, in
matching with the posterity of outcast Cain, Genesis 6. 2. The Sons of God saw
the daughters of men, that they were fair, and took them wives of all which
they chose; thus did Esau dishonor that blessed stock of which he came, to
match into the cursed brood and Family of Cham, Genesis 26. 34, 35. And Judah did
too much this way, Genesis 38. 2. and God put dishonor upon him, in that vile
brood, which came of his Canaanitish wife Shuah, even Er and Onan, whose vile
wickedness, God immediately revenged. Verse. 7, 9, 10. And no wonder, since he
so much dishonored his Father, and Fathers house by that match, and so mingled
the holy seed, with the people of the lands (as its called Ezra 9. 2.) And they
said truly, though they spoke it guilefully, Genesis 34. 14. We cannot give our
Sister to one that is uncircumcised, for that were a reproach; when such
matches are made by your selves, yet your Parents are supposed, if not censured
by others, either to abuse their parentall Authority, in way of Commission,
contrary to Gods Rules, forbidding such unequal matchings, or to neglect their
Authority, in way of sin of omission of duty, for prevention of such an evil,
and so your Parents come hereby to suffet reproach; besides, by such unworthy
matches, vile practices come to arise, which yet were more reflect upon your
godly Parents Honor* As was too evident, in that posterity of the Sons of God,
and Daughters of men, Genesis 6. 2, 3, 4, 5. and in Judahs brood by Shuah, now
mentioned; and in that mungrell generation, which spoke half the Jews
Language, and half the Language of Ashdod. This also tends to undermine those
direct Acts of Honor due to your Parents; such bad Husbands will be hindering
the wives due respect to her good Parents, or any due reverence to them, or
filial obedience to them, or any filial recompense of them: and the like
mischief will a bad wife do in that way, to her husband, to withdraw him from
giving due Honor to his good Father or Mother; as too common experience makes
it good; but God will pay such of you home, either by laying you as low as
hell, in troubling, and terrifying your consciences for such courses, of which
there are sometimes examples: or if not that way, yet by some notable
judgments of his, exposing you to contempt, as he did those of the old world.

5. Such persons are especially to be reproved, 5. For degerating from the good
precepts and practices of their godly parents and Ancestors.
who being Children of the Church, Children of godly Parents, and Ancestors,
yet walk not after the precepts, which they often gave you, nor in the blessed
paths* wherein they exemplary led you, yea you steer a contrary course unto
that of your gracious Fathers or Mothers, Grandfathers, or Grand-mothers: yea
some of you, who possibly have been convinced of the evil of your State by
nature, and have been so far wrought upon, as to give good hops of the best
things to bebegun in you, yet you also come afterward to degenerate; like
those Sons of God, Sons of the Church, Genesis 6. 2. who receive not so much as
the Footsteps of any of the gracious ways of their good Ancestors; such a
generation are spoken of, Judge. 2. 7, 10, 12, 17. And the people served God all
the days of Joshuah, and all the days of the Elders that outlived Joshuah --
And all that generation died, and there arose another generation after them,
which knew not the Lord. -- And they forsook the Lord God of their Fathers --
they turned quickly out of the way, which their Fathers walked in, obeying the
Commandments of the Lord; but they did not so. Your Parents and Ancestors made
conscience of reading and hearing the word of God, and due meditation upon it,
but you their Children, at least some of you, hardly ever look into the Bible;
the great things of Gods Law, there written, are as a strange thing to you,
Hos. 8. 12. If with much ado you drop in into an Assembly where the word is
taught, there you fit as careless high-way-side hearers, mind not what is said,
lay not up what you hear, mind most such young men and women's garbs and
gestures, etc. And as for any serious meditation upon the word, you are
strangers wholly to it: your godly Parents were exercised in godly conference,
but you in frothy discourses, as soon as ever you are out of the Assembly, and
when ever you meet with other companions, like your selves; God is never in
your mouths, unless in way of profaning, some way, of his blessed name. Your
Parents were wont to be much in Prayer, not alone in public in the Assembly,
or in private, in the Family, but in secret, by themselves alone in their
closets, but you their Children make no conscience of Prayer, God seldom or
never hears of you by your selves alone in a corner, bemoaning your selves,
or earnestly desiring that he would turn your hearts unto him and to his ways:
how conscionable were your Parents, of Sanctifying the Sabbath, of which you
make none? you care not, if you may do it unseen of others, how vainly, or
profanely you mispend that sacred time; how conscionable were your Parents, of
what they spoke at any time, and of their thoughts, if possible, not to yield
to a vain and carnal thought, but to suppress it? but you regard neither what
you think, nor speak: you let your minds drive, and rove after all manner of
vanity and folly, and your lips even power out foolishness; how observant were
your good Parents, what company they came into, or were familiar with, that
they were godly, or hopeful persons? but no company comes amiss to you,
unless they be now and then a godly person, who rather puts you into your
dumps; How tender were your good Parents of their dealings with men, to
discharge a good conscience therein? of their very outward garb, what they
ware, and in what fashion, and the like? but you their Children regard not what
you do, nor how you deal with others, nor what you wear, nor of what Fashion,
so the newest. As it was said of those degenerate ones, Deuteronomy. 32. 17. They
sacrificed to devils, not to God -- to new Gods, whom their Fathers feared not;
so it may be said of you; you give up your selves to walk after the sight of
your own eyes, and after the desire of your own hearts, Eccles. 11. 9 You give
up your selves to serve your own vain imaginations, and lusts of the flesh, of
the eye, and of the pride of life, which your Fathers subjected not themselves
unto; if one should ask many such Children of godly Ancestors, did ever your
good Father or Grandfather wear such ruffianly hair upon their heads, did they
ever transform themselves, like Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 3^.
into the manner of beasts, to be so careless of their seasonable and suitable
cutting their hair, as you do? that as its said of him, your hairs are grown
like Fagles Feathers (which yet are not so long as women's hair, nor indeed
according to the ordinary causes in nature, can man's hair ever be so long as
women's, who are naturally of a moyster temper, and if that were all, in 1 Cor.
11. Its a shame to a man, even by natures law and light, to have long hair:
that is, say our Ruffianly haired men, to have it as long as women; but that
need not to be forbidden by Paul, or any other, for nature forbids that
among the number of things, not in ordinary causes, usual, or possible, but
this by way of digression;) or did your godly Parents frisk from one new
fangled fashion to another, as you do? surely no; or did they ever give you
examples of such looseness, prodigality, scurrility, and the like lewdness,
which you practice; assuredly no; nay if your godly Ancestors and Parents were
now existing upon the earth, would they now know you their posterity, theirs
Sons, their Daughters? surely no, You are so strangely Metamorphozed from any
likeness to your good Parents, or Ancestors. It may be confessed as it was of
their Ancestors, Esai 63. 16. Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledges us not, as some would have it expounded, we are so degenerate,
that if Abraham, or Israel were now alive again, they would not know, or own us
to be their posterity, John 8. 39, 40. Yea, do not too many of you now a days
degenerate, whilst your good Parents are with you Praying, and weeping many a
time over you, and for you before God, and giving many a pull at you before
Gods throne, if it might be to rescue you from the bottomless pit, into which
they fear you are hasting, and many a time with tears, sometimes the Father,
sometimes the Mother, in holywise adjuring, and sometimes meekly, and lovingly
entreating, and beseeching, such or such a Son or Daughter; Ah dear Son, dear
Daughter, that you would once at length look out seriously, after the salvation
of your souls, after God, after Christ, that you would but once set upon the
blessed work of Faith, Repentance, and Gospel-obedience: will you not leave
these, and these vain courses, and customs, fashions, and companions, will you
not be more conformable to Gods holy Rules, when shall it once be? and truly if
the arising generation now a days, too many of them begin to grow so rude and
graceless, and so far to degenerate, whilst godly Parents, Masters, Tutors,
Kind red, Magistrates, and Ministers are with them, Alas! what will they do
when they are gone? as Moses once said to that degeneration race of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, Deuteronomy. 31. 27. Behold, while I am yet alive with you this day,
you have been Rebellious against the Lord, and how much more after my Death? so
we may too justly fear, concerning too many of this arising Generating of
Christians, that if whilst we are with them, they so fast decline and
degenerate, they will much more do it after we are gone. Alas! what wrack did
those seven famous Asian Churches soon suffer in their degenerate posterity?
and Ah! that we had not too much cause to fear as much of ours. If it were the
case only of a few of the younger generation of the very Churches, that they
only were degenerated, it were the less to be feared; But when degenerating
from godly Parents, and Ancestors Paths and Principles waxes so common, and
even Epidemicall, in Protestant Churches here and elsewhere, under so much
light, and help to the Contrary, who can but fear the worst? yea when Children
grow so bold, if not impudent, in their impieties, and iniquities, as not
secretly but openly, not in any way of blushing, but even in a shameless way,
to be casting off the yoke of Jesus Christ, who would not tremble to think of
the issue of such speaking Symtomes of degeneration, and Apostasy? what for
you now to be, as he that confessed, Prove. 5. 14. I was utmost in all
wickedness in the midst of the Congregation, or like those in Isaiah, 26. 10.
Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn Righteousness, in the
Land of uprightness, shall he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of
God; and will not this be bitterness to you in the latter end; but that I may
quit my hands and heart of the blood of the souls of any such, and if blood
must needs lie, that it may lie upon the heads of your selves who are
degenerate Children, give me leave to do two things. To represent somewhat,
first of the evil of sin in such degeneration of yours; Secondly, of the
mischiefs attending the same. And because we Evils of sin in the degenerating
of the Children of the godly in general.
propounded the use of Reproof, as respecting first all degenerate Children in
general, Secondly such degenerate ones in special, who have had their inward
workings upon their Spirits, seen much, felt much, promised much, and given
great hopes of coming to good, we shall therefore begin with the former sort,
and then fall upon the latter sort. Concerning degeneration 1. It is unsuitable
to what God and his people may challenge from them.
of the posterity of the godly in general I say.

That it is most cross, and unsuitable to what God and his people also may
challenge from you, and therefore very evil and sinful, it may be said to
you, as it was to that degenerate generation, Mica. 2. 7. O thou that art named
the house of Israel, is the Spirit of the Lord straightned, are these his
doings? do not my words do good too them that walk uprightly? or as he said in
another case, Nehe. 6. 11. Should such a man as I fly? so, should such men and
women as you, of such and such Parents and interests, be so and so degenerate?
or as he said to him in that case, 2 Samuel 13. 4. Why art thou, being the Kings
Son, so As by external calling and covenant interest.
lean from day to day? so here, why are such and such of you, being Sons and
Daughters of spiritual Princes, and Priests before God, so declining, so
degenerating, from day to day? And that this your sin may even in this first
respect further appear, seriously consider,

1. That such as you are, you are in and through Holy and devoted to God.
your Parents, an holy, devoted, and special people to God above others, and
should such be as bad, or worse than others? thus when God would dissuade that
generation of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, from fellowship with the Canaanites
persons, or practices, Deuteronomy. 7. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. This is the Argument, v. 6. For
thou art an holy people to the Lord thy God, thy God has chosen thee to be a
special people unto himself, above all other people. So Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Ye are
the Children of the Lord your God, ye shall not cut your selves, nor make any
baldness between your eyes for the dead, (heathenish and Idolatrous customs)
For (verse. 2.) Thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God. So verse. 21. Ye
shall not eat any thing that dies of it self, etc. For thou art an holy people
unto the Lord thy God, etc.

2. Such as you are, are near unto God, in Covenant Near unto God.
and Church respects, how ever formerly, in pagan Ancestors, far off: hence
that speech to that degenerate posterity of Abraham, Esaias 57. 19. I create the
fruit of the lips to be peace, peace to him that is far off, (namely to the
gentile) and to him that is near, (namely to the Jews, which though in their
sinful and natural estates as far off as the Gentile, yet in Covenant and
Church respects near to the Lord.) Now should such, as in some respects are so
near God, by their degenerate principles and practices, remove your selves so
far from God? what a vile evil must this needs be? hence that way of Gods
Aggravation of the sin of that degenerate posterity of Jacob, Esaias 43. 21, 22,
23, 24. This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise.
But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou have been weary of me, O
Israel -- thou have caused me to serve with thy sins, and wearied me with thine
iniquities; and Oh that God had not too just a cause to take up this heavy
complaint against many of you that are the posterity of the godly, in these
days; that though made for himself, and formed for his praise, yet you have
not worshipped him, or called upon him, but have been weary of him, flung off
his yoke, cast his words behind your back, tired out his patience in awaiting
your return from your vain and sinful principles, and practices, whilst you
have made God to wait the leasures and pleasures of your lusts, if he look for
any service at length from you.

3. Such as you are, by external calling, Gods His servants.
household servants, as its said of the like, Levit. 25. 42, 55. They and their
Children are my servants, says the Lord. Now as Mal. 1. 6. a Servant honors
his Master, if I then am a Master (says God to that degenerate generation, so
to you) where is my fear? If Job accounted that so grievous in his servants, in
way of commission and of omission, Job 19. 15, 16. They that dwell in my house,
my Maids count me for a stranger, I am an Alien in their sight; I called to my
servant, but he gave me no answer, I entreated him with my mouth; O how ill
does God take this at your hands, and how grievous and loathsome is it, that
such as dwell in his house, in his Church, count him for a stranger? he is in
your sight an Alien; you will not come at this your blessed Master, you will
not come nigh him, you will not understand what he says to you; though he call
you being his servants, by external calling, as he did that degenerate
Apostatising generation, Hos. 11. 7. My people are bent to backsliding from me,
though they (his Prophets) called them to the most high, none at all would
exalt him, namely by Repentance, Faith, and Obedience; no more will any of you
being servants of God by calling, make God any such obedientiall Answer: yea
though the Lord instruct you with his mouth, as its said, 2 Cor. 5. 20. -- As
though God did beseech you, we pray you in Christ's stead, to be reconciled to
God, yet how few of you regard these blessed beseechings and entreaties of the
glorious and high God?

Besides, you also are by external calling Gods Children, to whom God says,
as to those degenerate ones, in Malac. 1. 6. If I am a Father His Children.
where is my Honor? And if the fifth Commandment require such Honor of
Respect, Reverence, Obedience, and Recompense to Fathers of our flesh, and such
carrying of it so by Children, as it redoundeth to parents honor (as we have
largely declared) O what Honor of Respect, Reverence, Obedience, and holy
Recompense to him; and what manner of carrying of it so as may redound to his
Honor, does God expect from you his Chldren, to whom he is not only a Father
of your Spirit or Soul, as he is to all others, but a Covenant-Father? If God
require that to Parents from their Children upon pain of life and death, he
much more requires this from you his Covenant and Church-Children, upon pain
of loss of eternal life, and undergoing eternal death. But is that the Honor
of Respect which you who are degenerate Children, give to this your Father, to
have no desire of the knowledge of his ways? As it is said of that degenerate
generation, in Job 21. 14, 15. (whether those in Jobs own time, or those before
the flood, of whom, Job 22. 15, 16, 17, 18.) but to wish rather what those
wretches, there mentioned, that God might depart from you, in respect of any
such motions which he makes, and convictions and restraints upon your Spirits,
which sometimes you meet with, and to take no delight at all in God, in his
word, worship, ways, days, government, Saints and Servants? Or is this the
honor of Reverence which you give him, to be awless and fearless of his
presence, when you are in his house, when at Prayer with your Parents, or the
like, and to be constantly fearless of his displeasure, or of sinning against
him? Or is this the Honor of Obedience which you give him, to obey the motions
of your own hearts lusts, of your Companions, of Seducers, and of the very
Devil himself? but as for Gods charge, or Commands, you make light of them: So
that God may say of you, as he did of that degenerate generation of old, and
speak of it as inter horrenda, Hear O Heavens, and give ear O earth, for the
Lord has spoken, I have nourished Children, and they have rebelled against me:
the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel does not
know, my people does not consider. Ah sinful Nation -- Children that are
corruptors -- they have forsaken the holy one, they are gone away backward,
Isa. 1. 2, 3, 4. And as Isa. 30. 9. This is a rebellious people, lying
Children, Children that will not hear the law of the Lord. Or is this the
honor of holy Recompense, which you should have rendered to him, for all his
benefits toward you? to depart from him, to vex and provoke his holy Spirit,
which is striving with you (as he was with that degenerate generation, in Genesis
6. 2, 3.) to corrupt your selves, as did that other generation mentioned, Deuteronomy.
32. 5. whose spot was not the spot of Children (or of right-bred children of
God) who were a crooked and perverse generation. Surely God may, and does say
to you, as he did by Moses to them, verse. 6. Do you thus requite the Lord, O
foolish people and unwise? is not he thy Father that has bought thee? has not
he made and established thee? finally, is this your being an honor to God your
heavenly father, to cause the name of God to be blasphemed, and the way of
truth to be evil spoken of, for your sakes? as it may be said of you, which
was said of those degenerate Jews, Romans 2. 23. Thou that make thy boast of
the law, through breaking of the law dishonourest thou God? verse. 24. For the
name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through you, when such as you are
by your vile speeches, carriages, opinions, or courses of life, shall occasion
the prophaner sort, or enemies to God and his Church, Ironically to say, as
they of old did of those degenerate Jews, Ezech. 36. 20. These are the people
of the Lord: So by your means others now a days to say of you; Yea, these are
your younger generation of the Church, these are those that are in the Covenant
of grace, these are your Church Members, these are they which in their
Infant Baptism were devoted to the faith and worship of Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; these are the brood of such Puritan Ministers, and other precise
followers, and the like blasphemous sarcasmes, wherein the Lords precious name,
together with his Truth, Covenant, Saints, and Servants, are also vilely
reproached. Again, as such Children are Gods Servants and Children, so they are
by external calling, Covenant and Church Interest, his subjects also. Of them
is Gods kingdom, Luke 18. 16, 17. Now for His Subjects.
such as you are, who are the subjects of the Lord, thus to break your Oath or
Covenant of Allegiance, and to reject his government over you by his Word,
Spirit, or Discipline, like those degenerate Jews, who said of the promised
Messiah, Jesus Christ, We will not have this man to rule over us, Luke 19. 27.
Hereby you do but rebel against your Lord and Sovereign, and what is rebellion,
but as the sin of witchcraft? 1 Samuel 15. 23. even a hellish, execrable, and
damnable crime. But to proceed to the other branches of the evil of sin, in
this degeneration of such Children; In which we shall be more brief.

2. Hereby you become breakers of Covenant 2. It is a breach of Covenant with
God.
with God, with whom you are confederate. Yea, you hereby tear off the very
seal of the Covenant, even your Baptism. Thus God, when telling Moses how that
people would degenerate, he says, Deuteronomy. 31. 20. They would break his Covenant,
so Isaiah, charging the degenerate generation in his days also with their sin,
he says, Isa. 24. 5. They have transgressed the Laws -- they have broken the
everlasting Covenant. And as for invalidating (after a sort) of the
Covenant-seal thereby, you may see it in those degenerate ones, mentioned even
now, Romans 2. 25. If thou be a breaker of the law, thy Circumcision (which to
them was the seal of the Covenant, and of the righteousness of faith, as
Baptism is to us, Genesis 10. 11, 13. Romans 4. 11.) is made uncicumcision, and so
ineffectuall: It is as it were torn off and trampled under foot through that
sin of theirs. Now if this be so heinous a thing with men, to break Covenant
with Princes, to tear off and tread under foot their broad seals, how evil is
this in Gods sight? and if that breach of a Covenant made before God, even with
a tyrant, by Zedechiah, were so grievous to God, that as Ezech. 17. 15, 16, 17.
he says, Shall he escape that does such things? or shall he break Covenant and
be delivered? So I may say here to these degenerate Children of the godly;
shall such as you are escape the fiery displeasure of God, that do such things?
or shall you that break Gods Covenant be delivered from wrath to come? no
assuredly, unless the Lord give you repentance unto life. And consider of it
in the fear of God, that Isaiah made account, that for the sins whereby those
degenerate ones brake Gods everlasting Covenant, Isa. 24. 3. The earth should
reel to and fro like a Drunkard, and that the trangression thereof shall be
heavy upon it, verse. 20. Now if such Covenant Breaking sins of degenerate ones,
be such, as they are a burden too heavy for the very earth to bear, and such
as makes the very earth to stagger under it, like a Drunkard, me thinks the
burden of such a sin should make your backs and hearts ache and crack, and even
reel under it, if it do not so now, yet let all degenerate ones know, that God
will one day awaken your consciences, when you shall say with that terrified
Apostate, degenerate Cain, My punishment, or my sin, is greater than I can bear.

3. Hereby you become grossly unfaithful, yea 3. It is unfaithfulness and
treachery to God, Ancestors, posterity, and the whole Church
treacherous to your God, to your Ancestors, to your Parents, to posterity, to
the whole Church. God made you his Trustees, and so did Ancestors and Parents
make you their spiritual Trustees, under God, to hold up Religion, Truth, the
Worship, Ways, and Government of Christ, when they should be gathered to their
Fathers; they look at and leave you their Children to be a seed of the Church,
to be as plants, to hold up Gods Orchards, (as Churches are called, Cant. 4.
12, 13.) and as lesser sets and slips to maintain the Lords Gardens, (of which
Cant. 8. 12) to be the Lords hand, and theirs also, to receive his Truth,
Worship, and Government from them under God, and faithfully and entirely to
deliver the same to your posterity, and so to help to propagate the same to
such as come after you. Psalm. 78. 5. The Lord established a testimony in Jacob,
and appointed a law in Israel, which he commanded our Fathers, that they should
make them known to their Children; verse. 6. That the generation to come might
know them, even the Children which should be born, who should arise and declare
them to their Children; verse. 7. That they might set their hope in God. The
like course of continuation and propagation of his ways and truth among the
Gentiles does the Lord pitch upon, Psalm. 22. 30, 31. A seed shall serve him --
It shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation: they shall come and shall
declare his righteousness unto a people that shall be born, that he has done
this; hence that twofold censure of God upon the two houses of Israel and
Judah, Hos. 11. 12. Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the house of
Israel with deceit, but Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful to the
Saints, (namely past, present, and to come) that Tribe was more faithful in
the matter of Gods charge left with them, and they were faithful to their
godly Ancestors, or Parents, who left also the things of God to them, and they
were therein also more faithful to posterity, who would come to be spiritual
gainers thereby; hitherto Abijahs speech is appliable also, 2 Chro. 13. 11. We
(of Judah) keep the charge of the Lord our Ged, but ye (Israelites) have for
saken him; hence that degenerate generation, in Deuteronomy. 32. 20. are said to be
Children in whom is no faith, or fidelity, or trustiness, and truth in the
matter of their holy charge delivered to them; and truly, if it were no more
for a sprinkling of a better generation, here and there, of the godly, than for
such as you are, what, in an ordinary way, would become of the way of God, of
religion, of Church, within a few years? And such as you are do what in you
lies, to break and ruin posterity, and the succession of Churches. Its true
indeed, if all such fail, as Matthew. 3. 9. God is able out of stones to raise up
Children unto Abraham; by unlikely ways and means, to raise up another seed of
the Church: but yet in regard of second causes, and Gods ordinary way of
dispensation, if all such plants, and nurceries fail, Gods Orchard and
Garden-Churches must fail. 4. It is going a whoring from God.


4. Hereby you go a whoring from God. Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy as other
people; for thou have gone a whoring from thy God; says God to those
degenerate ones, Hos. 9. 1. You are by Covenant as married to God, as God spoke
of that Apostate, degenerate posterity, when he would quicken them up to return
to him, Jer. 3. 14. Turn, O backsliding Children, says the Lord, for I am
married to you: yea, but in respect of you, that marriage Covenant is broken,
as by spirtuall whoredom; of which, Jam. 4. 4. Speaking of professors, and
members of Churches, that yet were turned aside from God; Ye Adulterers and
Adulteresses, says the Lord. Now how odious a sin is Adultery, with men? and
surely this spiritual whordome is very heinous, in Gods sight, and deeply
provoking: hence that Psalm. 73. 27. Thou have destroyed all them that go a
whoring from thee.

5. Hereby you become stumbling blocks to others, 5. It occasioneth much sin in
others.
and occasion in them, both evils of commission and omission. Oh its an
Attractive, a lodestone to draw company of other youngsters; why, there will
be such and such a members, a Ministers, an Elders Son, or Daughter there: It
hardens others in their evil; why I drank not, I played not, such a Lords day
or the like, alone; such and such members, Elders Sons or Daughters did so, as
well as I. I wear not such long hair alone, I go not in such and such fashions
alone, I hold not such and such opinions (which you Judge corrupt) alone, but
such and such Church Members, and their Children do as much, 1 Samuel 2. 17. The
sin of Elies Sons (its said,) was very great before the Lord; for men abhorred
the offering of the Lord.

6. Hereby you not alone cross, what in you 6. It is a crossing even of God's
expectation.
lies, the Churches, the Churches Officers, your Parents, your godly
instructors and friends, expectations, but you do, in a sense also, cross the
Lords expectations touching you, like that degenerate posterity, Esaias 63. 8.
God said of them, surely they are my people, Children that will not lie; so he
was their Savior, ves. 10. but they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit. So
Esaias 5. 3, 4. Wherefore when I looked for grapes, did it bring forth wild
grapes? God makes account (speaking after the manner of men, and according to
the way of his general will, and to second causes and the like) that surely
they would be trusty to him, and his truth and way, and they would be
fruitful, but they proved otherwise; so may God say of such as we are now
speaking of; but as that was most grievous in them before God, and severely
punished in them, so is this in these degenerate ones, your crime is heinous,
your punishment will be most dreadful, if you speedily repent not.

Now as for those degenerate ones in special, which notwithstanding the hopeful
working they Evils of sin in the degeneration of the more hopeful Children of
the Godly.
have had formerly in their souls, yet have degenerated, to the dishonor, as
of God and themselves, so of their godly Parents, let such seriously weigh the
evil thereof: for besides those six particular aggravations, which your sin,
in degenerating, admits of, in common with others, and of which we even now
spoke, there are some peculiar aggravations to be superadded to your sin in
special; for as its said of Solomon, the Son of David, a man after Gods own
heart, when he was in that degenerating way, 1 Kings 11. 9. The Lord was angry
with Solomon, because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, who had
appeared to him twice: so I may say, in some respect, to you, God must needs be
the more angry with you, because he has showed so much of your hearts, and of
himself to you, and so often been dealing with your hearts; so in the case of
Rehoboam, Solomon's Son, who as 2 Chronicles. 11. 17. for three years space was very
hopeful, and with the rest of those of Israel, who repaired to him, and those
of Judah, walked in the way of David his Father, and in the first way of
Solomon his Father: but as 2 Chronicles. 12. 1. afterward forsook the Lord, and all
Israel with him; Joash, how hopeful a young man was he? when as it is said, 2 Chronicles. 24. 2. He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, (for the
matter of it) all the days of Jehoiadah the Priest; but verse. 17, 18. upon
occasion of the flattering Courtiers counsel, the King hearkened to them, and
they left the house of the Lord God of their Fathers; and the like is said of
Vzziah, a very hopeful young man, 2 Chro. 26. 5. He sought God in the days of
Zechariah, who had understanding in the visions of God, but v. 16. When he was
strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction, etc. And how many such
Children of good Parents are there now a days, who diverse years ago, gave
great hopes of their saving good to their Parents and Friends? now how evil a
thing is this in such as you are? and how bitter will it prove to you in the
end, that thus leave off to be wise, and to do good? as it is said, Psalm. 36.
2. And as he said in another case, you begin in the Spirit, and end in the
Flesh, Gal. 3. As if it were not as good, always to be zealously affected in a
good thing, as for a little spurt of time; but that we may set this part of the
admonition the closer upon the hearts of such Children, who were sometimes so
hopeful, and now so much degenerated, let me show them the heinous nature of
such a manner of degenerating, or rather Apostatizing from such hopeful
beginnings, workings, and practices.

1. Your sin is against the Holy Ghost; albeit 1. It is a sin in special
against Gods spirit.
not the sin, the very unpardonable sin, against the Holy Ghost: for you sin
against him, as inlightning your minds to see so much of your selves, and ways
of God, and Christ and his ways, as you did; and in a sort drawing you from
your youthful lusts, and delights, and sinful practices, and bringing you on,
in the best things, and ways so far; but now you have made head against him,
as did those degenerate ones of old, of whom it is said, Nehem. 9. 30. that
they would not give ear to the Spirit, speaking against their degenerate
courses, by his Prophets, or as it is said of that degenerate brood, Acts 7.
51. You have always resisted the Holy Ghost, as your (degenerate) Fathers did,
so do ye; this sin, as it is a resisting, so it is a rebelling against the
Spirit, as it is said there, of whom then God said, they are Children that will
not lie, Es. 63. 5. But they degenerating, it is said, verse. 10. But they
rebelled, and vexed his Holy Spirit; they therefore hereby rebelled against the
Spirit, and that did not barely grieve him, but which is a high degree of
distasting, they vexed Gods Holy Spirit. Now how vile is your sin, thus to
resist, and rebel against, and thereby so deeply to vex him? and why should
any of you vex your blessed inlightner, and one that might and was willing to
be your quickener, converter, sanctifier, strengthner, supporter, and
comforter, had not you your selves been wanting to his motions, and means which
he used? God may say to you, as he said to those degenerate ones, with whom
his Spirit had been tampering, Mic. 2. 7. Oh thou that art named the house of
Israel, is the Spirit of the Lord ^^raightned? Could not he breath and shine
more abundantly into your minds, and hearts, in the Ministry of the word, but
that you will be thus grieving and vexing of him? but why do you sin against
your own souls in sinning against him, who alone must make them capable of all
blessing, grace, and glory? And is this your observance, and owning of that
Holy Ghost, unto whom in your Baptism you are devoted?

2. This is a special sin against the grace of Jesus 2. It is a special sin
against the grace of Jesus Christ.
Christ, who in those workings, and movings of yours, was also sweetly calling
and gathering you to himself, for your souls welfare: as he was dealing in like
sort, with that degenerate generation, Matthew. 23. 7. How often would I have
gathered you, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings? but ye would
not. But where could you, or can you find better soul-food, than with that
blessed Hen? to which he likeneth himself there? where can you meet with more
soul-warmth, than with Jesus Christ, and under his blessed wings? or where can
you expect to partake of more sweetness, and kindness of bowels and love, than
with the Motherly Hen? yea do not you, as much as in you lies, at once
contradict Christ's word, and the end of his coming, of which Mal. 9. 13. I
came to call sinners (convinced sinners) to Repentance? You were indeed
convinced sinners, but have worn out your convictions and troubles; and never
went any further, to a through work of Repentance, but rather gone away further
from God and good, and would give, in a manner, the lie to Christ in that
gracious speech of his.

3. Is not this a breaking of that bond of Gods 3. It is a breaking the bond of
Gods fear.
fear, which should have kept you close to God, and from starting aside from
his truth, word, or way? So he supposing that Job was degenerate, said, thou
castest off fear, thou restrainest Prayer, Job 15. 4. And must not this needs
be very grievous to the Lord?

4. Is not this to cast off the Authority of an awakened Conscience, as a
vicegerent of God 4. It is a casting off the Authority of conscience.
to keep his due order in your hearts, words, and ways? and what remedy of any
soul-mischiefs, where conscience is put out of its place? surely if ever God
mean your souls good, he will put conscience again into is place.

5. Is not this to disgrace the ways, and word 5. It is the casting of dirt
upon Gods ways.
of God, and to cast dirt upon them, and to make the world believe, that upon
trial you find them not worth the looking after, or cleaving too? hence that
querie made to those degenerate ones, Mic. 2. 7. Do not my words do good to
them that walk uprightly? You by your course would make men believe otherwise,
but is not the affirmative the very truth: that they do good indeed to them
that keep close to them? God therefore charge those Apostate and degenerate
Jews, Psalm. 50. 16, 17. With contemptuous casting his words behind their back,
as refuse things, as words that have no Authority over them, to curb and
control them in their ways; and just so do you deal with Gods words; but will
God, think you, take this well at your hands, and not make you as well, as
those Psalm. 50. 21. to know it to your cost?

6. Is not this to deal worse with God, his truth, 6. It is worse dealing with
God, than Idolaters deal with their Idols.
and ways, than ever Idolaters dealt with their Idols, and Idol worship? as
God reasons with those degenerate ones, in Jer. 2. 9, 10, 11. has a Nation
changed their Gods, which yet are no Gods? It is also to deal worse with Gods
word and truth, than Heretics, and Opinionists do with their Heresies and
Errors, who are wont to hold them steadfastly, and constantly? as that word
(...), used in Revel. 2. 14. signifies; which hold Balaams doctrine, that is,
hold it fast, hold it strongly and unmovably; and must not this be very evil
in Gods sight?

7. Is not this to put your godly instructors, 7. It is to make all godly
instruments to be losers.
Parents, Ministers, etc. to saddest loss: even to lose the spiritual things,
which (instrumentally) they have wrought in you, as it is said, 2 John 8. Look
to your selves, that we lose not the things which we have wrought; and must not
this also be very evil in Gods sight?

8. In a word, is not this to play the beasts, and 6. It is to play the very
Beasts.
to fulfill that proverb, the dog is turned to his vomit, and the washed sow to
her wallowing in the mire? 2 Pet. 2. 21, 22. When as in former times you were
so far enlightened and wrought upon, that out of trouble for your sins, you
cased your selves of them, and cast them off, and washed, and purified your
outward course and conversation, but now have defiled your selves again with
them, and can this be other than loathsome to the pure eyes of the Lord?

And now having represented to degenerate Mischiefs attending the degeneration
of the children of the godly in general.
ones in general, and special, the evil of sin, which is in their
degeneration, let me also show them the mischiefs attending the same. And first
those which attend degeneration in general. Now all degeneration of such
Children of the Church, and of the godly, being a sin against more light, means
and offers of grace, yea more grace it self, it is therefore the greater sin,
and must assuredly provoke the Lord to more fierce displeasure against
degenerate ones, than against others; the servant which knew his Masters will
and did it not, is beaten with more stripes, Luke 12. 47. Hence when God
speaks of that degenerate brood of Children, in whom was no trustiness, no
faith, Deuteronomy. 32. 20. verse. 19. He says, and when the Lord saw it he abhorred
them, because of the provocation of his Sons and Daughters. And it is given by
God as a general threat, Heb. 10. 38. If any man draw back, my soul shall have
no pleasure in him; but that we may press on a little here, let all or any such
degenerate offspring of the godly know,

1. That God takes exact notice of all your 1. God lays up this their sin
against an evil day.
degenerate Acts, he narrowly and thoroughly eyeth them, and lays them up
against a season of Justice; thus God concludes concerning their degenerating,
De. 32. 34. Is not this laid up in store with me among my treasures? and verse.
35. their foot shall slide in due time, the day of their calamity is at hand.

2. That you cannot have any just excuse for any 2. They can have no excuse for
this their sin.
such degenerating of yours; yea such like words and warnings which you have
had to the contrary, now, or at any other time, will one day come in as
evidences against you, Deuteronomy. 31. 19. 21. That warning Song and Sermon of Moses
at the plains of Moab, its said, should testify against them as a witness, in
case of their degeneration, and Apostasy from the good ways of God.

3. That the evils of sins of omission, or commission 3. The sins of succeeding
posterity will be charged upon them.
in the posterity which does succeed you, will be charged also upon your
accounts, as occasioned by your unfaithfulness, and degeneration. God, in
making search into men's sins, does it, that he might give to every man
according to the fruit of his doings, as well as according to his ways; so
that if that be the fruit of your degenerate doings, that being unfaithful in
the charge of God, and godly Ancestors and Parents, under God, which they
committed to your trust also; your posterity, and the succeeding generations
become profane, irreligious, superstitious, erroneous, or heretical; God will
render to you also, according to these fruits of your doings; you shall be
accounted and proceeded against, as children that are gone backward, and
corrupters thereby also, (as well as otherwise) of others, Isay 1. 4, 5. As it
was sometimes charged upon Lachish (possibly in respect of the Apostasy of the
Danites, the Ancient Inhabitants thereof, Judge. 18.) That it was the beginning
of sin to the daughter of Zion, for the transgression of Israel was found in
her, Mic. 1. 13. So in like sort will you be charged as the beginners of the
sins of your posterity. And alas have you not sins enough of your own to Answer
for, but must you answer for others sins also?

4. That Gods judgments will be more bitter 4. Gods punishments both of loss
and sense will be most sad and bitter to such.
and sad to you than to others. In that punishment of loss, when the degenerate
children of the Lords Kingdom shall be cast out of it, Mat. 8. 11. There,
amongst them, shall be sorest weeping and gnashing of teeth; the sorest, and
sharpest and vexingst griefs are with them; you will be ready to curse the day
that ever you came of such good Ancestors and Parents, that ever you had so
many good instructions, and other good means used with you, but to no purpose;
that ever you were in so fair, so near and ready a way to your eternal
welfare, had you not turned so far from it, and now you must suffer the more
anguish and torment by it. The punishments of sense also will be heavier upon
such degenerate ones as you are, than upon others; upon Children in whom is no
faith, Deuteronomy. 32. 20. God says, verse. 23. He will heap mischiefs upon them, and
will spend all his Arrows upon them; As that of Famine, so called, Ezekiel. 5. 16.
That of the sword, Jer. 50. That of pestilence, Psalm. 91. 5. that of Sickness,
Psalm. 38. 2, 3. That of thunder and lightning, 2 Samuel 22. 14, 15. That of
inward horror of his wrath, Job 6. 4. Whence the sad conditions and ends of
the degenerate Children of the Church, of the Children of the godly, they are
so carefully recorded in Scripture, in terrorem, that others might hear and
fear; what a dreadful condition befell wretched Cain, that he was a
Magor-missabib, one that had terror round about, he thought every one that met
him in his vagrand course, would kill him? Genesis 4. How fatal a deluge befell
those degenerate Sons of God, Sons of the Church? Genesis 6. 2. with Chap. 7. and
8. What a woeful state was that of degenerate Cham, that he and his posterity
are condemned to vilest slavery, to be servants of servants? Genesis 9. What
mischief befell many others of Noah's degenerate posterity, at the building of
the Tower of Babel? how sad was Gods judgment upon degenerate Ishmael and
Esau, when they and theirs came to be excluded from the Church of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob? how deplorable were the ends of the degenerate Sons of Aaron,
Nadab, and Abihu, who were consumed by fire from heaven? to what sad ends came
that degenerate generation (for the body of them) in the wilderness, some by
fire from heaven, Numb. 11. 1, 2, 3. Some at Kibroth Hataavah, where so many
were struck dead whilst eating their quails, Numb. 11. 33. Some swallowed up
alive into the bowels of the earth, opening it self for that end, Numb. 16. 31,
32, 33. Some by the plague and pestilence, Verse. 46, 47, 48, 49. Numb. 25. 9.
Some by fiery serpents, Numb. 21. How sad were the strokes of God upon the
degenerate posterity in the times of the Judges, as that whole Book shows?
not to mention the dreadful ends of Hophni, and Phineas, 1 Samuel 4. and that of
Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. I might add that remarkable hand of God upon degenerate
Iehoram, the Son of good Jehoshaphat, who dyed of sore diseases, his very
bowels falling out, 2 Chronicles. 21. 1. 19. compared. You may see more of the sad
ends of the degenerate Children of godly Josiah, Jer. 22. Latter times, even
those in our days, afford many terrible and notable examples, of like nature:
but I forbear instances. And if such severe judgments befall such in special
here, O how inexpressible are those hereafter, which are your peculiar portion?
then to the Jew first, even to the degenerate Jew, above other sinners, is
Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation, and Anguish, Romans 2. 8, 9.

5. That God will be farthest off from you, in your saddest hours, when you
would have God 5. God will be farthest off from such in sad hours.
nearest to you, when in sorest affliction, as in the case of degenerate Saul,
1 Samuel 28. 15. God no way answers him then, God departs from him then; so
Deuteronomy. 31. 17, 18. He threatens those degenerate ones, that in the many troubles
befalling them, they shall from a Conscience awakened, say, Are not all these
evils come upon us because God is not amongst us? (and says God) I will surely
hide my face in that day, for all the evils which they have done in turning
away to other Gods.

6. That notwithstanding all your privileges, 6. They shall be looked at, and
dealt with, as if very Pagans.
yet by such degenerating, you will come to be looked at, and proceeded against
by God, as if but Pagans or worse, as if a very Vipers brood, as if Children of
Ammonites, or Hittites, rather than of godly Ancestors, as if Children of the
Sorceresse, and Harlot Church, than of the true Church; Amos 9. 7. Are ye not
Children of Aethiopians unto me, O Children of Israel? says the Lord, to
degenerate Israelites; Isa. 57. 3. Draw near hither ye sons of the Sorceresse,
and of the Whore, says God to such like; Matthew. 3. 7. Ye generation of Vipers,
says John to such like.

7. In a word, Consider, how in such an estate you will ever dare to look even
your good Ancestors 7. Even their godly Parents and Ancestors will one day
gladly join with Jesus Christ in sentencing them to eternal damnation.
in the face at the day of Judgment (as sometimes dying worthy Bolton spoke to
like purpose to his Children) or how can such degenerate Children of godly
Parents as you are, ever look for favor or pity from your own Parents another
day, and not rather upbraiding with what you have already enjoyed, and not
rightly improved? as Abraham is brought in, in the Parable, Luke 16. upbraiding
his son Dives, with his former good things, verse 26. Son (said Abraham)
Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things. Dives can have
no pity, nor favor from him, in his torment, no, (as it is said Psalm. 58.
10.) The Righteous shall rejoice, (especially at the day of Judgment) when he
sees the vengeance, (be it upon Son or Daughter) he shall wash his feet in the
blood of the wicked; as that good Woman (as I have heard) who had a very
degenerate Son, for whom she had often prayed, and wept before God for many years
together, and he rather grew worse than better, and God at one time in prayer
having quieted her heart in himself if it should be his pleasure even to damn
him, she one day called in her Son, and with sighs and tears told him, how
dear a Son he had been to her, how many means she had used, time after time,
both with him, and with God, to bring him home to the Lord; but now (says she)
I am content to leave thee to the Lords pleasure, although he should damn thee,
wherefore, take thy course now, I have done, if thou will needs go on in thy
sin, upon thy peril be it; a day will come, when I that have wept so often to
thee and over thee, shall yet rejoice in the sentence of thy just damnation;
which very speech of hers (as I was credibly informed) wrought much upon the
young man's heart, and from that day forward, he proved really hopeful in the
best things. O that the very forementioning of this might have some such
blessed effect, upon some degenerate Child or other; but verily the Saints
being to be assessours with Christ at the last day, in which respect its said,
1 Cor 6. 2, 3. that the Saints shall judge the world, namely of the ungodly,
and so their ungracious Children also among the rest, neither Son or Daughter
will then be respected by them; and if zealous Levi in that way of divine
Justice here, Know not his own Children, Deuteronomy. 33. 9. much more hereafter,
where Godly zeal shall be in its perfection, and without any dross of sinful
nature cleaving to it; Godly Parents in attesting, and gladly owning the
righteous sentence of Jesus Christ against all and every sinner, saying, Depart
from me ye cursed into everstasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, Matthew. 25. 41. They shall know neither Son nor Daughter.

Now in all these mischiefs attending degenerating Mischiefs attending the
degeneration of the hopeful Children of the godly.
from the ways of God, and precepts and examples of godly Parents, those
degenerate ones, who have given good hopes of better thnigs, you also have you
share with others, but I would add and present a few things more unto your sad
and serious consideration.

1. That it is very questionable whether ever 1. God may never come so near to
them again.
God will come so near you again, yea or no; he may wholly with draw, and return
no more, as in the case of degenerate Saul, Rehoboam, Iehoash, and others.

2. That if he should return again, the work 2. The work will be the more
painful*
will be more difficultly, and painfully brought on; You have broken Gods
Prison, and if brought in again, you must expect more of Gods Irons to be clapped
upon you. God was in setting your bones, and you foolishly breaking them again,
it will be more painful to have them set again; you have falsified your trust
with God, and he will more hardly be drawn to trust you again, with such
mercies.

3. You will be more apt to be hardened in the 3. They are rather most apt to
be hardened in their way.
way of degenerating and apostasy; when you once begin to turn away, you will
be apt to superadde other sins, and likewise many excuses for that which draws
you away from God and good, which will but fasten and further you more in your
way of degenerating.

4. That you will be more afraid of God, or to 4. They will be the more afraid
and discouraged to come nigh to God.
come nigh to him, being privy to your selves, how far, how long, and against
how much light, you have gone from him; yea, you will grow discouraged, and at
length at a point with God, even desperate in your course; As those degenerate
ones, who Ier. 2. 25. say, There is no hope, but we will walk after our own
devices, or like those of a like stamp, in Ezech. 33. 10. Who when called to
come to God, they say, if we pine away in 5. Commonly the latter end of such,
is worse than their beginning.
our iniquities, and our sins be upon us, how shall we then live?

5. It is well if God leaving you, and such as you are upon your leaving of
him, it befall not you which is parabolically represented to befall that
degenerate generation, that the unclean spirit, being to man's view gone out of
them, being restless he resolves to return as to his own house, and finding
them empty of the Spirit indwelling in them, though swept from many pollutions
of the world, and garnished with goodly common gifts of the Spirit, and the
like, he returns with seven worse spirits, and so their latter end becomes
worse than their beginning, Matthew. 12. 43, 44, 45.

We have done with the use of reproof.

We come now to the second use, which serves for exhortation.

1. To Parents. 2. To Children. Use of exhortation to Parents to use all good
means to farther this reflect Honor from their Children.


First then let godly and Christian Parents be exhorted, So to be, and so to
carry it in your place of Parents, as may further that reflect Honor due to
you from Children: especially in this respect, that your Children may rise up
after you, to hold up purity and power of Religion, as your selves do desire
and endeavor to do, and that your children may not degenerate there from,
neither whilst you are with them, nor after your selves shall be moved from
out of this world. And for this end,

First and chiefly, let good Parents take special care and use the utmost
diligence you can, about the 1. By their good and godly education.
matter of the good and godly education of your Children. I have lightly
touched this formerly, I shall now more fully prosecute the same; this is
expressly charged, and that as the especial duty respecting Parents in their
place, in regard of the honor due to them from their children, in their place,
Ep. 6. 2, 3, 4. Honor thy father and thy Mother, says God to Children, and
hereupon annexeth, And you Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath (and so
to hinder your Children from honoring of you) but bring them up in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord, and so further your due honor from them; Prove. 22.
6. Train up a Child in the way that he should go; and when he is old he will
not depart from it. Would you have your Children to understand the Scriptures,
and to make profitable use thereof, to their own and others best good? train
them up thereunto betime. So was Timothy by his good Mother Eunice, witness
that, 2 Timothy 3. 15. And that from a Child thou have known the holy Scriptures,
which are able to make thee wise to Salvation, through faith in Christ. Or
would you have your Children afterward to pray or to praise God and Christ
aright? then inure them to that also betime; As those godly Parents did theirs,
whence that in Matthew. 24. 15, 16. There were Children crying in the Temple
saying, Hosanna to the Son of David, and you may see there how Christ took it,
and that he justified it, and grounded it upon the Scripture, Psalm. 8. 2. Out
of the mouths of Babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength, because of
thine enemies, that thou may still the Enemy and Avenger. Christ made account
that his praise was much perfected by the Hosannahs of Children, which they
have been taught to utter by their good Parents. God had much glory by the
prudent answer of that Child, who spoke (as we formerly mentioned) at the
martyrdom of Romanus, the enemy had much confusion; as Mr. Fox. says well in
his first Book of Martyrs. If you would have them believe in their old age,
further them in it in their childhood and Youth. So did the Parents of David, a
type of Christ, further him this way. Whence that speech, Psalm. 2 2. 10. I was
cast upon thee from the Womb, thou art my God from my Mothers belly, and verse.
4. thou made me hope, when I was upon my Mothers breasts, that is, very
early, very betimes, in my very Childhood. Hence the blessed succession of the
indwelling of faith, first in the grandmother Lois, and then in her Daughter
Eunice, and then in her young Son Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. 5. This holy Parentall
industry in such instructions and education of their Children, it is Gods own
ordinance, Ephesians. 6. 4. and Prove. 22. 6. and therefore one of Gods ordinary ways
and means, to effect saving good in Children; therefore in an ordinary way his
Blessing is upon it, as upon any other Ordinance of his. Hence that engagement
of God; Train up a Child in the way he shall go; Parents do you instruct and
educate your Children well, and through my Blessing it shall come about, that
they shall not alone be towardly for a time, but in their old age it will stick
by them, they will not apostatize nor degenerate therefrom. Hence that
engagement of the Lord touching Abraham's faithful care, and endeavor with his
Children, Genesis 18. 19. I know Abraham, that he will command his Children, and
his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, that God
might bring upon Abraham that which he has promised. And here give me leave a
little to clear up that place in Genesis 14. 14. He armed his trained servants
born in his house: trained servants; namely to his religion, and not to warlike
affairs, only or chiefly, and so in the Margen of your greater Bibles, it is
well rendered instructed, it is the same Hebrew word (...) used there, as is
used in Prove. 22. 6. Train up a Child, etc. Or as the Geneva notes have it
there, Train up a Child virtuously when he is young. Nor is that Hebrew word
(...) whence that word (...) (his trained ones) Genesis 14. 14. is taken, ever
used so far as I can find in Scripture, but in a religious sense; it is used
for dedicating a thing to holy use, Numb. 7. 10, 11, 84, 88. 1 King. 8. 63. 2 Chronicles. 7. 5, 9. Ezra 6. 16, 17. Nehem. 12. 27. Deuteronomy. 20. 5. Psalm. 30. Title.
It is used in Dan. 3. 23. for the consecrating of that Idol, which though an
abuse, yet still the word notes a religious sense of it, and possibly godly
Jared the Father of Enoch did therefore call his Son (...), that is, a
dedicated, a devoted one, one to be trained up, and initiated from a very Child
to the Lord, and to his use, as it seemed he was, and proved a very worthy man,
one that walked long with God himself, Genesis 5. and was of public good use to
others, as Judge. 11. shows. I have the more largely insisted upon these
passages, respecting Abraham and his Family,

1. Because Abraham has his name to be a Father of all believers, Genesis 17. 5.
Who amongst them have that blessing amongst others to be accomplished, which is
mentioned, Genesis 12. 3. In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed;
which as in the first place it looks to Christ coming out of Abraham's Loins,
in whom they should all be blessed; so in a second place, in and through
Christ, it is fulfilled in all and each of Abraham's believing seed, who
becoming Fathers and Mothers of Families, shall also become by the blessing of
grace upon their Covenant-interests, Prayers, and holy diligence in matters of
education, Blessings to their respected Families throughout all the earth. So
that hence also godly Parents may be encouraged to take pains in Virtuous and
Religious education of their Children, in that it is a Covenant-blessing to
them, in their Father Abraham's Charter for them, that they shall become
Blessings to their Families. Hence also in one tespect among others, Christ
said, This day is salvation come to this house, for as much as he also
(Zacheus) is become a Child of Abraham, Lu. 19. 9. Hence also that Act. 16. 31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thy house.

2. That it might appear what a Family-church Abraham had in his house; the
adult circumcised ones, were all proselited, and such as from very Childhood
gave pledges of fearing God, through their good education, for they were Sons
of his house, or born there, most of them (Genesis 14. 14. with 17. Genesis 23. He
circumcised all that were born in his house) Such as] Eliezer is said to be,
Genesis 15. 3. A Son of his house, or born there; and how godly a man he was let
his works declare, Genesis 24. 2, 9, 12, 15, 21, 26, 27, 33, 42, 43, 44, 45, 48,
49, 52, 56. and how godly the rest were, may be gathered by their conscionable
obedience to Abraham, who therefore could undertake that on all their behalf,
mentioned Genesis 14. 23. The Angel spoke also of Abraham, by experience of what
was already, when he said, Genesis 18. 19. I have found him such an one by
experience, That he will command his Children, and household after him, and
they shall keep his way, he that had so done will do so: and indeed being most
of them Sons of his house, or born there, therefore faithful Abraham must
needs see them so educated from their very Childhood, that they might walk in
Gods ways.

3. That it may be seen in our Father Abraham's Church, how exactly careful God
was that the Children of godly proselites and members of the Church, might be
admitted to the seal of the covenant, and of the righteousness of faith, as it
is called, Genesis 17. 11, 13. My Covenant in their flesh, (i) seal of it, To. 4.
circumcision, the seal of righteousness of faith. Y^^ was Abraham's Church no
Jewish Church; all but Abraham and Sarah, being not of Eber, but of other
Ancestors: Nor was it a national Church; for they were all one entire
congregation, in covenant with God and each other, implicitly at least, and
meeting constantly in one place to wor-God together, as 600 might very well do,
if that 300. Genesis 14. were doubled, that the weight of such pious educating
of Children may appear, namely to be Gods appointed means of good, of grace in
Children, as the means, for the full effecting of the promises of grace, as
the end, which promises are made to godly Parents with respect to their
children, namely that God will be a God to them, etc. Genesis 17. 7. and 18. 19.
For so God says to this Father, and pattern believer, He will command his
Children, and they shall walk in his ways, that God may bring upon Abraham (in
his Children also) what he has spoken of him, (with respect also to his
Children) Hence David in his instructing of Solomon, takes up the like speech,
1 King. 23. 4. and keep the Charge of the Lord, that God may confirm his word,
and that promise in the general, Genesis 17. 7. being not of an absolute but of a
conditional nature. So that the greatest love and faithfulness which Parents
as Covenanters can show to God, and to their Children, who in and with
themselves, are joint Covenanters with God* is so to educate them, that what in
them lies, the conditions of the Covenant may be attended by their Children,
and so the whole Covenant fully effected, in the promised mercies of it also to
them, and to their Children.

Now this duty of good education of Children, being so weighty, and being a
furtherance to the other duty in hand, even Childrens being an honor Rules
concerning good education of Children.
to their Parents every way, besides former things occasionally hinted, Let us
here propound.

1. Some few rules about it. 2. Some motives to it. As for Rules about
education.
1. Let Parents wisely observe and pry into the 1. Observe the genious bent and
capacity of Children.
genius (as I may call it) and bent and capacity of their Children, which way
they are most biased in their spirits, and of what they are most capable, Prove.
20. 11. Even that Child is known by his doings, whether his work be pure, or
whether it be right, that is, as is well noted in the Synod Bible, Children
show betimes whether they be inclined to good ways or bad, and must be dealt
withal accordingly. When Themistocles was a very boy, Plutarch tells us that
he would not play with the boys, but compose their differences. So Alexander
the great when he was a boy, at play with other boys, and was asked whether he
would wrestle after the manner of the Olympic games, yes, gladly says he, If
I might wrestle with a King. Such speaking signs gave they of an Heroic and
Princely Spirit, when they were little: and so many others do, no doubt in
other things.

2. When Parents by wise observations do perceive 2. Carry it wisely and
suitably toward them as that their disposition requires
the bent, and bias of their Children, now let them carry it toward them
accordingly. If they be strongly bent to some vice more than others, as Lying
(as it is said of some, Psalm. 58. 3. They go astray from their birth speaking
lies) admonish them betimes in the evil of it, represent to them what God
speaks, in especial wise against it, what sad examples and sequels, in
Scripture and otherwise, both in point of sin, and in point of judgments, are
found, thereof: after which course taken, then watch them the more narrowly,
and spare them not for it, if they fall into lying again, and do the like in
case of a slandering disposition, or of a venerious or lustful disposition, or
a proud spirit, showing its lofty bent after gay apparel, great and high
things in the world, or a covetous spirit, showing it self in expressions of a
greedy having, and craving spirit, in them, when Children, in a gripple and
nigardly temper, and the like, or a scoffing spirit, or a profane spirit, or an
intemperate spirit, in matter of meat and drink, or a whimficall, brainsick
disposition, even in their Childhood and youth: spare no seasonable rebukes or
correction, whereby to curb such vile dispositions in them seasonably and
thoroughly. Prove. 23. 13, 14. Withold not correction from the child, thou
shall beat him, and save his soul from hell; and 22. 15. folly is bound up in
the heart of a child, but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.
It Is Gods ordinance for the seasonable, and true redress of such evil
dispositions, and the cure of such distempers of nature. If Cham had curbed
that slandring disposition earlier in his Son Canaan, it had been better for
them both; if Isaac had seasonably curbed Esau's voluptuous disposition, Genesis
25. 25. And David, Amnons lustful disposition, that mischief had not fallen
out in both their Families, mentioned, Genesis 26. 35. and 2 Samuel 13. 1, 2, 4, 15,
17. If the Jews had curbed those buddings out of their sons and daughters
pride, or Josiah had done so with that of his Children, the whole Land had not
so sinned and smarted by it, as it did, Esaias 3. 5, 16, 17. and Zeph. 1. 8. If
Absoloms aspiring spirit had been seasonably observed, and crushed by David in
his childhood and youth, It had never grown so impetuous, and mischievous as
is spoken, 2 Samuel 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12, 13, etc. It was those Jew
parents horrid sin, that they were covetous themselves, and so rather
cherished, than curbed a covetous spirit in their Children, until the Lord
seeing them all, from the greatest to the least, eldest to the youngest, given
to covetousness, he undertaketh the punishing thereof, to their cost, Jer. 6.
13, etc. If those parents, who might well enough have discerned a jeering
spirit in those boys, before it brake out so far, as afterward, had
seasonably curbd it in them, the wild bears of the wood had never been such
executioners of the Prophets just curse against them, for that flout of theirs,
come up thou bald-head, come up thou bald-head, 2 Kings 2. 23, 24. And
doubtless that was not the first time that the blasphemous Son of the
Israelitish woman, mentioned, Levit. 24. 10, 11. had declared the profaness of
his Spirit, which if timely corrected and curbed, It had not broken out in so
capital a way as then it did. And I might say the like of all other folly, or
foolish dispositions, which are in Childrens hearts naturally, which as they
outwardly appear, if duly corrected and curbed, they would be removed, or
driven far away, Prove. 22. 15. If Children, either by common, or saving
influences of the Spirit, are more ingenuous spirits, and of better and more
hopeful dispositions, Oh let parents, as they discern the same, encourage the
same, all the prudent and pious ways that may be: thus wise and gracious
Rebeccah, perceiving in her Son Jacob, the specimen, and signal tokens of a
plain, honest, single, open-hearted spirit, she expresses and enlarges her
love far more to him, than to her Eldest Son Esau, whom she perceived to be of
a more haughty and voluptuous spirit, Genesis 25. 27, 28. and amongst other (...),
tokens, by which to Judge, and accordingly to encourage such laudable
ingenuity, and hopeful disposition of Children, or youth, mind and observe the
nature and scope of their questions, and how ready they show themselves
thereby, to search and seek after, and to understand the best things, and of
weightier concernment to their souls; as a worldly covetous frame of heart is
discovered by answerable questions; whence that character given of worldlings,
there be many that say, who will show us any good? (even any worldly good)
Psalm. 4. 6. and as their graceless spirit is described by their omission of
enquiries, and asking after God. Esaias 65. 1. So an inquisitive disposition
after soul-matters in Children, as a better and more hopeful Omen in them, is
to be encouraged by parents; Exodus 12. 26. and 13. 24. Josh 4. 21. when thy Son
shall ask thee in time to come, what means this, or that? then you shall say,
the Lord did thus and thus; so let parents mind and encourage some better
speeches, which sometimes, beyond expectation, will fall from very Children;
those rarer speeches and answers of Jesus Christ, when a lad of 12. years old,
Luke 2. 42, 49. though Mary his Mother did not so understand at first the full
scope of them, v. 50. yet she kept them all in her heart, she had many a
pondering and thought about the same.

3. Let parents carry it with a very jealous eye, 3. Carry a jealous eye over
them in point of sin.
and hand over their Children, in the matter of known sin against Gods rules;
as Job did over his, Job 1. 5. he sanctified them daily, in that feasting time
of theirs, saying, It may be my Sons have sinned, and cursed God in their
hearts; and let parents by no means be drawn in, to consent to their Children,
in any evil way of theirs, as Jacob said of his cruel Sons, Genesis 49. 6. O my
soul come not thou into their secret, unto their Assembly, my honor, be not
thou united: nor by any means let them own their Children in any way of an
evil spirit, as Levi, who (Deuteronomy. 33. 9.) said of his children, I have not
known them, Zech. 13. 3. Deuteronomy. 13. 6.

4. Let Christian parents be often Catechizing 4. Be often Catechizing them and
as they can best conceive and remember teaching them in the best things of
their souls.
their children in the principles of Religion, and instructing them in the best
things of their souls; under that head of bringing up Children in the nurture,
and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. some take in this of Catechizing. It was
the practice of Jewish parents of old, hence that Romans 2. 18. being instructed
out of the Law, or as in the Greek, being Catechized. Aegysippus says, That by
virtue of Catechizing, there was never a Kingdom but received alteration, in
the heathenish religion, within forty years after Christ's passion; Julian when
he would have suppressed Religion, suppressed partly Catechizing of Children,
partly Schools of Learning; the Papists (as it appears in the Popes Bull,
before the Trent Catechize) acknowledge, that by Catechizing, the Protestants
got the start of them; this milk is appointed of God, for the benefit of such
Christians, which have not their senses so raryfied, as to discern so well of
good or evil, Heb. 5. 12. compared with 6. verse, where the heads of
Catechizing publicly, and privately, in the Apostles days, are mentioned; and
let parents be often talking of good things, and choice passages of the word
diligently to their Children, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. thou shall teach these words
diligently to thy Children, when thou sit in thine house, and when thou
walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up,
especially be pressing them to look after the weightier matters of their souls,
as David did his son Solomon, to get wisdom, that principal thing, even the
saving knowledge of God in the Messiah, Prove. 4. 4, 5, 7. So David, Psalm. 34.
11, 12, 13, 14. Come ye Children unto me and I will teach you the fear of the
Lord, etc. only in teaching thus, let parents take the best and easiest way
that may be for their capacity and memory; that they may best conceive,
receive, and retain their holy instructions; it must be dropped in by little,
and little; teaching proper and fittest for Children, is by precept upon
precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little,
and there a little, Es. 28. 9, 10, 11. Aelian tells, Lib. 2. cap. 29. that
the Cretenses as they taught their more weighty matters -- as their Laws, their
Praises of their heathenish Gods, and famous acts of their worthies, so for the
manner of it, that they might more cheerfully Learn, and better remember the
same, they taught them in way of Musical, and Melodious Song; even Moses also,
when to commend the weighty counsels of God, to be commended by them to their
Children, it is in a way of a Song, Deuteronomy. 31. 19, 22. now therefore write you
this Song for you, and teach it to your Children.

5. Let Parents be sure that Children whilst 5. Let them be taught to read the
Scriptures duly.
Children, be taught to read well the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3. 13. From a child
Timothy was taught to understand (and as a means of it) to read the Sriptures
through, and through, over, and over, often, diligently and heedfully. Oh the
unexpressible wrong done to many Children by their parents neglect to have them
taught to read the Scriptures, when they were young! here the English proverb
may take place, Better unborn (almost) than untaught; only let parents help
Childrens understandings, all they can, in what they have read or heard,
further the due application of it to themselves, their soul estate and
condition, and be often calling them to an account of what they have read or
heard, to see what they remember, understand, or improve thereof, like Christ
as a Father to his Children, the Disciples, inquiring of them, Matthew. 13. 51.
Have ye understood all these things?

6. Let parents be putting their Children betimes, 6. Put them betimes upon
holy exercises.
upon actual exercise, and practice of religious principles, and rules, which
have been taught, by their parents; what religious practices and precepts you
would have them to attend, and not depart from them, when they are old, train
them up practically, to those very godly exercises when they are young, Prove.
22. 6. Heathen Agesilaus, when asked by one, What youth should learn in their
youth? answered, such things as when they are men, they have most use of* Deuteronomy.
32. 46. You shall command your Children (even whilst Children) to observe to
do all these words: and therefore to practice piety, to call upon God in
Prayer, to praise him, and give thanks to him, to sanctify the Sabbath, in all
the holy exercises thereof in public, in the assembly; in private, with the
rest of the Family; and in secret, in their own closets, apart by themselves.
Adam and Eve had trained up Cain and Abel, their sons, to the practicals of
Religion betimes; witness that their sacrificing, Genesis 4. 3, 4. as its likely
before either of them were married men. Verse. 16, 17. compared. Those godly
Jewish parents had taught their Children to pray; witness that short Prayer of
theirs, Mat. 21. 15. taken from Psalm. 118. 25. which in the Hebrew is
Hoshia-na, rendered by the Greek, Hosanna, save (O Lord) I beseech thee --
namely the blessed Messiah, rescue him from all his enemies, from all mischiefs
whatsoever, carry him through his work, so as that he may save others, and the
like. This practice of Children, Christ there justified and defended. Not alone
old men, and young men, and maidens, but children also are charged to praise
God, Psalm. 148. 12, 13. and if to praise God, then also to pray to him:
praising being but a part of prayer. In the 4th Commandment, God expressly
charge the heads of Families to look to it, that not themselves alone, but
their sons and daughters keep holy his day of rest; and if to keep it holy,
then to be acting in all the holy exercises of the day, according to their
understandings; as in reading, discourse about good things, prayer, singing of
Psalms, blessing their meat, and such like; Leviticus 19. 3. every one without
limitation is charged, you shall every man fear his Father, and every man his
Mother, (and as a fruit and pledge of it,) keep my Sabbaths. See more Deuteronomy. 31.
11, 12. Joshua 8. 35. Deuteronomy. 16. 10, 11, 16. It was the devil in Pharaoh, who
would not have had the Israelites Children to have gone with them to sacrifise
in the wilderness, but to have stayed in Egypt the while their parents went
about it, Exodus 5. 3. with 10. 11. and no doubt he was too busy with Christ's
own Disciples, when they would have hindered the good peoples Children from
their near approaches to Christ, Mark. 10. 13, 14. and its from Satan, that
some now adays, would not have Children, whilst Children, taught the ways or
things of God, (Catechistically, or practically,) as to pray, or the like:
contrary to the very grain of that Scripture, Prove. 22. 6. 7. Let them be
trained up to some honest callings, especially to the Ministry, if of parts
that way.


7. let parents look well to it, that none of their Children whilst young live
idly, but that they be trained up to some honest, and laudable callings and
employments. Adam trained up his sons to husbandry, Genesis 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. and
such of your Children as may be men capable of learning, let parents set them
apart for learning; David had his Tutors for his sons, 1 Chro. 27. 32. Such
capacity, and dispositions in youth for Scholastic indouments, and
employments, they also are Talents of God bestowed upon children, and would not
be buried in the earth; and oftentimes as it fares with lustier soil, being
not answerably husbandred, it brings forth more weeds than other ground: So in
Children of good natural parts, and not well ordered and employed in learning
and arts, they often prove the worse; yea albeit such natural parts should not
be abused thus, but better employed, yet as Prove. 16. 21. the sweetness of the
lips, ability of sweetness, aptness, and elegancy of expression, it adds an
ornament, and grace, and force to what is spoken, it increases learning; and
indeed in an ordinary way of common prudence and providence, although parents
in some conditions may strain hard, to bring up their sons to be Scholars, it
is in it self a far better portion, than barely to leave them such a portion of
money, or goods, or Lands. God himself accounts such liberal sciences among the
number of his chiefer gifts, Dan. 1. 17. speaking of Daniel, and his three
companions, as for these four Children, God gave them knowledge, and skill in
all learning, and wisdom. Its spoken in the commendation of Moses, by Stephen,
Acts 1. 7. 22. that he had skill in all learning of the Egyptians; verily it
was well for the Church in Moses his time, and for the Church in Daniels time,
that Daniel and Moses, when they were young, were so well educated and gifted
with skill in all learning and wisdom. God will reward good parents also as
well as bad, according to the fruit of their doings, John 17. 10. if by the
fruit of your education, and blessing of God upon the education of your
Children to learning, they come to do much more good, either in Church or
commonwealth, all that good will be partly put upon the good parents account
also, as well as added to the good Childs score; and in particular, the more
to encourage Christian parents to educate, and sequester their Children, which
have good natural parts, unto learning, in reference to the ministry in
special sort, let me add a word or two; let such remember Hannahs example,
who in setting apart her son Samuel, presently upon his coming to be trained
up under Elies tuition, for the Ministry, she is said herein, to lend him to
the Lord, 1 Samuel 1. 24, 28. compared, and cap. 2. 20, 21. it appears that she
lost nothing by this loan. Remember also what a favor and wonder of bounty,
and faithfulness of God is extended to you, that God will take any of your
children, for such an employment of his, and of his Church, namely for the
Ministry; amongst three of the most notable acts that God did for Israel, next
to that of bringing them up out of Egypt, and to that of destroying the
Canaanites for them, Amos 2. 9, 10. this is reckoned one, I raised up of your
sons, for Prophets; to conclude, remember also what an honor God puts upon
your Children, and what favor he shows them therein, 1 Timothy 1. 12. I thank
Christ Jesus our Lord (says Paul) who enabled me, for that he counted me
faithful, putting me into the Ministry; when God would honor Phinehas, he
puts this upon him, as by a perpetual Covenant, that he and his children
shall be the Lords Priests, Numb. 25. it was the honor also that God put upon
the tribe of Levi, that for Levies zeal in that business, at Massah and
Meribah, his Vrim and Thummim, his Priestly indowments and ornaments, of
Priestly employments should be upon him, Deuteronomy. 33. 8, 9. it was the honor at
first put upon Isreal's firstborn, only to be the Lords, and for the Lords
Ministerial service; whence, Exodus 24. 5. and he sent the young men of the
Children of Israel, their first born, who offered burnt offerings and
sacrificed peace offerings of Oxen unto the Lord; afterward indeed in honor
of the Levits, the Levits were taken to be the Lords, or for the Lords
Ministerial service, and bestowed upon Aaron, and his sons, who successively
were to be Gods high Priests, 3 Numb. 12. 41. and cap. 8. 16, 19. compared; it
must needs be an honor to the ministers calling, and such as are therein
conscionably employed, that the blessed God in his counsels, respecting the
souls welfare of his people, which in themselves, and by nature were
rebellious, to the intent that by his blessing upon the Ministry in their
hearts, God might come to dwell amongst them; he ordered it thus, that Christ
dying, and rising again, should ascend into heaven, and there receive from his
father as an honorable boon of favor, gifts for men, even for his people in
themselves Rebellious, that God might by his blessing thereupon dwell amongst
them, Psalm. 68. 18. upon his actual ascension, as Paul expresses it, Ephesians. 4.
8, 11, 12, 13. He gave those gifts, so received, to men, to his people, and
Church; That is, as the Apostle expounds those gifts to be, verse. 11. He gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith and a perfect
man, etc. No greater honor surely than this, to be given, as a
Coronation-mercy, to Christ ascending, and from Christ given back again, as his
Coronation Favor, and Bounty to his Church, for such high, holy, and
honorable ends; nor need I say more in honor of your children, If becoming
faithful Ministers; their Scripture titles do Emblazon that sufficiently;
Ministers being called, Angels, Rev. 2. 1. Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Stewards, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Watchmen, Ezekiel. 3. 17. Co-workers with God, 1 Cor. 3.
And many other titles of honor which he is pleased to crown Ministers withal.

As for motives I will but name two or three. Motives to good education of
Children. 1. They are the Lords, more than ours.


1. Our Children are more the Lords than ours, by Covenant-right, by our own
act of devoting them to him in Baptism, Matthew. 28. 19. and many other ways,
Ezekiel. 16. 20. Let Parents therefore bring up their Children for God, in the
best way they can.

2. Education will greatly difference our Children 2. That will honorably
distinguish them from others.
from others not so well educated, as Lycurgus, when he would convince the
Lacedaemonians of the benefit of education, he takes two whelps of one
litter, the one he traineth up to Hunting, the other not, the one proved of use
to the field, the other was good for nothing, but for a cur in the Kitchen; and
experience witnesses, that ordinarily persons well educated, become of very
public and good use, more ways than one, where ever God casts their
habitation, others, not so educated are little serviceable, in any matters of
public concernment. Socrates used to say, that many Men's Sons who were without
education, were like courageous Horses without well ordering and government,
becoming very Asses, or as it might be added, resty Iades. I need not apply
it, its easily understood.

3. The honor of good education will be 3. Children also will have the honor
of it: the sin of the contrary will lie upon the Parents.
partly the Child's, and will partly reflect honor upon the Parents, As that of
Augustus, who so well educated his Sons, that what they spoke, he would have
them speak it openly, and then have the Speech (as matter of worth and note)
publicly recorded: But in neglect of good education Childrens sins will be
charged upon Parents, As in Elies case of neglect of well educating, and
Fatherly watching over his Sons, Hophni, and Phineas, 1 Samuel 2. 29, 30. he is
charged with kicking at his sacrifices, why have ye kicked at my sacrifices?
etc. The very Heathens, by natures light so took this; hence the Lacedaemonian
Ephori, they punished a certain Father, for suffering two of his Sons to fall
out, and to fight one with another.

4. It may somewhat awaken, and move Christian 4. Even Heathens have been much
for good education. Justin l. 3.
Parents to a more conscionable care in this matter of well educating your
Children, to consider some of the Laws, Acts, and speeches, of the very
Heathen, about this very particular. Lycur-the Spartan Lawgiver, commanded
that Youth should be brought into the field, not into the Markets that they
should spend their first year not in Lxury, but in work and Labors; And the
Spartans had another Law, that if any of their Freemen neglected the
discipline of youth, he should be disenffranched; Aelian also speaks of
another sore punishment which the conquering Mytilenesians imposed upon their
revolting associates, that their Children should not be trained up to the
liberal Sciences; Plato was wont to reprove this as a gross evil in those of
his times, that men would bestow all their care and pains in getting Riches,
but took little, or no care about their Children, unto whom they were to leave
their Riches. When one answered Aristippus, that for a thousand drachmes which
he demandded to bring up his Son to Learning, that he could buy a servant; nay,
says the Philosopher, you shall have two servants, to wit, him that you buy,
and your own Son too. Diogenes sometime said, he had rather be a Ram or sheep
of a Megarensian, than his Son, whereby he declared, that the Megarenses took
more diligent care of their Cattle, than of their Children. To conclude with
one admonitory Item to some in these days, who are secret enemies to
catechizing Children, and bringing them up in Learning, Let them tremble to
think with how like a spirit they are acted to that of that notorious Apostate
Julian, who designing the extirpation of the Christian Religion, thought no way
better, than to put down catechizing and Schools of Learning: as for other
Parents who would full gladly bring up some of their Sons, who have natural
parts for Learning, but through Idleness or Voluptuousness, or the like,
they will not be drawn to attend it, or to be trained up to it, let then some
other way punish them, with suitable epressions of Parentall distaste and
displeasure. Solons law this way, was somewhat too harsh, that if Sons would
not be drawn by their Parents to Learning, their Parents should deny them
necessaries; but yet Christian Parents would do somewhat this way, that such
Children should know themselves, and sufficiently see cause to bewail their
folly and error. I have been long in this first way of Parents furthering
Children in being an honor to them, because it is of great moment; we shall be
briefer in the rest.

2. Then let Christian Parents, as a help to the said end, be sure to leave
your Children under 2. By leaving Children under Gods ordinances and good
government.
Gods ordinances purely and powerfully dispensed, in the Church, and under good
government in the civil state. The Children of Israel would not leave one of
their Children in Egypt, Exodus 10. 9, 10. Where God pure Religion was not, nay,
where sacrifices to the Lord was an abomination, Exodus 8. 27. and where the
government of the state was tyrannical; these better-minded people of Israel,
when the godly Priests were put down by Jeroboam, and removed to Judah, under
Rehoboham, and when Jeroboam set up corrupt unworthy fellows to be priests,
they also removed themselves and families to Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 11. 13, 14,
15, 16. Hence that enquiry of the company of the godly, Canticles 1. 7. Tell
me, O thou whom my Soul loves, where thou dwell, and where thou causest thy
flock to rest at noon? that parching time of enemies raging against the truth,
ways, and people of Christ, to which Christ's answers, verse. 8. Go thy way
forth by the footsteps of the flock, (the rest of my people) and feed thy kids
itttle ones by the shepherds (godly Magistrates and Ministers) tents. Alas,
for us, and ours to go where Gods pure ordinances or government is not, it is to
expose our selves, and them to, to soul-ruines, as David said in that case, 1 Samuel 6. Cap. 16. They have cast me out this day from the Lords inheritance,
(where his ordinances and Ministers and people are) saying, Go and serve other
Gods -- their actions, in driving me out amongst strangers to Gods pure
Religion and Laws, do even as it were say, Go, and serve other gods, putting
me upon that temptation to it. But by leaving our Children under good
ordinances and government, we do hereby greatly further them in the best things,
and thereby also in becoming an honor to us.

For 1. They are furthered that way by your godly Ministers there; and the pure
dispensation of the word and ordinances by them; when such Fishers are upon the
Churches banks, your fish of all hand great and small are wont to be caught and
drawn to the Land, Ezekiel. 47. 8, 9, 10. by John Baptists Ministry (as we before
showed) all is brought to rights 'twixt Children and Parents, Mal. 4. 6. He
shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the Children, and the hearts of the
Children to the father.

2. They are much helped that way by the Churches and Saints Christian watch
over them, Counsels, instructions, and seasonable admonitions of them, and
prayers for them. Peter, as an Apostle, having all virtuall, Apostollical, and
Church power in him, is charged with the feeding, teaching, and ruling, of
Christ's Lambs, as well as elder sheep, Joh. 21. 15, 16. The Children of the
Church have a beneficial privilege, that they must be watched over, kept from
wanderings, searched out if started aside, and brought in if gone astray,
healed if diseased, cherished and nourished up by all holy means, of which
they are capable, kept to their pasturage, watering, folding, and the like.

3. They will be much helped by the good civil governors means also, who is
a nursing Father unto the Church and to her little Children, Jsa. 49. 23. and
who is to take magistraticall care in special sort, of the education of
Children. As even the heathen Aristotle says it, (...). Arist. polit. l. 8. c.
1.
That it is an unquestionable thing to all men, that it especially concerns
the civil Lawgiver, to look to and make laws about the education or
disciplining of youth, which being not attended (says he) in States, it
overthrows them. It was one of Lycurgus his Laws, to restrain the
carelessness of Parents in educating their children, that after Children were
seven years old, their Parents should not breed them up as they list, but they
should be disposed to certain companies of Children, to be excercised to good
instructions, and discipline, and when grown up to be Youths, they should
mispend no time without instructions and regulations; and no doubt that Spartan
state flourished the better, for that and other like Laws of Lycurgus, as
stories tell us, God himself makes account that a godly ruling Eliakim, is of
great use to his people, in respect of their offspring or Children, whence that
in Esai 22. 20, 24. in a word, the Lord does promise it as a most advantageous
privilege in the days of the Gospel, both to the godly returning Jews, and to
their Children, that they shall be in his Church and under his blessed
ordinances in his Church, in which he will be present: his sanctuary shall be
amongst them, Ezekiel. 37. 25, 26. and that they shall be under the government of
Christ (under the name of David) Ibid. and that not alone ecclesiastical in
the Church, but civil also, in their Christian-state and Commonwealth; all
goverments civil and sacred, being in a diverse respect Christ's: delivered to
him of the Father, Matthew. 28. 18. and by him to Christian rulers, Prove. 8. 15.
as King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

3. Let Christian Parents for the furtherance of their Children, being an
Honor to them, take special care to maintain peace among their Children, and
to take away all occasion of breaches among them in after times; this was
Abraham's care in his life time, to give Returahs Children their portions; and
so to send them away, farther off from Isaac who was to hold on Abrabrahams
Honor, as a Covenant and Church-Father, etc. Genesis 25. 5, 6. In defect of such
Parentall care, worse matters have fallen out in Christian Families, to their
Parents great dishonor.

4. Let Christian Parents also for the end mentioned, take special care of the
well disposing of their Sons and Daughters, in Matiage: So did Abraham for his
only Son (as God in a sense called him) Isaac, Genesis 24. 1, 2, 3, etc. So did
Isaac, and Rebeckah for Jacob, Genesis 28. 2, 3, etc. Having smarted for the
contrary neglect in Esau, Genesis 27. 46. and both Isaac and Jacob proved an
Honor to their Parents, but Ishmael and Esau not looked after that way, by
their Parents, were rather a reproach to them who begat them. Hence that charge
of God to Jewish Parents, to look much to the disposing of their Children in
Marriage, Deu. 7. 3.

Lastly, let Christian Parents who would have their Children be an honor to
them, lay up many prayers for them, for that end, and accordingly exercise
faith also in Gods promises, for bringing the same to pass, Psalm. ^0. 16. Let
thy glory appear to our Children, and then verse. 17. Let thy beauty be upon us,
so Psalm. 144. 12. It is one great part of the matter and scope of their
prayer, that they may have an hopeful, honorable, and useful posterity, even
as growing plants, and as choice polished corner pieces of a Palace; and when
Hannah was now about disposing of young Samuel under Elies Tuition, 1 Samuel 1.
23. all Hannahs prayer is this, only the Lord establish his word: even that
which he has promised, respecting this our Son. And the godly, Psalm. 102. 28.
are brought as acting of faith for this end, the Children of thy servants shall
continue, and their seed shall be established before thee; and if thus to
continue before God, then such as should honor Parents also, both in a direct
and reflect way, as a means under God, of their living long, and continuing of
them, in the Land which God gives them.

Thus much for the Exhortation respecting Parents.

2. It is of Exhortation also to Children, or unto persons, as in the relation
of Children, (whether Children in years, or grown persons) to be an honor to
your godly Parents, especially, by imitation of what is good in them, and
following their gracious counsels, and by holding on in the truths and ways of
God, wherein they have taught and led you, without ever turning aside
therefrom. For which end, let me briefly propound, 1. Some motives.

2. Some helps.

The Motives to it may be such as these.

1. In that such good interest of Children, and such godly precepts and
examples of Parents, which are laid before them, they are a special talent of
mercy, and therefore God expects that you should make an honorable inprovement
of them; Solomon speaks of the same thus, as his merciful advantage, Prove.
4. 3. For I was my Fathers Son, verse. 4. He taught me also, and verse 10. Hear
O my Son, and receive my instruction, and the years of thy life shall be many,
and so be an honor every way of Parents, as a means to that end, and then
adds, verse. 11. I have taught thee in the way of wisdom, (namely,
instructively) I have led thee in the right paths, (namely, exemplarily;) the
like holy advantage did they make of that counsel and doctrine of their
Fathers, Psalm. 144. 1. and David likewise makes advantage of his Mothers
interest in God, Psalm. 86. 16. and Psalm. 116. 18. Now if this be a talent, it
must be accounted for one day, and Children had need look that they make
answerable returns. Parentall nurture and admonition, and Christian education
is an holy advantage to such Children, above others that want the same, As
being Gods ordinance for Childrens best welfare, as was showed before. When
Solomon had charged his Son to keep his Fathers command, and not to forsake the
Law of his Mother, Prove. 6. 20. verse 23. he adds this reason, for the
commandment (even of a godly Father) is a lamp, and the Law (even of a godly
Mother) is light, and reproofs of instruction (given by Parents also to
Children) are the way of life, Prove. 29. 11. The rod and reproof give wisdom:
namely, as Gods appointed means, in the use whereof he will give it to
Children. Godly examples are also very forcible and helpful, hence the godly
are said to be blessings in all places where they are cast, Isa. 19. 2. As
Husbands may be won to God and good, while they behold the Godly and wise
conversation of their wives, 1 Pet. 3. 1. So may a child by the gracious
example of godly Parents; yea, such children have the superadded advantage of
their good Parents, and Ancestors Covenant interest, Prayers and blessing,
Genesis 49. 26. The blessings of thy Father, (says, Jacob to his Son Joseph) have
prevailed above the blessings of my Progenitors, every godly Ancestour and
Parent, contributeth something to the Child's blessed stock, besides the blessed
advantage which such Children have to be an Honor to God, and to their
Parents, by the very Entail of grace by Promise and Covenant of God, from their
Parents unto them, Deuteronomy. 30. The Lord will circumcise thine heart, and the
heart of thy seed -- to love him, etc. and Isa. 59. 21. The word and spirit in
the mouth of the Ancestors, is promised to the suceeding Children, let
Children then of the Church of the godly, look you husband this holy advantage
the rather to Gods and godly Parents Honor.

2. In that the posterity of Papists, and Mahumetans, will follow the tract of
their parents instructions, and examples, and will by no means depart
therefrom; and shall not such children as you are, much rather follow your
godly teaching and leading Parents, without departing from their blessed
counsels and examples? God forbid any should do otherwise.

3. In that otherwise if you will not do thus to the honor of your godly
parents, verily then, all the blessed words which your good parents have urged,
and charged, and that as from God, by their parentall authority, upon you their
children, they will come in, another day, as evidences against you, according
to that phrase concerning Gods word delivered by Moses to the Israelites, and
by them to be commanded to their Children successively, in case of their
Apostasy, it is said, this Song shall be Gods witness to testify against them,
Deuteronomy. 31. 19, 21, 26.

Touching the helps to further you, in being such an honor to godly parents,
they may be such as these.

1. Take heed of what tends to dishonorable degenerating, and Apostasy from
the gracious counsels, and examples of your godly Parents and Ancestors: and
for this end, take heed of 1. corrupt principles, or practices in Religion, for
they tend to Apostasy; hence the Apostasy of those hopeful beginners in 2 Pet.
2, 19. 20. whilst corrupt libertine, principles are distilled into them, and
embraced by them, they are entangled again and fall off, 2 Timothy 21. 16, 17.
Timothy must avoid such profane and vain bablings (such the Apostle terms
their false doctrines) because they tend to ungodliness, and their word and
doctrine, like a Canker eats out the heart and life of Religion where it
takes.

2. A worldly spirit; that causes degenerating in hopeful persons; that
hopeful young man in Mark. 10. 20, 2^. was spoiled by it; so was Saul, Judas,
Ananias, and Saphira, Demas, and all those professors, which so far out-go
those of the high way, and stony hearers, even, those of the thorny soil, they
come to be choked by the thorny cares, desires, occasions, and contentments of
the world, so that no fruit of theirs ever comes to perfection.

3. Pride; this ushereth in even this fall also: instead of him whose beart is
lifted up, in Hab. 2. 4. it is in Heb. 10. 35. if any man draw back: the one
ushereth in the other; let Children, hopeful ones specially, beware of this.

4. Wantonness under outward prosperity, plenty, peace, liberty, civil and
sacred; Deuteronomy. 32. 11. Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked, turned against God. So
those Nehem. 9. 22, 26. Hence God warns them then to take heed, that when in
Canaan they have all they can desire, in a manner, that then they forget not,
and forsake not the Lord, Deuteronomy. 8. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. let the posterity of the
godly here and elsewhere take heed of this spiritual wantonness, which
ushereth in Apostasy.

5. Bad matching; this caused Jehoram, good Jehoshaphats Son, so vilely to
degenerate, namely his matching into wicked Ahabs stock, 2 Chro. 21. 1, 2. bad
wives outlandish women, caused even wise Solomon to sin, and for a time to
degenerate, Nehem. 13. 26. let young persons especially take heed of this.

2. Let such Children of the Church, of the godly, engage themselves
personally, in solemn wise before the Lord, and his people also, as well as
privately, to walk according to God, and those godly counsels and examples of
their good Parents and Ancestors, and by his strength and help, never to turn
away there from; good Ruth did so privately, when she so solemnly vowed before
God, and her Mother-in-Law, that she would go with her, be with her, partake in
weal and woe with her, own her God and people, and only them, for hers, and
nothing but death should hinder the same, Ruth 1. 15, 16. whither thou go,
thither I will go, thy God shall be my God, and thy people my people; God do so
to me, and more also, if ought but death part me and thee; she engages
implicitly to all honor of her, both direct, to honor her with all honor of
respects, reverence, obedience and recompense, and reflectly, to be an honor
to her also, all which may be very well gathered out of that speech of hers: as
I might particularly evince, but I forbear: Nehem. 10. 28, 29. the Children of
the Church there, their sons and daughters that could understand, (as well as
their Parents) came publicly to enter into an oath, and curse, to walk in Gods
Laws, to observe and do all his Commandments; and if Churches would call upon
their Church Children, who are of understanding, personally to renew the
Covenant of God, made by their Parents on their behalf, such a bond would the
more engage and unite their hearts, by the Lords blessing, to the good ways,
and things of God, to his and their Parents Honor.

3. Let such Children, according as the Lord helps them, eye, and plead with
God, his own words, undertaking this in effect, that they shall walk after the
blessed precepts, and practices of their godly Parents and Ancestors, and so be
an honor to them; this is held forth in that promise of God made with
reference to his Kingdom and Church in all Nations amongst the Gentiles, Psalm.
22. 27. with verse. 30, 31. their seed (as the Geneva reads it) shall serve him,
it shall be counted to the Lord for a generation, they shall come, and shall
declare his righteousness unto a people that shall be born, that he has done
this; if God undertake that this seed of Gentile-believers, shall hold up
Religion after their Parents, and convey it to their next generation, what can
godly Parents desire more for their Children, or, their children desire for
themselves? they shall hereby greatly honor God, his truth, ways, and
government, and greatly honor their godly Parents, their instructions,
examples and prayers, beside that good that will thereby come to themselves,
and their own souls and posterity also: O let such children then entrench
themselves within this and such like blessed strong holds and places of
spiritual refuge. And so at length we have dispatched our discourse about this
so necessary a subject, and the blessing of our gracious God be upon it.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.
30. March, 1655.

