The Coat of Arms of N. T. I. F. and R. L.


An Answer to Thomson's Ballad called The Loyal Feast.
A True Blue Protestant will never stain
His good profession, for the hopes of gain:
Most Loyal thou do call them, and say true,
For they are no such dissembling Knaves as you.
The Whigs from North to South, from West to East
Did all contribute to a Loyal Feast,
To show their hatred to the Roman Beast.
Eight Hundred Guineys were laid up in store,
There would have been at least as many more,
Such hatred we do bear the Roman Whore.
This Feast was thrown aside, and naught but reason:
Some did surmise a new Gunpowder Treason,
That could not be supposed, for our good King,
Does hide his Parliaments beneath his wing:
He will not let them meet in any place,
For fear of mischief from the Roman Race.
Let this be Sung to what tune Thomson pleases, but let the rest be to his own
Tune, Sawny will never be my Love again.

Tory is small and of no good race,
And is beloved by very few;
He broaches his Shams in every place,
And that in time I hope he will rue.
He sends to Yeoman, Lord and Knight,
His Roguish tricks to entertain:
But Tory'l be hanged, if he has but his right,
Then Tory shall never be my Love again.
He sends to the Devil for Plots good store,
And they too often do come to Town:
His Tap does run for the Roman Whore;
The True Blue Protestants to drown.
He sends to Rome, and France, and Spain,
To all the Papists in the Land,
That they may bring in Plots amain.
And Tory shall never be my Love again.
At some great Houses in this Town,
Tory did meet with a Jovial Crew,
Of Traytrous Lords of high renown,
Not one a Protestant True Blue.
They threw in heeps of yellow boys,
The damned Sham Plots for to maintain.
Old Rowly their Treason now destroys,
And Tory shall never be my Love again.
They all owed duty to their Prince,
And Loyal Subjects should have been:
But their duty was all worn out long since,
By their Plots we have too plainly seen.
From Church to Chapel they did go,
Their Popish guests to entertain,
They sought to kill us at one blow,
Now Tory sholl never be my Love again.
The D. They Love, but not the King,
Can any tell a reason why,
Can any tale or tidings bring,
Why they should raise the D. so high?
They Would Crown him if they might have leave,
And our good King they would have slain:
These things do make the Nation grieve:
And Tory shall never be my Love again.
The bloody Papists shall no more,
Contrive against Great Charles his Reign;
Though they have done it often before,
We will not let them do it again:
Give them an inch they will take an ell;
To work his ruin they are in pain,
Their bloody actions comes from Hell,
And Tory shall never be my Love again.
A True Blue Protestant will pray,
That Heaven would still protect the King:
And I am sure they will all give way,
For a Popish -- to take a Swing:
But he that hopes Popes here shall sit,
And Protestants shall all be slain:
I hope his hopes will be besh --
And Tory shall never be my Love again.
Fat Capons then shall fly about,
With Frigacees of Ambergreece,
When we the Popish Tribe do Rout,
And do enjoy our happy Peace,
That Council shall not have a bit,
That did our Peace so long restrain.
Nor Popish Not shall not lick the spit,
No nor Tory shall never be my Love again.
Le' Strange that Monckish Scribbling Fopp,
That has abused the Kingdom so,
Shall starve before he gets a Sop;
For he is a Tory Curr we know.
A Priest shall feed upon a Pope,
Till all the Tory Tribe are slain,
Then we shall have our Peace I hope,
And Tory shall never be my Love again.
Dublin Printed for A. Banks.


