THE UNCERTAINTY Of the ART OF Physic, TOGETHER With an Account of the
innumerable Abuses practiced by the Professors of that Art. CLEARLY Manifested
by a Particular Relation of the Original and Progress thereof. Also diverse
Contests between the Greeks and Arabians concerning its Authors.

Written in Italian by the Famous LIONARDO di CAPOA, And made English by J. L.
Gent.

LONDON: Printed by Fr. Clark, for Thomas Malthus at the Sun in the Poultrey.
1684.

TO THE HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL, Esquire
THE Fame of Your sublime, and more than Humane Wisdom has begot You many
Admirers; and Your rare and incomparable Inventions, makes all men confess,
That You are He, who by Your New Discoveries have given Light to, and greatly
improved the Ingenious in their Curious Inquiries into the Secrets of Nature.

This incourages me to Address my self to You, Imploring Your Protection for
this weak Essay of Mine, which now adventures to appear in Public; not
doubting, but that as You have always been pleased to let me enjoy a constant
Influence of Your most esteemed Favor, so You will likewise at present pardon
the Boldness, and with Your wonted Goodness pass by the Defects, which You may
possibly meet with in this Attempt of

Honorable Sir, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, John Lancaster.

Don Carlo Buragna TO THE READER.
NOT many months since, by Order of the Viceroy of Naples was held a Consult
of several Physicians, for the putting of some stop to the Abuses and Errors
daily committed in the Practice of Physic. They, after some discourse
thereabout, judged it most convenient for a thorough-examination of the Reasons
already propounded; and yet farther to be propounded, that every one should set
down his Opinion in writing. Signor Lionardo di Capoa, who was one of the
aforesaid Consult, was obliged therefore to write his Opinion in this Affair;
and it seeming to him, that this could not be done to any purpose without a
diligent consideration of, and search into the nature of the thing to be
treated of, viz. Physic; he acquitted himself of his Obligation with so much
Learning, Eloquence and Erudition, that his Manuscript falling into the hands
of certain learned Men, and other Friends of his, appeared to them rather
composed for the Universality of those that take delight in the sublime
Mysteries of Literature, than to be kept up amongst a private and small
company, as if the Author in the writing thereof had purposed to himself no
other end, but to satisfy the Command imposed upon him. They were therefore of
Opinion, that a work of such excellency ought to be published in Print: and for
that purpose so labored with Signor Lionardo, that they at last prevailed with
him to give them a Copy thereof, and to condescend, that this at least, of the
many and different Tracts which he has lying by him, should be committed to the
Press. And herein they regarded not only the pleasure, the Learned and Curious
will take in perusing this Treatise, but the Profit also, that may thence
result to all sorts of Persons, especially to those that are wary and
judicious: Since by seeing therein the variety of Opinions and Sects, with the
diverse, and oftentimes contrary ways of Curing, practiced amongst Physicians,
they may, without entering into the more subtle Speculations of the
Philosophers, easily perceive, with how great Reason others believe and are
persuaded, that a Profession, so doubtful and uncertain in it self, has neither
Learning nor Principles, upon which others may lay any firm Foundation; and how
perilous a thing it is for men to see themselves in the hands of those, that
will have it so, especially when Health and Life lie at stake. Moreover, who
does not perceive how advantageous this Treatise may be to such young men, as
follow Physic, since by the reading of this alone, they may arrive at a more
exact knowledge of its Nature, than by turning over the great Volumes of the
most reputed and solemn Masters thereof, and may in an hour understand what way
in the Method of Curing is to be taken by him, who, laying aside cozening
Tricks and Cheats, intends, as his profession obliges him, to honor himself by
the help he brings to such Patients as come under his hands. Nor, shall they,
or any else that apply themselves to better Studies, fail to see how many there
formerly have been, and at present are, who both in Medicine and other Arts
melt their Brains in the pursuit of that, which either is not, or not to be
found; and as our Dante has it, Trattando l'ombre, come cosa salda.
Treating of shadows, as substantial things.


But without my enlarging any farther herein, the Reader may of himself by the
perusal of this Treatise sufficiently perceive how useful, and full of
exquisite literature it is, and that its being composed without intention of
having it published, hinders it not from agreeing with the Fame of its Author,
and with the Opinion, that all judicious and understanding men have of him.

Farewell.
The Uncertainty of the Art of Physic, clearly manifested by a particular
Relation of the beginning and Progress thereof.
THERE is not indeed, Gentlemen, any Undertaking that makes the Majesty of a
Prudent and Valiant Prince appear so worthy of Regard, as his acting in such a
manner, That by his Wisdom and Valor, the people committed to his care, may be
assured not to be assailed by foreign Arms, or miserably out-raged without
Revenge. Nor, is it in my opinion an Action any whit less generous and laudable
to secure them from the Deceits of domestic Enemies, who then usually do the
greatest mischief, when they most craftily cover themselves with the Veil of
Benevolence and Charity, and counterfeiting themselves full of Humanity, and
greatly touched with Compassion for the Misfortunes of others, lay afterward
for them such treacherous Snares, as can seldom or never be eschewed without
mortal danger. And indeed, what Advantage would it be to a man to come off safe
and secure from the manifest Perils of War, and afterward unwarily to fall
into dangers, the more hidden they are, the worse? And this indeed appears so
much the more worthy of Compassion, as the Mishaps of that Ship are to be
judged more grievous and lamentable, which, having escaped many storms at Sea,
miserably perishes at her very entrance into the Port. The pious and prudent
Foresight therefore of our most excellent Viceroy cannot sufficiently be
commended, who, having with wonderful and incredible Felicity accomplished the
first, and defeated the Designs and Attempts of those proud and cruel Fleets,
which, infesting our Seas and Coasts, threatened us with Fire and Sword, and
having likewise cleared the Highways and Roads of those Robbers and Murderers,
that disturbed the Kingdom, and preyed upon the Villages, does at present make
it his whole study diligently to prevent us, whom he has rendered secure in the
enjoyment of our Fortunes, from being ill treated in our persons by the
misusage of Physic: Which, because every one has need thereof, as it may, when
kept within the limits of experience, and our (although weak) Reason, be
perhaps of some help to the public. So on the contrary, whenever it happens to
decline to a sinister path, it proves more dangerous and destructive to
Mankind, than Diseases themselves. And no sooner were the unhappy Accidents
that had befaln some sick persons, and for which the Chimical Medicines were
accused, made known to his Excellency, but he immediately ordered, That we
should with the greatest diligence imaginable apply our selves to search out a
Remedy for such Misfortunes, and also to prescribe unto Physicians (where there
is need) certain, secure, and solid Rules to be observed in their Practice.

But whenever, ruminating with my self, I reflect upon the Numerosity and
Quality of the Difficulties there are in such an Attempt, finding likewise as
many in my self, I remain confused and at a stand, either because it so happens
in all other affairs of great Consideration, or that the nature of this Art not
bearing it, it seems exceeding hard and difficult to give Laws to the things
appertaining thereunto. I should therefore rather choose, without any more ado,
by my silence, to free my self from trouble, did I not know, that I should
thereby contravene his Commands, whose not only Requests, but even Signs, I
ought without any Reply, and with awful Reverence to obey: By which, as also by
the Benefit that may perhaps thence redound to my Country, being incited, I
willingly enter the Lists.

Now to the end every Deliberation or Resolution that is to be taken in this
matter, may not prove altogether vain and unprofitable, I shall employ all the
strength of my weak Understanding; Discoursing, in the first place, of the
Difficulties, whereinto, not only Princes and Magistrates, but also the wisest
and most intelligent Physicians have oftentimes fallen in giving permanent and
certain Laws to Medicine, an Art, of its own nature in the highest degree
uncertain, dubious, and inconstant. Then afterward, gradually and with sober
advice penetrating more inwardly, we will purpose (as far as the Nature of the
thing will suffer) the way to make a good Physician and a better Chimist. Nor
do I at present remember any other Remedy, that may be able and fit to repair
the perpetual and almost fatal Calamities of Physic.

And to begin with the most ancient Memoirs, setting aside how short a time
continued in India, Babylonia, and Assyria, their device of lodging the Sick on
the most frequented Roads of the Country to have them cured by Travelers. In
Egypt where all the Arts and more Noble Studies first came to light and
flourished, only the Kings, Priests, and some few of the chief Nobility were
permitted to give Physic to the sick, whence by Manethon were reckoned amongst
the Physicians of most profound Judgment Antotides, the second King of the
first Dynasty, of the Tinites, who wrote some Books of Anatomy, and Tosoretrus
of the third Dynasty, which was that of the Memphitians. But afterward in
process of time this Profession grew common also with the Multitude, and so
much was the Number of Physicians increased, that for every Distemper there was
appointed a particular Physician, who was permitted to cure no other, as is
testified by Herodotus, Father of the Greek History, in these words; Medicine
with them was divided, every particular Disease, and no more, having its
Physician: whence all the Country is pestered with Physicians. For some are
appointed to cure the Eyes, others the Head, others the Teeth, others the parts
of the Belly, and others internal and hidden Distempers. The Egyptian Physic
remaining only amongst private persons, it is not easy to believe, how,
falling from its ancient Splendour, it changed through the Laziness and
Ignorance of the new Physicians, who were of such small parts, that, as the
but-now-mentioned Herodotus says, The chiefest of them at the Court of the
great King of Persia, when he had dislocated his Foot, knew not how to cure it,
but with their Arguments reduced him to a very bad condition. Therefore we
ought without doubt to believe, That in Egypt the Physicians were, as Diodorus
relates, prohibited to depart from the Precepts of the ancient Masters; from
which, if any one happened to swerve, and his Patient thereby grew worse, he
was severely punished for it. For, says he, if after they had directly
followed the acknowledged Laws of the sacred Book, they sailed of curing the
Patient, no Charge could be laid against them. But if they went contrary to the
written Rules, they underwent the Judgment of Death. And really it was no small
good Fortune of Galens (to say nothing at present of Hippocrates and others)
that he was not born in those times, and in that Country: For he would not so
easily have escaped Punishment, if contemning, as it were, the reverend
Authority of the Law, he should have had the boldness to utter these words, I
observe this not only in the writings of Hippocrates, but in all the Books of
the Ancients, that I am not easily drawn to believe what any one of them has
left written, until I have first well examined by the Test of Experience and
Reason, whether, what they have delivered, be true or false. And that he was
well versed in Logic, is seen by such Weapons as he used to defend himself
withal, as Commenting upon the Ancients, and reporting their Opinions entangled
and obumbrated, to the end they might not contradict his own. A Custom, which
those Physicians that tread in the same steps, have followed, and still do
follow, and which does in such a manner deform his sayings, and also those of
Hippocrates, that they oftentimes clearly appear to have written quite contrary
to their first Determinations. And perhaps the Egyptians, deriding their own
Law, acted maliciously in the same manner, according to the Proverb; Fatta la
leg pensata la Malizia: No sooner is the Law made, but ways are found out to
evade it. And to such a pitch peradventure did their neglected Boldness arrive,
that their usual falling presently to Purgations, and for the most part with
ill success, forced them (their first Law being antiquated) to remedy it by
publishing a new one, as Aristotle relates in these Words; The Physicians may
after the fourth day stir the humors, but if they will do it sooner, at their
own peril be it. Which Simplicity, I believe found not many Abettors, if they
considered, how often Diseases happen, that on the very first day need violent
Remedies. But what a Fool would that Physician have been, that should have
procured another Life with his own death?

The Grecians, who out-went all other Nations, as in Arts and Sciences, so
likewise in Civil Prudence, having regard perhaps to such inconveniences, would
not impose any positive Laws upon Physic, or those that professed it, choosing
rather, that Infamy should be the punishment of those Physicians, by whose
fault the Sick should miscarry: For says Hippocrates, There is no penalty set
upon the Practisers of Physic, only in these Cities, but that of Infamy. Which
to those that take their Reputation to heart, is more grievous and tedious,
than any other Torment. Which Custom is manifestly shown by Philemon, when he
says, (...)
(...).


That is to say, Only the Physician and the Judge are permitted to kill others
without being put to death. This also pleased the divine Plato, who thus
ordered in his Commonwealth; The Physician shall not be subject to any
Penalty, if a Patient, taken in hand by him, dies contrary to his best
endeavor. To which opinion Lucian comes very near, where he says: By how much
the Art of Physic is worthy of greater honor, and more beneficial to Life
than others, by so much should the Professors thereof have greater Liberty; and
it is convenient that it should enjoy some privilege, nor ought a Doctrine,
consecrated to the Gods, and the Exercise of the most intelligent men, to be
restrained, or subjugated by any power, or brought under the servitude of the
Laws, or under the fear and penalties of Tribunals. And although among the
Grecians the Athenians alone prohibited Women and Servants the Study of
Physic, yet is not such a Statute worthy of much praise, not to say, it
deserves much blame; Because, as hereafter shall be declared, the Understanding
of worthy Women has been seen, contrary to their Expectation, to undertake the
most sublime Studies, and Nature has often granted to Servants Courage and Wit
fit for a Philosophic Liberty; therefore did they, not without Reason, a while
after revoke this Law. Hyginus saying, That the practice of Physic was allowed
to Midwives for necessity and decency sake. Much less ought we to believe, that
the Sottishness of Seleucus took place, for so we may well call his Law,
whereby, as if it had been mortal Poison, he prohibited upon pain of Death, all
the Sick Persons of Locris to drink Wine, unless they had at first obtained a
License from their Physicians: If any of the Epizephyrian Locrians drank wine
contrary to the Physicians direction, though he escaped, Death was his
punishment, because he did contrary to what was prescribed him. The Roman
Commonwealth, which far excelled all Greece and the Barbarous Nations not only
in Military Government, but also in Politics, thought it not convenient to
commit, without restraint, the Care of men's Lives to the Custody of Physicians;
and therefore by a Plebiscitum, first made by Aquilius a Tribune of the People
(whether it were Gallus, or another of that name, I know not) and afterward
recorded amongst the Roman Laws it was decreed, that some punishment should be
inflicted on their Failings, whereby they might be rendered more circumspect and
cautious in their actings. We may nevertheless well believe, that this Law, or
Plebiscitum, although made, was never put in Execution, otherwise Pliny would
have been to blame to cry out in this manner against the Physicians;
Furthermore no Law punishes capital ignorance, no example of Justice done. To
which he adds, They learn by our dangers, and gain experience by our Deaths:
And at length concludes, Only the Physician is allowed to kill a man
unpunished. But there is something yet in the same Author that touches more to
the quick; The Ignominy of the Physician passes away, and Intemperance bears
the blame, while they that perish are accused of their own misfortunes- And for
this reason, I suppose, did those renowned Lawyers that were by command of the
Emperor Justinian employed in compiling the Pandects, purposely pass by that
oversevere and cruel Sentence of Paulus upon the Cornelian Law against
Murderers; If a man die of the Medicine given him for his health or the
recovery of his Distemper, he that gave it, were he of Quality, shall be
banished; if of meaner Condition, let him be put to death. Which Sentence in
the judgment of that great Soul of the Civil Law, Jacobus Cujacius, could not
properly be reduced to the aforesaid Cornelian Law; forasmuch, says he, as the
Physician sanandi, non nocendi animo dedit. And although the same Lawyers
registered both in the Institutes and in the Digests, not only the aforesaid
Head of the Aquilian Law, but also the following words of Vlpian; Though the
event of Mortality ought not to be imputed to the Physician, yet what he
commits out of ignorance, is to be laid to his charge, neither is the Deceiver
to go unpunished under pretense of humane frailty. Yet were these Statutes
nevertheless rarely executed, although not only Pliny, but very many also after
him, renewing in a more bitter manner the same Complaints, brought Accusations
against them: Amongst whom the most learned Angelus Politianus in an Epistle of
his to Leonicenus writes thus; I have again bewailed the folly of mankind, that
has so long suffered besotted Ignorance to reign, and all the while buys the
hope of life from them, who are the real causes of certain death. Ludovicus
Vives also cries out thus, Their Miscarriages and Errors, speaking of the
Physicians, not only go unpunished, but are also recompensed with Fees.
Baptista Mantuanus likewise has these words of them His, etsitenebras palpant,
est facta potestas
Excruciandi aegros, hominesque impune necandi.
Though blind with ignorance, yet scotfree they
The Sick torment, and men (unpunished) slay.
And an Italian Satyrist sporting with the Title Doctor, says to the same
purpose of the Physician, Ma poiche un talci puo donar la morte
Senza punizione, e senza pena,
Forza^e, che fi gentil titol riporte.
Since Doctors have free liberty to cause
Our death, not fearing Punishment or Laws,
Our Hangman may this noble Title bear.


And our Academick in his most choice Dialogue says in like manner of
Physicians; Hoc tamen ipso securi, quod nulla sit lex quae puniat inscitiam
capitalem; immovero cum mercede gratia referatur. And another; Carnifici
Medicus par est; nam caedit uterque
Impune, and merces caedis utrique datur.
Hangman and Doctor herein alike fare,
Both kill unpunished, both rewarded are.


And another Author, Si quaecunque sua plectuntur crimina lege,
Quas, Medici, maneant modo vestra piacula poenas?
Qui plerumque ipso facitis medicamine morbum,
Et diro ante diem aegros demittitis orco?
Scilicet hoc vobis indulsit opinio, rerum
Vna potens. Clades infer impune per orbem,
Mercedemque alieno obitu, laudemque parare.
If to each Crime its punishment be due,
What pain, Physicians, is enough for you?
Who with your Drugs Diseases frequently
Do cause, and the Sick before their time to die?
This has Opinion, which the whole World sways,
Indulged to you, by others harms to raise
Your selves, and by their deaths, to merit Praise.


And although Maximinus condemned to death all his Physicians, because they had
neither wholly healed him of his wounds, nor eased him of the pain, yet cannot
the example of such a Tyrant give vigor to any Law; nor was he less blamed for
this, than for his other Cruelties, by the Writers of that Age, as also
Alexander was deservedly styled cruel, for having unjustly caused Glaucias the
Physician to be slain, through a suspicion, that he had not been diligent
enough in curing his dearest Friend Hephestion. As on the contrary, the
Clemency and Humanity of Darius Hystaspes, King of Persia, is highly commended,
who freely permitted the Physicians, already condemned to die, for having
reduced him to a bad Condition, to be set at liberty by Democides a famous
Physician of Crotona. But let not any one therefore believe, that the
Physicians gained such a liberty by transgressing their Rules; for it proceeded
rather from the utmost necessity of the public, and is, as it were an effect
of the Art of good Government: for I am verily persuaded, that even the memory
of the Mystery of the Medicine would have been utterly extinguished, if
Physicians had been proceeded against according to the rigor of Justice. And
what man indeed, unless he were exceeding dull and stupid, or extremely rash,
would ever have vainly spent his Time and Endeavors in the pursuit of an Art
(if Medicine, which has not any certain and fixed Rule in its operations, may
possibly be so called) in it self displeasing, and hard to be obtained, and in
its Events very dubious? I say displeasing, for what can be more offensive and
disgustful, than continually to converse with sick persons, and daily to see
and heal the Miseries of others, and that many times without being any ways
able to remedy them? It is also difficult to undertake, and always uncertain in
its success; because in the curing of the Sick, not only the skill of the
Physician, but also Fortune and Chance claim their share: from whence arose
this common Proverb; A Physician had need be born under a fortunate
Constellation. And O how exceeding often does it happen, that contrary to all
human expectation, as Celsus writes; Expectation is likewise frustrated, and
that man dies, of whom the Physician was secure before. And Hippocrates
himself, although esteemed a most profound and skilful Physician, yet
confesses, That he gained more Reproach than Commendations by his Profession.
And therefore it is exceeding difficult, or rather impossible always to judge,
whether the unhappy success of of distempers proceeds from the sottishness of
the Physicians, or from the Nature of the disease, or from some other internal
Cause, into which no humane Wisdom or Knowledge can penetrate. Most uncertain
always and obscure are the Symptoms of diseases, especially of the acute,
according to Hippocrates: wherefore Celsus also said; It behooves us also to
understand, that in acute Diseases the Symptoms of life and death are much more
fallacious. Besides that in the Bodies of Animals are wont to be engendered
poisons, and that oftentimes presently, by sudden precipitation and
Coagulation; and the man, whom not only others, but even Appollo and
Aesculapius themselves would have judged most sound and healthful, may have
within him Imposthumes, and other secret distempers, which, when he least
thinks of it, may be able to cause his death, and that at the very Instant when
the Medicines are prepared: wrongfully therefore are the Remedies blamed, and
not the evil quality of the distemper. And besides this, some Medicines which
are esteemed good, and conducing to the Health of man, may oftentimes occasion
such disturbance within the Patients body, as may bring on his death, before we
with our shallow Understandings can prevent it, as Celsus testifies. It will
not therefore be the Physicians fault, if sometimes his Patient grows worse by
his Remedies; nor can Laws ever determine any thing herein. But come, let us
grant, that a method of Curing may by Law be prescribed to Physicians, how can
they be punished for transgressing it? or how can the Crime be so clearly
manifested, that they may be proceeded against in form of Law? And who does not
sufficiently know, how all Physicians are of contrary Sects, and perpetually
disagreeing in their Sentiments? Wherefore being either always stimulated by
open Enmity, or which is worse, by secret Envy, or else allured by the love and
Benevolence of their own party, they will, without any respect to Truth,
represent the matter to the Judge quite otherwise, than in Justice they ought,
and make him, as the Italian Proverb has it, See the Moon in the Well
acccording to their own desire. Besides that, the fear of punishment, which the
Physician may easily incur, will always keep him suspended and dubious in
taking his Resolutions, even when he intends to operate most effectually; and
thus being terrified and confounded, he will, for fear of hazarding his person,
in the greatest Maladies stand, as it were, fettered, and with his hands bound
behind him, or else, not to depart from the common opinion of the Vulgar,
however false and contrary to the distemper, will oftentimes make use of vain
and dangerous Remedies. A thing which, as it is well observed by Cardanus, is
oftener wont to befall the Physicians of Princes, than any others, who not only
for fear of Infamy, but also of greater Mischief, forbear making use of great
and unusual Remedies. It will not be far from the matter to bring here an
Example taken from the art of War, not much differing truly in the uncertainty
of its success, from that of Medicine. The Roman Magistrates rather pitied,
than punished the Errors of their Captains, and it is well seen to what a
height the Empire of Rome ascended thereby; as on the other side, every one
knows to how wretched a Condition the Carthaginians were reduced, by always
taking contrary measures. And this was yet nearer to our times manifested by
the Venetians to their exceeding great damage, and with the almost Universal
Ruin of their Republic, when they unjustly beheaded Carmagnuola for his
carelessness, by which, Liviano afterward being dismayed, and following the
Opinion of the unwary Proveditors, lost the day at Vicenza, and was miserably
with his whole Army discomfited and cut in pieces. And perhaps the putting of
Vitelli to death, was one of the principle Occasions, that the Florentines
betrayed by Baglione, sadly afterward lost their liberty.

And here some one may not without reason object, That as well the Aquilian, as
all the other Laws of the Romans, by us related, were not made for able
Physicians, whether Methodical, Empirical, or Rational, but only for such
popular Empiricks, as are Quacks and Mountebanks; the Name of Physician being
not only given to such vulgar Empiricks, but even to those also that were wont
to castrate little Children, as may be easily seen in the Digests and Code, as
well of Theodosius as Justiman. And certainly it is to be believed, That in
them alone the Ignorance of the Art took place, through occasion whereof, the
Laws against Physicians were ordained in Rome. But this foolish sort of
Physicians ought indeed to be severely punished for rashly intermedling in a
Mystery of so great importance, as is the art of Healing, and blindly ordaining
Remedies at the peril of their Patients Lives. Therefore I think it very wisely
enacted in many Countries of Europe, that such Fellows are under very great
penalties forbidden to practice, though these Edicts are seldom or never
executed. And indeed, with great reason does Anneode Roberti say of them, what
Tacitus heretofore said of Astrologers, That they are A Generation of people
unfaithful to the Enquirer, and fallacious to those that hope; always forbidden
in our City, yet never expelled. And the Comparison of Roberti is but scarce
enough, That the Knavish Astrologers do nothing else, but entertain the Curious
with their Jargon, feeding them with most vain hopes; and the vulgar Empiricks
do either with their silly Secrets, and idle prattling, hinder the Sick from
taking Remedies of able Physicians, which Neglect costs them their Lives; or
else they do themselves kill them with most pernicious Medicines.

And justly, perhaps, were those paltry Knaves first degraded, and afterward
condemned in France, who, instead of curing King Charles the Sixth, reduced him
with their Remedies to such an Estate, that there was scarce any hopes of his
Life. But in my opinion, that valiant King was not over-considerate, or too
well advised, to hazard his Life in the hands of such Quacks and Cheats; and he
should, at their first offering to cure his Distempers, immediately, and
without Experimenting their Remedies, or regarding their promises, have
punished them for their Temerity and foolish boldness; if it were not the ill
Will, and Craft of the spiteful Physicians of those times, which made things go
so ill with those wretched Creatures.

But how should it ever be possible for either the people, or Magistrates, who,
for the most part understand little or nothing thereof, to settle the practice
of Physic by firm and durable Laws, when the wisest and skilfullest
Physicians, who with long Study, and much practice have searched far into it,
could never arrive thereunto? The Inventor, as it is thought, or at least the
most ancient Writer of Physic was Aesculapius, and he, as testifies
Hippocrates, or whoever else was the Author of the Epistle to Democritus,
prescribed many Rules to be observed in the practice of Healing; but soon
finding them not to be exact, most gently dispensed with them. (...), says the
Epistolizer of Aesculapius, (...). Therefore we may say with the Toscan Lyrick,
that he Solchi onde, in rena fondi, e s^riva in vento.
Plows the Waves, builds on the Sand, and writes in the Wind.
Who vainly wearys himself with laboring after the establishment of such
Rules. And if any one shall desire to have this made clear unto him, I shall
with the best ordered Discourse I can, endeavor to demonstrate to him the
Reasons thereof.

The Art of Medicine is at this day so greatly increased and advanced, that it
seems to strive for Superiority with the most illustrious and most noble
Studies, its Jurisdiction to penetrate even into the most remote and extreme
Confines of Nature; whereas it was at first restrained within the narrow Limits
of a few Plants, as (to say nothing of others) is acknowledged by the ancient
Interpreter of Homer, (...): whereunto agrees our Seneca; Medicina quondam
pancarum fuit Scientia Herbarum. Thus in that pleasant, and above all others,
happy Age, -- When Milk for food
Had the Infant World, whose Cradle was a Wood.
And then those first men lived free from fear
Of scorching Fevers, though as yet by Herbs,
Or Physics skill they unassisted were.
Either because they had then little need of Physic, Firmis adhuc, solidisque
corporibus, and facili cibo, nec per artem, voluptatemque corrupto: Or, because
Medicine, as all other (even the greatest) things here below was to take its
rise from very weak beginnings; men at that time using such Remedies as they
found out either by chance, or by observing the brute Beasts, or by their own
Industry. Whence it is rationally to be believed, That Agenor and Chiron, held
by some for the most ancient of all Physicians, made use only of Plants in
their Cures: The Tyrians preserve their first fruits for Agenor, the Magnetians
for Chiron, said to be the first that ever practiced Physic: For that by the
use of Roots and Herbs they cured the Sick. And of Chiron, the Finder out of
the Chironian Panacea, or All-heal, The healing Root was Centaure, so called
From the feigned Centaure Chiron, Saturn's Son,
Who found it first on snowy Polion.


Eustathius declares, That being wounded in the Hand, or as Pliny would have
it, in the Foot, he found out the way of Curing by Herbs. And to say nothing of
Mercury, who taught Ulysses, as Homer sings the use of the herb Moly, This
said, from the earth a Medicine Mercury
Dig'd up, and taught the use thereof to me.


It appears, that Hercules, from whom the Herculean Panacea took its Name,
cured only with Plants; as also did Isis and Osiris, and Apollo, and Arabus,
and Cadmus, and Bacchus, by whose means, as Plutarch tells us, that most
powerful and pleasant Medicine, Wine, was first found out, and brought into
esteem; and the great virtue of Ivy of mavelous efficacy in repairing the
Evils caused by the too excessive use of Wine, was made known to the World:
Bacchus, says he, was accounted an Excellent Physician, not only because he
found out the use of Wine, a most pleasing sort of Physic, but for that he
also taught the use of Ivy, and caused his Followers, in the midst of their
Cups, to crown their Temples with it, as being that, which by its coolness
repels the Vapors from the head. Herbs alone were likewise made use of by
Aesculapius, the Inventor of the Asclepian Panacea, with which, as Nicander
sings, he Cured Iolas the Son of Iphicles, The Phlegyan All-heal first Paieon
took,
As on the banks it grew of a black Brook,
Which he to cure Amphitruo's Grandchild used.


And as his Commentator relates, he was wont to use it in the Cure of his other
Patients: Asclepius was said to make use of this herb (meaning All-heal) who
was the Son of Korones the Sister of Phlegys, the Physician Aesculapius. And so
did Amithaon and Melampus, who, as we read in Dioscorides, made use of
Hellebore in Curing the Daughter of Proetus, King of the Argives. Nor did
Podalirius or Machaon use any thing but Herbs to heal the Wounds of the Grecian
Army; and before the Trojan War, Medea, as Diodorus relates, cured with Herbs
the wounds of J^son, Atalanta, Laertes, and the Thespiades: Jason, Laertes,
Atalanta, and they who were called the Thespiades, all these they report were
cured by Medea with certain Roots and herbs. And Tryphon, according to
Plutarch, highly extolled and praised the Ancients, (...). Whence they, having
very often tried and proved their Medicines, gave, as Manilius sings, the first
beginning to the Art of Curing, Experience through diverse chances brought
Forth Art, the way first by example taught.


But as Medicines were at first but few and simple, so also few and simple
ought the Rules of Physic then to be: whence by reason of the Errors,
whereinto Experience might easily fall, it was necessary, that such Rules,
although very few, should frequently change, the first Medicines daily changing
and growing better. Thus began the Art of Physic at the very first to manifest
its Inconstancy. But it did not long thus remain in the hands of simple
persons, ere Philosophers began by degrees to put in their fingers; who at
first, as is to be believed, were drawn thereunto by mere Curiosity, and a
desire of searching out the cause of Medicines; but by little and little
advancing and going forwards, they arrived at length to this, that blaming, as
inconstant, and perilous, the ancient simplicity of Curing, they laid the first
foundation of rational Physic. And although Eustathius makes Podalirius the
first Inventor thereof, yet it seems, by what Erisimachus in Plato relates That
this Honor ought to be attributed to his Father Aesculapius; Our Fore-father
Aesculapius ( as the Poets say, and I believe was the first that ever
methodized the Art of Physic. And therefore the whole Art of Physic is
governed by that God. And he had also said before this, The knowledge of what
agrees with the Body in reference to Fullness and Emptiness, and he that
distinguishes in those things the good and bad agreement, he is the most
skilful Physician. And he that makes such a change, that for one Agreement
there shall be another; and where there is not a Sympathy, which ought to be,
knows how to cause one, and take away that which was there before, he is to be
accounted a good Artist. For whatever Contraries there are in the body, ought
to be made to agree one with another; Cold with Heat, Bitter with Sweet, Dry
with Moist. Yet for all this, did not the Mutations and Uncertainties of
Physic hereby cease, but rather multiplied more and more: and as the
Practitioners were various and disagreeing, so it self also became various, and
divided (as it were) into a thousand parts.

But in the mean time Rational Physic was in the strictest manner so conjoined
to Ph^losophy, that it was (as Celsus avers) by the wisest and most prudent
Estimators of things adjudged to be a part thereof: and thus (it seems) it
continued to the time of Herodotus, mistakenly by some called Prodicus. Now he,
as may be collected from what Plato relates in his Discourse of the Gymnasium,
whereof he was Master, and first Minister, casually falling sick, through the
necessity, he had at that time, applied himself with great fervency, and the
utmost of his endeavors, to the cultivating of Physic, and joining it to the
Gymnastick, and prescribing it some Rules, which he first found out by Reason
and Experience, began (it seems) before all others to give it some form of Art.
And then it came by little and little to lose its ancient Familiarity with
Philosophy; although Celsus and some others are of opinion, that this first
happened through the means of Hippocrates. And from Herodicus it seems, that the
now-mentioned Hippocrates, his Scholar Euryphontes, and others learned the
custom of treating separately from Philosophy, the things that belong to
Physic. And although some thought this a very good act, and of great advantage
to Physic, yet can it not but appear to him, who shall strictly look into the
truth of things, that great Harm ensued thereby. Forasmuch as the Philosophers
not at all regarding to meddle with Physic, and the Physicians discoursing
grossly of its affairs, there remained little or nothing of Rational, but the
Name. And to such an height did that blameable Custom arrive, that their
Successors pertinaciously set themselves with all their might to defend it; and
being obstinate in their belief, endeavored to make all others give credit to
it. And Galen durst say of Hippocrates, That he had certainly shown great
Wisdom, in that he would never intermeddle, as Plato afterward did, in
investigating the Nature and Generation of the Qualities of those four first
Bodies, whereof the whole Mass of the World, with all things therein contained,
is judged to have been framed and composed; saying, that such a Dispute
belonged particularly to the Philosophers, and not to the Physicians; who have
then sufficiently complied with their Duty, when they arrive to know, that the
Healthfulness of Bodies is engendered of the Temperament or Mixture of Heat,
Cold, Moisture, and Drought. But what could ever be imagined more hurtful and
destructive to Physic, than this?

Thus in tract of time the Love of Wisdom decaying by degrees in those
Physicians, that called themselves Rational, the Contests about the ill-managed
Physic sprang up more fierce and outrageous than before: for whereas at first
their contrasting one another Sentiments, aimed only at clearing the Truth,
now being wholly plunged into Factions, and obstinate in their designs, they
never ceased contending, brawling, and reviling one another, and railing in
such a manner, that the very first Masters and Inventors of the Art were not
secure from their Reproaches. Apollo esteemed heretofore the God of Physic,
was now scoffed at by the foolish people, and vulgar Troop of Physicians, who
openly accused him of having been a Pratler, and a Boaster; and above all they
taxed him with Ingratitude; because that having gained the Knowledge of Medicine
from the Humanity and Courtesy of others, he afterward demeaned himself so
proudly and arrogantly, as if he had by his own Industry without any assistance
first found it out. Thus this crafty Cozener, to gain the greater applause, and
the more to advance his Glory, having learned the art from Glaucus, who was an
old Fox, began to play his Pranks, and to act the Astrologer, opening a way to
those Tricks and Cheats, by which the Multitude have ever since been deceived.
Others railed against Aesculapius, who was himself also a God of Physic, for
his Inconstancy, and little Firmness in curing; and not a few Curses were also
bestowed upon him for his insatiable avarice: Forasmuch as he first of all, as
it is reported, profaning the venerable and sacred Art of Physic, drawn by
filthy Lucre to cure for a price, sold to a sick Prince a few Herbs and Roots
for an infinite Sum of money, whereby he justly merited to be afterward
Thunderstruck and burnt by Jupiter for leaving to posterity so unfitting and
abominable an Example. And besides this they say, That in all sorts of Juggling
Tricks and Cunning Feats, he far out-strip'd his Father Apollo, and was
therefore afterward believed by every body to preside over Auguries and the
art of Divination. They farther also add, That by a thousand Impostures and
subtle Artifices he persuaded others, as he did his Father, That he could raise
people from the dead; wickedly thinking thereby to procure to himself the Title
of Divine. But to be brief, they in fine concluded, That Apollo knew little or
nothing of Medicine, and his Son Aesculapius much less: wherefore doubting,
that he could not perfectly teach his Son his own Art, he caused him for a long
time to be instructed therein under the Discipline of Chiron. And he, after he
had spent so much Time and Study, grew so skilful, that in curing a little
Toothache he was in danger to lose his Reputation, had he not in fine with a
quick deliberation set himself to draw them, which if not performed, who knows
what might have befaln the Patient. And for his great Master Chiron, how could
he cure others, who was not able to cure himself; but being accidentally
wounded by Hercules, resolved wholly to resign his Life and Immortality to
Prometheus, and so bravely to rid himself out of all his Troubles? And hence we
may plainly understand, what Truth there was in those so wonderful and
incomparable actions, which lying antiquity boasts of them. Thus peradventure
do the spiteful Contradictors fable of these first Masters; and that I also may
at present speak, what I think, it does not seem to me very dubious, That the
first Inventors of Physic among the Greeks were certainly but very small
Proficients therein; since that in after-ages, when the World with Time
advanced in every Art and Study, their witless Discourses about it,
demonstrated, that their skill was yet little enough. And although they gained a
great deal of Fame and Reputation in all parts, yet ought we not therefore the
less to persist in our Belief, judging, that at the first appearance of Arts to
the simple and growing World, the first Operations of Physic appeared
wonderful and Divine Inventions. And this was much more easy for Physicians,
than for any other Inventors; because all their most considerable Mistakes and
Errors being, as one says, buried in the same Grave with those that were slain
by them; and on the contrary, nothing appearing of them, but their Experiments,
how mean soever, on the living by them cured, they might without any great
opposition easily acquire immortal praise and honor. Besides that, this
certainly happens in the most wicked and infamous persons, who as they are
crafty and malicious, procure themselves every where Favorers and Partakers;
and being far from true Wisdom, leave no Deceit or Cheat untried, whereby they
may gain esteem amongst the Dregs of the people. It is therefore certainly to
be judged, That they, whose Fame was so much trumpetted about, were most crafty
Juglers and Mountebancks. It is not here my Intention to allege those numerous
Examples, which I could bring both from ancient and modern Records; I will only
not leave unrelated, how it was anciently reported, that Acron of Agrigentum
once freed the City of Athens from a mortal Plague, by the great Lights and
Fires, which he caused to be kindled therein. But that Fire alone cannot
produce any such effect, our own Eyes have certainly and sufficiently taught
us. The same thing is Hippocrates said to have done in his time. And Toxares
also had after his death Statues erected, and Sacrifices offered to him with
other Divine Honors; because that (as Lucian tells us) at a time when Athens
was more than ever annoyed, and even dispeopled by a raging Pestilence, he is
said to have appeared to Architele, the Wife of a certain Areopagite, and to
have assured her, That, if the Athenians would sprinkle all their Streets with
Wine, the Plague would presently cease; which they having done, it suddenly
fell out, as he had promised. But here I find his usual prudence wanting in
Lucian, who foolishly believes it, and phancies, That this might proceed from
the Vapors of the Wine, which, mixing with the Air, purged it, and freed it
from those pestilential Qualities that infected it. But good God! if these
Plagues ceased not, till that, after a long Destruction and Mortality of the
people, the Malady had quite spent it self; why must we say, That this happened
through the means of vain and helpless Remedies, and not rather through the
weakness and diminution of the Evil? therefore it is certainly to be judged,
that the most crafty and subtle Quacks, knowing that the Fury of the Distemper
was already spent, and that it was in the wane, to gain themselves Fame and
everlasting Renown, cunningly prescribed a Remedy, that so the peoples
deliverance might be rather attributed to them, than to the Nature of the
Infection. An Artifice, which is even at this day continually practiced by
Physicians. But as for Aesculapius, he may well rest contented with that Glory,
which, for his having been the first that taught the World the Art of
Tooth-drawing, is rationally given him by the Roman Orator, when he says;
Aesculapius was the first that invented the drawing of Teeth: Although the Cures
wrought by him are said to have been so rare and wonderful, and those in so
many different ways related, that as Sextus the Empirick wisely reflects, they
may hereby have been concluded to have been wholly Fabulous: For our Historians
going upon false Suppositions, report, the Captain of our Science, Aesculapius,
to have been touched with Thunder, not contented with a Fiction, which
nevertheless they variously transform. Stesichorus reports, That Aesculapius
ascended to the height of his Glory by having, with his Medicines, restored to
life some of those that died at Thebes. But Polyanthus says, That Aesculapius
grew famous, for that some, who were by the anger of Juno struck with Madness,
did by his means recover their Senses. And Parrhasius recounts, That he gained
his chief Repute by recalling Tyndarus from death. And Staphylus affirms, That
his greatest Renown was gotten by his joining together, and enlivening the
scattered Limbs of Hyppolitus, whom his frightened Horses had torn into an
Hundred pieces. But Phylarchus avers, That all his Esteem and Honor was
derived from his curing of their Blindness the Sons of Phineus. And Telesarchus
in fine will have him placed among the Gods, because he attempted to raise
Orion from the dead. But what Artifices, how loathsome and abominable soever,
did he leave untried, to be held diligent and circumspect in curing? He (says
Celus Rhodiginus) would (wherein he was also imitated by Hippocrates) even
taste the Excrements of the Sick, as if that were necessary to the finding out
the Causes of Distempers; for which he was afterward by Aristophanes in his
Plutus wittily called (...), or Excrement-eater, and we may better hit him home
by saying with our Actius Sincerus, Esse idem poteris Merdicus and Medicus.

But above all, highly advantageous to Aesculapius, were Riddles, Sorceries,
Oracles, Sacrifices, and many other Superstitions and juggling Tricks, which he
made use of to impose upon the Belief of the silly multitude, feeding the Sick
with certain hopes of their recovery, when he only held them in suspense with
his Talk. An usual Custom at that time of every one, who would with any
Commendations practice Physic. And to say nothing of Medea, and many others,
Melampus by such foolish Artifices and Flim Flams, besides the great Fame he
obtained from a poor Fellow, as he was, together with his Brother, became most
Rich Princes and Sovereign Lords of two parts of the Realm of King Proetus,
marrying his Daughters, by him cured, whose names (says Apollodorus) were
Lysippe and Iphianassa; but Aelian calls them Elea and Celene, who, either
through the overmuch use of Wine, or by the procurement of the Queen of Cyprus
falling mad, went together with their Sister Iphinoe, who died before she could
be cured, feeding on Grass, and lowing like Cows about the Valleys of Morea,
and other Countries. Of these Virgil says in his Bucolicks; With Lowings vain
the Praetides stark mad,
Fill all the neighboring Fields, etc.


But a Remedy was found out for their Madness by Melampus, who, as Dioscorides
will have it, cured them with Black Hellebore; although Galen on far better
Grounds, judges that it was White Hellebore which wrought the Cure. This
Medicine Melampus first learned from the Sheep, says Theophrastus, or rather
from the Goats, which, as Pliny writes, he kept, who purge themselves by
feeding on Hellebore. Although some are of opinion, that Melampus cured those
distracted Ladies, not with Hellebore, but with the Milk of Goats, first fed
therewith; and others say, that it was not Melampus the Goatherd, who restored
them to their Senses, but another Melampus called the Soothsayer. And
Polyanthus, as it is related by Sextus the Empirick, and Eudoxus a most ancient
Geographer in Stephanus attributes this to Aesculapius. But however this be, it
is not to be doubted, but Melampus, after many long Ceremonies accompanied with
Sacrifices, and other Superstitions, caused these distracted Ladies to be first
washed in that famous Fountain of Arcadia, called Clitorius; wherefore in
memory thereof there were engraven in Marble those witty Verses, related by
Isogonus a most ancient Writer, concerning Waters.

Wherefore after this, a Debate arose amongst Writers, differently judging of
this Cure: Some attributing it only to the Sacrifice and Bath, others to the
Hellebore; but certainly, as far as we can perceive, that both the Medicines
were made use of by Melampus: Pythagoras saying thus in Ovid: Who once has
quenched his draught at Clitro's Well,
Flies Wine, and drinks unmixed water still.
Whether the water bear a secret Feud
To Wine, or as the Shepherds there report
How Amithaon's Son, when from the Harms
Of raging Madness, he by herbs and Charms
Had freed, he flung the Infections of their mind
Into the Well, where it has still remained behind.


To which Custom, the Homer of Ferrara perhaps had respect, when he made
Astolfo several times wash his mad Orlando in the Sea, before he gave him to
drink the Liquor he had received from Heaven to cure him.

Astolfo caused him to be seven times washed,
And under water to be plunged seven times,
So were his face and all his members cleansed
From that same filth, that had him so befrenfied.
But Melampus not content with these silly Tricks only, to render his Cures
more famous and remarkable, bragged, as may be seen in Synesius, that he was
skilled in the Interpretation of Dreams, proceeding thence to Soothsayings, and
giving all men to understand, That Apollo had endowed him with the Art of
Divination, and that he having bred up in his house certain Serpents, they had
in the dead of the Night, when he was asleep, licked his Ears, whereat he,
suddenly waking for fear, found at Daybreak, that he understood the Language
of all Birds. As Apollodorus, relates, speaking of Melampus. Not any Art then
had ever, I believe, so much Commerce with Lies, Fraud, and Superstitions, as
the Mystery of Physic, which so manifestly appears to every one, who has but
the least Insight therein, that it is not necessary for me at present to
trouble my self any farther about it. Yet will I not forbear to glance a little
at the strange and ridiculous Ceremonies, which the Ancients used in gathering
of Plants, to the end that by the ignorant people their Medicines might be
esteemed more wonderful and regardable. Piony could not be gathered in the
daytime, for fear of losing presently their Sight, if they should chance to be
seen by a Jay. He that would dig up Mandrakes, was obliged to have a care of a
contrary Wind; and before he began to dig for it, he made about it three
Circles, and afterward plucked it out of the ground, holding his Face toward
the West; but while he pulled it up, another was to go round about him,
skipping and sneering, and uttering, I know not what, undecent and obscene
Speeches; as Theophrastus relates in these words, They who go about to cut the
Mandrake, let them take care of a contrary wind, and make three Circles first
with a Sword, then let them dig looking to the West.

But with far greater Ceremonies was the Baara, which some will have to be
nothing else, but the very same Mandrake diged up by the Ancients. They first
threw upon it the menstruous Blood or Urine of Women, then having removed the
Earth from round about it, they tied a Dog to the Root, who, being called by
his Master, in running, plucked it up, and presently fell down dead. This is
thus related by Josephus the Jew; That part of the Valley which encompasses the
City to the North, is called Baaras: That place bears a Root of the same Name:
In Color it is like the flame of Fire; and in the Evening casts forth a kind
of Lightning. It will not be touched by those that go about to pull it, but
flies away; nor is there any way to stop it, but by casting upon it either the
Urine or Menstruum 's of a Woman. And then also it is death to them that handle
it, unless by fortune the person that carrys the Root, so carrys it, that it
may hang down out of his hand. But it is taken up another way without any
danger, and that is this: They make a Circle about the Roots, for the hidden
part of the Root is the shortest; then they tie a Dog to it, who, when the
Master calls him away, easily pulls it up: But the Dog immediately dies, as
being a kind of Revenge for offering violence to the Root, for after that,
there is no danger to any body that takes it up.

An Account much like to this is given by Elian in his History of Animals,
concerning the digging up of the Cynospastus.

The name of the Plant is Cynospastus, which is also called the Bright-shine.
Now you must know, that all day this Plant is not to be seen, but at night it
shines like a Star, and glitters like Fire. Therefore marking the place
diligently in the day time, they go away, and come again the next night, and
then seeing the mark which they left there. But the Root is neither to be cut
nor pulled up; for they report, That the first, who, through ignorance of its
Nature, touched it, soon after perished, Therefore they take a Dog that has
been kept hungry for nine days together; which done, they bring the Dog to that
part of the Root next the earth, and then fasten the Dog and the Root together,
with a Rope tied with a strong Knot: then returning a good distance off, they
throw upon the ground several morsels of Meat, which the Dog smelling, and
pressed by hunger, pulls with all his force to get at the Meat, and so at last
plucks up the Root. But if it happen, that the Sun see the Root, the Dog dies
immediately, and they bury the Dog in the same place, using certain sacred
Ceremonies over the dead body of the Dog, as having died for their sakes; for
then they may be bold to touch and handle the Plant, and carry it home; where,
as they report, they make use of for many profitable Advantages.

Nor less vain and ridiculous were the Superstitions, used by the Ancients in
digging up the Panacea, as Theophrastus relates. And of Ellebore and many other
Plants there is such a number of Fables reported as well by the same
Theophrastus, as by Dioscorides and Pliny, that if I would relate them one by
one, I should scarce come to an end.

But above all to be admired were the most tedious and vain Ceremonies, used by
the Priestess of the Isle of Lemnos, in gathering the sealed Earth, as they are
related by Galen, who being an Eyewitness, made an Elegant Description
thereof. To which Artifices also the most witty Ariosto alluding, introduces
the chaste Isabella, making the drunken Saracen believe, that she had a
never-sailing Secret for the rendering a man invulnerable, and to gain the more
Credit to her assertion, envelloping it in abundance of Cautions and Conditions
in this Discourse to Rodomont: I know where an herb grows, which I have seen,
Which being boild with Ivy and with Rue
Over an easy Fire of Cypress-wood,
Then pressed between a spotless Virgins hands,
A Liquor yields that hard'ns so the skin,
That neither Fire nor Steel can do it harm.
Three times anoint your body with this Oil,
And you shall be a month invulnerable.
But then the Virtue ceases, then again
You must again anoint, etc.


But leaving these things to persons more at leisure than my self, and
returning to our former Discourse, it is almost incredible, how the first
Inventors of the Art were slandred and back-bitten by the Envy and Malice of
those Physicians, who more than the rest wounded the Reputation of Melampus,
giving out, that he was the first, who, to the Ruin of the World, brought
forth the evil and troublesome use of Purges; and that, if it fell out well for
him in the Cure of Proetus's Daughters, it was more by good Luck, than any
prudent Foresight of his. But to let alone Melampus for the present, and to
return from whence we digressed, it is likely, perhaps, that long before
Herodicus's Medicine was separated from Philosophy, since we read in Herodotus,
the Prince of the Grecian History, That there were exceeding ancient Schools of
Physic in Cyrene and Crotona, to which the often by us mentioned Democides
gave very great Repute, by whose means, as the same Author relates, the
Crotonians gained the Honor to be esteemed the most excellent Physicians in
the World. But it is to be believed, that Empirical Physic was at first taught
in those Schools; and that likewise there divided into different Opinions,
causing diverse Factions. The same thing also happened in Rhodes, in Coos, and
Gnidos, where Eurifontes, or whoever else it was, published those famous
Sentences, that were afterward called Gnidian, which Hippocrates opposing in
his Writings, there arose the first Contest, that was ever seen upon paper
betwixt Physicians, or at least the first that afterward came to our
Knowledge. And as for the other Disputes of those times, Hippocrates gives us
an Account of some of them in these words; In acute Diseases so various are the
Sentiments of Physicians, that often times what one prescribes, as most
helpful, others forbid as harmful: And for this reason the Art of Physic ought
to be esteemed very like to that of Divination, because the Physicians behave
themselves just like to Soothsayers, some of which will have the same Bird, if
appearing on the right hand, to be an Augury of good Luck; but if on the left,
of bad. But others again hold the contrary. Now whosoever desires to be more
fully informed concerning such Disputes and Contests among Physicians, let him
read the Comment of Galen upon the aforesaid Test of Hippocrates, and I
question not, but he will there find abundant satisfaction. Nor ought we here
to pass by unobserved what Hieronymus Cardanus suspects, that the Book, which
goes under the name of Hippocrates, concerning the bringing forth of Children
in the seventh Month, is, as he says, Forsan Eurifontis, nulla ex part
Hippocrate inferioris, si ex unguibus Leonem, ut in Proverbio est, cognoscere
mihi concessum est. Hippocrates then must needs have rallied all his Forces,
when he contended with one, between whom and himself there was, if we may
believe Cardan, In value none, or little difference.

And perhaps with several others, of no less parts than Eurifontes; of whom by
reason of all-devouring time, which has Consumed their bodies, and their Works
concealed, I cannot at present give any account. But the famous Hippocrates
published his Works in that place, who, although he showed so much Virtue, as
made some think, that Nature and Art strove together to perfectionate in him
the Idea of a most skilful Physician, yet could they not render his Doctrine so
clear and warrantable, but that it was sifted, depressed, and confuted first by
Diocles, and afterward by Plistonicus, by Praxagoras, by Erophilus, by
Philotimus, by Eudemus, and chiefly by Chrysippus, and his Scholar
Erasistratus, who was held in such esteem for Physic, that he was by many able
men judged equal to Aesculapius. And certainly from those few Fragments, which
by some, who have written against him, have been preserved out of his many
Works, it is sufficiently clear and manifest, That Erasistratus was no less a
most subtle Philosopher, than a most Excellent Physician. He was exceedingly
free in philosophizing, and so great a lover of the Truth, that he often
preferred it before his Grandfather Aristotle, and his School, openly saying,
that the Peripateticks had established nothing solidly about Natural Things.
Wherefore his Opinions were for some Ages received with greot Esteem and
Veneration by Philosophers and Physicians of more than ordinary worth. And
although they did not use much Blood-letting (which is wont not a little to
diminish the Esteem of Physicians amongst the Vulgar) yet their Fame never
staggered, insomuch that even in the time of Galen and afterward, their Sect
was held in far greater Repute, than any other. Yet was not all this sufficient
to restrain the Rage of other Factions, that rose up against it under the
Standards of Nesitheus an Athenian, of Cienus, called also Prusias, and of many
others, all esteemed in their times excellent Heads, and Founders of diverse
other ancient Sects of Rational Physic. In the mean time the never
sufficiently praised Empedocles, no less sublime a Poet, than Philosopher,
doubting, that he should not otherwise be able to infuse into Acron his
Scholar, evident and indisputable Arguments for the Mutations of Nature, wholly
forsook the Rational, and with his utmost Endeavors applied himself solely to
advance the most ancient Empirical Physic; which was afterward brought to
perfection by Philinus, Serapion, and other most famous Physicians, whose
Followers always strove to ruin, and reduce to nothing all the other Sects.
Nor must I conceal, that some are of Opinion, That Acron gave the first
Beginning to Empirical Physic, whilst others say, That Philinus the Son of
Erophilus, and some yet, That Serapion was indeed the Inventor and Founder
thereof:

Thus by degrees were the different Companies of Physicians multiplied, every
one with all his force contending to defend his own Party, and overthrow the
rest, when in the time of Pompey the Great, there sprang up with Asclepiades
another most famous, and most illustrious Faction. This not only ascended to a
sublime degree of Eloquence, as some vainly think, but prevailed much also both
in Philosophy and Physic, as may well be gathered from the Writings of Celius
Aurelianus, and others, who report some of their Sentences.

But I my self am at last grown weary of turning over so great a variety of
Factions and Schools; which since I have purposed to recount, passing over at
present the less Famous, I shall only touch upon the more considerable, as I
have hitherto done; and in the mean time I must beg your excuse, if to bring my
intent, I shall be somewhat long in my Discourse. I say then, following my
begun Harangue, That not far from, or even in the very time of Pompey the
Great, against both the Empirical and Rational Physic, started up Themison
with his new Inventions, who, as he rejected the Sentiments of all others, so
would also give his School a different Name, calling it from his brief, clear,
and well-ordered Discourse, Methodical.

But this also did the most Eloquent Antonius Musa, the Scholar of Themison, no
less by his own Learning and Industry, than by the Authority of Octavius
Caesar, cause, Proteus-like, to change its Form. Yet was it not long for all
this, ere the Methodical Sect got up again by the assistance of Vectius Valens,
Physician to the Emperor Claudius, and Gallant to his Wife the Empress
Messalina. Afterward it mounted to an exceeding height, being in a great
measure restored by Thessalus, Physician to Nero, who would therefore have
arrogated to himself all the Glory of inventing it, as may be seen in that
Epistle, which he writes to the same Emperor, wherein he begins to say thus; I
having now established a new Sect, which alone has first discovered all Truth:
forasmuch as all those, who have heretofore practiced Physic, could not find
out any thing that was available either for the curing of Diseases, or the
preserving of Health. And in fine, this Sect was not long after completed, and
brought to perfection by Soranus of Ephesus.

But of how happy a wit, and of what profound Knowledge the Inventors of this
sort of Physic were, with the whole Company of innumerable Followers, we may
partly perceive by what is related in those Books of Celius Aurelianus, that
are come to our hands; and also by what Galen, and other Authors have written
of them, though sparingly enough. And certainly Themison was sufficiently
commended by Pliny, and his Name adorned with the glorious Adjunct of Chief
Physician. And Thessalus by his Sagacity and Advisedness wrought himself so far
into the good Grace and Favor of the Emperor Nero, a Prince (though extreme
cruel, yet) very intelligent, that he became his intimate and familiar Friend;
and got so much the better of the Physicians, his Contemporaries, that he
deserved to have engraven on his Sepulcher that famous Inscription (...). And a
famous Physician of our time, although a Rational and Galenist, could not (as it
is related by Prosper Alpinus) forbear in speaking of him, to say thus much to
his Commendation, I could wish the Books he wrote de Communitatibus and
Synchreticis, were now extant: for by the Fragments which some have cited, he
appears to be a most acute and learned Author.

But whither I do find my self transported, without having made mention of the
most famous Clinias of Marseilles, who, in despite of Thessalus, and all other
Methodists, gave beginning to another sort of new Physic, never before heard
of? And why amongst such an heap of Physicians do I let pass the most wary
Charmis, who was also of Marseilles, and Founder of another new and strange way
of Curing. This man was endowed with such high and noble parts, that he
introduced his new and mavelous Doctrine into Rome with most happy Presages,
and to such an height arrived the Belief of his rigorous and strange
Inventions, that in a small time the chief of the Senate were at his disposal.
They governed Fate, says Pliny of the said Physicians, Into which City
suddenly Charmis got, coming from Massilia, and not only condemned the former
Physicians, but also persuaded his Patients to bathe in cold water in the midst
of winter: (O the Efficacy of the Art of Medicinal Persuasion, to which all
other force of Eloquence must of necessity give place) He plunged his sick
Patients into Lakes of cold water; and we have seen ancient persons of Consular
dignity shivering and chattering with their teeth, even to ostentation. Thus
sprang up, and continued Physic until the time of the most curious Claudius
Galen of Pergamus, whose Fame is known to every one. He, joining to his natural
disposition, Geometry, Astronomy, Logic, and all other Sciences, which he
judged either useful, or necessary to a Physician, and being encouraged by the
persuasions of his Father, who, as he himself tells us, was stimulated
thereunto by various Dreams and Visions from the Gods, underwent most grievous
fatigues by reason of his continual Labors and Watchings, undertaking long and
difficult Voyages, subject to many, and those not ordinary Dangers, that he
might attain to a more than usual Eminence in that Art, wherein he caused
himself to be instructed by the most famous Masters of those times, if we will
give credit to his own Relation about it. But he indeed was not crafty and
malicious, as some other Greek Physicians, but sincere, and of very great
Morality. In matters of Philosophy he would never tie himself to the opinions
of any other, always declaiming against that Custom, as blameable, and unworthy
a Philosopher; and protested, That in following the documents of Hippocrates
(whom he always regarded as the chief and principal Master of the Art) that he
did not look upon his words, as proceeding from a credible Evidence, but from a
Demonstrator only, that is, That he did not give any Credit to the sayings of
Hippocrates, but to the Reasons brought by him. And therefore, where he could
conveniently do it, he failed not now and then maliciously to discover some of
his blemishes; blaming him sometimes, as no great Observer of the propriety of
Language; and other whiles as extremely dark, and obscure, saying, That he
often entered into Labyrinths without knowing the way out again, and that by his
tedious and vain Stories he sometimes repeated the same thing over and over
again, not observing the ordinary Method of Discourse: and in fine he forbore
not to say, That he was mean, and pitiful, and confused in his Talk. Nay, so
great an affection he always bore to Truth, that where it was convenient for
him to do it, he snarles, and carps at as well the ancient Physicians, as those
of his own time, although they were of very great Repute, and notwithstanding
some of them had been before very highly extolled by himself for their skill
and Knowledge. He unmeasurably jeers Asclepiades, calling him the
VVonder-talking Physician, Emptypate, teasty, and obstinate, saying, That he
understood Logic and Philosophy as much as the Ass and Ox do playing on the
Bag-pipe, and that he was sometimes plainly out of his wits. He accuses
Archigenes of words, saying, That he often roams about, never keeping to his
matter; and that he is always childishly busying himself in the idle Toys of
Definitions. He exceedingly bespatters Herophilus, whom he calls Cozner,
Jugler, and riotous fellow. And in the like manner he deals with Erasistratus,
affirming him to be obscure and confused in his Sentiments. But this is nothing
to the Blows he gives Thessalus and Julianus; calling the first Madman, and
Thessalian-Ass, saying, That he was bred up by his Father amongst Women, who
carded Wool; and giving the second, whom he makes another Thersites, the Title
of Apish-fellow, and brazen-faced Conjurer, likening him in fine to Aesops Ass.
And so far did he suffer himself to be transported with this vain blast, that
he brake forth at last into most horrid and impious Blasphemies, foolishly
depriving GOD of his Omnipotency, and sharply reprehending Holy Moses for
having attributed it to him; ridiculously scoffing at the Doctrines of Moses,
and our ever blessed Redeemer CHRIST JESUS, and impudently daring to equallize
the Obstinacy of the Medicinal Sects to the laudable and invincible Constancy
of the Christian Saints; and yet Galen lived in an Age, when there was scarce
any place in the World, but was continually illuminated by the Miracles, which
were every where wrought by the Teachers of our Holy Religion: Nor could he but
have heard of that most famous Victory, obtained by Marcus Aurelius over the
Marcomanni through the most fervent Prayers of the Christian Legion, called
afterward from the Effect, that followed their Petitions, Legio fulminans:
whence it proceeded, that by the Imperial Edict a stop was put to the cruel
Persecution of the Christians, and severe Penalties appointed to be inflicted
on those that should accuse them, or inform against them; upon which account
also was erected that famous Turret or Column in Rome, which reserving even to
our days the Records of signallized Virtue, is admired by all amongst the
Wonders of that glorious City. This Conradus Gesner Considering, could not
(however unreasonably partial for him) forbear saying; Rashly and impiously
does Galen refuse the Schools of Christ and Moses, as founded upon no
Demonstration, as if the Miracles which are both numerous and divine, of which
we read both in the old and new Testament, did not exceed all Demonstration.
Nor does he here make a stand, but proceeds with many other very grave
Expressions to reprove him. But to return from whence the zeal of Piety and
Religion had transported me. After Galen, But few or none so far advanced in
Fame. Few or none of any great repute were seen in Physic: forasmuch as within
a little while after the true and perfect Method of Philosophy, which already
began by degrees to decay, fell totally from its pristine splendour, and
swerving from its right path, those Bastard-philosophers set at naught the true
Knowledge of the Causes of Natural Events, and contenting themselves only with
simple Logic, or to say better, with witless Sophistry, foolishly followed the
fantastical Chimera's of Terms, and prattle, wherewith casting, as we use to
say, dust in the eyes of the Multitude, they made them think Glowworms to be
Lanthorns, and would make every one believe, That they knew all, when in
Natural things, it cannot certainly be affirmed, that they knew any thing. But
in fine this vain shadow of Philosophy, sinking together with the Majesty of
the Roman Empire gave the last plunge, drawing with it also Physic, as may be
seen in the Books of Oribasius, Paulus, of Aetius, Alexander Trallianus,
Actuarius, Philotheus, and other Authors, who scarce did any thing else, but
collect, compile, and sometimes unskilfulfully translate the Writings of
others. But in them we may yet see, although not so much at large, the usual
Contests of the Art, especially in Trallianus, who, being bolder than the rest,
more than once manifestly opposes Galen, and besides, prude^^ly enough avers,
That it is indeed a wicked thing, not to contradict Galen, when the Truth
requires it.

And it has always been observed, that as men have been more or less addicted
to Philosophy, proportionably more or less frequent have been the Contests and
Wranglings of Physicians; which is a manifest sign, that these Controversies
proceeded from men's more or less examining the defects of the Art.

But at last through the extreme Negligence of the Greeks, who took no care to
copy them, together with the choicest pieces of Philosophy, and other Sciences,
were lost the most excellent Volumes, till that time extant of Physic; which
were in the time of Galen grown to such a number, that the very Reading, as he
tells us, of the good and useful Books of Medicaments would have employed a man
all the days of his life. And the same disaster did then happen to the Books of
Physic, as the Great Bacon of Virulam observes to have befaln those of
Philosophy, which being carried along by the rapid stream of time, as by an
overflowing River, the lighter only swam on the top, whilst the weightier, and
those of greater value sank down to the bottom. Thus together with Philosophy
did Physic remain depressed, when the Arabians, who having forsaken their
ancient Faith, to follow the impious doctrines of Mahomet, and rebelliously
withdrawn themselves from the Jurisdiction of the Roman Empire, had with
victorious arms taken and ransacked very many rich Provinces of Asia, Africa,
and Europe, finding by chance amidst the prey and spoil they got in Greece,
some Books, applied themselves with more than ordinary fervor, to the Study;
and lighting on the Works of Aristotle, and some of his Commentators, as also
on those of Hippocrates, and Galen, they equally attended to profit themselves
both in Philosophy and Physic: But being somewhat of a servile and
superstitious temper and disposition, they durst scarce ever look into the Book
of Nature, and searching therein for the Truth of natural Things, curiously
examine and enquire, whether, what they had themselves experimented, did
punctually agree with what those learned men had before described; but like a
poor flock of Goats, they unwisely, if not madly followed them as Guides,
blindly retaining all the parts of Physic, and especially Anatomy, just as
they found it: whence through the fault of the Translators, or perhaps of the
Originals themselves, they ran into many Errors. Notwithstanding from those
small and dusky Lights of Philosophy they contracted so much Spirit, that they
dared ever in matters of very great import to front both the Grecian Masters;
on one side, to say nothing of other matters, restraining the use of
Phlebotomy, and on the other as much enlarging it by letting even Children
blood, little or nothing regarding that Galen and Hippocrates had manifestly
taught the contrary; against whose Sentiments also they used Purgations, where
there were no Inflammations, the Humors in the Distempers being yet crude.
Besides this, they made use of Sena, Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, Rheubarb, and
other new Drugs not heretofore known to the Ancients. They invented new ways of
compounding Medicines, and having, I know not whether from Egypt, or elsewhere
gotten some Volumes of the most ancient Chimistry, endeavoring according to
their ability to restore it, they enriched the Shops with many strange and
unusual Compositions; and some of them also with the same Art attained to
philosophize about the things appertaining to Physic. Whence their Prince
Avicen departed so far from the steps of Galen, as occasioned Pietro Messia
(not without reason) to say; That the Practice and manner of curing used by
Avicen, is so far different from that of Galen, and the Ancients, that it seems
quite another thing.

But the Arabians not content to have deviated from the path, kept by the
Grecian Masters, often also assaulted Galen with the same Weapons of Reproaches
and Contumelies, as himself had formerly used to vilify and disgrace the most
ancient Physicians. And amongst the rest Avicen in Terms certainly villainous,
and barbarous, says, That the discourse of Galen is contrary to that of
Hippocrates, and that it is full of infinite Errors, and impudent Lies; and
that he cast his Eyes only on the Branches and Sprigs, never prying into the
Roots of Sciences; that he had little or no Wit, or Sagacity in any thing; and
that professing himself a Philosopher, he nevertheless used childish and vulgar
Reasons. Whereupon that famous Galenist Vallesius exclaims thus; Avicen in many
things on purpose differs from Galen, contradicting him arrogantly, not only in
contemplative, but practical Opinions.

After him followed Averroes, who not only blames, and vituperates Galen, but
also severely reproves his own Countryman Avicen, exceedingly wondering at his
having taken for his Guide a Grecian Babbler, who was not of parts sufficient,
ever to arrive at the Knowledge of Natural things. Whereunto he adds, That
Galen was so weak and unskilful a Logician, that Syllogisms framed by him, were
often found false in their principles, and faulty in their figures, and that
his discourse was like to the idle Talk and Quibbles of Buffoons and Jesters.
Nor were the Arabians less contentious, and divided among themselves, than the
Greeks had formerly been, although they did not after the manner of those,
separate themselves into parties, as may be easily discerned in the Works of
Rhasis, Avicen, Averroes, and other their Writers. And thus they went
continually on, philosophizing, and advancing in their Studies, when by the
command of the Caliph, and other Mohammedan Princes, their Schools were all shut
up, and good Learning prohibited; and this by reason of the barbarous
Government, they having long observed, that the Sciences, especially
Philosophy, opening the Eyes of the peoples Mind, made them easily perceive the
ridiculous Forgeries, and childish Simplicities of the Alcoran: Wherefore with
Philosophy, Physic also decayed in an instant among the Arabians, and all
Literature gave up the Ghost. But before this came to pass, by the means and
diligence of the Emperor Charles the Great, the Arabian Authors together with
those few Greeks, which were then published in Arabic, were Translated into
Latin, however barbarous and unpolished, such as was used in those most unhappy
times. And thus in afflicted and desolate Italy began the interrupted, and
decayed Studies of Physic to rise up again. But how violently then of a sudden
the Contests and Disputes of the Italian Wits were awakened, he that is
desirous to know, may read in Pietrod' Albano, Gentile da Foligno, Taddeo, and
Nicolo Fiorentini, Dino, and Tomasso dal Garbo, Giacomo da Forli, Vgoda Siena,
Giacomo delle Parti, and may other Writers.

But afterward the purity and elegancy of the Latin Tongue being in more quiet
times arrived at first in our most delightful Country of Italy, and then in
the other provinces of Europe, and the mellifluous Greek Language coming about
the same time from Greece, then for the most part subjugated and harrassed by
the Ottoman Princes, Physicians began by little and little to read the Greek
Authors in their primitive Idiom, faithfully translating them from their
Original into Latin. And then more fiercely than ever sprang up the Contests of
Physicians, which grew exceeding hot between those, who on the one side would
follow their Galen and Hippocrates, and others, who on the contrary in defense
of the Arabians vigorously opposed the Grecian Authors. And because there are
yet to be found in the hands of the Curious some of their detracting Writings,
I have thought it not amiss, out of one of them, entitled, Nobilis Socii
Salodiensis praecertatio pro Arabum, and proborum medicorum tutela, as briefly
as I may, and by way of Abridgment to rehearse some things, which may serve as
a Sample of the rest.

This Treatise, although it undertakes the defense of the Barbarian Physicians,
yet appears not in the least to be barbarously written; and the Author thereof
seems to me to be an able man, and very well seen in the Doctrines of Galen and
Hippocrates, whereof joining together many Sentences, he with exquisite
artifice frames long, and well-ordered discourses. He begins ingenuously, and
with a mind free from passion, induced, as he says, by the love of Truth alone
to contend with certain Physicians of his own Time, who, either to show
themselves skilled in the Learning of the Greeks, or through the overmuch
affection they bare the Grecian Authors, or to let others see, that they walked
not in the common Road, made it their profession to oppose, as the Proverb has
it, the Pandects, and vilifying, and contumeliously treating the Arabian
Physicians, endeavored on the contrary with the highest praises to extol the
Grecians unto Heaven. And it seems, that their first Motive thereunto, was only
the secret ill Will, Anger, and Spite, which they bore toward most barbarous
and foreign Nations; which they so far improved, that contrary to the express
Laws of good Manners, and the precepts of their own Master Hippocrates, they
impudently belched forth against them the greatest Villainies, that the Malice
of such silly Wretches could invent, calling them now Cheats, anon
Shallow-pates, and often branding them with like Imputations. Having prefaced
in this manner, he proceeds to his discourse, what is by these men in behalf of
the Greeks objected against the Arabian Physicians: viz. That the clear and
overflowing Fountain of Physic was at first preserved pure and without mixture
by its Authors, but falling afterward into the hands of these, soon became
troubled and muddy; and that those were the true Masters and Inventors of that
Art, and these Barbarian Caitiffs only Translators, who without taking any
pains, vainly boasted of other men's Works, as if they were their own. Then
going on, he says, That they accused the Arabians, for that in translating the
Greeks from their Originals, not well comprehending their Sentiments, they
filled their Writings with Confusion and Contention; and in Conclusion, he
adds, That the Censurers of his time, prosecuting the Followers of the
Arabians, as standing upon most weak and unsure Foundations, or being only
covetous after money, accused them for inventing so many, though rich and costly
Syrups.

But the aforesaid Author, desirous by a strict Examination of them, to refel
these Accusations, brought against the Arabians, first explains the meaning of
that Saying, to wit, That the Greeks were indeed the Masters, and the Arabians
no more but Scholars, and Translators in physic. Hereby, says he, they either
mean, that the Greeks were of all Nations the first Inventors thereof, and the
Arabians only Builders upon the old foundation, which, as he tells us, needs
farther Confirmation before it be granted, since he manifestly proves by the
Authority both of the Greeks themselves, and of the Latin Writers, That they,
to wit, the Greeks, first learned it from the Egyptians, or some other people;
or else their opinion is, That the Greeks by putting the last hand to it,
brought it to such a degree of perfection, that it is impossible to advance it
any higher. And this said, he fell again anew to distinguishing, telling us,
That hereby they intended, either that by every one of the Greeks, physic was
raised to the utmost height whereunto it possibly could arrive; or that they
had all of them contributed their assistance thereunto; or that some one
amongst so many Masters had performed this Exploit. The first he avers to be
manifestly false, and to have been in many plac^s confessed so to be by their
Prince Galen himself. The second, he says, can never be granted to be true, by
many and evident reasons demonstrating it to be most false, which were it
otherwise, yet would it be exceeding difficult, nay even impossible ever to
learn from the Grecian Masters the most confused Art of Physic; there being so
many Volumes differently written by them, that a man cannot run them over with
his Eye, much less attentively study them, though he should employ therein every
day of his life. It remains then to say, That one alone amongst so many Greeks
has brought Medicine to its chiefest Splendour, and forasmuch as we are assured
by the Authority of Galen, that all others before him were often entangled and
misled: and therefore, as being imperfect, and without much Knowledge, not
greatly to be regarded. This most magnificent Honor and dignity must be
attributed therefore to the most profound and more than human Wit of Claudius
Galenus of Pergamus, esteemed commonly the chief amongst all the Grecian
Masters; and that, not only by the Universal Consent of his Partisans, but also
in his own proper Judgment, which he was not ashamed in many places
vaingloriously to affirm. Here our Censurer, losing his patience, makes his
Avicen briskly enter the Lists against Galen. He introduces the Greek, exposing
his reasons, and declaring his honorable Quality, and this he does in Galens
own Words, collected and tacked together out of his own Writings, in which he
extremely glories of his Birth, Education, Studies, extraordinary progress in
the Encyclopaideia of all Sciences, and divine Knowledge in physic, relating in
fine, what he with Grecian, and infinite Brags, vauntingly tells us of his own
Qualifications. On the contrary with simple, modest, and humble words he
declares the Life, Manners, and Studies of his Avicen: and as he makes the
Arabian far exceed the Greek in Birth, and good Qualities, so not at the first
glance alone, but by penetrating farther into the matter, he will plainly let
us see, which of the two excels in Knowledge. And here he begins strictly to
sift and examine Galens Works: And although he tells us, That he will elsewhere
clearly and distinctly discover his Errors and Impostures, promising to collect
them into one entire Volume, yet since he judges it necessary to his present
purpose, he proceeds to give an account of some of the greatest and most
conspicuous, saying, That however gross and palpable they are, yet will not the
Galenists discern them, when for the least Straw that lies in their way, they
presently take snuff, proudly vilifying and reproaching poor Avicen.

He says then, That Galen, however esteemed a most profound and acute
Philosopher, yet in that part of Philosophy which is deservedly held to be of
greatest import, and value, to wit, the Moral, he had as little Judgment and
Understanding, as a Blind-man has in Colors; and that this was the reason he
so little practiced it. First he demonstrates him to have been most ungrateful
to his parents, and not being ashamed to lay open to the whole World the Faults
and evil Qualities of his Mother, saying, That she was so proud and peevish,
that often falling into excess, she used unmercifully to outrage her Servants;
and that she behaved her self more frowardly, and cross-grainedly to her
Husband, than ever did Zantippe to the most patient Socrates. Hereto he adds,
That he is extremely vainglorious, and an unmeasurable Boaster of his own
Excellencies: and this may without any other proof be easily learnt from his
writings, he having filled them all with Praises and Encomiums of himself. And
indeed, what greater vanity, and presumption can there be, than to affirm, as
he does, That none can fully comprehend the meaning of Hippocrates without the
assistance of his most profound Comments? and that he alone had given physic
its ultimate perfection? and that the Gods, as if they were concerned, and
zealous for his Honor, had taught him many Medicines, as he brags, when he
treats of the Nerves of the Eyes, and of the Cure of wounded Nerves in general?
and that he could discourse for a whole day on the most obscure and difficult
Question, having often done it to his great commendation, when taken on a
sudden?

But of what Honesty, Constancy, or Justice, can he ever boast, having, as he
himself tells us, given a sick Child a Medicine, which according to his own
Doctrine, and Opinion, must have undoubtedly killed him, as it did? Certainly
he cannot but be infinitely blamed for so doing by any one, that has the least
sense of Humanity and Compassion. Nor does it any whit avail him to cover this
barbarous action with light excuses, as that he did not herein follow his own
Inclinations, but was forced thereunto by fear; since he ought, courageously
resisting, and refusing so to do, to have acted according to Justice and Reason.

But our Author, having thus shown him to be blameworthy for his want of
Morality, proceeds to acquaint us with his Learning, saying, That he was as
well skilled in Logic, as a Tortoise in flying, or a Cow in dancing. For
setting himself, at his beginning, to divide Words into significative, and
insignificative, and alleging for the latter the common Example of Blictri and
Syndapsus, he immediately subjoyns, that these are no words. And besides this,
all Logicians acknowledging rationality to be the ultimate difference that
constitutes man in his Essence, he on the contrary stiffly holds, that Babes are
not rational, but in time will be; which in good earnest is to say, that they
are not true Men, but hereafter will be so: which most notorious Error he fell
into, for that seeing them prattle confusedly, the Sot had not the Wit to
consider, that Rationality did not necessarily imply Discourse in actu, but in
potentia only, as the term is. Nay, what is more, this great man could not
arrive to comprehend, That Rational and Irrational are terms absolutely
contradictory; and therefore he foolishly and childishly affirms, That the
Brute Beasts, which are all of them undoubtedly void of Reason, are more or
less partakers thereof, calling man Rational only by way of Excellency, or per
(...), as he has it. And from this (...) ^^ves another Error, no less gross
(...) ^^excusable, nay, perhaps greater than (...) ^ormer: That Asses, although
the dullest and sluggishest of all Beasts, have yet full and perfect knowledge
of this most difficult Aphorism of the Physicians, Contraria contrariis
curantur. But who, for Gods sake, is there among the Logicians, which does not
fully approve the saying of Aristotle, That from Truth follows only Truth;
whereas from Falsity Truth and Falsity do equally proceed? And yet the most
acute Galen, manifestly opposing it, gives us cause to believe that he did not
sufficiently understand it. But what praise did he gain by that his most
ingenuous Invention of the fourth Figure, gloriously found out by him to the
shame of Aristotle, and the other Master in Logic? Certainly it has by all
Logicians been disapproved, and with reason rejected, as confused and unfit for
Disputation.

From these frivolous Toys of Logic our Censurer proceeds to examine him in
matters of greater import, such as is Natural Philosophy. And he thinks Galen
to be in Philosophy more thick and muddy than puddle-water; and this he
manifests by many proofs: whereof I shall rehearse only a few, not to deviate
too far from my principal intent. Galen then says, and constantly affirms, that
Plants have full and entire Sense, and an internal principle of Motion within
themselves; that Motion cannot be comprehended of us by the corporal Senses,
but by Reason only; that Crabs and Beetles have no heads, those Animals only in
his opinion, having an Head, which have soft Eyes, and not those, whose Eyes
are covered with an hard and cristalline shell; and yet the contrary is
manifestly seen in Grasshoppers, Locusts, and such like Creatures. Besides this,
he says, That the Head is not made by the Brain, that in Volatils the Neck and
Feet are equally distant from the Heart; that the brain in Animals has need of
somewhat to move it, which are the Feet, and that the Feet on the contrary have
need of Sense, which is given them by the brain; and that the one without the
other is of no use or value; not observing, that Eels, Lampreys, and such like
Fish, although they have no Feet, have yet Brains. And here the wary Champion of
the Arabians opportunely retorts upon Galen the same Weapons wherewith the
other thought to have wounded Avicen: And since, says he, mention begins to be
made of the Brain, before we leave that discourse, we shall add, that Galen (in
the same manner as they reproached Avicen) wanted Brains himself. But how
expert Galen was in Philosophy, any one may easily discern from his discourse
concerning Hair; he observing, that the Hairs of the Eyelids and Eyebrows are
always at a stay, and do not increase and grow, as do those of the Head, and
other parts of the Body, and willing to give a reason thereof, says, That, as
it happens in dry and barren grounds that the Grass does not grow for want of
sufficient Moisture, so the Hairs of the Eyelids and Eyebrows by reason of
the little or no Nourishment, which they draw from the other parts, cannot come
to any great length. Now who in God's Name, does not see, that, if this were
the cause thereof, the Hairs of the Head must much less increase and grow, as
being rooted in an harder and drier skin, than that of the Eyelids? And it
appears to our Author, that the nourishment of these Hairs insensibly exhales
and evaporates through the exceeding small Pores of the Eyes. The most
sharp-sighted Galen likewise says, That provident Nature has given us Hair for
an Ornament to our Body: But if it were so, to what purpose do they grow in
those parts, which Modesty obliges us not to name? Besides that Nature would
greatly have injured Women by depriving them in some parts thereof. And in
fine, Galen, contrary to the Opinion of all Philosophers, holds, That Flame,
besides its natural Motion, which is always upwards, has also another which
makes it sometimes incline downwards; not considering, that Flame never has any
such Motion, but when it is forced and constrained thereto by Art.

Nor does the Censurer of Galen stop here, but passing on, examins his
Doctrine, where it seems of greatest weight, that is, in things appertaining to
Physic. And here he proves, That although Galen seriously employed all his
Industry and Wit therein, yet he penetrated so little into it, and committed so
many Errors therein, that it would be impossible to reckon them up distinctly.
And setting aside how much his ill Nature obliged him to leave no way untried,
that he might obscure the Fame of the Great Hippocrates, saying, That he
observed not the signs of the Pulses, nor made any mention of many Feavours,
with other like frivolous and vain Objections, wherewith he does not so much,
as in the least, raze his skin, although he thought to have grievously wounded
him; that which seems to be most important, is, that setting himself designedly
to comment on the Writings of Hippocrates, he seems in many places not to
understand them, often and in many places entangling himself, as the Censurer
distinctly shows, though I, not to be over-tedious, pass them over. He sometimes
refutes the Discourse of Hippocrates, but afterward giving himself the Ly,
elsewhere commends it, thus manifestly showing his little Firmness and
Constancy.

He brags moreover, That he had given certain and sure presages for the
Knowledge of all Diseases: but if others will, yet his most cautious Reprover
will not in the least believe him herein. For from those few Cures, which, that
his Fame might thereby live for ever, he relates himself to have performed, it
is manifestly seen, that he never aimed aright, but was rather greatly mistaken
in the Knowledge of the Distempers, and their Causes: as in that of the Wife of
Boetus, and of the Youth, to whom, contrary to the advice of Hippocrates, he
foolishly gave Meat in the Augmentation of his Feavor, to the Patients mortal
danger. But peradventure he showed himself more silly, and mad-man-like, when
to regulate the Cure of certain Diseases, he foolishly sought after the
Interpretation of idle Dreams. But above all his other Follies that seems the
greatest, which he committed in Curing the Wife of Boetus; and it is a wonder,
that he met not with that Eternal disgrace and Reproach, which he but too much
deserved for having shown himself so childish and ignorant, running perhaps
into as many Errors, as he divised Medicines.

And finally this sage Writer concludes against Galen, That if the great Number
of his Volumes were sifted, there would in this vast Bulk be found more Bran
than Flower; all that he writes, being paltry Stuff, and idle Prattle, full of
vain and high Boastings, often intermixed with digressions and Tales, void both
of Wit and Sense; and that they are in fine a confused Miscellany of
unwarrantable Doctrines, wherein he often enough repeats over the same thing,
although he openly protests, that he would never do it. I pass over many other,
even infinite Errors, whereof Galen is found guilty by his subtle Accuser,
because I think enough has been said to make it easily comprehended what, and
how great were the Contests between the Followers of the Arabians, and those of
the Greeks.

But whilst the Disputes of the Physicians were prosecuted with the greatest
heat, on a sudden rose up the most ingenious Theophrastus Paracelsus, who,
renewing the most ancient Method of Philosophy, which had for a long time been
laid aside, began attentively to read the great Book of Nature, that he might
therein learn the reason of Natural Evenements. He, intermixing Chimistry,
wherein he was very skilful, with Physic, and therewith, as with an useful and
fit Instrument, searching into the choicest of Natures Secrets, very
successfully undertook to cure the most desperate Diseases with Remedies which
he had found out by his Knowledge in this Art. It cannot easily be believed, to
what an height within a certain space of time his new Sect arrived, either
through the new and most curious way opened by him to true Philosophy, or
through the agreeable Pleasantness and Efficacy of his powerful Medicines, or
through his happy success in Diseases till that time thought incurable. And the
Fame of his skill being now generally spread over Germany, France, and other
Provinces of the Christian World, his Doctrines were fervently embraced by men
well versed in Sciences. And without doubt the advance of his Glory would have
been greater, had he not purposely wrapped up and concealed his Doctrine in
obscure Aenigmes, and ambiguous Allegories usual with Chimical Authors. What
and how great were afterward the Contests and Debates, as between those that
were only Galenists and only Paracelsians, so between those who may be called
Paracelso-Galenists, and Galeno-Chimists, is peradventure so well known to
every one, that I may well forbear to say any thing thereof. And though the
Galenists had enough to do with their extern Enemies, yet were they not, as the
Books of that Age testify, very well united, but oftentimes turned their
Animosities upon themselves, biting and tearing one another, like so many mad
Dogs.

But whilst Paracelsus happily introduced vital Anatomy both into Philosophy
and Physic; the Anatomy also of Animals was again brought to light out of the
Ruins of Oblivion, wherein it had for a long time lain wholly buried. And the
first Restorer thereof was Andreas Vessalius of Bruxells, a man certainly
worthy of Immortal Fame. He, questionless a greater Anatomist than Herophilus,
having accustomed himself from a Child to dissect Rats, and other small
Creatures, being come to years of more maturity, by degrees searched into the
several parts of human Bodies, and relying upon no other Testimony, but what
was given him by his own Eyes, and his own Hands, clearly manifested to every
one, in what great Errors the ancient Anatomists had lived, and above all,
Galen, whom he taxes with an hundred and an hundred Faults. It is strange and
wonderful to hear, how unmeasurably he was therefore persecuted and outraged by
the Physicians, his Contemporaries; and how the Disputes in Physic thereby
more and more increased, there being some, who would right or wrong defend and
maintain the most evident Faults of their Master Galen, not at all regarding,
that they thereby thwarted and went against his first and principal Sentiment,
who rather chose to incur the danger of Erring with his own Senses, than
blindly to give credit to what he had found related concerning human Bodies by
the ancient Anatomists, whom he sometimes, though wrongfully, blames for their
Observations about the Entrals of men, because he had seen it otherwise in
those of Monkies.

But amongst the fierce and implacable enemies of Vessalius, that famous
Parisian Physician Jacobus Silvius would needs signalize himself, and desirous
to contend with him, violently assaults him, changing his name Vessalius into
Vaesanus, that is, mad, stiling his book a most unworthy, villainous and
perplexed Miscellany of Errors, and an abominable Dream of filthy and wicked
Instructions. Then turning to the Readers, he with Prayers and Protestations
exhorts and conjures them furiously to tear it in pieces, and burn it. He
beseeches also the Emperor then being, severely to punish the Author, whom he
terms a Monster of Folly and Ingratitude, an Exemplar of Insolence and Villainy,
basely born, and worse educated in his Court, saying, It would be a deed of
Charity, if he totally made him away, and strangled him, that he might not with
his poisonous and pestilential Breath to infect and corrupt the Remainder of
Europe. Now what more, I pray, could he have done, had poor Vessalius been
guilty of High Treason not only against Monsieur Galen, but even against Caesar
himself; or if he had betrayed and sold Buda, or Alba Regalis to the Turks; or
if his Writings had been like to those of Philip Melancthon and impious Luther?
yet so far did the Calumnies and Diffamations of the envious Silvius, and other
rascally Galenists prevail with the Emperor, who was in all things else a most
just Prince, that in fine Vessalius unfortunately lost his Favor, and was
banished the Court. Thus was that Saying verified, which Dioclesian, not yet
advanced to the Purple, often had in his mouth; Saepe bonus, saepe cautus
decipitur Imperator. Not long after it appeared, that the Frowardness and Spite
of Silvius passed into Andreas Laurentius, which made him thus also break out
against the innocent Vessalius; Against this man let us, as they say, put on
the Lions skin, and tame all those monsters, which he has brought forth out of
a Spirit of Contradiction, so let him undergo the due reward of his Arrogance
and Ingratitude against his Master Galen. And perhaps that our Reader of
Physic, who put into his printed Conclusions these most elegant words, The
Circulation of the Blood, together with Harvey the Author, we utterly reject
and explode; would, if it had been in his power, have done as much for the
great Harvey with the King and Parliament of England.

But other learned men little or nothing regarding the disgrace befaln
Vessalius, but rather as is usual with all great and generous Souls, in whom it
is always seen, that Difficulty whets desire. being rendered more courageous and
eager by the opposition, set themselves with their utmost endeavor to follow
the same Track, such as were Felix Platerus, Gasper Bauhinus, Gabriel
Fallopius, Volcherus, Coiter, Realdus Columbus, Fabritius de Aqua pendente,
Adrianus Spigelius, and many other most skilful and industrious Anatomists, who
seemed to have arrived to the highest pitch of that Art, nothing remaining for
a farther search. When behold Gasper Asellius and William Harvey (who by the
universal Consent of all learned men is reckoned amongst the greatest, and most
expert Anatomists of our, or former Ages) published their new and glorious
Inventions, being followed by the noblest Company of Physicians that ever were
in the World, of whom I must not omit the most famous, as Joannes Heurnius,
Giovanni Picchetti, Thomas Wharton, Ludovicus Bilsius, Nathanael Heighmore,
Francis Glisson, Thomas Bartholinus, Regnerus Graaf, Carlo Fracassati, Richard
Lower, Lorenzo Bellini, and many others, whom for brevity sake I pass over, all
worthy of immortal praise and Renown. Yet must I not but make mention of the
most ingenious Marcellus Malpighius, The chiefest glory of Felsinian streams.
who thirsting after Honor, does so accurately practice Anatomy in Plants, that
nothing more can be desired in that Art. And in my opinion, it may freely be
confessed, that within the narrow compass of a few years there have been more
Wonders discovered in the bodies of Animals, than were formerly known in the
long course of five and thirty Ages: without my taking the boldness to say,
That the finding out alone of the Circulation of the Blood, first discovered in
this our Italy, which has always (O great Infelicity of ours) Fruitful in
bringing forth, in cherishing ungrateful -- of her Children, and afterward
fully established and divulged in England, far exceeds the Invention of all
Antiquity put together. But of the Questions, Quarrels, Contentions, Debates,
Disputes, and Skirmishes, that did thereupon arise amongst Physicians, I do at
present forbear any mention; because I well know, we do still with our Eyes
behold them. And perhaps it is manifest to every one, how that Primerose,
Parisani, and Riolanus Junior (who was in all things else an acute Anatomist)
pertinaciously maintaining the Non-circulation of the Blood, being scoffed at,
and baffled by the most famous Scholars of Europe, were forced at last
shamefully to recant their Follies; and that Vopiscus Fortunatus Pemplius,
having first briskly opposed the Circulation of the Blood, being afterward
convinced and refuted by the Great Renatus des Carts, and John Wallis more
accurately publishing his Works anew, he finally sang this famous Palinody; At
first the Invention pleased me not, as by my Discourses and Writings I have
publicly testified: But the more I labored to refute and condemn it, the more
I condemn, and refute my self; his reasons being not only so persuasive, but
compulsive. I know very well, that there are at this day some, who, considering
the reproach and dishonor that befell Primerose and Parisani, and seeing all
those learned men, which either publish Books in Print, or with esteem read
Lectures in their Universities, unanimously do admit of these Modern
Discoveries, and therefore not daring in the presence of Scholars to contradict
any of them, do yet amongst those, who are wholly ignorant of Anatomy, covertly
mutter and murmr, impudently presuming to say, That so many different things
cannot any way be in the bodies of Animals; that, if they were there, their
Galen was not so simple or foolish, but that he, long before these Modern
Inventors appeared in the World, would distinctly have discerned and described
them: forasmuch as being most accurate and ingenious, and having given all
Physic its last and perfect Complement, it is not credible, that he should in
this alone have so grossly erred: wherefore it is not necessary for us to beat
our Brains about these new Inventions in Medicine, seeing we ought to rely upon
his Labors, and satisfy our selves with a full understanding of his
Sentiments, Reasons, and Oracles, so they call his most Witless and vain
Expressions. And in fine they conclude, That we ought blindfoldly to believe
Galen, and some other ancient Authors, even though our Senses sometimes oppose,
that these are often wont to deceive us, which those men will not do, who,
having spent their whole life in Study and Experience, have all along been by
every one reputed as the Gods of Physic.

But for my part, I shall not, to convince, and undeceive them, give my self
the trouble manifestly to show them (as I could well do) that do give more
credit to authority and reasons, than to our Senses, is the most foolish
Obstinacy that could ever fall into the mind of man: forasmuch as I imagine
that to get clear of such Straits, they would reject the clearest
Demonstrations of the Modern Philosophers. I shall therefore only briefly let
them know, how little they understand the very Sentiments of their Masters. And
perhaps they never much regarded that most true Saying of their own Aristotle;
That we ought to give credit to Reason, if the things of Reason agree with
Experience: Nor yet that other Saying of the same Author; That to forsake the
Guidance of our Senses, to be blindly led by Reason, is a great Argument of the
weakness of our Wit. And was not Galen also of the same mind? See here his own
Words; all those are rather to be esteemed foolish, than wise, who being able
fully to comprehend, and perceive things by their Senses, will yet avow, that
we cannot learn but by Demonstrations alone. And in another place the same
Author says; The Doctrine of those that rely upon the Sayings of others, is
tyrannical, and full of Confusion and Debates. And in Gods Name let them read
also the same Sentiment in their Avicen; and if they be not yet satisfied, let
them go, and learn of the Prince of Divines, Joannes Scotus, where he says,
That all those who will not credit their Senses, justly deserve to be burnt.
And let them know farther, that whoever has the least spark of Reason, of what
Sect soever he be, must needs say, as does that great Light of Galenical and
Hippocratical Physic, Nicolaus Leonicenus; We ought not so far to foregoe our
own Judgments, as always to follow the footsteps of others, and to be certain
our selves of nothing: For this would be to see with other men's Eyes, to hear
with other men's Ears, and smell with other men's Noses, and to understand with
other men's Intelligence, and to believe our selves no other than mere stones,
to commit all things to the assertions of others, and not to believe our selves
able to make any true discussion in doubtful matters

And another of Galens Followers exceedingly condemning this same pertinacy,
relates a very pleasant adventure, to wit, That a certain public Reader, long
time versed, and grown old in the Books of Aristotle, being one day by chance
present at an Anatomy, and clearly seeing, that the Vena cava takes its
Original from the innumerable Threads or Roots which are in the Liver, full of
wonder and astonishment,

As one that never beheld a thing incredible. confessed indeed, by what his
Senses showed him, the Vena cava must descend from the Liver; but that he ought
not therefore by crediting his Senses to contradict his Master Aristotle, who
constantly affirms, all the veins in man's body to have their beginning from the
Heart; because, said he, it is much more easy for our Senses to be sometimes
deceived, than for the Great and Sovereign Aristotle ever to have fallen into any
Error. And so much Power had his Obstinacy over him, that being in the company
of certain learned men, shown by one of them a little Suet about the Heart,
which melted by the faint heat of a Candle, to defend his Aristotle, by whom
this is denied, he durst to say, that what he saw, was not Fat,

And certainly pleasant enough is that also which is related by the most famous
Redi, that one, who was deeply read in the Writings of the Peripateticks,
because he would not be compelled to confess, that the Stars, and other new
things discovered in the Heavens by the great Galileo, were true, refused the
assistance of the Telescope; and that another, yet more obstinate, would not
condescend to see him open one of those little Frogs, which in Summer are seen
in the dusty Highways, for fear of being obliged to confess, that they are not
engendered in the instant of the Drops being incorporated with the Dust. But
where shall I have room to relate the Disputes and Contests which grew up in
Rome about the Medicinal Doctrine of that famous Physician Prosper Martianus?
Who being endued with uncommon Learning, and prudent Sagacity, and gloriously
employing the utmost of his Ability and Industry in searching into the Doctrine
of Hippocrates, manifestly shows, that Galen oftentimes either did not, or
would not comprehend the true Sentiments of that venerable old man. And Petro
Castelli, avouching the same thing, tells us besides, That Galen took the same
course in explaining the most learned Opinions of the divine Plato: Galen
either understood not, or would not understand Hippocrates or Plato, to give
the greater esteem to his own Writings. Then he defends the most wise Old Man
from his Reproofs and Taunts, especially about the Causes of Fevers,
constantly affirming, not only that Hippocrates never prescribed the letting of
Blood in Fevers, but where the excessive internal Inflammation required it, as
was also before him fully observed by Hieronymus Cardanus; but farthemore
asserting, That according to the Doctrine of Hippocrates, a Fever is one of
those Distempers, which in nowise admits of Phlebotomy. These and other good
and sound Doctrines the learned Martianus wisely manifesting, revived with them
the decayed, and almost extinguished Sect of his dear Hippocrates.

But I know not how I have hitherto forbore to mention one, who, although a woman,
deserves yet to be reckoned amongst the greatest Scholars, I mean the Lady
Donna Oliva Sabuco, She childish sports, and Female Exercise
Even from her tender years did still despise
To spin, or to the Needle set her hand,
Of masculine learning studious, she disdained.


Now she being abundantly furnished with more than masculine Wit, and
Understanding, courageously employed both her Brains and Mind in the
Investigation of Natural things; and advancing in her Studies, she set her wits
upon things of greatest use, and to the end Spain, and the Whole might receive
some benefit thereby, she wonderfully gave beginning to a new and most
ingenious way of Curing. And writing a Letter to the most august Monarch Philip
the Second, of Eternal and Glorious Memory, she thus displays her Wit. It is as
plain as the light of the Sun, That the ancient Physic was in an Error,
according as it is read and practiced in its principal Fundamentals, for that
the ancient Philosophers and Physicians neither understood or reached the true
nature upon which Physic is founded, and from whence it draws its original; of
which, not only the understanding Christian Physicians may be Judges, but also
those that have any prospect into other Faculties, being persons of Wit and
Judgment. And a little after. He that cannot comprehend or understand it, let
him leave it to others that are to come, or let him believe Experience, and not
the ancient Physic. Therefore my Petition is just, that these my Followers may
be approved for one year, since they have tried the Rules of Galen and
Hippocrates for these 2000 years, and have found the Effect so inconsiderable,
and the Ends so uncertain, as is to be seen every day, and was lately observed
in the past Epidemic Catarrhs, Spotted Fevers, Small Pox, and Pestilences, and
many other Infirmities; in the Cure of which, that sort of Physic is so
ineffectual, that scarce two in a thousand live out the natural Limits of life;
but all die violent deaths of some Disease or other, without any Remedy from
ancient Physic.

And in her Dialogue of True Physic: You cannot deny (Mr. Doctor) but that the
Physic you use, is uncertain, various, and fallacious, and that its End and
Effects are false and dubious, whereas we see the ends and effects of other
Arts to be certain, and true without variation; as in Arithmetic, Geometry,
Music, Ascrology, etc. which bring to pass the end and benefit which they
purpose. Which end fails, as you see in Physic, being so deceitful, uncertain,
and various. Whence it must follow, that this Art fails in its first grounds
and foundations, because it produces not fruit conformable to what it proposes;
so that when we expect Currants, and delicious Apples, it brings forth nothing
but Galls and Medlars.

And a little further, maintaining the same Opinion, she says; You cannot
deny, Mr. Doctor, the Inconstancy of Physic, and how many alterations have
been made in it, and that the Art was for a long time forbidden in Rome, where
those wise people gave no credit to it, nor would seek for Cure from the hands
of the Physician, for the reasons I have said, which are of great efficacy.
Neither did the Saracens, nor those of China admit Physicians. And those grave
and ancient Authors themselves Cry out, that Life is short, Art long, Judgment
difficult, and Experience dangerous. And Hippocrates, That no certain and
perfect assurance in Physic can be attained to. Nor can you deny, Mr. Doctor,
but that they were men as we are, or that their Sayings were not above the
Condition of Men, but that they spoke according to Nature, which aspired no
higher than what the common sense of man could reach. Therefore, says Pliny,
there is no Art in the World so inconstant as that of Physic, which changes
every day.

The Lady Donna Oliva goes on farther, whose excellent parts is not my intent
now to sum up, and reckon, since the doing thereof would hold me over long. I
shall content my self therefore to mention, that some of the most famous
Authors have laid claim to many things, falsely boasting, themselves to have
been the first Discoverers of them (as about the manner, which Nature uses in
distributing the Aliment to all the Parts of an animated Body) whereof she had
full knowledge long before, and gloriously published them in her Books.

After her there arose in our Italy a new System of Rational Physic, which was
the laudable Invention of that famous Philosopher, and Doctor in Divinity,
Thomas Campanella. He never practiced Physic, but yet would search into the
most secret Arcanum's thereof: And as it was easy for his more than ordinary
Wit to separate his Philosophy from the vulgar, commonly taught in the Schools:
so also he wanted not skill with specious Doctrines to establish another
Invention of Rational Physic, from whence again followed many various Disputes
and Contentions in the Art.

But O how far were they in our days out-strip'd by that Great Hermes of the
lower Germany, John Baptist van Helmont, who, being endued with more sublime
and noble Parts, attempted a great Enterprise, whence Debates and Oppositions
mightily increased. He, accompanying the Vivacity of his Wit with a singular
Morality, and curiously applying himself to Chimistry, wholly bent his Studies
to the solving of Natural Bodies, and sparing no sort of Pains or Charge,
surmounted to such an height, that leaving far behind him the glorious steps of
Paracelsus, he never stopped, till he had happily arrived to finish a wonderful,
and never-before-heard-of System of Rational Physic.

And in like manner have we seen in our Days the famous Thomas Willis with his
new System of Rational Physic advancing apace along the path of Immortality
and Glory: Nor is it easy to believe, with what Diligence he endeavored to
collect all that he deemed necessary for so Noble a Work; nor yet what Pains he
took, what Watchings he underwent, and what Eagerness he used to bring it to
its entire Perfection. Nor was less Trouble undergone, or less Industry used in
a like Uundertaking by Silvius, famous for the innumerable Multitude of his
Followers, as Glisson Helvetius, Messonier, Travagino, and other illustrious
Scholars of this Age: Many of which, I know not for what reason, have not yet
published their Conceptions. I say nothing at present of those able men who yet
sweat at the work, and hope, by the Assistance of the Modern Anatomists, and
new Natural Philosophy, to bring about their generous Designs concerning
various Systems of Rational Physic. And I pass by also those who ingeniously
empty themselves in devising Systems of Experimental and Methodical Physic,
but such as greatly varies, and differs from that of the Ancients. But how much
the Quarrel of Physicians are thereby increased, to the overturning and
obscuring all Medicine, is not necessary to be named at present, since we
plainly see it before our Eyes. Wherefore if the most Eloquent Pliny were
living in these our days, he would certainly more angrily than ever cry out;
Mutatur Ars quotidie toties interpellis, and ingeniorum flatu impellimur, not
indeed by the Wits of Greece, now lying idle, and servile under the Yoke of the
Barbarians; but the most famous ones of England, and other Provinces, by him in
his time esteemed Barbarous.

But I now at last see my self encompassed about with a most innumerable Troop
of Physicians, by whom Physic is divided into so many Factions, and shivered,
as it were, into so many pieces, that it is impossible for the Wit of man to
part it into more. And these are all men, who will not follow the steps of
either Greek, Latin, Barbarian, or other Foreign Writer, whether Ancient or
Modern, nor be always tied to the Sentiments of any; but being free, and
disengaged, swiftly overrun the most vast Kingdoms of Nature, and then
oppugning the most difficult and obstin^te Diseases, with Arms gotten by their
own Labors ^^d not borrowed, or taken from the Arsenals of ot^^^s, nor
unskilfully managed, know how to render their Names eternally illustrious by
their glorious Undertakings. Thus crediting nothing but what they perceive by
their own Senses, or have approved by most certain Experience, they will look
into all, penetrate all, and with a curious Eye narrowly examine all, not
allowing any Reason for vendible, but only what agrees with the Sagacity of
their own Understanding. And thus being contrary to all Sects, and not wholly
Enemies to any of the Sectators, they protest, that they herein follow the
steps of Hippocrates and Galen more, than their most obstinate Defenders. And
forasmuch as I think it pertinent to our purpose, to see whether such a Liberty
ought to be permitted them: I beseech you, Gentlemen, at our next Meeting to
hear their Reasons, since what I have already said, may suffice for the present.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THis is the first Discourse of Signor Lionardo di Capoa, who has writ seven
others upon the same subject: which according to the acceptance this meets with
in Public, shall likewise be Englished.


