THE WHORE UNVAILED, Or the Mystery of the Deceit of the CHURCH of ROME,
REVEALED.

BEING A brief Answer to a Book Entitled, The Reconsiler of Religions; or a
Decider of all Controversies in matters of Faith, Written by a professed Roman
Catholic, who subscribes his name A.S. in which he endeavored to prove the
Church of Rome to be the true Church; But what his arguments therein produced
are worth for his purpose, may be here seen in this following Treatise.

Also his reflections upon the Principles of the People called Quakers,
Answered.

With a brief Discovery of the true Church, in which the Doctrine of Perfection
is vindicated, by sound (Scripture) Arguments.

By a servant of the Lord, Josiah Coal.

Whereunto is added the 14 th. Chap. of A.S. his Book, in which he declares the
Protestant, or Sectarian Ministers, not to be true preachers, nor sent of God,
which I thought meet to publish herewith, that the Sectarians, or Episcoparians
may answer for themselves.

O thou that dwell upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is
come, and the measure of thy Covetousness, Jer. 51.13. For out of the north
there comes up a Nation against her, which shall make her land desolate* and
none shall dwell therein, chap* 50.3.

And a mighty Angel took up a great stone, like a millstone, and cast it into
the sea, saying, thus with violen^e shall that great City Babylon be thrown
down, and shall be found no more at all, Rev. 18.21.

Their Idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands: They have mouths* but
they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not; they have ears, but they hear
not; noses have they, but they smell not; they have hands, but they handle not*
feet have they, but they walk not, neither speak they through their throat,
they that make them are like unto them, so is every o^ that trusts in them,
Ps. 115.4, 5, 6, 7, 8 But our God is in the heavens, he does whatsoever he
pleases. ver 3.

Printed in the Year, 1665.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
ALthough the Author of the pretended Reconciler of Religions, did, in the
conclusion thereof, seem to Challeng an Answer to all particulars therein laid
down, according to the Chapters and Numbers thereof; yet I did not look upon
his Challeng to be any obligation to me, to proceed according to his
directions; neither indeed was it needful or necessary that I should answer his
desire therein; for it would have required more time than I was willing to
spare for that work, and more labor than I was willing to bestow about it,
because there is an easier way which I have taken to do the work as effectual
as though I had gone through with every particular there incerted. For when the
foundation of a building is Raced, the whole building will fall as effectually,
as though a man should begin at the top, and pull down all, one stone after
another; and with a great deal less labor it is done. So, for my Comodaty, I
have observed that Rule in answering the aforesaid Book, by Racing the
Foundation of the Contents thereof, or answering the chief Heads by which he
therein endeavored to prove the Church of Rome to be the True Church; upon
which all the rest of his Book has its dependancy: and those Heads or
Particulars being Confuted, the rest must of (themselves needs fall, or of)
necessity be of no validity, and so not worth spending Ink and Paper about,
upon consideration of which, I doubt not but the Reader will find as good
satisfaction in what I have hear written concerning the Church of Rome, as
though I had answered all his particulars particularly. And so to the Grace of
God do I commend thee.

J. C.

The Whore unvailed, etc.
GReat is the controversy at this day throughout the whole Christendom
concerning the way of worship and salvation, and great is the confusion that is
about faith, and religion, etc. Even amongst all professing Christianity; and
many, and cruel are the murders, that have been acted by them, one against
another, about faith, and worship, since the apostasy bebegan; and since people
forsook the right way, and went in Cains way, and in Balaams, Jude ver. 11. For
then persecution began amongst the prof^st Christians, and not before; and when
the right way was forsaken, then people went into envy, and then they withstood
the truth; even as Jannes, and Jambres withstood Moses; and then they began to
be scattered (from the holy mountain of the Lord, where nothings hurts, nor
destroys) to the ba^ren mountains, where they have been destroying one another;
and there (in the dark and cloudy day of Antichrists reign) they have been
worshipping the many headed beast; (that then arose) and also the dragon, that
gave power to the Beast to make War with the Saints; and they who have been
worshipping upon one mountain, they have cried salvation is here: And they who
have been worshipping another head, or upon another hill, they have cried that
salvation was to be found there: (For the seven heads of the beast, are seven
mountains upon which the whore sits, that drinks the blood of the Sain^s.) And
so they fell out one with another about the way of salvation, and upon these
barren mountains (unto which people are, in vain, looking for salvation) the
strife and the envy has been: And there people has been killing one another,
about the way, and themselves all out of the way, in an Antichristian,
destroying, persecuting spirit, as their fruits declares; for the Spirit of
Christ never led the true Christians to prosecute any about Religion, neither
does any who are in the right way, kill and destroy men's lives about religion;
Nay, they that do so, are not true Christians, but of an Antichristian spirit
for I testify in the name of the Lord, and for God, that the Spirit of Christ
does not (nor never did) admit, or allow of persecution, or of destroying men^
lives, about worship, and faith toward God; neither are any of them all true
Christians (whatsoever they profess) that are found so doing.

For it is not a bare profession of Christ, and of zeal for his cause, and
crying up ordinances, etc. that makes people true Christians, or that gives
them acceptance with God, or will make them well pleasing unto God; But that
which makes a man a true Christian, is (his obedience unto) that Spirit, which
baptizeth into the true faith, by which righteousness is wrought, Heb. 11.33.
and into Christ who is the Author of faith, and will bring him to have the mind
of Christ (as the true Christians had) and will make him partaker of his divine
nature, and will teach him to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present world, and to do to all men as he would they should do unto him* which
is according to the Law and Prophets, that Christ came to fulfill: And indeed
there is nothing that can bring a man into this true Christian state, but only
the w^rking and operation of the Spirit of Christ, in his inward parts, which
all ought to obey and submit unto; For the persecuting Jews, who were
uncircumcised in heart, and ears, and did always resist the holy Ghost; they
professed as great zeal for God, and his cause, as the Apostate Christians now
do, and they looked for the coming of the Messiah, of whom all the Prophets
prophesied, and professed they would adore him, and reverence him, etc. and said
that if they had been in the days of their fathers, they would not have slain
the Prophets, Mat. 23.31. who prophesied of the coming of Christ, and so they
had seemingly a great zeal for God, and his truth; But alas, a murdering spirit
was found in them, for notwithstanding they professed that they would not have
killed the Prophets, yet they killed the Son who was the end of the Prophets;
And although the Prophets signified the time when, Dan. 9.24. and the place
where the Messiah should be born, Mic. 5 2. yet when he was come according to
the Prophets, which they professed; These professing Jews would not own him, nor
receive him, Joh. 1.11. because he reproved their hypocrisy, and their
murdering spirit, Joh. 8.40. But they crucified and slew him: And this is the
very state of the Apostate Christians at this day; for who is there now amongst
them but will profess as great love to Christ, as the Jews in Christ's days did
to the Prophets, who prophesied of him; and who is there now amongst them but
will say, had we been in Pilats days, we would not have crucified Christ, nor
delivered him up to be crucified (a^ the Jews said of the Prophets) yet
notwithstanding their so saying, they do as the Jews did; for now in this day
of his spiritual appearance (which they profess they look for and expect) they
are found persecuting of him in his Members, under the same pretense that the
Jews persecuted him in their day, ( viz.) as a Blasphemer, etc. And so the
Persecutors were in all ages b^inded by the god of the world, who was a
murderer from the beginning; and though they could see the iniquities of their
fathers and predecessors, in persecuting and killing the Prophets, yet the envy
of their hearts was such, that they could not see their own iniquities, in
persecuting and slaying the son, who was greater than the servants, whom their
fathers slew: so, as I said before, it is not a profession of Christ, and his
Ordinances, or zeal for his cause, that makes people true Christians; neither
is God worshipped upon any of those mountains where the persecuting and
destroying one another is, but the worship of God consists in obedience to
that spirit of truth, which condemns all those works of darkness and cruelty,
and in his own mountain of holiness, where nothing hurts nor destroys, Isa.
11.9. And such is the Father now seeking to worship him, that will worship him
there, and is now gathering his sheep from off the barren mountains upon which
the Whore si^s, (where they have been scattered in the dark and cloudy day of
Antichrists reign, and where the wars and fightings are) even to his own holy
mountain, where they shall learn war no more, Isa. 2.4. And this is the work
that the envious, and murtherous one opposes, and bestirr^ himself with all
his force and might, in his instruments of cruelty, and men of war, arming of
them with all kind of weapons that possibly he can form, to fight against this
appearance and work of God; for so it has been, that since we (who are
reproachfully called Quakers) were raised up to be a people, to bear testimony
for the name of the Lord, and of the working of his spirit and power, we have
always been even as a But for all the Archers of Babylon (even from every
mountain) to shoot at: And our sufferings has not been only in our persons and
estates, as the spoiling of our goods, and scourgings, and cruel mockings, and
imprisonments (many unto death, as this Nation to her anguish must be made to
know) but even all sorts of Babylons Me^chants, (or they that trades in every
part of her, or within her subburbs) have often made it their business to write
and print against us, endeavoring thereby as much as in them lay, to render us
odious, (to our own Nation, and to Nations about us) under pretense that we
were Papists, and Jesuits, and that we propagated Jesuitical principles, etc.
but they being almost, if not altogether, weary of that work, finding it to be
to no purpose, (for the truth which we profess has still got ground, and
flourishes through all these things) now at last, the Papists, or Jesuits
themselves, (who, I perceive have a secret hope of a day once more in this
Nation,) they begin to put out their heads, and to print against us, and so
both Protestants and Papists, even every head and horn of the Beast, after whom
the whole world wonders, are ^^u^d pushing against the La^o and the Saints,
Rev. 17.14. For of late a cer^ain Pamphlet accidentally came to my hands,
written by a perfect Roman Catholic, who subscribed his name A.S. in which he
seems to show himself sensible of the great distractions that are throughout
the whole Christendom, about the true way of worship, and con^e^ning the true
Church; and first states a Question, viz which is this Church? etc. and
afterward makes it his business to prove the Church of Rome to be this true
Church, and that by diverse Arguments by him stated in a Syllogistical manner:
And I also finding the Author of the aforesaid Pamphlet therein smiting at the
people of God called Quakers, and endeavoring to render them odious, by
affirming they are led by a deluding spirit, etc. I found my self som^what
concerned to return a brief reply to his chief Arguments therein produced, by
which he ha^h (in vain) endeavored to accomplish the aforesaid work by him
undertaken.

A.S. His first Argument, produced to prove the Church of Rome to be the true
Church, consists of nine particulars, as follows; viz. That is the true
Church, and no other, which is one, holy* Catholic, and Apostolic Church,
which is visible, infallible, inerrable, in which is power of miracles, out of
which none can be saved; But the Rom^n Pontificial, that is to say, the
faithful people, dispersed all the world over, in communion with the high
Priest, Bishop, or Pope of Rome is such, and no other; Therefore the Roman
Pontificial alone is the true Church.

Reply. To which I reply, that the true Church, of which Christ alone is Head,
and Supreme Governor, is in it self one, holy, Apostolic Church, etc. I shall
not go about to deny: but as touching that grand Question by A.S. stated before
his Argument here inserted ( viz.) which is this Church, etc. I answer, this is
a thing indeed disputable amongst many, yea, amongst many thousands, yet not at
all questionable, nor yet doubtful unto me; for I am well satisfied therein,
and in all other things that appertain to the way of Life and Salvation, but
that the Church of Rome is the true Church, (as A.S. affi^meth, and by his many
Arguments has endeavored to prove) I do not acknowledge, but deny, and doubt
not but I shall, in this short ensuing Treatice, prove the contrary, to the
satisfaction of every judicious Reader.

First, Although the true Church, of which Christ is invisible Head, is one,
yet the oneness of the Church of Rome is not a sufficient Argument to prove her
to be the true Church; for wherein does her oneness consist, farther than in
Idolatry, Superstition, Murder, and such like abominations, of which much
might be mentioned (which was never practiced by the true Church in the
Apostles days) but in these things the Church of Rome is one: witness her
worshipping Idols, or images, bowing to that she calls her Altars, and the
rest of her Superstitious Ceremonies; witness the killing, burning, or
drinking the blood of so many thousands, as she has done for many hundred
years p^st, as the whole Christendom full well knows; therefore the Church of
Rome is not the true Church.

Secondly, And consider, was not the company of Priests one in Hosea's days,
who murdered in the way by consent? whom the Prophet compared to troops of
Robbers, Hos. 6.9. And is not the Church of Rome one as they were? for has not
she murdered many (by consent of most of her members) in the way that she is
in? consider these things.

But then A.S. says, that she is one in matters of Faith, and governed by one
invisible Head, Christ; and by one visible Head, the Pope, the true successor
of Peter, etc. and therefore she is the true Church.

Answ. 1. I answer, that she is perfectly united in matters of Faith, I utterly
deny: witness the History of the Counsel of Trent, which copiously relates the
Divisions and Contradictions amongst them there about matters of Faith. But
admit tha^ it were so, that she were one in matters of Faith, that does not
prove her to be the true Church, unless she could prove her Faith to be the
true Faith, by which righteousness is wrought, Heb. 11.13. And which is made
perfect by works of righteousness, James 2.22. But the Faith of the Church of
Rome is not the true Faith, (as her works of unrighteousness before mentioned
clearly make manifest) therefore the Church of Rome is not the true Church.

Secondly, That the Church of Rome is governed by one invisible Head, Christ,
that I also deny, and her fruit^ before mention^d, and which I shall hereafter
mention, sufficiently declares the contrary; and as Christ said to the Jews, If
you were of Abraham, you would do the works of Abraham, but now you go about to
kill me; thus did not Abraham. So say I of the Church of Rome, If she were
governed by the one invisible Head, Christ, as the true Church was, then she
would have the mind of Christ, (who came not to destroy men's lives, but to save
them) as the true Church had, 1 Cor. 2.16. but she has not the mind of Christ:
Witness her destroying the lives of many, not only of those that believe not,
but of those that beli^ve: Therefore she is not governed by the invisible Head,
Christ, and consequently is not the true Church, but the Whore that drinks the
blood of the Saints.

Thirdly, But that the Church of Rome is governed by her visible Head, the
Pope, I shall not go about to contradict; for although that proves her to be
one, in subjection to the Pope, yet it does not prove her to be the true
Church; because Christ never ordained a visible Head to his Church; but that
the Pope is the true successor of Peter (as A.S. affirms) that I do deny; and
it remains for him to prove it, or for some of his servants to do it for him;
for after Peter was converted, he never gave consent to the murdering of any,
as the Pope has done many; Therefore he is not the true Successor of Peter.

2. That the true Church is holy* or (as A.S. says) the spotles^ body of
Christ, that I do acknowledge; but the Church of Rome (of which the Pope is
visible head) is not holy, nor the spotless body of Christ.

1. For the spotless body of Christ (the true Church) was baptized with the
holy Ghost and with fire, the spirit of Judgment and of burning, and thereby
her filth and her spots were purged away from her, and she was washed from
Idolatry and covetousness, etc. as the Apostles testified, 1 Cor. 6.11. and
thereby she was fitted for Gods Kingdom, and was made to sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus, and had the mind of Christ, 2 Cor. 2.16. who
came not to destroy men's lives, etc. Luke 9.56. But the Church of Rome is not
washed from Idolatry, nor free from Murder, as her worshipping of Idols or
Images does testify; and as her killing and destroying about Religion, and
worship bears witness (which the spirit of Christ never allowed of, nor the
spotless body of Christ never practiced.) Therefore the Church of Rome is not
holy, nor the spotless body of Christ. And as to that affirmation of A.S. in
the third Number of his first Chapter ( viz.) Every man as he is Regenerated in
Christ, and a member of his body, is holy, and a saint, though as he is the son
of Adam, he is a liar and a sinner.

Answ. To this I answer, That the most part of all the Sectaries in the world
will join with him in that particular; therefore he need not so much ^ry
against them: but the true Church will not own that Doctrine, neither can I own
i^, because it is the Doctrine of Devils, and the spirit of God testifies
against it. For it is impossible for any man to be both a saint and a sinner at
one season: for if that could be, then might a man serve two Masters, which
Christ said could not be, Luke 16.13. And the Apostle said, He that commits
sin, is the servant of sin, Joh. 8*34. and is free from righteousness, Romans
6.22. So has no part in Christ, who is the righteousness of God. And
whosoever loves or makes a lie, shall not enter the holy City, which is the
true Church, Revel. 21.27. Therefore is no member of it. Now let A.S. consider
his ignorance, for according to his own confession, the true) Church is built
of living believers (elect and precious) but he that is a liar and a sinner, is
dead ( for the soul that sins shall dye, Ezekiel. 18.4.) Therefore, he that is a
liar and a sinner, is not a living believer, nor yet holy and a saint. Yet I do
not deny, but that he that is regenerated in Christ, and is baptized into him,
and is thereby made a member of his spotless body, is holy and a saint; for by
and through the second Adam, he is redeemed out of the first fallen Adams state.

Well,

But A. S. says, That all the members of the Church of Rome are baptized and
sanctified in Christ, and that all her Institutes and Ceremonies, etc. are
holy, and therefore she is holy.

Answ. I deny i^, and he cannot prove it; for all who are baptized into Christ
(and are sanctified in him) have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. and does live holy,
and have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. But the Church of Rome has not the
mind of Christ, neither does she live holy (as before proved;) Therefore she is
not holy. And as concerning her Institutions and Ceremonies, as Bowing to
Images, and Altars, and such things, we never read that the holy Church in the
Primitive times, did practice such things; therefore we have no ground to
believe they are holy.

3. That the true Church is Catholic or Universal, I shall not go about to
deny: but I do deny that the Universality of the Church of Rome, is a
sufficient Argument to prove her to be the true Church; for consider,

1. What Church is more universal then the great Whore (the false Church) who
has a name written, MYSTERY BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND
ABOMINATION OF THE EARTH, Rev. 17.5. Who sits upon the many waters, which are
Nations, Kindreds, Tongue^, and Peoples? Rev. 17.15. And did not the Whole
world, wonder after the beast, that carries the Whore? Rev. 13.3. And did she
not sit as a Queen over them all, with her (fair profession, or) golden cup in
her hand, full of abominations, and filthiness of her fornication? Rev. 18.7.
and 17.4. And did not all the inhabitants of the earth, and the Kings of the
earth drink of the wine of her fornication, and commit fornication with her,
Rev. 18.3. and 17.2. (Mark) how universal was this great Whore, the false
Church, and how confident she was; for she said in her heart, that she should
see no sorrow, Rev. 18.7. And did she not glor^fie her self, and reign over the
kings of the earth? Rev. 17.18. mark this thing. Is not this the very state of
the Church of Rome now at this day? does she not reign over the Kings of the
earth, and over the inhabitants of the earth? and has she not so done long,
even for many ages? Witness Fox his Acts and Monuments, the first Volume,
which copiously relates the Authority she hat^ exercised over Kings, and how
Pope Aarian made Fredricus the Emperor hold his stirrup while he got up his
horse; yea, and shent him for his pains, because the poor Emperor (not being
used to that work) held his stirrup on the wrong side of his horse.

And again, Did not the great Whore (which John sp^ke of) drink the blo^^ of
the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus? Rev. 17.6. And was she not to have blood given
her to drink? And has not the Church of Rome drunk the blood of many thousands
of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus? Surely the Histories of many generations
past will testify she has: Therefore she is not the true Church, but the
Whore.

And have not many Nations gone into her, and committed fornication with her?
and does she not sit upon many waters? the Peoples, Kindreds, Tongues, and
Nations? and this kind of universality she makes use of, as an argument to
prove that she is the true Church: which may be truly said to be a part of her
witchcrafts and sorceries, with which she has long bewitched the Nations, even
all this long night of Apostasy, in which Antichrist has reigned, who has
blinded the invisible eye in people, and with this same pitiful shallow stuff
she would fain still blind that eye which God has opened in us: But blessed be
the Lord, the day is dawned which makes all things manifest.

Secondly, And farther, consider what a slender, or blind Argument it is, to
plead universality to prove the Church of Rome to be the true Church. Surely
A.S. did not consider, that they are many who goes in the bro^d way that lead^
to destruction, and that the whole world wondered af^e^ the bea^^ that carries
the Whore* the false Church, neither did he consider that they are but few who
finds (and walks in) the straight way which leads unto life: ^or had he
considered these things, he would have been ashamed to have produced such an
Argument to prove the Church of Rome to be the true Church. But its clear that
the universal Church of Rome sits upon the many waters, and reigns over the
Kings of the earth, and goes in the broad way; Therefore she is not the true
Church, but the Whore.

Fourthly, Again, That the true Church is Apostolic, and built upon the
foundation of the holy Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20. and was propagated
through the world, by the Apostles, that I acknowledge, but that the Church of
Rome is Apostolic, or had her beginning in Christ and his Apostles, (as A.S.
affirms) or that she was propagated through the world by the Apostles, in
that discipline (Ceremonies, worshipping of Idols, or Images, Murdering the
people of God, etc.) in which she now stands, that I do deny, and its
abomination in A.S. to affirm it. For consider,

First, When, or where did Christ, or his Apostles, begin the practice of
bowing to Images, or worshipping Idols? or when did any of them bow to an Altar
of wood, or pray with a string of beads, or pray to Saints, or carry a silver,
or wooden Cross about with them, or murder any because they were not of their
Faith? The Church of Rome cannot prove that ever Christ or his Apostles began,
or practiced any of these things; nor that they were in being in their days,
we defy them; but they are inventions set up in the false Church, in the dark
night of Apostasy, that has been over the Nations since the Apostles days,
and are practiced in the Church of Rome to this day; Therefore she is not
Apostolic, but Apostate like.

Fifthly, That the true Church, or the Members of it, is visible, I shall not
deny; and that she is the Light of the world, I do confess, but that the
Church of Rome is the true Church, or the Light of the world, because she is
visible, that I do not acknowledge, but deny; for although the true Church, or
the Members of it, is visible, yet so is the Whore also.

But then some will say, How are they the^ to be distinguished*

First, I answer* By the^^ fruits; as Christ said, men do not gather grapes of
thorns, nor figs of thistles, Matthew. 7.^6. neither can one (...) send forth
bi^ter water and sweet, James 3.12. nor a good tree (...) b^ing forth bad
fruit; But the visible Church of Rome bring^ forth bad fruits, and sends forth
bi^^er waters, as the Cruelties exercised by her, and the Murders she has
acted for ages past, testifies; and as the Idolatries exercised in her to this
day (as before mentioned) witnesses: For such things was never exercised by,
nor in the true Church, in Christ's, nor the Apostle^ days; therefore though
the Church of Rome be visible, yet her fruits testifies, that she is not the
true Church.

Secondly, Again A.S. says, (and diabolically affirms in the second Page of
his pretended Reconciler of Religions) that the true Church is composed of both
good and bad, wheat, and tares; which I do abominate to acknowledge and is
blasphemy in him to affirm: for, the true Church is built of Living stones, 1
Pet. 2.5. elect and precious; or (as A.S. affirms) of living believers: but
no living believers can be truly called the bad, nor the tares, but elect and
precious, and all that are living, or precious, are the good; therefore the
true Church is built of the good only.

Thirdly, But if the Church of Christ (which A.S. in his second page, affirms
is the kingdom of Christ) be composed of both good and bad, then according to
his own affirmation, the kingdom of Christ is part good, and part bad, which
is horrid blasphemy in A.S. to affirm.

Oh gross darkness and confusion! Are thou a Member of that Church that calls
it self the light of the world? Oh, dark, dull, gloomy light! the Lord God
Almighty bring all his people out of that dark Cell, that they may wal^ in his
mavelous light, which (lights every man that comes into the world) which
makes all things manifest of what sort it is.

Fourthly, But if you say that Christ likened the kingdom to a net that was
cast into the Sea, which gathered of all kinds; -- I answer he did so; yet when
it came to land, there was none composed, or gathered into the vessels, but the
good only, and the bad were cast away, Matthew. 13.48. Therefore the true Church
is not composed of both good and bad, but of the good only.

Fifthly, But if you object, that the tares and wheat were both to grow
together in the field; I answer, they were so until the harvest; ( and the
field is the world, Mat. 13.39* but the true Church is not of the wo^ld, Joh.
17.14) but when the reapers were sent forth (which were the Angels, that had
the Gospel to preach, Rev. 14 6. who went to disciple people, and to baptize
them into the true Church, Mat. 28.19.) Their commission was to compose or
gather the wheat only, and to separate the tare^ from it, and to bind them in
bundles for the fire, Mat. 13.30. and therefore the true Church is not composed
of both wheat and tares, but of the wheat only.

Sixthly, Farther, If you say that there was some in the true Church, in the
Apostles days, that were false brethren, and these were bad; I answer, Though
they were amongst them, yet they were not of them: as the Apostle said, 1 John
2.19. Therefore the true Church is not composed of both good and bad, but of
the good only.

But to r^tu^n to the fifth part of A.S. his argument, where he says, that the
Church of Rome is known to the world, in her Bishops, Pastors, and Believers,
etc. and therefore she is visible.

Answ. Although that proves her visible, yet it does not prove her to be the
true Church, but the contrary; for the true Church that was the light of the
world, was not known to the world, John 17.14. but the visible Church of Rome
is known to the world, (as A.S. himself affirms) therefore she is not the
true Church, but the contrary.

Again, the true Church wrestled not with flesh and blood, neither was her
weapons carnal, but spiritual, and she wrestled with spiritual wickednesses
that were in the high places, and broke down the strong holds of iniquity, 2
Cor. 10.3, 4. but the Church of Rome wrestles with flesh and blood, and kills
men's bodies about Religion, as the whole Christendom knows, and the
spiritual wickednesses are still standing in her, as before proved, and as all
the world sufficiently knows; therefore she is not the true Church.

Sixthly, The infallibleness of the true Church, of which Christ is supreme
head and governor, I do not go about to deny, but that the Church of Rome is
infallible, that I do deny. For,

First, Although A.S. has affirmed, that she has always remained since
Christ's time unto this day, without interruption, etc. yet he never proved it;
neither can he do it; for, as before I have said, we never read that the true
Church in Christ's days was found in such things, neither was such things then
found in her, as is now found in the Church of Rome, and which the Church of
Rome is now found in: by which it is clear, that she has not always remained
since Christ's time, in the state she now stands.

Secondly, But if she has always remained, since Christ time to this day,
without interruption (a^ A.S. says she has) then she cannot possibly be the
true Church; for the true Church was interrupted since the Resurrection, and
Ascension of Christ, (and yet remained, as hereafter I shall show;) and in the
Apostles days her interruption began, and some of the Apostles foresaw it, and
said, of your selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, Acts 20.30. and
when they were arisen, they withstood the truth, as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, 2 Timothy 3.8. so here the interruption of the true Church began:
and after this John saw the Dragon (interrupting, or) persecuting her into the
Wilderness, where she had a place prepared of God, that they might feed her
there, a thousand, two hundred, and threescore days, Rev. 12.6. and 13.14.
ver. concerning which, I shall have occasion to speak more hereafter* so on
this wise the true Church was interrupted since Christ's days: But A.S. says,
that the Church of Rome has always remained since Christ's time without
interruption; Therefore she is not the true Church.

Thirdly, And whereas A.S. farther says, that the Church of Rome shall always
remain, to the end of the world, and therefore she is infallible,

I answer, He has not at all confirmed that by any proof, neither has he any
farther proof than his own affirmation; except he would produce that saying of
the Mother of Harlots, (viz.) I sit as a queen, and am no widow, and shall see
no sorrow, Rev. 18.7. And indeed what would be a very pitiful Argument to
prove the Church of Rome infallible; but none other can he produce (except he
could first prove her to be the true Church, which he is never able to do, his
best argument by which he has undertaken it, being already confuted) Therefore
we have no more cause to believe his affirmation, than we have to believe the
sayings of the forementioned mother of Harlots, for they are both alike to us;
and though she said she should see no sorrow, yet John (who was in the spirit
of the Lord) said, that in one day her desolation should come, Rev. 18.8. And
although A.S. says, that the Church of Rome shall always remain to the end of
the world, yet I say, in the name of the Lord, and by the same spirit that John
was in, That the one day, of which John spoke, is already dawned, in which the
desolation of that Great Whore, the Church of Rome shall come; and as surely,
as when Sodom was overthrown, the Cities round about it were overthrown also, 2
Pet. 2.9. Jude ver. 7. so certainly, when this great City Babylon is
overthrown, and made desolate, the suburbs thereof shall be overthrown, and
made desolate also. The mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and therefore she
must fail in her prophesies, and cease in her being, which, as A.S. says, the
true Church cannot.

Fourthly, And farther, the Church of Rome is variable in her Judgments, as the
diversities of Councels that she has held concerning matters of Faith, bears
witness; for the following General Counsel has often times excluded that, which
was concluded on by the former: and surely both cannot be in^^llible, they
being quite contradictory one to the other. Read the 15th chapter of F. H. his
book, entitled, THE GLORY OF THE TRUE CHURCH DISCOVERED, etc. wherein the
contradictions of the General Counsels which the Church of Rome has held, are
sufficiently made manifest; so that I need not trouble my self to insert them
here: and thereby its evident enough, that the Church of Rome is not infallible.

Fifthly, Again, if A.S. or any other, could prove that the Church of Rome had
always remained since Christ's time; yet, as aforesaid, that is not a
sufficient argument to prove her infallible, or that she cannot fail, nor
cease. For consider, the Dragon, that old S^rpent, called the Devil, who was a
murderer from the beginning, (who gave power to the beast that carries the
Whore, that drinks the Saints blood, that said she should see no sorrow) wa^
before the days of Christ's appearance in the flesh, yet the Dragon is not
infallible; But the Church of Rome is upheld by the Murderer, or carried by
the Dragons power in the beast, as the Murders acted by her bears witness;
therefore she is no more infallible than the Dragon is.

Seventhly, And as to the 7th part of A.S. his Argument, wherein he says, the
true Church is inerrable, and then says, that the Church of Rome is this
inerrable true Church: for all the Sectaries, Schismatics, and Heretics in
the world, says he, could never yet show wherein she erred, nor ever shall:
Therefore she is inerrable.

Answ. 1. I answer, although the Heretics could not prove that the Church of
Rome has erred, yet there are many, who are members of the true Church, of
which Christ is Head, and supreme Governor alone, that can prove wherein she
has erred, and does still grossly err, from the Doctrine, Practice, and
Discipline of the true Church, as it stood in the Apostles days: for the
Apostle in his days said, let every man be fully persuaded in his own
conscience, Romans 14.5. and did not go about to force people to conform to such
things, that they were not persuaded of in their consciences, nor to compel
them by outward laws to conform thereunto; but the Church of Rome does not
admit, that every one should walk, or act according as they are persuaded in
their own consciences, but goes about by outward laws to compel them to
conform to that which she calls her holy Ordinances and Institutions, which
many, for conscience sake toward God, dare not conform to, because they know
them to be invented Idolatries; and they, who cannot for conscience sake submit
to her impositions, or drink of her cup of abominations, then to be sure she
will drink their blood: Witness the blood she has drunk (for above this
thousand years past) of them that could not, for conscience sake toward God,
conform to her Ordinances: And therefore she has erred from that spirit which
was in the true Church, and from the Apostles Doctrine, and is still in the
error.

Secondly, In the true Church in the Apostles days, every one as he had
received the gif^ of the spirit of God, so he might administer, 1 Pet. 4.10.
an^ (...) Prophets might speak two or three; and if any thing was ^ealed to him
that stood by, he might speak, and the first shou^^ be silent, 1 Cor. 14.29,
30, 31. But this is not the order of the Church of Rome, as is sufficiently
manifest to all Christendom, therefore she has erred from the Apostles Spirit
and order, and is still in the error: And thus I might produce many more
arguments, to show wherein the church of Rome has erred, and does err, only
my desire is to be as brief as may be, so that satisfaction may be given; for
which I doubt not but this is sufficient as to that particular.

8. And as concerning miracles in the true Church, I do confess and be^r
witness, that there are miracles wrought in her daily; but that all miracles
are an argument sufficient to prove a people to be the true Church; that I do
not acknowledge, but deny: For,

First, the Magicians of Egypt could by their Sorceries, or Enchantments
imitate those things in the sight of the Egyptians, that Moses and Aaron did
by the power of God, Exodus 8*7. and he false prophet he wrought lying miracles
before the beast that carries the Whore, insomuch that he caused fire to come
down out of heaven in the sight of men, Rev. 13.13, 14. and chap. 19. ver. 20.
And this the Whore might have said was done in confirmation of her faith and
doctrines; (as A.S. does) yet nevertheless it was done by the Dragons power,
who was a murderer* from the beginning, For he gave power to the beast (that
carries the Whore) to do such things, Rev. 13.2. and therefore the miracles in
the Church of Rome (if now there be any) is no infallible evidence to prove her
to be the true Church. Well,

2. But then it may be some will say, that this is harsh judgment, and how can
you tell but that the miracles wrought in the Church of Rome, are wrought by
the power of God? or how can you distinguish between miracles wrought by the
power of God, and miracles wrought by the dragons power?

Answ. I answer, we have an infallible way to judge in this particular; For,
all miracl^s wrought by the murdering power, are not wrought by the power of
God, but by the Dragons power, for the Dragon, that old Serpent, who is called
the Devil, was a murderer from the beginning, (but Christ the power of God, is
not a murdering power, for he came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them,
Luke 9.56. Therefore the miracles wrought by Christ, the power of God, are not
wrought by a murdering power) But the miracles ^n the Church of Rome (if now
there be any) are wrought by a murdering power; for the many murders she have
acted, sufficiently testifies to the whole Christendom, that a murdering power
rules in her: By which its clear, that the mir^cles wrought in the Church of
Rome, (if there be any) are wrought by the Dragons power, and not by the power
of God: So that my judgment concerning the miracles in the Church of Rome is
not harsh, but according to the spirit of truth and sound reason.

Thirdly, but for all A.S. in his Epistle Dedicatory, has made such a great
noise about miracles wrought by a Roman Catholic Priest in and about London
and Westminster, yet when he comes to prove that the Church of Rome is powerful
in miracles, then he does just as much as nothing, but takes an easy way to
get out from that thing, which seemingly he undertook to go through with, by
referring of us for a witness of his affirmation to nostre, dame de Loretto,
nostre dame de montague, nostre dame de hall, and to the whole world, etc. Now
what a pitiful proof or witness is this, which A.S. directs* us to; For as
the Apostle says, the whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John. 5.19. and
wonders after the beast, by whom lying miracles are wrought, Rev. 13 3. So that
the miracles which the world bears witness to are lying miracles; for the
world knows no^ Christ, nor his Church, 1 John 3.1. by whom true miracles* are
wrought* for when Christ wrought miracles amongst the world, they did not bear
witness to him, but said he did it by the Prince of Devils, Mat 9 34. So that
the witness that A.S. calls for, confirms my forementioned affirmation, viz.
that the miracles in the Church of Rome are wrought by the Dragons power in the
beast* and false prophet, that the whole world wonders after.

Fourthly, and for nostre dame de loretto and the rest mentioned, they signify
nothing as to our satisfaction in this particular, because they are altogether
unknown to us; neither can we attain to a certain knowledge of them if we
would; for the information of the Church of Rome is to us no satisfaction, so
as I said before (that A.S.) for matter of proving his affirmation, has done
just as much as nothing; only made a show, like a cloud without rain: But
methinks, if there were so many miracles wrought daily* by a Roman Priest about
London, etc. as A.S. seems to make a noise of; he should have instanced some of
them particularly for our satisfaction: but seeing he has not instanced any,
we have just cause to believe, that there are none at all.

Ninthly, So to proceed to the ninth part of A. S. his first Argument, viz. Out
of the true Church none can be saved.

I answer, that thing I do not at all deny, for all that are saved are of the
true Church, but that none can be saved out of the Church of Rome, that I do
deny, for the Church of Rome is not the true Church, but the Whore that drinks
the blood of the Saints, as afore-proved, therefore out of the church of Rome
people may be saved. Wherefore let all who expects or desires salvation make
have out of this great City Babylon: And run for your lives toward Jerusalem
the holy City, the true Church, the Lambs wife, in whose light the Nations of
them that are saved must walk, Rev. 21.24. lest you perish within the borders
of Babylon, whose desolation shall certainly come in one day: Yea, Death, and
Mourning, and Famine, ^ for strong is the Lord, who (is now arisen and) judges
her. Well,

But if the Church of Rome say, that she does not drink the blood of the
Saints, The mystery of the Whore farther discovered.
but the blood of heretics, etc. and therefore she is the true Church.

1. I answer, so, or to that effect, said the destroyers and murderers in all
ages, even they that put Christ to death; they did it not in their own account,
as he was the Son of God; but as a blasphemer, and the Apostles were persecuted
as spreaders of heresy, and shedders of sedition, and not as Saints and
servants of the Lord, in their adversaries account, Act. 24.5. and thus the
murdering persecuting spirit has in all ages; as at this day sought to
shelter it self; but this covering must now be ripped off, for the power of God
is arisen that rends the vail of darkness, and the day is dawned that makes
all things manifest.

2. And farther; If they were heretics, etc. whose blood the Church of R^me
drinks, yet that does not argue that she is the true Church, but the contrary;
for the true Church did never drink the blood of heretics, nor persecute any
because they were heretics; but the greatest punishment that ever Christ
appointed for heretics, was, that they should account them as Publicans, and
Heathens, Mat. 18 17.

3. So its clear, that Christ the power of God, and the true Church that had
the mind of Christ, did never kill, nor persecute any because they were
heretics, or did not believe, nor yet because (after they believed) they made
shipwreck of faith; But labored in the spirit of love and meekness, to
restore them, and to convince them by sound doctrine; but if they refused to
receive admonition, or to submit to the Church after due admontion given, then
they, let them receive the punishment aforesaid, and refused to have fellowship
with them, and this was the greatest punishment that ever the true Church
inflicted upon any, though they were rebellious, and this was the way to make
true believers of people, which force and compul^ion, by penal laws will never
do: Though its true, compulsive laws may make many of them hypocrites, who
fears man more than God, but they who fears not man that can kill the body, and
can do no more; but fears the Lord God almighty above all, such will not bow to
the compulsive Laws of men, which violates the righteous Law of God in* their
own hearts; (no more then Sbadrach, Meshach and Abednego would bow to the image
that Nebuchadnezzar set up) though for their steadfastness they suffer the
pangs of death, as many of their predecessors have done, whose blood the Church
of Rome has drunk.

Thus much in brief to the nine particulars of A.S. his first Argument, by
which (I perceive) he thought he had infallibly proved the Church of Rome to be
the true Church, but what his Argument is worth for his purpose, let all who
reads this, Judge.

And the next thing he undertakes, is, to prove Peter to be the rock or
foundation upon which Christ builds his Church; and to accomplish this design,
he rambles through several languages, into which the Scripture has been
translated; and in the conclusion he says (a great lie) to Peter then Christ
said, upon thee I will build my Church, etc. when neither of the several
Languages (which he makes use of to prove it) says any such thing, according
to his own interpretation of them; and indeed its blasphemy in A.S. to affirm
it: But then he says that Christ is the primary rock, and Peter the secondary
rock.

Reply. But how can that be, that Peter should be a secondary rock, for A.S.
cannot prove that God ever ordained, or appointed a secondary rock to build his
Church on, (neither do we in all the Scriptures read of a secondary rock once
mentioned) for the Apostle affirms the contrary, saying, Another foundation
can no man lay, then that which is already laid, 1 Cor. 3.11. which is Jesus
Christ: So he is the first and the last, the beginning and the end; and A.S.
his affirmation is nothing worth for his purpose: nay, it is worse then nothing,
for it discovers his deceit and ignorance, though I perceive his intent and
aim was, to gratify his Master the Pope, by pleading his Supremacy, under
pretense of setting Peter above the rest of the Apostles, when indeed, its
manifest enough, that his intent was to set up the Pope, as Lord and Master
over Gods heritage, Gentile like, contrary to that saying of our [one] Lord
Christ, viz. be not many masters, for one is your Master, even Christ, and all
ye are brethren, Mat. 23 8. So that Peter was not set up as a visible head over
the Church of Christ, as A.S. says the Pope is over the Church of Rome,
neither was Peter above other of the Apostle^* but a fellow servant with them,
and they all fellow workers together with Christ, 2 Cor. 6 1. and Paul was not
at all inferior to Peter (in relation to his spiritual authority) for he
himself said (yet not bo^stingly but truly) that he came not behind the very
chiefest Apostles, 2 Cor. 12.11. So that Peter was no more the rock then Paul
was, and what was Paul, or what was Apollo, or Peter, either:

But Ministers, by whom the Church believed, 1 Cor. 3.5. so it was not the work
of the Apostles to set themselves one above another, for they abased
themselves, that the Lord Jesus Christ might be exalted: Neither did they
preach themselves, but Jesus Christ the Lord, and themselves servants, etc. 2
Cor. 4.5. by which it appears that the Pope does not truly succeed Peter in the
same spirit that he and the rest of the Apostles were in, who had the spirit
and mind of Christ, who made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.7. but the Pope
truly succeeds those whom the Apostle saw would come, that should be covetous
boasters, and pr^ud blasphemers, 2 Timothy 3.2. as does appear by his preaching
up himself, and his boasting of his great power and superiority, witness Fox
his Acts, the first Volume page 1023. and so on; where you may read at large
how several of the Popes of Rome have sufficiently declared themselves to be
covetous boasters, and proud blasphemers, and have also laid themselves open
enough to the view of all who have an eye to see, so that I need not produce
any farther Argument to prove the Pope a proud blasphemer.

Then next A.S. in his third chapter undertakes to prove, That neither all
sects, nor any one of them, is the true Church, etc. Whose Cause I am not
engaged in, nor intend to plead, therefore I shall let that pass. But his
fourth and fifth Chapters contains several Arguments, by which he undertakes
farther to prove the Church of Rome to be the true Church; together with some
Queries propounded. To which I intend to return a brief and sober Answer.

1. First. A. S. says, That which was once the true Church is now, etc. But
the Roman Pontificial was once the true Church, etc. I answer, I do not deny
but that there was a true Church at Rome in the Apostles days, but that the
Church now at Rome is therefore the true Church, that does not follow; for as I
have before proved, the true Church in the Apostles days was far different,
both in Discipline and Practice, from the Church of Rome that now is.

But then A.S. says, If the Roman Pontificial did fall, what Church did she
fall from? If she did fail, when, etc? I answer, Paul, in the first Chapter in
his Epistle to the Church*of Rome, spoke of some, who when they knew God, did
not glorify him as God, but became vain in their imaginations, and changed the
glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible man; and
so not likeing to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a reprobate
mind, and they were filled with unrighteousness, fornication, and wickedness,
covetousness, envy, murder, etc. Romans 1.21.23.28, 29. And is not this the very
state of the Church of Rome at this day? is she not now filled with these
things? Surely yes. Thousands of thousands must acknowledge it, if they consider
it and speak the truth. Oh the murders acted by her, and the blood she has
drunk, as before hinted, and the adulteries committed within her borders.
Indeed these, and many other her abominations, are innumerable, as she her self
full well knows; therefore she is indeed fallen, and deeply revolted from that
pure spirit in which the true Church stood in the Apostles days: Thence she is
fallen, and the time when she fell, was, when she began to enter into these
aforesaid abominations that is now found in her. Well:

2. But then A.S. says, That if the true Church be infallible, she must have
always remained without interruption, since Christ's time, to this day, etc. I
answer, although the true Church be infallible, yet it does not absolutely
follow, that she must have always remained without interruption unto this day;
for, as I have already proved, the true Church was interrupted by the Dragon,
and was persecuted into the Wilderness, but she did not fail, but remained
there, and had a being there, a place prepared of God for her; concerning
which, I shall have occasion to speak more fully shortly.

3. But A.S. says, That no other Church on earth has remained unto this day
without interruption, besides the Roman Pontificial, and therefore she is the
true Church. I answer no, she is not therefore the true Church, but the Whore;
for as I have already proved, the true Church was interrupted, and yet remained.

4. But then said A.S. If any can say that there has remained any other Church
on earth, since Christ's time, unto this day without interruption, and error,
let him tell what was she, or what is she, where was she, or where is she, what
is her name, what Bishops, Pastors, and Believers had she, or yet has she,
what Emperors or Kings did adhere to her, or now do; what general Councils did
she hold, what Heretics did she condemn, what Accademies did she errect, or
confirm, what Churches or Monastries did she build? etc. And then said he, To
these and such like Interrogatories, all the Schismatics, Sectaries, and
Heretics in the world cannot answer.

Answ. To which I answer, Although all the Sectaries in the world cannot answer
those questions; yet there are many who are members of the true Church (not of
the Church of Rome) that can answer them; and first, I say there has remained
another Church since Christ's time to this day (besides the Roman Pontificial
tha^ now is) though not without interruption; yet the true Church (as before
proved) was interrupted. And as to those questions, ( viz.) What was she, or
what is she? etc. I answer, she was in John's day a wonder in Heaven, a woman
clothed with the sun (that and there she was) and the Moon was under her
feet, and upon her head a Crown of twelve stars, Rev. 12.1. And having brought
forth a man child, that was to rule all Nations with his rod of Iron, the
enmity of the Dragon then arose, who sought to devour the man child; but being
by the hand of God prevented of his purpose on the man-child, ver. 5. he then
cast out his flood of persecution after the woman, ver. 15. (of whom this ruler
was born) and drove her into the Wilderness, whither she fled from him, to her
place prepared of God, that they might feed her there, a thousand, two hundred,
and threescore days, Rev. 12.6.14* ( To A.S. his Query (viz.) where was she?
and there she has been) and there she has fitt^n a^ in a sollitary place,
and in a mourning state and condition, out of which she To, where is she?
is now returning, and is now coming up out of the Wilderness, and is
descending from God, as a Bride adorned for her husband, Rev. 21.2. and her To
A. S. Query, what is her name?
name is, the Bride, the Lambs wife, the holy City, ver. 9. new Jerusalem. And
now is Jerusalem shaking her self from the dust of the earth (in which she has
been trodden of the Gentiles) and now is she putting on her beautiful garments,
and now does the solitary begin to rejoice, and the barren that did not bear,
begins to break forth into singing, Isa. 54.1. And the things that many
Prophets desired to see, and could not see, is now seen and revealing; glory to
God in the highest. The day is come which we have waited for, we will be glad
and rejoice in it; and now the time, times, and half a time, is expired, in
which the true Church has been fed in the Wilderness; and now is the forty
and two months expired also, for which time the holy City has been trodden
under foot of the Gentiles, Rev. 11.2. in which time the beast had power given
him to continue, Rev. 13.5. and the Whole world wondered after him, and
worshipped him, and in that time it was given unto him, to make war with the
Saints, and to overcome them; and he received power over all Kindreds, and
Tongues, and Nations, that all that dwelt upon the earth should worship him,
whose names were not written in the book of Life, of the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world; if any man have an ear, let him hear, Rev. 13.7, 8, 9.
And this was the time that the true Church was in her mourning state, which now
begins to be over; Glory to God for ever, the day of rejoicing is come.

And for her Bishops, Pastors, and Believers that she had; I answer, Christ
was, and is her Bishop and chief Pastor, 1 Pet. 2.25. And the rest (after the
Apostles days) were they that fed her in the Wilderness; and her Believers
were those that had the Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12.17. whose blood the Whore
drunk. And they are now her Believers, whose blood the Whore thirsts after. And
as to that question ( viz.) What Emperors or Kings did adhere to her, or now do?

Answ. I answer, On this wise did the Pharisees Query with those Officers whom
they sent to take Jesus and bring him unto them, saying, Have any of the
Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? Joh. 7.48. Well, what Emperors or
Kings did adhere to him at that time? Was he not therefore the true Christ,
because the Rulers of the world, and the Pharisees rejected him? And what said
the Apostle to the true Church in his day? You see your calling, brethren, how
that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighthy, nor noble, etc. but
God has chosen the foolish things of this world, to confound the wise, etc.
that flesh might not glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. And farther, the
Apostle (who preach^ Christ) said, That he preached the wisdom of God in a
mystery, which none of the Princes of the world knew, etc. 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. By
which it appears, that none of the Princes of the world knew Christ, the
Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. And the true Church was in the world as Christ was;
for the Apostle said, as he is so are we in this present world, 1 John 4.17.
And the world knows us not, ver, 1. because it knew not him. So that
notwithstanding the Princes of this world knew not Christ when he was amongst
them, and although the Rulers believed not in him, nor did adhere to him when
he was come, yet that did not argue that he was not the true Christ. And
notwithstanding i^ was so, that the true Church was unknown to the world, and
was composed not of many wise men after the flesh, nor of the Nobles of the
earth, but was persecuted by them (as she is at this day) yet she was the true
Church for all that.

And seeing it was so, that the Princes and Rulers did not adhere to her, in
the time of her flourishing state (when she was clothed with the Sun) how can
it be expected that they should adhere to her in her persecuted state, and in
her mourning wildernesse-state (for a rich man shall very hardly enter the
kingdom, Mat. 19.23. but there is more in them words) And moreover, seeing the
Kings of the earth committed fornication with the great Whore, and went into
her, how then can it possibly be expected that they should adhere to the true
Church? Surely all who have a spiritual eye open, may be hereby satisfied as to
this particular. And farther, as to that Query ( viz.) What general Councils
did she hold, and what Heretics did she Condemn?

Answ. I answer, she has not been in a capacity in her wilderness state to
hold general counsels, as in the time of her flourishing state, yet the mighty
God has always been her wonderful counselor, Isa. 9.6. and the members of
her has stood in (and held to) his counsel, according to the manifestation
thereof received by them; Not loving their lives unto death, as the Church of
Rome well knows, (who have drank the blood of many of them) or shall know to
her sorrow and pangs. And as for the true Churches condemning heretics; the
Church of Rome knows, that those members of her, whose blood she has drunk,
did always condemn those heresies that are healed, and the idolatries acted in
the Church of Rome, and did always give testimony against her superstitious
inventions, and denied to have fellowship with her therein, and looked upon her
as reprobated from the true faith (as Fox his Acts copiously relates) and this
was a great condemnation, as the Spirit of Christ gave commission to the true
Church to pass upon heretics.

And again, as to that question, viz. What Academies did she erect.

Answ. I answer, A peoples Erecting of Accademies, is not an argument
sufficient to prove them to be the true Church; for what Academies, or
Universities did the Apostles Erect or confirm, or attain the knowledge of God
in? Was it not the light that shined in their hearts, that gave them this
knowledge? 2 Cor. 4.6. And was not this light the Law, that was the Apostles
Schoolmaster till Christ? Gal. 3.24. And is not the Law which is light, Pro.
6.23. written in the hearts of all people? And is it not a sufficient
Schoolmaster now, to bring people (who are taught by it) unto the knowledge of
the glory of God, in the face of Christ, as it did the Apostles then? What need
then is there of erecting Academies, for people cannot attain to the knowledge
of God by Natural learning, 1 Cor. 1.21. Nor thereby be made true Ministers of
Jesus Christ. Yet I am not against having an outward School house, or some
convenient place for the educating or bringing up of children in Natural
Learning, which is good in its place; but that any can thereby be brought to
the knowledge of God, or made true Ministers of Jesus Christ; that I cannot
own. Neither was this way of making Ministers by natural learning, or setting
of them up by man, in being, until people had forsaken the right way, and went
into Cains way, and Balaams, and then the envy and murder began amongst the
professed Christians, and then they could not endure sound Doctrine, but heapt up
to themselves teachers according to their own hearts lusts, who knew nothing
but what they knew naturally, as bruit beasts, etc. and this the Apostle Paul
foresaw; and wrote of to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.3. and Peter prophesied of them
also, 2 Pet. 2. and John, and Jude, saw them come; 1 John 2.18. Jude 10.11. so
that by natural learning, and ordination of man, no true Minister of Christ was
ever made, or sent forth; but contrariwise, the Apostle Paul was made a
Minister, viz. not of man, nor by man, nor yet by natural learning, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.1. so we do not understand that in the
Apostles days they did erect Academies, or that they had any need of them, and
indeed I cannot but look upon it as an ignorant question to be proposed by A.
S. upon this account. But to his next Query, viz. What Churches and Monasteries
did she build?

Answ. I answer, this is as ignorant a question as the former, and great
foolishness to ask, what Churches the Church built? however this I say, they
who were Members of the true Church, did build up one another in their most
holy faith, Jude 20. And as for Monasteries, or Monk houses, we hear of no such
thing that was in being in the Apostles days, neither do we believe that there
is any need of them* for we do not read in the holy Scriptures, that ever the
true Church, in any generation, built such places, but we know, that many such
places have been erected and built within the borders of the great City
Babylon, since the Apostasy began, and since the right way was forsaken, and
many other Superstitious inventions and Idolatries, as before hinted, has been
set up, relating to the beasts and Dragons worship, all which God has
determined to throw down; and when the desolation of all these things comes,
and the seven Mountains upon which the Whore sits, comes to be laid waste,
according as has been prophesied in ages past, Isa. 42.15. And when the great
Whore comes to drink the cup of Gods fury, which is already filled into the
hands of the Saints of the most High, to pour out unto her, Rev. 12. I say,
then shall she know that God has spoken by me, and that I have herein declared
the truth according as I received it from, and by the spirit often he Lord. And
thus much as to his Queries.

But then he speaks of another clear and easy way to find out the true Church,
to try all Churches by the true Catechism, and see which of them all says it
truly, believes it rightly, etc, and that which does, is the true.

Answ. I answer, to try all Churches by their Doctrine, and practice, and see
which is most agreeable to the Principles, Doctrines, and Practice of the true
Church in the Apostles days, is indeed a way that I do very well approve of,
and if all controversies betwixt you and us might be decided after this manner,
(laying aside all carnal weapons, carnal laws, prisons, fires, and the like,
which has been the weapons that the Church of Rome has defended her self
with, for many age^ past, and does at this day) I say then it would be indeed
well, and we shall be very willing to engage with you wi^h spiritual weapons,
bring the best you can form or find out; but for carnal weapons, we are
redeemed from them, and the weapons of our warfare are spiritual; so I say,
upon equal terms we shall be very willing to dispute the matters with you,
that are in controversy betwixt us, and they who are found, either you or us,
in Doctrine, life, and practice, to be most agreeable to the true Church in the
primitive times, shall be owned, and acknowledged to be the true Church now at
this day. And they who are detected to be in the steps, practices, and
Doctrines of them whom the holy Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles testified
against, shall be concluded to be the false Church, now at this day: and upon
these terms, as I said before, we shall be very ready and willing to join
issue with you, at any time or place, that you wi^h us shall agree upon.

And whereas A.S. says, that all the Schismatics, Sectaries and Heretics in
the world, cannot truly say that prayer that Christ taught his Disciples, viz.
Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. for, said he, they are continually doing
the works of the Devil, and are his children, and consequently cannot truly
call God Father.

I answer, therefore the Church of Rome cannot call God Father, for she is, and
long has been, doing the works of the Devil, the murderer, as before proved,
therefore she is of her father the Devil, and cannot call God father in truth
and in righteousness. Then A. S. rambles through several other particulars, in
which he controverts with Sectaries, etc. whose cause I am not concerned to
plead, only this small hint before I have given to prove the Church of Rome one
of those Sects, who cannot speak the forementioned words truly, and so I shall
leave the Sectaries, with whom A. S. controverts, to plead their own cause; for
the thing that was chiefly in my heart, when I took in hand to write this brief
reply, was to prove the Church of Rome not to be the true Church, and the chief
Arguments by him produced to prove her the true Church, I have already in brief
answered.

Again, A. S. in his 6th Chapter, makes it his business to prove the Church to
be the Judge of all controversies in matters of faith, and says, that not
every man, nor human reason, nor the private spirit, nor the Bible is this
Judge; and to prove it, he quotes Matthew. 18.17. where Christ said, tell the
Church, etc.

Ans. To which I answer, That the Judgment of the true Church, of which Christ
is Head, in matters of faith, I do not deny for being governed in all things by
the Head Christ, ( to whom all Judgment is committed, John 5.20.) the Judgment
thereof must of necessity be true, (for the strength of Israel cannot lie) and
ought to be submitted unto by all; But the Church of Rome being not the true
Church, (she being not governed by the invisible Head* Christ, to whom all
Judgment is committed, as before proved) Therefore she is not Judge of
controversies in matters of Faith. And the true Church, to whom Christ said, he
that hears you, hears me, were such as heard Christ, and in whom the spirit
of the Father spoke, Mat. 10.20. But the Church of Rome does not hear Christ,
as hereafter I shall prove; therefore they who hear the Church of Rome, do not
hear Christ. But surely when A.S. began this work of deciding controversies, he
had forgotten that the Church was the only Judge in that particular, and not
every man, nor the private spirit; for had he considered that, (he being but a
particular man, would not have undertaken the Churches work; as appears by the
Title of his book he has, for he calls it, A brief Decider of all
controversies in matters of Faith, which book we have cause to judge is his own
only work, and not the Churches; in which we find him condemning himself for
the thing which he is doing; for, as appears by his aforesaid Title, himself
undertakes to decide controversies; and in his 6th Chapter he affirms, that
the Church is the only Judge, or decider of all controversies: But this is,
that his confusion may the more appear, as it has done in many other things,
as may be seen in this small Treatise; and surely, if the Pope have no better
servants than A. S. to do his work for him, he had better keep them idle, than
to employ them in such a work; for in the end they will bring more shame to him
than they will honor, for such like confusione, and other abominations, has
already made the very name of the Pope an ill savor to all true Christians*

And one thing more in A. S. his 6th Chapter, I cannot well omit to observe,
where he says, the spirit inspireth when he will, and you hear his voice, but
cannot tell whence, from God or the Devil, he does come, or whither, to heaven
or to hell, he does go; and then says, so is every one that is born of the
spirit; and to prove this, he quotes Luke 9.55. where Christ said, ye know not
what spirit ye are of.

Now consider the blindness, and ignorance, or else the wilful wickedness, of
A. S. who jumbles a deal of Scriptures together, blasphemously wresting of them
to his own destruction, or at least, to the destruction of his own work in
hand, thinking thereby to blind the minds of people, and with his good words,
(mixed with blasphemies) and fair speeches, to deceive the hearts of the
simple, as his predecessors have done in the long night of Apostasy which has
been over all nations, since the Apostles days. But its in vain for him to
strive to accomplish his end, for the day is dawned unto many, and there is an
eye opened in many thousands in this Nation of England, that gives them to see
over, and beyond all this Babylonish or confused trumpery and stuff, and have a
feeling of that which was before Babylon was, and shall out last Babylon, to
the praise of God, and to the glory and honor of his name, who is blessed for
ever. Well,

Although it was so, that Christ said unto his Disciples, you know not what
spirit ye are of, yet consider the time when he spoke these words, was it not
before they were born of the spirit? (although called to be Apostles) for
Christ said unto them, you must be born again, John 3.7.8. and that he would
send them the spirit (of which he said they must be born) which should lead
them into all truth, John 16.13. and he did not say, as A.S. does, that they
should not know whence (from God or the Devil) the spirit came, or whither (to
heaven or to hell) it went; oh, horrid blasphemy in A. S! who says, so is
every one that is born of the spirit; as much as to say, that he that is born
of the spirit, knows not whether he be from God or the Devil, or whither he
shall go, to heaven or to hell, oh, wickedness indeed! Christ said no such
thing, as A.S. does, although that blessed worthy saying of our Savior and
Lord Christ, was, and is very true, ( viz) Marvel not that I say unto you, that
you must be born again, for the wind blows where it lists, and men hears
the sound thereof, but cannot tell from whence it comes, nor whither it goes;
adding, even so is every one that is born of the spirit, John 3.7, 8. (Mark)
they that were born of the spirit, were unknown to the world; for said the
Apostle (after they were born again) the world knows us not. So, although they
were in the world, and men saw them, yet the world knew them not, no more than
they knew from whence the wind came, and whither is went, which they heard the
sound of; and indeed* so is the state of the true Church in the world at this
day.

And the Apostles did know from whence the spirit came, and of what spirit they
were, after they received the spirit of truth, and were born of it, for Christ
told them, John 14.16. that he would pray the Father, and he should send them
the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, John 16.7.13. which should abide with them for
ever; and they did receive it, and were led by it into a heavenly habitation,
Ephesians. 1.3. for they were made to sit together i^ heavenly places in Christ
Jesus: so its hereby clear, that the Apostles knew from whence the spirit came,
and whither it led them; and its also plain, that A.S. either wilfully, or
sottishly wrests the words of Christ, and by his additions to them, would make
them import another thing, than was intended by him, of purpose to divert
people from being led by the spirit of God, or to dissuade them from adhering
to the leadings of it, under pretense that they cannot tell whence, (from God
or the Devil) it does come, or whither (to heaven or to h^^l) it goes, when
indeed Christ's words in themselves imports quite another thing, as above
showed; Wherefore let all mind and obey the spirit of truth, which will lead
into all truth, and condemn sin in the flesh, and will lead out of all
unrighteousness, and errors, and heresies, which the Church of Rome is full
of, and that spirit which condemns the abominations of the Whore, and all sin
and unrighteousness that is the spirit of God, and comes from God, through the
Son of his love, who is the light of the world, that lights every man that
comes into the world, and leads up to God the Father, from whence it comes,
all who are taught and guided by it, but condemns from God all who in unbelief,
or in rebellion, do despite unto it, and disobey the motions thereof.

But to return to the matter concerning the Churches being Judge.

First, I find A.S. in the beginning of his seventh Chapter, saying, Methinks I
hear a Quaker whispering, the Light that is in thee is the Judge of all
controversies, and the law and rule according to which thou must walk.

Answ. I answer, Yea, the people called Quakers do believe and say, that the
light which every man is enlightened with, is the law and rule according to
which every man ought to walk, and is the Judge in all controversies in matters
of faith, for, (as before) All Judgment is committed to the Son, John 5.22.
who lights every man that comes into the world; so all Judgment being
committed to the light, that lights every man, the light that is in every man
must of necessity be the Judge of all controversies: and this I farther add,
that all who are baptized into Christ, has put on Christ, and all who are by
one spirit baptized into one body, (though they were sometimes darkness) are
made light in the Lord, and so they being in him, and he in them, are all one,
even as Christ and the Father is one, and he that sanctifies, and they that
are sanctified, are all of one; by which its clear, that Christ in his Church,
who is light with him, is the only Judge of all controversies: and indeed this
supernatural Light is the true touchstone, by which all spirits may be tried,
whether they be of God, or not, for, as the Apostle said, whatsoever makes
manifest, is light, Ephesians 5.13. so that without this touchstone none can
try spirits, because an evil spirit may speak good words.

Again, Christ is in all things to be the Example of all believers; and he
lights every man that comes into the world, John 1.9. so every man being
enlightened with the light of his spirit, who is to be our example in all
things, it must of necessity be, that the light that is in us is this Judge,
and the law and rule according to which all ought to walk.

Secondly, But then A.S. replies, that the light that is in thee tells thee,
that thou must hear Christ, and Christ tells thee, that thou must hear the
Church, etc.

Answ. I answer, Yea, the Light that is in us teaches us to hear Christ, who
has enlightened us, and also to hear his Church, with whom he dwells, and that
hears him, and in whom his spirit speaks, so, as I said before, I shall not go
about to deny the Authority of the true Church; but the usurped authority of
the Church of Rome I do deny; usurped, I say, because she has been, and here
is, sufficiently proved not to be the true Church (to whom Christ gives power
and authority both to bind and to lose) therefore her authority is usurped, and
she is not to be heard, but to be turned away from.

Thirdly, A.S. says, If you object, that the spiritual judges all things, and
the spiritual is judged of no man; I answer, that the godly spiritual judges
all things, etc. But I deny that you, or any other Sectaries in the world, is
godly spiritual, for* as St. Augustine says, they have not the Holy Ghost that
are out of the Church.

Reply, To which I say, that as A.S. has confessed, That the spiritual man
judges all things, its according to my own belief; but what does this avail
the Church of Rome, who as I have proved is not godly spiritual; but is sensual
and devilish, and is not the true Church, but the Whore; for although as he
says, The godly spiritual is judged of none, yet the Whore is judged of all
who are godly spiritual; and although A.S. denies that the Quakers are godly
spiritual, yet he is never able to prove his affirmation; for though they have
not the holy Ghost who are out of the Church, yet it does not follow, that they
have it not who are out of the Church of Rome, except she could be proved to be
the true Church.

The contrary whereof I have already proved; for the people called Quakers
(though they are out of the Church of Rome) are led by that spirit which
teaches them to live soberly* righteously, and godly in this present world, as
thousands of their Neighbors can bear witness; therefore the people called
Quakers are godly Spiritual.

Again, That Prophet which is of God, is godly spiritual, Jer. 28.9. and that
Prophet which speaks a thing, and the thing come to pass, that Prophet is of
God: But the people called Quakers have prophesied several things, as to the
late overturned Powers of this Nation Witness the Book Entitled, Good Counsel
and Advice Rejected.
(with diverse other things) which accordingly came to pass, (as to their sorrow
they were made to know) therefore they are of God, and godly spiritual.

4. A. S again says, If you say, know ye not your selves, how that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates* 2 C^r. 13.5. I answer, the true
sense and meaning of this place is this, etc. So here A.S. is again undertaking
that which himself says is the Churches work; for says he in his eighth
chapter, the Church is the alone interpreter of all Scriptures; and yet he
himself, who is but a particular man, is here undertaking to give an
interpretation or meaning, to the forementioned Scripture, by which it is
plain, that he condemns himself in the thing he is doing.

5. Again fifthly, he says, That the spirit of God says, Hear the Church, but
the spirit of the Devil contradicts, and says, Hear not the Church, but Christ
alone; for of Christ, says he, its written, This is my beloved Son, him hear
ye: behold how the Devil pleads for Christ, of purpose to deceive Christians,
etc.

Ans. To which I answer, That I think I need not say much to convince all that
reads but A.S. his own words, that he is either grossly ignorant, or else
abominably wilful and wicked; for who can believe that the Devil will plead for
Christ, or persuade people to hear Christ, and dissuade them from hearing of
the Church? certainly, if he would persuade people to hear the greater, he
would not dissuade them from hearing the lesser: And how can people p^ssibly be
deceived, that hears Christ and obeys him? I cannot believe that its the spirit
of the Devil that persuades people to hear Christ, but rather, that its the
drawings of the spirit of the Father, that invites them to come unto the Son,
and to he^^ him, for Christ said, None comes unto me, except my father, who
has sent me draw him, Joh 6*44.

But A.S. contrariwise (in effect) says, That the Devil draws people to come
unto Christ and to hear him. By which he has manifestly showed, that he is of
^ contrary spirit unto Christ; Therefore A.S. is an Antichrist, and one that
puts light for darkness, and darkness for light; against whom the woe is
pronounced, Isa. 5.20. And although A.S. so much pleads for the church (whom I
know all will hear that hears Christ) yet upon serious consideration, I find
its of purpose to deceive Christians, and so he has showed himself as bad as
the Devil he speaks of, being found doing the same work, of which he seems to
accuse the Devil; for in his sixth chapter I find him (as before declared) in
effect persuading people, Not to adhere to the motions of the Spirit of Christ,
under pretense that they cannot tell whence (from God or the Devil) it comes,
or whither to (Heaven or Hell) it goes, etc. And, a^ above, he is again
persuading people, That its a dangerous thing to hear that spirit that invites
them to hear Christ; calling it the Devil, because it does not invite them to
hear the church of Rome also. But I never read or heard before, that any spirit
did invite people to hear Christ, but the spirit of the Father, and his spirit
said, This is my beloved Son, him hear ye, Mat. 17.5. Therefore that spirit
that invites people to hear the Son of God, is not the Devil, but the spirit of
the Father, and ought to be heard and obeyed by all.

6. Again, A.S. affirms, that the spirit of God says, That Carpenters,
Smiths, Masons, and other tradesmen, must not meddle with Ecclesiastical
things, as to Preach, or Teach, etc. But, says he, the evil spirit affirms
the quite contrary, by persuading them they may all prophecy one by one. But
alas then, says, A.S. he deceives, for that place is understood of the real
and true Prophets, of whose number all the Devils in Hell cannot prove all
tradesmen to be.

Answ. Here A.S. seems to oppose that, which for my part I know none affirms;
for who is there that says all Tradesmen have the spirit of Prophecy? I know
none. Yet although all Tradesmen have it not, it does not therefore follow that
no Tradesmen have it; neither did I ever read, that the spirit of God did
forbid Tradesmen to meddle with those things, nor does that Scripture which
A.S. quotes confirm any such thing which he affirms, but rather the contrary:
and we do read in the Scriptures of truth, that Christ did call some of several
Tradesmen to teach the way of God, and to Preach the everlasting Gospel;
witness St. Peter a Fisherman, and St. Paul a Tent-maker, with diverse others
that might be mentioned; so that though all Tradesmen have not the spirit of
Prophecy, yet we see that some had, and they were not forbidden, but commanded
to Preach and Teach; and therefore they who have the Testimony of Jesus, which
is the spirit of Prophecy (although they be Tradesmen) they may Preach and
Teach, according to the gift thereof received, for the Appostle said, Every one
as he has received the gift of the spirit, so let him administer, 1 Pet. 4.10.

7. And says A.S. the Apostle says, Women must not speak in the church; but
the Devil says they may. For the Scripture averreth, says he, That your sons*
and daughters shall Prophecy; this Devil deceives the women Quakers. But
alas, that Scripture was fulfilled in the Apostles, and in the true
Prophe^esses in their times, as Anna, Luke 2.28. and now is in such as have the
true spirit of prophecy, which Quakers Wives and Daughters can never prove
themselves to have.

Answ. Here A.S. has confessed that there was Prophetesses in the Apostles
days, and that there now is at this day also; and the Apostle spoke of Women
that were helpers with him in the Gospel, Phil. 4.3. So then its undeniable
that Women did speak and Prophecy, and now may; though the Apostles did not
permit busybodies and ta^lers, to be asking questions in the Church, but said
they should ask their Husbands at home.

So the thing disputable is, Whether or no the Quakers Wives and Daughters h^ve
the true spirit of Prophecy? concerning which I say this, The Testimony of
Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy, and many Wives and Daughters of the people
called Quakers, have received the testimony of Jesus, and knows the life of
Jesus manifested in them, as by their fruits of love, meekness, gentleness,
patience, long-s^ffering, etc. (which are fruits of the spirit) does appear
unto those who have a knowledge of them; Therefore they have the spirit of
Prophecy.

And farther, several of the Wives and Daughters amongst the people called
Quakers, have prophesied of the desolation of the great Whore (the Church of
Rome) and when that comes to pass, it will be thereby proved, that they have
the true spirit of prophecy; and then shall every tongue confess to it, and
in the mean time let none speak evil of the the things they know not, least
they be found fighters against God.

8. Again, A.S. says, That the good spirit says, It is a Religious act to
swear by God in a Just Cause; but the evil spirit contradicts* for its written,
says he, [Swear not at all.] Behold the ^uritanisme of this impure spirit; but
alas, he deludeth, for God expressly commands, Jer. 4.2. Thou shall swear the
Lord lives in Truth, in Judgment, and in Justice, etc.

Ans. I answer, although in the Law and Prophets, people were commanded to
swear in truth and righteousness, and to perform their oaths to the Lord; yet
Christ (the new covenant, whom God promised should not be according to the old)
says swear not at all, Jer. 31 31, 32. and though Moses and the prophets was
to be heard, under the ministration of the first covenant, yet they said when
Christ the second covenant was come, people must hear him; for said Moses, a
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you like unto me, him shall ye
hear, Deuteronomy. 18.15. And the Prophet said, that Nation and people that will not
serve thee, that Nation shall perish, Isa. 60.12. So that although Moses said
thou shall perform thy oath to the Lord, yet Christ that Prophet who is the end
of that Law (and whom Moses said the people must hear, or else be cut off) he
says, swear not at all; and although the Prophet said, thou shall swear the
Lord lives, etc. yet Christ who is the end of the Prophets (and whom the
Prophets said people must serve or else perish) says, swear not at all; and
although it may be alleged that the Angels swore, yet Christ the first born
amongst many brethren (to whom all the Angels must bow) says, swear not at
all; and although* it may be farther alleged, that God himself swoare, and
therefore its lawful for Christians to swear, yet God himself said concerning
Christ, This is my beloved son, hear ye him, Mat. 17 5. And this beloved son of
God, (whom all Christians ought to hear) says, swear not at all. All which
being rightly weighed, and considered, it plainly appears, that swearing by any
oath whatsoever, was forbidden by Christ Jesus, who is the Lawgiver unto all
Christians, and therefore it is not lawful for Christians to swear at all: And
that spirit that tolerates swearing, or would set it up as a religious act, is
an an^ichristian spirit, because it is against the command of Christ.

And although the Apostle might, or did call the Lord to witness concerning
the truth which he spoke, yet that does not prove that the Apostle swore, as A.
S. affirms that he did, neither do we read that ever any of the Apostles did
either propagate, or tolerate swearing, since Christ forbid it; But
contrariwise the Apostle James says, Above all things my breth^en, swear not;
neither by heaven, nor by the earth, neither by any other oath, but let your
yea be yea, and your nay, nay, least you fall into condemnation: So that
although A.S. would wrest the words of Christ to persuade people that his
intent was they should not swear but in truth and in righteousness, yet the
words of Christ and the Apostle (whom all true Christians are to hear) does
clearly import that their intent was, that people should not swear at all by
any oath whatsoever: But this Antichristian spirit which opposes the doctrines
and commands of Christ and his Apostles, we have had large experience of, and
we have oft-times seen that it leads people to swear, and also to forswear
themselves, both which are an abomina^ion to the Lord, and in the transgression
against God and the new covenant.

Ninthly, and A.S. says, the Apostle said, salute one another, but the devil
says, salute not one another, for Christ says, he sending his disciples bid
them salute no man by the way, Luke 10.4. this Devil follows all Quakers, but
alas, Christ^ meaning there was, that none should hinder them by the way, etc.

Answ. To which I answer here again A. S. goes about to make us believe, that
the commands of Christ are the impositions of the Devil, or at least that the
Devil stirs up people to keep the commands of Christ; the first of which is
bl^sphemy in the highest degree, and the second is little less: for if the
Devil would teach people to keep the commands of Christ, then might they serve
Christ and B^lial: but as Christ said, that cannot be. And indeed we do
experimentally see and find, that the Devil always opposes the keeping of
Christ's commands: As now in A. S. Who would diswade them from it, under
pretense that its the devil that leads them to it: And as to his saying, this
Devil follows all Quakers. I answer, its true, but alas its intentionally to
destroy them; for it was said to the Serpent in the beginning, that the seed of
the woman should bruise his head, and he should bruise its heel, Genesis 3.15. And
even so its now come to pass, for the Lord Jesus Christ the promised seed,
Gal. 3.16. being become the leader of his people, and the Angel of Gods
presence going before them, the Devil, as A. S. says, comes after them, and
follows them with his fiery darts of persecution, and Serpent like is snarling
at the heel: But blessed be the Lord, he that goes before them, and is in them,
is greater and mightier, then the Devil that follows them, and he has been
their preserver hitherto, and I doubt not but he will unto the end preserve all
who trust in him.

And as concerning Christ's words, there needs no meaning to be given to them,
for he meant as he spoke, but if they did according to A. S. his own
conclusion, he is not the interpreter, but the Church; Therefore ( A.S. being
not the church, but a particular man) according to his own argument, his
interpretation is not to be heeded. Again he says, every man is not the
Interpreter, for says he, every man is a liar: and indeed he has confirmed
unto us, that himself is a liar, because he has belied the intent of Christ's
words aforesaid, by giving his meaning to them.

Then says A. S. Yet these deluded souls think that this their deluding spirit
is of God, and why forsooth, because it reprehends them of sin, etc. and did
not Judas his spirit rebuke him of sin, and notwithstanding induce him to
desperation, and to hang himself.

Answ. Here A. S. is again putting light for darkness, or calling the spirit
of truth a deluding spirit, for is not that the spirit of truth that reproves
the world of sin, John 16.7, 8. Did not Christ say, that he would send the
comforter, that should reprove the world of sin, and we never read of any other
spirit that did reprove sin, but the spirit of truth, which A. S.
(blasphemously) calls a deluding spirit, neither did I ever read that a
deluding spirit was the comforter, which that spirit that reproves for sin is,
as Christ said. And again, is it not clear that A.S. puts light for darkness,
in calling that a deluding spirit, which reproves sin, for the Apostle said,
that whatsoever things are reproved, are made manifest by the light, for
whatsoever makes manifest is light, Ephesians. 5.13. and the deluding spirit is
darkness it self, so that hereby it manifestly appears, that A.S. cannot
discern betwixt light and darkness, so is a miserable blind guide indeed. And
though the spirit of truth did rebuke Judas for his treachery, does it
therefore follow that it was the same that led him to hang himself; no, this is
great ignorance in A.S. to affirm, for he might as well have said, That the
same spirit that led him to betray his Master, did afterward rebuke him for
it; but then his ignorance would have somewhat more plainly appeared: But it
was indeed the same spirit which led Judas into that presumptuous act, as to
betray his Master, that afterward led him to desperation, and to hang himself,
and that spirit which let him see his wickedness which he had done, and
rebuked him for it, was light, for whatsoever makes maninifest is light, Ephesians.
5.13.

Eleventhly, then lastly he says, Thus far have we degressed for the
Conversion of Quakers, etc.

Answ. To which I say, that if he have no better way to convert Quakers, nor no
better arguments to produce in order to their conversion, then what he has
made use of in his pretended reconsiler of Religions, he were better be silent,
and save his labor, for I cannot believe that a thousand such books will ever
convert (or rather divert) one Quaker, nay, nor convince them neither, except
it be of his own gross ignorance, or wilful wickedness, of which there is
enough appears, as before manifested.

Thus having briefly answered the most remarkable arguments produced by A. S.
to prove the church of Rome, the true church, and also the several particulars,
by which he endeavored to render the people called Quakers, as a people led by
a deluding spirit: I find the rest of his book consists of diverse arguments, in
which he controverts with Sectaries, and their Bibles, and Ministers, etc.
whose cause (as aforesaid) I am not engaged in, therefore it does not concern
me to answer his charges against them, but shall leave them to answer for
themselves.

Although there are indeed many things contained in the remaining part of his
book, from which I might lay open much of the deceit and ignorance of A. S. and
the abominations of the church of Rome; But the generality of people being
already so fully satisfied concerning her: and the confusion and ignorance of
A. S. also being herein so fully manifested already; I look upon it as
superfluous at present to enlarge on this account, and indeed if never a word
had been said, the very fruits brought forth by the church of Rome in the view
of all Nations, are enough to forewarn them of adhering to her, for can a man
touch pitch and not be defiled.

But for all that has been said; It may be some will say; A hint toward the
discovery of the true Church.
that grand question propounded by A.S. in the second Chapter of his book;
Remains yet unanswered, ( viz) which is the true Church etc.

First, To which I answer; that is the true Church; (and no other) whose fruits
makes manifest that they are governed by the invisible head, Christ, and that
continues in the doctrine of Christ and his apostles, and that are found in the
same order, or discipline in their Assemblies, that the true Church was in the
primitive times; and that have the same way of ordaining ministers; that the
true Church had, And that lives soberly, righteously, and godly, in this
present world; as the true Church did; But the people called Quakers are such
as hereafter I shall prove, Therefore the people called Quakers are the true
Church;

Secondly, It is manifest by the fruits of the people called Quakers, that they
are governed by the invisible head, Christ, for Christ commandes his followers;
not to swear at all, which command the aforesaid people observes and keeps, as
this nation of England full well knows;

Again Christ came not to destroy men's lives; but to save them; and commanded
his followers to love their enemeis; And it is manifest that the people called
Quakers have the mind of Christ; because they seek not the destruction of any,
but the preservation and good of all, and that they love even their enemies,
who hates, and persecutes them; because they are ready to assist, or be
helpful to them upon all occasions; or opportunities, in any thing that may
tend to their present, and future well-being; therefore, they are governed by
the invisible head, Christ; again, Christ commanded saying, whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you even so do ye unto them. Mat. 7.12 which
command the aforesaid people observes, and keeps, as thousands can bear
witness for them; Therefore they are governed by the invisible head, Christ,
and are the true Church.

Thirdly, Again the people called Quakers continues in the doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles; for Christ preached the doctrine of perfection, saying, be ye
perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect, Math: 5* 48. And the Apostle
preached the same doctrine: Heb. 6: 1: and labored to present every man perfect
in Christ; Col: 1: 28: having received gifts for that very work, Ephesians: 4:
11: 12: And the people called Quakers do preach the same doctrine of
perfection, and labors in the power and spirit of the lord, to present people
perfect in Christ* as the Ap^stles did, as thousands can bear testimony, by
which it sufficiently appears that they continue in the doctrine of Christ,
and his apostles, and therefore they are the true Church.

But this Christian doctrine is now opposed by all the Antichristian Ministers
throughout the whole Christendom, or by all Babylons merchants in every part
of her teritories, who Ignorantly produce many good words to oppose this
doctrine.

1. As first, they urge Solomon's words ( viz) There is not a just man upon the
earth that does good and sineth not, Therefore say they, people cannot be
perfect; But alas, they do not discern the signs of the times, neither do
they consider the time and season when these words were spoken, for, at that
time all were gone out of the way, and there was none that did good: Psa: 14: 3.
and they had forsaken the Lord and knew not so much of him, as the ox did of
his owner Isa. 1: 3: and were in the transgression of gods covenant which he
made with their fathers Ier: 31: 32: so that although there was none without
sin at that time, yet it does not follow the people can never be free from sin,
no more then their being then Ignorant of God, does argue, that people should
never come to the knowledge of him; the contrary of both which may be easily
proved by plain scripture, for at that time when Israel were strangers unto
God, and were all gone out of the way, and none amongst them did good etc. even
then did God promise that the day should come in which he would make anew
covenant with the house of Judah, and with the house of Israel, (who were in
the transgression, of the first covenant Jer: 31: 31:) and that he would finish
transgression, and make an end of sin, Dan: 24: which had hid his face from
them (and by which they were made strangers to him, Is^. 59.2.) and that he
would Remember their Iniquities no more, and that they should all know him from
the least, to the greatest, Jer. 31: 34 by which it is evident, that (al^hough
in the prophets days, they were all in transgression, and had not the knowledge
of God) the purpose of God was to bring them into a better state, which the
true Church in the apostles days were witnesses of, (for the apostles said,
Heb. 11: 4^: God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us
could not be made perfect*) and although some of them had been Idolators, and
had lived in the pollutions of he world, yet they were washed and cleansed, yea,
and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the spirit of our God, 1
Cor. 6.10, 11: and so though they were some times Ignorant of God, yet, God
caused the Light to shine out of darkness in their hearts to give them the
Light of the knowledge of Gods glory in the face of Christ who dwelt in them, 2
Cor. 4.6. Gall. 2.20. so that both sin and Ignorance was don away in them
through the power and coming of the Lord Jesus, and so they did not always
remain in their sins, but was freed from them, as the apostle testified Romans
18. and 8.2.

Secondly, But then Antichrists ministers says, that if they were free from
sin, why did the apostle say, that if we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves and the truth is not in us, 1 John. 1.8.

I Answer he did not say so because people could not be made free from sin, but
he said so that they might not sin, 1 John. 2.1. and consider who they were
that he then wrote to for, he sometimes wrote to children, and sometimes to
young men, and sometimes to fathers in the truth, 1 John. 2.13. But when he
spoke those words ( viz) If we say we have no sin, etc. he then spoke to
children; for said he, my little Children, these things I write unto you, that
you sin not, 1 John 2.1. Now if they had been already perfect, or fully freed
from sin, then had they attained to the man's state, which the apostle labored
to bring them to Colo. 1.28. But they having not attained to that state, he
would not have them to deceive themselves, (nor to think more highly of
themselves then they ought to think, Romans 12.3.) which children in
understanding are s^bject to do, but with these little children the apostle
traveled in birth, that Christ might be formed in them, Gal. 4.19. (who is the
one offering that perfects for ever, all them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14.)
and he labored to build them up in the holy faith which gives victory through
Christ, that so they might be borne up to a man's state, for said he, he that is
born of God does not sin, John. 3.9.

Thirdly, But then, it may be some will object, that the apostle spoke not only
of children, but of himself also, saying, if we say etc.

To which I Answer, that although the apostle numbered himself with them, yet
that does not argue, that he was in their state, or that he was not set free
from sin, no more then James his numbering himself amongst the scattered Jews,
(saying, with the same mouth curse we men etc. Jam. 1.9) does argue that he was
one of them that did curse men, for its evident that the apostle became as
weak to them that were weak, and to the strong, as strong, and to them that
were under the Law, as under the law, and to them that were without the law, as
without the law, though not without law to God, and became al things unto all,
that he thereby might gain some; 1 Cor. 9.20.21.22. so although he did
condescend to them that were weak, as children or babes in Christ, as to
number himself amongst them, for the gaining of them to a farther state, yet
that does not at all argue, that he was, as they were, for the apostle Paul
himself said, that he was set free from the law of sin and death, Romans 8.2. all
which being rightly weighed, and considered, It manifestly appears, that
perfection or freedom from sin, is attaineable according to the doctrine of
Christ and his apostles, which by the people called Quakers is preached and
continued in, as before asserted, therefore they are the true Church.

4. Again, The Order and Discipline of the true Church in the Apostles time,
was, That the Propets might speak two or three, and the rest might judge; and
if any thing was revealed to another that sat by, he might speak, and the
first was to hold his peace, 1 Cor. 14.29, 30. and the same order the people
called Quakers have in their assemblies, as is known to thousands, by which it
appears that they are the true Church.

5. Again, The Ministers of Christ in the true Church in the primitive times
(who turned people from darkness to light, and from Satan's power, to the power
of God, Gal. 1.1.) were Ordained and made Ministers, not of man, nor by man,
nor of the letter, but of the spirit, by the revelation of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor.
3.6. and so are the Ministers amongst the people called Quakers, made Ministers
of the spirit, by the revelation of Jesus Christ, as the effects of their
ministry does testify; for many are turned from darkness to light, and from
iniquity to righteousness, and the spirits in prison is by them ministered unto,
and the dead are raised unto life, and the captives are set at liberty, as
thousands can and must bear witnes^; Therefore the people called Quakers are
the true Church.

6. The true Church in the primitive times, was taught by the grace of God,
that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, they should live soberly and
righteously, and godly in this present wo^ld, Tit. 2.11, 12. and the people
called Quakers, being taught by the same spirit of grace, does deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts (as many in this Nation well knows) and does
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present word, as thousands can
testify; Therefore the people called Quakers are the true Church.

Thus I might produce many more arguments to prove the aforesaid people to be
the Church of true Christians, but much of this kind has been by several of
them already written; wherefore, I shall not enlarge at present; but for any
that shall desire any farther satisfaction, let them come to the Assemblies of
the aforesaid people, and hear their Doctrines, and behold their Discipline,
etc. and, as the Apostle said, Try all things, and hold fast that which is
good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.

These following Lines are sent to all Sectaries (in Christendom, who have
been killing and destroying one another about Faith and Worship) but especially
to the Church of ROME.
O Babylon the Great, who long have reigned a Painted Whore,
And have bewitch't the Nations with thy enchanting power,
Into remembrance thou art com'd of God, the mighty Lord,
^ho'll do to thee as thou have done; the Saints with one accord
Have bent their bows against thee, strong, and mighty men they are:
They will not spare nor pity thee, in this day o'th Lambs War,
For it is the day of vengeance great, of our Almighty God,
He Will do to thee as thou have done, thou cannot escape his rod.
The holy Prophets in their day, foretold these things of thee,
Which to our consolation, we hope to live and see;
For Jeremiah he foresaw, thy desolation great,
And said an Army great should come, that should give thee defeat;
Out of the North the Prophet said, they should come against thee, Jer. 50.9.
(Even as it now is come to pass) before whom thou must flee.
The seven heads, or mountains great, on which thou long have sat,
Must now be turned upside down, and made to reele and quake;
For now the Lion he does roar, and utter forth his voice,
At which the mountains great must move, and fly away at's noise, Isa. 42.14,
15.
Yea, vacant, waste, and desolate, those mountains must be laid
And be no more inhabited, for so it has been said;
Thy Merchants many have enricht themselves, and made them great,
And Ruled with Force and Cruelty, false-prophet like indeed.
Wherefore Lament, and howl they must, and mourn both great and small,
And cry, alas, alas, for now is come thy sudden fall:
For'th day is dawned which John foresaw (and Prophesied of thee)
In which he said, and Testified, thy total fall should be.
Though thou have sitten in thy pride, like as a stately Queen,
And said within thy heart and mind, Thine end should not be seen;
Though thou have drunk the blood of Saints, and glorified thy self,
And said, Thou should no sorrow see, nor ever loose thy wealth,
Yet woe and sorrow, great and sore, will swiftly thee surprise,
And all thy expectations, will fall before thine eyes.
When Death and Famine comes on thee, with mourning great and sore,
This will predict thine end to thee, who never* shall rise more;
And truly thy divisions great, predicts thy sudden fall,
The more, because thou have refused to hear the heavenly call,
For in thy streets the voice has cried, Repent and fear the Lord,
And turn from your Idolatries, serve God with one accord;
But like the Adder thou have been, that is deaf and will not hear
The Charmer, who has charmed long, so thou have stopped thine ear:
Why do not mind the words of Christ, who spoke and said himself
The Kingdom cannot stand that is divided against it self?
And is not thy divisions great, Oh Babylon thou Whore!
Which does foretell thy total end, and thou shall be no more.
The cause which does provoke the Lord, to pour his Judgments great
On thee, is thy deceit and pride, and murders which are great,
And also thy Idolatries, and Whordoms which are many,
This does provoke the Lord to wrath, and's anger will not tarry:
Wherefore look for it, and expect that it will surely come,
For God has said it, and it must accordingly be done.
Written in Bridewel, near Lanston in Cornwall, the 11th Month. 1664. J. C.

Here follows the Papists 14th Chapter concerning the Protestants, or Sectarian
Ministers, published for them to Answer.
That the Protestant, or Sectarian Minister or Preachers, are not True
Preachers, or sent by God.

1. ALl that have no true Mission, are not true Preachers; How shall they
Preach unless they are sent? Romans 10.15. But Protestant, or Sectarian
Ministers and Preachers have no true mission: For all their mission, from the
beginning of their Reformation, was either the Inspiration of a Spirit they
knew not what, or the Commission of a Child, Edward the Sixth, whom they called
Supreme Head of the Church, and from whose Kingly power, all Jurisdiction, as
well Ecclesiastical as Secular, they affirm did slow. See Fox tom. 2. Anno,
1546. in Edw. the 6th. or the Letters Patents of a Woman, Queen Eliz. to whom
also they were pleased to attribute the like Superiority and Power. See Stat.
Anno primo Eliz. Cap. 1. or the Ilisit and invallid* Ordination or mission, of
or by one Story an Apostate Monk, who Ordained their first Bishops at the Nags
Head in Cheapside, in Queen Elizabeth's time: See Christophorus de Sacro Bosc^,
or at length the Approbation of Tryers, Instituted by his late Highness
(forsooth) and Confirmed by Act of Parliament (if they have any better let them
prove it, in the mean time let them know, we value not a straw Mason's Old New
Records produced in the year 1613. which was the matter of 50 years after the
thing now mentioned was Sacrilegiously and invalidly done, and most
disgracefully and shamefully cried down) But those could not give them any
spiritual Authority, Power, or Right to Preach, for according to that Received
Maxim of the Law, No man can give more right, then he himself has, Cook. lib.
4. Therefore, etc.

2. Moreover, a Bishop is to be ordained by two or three Bishops, Consil.
Apostil. Can. 1. And a Priest, and likewise a Deacon, and the rest of the
Clergy, by a Bishop, ibidem Can. 2. Con. Trident. Sess. 23. Can. 7. But this
Apostolical and needful manner of Ordination, or Mission, they never yet had;
for they rejected it quite, and brought in an Heretical fashion in its steed,
in Edward the Sixth's time; neither if they were willing, could they have, for,
as I said before, their Bishops from the beginning of their Reformation, had no
other Ordination, Consecration, or Mission, then the Commission of the King or
Queen; nor yet that, but during the King or Queens pleasure: For the
sacrilegious, Ilicit, or Invalid Ordination of or by Story (which was the first
pretended holy Mission of Protestants in England, and from whence they hitherto
derive their Orders) it was not worth a straw, witness the aforementioned
Canons of the Apostolic Council, etc. and consequently, their pretended holy
Orders thence derived, are not worth a pins head; no more is the Approbation of
Tryers; Therefore they are not true Preachers. What are they then, forsooth?
Intruders, Thieves and Robbers, Hypocrites, Ravenous Wolves, and Murderers,
Sons of Belial, False Prophets, and Priests of Baal. Which is their Heresy?
Rebellion, and stubbornness against the Church; for Rebellion (as they
themselves, even in their newest Bible confess) is as the sin of Witchcraft,
and Stubbornness, is as Iniquity and Idolatry, 1 Samuel (as they call it) the
15. and 23.

3. Now if the Protestant or Sectarian Preachers and Teachers be such, what
must the Protestants and Sectarians themselves be? If the light that is in them
be darkness, how great shall the darkness its self be? If the blind lead the
blind, shall they not both fall into the ditch? Sure enough they shall, even
into the ditch of everlasting burning, brimstone and fire, where shall be
howling, and crying, and weeping, and lamenting, and gnashing of teeth for
ever, unless they be converted and do Penance, and live in the Church, in which
must always be true Preachers and Teachers, for the Consummation of Saints, to
the work of the Ministry, and edification of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. ver.
5, and 11. But in the Protestant, or Sectarian Church, are not such, as now
proved, therefore the Protestant or Sectarian Church is not the true Church of
true believers: How shall they believe in him whom (not of whom, as their Bible
says of purpose to excuse themselves. See above) they have not heard, or how
shall they hear without a Preacher, or how shall they Preach, unless they are
sent?

4. Note this well, gentle Reader, and consider seriously with your self, how
deplorable a thing it is to see such hypocritical Intruders to stand in a
Pulpit or Tub, with such a brazenfac'd book, as is their Unjust, Corrupt, and
perverse Bible in their hand, lulling the poor Ignorant people to the sleep of
death, with these words, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord says no such
thing. Are not these they of whom the Lord himself says, Jer. 14.14. They
prophecy falsely in my Name, I sent them not, and I did not bid them, neither
did I speak unto them, a lying vision, and divination, and fraudulence, and
sedition of their own hearts they prophecy unto you. See more Deuteronomy. 13.5. Item
18.20. etc. And when they have done with their, Thus says the Lord, and can
say no more, then they rowse up their slumbering spirits by singing unto them
one of Tho. Sternholds, Jack Hopkins, or Rob. Wisdoms Psalms; suppose, From
Turk and Pope, etc. which Sacrilegious Psalm, or Diabolical Song, passes with
these deluders, and their deluded Auditors and Chorists, for holy Scripture,
and the Word of God, as well as Dixit Dominus, Domino meo, etc. Oh times, Oh
manners, Oh God amend them. Amen. See Erastus senior and jun. who copiously
prove this Subject.

A.S.

THE END.

