THE CLERK's TUTOR for Writing.

March Dom Year of Apr Sep Jun Nov Aug May Jan * * Letter our Lord July Dec *
Feb * * Oct * * AG F 1660 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 4 5 D C E D 2 3 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 6
7 P A G CB A 4 5 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 8 9 F E G F 6 7 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 1680
1 DC B E D C 8 9 29 30 31 * * * * 2 3 A G B A 1670 1 G F E D C B A. 4 5 F E D G
F E 2 3 S M T W T F S 6 1687 C B A perpetual Almanac

London Printed for Io: Streater. Ia. Flesher. and Hen: Twyford. Sold in Vine
Court Middle Temple. 1667.

Written and Engraven by Edw Cocker.

Your book, arm, pen, right forward place.
Your breast from board, your. head upright.
Your fingers strait, mind every grace.
Move your pen freely, bear it light
Full, small, height, depth, and distance mark
These, with proportions, make a Clerk.










To the Reader.
HOw profitable it is to observe those Forms which the Law approves, daily
experience does sufficiently demonstrate; for that hereby all assurances are
rendered plain and manifest to every capacity, and fortified against all
exceptions. And surely the captious age wherein we live, that so busily
examines and eagerly pursues all advantages and shifts whatsoever, will
certainly drive every man to his just defense, and so make this Book as
welcome, as is it undoubtedly necessary.

Here is presented to thy hand a faithful Collection of Presidents of all
sorts, which for the variety, will fit every man's occasions; and for the
clearness will be useful to any understanding, who may at all times readily
find here sound Instructions; if either the distance of his abode, the have of
his business, or any other cause do withhold him from further advice: for those
Instruments which are usually drawn in Latin, here you shall find the proper
Cases both for the Names of the Persons, their Additions, the Sums of Money,
with the day of the date, only observing this throughout the Work; if A. be
bound to B. then is A. the Obligor, and B. the Obligee: and if A. acknowledge a
Recog^isance to B. then is A. the Conufor, and B. the Conusee.

And in this Impression, to complete the Design that was intended by this Book,
are added the best Presidents of all manner of Concords of Fines, and
Directions how to sue out a Fine, with many remarkable Observations therein
will appear; also directions of Writs of Habeas Corpus, Writs of Error, etc. To
the inferior Courts in the several Cities, Buroughs, Hundreds, and Bailywicks
of England; and the respective Mayors, Bailiffs, and Governors thereof; for
default whereof, and Error wherein, so many nonsuits do daily happen, and Writs
of Error are afterward brought to the endangering of the whole Cause, and
perplexity and vexation of the Client, which all ingenious Practisers as they
desire, so here are rightly instructed how to avoid. There is also a Supplement
to the Names both of Men and Women, with their several Trades and Employments
rendered into Latin; so that nothing is wanting to answer every occurrence or
emergent occasion whatsoever of this Nature.

Hereby it will not be easy to mistake, and cheaper then this no man can
purchase greater quiet and security. Farewell.

The TABLE.
A.
ATtornment of Tenants, to be endorst on a Deed, Page 88 An Affidavit, that a
man is seized in Fee free of all Encumbrances, ibid. Acquittance for the
consideration of money in an Indenture; and a Release of the Estate, Page 89 An
Assignment of an Annuity for years, granted out of a Lease for years, Page 95
Attornment of Tenants, Page 105 Another of the same, ibid. An Acquittance for
receipt of money upon a Sale, Page 109 Articles of Agreement, for enjoyment of
a quiet Lease as Tenants in Common, Page 68 An Acquittance, for the Redemption
of a Mortgage, Page 75 -- For Rent, Page 76 -- For a Legacy for money received
to pay to another, Page 77 An Assignment of a Lease by Indorsement, Page 118 An
Assignment of a Mortgage by Indorsment by a Friend in Trust, for one that
purchased the same to keep it in force. Page 117 An Acquittance and Receipt for
a Legacy given by Will to the Executor thereof, Page 118 An Affidavit that
Lands are free from all Encumbrances, Page 119 An Assignment of a Bond, with a
Letter of Attorney verbatim, as in the Bond, Page 120 An Acquittance for part
of a Debt, Page 140 An Affidavit the form, Page 144
B.
Bishoprics in order, Page 170 A Bond to the King, Page 135 A Bill of sale of
Goods to be void, upon payment of a sum of Money with Interest, Page 37 --
Single without a penalty, Page 39 A single penal Bill, ibid.
C
A Condition from one to one, to pay a sum of money at several payments; with a
Clause, if any payment be unpaid, the Bond to be forfeited, Page 20 A Condition
of a Bond of Arbitration, from two to two, without an Umpire, Page 22 A
Condition of a single Bond of Arbitration, without an Umpire, Page 23 -- Of a
double Bond to pay a sum of money at several payments; with a Clause, if any
payment be behind, the Bond to be forfeited, Page 25 -- Of a single Bond to pay
a sum of money at a place certain, Page 26 -- Of a single Bond to pay a sum of
money without a place certain, Page 27 -- Of a treble Bond to pay a sum of
money at one payment, Page 28 -- Of a double Bond to pay a sum of money at a
place certain, Page 29 -- Of a Counter-Bond, from two to a third person, who
was bound with them, Page 30 -- Of a Counter-Bond from one to one, Page 31 --
To perform Covenants in Articles of Agreement, Page 33 -- To perform the
Covenants in an Indenture, Page 34 -- To stand by the Award of Arbitrators,
with an Vmpire certain nominated, Page 40 A Charter-part of a Freight, Page 63
A Covenant from an Infant, to engage him to execute a Conveyance at Age, Page
82 A Condition of a Recognizance to pay Costs in Chancery, Page 112 A
Recognizance to seal a Deed by a certain day* and perform the Covenants
therein, Page 78 A Recognizance that the Heir shall enter into Bond at his full
Age to pay another, Page 79 -- That the Administrator not present shall seal a
Deed, Page 80 A Declaration of an Obligee, that his name is used in trust, Page
129 A Codicill to a Will, Page 143 Cities, Page 274 Counties, Page 276
D.
DEed of Gift, Page 42 Defeazance of a Statute for performance of Covenants.
Page 86 A Declaration that money lent in one man's name is the proper moneys of
another, Page 91 A discharge of a Bill, the Bill being lost, Page 107 A
Defeazance upon a Judgment with a Release of Errors, Page 115 A Defeazance upon
a Statute Staple for payment of money, Page 123 A Discharge of money decreed in
Chancery, Page 134 -- To Trustees for money by them received, Page 136 A Deed
of Feoffment upon a Sale, Page 139 A Deed to declare that the name of the
Obligee in an Obligation is used in trust for another, Page 141 The several
dates for Bonds, Page 279 Directions for suing out of Fines, and making the
Concords thereof, with several necessary Notes thereupon. Page 145 Directions
for Writs, Page 303
E.
AN Exchange by Indenture of bargain and Sale, with Livery and Seizin, Page 113
F.
THe form of a Will, pa. 142 A Fine from one to one of a Message and Garden,
Page 147 A Fine from a man and his Wife to one Cognisee, of two Messuages, one
Yard or Backside, etc. Page 148 A Fine for two Cognisees and the wife of one of
them to two Cognisees, of Messuages, Barns, Gardens, Orchards, Lands, Meadows,
Pasture, Common of Pasture for all manner of Cattle, Page 149 A Fine by a
Knight and his Wife, to an Archbishop, and another of their Manors, Messuages,
etc. the Advowson of a Church, and view of Frank-pledge with General Warranty,
Page 151 A Fine by one and his wife to one, of one Manor, Messuages, etc. And
the Advowson of a Church by turns, Page 153 A Fine of a Rent, by an Earl and
his wife, Page 154 A Fine of a third part of a Rent, Page 155 A Fine of a
Parsonage, excepting the Advowson of the Vicarage of the same Parsonage, Page
156 A Fine of one Message, one Barn, Land, Meadow, Pasture, and 5 s. Rent the
Parsonage of B. and the Advowson of the Vicarage of B. Page 157 A Fine by an
Earl and his wife, of a Manor, Advowson, Liberty of Foldage, free Warren, and
free Fishing, etc. Page 158 A Fine from three and their Wifes, to one, with
several Warranties, Page 160 A Fine of nine Messuages, nine Gardens, etc. and
the moiety of one Water-Mill, one Dove-house, etc. Page 167 A Fine by a husband
and a wife, and another to one who grants and renders the same again to one of
the Conusors for 21 years, to begin at a time to come, reserving a Rent with
Clause of Distress; and afterward the Conusee grants the Reversion to the
husband and Wife Conusors, and the heirs of the husband. Page 163
I.
AN Indenture being a Defeazance of an Assignment of a Bond, page 130
K.
EVery Kings Reign, with the Year of our Lord annexed to the year of their
Reign, p. 228
L.
A Letter of Attorney to receive a sum of money, very usual, page 44 -- To
receive money due upon Bond, Page 51 A Letter of Attorney to receive money due
upon several Bonds, allowing the Attorney reasonable Charges out of the money
he shall receive, etc. Page 55 A General Letter of Attorney to let, set, and
dispose, etc. Page 58 A Letter of Attorney to recover Livery and Seisin
according to the Feoffment, Page 84 A Lease of Ejectment, Page 85 Livery and
Seisin to be Indors'd on a Deed, Page 94 A Letter of Attorney from the husband
to the wife upon his Voyage, Page 100 A Letter of Attorney to be added to the
end of a Sale, to give power for the Vendor to another to deliver possession
and seizin to the Vendee, Page 106 A Letter of Attorney to receive seizin of
Land, Page 128 -- To receive money decreed in Chancery, Page 133 A Lease of a
house, Page 173
M.
A Mortgage of a house, page 124 A Mortgagee's Assignment of his Mortgage to
the Mortgagor, to be Indorsed on the Deed, Page 138
N.
THe Names of Officers in order, Page 269 The Names of Moneys, Page 281 The
proper Names of Men in Latin and English in the same cases as they are to stand
in the Recognizance and Obligation, Page 210
O.
AN Obligation from one to one, page 1 An Obligation from one to two, Page 2 An
Obligation from one to three, Page 2 -- Two to one, Page 3 -- Two to two, Page
4 -- Two to three, Page 5 -- Three to one, Page 6 -- Three to two, ibid. --
Three to three, Page 7
R.
A Recognizance from one to one, Page 8 -- One to two, Page 10 -- One to three,
Page 11 -- Two to one, Page 12 -- Two to two, Page 13 -- Two to three, Page 15
-- Three to one, Page 16 -- Three to two, Page 17 -- Three to three, Page 19 A
General Release from two to two, Page 35 A General Release from one to one,
Page 36 A Release of Errors upon a Judgment in the Common Bench, Page 49 -- In
the Kings Bench, Page 50 A Release of personal Actions, Page 83 -- of a Ward to
his Guardian when he is at Age, Page 93 A Release from the Father to one that
bought the son's Land, Page 103 The Returns of the Four Terms, Page 182, 183
S.
A Surrender of a Lease, page 108 A Surrender of the Lessee's Term, to be
Indorsed on the Lease, Page 132 A Schedule to a Will, Page 143 The several Sums
of money. Page 283
T.
TRades and Professions of Men and Women in their proper case to fill up the
Bonds and Recognizances, Page 264 The Titles of Men and Women, Page 272
U.
AN Umpirage, Page 73
W.
A Warrant of Attorney to confess a Judgment in the Kings Bench, Page 45 -- To
acknowledge satisfaction upon Record for a Judgment recovered formerly, Page 47
A Warrant of Attorney to appear for one in the Kings Bench, Page 53 The same in
the Common Pleas, ibid. A Warrant to confess a Judgment upon a Bond, if the
money be not paid on the day, Page 54 A Warrant to a Proctor by the Son, to
permit a stranger to administer upon his Fathers Estate Page 110 A Warrant to
an Executor, Page 111, A Warrant of Attorney to confess Judgment in Chancery
for privileged persons, Page 137 A Will, Page 142 A Writ of Covenant for the
King, of Tithe Corn, Page 157
The Explanation of the Almanac.
HAving on the upper part the Months, and under them the Figures for the days
of the Month, from 1 till 31. under them your Dominical Letters; and in the
lower part the Letters for the days of the Week, from Sunday to Saturday, on
each side you have the year of our Lord from 1660. till 1687. on each side of
them are your Dominical Letters. Now to know your day; first, find out your
Year, next your Dominical Letter against that year, which Letter find in the
lower part of your Almanac, and the Letter under that is the day of the Week,
for your Observation for the whole year. Only every Leap-year you have two
Dominical Letters, which you must observe,, the first for January and February,
and the next for all the year after.

IN the Year. 1660. you find the Letters A. G. A. directs you to Saturday for
January and February, and G. to Sunday for all the year after: so that you find
the first Saturday in January is the seventh day, and under that Saturdayes for
that Month, and under February 4, which are Saturdayes for that Month: But in
March you must observe G. which directs you to Sunday; so that the first Sunday
in March is the fourth day, and so you reckon forward. April and July, the
first Sunday is the first day of the Month, and so of the rest. In the year
1661. you find your Dominical Letter F. which directs you to Monday, which is
your observation for that year, and so you find the rest: and when you are at
1687. you may begin again.

THE Young CLERKS TVTOR.
An Obligation from One to One.
NOverint universi per praesentes me A.B. de C. in Com. D. generosum teneri and
firmiter obligari E.F. de G. in com. H. Armigero in Centum libris bonae and
legalis monetae Angliae, solvend. eidem E. F. aut suo certo Attorn.
Executoribus, Administratoribus, vel Assignat. suis; Ad quam quidem solutionem
been and fideliter faciend. Obligo me, haeredes, Executores, and
Administratores meos firmiter per praesentes; Sigillo meo Sigillat. Dat. primo
die Aprilis An. Reg. Dom. nostri Caroli secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae, and Hibernia, Regis Fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo. Annoque Dom.
1662.

Obligations from One to Two.
NOverint universi per praesentes me A.B. de C. in Com. D. generosum teneri and
firmiter obligari E.F. de G. in Com. H. Yeoman, and J.K. de L. in Com. M.
Yeoman in Centum libris bonae and legalis monetae Angliae solvend. eisdem E. F.
and J. K. seu eorum alteri vel eorum certo Attorn. Executor. Administrator. vel
Assignat. suis; Ad quam quidem solutionem been and fideliter faciend. Obligo
me, Haeredes, Executores, and Administratores meos firmiter per praesentes,
Sigillo meo Sigillat. Dat. primo die Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1662. Annoque Regni
Domini nostri CAROLI secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae, Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from One to Three.
NOverint universi per praesentes me A. B. de C. in Com. D. generosum teneri
and firmiter obligari E.F. de G. in Com. H. Yeoman, J. K. de L. in Com. M.
Yeoman, and N.O. de P. in Com. Q. Yeoman, in Centum libris bonae and legalis
monetae Angliae, solvend. eisdem E.F. J.K. and N. O. vel alicui eorum aut suo
certo Attorn. Executor. Administrator. vel Assignat. suis; Ad quam quidem
solutionem been et fideliter faciend. Obligo me, Haeredes, Executores, et
Administratores meos firmiter per praesentes, Sigillo meo Sigillat. Dat. primo
die Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1662. Annoque Regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi Dei
gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae Regis Fidei Defensoris, etc.
Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from Two to One.
NOverint universi per praesentes nos. A.B. de C. in Com. D. generosum, and
E.F. de G. in Com. H. generosum, teneri and firmiter obligari J. K. de L. in
Com. M. Armigero in Centum libris bonae and legalis monetae Angliae solvend.
eidem J. K. aut suo certo Attorn. Executor. Administrator. vel Assignat. suis;
Ad quam quidem solutionem been and fideliter faciend. Obligamus nos and
utrumque nostrum per se pro toto and in solido, Haeredes, Executores, and
Administratores nostros and utriusque nostri firmiter per praesentes. Sigillis
nostris Sigillat. Dat. primo die Aprilis Anno Dom. 1662. Annoque Regni Domini
nostri Caroli secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
Regis Fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from Two to Two.
NOverint universi per praesentes nos A. B. de C. in Com. D. Generosum and E.F.
de G. in Com. H. generosum teneri and firmiter obligari I.K. de L. in Com. M.
Armigero and N.O. de P. in Com. R. Armigero in Centum libris bonae and legalis
monetae Angliae, solvend. eisdem I.K. and N.O. seu eor. alteri vel eorum certo
Attorn. Executor. Administrator. vel Assignat. suis; Ad quam quidem solutionem
been and fideliter faciend. Obligamus nos and utrumque nostri per se pro toto
and in solido, Haeredes, Executores, and Administratores nostros, and utriusque
nostri firmiter per praesentes. Sigillis nostris Sigillat. Dat. primo die
Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1662. Annoque regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi Dei gratia
Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc.
Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from Two to Three.
NOverint universi per praesentes nos A. B. de C. in Com. D. generosum and E.
F. de G. in Com. praedict. generosum teneri and firmiter obligari H.I. de K. in
Com. H. Yeoman, M. N. de O. in Com. praedict. Yeoman, and P. Q. de R. in Com.
praedict. Yeoman, in Centum libris bonae and legalis monetae Angliae, solvend.
eisdem H.I. M.N. and P. Q. vel alicui eorum aut suo certo Attorn. Executor.
Administrator. vel Assignat. suis; Ad quam quidem solutionem been and fideliter
faciend. Obligamus nos and utrumque nostri, per se pro toto and in solido,
Haeredes, Executores, and Administratores nostros and utriusque nostri,
firmiter per praesentes, Sigillis nostris Sigillat. Dat. primo die Aprilis,
Anno Dom. 1662. Annoque regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi, Dei gratia Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from Three to One.
NOverint universi per praesentes nos A.B. de C. in Com. D. generosum E.F. de
C. praedict. generosum and G.H. de J. in Com. K. generosum teneri and firmiter
obligari L. M. de N. in Com. W. Armigero in Centum libris bonae and legalis
monetae Angliae, solvend. eidem L.M. aut suo certo Attorn. Executor.
Administrator. vel Assignat. suis; Ad quam quidem solutionem been and fideliter
faciend. Obligamus nos and quemlibet nostri per se pro toto and in solido,
Haeredes, Executores, and Administratores nostros and cujuslibet nostri
firmiter per praesentes, Sigillis nostris Sigillat. Dat. primo die Aprilis,
Anno Dom. 1662. Annoque Regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi, Dei gratia Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from Three to Two.
NOverint universi per praesentes nos A.B. de C. in Com. D. generosum E. P. de
C. praedict. generosum and G. H. de J. in Com. praedict. generosum teneri et
firmiter obligari K. L. de M. in Com. N. Armigero and O.P. de Q. in Com. R.
Armigero in Centum libris bonae and legalis monetae Angliae, solvend. eisdem
K.L. and O.P. seu eorum alteri, vel eorum certo Attorn. Executor.
Administrator. vel Assignat. suis; Ad quam quidem solutionem been and fideliter
faciend. Obligamus nos and quemlibet nostri per se pro toto and in solido,
Haeredes, Executores, and Administratores, nostros and cujuslibet nostri,
firmiter per praesentes, Sigillis nostris Sigillat. Dat. primo die Aprilis,
Anno Dom. 1662. Annoque regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi, Dei Gratia Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from Three to Three.
NOverint universi per praesentes nos A.B. de W. in Com. L. generosum C. D. de
W. praedict. generosum and E.F. de S. in Com. praedict. generosum teneri et
firmiter obligari G.H. de J. in Com. K. Yeoman, L.M. de J. praedict. Yeoman,
and N. O. de P. in Com. S. Yeoman, in Centum libris bonae and legalis monetae
Angliae solvend. eisdem G. H. L. M. and N. O. vel alicui eorum, aut suo certo
Attorn. Executor. Administrator. vel Assignat. suis; Ad quam quidem solutionem
been and fideliter faciend. Obligamus nos et quemlibet nostri per se pro toto
and in solido, Haeredes, Executores, and Administratores nostros and cujuslibet
nostri, firmiter per praesentes, Sigillis nostris Sigillat. Dat. primo die
Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1662. Annoque regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi, Dei gratia
Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc.
Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from One to One.
RIchardus Whelden, de Hampton in Com. Middles. Pistor, coram Domino Rege in
Cancellaria sua personaliter constitutus, recognovit seipsum debere Arthuro
Hogsden, de Fulham, in Com. praedict. Armigero, quadringentas libras bonae and
legalis monetae Angliae, solvend. eidem Arthuro Hogsden, aut suo certo Attorn.
Executoribus, vel Administratoribus suis, in Festo Natalis Domini prox. futur.
post Dat. praesentium. Et praedict. Richardus vult et concedit pro se,
Haeredibus, Executoribus, et Administratoribus suis, per praesentes, quod si
defecerit in solutione praedictae summae pecuniae, Quod tunc praedicta summa
pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de se, Haeredibus, Executoribus, et
Administratoribus suis, de omnibus and singulis Maneriis, Messuagiis, Terris,
Tenementis, Haereditamentis, Possessionibus, Bonis, and Catallis ipsius
Richardi Whelden, Haeredum, Executorum, and Administratorum, suor. Test dicto
Domino Rege apud Westminster. 11 die Aprilis, Anno Regni ejusdem Domini Regis Caroli
secundi, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regis, Fidei
Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from One to Two.
RObertus Alger de Kirton in Com. Lincoln generosus coram Domino Rege in
Cancellaria sua personaliter constitutus recognovit seipsum debere Iohanni Lark
and Richardo Sparrow de Kirton praedict. generosis Centum libras bonae and
legalis monetae Angliae solvend. eisdem I.L. and R.S. seu eorum alteri vel
eorum certo Attorn. Executor. vel Administrator. suis, in festo Annunciationis
beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. post Dat. praesentium: and praedictus R.
vult and concedit pro se Haeredibus, Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis,
per praesentes, quod si defecerit in solutione praedictae summae pecuniae quod
tunc praedicta summa pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de se, Haeredibus,
Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis, and de Omnibus and Singulis Maneriis,
Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis, Hereditamentis, Possessionibus, bonis and
catallis ipsius Roberti, Haered. Executor. and Administrator. suorum ubicunque
invent. fuerint ad solum and proprium opus and usum ipsorum Iohannis Lark and
Richardi Sparrow, Haered. Executor. Administrator. and Assignat. suor. Test
dicto Domino Rege apud Westminster. 11 die Ianuarii, Anno regni ejusdem Domini Regis
Caroli secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis,
Fidei Defensoris, etc. Tertiodecimo.

A Recognizance from One to Three.
ANtonius Badwer de London Generosus coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua
personaliter constitutus, recognovit seipsum debere Carolo Dunch de London,
Armigero, Edwardo Burdit de London. Generoso, and Francisco Stoe de London.
Generoso, Ducentas libras bonae and legalis monetae Angliae solvend. eisdem
Carolo Dunch, Edwardo Burdit, and Francisco Stoe, vel alicui eorum aut suo
certo Attorn. Executoribus, vel Administratoribus suis in festo Sancti Marci
Evangelistae prox. futur. post dat. praesentium. Et praedictus Antonius vult
and concedit pro se, Haeredibus, Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis per
praesentes, quod si defecerit in solutione praedictae summae pecuniae, quod
tunc praedicta summa pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de se, Haeredibus,
Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis, and de omnibus and singulis Maneriis,
Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis, Hereditamentis, Possessionibus, Bonis and
Catallis ipsius Antonii, Haered. Executor. and Administrator. suor. ubicunque
invent. fuerint, ad solum and proprium opus and usum ipsorum Caroli Dunch,
Edwardi Burdit, and Francisci Stoe, Haered. Executor. Administrator. et
Assignat. suor. Test dicto Domino Rege apud Westminster. 11 die Februarii, Anno
Regni ejusdem Domini Regis Caroli secundi, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from Two to One.
JOh'es Toogood de Ixland in Com. Hunt. Generosus and Will'us Hewlet de Ixland
praed. Generosus coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua personaliter constituti,
recognoverunt seipsos, and uterque ipsorum recognovit seipsum debere Henrico
Oxbut de London, Generoso, Centum libras bonae and legalis mouetae Angliae
solvend. eidem Henrico Oxbut, aut suo certo Attorn. Executor. vel
Administrator. suis, in vel super primum diem Maij prox. futur. post dat.
praesentium. Et praedict. Ioh'es and Will'us volunt and concedunt pro seipsis
and utroque ipsorum, Haeredibus, Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis and
utriusque ipsorum per praesentes, quod si defecerint in solutione praedict.
summae pecuniae, quod tunc praedicta summa pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de
se, and utroque ipsorum, Haeredibus, Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis,
and utriusque ipsorum, and de omnibus and singulis Maneriis, Messuagiis,
Terris, Tenementis, Haereditamentis, Possessionibus, Bonis and Catallis ipsorum
Ioh'is Toogood, and Willi' Hewlet, and utriusque ipsorum, Haered. Executor. and
Administrator. suorum and utriusque ipsorum, ubicunque inven. fuerint, ad solum
and proprium opus and usum ipsius Henrici Oxbut, Haered. Executor.
Administrator. and Assignat. suorum. Test dicto Domino Rege apud Westminster. quarto
die Aprilis, Anno Regni ejusdem Domini Regis Caroli secundi, Dei gratia
Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc.
Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from Two to Two.
ARthurus Belger de etc. Generosus, et Christopherus Dry de etc. Generosus
coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua personaliter constituti recognoverunt
seipsos, et uterque ipsorum recognovit seipsum, debere Henrico Bun de London,
Gen: and Francisco Sweeting de London, Generoso, Centum libras bonae and
legalis monetae Angliae, solvend. eisdem Hen. Bun and Francisco Sweeting, seu
eorum alteri, vel eorum certo Attorn. Executoribus, vel Administratoribus suis,
in vel super decimum diem Augusti prox. futur. post Dat. praesentium: Et
praedict. Arthurus and Christopherus volunt et concedunt pro seipsis et utroque
ipsorum, Haered. Executor. et Administrator. suis, and utriusque ipsorum per
praesentes, quod si defecerint in solutione praedict. summae pecuniae, quod
tunc praedicta summa pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de se and utroque ipsorum,
Haeredibus, Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis, and utriusque ipsorum,
and de omnibus and singulis Maneriis, Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis,
Hereditamentis, Possessionibus, Bonis, Catallis ipsorum Arthuri Belger, and
Christopheri Dey, and utriusque ipsorum, ubicunque invent. fuerint, ad solum
and proprium opus and usum ipsorum Henrici Bun, and Francisci Sweeting, Haered.
Executor. Administrator. and Assignat. suor. Test dicto Domino Rege apud
Westminster. primo die Aprilis, Anno Regni ejusdem Domini Regis Caroli secundi, Dei
gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc.
Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from Two to Three.
AAron Bell de etc. Generosus and Robertus Cree, de etc. Generosus, coram
Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua personaliter Constituti recognoverunt seipsos et
uterque ipsor. recognovit seipsum debere Rich. Den, de etc. Armig. Willo Pea de
etc. Gen: et Dan: Rich: Gen: Centum libras bonae et legalis monetae Angliae
solvend. eisdem Rich. Den, Willielmo Pea, and Danieli Rich, vel alicui eorum
aut suo certo Attorn. Executoribus; vel Administratoribus suis, in vel super
vicesimum diem Septembris prox. futur. post Dat. praesentium. Et praedict.
Aaron et Robertus volunt et concedunt pro seipsis and utroque ipsorum,
Haeredibus, Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis, et utriusque ipsorum per
praesentes, quod si defecerint in solutione praedict. summae pecuniae quod tunc
praedicta summa pecuniae levetur et recipiatur de se et utroque ipsorum Haered.
Executor. et Administrat. suis, et utriusque ipsorum, and de omnibus et
singulis Maneriis, Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis, Hereditamentis,
Possessionibus, Bonis and Catallis ipsorum Aaronis Bell, and Roberti Cree, and
utriusque ipsorum, Haeredum, Executor. and Administrator. suor. and utriusque
ipsorum ubicunque invent. fuerint ad solum and proprium opus and usum ipsorum
Richardi Den, Will. Pea, and Danielis Rich, Haered. Executor. Administrat. and
Assignat. suorum. Test dicto Domino Rege apud Westminster. vicesimo secundo die
Aprilis, Anno Regni ejusdem Domini Regis Caroli secundi Dei gratia Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from Three to One.
RObertus Book de London. Generosus, Will'us Finch de etc. Generosus, and Hen.
French de etc. Generosus, coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua personaliter
constituti, recognoverunt seipsos and quilibet ipsorum recognovit seipsum,
debere Francisco Hennet de etc. Armigero Centum libras bonae and legalis
monetae Angliae, solvend. eidem Francisco Hennet, aut suo certo Attornat.
Executoribus, vel Administratoribus suis, in vel super decimum diem Octobris
jam prox. futur. post Dat. praesentium. Et praedict. Robertus, Will'us, and
Henricus volunt and concedunt pro seipsis and quolibet ipsorum, Haered.
Executor. and Administrator. suis, and cujuslibet ipsorum per praesentes, quod
si defecerint in solutione praedictae summae pecuniae, quod tunc praedicta
summa pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de se and quolibet ipsorum, Haered.
Executor. and Administrator. suis, and cujuslibet ipsorum, and de omnibus and
singulis Maneriis, Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis, Haereditamentis, Bonis, and
Catallis, ipsorum Roberti Brook, Willi. Finch, and Henrici French, and
cujuslibet ipsorum, Haered. Executor. and Administrator. suorum and cujuslibet
ipsorum, ubicunque invent. fuerint, ad solum and proprium opus and usum ipsius
Francisci Hennet Haered. Executor. Administrator. and Assignat. suorum. Test
dicto Domino Rege apud Westminster. primo die Aprilis, Anno Regni ejusdem Domini
Regis Caroli secundi, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from Three to Two.
ARnoldus Helper de etc. Armiger, Bernardus Ienney de etc. Armiger, and Drugo
Kelp de etc. Armiger, Coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua personaliter
constituti, recognoverunt seipsos, and quilibet ipsorum recognovit seipsum
debere Edmundo Lam de etc. Generoso, and Frederico Man de etc. Generoso, Mill
libras bonae and legalis monetae Angliae solvend. eisdem Edmundo Lam and
Frederico Man, seu eorum alteri vel eorum certo Attorn. Executor. vel
Administrator. suis in vel super vicesimum primum diem Septembris jam prox.
futur. post dat. praesentium: Et praedicti Arnoldus, Bernardus, and Drugo
volunt and concedunt pro seipsis and quolibet ipsorum, Haeredibus,
Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis, and cujuslibet ipsorum per
praesentes, quod si defecerint in solutione praedictae summae pecuniae quod
tunc praedicta summa pecuniae levetur and recipiaturde se and quolibet ipsorum,
Haeredibus, Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis, and cujuslibet ipsorum,
and de omnibus and singulis Maneriis, Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis,
Haereditamentis, Possessionibus, Bonis and Catallis ipsorum Arnoldi He^per.
Bernardi Ienney, and Drugonis Kelp, and cujuslibet ipsorum Haered. Executor.
and Administrat. suorum and cujuslibet ipsorum ubicunque invent. fuerint, ad
solum and proprium opus and usum ipsorum Edmundi Lam and Frederici Man, Haered.
Executor. Administrator. and Assignat. suor. Test dicto Domino Rege apud
Westminster. primo die Maij, Anno Regni ejusdem Domini Regis Caroli secundi Dei
gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc.
Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from Three to Three.
HEnricus Dover de etc. Armiger, Joh'es Butler de etc. Armiger, and Laurentius
Carey, de etc. Generosus, coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua personaliter
constituti recognoverunt seipsos, and quilibet eorum recognovit seipsum debere
Edwardo Dunstable de etc. Generoso, Petro Darcy de etc. Generoso and Jacobo
Sackle, de etc. Generoso, Ducentas libras bonae et legalis monetae Angliae
solvend. eisdem Edwardo Dunstable, Petro Darcy, et Jacobo Sackle, vel alicui
eorum aut suo certo Attorn. Executoribus, vel Administratoribus suis, in vel
super Tricesimum diem Decembris prox. futur. post. Dat. praesentium. Et
praedict. Henricus Joh'es, and Laurentius volunt et concedunt pro seipsis and
utroque ipsorum, Haeredibus, Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis, et
cujuslibet ipsorum per praesentes, quod si defecerint in solutione praedict.
summae pecuniae quod tunc praedicta summa pecuniae levetur et recipiatur de se,
et quolibet ipsorum Haered. Executor. et Administrat. suis, et cujuslibet
ipsorum, and de omnibus et singulis Maneriis, Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis,
Haereditamentis, Possessionibus, Bonis and Catallis ipsorum Henrici Dover,
Joh'is Butler, and Laurentii Carey, and cujuslibet ipsorum, Haered. Executor.
and Administrator. Suorum and cujuslibet ipsorum ubicunque invent. fuerint, ad
solum and proprium opus and usum ipsorum Edwardi Dunstable, Petri Darcy, and
Jacobi Sackle, Haered. Executor. Administrator. and Assign. suorum. Test dicto
Domino Rege apud Westminster. quarto die Aprilis, Anno Regni ejusdem Domini Regis
Caroli secundi, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis,
Fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

A Condition from One to One, to pay a sum of Money at several payments with a
Clause, if any payment be unpaid, the Bond to be forfeited.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden John
Denew, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, do and
shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed James
Fisher, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the full and whole Sum of
three hundred pounds, of good and lawful money of England, in manner and form
following; that is to say, the sum of one hundred pounds, part thereof on the
first day of July, next ensuing the date above written: One hundred pounds more
thereof on the first day of January then next following: and one hundred pounds
more residue thereof on the first day of July, which shall be in the year of
our Lord, 1663. Then this Obligation to be void and of none effect: But if
default be made in payment of any the said several and respective sums of money
abovementioned, or any part of any of them, on any of the said several and
respective Days or Times of payment above limited, contrary to the true intent
and meaning of these Presents; Then this Obligation to be and remain in full
force and virtue.

Sigillat. and deliberat. in praesentia.

A Condition of a Bond of Arbitration from Two to Two, without an Umpire.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden James
Free, and William Slow, their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, for their
and every of their parts and behalfs, shall and do in all things well and truly
stand to, obey, abide, observe, perform, fulfill, and keep the Award, Order,
Arbitrament, Judgment, final end and determination of Jacob True Love, and James
Hatelong of London, Merchants, Arbitrators indifferently chosen, elected and
named, as well on the part and behalf of the above-bounden James Free, and
William Slow, as of the abovenamed John Roe, and Richard Holdfast, to
arbitrate, award, order, judge, and determine of, for, upon, and concerning
all, and all manner of Action and Actions, cause and causes of Actions, Suits,
Bills, Bonds, Specialties, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Quarrels,
Controversies, Trespasses, Damages, and Demands whatsoever, at any time
heretofore had, made, moved, brought, commenced, sued, prosecuted, done,
suffered, committed, or depending by or between the said parties, or any of
them, so always as the said Award, Arbitrament, Order, Determination, final end
and Judgment of the said Arbitrators, of, for, or upon the Premises, be made
and given up in writing, indented under their Hands and Seals, ready to be
delivered to the said parties, on or before the second day of May next ensuing
the Date above-written; Then this Obligation to be void and of none effect, or
else it to stand and remain in full force and virtue.

A Condition of a single Bond of Arbitration without an Umpire.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden Joshua
Lee, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, for his and their parts and
behalfs, shall and do in all things well and truly stand to, obey, abide,
observe, perform, fulfill and keep the Award, Order, Arbitrament, Judgment,
final end and determination of John Shakeapple of Alaxon, in the County of
Wilts Gent. and Hugh Sweeting of Alaxon aforesaid, Gent. Arbitrators
indifferently chosen, elected and named, as well on the part and behalf of the
above-bounden Ioshuah Lee, as of the abovenamed James Fritter, to arbitrate,
award, order, judge, and determine of, for, upon, and concerning all and all
manner of Action and Actions, Cause and Causes of Actions, Suits, Bills, Bonds,
Specialties, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Quarrels, Controversies,
Trespasses, Damages, and Demands whatsoever, at any time heretofore had, made,
moved, brought, commenced, sued, prosecuted, done, suffered, committed, or
depending by or between the said parties, so always as the said Award,
Arbitrament, Order, Determination, final end and Judgment of the said
Arbitrators, of, for, or upon the Premises, be made and given up in writing,
indented under their Hands and Seals, ready to be delivered to the said
parties, on or before the second day of May next ensuing the Date
above-written; Then this Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else it
to stand and remain in full force and virtue.

A Condition of a double Bond, to pay a sum of Money at several Payments, with
a Clause, if any Payment be behind, the Bond to be forfeited.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden Io.
Makepeace, and Richard War, or either of them, their, or either of their
Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, or any of them, do and shall well and
truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed Drew Holdstaff, and Richard
Lamb, or either of them, their, or either of their Executors, Administrators,
or Assigns, the full sum of sixty pounds, of good and lawful money of England,
in manner and form following; That is to say, the sum of twenty pounds, part
thereof on the first day of June, next ensuing the date above written; twenty
pounds more thereof on the first day of December then next following; and 20 l.
more, residue thereof, on the first day of June, which shall be in the year of
our Lord 1663. without Fraud or Covin; Then this Obligation to be void, and of
none effect: But if default be made in payment of any the said several and
respective sums of money above mentioned, or any part of any of them, or any of
the said several and respective days or times of payment above limited,
contrary to the true intent and meaning of these Presents; Then this Obligation
to be and remain in full force and virtue.

Sigillat. and deliberat. in praesentia.

A Condition of a single Bond, to pay a sum of Money at a certain place.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden John
Wright, his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, shall and do well and truly
pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed William Wrong, his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, the full sum of One hundred pounds, of good and
lawful money of England, on the twentieth day of June, next ensuing the date of
these Presents, at, or in the now dwelling house of the said William Wrong,
situate in Thames Street in London, without fraud or further delay; Then this
Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else to be and remain in full
force and virtue.

Sigillat. and deliberat. in praesentia

A Condition of a single Bond, to pay a sum of Money, without a place certain.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden Joseph
Fatback, his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, shall and do well and truly
pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed James Halfpenny, his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, the full and whole sum of one hundred pounds, of
good and lawful money of England, on the twentieth day of December, next
ensuing the date of these presents, without any fraud or further delay; Then
this Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else to be and remain in full
force and virtue,

Sigillat. et deliberat. in praesentia

A Condition of a treble Bond, to pay a sum of Money, at a place certain.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden Peter
Potter, John Askew, and Thomas Teltruth, or any of them, their, or any of their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, shall and do well
and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed Ieffery Whitehead, his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the full, whole, and entire sum of fifty
pounds, of good and lawful money of England, on the tenth day of October, next
ensuing the date of these presents, without any fraud or further delay; Then
this Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else to be and remain in full
force and virtue.

Sigillat. et deliberat. in praesentia

A Condition of a double Bond, to pay a sum of Money at a certain place.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden John
Larks, and William Sparrow, or either of them, their, or either of their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, shall and do, well and
truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed Thomas Thorowgood, his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the full, whole, and entire sum of one
hundred pounds, of good and lawful money of England, on the twentieth day of
June, next ensuing the date of these presents, at or in the now dwelling house
of the said Thomas Thorowgood, situate and being in Cutpurse Lane in London,
without any fraud or deceit; Then this Obligation to be void and of none
effect, or else to be and remain in full force and virtue.

Sigillat. et deliberat. in praesentia

A Condition of a Counter-Bond, from Two to a third Person, who was bound with
them.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the abovenamed
Goodgame, at the special instance and request of the above bounden Alexander
Burt, and Christopher Den, and for their only Debt, Duty, Matter, and Cause,
together with them the said Alex. Burt, and Christopher Den, is held and firmly
bound unto John Toogood of Appleby in the County of York Gent. in and by one
Obligation, bearing even date with these Presents, in the penal sum of one
hundred pounds of lawful money of England, conditioned for the true payment of
fifty pounds, and fifteen shillings, of like lawful money, unto the said John
Toogood, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, on the twentieth day of May
next ensuing the date of the same recited Obligation, as by the same
Obligation, and the Condition thereof (relation being thereunto had) does and
may more fully and at large appear; If therefore the said Alex. Burt, and
Christopher Den, or either of them, their, or either of their Heirs, Executors,
or Administrators, or any of them, shall and do well and truly pay, or cause to
be paid unto the said John Toogood, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns,
the said sum of fifty pounds, and fifteen shillings, of lawful money of
England, on the said twentieth day of May, next ensuing the date of the same
recited Obligation, in discharge of the same Obligation; Then this present
Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else to be and remain in full
force and virtue.

Sigillat. et deliberat. in praesentia

A Condition of a Counter-Bond from One to One.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the abovenamed Isaac
Born-free, at the special instance and request of the above-bounden William
Goodenough, and for his only Debt, Duty, Matter, and Cause, together with him
the said Will. Goodenough, and Ioshuah Ringrose of Balstead, in the County of
Cumberland Gent. is held and firmly bound unto Samuel Goodman of Cranbrook, in
the County of Lincoln Yeoman, in and by one Obligation, bearing even date with
these Presents, in the penal sum of two hundred pounds of lawful money of
England, conditioned for the true payment of one hundred pounds, of like
lawful money, unto the said Samuel Goodman, his Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, on the twenty fourth day of July, next ensuing the date of the same
recited Obligation, as by the same Obligation, and the Condition thereof
(relation being thereunto had) does and may more fully and at large appear; If
therefore the said William Goodenough, his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators,
or any of them, shall and do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the
said Samuel Goodman, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the sum of one
hundred pounds, of lawful money of England, on the said twenty fourth day of
July, next ensuing the date of the same recited Obligation, in discharge of the
same Obligation; Then this present Obligation to be void and of none effect, or
else to be and remain in full force and virtue.

Sigillat. and deliberat. in praesentia

A Condition to perform Covenants, in Articles of Agreement.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden John Do,
his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, shall and do for
his and their parts, in all things well and truly observe, perform, fulfill,
accomplish, pay, and keep, all and singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles,
Clauses, Provisoes, Payments, Conditions, and Agreements whatsoever, which on
his and their parts and behalfs, are or ought to be observed, performed,
fulfilled, accomplished, paid, and kept, comprised, and mentioned in certain
Articles of Agreement indented, bearing even date with these presents, made or
expressed to be made between the said John Do, of the one part, and the above
named Robert Renn, of the other part; and that in and by all things, according
to the contents, purposes, true intent and meaning of the same Articles,
without Fraud or Covin: Then this present Obligation to be void and of none
effect; Or else to be and remain in full force and virtue.

A Condition to perform the Covenants in an Indenture.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden Arthur
Butler, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, shall and
do for his and their parts, in all things well and truly observe, perform,
fulfill, accomplish, pay, and keep, all and singular the Covenants, Grants,
Articles, Clauses, Provisoes, Payments, Conditions, and Agreements whatsoever,
which on his and their parts and behalfs, are or ought to be observed,
performed, fulfilled, accomplished, paid, and kept; comprised and mentioned in
one pair of Indentures, bearing even date with these presents, made or
expressed to be made, between the said Arthur Butler of the one part, and the
above named Christopher Downs of the other part; and that in and by all things,
according to the contents, purposes, true intent and meaning of the same
Indentures, without Fraud or Covin: Then this present Obligation to be void and
of none effect; Or else to be and remain in full force and verute.

Note, If to perform the Covenants in an Indenture Tripartite, or
Quadrupartite, then it must be expressed in the Condition thus, to wit, To
perform the Covenants comprised and mentioned in certain Indentures Tripartite,
or Quadrupartite, bearing date with these presents, made between A. B. of the
first part, C.D. of the second part, and E. F. of the third part; and that in
and by all things, etc. as before is expressed.

A general Release from Two to Two.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That we John Makepeace of London,
Gent. and Henry Woodbegood of London, Gent. have and either of us has remised,
released, and for ever quit-claimed, and by these presents do, and either of
us, does for us, and either of us, our and either of our Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, remise, release, and for ever quit-claim, unto John Higdon of
London Esquire and Nicholas Longman of London Gent. their Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, all and all manner of Actions,
Suits, Debts, Bills, Bonds, Accounts, Reckonings, Judgments, Executions,
Trespasses, Controversies, Damages, and Demands whatsoever, both in Law and
Equity, which against the said John Higdon, and Nicholas Longman, ever we or
either of us, have had, now have, or which our Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, hereafter shall or may have, claim, challenge, or demand, for
any matter, cause, or thing whatsoever, from the beginning of the World, until
the day of the date of these presents. In witness whereof, etc.

A General Release from One to One.
KNow all men by these presents, That I Laurence Lovelittle, of Munsham in the
County of Kent, Gent. have remised, released, and for ever quit claimed; and by
these presents do, for me, my Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, remise,
release, and for ever quit claim unto John Hoar of London, Gent. his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, all and all manner of Actions, Cause and Causes
of Action, Suits, Bills, Bonds, Writings Obligatory, Debts, Dues, Duties,
Accounts, Sum and Sums of Money, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Quarrels,
Controversies, Trespasses, Damages, and Demands whatsoever, both in Law and
Equity, or otherwise howsoever, which against the said John Hoar I ever had,
now have, and which I, my Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, shall or may
have, claim, challenge, or demand, for or by reason or means of any matter,
cause, or thing, from the beginning of the World, unto the day of the date of
these presents. In witness, etc.

A Bill of Sale of Goods, to be void upon payment of a Sum of Money with
Interest.
KNow all men by these presents, That I Philip Have-enough, of Reedy in the
County of Hertford, Yeoman, for and in consideration of the sum of twenty
pounds, of lawful money of England, to me in hand paid by Ieffery Catchpole of
Longrack, in the County of Hunt. Gent. whereof I do hereby acknowledge the
Receipt, and my self therewith fully satisfied; Have bargained, sold, and
delivered, and by these presents, in plain and open Market, according to due
form of Law, do bargain, sell, and deliver unto the said Ieffery Catchpole, one
Silver Basin weighing twelve ounces, six Silver Spoons weighing one ounce a
piece, and two Feather-Beds, with Bedsteads, Bolsters, and Pillows, etc. To
have and to hold the said Bargained Premises, unto the said Ieffery Catchpole,
his Executors, Administrators, and assigns to the only proper use and behoof
of the said Ieffery Catchpole, his Exec. admin. and Assigns for ever. And I the
said Philip Have-enough, for my self, my Executors, and Administrators, the
said Bargained Premises, unto the said Ieffery Catchpole, his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, against all persons, shall and will warrant, and
for ever defend by these presents: Provided nevertheless, That if I the said
Philip Havenough, my Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of us, do
and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said Ieffery
Catchpole, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the sum of twenty one
pounds and four shillings, of lawful money of England, on the ninth day of May,
which shall be in the year of our Lord 1663. for redemption of the said
bargained Premises; Then this present Bill of Sale to be void; or else to
remain in full force. In Witness whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal
the Seventh day of May, Anno Dom. 1662. And in the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
King Charles the Second of England, etc.

A Single Bill, without a penalty.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I A. B. of C. in the County
of D. Gent. do owe and am indebted unto E. F. of G. in the County of Hunt.
Gent. the sum of twenty pounds of lawful money of England, to be paid unto the
said E. F. his Executors, Administrators, or assigns, at or upon the first day
of June, next ensuing the date hereof. In witness, etc.

A Single penal Bill.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I Alex. Fish of Henslow, in
the County of York, Gent. do owe and am indebted unto Robert Herringrose of
London, Cordwayner, the sum of ten pounds, of lawful money of England, to be
paid to the said Robert Herringrose, his Executors, administrators, or assigns,
at or upon the Ninth day of September, next ensuing the date hereof: To which
payment, well and truly to be made, I bind my self, my Heirs, Executors, and
administrators, to the said Robert Herringrose, his Executors and assigns, in
the penalty of twenty pounds of like money firmly by these presents. In
witness, etc.

A Condition to stand by the Award of Arbitrators, with an Umpire certain
nominated.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden Anthony
Bartlet, his Heirs, Executors, and administrators, and every of them, do and
shall for his and their parts and behalfs, stand to, obey, abide, observe, and
in and by all things well and truly perform and accomplish the Award,
Arbitrament, Order, Determination, final end and Judgment of Christopher
Dowdeswel of London, Merchant, and Edward Fairclough of Westminster Gent.
Arbitrators indifferently chosen, elected, and named, as well on the part and
behalf of the said Anthony Bartlet, as on the part and behalf of the
abovenamed Solomon Crofts, to award, arbitrate, order, judge, determine, final
end to make of, for, upon, and concerning all and all manner of Actions, and
causes of Actions, Suits, Debts, Strifes, Accounts, Reckonings, Sum and Sums of
Money, Trespasses, Variances, Quarrels, Bonds, Specialties, Matters, and
Demands whatsoever, had, made, moved, risen, or depending, having been, or now
being between the said parties; so always, as the said Award, Arbitrament,
Order, Determination, final End, and Judgment of the said Arbitrators, for or
upon the Premises, be made and given up in Writing, indented under their Hands
and Seals, ready to be delivered to the said parties, on or before the 24 of
June next, ensuing the date above written; And if the said Arbitrators shall
not make and give up their award and arbitrament, of and upon the premises, on
or before the said 24 day of June, If then the said Anthony Bartlet, his
Executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them, do and shall stand
to, abide, observe, perform, and keep the Award, Umpirage, final End and
Judgment of George Hide of London Esquire Umpire indifferently chosen betwixt the
said parties, for the ending and composing the differences aforesaid; so as the
said Umpire do make and give up his said award, Umpirage and Determination in
Writing, indented under his Hand and Seal, ready to be delivered to the said
parties, on or before the tenth day of June next ensuing the Date above
written, without Fraud or Covin; Then this Obligation to be void and of none
effect; or else to stand and remain in full force and virtue.

A Deed of Gift.
TO all Christian People to whom these presents shall come; I A.B. of etc.
Gent. send greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know ye, That I the said A. B.
for the love and and affection that I the said A. B. do bear unto C.D. Son of
I.D. of etc. Innkeeper, I the said A. being in perfect memory; Have given,
granted, and confirmed, and by this my present Writing, do fully, freely, and
absolutely give, grant, and confirm, unto the said C.D. all and singular my
Goods, Chattels, Leases, personal Estate whatsoever, Utensils, Household Stuff,
Implements, and Things whatsoever, of what nature, kind, or property soever the
same be, or can be found within the Realm of England; To have, hold, levy, use,
dispose of, take, and enjoy, all my said Goods, Chattels, Leases, personal
Estate, Household Stuff, and Implements; and all other the premises aforesaid,
unto the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators, and assigns, from henceforth
for ever, without any manner of claim, challenge, or demand whatsoever, of or
by any person or persons whatsoever: And I the said A.B. all and singular the
said Goods, Chattels, Leases, Implements, and Things whatsoever, and all other
the Premises, unto the said C.D. his Executors, administrators, and assigns,
against all people, shall and will warrant, and for ever defend by these
presents; of all and every which said Goods, Chattels, Leases, and Premises, I
the said A. B. have put the said C. D. in full and peaceable possession, by the
Gift and Delivery of one Silver Salt; which to the said C. D. the day of the
Date of these presents, I have given and delivered, in the Name of Possession
and Seizin, of all and singular the said Premises.

In witness, etc.

Sealed and delivered, and quiet Possession and Seisin given and delivered by
the said Silver Salt, parcel of the said Premises, according to the effect of
this present Writing, in the presence of (...)

A Letter of Attorney, to receive a Sum of Money, very usual.
TO all Christian People to whom these presents shall come, I A. B. of etc.
Gent. send greeting. Know ye, That I the said A.B. for sufficient causes, and
valuable considerations me hereunto especially moving; have made, ordained,
constituted, and in my stead and place, put and deputed; and by these presents,
do make, ordain, constitute; and in my stead and place put and deput* C. D. of
etc. Gent. my true and lawful Attorney irrevocable, for me, and in my name, and
to my use, to ask, demand, sue for, recover, and receive of I. F. of etc. Gent.
all such sum and sums of money, debts, and demands whatsoever, which now are
due, and belonging unto me the said A.B. by and from the said I.F. and to have,
use, and take all lawful ways and means in my Name; or otherwise for recovery
thereof, by attachment, arrest, distress, re-entry, or otherwise; and to
compound and agree for the same, and acquittances, or other sufficient
Discharges for the same, for me, and in my Name, to make, seal, and deliver;
and to do all other acts and things whatsoever, concerning the premises, as
fully in every respect, as I my self might or could do, if I were personally
present; and Attorneys, one or more under him, for the purposes aforesaid, to
make, and again at his pleasure to revoke. And I the said A. B. do hereby
ratify and confirm whatsoever my said Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to
be done in my Name, or otherwise, by force of these presents. In Witness, etc.

A Warrant of Attorney, to confess a Judgment in the Kings Bench.
TO T.W. A. W. T.I. and H. G. Gentlemen, Attorneys of his Majesty's Court of
King's Bench at Westminster, or to any one of them, or any other Attorney of the
same Court. [These are to desire and authorize you, or any of you, to appear
for me Arnold Briggs of London, Gent. in the said Court, at the Suit of Walter
Hughes of Gray's Inn, in the County of Middlesex Esquire in Easter-Term now next
ensuing, and confess a Judgment against me unto him, for the sum of six hundred
pounds Debt besides cost of Suit by non sum informatus, nil dicit, or
otherwise; and for your, or any of your so doing, this shall be your sufficient
Warrant. Witness my Hand and Seal, this 24 Day of March, Anno Dom. 1661. and in
the 14th year of the Reign of our now Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second of
England, etc.

Note, you may alter the direction aforementioned to this following, and it is
a Warrant in the Common-Bench.

To F.G. F. M. T.A. and H. L. Gentlemen; Attorneys of his Majesty's Court of
Common-Bench at Westminster; or to any one of them, or any other Attorney of
the same Court. A Warrant of Attorney, to acknowledge satisfaction upon Record,
for a Judgment recorded formerly.
To T. W. A. W. T. I. and H. G. Gentlemen Attorneys in his Majesty's Court of
Kings Bench at Westminster, or to any one of them; or to any other Attorney of
the same Court.
WHereas I Walter Hughs of Gray's Inn, in the County of Middlesex Esquire in Easter
Term now last past, did obtain and recover a Judgment in the said Court of
King's Bench, against Arnold Briggs of London Gent. for six hundred pounds Debt,
and thirty shillings for Damages, or Costs of Suit, as by the Records thereof
remaining in the said Court more at large may appear; of and for which said
Judgment, and the Debt and Damages thereby recovered, I the said Walter Hughs,
do hereby acknowledge my self to be fully satisfied and contented. These are
therefore to entreat and authorize you, or any of you, to acknowledge
satisfaction upon Record in the said Court, of and for the said Judgment, and
the said Debt and Damages thereby recovered; And this my Writing shall be your,
or any of your sufficient Warrant and Discharge in this behalf. In Witness
whereof, I the said Walter Hughes have hereunto set my Hand and Seal this four
and twentieth Day of May, Anno Domini, 1662. And in the Fourteenth Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second of England, etc.

This Warrant altering the Style of the Court, will serve to acknowledge
satisfaction in the Common-Bench at Westminster.

A Release of Errors upon a Judgment in the Common-Bench.
KNow all men by these presents, That I* Arnold Briggs of London Gent. have
Remised, Released, and for ever Quit-claimed; And by these presents do Remise,
Release, and for ever Quit-claim unto Walter Hughs of Gray's Inn in the County
of Middlesex Esquire his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, all and all manner
of Error and Errors, Cause and Causes of Errors, Mis-Entries, Mistakes and
Jeofails whatsoever, which are or have happened in the Record or Proceedings of
one Judgment for six hundred pounds Debt, and Thirty shillings for Damages or
Costs of Suit, which is obtained and gotten against me the said Arnold Briggs,
at the Suit of the said Walter Hughs in his Majesty's Court of Common-Bench at
Westminster, in Easter Term now last past, or for, or by reason of the not
suing out, or filing of an Original Writ, or the filing of a Warrant or
Warrants of Attorney, or other fault in any of the Entries or Proceedings
thereupon, or relating thereunto. In Witness whereof, I have hereunto set my
Hand and Seal the four and twentieth day of May, Anno Dom. 1662. And in the
fourteenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second of
England, etc.

A Release of Errors upon a Judgment in the King's Bench.
KNow all men by these Presents; That I William Goodman of Tilmanston in the
County of Kent Gent. do by this present Writing, for me, my Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, Remise, Release, and for ever quit Claim unto Thomas Crofts
of Kingwould, in the County of Kent Yeoman, all and all manner of Error and
Errors, and Misprision of Error and Errors, which are or may be in one
Judgment remaining upon Record in his Majesty's Court of King's Bench at
Westminster, against the said William Goodman, at the Suit of the said Thomas
Crofts, for one hundred pounds Debt, and two pounds seventeen shillings three
pence Charges, or thereabouts; or in any the Premises or Proceedings of the
said Judgment, or Suit. In Witness whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand and
Seal the eight and twentieth of May, Anno Domini 1662. And in the fourteenth
year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive Money due upon a Bond.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I R. Belsey of Colchester, in the County
of Essex Gent. have Assigned and Ordained, and made, and in my stead and place,
by these Presents put and constituted my Trusty and well-beloved Friend John
Edmunds of London Gent. my true and lawful Attorney for me, and in my stead and
Name, and to the use and behoof of him the said John Edmunds, to ask, recover,
receive of John Cole of High-Gate, in the County of Middlesex Gent. Thomas Lee,
and John Plodwel of Hammer-Smith, in the same County, Esquires, the Sum of five
hundred pounds due unto me for non-payment of two hundred and fifty pounds of
like Money, on the 28 th day of May, 1662. last past before the date of these
Presents, as by one Obligation, with Condition thereunder written, bearing Date
the 12 th of May, 1661. in the thirteenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord King Charles the Second, etc. more plainly appears, giving, and by these
Presents granting unto my said Attorney, my full power and lawful Authority in
the Premises, to do, say, perform, and finish for me and in my Name, as
aforesaid, all and every such Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Devise and
Devises in the Law, whatsoever, for the Recovery of all the Debts aforesaid, as
fully, largely, and amply, in every respect, as I my self might or could do, if
I were personally present; and upon the Receipt thereof, Acquittances or other
Discharges for me, and in my Name to make, seal and deliver; Ratifying,
allowing, holding firm, and stable, all and whatsoever my said Attorney shall
lawfully do, or cause to be done, in or about the Execution of the Premises,
by virtue of these Presents. In Witness, etc.

A Warrant for an Attorney to appear, etc.
To R. A. D. E. Attorneys of the Court of Common-Bench at Westminster, or any
of them.
THese are to authorize you, and I do hereby desire you, or either of you, to
appear for me I.S. in the said Court, at the Suit of M. N. in an Action of,
etc. to imparle unto the said Action, and afterward to plead, etc. And for
your your so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Witness my Hand and
Seal this day of 1662.

A Warrant for an Attorney to appear, etc.
To A.B. C.D. Attorneys of the Court of King's Bench at Westminster, or any of
them.
THese are to authorize you, and I do hereby desire you, or either of you, to
appear for me I. S. in the said Court, at the Suit of M. N. in an Action of,
etc. to imparle unto the said Action, and afterward to plead, etc. And for
your so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Witness my Hand and Seal
this day of 1662.

A Warrant to confess a Judgment upon a Bond, if the Money be not paid on the
day.
To E.C. and A.G. or to any other Attorney of His Majesty's Court of
King's Bench at Westminster.
THese are to Warrant and Authorize you, or either of you, to appear for me
William Pilken of Rosse, in the County of Bucks, Esquire at the Suit of Peter
Bolter, in the County of Berks, Baronet; and to receive a Declaration in an
Action of Debt for one thousand pounds, as of Michaelmas Term last past, and to
confess Judgment by ( non sum informatus, nihil dicit) or otherwise at your
discretion: and for your so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant in
that behalf. In Witness whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal this 16
th of April, Anno Dom. 1662. and in the 14. year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Charles the Second, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender,
etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive Money due upon several Bonds, allowing the
Attorney reasonable Charges, out of that Money which he shall receive, to
satisfy himself of such Moneys as are due to him from him which makes this
Letter.
TO all men to whom these Presents shall come, W. R. of Tattersel, in the
County of Lincoln, Yeoman, sends Greeting. Know ye, That I the said W. R. for
diverse good sufficient, and reasonable Causes and Considerations, me hereunto
moving, but especially for, and in respect of certain several sums of money
heretofore to me paid by C. H. of T. in the said County of Lincoln Gent. have
authorized, constituted, nominated, made and ordained, and by these Presents,
do authorize, constitute, nominate, make, ordain, and in my place put the said
C. H. my true, faithful, lawful, undoubted, and irrevocable Attorney, from
henceforth for me, and in my Name to ask, receive, gather, and take all such
sum and sums of Money, as are already due, or hereafter shall or may become due
unto the said W. from any person or persons herein hereafter mentioned and
expressed; as also all such Sum and Sums of Money, as were due unto E. my now
Wife in her Widowhood, or hereafter may or shall be due unto her, by any person
or persons whatsoever, and herein hereafter mentioned and expressed, by virtue
of any Bill, Bond, or any other Writing or way whatsoever, that is to say, to
ask, gather, receive and take of A. B. of C. in the County of E. Yeoman, the
sum of Ten pounds of lawful English money, due unto me by virtue of one Bond or
Writing Obligatory, from the said A. B. to me the said W. R. dated the last day
of June last past, before the date hereof, as in and by the Condition of the
said Obligation, Reference being thereunto had, more plainly and at large it
does and may appear; and also forty shillings of lawful English money, from,
etc. (Then name every particular Sum, and set them down according to their
several names, sums, and dates as they are, and insert these Covenants
following) as in and by the several Conditions of the said Bonds, whereunto
relation being had, more plainly and at large it does and may appear, for the
recovery of all which said several Sums of money, which shall arise or grow due
unto me the said W. R. by virtue of any or either of the said Bonds, yet
arrear, due and unpaid; I do by these Presents give full Power and Authority
unto the said C. H. for me, and in my name, and to my use as aforesaid, to
receive, and upon non-payment of them, or any of them, to bring, sue, and
prosecute for me, and in my Name, all and all manner of Actions whatsoever, as
well real as personal, and the same to prosecute and follow by Suit, Arrest,
Imprisonment, Judgment, Condemnation, Execution, or otherwise: And one
Attorney, or more, for the doing of the Premises to make, and the same at his
will and pleasure to revoke, and another in his or their place to be put, in as
large and ample manner as I might do, if the same were by me in proper person
done, commenced, sued or taken, to the only benefit and behoof of me the said
W. R. allowing to the said C. out of the said Sum or Sums of Money, so by him
received, his reasonable, lawful, and necessary expenses and charges laid out
or disbursed in hand or otherwise, in or about the recovery, getting and
procuring of the said Sums of Money, or any of them, with allowance and payment
of all such Reckonings, Sum and Sums of Money as are due to him the said C. by
me the said W. as shall or may appear upon any Reckoning, Bill, Bond, or
otherwise under my Hand and Seal, or by sufficient Witness. And I do by these
Presents Covenant, promise and grant to and with the said C. his Executors,
etc. that I, my Heirs and Assigns, shall and will at all times hereafter,
ratify, confirm, and allow whatsoever my said Attorney shall do, or cause to
be done, in or about the Premises. In Witness, etc.

A general Letter of Attorney, to let, set, dispose, etc.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come; I James Rich
of etc. send greeting. Know ye, That I the said I. R. for diverse good Causes
and Considerations me hereunto especially moving, have made, ordained,
constituted, and in my stead and place put and deputed, and by these Presents
do make, ordain, constitute, and in my stead and place, put and depute my
loving Friends R. C. of etc. F. G. of etc. to be my true and lawful Attorney,
and Attorneys irrevocable for me, and in my Name, and to my own proper use and
behoof, to ask, demand and require, sue for, recover, and receive all such
Debts, Duties, Sum and Sums of Money, Rent, proper Rents, and Arrearages of
Rent and Rents, Yearly Payments, Merchandises, Goods, Chattels, Legacies, Money
due, or to be due upon any Bill or Bills of Exchange, or otherwise, and all
other Demands whatsoever, which now are, or hereafter shall be due, payable, or
any way belonging unto me, by, or from any person or persons, or Bodies
Corporate or politic whatsoever, or howsoever; and for default of payment of
any Rent or Rents, or Arrearages of Rent, or Rents which now is, or hereafter
shall be due to me to enter into all or any of my Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, or any of them, or any part thereof, and to distrain for the
same Rent and Rents, and Arrearages of Rent or Rents, and for default of
payment thereof, or of any part thereof, to enter in the name of the whole and
possession thereof, to take, and to make, seal and deliver in my name, any
Lease or Leases of Ejectment thereupon, for any term or number of years, as in
such Cases is usual, and to take and use all lawful ways or means for recovery
of the Premises. And to pay any sum or sums of Money. And to contract for,
let, set, bargain and sell all, or any of my Messuages, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, or Estate whatsoever, for any term or number of
years, or otherwise, as he shall think fit, and to sue, implead, and make
answer, prosecute and defend in any Court, or Courts of Law or Equity, and
before any Judges or Justices, or other person or persons, in any Suit, Action,
matter or Cause with me, for me, or against me, as the Cause shall require, and
to deal, and intermeddle in any Action, Suits, Affairs and Businesses, any way
touching or concerning me as my Agent or Factor, or otherwise, giving, and by
these Presents granting unto my said Attorneys, my full and whole Power, and
lawful Authority, in the Execution and performance of all and singular the
Premises, and to make any Composition or Agreement for, and concerning the
Premises, and to make, seal, and deliver, or otherwise execute any Acquittance
or Acquittances, or other sufficient Discharges or Releases concerning the
Premises, or any part thereof, for me and in my name or otherwise, as the
Cause shall require. And Attorneys one or more for the purpose aforesaid, or
any of them under them to make, and again at their pleasure to revoke, and
generally to do, accomplish, determine, and execute all and every such further,
and other lawful and reasonable Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Devise and
Devises whatsoever, which in, or about the Premises shall be unto my said
Attorneys thought fit to be done, as fully and amply in every respect, as I my
self might or could do, if I my self were personally present; Ratifying and
allowing for firm and effectual, all that, and whatsoever my said Attorneys
shall lawfully do, or cause to be done in my Name, or otherwise by force
hereof. In Witness, etc.

A Charter-party of an Affraightment.
IN the Name of God, Amen. This Charter-party of Affraightment, indented, made,
and agreed, upon the etc. Anno Dom. 1663. and in the fifteenth year of the
Reign of etc. Between James Wakefield of Deal in the County of Kent Mariner
part-Owner of the good Barque or Vessel, called the etc. of the Portage or
Burden of forty Tuns, or thereabouts, now riding at Anchor in the River of
Thames, within the Port of London, and Master (under God) of the said Barque or
Vessel, for her now intended Voyage on the one part; and Thomas Chapman of
London Merchant, of the other part, Witnesses, That the said Party, Owner and
Master, for and on the behalf of himself, and the rest of the Owners of the
said Barque or Vessel, has granted and let to Freight the said Barque or
Vessel unto the said Merchant; and the said Merchant has hired the said Barque
or Vessel, for a Voyage with her to be made, in manner and form following; That
is to say, The said I. W. for himself, his Executors, and Administrators, does
covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said T. C. his Executors, and
Administrators, by these Presents, That the said Barque or Vessel, with the
first Wind and Weather that God shall send after the Tenth Day of this instant
January, shall depart from the said Port of London, with such lawful Goods and
Merchandises, as it shall please the said Thomas Chapman, or his Assigns in the
mean time, to lade aboard her, and that it shall be lawful, to and for the said
T. S. his Factors and Assigns, in the mean time to lade aboard her all such
lawful Goods and Merchandises, as he or they shall think fit; which she may
reasonably carry and stow over and above her Victuals, Tackle, and Apparel; And
that the said Barque or Vessel, shall by God's Grace, directly as Wind and
Weather will serve, sail unto the Port or Harbor of Dublin in Ireland; and
there deliver unto the said T. Chapman, his Executors, Administrators, Factors,
or Assigns, all such Goods and Merchandises, as shall be laden aboard of her by
the said T. C. his Executors, Administrators, Factors or Assigns, dry and well
conditioned (danger of the Seas, Fire, Enemies, and Imbargo of Princes only
excepted;) and after her clearing, and right discharge of such Goods, as she
shall receive into her, within the said Port of London, shall receive into her
at the Port of Dublin aforesaid, her full Lading, in such lawful Goods and
Merchandises, as it shall please the said Tho. Chapman, his Executors,
Administrators, Factors, or Assigns, to lade, or cause to be laden aboard her;
and after such her full Lading at Dublin aforesaid, shall directly sail, as
Wind and Weather will permit, to the said Port or Harbor of the City of
London, and there deliver unto the said T. C. his Executors, Administrators,
Factors, or Assigns, within the space of seven working days hereafter
mentioned, the said Goods and Merchandises, so received into her at Dublin
aforesaid, dry and well-conditioned, and make a right Discharge and End of the
said Voyage; (the perils of the Seas, Fire, Enemies, and Imbargo of Princes
only excepted;) And that the said Barque or Vessel, after her arrival at
Dublin aforesaid, shall stay at Anchor there for her unlading, and re-lading,
as aforesaid, 30 working days, and shall stay at Anchor at the said Port of
London, after her return again, and arrival here from Dublin aforesaid, by the
space of seven Working days, for the delivery of the said Goods, so to be laden
aboard of her at Dublin aforesaid; and the said T. C. for himself, his
Executors and Administrators, does further covenant, promise, and grant, to and
with the said I. W. his Executors and Administrators; and also warrant by these
presents, that the said Barque or Vessel, at her departure from the said River
of Thames, and during the said Voyage, shall be strong and staunch, and well
and sufficiently Victualled, tackled, and apparelled, and furnished with Masts,
Sails, Sail-yards, Anchors, Cables, Ropes, Cords, Tackle, Apparel, Boat, and
all other Furniture whatsoever, requisite or needful for such a Barque or
Vessel for such a Voyage: together with an able Master, and three sufficient
able Seamen, and two Boys, which shall be ready at all times, upon every
request, with the Cockor-Boat of the said ship, to serve the said T. C. his
Executors, Administrators, Factors, and Assigns, to and from Land, during the
said Voyage; and the said T. C. for himself, his Executors and Administrators,
does covenant and grant, to and with the said I. W. his Executors, and
Administrators, not only to unlade, relade, and dispatch away the said Barque
or Vessel, at and from Dublin and London aforesaid, within the time and times
before therefore limited and agreed upon: but also for the Freight or Hire of
the said Barque or Vessel, for all the said Voyage, viz. from London to
Dublin, and from thence back to London, well and truly to pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said I. Wakefield, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the
sum of 120 l. sterling, in manner and form following ( that is to say) 30 l.
thereof at the said Port of Dublin, within 20 days next after the arrival of
the said Barque or Vessel, and delivery of the said Goods, well-conditioned at
Dublin as aforesaid, and 90 l. more residue of the said 120 l. at London
aforesaid, within 7 days after the return again and arrival of the said Barque
or Vessel, from Dublin to London, and the delivery of the said Goods so to be
received into her, at Dublin aforesaid, unto the said T. C. Merchant, his
Executors, Administrators, Factors, or Assigns, at London aforesaid,
well-conditioned as aforesaid: together with Avarge and Primage, and
petty-logunnage, according to the use and custom of Merchants in such cases
used; and shall and will then also give unto the said I. W. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, 20 s. sterling, for his care and pains, to be taken
in the premises during the said Voyage, over and above the said 120 l. And the
said T. C. for h^mself, his Executors, and Administrators, does covenant and
grant, to and with the said I. W. his Executors, and Administrators, by these
presents; that in case the said Barque or Vessel, shall through the default of
the said I.W. his Factors, or Assigns, stay for her unlading, or re-lading, at
Dublin aforesaid, or for her lading at London aforesaid, before her departure
from thence, or for her unlading at London aforesaid, after her return and
arrival from Dublin aforesaid, to London as aforesaid, after the several days
therefore above limited; that then the said T. C. his Executors, or
Administrators, shall and will pay, or cause to be paid unto the said I. W. his
Executors, or Administrators, the sum of 30 s. for every working day that the
said Barque or Vessel shall either stay at Dublin aforesaid, for her unlading
and re-lading, or at London aforesaid, for her lading or unlading, after the
days above limited and agreed upon; and to the performance of all and singular
the Covenants, Grants, Articles, and Agreements above mentioned, which on the
part and behalf of the said I. W. his Executors, or Administrators, are to be
performed in all things as abovesaid, the said I. W. binds himself, his
Executors, and Administrators, and especially the Barque or Vessel aforesaid,
with her Freight, unto the said T. C. his Executors and Administrators, in the
sum or penalty of 200 l. of lawful money of England, well and truly to be paid
by these presents; and likewise for the performance of all and singular the
Covenants, Grants, Articles, Payment, and Agreement above specified; which on
the part and behalf of the said T. C. his Executors, and Administrators, are
and ought to be performed in all things, as is above-recited, the said T.C.
binds himself, his Executors, and Administrators, and Goods, unto the said I.
W. his Executors and Administrators, in the sum or penalty of 200 l. of like
money of England, well and truly to be paid by these presents. In Witness
whereof, the parties first above named to these Charter-parties Indented,
interchangeably have set their Hands and Seals the day and year first above
written.

Articles of Agreement, for enjoyment of a quiet Lease, as Tenements in Common.
ARticles of Agreement, indented, made, and agreed upon, the etc. Between W. S.
of etc. and S. V. of etc. in manner and form following; That is to say, First,
whereas H. A. of etc. being heretofore seized in Fee, of and in all that etc.
And being so seized by his Indenture of Lease, bearing date the etc. for the
considerations therein mentioned, did demise, grant, and to farm let, unto one
A.B. etc. of etc^ the said Message, etc. for the term of etc. at and for the
yearly rent of etc. payable, as in the recited Indenture of Lease is mentioned,
as by the said Indenture, relation being thereunto had, more at large may, and
does appear: which said Indenture of Lease, and the Interest, Estate, and Term
of years of the said A. B. of, in, and to the said pieces or parcells, etc. and
Premises thereby demised; the said W. S. and S. V. by several Indentures of
Assignment, now jointly have, and are thereof possessed. Now this Indenture
Witnesses, That the intent, purpose, and true meaning of the Parties, to these
Presents, is; And it is hereby declared between them, that no advantage or
benefit shall be had or taken by the said W. S. and S. V. by means or reason of
Survivorship of either of them, for or concerning the Interest of the said
Lease, or Term of years, and Interest respectively granted, by and from the
said Henry Atkins, to the said A. B. as aforesaid: But that either of the said
parties, his and their Executors, and Administrators, shall and may have, and
take the equal benefit and profit, arising and coming of the said piece and
parcel of Land yearly, and every year, during the continuance of the said Term
to the said A. B. granted as aforesaid, in such and the like manner, as if they
were Tenants in Common. And it is therefore mutually covenanted, granted,
concluded, and agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents; and
each of them the said parties to these presents, for his own part, severally
for himself, his Executors, and Administrators, does Covenant and grant, to and
with either of them, his Executors and Administrators respectively, by these
presents, That he, his Executors, or Administrators, shall and will at any time
hereafter, during the said term of years, by the said Indenture of Lease, made
from the said H. Atkins granted, pay, and discharge, one moiety of the Rents
and Charges, to grow due or payable, for or by reason thereof; and shall do or
cause to be done, any manner of act or acts, or assent unto any act or thing
whatsoever, which shall, or any way may forfeit the said Lease, or the Terms,
Interests, or Estates of the Parties, to these presents, of or in the said
Pieces or Parcels of Ground and Premises, thereby demised, or mentioned to be
demised, or any part thereof; But that the Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, of such of the parties, to these presents, which shall first dye,
shall be permitted and allowed to take and enjoy the moiety, or one half of the
said Lease and Premises thereby demised, and the Rents and Profits thereof in
like manner, as if he so dying had lived together with the Survivors of them,
according to the true intent of these presents, without any manner of let,
interruption, molestation, eviction, or expulsion, of the Survivor of them, his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them; and that the Survivor of
the said parties to these presents, shall and will, at the reasonable Request,
Costs, and Charges of the Executors or Administrators, of him or them that
shall first happen to dye, by sufficient conveyance and assurance in the Law,
grant and assign the one moiety of the Premises to the Executors or
Administrators of him so first dying, clear of all Encumbrances done by him.
Also whereas by the mutual consent and agreement of the said W. S. and S. V.
the said W. S. has the custody and keeping of the said Indenture of Lease, and
Indentures of assignment, the said W. S. does now Covenant, promise, and grant,
for him, his Executors, administrators, and assigns, and every of them, to and
with the said S. V. his Executors, Administrators, and assigns, and every of
them, by these presents, That he the said W. S. his Executors, or
Administrators, at all time and times hereafter, after reasonable warning to
him or them to be given, and request therefore to him or them to be made by the
said S. V. his Executors, Administrators, or assigns, at the equal costs and
charges of them the said W. S. and S. V. their Executors, or administrators,
shall and will deliver unto the said S. V. his Executors, administrators, or
assigns, true Copies of the said Indenture of Lease, and Indentures of
Assignment: And at all and every time and times hereafter, and from time to
time, upon reasonable warning to be given, and request to be made as aforesaid,
shall and will bring and show forth the said Indenture of Lease, and Indentures
of assignment, in all and every Court and Courts; and unto and before all and
every such Judge or Judges, or other person or persons, as by the said S. V.
his Executors, administrators, or assigns, shall be reasonably required, for
the better maintenance, showing forth, and approving of the Interest, Estate,
Right, Title, and Term of years, of them the said W. S. and S. V. their
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, in and to the said Indenture of Lease,
and of, in, and to the said piece or parcel of Land and Premises, as any
needful occasion shall be or require, during the rest and residue which is now
to come and unexpired of the aforesaid term of years, in and by the said
Indenture of Lease granted; as also as occasion shall serve or require, upon
the request and warning as aforesaid, shall and will produce, and show forth in
all Court or Courts, and before any person or persons, the Counter-part of the
Indenture of Lease, made by the said A. B. to the said A. D. and that from time
to time, during the continuance of the said Lease, In Witness, etc.

An Umpirage.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing Indented shall come, I R.
C. Citizen and Stationer of London, Umpire indifferent chosen by F. W. etc. and
T. C. of etc. having deliberately heard and understood the griefs and
allegations, and Proofs of both the said parties; and willingly as much as in
me lies, to set the said parties at unity and good accord, do by these
presents arbitrate, award, order, deem, decree, and judge, that the said F. W.
his Executors and Assigns, shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto
the said T. C. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, at, or in the etc.
the full sum of etc. of lawful money of England, on the tenth day of etc. next
ensuing the etc. And that upon payment thereof, either of the said F. W. and T.
C. shall seal, subscribe, and as his several Act and Deed deliver unto the
other of them, a General Release in Writing, of all matters, actions, suits,
causes of actions, Bonds, Bills, Covenants, Controversies, and Demands
whatsoever, which either of them has, may, might, or in any wise ought to
have, of and against the other of them, by reason aforesaid, or means of any
matter, cause, or thing whatsoever, from the beginning of the World, until the
30th day of June now last past, and in the 15th year of etc. In witness, etc.

An Acquittance, for the Redemption of Lands Mortgaged.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I A. B. of etc. Gent. have
received, this present day, at the now dwelling house of John Williams, at the
Star in Fleetstreet London, between the hour of etc. of B. C. of L. in the
County of K. Yeoman, 30 l. for the redemption and full satisfaction of all and
singular those Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenance in the Parish of etc.
in the said County, called etc. contained and specified in one pair of
Indentures of Covenant, bearing date the etc. in the 15th year etc. made
between the said B. C. of the one part, and me the said A. B. of the other
part, of, for, and concerning the Bargain and Sale of all and singular the said
Lands and Tenements conditionally, as by the same Indentures more at large may
appear, of which 30 l. in full payment, as is above recited; I the said A. B.
acknowledge my self well and truly contented, satisfied, and paid thereof, and
of every parcel thereof, I clearly acquit, and discharge the said B. C. his
Heirs and Executors, by these presents. In Witness, etc.

An Acquittance for Rent. December 30. 1663.
REceived then of A. B. of etc. for this half years Rent, due at the Nativity
of our Blessed Lord and Savior Christ Jesus last past, the full and just sum
of 40 l. for Houses or Lands, in the County of etc. the day and year
above-written. By me,

An Acquittance for a Legacy.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That we A. B. and C. my Wife,
Daughter etc. have received and had the day of the making hereof, of C. W. and
W. C. Executors of the last Will and Testament of T. D. 20 l. of etc. in full
payment of 20 l. given and bequeathed by the said T. D. in his said Testament;
of which said sum of 20 l. in full payment and satisfaction of all Bequests and
Legacies to us given in the said Testament, We acknowledge our selves fully
satisfied, contented, and paid. In witness, etc.

An Acquittance for Money received, to pay another.
THis Bill Witnesses, That I A. B. of etc. have received and had on the day of
the making hereof of C. D. of etc. in the etc. Yeoman, by the hands of etc. the
sum of etc. to be paid and disbursed by me the said A. B. for the said C. D. to
be paid and disbursed in such sort and manner, as the said C. D. has
appointed. In Witness, etc.

A Condition to seal a Deed by a certain day, and perform the Covenants therein.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas in and by one Indenture, bearing date etc.
made or mentioned to be made between the above-bounden A. B. C. D. and E. F. of
the one part, and the abovenamed G. H. of the other part, It is mentioned,
that for the considerations therein expressed, the said A.B. C.D. and E.F. have
granted, bargained, sold, and demised, unto the said G. H. the Manor, etc. and
other Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, in the said Indenture mentioned, in
the said County of etc. for one thousand years, from the making thereof, at a
Pepper-Corn Rent, and with and under the Proviso, Conditions, and Agreements
therein contained; as by the same Indenture may at large appear; which
Indenture is only signed, sealed, and delivered, by the said A. B. and C. D.
and not by the said E. F. Now if the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, do procure the said E. F. on or before etc. to sign, seal, and
deliver, as his Act and Deed, the before recited Indenture; And do also from
time to time, and at all times, well and truly hold, observe, perform, and keep
all and every the Covenants, Grants, Provisoes, Conditions, and Agreements,
which on his and their parts and behalfs are and ought to be held, observed,
performed, and kept, comprised and contained in the before recited Indenture;
and that in all things, according to the purport, true intent, and meaning of
the same Indenture: Then this, etc.

A Condition that the Heir shall enter into Bond at his full age, to pay
another.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above-bounden G. H. procure R. H. his Son and
Heir apparent, within one Month after he shall have attained the age of 21
years, to enter into one Obligation, together with the said G. H. wherein the
said G. H. and R. H. shall be jointly and severally bound unto the abovenamed
L. M. in the penal sum of etc. conditioned for the true payment of the same,
etc. unto the said L. M. his Executors or Assigns, on the etc. at or in etc.
And if the said G. H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any
of them, do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said L. M. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the said sum of etc. on etc. at
the place aforesaid: Then, etc.

Condition, That an Administrator not present, shall seal a Deed.
THe Condition etc. That whereas in and by one Indenture, bearing even date
with these presents, made between etc. mention is made, that G. F.
Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of H. P. at and by the request and
appointment of the said W. G. for the consideration of the sum of etc. therein
mentioned, to be paid to the said W. G. by T.B. has granted and assigned unto
the said T. B. for the term of years therein mentioned, the Manor, etc. as
thereby appears. And whereas the said G. F. has not yet sealed or delivered
the said Indenture, and by reason of his employment, etc. it will be some time
before he can be procured to seal: If therefore the said G. F. shall at any
time hereafter, within the space of etc. seal and deliver the said Indenture as
his Act and Deed; or if he happen to dye, or his Administration to be repealed,
before such sealing and delivery of the said Indenture: If thed some other
Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of the said H. P. not administered by
the said G.F. do and shall within the said space of etc. well and sufficiently
grant and assign to the said T.B. his Executors or Assigns, the said etc. in
manner as the same is mentioned to be assigned by the said Indenture, and
according to the purport and effect thereof. And if the said Assignment so
sealed and delivered, shall be within the said space of etc. delivered into the
hands and custody of the said T. B. unaltered and undefaced. And if the said
T.B. his Executors and Administrators, shall in the mean time, quietly and
peacefully have, hold, enjoy, perceive and take the annual Rent of the said
Manor and Premises aforesaid, without any let or interruption of or by the
said G. F. and the said W. G. or either of them, or any other person or
persons, claiming by, or under them, or either of them, or the said H. P.
deceased. Then etc.

A Covenant from an Infant, to engage him to execute a Conveyance at Age.
KNow all men, etc. That I A. B. of etc. in pursuance of the intentions of etc.
expressed in his last Will and Testament, bearing date, etc. as otherwise, do
hereby promise and engage my self to C.D. that I shall and will at any time or
times, after I shall attain the Age of 21 years, upon the request, and at the
costs and charges of the said C.D. his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators,
make and execute such Conveyances and Assurances, for the settling, conveying,
and assuring unto, and upon the said C.D. his Heirs Exec. and Assigns, all that
etc. whereof or wherein I have any Estate, Right, Trust, or Equity whatsoever,
as by the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns, shall be reasonably devised, or
advised and required; and that the same, at the time of such Conveyances or
Assurances, shall be free and clear, of and from all Estates or Encumbrances
made, or wittingly and willingly suffered by me the said A. B. In Witness, etc.

A Release of Personal Actions.
TO all etc. A. B. sends greeting; Know ye, That the said A.B. has remised,
released, and quit-claimed; And by these presents for him, his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, does remise, release, and for
ever quit-claim unto C.D. of etc. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and
every of them, their and every of their Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels,
all and all manner of personal Actions, Suits, Debts, Duties, Reckonings,
Accounts, Sum and Sums of Money, and Demands personal whatsoever, from the
beginning of the World, until the day of the date hereof. In Witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney, to receive Livery and Seisin, according to the Feoffment.
TO all etc. A. B. and C. D. of etc. send greeting; Know ye, That the said A.
B. and C. D. for diverse good Causes and Considerations, them thereunto moving,
have made, constituted, and in their place put G.F. of etc. and H. P. of etc.
and either of them jointly and severally, our true and lawful Attorney and
Attorneys, to enter into the Manor of etc. and other the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, mentioned in one Indenture, bearing date etc. and mentioned to
be made between R.G. and G.W. of etc. of the one part, and Us the said A.B. and
C.D. of the other part, purporting a Feoffment of the said Manor and
Premises, to Us and our Heirs, or into any part of the said Premises, and
Possession and Seisin thereof, for Us, and to our uses, from them the said R.G.
and G.W. or their Attorney or Attorneys in that behalf, to take, receive, and
keep, according to the tenor, form, and effect of the said Indenture;
Ratifying, and by these presents confirming, all and whatsoever our said
Attorneys, or either of them, shall do, or cause to be done in the Premises,
as fully and effectually as we could do, if we were personally present. In
witness, etc.

A Lease of Ejectment.
THis Indenture, etc. witnesses, That the said A. B. for good considerations
him hereunto moving, has leased, set, and Ferm let; and by these presents does
lease, set, and to Ferm let unto the said C.D. all that etc. To have and to
hold the said etc. unto the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, from the Feast of etc. for and during the term of etc. from thence
next ensuing, fully to be complete and ended, yielding and paying therefore
yearly, the Rent of one Pepper-Corn at the Feast of etc. only, if the same be
demanded. Provided always, That if the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, do and shall at any time hereafter,
pay or tender, or cause to be paid or tendered, unto the said C. D. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or to any other person or persons, to
his or their use, the sum of 12 d. of lawful money of England, to the intent to
make void this present Indenture; that then and at all times from thenceforth,
this present Indenture, and the Lease hereby made, shall cease, determine, and
be void; any thing herein before contained to the contrary notwithstanding. In
Witness, etc.

Defeazance of a Statute, for performance of a Covenant.
THis Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of the one part, and C. D. of the other
part; Whereas in and by one Recognizance, in the nature of a Statute-Staple,
bearing even date with these presents, taken and acknowledged before etc. the
said C. D. is and stands bound unto the said A.B. in the sum of etc. payable,
as by the said Recognizance may at large appear. Now this Indenture witnesses,
That it is nevertheless covenanted, conditioned, and agreed, by and between the
said parties, to these presents. And the said A.B. for him and his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, does covenant, conclude, and agree, to and with
the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, by these presents, That if the said C.D.
his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, do and shall well
and truly pay, perform, observe, fulfill, and keep all and every the Payments,
Covenants, Conditions, and Agreements, which on his and their parts and
behalfs, are and ought to be paid, observed, performed, fulfilled, and kept,
contained in one Indenture, bearing date, etc. and made, or mentioned to be
made, between the said A.B. of the one part, and the said C. D. of the other
part; and that in all things, according to the true intent and meaning of the
same Indenture; then and at all times from thenceforth the said Recognizance or
Statute-Staple, shall be void and of none effect, and shall be delivered up, to
be at the costs and charges of the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns, vacated on
Record. In Witness, etc.

Attornment of Tenants, to be endorsed on a Deed.
WE whose Names are hereunder subscribed, being the present Tenants of the
within mentioned Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, understanding the effect
of the within written Grant thereof made unto the within named H. P. do assent
and agree unto the same Grant in every respect, as the same is within written;
and do thereunto attorn. And in testimony of such Attornment, each and every of
Us have hereunto subscribed our Names, the day, etc.

Affidavit that a man is seized in Fee, free from Encumbrances.
A. B. of etc. makes Oath, that he is seized of and in the Manors etc.
contained and specified in one Indenture, or Writing indented, bearing date
etc. made between etc. and thereby demised, or mentioned to be demised, to the
said C. D. for the term of etc. under the Conditions, and Agreements therein
contained, of a good and indefeazable Title, and lawful Estate, to him and the
Heirs of the said A. B. in Fee-simple, as he conceives; and that the Premises
are called or known by the Names and Descriptions in the said Indenture of
Demise expressed, and are of the full and clear yearly value of etc. above all
Reprizes; and free and clear of and from all manner of former Estates, Titles,
Rents, and Arrearages of Rents, Judgments, Recognizances, Statutes, and other
Encumbrances, except the Rents and Services to the Lord or Lords of the Fee,
etc.

Acquittance for the consideration of Money in an Indenture, and a Release of
the Estate.
TO all, etc. A. B. sends greeting; Know ye, That the said A.B. does hereby
acknowledge, to have, before the sealing and delivery of these presents, had
and received of and from D. E. of etc. the sum of etc. which said sum of etc.
is the same sum, which in and by one Indenture, bearing date, etc. made between
the said A. B. of the first part, and the said D. E. of the other part, is
mentioned to be paid to the said A. B. and to be the consideration for the
Purchase of the Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments therein mentioned
to be thereby granted unto the said D.E. and his Heirs; of which said sum of
etc. the said A.B. does hereby acknowledge himself fully satisfied, and does
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, acquit, release, and discharge
the said D. E. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and every of them by
these presents. And further in consideration thereof, the said A. B. does by
these presents remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto the said D. E. and
his Heirs, all the Estate Right, Title, Interest, Claim, and Demand whatsoever,
of him the said A.B. of, in, and into all and singular the Manors, Messuages,
Closes, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, to the said D. E. granted, or
mentioned to be granted, in and by the before mentioned Indenture; and of, in,
and to every part and parcel thereof. In witness, etc.

A Declaration, that Money lent in one man's name, is the proper Moneys of
another.
THis Indenture Tripartite, etc. Between A. B. of the first part, C.D. of the
second part, and E.F. of the third part. Whereas by Indenture Tripartite,
bearing date etc. made between I.F. of the first part, the said A.B. of the
second part, and the said C. D. of the third part; It is mentioned, that the
said I. F. in consideration of 4500 l. therein mentioned, to be paid unto him
by the said A.B. and C. D. Has demised, granted, bargained, and sold unto the
said A. B. and C.D. all that, etc. and other Lands, Tenenements, and
Hereditaments, in the said Indenture mentioned, for the term of years therein
mentioned, at a Pepper-Corn Rent, redeemable nevertheless, and to be redeemed
by the repayment of the said 4500 l. with Interest, in manner as therein is
expressed; as by the said recited Indenture may at large appear. Now this
Indenture witnesses, That it is declared and acknowledged by the said parties
to these presents, That the said principal sum of 4500 l. was the proper moneys
of the said E. F. and was paid by him, and not by the said A. B. and C.D. or
either of them. And therefore it is further declared, That the said A.B. and C.
D. their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, shall and will stand and be
possessed and interessed of, and in the said Manor and Premises, and all
other Securities made or given, for securing of the said 4500 l. And as to and
concerning the said 4500 l. and the Interest and Proceed of the same upon
Trust; and for the benefit of such person or persons, as the said E. F. by any
Writing or Writings, under his Hand and Seal shall appoint. And in default
thereof, upon Trust, and for the benefit of the said E. F. his Executors, and
Administrators. In Witness, etc.

Release of a Ward to his Guardian, when he is at Age.
TO all, etc. A. B. sends greeting; Know ye, That the said A. B. for good
causes and considerations him thereunto moving, has remised, released, and for
ever quit-claimed, and by these presents, does remise, release, and for ever
quit-claim unto T. F. his Executors, and Administrators, all and all manner of
Actions, Suits, Debts, Duties, Reckonings, Accounts, and Demands whatsoever,
which he the said A. B. now has, or at any time hereafter shall or may have
against the said T.F. his Executors, or Administrators, for, touching, or
concerning any the Rents received, and Profits of any the Manors, Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments of the said A. B. or touching or concerning any
Wood-sales, upon or out of the said Manors and Premises, or any of them, or
for any other matter, cause, or thing whatsoever, made, committed, or done, or
for any Receipts or Payments, of or touching the said Manors and Premises, or
any of them, during the minority of the said A.B. or at any time sithence,
until the day of the date of these Presents. In witness, etc.

Livery and Seizin to be endorsed on a Deed.
MEmorandum, That peaceable and quiet Possession and Seisin, of the Lands and
Hereditaments within mentioned to be granted, was had and taken by the within
named A. B. the Attorney within mentioned, and by him was delivered to the
within named M. G. the Bargainee in his own proper person, To hold to him the
said M.G. and his heirs, to the use of him the said M.G. and of his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, according to the tenor, form, and effect of the within
written Deed, in the presence of Us.

An Assignment of an Annuity for years, granted out of a Lease for years.
TO all Christian People, to whom these presents shall come. E. E. of etc. and
W. S. of etc. send Greeting. Whereas by Indenture of Lease bearing date etc.
for the Consideration therein mentioned, the said E. E. did Lease, betake, and
to farm let unto M.L. of etc. and E. his Wife, all that etc. and diverse other
Messuages or Rents, or Hereditaments in the said Indenture mentioned for the
term of etc. concerning etc. at and for the yearly Rent of etc. payable as in
the said Indenture amongst other things does and may appear. And whereas the
said I. T. by one other Indenture of Lease, bearing date etc. And whereas the
said M. L. by Indenture bearing date etc. for the Consideration therein
mentioned, did bargain, sell, alien, assign and set over unto R.L. of etc. as
well the said several Indentures above recited, as the Premises therein and
thereby demised; as also all his Estate, Right, Title and Interest of, in, and
to the same, as by the said Indenture of assignment more at large may appear.
And whereas also the said M. L. and R.L. by their Indenture of assignment,
bearing date etc. for the Consideration therein mentioned, did bargain, sell,
assign and set over unto W.B. of etc. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, the said several Indentures and Premises; as also all their Estate,
Right, Title, and Interest of, in, and to the same. To have and to hold the
said several Indentures and Premises unto the said W. B. his Executors,
administrators and assigns, from the day of the date of the said last recited
assignment forthwards, for and during all the term, and rest and residue of the
respective terms then to come and unexpired, contained and expressed in the
said several Indentures, and every of them, upon a Provisoe and express
Agreement and Covenant, nevertheless in the said Indenture of assignment
contained. That in lieu and further satisfaction, or consideration of the said
agreement, he the said W. B. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, should
and would pay, or cause to be paid unto the said M.L. his Executors and
Assigns, for and during all the rest and residue of the said terms of 21 years,
and 13 years granted as aforesaid by the said I.T. and to the end of the said
term of 13 years, being the longest term of those Leases, as being in reversion
after the said 21 years should be expired as aforesaid, yearly and every year
the sum of 26 l. of lawful money etc. at the four most usual Feasts in the year
(that is to say) at the Feasts etc. or within 14 days next after every of the
said Feasts, by even portions, the first payment thereof to be made in the etc.
or within 14 days then next ensuing, with a Clause of Entry and Distress, if
it should happen the said yearly Rent or sum of 26 l. or any part thereof to be
behind and unpaid, by the space of 14 days next after any Feast or term of
payment thereof above limited, in which the same ought to be paid, being at the
said great Message called the White Lion, lawfully demanded. And with a
Clause that the said last recited Indenture, and the Assignment therein
contained, should be utterly void, and re-entry, if it should fall out, that no
sufficient distress should be there found, or that the same could not be come
at to be distrained, after the said 14 days should be expired, and the said
payments respectively should be unsatisfied at the end of one month next after
any Feast or term of payment thereof aforesaid, in which the same ought to be
paid, being at the same Message called the White Lion, lawfully demanded at
the end of the said month, as in and by the said last recited Indenture,
relation being thereunto had, may more at large appear. All the Estate, Right,
Title and Interest of which said M.L. of and in the said annuity or yearly sum
of 26 l. is now by good and sufficient Conveyance and assurance in Law, come
unto, settled, and vested in the said K. L. and VV. S. or one of them. Now know
ye, That for, and in Consideration of the sum of etc. to the said K. L. in hand
paid by E. D. of etc. before the sealing and delivery of these Presents, and of
6 d. of like money to the said W.S. in hand also paid by the said E. D. before
the sealing and delivery of these Presents, whereof they do hereby severally
and respectively acknowledge the Receipt, and thereof do severally and
respectively acquit and discharge the said E. D. her Executors and
Administrators, for ever by these presents, They the said K.L. and VV.S. have,
and either of them has bargained, sold, released, assigned and set over; and
by these Presents do, and either of them does fully, freely, and absolutely
bargain, sell, release, assign and set over, and for ever quit-claim unto the
said E.D. her Executors, administrators and assigns, as well the said Annuity,
or yearly sum of 26 l. as also all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Power of
Distress, Re-entry, Claim and Demand whatsoever, which they the said K. L. and
VV.S. or either of them, have or has, or in any wise might, should or ought to
have, of, into, and for the said annuity or yearly sum of 26 l. or any part or
parcel thereof, in or unto the said Messuages or Tenements, and Premises, or
any part thereof, by force, virtue or means of the said severally recited
Indentures, or otherwise howsoever. To have, take, perceive, receive and enjoy
the said annuity or yearly sum of 26 l. and Premises hereby mentioned to be
assigned unto the said E.D. her Executors, administrators and assigns, to her
and their own proper use and uses forthwards, for and during all the rest and
residue now to come and unexpired of the said term of 13 years. And the said
K.L. for her self, etc. does Covenant, promise and grant to and with the said
E.D. her Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these Presents, That the
said E.D. her Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and may from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, during all the rest and residue now to come
and unexpired of the said term of 13 years, fully, peaceably, and quietly have,
take, perceive, receive and enjoy to and for her and their own proper use and
uses, the said Annuity or yearly sum of 26 l. and Premises hereby mentioned to
be assigned, and every part thereof, without any lawful let, suit, trouble,
molestation, Release, discharge, or interruption of, or by the said K.L. her
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or of or by any other
person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming, or to claim by, from, or under
them, or any of them, by, from, or under the said M.L. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney from the Husband to the Wife, upon his Voyage.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I A.B. of etc. Esquire do hereby
assign, ordain, authorize, constitute, and in my stead and place, do put,
appoint, and depute my Loving Wife C.B. to be my true and lawful Deputy and
Attorney for me and in my name, and to my own proper use, benefit, and behoof,
to ask, demand and require, sue for, recover and receive all such Debts,
Duties, sum and sums of Money, Rent and Rents, and Arrearages of Rent and
Rents, yearly payments, Merchandises, Legacies, Money due, and to be due upon
Bill of Exchange, and all other demands whatsoever, as now are, or hereafter
shall be due and payable, or belonging, or to be delivered unto me, by or from
any person or persons whatsoever, or wheresoever, and to pay money for me, and
to contract for, demise and let to ferm at the accustomed Rents, or more, all
or any of my Messuages, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments whatsoever, and for
default of payment, or delivery of any Rent or Rents, or other sum of money, or
other thing or things to me due, or to be due, or belonging, to use all lawful
ways and means for recovery thereof, by Action, Suit, Arrest, Bill, Plaint,
Attachment, Distress, Re-entry or otherwise, as fully and amply in every
respect, as I my self might or could do, if I were personally present, and to
sue, implead, make answer, prosecute and defend in any Court or Courts of Law
or Equity, and before any Judges or Justices, in any Suit, Matter, or Cause
with me, for me, or against me, as the Cause shall require, and to deal and
intermeddle in all Actions, Suits, affairs and businesses, any ways touching
or concerning me, as my Agent or Factor, or otherwise: Giving, and by these
presents granting unto my said Attorney full and whole, and lawful authority
in the execution of all and singular the premises. And to substitute and
appoint one or more Attorney or Attorneys in any of the Premises, and the same
again at her pleasure to revoke, and to make and give any Acquittance, Release
or Discharge upon the recovery and receipt of any debt, sum or sums of money,
rent or rents, or other thing whatsoever, as the Cause shall require. And
generally to say, Do, execute, compound, conclude, agree, determine, and finish
all and every other Act and acts, thing and things whatsoever, which in or
about the Premises, shall be requisite or needful to be had, made or done, and
that in as large and ample manner, and as fully and effectually to all intents
and purposes, as I my self might, ought or could, if I were present in mine own
person, Ratifying, allowing for firm, effectual, and irrevocable, all and
whatsoever my said Attorney shall do or cause to be done, in or about the
Premises, by virtue of these presents. In witness, etc.

A Release from the Father to one that bought the Sons Land.
TO all Christian People, to whom these presents shall come. I A.B. etc. Know
ye, That I the said A. B. for diverse good Causes and Considerations me hereunto
moving, have granted, surrendered, remised, released, and for ever quit-claimed,
and by these presents do for me, my Heirs, Executors and Administrators, grant,
surrender, remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto R.C. of etc. in the
County etc. Yeoman, and to his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that parcel of
ground, with the appurtenances lying and being within the Parish of etc. in the
said County of. etc. commonly called or known by the name of etc. containing
etc. now in the occupation of etc. and also all my Estate, Right, Title,
Interest, Use, Possession, Reversion, Property, Claim, Benefit and Demand
whatsoever, of, in, and to the same, To have and to hold the said piece and
parcel of Ground, and all and other the Premises before hereby mentioned to be
granted and released, and every part and parcel thereof, with their and every
of their Appurtenances unto the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to
the sole and only proper use and behoof of the said R. C. his Executors and
Assigns for ever. And I the said A. B. for my self, my Heirs, Executors and
Admistrators, do covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said R. C. his
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and every of them by these presents, that
he the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and may from time to time, and
at all times for ever hereafter, lawfully, peaceably, and quietly have, hold,
occupy, possess and enjoy all the said piece or parcel of ground and premises
hereby mentioned to be granted, and released, and receive the Rents, Issues,
and profits thereof to his and their own use, without any lawful let, suit,
trouble or interruption whatsoever, of or by me the said A. B. my Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or of, or by any other person or persons
whatsoever lawfully claiming, or to claim, by, from, or under me the said A. B.
or by my means, estate, act, default, neglect, or procurement. In Witness, etc.

Attornment of Tenants. The 8th of January, 1663.
MEmorandum, That the day and year abovesaid, M.G. Tenant to the House and
Lands within mentioned, did attorn to this Grant, and assent thereunto, and did
pay 6 d. in Name of Seizin of his Rent, to the within named A.B. in the
presence of H.M. etc.

Attornment of Tenants.
MEmorandum, That the 26 day of Ian. Anno 15. etc. A.B. and C. being Tenants of
the Lands and Hereditaments within mentioned, or some part thereof, did
severally agree to this Grant, and attorn Tenants to the Premises, to the
within named T. M. according to this Grant: and either of them did pay unto the
said T.M. 6 d. in the Name of Seizin, and in part of payment of the Rent, in
presence of T. C. H. B. and G.H.

A Letter of Attorney, to be added to the end of a Sale, to give power for the
Vendor to another to deliver Possession and Seizin to the Vendee.
ANd moreover, E.B. has made, ordained, and constituted and appointed, and in
his stead put, and by these Presents does make, ordain, constitute, and in his
stead put T.C. of etc. and I. F. of etc. his true and lawful Attorneys, jointly
and severally, for him, and in his name and stead, to enter into the aforesaid
pieces or parcels of Land and Premises, or any part thereof, in name of the
whole; and in his name and stead, to expel and put out all other person and
persons, and full and peaceable possession and seizin of the Premises, for
him, and in his name and stead to take; and after such possession and seizin so
thereof had and taken, full and peaceable possession and seizin of the
Premises, for him, and in his name and stead to deliver over unto the said
R.O. and his Heirs, or to his certain Attorney, To hold to him and his Heirs,
to the only use of him and his Heirs for ever, according to the true intent
and meaning of these Presents; Ratifying and allowing whatsoever may said
Attorneys, or either of them shall do in the Premises. In Witness, etc.

A Discharge of a Bill, the Bill being lost.
TO all Christian People, to whom these Presents shall come, I F. S. of etc.
send greeting in our Lord God everlasting: Whereas V. L. of etc. in the County,
etc. by one Bill under his Hand and Seal, dated etc. in the year etc. did
become bound unto me the said F. S. in 40 l. for payment etc. which 20 l. is
paid, and the said Bill being lost, now I the said F.S. do hereby acquit and
discharge the said V. L. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and every of
them, of and from the said sum of 20 l. and the said Bill so entered into, for
payment thereof as aforesaid, and of and from all Actions, Arrests, Costs,
Damages, and Demands whatsoever concerning the same. In Witness, etc.

A Surrender of a Lease.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come to be seen,
read, or heard, F. R. sends greeting, etc. Know ye, That the said F.R. for
diverse good causes, and valuable considerations, him the said F.R. hereunto
moving, has granted, bargained, sold, surrendered, and released; and by these
Presents does grant, bargain, sell, surrender, and release unto T.I. of etc.
his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, all his Lease, Estate, Right, Title,
time, and term of years, yet to come and unexpired, use, possession, rent,
reversion, property, claim, and demand whatsoever, of, in, and to all that
Message or Tenement, etc. as in the Indenture of Lease, etc. To have and to
hold the said Message or Tenement, etc. as in the said Indenture of Lease, and
all his Estate, Right, Title, Interest, term of years yet to come and
unexpired, use, possession, reversion, property, claim, and demand of, in, and
to the same, unto the said T.I. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, from henceforth, for and during, and unto the full end and expiration
of the time and term of years yet to come and unexpired, granted unto the said
F. R. by the said T. I. by his Indenture of Lease, bearing date etc. in as
large and ample manner, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as he the said
F.R. should or might have held and enjoyed the same, if this present Surrender
or Release had never been hereof had or made. In witness, etc.

An Acquittance for Receipt of Money upon a Sale.
REceived the etc. in the year of etc. by me etc. of R.C. of etc. the full sum
of etc. of lawful money etc. being the consideration and in full satisfaction
of and for all that etc. now bargained and sold by me the said T. W. to the
said R.C. and his Heirs, by Indenture, bearing date the day above-written, made
between etc. of which said sum of etc. I the said T. W. do acquit and discharge
the said R. C. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, for ever, by these
presents. In Witness, etc.

A Warrant to a Proctor by the Son, to permit a Stranger to administer upon his
Fathers Estate.
KNow all men by these presents, That I R. D. of the Age of 15 years, but under
the Age of 21 years, Son of A. B. and C. B. both late of and in the County etc.
deceased, do elect and choose T. H. of etc. my Curator or Guardian, to take
Administration of the Goods of my said Father, left unadministred by my said
Mother, for my benefit, during my minority, and to all other effect of Law
whatsoever; and I do give power and authority to Mr. T.M. and Mr. T. C.
Proctors of the Court of Prerogative, jointly and severally to appear for me,
before the Judges of the Prerogative Court aforesaid, lawfully authorized, and
in my name, to pray and obtain the said T. H. to be assigned my Curator or
Guardian as aforesaid; and what they or either of them shall do herein, I do
promise to hold firm for ever by these presents. In Witness, etc.

A Warrant to an Executor.
KNow all men by these presents, That whereas R.C. late of etc. in the etc.
Widow, The Relict and Administratrix of the Goods of T.C. late of the same
place deceased, made her last Will and Testament in Writing, bearing date etc.
and therein made and named P.D. of etc. Now I E. C. eldest Son of the said T.
C. deceased, and R.C. his Wife deceased, do consent, that the said P. D. do
prove the said Will, and take upon him the execution thereof, and
Administration of her Goods, and of my said Fathers Goods she left behind her
at her death unadministred, for the benefit of me and my Brother W.C. In
Witness, etc.

A Condition of a Recognizance to pay Costs in Chancery.
THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the above-bound R. C.
being Plaintiff in the said Court of Chancery, against R. M. and T. N.
Defendants, shall pay such Costs to the said Defendants without Suit, as the
Court of Chancery shall award, if they shall see cause to award any; This
Recognizance to be void, and of no effect, or else to stand and be in full
force, power, and virtue.

Acknowledged by the Recognizor the Tenth Day of January, and in the Fifteenth
Year, etc. before me, JOHN GOOD.

An Assignment of a Lease by Indorsement.
MEmorandum, That the within named T. R. toward satisfaction of 20 l. by me
now due, and owing unto S. H. Gent. have granted, assigned, and set over, and
do hereby grant, assign, and set over unto the said S. H. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, as well this present Indenture, all the Message
or Tenement and Hereditaments within mentioned, to be demised: as also my
Estate, Right, Title, and Interest, of and into the same, either by force,
virtue, or means of this present Indenture, or otherwise howsoever. Witness my
Hand and Seal the 4th Day, etc.

An Exchange by Indenture of Bargain and Sale, with Livery of Seizin.
THis Indenture made etc. Between etc. witnesses, That the said A. B. has
granted, bargained and sold, and by these Presents does grant, bargain, and
sell unto the said C.D. all that Acre of Land, etc. To have and to hold unto
the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to be holden of the chief Lord
or Lords of the Fee or Fees thereof, etc. And the said C.D. in consideration
thereof, has granted, bargained, and sold; and by these presents does grant,
bargain, and sell unto the said A.B. etc. all that Acre of Land, etc. To have
and to hold, etc. to be holden of etc. a Covenant from each party, that they
have power to sell, and are seized in Fee, etc. a Proviso, That if either party
shall be lawfully evicted, of either of the said Acres, by any former Sale;
Then this Deed of Bargain and Sale, and Exchange, to be void; And that then it
shall be lawful to re-enter, and the same to have again, etc.

A Defeazance upon a Judgment, with a Release of Errors.
THis Indenture made etc. Between etc. of etc. of the one part, and C.D. of
etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That whereas the said A.B. in this present
Michaelmas Term, has recovered a Judgment against the said C.D. in the Court
of Common-Bench at Westminster, for 200 l. Debt, besides Costs of Suit; as by
the Records thereof remaining in the said Court more at large it may and does
appear. Nevertheless, the said A. B. is contented and pleased, and by these
presents does covenant and grant for him, his Executors and Administrators, to
and with the said C.D. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, That
if the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of
them, do and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said A. B.
his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the full sum of one hundred pounds,
of lawful money of England, on the Day of etc. which shall be in the etc. That
then he the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, shall and
will upon reasonable request, and at the costs and charges of the said C. D.
his Executors or Assigns, acknowledge or cause to be acknowledged satisfaction
upon Record, of and for the said Judgment, and the Debt and Damages thereby
recovered; and shall not, nor will not take out, or cause to be taken out, any
Execution or Executions upon the said Judgment, against the said C. D. his
Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, or any of them, or against his or their
Goods, Chattels, Lands, or Tenements whatsoever, or wheresoever; and the said
C.D. has remised, released, and for ever quit-claimed; and by these Presents,
for him, his Executors, and Administrators, does remise and release, and for
ever quit-claim unto the said A.B. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
all and all manner of Error and Errors, cause and causes of Error, Jeofails,
and Demands whatsoever, for or by reason of the said Judgment, or for or by
reason of any Entries or Proceedings thereupon, or relating thereunto. In
Witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Mortgage, by Indorsement by a Friend in Trust, for one that
purchased the same, to keep it in force.
MEmorandum, That I the within named T. F. in consideration of the sum of etc.
of lawful money etc. in hand paid by M.G. of etc. by the appointment and
direction of the within named H. N. and 12 d. to me paid by A. C. have assigned
and set over, and do hereby assign and set over unto the said A. C. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as well this present Indenture, and all
the Message or Tenement, and Hereditaments within mentioned to be granted: As
also, all my Estate, Right, Title, and Interest, of, in, and to the same,
either by force, virtue, or means of this present Indenture or otherwise
howsoever, To have and to hold the Premises unto the said A. C. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, during all the residue now to come and unexpired
of the term of 500 years within mentioned, to be granted, in trust, and for
the only benefit of the said M.G. his Heirs and Assigns, and to extend upon
the estate of Inheritance of the Premises, which the said M.G. has purchased.
Witness my Hand and Seal, in the Year, etc.

An Acquittance and Receipt for a Legacy given by a Will to the Executor
thereof.
REceived the etc. in the year of etc. by me L.M. of etc. of N.O. etc. of etc.
Executor of F. R. etc. the full sum of etc. of lawful Money etc. being a
Legacy given unto me the said L. M. by the said F. R. in and by her last Will
and Testament: of which said sum of etc. and all other Debts, Duties, Sum and
Sums of Money, and Demands whatsoever, I the said L. M. do acquit and discharge
the said N. O. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, for
ever by these presents. In Witness, etc.

An Affidavit that Lands are free from all Encumbrances.
RObert Fall of Rochester, in the County of Kent, Butcher, makes Oath, that
all that parcel of ground, with the Appurtenances, lying and being in the
Parish of etc. in the County of Kent, commonly called and known by the name of
etc. containing by estimation, six Acres more or less, now bargained and sold
from the said Robert Fall, to Thomas Giles of etc. in the County aforesaid
Yeoman, by Indenture, bearing date the day of etc. now are, and were at the
sealing and delivery of the said Indenture, and so shall continue, free and
clear of, and from all and all manner of former and other Bargains, Sales,
Gifts, Grants, Releases, Statutes, Recognizances, Estates, Acts, Titles, and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed or done by the said R. F. or any
other person or persons whatsoever, to his knowledge, or by his Order, means,
Authority, consent or procurement.

An Assignment of a Bond, with a Letter of Attorney verbatim as in the Bond.
TO all Christian People, to whom these Presents shall come, I A. B. send
greeting; Whereas E. S. of etc. by one Bond or Obligation bearing date etc. in
the year etc. did become bound unto me the said A. B. in the penalty of etc. of
lawful etc. conditioned for the true payment etc. of like money, at such days
and times, and in such manner and form as in the Condition of the said recited
Bond or Obligation is mentioned, as by the said Obligation and Condition,
relation being thereunto had, more at large may and does appear. Now know ye,
that I the said A. B. for diverse good Causes and Considerations, me hereunto
especially moving, have assigned and set over, and by these presents, do assign
and set over unto W.C. of etc. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, the
said recited Bond or Obligation, and the said sum of etc. therein mentioned;
and I the said A. B. have made, ordained, constituted etc. and depute the said
W. C. my true and lawful Attorney, for me and in my name, but to his own proper
use and behoof, to ask, demand, sue for, recover, and receive of the said E.S.
all such sum and sums of money, as are, or shall be due to me by virtue of the
said recited Bond or Obligation, and to have, use, and take all lawful ways and
means in my name, or otherwise, for recovery thereof by Attachment, Arrest,
Distress, or otherwise, and to compound and agree for the same, and
Acquittances, or other sufficient Discharges for the same, for me and in my
name, to make, seal and deliver, and to do all other Act and Acts, and things
whatsoever concerning the Premises, as fully in every respect, as I my self
might or could do, if I were personally present. And Attorneys one or more
under him for the purpose aforesaid, to make, and again at his pleasure to
revoke; And I the said A. B. do covenant for me, my Executors and
Administrators, to and with the said W. C. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, by these Presents, That I have not received, released, or discharged
the said Bond, or any of the money therein mentioned, neither will I, my
Executors or Administrators, acquit, discharge, or receive the same, or any
part thereof, but shall and will justify all such lawful Actions and
proceedings in Law and Equity, as shall be brought, prosecuted or defended
concerning the same, or by reason thereof, and will not nonsuit, d^savow, or
discontinue any such Action, Suit or Plaint. And that it shall be lawful to and
for the said W. C. his Executors,, Administrators, and Assigns, to receive and
enjoy to his own use, all such sum and sums of money as shall be duly
recovered, by virtue of the said Obligation, or the Condition thereof, without
any account to be given concerning the same; and that neither I the said A. C.
my Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall or will revoke this Letter of
Attorney, or Writing of Assignment, but that I, my Executors and
Administrators, shall and will upon every reasonable Request, do acknowledge,
and execute all and every such further Act and Acts, thing and things
whatsoever, be it by making a new Letter of Attorney or Assignment, or
otherwise howsoever, for the better enabling and authorizing him the said W.C.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to recover and receive to his own
proper use, all such sum and sums of money, as shall be due by virtue of the
said Obligation, as by the said W.C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
or by his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or
advised, and required, so as for the doing thereof, they being not compelled to
go, or travel further then the Cities of London and Westminster, or any of
them, and to the true performance of all and singular the Covenants herein
contained; I the said A.B. do bind my self, my Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, to the said W.C. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, in
the penalty of 200 l. of lawful money of England, by these presents. In
witness, etc.

Incert not the Penalty, if it is not agreed by the Assignee.
A Defeazance upon a Statute-Staple for payment of Money.
THis Indenture made etc. between etc. witnesses, That whereas H. M. and R.M.
by one Recognizance, in the nature of a Statute-Staple, bearing date etc. are
become bound unto the said I. M. in the sum of 200 l. of lawful money etc.
payable as by the said Recognizance of Statute-Staple more at large appears.
Now nevertheless, etc. by and between, etc. and the said I. M. is contented and
pleased, and for himself, his Executors, and Administrators, does covenant and
agree to and with the said H. M. and R. M. their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, to these Presents, that if the said H.M. and R. M. their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, do and shall well and
truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said I.M. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, the sum of etc. on the etc. next ensuing etc. that
then the said Statute-Staple shall be utterly void, frustrate, and of none
effect, or else to stand and remain in full force and virtue. In witness, etc.

A short Mortgage of a House.
THis Indenture made etc. between C. B. of the one part, and I.H. of the other
part, witnesses, That the said C. B. for and in consideration of the sum of
etc. of lawful etc. to him in hand paid by the said G. H. at and before the
sealing and delivery of these Presents, whereof he does hereby acknowledge the
Receipt, and thereof, and of every part thereof, does acquit and discharge the
said I.H. his Executors and Administrators, and every of them, for ever by
these Presents, has granted, bargained, and sold, and by these Presents does
grant, bargain and sell unto the said I.H. all that Message, etc. And the
Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders thereof. And also all the
Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Property, Possession, Claim and Demand
whatsoever, of him the said C. B. of, in, and to the said Bargained Premises,
and of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances: And
also all Deeds, Evidences and Writings that concern the same Premises, or any
part thereof; To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, and all and
singular other the Premises, with the Appurtenances, unto the said I. H. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, from the day before the date of these
Presents, unto the full end and term of 99. years from thence next ensuing, and
fully to be complete and ended, without impeachment of, or for any manner of
waste, Yielding and paying therefore Yearly the Rent of one Pepper-Corn on the
24th day of June, if the same shall be lawfully demanded, and no more. Provided
always, and upon Condition nevertheless, That if the said C. B. his heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly pay, or
cause to be paid unto the said I. H. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns,
at or in the Common Hall, etc. the full sum of etc. free and clear of and from
all, and all manner of Charges, Taxes, Assessments, and Impositions whatsoever
or howsoever; That then, and from thenceforth, this present Grant, Bargain and
Sale of all the Premises shall cease, determine, and be utterly void,
frustrate, and of none effect; or else the same shall stand and remain in full
force, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding. And the said C.B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, does covenant, promise, and
grant, to and with the said I.H. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, by
these Presents, That in case default shall be made of, or in payment of the
said sum of etc. before herein mentioned, or any part thereof, at the day,
time, and place before specified, That then, and from thenceforth, and at all
times afterward, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said I. H. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, to enter into, have, hold, use, occupy,
possess, and enjoy, all the said Message or Tenement, and all other the
Premises, during all the said term of 99 years, by these Presents granted,
without any lawful Let, Suit, Trouble, Denial, Disturbance, or Interruption, of
or by him the said C.B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or
any of them, or of, or by any other person or persons whatsoever. And that then
he the said C. B. shall and will make, do, knowledge, suffer, and execute all
and every such further Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Devise and Devises
whatsoever, for the further and better conveying and assuring of the said
Message or Tenement, and other the Premises by these Presents granted unto
the said I. H. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, during the said term
of 99 years, as by the said I.H. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns; or
by his or their Council learned in the Law shall be devised, advised, or
required. And it is agreed by and between the said Parties to these Presents,
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said C. B. his Heirs and
Assigns, to receive and take all the Rents, Issues, and Profits of the
Premises, until default shall be made in payment of the said sum of etc.
without any Let, Suit, Trouble, Denial, or Interruption of him the said I.H.
his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns. In Witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney, to receive Seizin of Lands.
TO all Christian People, to whom this present Writing shall come, We R. O. and
T. T. send greeting in our Lord God everlasting: Know ye, That we the said R.
O. and T. T. have made, ordained, constituted, and in our steads and places put
and deputed; And by these Presents do make, ordain, constitute, and in our
steads and places put and depute N. D. of etc. our true and lawful Attorney,
for Us, and in our Names, full and peaceable Possession and Seisin of all that
Message or Tenement, etc. which by Indenture, bearing date the etc. was
granted, bargained, sold, aliened, enfeoffed, or confirmed; or mentioned to be
granted, enfeoffed, and confirmed unto us the said R.O. and T. T. and our Heirs
and Assigns, to the use of Us and our Heirs, by R.Y. of etc. to take and
receive to and for our own use, of the aforesaid R. Y. or of his certain
Attorney in this behalf; Ratifying and confirming all that, and whatsoever our
said Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be done in our Names concerning
the Premises, In witness, etc.

A Declaration of an Obligee, that his Name is used in Trust.
TO all, etc. H. P. of etc. sends greeting: Whereas H. A. of etc. by his
Obligation, bearing date, etc. stands bound unto the said H.P. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, in the sum of, etc. conditioned for the payment of
etc. upon the etc. as by the said Obligation may more fully appear. Now know
ye, That the said H. P. does hereby acknowledge and confess, That the said
Obligation is so taken in his Name only upon Trust, for the only proper use
and behoof of G. F. of, etc. his Executors and Administrators. And that the
Moneys secured by the said Obligation, were the proper Moneys of the said G.F.
In Witness, etc.

An Indenture, being a Defeazance of an Assignment of a Bond.
THis Indenture, etc. between A. B. of etc. of the one part, and C. D. of etc.
of the other part: Whereas the said C.D. is, and now stands really indebted
unto the said A. B. by his Bill-Obligatory, bearing date, etc. in the full sum
of etc. to be paid, etc. And whereas R.G. of etc. by his Obligation, bearing
date, etc. became bound to the said C. D. in the penal sum of etc. with
Condition there underwritten for the said R. G. paying unto the said C.D. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, the sum of etc. upon etc. as by the
said Bond more at large may appear. And whereas the said C. D. has by Writing
under his Hand and Seal, bearing date etc. constituted and appointed the said
A. B. to be the said C. D. his lawful Attorney in his stead and name, but to
the use of the said A, B, to ask, levy, recover, demand, and receive the Money
due on the said Bond, when it shall become payable; as by the said Letter of
Attorney, among other things therein contained, may appear. Now this Indenture
witnesses, and it is the true intent and meaning of the Parties to these
presents, That the said Letter of Attorney so made by the said C, D, to the
said A, B, as aforesaid, is, and is hereby declared to be, made for the said A,
B, farther, and better security of the said sum of etc. so owing from the said
C, D, to the said A, B, as aforesaid. And the said A, B, for himself, his
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, does covenant, promise, and grant, to and
with the said C, D, his Executors and Administrators, and to and with every of
them by these presents, That if the said C, D, his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, or any of them, do, and shall well and truly pay, or cause to
be paid unto the said A, B, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the said
sum of etc. of lawful Money of England, at or upon the etc. that then upon
Receipt thereof, he the said A, B, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns,
shall and will deliver up the said Letter of Attorney, and the Bond aforesaid,
whole and uncancelled unto the said C, D, his Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns: Any thing in the said Letter of Attorney contained to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

A Surrender of the Lessees Term to be endorsed on the Lease.
KNow all men by these Presents, That the within named G. F. of etc. has
granted, assigned, surrendered, and yielded up; and by these Presents does
grant, assign, surrender, and yield up unto the within-named H. P. of etc. all
that the Manor, etc. ( prout in the Lease) and all other the Premises within
demised, or mentioned to be demised by the said H.P. unto the said G.F. And
also all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Property, Claim, and Demand
whatsoever, of him the said G. F. of, in, or to the said Manor or Premises;
or of, in, or to any part thereof, To have and to hold the same unto the said
H.P. his Heirs and Assigns, to do therewith at his and their free will and
pleasure. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive Money decreed in Chancery.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I H. P. of etc. for diverse good causes
and considerations me thereunto moving, Have made, constituted, and appointed;
and by these Presents do make, constitute, and appoint G.F. of etc. my true and
lawful Attorney, for me, and in my Name, and for my use, to ask, demand, and
receive of I.B. of etc. all that sum of 1000 pounds of lawful Money of England,
which by a Decree made in the High-Court of Chancery, in a Cause there
depending between me the said H.P. Complainant, and the said I. B. Defendant,
bearing date, etc. he the said I.B. is to pay unto me; And upon receipt of the
said sum of 1000 l. to give and deliver unto him the said I. B. one Acquittance
or Release, bearing date the day of the date hereof, made, sealed, and
delivered to me to their use, testifying the Receipt thereof, and in full of
all Demands touching the same: Giving, and by these Presents granting unto the
said G.F. full Power and lawful Authority for me, and in my name, stead, and
place, to do, or cause to be done all and every such other Act and Acts, Thing
and Things, as shall be requisite or needful to be done in the Premises, in as
full and ample manner, as if I my self were at the doing thereof personally
present; Ratifying and confirming all and whatsoever my said Attorney shall
lawfully do, or cause to be done, in or about the Premises. In witness, etc.

A Discharge for Money Decreed in Chancery.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I H. P. of etc. do hereby acknowledge to
have had and received of I. B. of etc. the full sum of one thousand pounds of
lawful Money of England, adjudged to be paid unto me by a Decree made in the
High-Court of Chancery the first day of etc. in a Cause there depending between
me the said H. P. Complainant, and the said I. B. Defendant, being in full of
all Matters in Question and Demand in the said Causes. And I do for my self, my
Executors and Administrators, acquit, release, and discharge the said I. B. his
Executors and Administrators, of and from the said one thousand pounds; and
every part thereof, and of and from all Interest, Damages, and other Demands,
for, touching, or concerning the same. In witness, etc.

A Bond to the KING.
NOverint universi per praesentes me H.P. de etc. teneri et firmiter Obligari
serenissimo Principi, and Domino nostro Carolo Secundo, Dei Gratia, Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, Regi, Fidei Defensor. in mill libr. legalis
monetae Angl. Solvend. eidem Domino Regi, Haered. vel Successor. suis. Ad quam
quidem solutionem been et fideliter faciend. obligo me, haeredes, Execut. and
Administrator. meos firmiter per praesentes, Sigillo meo Sigillat. Dat. primo
die Jan. An. Regni dicti domini nostri Caroli Secundi Regis, decimo quarto,
etc. Annoque Domini, 1662.

A Discharge to Trustees for Money by them received.
WHereas G.F. of etc. did by his Indenture, dated, etc. Demise and Lease unto
H.P. of etc. and others, diverse Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
therein mentioned: To have and to hold the same unto the said H.P. and the rest
of the Lessees therein named for the term of 99 years, if the said G. F. should
live so long; upon Trust, that the said Lessees should dispose the Profits of
the lands demised to the several purposes in the said Indenture mentioned, as
by the same Indenture may at large appear. Now know all men by these presents,
That I the said G. F. do hereby acknowledge, signify, and declare, That all
such Moneys as have been received by the said H. P. by virtue of the said
Lease, have been all paid and satisfied by him the said H. P. according to my
Directions and Appointment, and according to the Tenor of the said Lease; and I
do hereby acquit and discharge him the said H. P. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, of and from all such Moneys as
aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof. In witness, etc.

Warrant of Attorney, to confess a Judgment in Chancery, for privileged
persons.
To, etc. or any other of the Six Clerks belonging to His Majesty's High-Court
of Chancery.
WHereas I A. B. of etc. became bound by Obligation, bearing even Date with
these Presents, to C.D. of etc. in the penal sum of 100 l. for the payment of
50 l. of lawful Money, on, or before the etc. if in case I the said A.B. do not
satisfy and pay, or cause to be paid unto the said C. D. his Executors or
Administrators, the said sum of 50 l. on, or before the etc. Then I the said
A.B. do hereby give warrant, and authorize you the said etc. or any other of
the said Six Clerks, to appear for me at the said Court, unto an Action or Suit
there to be brought, or commenced against me the said A.B. by the said C. D.
his Executors or Administrators, upon the said Obligation, and thereupon to
acknowledge and confess a Judgment in Hillary Term, next ensuing the date
hereof; and for so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant: Witness my
Hand and Seal, etc.

A Mortgagee's Assignment of his Mortgage to the Mortgagor, to be endorsed on
the Deed.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I H.P. of etc. the Lessee within named,
for and in consideration of the sum of etc. unto me in hand paid, by the within
named G. F. Have granted, assigned, and set over, and by these Presents do
grant, assign, and set over unto the said G. F. all that the Manor of etc. and
all and singular other the within-mentioned Premises, with their, and every of
their Appartenances; and all my Estate, Right, Title, Term and Interest
therein, as fully and amply as the same were granted or demised unto me from
the said G. F. by the Deed or Writing within-written, contained; To have and to
hold the same unto the said G.F. his Heirs and Assigns, to do therewith at his
and their free will and pleasure. And I the said H. P. do hereby covenant and
grant to and with the said G. F. his Executors and Administrators, That I have
not made, done, or willingly suffered any Act or Thing, whereby the Premises
within mentioned, or the Estate or Term hereby granted or demised, shall or may
be in any wise discharged, impeached, or encumbered. In witness, etc.

A Deed of Feoffment upon a Sale.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, greeting:
Know ye, That I W. B. of etc. in part of performance of the Covenant mentioned
in one Pair of Indentures, bearing date, etc. made between me the said W.B. and
F. my Wife, of the one part, and G. H. of etc. of the other part; Have given,
granted, enfeoffed, and confirmed; and by these Presents, do give, grant,
enfeoff, and confirm unto the said G. H. all those, etc. several Messuages,
Tenements, or Cottages, etc. And the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and
Remainders. Rents, Issues, and Profits of all and singular the Premises; and
all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Benefit, Claim, and Demand whatsoever
of me the said W. B. of, in, and to the same, To have and to hold the said
Messuages, Tenements, or Cottages, and all and singular other the Premises,
with their and every of their Appurtenances beforementioned, to be granted
unto the said G.H. and his Heirs, To the use of the said G. H. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever; And I the said W. B. have granted for me and my Heirs, That
we will grant unto the said G. H. and his Heirs, the said Messuages, Tenements,
or Cottages, and Premises, with the Appurtenances, against all People for ever
by these Presents. In witness, etc.

An Acquittance of part of a Debt.
BE it known unto all men etc. That I A. B. etc. in the County of etc. have
received, and had the day of the making hereof of etc. R. W. etc. in the said
County, Yeoman, 6 l. etc. due to me on the Feast Day of etc. last past, before
the date of these Presents, in part of Payment of a greater sum, contained and
specified in a writing Obligatory, wherein the said R.VV. with others, stand
bound unto me; the which 6 l. as abovesaid, I do by these presents acknowledge
to have received, etc.

A short Deed, to declare that the name of the Obligee in an Obligation is used
in trust for another.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, I S.B. of
etc. send Greeting. Whereas J. T. and J. G. of etc. by Obligation, bearing
date, etc. stand jointly and severally bound unto me the said S.B. for the true
payment of etc. on the etc. as by the etc. (recite more if there be more) Now
know ye, That I the said S.B. do hereby signify and declare, That the several
sums of Money in the Conditions of the said several Obligations mentioned,
were, and are the proper Moneys of A.B. of etc. And that my name is used in the
said several Obligations in Trust, and for the only benefit of the said A.B.
his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns; and therefore I the said S.B. do
hereby authorize and appoint the said A.B. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, to receive and take all the several sums of Money to his and their
own proper use and behoof, without any Account to be given concerning the same,
and to use all lawful ways and means for recovery thereof, and to compound and
agree for the same; and to acquit, discharge, and deliver up the said several
Obligations, as fully in every respect as I might or could do, if I were
personally present. In Witness, etc.

A Form of a Will.
IN the Name of God, Amen. I A. B. of etc. being in good health of Body, and of
sound and perfect Mind and Memory, Praise be therefore given to Almighty God,
do make and ordain this my present Last Will and Testament, in manner and form
following (that is to say); First and principally, I commend my Soul into the
Hands of Almighty God, hoping through the Merits, Death, and Passion, ^f my
Savior Jesus Christ, to have full and free Pardon and Forgiveness of all my
Sins, and to inherit everlasting Life; and my Body I commit to the Earth, to be
decently buried at the discretion of my Executor hereafter named; And as
touching the disposition of all such Temporal Estate, as it has pleased
Almighty God to bestow upon me, I give and dispose thereof, as follows;

First, I will, That my Debts and Funeral Charges shall be paid and discharged.

Item, I give unto, etc. (here set down all your Legacies that you intend to
give, and then write.)

All the rest and residue of my personal Estate, Goods, and Chattels,
whatsoever, I do give and bequeath unto my loving etc. (here name the person)
full and sole Executor of this my last Will and Testament.

And I desire, That my Body may be buried in the etc. And I do hereby revoke,
disanul, and make void all former Wills and Testaments by me heretofore made.
In witness whereof, I the said A. B. to this my last Will and Testament, being
contained in five Sheets of Paper, set my Hand, and to the top and last Sheet
thereof, set my Seal the etc. In the year, etc.

A Codicil or Schedule to a Will.
BE it known unto all Men by these presents, That whereas I A.B. of etc. have
made and declared my last Will and Testament in writing, bearing date, etc. I
the said A. B. do by this present Codicil, confirm and ratify my said last
Will and Testament; and do give and bequeath unto I.E. of etc. the sum of etc.
and my will and meaning is, That this Codicil or Schedule be, and be adjudged
to be, part and parcel of my said last Will and Testament; and that all things
herein contained and mentioned be faithfully and truly performed, and as fully
and amply in every respect as if the same were so declared and set down in my
said last Will and Testament. In witness, etc.

The Form of an Affidavit.
INter R.L. quer. et R.R. Defend. in ejectione firmae de duobus Messuagiis,
etc. in etc.

A.B. makes Oath, That he this deponent upon the 20th day of January, now last
past, did deliver unto R. C. who was then Tenant in possession of the Tenements
above mentioned, a Copy of a Declaration made by the Plaintiff against the
Defendant in this Cause; whereupon there was written as follows, or to the
same effect, R.C. this Declaration is for Trial of the Plaintiffs Title, etc.
verbatim, as on the back of the Declaration.

Directions for suing out Fines, and making the Concords thereof; with several
necessary Notes thereupon.
IT is called a Fine, Et Finalis concordia, quia imponit finem litibus.

Fines are Instruments of Record, of Agreements concerning Lands or other
Hereditaments made most usually upon Writs of Covenant in the Court of
Common Pleas, and are of such force and efficacy in Law, that they are
perpetual Bars to all Parties to the same Fines and Estrangers, not
prosecuting their Right in due time.

He who acknowledges the Fine, is called the Conusor; and he to whom the Fine
is levied, is called the Conusee.

If the use of a Fine be not declared before nor after the Fine levied, it
shall be intended to the use of the Conusor, and his Heirs.

Infants (that is, all persons under the age of one and twenty years) ought to
have special care how they levy Fines, for unless they be reversed by the
Infants themselves before they come of Age, they are good.

If a married Woman under Age levy a Fine of her own Lands, she may not reverse
it, unless her Husband dye before she come to full age.

If a married woman levy a Fine of her Jointure, she will thereby lose both
that and her Thirds, if the Jointure were well settled before marriage.

It is requisite, that either the Conusor, or the Conusee, be seized of the
Lands in the Fine at the time of levying thereof, otherwise the Fine is void.

Persons Outlawed, or waved in personal Actions, may alien by Fine.

To sue out a Fine by Dedimus Potestat. to Commissioners in the Country, you
are first to draw your Praecipe of the Writ of Covenant in Paper, and then
write under, your Commissioners Names, four, or more, whereof one is to be a
Knight, thus,

S. ss. Pr. A. B. quod just etc. teneat C. D. con. etc. de uno Messuagio, uno
Horreo, uno gardino and december acris ter. cum pertin. in E.

De. po. F.D. Militi H. I. L.M. N.O. P.Q. generosis.

Carry this to the Cursitor of the same County, and he will make your Dedimus
Potestatem take the Fine.

When you have your Ded. pot. then make ready your Concord to be fairly
engrossed in Parchment; and see that the Land be exactly named, as in the
Dedimus: The Forms of which Concords next follow.

A Fine from One to One, of a Message* and Garden.
Sussex. ss. PRaecipe A. B. quod just etc. teneat C. D. con. etc. de uno
Messuagio, et uno Gardino, cum pertin. in M. E. nisi etc. Et est Concordia
talis, scilicet quod praedict. A. recogn. praedict. tenementa cum pertin. esse
jus ipsius C. ut illa quae idem C. habet de dono praed. A. Et illa remisit and
quiet. clam. de ipso A. and hered. suis praefat. C. et hered. suis in
perpetuum. Et praeterea idem A. concessit pro se and hered. suis quod ipse
warrant. praefat. C. and hered. suis praedicta tenementa cum pertin. contra
ipsum A. and hered. suos in perpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

A Fine from a Man and his Wife to one Conusee, of two Messuages, one Yard, or
Backside, one Garden, Land, Meadow and Pasture.
Southt. ss. PR. Henr. B. and Mariae uxori ejus, quod just etc. teneant
Iohanni B. con. etc. de duobus Messuagiis, uno curtilagio, uno Gardino, december
Acris Terrae, quinque Acris prati, and sex Acris Pasturae cum pertin. in M. Et
nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scilicet, quod praed. H. and Maria recogn. praedict.
tenementa cum pertin. esse jus ipsius Iohannis, ut illa quae idem Johannes
habet de dono praedict. Henr. and Mariae. Et illa remiser. and quiet. clam. de
ipsis Henr. et Maria, et hered. ipsius Hen. praefat. Iohanni and hered. suis in
perpetuum: Et praeterea iidem Hen. and M. concesserunt pro se and hered. ipsius
Hen. quod ipsi warrant. praefat. I. et hered. suis praed. tenement. cum pertin.
contra ipsos Henr. and M. and hered. ipsius Hen. in perpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

Note, That where there be diverse Conusors, the Release and Warranty must be
from the Heirs of one of the Conusors only, as in the last mentioned; and also
when a Fine is levied to diverse Conusees, the right shall be limited to one of
them only, and the Remise and VVarranty to his heirs only, whose Right it is
acknowledged to be.

A Fine from Two Conusors, and the Wife of one of them, to Two Conusees, of
Messuages, Barns, Gardens, Orchards, Land, Meadow, Pasture, and Common of
Pasture for all manner of Cattle.
Southt. ss. PRaecipe Nicholao Gibbons generoso, and Ric. Henet, et Annae uxori
ejus, quod just etc. teneant I. S. Armigero, et D.F. con. etc. de quatuor
Messuagiis, duobus Horreis, duobus Gardinis, duobus Pomariis, Viginti Acris
Terrae, una acra Prati, octo acris Pasturae, et Communia Pasturae, et omnimod.
averiis, cum pertin. in Warbleington et Emesworth. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis scilicet, quod praedict. Nich. et Ric. and Anna recog.
praedicta tenementa et communiam Pasturae, cum pertin. esse jus ipsius I. ut
illa quae iidem I. and D. habent de dono praedictorum Nich. et Ric. et Annae.
Et illa remiserunt et quiet. clam. de ipsis Nich. et R. and A. et hered. ipsius
N. praedictis I. et D. et hered. ipsius in perpetuum. Et praeterea idem Nich.
concessit pro se et hered. suis, quod ipsi warrant. praedictis I.S. et D.F. et
hered. ipsius I.G. praed. tenementa, et communiam Pasturae, cum pertin. contra
praedict. Nich. et hered. suos in perpetuum. Et ulterius idem Ric. and Anna
concesser. pro se et hered. ipsius R. quod ipsi warrant. praedictis I. et D. F.
et hered. ipsius I.G. praed. tenementa et communiam Pasturae, cum pertin.
contra praedict. R. et A. et hered. ipsius R. in perpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

Note, That in the Concord all the special names of the things contained in
the Writ, are not to be rehearsed, but only the general words thereof; as
Manor, Tenements, Rents, Fishing, Warren, Advowson, Common, Moyty, third,
fourth, or fifth Part; view of Franck-Pledge, Rectory, Tithes, Fairs, Markets,
etc. as in the several Presidents you may observe.

A Fine by a Knight and his Wife to an Archbishop and another of three Manors,
Messuages, Tofts, Cottages, Mills, Barns, Gardens, Land, Meadow, Pasture, Wood,
Furse, Heath, and Rent; the Advowson of a Church, and View of Franck-Pledge,
with general Warranty.
Midd. ss. PR. I.L. Militi et M. uxori ejus, quod just etc. teneant Reverendo
in Christo Patri T.Y. permissione divina Archiepiscopo Eborac. Angliae Primati,
and G.L. Armigero, con. etc. de Maneriis de R. K. and M. cum pertin. ac de
quinquaginta Messuagiis, quingentis Toftis, ducentis cottagiis, sex molendinis,
quingentis horreis, quingen. gardinis, quinque mill acris Terrae, mill acris
Prati, sex mill acris Pasturae, mill acris bosci, december mill acris Jampnorum
and bruere, ac de quinquaginta libris reddit. cum pertin. in R. C. A. alias
S.T. V.W. and E. ac de advocatione Ecclesiae de E. praedict. ac de visu Franci
plegii de R.C. and A. praedict. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scilicet, quod praed. I. et M. recogn. praedict.
maneria, tenementa, reddit. advocationem and visum Franc. Pleg. cum pertin.
esse jus ipsius Archiepiscopi, ut illa quae idem Archiepiscopus et G habent de
dono praedictorum I. et M. Et illa remiserunt, and quiet. clam. de ipsis I. et
M. et hered. ipsius I. praefat. Archiepiscopo et D. et hered. ipsius
Archiepiscopi in perpetuum. Et praeterea iidem I. et M. concesserunt, pro se
and hered. ipsius I. quod ipsi warrant. praefat. Archiepiscopo and G. and
hered. ipsius Archiepiscopi praedict. maneria, tenementa, reddit. advocationem
et visum Franc. Pleg. cum pertin. contra omnes homines in perpetuum. Et pro
hac, etc.

Note, That although a married Woman cannot covenant by Deed, yet she may
warrant by Fine.

Note, If a Manor extend into diverse Towns or Villages, you must express all
the Towns whereinto it extends; or if you omit any of them, no part of the
Manor in such Town omitted passes; yet a Fine of a Manor cum pertin. without
naming any place where it lies, is good, and passes the whole Manor.

Note, A Mill will pass by Molendinum alone, but it is better, and more usual
to add Ventosum or Aquaticum.

Note, That Parsonages, Rectories, Advowsons, Vicarages, or Tithes impropriate,
pass not by the names de advocatione Ecclesiae, but de Rectoria Ecclesiae de
A. cum pertin. But when it is of a presentation only, it must be advocatione
Ecclesiae de A. and not cum pertin.

A Fine by One and his Wife, to One of one Manor, Messuages, Tofts, Cottages,
Barns; a Water-Mill, a Fulling-Mill, a Windmill, a Dove-house, Gardens,
Orchards, Land, Meadow, Pasture, VVood, Furze, Heath, Moor, fresh and salt
Marsh, Rent, free Fishing, the advowson of a Church by turns.
Sussex ss. PR. Johanni H. Armigero, and Ursulae uxori ejus, quod just etc.
teneant Roberto P. generoso con. etc. de manerio de B. cum pertin. ac de
Viginti Messuagiis, duobus Toftis, sex Cottagiis, quatuor Horreis, uno
Molendino aquatico, uno Molendino fullonico, uno Molendino ventoso, uno
Columbario, Viginti Gardinis, quindecim pomariis, ducentis acris Terrae, Centum
acris Prati, Mill acris Pasturae, December. acris Bosci, Centum acris Jampnorum
and bruere, triginta acris More, december acris Marisci frisci, duodecim acris
Marisci salsi, et december Marcis reddit. cum pertin. in B. C. and D. necnon de
libera piscaria in aqua de S. ac de advocatione Ecclesiae de P. alternis
vicibus cum acciderit. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scil. quod praedict. I. et V. recognoverunt maneria,
tenementa, red. and liberam piscariam praedicta cum pertin. ac advocationem
praedictam esse jus ipsius Roberti, ut illa quae idem R. habet de dono
praedictorum I. and V. Et illa remiserunt and quiet. clam. de ipsis I. et V. et
hered. ipsius V. praedicto R. and hered. suis in perpetuum. Et praeterea iidem
I. et V. concesserunt, pro se and heredibus ipsius V. quod ipsi warrant.
praedicto R. et heredibus suis praedicta maneria, tenementa, reddit. et liberam
piscariam cum pertin. ac advocationem praedictam contra ipsos I. et V. et
heredes ipsius V. in perpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

A Fine of a Rent by an Earl and his Wife.
Ebor. ss. PRaec. Johanni Comiti Devon, et dominae Katherinae uxori ejus,
Comitissae D. quod just etc. ten. VV.C. con. etc. de quadraginta libris annui
redditus cum pertin. exeuntis de manerio de E. Et nisi, etc.

Et est concordia talis, scil. quod praed. Comes et Comitissa recognover.
redditum praedictum cum pertin. esse jus ipsius VV. ut illa quae idem VV. habet
de dono praedictorum Comitis et Comitissae. Et illa remiser. et quiet. clam. de
ipsis Comite et Comitissa and hered. ipsius Comitis praefat. VV. et hered. suis
in perpetuum. Et praeterea iidem Comes et Comitissa concesser. pro se et hered.
ipsius Comitis quod ipsi warrant. praefat. VV. praedict. reddit. cum. pertin.
contra ipsos Comitem et Comitissam et hered. ipsius Comitis in perpetuum. Et
pro hac, etc.

A Fine of the third Part of a Rent.
PRaec. A. B. et C. uxori ejus, quod just etc. ten. D. E. militi Balnei con.
etc. de tertia part quinque librarum, sex solidorum et octo denar. reddit. cum
pertin. exeun. de maneriis de F. et G. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scil. quod praedicti A. et C. recognover. tertiam
partem praedictam cum pertin. esse jus ipsius D. ut illam quam idem D. habet de
dono praedict. A. et C. Et illam remiser. et quiet. clam. de ipsis A. et C. and
hered. ipsius A. praefat. D. et hered. suis in perpetuum: Et praeterea iidem A.
et C. concesserunt pro se et hered. ipsius A. quod ipsi warrant. praefat. D.
and hered. suis praedictam tertiam partem cum pertin. contra praed. A. and C.
et hered. ipsius A. in perpetuum, etc. Et pro hac, etc.

A Fine of a Parsonage, excepting the Advowson of the Vicarage of the same
Parsonage.
PRaec. A.B. generoso, quod just etc. teneat C. D. con. etc. de Rectoria de E.
cum pertin. except. advocatione Vicariae Ecclesiae de E. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scil. quod praed. A. recognovit Rectoriam praed. cum
pertin. (except. praeexcept.) esse jus ipsius C. ut illam quam idem C. habet de
dono praed. A. Et ill. remisit et quiet. clam. de ipso A. et hered. suis,
praefat. C. et hered. suis in perpetuum. Et praeterea idem A. concessit pro se
et hered. suis, quod ipsi warrant. praefat. C. et hered. suis Rectoriam praed.
cum pertin. (except. praeexcept.) contra ipsum A. and hered. suis in perpetuum.
Et pro hac, etc.

A Writ of Covenant for the King, of Tythe-Corn.
E. ss. PRaec. A.B. and C.D. quod teneant nobis con. inter nos and praefat. A.
and C. fact. de omnibus et omnimod. decimis granorum crescen. provenien. sive
renovan. infra parochiam de Hoten. Et nisi etc.

Note, This Writ is indorsed thus, Galfridus Palmer Miles, Attorn. Dom. Regis
generalis, pro eodem Dom. Rege sequitur hoc breve.

A Fine of one Message, one Barn, Land, Meadow, Pasture, and five shillings
Rent; the Parsonage of B. and the Advowson of the Vicarage of B.
S. ss. PRaec. I. G. et M. uxori ejus, quod just etc. ten. R. R. Militi con.
etc. de uno Messuagio, uno Horreo, quindecim acris Terrae, sex acris Prati,
Viginti acris Pasturae, et quinque solidis redd. cur. pertin. in B. ac de
Rectoria de B. praedict. cum pertin. necnon de advocatione Vicariae Ecclesiae
de B. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scil. quod praed. J. et M. recogn. praed. tenement.
redd. and Rectoriam cum pertin. ac advocationem praedict. esse jus ipsius R. ut
illa quae idem R. habet de dono praed. I. et M. Et illa remiser. et quiet.
clam. de ipsis I. et M. et hered. ipsius I. praefat. R. et hered. suis in
perpetuum: Et praeterea iidem I. et M. concesserunt pro se et hered. ipsius I.
quod ipsi warrant. praed. R. and hered. suis praed. tenementa, redd. and
Rectoriam cum pertin. ac advocationem praed. contra ipsos I. et M. et hered.
ipsius I. in perpet. Et pro hac, etc.

A Fine by an Earl and his Wife, of a Manor Advowson, liberty of Foldage,
free-VVarren, and free-Fishing, etc.
Sussex ss. PRaec. Thomae Comiti Sussex and Franciscae uxori ejus, quod just
ten. VV. C. Ar. con. etc. de manerio de B. cum pertin. ac de octoginta
Messuagiis, quinquaginta Cottagiis, december Toftis, Centum Gardinis, sexaginta
Pomariis, quadringentis acris Terrae, septuaginta acris Prati, ducentis acris
Pasturae, viginti acris bosci, quadraginta acris Jampnorum et bruere, ducentis
acris more, Centum acris alneti, et viginti solidis reddit. cum pertin. in
Billingford, alias Billingforth; and Bylow, alias Byling, necnon de advocatione
Ecclesiae de B. ac de liberate unius foldagii ad duas mill oves, liberae
warrenae, liberae piscariae in B. etc. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scil. quod praedicti Comes et Francisca recogn. praed.
manner. tenement. et reddit. cum pertin. ac advocationem, libertatem, liberam
warrenam et liberam piscariam praed. esse jus ipsius W. ut illa quae idem VV.
habet de dono praedict. Comitis and F. Et illa remiser. et quiet. clam. de
ipsis Comite et F. et hered. ipsius Comitis, praefat. VV. and hered. suis in
perpetuum. Et praeterea iidem Comes and Francisca concesserunt, pro se and
hered. ipsius Comitis, quod ipsi warrant. praefat VV. et heredibus suis
manerium, tenementa, et redd. praed. cum pertin. ac advocationem, libertatem,
liberam warrenam et liberam piscariam praed. contra praed. Comitem and F. and
hered. ipsius Comitis in perpet. Et nisi, etc.

A Fine from Three and their Wives, to One; with several VVarranties.
S. ss: PRaec. A.B. and C. uxori ejus, D. E. et F. uxori ejus, et D.H. et I.
uxori ejus, quod just etc. ten. VV.C. con. etc. de duobus Messuagiis, duobus
Gardinis, uno Pomario, triginta acris Terrae, viginti acris prati, 40 acris
Pasturae, et sexdecim solidis redd. cum pertin. in VV. and D.

Et est Concordia talis, scil. quod praed. A. et C. D. et F. et G. et I.
recogn. praed. tenementa et redd. cum pertin. esse jus ipsius VV. ut illa quae
idem W. habet de dono praed. A. et C. D. et F. et D. et I. Et illa remiser. et
quiet. clam. de ipsis A. et C.D. et F. et D. et I. et hered. ipsius A. praefat.
VV. et hered. suis in perpetuum: Et praeterea iidem A. and C. concesserunt, pro
se et hered. ipsius A. quod ipsi warrantizabunt praefat. VV. et hered. suis
praed. tenementa et redd. cum pertin. contra ipsos A. et C. et hered. ipsius A.
in perpetuum. Et ulterius iidem D. et F. concesserunt, pro se et hered. ipsius
D. quod ipsi warrant. praefat. W. et hered. suis praedict. tenementa et reddit.
cum pertin. contra ipsos D. and F. and haered. ipsius D. in perpetuum. Ac etiam
iidem G. and I. concesserunt pro se and haered. ipsius I. quod ipsi warrant.
praefat. W. and hered. suis praed. tenementa and redd. cum pertin. contra ipsos
G. and I. and hered. I. ipsius in perpet. Et pro hac, etc.

Note, That several Purchases may be put in one Fine, though there be several
Purchasors, by passing all the Lands so purchased, and making all the Sellers
Conusors, and all the Buyers Conusees, with a several Warranty against every
Conusor and his Heirs; and declaring the use of the Fine to the several Buyers
for their several parts; or, where there be many Purchasors, two of them only
may be named in the Fine, and afterward by Indenture declare the use, as
aforesaid, to the rest.

A Fine of nine Messuages, nine Gardens, etc. and the moiety of twenty
Messuages, one Water-Mill, one Dove-house, etc.
Dorset ss. PRaec. I. P. generoso and E. uxori ejus, quod just etc. teneant
Nich. Covert genesis con. etc. de novem Messuagiis, novem Gardinis, trescentis
acris Terrae 100 acris Prati, Centum acris Pasturae, and 100 acris Jampn. and
bruere, ac de medietate viginti Messuagiorum, 100 Gardinorum, unius Molendini
aquatici, unius Columbarii, 60 acrarum Terrae, 200 acrarum Prati, 300 acrarum
Pasturae, 60 acrarum bosci, and 100 acrarum Jampn. and bruere, cum pertin. in
M. C. B.D. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scilicet, quod praed. I. P. and E. recognoverunt
praed. tenementa and medietat. cum pertin. esse jus ipsius N. ut illa quae idem
Nich. habet de dono praedict. I. and E. Et illa remiserunt and quiet. clam. de
se and hered. suis, praedict. N. and hered. suis inperpetuum. Et preterea iidem
I. and B. concesserunt pro se and hered. ipsius I. quod ipsi warrant. praefat.
N. and haered. suis praed. tenementa and medietatem cum pertin. contra ipsos I.
and F. and hered. ipsius I. inperpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

Here might be added many Examples of Fines, with Entails, Renders, Clauses of
distress, etc. which being seldom used at this day, and more likely to confound
than help those for whom I intend this Work, I purposely omit, adding only one
of them, which follows next.

A Fine by Husband and Wife, and another, to One, who grants and renders the
same again to one of the Conusors for 21 years, to begin at a time to come,
reserving a Rent, with Clause of Distress; and afterward the Conusee grants the
Reversion to the Husband and Wife Conusors, and the Heirs of the Husband.
S. ss. PRaec. I.P. and B. uxori ejus, and R.D. quod just etc. ten. R.B. con.
etc. de manerio de C. cum pertin. ac de duobus Messuagiis, 40 acris Terrae, 100
acris Prati, quingentis acris Pasturae, 200 acris Bosci, and 40 acris Jampnorum
and bruere cum pertin. in W. Et nisi etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scilicet, quod praed. I. B. and R. D. recogn. manerium
and tenementa praed. cum pertin. esse jus ipsius R. B. ut illa quae idem R. B.
habet de dono praed. I. and B. and R. D. Et illa remiserunt and quiet. clam. de
ipsis I. and B. and R.D. and hered. ipsius I. praedict. R. B. and hered. suis
inperpetuum. Et praeterea iidem I. and B. concesserunt pro se and hered. ipsius
I. quod ipsi warrant. praedict. R. and hered. suis manerium and tenementa
praedict. cum pertin. contra omnes homines in perpetuum. Et pro hac, etc. idem
R.B. concessit praefat. R. D. manerium and tenementa praedict. cum pertin. Et
illa ei reddidit in eadem Cur habend. and tenen. eidem R.D. a festo Sti.
Michaelis Archangeli quod erit in Anno Dom. 1563. usque ad finem and terminum
21 annorum extunc proxime sequen. and plenarie complend. Reddend. inde annuatim
praedict. R. D. and hered. suis viginti and septem libras and sex solidos
legalis monetae Angliae ad festa Sancti Michaelis Archangeli and Annuntiationis
beatae Mariae Virginis, per equales portiones annuat. solvend. prima solutione
inde fiend. ad festum Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, quod erit in Anno Dom. 1563.
Et si contingat praed. redd. 27 l. 6 s. a retro fore insolut. in part vel in
toto post aliquod festum festorum praed. quo (ut prefertur) solvi debeat, quod
tunc been licebit praefat. R. D. and hered. suis in manerium and tenementa
praedict. cum pertin. intrare and distringere. districtionesque sic inde cap.
and habit. licite abducere, asportare effugar. and penes se retinere, quousque
de praed. redd. 27 l. 6 solid. cum arreragiis ejusdem si quae fuerint, plenarie
fuerint satisfact. and persolut. Concessit etiam idem R. B. praed. I. and B.
reversionem manerii and tenementorum praed. cum pertin. ac praed. reddit.
superius expressum and reservat. and ill. eis reddidit. etc. Haben. and tenend.
eisdem I. and B. and hered. ipsius I. de capitalibus dom. feodi illius per
servitia, etc.

When the Parties come to acknowledge the Fines, let all the Conusors set their
Hands to it, and then let the Commissioners ask them if they be willing to pass
the Fine, and read unto them the substance; and then the Parties having made
Recognizance accordingly, write under the Record thus:

Capt. and cognit. apud Civitatem Cicestr. in C.S. die etc. Anno Regni Dom.
Caroli secundi nunc Regis Angliae, etc. 16. coram.

And then let the Commissioners subscribe their Names, which must be two at
least: Then write on the back of the Commission thus:

Executio istius brevis patet in quadam schedula eidem brevi annexa; And let
the Commissioners subscribe their Names there.

According to the Tenor of the Writ, the Commissioners should set their Seals
to the Concord, which seems the best way, although it be often omitted at
this day.

If a married Woman be a Conusor, the Commissioners are to examine her
privately, whether she be willing to pass the Fine, and do it without Threats
or Fear of her Husbands displeasure; which if she confesses, the Commissioners
ought not to take her Cognizance.

If all the Conusors cannot conveniently come to acknowledge the Fine at the
same time, the Commissioners may take the Cognizance of such as are present;
and the same Commissioners, or others, may take the Cognizance of the rest at
another time, and then write under the Concord thus;

Capt. and cognit. per supradictos A. and B. apud C. in Com. S. primo die
Julii, Anno Regni Dom. Car. Secundi Regis Angliae, etc. decimo quinto coram.

Whereto the Commissioners must set their Hands as before; and when the rest
have acknowledged, let them, or other Commissioners named in the Dedimus, write
the like for the rest, and let all the Commissioners, who have taken the Fine,
set their Hands to the back of the Will.

Note, That this Dedimus potestatem has no certain Return, so that if you
execute it any time within a Year after it issued out, it will be well enough.

Your Fine thus acknowledged, you must File the Dedimus and Concord together,
and then carry it to the Cursitor for that County (at the Cursitors Office in
Chancery Lane, over against Lincoln's Inn) who will thereupon make your Writ of
Covenant, which ought to bear Test before the Dedimus, because it is supposed
by the Dedimus to be then depending; but whether it be returnable before or
after Caption of the Fine is not material, though they usually make it
returnable after the Caption: Your Writ of Covenant thus made, you are to carry
to the Alienation-Office, where you are to compound for your Fine, according to
the value of the Land, with one of the Commissioners there sitting. If all that
is passed in your Fine be not worth forty shillings by the Year, you must have
one to make Affidavit of it before the Doctor there, and then you shall pay no
Fine for Composition: Or if you know the value of the Land, or the
Purchase-Money, you are to inform the Commissioners, that they may rate the
Fine accordingly. If any Fine of the same Lands has been passed not long
before, you are to show that, whereby you may persuade the Commissioners to tax
it somewhat the less. The Fine thus rated, you must go in to the Receiver in
the same Office, and there pay the Fine of Composition, and six pence over for
entering in the Receivers Book, and his signing the Writ. But if the Fine were
taken by my Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, that six pence is not to be
paid to the Receiver.

When you have paid the Fine, you carry the Writ to one of the Clerks in the
same Office that sits next Mr. Crew, who does indorse the Writ, for which you
pay four pence: Then Mr. Crew's Hand, 4 pence: To the Clerk that sits next by,
who enters it, and has six pence: But if it be after Term, a shilling: Then
get two of the Commissioners Hands to your Writ, for which you pay nothing.

Having thus done at the Alienation Office, you are to carry your Writ again to
the Cursitor, who writes under the Writ thus:

Pro dim. marc. solut. pro Fine; or otherwise as the Fine is, and will then get
it sealed for you: for which, when you fetch it away, you pay him two shillings
six pence, and then he will deliver you your Concord and Dedimus again, which
you left with him at the bespeaking your Writ of Covenant.

Next you are to make your Warrant of Attorney in Parchment, as follows:

D. ss. A. B. po. lo. suo N. C. Attornat. suum ad prosequend. breve con. versus
C. D. and E. uxorem ejus, de tenementis cum pertin. in F.

You are to carry your Warrant of Attorney, together with your Writ of
Covenant, to the Clerk of the Warrants, who has for filing the Warrant, and
signing the Writ, four pence.

Next you are to carry your Writ to the Office, called Iones's Office in
Brick-Court, Middle Temple, who will return your Writ, and enter it, and has
for that one shilling six pence.

Note, For more expedition you may return your Writ your self, before you carry
it to the last mentioned Office; it is done thus,

Toward the upper end of the back of the Writ. pleg. de. pros. Johannes Do.
Richardus Roe.

Toward the Middle Sum. Johannes Denn. Richardus Fenn.

Toward the bottom, the Sheriffs Name, A. B. Miles, Vic.

Note, It must be the Sheriff that was in Office when the Writ was returnable.

Having gone thus far, you are to file your Writ of Covenant, Dedimus, and
Concord together, and carry them to the Office of Custos Brevium, where the
Secondary, or his Clerks will enter it in his Book, and endorse the Writ, for
which you pay three shillings eight pence; from thence you carry it to the
Kingsilver-Office in Lincoln's Inn, where the Fine for the value of the Land is
entered, for which you pay in Sussex fourteen pence, Surrey ten pence, most of
the Western Counties eighteen pence, etc. Hence you are to carry it to the
Secondary at the Ciropraphers Office, who enters it in his Book, and has for
it in Term-time five shillings eight pence, after Term six pence more.

Then are you to deliver it to such of the Clerks of the same Office, who write
for the County where the Lands lie, who will engross the Indentures of your
Fine; which, when you fetch from him, some convenient time after, he will
demand of you three shillings six pence, if it be with one warranty only;
otherwise six pence a piece for every warranty more. How justly these Clerks
demand this Fee of three shillings six pence I know not, formerly they never
received more then two shillings six pence.

And thus have I led you through the several Offices where your Fines pass: At
many of which, you shall be enforced to wait long, and often to go and come
again two or three days after, the Clerks hoping thereby to extort somewhat
out of you for expedition: which, I conceive, Non expedit, for you cannot
justly demand it of your Clyent. It is best therefore to begin with your Fines
as soon in the Term as you can, which will save you many post Terminums.

Note, You may acknowledge a Fine in open Court, or before the Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas out of Court, or before any other Judge of that
Court; or before the Justices of Assize in the Country, as well as by special
Dedimus potestatem. And if you can conveniently have it acknowledged any of
those ways, it will be less charge to the Clyent.

The Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas may, ex officio, out of Court take
the acknowledgments of Fines without any Dedimus, etc. but none other; if
therefore you are to acknowledge it before him, you must draw out the Praecipe
and Concord fairly in Paper, and let the Conusors set their hands to it; then
go to my Lords Chamber, and deliver your Concord to him, who (the Parties being
ready) will take their Acknowledgments, for which you pay eleven shillings
eight pence; and my Lord himself will keep the Concord thus made in Paper, and
you are to go to his Clerk some time after, who will engross it in Parchment,
and get my Lords hand to it, which when you have from him, you are to go on
through the several Offices as before.

Note, For more expedition, you may engross your Concord in Parchment before
you go to acknowledge the Fine, and then have my Lords Hand to it at the same
time when you carry your Concord in Paper; which my Lords Clerk will better
like, and will be less trouble to you.

If you acknowledge a Fine before any other Judge, you must go with your Concord
in Paper as before, and then after the Fine acknowledged, you may sue out a
general Dedimus potestatem, directed to that Judge that took the Fine; which if
you carry to his Clerk, he will engross the Concord upon the back of the
Dedimus, and get the Judges hand to it; for which, besides the Judges Fee, you
pay his Clerk sixteen pence, and no more, if it be a Fine in several Counties;
Thence are you to proceed as before is directed.

An ordinary Lease of a House in London.
THis Indenture made the etc. between I.H. and M. his Wife, etc. of the one
Part, and R. M. of etc. of the other Part; Witnesses, That as well for and in
consideration of the sum of etc. As also in consideration of the Rents and
Covenants hereafter in these Presents mentioned, on the part and behalf of the
said R. M. his Executors and Assigns, to be paid, done, and performed; Have,
and either of them has, demised, granted, and to ferm let, unto the said R. M.
all that Message or Tenement, etc. and all and singular Shops, Cellars,
Sollers, Chambers, Rooms, Lights, Easements, Watercourse, Commodities, and
Appurtenances whatsoever, to the same Message or Tenement belonging or
appertaining; together with the use of all and singular the Goods and
Implements, Partitions, and other things remaining, and being, in or about the
same Message or Tenement, mentioned in a Schedule or Inventory indented,
hereunto annexed, except and always reserved out of this present Demise, Lease,
and Grant, all that etc. To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, and
all and singular other the Premises (except before excepted) unto the said
R.M. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, from the 24 day of June, next
ensuing the date of these Presents, unto the full end and term of 31 years,
from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, yielding and
paying therefore yearly, and every year, during the said Term, the yearly Rent
or Sum of 30 l. of lawful Money of England, at the four most usual Feasts,
Days, or Terms in the Year hereafter mentioned; that is to say, The Feast Days
of St. Michael the Archangel, the Birth of our Lord God, the Annuntiation of
the blessed Virgin Mary, and the Nativity of St. John the Baptist; by eaven and
equal portions. And the said R.M. for himself, his Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, and every of them, does Covenant, Promise, and Grant, to and with
the said I.H. and M. his Wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of the said I. H. by
these Presents, That he the said R. M. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, the said
yearly Rent of 30 l. before hereby reserved, at the Days and Times before
herein limited for payment thereof, during the said Term. And also shall and
will from time to time, and at all times, during the said term of 31 years
hereby demised, as often and when as need shall be or require, at his and their
own proper Costs and Charges, well and sufficiently repair, uphold, support,
sustain, glaze, amend, and maintain the said Message or Tenement, and all and
singular other the Premises with the Appurtenances, in, by, and with all, and
all manner of needful and necessary Reparations and Amendments whatsoever, as
well with principal Timber, as otherwise. And also at his and their like Costs
and Charges, all the Walls, Pavements, Gutters, Sincks, Privies, Seidges, and
Widraughts of and belonging to the said demised Premises, shall and will from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, when, and as often as need shall be,
or require, during the said term, well and sufficiently pave, purge, scour,
cleanse, amend, and keep. And the said Message and Tenement, and all and
singular other the Premises, with the Appurtenances, so well and sufficiently
repaired, supported, upholden, sustained, amended, paved, purged, scoured, and
kept as aforesaid, in the end of the said term, or other sooner determination
of this present Lease, which shall first happen, shall peaceably and quietly
leave, surrender, and yield up, together with all such Goods, Chattels, and
Implements, as are mentioned in the Schedule, or Inventory hereunto annexed, in
as good case and condition as the same are now, reasonable use, and wearing
thereof, in the mean time always excepted; and that it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said I. H. and M. his Wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of the
said I. H. with Workmen, or others in his, her, or their Companies, or
without, twice in every Year yearly, during the said term, or oftener, at
convenient times in the day time, to enter, and come into and upon the said
demised Premises, or every, or any part thereof, there to view, search, and
see the Estate of the Reparations of the same; and of all defects and wants of
Reparations then and there found upon such View, from time to time, to give or
leave Notice, or Warning in Writing, or otherwise, at the said demised Message
or Tenement, unto, and for the said R.M. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, to repair and amend the same within the time and space of four Months
then next following; within the time and space of which four Months, the said
R. M. for himself, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of
them, does covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said I. H. and M. his
wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of the said I. H. to repair and amend all and
every the same defaults and wants of Reparations, which from time to time, upon
every, or any such View shall be so found, and notice or warning thereof given
or left in writing as aforesaid, during the said term. Provided always, That
if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of 30 l. or any part thereof to be
behind and unpaid, in part, or in all, by the space of 14 days next over and
after any of the said Feast-days above mentioned for payment thereof, being
lawfully demanded; or if the Reparations of the aforesaid Premises, whereof
notice or warning shall be given or left aforesaid, shall not be well and
sufficiently made and amended from time to time, within the space of four
Months, next after every or any warning to be given as aforesaid, during the
said term; That then, and from thenceforth, in either, or any of the said
Cases, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said I.H. and M. his wife, and
the Heirs and Assigns of the said I.H. into the said Message or Tenement, and
all other the Premises with the Appurtenances, above by these Presents
demised, or any part thereof, in the name of the whole, wholly to re-enter, and
the same to have again, retain, re-possess and enjoy, as in his, her, and their
first and former Estate. And the said R. M. his Executors and Assigns, and all
other the Occupyers of the same, thereout, and from thence utterly to expel,
put out, and remove, this Indenture, or any thing herein contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And the said I.H. and M. his
Wife, for themselves, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and
every of them, do covenant and grant to and with the said R.M. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, by these Presents, That the said R. M. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, paying the said yearly Rent of 30 l. in
manner and form aforesaid; and observing, performing, and keeping all and
singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles, and Agreements, before in these
Presents contained, on his and their part and behalf to be performed,
fulfilled, and kept, shall and may from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, during the said term of 31 years before in these Presents demised,
lawfully, peaceably, and quietly, have, hold, occupy, possess, and enjoy the
said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the Premises, with the
Appurtenances above in these Presents demised, or mentioned to be demised, and
every part and parcel thereof, without any lawful let, trouble, eviction,
ejection, disturbance, or interruption of or by them the said I. H. and M. his
Wife, or either of them, or the Heirs or Assigns of the said I. H. or by any
other person or persons lawfully claiming, or to claim, by, from, or under him,
her, them, or any of them, or by their, either, or any of their means, act,
default, or procurement. In witness, etc.

An exact Table, showing how many Years Purchase a Lease or Annuity, to endure
for a term of years under 33, is worth presently at Interest upon Interest, at
six in the hundred; and showing plainly how to discount any Lease in being, and
the true value of the Reversion after any number of Years.
The use and explanation of this Table.
Years of a Lease. Years. Months. dec. parts. The first Colume, toward the
left hand, shows the years of a Lease or Annuity, and right against each
year, is the years, months, and decimal parts of a Months Purchase, That such
a Lease or Annuity is worth. Example. 1 0 11 0 2 1 9 9 3 2 8 1 4 3 5 9 5 4 2 5
6 4 11 0 7 5 7 0 8 6 2 5 9 6 9 6 10 7 4 3 11 7 10 7 12 8 4 6 13 8 10 3 14 9 3 6
15 9 8 5 16 10 1 8 Years of a Lease. Years. Months. Dec. parts. 17 10 5 8 18
10 9 9 19 11 1 3 20 11 5 7 21 11 9 3 22 12 0 5 23 12 3 6 24 12 6 6 25 12 9 4 26
13 0 0 27 13 2 5 28 13 4 9 29 13 7 1 30 13 9 2 31 13 11 32 14 1 0 33 14 3 0

Again, you are to take or buy the Reversion of any Lease or Annuity.
WOrk thus; Suppose the Lease to be 30 years in all, you find in the second
Table, and right hand against it 13 years, 9 Months, and two tenth parts of a
Months Purchase; This it were worth, were it in present possession: But
suppose there be a Lease of five years (more or less) before yours commence,
look in the Table against the five years, and there you find four years, two
Months, and five tenth parts, half a Months Purchase: Take this out of the
sum against 30, which is 13, 9, 2, 4, 2, 5; the remainder is 9 years, 6 months,
7 tenth parts of a month, and so much in the Reversion after 5 years, worth
the Remainder of 30 years; this is useful, and very easy.

The four Terms, with their Returns.
Hillary Term begins Jan. 23. and ends Feb. the 12. IN 8 days of St.
Hillary, Ian. 20. Ian. 21, 22, 23. From the day of St. Hillary in 15 days, Ian.
27. January 28, 29, 30. In the morrow of the Purication of the Blessed Mary,
Feb. 3. Feb. 4, 5, 6. In 8 days of the Purification of the Blessed Mary, Feb.
10. Feb. 10, 11, 12. Easter Term begins 17 days after Easter, and Ends and
Returns. FRom the day of Easter, in 15 Days. From the day of Easter in three
Weeks. From the day of Easter in one Month. From the day of Easter in three
Weeks.
Trinity Term begins the Friday seven-night after Whitesunday. ON the morrow of
the Holy Trinity. In 8 days of the Holy Trinity. From the day of the Holy
Trinity in 15 days. From the day of the Holy Trinity in 3 Weeks.
Michaelmas Term begins the 23. of October, and ends the 28 of November. 1
FRom the day of St. Michael in 3 Weeks, October. 20. October. 21, 22, 23. 2 From
the day of St. Michael, in one Month, October. 27. October. 28, 29, 30. 3 On the
morrow of All Souls, Novem. 3. Novem. 4, 5, 6. 4 On the morrow of St. Martin,
Nov. 12.. Nov. 13, 14, 15. 5 In eight days of St. Martin, Nov. 18. Nov. 19, 20,
24. 6 From the day of St. Martin, in 15 days, Nov. 25. Nov. 26, 27, 28.
A plain and easy Table, showing the true Interest due upon any sum of Money,
from 5 s. to 100 li. for a Year, or under, after the rate of 6 l. in the
hundred.
1 Mo. 3 Mo. 6 Mo. 9 Mo. a Year. sh. p. q. sh. p. q. sh. p. q. sh. p. q. sh. p.
q. Shil. 5 0 0 1 0 0 3 0 1 3 0 2 2 0 3 2 10 0 0 2 0 1 3 0 3 2 0 5 2 0 7 0 15 0
0 3 0 2 2 0 5 1 0 8 0 0 10 2 pounds. 1 0 1 0 0 3 2 0 7 0 0 1 02 1 2 1 2 0 2 1 0
7 0 1 2 1 1 9 1 2 4 2 3 0 3 2 0 10 2 2 9 1 2 7 3 3 6 3 4 0 4 3 1 2 1 2 4 2 3 6
3 4 9 0 5 0 5 0 1 6 0 3 0 0 4 6 0 6 0 0 6 0 7 0 1 9 2 3 7 0 5 4 2 7 2 1 7 0 8 1
2 1 0 4 2 1 6 3 1 8 4 2 8 0 9 2 2 4 2 4 9 1 7 1 3 9 6 3 9 0 10 3 2 8 1 5 4 2 8
0 3 0 9 0 p. sh. p. p. sh. p. p. sh. p. p. sh. p. p. sh* p. Ten of pounds. 10 0
1 0 0 3 0 0 6 0 0 9 0 0 12 0 20 0 2 0 0 6 0 0 12 0 0 18 0 1 4 0 30 0 3 0 0 9 0
0 18 0 1 7 0 1 16 0 40 0 4 0 0 12 0 1 4 0 1 16 0 2 8 0 50 0 5 0 0 15 0 1 10 0 2
5 0 3 0 0 60 0 6 0 0 18 0 1 16 0 2 14 0 3 12 0 70 0 7 0 1 1 0 2 2 0 3 3 8 4 4 0
80 0 8 0 1 4 0 2 8 0 3 12 0 4 16 0 90 0 9 0 1 7 0 2 14 0 4 1 0 5 8 0 100 0 10 0
1 10 0 3 00 0 4 10 0 6 0 0

Here follows the Names of Men and Women, with their Trades and Titles. As
also the Days of the Month. Together with the several Sums of Money in Latin,
in their proper Cases, as they stand in the Obligation, or Recognizance.
A A A A AAron AAron AAron AAroni Abel, see Habel Abel Abelem Abeli Abiah Abias
Abiam Abiae Abiam Abiam Abiam Abiam Abiathar Abiathar Abiathar Abiathar Abiel
Abiel Abiel Abiel Abiezer Abiezer Abiezer Abiezer Abihu Abihu Abihu Abihu
Abijah Abijah Abijah Abijah Abimelech Abimelech Abimelech Abimelech Abinadab
Abinadab Abinadab Abinadab Abinoam Abinoas Abinoam Abinoae Abner Abner Abnerem
Abneri Abraham Abrahamus Abrahamum Abrahamo Absalom Absalon Absalonem Absaloni
Adam Adamus Adamum Adamo Adelard, see Ethelard, Ethelardus Ethelardum Ethelardo
Adolph, see Eudolph, Eudolphus Eudolphum Eudolpho Adoniah Adonia Adoniam
Adoniae Adrian, see Hadrian Adrianus Adrianum Adriano Aelfred Aelfredus
Aelfredum Aelfredo Aeneas Aeneas Aenean vel Aeneam Aeneae Agabus Agabus Agabum
Agabo Agrippa Agrippa Agrippam Agrippae Ahab Ahab Ahab Ahab Ahaz Ahaz Ahaz Ahaz
Ahaziah Ahazias Ahaziam Ahaziae Ahiah Ahias Ahiam Ahiae Aan Alanus Alanum Alano
Alban Albanus Albanum Albano Alberic see Averie Albericus Albericum Alberico
Albert Albertus Albertum Alberto Aldred Aldredus Aldredum Aldredo Aleward, see
Ethelward Ethelwardus Ethelwardum Ethelwardo Alexander Alexander Alexandrum
Alexandro Algernon Algernon Algernon Algernon Alphonse Alphonsus Alphonsum
Alphonso Alvin Alvinus Alvinum Alvino Ambrose Ambrosius Ambrosium Ambrosio
Amerie Americus Americum Americo Amias Amadeus Amadeum Amadeo Aminadab Aminadab
Aminadab Aminadab Amnon Amnon Amnon Amnon Amos Amos Amos Amos Amon Amon Amonem
Amoni Ananiah Ananias Ananiam Ananiae Ananias Ananias Ananiam Ananiae Anarand
Honoratus Honoratum Honorato Andrew Andreas Andream Andreae Angel Angelus
Angelum Angelo Anselme Anselmus Anselmum Anselmo Anthony Antonius Antonium
Antonio Antiochus Antiochus Antiochum Antiocho Apelles Apelles Apellem Apelli
Apollo Apollo Apollinem Apollini Apolonius Apolonius Apolonium Apolonio Aquilla
Aquilla Aquillam Aquillae Archelaus Archelaus Archelaum Archelao Archibald
Archibaldus Archibaldum Archibaldo Aretas Aretas Aretam Aretae Arfast Arfastus
Arfastum Arfasto Arias Arias Ariam Ariae Aristarchus Aristarchus Aristarchum
Aristarcho Arnold Arnoldus Arnoldum Arnoldo Arthur Arthurus Arthurum Arthuro
Averie Albericus Albericum Alberico Augustine Augustinus Augustinum Augustino
Augustus Augustus Augustum Augusto Azariah Azarias Azariam Azariae Azariel
Azariel Azariel Azariel B B B B BAldwyn BAldwinus BAldwinum BAlwino Balthazar
for Balshazzar Belshazzar Belshazzarem Belshazzari Bamfield Bamfieldus
Bamfieldum Bamfieldo Baptist Baptista Baptistam Baptistae Bardulph Bardulphus
Bardulphum Bardulpho Barnaby for Barnabas Barnabas Barnabam Barnabae
Bartholomew Bartholomeus Bartholomeum Bartholomeo Baruch Baruchus Baruchum
Barucho Barnaby Barnabius Barnabium Barnabio Barnham Barnham Barnham Barnham
Basil Basilius Basilium Basilio Beauchamp Beauchampus Beuchampum Beuchampo Bid
Beda Bedam Bedae Benet Benedictus Benedictum Benedicto Benjamin Benjaminus
Benjaminum Benjamino Bernard Bernardus Bernardum Bernardo Bertram Bertranus
Bertranum Bertrano Bevil Bevil Bevil Bevil Bevis Bevis Bevis Bevis Bevis Bogo
vel Bellonesus Bogonem vel Bellonesum Bogoni vel Belloneso Bonham Bonhamus
Bonhamum Bonhamo Bonaventure Bonaventura Bonaventuram Bonaventurae Boniface
Bonifacius Bonifacium Bonifacio Botolph Botolphus Botolphum Botolpho Blase
Blasius Blasium Blasio Bryan Brianus Brianum Briano Bullen Bullen Bullen Bullen
Butts Buttus Buttum Butto C C C C CAdwaller CAdwalladerus CAdwalladerum
CAdwalladero Caesar Caesar Caesarem Caesari Caius Caius Caium Caio Caleb Caleb
Calebem Calebi Calisthenes Calisthenes Calisthenem Calistheni Capel Capellus
Capellum Capello Cephas Cephas Cepham Cephae Charles Carolus Carolum Carolo
Christopher Christophorus Christophorum Christophoro Chrysostom Chrysostomus
Chrysostomum Chrysostomo Cirenius Cirenius Cirenium Cirenio Cirill Cirillus
Cirillum Cirillo Claudius Claudius Claudium Claudio Clement Clemens Clementem
Clementi Collen Collenus Collenum Colleno Conrade Conradus Conradum Conrado
Constantine Constantinus Constantinum Constantino Cornelius Cornelius Cornelium
Cornelio Crescens Crescens Crescentem Crescenti Crispus Crispus Crispum Crispo
Custans see Constantine Cuthbert Cuthbertus Cuthbertum Cuthberto Cyprian
Cyprianus Cyprianum Cypriano D D D D DAniel DAniel DAnielem DAnieli Dannet
Dannettus Danettum Dannetto Darius Darius Darium Dario David David Davidem
Davidi Demophoon Demophoon Demophoonta vel em: Demophoonti Demetrius Demetrius
Demetrium Demetrio Denis Dyonisius Dionysium Dionysio Densell Denzillus
Denzillum Denzillo Deodat Deodatus Deodatum Deodato Deric see Theodoric
Theodoricus Theodoricum Theodorico Dru Drugo Drugonem Drugoni Dudley Dudleius
Dudleium Dudleio Duncan Duncanus Duncanum Duncano Dunstan Dunstanus Dunstanum
Dunstano Dutton Dutton Dutton Dutton E E E E EAdgar for Eadigar EAdgarus
EAdgarum EAdgaro Eadulph Eadulphus Eadulphum Eadulpho Eadwyn Eadwinus Edwinum
Edwino Ealdred Ealdredus Eldredum Eldredo Ealred Ealredus Elredum Elredo Edmund
Edmundus Edmundum Edmundo Edward Edvardus vel Edwardus Edvardum Edwardum
Edvardo Edwardo Egbert or Ecbert Egbertus Egbertum Egberto Eleazer Eleazar
Eleazarem Eleazari Elisha Elisha Elisham Elishae Elias or Eliah Elias Eliam
Eliae Ellis Elizeus Elizeum Elizeo Elmer Elmerus Elmerum Elmero Elnathan
Elnathanus Elnathanum Elnathano Ely Elius Elium Elio Emery see Amerie Emanuel
Emanuel Emanuelem Emanueli Emon Emon Emonem Emoni Engelbert Engelbertus
Engelbertum Engelberto Ephraim Ephraim Ephraimum Ephraimo Erasmus Erasmus
Erasmum Erasmo Erchenbald Erchenbaldus Erchenbaldum Erchenbaldo Ernest Ernestus
Ernestum Ernesto Esaias for Isaiah Isaias Isaiam Isaiae Ethelbald Ethelbaldus
Ethelbaldum Ethelbaldo Ethelbert Ethelbertus Ethelbertum Ethelberto Ethelard
Ethelardus Ethelardum Ethelardo Ethelred Ethelredus Ethelredum Ethelredo
Ethelstan Ethelstanus Ethelstanum Ethelstano Ethelward Ethelwardus Ethelwardum
Ethelwardo Ethelwold Ethelwoldus Ethelwoldum Ethelwoldo Ethelwolph Ethelwolphus
Ethelwolphum Ethelwolpho Evan Evanus Evanum Evano Eubulus see Euball Ybel
Euballus Euballum Euballo Everard Everardus Everardum Everardo Eusebius
Eusebius Eusebium Eusebio Eustace Eustachius Eustachium Eustachio Eutropius
Eutropius Eutropium Eutropio Ezechia Ezechias Ezekiam Ezechiae Ezechiel
Ezechiel Ezekielem Ezekieli F F F F FAbian FAbianus FAbianum FAbiano Felix
Felix Felicem Felici Ferdinando Ferdinandus Ferdinandum Ferdinando Festus
Festus Festum Festo Fieg Fiegus Fiegum Fiego Florence Florentius Florentium
Florentio Fortunatus Fortunatus Fortunatum Fortunato Fowler Fowlerus Fowlerum
Fowlero Francis Franciscus Franciscum Francisco Frederic Fredericus Fredericum
Frederico Fremund Fremundus Fremundum Fremundo Fulbert Fulbertus Fulbertum
Fulberto Fulcher Fulcherus Fulcherum Fulchero Fulk or Foulk Fulco Fulconem
Fulconi G G G G GAbriel GAbriel GAbrielem GAbrieli Gaius Gaius Gaium Gaio
Gamaliel Gamaliel Gamalielem Gamalieli Garret see Gerrard Gawyn for Walwyn
Gawinus Gawinum Gawino Gedaliah Gedalias Gedaliam Gedaliae Geffrey Galfridus
Galfridum Galfrido George Georgius Georgium Georgio Gerald for Gerard Geraldus
Geraldum Geraldo Gerard Gerardus Gerardum Gerardo German Germanus Germanum
Germano Gervas for Gerfast Gervasius Gervasium Gervasio Gideon Walgamus
Walgamum Walgamo Gifford Giffordus Giffordum Giffordo Gilbert Gilbertus
Gilbertum Gilberto Giles Egidius Egidium Egidio Godard Godardus Godardum
Godardo Godfrey Godfridus Godfridum Godfrido Godrich Godricus Godricum Godrico
Godwyn Godwynus Godwinum Godwino Gravely Gravelius Gravelium Gravelio Gregory
Gregorius Gregorium Gregorio Gray Gregus Gregum Grego Griffith Griffithus
Griffithium Griffithio Grimbald for Grimoald Grimoaldus Grimoaldum Grimoaldo
Gruffin Gruffinus Gruffinum Gruffino Guy Guido Guidonem Guidoni Guischard see
Wischard Guischardus Guischardum Guischardo H H HAbel IDem cum Abel Hadrian
Idem cum Adrian Hannibal Hannibal Hannibalem Hannibali Harbottel Harbottellus
Harbottellum Harbottello Hardolph Hardolphus Hardolphum Hardolpho Harble
Harblus Harblum Harblo Harold Haroldus Haroldum Haroldo Harman Hermanus vel
Arminius Hermanum vel Arminium Hermano vel Arminio Hawton Hauton Hauton Hauton
Hector Hector Hectorem Hectori Helias Helias Heliam Heliae Heman Hemanus
Hemanum Hemano Henoch Henos Henos Henos Hengist Hengistus Hengistum Hengisto
Henry Henricus Henricum Henrico Herbert Herbertus Herbertum Herberto Hercules
Hercules Herculem Herculi Herwin Herwinus Herwinum Herwino Hermes Hermes
Hermetem Hermeti Hierome Hieronymus Hieronymum Hieronymo Hilarie Hilarious
Hillarium Hillario Hildebert Hildebertus Hildebertum Hildeberto Homer Homerus
Homerum Homero Horace Horatius Horatium Horatio Hosea Hosea Hoseam Hoseae Howel
Hoelius vel Howelius Hoelium Hoelio Hubert Hubertus Hubertum Huberto Hugh Hugo
Hugonem Hugoni Humphrey Humphridus Humphridum Humphrido I I I I JAcob Jacob
JAcob Jacob James Iacobus Jacobum Iacobo Jason Jason Jasonem Iasoni Jasper
Gasparus Gasparum Gasparo Jeconias Ieconias Jeconiam Ieconiae Jeffery Galfridus
Galfridum Galfrido Jenico Ienico Jenico Ienico Jenkin Ienkinus Jenkinum Ienkino
Jeremy for Jeremiah Ieremias Jeremiam Ieremiae Jerome see Hierome Ieronimus
Jeronimum Ieronimo Ignatius Ignatius Ignatium Ignatio Inglebert see Englebert
Ingelbertus Ingelbertum Ingelberto Ingram Engelramus Engelramum Engelramo Joab
Ioab Joabum Ioabo Joachin Ioachin Joachimem Ioachimi Joel Joel Joelem Ioeli Job
Job Jobum Iobo John Johannes Johannem Iohanni Jonas or Jonah Jonas Jonam Ionae
Jonathan Jonathan Jonathanem Ionathani Joscelin Ioscelinus, Iustulus vel
Iudocus Joscelinum Ioscelino Josias or Josiah Josias Josiam Iosiae Joseph
Josephus Josephum Iosepho Josuah Iosuah Josuam Iosuae Isaac Isaacus Isaacum
Isaaco Israel Israel Israelem Israeli Juda Judas Judam Iudae Jude Judah Judam
Iudae Julius Julius Julium Iulio K K K K KEllam KElhamus KElhamum KElhamo
Kenhelm Kenhelmus Kenhelmum Kenhelmo Kenard Kenardus Kenardum Kenardo L L L L
LAmbert LAmbertus LAmbertum LAmberto Lancelot Lancelottus Lancelottum
Lancelotto Laurence Laurentius Laurentium Laurentio Lazarus Lazarus Lazarum
Lazaro Legar for Leodegar Leodegarus Leodegarum Leodegaro Leonel Leonellus
Leonellum Leonello Leopold Leopoldus Leopoldum Leopoldo Leostan Leostanus
Leostanum Leostano Leofwyn Leofwinus Leofwinum Leofwino Leonard Leonardus
Leonardum Leonardo Lewis Ludovicus Ludovicum Ludovico Leolin Leolinus Leolinum
Leolino Lewellin Lionellus Lionellum Lionello Livin Livinus Livinum Livino
Lodowick Lodovicus Lodovicum Lodovico Lomeley Lomleius Lomleium Lomleio Luke
Lucas Lucam Lucae M M M M MAdock MAdock MAdocum MAdoco Malachie Malachias
Malachiam Malachiae Mallet for Marcellus Manasseh Manasseh Manasseh Manasseh
Manasses Manasses Manassem Manassi Marcellus Marcellus Marcellum Marcello Mark
Marcus Marcum Marco Marmaduke Marmaducus Marmaducum Marmaduco Martel for
Marcellus Martin Martinus Martinum Martino Marvin Marvinus Marvinum Marvino
Matthew Mattheus Mattheum Mattheo Matthias Matthias Matthiam Matthiae Maugre
Malgerius Malgerium Malgerio Maurice Mauritius Mauritium Mauritio Maximilian
Maximilianus Maximilianum Maximiliano Maximus Maximus Maximum Maximo
Melchisedeck Melchisedech Melchisedech Melchisedech Merven Mervenus Mervenum
Merveno Mercury Mercurius Mercurium Mercurio Meredith Mereducius Mereducium
Mereducio Merick Mericus Mericum Merico Michael Michael Michaelem Michaeli
Miles Milo Milonem Miloni Mildmay Mildmaius Mildmaium Mildmaio Morrogh
Morroghus Morroghum Morrogho Morgan Morganus Morganum Morgano Moses Moses Mosem
Mosi Mountague Mountague Mountague Mountague Mountjoy Mountjoy Mountjoy
Mountjoy N N N N NAthan NAthan NAthanem Nathani Nathaniel Nathaniel Nathanielem
Nathanieli Neal Nigellus Nigellum Nigello Nehemiah Nehemias Nehemiam Nehemiae
Nicanor Nichanor Nichanor Nichanor Nicodemus Nichodemus Nichodemum Nichodemo
Nicholas Nicholaus Nicholaum Nicholao Noah Noah Noam Noae Noel Noelius Noelium
Noelio Norman Normanus Normanum Normano O O O O OBadiah OBadia OBadiam OBadiae
Obed Obed Obed Obed Odan see Otho Oliver Oliverus Oliverum Olivero Olimpas
Olimpas Olimpam Olimpae Onesiphorus Onesiphorus Onesiphorum Onesiphoro Origin
Origines Originem Origeni Osbern Osbernus Osbernum Osberno Osbert Osbertus
Osbertum Osberto Osea see Hosea Osmund Osmundus Osmundum Osmundo Oswold
Oswoldus Oswoldum Oswaldo Oaths see Otho Otho Otho Othonem Othoni Otwey and
Oswel, from Otho Owen Ogdoenus vel Audoenus Ogdoenum Ogdoeno P P P P PArmenas
PArmenas PArmenam PArmenae Paschal Paschalis Paschalem Paschali Patrick
Patricius Patricium Patricio Patrobas Patrobas Patrobam Patrobae Patroclus
Patroclus Patroclum Patroclo Paulet Pauletus Pauletum Pauleto Paul Paulus
Paulum Paulo Paulin Paulinus Paulinum Paulino Percival Percivallus Peircivallum
Peircivallo Peregrine Peregrinus Peregrinum Peregrino Peter Petrus Petrum Petro
Pierce Peircius Peircium Peircio Philebert Philebertus Philebertum Phileberto
Philip Philippus Philippum Philippo Phineas Phineas Phineam Phineae Philemon
Philemon Philemonem Philemoni Posthumus Posthumus Posthumum Posthumo Poynings
Poynings Poynings Poynings Q Q Q Q QUintin QUintinus QUintinum QUintino
Quintilian Quintilianus Quintilianum Quintiliano R R R R RAndol or Renulph
RAnulphus RAnulphum RAnulpho Ralph Radulphus Radulphum Radulpho Raphael Raphael
Raphaelem Raphaeli Raymund Raymundus Raymundum Raymundo Reynfred Reynfredus
Reynfredum Reynfredo Reynold Reginaldus vel Reynoldus Reginaldum Reginaldo
Reuben Reuben Reubenem Reubeni Rhese Rhesus Rhesum Rheso Rice Riceus Riceum
Riceo Richard Richardus Richardum Richardo Robert Robertus Robertum Roberto
Roger Rogerus Rogerum Rogero Roman Romanus Romanum Romano Rowland Rolandus
Rowlandum Rolando S S S S SAbcot SAbcotus SAbcotum SAbcoto Sackvil Sackvil
Sackvil Sackvil Saint John Saint John Saint John Saint John Sampson Sampson
Sampsonem Sampsoni Samuel Samuel Samuelem Samueli Saul Saulus Saulum Saulo
Sebastian Sebastianus Sebastianum Sebastiano Sigismund Sigismundus Sigismundum
Sigismundo Silvanus Silvanus Silvanum Silvano Silvester Silvester Silvestrem
Silvestri Silvius Silvius Silvium Silvio Simeon Simeon Simeonem Simeoni Simon
Simon Simonem Simoni Spencer Spencerus Spencerum Spencero Stephanas Stephanas
Stephanam Stephanae Stephen Stephanus Stephanum Stephano Swithin Swythinus
Swythinum Swythino Sydney Sydneius Sydneium Sydneio T T T T TAlbott TAlbottus
TAlbottum TAlbotto Theobald Theobaldus Theobaldum Theobaldo Theodore Theodorus
Theodorum Theodoro Theodorick Theodoricus Theodoricum Theodorico Theodosius
Theodosius Theodosium Theodosio Theophilus Theophilus Theophilum Theophilo
Thomas Thomas Thomam Thomae Tieg Tiegus Tiegum Tiego Timothy Timotheus
Timotheum Timotheo Titus Titus Titum Tito Tychicus Tychicus Tychicum Tychico
Tobie, Tobias, or Tobiah Tobias Tobiam Tobiae Trinian Trinianus Trinianum
Triniano Tristram Tristramus Tristramum Tristramo Trophimus Trophimus Trophimum
Trophimo Turstan for Trustan Turstanus Turstanum Turstano V V V V VAlter VAlter
VAlterum VAltero Valens Valens Valentem Valenti Valentine Valentinus Valentinum
Valentino Uchtred Uchtredus Uchtredum Uchtredo Villam Villamus Villamum Villamo
Vincent Vincentius Vincentium Vincentio Vital Vitalis Vitalem Vitali Vivian
Vivianus Vivianum Viviano Urban Urbanus Urbanum Urbano Urian Urianus Urianum
Uriano Uriah Urias Uriam Uriae W W W W WAlter WAlterus WAlterum WAltero Walwin
Walgamus Walgamum Walgamo Warin Guarinus Guarinum Guarino Warren Warren Warren
Warren William Gulielmus vel Willielmus Willielmum vel Gulielmum Willielmo vel
Gulielmo Wilfrid Wilfridus Wilfridum Wilfrido Willibald Willibaldus Willibaldum
Willibaldo Wimund Wimundus Wimundum Wimundo Wischard Guischardus Guischardum
Guischardo Wulpher Wulpherus Wulpherum Wulphero Wulstan Wulstanus Wolstanum
Wolstano Wulstano Y Y Y Y YBel EUbulus EUbulum EUbulo Ythel Euthalius Uthalium
Euthalio Z U Z Z ZAcheus ZAcheus ZAcheum ZAcheo Zachary or Zacharias Zacharias
Zachariam Zacharia Zephany Zephanias Zephaniam Zephaniae

The NAMES OF WOMEN.
A A A A ABigal ABigail ABigailam ABigailae Adelin Adelina Adelinam Adelinae
Agatha Agatha Agatham Agathae Agnes Agnes Agnetem Agneti Aletheia Aletheia
Aletheiam Aletheiae Alice Alicia Aliciam Aliciae Amie Amicia vel Amata Amiciam
Amiciae Anchorett Anchoretta Anchorettam Anchoretta Angellett Angeletta
Angelettam Angelettae Arne Anna Annam Annae Annis Agnes Agnetem Agneti Anastate
Anastatia Anastatiam Anastatiae Arbella Arbella Arbellam Arbellae Audrie Audria
Audriam Audriae Avice Avisia vel Hawisia Avisiam Avisiae Aureola Aureola
Aureolam Aureolae Austice Austicia Austiciam Austiciae B B B B BArbara BArbara
BArbaram BArbarae Bathsheba Bathsheba Bathshebam Bathshebae Beatrice Beatrix
Beatricem Beatrici Benet Benedicta Benedictam Benedictae Benigna Benigna
Benignam Benignae Bertha Bertha Bertham Berthae Blanch Blanchia Blanchiam
Blanchiae Bona Bona Bonam Bonae Bridget Brigitta Brigittam Brigittae C C C C
CAssandra CAssandra CAssandram CAssandrae Chara Chara Charam Charae Charity
Charitas Charitatem Charitati Christian Christiana Christianam Christianae
Cicely Cecilia Ceciliam Ceciliae Clare Clara Claram Clarae Constance Constaniia
Constantiam Constantiae D D D D DEborah DEborah DEboram DEborae Denis or
Dionis, or Dionysia Dionisia Dionysiam Dionysiae Diana Diana Dianam Dianae Dido
Dido Didonem Didoni Dorcas Dorcas Dorcadem Dorcadi Dorothy Dorothea Dorotheam
Dorotheae Dousabel Dulcibella Dulcibellam Dulcibellae Douse Dulcia Dulciam
Dulciae Dinah Dina Dinam Dinae Duella Duella Duellam Duellae E E E E EAde EUda,
Ida, Ada, vel Idonea EUdam, Idam, Adam etc. EUdae, Idae, Adae, etc. Edith
Editha Editham Edithae Elcana Elcana Elcanam Elcanae Elianor Elianora Elianoram
Elianorae Elhena Elhena Elhenam Elhenae Eliza Eliza Elizam Elizae Elizabeth
Elizabetha Elizabetham Elizabethae Emme Emma vel Elgiva Emmam vel Elgivam Emmae
vel Elgivae Emmet Emmetta Emmettam Emmettae Esther Esthera Estheram Estherae
Ethelburg Ethelburga Ethelburgam Ethelburgae Etheldred for Ethelred Etheldreda
Etheldredam Etheldredae Evah see Hevah Eva Evam Evae Euadne Euadne Euadnen
Euadne F F F F FAith FIdes FIdem FIdei Florence Florentia Florentiam Florentiae
Felix Felicia Feliciam Feliciae Fileda Fileda Filedam Filedae Fortune Fortuna
Fortunam Fortunae Frances Francesca Francescam Francescae Frydeswid Fridiswida
Fridiswidam Fridiswidae G G G G GErtrude GErtrudis GErtrudem GErtrudi Gillian
for Julian Iuliana Julianam Iulianae Gillet Iulietta vel Egidia Juliettam vel
Egidiam Iuliettae vel Egidiae Gladuce Gladusa vel Claudia Gladusam vel Claudiam
Gladusae vel Claudiae Godly Godly Godly Godly Grace Gratia Graitam Gratiae
Grissil Grishilda Grishildam Grishildae Guinfrida Gainfrida Guinfridam
Guinfridae H H H H HAgar HAgar HAgar HAgar Hannah Hanna Hannam Hannae Hawis for
Avice Havisia Havisiam Havisiae Hellen Helena Helenam Helenae Hester Hestera
Hesteram Hesterae Hevah Heva Hevam Hevae I I I I JAcomena IAcomena JAcomenam
IAcomenae Jane Iana Janam Ianae Jennet Iohannula Johannulam Iohannulae Joyce
Iocosa Jocosam Iocosae Joan Iohanna Johannam Iohannae Isabel Isabella Isabellam
Isabellae Judith Iuditha Juditham Iudithae Julian Iulia Juliam Iuliae K K K K
KAtharine KAtharina KAtharinam KAtharinae Kinburg Kinburga Kinburgam Kinburgae
Kinulph Kinulpha Kinulpham Kinulphae L L L L LEah LEa LEam LEae Lettice
Laeticia Laetitiam Laetitia Lydia Lydia Lydiam Lydiae Lora Lora Loram Lorae
Love Amorea Amoream Amoreae Luce Lucia Luciam Luciae Lucrece Lucretia Lucretiam
Lucretiae M M M M MAbel Mabella MAbellam, etc. MAbellae vel Amabiliae Magdalen
Magdalena Magdalenam] Magdalenae Margaret Margareta Margaretam Margaretae
Margery Margeria Margeriam Margeriae Mary Maria Mariam Mariae Marian Marian
Marian Marian Martha Martha Martham Marthae Mawd, Mawdin, see Magdalen Matilda,
Matildis vel Mathildis Matildam Matildae Mercy Misericordia Misericordiam
Misericordiae Milecent Milecentia Milecentiam Milecentiae Merawd Meranda
Merandam Merandae Mildred Mildreda Mildredam Mildredae Muriel Muriela Murielam
Murielae N N N N NIchola NIchola NIcholam NIchola Nicia Nicia Niciam Niciae O O
O O OLive OLiva OLivam OLivae Olympia Olympia Olympiam Lympiae Orabilis
Orabilis Orabilem Orabili P P P P PAtience PAtientia PAtientiam PAtientiae
Parnel Petronilla Petronillam Petronillae Penelope Penelope Penelopen Penelope
Philadelphia Philadelhia Philadelphiam Philadelphiae Philip Philippa Philippam
Philippae Phillis Phillis Phillidem Phillidi Phillida Phillida Phillidam
Phillidae Phebe Phoebe Phoeben Phoebe Polixena Polixena Polixenam Polyxenae
Prisca Prisca Priscam Priscae Priscilla Priscilla Priscillam Priscillae
Prudence Prudentia Prudentiam Prudentiae R R R R RAchel RAchel RAchelam
RAchelae Radigund Radegunda Radegundam Radegundae Rebecca Rebecca Rebeccam
Rebeccae Rosamund Rosamunda Rosamundam Rosamundae Rose Rosa Rosam Rosae
Rosacleer Rosaclera Rosacleram Rosaclerae S S S S SAbina SAbina SAbinam SAbinae
Sanchia Sanchia Sanchiam Sanchiae Sarah Sara Saram Sarae Scholastica
Scholastica Scholasticam Scholasticae Sibil Sibilla Sibillam Sibillae Sophia
Sophia Sophiam Sophiae Sophronia Sophronia Sophroniam Sophroniae Susan or
Susanna Susanna Susannam Susannae T T T T TAbitha TAbitha TAbitham TAbithae
Tace Taca Tacam Tacae Tamer Tamera Tameram Tamerae Taphaes Taphnes Taphnem
Taphni Temperance Temperantia Temperantiam Temperantiae Thamer Thamera Thameram
Thamerae Theodosia Theodosia Theodosiam Theodosiae Tomasin or Thomasin
Thomasina Thomasinam Thomasinae V V V V VENus VEnus VEnerem VEneri Ursley or
Ursula Ursula Ursulam Ursulae Virtue Virtus Virtutem Virtuti W W W W WAlburg or
Warburg WAlburga WAlburgam WAlburgae Winifrid Winifrida Winifridam Winifridae

Note, There be many words that be not declined, and the Conusor, Obligor,
Conusee and Obligee, are all alike, as before you may observe in reading them.

Trades and Professions of Men and Women in the same Case, to fill up Bonds and
Recognizances.
A
ANchor-maker ANchoraefaber Apothecary Pharmacopola Armorer Armifaber Attorney
Attornatus
B
BAker PIstor Barber-Chirurgion Chirurgus-Tonsor Bailiff Ballivus Bell-founder
Campanarius Blacksmith Ferrifaber Bricklayer, Brickmaker Latentiarius Butcher
Lanius vel Lanio
C
CArpenter ARchitectus Carrier Plaustrarius Carver Sculptor Chandler
Candelarius Cheesemonger Casearius Surgeon Chirurgus Clockmaker Horologus
Clothier Pannifex Clothworker Pannitonsor Collier Carbonarius Combmaker
Poctinarius Confectioner Confector Cook Coquus Cooper Doliarius Copersmith
Aerarius Crossbowmaker Balistarius Currier Corcinnator Cutler Cultellarius
Cordwainer Allutarius
D
DRaper PAnnarius Dial-maker See Clockmaker Dicemaker Talorum factor
F
FEather-maker PLumarius Fellmonger Pellicarius Fish-monger Piscenarius
Flaxdresser Limpola Fletcher Sagittifex Founder Metallo-ductor Fruiterer
Pomarius Furrier Pellicator
G
Gardener HOrtulanus Glasier Vitrarius Glassmaker Vitriarius Glover
Cheirothecarius Goldsmith Auri-Faber vel Aurifex Grocer Aromatarius Girdler
Zonarius Gunmaker Faber Bombardicus
H
HAberdasher GAlerarius Hatmaker Galerius Horner Cornualius Horse-courser
Hippocomus Hosier Caligarius
I
JEweller GEmmarius Imbroiderer Acupictor Innkeeper Pandochus Iron-monger
Ferrarius
L
LAttener ORichalcarius Leatherseller Vellio
M
MAltster HOrdeanus Mason Lapidarius Mealman Suffarraneus Mercer Seniarius
Merchant-Tailor Mercator Scissor Millaner Minutarius
N
Nailer Clavi-faber
O
Oylman Olearius
P
PAinter-stainer PIctor Paviour Saxi-cultor Perfumer Odorarius Peuterer
Stannarius Pinmaker Acicularius Plasterer Gypsator Plumber Plumbarius Potter
Figulus Poulterer Pullarius
R
Rope-maker Restio
S
SAdler EPhippiarius Salter Salarius Sawyer Serrarius Scrivener Scriptor
Ship-Carpenter Naupegus Silk-Dyer Tinctor-Bombycinus Silk-Weaver Serricarius
Textor Silver-Smith Faber Argentarius Smith Faber Ferrarius Spectacle-maker
Specularius Spurrier Calcarius Stationer Bibliopola Stone-Cutter vide Mason
T
TAllow-Chandler CAndelarius Sevosus Tanner Byrseus Tentmaker Scenofactorius
Thatcher Tector Trunk-maker Syringator Turner Tornator
V,N
VIntner VIntarius Upholster Tapetiarius
W
WAtchmaker VIde Clockmaker Wax-chandler Cerarius Weaver Telarius and Textor
Wheel-Right Rotifex Wine-Cooper Doliarius Vinarius Wood-Monger Lignarius
The Names of Officers in order.
ALderman ALdermanus Attorney Attornatus Bishop Episcopus Captain Dux
Chamberlain of L. Camerarius Chancellor of a Church Cancellarius Churchwarden
Guardianus Clerk Clericus Colonel Tribunus Militum Constable Constabularius
Coroner Coronator Corporal Manipularis Counselor Consiliarius Crier Praeco
Dean Decanus Deacon Diaconus Emperor Imperator Emperess Imperatrix Judge Iudex
Justice Iusticiarius Lawyer Iurisconsultus Prothonotary Prothonotarius
Secondary Secondarius Sergeant at Law Serviens ad Legem Sheriff Vicecomes
Steward Seneschallus Water-Bayliff Ballivus ad Aquam.
Bishoprics Episcopatus BAth and Wells BAthon and We^lens Canterbury
Cantuariensis Chester Cestrensis Chichester Cicestrensis Durham Dunelmensis Ely
Eliensis Exceter Exoniensis Gloucester Gloucestriensis Hereford Herefordiensis
Lincoln Lincolniensis Lichfield and Coventry Lichfield. and Coventriensis
Norwich Norvicensis Oxford Oxoniensis Rochester Roffensis Salisbury Salopiensis
Winchester Wincestriensis

Additions.
DUke DUx DUcem DUci Marquess Marchio Marchionem Marchioni Earl Comes Comitem
Comiti Vicount Vicecomes Vicecomitem Vicecomiti Baron Baro Baronem Baroni
Knight of the Garter Praenobilis ordinis Periscelidis Knight Baronet Miles
Baronettus Baronet Baronettus Baronettum Baronetto Knight of the Bath Eques
Balnei Equitem de Balneo Equiti de Balneo Knight Bachelor Miles, Eques Auratus
Militem, Equitem Auratum Militi, Equiti Aurato Esquire Armiger Armigerum
Armigero Yeoman Yeoman Gentleman Generosus Generosum Generoso Doctor of the
Civil Law Legum Doctor Legum Doctorem Legum Doctori Doctor of Divinity
Theologiae Professor Theologiae Professorem Theologiae Professori Doctor of
Physic Medicinae Doctor Medicinae Doctorem Medicinae Doctori Bachelor of
Divinity Theologiae Baccalaureus Theolog. Baccalaureum Theologiae Baccalaureo
Master of Arts Magister Artium Magistrum Artium Magistro Artium Bachelor of
Arts Baccalaureus Artium Baccalaureum Artium Baccalaureo Artium Parson Clericus
Clericum Clerico Bachelor of Law Legum Baccalaureus Legum Baccalaureum Legum
Baccalaureo Merchant Mercator Mercator Mercatori

Duchess DUcissa DUcissam DUcissae Marchioness Marchionissa Marchionissam
Marchionissae Countess Comitissa Comitissam Comitissae Vicountess Vicecomitissa
Vicecomitissam ^icecomitissae Baroness Baronissa Baronissam Baronissae Lady
Domina Dominam Dominae Widow Vidua Viduam Viduae Gentlewoman Generosa Generosam
Generosae Spinster Spinster Spinster Spinster

Cities. De Civitate Cities. De Civitatis BAth BAthoniae LOndon LOndini Bristol
Bristoliae Norwich Norwici Canterbury Cantuariae Oxford Oxoniae and Oxoni
Chichester Cicestriae Rochester Roffae Gloucester Gloucestriae York Eboraci
Hereford Herefordiae Winchester Wintoniae Lichfleld Lichfieldiae Exeter Exoniae
Lincoln Lincolniae Worcester Wigorniae

Recognizance. Forty shillings Quadraginta solidos Fifty shillings Quinquaginta
solidos Three pounds Tres libras Obligation. Forty shillings Quadraginta
solidos Fifty shillings Quinquaginta solidis Three pounds Tribus Libris

Counties. In Comitatu BArkshire BErks Bedfordshire Bedfordiae Buckinghamshire
Buckinghamiae Cambridgeshire Cantabrigiae Cheshire Cestriae Cornwall Cornubiae
Cumberland Cumbriae Derbyshire Derbiae Devonshire Devon. Dorsetshire Dorset
Durham Dunelm. Essex Essex Gloucestershire Gloucestriae Hampshire Southampton
Hartfordshire Hertfordiae Herefordshite Herefordiae Huntingtonshire
Huntingtoniae Kent Canc. Lancashire Lancastriae Leicestershire Leicestriae
Lincolnshire Lincoln Middlesex Middlesex Northamptonshire Northampton
Nottinghamshire Nottinghamiae Northumberland Northumbriae Norfolk Norfolciae
Oxford Oxoniae, vel ii Rutland Rutlandiae Shropshire Salopiae Somersetshire
Somerset Staffordshire Staffordiae Suffolk Suffolciae Sussex Sussexiae Surrey
Surry Warwickshire Warwick Westmerland Westmerland Wiltshire Wiltoniae
Worcestershire Wigorniae Yorkshire Eborac. Brecknockshire Brecknock
Cardiganshire Cardigan Carmarthenshire Carmarthen Carnarvan Carnarvan
Denbighshire Denbigh Flintshire Flint Glamorganshire Glamorgan Montgomery-shire
Mountgomor. Monmouth-shire Monmouth Merionith-shire Merionith Pembrook-shire
Pembrochiae Radnorshire Radnor
Dat^ PRimo die Dat^ Secundo die Dat^ Tertio die Dat^ Quarto die Dat^ Quinto
die Dat^ Sexto die Dat^ Septimo die Dat^ Octavo die Dat^ Nono die Dat^ Decimo
die Dat^ Undecimo die Dat^ Duodecimo die Dat^ Tertio decimo die Dat^ Quarto
decimo die Dat^ Quinto decimo die Dat^ Sexto decimo die Dat^ Decimo septimo die
Dat^ Decimo octavo die Dat^ Decimo nono die Dat^ Vicesimo die Dat^ Vicesimo
primo die Dat^ Vicesimo secundo die Dat^ Vicesimo tertio die Dat^ Vicesimo
quarto die Dat^ Vicesimo quinto die Dat^ Vicesimo sexto die Dat^ Vicesimo
septimo die Dat^ Vicesimo octavo die Dat^ Vicesimo nono die Dat^ Tricesimo die
Dat^ Tricesimo primo die
Ianuarii Februarii Martii Aprilis Maii Iunii Iulii Augusti Septembris Octobris
Novembris Decembris


Millesimo sexcentesimo sexagesimo

Anno Dom. 1662 secundo Anno Dom. 1663 tertio Anno Dom. 1664 quarto Anno Dom.
1665 quinto Anno Dom. 1666 sexto Anno Dom. 1667 septimo Anno Dom. 1668 octavo
Anno Dom. 1669 nono Anno Dom. 1670 septuagesimo Anno Dom. 1671 primo Anno Dom.
1672, etc. secundo, etc. Anno Dom. 1680 octogesimo Anno Dom. 1690 nonagesimo
Anno Dom. 1700 Millesimo septingentesimo, etc.


Nomina Mensium.
JAnuary Ianurrius. rii. February Februarius. rii. March Martius. tii. April
Aprilis. lis May Maius. ii. June Iunius. ii. July Julius. ii. August Augustus.
sti. September September. bris. October October. bris. November November. bris.
December December. bris.

FIrst day PRimus dies Second day Secundus dies Third day Tertius dies Fourth
day Quartus dies Fifth day Quintus dies Sixth day Sextus dies Seventh day
Septimus dies Eighth day Octavus dies Ninth day Nonus dies Tenth day Decimus
dies Eleventh day Undecimus dies Twelfth day Duodecimus dies Thirteenth day
Tertiusdecimus dies Fourteenth day Quartusdecimus dies Fifteenth day Quintus
decimus dies Sixteenth day Sextus decimus dies Seventeenth day Decimus septimus
dies Eighteenth day Decimus octavus dies Nineteenth day Decimus nonus dies
Twentieth day Vicesimus dies One and Twentieth day Vicesimus primus dies Two
and Twentieth day Vicesimus secundus dies Three and Twentieth day Vicesimus
tertius dies Four and Twentieth day Vicesimus quartus dies Five and Twentieth
day Vicesimus quintus dies Six and Twentieth day Vicesimus sextus dies Seven
and Twentieth day Vicesimus septimus dies Eight and Twentieth day Vicesimus
octavus dies Nine and Twentieth day Vicesimus nonus dies Thirtieth day
Tricesimus dies One and Thirtieth day Tricesimus primus dies


One shilling Unus solidus Two shillings Duo solidi Three shillings Tres solidi
Four shillings Quatuor solidi Five shillings Quinque solidi Six shillings Sex
solidi Seven shillings Septem solidi Eight shillings Octo solidi Nine shillings
Novem solidi Ten shillings December solidi Eleven shillings Undecem solidi Twelve
shillings Duodecem solidi Thirteen shillings Tredecem solidi Fourteen shillings
Quatuordecem solidi Fifteen shillings Quindecim solidi Sixteen shillings
Sexdecim solidi Seventeen shillings Septendecim solidi Eighteen shillings
Octodecim solidi Nineteen shillings Novendecem solidi Twenty shillings Viginti
solidi Thirty shillings Triginta solidi Forty shillings Quadraginta solidi
Fifty shillings Quinquaginta solidi Three pounds Tres librae Four pounds
Quatuor librae Five pounds Quinque librae Six pounds Sex librae Seven pounds
Septem librae Eight pounds Octo librae Nine pounds Novem librae Ten pounds
December librae Twenty pounds Viginti librae Thirty pounds Triginta librae Forty
pounds Quadraginta librae Fifty pounds Quinquaginta librae Sixty pounds
Sexaginta librae Seventy pounds Septuaginta librae Eighty pounds Octoginta
librae Ninety pounds Nonaginta librae One hundred pounds Centum librae Two
hundred pounds Ducentae librae Three hundred pounds Trescentae librae Four
hundred pounds Quadringentae librae Five hundred pounds Quingentae librae Six
hundred pounds Sexcentae librae Seven hundred pounds Septingentae librae Eight
hundred Octingentae librae Nine hundred Noningentae librae One thousand Pounds
Mill Librarum Two thousand Pounds Duo mill Librarum Three thousand Pounds
Tres mill Librarum Four thousand Pounds Quatuor mill Librarum Five thousand
Pounds Quinque mill Librarum Six thousand Pounds Sex mill Librarum Seven
thousand Pounds Septem mill Librarum Eight thousand Pounds Octo mill Librarum
Nine thousand Pounds Nove mmille Librarum Ten thousand Pounds December mill
Librarum


And so forwards, as cause shall require.

Recognisance.
FOur Pounds Quatuor Libras Five Pounds Quinque Libras Six Pounds Sex Libras
Seven Pounds Septem Libras Eight Pounds Octo Libras Nine Pounds Novem Libras
Ten Pounds December Libras Eleven Pounds Undecem Libras Twelve Pounds Duodecem
Libras Thirteen Pounds Tredecem Libras Fourteen Pounds Quatuordecem Libras
Fifteen Pounds Quindecem Libras Sixteen Pounds Sexdecem Libras Seventeen Pounds
Septemdecem Libras Eighteen Pounds Octodecem Libras Nineteen Pounds Novendecem
Libras Twenty Pounds Viginti Libras Thirty Pounds Triginta Libras Forty Pounds
Quadraginta Libras Fifty Pounds Quinquaginta Libras Sixty Pounds Sexaginta
Libras Seventy Pounds Septuaginta Libras Eighty Pounds Octoginta Libras Ninety
Pounds Nonaginta Libras One hundred Pounds Centum Libras Two hundred Pounds
Ducentas Libras Three hundred Pounds Trescentas Libras Four hundred Pounds
Quadringentas Libras Five hundred Pounds Quingentas Libras Six hundred Pounds
Sexcentas Libras Seven hundred Pounds Septingentas Libras Eight hundred Pounds
Octingentas Libras Nine hundred Pounds Nongentas Libras One thousand Pounds
Mill Librarum Two thousand Pounds Duas mill vel bis mill Librarum Three
thousand Pounds Tres mill Librarum


l. In 100 Centum Libris. 200 Ducentis Libris. 300 Trecentis Libris. 400
Quadringentis Libris. 500 Quingentis Libris. 600 Sexcentis Libris. 700
Septingentis Libris. 800 Octingentis Libris. 900 Nongentis Libris. 1000 Mill
Libris. 2000 Duabus mill Libris. 3000 Tribus mill Libris. 4000 Quatuor mill
Libris.

A TABLE showing the beginning of every KING's Reign from the Conquest,
together with the Year of CHRIST, answering to every Year of each King's Reign;
the Years beginning at the 25 of March.
William the Conqueror began his Reign the 15 of October. 1066. and therefore had
Reigned one Year complete, October. 15. 1067.
AN. Reg. AN. Dom. 1 1067 2 1068 3 1069 4 1070 5 1071 6 1072 7 1073 8 1074 9
1075 10 1076 11 1077 12 1078 13 1079 14 1080 15 1081 16 1082 17 1083 18 1084 19
1085 20 1086

10 Months, 21 Days.

His Reign ended the 9. of Sept. 1087.

William Rufus began his Reign Sept. 9. 1087.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1088 2 1089 3 1090 4 1091 5 1092 6 1093 7 1094 8 1095 9
1096 10 1097 11 1098 12 1099

11 Months, 18 Days.

Hen. 1. Aug. 1. 1100.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1101 2 1102 3 1103 4 1104 5 1105 6 1106 7 1107 8 1108 9
1109 10 1110 11 1111 12 1112 13 1113 14 1114 15 1115 16 1116 17 1117 18 1118 19
1119 20 1120 21 1121 22 1122 23 1123 24 1124 25 1125 26 1126 27 1127 28 1128 29
1129 30 1130 31 1131 32 1132 33 1133 34 1131 35 1135

4 Months, 12 Days.

Steph. December. 2. 1135.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1136 2 1137 3 1138 4 1139 5 1140 6 1141 7 1142 8 1143 9
1144 10 1145 11 1146 12 1147 13 1148 14 1149 15 1150 16 1151 17 1152 18 1153

11 Months, 20 Days.

Hen. 2. October. 1554.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1155 2 1156 3 1757 4 1158 5 1159 6 1160 7 1161 8 1162 9
1163 10 1164 11 1165 12 1166 13 1167 14 1168 15 1169 16 1170 17 1171 18 1172 19
1173 20 1174 21 1175 22 1176 23 1177 24 1178 25 1179 26 1180 27 1181 28 1182 29
1183 30 1184 31 1185 32 1186 33 1187 34 1188

9 Months, 5 Days.

R. 1. July 9. 1189.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1190 2 1191 3 1192 4 1193 5 1194 6 1195 7 1196 8 1197 9
1198

9 Months, 19 Days.

John, April 6. 1199.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1200 2 1201 3 1202 4 1203 5 1204 6 1205 7 1206 8 1207 9
1208 10 1209 11 1210 12 1211 13 1212 14 1213 15 1214 16 1215 17 1216

7 Months, 0 Days.

Hen. 3. Oct. 29. 1216.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1217 2 1218 3 1219 4 1220 5 1221 6 1222 7 1223 8 1224 9
1225 10 1226 11 1227 12 1228 13 1229 14 1230 15 1231 16 1232 17 1233 18 1234 19
1235 20 1236 21 1237 22 1238 23 1239 24 1240 25 1241 26 1242 27 1243 28 1244 29
1245 30 1246 31 1247 32 1248 33 1249 34 1250 35 1251 36 1252 37 1253 38 1254 39
1255 40 1256 41 1257 42 1258 43 1259 44 1260 45 1261 46 1262 47 1263 48 1264 49
1265 50 1266 51 1267 52 1268 53 1269 54 1270 55 1271 56 1272

1 Month, 0 Days.

Edw. 1. Nov. 16. 1272.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1273 2 1274 3 1275 4 1376 5 1277 6 1278 7 1279 8 1280 9
1281 10 1282 11 1283 12 1284 13 1285 14 1286 15 1287 16 1288 17 1289 18 1290 19
1291 20 1292 21 1293 22 1294 23 1295 24 1296 25 1297 26 1298 27 1299 28 1300 29
1301 30 1302 31 1303 32 1304 33 1305 34 1306

8 Months, 9 Days.

Edw. 2. July 7. 1307.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1308 2 1309 3 1310 4 1311 5 1312 6 1313 7 1314 8 1315 9
1316 10 1317 11 1318 12 1319 13 1320 14 1321 15 1322 16 1323 17 1324 18 1325 19
1326

7 Months, 9 Days.

Ed. 3. Jan. 25. 1326.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1327 2 1328 3 1329 4 1330 5 1331 6 1332 7 1333 8 1334 9
1335 10 1336 11 1337 12 1338 13 1339 14 1340 15 1341 16 1342 17 1343 18 1344 19
1345 20 1346 21 1347 22 1348 23 1349 24 1350 25 1351 26 1352 27 1353 28 1354 29
1355 30 1356 31 1357 32 1358 33 1359 34 1360 35 1361 36 1362 37 1363 38 1364 39
1365 40 1366 41 1367 42 1368 43 1369 44 1370 45 1371 46 1372 47 1373 48 1374 49
1375 50 1376

1 Month, 7 Days.

R. 2. June 21. 1377.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1378 2 1379 3 1380 4 1381 5 1382 6 1383 7 1384 8 1385 9
1386 10 1387 11 1388 12 1389 13 1390 14 1391 15 1392 16 1393 17 1394 18 1395 19
1396 20 1397 21 1398 22 1399

3 Months, 14 Days.

H. 4. Sept. 29. 1399.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1400 2 1401 3 1402 4 1403 5 1404 6 1405 7 1406 8 1407 9
1408 10 1409 11 1410 12 1411 13 1412

6 Months, 3 Days.

H. 5. March 20. 1412.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1413 2 1414 3 1415 4 1416 5 1417 6 1418 7 1419 8 1420 9
1421

5 Months, 24 Days.

H. 6. Aug. 31. 1422.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1423 2 1424 3 1425 4 1426 5 1427 6 1428 7 1429 8 1430 9
1431 10 1432 11 1433 12 1434 13 1435 14 1436 15 1437 16 1438 17 1439 18 1440 19
1441 20 1442 21 1443 22 1444 23 1445 24 1446 25 1447 26 1448 27 1449 28 1450 29
1451 30 1452 31 1453 32 1454 33 1455 34 1456 35 1457 36 1458 37 1456 38 1460

6 Months, 16 Days.

[Edw. 4. Mar. 4. 1460.]
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1461 2 1462 3 1463 4 1464 5 1465 6 1466 7 1467 8 1468 9
1469 10 1470 11 1471 12 1472 13 1473 14 1474 15 1475 16 1476 17 1477 18 1478 19
1479 20 1480 21 1481 22 1482

1 Month, 8 Days.

R. 3. June 22. 1483.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1484 2 1485

2 Months, 5 Days.

H. 7. Aug. 22. 1485.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1486 2 1487 3 1488 4 1489 5 1490 6 1491 7 1492 8 1493 9
1494 10 1495 11 1496 12 1497 13 1498 14 1499 15 1500 16 1501 17 1502 18 1503 19
1504 20 1505 21 1506 22 1507 23 1508

8 Months, 19 Days.

H. 8. April 22. 1509.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1510 2 1511 3 1512 4 1513 5 1514 6 1515 7 1516 8 1517 9
1518 10 1519 11 1520 12 1521 13 1522 14 1523 15 1524 16 1525 17 1526 18 1527 19
1528 20 1529 21 1530 22 1531 23 1532 24 1533 25 1534 26 1535 27 1536 28 1537 29
1538 30 1539 31 1540 32 1541 33 1542 34 1543 35 1544 36 1545 37 1546

10 Months, 1 Day.

Edw. 6. Jan. 28. 1546.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1547 2 1548 3 1549 4 1550 5 1551 6 1552

5 Months, 19 Days.

Mar. Jul. 6. 1553.
An. Reg. An. Dom.. 1 1554 2 1555 3 1556 4 1557 5 1558

4 Months, 22 Days.

Eliz. Nov. 17. 1558.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1559 2 1560 3 1561 4 1562 5 1563 6 1564 7 1565 8 1566 9
1567 10 1568 11 1569 12 1570 13 1571 14 1572 15 1573 16 1574 17 1575 18 1576 19
1577 20 1578 21 1579 22 1580 23 1581 24 1582 25 1583 26 1584 27 1585 28 1586 29
1587 30 1588 31 1589 32 1590 33 1591 34 1592 35 1593 36 1594 37 1595 38 1596 39
1597 40 1598 41 1599 42 1600 33 1601 44 1602

4 Months, 15 Days.

Jac. Mar. 24. 1603.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1603 2 1604 3 1605 4 1606 5 1607 6 1608 7 1609 8 1610 9
1611 10 1612 11 1613 12 1614 13 1615 14 1616 15 1617 16 1618 17 1619 18 1620 19
1612 20 1622 21 1623 22 1624

0 Months, 3 Days.

Car. 1. Mar. 27. 1625.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1625 2 1626 3 1627 4 1628 5 1629 6 1630 7 1631 8 1632 9
1633 10 1634 11 1635 12 1636 13 1637 14 1638 15 1639 16 1640 17 1641 18 1642 19
1643 20 1644 21 1645 22 1646 23 1647 24 1648

11 Months, 3 Days.

Car. 2. Jan. 30. 1648.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1649 2 1650 3 1651 4 1652 5 1653 6 1654 7 1655 8 1656 9
1657 10 1658 11 1659 12 1660 13 1661 14 1662 15 1663 16 1664 17 1665 18 1666

The manner of direction of any Writ, for removing of any Body or Cause, or
certifying of any Record, etc. to any the greater Courts at Westminster, from
other inferior Courts, according to the several Styles of their Cities, Towns,
or Bodies Corporate or enabled to hold Plea, for the certain Information of
such as shall have occasion of this nature, and for prevention of the great and
manifold Inconveniences which may daily happen by the mistaking of such Styles.
A
St. Alban in Com. Hertf. SEnescallo Cur. de Record. Burgi nostr. Sancti Albani
in Com. Hertf. Aliter. Majori and Burgens. ac Senescallo Curiae nostrae de
Record. ipso Senescallo infra Burgi Sancti Albani in Com. Hertf. and eorum
cuilibet salutem. Aldborough. Ballivis Villae de Aldborough. Cur.
Admiralitatis. I. B. Supremae Curiae Admiralitatis Angl. Mar. ejusve deputatis
legitimis ibidem. Abbington Vill. Majori Ballivis and Burgens. Burgi sui de
Abbington and eorum cuilibet salutem. St. Albans in Com. Hertf. Preclarissimo
C. H. magno Admirallo nostro Angliae sive ejus locum-tenenti, aut deputat.
Senescallo de Record. tenent. infra Burgum Sancti Albani in Com. Hertf.
Abendon. Majori and Ballivis Villae de Abendon and eorum cuilibet. Adven.
Majori and Ballivis Villae nostrae de Adven. and eorum cuilibet. Aburgavenny in
Com. Senescallo and Ballivis Henrici Nevil, Milit. Dom. Aburgavenny, Villae
suae de Aburgavenny. Mon. Aldburges. Senescallo Manerii nostri de Aldburges in
Com. Eborac. Salutem. Allerton. Ad Curiam Thomae Com. Exon. Manerii and
Libertatis suae de Allerton in Com. Appulbie. Majori Burgi sui de Appulby in
Com. Westmerl. Salutem. Alesbury. Ballivis Villae suae de Alesbury in Com.
Bucks. salutem. Arundel. Majori and Burgens. Burgi sui de Arundel in Com.
Sussex salutem. Andover. Ballivo and Burgens. Burgi sui de Andover in Com.
Southampt. salutem. Avendon. Majori and Ballivis Villae nostrae de Avendon in
Com.
B
Civitat. Bristol. Bridgewater. MAjori Aldermannis ac vic. Civitatis sive Vill.
Bristol ac Majori and Constabular. Stapulae ejusdem Civitatis sive Villae
necnon Ballivis Majori Communitat. ejusdem Civitatis sive vill. Curiae suae
tol. ac Ballivis Dict. Majoris and Communitat. ejusdem Civitat. sive Villae
Curiae pedispulverizat. and eorum cuilibet salutem. Majori and Ball. villae
suae de Bridgwater salutem. Beverley. Majori and gubernatoribus Villae nostr.
de Beverley in Com. Ebor. Redford. Majori, Aldermanis, Burgens. and Recordator.
Burgi sive Vill. de Bedford. Boston in Com. Linc. Majori and Burgens. Burgi
nostri de Boston in Com. Lincoln. Bridgenorth Salop. Ballivis and Burgens.
Villae nostrae de Bridgenorth and eorum cuilibet. Burgus de Bewdley. Ballivo
and Burgens. Burgi nostri de Bewdley in Wigorn. Barnstable. Majori Aldermannis
and Burgens. Burgi sive Villae de Barnstable alias Barstable. Banbury in Com.
Oxon. Majori aut ejus deputat. uno Aldermanno Recordatori vel ejus deputat.
duobus Capitalib. Burgens. Burgi de Banbury in Com. Oxon. vel trib. eorum
salutem. Banbury. Ballivis Lanceloti Episc. Lincoln. Cur. suae de Banbury.
Bath. Majori Aldermannis and Recordat. and Justic. Civitat. nostrae Bath.
Berwick. Majori Villae Berwick super Twedam. Battle. Senescallo and Ballivis A.
Brown Milit. Dom. Vic. Montague Libertat. suae de Battle in Com. Sussex. Bury
Sanct. Edmundi. Alderm. Recordator and Capital. Burgens. Burgi nostri de Bury
Sancti Edmundi in Com. nostro Suff. Burton super Trent. Ballivis and Senescal.
T. Paget. Dom. Paget. Burgi sui de Burton super Trent. and eorum cuilibet.
Bridewel. Majori and Communitat. ac omnibus Civibus Civitat. London necnon
Gubernator. possession. Bridewel and Sanct. Thomae Apost. Beverley. Majori
Gubernatori and Burgens. Villae suae de Beverley and eorum cuilibet. Bodmyn.
Majori and Com. clerico Burgi nostri de Bodmyn. Beverlacy. Majori Recordator.
and Gubernatoribus Vill. Beverlacey. Bathon Civitas. Majori Recordatori
Aldermannis and Justiciariis Civitatis Bathon. in com. Summers. and eorum
cuilibet salutem. Aliter. Majori Justic. ac Recordatori Civitatis Bathon.
salutem. Bathon Episcopo. Senescallo sive Ballivo Curiae suae de placitis ad
reverendum in Christo Patrem Dom. N, permissione divina Bathon: and Wellen:
Episcop. pertinen. sive Concess: tent. apud Guild Hall infra Burgum and Villam
nostram de Wells in com. Summers. salutem. Bidyford. Majori, Aldermannis,
Burgensibus and Recordatori villae suae de Bidyford in com. Devon. salutem.
Brownshal. Ad hundred. Johannis D. Manerii sui de Brownshal in com. Badbury. Ad
Hundred. Mountjoy Blunt Dom. Mountjoy de Badbury in com. Blandford forum.
Ballivo and Constabulariis Burgi sui de Blanford Forum in com. Dorset salutem.
Aliter. Ballivis and Constabulariis Burgi sui de Blandford* Forum in com.
Dorset. parcel. Ducatus sui Lancast. salutem. Blechlinlie. Burgensibus Burgi
sui de Bleclinly in com. Surrey salutem. Bromchard. Ad Curiam F. Ep. de
Bromchard Foreign. in com. Brighouse. Ad Curiam M. E. de Brighouse in com.
Barnsley. Ad Curiam Manerii nostri de Barnsley in com. Burrowbrige. Senescallo
Burgi nostri de Burrowbridge in com. Eborac. parcel. Ducat. nostri Lancastr.
salutem. Brustwick. Ad curiam H, C, Militis manerii sui de Brustwick. in com.
Barnsley cum Dadworth. Ad curiam manerii de Barnsley cum Dadworth in com.
Berealston. Majori and Burgensibus Burgi sui de Berealston in com. Devon.
salutem. Bridport. Ballivis and Burgensibus burgi sui de Bridport in com.
Dorset. salutem. Bedwyn magna. Portgreve. Ballivo and Burgensburgi sui de
Bedwyn magna in com. Buckingham. Ballivis and Burgens. Villae suae de Buck. in
Com. Bucks. salutem. Brackley. Majori and Burgens. Burgi sui de Brackley in
Com. Northampt. salutem. Bewdley. Ballivo and Burgens. Burgi sui de Bewdley in
Com. Salop. Bossyn. in Com. Cornub.
C.
Cantuar. C. Cur. Palatii Archiepisc. in Cantuar. MAjori Civitat. Cantuar.
Senescallo Libertat. Gilberti Dom. Archiepiscopi Cantuar. Cur' Palatii sui
infra Civitat. Cantuar. Cicester C. Majori Aldermannis ac Civibus Civitat.
Cicestr' salutem. Colchester. Ballivis Villae de Colchester. Cestr. C. Carolo
Principi Walliae, Duci Cornub. and Ebor. Comiti Cestr. filio suo Clarissimo
sive ejus Camerario Civitatis Palatini Cestr. vel ejus locum-tenenti ibid.
Cantabr. Majori and Ballivis Villae Cantabr. Coventr. C. Majori and Ballivis
Civitatis suae Coventr. Cheping Wycombe. Majori Ballivis and Burgens. de
Cheping Wycombe. Carlyon. Majori and Ballivis villae de Carlyon. and eorum
cuilibet. Cheltenham. Capitali Senescallo Ballivo and sectatoribus Manerii
Burgi sive Villae de Cheltenham necnon Custod. Gaolae nostrae ib. Custod.
Brevium in Com. muni Banco. Dilecto and fideli nostr. J.L. custod. Brevium
nostr. de Communi Banco. C. Cantuar. Senescallo Cur. Palacii Dom. Archiepisc.
Cant. in Com. Kancii. Clay juxta Mare in Com. Nor. Senescallo C. H. Cur. suae
portae de Clay juxta Mare. Chiping-hamden. Ballivis and Burgens. Burgi nostri
de Chiping-hamden in Com. Glouc. Castle Rising Majori Villae suae de Castle
Rising. Cinque Ports. Dilecto and fideli consiliar. nostr. E. Z. St. Maurc. and
Cantelupe Castri nostr. Dover Custod. Cancellario and Admirallo Cinque Portuum
nostror. and membror. eorundem. sive ejus locumtenenti vel deputat. ibidem
salutem. Clinck. Senescallo Cur. Libertatis Reverendi in Christ. Patr. Dom.
Thomae Episc. Winton. Manerii sui de Southwark. C. Carlick. Majori and Ballivis
Civitatis Carlick. Cheney Ballivis Reverendi in Christ. Court. Patris T. Episc.
C. Cur. suae de le Cheney Court. Cantuar. Senescallo Cur. Palatii Dom.
Archiepisc. Cant. Pal. Cestr. Camerario Com. Palantini nostri Cestr. seu ejus
locum-tenen. ibidem salutem. Cantabr. Universitas. Procancellario Universatis
Cantabr. salutem. Carleil. Majori and Ballivis Villae de Carleil in Com. Cumb.
and eorum cuilibet salutem. Carlick Civitas. Majori and Ballivis Civitatis
Carlick in Com. Coldfield Sutton. Gardiano and societati Villae nostrae de
Sutton. Coldfield in Com. War. Calue. Constabulario and Burgensibus Burgi sui
de Calue in Com. Cricklade. Ballivo and Burgensibus Burgi sui de Cricklade in
Com. Wilts salutem. Carisbrook. Clarissimo consanguineo suo H. comiti
Southampt. Constabulario castri sui de Caresbrook in com. Southampt. vel ejus
locum-tenent. Ac portatori sive ejus Deputat. ibid. Chagford Stannar.
Praecharissimo consanguineo suo W. comiti Pembrook Camerario hospitii sui,
praeclari ordinis Garterii Milit. Custodi Stannar. in com. Devon. and Cornub.
Capitali Senescallo totius Ducat. Vic. Subsenesc. Deputat. sive ejus
locum-tenenti Curiae Stannar. de Chagford in com. Devon. salutem. Clitheroe.
Ballivo burgi sui de Clitheroe in com. Lancastr. salutem. Commissario Curiae
Archiep. A. B. Auditori causarum venerabilis in Christo patris G. Archiepisc.
Cant. totius Angliae primat. causar. and negotior. cur. and Audientiae suae.
Commissario Curiae London. Aliter. A.B. Commissario Generali R. Episcopi
London. Curiae suae Christianitatis apud tenend. vel ejus locumtenenti.
Chipping-Norton. Ballivis Senescallo sive communi clerico vel Deputat. ejus
burgi sive Villae de Chipping-Norton in Com. Oxon. salutem. Chesthunt.
Senescallo curiae L. militis manerii sui de Chesthunt in Com. Hartf.
Christ-Church. Majori and Burgensibus burgi sui de Christ-Church in Com.
Southampt. Cancellario Angliae. Praedilecto and fideli suo A. B. Cancellario
suo Angliae. Custodi Sigilli magni. Praedilecto and fideli suo J. W. Episcopo
Lincoln and Custodi magni Sigilli sui Angliae. Custodi privati Sigilli. E.
Comiti Wigorn and custodi privati Sigilli sui. Cirographario de Banco. A. C.
Armigero Cirographario curiae nostrae de Banco salutem. Cullenbeck. Senescallo
curiae suae de Cullenbeck in Com. Carnanton. Senescallo and Ballivo Manerii sui
de Carnanton in Com. Cornub. salutem. Carvion. Majori and B^llivis Villae de
Carvion in Com. Cramborn. Ad hundred Cur. W. Comitis Sarum. Manerii sui de
Cramborn in com. Chepstow Villa. Senescallo and Ballivis Villae de Chepstowe in
Com. Monmouth. Chepstow. Admiralitat. Senescallo Curiae Admiralitatis in
Chepstowe in Com. Monmouth salutem. Carlion. Ad curiam W. Comitis Pembrook de
Carlion in Com. Corf castrum Majori and Senescallo de Corf-Castle in Com.
Dorset. Christi Ecclesiae Cantuarien. Senescallo altae curiae Decani and
Capituli Ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Camelford. Majori and Burgensibus Burgi sui
de Camelford in Com. Cornub. Carlington. Majori and Burgensibus Burgi sui de
Carlington. in Com. Castri Episc. Villa in Com. Salop. Ballivo and Burgensibus
Villae Castri Episcopens. in com. Salop. salutem. Clifton Dartmouth Hardness.
Majori Ballivo and burgensibus Burgi sui de Clift. Dartmouth, Hardness in com.
Devon. salutem. Castri Novi subtus Linam. Majori and burgensibus burgi sui novi
Castri subtus Linam. in com. Staff. salutem. Castri Novi sup. Tinam. Majori and
Villae Castri novi sup. Tinam. in com* Northumber. This was lately made a
County Palatine (unde quaere.) Clunsland Stai. Stannar. Gardiano Stannar,
Devon. and Cornub. and Capitali Senescallo Ducat. sui Cornub. aut suo Deputat.
ibid. Et praecipue sibi aut suo Deputat. Senescallo infra Manerium de Stan.
Clunsland parcel. Ducat. Cornub. praed. infra Can. Cornub. etc. Cantuarien.
Provinciae Supremis Commission. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri G. providen^ia
divina Cantuar. Archiepisc. P^imat. and Metropolitano. Ac aliis supremis
Commissionar. Reg. ad causas Ecclesiasticas inter alias sub magno sigillo
Angliae legitime and sufficient. authoritat.
D.
Dartmouth. MAjori Ballivis etc. Burgi sui de Clifton. Dartmouth Hardness.
Devises. Majori Ballivis and Burgens. burgi nostri de Devises. Dunelm.
Reverendo in Christo Patri W.D. unel. Episcop. sive ejus locum-tenenti ibidem
salut. Derby. Ballivis Recordatori and Burgens. Villae sive burgi Villae de
Derby salutem. Denbigh. Ballivis and Recordatori burgi sive Villae de Denbigh
salutem. Doncaster. Majori and Recordatori Villae de Doncaster and eorum
cuilibet. Donwich. Ball. Villae sive burgi de Donwich in com. Suff. Dover.
Constabular. nostris Castri nostri de Dover infra libertat. quinque Portuum in
Com. nostro Canc. sive deputat. ejus ib. seu eorum alteri. Downhevit. Majori
Aldermannis and Recordat. Burgi de Downhevit. alias Launceston. Derbiae.
Ballivis and Burgen. burgi nostr. Derb. Sede vacant. T. C. Armigero
Cancellario Com. Palentini Dunelm. sede Episcopali ibid. Jam vacant. Aliter in
alio libro. Custodi Spiritualitatis Episcopatus Dunelm. sede Episcopali
vacant. Danx. Ballivo A, D, M, manerii sui de Danx in Com. Ebor. Downton.
Constabulario and Burgensibus burgi sui. de Downton. in Com. Dorchester.
Ballivo and Recordatori burgi sui de Dorchester in Com. Dorset. Droitwich.
Ballivis and Burgensibus burgi sui de Droitwich in Com. Downhevit alias
Launceston. Majori Aldermannis Recordatori Burgi sui de Downhevit, alias
Launceston. in Com. Cornub. Daventry. Ballivo Burgensibus and communitati de
burgo de Daventry in Com. Northampt. salutem.
E
C. Eborac. MAjori Aldermannis and Vic. Civitatis Eborac. C. Exon. Majori and
Ballivis Civitatis suae Exon. ac Ball. Cur. pro vestr. ejusdem Civitatis and
eorum cuililibet in Com. Devon. Sancti Petri Ebor. Senescallo cur. libertat.
Decani and capituli Ecclesiae Cathed. Sancti Petri Ebor. Estretford. Ballivis
Villae suae de Estretford. in Com. North. E^e. Ballivis nostris Villae and
Burgi de Eye salutem. Escaetori. A, B, Armig. Escaetori nostro Com. nostri
Salop. ac. vic. ejusdem. Com. Necnon omnibus B^llivis and singulis minist ris
nostr. com. praedict. tam infra Libertates quam extra, salutem. Evesham,
commonly Esom in the Vale. Majori and Burgensibus Burgi sui de Evesham in Com.
Wigorn, etc. Edlogom. Ad curiam E, M, Armig. manerii sui de Edlogom. in com.
Elye. Justic. Episcop. Elien. ad placita infra insulam. tenend. Ac Senescallo
ejusdem Episcopi infra libertatem insulae praed. and eorum cuilibet salutem.
Eborac. beati Petri. Senescallo Curiae libertatis Decani and Capituli Ecclesiae
and Metropolitic. beati Petri Eborac. in com. Ebor. Episcopens. castrum Com.
Ballivo and Burgensibus Villae castri Episcopensis in com. Salop. Salop.
East-lowe. Majori and burgensibus burgi sui de East-low in com. Cornub.
East-Greensted. Ballivo and burgensibus burgi sui de Bast-Greensted in com.
Sussex salutem. Evermouth. Majori and burgensibus Villae suae de Evermouth in
com. Southhampt.
F
Forien. juxta Salop. SEnescallo and Ball. Libertat. Forien. oriental. juxta
vill. Salop. Fleet. Guardian. Prisonae nostrae de le Fleet seu ejus
locum-tenenti ibidem. Le Fleet. Gardiano Prisonae nostrae de le Fleet sive ejus
locum-tenenti ibidem salutem. Farnham. Ballivis Burgi and vill. de Farnham in
com. Surry. Aliter. Senescallo Curiae Castri Reverendi in Christo Patri Dom. L.
Winton. Episcopi Manerii sui de Farnham. in. com. Surry. Fordington. Ad Curiam
Caroli Principis Walliae, Ducis Cornubiae and Eborac. and Comitis Cestr.
Manerii sui de Fordington. in com. Dorset. Foway. Praepositis and Burgens burgi
sui de Foway in com. Cornub. salutem.
G
Gipvicus. BAllivis Villae suae Gip. in com. Suff. salutem. C. Glouc. Majori
Aldermannis and Vic. Civitatis nostrae Glouc. Guilford. Majori and probis
hominibus Villae nostrae de Guilford. Gravesend. and Milton. Plaeposit. Jur.
and capital. Inhabitant. villarum and Paroch. de Gravesend, and Milton in Com.
Canc. Greensted. Ballivo and Burgens. Burgi sui de East-Greensted in com.
Sussex salutem. East Gipwicum, or Ipswich. Ballivis Villae suae de Gipwici in
com. Suff. salutem. Gate House Westminster. Custodi nostro de le Gate House
infra. Westmonasterium. Gillingham. Senescallo curiae suae de Gillingham. in
Hundred. de Gillingham. in Com. Dorset. hac vice sede Archiepisc. Cantuar. jam
vacant, seu ejus deputat. ibid. salutem. Glastonbury. Curiae Libertatis Dom.
Regis de Glastonbury in Com. Somerset. Aliter. Curiae Dom. Regis xij. Hidari de
Glaston. Libertatis in Com. Summers. Goodrich. Ballivis W, M, Armig. and B. H.
Genesis Manerii sive Dom. sui de Goodrich in Com. Grampount, or Crampound. Majori
and Burgensibus burgi sui de Crampound in Com. Cornub. Grimsbie. Majori and
Burgensibus Villae suae Magni Grymsbie in Com. Lincoln. Grantham. Aldermano and
Burgensibus Villae suae de Grantham. in com. Lincoln. salutem. Gatton. Burgens.
burgi sui de Gatton in Com. Surry.
H
Havering at Bower. SEnescallo and sectatoribus cur. Manerii nostri de
Havering. at Bower. Havering Bower. Senescallo and sectatoribus dominae Annae
Reginae Angl. consortis suae praecharissimae. Heston. Majori and Ballivis burgi
nostri de Heston in Com. Cornub. Heref. C. Majori, Aldermannis and Civibus
Civitatis nostrae Heref. Harwich. Majori and Senescallo burgi Herewici. Higham
Ferrers. Majori and Aldermannis Villae nostrae de Higham-Ferrers and eorum
cuilibet. Hunt. Ballivis villae nostrae Hunt. Henley super Thames. Ballivis,
Guardian. Pontinariorium burgensium and civitatis vill. de Henley super Thames.
Hertf. Vill. Majori and capital. burgens. burgi nostri de Hertf. necnon
Senescallo Cur. nostrae de Record. ibidem. Hexham. Senescallo Curiae suae de
Hexham in Com. Westmerl. Aliter. Senescallo Manerii nostri de Hexham in Com.
Westminster. Harbill. Ad Wapentagium nostrum de Harbill. in Com. Hartpool. Majori and
Burgensibus Burgi sui de Hartpool infra Episcopatum Dunelm. Heydon in
Holdernes. Majori and Ballivis Villae suae de Heydon in Holdernes in com. Ebor.
Hunnington burgus in Com. South. hampt. Hatfield. Ad Curiam manerii nostri de
Hatfield in Com. Helston. Majori and Burgensibus Burgi nostri de Helston in
Com. Cornub. Heref. Hal. Episcop. Ad Curiam S. Episc. Hereford Palatii Heref.
Henley super Thamesin. Ballivis, Guardian. Burgensibus and communitat. Villae de
Henley super Thamesin. in Com. Berks. salutem. Haselmere. Burgensibus Burgi sui
de Haselmere in Com. Surrey. Horsham. Majori and Burgensibus Burgi sui de
Horsham. in Com. Sussex salutem. Heytesbury. Ballivo and Burgensibus Burgi sui
de Heitesbury in com. Wilts. salutem.
I
Insul. Elien. JUstic. nostr. ad placita infra insul. Elien. in Com. Cantabr.
tenend. assign. Iernemouth. Ball. Villae sive burgi and libertat. villae sive
burgi magnae Jernmouth ( alit.) ballivis villae nostr. magni Jernm. salutem.
Iusticiariis ad placita. Jacobo Ley militi Capital. Justic. nostro ad placita
coram nobis tenend. assignat. Justice. de Banco. H, H, Militi and Baronetto
capitali Justic. nostro de Banco. St. Iohannis Beverlacie. Senescallo Curiae
Libertatis Ante placitorum Sancti Johannis Beverlacie in Com. Ebor. salutem.
St. Ives. Praeposit. and Burgensibus Burgi sui de St. Ives in com. Cornub. St.
Iermyns. Praeposit. and Senescallo Burgi de St. Jermins in Com. Cornub.
K
Kingston super Hull. Kingston super Thames. MAjori and Vic. Villae nostrae de
Kingston super Hull. Ballivis and Senescal. Cur. villae nostrae de Kingston
super Thames and in absenc. dicti senescall. ball. and Recordator. ejusdem
vill. sive duobus eorum. S. Katherins ss. Senescall. Magistr. sive custod.
Hospital. sive liberae capellae S. Katherinae prope Turrim. London. in Com.
Midd. seu ejus locum-tenen. ibidem. Aliter. Senescall. Libertat. Magistr.
fratrum and sororum and capell. in Ecclesia Hospitalis Sanct. Katherinae
Virginis and Martyris prope Turrim London. Curiae nostrae ibidem necnon Ballivo
ejusdem. Kerby Kendal. Aldermanno Recordatori and Burgens. burgi de Kirby.
Kings-Norton. Senescallo Ballivo ac secta^^ribus Curiae Manerii de Kings-Norton
in com. Wigorn. and eorum cuilibet salutem. This was the late Queens, and
before her death it was styled accordingly. Kendal. Ballivis manerii nostri de
Kendal in com. Westmerl. Knaresborough. Senescallo Curiae Honoris de
Knaresborough in com. Ebor. parcel. Ducat. nostri Lancastr. Kellington burgu^.
in com. Cornub.
L
Lyn Regis in Norf. MAjori and Recordatori Vill. sive Burgi de Lyn Regis in
com. Norf. and eorum utrique. London. Majori Alderman. and Vic London salutem.
Lyn Epi. Majori Villae de Lyn Episcop. Litchfield ss. Ball. Libertat.
Litchfield. Un. Vic. in com. Staff. Lincoln. Majori Vic. and Civibus Civitat.
suae Lincoln* Lydiford. Majori and Burgensibus Burgi de Lydiford. Lanceston,
al. Downhevet. Majori and communitat. Burgi de Lanceston alias Downhevet.
Ludlow. Ballivis Villae de Ludlow. Lyn Regis in Dors. Majori villae nostrae de
Lyn-Regis in Com. Dors. Liscared al. Liskerd. Majori and Burgens. Burgi de
Liscared alias Liskerd. Lincoln. Ball. Decani and Capitul. Ecclesiae Cathedr.
Beatae Mariae Lincoln. cur. suae Gaolae infra clausum ibidem. Leicest. Majori,
Ballivis and Burgens. Burgi sui Leic. Lancastr. Cancellar. nostro Com. Palatini
nostri Lancastr. vel ejus locum-tenen. ibidem vobis mandamus quod per breve
nostrum sub sigillo Com. Palatin. nostri praed. debit. conficiend. mand. fac.
vic. com. praed. quod, etc. London Counters. Majori, Aldermannis ac vic.
London. and eorum cuilibet salutem. Leicestr. Majori, and Burgensibus Villae
Leicestr. Leoni. Ballivo and Burgensibus de Leoni in com. Ledbury. Ballivo suo
burgi sui de Ledbury in Com. Necnon judicibus cur. ejusdem Burgi salutem.
Lugharnes. Ad curiam R.H. Armig. de Lugharnes in Com. Lugwarden. Ballivis T. B.
Armig. Manerii sui de Lugwarden in Com. Leomynster, which I take for Lempster.
Ballivis and Burgensibus burgi sui de Lempster in Com. Heref. salutem.
Lugbargh. Ad hundred de H.B. Milit. and Baronetto de Lugburgh in Com. Lostwich.
Majori and Burgensibus burgi sui de Lostwich in Com. Cornub. salutem.
Lancaster, burgus. Majori and Ballivo Burgi sui Lancastr. in Com. Lancastr.
Leverpool. Majori and Aldermanno Villae suae de Leverpool in Com. Lancastr.
salutem. Jews. Constabulario and Burgensibus Burgi sui de Jews in Com. Sussex
salutem. Ludgershal. Burgensibus burgi sui de Ludgershal in Com. Wilts salutem.
Lymington. Majori and Burgens. burgi sui de Lymington in Com. Southhampt.
salutem.
M
Maidstone. MAjori Villae sive Parochiae de Maidstone. Marleberge. Majori and
Burgens. Burgi and Villae de Marleberge in Com. Wilts. Maldon. Ballivis Villae
suae de Maldon in Com. Essex. Maidenhead. Gardiano Potentiariis Burgens. and
Communitat. Villae de Maidenhead in Com. Berks. Melcomb-Regis. Majori villae
suae de Melcomb Regis. Weymouth and Melcomb-Regium. Majori, Aldermanis,
Ballivis Burgens. and Communitat. Villae de Weymouth and Melcomb Regis in Com.
Dors. Mynehead. Praeposit. and Burgens. Burgi de Mynehead in Com. Summers.
Monmouth. Majori and Ballivis Villae suae de Monmouth. Mar. Mares. Mar.
Mares. nostrae in curia nostra coram nobis. Mar. hospic. nova Cur. Senescallo
Curiae Marescal. Hospitii nostri ac Mar. nostro ejusdem Hospitii necnon
Judicibus Cur. virgae Hospitii praed. and eorum deputat. ibidem. St. Martins le
Grand London. Senescallo Decani and Capituli Ecclesiae Collegiat. Beati Petri
Westminster. Cur. libertatis suae sive praecinct. Sanct. Martini le Grand London. and
Constabular. ibidem salutem. Mar. hospic. Judicibus curiae virgae hospicii
nostri vel ejus deputat. ibidem salutem. Mandeville. Senescallo and Ballivo
honoris de Mandevile parcel. Ducat. Lancastr. salutem. Midhurst. Ballivo and
Burgensibus Burgi sui de Midhurst in Com. Sussex salutem. Malton. Marden. in
com. Ebor Ballivis suis manerii de Marden, alias Mawrden, alias Mawarthyn in
Com. Magor and Redwick. Ad Curiam E. comitis Wigorn. de Magor. and Redwick in
Com. Malmsbury. Aldermannis and Burgensibus burgi sui de Malmesbury in com.
Wilts salutem. Morpeth. Ballivis and Burgensibus Burgi sui de Morpeth in Com.
Northumb. Michael. Praeposit. and communitatibus burgi sui Michaelis in com.
Cornub. salutem. St. Mawes, alias St. Mary's. Majori Villae suae St. Mawes
alias St. Mary's in com. Cornub. salutem.
N
Newport. MAjori and Ballivis villae sive Burgi de Newport. Novum Castr. super
Tinam. Majori Alderman. and Vic. Villae novi Castri super Tinam. Northton.
Majori and Ball. villae nostrae de Northton. Newark super Trent. Alderman. and
assisten. Inhabitant. Villae and Parochiae de Newark super Trent. in Com. Not.
Norwici. Majori and Vicecomitibus civitat. Norwici vic. Com. Norff. Not.
Majori Aldermannis and vic. Villae Not. (2. vic.) Newberry. Majori Aldermannis
and Burgens. Burgi de Newberry in com. Berks. Civitas Norwici. Majori Vic. and
Aldermannis Civitat. nostrae Norwici and eorum cuilibet. Novi castri sulter
Line. Majori and Burgensibus Burgi sui Novi castri subter Linam in Com. Staff.
Newton. Ballivo and Burgensibus Burgi sui de Newton in Com. Lancastr.
O
Oswestry. BAllivis and Burgens. Villae de Oswestr. Oxon. Majori and Ballivis
Civitatis Oxon. Orford. Majori and Portmannis Villae de Orford. Oxon
Universita^. Vice-Cancellario Academiae Oxon.
P
Pool. MAjori Villae de Pool and seniori ballivorum ejusdem villae. Plymton
Morris. Majori Ballivis and Burgens. burgi sui de Plymton Morris. Peterborough
Senescallo Cuiae Decani and Capituli Ecclesiae Cathedral. Civitatis de Burgo
Sancti Petri and Burgens. ejusdem Civitatis and eorum cuilibet. Plymouth.
Majori and Communitati Burgi sui de Plymouth. Pawnton. Senescallo and Ballivis
Manerii sui Villae de Pawnton. Portsmouth. Majori Aldermannis, and Burgens.
Villae de Portsmouth. Curia Pallatii. Judicibus curiae Pallatii nostri Westminster.
and eorum cuilibet. Pevensey. Ballivo Libertatis Ducat. sui Lancastr. infra
ripam suam de Pevensey in Com. Penwith. Senescallo and Ballivo hundred. and
libertatis suae de Penwith in Com. Cornub. Padstow, alias Petrockstow. Majori
and burgensibus burgi nostri de Padstowe in Com. Cornub. Portland. Ad Curiam
Manerii sui de Portland in Com. Dorset. Portpigham or Parthighsam alias
Westlowe. Majori and burgensibus burgi sui de Portpigham alias Westlowe in Com.
Cornub. salutem. Pymbern. Ad hundred* Willielm. Comitis Sarum de Pymbern in
Com. Preston Andernes. Majori and Ballivis Villae sive burgi sui de Preston in
Andernes in Com. Lancastr. Pembrig. Ballivo and Senescallo Villae sive burgi de
Pembrig* in com. Petersfield. Majori and Communitatibus Burgi sui de
Petersfield. in Com. Southampt. salutem. Park. Senescallo R. W. Armig. Manerii
sui de Park Lettys alias Part Lettys in Com. Pontfract. Majori Villae suae
Pontfract. in Com. Ebor. parcel. Ducat. sui Lancastr. Pickering. Ballivis and
sectatoribus curiae nostrae de Pickering in Com. Ebor.
Q
Quinborough MAjori and Burgens. Burgi sui de Quinborough in Com. Canc.
salutem.
R
Ryalton. SEnescallo and Ball. Cur. Manerii de Ryalton. Reading. Majori,
Aldermannis and Burgens. Burgi de Reading. Rillaton. Senescallo, Decemar. and
praeposit. ac liberis Tenentibus Manerii sui de Rillaton parcel. Ducat. sui
Cornub. Richmond in Com. Ebor. Aldermannis, Recordatori and Burgens. Burgi
nostri de Richmond in Com. Ebor. Roffen C. Majori and civibus civitatis nostrae
Roffen. Pallatum Roffen. Senescallo Reverend. in Christo Patris Jo: Epis:
Roffen: Cur: Palacii sui Roffen: salutem. Rumney Marsh. Ball. and Jurat. de
Rumney-Marsh. in Com. Canc. Rippon. Senescallo and Ballivis libertat. Cur:
Canon nuper Canonicorum and capituli Ecclesiae Collegiat: de Rippon: in com.
(Ebor.) parcel. Ducat. nostri Lanc. ( Inquire if more Rippons.) Rye-gate.
Ballivo and Burgensibus Burgi sui de Rye-gate in Com. Surrey.
S.
Salop. BAllivis Villae nostrae Salop. salutem. Le Strand. Ballivo Libertat.
Ducat. Lancastr. in le Strand in com. Midd. Saltash. Majori and liberis
Burgens. sui de Saltash. Southold. Ballivis Villae nostrae de Southould aliter
Ballivis and Burgens. libertat. villae de Southold. Southmoulton Majori and
Capitul. Burgens. villae suae Southmoulton. C. Novae Sar. Ball. Libertat.
Episc. Sar. Civitat. Novae Sar. Staff. Ball. and Burgensibus Burgi de Staff.
Sudbury. Majori Aldermannis burgens* and Senescallo Burgi sive Villae de
Sudbury et eorum cuilibet. Manerium de Southwark. Senescallo Curiae libertat.
Reverendi in Christo patris B. Winton Episc. Manerii sui de Southwark in Com.
Surry. Compter in Southwark. Senescallo Curiae libertat. Majoris, Communitat.
ac Civ. Civitatis London Burgi sui de Southwark. Scarborough. Ballivis Villae
nostr. Scarborough. Southon Vill. Majori and Ball: Villae Southton. Aliter.
Majori and Ball: Villae nostrae Southton Curiae suae pedis-pulverizat. ibidem
necnon Custod. Gaolae nostrae infra eandem villam ejusdem deputat. ibidem and
eorum cuilibet. Aliter. Vic. Southt. necnon custod. Gaolae nostri castri
Winton. ac Civit. nostrae Winton. Shafton. Majori Recordatori and Burgens.
Burgi de Shafton in Com. Devon. Stoke Clunsland. (Tali Dom.) Gardiano Stannar.
Devon. and Cornub. and capital. senesc. ducatus sui Cornub. aut suo deputat.
ibidem and praecipue, sibi aut suo deputat. senescallo infra Manner. de Stoke
Clunsland parcel ducat. Cornub. praed. infra com. Cornub. praed. salutem.
Supremis Commissionariis Cantuarien. provintiae. Reverendissimo in Christo
Patri G. providentia Divina Cantuar. Archiepiscop. Primat. and Metropolitano ac
aliis supremis Commissionar. Regis ad causas Ecclesiasticas internal. sub magno
sigillo Angliae legitime and sufficient. authoritat. Steford East or
East-Stretford. Ballivis villae suae de East-Stretford in Com. Not. Slaughter.
Senescallo Ballivo and liberis sectatoribus libertatis hundredi nostri de
Slaughter in com Gloc. salutem. Le Savoy extra Temple Bar. Ballivo libertatis
Dom. Regis ducat sui Lanc. in com. Midd. salutem. Spiritualis curiam. J. S.
Legum Doctori ac Audientiae Reverendissimi in Christo patris G. Archiepisco
Cantuar. totius Angliae primat. and Apostolicae sedis legalis causarum and
negotiarum auditori. Sherborn. Ad curiam hundred. de Sherborn in Com. Dorset.
Stebunheath. Senescallo praenobilis T. W. Manerii sui de Stebunheath.
Stepleton. Senescallo curiae T. C. militis manerii sui de Stepleton in Com. ()
Snaith. Ad curiam nostram de Snaith in Com. () Aliter. Ballivis and
sectatoribus curiae manerii nostri de Snaith parcel. Ducat. Lanc. Sheffield. Ad
curiam C. comitis Salop de Sheffield in com. St. Iermins. Praeposit. and
senescallo Burgi de St. Jermins in Com. Cornub. Stamford. Aldermannis and
Burgensibus Villae suae le Stamford in Com. Lincoln. Stockbridge. Ballivo and
Burgensibus Burgi sui de Stockbridge in com. Southton. Stayning. Constabulario
and Burgensibus Burgi sui de Steyning in Com. () Shoreham. Constabulario and
Burgensibus Burgi sui de Shoreham in Com. Lanc. Sarum vetus Burgensibus burgi
sui veteris Sarum in Com. Wilts. Shaftsbury. Majori and Burgensibus Burgi sui
de Shaftsbury in Com. Dorset. Vide an sit Shafton in Shaftsbury.
T
Turris London. WIllielmo Ward Militi Constabul. seu locumtenen. Turris London
necnon Senescallo Curiae ejusdem and eorum utrique. Torrington magna. Majori
Aldermannis and Burgens. Burgi sive Villae de Torrington. magna. Aliter. Majori
Aldermannis Capital. Burgens. et Senescallo Burgi sive Villae de Torrington
magna in Com. Devon. Tavestock. Senescallo sive Ballivo F. commit. Bedf.
Libertatis suae de Tavestock. Thacksteed Majori Ballivis and Communitat. Burg.
de Thacksteed et eorum cuilibet salutem. Thetford. T, C, Commit: S, Capitali
Senescallo Villae nostrae de Thetford parcel: Ducat: nostri Lancastr: vel ejus
Deputat: ibidem. Toll-Booth. Ball: de le Toll-Booth Villae de Lyn Episc.
Aliter. Ball: Bur: de le Tolbooth: vill. de Venner Episc. Totnes. Majori de
Burgens. Burgi de Totnes: et eorum cuilibet. Taunton. Ballivo Reverendi in
Christo Patr. T. Episcopi Winton libertat. suae de Taunton et Taunton-Dean.
Tewksburgh. Ball. Burgens. and Communitat. Burgi sui de Tewksburgh. Thetford.
Majori and Recordatori Burgi nostri de Thetford in Com. Norf. Tamworth.
Ballivis villae nostr. de Tamworth. Thremalton. E. H. Praeclari Ordinis
Garterii Militi dom. Hasting de Loughborough Capital. senescallo nostro ducat.
nostri Cornub. necnon feod. and Manerii de Thremalton sive ejus deputat. ibidem
salutem. Trebenin alias Bossiny Majori Burgensibus Burgi sui de Trebenin alias
Bossiny incom. Cornub. Truro. Majori and Burgensibus Burgi sui de Truro in Com.
Cornub. Tregoni. Senescallo and Ballivo H. P. Manerii sui de Tregoni P. in Com.
Cornub. Trellock. Majori and Ballivis W. comitis Pembrook villae suae de
Trelleck in Com. Cornub. Tregony. Ad curiam A. W. Arm. de Tregony in Com. Co
nub. Tickhill. Ad curiam nostram honoris nostri de Tickhil in Com. Ebor.
parcel. Ducat. sui Lanc. Turman-Hall. Ad curiam W. Manerii sui de Turman-hall
in Com. () Trennaton. Charissimo consanguineo ac praedilecto and fideli
consilia^io nostro Willielmo comiti Pembrook Domino camerario hospitii nostri,
praenobilis ordinis Garterii milit. capital. senescallo Ducat. nostri Cornub.
Nec^on feod. and manerii de Trennaton in com. Cornub. sive ejus deputat.
salutem.
V
Uske. PRaepositis and Ballivis Villae sive Burgi de Usk.
W
C. Westminster. BAllivo libertat. Decani and Capitali Ecclesiae Collegiat. beati
Petri Westminster. Wallingford. Majori, Alderm. and Recordatori Burgi sive villae de
Wallingford. Wenlock. Ball: et Senesc: villae et libertat: de Wenlock magna.
Warwick. Ball: et Recordator: Burgi nostri Warwici. Wenlow. Ball: Villae de
Wenlow. Wye. Senescallo et Ball: H, C, Nobil: ordinis Garterii Mil: Dom:
Hounsdon Reg: Manner: de Wye in com. Canc. et eorum cuilibet. Wygorn. C.
Ballivis Alderm: et Camerar: Civitatis nostrae Wigorn. Wigmore. Senescallo et
Ballivo villae sive Burgi de Wigmore. Nova Windsor. Majori Ball: ac Burgens:
Villae sive burgi nostri de Nova Windsor in Com: Berks. Aliter. Majori, Alderm:
Ballivis and subsenescallo Burgi de Nova Windsor. Castrum Wind. T, C,
Constabular: Honoris and Castri sui de Windsor ac Custod: Forest: ejusdem aut
ejus locum-tenen: seu ejus deputat: ibidem. C. Winton. Majori Recordatori vel
ejus deputat: and Ball: Civitat: nostrae Winton et eorum cuilibet. Woodstock.
Majori Villae suae de Nova Woodstock. Aliter. Majori et Communitat: Burgi Novae
Woodstock. Cur. Waittel. Ballivis and sectatoribus Curiae suae de Waittel.
Castr. Windsor. Carolo Comiti Nottingham Baron: Howard de Effingham praeclari
Ordinis Garterii Milit: magno Admirallo Angliae Constabulario honorum Castri
Domini Regis de Windsor ac Custod: totius Forestae ibidem Janitori extr. portum
dicti Castri salutem. Westmon. Dean and Chapter. Ballivo libertat. Decani and
Capituli Ecclesiae Collegiat: beati Petri Westminster. Wellen. curia Episcop.
Senescallo sive Ballivo Curiae Reverendi in Christo Patris J, Bathon: et
Wellen: Episcopi. Wellen. burgus. Senescallo sive Ballivo Curiae nostrae de
placit. ad reverend. in Christo Patrem Dom. J. permissione Divina Bathon. and
Wellen. Episc. pertin. sive concess. tent. apud Guild Hall infra Burgum and
Villam nostram de Wells in Com. nostro Somerset. Wotton-Basset. Majori and
Burgensibus Burgi de Wotton-Basset in Com. Wilts and eorum cuilibet. Wike
Regis. Ad curiam Dom. Regis Manerii sui de Wike Regis in com. () Worham. Majori
and Burgensibus Burgi sui de Worham in Com. Dorset. Wormlowe. Ballivis A. Dom.
Chandos and E. B. arm. Manerii five hundred. de Wormlowe in Com. Wickome. Ball.
() VVickcom in com. Buckingham. Inquire Chipping-Wickom before. Wilton super
Wian. Ballivis A. B. arm. manerii sive Dom. de Wilton super Wian in Com.
Wentworth Li^erty near London. Ballivo Libertatis Thomae Dom. Wentworth in com.
Midd. Inquire if they be distinct under the same style, lying in eodem Com.
Walsal. Ballivis Manerii sui de Walsal in com. () salutem. Whitchurch. Majori
and Communitatibus Burgi sui de Whitchurch in com. Southam. Westbury. Majori
and Burgensibus Burgi sui de Westbury in com. salutem.
Speciales Directiones.
Monmouth. Escaetori. ss. EScaetori ac vic: Monmouth necnon Ballivis
singulisque ministris nostris tam infra Libertates quam extra and eorum
cuilibet. Justice. insul. Elien. ss. Justic: Epi: Elien ad placita infra insul:
Elien tenend. Ac Senes: Epi: infra libertatem insulae praedict: and eorum
cuilibet. Custod. pacis infra libertatem. ss. Custos pacis suae infra
Libertatem Villae Sancti Albani in Com: Hertf. Justice. ad Gaol delib. ss.
Justic: nostris ad Goalam nostram Castri Lincoln: de prisonariis in ea existen:
deliberand: Assign: salutem. Vic. and Custod. Goal. ss. Vic: Lincoln: and
Custod: Goalae Castri nostri Lincoln: sive ejus locum-tenen: aut deputat:
ibidem and eorum cuilibet. Justice. Forest. ss. Dilect. and fidel: suo W, Comiti
C, Justic: suo omnium Forestarum suarum citra Trent: vel ejus locum-tenenti
infra Forestam suam de Walton. Justice. ad Assizas Custod. pacis ac Vic. ss.
Justic: suis ad Assizas in Com: W, ac Custod: pacis in eodem Com: necnon vic.
ejusdem Com: and eorum cuilibet. Justice. ad Assizas and Justice. ad Goal. delib.
ss. Justic. suis ad Assizas in Com: S, and Justic. nostris ad Goal. nostram
Castri-nostri de L, delib. Assign. Custod. pacis infra libertatem. ss. Custod:
pacis Thomae Archiep. Ebor. infra libertatem suam de Rippon. Custod. bre. ss.
Dil. and fideli nostro T, L, A, Custod: Brevium nostrorum de Com: Banco.
Custod. Gaol. ss. Custod: Gaol: Castri sui Ebor: aut ejus deputat: and eorum
utrique salutem. Majori London. ac Justice. ad Newgate and vic. ss. Dil. et
fidelibus nostris A, B, Majori Civitat: London, Sociis suis Justic: nostris ad
Gaolam nostram de Newgate de Prisonar. in eadem existen. delib. Assign. ac vic.
ejusdem Civitat. et eorum cuilibet salutem. Escaetori and Vic. ss. Escaetor.
nostro ac vic. ejusdem Com. necnon omnibus Ballivis singulis-que ministris Com:
praedicti tam infra libertat: quam extra and eorum cuilibet salutem. Majori
Alderis and vic. London ac deputat. Alderorum et Constabularior. etc. ss.
Majori, Alderman. and vic. London ac omnibus and singulis deputat. Aldermanorum
Constabularior. et aliis ministris nostris infra libertates Civitatis London
and eorum cuilibet salutem. Locum-tenent. Com. and Capitaneis. ss. Deputat.
locum-tenentis Com. nostri Suff. ac omnibus and singulis Capitaneis in eodem
Com. Assign. and eorum cuilibet salutem. Omnibus Justice. majoribus Ballivis ac
al. officiariis. ss. Universis and singulis Justic. majoribus, ballivis, vic.
comitibus Constabulariis, officiariis, ministris and fidelibus et quibuscunque
tam infram libertates quam extra ad quos praesentes pervenerint salutem.
Custod. pacis vic. and omnibus seneschallis and al. in Com. Lincoln. ss.
Custod. pacis ac Justic. nostris ad diversas felonias transgressiones and alia
malefacta in Com. nostro Lincoln. perpetrat. audiend. and terminand. Assign. Ac
vic. Lincoln. Ac omnibus Seneschallis and Secretaribus curiarum and eorum
cuilibet. Epo. Sarum. ss. Johanni eadem gra. Epo. Sarum salutem. Custod.
specialis. ss. I. A. Custod* spiritualitatis Episc. Sarum sede Episcopali jam
vacant, salutem. Pleg. Justice. Cestr. ss. Justic. suis Cestr. vel ejus
locum-tenenti salutem. Justice. ad Assizas Regis. ss. Dil. and fidelibus suis
W.M. militi and T. Justic. dom. E. nuper Regis Angl. quarti post Conqu. Ad
Assizas in Son. capiend. assign. salutem. Vic. majoribus^ Burgens. Sen. and
aliis officiar. ss. Vic. Com. nostri B. necnon omnibus majoribus Burgensibus
Seneschalis Ballivis, ac omnibus aliis ministris tam infra libertates quam
extra in Com. B. and eorum cuilibet. Custod. pacis Justice. ad Assizas and vic.
ss. Custod. pacis suae in Com. Exon. ac Justic. suis ad diversas Felonias
transgressiones and al. malefacta eodem Com. Audiend. and terminand. Assign. ac
Justic. suis ad Assizas in Com. praedicto capiend. assign. necnon Justic. suis
ad Gaolam Castri Exon. de Prisonar. in eadem existen. deliberand. Assign. ac
vic. ejusdem Com. and eorum cuilibet. Majori Admirallae Southamton. ss. Majori
villae suae Southamton ac Admirallo infra Castras maris eidem villae ab antiquo
partim. Aldermano Ward and Collectoribus. ss. Aldermano Wardae Turris London
infra Civitatem nostram London ac collectoribus and Subcollectoribus xxxv.
nobis plegiis Regni nostri Angl. concess. in Civitate praedict. and eorum
cuilibea. Justice. Forestae citra Trentam. ss. Charissimo Consanguineo suo H. B.
Comiti Essex Custod: Forestae nostri citra Trentam vel ejus locum-tenenti in
Foresta nostra de Windsor. Aliter. ss. Charissimo Consanguineo suo H.B. Comiti
Essex Justic. Itinerant. omnium Forestarum, Parcorum, Chasearum and VVarrenarum
nostrorum citra Trentam vel ejus locum-tenenti in Foresta nostra de Windsor.
Recordator et parochianis. ss. Recordatori and parochianis Ecclesiae Sancti
Andreae Holborn in Suburbiis London. Custod. pacis and vic. ss. Custod. pacis
suae in com. Some. ac vic. ejusdem Com. and eorum cuilibet. Thesaur. and Bar.
Scac. ss. Thesaurario and Baronibus suis de Scaccario. Prolotutori Parliamenti
and unius Bar. Scac. ss. Dil. et fidelibus suis Henagio Finch militi servien.
ad legem prolocutori Parliamenti nostri and Recordatori London, Thomae Trevor
militi unius Baronum de Scaccatio nostro and Johanni Hobart milit. and
Baronetto Executoribus, Testamenti Henr. Hobart Militis and Baronetti nuper
Capitalis Justic. de Banco salutem. Justice. magne Sessione wallia. ss. Justic.
nostris magnae Sessionis nostrae in com. Brecon.
Tituli domorum Rel giosorum and Collegiorum.
Eaton. ss. PRaepositus Collegii Regalis Beatae Mariae de Eaton in Com: Buck:
Windsor and iidem Collegae. Exon. ss. Decanis and Capitl. Ecclesiae Cathedralis
beati Petri Exon^ Emanuel. Cantabr. ss. Magr. Sociis and Scholar-Collegii
Emanuelis infra Universitat. Cantabr. Corpus Christi in Oxon. ss. Praefec. and
Scholar. Collegii Corporis Christi infra Universitatem Oxon: in com. Oxon.
Magdalen Oxon. ss. Praesident. Collegii Sanctae Mariae Magdalen in Universitate
Oxon and Scholar: ejusdem Collegii. St. John de Jerusalem. ss. Cuidam W.W.
Milit nuper Priori Sancti Johannis Jerusalem in Anglia and ejusdem nuper
Hospitalis conf. nuper fuerunt Seisit. Baliol. Oxon. ss. Magistro and Scholar.
Collegii de Baliol. in Universitate Oxon. Heref. ss. Decano and Capitul.
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Heref. All Souls Oxon. ss. Gardianis et Sociis Collegii
Animarum omnium fidelium and defunctorum de Universitate Oxon. Wigorn. ss.
Decano and Capitul. Ecclesiae Cathedralis Christi and Beatae Mariae Virginis
Wigorn. Christum Oxon. ss. Decano and Capitul. Ecclesiae Cathedralis Christi in
Oxon. Ex fundatione Regis Hen. octavi. Windsor. ss. Decano liberae -- Capellae
Regiae Sancti Georgii infra Castrum sui de Windsor and Canonicis ejusdem
Capellae. Corpus Christi College. ss. Magistro sive Custod. Collegii Corporis
Christi and Beatae Mariae Virginis vulgariter nuncupat. Bennet College in
Universitate Cantabr. ac Sociis and Scholar. ejusdem Collegii Hill. 10 Car.
primi MDCXLVI.
Communitat. Societat. and Fraternitat. Civitat. Burgorum and Villarum.
Gardiani London. ss. MAgistro, Gardianis assistan. and Communitat. Guard.
Civitatis London. Sarum. ss. Majori and Communitat. Civitatis Sarum. Grocer
London. ss. Ad Respondend. Custod. and Commun. Magistro. Grocer. Civitat.
London. Mich. 43 Car. Rott. 440. Mayor and Communitas London. ss. Ad
Respondend. Majori and Communitat. ac Civibus Civitat. London. M. 3. Car. Rott.
1331.
Parochiae and Wardae in London.
Cheapside. ss. IN Parochia libert. Mariae de Arcubus in War. de Cheap.
Lumbardstreet. ss. In Parochia omnium Sanctorum in Lumbardstreet in Warda de
Bishopsgate. Sepulchers. ss. In Parochia Sancti Sepulchri in Warda de
Farringdon extra. Dunstans West. ss. In Parochia Sancti Dunstani in occiden* in
Warda de Farringdon extra. Woodstreet. ss. In Parochia Sancti Michaelis in
Woodstreet in Warda de Cripplegate. St. Martins. ss. In Parochia Sanct. Martin.
in Warda de Farringdon extra. Fanchurch-street. ss. In Parochia Sancti Dionisii
in Fanchurch-street in Warda de Langborn. Queenhithe. ss. In Parochia Sancti
Michaelis apud Queenhithe in Warda de Queenhithe London. St. Olaves. ss. In
Parochia Sancti Nicholai Olave in War. de Queenhithe. St. Faiths. ss. In
Paroch. Sanct. Fidelis in Warda de Farringdon infra. Little S. Bartholomews
prope le Regal. Excambium. Apud le Northgate Regalis excambii in Par. Sanct.
Barthol. parvi prope Regale excambium in Ward. de Broadstreet, Hill. 20 Car.
primi Rott. 383. St. Lawrence old Jury. ss. Inquisitio Capt. apud Guildhall
Civitatis London scituat. and exist. in Par. Sanct. Laurencii in veteri Jury in
Ward. de Cheap London. St. Paul's. ss. Apud Ecclesiam Cathedralem Divi Pauli
London in War. de Farringdon infra. St. Magnes. ss. In Par. Sanct. Magnetis in
Warda de Bridgeward London, Pasch. 3 Car. Rott. 1205. St. Anne. Devisum Sanctae
Annae in Warda de Farringdon infra.
Civitat. and Villae habentes Vic. Videlicet.
Civitas Bristol. duo vic. Civitas Coventri. duo. Civitas Cantuar. un. Civitas
Ebor. duo. Civitas Exon. duo. Civitas Glouc. duo. Civitas Lichfield. un.
Civitas Lincoln. duo. Civitas London. duo. Civitas Norwic. duo. Civitas Wigorn.
un. Villa De Kingst. super Hull. un. Villa Southampton. un. Villa Nottingham.
duo. Villa De Pool. un. Villa Nov. cast. sup. Tinam. un.
FINIS.

