Cocker's DECIMAL ARITHMETIC: Wherein is showed the Nature and Use of Decimal
Fractions, in the usual Rules of Arithmetic, and in the Mensuration of Planes
and Solids. Together with Tables of Interest, and Rebate for the valuation of
Leases and Annuities, Present, or in Reversion, and Rules for Calculating of
those Tables. Whereunto is added. His Artificial Arithmetic, showing the
Genesis or Fabric of the Logarithmes, and their Use in the Extraction of
Roots, the Solving of Questions in Anatocisme, and in other Arithmetical Rules
in a Method not usually practiced. ALSO His Algebraical Arithmetic, containing
the Doctrine of Composing and Resolving an Equation; with all other Rules
requisite for the understanding of that mysterious Art, according to the Method
used by Mr. John Kersey in his Incomparable Treatise of ALGEBRA.

Composed by EDWARD COCKER, late Practitioner in the Arts of Writing,
Arithmetic, and Engraving.

Perused, Corrected, and Published By JOHN HAWKINS, Writing-Master at St.
Georges-Church in Southwark.

Cum tua non edas cur haec mea Zoile Carpis,
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
(...).
LONDON, Printed by I. Richardson, for Tho. Passinger, at the Three Bibles on
London Bridge, and Tho. Lacy, at the Golden-Lyon in Southwark. M DC LXXXV.

To the Right Worshipful Sir PETER DANIEL, Knight. AND PETER RICH, Esquire Aldermen of
the CITY OF LONDON. THOMAS LEE, Esquire AND JAMES READING, Esquire Justices of the
Peace for the COUNTY of SURRY. JOHN HAWKINS Humbly Dedicateth this Treatise of
ARITHMETIC.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IN the year of our Lord, 1677, I published Mr. Cocker's Vulgar Arithmetic;
and therein gave an account of the speedy publication of his Decimal,
Logarithmical, and Algebraical Arithmetic; but other extraordinary occurrences
intervening, occasioned its not seeing the light before this time:

By the Vulgar part, the Ingenious Learner may be qualified with so much of
that most necessary Art of Arithmetic as is sufficient for the management of
business in the greatest concerns of Trade and Commerce; And for those
Ingenious Souls, whose active fancies lead them to a further scrutiny into the
study of the Arts Mathematical was this Treatise composed, which will fairly
lead them by the hand, without any other Guide or Company, into the
Contemplation of those most sublime speculations, an inheritance entailed only
upon the ingenious, and industrious sons of Art.

The Method throughout the whole is plain, perspicuous, and clear, and I hope
will prove satisfactory to those who shall seriously apply themselves to the
Rules, Precepts, and Examples therein contained

The use of Decimals (in the solution of Questiors Arithmetical, and such
Geometrical as are necessary in the mensuration of the most usual planes and
solids) is as plainly laid down as the Author or my self could possibly
contrive it, and particularly in all the varieties of Interest both Simple and
Compound, with Tables, and Rules for the Calculation thereof, according to the
Method of several Famous Authors (who have bestowed much pains in the
management thereof,) and especially of that most famous, and no less laborious
Mathematician of our Age and Nation, Mr. John Kersey, whose memory deserves
highly to be honored by all the Professors of this Science.

The Genesis or Fabric of the Logarithmes, and their use in Arithmetic is
laid down after a different but more intelligible manner than hitherto has
been used by other Authors, and I hope the studious Reader will receive that
satisfaction therein which our Author earnestly aimed at, or himself can expect.

And as for the Algebraical part I think there is nothing therein expressed
that is superfluous, nor any thing omitted that could be thought necessary to
render it plain, perspicuous, and clear; so that what other Authors treating
upon this subject have left intricate, and difficult to be understood is here
made obvious (by clear demonstration) to the meanest Capacity; Therefore
Courteous Reader, if thou intendest to be a proficient in the Mathematics,
begin cheerfully, proceed gradually, and with resolution; and the and will
crown thy endeavors with success; and be not so sloathfully studious as at
every difficulty thou meetest withal to cry out Ne plus ultra, for pains and
diligence will overcome the greatest difficulty: To conclude, That thou may
so read as to understand, and so understand, as to become a proficient is the
hearty desire of him who wishes thy welfare and the progress of Arts.

From my School at St. Georges Church in Southwark, October. 27, 1684. JOHN
HAWKINS.

Anixo guo Anamfiggino Jorammi Lehkeg Lofoxrofeholrii T^rpiemgig Im Xonifafu
Disohemiemgi Puwinasigfeho.
GIH,
IT you Lepeag fo zegfod gone ot youh glahe rouheg im lehugims fre toppodims
feheafige you dipp frem ze fre zeffeh azpe fo juws rod I rave glemf nime, amw
it ny laimeg freheim nay ze Lhotifazpe fo fre luzpixk I rave ny digr, zuf it
mof, if ig mof a soow frims mod imweew I woe gay go.

Oxfoz. 30. 1684. Thon Pomwom GIH, I an Youh runzpe gehvams Jorm Radking.

The Advice of a Friend of the Authors to such as are desirous to attain to the
perfection of this most useful ART, etc.
YOu that peruse this curious work, observe,
That he not meanly does of men deserve,
Whose studious labor brought it to an end,
And as his Masterpiece did it commend
To those who are desirous to employ
Their time the best of curious Arts to enjoy;
An Art by which man's fortun's often raised,
An Art by all that Trade or Traffic praised:
An Art, or an Acquirement, who so wants
His business, (if important,) quickly faints;
It Is what is so useful, that not to be known,
Would ruin each man's occupation:
Therefore let those who fain would rise embrace
This, and preferment they have in the chase.
Long since it was invented for our good,
Yet till late days, not rightly understood;
And not till now to its perfection brought,
Though many ways with tedious trouble sought.
In these choice pages all is to be found
That does concern the Subject: these do bound
The largest field of true Arithmetic,
No numbers wanting that Mankind would seek
The curious Artist with a searching eye,
Although turned Critic, here no faults can spy,
Or if there any be, they are so small,
That nearly they resemble none at all;
For all that have perused it, have confessed
That of this kind, this much exceeds the rest.
I. A. Teacher of the Mathematics.

In Commendation of his Friend Mr. JOHN HAWKINS, upon the Publication of this
Treatise.
THE Learned Chemist cannot more truly say
He can the unseen powers of Herbs display;
Or by dissolving their External face
Bring Subtle Spirits, Sulphurs, Salts, in place;
Exalt their intern Energy; sublime
From Putrefactive Nunc, Eternal Time:
Than you by ALGEBRA and Numbers prove
The Aequations true, of all the Orbs above.
You by subtracting add, and do divide
The self same way by which you multiplied.
From Numbers small you mighty Powers make,
And from the same the Quintessence you take.
By Infinites, you finite Numbers bind,
By things unknown, you unknown things do find.
Proportions you find out, and as Exact,
As Chemists you Aequations do Extract.
Thus you the Powers of Numbers do unfold,
And like them, change base Metals into Gold.
The spring's unseen; for no man fully knows
From whence the sacred source of Number flows.
But my poor Mite you need not, nor my praise,
To you my lines cannot lasting Trophies raise.
Nor need your Numbers my unlearned defene,
Numerick Truth in its abstracted sense,
Derives its spring from an Eternal Fount,
Without beginning, endless in Account.
The Universal World it does comprise,
It no beginning had, nor ever dies.
All things in the sphere of Sacred Numbers stand,
The most Immense, and the minutest sand.
Heaven, Earth, the Seas, their furniture submit,
And^ heir numerous offspring flows with it:
It measures place and time; in shades of night
It sees no darkness, but Illustrious light.
Both Life and Death to it the same appear,
And Subjects are within its mighty Sphere.
Thus my affections (friend) make me intrude,
Though with unpolished lines, and numbers rude,
On such a Theme, Who could forbear to sing?
To Sacred Fire, who should not Incense bring?
Inspired by thy Great ART, my sublime Muse
The eternal Truth of Numbers shall diffuse:
Whii'st I applaud the object of thy Pen,
The unknown depths of Algebra and Men.
Here fix thy Pillars; in this ART aspire
To light Our Tapers with Celestial fire.
In the same Zeal proceed: thy numbers f^
With speaking Symbols to the meanest Wit.
13th October. 1684. Yours, and Truths Servant William Salmon. Med. Profess.

To the Ingenious Author of these Decimals, and Algebra, the Famous
Arithmetician; and his Singular good Friend by choice, EDWARD COCKER.
WIth admiration struck I here should pause,
Not daring trust my muse in your applause,
Whose fame already has so loud been sung
By the Divinest of the Sacred Throng:
Did not your Rich, and Matchless Art inspire
My drowsy soul with a poetic fire;
For who in silence can remain, that views
A Subject worthy such as can infuse
A moveing Rapture of the first degree
Into a Breast, before from Phoebus free:
So great a Masterpiece as this, mankind
In all their tedious search could never find.
Arithmetick's here to perfection brought,
Here Is to be found what never yet was taught:
The curious work so to the Life is drawn,
That all besides are like the Mornings dawn;
Compared to Days clear face when Sol sits high
In his Meridian Throne in vain some try
To reach your arts perfections, but the more
Their genious flags when to your hights they would soar;
And at the best their labors do appear
But foiles to make your Di'monds shine more clear.
This Book of yours bears record of your fame,
And to all ages will transfer your Name.
For why, your boundless Wit, and curious Pen
Do style you right the miracle of Men.
R. N. Philo-Math.

In memory of the deceased Author, Mr. EDWARD COCKER: And in praise of this
(Posthumal) and His Former Works.
WHO e're (of old) to the Common good applied
Their minds or means, but they were Deifi'd?
And chiefly those, who new Inventions found;
Bacchus for Wine: Ceres who Tilled the Ground:
Whose Fames and Memories will ever last
Till the late Evening of the World be past.
Now this our Author by his fluent Pen
In all Fair-Writing did exceed most Men:
And though in Knotting, Gething did do well,
Cocker in That, did Gething far excel:
And not with Pen alone, on Paper He
Could Write and Knot, but with the Graver too
On Copper plates He did all Men outdo.
What curious Copy-Books and Sculptures are
Extant in Print of His, which may compare
With any in the World, and no one Hand
Had Pen and Graver both at such Command.
But leaving now his Writing, take a view
Of his Arithmetic, whose Books are Two:
The one of Plain (or Vulgar Numbers) made
Fit for Young Scholars, and for Men of Trade.
This other's in Three parts, more General;
Of Artificial Numbers, DECIMAL,
The second's Numbers LOGARITHMICAL:
The third by Symbols ALGEBRAICAL:
All Fraught with Questions Enigmatical,
Of all Arithmeticks the GENERAL.
Consider now what Pains the Author took,
And Praise Him as Thou benefits by His Book.
But since the Authors dead, I Will not defer
To praise and thank the ingenious Editor.
W. Leybourn.

Ad amicum suum dilectissimum dominum Joannem Hawkins de opere hoc mira cum
eruditione, tum industria Correcto and Reviso.
(...).
Si meruit Laurum, qui Lauro scribere digna
Novit, and ad sophiam pandere callet iter.
Quid meruit qui non tantum novit, sed and ipse;
Praestitit ingenio, vix facienda, suo?
Laurea convenient non tantum serta capillis,
Aurea sed potius, docte, corona tuis.
Aurum vos illi divites concedite, Laurum
Dent alii, nemo se meruisse neget.
Quod si nec Lauri nostro tribuetis honorem
Autori, plane quem meruisse liquet,
Auri nec summam dabitis quam quisque fatetur
Ingenii meritum non minus esse sui.
Non Maecenates eritis, non esse patronos
Posse putat, quorum tam sit avara manus,
Sed potius (veniam petimus, dabimusque vicissim)
Nominat ingratos vos (scio cur) asinos.
Ioannes Robinson.

A Catalogue of the Chapters contained in the Decimal Part.
Chap. Page NOtation of Decimals. 1 1 Reduction of Decimals. 2 (...) Addition
of Decimals. 3 1^ Subtraction of Decimals. 4 18 Multiplication of Decimals. 5
20 Division of Decimals. 6 25 The Rule of Three in Decimals. 7. 39 The further
use of Decimals in the Mensuration of superficies and Solids. 8 44 The
Extraction of the Square Root. 9 7^ The Extraction of the Cube Root. 10 89 The
use of the Square and Cube Root in solving some Questions Arithmetical and
Geometrical. 11 116 Concerning Simple Interest. 12 129 Of Compound Interest. 13
150

A Catalogue of the Chapters contained in the Logarithmical Part.
Chap. Page OF Artificial Arithmetic. 1 205 Of the nature of Logarithmes. 2
207 Of the Genesis or Fabric of the Logarithmes. 3 212 Of the use of the Table
of Logarithmes, and to multiplly thereby. 4 219 Division by the Logarithmes. 5
222 To raise the Powers of Numbers, viz. to find the Square, Cube, Biquadrat,
etc. of any Number. Also to Extract the Square, Cube, Biquadrate, etc. Roots of
any Numbers by the Logarithmes. 6 223 Of the use of Logarithmes in Comparative
Arithmetic. 7 239 Of Anatocisme or Compound Interest wherein is showed ^ow by
the Logarithmes to answer all questions concerning the Increase, or present
worth of any sum of Money or Annuity for any term of years, or at any Rate of
Interest, etc. 8 249

A Catalogue of the Chapters contained in the Algebraick Part.
Chap. Page Concerning the construction of Cossick Powers, and the way of
expressing them by Letters, together with the signification of all such
Characters or marks as are used in the ensuing Treatise. 1 263 Addition of
Algebraick Integers. 2 279 Subtraction of Algebraick Integers. 3 285
Multiplication in Algebraick Integers. 4 292 Division in Algebraick Integers. 5
301 The Doctrine of Algebraical Fractions, and first of Reduction. 6 316 Of
Addition and Subtraction of Algebraical Fractions. 7 320 Multiplication and
Division of Algebraical Fractions. 8 324 The Rule of Three in Algebraick
Quantities. 9 327 A Collection of some easy Questions wherein the Rules
hitherto delivered are exercised, etc. 10 331 Reduction of Equations. 11 335 To
Convert Analogies into Equations, and Equations into Anglogies. 12 344 The
Resolution of Arithmetical Questions (Algebraically) which produce simple
Equations. 13 347 How to extract the Root of a square formed from a Binomial,
and how by having any two of the Members of such a Square given, to find the
third. 14 365 Concerning the Resolution of Questions producing Quadratick
Equations. 15 372 The Doctrine of Sard Quantities. 16 399 The parts of
Numeration in Compound Surds. 17 404 The parts of Numeration in Universal Surd
Roots. 18 408 Algebraical Questions resolved by various Positions. 19 423

ADVERTISEMENTS.
ALL sorts of Mathematical Books are sold by Tho. Passinger; at the Three
Bibles upon London Bridge.

AT St. Georges Church in Southwark are taught Writing, Arithmetic in all its
parts, and Merchants Accounts after the Italian manner, and also these
Mathematical Arts, viz. Geometry, Algebra, Trigonometry, Plain and Spherical,
Astronomy, Navigation, Gunnery, Fortification, the projection of the Sphere,
the use of the Globes, and other Mathematical Instruments by John Hawkins, the
Publisher of this Treatise.

MR. James Atkinson Teacher of the Mathematics, living at Cherry Garden-stairs
in Rotherhithe teaches all Mathematical Arts to all Persons whatsoever, at as
easy Rates, and as speedy as any.

NOTATION OF DECIMALS.
CHAP. I.
1. WHAT Arithmetic, and the Subject thereof, (viz. Number) is, I have largely
defined in the First Chapter of my Vulgar Arithmetic, in which Treatise I have
applied the species of Numeration to the various Rules of Vulgar Arithmetic,
both in Integers, and Fractions; for the solution of various Practical
Questions solvable thereby, by such plain and easy Rules as many years
experience in the practice thereof had made me capable of, and which I hope
might render it Intelligible, and serviceable to the meanest Capacity.

And in this I shall show you the use of Decimal Fractions in all the Rules of
Arithmetic, but Principally in the solving Questions of Interest and Rebate,
according to several Rates of Interest, both Simple and Compound, with the true
Valuation of Leases and Annuities, either present or in Reversion, and likewise
their use in the calculating of Tables for that purpose, etc.

II. In Decimal Fractions we suppose the unite or Integer to be divided into
ten equal parts, and each of those tenth parts are again divided into ten other
equal parts, so that then the Unit or Integer will be divided into 100 equal
parts, and then again each of those hundred parts is supposed to be divided
into 10 other equal parts, so that then the Unit or Integer will be divided
into 1000 equal parts, etc. And so by Decimating the first and subdecimating
the second we proceed ad infinitum.

III. And hence it is evident that a Decimal Fraction is always either so many
tenths, or it is so many tenths of 1/10, or it is so many tenths of 1/10 of
1/10, or so many tenths of 1/10 of 1/10 of 1/10, etc. which compound Decimal
Fraction being Reduced, as is taught in the 6 Rule of the 19 Chapter of my
Vulgar Arithmetic, will give its equivalent simple Decimal Fraction; As for
Example, 8/10 of 1/10 of 1/10 is.008 that is 8/1000 and hence it follows that
always a Decimal Fraction has for its Denominator an unite with a Cipher, or
else Ciphers annexed to it on the right hand, viz. either 10, or 100, or 1000,
or 10000, or 100000, etc. ad infinitum.

IIII. In Decimal Fractions the Denominator is never expressed, but may at
first sight be understood by the Number of places contained in the Numerator;
the Denominator being always an unite with as many Ciphers annexed to it, as
there are real places in the Numerator; as 8 being a Decimal is 8/10, viz. its
Denominator is an unite with one Cipher annexed to it, and 85/100 is thus
written.85 and 146/1000 thus written.146; But if the Numerator of a Decimal
Fraction consists not of so many places as there are Ciphers in the
Denominator, then such defect is supplied by prefixing so many Ciphers before
the Numerator, (viz.) on the left hand as there are places deficient; as for
example, 8/100 if it were only set down thus, (.8) then it would be but 8/10,
but by praefixing a Cipher before it thus (.08) it is 8/100 and 8/1000 is thus
expressed (.008) and 25/1000 is thus written (.025) and 25/10000 thus (.0025)
etc.

V. A Decimal Fraction being written without its Denominator, is known from a
whole Number, by having a point or prick prefixed before it thus;.25 is 25/100
but if it had been expressed without a point thus (25) it would have signified
so many unites: The same is to be observed in mixed Numbers, for 2916/100 being
written Decimally, will stand thus (29.16) and 4825/1000 thus, (48.025) and
4828/10000 thus, (48.0028) and the like of any others.

But some Authors distinguish Decimals from whole Numbers, by prefixing a
virgula, or perpendicular line before the Decimal, (whether it be alone, or
joined with a whole Number) thus, (...) is 8/10, and (...) is 25/1000, and
(...) is 2916/100, etc. Others express the same Decimal Fraction and mixed
Numbers thus, (viz.) (...) (...) (...), etc. Others with a point over the place
of Units in the whole Number; and then the former Fractions and mixed number
will be thus written; viz. 08, 0025, 2916 the like of others: And some Authors
again put points over all the places or figures in a Decimal Fraction thus: 8,
025, 2916, 48025, etc. but being written according to the first Direction, I
conceive they may be most fit for Calculation.

VI. As whole Numbers do increase their value in a decuple proportion, by
annexing a Cipher or Figure to the place of Units, so by prefixing a Cipher or
Figure on the left hand of a Decimal, so as actually to take place in the
Decimal, its value is decreased in a subdecuple proportion, so the Number 4, by
annexing a Figure or Cipher to it; it is increased from 4 to 40, etc. But if 4
had been a Decimal, viz. 4. and if there had been o prefixed before it on the
left hand, its value had been decreased from 4/10 to 4/100 or.04, and by
prefixing 5, it is.54; and still by prefixing more Figures or Ciphers, its
value will decrease in the same Ratio ad infinitum.

VII. And as Ciphers being prefixed before a whole Number, (viz.) on the left
hand thereof) do neither increase or decrease its value; (for 4, and 04, and
004 being Integers, do still retain one and the same value;) So a Decimal, by
having a Cipher, or Ciphers annexed to the Right hand thereof, have not their
value either Increased, or Decreased.

Whence it is evident, that all Decimal Fractions may be Reduced to an equal
Denomination at first sight; for suppose.15, and.068, and.73465 were Decimals
given to be Reduced to one Denomination; In this case I consider that the
Denominator for the given Decimal consisting of the most places is 100000,
and.15 and.068 whose Denominators are 100 and 1000 may be reduced to Decimals
of the same value, having likewise 100000 for their Denominator, by annexing so
many Ciphers on the Right hand of the Numerators, as (according to the 4
Definition foregoing) may make each of them to have 100000 for a Denominator,
so.15 will be.15000, and.068 will be.06800.

VIII. As the order of places in whole Numbers is from the Right Hand to the
left, so the order of places in a Decimal Fraction is from the Left Hand to the
Right; the first place being accounted tenth parts of an Unity, and by some it
is called primes, the second place is so many hundredth parts of unity, or it
is called seconds, the third place is so many thousandth parts of unity, or
it is called thirds, etc. which will more fully appear by the following Table.

A Table of Notation of Integers and Decimals.
Integers Of Unites Ninth place 3 C of Mill. Eighth place 8 X of Mill. Seventh
place 4 Millions Sixth place 3 C of Thous. Fifth place 7 X of Thous. Fourth
place 5 Thousands Third place 8 Hundreds Second place 6 Tens First place. 4
Unites Decimals Of Unity. Primes 8 Tenth parts Seconds 2 Hundr. parts Thirds
3 Thous. parts Fourths 0 X Thous. parts Fifths 5 C Thous. parts Sixths 6
Mill. parts. Sevenths 3 X Mill. parts Eighths 5 C Mill. parts Ninths 4 Tho.
Mill. parts

In the foregoing Table is given a mixed Number of Integers and Decimals; the
Integers being separated from the Decimals by a point, or prick, according to
the fifth definition beforegoing; so that 384375864 signify so many Integers
or Unites, and 823056345 signify so many parts of Unity, the figure 8 in the
first place being so many tenth parts of unity; and the next figure, viz. the
figure 2 is so many hundredth parts of unity, etc.

So in the Decimal Fraction.4378, the figure 4 possesses the first place, and
is 4 primes, or four tenth parts of an unite, and 3 the second figure is called
3 seconds, or three hundredth parts of an unite, and 7 the third figure is
called seven thirds, or seven thousandth parts of an unite, and 8 the fourth
figure is called eight fourths, or eight ten thousandth parts of an unite, etc.

Whence it appears that every place in a Decimal Fraction being considered a
part by it self, without any respect to the rest, will of it self make a
particular Decimal Fraction; so in the last mentioned Decimal Fraction, viz.
4378, each place being considered by it self, will make these following Decimal
Fractions, viz.. 4.03.007 and.0008, or 4/10, 3/100, 7/1000, and 8/10000; which
Fractions being added together, according to the Rules of Addition of Decimals
hereafter delivered in the third Chapter, their sum will be.4378, which is the
given Decimal of which they are composed.

IX. A Decimal Fraction is expressed by some Authors, by Primes, Seconds,
Thirds, Fourths, etc. As if this Decimal.748 were to be expressed, they say it
is seven primes, four Seconds, and eight thirds: Others there are which express
it thus, viz. seven hundred forty eight thirds, but the most approved way to
express or read a Decimal Fraction, is according to the method of reading a
vulgar Fraction, and to give it the Denomination of the Figure in the last
place of the Decimal, and then the Decimal.748 will be thus read, viz. seven
hundred forty eight thousandths, and.036 is thus read, thirty six thousandths,
and so of any other. This Chapter being well understood, all the parts of
Numeration, viz. Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division of
Decimals will prove very easy.

CHAP. II. Reduction of Decimals.
To Reduce a given Vulgar Fraction to a Decimal, that shall be equivalent
thereto.
1. When in any Arithmetical Operation your work is so mingled with vulgar
Fractions, as to render it tedious, or difficult; the best remedy you can have,
is to reduce your vulgar Fraction or Fractions into a Decimal or Decimals,
which having done the work, will be as easy in every Respect, as if you had to
do with nothing but whole Numbers, which you may effect by the following
Proportion, viz. As the Denominator of the given vulgar Fraction, is to its
Numerator,

So is an Unite, with so many Ciphers as you intend your Decimal shall have
places, To the Decimal Required.

So if the Fraction to be Reduced were, and you would reduce it to a decimal
consisting of 4 places, I say, the Proportion is

As 4 (the Denominator of the given Fraction.)

Is to 3 (its Numerator.)

So is 10000 (the denominator of the decimal required.)

To.7500 (the Decimal required.)

So that I conclude will be reduced to its equivalent decimal.7500, or.75; for
Ciphers on the Right hand of a decimal do neither increase nor diminish its
value, by the seventh definition of the First Chapter.

Now according to the foresaid proportion, it is evident, that if to the
Numerator of any Fraction given to be Reduced to a decimal, you an^ex as many
Ciphers as you intend its equivalent decimal shall have places, and then divide
it by its denominator, the Quote will be the decimal required.

So let there (again) be given to be Reduced (as before) to a decimal of 4
places, in order thereunto I annex 4 Ciphers to the Numerator 3, and it makes
30000, which I divide by the denominator 4, and it Quotes.7500, or.75, for the
decimal equivalent to the vulgar Fraction.

Note that all vulgar Fractions cannot be Reduced to decimals, having exactly
the same value, although they may come infinitely near, and the more places
that you make your decimal to consist of, so much the nearer does it come to
the truth, but 4 or 5 places is exact enough for most operations, so if it be
required to reduce the vulgar Fraction 9/11 to a decimal of 4 places, it will
be found to be.818^ which is not exact, but yet it wants not 1/10000 part of
an unit of the truth, and if you make it.8182, it will be somewhat more than
the truth.

Again if you annex 5 Ciphers to the Numerator, and so make the decimal consist
of 5 places, it will then be.81818, yet it will want of the truth, but not so
much as when it had but 4 places, for now it will not want 1/100000 part of an
unite of the exact truth, and if you make it to be.81819, it will then exceed
the truth. Thus by increasing the number of places in the Decimal, you may come
infinitely near the truth, but never find a decimal exactly equivalent in many
cases.

Note also, that if after you have Reduced your vulgar Fraction to a decimal,
according to the foregoing Rule, there be not as many places in the decimal, as
you annexed Ciphers to the Numerator of the given vulgar Fraction, then you are
to supply such defect by prefixing so many Ciphers on the left hand of the
significant Figures, as there are places wanting, according to the fourth Rule
of the First Chapter.

So if 11/941 were given to be Reduced to a decimal of any number of places, as
suppose 6; in order to it, I annex 6 Ciphers to the Numerator 11, and it makes
11000000, for a dividend, which divided by 941, it quotes 11689, which
consists but of 5 places, but it should have 6 places, wherefore to make it
complete, I prefix a Cipher before it, and it makes.011689 for the true decimal
Required; and if it had been required to consist of 4 places, then I annex 4
Ciphers to the numerator, yet after division is ended, there will be but 3
places in the Quotient, viz. 116, therefore to make it consist of 4 places, I
prefix a Cipher before it, and it makes.0116 for the decimal ^ought. Again let
there be given 23/5642 to be Reduced to a decimal of (suppose) 5 places it will
be found to be.00407; and 14/64837 will be reduced to.000215

To Reduce the known parts of Money, Weight, Measure, Time, etc. to Decimal
Fractions.
II. Hence it is evident that the known parts of Money, Weight, Measure, Time,
and Motion, etc. may be Reduced to decimal Fractions of the same value, or
infinitely near it, for if (in Money) a Pound Sterling be an Integer,
whatsoever is less than a Pound, is either a part or parts of the same; and
when you know what part or parts thereof it is, you may reduce it to a decimal
of the same value, by the first Rule of this Chapter; so if you would know what
is the decimal of a Pound Sterling equal to 7 Shillings; consider that 7 s. is
7/20 of a Pound, and by the said Rule, the decimal answering thereto is.35 l.
And if I would know the decimal equal to 3 d. I consider that 3 d. is 3/12 of
1/20 of a Pound, or 3/240 of a Pound, and the decimal equivalent thereto, will
be found (by the said Rule) to be.0 125; likewise if there were given 7 s.3 d
to find the decimal equal thereunto: First, I consider, that 7 s.3 d. is 87
pence, which is 87/240 of a pound, and the decimal equal thereto will be found
to be.3625 l.

In like manner if it were required to find the decimal of a Pound Troy weight
equivalent to 6 oz.-12 pw. I first find that 6 oz.-12 pw. make 132 pwts. which
is 132/240 of a pound Troy weight, and the decimal equivalent thereunto, will
be found to be.55 by the said first Rule of this Chapter. The like is to be
understood in the Reducing of any of the known parts of Coin, Weight, Measure,
etc. into Decimals.

To find the value of a Decimal Fraction, in the known parts of Money, Weight,
Measure, etc.
III. When you would find the value of a decimal Fraction in the known parts of
Coin, Weight, Measure, Time, Motion, or the like, observe the following

RULE

Multiply the given Decimal by the Number of parts in the next inferior
denomination that are equal to an Integer in the same denomination with the
given decimal, and see how many places are in the product, more than were in
the said given decimal; and cut so many off from the left hand with a dash of
your pen, and those Figures so cut off, are the value of the said decimal in
the next inferior denomination to it, and the Figures (if there be any)
Remaining, are the decimal of an Integer in the said denomination, and may be
Reduced as low as you please by the same Rule; as in the following Example.

Let it be required to find the value of this decimal of a pound sterling, viz.
7635.

First, I multiply the given decimal by 20, and the product is 152700 which is
of 6 places, and the given decimal is but of 4 places, wherefore I cut off 2
Figures at the left hand, viz. 15. which is so many shillings, now when the
said ^ 15 is Cut off from the rest, there are yet remaining 2700, which I
multiply by 12 to find the value thereof in pence, and the product is 32400,
which consisting of 5 places, I cut off one Figure, (viz. 3) from the left
hand, which is so many Pence; so that I conclude the value of the given decimal
to be 15 s.-03 d. and the remaining Figures, viz. 2400 are the decimal parts of
a penny, which because they do not amount to the value of a Farthing, I do not
Reduce any lower, see the work in the Margent.

So if.6847 l. be given, and it be required to find its value, if you work as
is before directed, you will find it to be 13 s.-08 d.-1.312 quarters. And 374
l. being so Reduced, you will find it to make 7 s.-05 d.-3.040 quarters.

In like manner, if it were required to Reduce this decimal of a pound Troy
weight, viz..84576 l. into known parts; First, I multiply it by 12, and it
produces 1014912, from which I cut off the two first Figures to the left hand,
(viz. 10.) for Ounces, and the Remaining Figures, which are 14912 do I multiply
by ^0, and the product is 298240, ^ from which I cut off the first Figure, viz.
2, which is two penny weight, and 98240 remains, which I multiply by 24, and
the product is 2357760, which is 23.57760 grains; so that I conclude the value
of the given Decimal.84576 pound Troy weight to be 10 oz.-02 pw.-23 gr..57760;
the same is to be observed in finding the value of any other decimal
whatsoever, whether of Coin, Weight, Measure, Time, or Motion.

I might here have added Tables of Reduction, showing the decimal Fractions of
any of the parts of Money, Weight, etc. as diverse Authors have already done;
but (because they are (though useful) seldom made use of, and partly by reason
of the ease in finding the equivalent decimal of any Fraction whatsoever,
according to the Rules herein delivered) I shall forbear it.

IV. There is a briefer way of discovering the value of a decimal of a Pound
sterling, viz. The Figure which stands in the first place of the decimal,
(viz. in the place of primes) being doubled, gives you the number of shillings;
then let the Figure possessing the second place of the decimal, (viz. the place
of seconds) be esteemed so many tens, and the Figure in the third place account
so many units, which said te^s and units being accounted one entire number, and
made less by one, will be so many farthings, which said shillings and farthings
are the value of the given decimal; but if the Figure in the second place be 5,
or else exceed 5, then reckon one shilling for that, and for the excess above
5, esteem every unit 10, as before.

Example 1.

What is the value of.7365 l?

The Figure 7 (standing in the place of primes) being doubled, gives 14, which
is so many shillings, and the Figure in the second place, (which is 3) being
accounted so many tens is 30, and the Figure in the third place (viz. 6) being
esteemed units, and annexed to the tens beforesaid, makes 36, which being
lessened by 1, makes 35 farthings, which is 8d., so is 14s.-08d. the value of
the given Decimal.7365 l.

Example 2.

What is the value of.8896 l?

The first Figure (8) being doubled, makes 16; and because the next Figure is
above 5, I add 1 to 16, which makes 17 shillings: Then the excess of the second
Figure above 5 being 3, I esteem it so many Tens, and the Figure (9) in the
third place being units, makes 39; which lessened by 1, makes 38 Farthings,
which is 9d., so is 17s.-9d., the value of the given decimal.8896. And after
the same manner may the value of any decimal of a pound sterling, be discovered
at first sight without loss of a farthing.

CHAP. III. Addition of Decimals.
I. THE work of Addition of Decimal Fractions is in every respect the very same
with that of whole Numbers of one Denomination in common Arithmetic, respect
being had to the right ordering or placing of the decimals required to be
added, which that you may understand, observe this

General Rule,

II. When two or more decimals are given to be added together, you are so to
dispose of them one under the other, as that all the Figures on the left hand
may stand in order one under the other, that is to say, primes under primes, or
tenth under tenths, (whether they be Ciphers or significant Figures) and
seconds or hundredths, under seconds or hundredths, etc. observing the same
order if they consist some of them of never so many places, and others of never
so few.

Example.

Let there be given these following Decimals to be added together, viz..00746,
and.0832, and.62 and.8: First, I dispose of them in order to the work, as you
see in the ^ Margent, where you see the lowermost Figure 8, which is primes, is
placed under 6, 0 and 0, which are likewise primes, and the Figure 2 in 62
being in in the place of seconds is placed under 8 and 0 which are likewise
seconds, or hundredths, and the Figure 3 in the place of thirds, or thousandths
is placed under 7, which is also so many thirds, etc. The same order is to be
observed in placing of the decimals of mixed Numbers to be added, as suppose
there were given these following mixed Numbers to be added together, viz.
168.3572, and 36.864, and 7.42. and.6: Now in order to the finding out their
sum, I dispose of them in order one under the other as follows. Where you may
observe that the whole Numbers themselves, or Integral parts of the given mixed
Numbers are placed one under the other, as is directed in Addition of whole
Numbers, without any respect at all had to the decimals annexed to them, and
the decimals are placed under each other, according to the Directions given in
the last Rule, without any respect had to the Integers, properly belonging to
them.

^

III. Having placed your given Decimals in order, according to this Rule, draw
a line under them, as in Addition of whole Numbers, under which line you are to
place their sum; Then proceed in your work in every respect, as in Addition of
Integers, beginning at the right hand, and so proceeding through the Decimals
without any regard to them as Decimals, but as if they were all whole Numbers:
As for example, let us take the Decimals given in the first example of the last
Rule foregoing; And first I put down 6 under the line, because there is no
other figure or number to add to it, then I proceed to the next, saying 2 and 4
make 6, which I also set down in order under the line, then I ^ say 3 and 7
make 10, so I set down 0, and carry 1 to the next, saying 1 that carry, and 2,
and 8, make 11, for which I set down 1, and carry 1 to the next, saying, 1 that
I carry and 8, and 6, make 15, which I put in its place under the line, because
it is the last; and because the figure 5 stands under the place of primes, I
put a point before it, that is to say between 1 and 5, and the work is
finished; the number 1 being an integer, and the rest a decimal, whereby I find
the sum to be 1.51066, that is 1 integer, and.51066 parts of an integer.

After the same manner if the mixed numbers in the second example of the
foregoing Rule were given to be added, their sum will be found to be 213.2412,
that is 213 integers and.2412 decimal parts of an integer, as you may see by
the following work.

^

Other Examples for the Learners practice may (...) such as follow.

^

CHAP. IV. Subtraction of Decimal Fractions.
1. When two Decimal Fractions are given, and their difference or excess is
required, you must place them (in order to the work) as you were taught in the
foregoing Chapter of Addition, and the operation is the very same in every
respect as in Subtraction of whole Numbers of one denomination, beginning at
the Right hand, as in the following Example.

Let it be required to Subtract the Decimal.634 from the Decimal.728; In order
to the work I put them one under the other, viz. ^ the biggest uppermost, and
take each figure in the lowermost out of its Correspondent figure in the
uppermost, putting their respective differences in order below the line, and I
find, (that when I have finished the operation) the Remainder or difference to
be.094 as by the work appears.

In like manner if the mixed Number ^ were given to be subtracted from the mixed
number 76.123. I place them in the same order as is directed in Addition
before-going, only with this Caution, be sure to place the biggest uppermost,
then proceed to take each figure in the lowermost out of its correspondent
figure in the uppermost, as if they were whole numbers, and having finished the
work, the Remainder, or difference will be found to be 33.776 as you see it
done in the Margent.

When the Decimal given to be Subtracted do not consist of an equal number of
places, such defect must be supplied by annexing Ciphers, or supposing as many
Ciphers to be annexed (as are wanting) on the Right hand, and then the work
will be as in the former Examples.

Example.

Let it be Required to Subtract.037486 from from.84; Now because.84 has in it
but 2 places, and the other has 6, I ^ supply that defect by annexing 4
Ciphers thereto as in the Margent, and the work being finished, I find the
Remainder, or difference to be.802514.

The same is to be observed when a decimal Fraction or mixed number is given to
be Subtracted from a whole number, as ^ suppose 15.486 were given to be
subtracted from 64, because there is no decimal annexed to 64, you are to
supply the Decimal places with Ciphers, and then proceed in the work as before
is directed, and having finished the work of Subtraction, the Remainder will be
found to be 48.514 as by the work in the margent appears.

Other Examples for Practice may be these following.

^

CHAP. V. Multiplication of Decimal Fractions.
I. IN Multiplication of Decimals, whether both the Factors are decimal
Fractions, or whether they be mixed Numbers, or if the one be a decimal
Fraction, and the other a whole or mixed Number the Multiplier is to be placed
under the Multiplicand in the very same manner as in multiplication of whole
Numbers, and when they are so placed, the operation is the same in every
Respect, as in Multiplication of whole Numbers, and when you have added the
several particular products together, as is usual in whole Numbers, the value
of the product is to be found out by this

General Rule,

Look how many Decimal places are in both the Factors, (viz. the Multiplicand
and Multiplier) so many decimal places must be in the product.

Wherefore cut off so many figures from the right hand of the product for
decimals, and the figure or figures Remaining on the left hand (if there be
any) are Integers, as in the following Example.

Let it be Required to Multiply 34.82 by 7.26, it matters not which you make
the Multiplicand, or the Multiplyar, but I take 7.26 for the Multiplyar,
because it has fewest places, and put it in order under 34.82, as if they were
both whole numbers, and having finished the work of Multiplication I find the
product to be 2527932 as you may see by the following work.

^

Then to find the value of the product, I look how many Decimal places are in
(both) the Multiplicand and Multiplyar, and I find 4, wherefore I mark the 4
first places to the Right hand for Decimals, by putting a point between them
and the other figures on the left hand, and then the Product will appear to be
really 252.7932 that is 252 integers, and.7932 Decimal parts of an integer.

A second Example may be of a mixed Number given to be multiplied by a Decimal
Fraction; as thus, let it be required to Multiply 38.5746, by.00463; I prepare
the given Numbers for operation as is before directed, and having finished the
work I find the product to amount to 178600398. Then to find the true value of
the product I consider the number of decimal places, in both the Factors, which
I find to b^ 9, viz. 4 in the Multiplicand and 5 in the Multiplyar, therefore I
mark out 9 places toward the Right hand of the product for a Decimal Fraction,
which indeed is the whole product, and therefore I conclude the true value of
the product to be.178600398, as by the following operation appears, viz.

^

A Third Example shall be of 2 Decimal Fractions, the one being given to be
multiplied by the other, as, let there be given.63478 to be Multiplied by.8264,
having disposed of the given numbers according to order, and finished the work
of Multiplication as is before directed, I find the product to Amount to
524582192, which being done, to find the true value thereof, I consider that
there are 9 decimal places in both the Factors, viz. 5 in the Multiplicand and
4 in the Multiplyar; wherefore I note out 9 places in the product for a decimal
Fraction, and so I find the true value of the product to be.524582192, as by
the following operation appears.

^

The like is to be understood in any of the like Cases whatsoever.

II. If it so happen (as oftentimes it may) that after your Multiplication is
finished, the figures in the product do not consist of so many places as there
are decimal figures in the Multiplicand and Multiplyar, such defect must be
supplied by prefixing as many Ciphers before it toward the left hand, as it
wants places, and then mark such product with the said prefixed Ciphers, for
a decimal Fraction and the true product Required; as in the following Example.

Let it be Required to Multiply.0476 by.0642, after the Multiplication is
finished, I find the product to be 305692, consisting but of 6 places, but the
Number of Decimal places in the Multiplicand and Multiplyar is 8, wherefore to
make the product to consist of 8 places, I prefix 2 Ciphers before it, and then
the true product will be.00305592; the work follows,

^

In like manner if.376523 were given to be Multiplied by.1346, you will find
the product to be 506799958 consisting of 9 places, but there are 10 Decimal
places in both the given Factors; wherefore the product must be increased to 10
places by prefixing a Cipher which will make it.0506799958, as by the following
work.

^

By this time I doubt not but the diligent Learner is well acquainted with
Multiplication of Decimal Fractions, the work being as plain and easy as in
whole Numbers; The next we come to is Division.

CHAP. VI. Division of Decimal Fractions.
HAving gone through Addition, Subtraction, and Multiplication, (The operation
being (as you see) in every Respect the very same as in whole Numbers) we come
now to Division; and although in Decimals, (as well as in whole Numbers)
Division may seem somewhat difficult to the young Practitioner, yet we shall
endeavor to render it as plain and easy as possible may be.

I. The operation in Division of Decimals is in every respect the same with
that of whole numbers, therefore the difficulty in Division of Decimals lies
not in the operation, but in finding out the value of the Quotient after the
work of Division is ended, a general Rule for finding of which shall be given
by and by.

II. It is necessary many times to annex a cipher or ciphers to the Dividend,
whether it be a whole Number, or a mixed Number, or a Decimal Fraction, for many
times the Divisor consists of more places then the Dividend, and in that case
there must be a competent Number of Ciphers annexed to the Dividend, as,
suppose it were required to divide 73.564 by 46.24897, here you cannot
conveniently proceed in the work till you have annexed Ciphers to the Dividend,
to increase the number of places in the decimal part thereof, and you may annex
as many as you please, for by the 7 Rule of the first Chapter, Ciphers annexed
to a Decimal Fraction do neither Augment, nor diminish its value.

III. When a question to be wrought by Division of decimals is proposed,
consider whether there are as many decimal figures in the dividend, as there
are in the divisor; if there be any wanting, make them full as many, or rather
more by annexing Ciphers thereto According to the Rule foregoing, but in some
Cases there must of necessity be more, for when there is an equal number of
decimal places in the dividend, and in the divisor, and a division can be made,
then the Quotient will infallibly be a whole Number without any Fraction,
except what is in the Remainder.

IV. In Multiplication of Decimal Fractions, the product contains as many
Decimal figures as there are decimal places in the Multiplicand and Multiplier,
and in Division if you multiply the Quotient by the divisor the product will be
equal to the dividend, upon which consideration the true value of the Quotient
of any division may infallibly be known by this

General Rule.

After the work of Division is ended, consider how many decimal places are in
the dividend more then there are in the divisor, and how many soever the excess
is, let so many in the Quotient be separated from the Rest for a Decimal. But
if there are not so many figures in the Quotient, as the said excess is, such
defect must be supplied, by prefixing as many Ciphers on the left hand, putting
a point before them, as has been Taught already; then shall such Decimal as
aforesaid, be the true value of the Quotient sought.

I shall explain this Rule by Examples of the several Cases that may happen in
the division of Decimals, which are 9, as follows.

1 a whole Number being given to be divided by a whole Number 2 a mixed Number 3
a Decimal Fraction 4 a mixed Number a whole Number 5 a mixed Number 6 a Decimal
Fraction 7 a Decimal Fraction a whole Number 8 a mixed Number 9 a Decimal
Fraction

Case 1. A whole number given to be divided by a whole number.

V. When you are to divide one whole Number by another and they are not
commensurable, though there are no decimals in either the dividend or the
divisor, yet if you annex a Competent number of Ciphers to the dividend, there
will be a decimal in the Quotient consisting of as many places as you annexed
Ciphers to the dividend.

Example 1.

Let there be given 5729 to be divided by 438; According to the foregoing Rule,
I annex a Number of Ciphers, (suppose 4) to the given dividend which will
supply 4 decimal places, and it will be 5729.0000, and after the work of
division is finished I find the Quotient to be 130799

^

Now to find out the value of the Quotient by the General Rule before-going, I
consider that there are no decimals in the divisor, but there are 4 in the
dividend, and consequently by the said Rule there must be 4 decimal places
noted out in the Quotient by setting a point before them, and then the true
value of the Quotient will be found to be 13.0799.

Example 2.

Let there be given 48 to be divided by 43796, you cannot here make any work
till you have annexed Ciphers to the Dividend, because the divisor is bigger
than the dividend and therefore annex as many as you think convenient, suppose
6, and having finished the work of Division you will find the Quotient to be
1095, now to find out its true value, consider that there are no decimal places
in the divisor, but there are 6, in the dividend, therefore there must be 6
decimal places in the Quotient, but the Quotient as yet possesses but 4
places, therefore to make them up 6 according to the said general Rule, I
prefix two Ciphers before the other figures, on the left hand of the same, so
as they may take place in the decimal by putting a point before them, so will
the true Quotient be.001095, etc.

^

This First Case may very well serve for a further illustration of the first
Rule of the second Chapter of this book.

Case 2.

Example. 3.

A whole number given to be divided by a mixed number.

Let the whole number 586 be given to be divided by the mixed Number 36.4865;
here you may observe that although the dividend be greater then the divisor,
yet there can be no operation until the dividend is prepared by annexing a
competent number of Ciphers to it, and according to the third Rule of this
Chapter, I must annex at least 4, but here I shall take 6 (or more at pleasure)
and then the dividend will be 586.000000, and the work being finished as in
Division of whole numbers, the Quotient will be found to be 1606, etc.

^

Now to discover the value of this Quotient, according to the general Rule
aforegoing, I consider that there are 4 Decimal figures in the divisor, and 6
decimal places in the dividend, the excess being 2, and consequently there must
be two decimal places noted in the Quotient by putting a point before them, and
then the true Quotient will be 16.06 as you may prove at your leisure.

Example 4.

Another Example of the second Case may be this, Let there be given the number
2, to be divided by the mixed number 28.74, having prepared the dividend, by
annexing 6 Ciphers to it, (or more at pleasure) and finished the work of
division as in whole numbers, I find the Quotient to be 695, etc.

^

Now to find out the true value of this Quotient I consider according to the
General Rule, that there are but two Decimal places in the Divisor, and 6 in
the dividend, therefore (the excess being 4) there must be 4 decimal places in
the Quotient, but there are but three places, wherefore I make them up 4, by
prefixing a Cipher before them, according to the latter part of the said
General Rule.

Case 3.

Example 5.

A whole numb. given to be divided by a decimal Fract.

Let there be given the whole Number 48 to be divided by the decimal.0675,
after the dividend is prepared by annexing a competent number of Ciphers, as
suppose 7, after the work of Division is ended, I find the Quotient to amount
to.711111 as follows.

^

Now to find out the value of the said Quotient, by the foregoing general Rule,
I consider that there are 4 decimal places in the Divisor, and 7 in the
Dividend, the excess being 3; wherefore I conclude that according to the said
Rule, there must be 3 decimal figures in the Quote, out off or separated from
the rest by a point, and then the true value of the Quotient will be 711.111
that is 711 integers, and 111 decimal parts of an integer or very near.

Case 4.

Example 6.

A mixed number given to be divided by a whole number.

Let there be given the mixed Number 743.574, to be divided by the whole Number
75.

After the Dividend is prepared by annexing Ciphers at pleasure, and the
operation (according to division of whole numbers finished) you will find this
Quotient, viz. 991432.

^

Now to find out the true value of the said Quotient, I consider that after
there are 2 Ciphers annexed to the dividend, that the decimal part thereof will
possess 5 places; and because there are none in the divisor, therefore the
excess is 5, and consequently (according to the said General Rule) I note 5
places in the Quotient for the decimal part, which being done, I find the true
value of it to be 9.91432.

Example 7.

Again, Let the dividend in the last Example, viz. 743.574 be given to be
divided by the whole Number 43576, and the Quotient will be found to be 17063,
if there be 3 Ciphers annexed to the dividend, and there will be 6 decimal
places in it, and not one in the divisor, wherefore there must be 6 decimal
places in the Quotient, but there are but 5, therefore to make them 6,
according to the said General Rule, I prefix a Cipher, and then the true value
of the Quotient will be.017063 as upon proof you will easily find.

^

Case 5.

Example 8.

A mixed number given to be divided by a mixed nmuber.

Let the following mixed Number viz. 3.748 be given to be divided by the mixed
Number 46.375. Here according to former directions I annex Ciphers (at
pleasure) to the dividend, suppose 5, then will the dividend be 3.74800000 and
having finished the work of division, as if they were whole numbers, I find the
Quote to be 8084, etc. but the true value of this Quotient thus found I as yet
know not, therefore to make a discovery of its value I consider that in the
dividend there are 8 decimal places, and in the divisor there are but three
such places, therefore the number of decimal places in the dividend exceeds the
number of places in the divisor by 5, so that by the foregoing general Rule I
know that there must be 5 decimal places in the Quotient, but there are only 4
figures, viz. 8084, but to make them 5 according to the General Rule, I prefix
a Cipher before the other figures and it makes.08084, which is the true
Quotient sought.

^

Case 6.

A mixed number given to be divided by a Dec. Fraction.

Example 9.

Let there be given the mixed number 54.379 to be divided by the Decimal
Fraction.34687, having annexed a competent number of Ciphers, so that there may
be 3, or 4, or 5 Decimal places in the dividend more then there are in the
divisor, wherefore I annex 6 Ciphers, and then the dividend will be
54.379000000, and when the work of division is ended the Quotient will be found
to be 1567705.

Which being done the next thing in order to the completing of the work, is to
find out the true value of the said Quotient, which is easily done by the said
general rule, for I consider that in the divisor there are 5 decimal places but
in the dividend there are 9 (viz. 3 given significant figures and 6 Ciphers
annexed) so that the excess is 4, therefore I conclude that there must be 4
decimal places in the Quotient, and the rest are of the Integral part, so that
I find the true Quotient is 156.7705, that is 156 Integers, and.7705 or
7705/10000 parts of an Integer, which you may easily prove at your Leisure.

^

Example 10.

If there were given the mixed Number 45.384 to be divided by.000247; here are
not so many decimal places in the dividend as there are in the divisor,
therefore do I increase their Number by annexing 5 Ciphers thereto, and then
the dividend will be 45.38400000, then do I proceed to the operation, taking no
notice at all of the Ciphers which are before the divison, but work as if there
were none at all, and when the work of division is finished, I find the
Quotient to be 183740.89, etc.

^

Now the Quotient being found, I come next to find out its value, which to do I
consider that there are 6 decimal places in the divisor, and 8 in the dividend,
so that the excess is 2 places, therefore I conclude according to the said
general Rule, that there must be two decimal places noted in the Quotient, so
that then its true value will be found to be 183740.89, etc.

Case 7.

A Decimal Fraction given to be divided by a whole number.

Example 11.

Let it be Required to divide the decimal Fraction.07864 by the whole Number
25. here in this Example, there is no need of annexing any Ciphers to the
dividend to prepare it for operation, but yet you may at your pleasure, only
because there is no necessity I shall forbear it, and proceed to the work
according to the Rule of Division in whole Numbers, and the work being
finished, I find the Quotient to be 314, then I proceed to find out the value
of this Quotient by the General Rule foregoing, and because there is no decimal
in the divisor, and 5 in the dividend, therefore there must be 5 decimal places
in the Quotient, and there are but 3 places as yet, therefore do I prefix two
Ciphers before the Quotient thus found, and note them for the true Quotient
sought, which is.00314, as by the operation appears.

^

Case 8.

A Decimal Fraction given to be divided by a mixed Number.

Example 12.

Let there be given the Decimal Fraction 846, to be divided by the mixed Number
3.476, here l 1. prepare the dividend for the work by annexing 4 Ciphers
thereto, and having finished the work of division I find the Quotient to be
2433, and to discover its value according to the general Rule, I consider that
there are in the dividend (after the 4 Ciphers are thereto annexed) 7 decimal
places, and in the Divisor there are but 3, so that the excess is 4, therefore
I conclude that there must be four decimal places in the Quotient, so that the
true Quotient is the Decimal Number.2433, etc. as follows.

^

But if to the said dividend.846 there had been annexed 5 Ciphers then the true
Quotient would have been.24338, etc. and if there had been 6 Ciphers annexed
thereto then had the Quotient been.243383, etc.

Example 13.

Let it be Required to divide this Decimal Fraction, viz..846 by the mixed
Number 34.76, after I have annexed Ciphers to the Dividend to prepare it for
the work; and the work of Division being finished, I find (as before) the
Quotient to be 2433, but the value of it being found out, by the general Rule,
will be different from the former Quote, for having taken the number of decimal
places, in the dividend and the divisor, I find the excess to be 5 in the
dividend, so that there should be 5 decimal places in the Quotient, but there
are now but 4 places, wherefore to supply that defect I prefix a Cipher before
the said Quote, and put a point before it so as it may take place in the
Decimal, and then the true value of the Quotient will be.02433, etc. as
follows

^

And if the Divisor had been 347.6 then the Quote would have been.002433, etc.

Case 9.

A Decimal Fraction given to be divided by a Decimal Fraction.

Example 14.

Let there be given the Decimal Fraction.835796 to be divided by.243, here I
may annex Ciphers at pleasure to the Dividend to prepare it for operation, but
because there is no necessity for it I shall forbear, and proceed to the work
as in Division of whole numbers, which being finished I find in the Quotient
the number 3439, and now I have nothing to do but to find out the true value of
this Quotient, and in order thereunto I consider that in the dividend are 6
decimal places, and in the divisor but 3, wherefore the excess is 3, which is
the number of decimal places in the Quotient, which being separated from the
rest by a point according to former directions, the true value of the Quotient
will be found to be 3.439, etc.

^

But if the dividend had had a Cipher annexed to it, then the Quotient would
have been 3.4394 etc. and if two Ciphers had been annexed to it, then the
Quotient would have been 3.43948, etc. But if the dividend had been.0835796,
and the divisor the same as before, the operation would have been still the
same, and the same figures would be in the Quotient but not of the same value,
for they would have been all Decimals, viz..3439, etc. But if the dividend had
been (as before).835796, and the divisor had been (.0243,) the same as before
with a Cipher prefixed before it to depress its value, though the operation be
the very same, yet the value of the Quotient would have been 34.39, etc. And if
the Divisor had had two Ciphers prefixed before it thus.00243 then the Quotient
would have been 343.9, etc. And if the divisor had been (.000243) the same as
before with 3 Ciphers prefixed before it then the Quotient would have been
3439. consisting entirely of Integers, except you had annexed Ciphers to the
Dividend. Thus have I largely gone over all the Cases that can happen in
division of Decimals, and have given one or more examples in every Case, so
that I hope by this time the diligent Reader is made capable of performing any
operation, either in Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, or Division of
Decimals, and if he be so perfected, perhaps he may be desirous to know
something of their use and application in the practical parts of Arithmetic,
before he comes to the more difficult part of the extraction of Roots, and
because I would not dull the edge of his Appetite, I shall give him a taste of
their excellent use in the Rule of Proportion, and in the mensuration of some
Supersicies and Solids, and then come to show their use in the extracting the
Cube and Square Roots, and the calculating of Interest, etc.

CHAP. VII. The Rule of 3 in Decimals.
I Shall not here meddle with the Rule of 3 in its distinct kinds, viz. Single,
Double, Direct, or Inverse, supposing the Learner to be acquainted with that
already in the Practice of vulgar Arithmetic.

I. In the Rule of 3 in Decimals, the operation is in every Respect the same as
in whole Numbers, so is it in all the parts, or Rules of Arithmetic, only when
you work in Decimals, you must have Respect to the Decimal Rules before taught,
for in Decimals you must Add, Subtract, Multiply, and Divide, when, and after
the same manner as you do in whole Numbers, a few Examples will make you
perfect in the knowledge thereof.

Example. 1.

If 1 l. of Tobacco cost 3 s. 6 d. how much will 326 l. cost at that Rate?

When the Fractional parts of the Numbers in this Question are turned into
Decimals, then it will be read thus, viz.

If 1.75 l. of Tobacco cost 3.5 s. how much will 326.25 l. of the same cost at
that Rate?

The numbers being orderly placed as is directed in the 6 Rule of the 10
Chapter of my Vulgar Arithmetic will stand as follows, viz.

^

And if you multiply the third number by the second, or the second by the
third, which is all one, and divide the product thereof by the first, as is
directed in the 10 Rule of the 7 Chap. of my Vulgar Arithmetic; only in
Multiplying and Dividing, you must have regard to Multiplication and Division
of Decimals delivered in the two Chapters foregoing, and when the work is
finished, the answer will be found to be 652.5 shillings, or 32 l. 12 s. 6 d.
see the following work.

^

Example 2.

If 9 C. of Tobacco cost 25 l. 7. s. what will be the Price of 17 C. weight of
the same at that Rate?

The given numbers being Rightly stated, together with the whole operation take
as follows.

^

Here you see that the Answer in Decimals is 47883 l. now the value of this
decimal Fraction, may be discovered at first sight (by that brief way of
finding the value of a decimal part of a pound sterling, delivered in the 4
Rule of the 2 Chapter foregoing) to be 17 s. 8. d. fere, for 8 primes is 16
shillings, and 8 seconds is 1 shilling more, and 3 seconds over, which with the
3 in the place of thirds make 33, from which abating 1, because it is above 25,
there remains 32 farthings or 8 pence.

Example 3.

If an ounce of Gold be worth 2 l. 19 s. 4 d. I demand the price of 19 oz. 3
pw. 5 gr. at that Rate?

By the 4 Rule of the 2 Chapter 3 pw. 5 gr. may be Reduced to this decimal of
an ounce viz. 160416, so that 19.160416 is a mixed number equal in value to 19
oz. 3 pw. 5 gr. And by the same Rule.9666 is found to be the Decimal part of a
pound sterling, equal in value to 19 s. 4 d. so that the Decimals being found
out, and the numbers given in the Question being stated in order will be as
follows, viz.

^

So that I find the Answer to the Question to be 56.84129, etc. or 56 l. 16 s.
10 d. very near as it may be discovered by the brief way of finding the value
of the decimal of a pound sterling delivered before in the 13 page.

CHAP. VIII. The further use of Decimals in the Mensuration of Superficies and
Solids.
PROP. I. To Measure a long Square.
THis Figure by Geometricians is called a Rectangular Paralelogram, and it may
very fitly be represented by a long square Table, or a long Board, or the like,
as the figure A, B, C, D, in the Margent, and to find out its Content the Rule
is

Multiply the length of it in Feet, or Inches, by the breadth of it in Feet, or
in Inches, and the product will give you the true Superficial Content of it in
Feet or Inches.

Example.

There is a Table whose length is 18.75 Feet and its Breadth 3.5 Feet, I demand
its content in Feet?

To Answer this Question, I take 18.75 feet (the length of it) and multiply it
by 3.5 feet (the breadth of it) and the product is 65.625 feet, which is the
Content of the Table, as was Required. See the work

^

Here by the way take notice that although amongst Artificers, the two foot
Rule is generally divided each foot into 12 Inches, etc. Yet for him that is at
any time employed in the practice of Measuring, it would be most necessary for
him to have his two foot Rule, each foot divided into 10 equal parts, and each
of those parts divided again into 10 other equal parts, so would the whole foot
be divided into 100 equal parts, and thereby would it be made fit to take the
dimensions of any thing whatsoever, in feet, and decimal parts of a foot, and
thereby the Content of any thing may be found as exactly if not more exactly
and near, then if the foot were divided into Inches, quarters and half
quarters, and thereby many times would there by much labor and pains avoided,
which the Artist is Content to undergo through the want of such Decimal
division of his Rule, as we will show in the solving of the former proposition,
after the vulgar way. The question is

There is a Table whose length is 18 foot 9 inches, and its breadth 3 foot 6
inches, now I demand its content in feet?

Now, before I can find its content, I must find its length and breadth in
inches, and then multiply the inches of the length by the inches of the
breadth, and then the product will be 9450 which is its Content in square
inches, and to find its Content in feet I must divide the inches by 144 (the
number of square inches in a foot) and the Quotient is the Content in feet: See
the work following.

^

So that you see according to this way the answer is 65 square feet and 90
inches, or (...) of a foot which is the very same with that answer in Decimals,
and if the Division by 144 had been continued by annexing Ciphers to the
Dividend 9450, there would have come out in the Quotient the Decimal.624 as
before.

But how tedious a work it is to answer it after the Vulgar way, compared with
the decimal way I leave the Judicious Reader to judge, and much more tedious
would it have been if there had been either halfs or quarters of inches either
in the length or breadth, or both, but the work would still have been the same
in the Decimal way, that is, in every Respect as easy.

After the same manner is found out the Content of the true Geometrical Square,
which is a figure fitly Represented by an exact square Trencher, that is,
having its length and breadth both equal.

PROP. II. To find the Content of a right angled Triangle.
A Right angled Triangle is a plain figure having 3 sides and 3 Angles as the
figure B, C, D, in the margent, two of which sides viz. BC, and CD, are
perpendicular to each other, now if from the top of the perpendicular at D,
there be a line drawn parallel to the base B, C, as is the Pricked line A, D,
and from the end of the Base at B, there be drawn the pricked line BA parallel
to the perpendicular till it meet the line AD in A, then will there be made the
parallelogram, or long square A, B, C, D, of which the Triangle B, C, D, is
half, the Diagonal B, D, dividing the whole paralelogram into 2 equal parts.



Now it is plain from the first proposition, that if you multiply the side B,
C, by the side C, D, then the product will be the Content of the whole
parallelogram A, B, C, D, and then the half of that Content will be the Content
of the given Triangle B, C, D. Or if you take half CD, which is C, F, and half
of BA, which is B, E, and draw the line E, F, then will E, F, divide the
parallelogram A, B, C, D, into two equal parallelograms, and either of them is
equal to the given Triangle B, C, D, now if by the first proposition I can find
the Content of the paralelogram E, B, C, F, I find also the Content of the
Triangle B, C, D, because they are equal, whence it comes to pass that if you
multiply the base by half the perpendicular, or the perpendicular by half the
base of a Rectangular Triangle (which is all one) the product will be the true
Content thereof.

Example.

In the former Triangle the base B, C, is 18.28 Feet, and the perpendicular C,
D, is 12.26 Feet, I demand its Content in Feet?

Here I first find the Content of the whole Parallelogram, by multiplying the
sides together, and the product is 224.1128 Feet, and the half of that product,
is the Content of the Triangle B, C, D, which is 112.0564 Feet. See the
following work:

^

The Content would have been the same, if I had multiplied the one side by half
the other, which is indeed the shortest way, and most practical; See the work:

^

The Answer would have been the same, if I had taken the whole side C, D, and
multiplied it by half the side B, C.

PROP. III. To find the Content of any plain Triangle, not Rectangular.
THE best and easiest way is to let fall a perpendicular, upon the longest side
from the angle that is opposite to it, which will divide it into two
Right-angled plain Triangles, As, suppose there were given the plain Triangle
ABC, as follows,



Here the side AB, being the longest side, I let fall a perpendicular from its
opposite angle at C, which falls upon D, in the line AB, so is the line CD
the nearest distance between the angular point C, and the line AB, and divides
the given Triangle ABC, into two Right-angled Triangles, (viz.) ADC and CDB;
and if you find the Content of these two Right-angled Triangles (according to
the directions in the second proposition) and add them together, their sum will
be the Content of the given Triangle ABC. But it may be more Artificially found
out thus,

Multiply half the line CD, into the whole line AB, the product will give the
Content of the Triangle which was sought, or if you multiply the whole line CD,
into half the line AB, the product will be the Content of the given Triangle,
which is very plain from a due consideration of the method used in solving the
se^ond proposition.

Example

Let the base or longest side AB be 48.5 Feet long, and let the length of the
perpendicular CD be 21.6 Feet, I desire to know how many square, or superficial
feet are contained in the said Triangle?

To resolve this Question according to the foregoing Rule, I first Bi-part the
base AB 48.5 which is 24.25 which I multiply by the length of the perpendicular
CD 21.6 and the product is 523.8: See the following work,

^

So that you see the content is the same which of the foresaid ways soever you
work; observe the same method in finding the content of an^ oblique Triangle
given.

PROP. IV. To find the Content of a Trapezium.
A Trapezium is a plane figure having for unequal sides, and as many unequal
Angle it matters not how unequal they are, and to find out its Content observe
the following directions, viz.

Divide it into two oblique Triangles, by drawing a line from any one of the
angles, to the angle that is opposite thereto, which line shall be a common
base to both the Triangles.

Then if you find out the content of both these Triangles, according to the
method prescribed in the third proposition, the sum of their contents, is the
content of the given Trapezium.

Or it may be more Artificially found out thus, viz.

Multiply the length of the common base by half the sum of the perpendiculars
let fall from the Angles opposite to the said common base, and the product will
be the content of the whole Trapezium: or else,

Multiply the sum of the said Perpendiculars by half the said common base, and
it will produce the same effect.

Example.

In the following Trapezium ABCD, draw the base AC, which suppose to be 9.5
Feet, then let fall the perpendicular at D, which let be 3.45 Feet, and that at
B 4.25 Feet, the sum of the said perpendiculars is 7.7 half of which is 3.85,
by which if the common base AC be multiplied, the product (which is) 36.575 is
the content of the Trapezium required Or if you multiply 7.7 the sum of the
perpendiculars by half of the common base 9.5, which is 4.75 the product will
be the same. See the following work.



^

PROP. V. To find the Content of any regular Polygon.
A Regular Polygon is a plane figure consisting of equal sides and equal
Angles, viz. a Pentagon, consisting of 5 equal sides, and 5 equal Angles; an
Hexagon, consisting of 6 equal sides, and 6 equal Angles, an Heptagon of seven
equal sides, an Octogon of eight, etc. and to measure any 1 of these Regular
planes, do thus draw a line from the Center of the figure to the middle of any
one of the sides, and multiply that line into half the sum of the sides, and
the product thence arising is the content of the given plane.

I shall give you an Example of this in the Mensuration of an Hexagon, or plane
of 6 equal sides.

Let there be given the Hexagon ABCDEF, having the length of each side 30 then
will the length of the perpendicular GH be 26 fere, now there being in all 6
sides, and each of them in length 30, the sum of them all is 180 the half of
which is 90, which being multiplied by 26, the product will be 2340, which is
the content of the given Hexagon.

The Reason of this manner of working is very plain, if from the Center you
draw the lines GA, and GB, thereby making the Triangle GAB, whose content (by
the third proposition) is found by multiplying the perpendicular GH into half
the side AB, viz. into HA, or HB, but there are 6 such Triangles in the given
Polygon; therefore GH, multiplied into 6 times HB, produces the content
required.

PROP. VI. To find the Content of any Irregular Polygon.
LET it be Required to measure the following Figure ABCDEFGHI.

First take Care that the whole plane be divided in Trapeziums and Triangles
according to your own Fancy, and as the nature of the plane will bear, and then
measure those Trapeziums and Triangles, as is directed in the third and fourth
Propositions before going, and add the several contents together, so will the
sum give you the whole content of that Irregular Polygon.

As in this Example, first I draw the lines AC, and DH, and EG, so is the whole
figure divided into the Trapeziums ABCI, and CIHD, and DHGE, and the Triangle
EGF, the contents of which being severally found out by the third and fourth
Proposition, the sum of them will be the content of the whole figure.

PROP. VII. To find the circumference of a Circle having the Diameter given.
A Circle is a Geometrical figure exactly Round, so that if from a point in the
middle of it called the Center, there be never so many lines drawn to the
Circumference, they will all be of equal length. But between the diameter and
circumference of a circle there cannot be found a true and exact proportion.
Archimedes has demonstrated the proportion to be near as 7 is to 22; but that
of Van Ceulen is the most exact, who makes it to be as 1, is to
3.14159265358979323846 etc. but for practice this following proportion is
sufficiently exact, viz.

As 1. is to 3.1416

So is the Diameter of any Circle,

To its Circumference.

In the Circle described in the Margent, the Diameter AC is 28, I demand what
is the circumference ABCD?

To Answer which I say by the proportion foregoing; As 1 is to 3.1416, so is 28
the diameter to 87.9648, which is the circumference ABCD. The work follows.

^

PROP. VIII. To find the content of a Circle having the Diameter given.
FIrst find out the circumference, by the last Proposition, then multiply half
the circumference by half the diameter, and that product is the Content.

Example

There is a Circle whose Diameter is 14 Inches, I demand how many square Inches
are the content of that Circle?

By the foregoing Proposition, I find the circumference to be 43.9824 Inches,
the half of which is 21.9912 which being multiplied by 7, (half the given
Diameter) the product is 153.9384 which is the content Required. See the work.

^

PROP. IX. To find the folid content of a square piece of Timber, Stone, etc.
whose bases are equal, that is, whose ends are of the same bigness.
SUch a solid piece by Geometricians is called a Parallelepipedon, and it^
^ontent is thus found out, viz.

First find out the ^uperficial content of the base or end, (by the first
proposition) then multiply that content by the whole length, and that product
is the Solid content of the whole piece.

Example

There is a square piece of Timber, the two contiguous-sides at the end of
which are 2.5 Feet, and 1.8 Feet, and its length is 22 Feet, I demand how many
solid Feet are in that piece of Timber.

First I multiply 2.5 by 1.8 the sides of the base, and that produces 4.5 for
the content of the base or end, and that product I multiply by 22 the length,
and that produces 99 Feet, and so many is there contained in that piece of
Timber. As you may see in the following work.

^

Here note, if the sides of the end, or base, be given in Inches, and its
length in Feet, then Reduce the sides of the base into the Decimal parts of a
Foot, and proceed as before, or you may find out the content of the base in
Inches, and multiply that content by the length in Feet, and that product
divided by 144, will give you the content in feet, or else reduce the length
into Inches, and multiply the content of the base thereby, and Divide that
product by 1728 (for there are so many Cubical Inches in a Foot) and the
Quotient will give you the solid content in Feet. But the Decimal way is
preferred.

PROP. X. To find the solid content of a Cylinder, having the Diameter of its
Base given.
A Cylinder is a Solid whose bases are Circular, equal, and parallel, and may
fitly be represented by a round pillar, or a Roling-stone of a Garden, and to
find the solid content of such a body this is

The Rule.

First find the plane of the base, by the 7 and 8 propositions foregoing, and
then multiply that by the length thereof, which product will give you the solid
content of the given Cylinder.

Example.

There is a Cylinder, (suppose a Roling-stone) whose length is 8.75 Feet, and
the Diameter of its base 2.8 Feet, I demand the solid content thereof?

As 1

Is to 3.1416

So is 2.8 the given Diameter

To 8.79648 the Circumference of the base, half of which (viz. 4.39824) being
multiplied by 1.4 the semi-diameter will produce ^.157536 for the content of
the Base, which being multiplied by 8.75 (the length) it produces 53.87844 for
the Solid Content Required.

If there had been given the circumference of the Cylinder, then the Diameter
of the base must have been found out by the converse of the seventh
Proposition, as suppose there had been given 8.75 the length of the Cylinder,
and 8.79648 its circumference to find the Solidity thereof. First I find out
the Diameter by the following proportion, viz.

As 3.1416

Is to 1

So is 8.79648 the given Circumference

To 2.8 the Required Diameter.

And then the Rest of the work is the same with that before.

PROP. XI. To find the Solid Content of a Cone.
A Cone is a Solid Body, having a Circle for its base, and its superficies
Circular, decreasing its equidistant Diameters from the base proportionably,
till it terminateth in a point over the Center of its base, and may fitly be
Represented by a Sugar Loaf, or a round Spire Steeple; and to find its solid
Content this is

The Rule.

By the 7 and 8 Propositions foregoing find out the plane of its base, and
multiply that by 1/3 of its height, and that product is the Solid content of
the Cone Required.

Example.

There is a Cone the circumference of whose base is 22.5 and its height is 16,
I demand the solid content of such a Cone?

As 3.1416

Is to 1.

So is 22.5 the circumference of the base

To 7.162 the Diameter of the base.

Then I multiply half 22.5 which is 11.25 by half 7.162 which is 3.581, and it
produces 40.28625 which is the superficial content of the base; then I take
1/3 of the height of the Cone (16) which is 5.333 very near, by which I
multiply 40.28625 (the superficial content of the base) and it produces
214.84657125. See the work as follows;

^

The same is to be observed in the mensuration of any other Cone.

But here you are to observe that the slanting side of the Cone, (viz.) the
length from the vertex to the extremity of its Base) is not to be taken for its
true height, but a perpendicular let fall from its vertex to the Center of its
base is its true height; and how you may find out that perpendiculars length
shall be shown you in the work of the fourth Proposition of the eleventh
Chapter.

PROP. XII. To find the solid Content of a Pyramid.
BEtween the Cone and Pyramid, this is the Difference, As the Cone has a
circular base and superficies, the Pyramid has a Polygon for its base, so that
its base and superficies are Angular, its vertex terminating in a point just
over the center of its base, and to find out its solidity, here follows

The Rule.

Find out the superficial content of the base, by the fifth Proposition
foregoing, and multiply that by (...) of its height, and it produces the solid
content of the Pyramid.

Example.

There is a Pyramid whose base is an Hexagon the side of which is 30, and its
perpendicular height is 54; I demand the solid content of such a Pyramid?

Here by the fifth Proposition I find the superficial content of the base to be
2340; then do I take, of the perpendicular height of the Pyramid, which is 18,
and thereby do I multiply 2340, (the plane of the base) and the product is
42120, which is the solid content of the given Pyramid.

Here note (by the way) that a line drawn from the point at the top of the
Pyramid, to the extremity of any part of the basis, is not the true height of
any Pyramid, but a perpendicular let fall from the Cuspis (or top) to the
center of the base is the true height, and how to find out such perpendicular
heights shall be shown in the fourth Proposition of the 11 Chapter.

PROP. XIII. To measure the Frustum of a Pyramid or Cone.
THE Frustum here given to be measured is AGEF, the side of the greater base at
A being 24 Inches, and the side of the lesser base at E being 8 inches, and the
length of it I, C, 20 foot equal to E B, or F O.

It is evident that if I find the solidity of the whole Pyramid AGD, and also
the solidity of the lesser Pyramid E F D, and then substract the content of E F
D, from the content of A G D, that there will remain the solidity of the
Frustum A G E F; and certainly this way of measuring the Frustum of a Pyramid
or Cone, is the most exact of any; And it may be easily measured thus, first of
all find out the height of the whole Pyramid C D, which you may do by the
following proportion, viz.

As the Semidifference of the sides of the Bases,

Is to the height of the Frustum,

So is the half side of the greater Base,

To the height of the whole Pyramid.

And this proportion will hold good if you work by the Semi-difference of the
Diameters of the bases, as well as by the Semi-difference of the sides of the
Bases.

As in the foregoing figure, let A G be the Diameter of the greater base, and E
F the Diameter of the lesser base, from E and F let fall the perpendiculars E B
and F O, then shall B O be equal to E F, and the sum of A B and O G are the
difference of the Diameters of the bases, E F and A G; and consequently A B is
the Semi-difference, and B E is the height of the Frustum, and A C is half the
side of the greater base, and C D is the height of the whole Pyramid. Then by
Eucl. 6.4.

As A B (the Semi-difference of Diameters)

Is to B E (the height of the Frustum)

So is A C (half the greater Diameter,)

To C D (the height of the whole Pyramid.)

So the height of the whole Pyramid A G D, will be fo^nd to be 30 foot; for the
greater Diaameter A G, is 24 Inches, the lesser 8, the difference 16, the
Semi-difference 8, therefore shall C D be 30 foot; for

^

Now having found the height of the whole Pyramid to be 30 foot, I thereby
(according to the 12th. Proposition foregoing) find the content of the whole
Pyramid to be 40 foot, then in the lesser pyramid E F D there is given the side
of its base E F, 8 Inches, and its height I D 10 Inches for C D 30 - C I 20 = I
D 10, and by the said 12th. proposition I find the solid content of it to be
1.48 Feet, which being Subtracted from 40 (the content of the greater Pyramid)
there will remain 38.52 feet for the true solid content of the given Frustum A
G E F.

After the same manner is found the solidity of the Frustum of a Cone, the
height of the whole Cone being found out by the difference of the Diameters of
its bases; and by the 11th. proposition find the solidity of the whole Cone,
and also the solidity of the lesser Cone, that is cut off from the Frustum,
then Subtract the content of the lesser from the content of the greater, and
the remainder will be the solid content of the Frustum.

This last proposition is useful in the measuring of tapering Timber, Round or
Squared, and for finding the liquid capacity of Brewers Conical, or Pyramidal
Tuns.

Thus have I showed the Use of Decimals in the Mensuration of the most usual
Planes and Solids, I might proceed farther to show you their Application in the
particular Mensuration of Board, Glass, Pavement, Plaistering, Painting,
Wainscot, Tiling, Flooring, Tapistry, Brickwork, Timber and Stone; But it
requires (rather) a particular Treatise, then the narow bounds here allowed
for such a work.

CHAP. IX. The Extraction of the Square Root.
IN the Solution of any Question, or in the working of any sum whatsoever
belonging to any of the Rules of Vulgar or Decimal Arithmetic, there have been
(at least) two things or numbers given, whereby the answer might be found; but
in the extraction of the Square, Cube, and all other Roots, there is but one
number given to find out the Number sought, viz. there is a square Number given
to find its Root, a Cube Number to find its Root, etc. and

I. A square Number is that which is produced by multiplying any number by (or
into) it self, which Number given to be so multiplied is called the Root; As if
the Number 8 were given to be multiplied by it self, it produces 64, then is 8
called the Root, and 64 is its square, so the Root 12, has for its square 144.

II. When a square Number is given, and its Root is Required, the Operation it
self is called the Extraction of the Square Root.

III. Square Numbers are of two kinds, viz. either Single or Compound.

IV. A single square Number is that which is produced by the Multiplication of
a Digit, or single Number into it self, and consequently such a square Number
must be under 100, which is the square of 10, so 25 being given for a square
number, it is a single square having for its Root 5. And 81 is a single square
Number, having for its Root the Digit 9. All the single square numbers with
their Roots, are contained in the following Tablet.

Roots 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Squares 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81

V. When the Root of any square Number is Required it being lesser than 100,
and yet is not exactly a single square, expressed in the Tablet above, then you
are to take the Root of that single square Number expressed in the said Tablet,
which (being less) is nearest to the given square; As if it were 74 whose Root
is required I find that 81 (the square of 9) is too much, and 64 (the square of
8) is too little, but yet it is the nearest square Number that is lesser than
74, and therefore I take 8 to be the square Root of 74, but yet it is plain
that 8 is too little for the Root of 74. And to find out the Fractional part of
this Root, you shall be plainly taught by and by.

VI. A compound square number is that which has above 9 for its Root.

VII. The Root of a single square Number may be discovered at the first sight,
but the extraction of a compound square Number is more tedious and difficult,
its Root consisting of two places, at the least, and the square it self, of 100
at the least.

VIII. When a compound square number is given, and it is required to have its
square Root extracted, before you can proceed to the Operation, your square
number must be prepared, by pointing it at every second figure, beginning at
the place of Units.

As, Suppose you were to extract the square Root of 2304, first I put a point
over 4 (it standing in the place of Units) and then passing over the second
place (or place of Tens) which is (...), I put a point over the figure standing
in the third place, (or ^ place of Hundreds) which is 3, and the preparative
work is done, as you may see in the Margent. Now if there had been more places
in the given number, then I must have put a point over the Figure standing in
the fifth place, and another over that in the seventh, etc. And here note, that
as many points as you put over the given square Number, so many Figures there
will be in the Root, that is, the Root will consist of so many places.

So if there were given the ^ number 33016516, to have its square Root
extracted, after I have pointed it according to the Direction before given, it
will stand as in the Margent, and because the points that are put over it are
in number 4, I conclude the Root it self will consist of 4 places, or figures.

IX. When you have thus prepared your number, then draw a crooked-line on the
Right Hand of your number, behind which to place your Root, as you do for a
Quotient in Division.

Note that when your number is prepared for Operation, as in the 8 Rule, the
numbers contained between point and point, may not unfitly be termed Squares,
and in the ensuing work, we shall so call them, as in the foresaid number
33016516, being pointed as before, I call 33 the first square, ^01, the second,
65, the third, and 16 the fourth, and last square; every square (except
sometimes the first consisting of two figures, or places, the last of which
toward the Right Hand has always a point over it, and if it so happen (as it
often does) that the last figure (in any given square number) toward the
left hand has a point over it then that number alone shall be accounted the
first square.

As if the number 676, were given, when it is pointed for the work according to
Direction, and as you see in the ^ Margent, I account 6 for the first square,
and 76, for the second.

These things being understood, we shall lay down those general Rules requisite
for the management of the work it self.

X. When your number is prepared, find out the square Root of the first square,
according to the 5 Rule foregoing, and place that Root behind the said crooked
line: as

Let it be Required to extract the square Root of the said number 2304, here
the first square number is 23, and (according ^ to the said 5 Rule) its Root is
4, which I place behind the crooked line as you see in the Margent.

XI. Then square the said Root, and place its square which is 16 under the said
first square 23, and having drawn a line underneath, subtract the said square
16, ^ from 23, and place the Remainder, which is 7 underneath the said line as
you may perceive by the work in the Margent:

XII. Then to the said Remainder bring down the Figures of the next square and
annex them thereto on the Right Hand, so that they may make one entire number,
which (for distinctions sake) we shall call the Resolvend.

As in this Example to the Remainder ^ 7, I bring down the next square 04, and
annex it thereto, and it makes 704 for a Resolvend, as you may see in the
Margent.

XIII. Always let the whole Resolvend (except the last figure on the Right
hand) be esteemed a Dividend, on the left hand of which draw a Crooked line
before which to place a Divisor, as in Division.

So in this example, the ^ Resolvend 704 is to be made a Dividend, all but the
last place which is 4, so that the Dividend is 70, before which I draw a
crooked line, as you see in the Margent.

XIV. Let the Quotient expressing the Root (or part of the Root sought) be
doubled, or multiplied by 2, and that double or product shall be a Divisor, and
must be placed on the left hand of the Resolvend, before the said crooked line.

So in our Example, the ^ number 4 which was put for part of the Root being
doubled makes 8, which I put before the Resolvend for a Divisor, as it appears
in the Margent.

XV. Then (according to the Rule of Division in whole numbers) seek how often
the said Divisor is contained in the said Dividend, and put the answer down in
the Quotient, and also on the Right hand of the Divisor.

As in our Example I seek ^ how often the Divisor 8 is contained in the
Dividend 70, which I find to be 8 times, therefore I put 8 in the Quotient for
part of the Root, and also on the Right hand of the Divisor. See the work in
the Margent.

XVI. Then by the figure last put for part of the Root, multiply the said
Divisor, together with the figure that you annexed to it (accounting them both
as one entire number) and place the product underneath the said Resolvend,
drawing a line under it, and then subtract it out of the said Resolvend,
placing the Remainder beneath the line.

As in our Example, having ^ placed 8 in the Quotient, and also on the
Right Hand of the Divisor, then in the place of the Divisor, there stands 88,
which I multiply by 8, the number last put in the Quotient, and the product is
704, which I place in order under the Resolvend 704, and having drawn a line
underneath, I subtract the said product 704, from the Resolvend 704, and there
remains (...), so is the work finished, and I find the square Root of 2304 to
be 48. See the work in the Margent.

Here note that if at any time when you have multiplied the number standing in
the place of the Divisor, by the figure last placed in the Quotient, or Root
(as is directed 1. Note.
in the last Rule) if the product be greater than the Resolvend, then conclude
the work to be erroneous, to correct which put a lesser figure in the Root,
and proceed as is before directed.

Note also that the work of the 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16, Rules must be repeated
as often as there are points over the figures, except for the first square,
which is to 2. Note.
be wrought according to the Directions given in the 10 and 11 Rules foregoing,
and the work of those two Rules is to be observed, but once in the extraction
of a square Root, tho* it consist of never so many squares or points.

These things will appear plain and easy in the working of one or two more
Examples.

Example 2.

Let it be Required to extract the square Root of 33016516.

Here in order to the work, I first prepare my number by distinguishing it into
squares, by pointing it according to the 8 Rule foregoing and thereby I find
that 33, is the first square, and (according to the 10 Rule) I take the square
Root of 33, which is 5, and place it for the first figure of the Root, then
(according to the eleventh Rule) I square the Root (5) and it makes 25, which I
place under the said first square number 33, and subtract it therefrom, and the
remainder (8) I place below the line, as in the following work.

^

Then (according to the twelfth Rule) I annex to the said remainder (8) the
next square (01) and it makes 801 for a Resolvend, then must 80 (according to
the thirteenth Rule) be my dividend, and (according to the fourteenth Rule) I
double the number (5) in the Root, and it makes 10 for a Divisor, and thereby I
divide the said dividend (80) and I find that it Quotes 7, which (according to
the fifteenth Rule) I put in the place of the Root after 5, and likewise before
the Divisor (10) so that in the place of the Divisor instead of 10, there is
now 107.

Then (according to the sixteenth Rule) I multiply the said 107, by 7, (the
figure last placed in the Root) and the product is 749, which I place orderly
under the said Resolvend, and subtract it therefrom, and the remainder is 52
which I put below the line, as in the following work.

^

Then I repeat the same work over again, in finding the next figure of the
Root, as I did in finding the last, viz. to the remainder (52) (according to
the twelfth Rule) I bring down, and thereto annex the next (third) square (65)
and it makes 5265 for a new resolvend, then (according to the thirteenth Rule)
is 526 a new dividend, and (according to the fourteenth Rule) I take the Root
(57) and double it for, a new Divisor, and it makes 114, which I place before
the resolvend (5265.)

Then (according to the fifteenth Rule) I seek how often the divisor (114) is
contained in the dividend, (526) and I find it will bear 4, which I place in
the Root orderly, and also on the right hand of the divisor, (114) and then
there will be in the place of the divisor, the number 1144, which (according to
the sixteenth Rule) I multiply by the figure (4) last put in the Root, and the
product is 4576, which I place orderly under the resolvend (5265) and subtract
it therefrom, and the remainder is 689 which I place under the line, as is
before directed. See the whole work as follows.

^

Then I again repeat the work of the 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 Rules of this
Chapter for finding the next figure of the Root, viz. first I bring down (16)
the next square number, and annex it to the remainder 689, (according to the
twelfth Rule) and it makes 68916, for a new resolvend, of which (by the
thirteenth Rule) 6891 is a new Dividend then (according to the fourteenth Rule)
I double the Root, and it makes 1148 for a divisor, which I place on the left
side the resolvend, and then seek how often it is contained in the said
dividend (6891) and the answer is 6, which I place for part of the Root (in
order) and also on the right hand of the said Divisor, so that in the place of
the divisor 1148, will then stand the number 11486, which (by the sixteenth
Rule) I multiply by 6, (the figure last placed in the Root, and the product is
11486, which I place in order under the resolvend, and subtract it therefrom,
and the remainder is o, and so the work is finished, whereby I find the square
Root of 33016516, to be 5746, as by the whole operation appears.

^

And if the Root had consisted of never so many places, yet for every figure
put therein (except the first, for which you are to observe the tenth and
eleventh Rules) the work of the 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 Rules must be repeated
according to the second note after the sixteenth Rule foregoing.

Example. 3.

A third Example may be this, let it be required to extract the square Root of
8328996,

In the working of this Example you will see the use of the first note upon the
sixteenth Rule, for only the number 8 is the first square, as you may see by
the pointing of the given number, and after the whole work of Extraction is
finished, you will find the square Root of the given number, to be 2886, as in
the following operation.

^

XVII. When there is given a number that is ^ot a square number, that is, whose
root cannot ^e exactly found, and you are desirous to find ^he Fractional part
of the root as near as may be, you are to observe the eighth rule in preparing
your number for extraction, and then to annex thereto an even number of Ciphers
at pleasure, and note, that as many pairs of Ciphers as you annex thereto, so
many Decimals will there be in the root expressed, (which though it come not to
be the exact root, yet will it come so near the truth, that if the last Decimal
figure placed in the root, be increased by an unite, it will be too much) and
as many points as there are over the given Integral square number, so many
places will there always be in the integral part of the Root, as in the
following Example, where it is required to extract the square root of 129596.

First I proceed to the work of extraction according to the former rules as if
it were an exact square number, and find the integral root to be 359, as
follows.

^

But because (when the work is finished) there is a remainder of 715, I annex a
competent eve^ number of Ciphers, to the given number, as (...) 4, or 6, or 8,
and point them out in the sa^ manner as if they were significant figures in an
integer, then bring two of them down to the said remainder (715) and annex them
thereto, so have you 71500 for a new resolvend; Then find out a new divisor by
doubling the root, as is before directed, and proceed as if the annexed Ciphers
were significant figures, or whole numbers, as far as you please, as in this
example, where the work is carried on till there are 3 decimal figures in the
root; and the work being finished, I find the root to be 359.994, and there is
a remainder of 319964. See the work.

^

But if you proceed to put another decimal in the root you will find it to be
359.9944, and the remainder will be 3196864. Now you may perceive that the said
root is too little, because there is a remainder, but yet it is so near the
truth that if the last figure thereof were increased by an unite, and so made
359.9945 it would then be too much, as you may prove at your leisure.

XVIII. The Square root of a vulgar Fraction that is commensurable to its root,
is thus found, viz. extract the square root of the Numerator, for a new
Numerator, and likewise the square root of the Denominator, for a new
Denominator; so shall that new Fraction be the square root of the given
Fraction; as for

Example

Let it be required to extract the square root of 25/36, first I take the
square root of 25, which is 5, and place it for a new Numerator, then I take
the square root of the denominator 36, which is 6, and place it for a new
Denominator, so is 5/6 the square root of 25/36, which was required; In like
manner if 4/9 were given to have its square root extracted, its root would be
found to be 2/3, and is the square root of 9/16, the like is to be observed for
any other.

But here note diligently; before you proceed to extract the Square root of any
Note
Fraction, that you reduce it to its lowest Terms, for it may happen that in
its given Terms, it may be incommensurable to its root, but being reduced to
its lowest Terms it may be commensurable, and its root exactly found out, so
(...), is incommensurable to its root, but being reduced to 25/36, its square
root will be found to be 5/6 as before.

XIX. The square root of a mixed number that is commensurable to its root is
thus found out, viz. reduce the mixed number to an improper Fraction, and then
extract the square root of the Numerator, and the square root of the
Denominator, for a new Numerator, and a new Denominator, as in the last Rule.

So if it were required to extract the square root of 1 11/25, first I reduce
it to an improper Fraction, and it is 36/25, whose square root is (...) = 1
1/5, so if it were required to extract the square root of 3 13/81, first I
reduce the given, mixed number, to the improper Fraction 256/81, and then
extract the square root of the Numerator 256, and it I find to be 16, for a new
Numerator, and ^ikewise the square root of 81, the denominator, which I find to
be 9, for a new denominator, so ^s 16/9 = 1 7/9 the square root of the given
mixed number 3 13/81, which was required.

XX. When you are to extract the square root of a Fraction that is
incommensurable to its ^oot, prefix before the given fraction, this Cha^acter,
or q signifying the square root of that before which it is prefixed, so the
square ^oot of 24/29 is thus expressed, ^ or ^, the ^ke of any other. But if
you would know as ^ear as may be the square root of any such fracti^n, reduce
it to a decimal of the same value by ^he first Rule of the second Chapter, but
let the ^ecimal confist of an even number of places, viz. ^ther of two, four,
six, or eight, etc. places; and the more places it consists of, so much the
nearer the truth will the root be; Then extract the square root of that decimal
(according to the Rules before delivered,) in every respect as if it were a
whole number, so shall this root so found be very near the true root; and so
near, that if it consist of 3 places it shall not want 1/1000 part of an unit
of the true root; and if of 4 places, it shall not want 1/10000 part of an unit
of the truth.

So if I would extract the square root of (...) first I reduce it to a decimal,
which I find to be ^75 and because I would have the root to consist of 4
places, I annex 6 Ciphers thereto and it makes.75000000, then extracting the
square root thereof as if it were a whole number, I find it to be.8660, and
there is a remainder of 4400, but if I would have it consist of 5 places, then
I annex 2 more Ciphers to the said remainder, and make it 440000, and proceed,
and then I find the root to be.86602, and the remainder to be 93596.

XXI. In like manner if it were required to extract the square root of a mixed
number incommensurable to its root, as near as may be, first reduce the
Fractional part to a decimal, but let it consist of an even number of places,
viz. of 2, 4, 6, or 8 etc. places, then proceed to extract its square root,
according to the Rules formerly delivered in this Chapter, in every respect,
(...) if it were a whole number, so shall the root so found, be very near the
truth, and the more places it consists of, so much the nearer will (...) be
to the true roo^. And note that in the root there will be so many decimal
places, as yo^ placed points over the Decimal part of the square number.

So if it were required to extract the square root of 28 6/13, first I reduce
the fractional part 6/13 to a decimal, and it makes.461538, so then the mixed
number whose square root I am to extract is 28.461538, which being pointed and
the work of extraction finished, according to the former Rules, I find its
square root to be very near 5.334 and there is a remainder of 9982, But if I
had proceeded yet farther, and made the decimal part to have consisted of 7
places, it would have had for its square root 5.3349, which does not want
1/10000 part of an unite of the true root.

But if you would not extract the square root of such a mixed number, then
prefix before it this character, or q so if the said mixed number 28 (...) were
given I would express its square root thus, viz. ^ or ^ the like is to be
understood of any other.

XXII. When you are to extract the square root of a decimal Fraction, which
has 2 or 3 Ciphers possessing the two or three first places on the left hand
of the given decimal, then cut off 2 of them with a dash of the pen, and put a
Cipher to possess the first place of the root, and proceed to extract the
square root of the remaining figures, according to the former Rules as if there
had been no such Ciphers before the given Decimal; and if the given decimal
have 4 Ciphers before it, cut them off with a dash of the pen, and put 2
Ciphers in the root, and then proceed as before.

So if it were required to extract the square root of 5/846, first I reduce it
to a decimal Fraction and it makes.005910, Then I cut off the two first
Ciphers, and place one Cipher in the root, then I proceed to extract the square
root of the remaining figures viz. 5910, as if there had been no such Ciphers
before them, and I find the root to be very near.077 as you may try at your
leisure.

XXIII. The operation in the extraction of the square root is thus proved; viz.
multiply the root into it self, and (if there be no remainder after the work
The proof of the extraction of the Square Root.
of extraction is finished) the product (if the work be truly done) will be
equal to the number first given. As in the first Example, where it is required
to extract the square root of 2304, which is there found to be 48, Now if I
multiply 48 by it self, it produces 2304, which is the given number, and
therefore I conclude the operation to be true. But if after the work of
extraction is finished, there is any Remainder, then, when you have multiplied
the root by it self, to the product add the said Remainder, and if the sum be
equal to the given number, the operation is right, otherwise not. As in the
Example of the seventeenth Rule, where it is required to extract the square
root of 129596, and is there found to be ^59.994, and the remainder is 319964;
Now to prove the work, I multiply the root (359.994) by it self, and it
produces 129595.680036, which should be 129596, therefore to the said product
I add the said Remainder (319964,) and the sum is 129596, and therefore I
conclude the work to be truly wrought.

CHAP. X. The Extraction of the Cube Root.
I. A Cube Number is that which is produced by multiplying any number into it
self and again into that product, which said given number is called the Cube
Root.

As, Suppose 5 were given to find its Cube, first I multiply 5 into it self,
and it produces 25, which is called the Square of 5, then I again multiply 25,
(the said square) by 5, and it produces 125, which is called the Cube of 5.
And here note that as 125 is called the Cube of 5, so is 5 called the Cube Root
of 125.

II. The extraction of the Cube Root is nothing else then when by having a Cube
number given, we find out its Cube root, which said Cube number given is
always supposed to be a certain number of little Cubes, comprehended within
one entire great Cube, which said Cube may very well be represented by a dye,
or any other solid body, having its length, breadth and depth equal; This being
supposed, let there be laid 9 Dies constituting a square, whose side shall be
3, and upon them let there be laid 9 more Dies, and upon them let there be laid
9 more, then will there be in all 27 Dies, which will constitute one greater
Cube, whose length, breadth and depth will be 3 Dies, and this greater Cube
comprehends 27 lesser Cubes, Now the extraction of the Cube root is by having
the number of little Cubes (27) comprehended in the greater given Cube, to find
out how many of the lesser Cubes make up the side of the greater.

III. A Cube number is either Simple or Compound.

IV. A Simple Cube number is that which has for its root or side, one of the 9
Digits, and it is therefore always lesser than 1000; so shall you find that 343
is a Simple Cube number, whose side or root is 7, for 7x7x7=343, All which said
simple Cubes, and Squares, as also their Roots are expressed in the Tablet
following

Roots 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Squares 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 8 Cubes 1 8 27 64 125 216
343 512 7^9

V. A compound Cube number is that which is produced by the multiplication of a
number consisting of two places (at the least) 3 times into it self
continually, and is therefore never less then 1000, so 1728 is a compound Cube
number, produced by the multiplication of 12 into its self 3 times, for
12x12x12=1728.

VI. When a compound Cube Number is given to have its Cube root extracted,
before you can go about it, you must prepare it for the work by pointing it;
which is thus done, viz. put a point over the first figure toward the right
hand, viz. over the place of Units, then (passing the two next places) put a
point over the fourth figure, or place of Thousands, and so proceed by putting
a point over every third figure, as you did over every second figure in the
extraction of the Square root, till you have finished your pointing, That being
done, on the right hand of the said Cube number draw a crooked line, behind
which to place its Cube root, as you do to place the Quotient in Division, as
in the following Example.

Example. 1.

Let it be Required to extract the Cube Root of 262144.

In order to prepare this Cube Number, for the Extraction of its Cube Root, I
first put a point over the first figure (4) toward ^ the Right hand, and then
overpassing the two next figures (14) I put another point over the fourth
figure (2) and then is the given number distributed into several parts not
unfitly called Cubes, viz. 262 (as far as the first point goes) is the first
Cube, and 144 (from thence to the second point) is the second Cube, and then I
draw a crooked line behind it as you see in the Margent.

VII. Having proceeded thus far, find out the Cube Root of the first Cube (262)
but because it is not an exact Cube number, take the Cube root of that number
in the foregoing Tablet, which being lesser than it is, yet is nearest to it,
(which I here find to be 6,) and place it behind the crooked line for the first
figure in the Root, as you see in the following work

^

VIII. This being done, Cube the said number which is placed in the Root, and
subscribe its Cube under the first cube of the given number. So in this Example
216 being the cube of 6, I place it under 262 the first cube of the given
number 262144, as follows

^

IX. Draw a line under the Cube thus subscribed, and subtract it from the first
cube of the given number, placing the remainder orderly underneath the said
line. So 216 (the cube of 6) being subtracted from 262, the remainder is 46,
which I place underneath the line as follows

^

X. Bring down the next cube number and annex it to the said remainder on the
right hand thereof. So 144 being the next cube, I bring it down and annex it to
the remainder 46, and it makes 46144, which by Artists is usually called the
Resolvend.

^

XI. Draw a line underneath the Resolvend, Then Triple the Root, that is,
multiply it by 3, and place its Triple under the Resolvend in such order, that
the place of units in the said triple may stand under the place of tens in the
Resolvend. So the triple of 6, is 18, which I place under the Resolvend so,
that 8 (the place of unites in the said triple) may stand under 4 in the place
of tens of the Resolvend, as you see following.

^

XII. Square the said root, and then triple the said square of the Root, and
place the said triple square under the said triple Root in such order that the
place of unites in the triple square of the Root, may stand underneath the
place of Tens in the triple Root, so in this Example, the square of the Root 6,
is 36, and the triple thereof is 108, which I place under 18, the triple Root
so, that 8 the place of unites in the said triple square of the Root, may stand
under 1, the place of Tens in 18, the said triple Root, as follows

^

XIII. Draw a line underneath the said triple Root, and triple square of the
Root, as they are placed, and add them together in the same order as they
stand, so shall their sum be a Divisor. So in our Example, a line being drawn
under 18 and 108, and they added together in the same order as they stand,
their sum is 1098 for a Divisor, as in the following work.

^

XIV. Draw a crooked line on the left hand of the Resolvend, before which to
place the said Divisor, and let the whole Resolvend (except the place of unites
therein) be esteemed a Dividend, then seek how often the said Divisor is
contained in the Dividend, and put the answer for the next figure in the Root.
So in our Example, seek how often 1098 the divisor is contained in 4614 the
Dividend (observing here the usual Rules of Division) and the answer I find to
be 4 which I place for the next figure in the Root, as in the Example.

^

XV. Draw a line underneath the whole work, and then Cube the figure last
placed in the Root, and place its cube underneath the Resolvend in such sort
that the place of unites of the one may stand under the place of units in the
other; so in our example 64 being the cube of 4 (the figure last placed in the
Root) I place it under the Resolvend in such manner that the figure 4 in the
place of unites of the cube 64, may stand under 4, the place of unites in the
Resolvend, and then the work will stand as follows

^

XVI. Square the figure last placed in the Root, and multiply its square by the
triple Root subscribed underneath the Resolvend, (as is directed in the
eleventh Rule of this Chapter) and subscribe the product under the Cube last
put down, in such order, that the place of Units in the said product, may stand
under the place of Tens, in the said Cube. So in our Example, the figure last
placed in the Root is 4, which squared is 16, and 16 multiplied by 18 (the
triple Root before set down) the product is 288, which I place under 64 (the
cube of 4) in such sort that 8 (in the place of Units of the said product) may
stand under 6 (the place of Tens) in the said cube of 4; view the work.

^

XVII. Multiply the triple square of the Root, (subscribed as is before
directed in the twelfth Rule of this Chapter) by the figure last placed in the
Root, and place the product under the number last subscribed, (which is the
product of the square of the figure last placed in the Root multiplied by the
said Triple Root) in such manner that the place of Units of this, may stand
under the place of Tens in that; As in this Example, The Triple square of the
Root is 108, which multiplied by 4 (the figure last placed in the Root) the
product is 432, which I place under 288 (the number last subscribed) in such
order that the figure 2 (in the place of Units of the said last product) may
stand under 8, which is in the place of Tens, of the said number last
subscribed; and then the work will stand as follows.

^

XVIII. Draw another line under the work, and ^dd the 3 numbers together, that
were last placed under the Divisor, in the same order as they there ^tand, and
let their sum be called the Subtra^end, which let be subtracted out of the
Resol^end, noting the Remainder; So in this Exam^le I add 64, 288, 432 together
in the same or^er as they stand, and their sum is 46144, for a ^ubtrahend,
which I subtract out of 46144 the ^esolvend, and there is nothing remains, so
^e whole work is finished; and I find the Cube ^oot of 262144 to be 64, without
any Remain^er; See the whole work as follows,

^

Now the Learner is to observe three things in general from the Rules before
delivered, concerning the extraction of the Cube Root.

Observe 1. That the work contained in the 7, 8 and 9 Rules for finding out the
first figure of the Root, is not again to be repeated, throughout the whole
work of Extraction, although the Root consist of never so many places, but the
work of all the Rules following is to be repeated as often as a new figure is
put in the root.

Observe 2. For every particular Cube in the number given, distinguished by the
points, (except the first) there is to be found out a new resolvend, by
annexing the next cube to the remainder (according to the 10th. Rule) and as
often as there is a resolvend, so often must there be found a new Divisor (by
the 11, 12 and 13 Rules) and as often as there is found a new Divisor so often
must there be found a new Subtrahend (according to the 15, 16, 17, and 18 Rule
before-going.)

Observe 3. When the Subtrahend chances to be greater than the resolvend, then
you may conclude there is an error in your work, which must be corrected by
putting a lesser figure in the Root.

Example. 2.

Let it be required to extract the Cube Root of 48627125.

Having prepared the given number for the work of extraction, according to the
6th. Rule of this Chapter, I find it to be distributed into 3 Cubes, viz. 48,
the first, 627, the second, and 125 the third. Then I proceed to the work; and
first I find the Cube ^ root of 48, (the first Cube) which is 3, then do I cube
3, and place its cube which is 27, under (48) the first cube, and subtract it
therefrom and the remainder is 21, according to the 7, 8, and 9 Rules of this
Chapter, and then will the work stand as you see in the Margent.

Then, to the said remainder 21, do I bring down, and thereto annex the next
cube, which is 627, and it makes 21627 for a Resolvend, according to the 10th.
Rule foregoing. Then do I find out a Divisor according to the 11, 12 and 13
Rules of this Chapter, and first I triple the Root (3) and it makes 9, which ^
I place under (2) the place of Tens in the Resolvend; Then do I square the said
Root (3) and that makes 9, then do I triple its square (9) and that makes 27,
which I place under the said Triple in such order as is directed in the 12th.
Rule, then drawing a line underneath the work, I add the two said numbers
together, (viz. the Triple Root, and the Triple Square of the Root) in such
order as they are there placed, and their sum is 279 for a Divisor; as per
Margent.

Then according to the 14th. Rule I seek how often the said Divisor 279 is
contained in 2162 the Dividend, and I find the answer to be 6, which I place
for the second figure in the Root, then do I in the next place go about to find
out a subtrahend, and in order thereunto first (according to the fifteenth Rule
of this Chapter) I cube the figure (6) last placed in the root, and it makes
216, which I place under the Resolvend in such order (as is directed in the
said fifteenth Rule) that the place of Units of the one may stand under the
place of Units of the other; Then (according to the 16th. Rule of this Chapter)
I square the figure (viz. 6) last placed in the root which makes 36, and then
multiply it by (9) the said triple root, and the product is 324 which I place
under (216) the said cube of 6, in such order as is directed in the said 16th.
Rule. Then do I multiply the said Triple square (viz. 27) by the figure (6)
last placed in the root, and it produces 162, which I place under the last
product (324) in such manner as is directed in the 17th. Rule. Then I add these
3 several numbers together in the same order as they stand, and their Sum is
19656 for a Subtrahend, which subtracted out of (21627) the Resolvend, the
remainder is 1971, as you may see by the following work.

^

Then to the said remainder (1971) do I annex the next cube number (125)
according to the 10th. Rule, and it makes 1971125 for a resolvend;

Then I proceed according to the 11, 12 and 13 Rules to find a Divisor, and
therefore I first triple the whole Quotient (36) and it is 108, Then do I
square the whole Quote (36) and it makes ^ 1296, which being tripled is 3888,
which being orderly placed under the triple Quote, and added thereto in that
order, the sum is 38988 for a new Divisor: See the work in the Margent.

Then do I seek how often the said Divisor is contained in the Dividend
(197112) and I find it to be 5 times contained therein, and accordingly I place
5 in the root, and proceed according to the 15, 16, 17 and 18 Rules to find out
a Subtrahend, and therefore first, I cube the number (5) last placed in the
root, and it makes 125, then do I square the said 5, and it makes 25, by ^
which I multiply (108) the said triple root, and place the product (2700) under
the said cube, as is before directed, then do I by the said 5, multiply (3888)
the triple square of the root, and the product (19440) do I place under the
former product (2700) according to former directions, and add the 3 Numbers
together, in the same order as they stand, and their sum is 1971125, (as
appears per Margent) for a Subtrahend, which taken out of the said Resolvend
there remains (0) and so the work is finished, and I find the cube root of
the given number 48627125 to be 365; view the whole work laid down as follows.

^

XIX. When it is required to extract the cube Root of a Number that is
incommensurable to its root, and you are desirous to know the Fractional part
of the root as near as may be, you are to annex to the given number, a
competent number of Ciphers, which number of Ciphers must be always a multiple
of 3, viz. either 3, 6, 9, 12, etc. Ciphers, that is 000, 000000, or 000000000,
etc. And having observed the 6 Rule for the punctation of the given number,
likewise point the annexed Ciphers, in the same manner as if they were
significant figures, or integers; and observe, that as many points as you put
over the integral part, so many places will the integral part of the root
consist of, and so many points as are put over the Ciphers, or Decimals, so
many decimal places will there be in the root, this being observed the work it
self in the extracting the Cube root of a Decimal Fraction, or of a mixed number
of integers and decimals, is the same in every respect as if the number given
were an integral Cube number, according to the Rules before delivered in this
Chapter. As in the following

Example.

Let it be required to extract the Cube root of 13798 which is a number
incommensurable to its Cube root, and to find out its root as near as may be I
annex to it 9 Ciphers (so by that means I shall have 3 Decimals in the root)
and prepare it for Extraction by pointing it as is before directed, and as you
see following.

^

And having performed the work of extraction according to the former rules, I
find its Cube root to be 23.984, which (as by the remainder you may perceive)
is somewhat too little, but yet so near the truth, that, if the Decimal part
were increased by an unite and so made 23.985 it would then be too much, and so
consequently it cannot want (as it is) 1/1000 part of an unite of the truth,
and if the root had had another figure placed in it, it would then have come so
near the truth that it would not have wanted 1/10000 part of an unite; for your
further satisfaction see the whole work performed as follows.

^

XX. If at any time it is required to extract the cube root of a vulgar
Fraction, let such Fraction be first To extract the Cube Root of a vulgar
Fraction.
reduced to its lowest Terms; because it may not be commensurable to its root
in the given Terms, but being reduced to its lowest Terms it may, and having so
done to perform the work, this is

The Rule.

Extract the Cube root of the Numerator, (by the former Rules) and place that
for a new Numerator, then extract the Cube root of the Denominator, and place
that root for a new Denominator, so shall this new Fraction be the cube root of
the given Fraction.

As for Example, Let it be required to extract the Cube root of 27/(...), first
I take the cube root of 27 (the Numerator) which is 3 and place it for a new
Numerator, Then I take the cube root of 64, (the Denominator) which is 4, and
place it for a new Denominator, so shall this new Fraction be the cube root of
the given Fraction 27/64.

In like manner if there were given 108/256 to have its cube root extracted, I
can easily discover that there cannot be found any cube root exactly either for
the Numerator or Denominator, in the Terms they are given in, but being
reduced to their lowest Terms, they are 27/64, whose cube root is as before.

In like manner the cube root of ^/1024 will be found to be = etc. (...).

XXI. But when there is given a vulgar Fraction to have its cube root
extracted, it being incommensurable To extract the Cube Root of a vulgar
Fraction that is incommensurable to its Root.
to its root, you may find its cube root very near* if you reduce the given
vulgar Fraction to a decimal and then extract the cube root of that decimal (by
the Rules before delivered) in every respect as if it were a whole Number, and
then shall that be a decimal cube root, less than the truth, yet so near the
truth that if you add an unite to the last decimal figure it will then be
greater than the truth.

Here take notice by the way that your vulgar fraction being reduced to a
decimal in order to have its cube root extracted, Note
its equivalent decimal must consist of such a number of places as may be a
multiple of 3, that is, it must consist of 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, etc. places, and
the more places there is in the decimal, the nearer the truth will the root be.

Example

Let it be required to extract the cube root of ^/8: In order whereunto I
reduce it to this Decimal, viz..625, which because it consists but of 3
places, (and so consequently can have but 1 figure in its Root) I increase to 9
places by annexing 6 Ciphers thereto thus.625000000 and then the root will
consist of 3 places, then do I proceed to extract its cube root, (according to
the former Rules) and find it to be.854, etc. and there will be a remainder of
2164136 as you may prove at your leisure.

XXII. When your given vulgar Fraction is reduced to a Decimal of the same
value, and the 3, or 4 first places toward the left hand are possessed by
Ciphers, then in this case you are to cut off 3 of them with a dash of the pen,
and for them place a Cipher to possess the first place in the root, and then
proceed to extract the cube root of the remaining figures, according to the
former Rules, as if there had been no such Ciphers at all.

As for Example.

Let there be given 4/8237 to have its cube root extracted; First reduce it to
a Decimal Fraction by the first Rule of the second Chapter of this Book, and it
makes.000485613, etc. now to extract the cube root of this Fraction, I first
prepare it, by pointing it in every respect as if it were a whole number, then
with a dash of my Pen, I cut off the 3 first Ciphers, and put a (0) to possess
the first place in the root, then I proceed to extract the cube root of the
remaining figures (485613) as if there had been no ciphers at all before them;
and having finished the work I find its cube root to be.078 as by the following
work.

^

In like manner if the decimal which is given to have its cube root extracted,
have 6 Ciphers placed before the significant figures on the left hand, then cut
off those 6 Ciphers with a dash of the Pen, and for them put two Ciphers to
possess the two first places in the root, Then proceed to extract the cube root
of the remaining figures as if there had been no such Ciphers, etc.

XXIII. When it is required to extract the Cube Root of To extract the Cube
Root of a mixed number.
a mixed number, reduce it to an improper Fraction, and if it has a perfect
cube root, then extract the cube root of the Numerator, and place it for a new
Numerator, and also extract the Cube Root of the Denominator, and place it for
a new Denominator, so shall this new Fraction be the Cube Root of the given
mixed Number.

Example.

Let it be required to extract the Cube Root of 513/343, having reduced it to
an improper Fraction, I find it to be (...), and having extracted the Cube Root
of the Numerator (1728) I find its Root to be 12, for a Numerator, and the Cube
Root of 343 the Denominator is 7, for a Denominator, so that I conclude (...)
or 15/7 to be the Cube Root of the given mixed Number 513/343, as you may prove
at your leisure.

XXIV. But if the given mixed Number, whose Cube Root is required, have not a
perfect Root, then you are to reduce the fractional part into a Decimal of the
same value, (but let the number of decimal places be always a multiple of 3)
and then proceed to extract the Cube Root of that mixed number, as if it were a
whole Number, always reserving so many decimal places in the Root, as there
are points over the decimal part of the mixed number.

Example.

Let it be required to extract the Cube Root of 28. First, Reduce into its
equivalent decimal, which is.75, but to make it consist of six places, I annex
thereto four Ciphers, and then the said mixed number will be 28.750000, which
being done, I proceed to the work as follows.

^ So that I find by the work, the Cube Root of 28.750000 to be 3.06 etc.

XXV. It is usual amongst Artists to express the Cube Root of a whole Number,
mixed number, or Fraction, either Vulgar, or Decimal, that is incommensurable to
its Root, by prefixing this Character, (viz. ^) before the incommensurable
number or quantity, so the Cube Root of 328 may be thus expressed ^, and the
Cube Root of 24, thus ^, or in a decimal mixed number thus ^ and of the fraction
thus ^ etc.

XXVI. The operation in the extraction of the Cube Root is proved thus, viz.
Cube the Root found out, that The proof of the extraction of the Cube Root.
is, Multiply it three times into it self, and if any thing remain after the
work is done, add it to the last product, and if that sum be equal to the given
number, then the work is truly performed, otherwise not.

As in our first Example, where it is required to extract the Cube Root of
110592, and which is found to be 48; and to prove the work, multiply 48 by it
self, whose product is 2304, which being again multiplied by 48, it produces
110592, which is equal to the given number, and therefore I conclude the work
to be right.

Likewise to prove the Example of the Nineteenth Rule, where it is required to
extract the Cube Root of 13798 which is found to be the mixed number 23.984. Now
to prove the work, I Cube the Root, as is before directed, and find it to be
13796.370427904 to which I add the remainder 1629572096 and their sum makes
the given number 13798 which proves the work to be right.

CHAP. XI. The Use of the Square and Cube Roots in solving some Questions
Arithmetical and Geometrical.
PROP. I. To find a mean proportional between two given Numbers.
MUltiply the given Numbers the one by the other, and extract the square Root
of the product, so shall that square Root be the mean proportional sought.

Example.

Let the given Numbers be 12 and 48, and let it be required to find a mean
proportional between them; first multiply the given numbers 12 and 48 the one
into the other, and their product is 576, the Square Root of which is 24, so
that I conclude 24 to be a mean proportional between 12 and 48, for, ^ the
square of the mean being equal to the product of the extremes.

This proposition is useful in finding the side of a square that shall be equal
to any given paralellogram; for, (according to the first Proposition of the
Eighth Chapter of this Book,) if you multiply the contiguous sides of a
Rectangular paralelogram the one by the other, that product will be its
content, and if you extract the square root of that content, it will give you
the side of a square, (in the same measure your paralelogram was) which will be
equal to the given Paralelogram.

PROP. II. To find the side of a Square that shall be equal to the Content of
any given superficies.
FInd out the Content of the given superficies by the Rules laid down in the
Eighth Chapter, and then extract the Square Root of the Content, so will that
Root be the side of a square equal to the given superficies.

Example.

There is a Rectangled Triangle whose base and perpendicular are 16 and 18, I
demand the side of a Square that will be equal to the given Triangle.

According to the second Proposition of the Eighth Chapter, I find the Content
of this Triangle tobe 144, the square root of which is 12, and is the side of a
square equal to the said Triangle.

In like manner, if you extract the square root of the Content of a Circle,
Pentagon, Hexagon, etc. or of any other Figure regular, or irregular, it will
give the side of a square equal to that superficies.

PROP. III. Having any two of the sides of a Right-angled plain Triangle, given
to find the third side.
THis most excellent and useful proposition is generally called Pythagoras his
Theoreme, and in the 47 Prop. of E^clides Elements of Geom. it is demonstrated,
and proved that the Square made of the Hypothenuse, or slant side of a Right
angled plain Triangle is equal to the sum of the squares made of the base and
perpendicular.

As for Example.

In the Triangle ABC, the Base AB is 48, and the perpendicular BC is 36, now I
demand the length of the Hypothenuse AC.

To find out an answer to this, first, I square the base AB, (48) which is
2304, then square the Perpendicular (36) and its square is 1296, the sum of
which two squares is 3600, which is equal to the Square of the Hypothenuse AC,
therefore the square Root of 3600 will give the length of AC, which is 60.

PROP. IV.
THere is a Tower about which there is a Moat that is 48 foot wide, and a
scaleing Ladder that is 60 Foot long, will reach from the outside of the Moat,
to the top of a Wall, that is within the said Moat, now I demand the height of
the said Wall above the Water?

Let the Base AB in the foregoing Triangle be the breadth of the Moat, and let
the Hypothenuse AC be the scaling. Ladder, then is the perpendicular BC the
height of the Wall above the Water. Now it is plain that (because the Square of
AC is equal to the sum of the squares of AB and BC) if from the square of AC
which is 3600 you subtract the square of AB which is 2304, there will remain
1296, which is the square of CB, therefore I extract the square Root of 1296,
and find it to be 36, which is the height of the said Wall above the Water as
was required.

By the help of this Proposition may be found the true perpendicular height of
a Cone, or of a Pyramid; for, in a Cone, if you square the slant height, (which
is the length of a line drawn from its vertical point, to the Circumference of
its base) and from the square of that, subtract the square of the semidiameter
of its base, there will remain the square of the perpendicular height of that
Cone.

Also, In a Pyramid, if from the square of the slant height of it, you subtract
the square of that line which being drawn from the Center of its base, shall
touch the end of the said slant line, (whether they meet at an Angle or not)
the remainder will be the square of the perpendicular height of that Pyramid,
and its square Root will give the height it self.

PROP. V. By the Content of a Circle to find its Diameter.
The proportion is

AS 22.

Is to 28.

So is the given Content

to the square of the Diameter.

Example.

There is a Circle whose superficial Content is 153.9385, I demand its Diameter?

^

The Square Root of which is 13.99 (very near 14) for the Diameter required.

PROP. VI. By the Content of a Circle to find its Circumference.
The proportion is

AS 7

Is to 88

So is the given Content

to the square of the Circumference.

The Square Root of which is the Circumference required.

Example.

There is a Circle whose superficial content is 153.9385, I demand the
Circumference of that Circle? ^ The square Root of which is 44 fere which is
the Circumference required.

II. The Cube Root is that by help of which we resolve all Questions
Mathematical that concern solidity, and by which we increase solid bodies
according to any given proportion. By it we discover the solidity of a body
that is capable of length, breadth, and depth, (or thickness,) and by having
the solidity given, we discover the side or Diameter of such a body.

Some Questions pertinent thereto may be such as follow.

PROP. VII.
THere is a Cube whose side is 4, I demand what shall be the side of a Cube
whose solidity is double to the solidity of that Cube?

To answer this proposition, find out the Cube of 4 (the side of the given
Cube) which is 64, and double it, which is 128, then extract the Cube Root of
128, and it makes 5.0397 fere, and that is the side of the Cube which is double
to the Cube whose side is 4.

PROP. VIII.
THere is a Cube whose solidity is 128 foot, I demand the side of a Cube whose
solidity is half as much?

Take of 128 = 64 the Cube Root of which (viz, 4.) answers the Question.

PROP. IX.
HAving the solid Content of a Globe to find the side of a Cube whose solidity
shall be equal to the given Globe?

Extract the Cube Root of the given solid Content of the Globe, and it will
give you the side of the Cube Required.

Example.

There is a Globe whose solid Content is 1728 Inches, I demand the side of a
Cube equal thereto?

Having extracted the Cube Root of 1728, I find it to be 12, which is the side
of the Cube required.

PROP. X.
HAving the Diameter and Weight of a Bullet, to sind the Weight of another
Bullet, whose Diameter is given.

As the Cube of the given Bullets Diameter,

Is to its weight, or solidity.

So is the Cube of the Diameter of any other Bullet,

To its weight, or solidity.

Examp'e.

There is a Bullet whose Diameter is 4 Inches, and its weight is 9 Pound, I
demand the weight of another Bullet, whose Diameter is 6^ or 6.25 Inches?

The Cube of 4 is 64.

The Cube of 6.25 is 244.140625

Then I say

^

So that the weight required is 34.33227 pounds, and if you Reduce the Decimal
to the known parts of Averdupois weight, you will find the answer to be 34 lb.
-05 oz.-05 dr.

This kind of proportion is by Artists Termed triplicate proportion.

In like manner, the Diameters of two Bullets, or Globes being given, and the
solidity of one of them to find out the solidity of the other, it may be done
by the same proportion, only changing the middlemost Term.

PROP. XI.
TO find the side of a Cube equal to a given paralelepipedon.

Find out the solidity of the given Paralelepipedon by the Eighth Prop. of the
Eighth Chapter, then is the Cube Root thereof, the required side.

Example.

There is a paralelepipedon having the sides of its base 10 Foot 4 Inches, and
5 Foot 2 Inches, and its length is 20 Foot 8 Inches, I desire to know what is
the side of a Cube whose content shall be equal to the given paralelepipedon?

The superficial Content of the base is 7688 inches, which drawn into 248 the
length in inches, the product is 1906624 inches for its solid Content, the Cube
Root of which is 124 inches for the side of a Cube equal to the given
paralelepipedon.

In like manner if you would find at any time the side of a Cube equal to any
solid Body whether Regular, or irregular: First, Find the solid Content of that
Body, and then extracting the Cube Root of its solid Content you have your
desire.

PROP. XII.
BEtween two given Numbers to find two mean proportionals.

Divide the greater extreme by the lesser, and extract the Cube Root of the
Quotient, and by the said Cube Root multiply the lesser extreme, then will the
product give you the lesser mean proportional, then multiply the said lesser
mean by the said Cubique Root, and that product will give you the greater mean
proportional.

Example.

Let the two given extremes be 6 and 48 between which it is required to find 2
mean proportionals.

First, I divide 48 (the Greater Extreme) by 6 (the Lesser Extreme) and the
Quotient is 8, the Cube Root of which is 2, then by (the Cube Root) 2 do I
multiply 6 (the lesser extreme, and the product is 12 for the lesser mean
proportional, and 12 being multiplied by 2 (the Cube Root) the product is 24,
for the greater mean proportional sought. Thus have I found 12 and 24 to be two
mean proportionals between 6 and 48, for

^

In like manner between 3 and 81 will be found 9 and 27, for two mean
proportionals.

PROP. XIII.
THE, Concave Diameter of two Guns being known, and the quantity of Gunpowder
that will charge one of them, to find out how much will be sufficient to charge
the other.

The Capacities are one to another, as are the Cubes of their Diameters, and
also the proportion is direct.

Example.

If.25 pound of Gunpowder be sufficient to charge a Gun, whose Concave
Diameter is 1 Inches, or 1.5 Inch. how much powder will be sufficient to charge
a Gun, whose Concave Diameter is 7 inches? Answer, 25.47.

The Cube of 1.5 is 3.375 and the Cube of 7 is 343. wherefore the proportion is
as follows.

^

Or thus,

^

PROP. XIV.
THE Concave Diameters of two Guns being given, and the quantity of a weaker
sort of Gunpowder sufficient to charge one of them, to find out how much
Gunpowder of a stronger sort (the proportion of the strength and weakness of
the Gunpowder being also given) will be sufficient to charge the other Gun.

This is solved by two operations in the Rule of proportion, first to find out
how much of the stronger sort of Gunpowder will be of equivalent strength with
the given quantity of the weaker sort, and this proportion is Reciprocal; The
second is the same with that in the foregoing Proposition.

Example.

There is a Gun whose Concave Diameter is 1 inches, and it requires 25 pound
of powder to Charge it, now there is another sort of Gunpowder which is much
stronger than the former, and the proportion between their strength is as 5 to
2, now I demand how much of the strongest powder is sufficient to charge a Gun,
whose concave Diameter is 7 inches?

To answer this, First, I find out how much of the strongest powder will charge
that Gun* which is 1 inch in its Concave Diameter, which is done by the
following proportion, viz.

^

Thus have I found that 1/10 of a pound of the strongest powder will charge a
Gun whose Concave diameter is (...) inch. And according to the last
proposition, I find by a direct Proportion that 10.16 pounds of the same will
be sufficient to charge a Gun whose concave diameter is 7 inches, viz.

^

CHAP. XII. Concerning Simple Interest.
I. When Money pertaining, or belonging to one person is in the hands,
possession, or keeping, or is lent to another, and the Debtor pays or
allows to the Creditor, a certain sum in Consideration of forbearance for a
certain time, such consideration for forbearance is called Interest, loan, or
use money; and the money so lent, and forborne is called the principal.

II. Interest is either Simple, or Compound.

III. When for a sum of money lent there is loan, or interest allowed, and the
same is not paid when it becomes due, and if such Interest does not then become
a part of the Principal, it is called Simple Interest.

IV, In the taking of Interest for the continuance or forbearance of Money,
respect must be had to the rate limited by Act of Parliament, which Act now in
force, forbids, or restrains all persons whatsoever, from taking more than
6 l. for the Interest of an 100 l. for a year, and according to the same
proportion for a greater or a lesser sum, not confining the lender or borrower
to the space of one year, no more than it confineth him or them to the
limitation of the sum to be lent, or borrowed, but that the sum may be either
more or less than 100 l, and may continue in the hands of the Debtor, either a
longer, or a shorter time than one year, according as the Lender and Borrower
do agree, and oblige each other; Now for any time greater than one year, the
rate or proportion of Interest is by Act of Parliament limited, but the Act
does not say what part of 6 l. shall be the interest of an 100 l. for half a
year, a quarter of a year, a month, a day, or for any time lesser than one
year, and in this case several Artists do differ in their opinions, some would
have the true proportional interest for any time less than a year to be
discovered by continual mean proportionals; as suppose it were required to know
the interest of 100 l. for half a year at 6 per Cent. per Annum, they would
have the Interest to be reckoned after the Rule of Compound interest, and so
3l. is not the interest of a 100 l. for half a year, but is too much: But say
they, to find out the true interest thereof, you are to find a mean
proportional between 100, and 106, and that made less by 100, will give you the
interest of 100 l. for half a year, and so by extracting of Roots they find out
the interest for any time less than one year, but this is sufficiently
laborious and painful if it be done without the help of Logarithms; but to
perform this work to the 12 power for a Month, or to the 52 for a Weak, is
very tedious, and to the 365 power for one Day is scarcely possible to be
effected by natural Numbers; but custom and daily practice tell us that the
interest of Money for any time less than one year ought to be computed
according to the Rules of Simple Interest, and so 3 l. is the undoubted
interest of 100 l. for 6 months, and 30 shillings is the interest of 100 l.
for a quarter of a year; but here note by the way that by 6 months is not
meant 6 times 4 weeks, or 6 times 28 days, but by six months, or half a year
is to be understood the half of 365 days, and a quarter of a year is of 3^5
days, and by 1 month is understood 1/12 of 365 days, so that a month
consists of 305/12 days.

Upon the foresaid custom of computing the interest of money for time less than
one year, this following Analogy seems to be assumed for a safe exposition
Vide Sect. 6 of the 5 chap of Mr. Kersies Appendix to Wing. Arith.
of the statute (and which is indeed the ground, and reason it self of Simple
Interest) viz. That such proportion as 365 days (or one year) has to the
interest of any sum for a year, such proportion has any part of one year, or
any number of days propounded, to the interest of the same sum, for that time
propounded. And this (as was said before) is the whole ground work, and very
foundation of the manner of computing of Simple Interest.

V. Rebate, or Discount, is, when there is an allowance of so much per Cent.
for money paid before it be due, and Of Rebate, what it is.
as the increase of money at interest is found out by continual proportionals
Arithmetical or Geometrical increasing, so is the Rebate or discount of Money
found out by continual proportionals decreasing Arithmetically or
Geometrically, that is according as the allowance is, either after Simple or
Compound Interest; Now the nature of Rebate or discount is thus; When there is
a sum of Money, (suppose 100 l.) to become due at the end of a certain time to
come, (viz. at the end of 12 Months;) and it is agreed upon by the Debtor and
Creditor that there shall be made present payment of the whole Debt, and it is
likewise agreed that in consideration of this present payment, that the
Creditor shall allow the Debtor after the rate of 6 per cent. per annum: Now
upon this agreement the Creditor ought to receive so much money as being put
out at interest for the same time it was paid before 'twas due, and at the same
rate of interest, that the discount was reckoned at, then would it amount or be
increased to the sum that was first due.

The manner of working Questions in Rebate at Simple Interest shall be shown in
the ninth Rule of this Chapter, and of working Questions in Rebate at Compound
Interest shall be shown in the Fourth Rule of the next Chapter.

VI. When the interest of a 100 l. for a year is known, the interest of any
other sum, for the same time, is also found out, by one single rule of direct
proportion, viz. The Interest of a 100 l. for a year by the statute is 6l, I
demand what is the interest of 75 l. for the same time, and at the same Rate of
Interest? The proportion is as follows.

^

Or if you would have the Answer to produce both principal and interest, then
make the second number to be the sum of the given principal and interest, and
the fourth proportional will answer your desire. Thus,

^

VII. When the Interest of 100 for a year is given, and the interest of any
other sum of pounds, shillings, and pence is required for a year, the answer
may be easily found after the practical method delivered in the following
Example.

Let it be required to find the interest of 148l.-13s. 04. for one year after
the rate of 6 per cent. per annum, simple interest?

First, I place the given Numbers according to the Direction given for the Rule
of 3, which will then stand thus, viz.

^

Now it is evident that if I multiply 148l.-13s-04d. (which is the third
number) by 6 (which is the second number) and divide the product by 100 (which
is the first number) the Quotient will be the answer; Therefore I proceed thus,
viz first I multiply the pence by 6, which makes 24 pence, or two shillings,
therefore I set down o under the pence, and carry 2 to the next, then I go to
the 13s. saying 6 times 13 is 78, and 2 that I carried is 80 s. which is 4 l.
therefore I set down o under the shillings, and carry 4 to the pounds, then I
proceed, saying 6 times 8 is 48, and 4 that I carry is 52, then I set down 2,
and carry 5, etc. proceeding thus till the work be finished, and then will the
product be 890l.-00s.-00d, which product should be divided by 100 (the first
number) but it being an Unite with two Ciphers, I cut off two figures from the
right hand of the pounds, with a dash of the pen, and the figures on the left
hand of the said dash, are so many pounds, and those on the right hand of it,
are the Decimal parts of a pound, whose value may be found out by the 3 R^le of
the 2 Chap. But remember, that if there be any shillings or pence, in the
product you are to add them to their respective products in your Reduction.

The work of the foregoing Example is as follows.

^

So that by the work I find the interest of 148 l.-13s.-4d. for one year after
the rate of 6 per Cent. per An. to be 8l.-18s.-04d-3.2qu.

Another Example may be this, viz. I demand the Interest of 368l. 15s.-3d. for
one year, at 6 per Cent. per An. Answer 22l.-02s.-6d. as by the work following.

^

VIII. The Interest of 100l. being known for a year, or 365 days, the interest
of any other sum may be known for any other time, or number of days, more or
less than a year, by two single Rules of 3 Direct, viz. First, find out what is
the interest of the given sum, for one year, or 365 days, according to the
last Rule, then having found out that, you may (by another single Rule of 3
Direct) find out its interest for any other time more or less.

Example.

What is the interest of 322l. for 6 years after the rate of 6 per Cent. per
Ann^m ^imple Interest?

First, I find what is the Interest of 322l. for a year by the following
proportion,

^

Thus having found the Interest of 322l. for a year to be 19.32l. at 6 per
Cent. by the following proportion, I find out its interest for 6 years, to be
115l.-18s.-04d. and that added to the principal, makes 437l.-18s.-04d. for the
sum due to the Creditor at the end of the said time.

^

And here take notice that the second number in this last proportion, must
always be only the interest of the sum proposed, and not the sum of the
principal and interest, as in the second proportion under the sixth Rule.

After the same manner is the interest of 1l. (at the rate of 6 per Cent. per
Annum, or any other rate of interest,) discovered for a day, by the help of
which the interest of any sum whatsoever may be discovered for any number of
days as shall be shown by and by.

^

So that by the foregoing proportions I have found that the interest of 1l. at
6 per Cent. per Annum for a day is.0001643835l.

Now if you would know the interest of any other sum for any number of days
more or less than 365, you may do it by help of the said number after this
manner, viz.

Multiply the sum whose interest is required by the said number, and that
product will give you the interest of the said sum for one day, then multiply
that product by the number of days given, and the last product will give you
the interest of the said sum for the number of days in the Question. Take the
following Question for an example, viz.

What is the interest of 568l. for 213 days after the Rate of 6 per Cent. per
Annum.

^

Having finished the work as you see, I find the answer to be 19.8877 etc.
which upon sight I discover to be 19l.-17s-09d. by the brief way of valluing a
Decimal Fraction of Coin laid down in the 4 Rule of the 2 Chapter before-going.

But when the interest of any sum of Money is required for any number of days
as aforesaid, at any other rate of interest then at 6 per Cent. per Annum, the
foresaid number will not then serve for the work, but you are to find out
particular multiplyars for the several Rates of Interest as is before directed.
All which I have expressed from 4 to 10 per Cent. in the following Table.

When you would find the Interest of any sum for any number of days at the
rate of 4 per. Cent per An. the Multiplyar is.0001095890 5.0001369863
6.0001643835 7.0001917808 8.0002191780 9.0002465753 10.0002739726

So that when you would find out the interest of any sum of Money for any
number of days according to the direction before given, at any Rate from 4 to
10 per Cent. per Annum, Simple Interest, you may perform the work by the
multiplyar in the foregoing Table which is placed against each respective Rate
of interest.

IX. When the present worth of a sum of money due at the end of any time to
come is required, Rebate being allowed at any rate of Simple Interest, it may
be found out by the following method; viz. First, Find out the Interest of
100l. for the time that the Rebate is to be allowed for, and at the same rate
of interest propounded, then make the sum of an 100 pound, and its interest for
the proposed time, to be the first number in the Rule of 3, and 100l. the
second number, and the given sum whose present worth is required, let be the
third number, and the fourth number in a direct proportion shall answer the
question, as in the following Example, viz.

What present Money will satisfy a debt of 100l. that is due at the end of a
year yet to come, discount, or Rebate being allowed at the Rate of 6 per Cent.
per Annum.

According to the foregoing Directions, I state the numbers as follows, and
the fourth proportional number or answer to the question is 94.33962 l.=94
l.-06s.-09 d fere.

^

The reason of the said Analogy will appear if you consider, that there ought
to be so much ready money paid, that if it were put out to interest at the same
rate of Int. that Rebate was allowed for, and for the same time, the same would
then be augmented to the sum that was at first due, as in the last question,
there is given 100 l. which is due at the end of 12 months, now I say, that
there ought to be so much money paid down to satisfy this debt, as being put
out to interest at 6 perCent. for 12 months, would then be increased to 100 l.
which is the sum first due, and again it is as evident that if there were 106
l. due at the end of 12 months, or a year, and present payment is agreed upon,
allowing Rebate at 6 per Cent. per Annum, that then there ought to be paid the
sum of 100 l, in full discharge of the said debt of 106 l. for if when I have
received the said sum of 100 l, I put it out to interest for one year at the
rate of 6 per. Cent. it will then be increased to ^06 l.

Therefore to solve the said question, the proportion here used is no more than
if I should say, If 106 l. be decreased to 100 l. what will 100 l. be decreased
to? The answer is, to 94l.-6s.-9d.^, and for proof, if yon will seek what that
sum will be increased to at the end of 12 months, at the rate of 6 per Cent.
you will find it to be 100l.

Example 2.

How much present money will satisfy a debt of 82l.-15s. due at the end of 126
days, yet to come allowing Rebate after the rate of 6 per Cent. per Annum?

First, I find the interest of 100l. at the same rate of interest for 126
days, by the following proportion.

^

Then do I add 2.0712l. (the interest of 100l.) to 100 l. and the sum is
102.0712 which I make the first number in the Rule of 3, and 100l. the second,
and 82.75l. (the sum given to be Rebated) the third number, and the fourth
number in a direct proportion is the answer to the question, see the work as
follows.

^

So that by the work it appears that 82l.-15s. due at the end of 126 days yet
to come, will be satisfied with the present payment of 81l.-01s.-04d. Rebate be
allowed after the rate of 6 per Cent. per An.

The proof of the Rule.

Find out (by the eighth Rule foregoing) how much the present money that is
paid upon Rebate, will amount to being put out to interest for the same time,
and at the same Rate of interest that Rebate was allowed for, and if the amount
be equal to the sum that was due at the end of that time, then you may conclude
the work to be rightly performed, otherwise not.

As for Example.

In the foregoing Question it was found that 81.0708 l. being paid presently
would satisfy a debt of 82.75 due at the end of 126 days to come, and to
prove it, let us see whether 81.0708 being put out to interest for 126 days at
the rate of 6 per Cent. per Annum, will be increased to 82.75 l. (the sum which
was said to be due at the end of 126 days to come) which I do by these two
proportions following according to the Eighth Rule.

^

So you see that I have found the interest of 81.0708 for 126 days to be
1.6791 etc. which added to the principal 81.0708 the sum is 82.7499 which by
the brief way of valuing the Decimal of a pound sterling is 82 l.-15s. and
indeed it does not want 1/10 part a farthing of the exact sum, which is
occasioned by the defective Decimal wherefore I conclude the work to be rightly
performed.

Upon the foregoing ninth Rule is grounded the manner of calculating the
ensuing Table of Multiplyars, which shows in Decimal parts of a pound, the
present worth of a pound sterling due at the end of any number of years to
come, not exceeding 30, Simple interest being Computed at 6 per Cent. per annum.

The first number in the Table being found out by this following proportion,
viz.

As 106l. is to 100l, so is 1 l. to.943396, and the second number in the Table
being the present worth of 1 l due at the end of two years to come, is thus
found out, viz. First I consider that 12 l. is the simple interest of 100l, for
2 years, which added to 100 l. makes 112 l. wherefore I say, as 112 l. is to
100 l. so is 1l. to.892857 l. which is the present worth of 1l. due at the end
of 2 years to come.

The several proportions and operations for the whole Calculation being as
follows, viz.

^ And after the same manner are all the numbers in the following Table
Calculated; which being well understood, the way of calculating most of the
ensuing Tables will easily be obtained; and its use you will find immediately
after the Table it self.

TABLE I. Which shows in Decimal parts of a pound the present worth of 1l.
due at the end of any number of years to come under 31, at the rate of 6 per
Cent. per Ann. Simple Interest.
years 1.943396 2.892857 3.847457 4.806451 5.769230 6.735294 7.704225 8.675675
9.649350 10.625000 11.602409 12.581395 13.561797 14.543478 15.526315 16.510204
17.495049 18.480769 19.467289 20.454545 21.4^2477 22.431034 23.420168 24.409836
25.400000 26.390625 27.381679 28.373134 29.364963 30.357143

After the same method might this Table be continued to any number of years at
pleasure, I might also have calculated for other rates of interest, as those
are in the next Chapter concerning Compound Interest, but Simple Interest being
not so generally in practice, I shall therefore forbear.

The use of the preceding TABLE.
It is evident (by the ninth Rule foregoing) that if any sum be paid with an
allowance of Rebate, you are to make 100 l. with its interest (for the same
time you Rebate for) both in one sum, to be the first number in the Rule of 3,
100 the second, and the sum to be rebated the third, then will the fourth
proportional be the answer; and the same may be wrought by any other number and
its interest, as well as by 100 l. and its interest mutatis mutandis; Now in
the Table before-going there is expressed in Decimal parts of a pound, the
present worth of 1 l. due at the end of any number of years to come under 31,
etc. that is to say, if you take the money signified by those Decimals, and put
it out to interest at 6 per Cent. per Annum, Simple Interest for so many years
as are expressed in the Collum of years against the said Decimal, then will
that sum at the end of the said Term be augmented to 1 l, wherefore if you have
any sum whatsoever to be Rebated for any number of years within the limits of
the Table, make 1 l. the first number in the Rule of 3, and the Decimal in the
Table against the number of years to be Rebated for, make that the second, and
the sum whose present worth is required the third number, so will the fourth
proportional be the Answer. But (because the first number (being Unity) neither
multiplyeth nor divides) if you take the number in the Table, correspondent to
the number of years for which you would reckon Rebate, and thereby multiply the
sum whose present worth is required, the product will give you the Answer.

Example.

There is a sum of money, viz. 560 l. due at the end of 8 years to come, but
the Debtor and Creditor agree that present payment shall be made, and the
Debtor to be allowed Rebate after the rate of 6 per Cent. per Annum, Simple
Interest. Now I demand how much present money will satisfy the said Debt?
Answer, 378.378l.=378l.-07s.-06d. see the following work.

^

First (the Rebate being to be reckoned for 8 years) I look for 8 in the Collum
of years, and just against it on the Right hand, I fiud.675675 which I multiply
by 560 (the sum whose present worth is required,) and the product is 378.378,
which (by the brief way of valuing the fraction of a pound sterling) I find at
first sight to be 378 l.=07s.-06^d.

This Question, if it had been wrought by the foregoing ninth Rule, would have
produced the same answer, for, The Int. of 100l. for 8 Mon. is 48l. and 100 +
48=148 wherefore by the Rule of 3 I say

^

X. When an Annuity or yearly income is in arrears for any number of years, and
you would know the increase, or amount of it, allowing Simple Interest at a
certain rate per Cent. per annum, for each yearly payment from the time it
first became due, the operation will be somewhat more tedious than to find the
amount of one single sum, according to the eighth Rule of this Chap. which will
clearly appear by solving the following question, viz.

There is an Annuity, or an income of 100 l. per annum forborne to the end of 6
years, I demand how much is due at the end of the said Term, allowing interest
at the rate of 6 per Cent. per Annum Simple Interest? Answer 690 l.

In order to the solution of this Question, I consider, First, that

It is evident that for the last year, viz. the sixth years payment, there must
be no interest at all Reckoned, because it becomes not due till the end of the
sixth year; Secondly, there must be reckoned the interest of 100 l. for one
year, viz that which is due at the end of the fifth year; Thirdly, there must
be reckoned the interest of 100 l. for two years, viz. that which is due at the
end of the fourth year. Fourthly, There must be reckoned the interest of 100 l.
for three years, viz. that which is due at the end of the third year, Fifthly,
the interest of a 100 l. for 4 years, viz. that which is due at the end of the
second year: And Sixthly, The interest of 100 l. for 5 years, viz. that which
is due at the end of the first year, and is forborne the second, third, fourth,
fifth, and sixth years; all which interests being added together, and their sum
added to the sum of each years income, the sum will exhibit the total sum, due
at the end of the said six years, which you may perceive by the following work
to be 690 l. which is the answer to the foregoing Question.

^

The Construction of Table II.
Upon the foregoing reason is grounded the Calculation of the following Table,
which shows the amount of 1l. annuity, being forborne to the end of any
number of years under 31, Interest being allowed for each yearly payment after
the rate of 6 per Cent. per Annum, Simple Interest.

The first number in the Table being 1 l. which is that due at the end of the
first year, no interest being due for that; the second number in the Table is
2.06, which is the first and second years payment, and the interest of 1l. for
one year, being that which was due at the end of the first year; The third
number in the Table is 3.18 l. being the increase of 1 l. for 2 years added to
the second number in that Table which is 2.06, for the amount of 1 l. at the
end of 3 years is 1.12 which added to 2.06 the second number it makes 3.18 for
the third number; The fourth number is the amount of 1 l. for 3 years which is
1.18 added to the number before it, viz. the third number, proceeding in the
same method, till you have composed the Table at your pleasure, each number in
the Table being 1 l. and the amount of 1 l. (for so many years as it stands
against in the Table made less by one.) added to the number immediately
preceding it.

TABLE II. Which shows in pounds and Decimal parts of a pound the amount of 1
l, annuity being forborne to the end of any number of years under 31, Simple
Interest being computed after the Rate of 6 per Cent. per Annum.
Years 1 1.00 2 2.06 3 3.18 4 4.36 5 5.60 6 6.90 7 8.26 8 9.68 9 11.16 10 1^.70
11 14.30 12 15.96 13 17.68 14 19.46 15 21.30 16 23.20 17 25.16 18 ^7.18 19
29.26 20 31.40 21 33.60 22 35.86 23 38.18 24 40.56 25 43.00 26 45.50 27 48.06
28 50.68 29 53.36 30 56.10

The Use of Table II.
In the preceding Table in the Collum under the word Years, are set down every
year successively from 1 to 30, and the number in the Table placed against each
year, is the amount of 1 l annuity, in pounds and Decimal parts of a pound,
being forborne so many years as it is placed against. The use of it will
plainly appear by the solving of one, or two Questions, viz.

There is an Annuity of 134 l.-10s.-6d. all forborne to the end of 4 years; I
demand how much is due to the Creditor at the end of the said Term, Simple
Interest being allowed after the rate of 6 per Cent. per Annum?

Facit 586l.-10s.-07d.

To answer this Question, First, I look for 4 years, in the Collum of years,
and the number against it is 4.36 which is the amount of 1 l. Annuity for 4
years; therefore having turned the 1 s.-6d. (in the given annuity) into a
Decimal (which is.525) I say by the Rule of 3 thus.

^

Thus by the work I find the answer to be 58.529 l. the value of which Decimal
by the brief way of valuing a Decimal laid down in the 4th Rule of the 2d
Chapter, I find to be 580l. 10s. 7d.

And it is plain that in solving Questions by this Table, that (the first
number in the Rule of 3 being unite) if you multiply the given Annuity by the
proper Tabular Number, that then the product will be the answer.

Example 2.

What is the amount of an Annuity of 150 l. 10 s. being forborne to the end of
7 years, allowing Simple Interest after the Rate of 6 per Cent, per Annum?
Answer, 1243 l.-02 s.-07 d. fere.

^

XI. When an Annuity or yearly Income, for a certain number of years to come,
is to be sold for ready Money, and the seller is to allow the Buyer Rebate at
The Rebate of Annuities at Simple Interest
Simple Interest for his present payment, then in this case the buyer ought to
pay so much present money for each yearly payment, as being put out at Simple
Interest for so many years as it is Rebated for, it would then amount to one
yearly payment, and the sum of all those present worths will be the present
worth of the Annuity required, the Rule will appear very plain by the following
Example.

There is an Annuity or Lease of 100 l. per Annum to continue 6 years yet to
come to be sold for ready Money, the Seller being to allow the Buyer Rebate at
6 per Cent. per Annum, Simple Interest, now I desire to know how much present
Money will buy out the said Lease?

Facit 499 l.-09 s.-04 d. fere.

It is evident that if we find out the present worth of 100 l. due at the end
of the first year, and also the present worth of a 100 l. due at the end of the
second year, and the present worth of 100 l. due at the end of the third year,
and likewise the present worth of 100 l. due at the end of the fourth, fifth,
and sixth years, and add all these present worths together, their sum will be
the present worth of the given Annuity; which several present worths are found
out according to the ninth Rule, by the several proportions following, viz.

^

So that you see by the foregoing proportions, the present worth of 100 l. per
Annum to continue six years, allowing Rebate at 6 per Cent. per Annum, Simple
Interest, is 499.468754 l.=499 l. 9 s. 04 d.

Upon the foregoing eleventh Rule is grounded the construction and calculation
of the following Table which The construction of the 3 Table.
shows the present worth of 1 pound annuity to continue any number of years
under 31 Simple Interest being computed after the rate of 6 per Cent. per
Annum; The first number in the Table is.943396 which is the present worth of 1
pound due at the end of a year to come. The second number in the Table is
1.836253, which is the sum of the present worths of 1 l. due at the end of two
years to come, and of 1 l. due at the end of one year to come added together;
And the third number in the Table is 2.683710 which is the sum of the present
worths of 1 l. due at the end of 3, 2, and 1 years to come. And after the same
method is the whole Table calculated.

But the numbers in the said Table may more easily be found out thus, viz. Look
in the first Table, and let the first number of that be the first number of
this third Table, and let the sum of the first number in this, and the second
number in that be the second number in this Table, and for the third number in
this Table take the sum of the second in this, and the third in that Table, and
in this manner you may proceed till you have composed the whole Table.

TABLE III. Which shows the present worth of 1 l. annuity to continue any
number of years under 31, Simple Interest being computed at 6 per Cent. per An.
Years 1.943396 2 1.836253 3 2.683710 4 3.490161 5 4.259391 6 4.994685 7
5.698900 8 6.374575 9 7.023925 10 7.648925 11 8.251334 12 8.832729 13 9.394526
14 9.938004 15 10.464319 16 10.974523 17 11.469572 18 11.950341 19 12.437630 20
12.892175 21 13.334652 22 13.765686 23 14.175524 24 14.585360 25 14.985360 26
15.375985 27 15.757664 28 16.120798 29 16.485761 30 16.842904

The Use of the foregoing Table. III.
In the foregoing third Table, in the left hand Collum under the Title of
years, are expressed all the integral numbers, from 1 to 30, which signify so
many years, and the numbers in the Right hand Collum which are placed against
the number of years are pounds, and decimal parts of a pound sterling, and
every one of them are the present worth of 1 pound Annuity to continue so many
years to come as are placed against them in the Collum of years, Rebate being
allowed at Simple Interest 6 per Cent. per An.

As, suppose there were a Lease of 20 shillings per annum to continue 6 years,
to be sold for present money, allowing the buyer Rebate at 6 per Cent. per
annum Simple Interest. I desire to know how much is its present worth? To
answer this, I look in the Collume of years for 6, and in the next Collume on
the right hand just against 6 you have 4.99468 5 l.=4 l.-19 s.-10 d. which is
the answer to the Question. And by the help of this Table may the present worth
of any Annuity to continue any number of years under 31 be found out, allowing
Rebate at 6 per Cent. per Annum, Simple Interest, by one single Rule of 3
Direct, according to the manner of solving the following question, viz.

Quest. 1.

There is a Lease of 18 years yet to come, of the yearly value of 130 l. to be
sold for ready Money, and the purchaser is to be allowed Rebate after the rate
of 6 per Cent. per Annum, Simple Interest, now I demand how much is the present
worth of this Lease?

Facit 1553 l.-10 s.-10 d.

First, I look in the Table for 18 years, and over against it on the right hand
I find ^1.950341 which is the present worth of 1 pound annuity to continue 18
years, etc. Therefore by the Rule of 3 Direct, I say

^

So that by the work you find the answer to be 1553.544 l. etc. or 1553 l.-10
s.-10 d. very near, which said answer is nothing else but the product of the
Tabular number, ( 11.950341l.) multiplied by the given annuity (130 l.) For it
is evident, that if the present worth of 1 pound annuity to continue 18 years
be 11.950341 l. then the present worth of 130 l. per annum, to continue the
same number of years (and Rebate being allowed at the same Rate per Cent. per
an. for the one as for the other) must be 130 times as much. But when Rebate is
to be allowed after any other rate then 6 per Cent. per annum, then the
foregoing Table will not at all be useful, but you must have recourse to a
Table calculated for the same rate of interest, which you may easily perform at
leisure by the foregoing Rules.

Quest. 2.

What Annuity to continue 18 years will 1553.5443 30 purchase, allowing the
Buyer Simple Interest at 6 per Cent. per annum?

Facit 130 l.

This Question is but the converse of the former, and may be thus Resolved,
viz. Take the Tabular number corresponding to 18 years, which is 11.950341 by
which divide the given purchase Money, and the Quotient will give you the
annuity that it will purchase, viz.

^

So that by the work I find it will purchase an Annuity of 130l. to continue 18
years.

The reason of the work is plain, for if the Tabular number correspondent to 18
years be the present worth of 1 l. Annuity to continue 18 years to come, then
it is certain that so much money as is expressed by that Tabular number, will
purchase an Annuity of 1 l. to continue 18 years: And consequently we may find
by help of the said Table what annuity any other sum of money will purchase, to
continue any number of years not exceeding 30, by a single Rule of 3 Direct, as
in the last Question, the proportion is as follows, viz.

^

And it is no more in effect than a sum in Division, for the second number
(being 1) neither multiplyeth, nor divides, etc.

By what has been said concerning the use of the foregoing Table, you may
perceive that the p^esent worth of an Annuity is found out by multiplication,
and to know what annuity any sum will purchase is performed by Division.

I might have made Tables for other Rates of Interest, but Simple Interest
being seldom allowed in the purchasing or valuing of Leases and Annuities,
(they being generally purchased at Compound Interest, or Interest upon
Interest) makes me forbear, and indeed at Simple Interest a Lease is
over-valued.

CHAP. XIII. Of Compound Interest.
I. WHat has been said in the last Chapter, I judge sufficient for the
understanding of the Nature and use of Simple Interest, and that being well
understood, the nature of Compound Interest will not seem difficult to the
studious Learner, and the better he is acquainted with the nature of Simple
Interest, so much the easier will he come to the knowledge of the nature, and
use of Compound Interest.

II. Compound Interest is, when a sum of money is put out to interest, and the
interest thereof becoming due is still continued in the hands of the Debtor, so
as to become part of the principal, Interest being reckoned for it from the
time it becomes due, for which reason it is called Interest upon Interest: And
as Simple Interest increases by a series of Arithmetical proportionals
continued; so does Compound interest increase by a rank or series of continual
Geometrical proportionals. For when a sum of money is put out to interest at
any Rate per Cent. per Annum, (as suppose 100 l. to be put out to receive at
the end of one year 6 l. for its interest) it is evident that if the interest
(being 6 l.) be continued in the hands of the Debtor, there will be at the end
of the second year the increase of 106 l. which is 112.36 l. and at the third
years end there will be the increase of 112.36 l. so that every number
proceeds from that going before it, after the same Rate or Reason as 100
proceeds from 100, as you see following.

^

So that by the Augmentation of 100 l. in 4 years, you have this rank of
Geometrical proportionals continued viz. 100, 106, 112.36, 119.1016. and
126.247696 which is in number 5, viz. more by one than is the number of years,
the last of which is the amount of 100 l. at 6 per Cent. for 4 years reckoning
Compound Interest, or Interest upon Interest, and each of these proportionals
proceeds from that going before it as 106 proceeds from 100, that is to
say, every of the said proportionals, is in such proportion to that which goes
before it as 106 is to 100, or as 100 is to 106, so is any one of them, to that
which follows it, or if you take any 3 of them which are placed together,
there is this proportion between them, viz* As the first of those three is to
the second, so is the second to the third, and the third to the fourth, and the
fourth to the fifth, and the fifth to the sixth, etc. whence it is evident that
they have amongst themselves this following Qualification, viz. that the Square
of any ^ne of them is equal to the Rectangle, or Product, made by that which is
placed immedi^tely before it, and that immediately after it, and the same would
it be if there were never so many Terms, and is a peculiar property of all
numbers that are Geometrical proportionals continued.

III. The Interest of 100 l. for a year being known, the Compound Interest of
any other sum for any number of years may be likewise found out by so many
single Rules of 3, as there are given years, for,

As 100 l, is to its increase for one year, so is any other sum to its increase
for the same time, and so is the first years increase to the second, and the
second years increase to the third, and so is the third years increase to the
fourth, etc.

Example.

Let it be required to find how much 350 l. will be increased to being put out
to Interest at 6 per Cent. per Annum Compound Interest for 5 years? Answer,
468l.-7s.-4, d. fere. Sec the following work.

^

Whereby you see that 350 l. being put out to Interest after the rate of 6 per
Cent will at the first years end be increased to 371 l. And 371 l. being put
out for the second year, will be increased to 393.26 l. and 393.26 l. being
made a principal, and put out at the same Rate for the third year, will at the
end thereof be increased to 416 8556 l. and at the end of 5 years it will be
increased to 468 37895216 l.

And upon the aforesaid grounds is Calculated the following Table 1, whose
Construction and use immediately follows the same.

TABLE I. Which shows what one Pound will amount to, being forborne to the
end of any number of years to come, not exceeding 30, Compound Int. being
computed at 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, or 10 per Cent. per annum.
Years 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10 1 1.05000 1.06000 1.07000 1.08000 1.09000 1.10000 2
1.10250 1.12360 1.14490 1.16640 1.18810 1.21000 3 1.15762 1.19101 1.22504
1.25971 1.29502 1.33100 4 1.21550 1.26247 1.31079 1.36048 1.41158 1.46410 5
1.27628 1.33822 1.40255 1.46932 1.53862 1.61051 6 1.34009 1.4^851 1.50073
1.58687 1.67710 1.77156 7 1.40710 1.50363 1.60578 1.71382 1.82803 1.94871 8
1.47745 1.59384 1.71818 1.85093 1.99256 2.14358 9 1.55^32 1.68947 1.83845
1.99900 2.17189 2.35794 10 1.62889 1.79084 1.96715 2.15892 2.36736 2.59374 11
1.71033 1.89829 2.10485 2 33163 2.58042 2.85311 12 1.79585 2.01219 2.25219
2.51817 2.81266 3.13842 13 1.88564 2.13292 2.40984 2.7196^ 3.06580 3.452^7 14
1.97993 2.26090 2.57853 2.93719 3.34172 3.79749 15 2.07892 2.39655 2.75903
3.17216 3 64248 4.17724 16 2.18287 2.54035 2.95216 3.42594 3.97030 4.59497 17
2.29^01 2.69277 3.15881 3.70001 4.32763 5 05447 18 2.40661 2.85433 3.37993
3.99601 4 71712 5.55991 19 2.52695 3.02559 3.61652 4.31570 5.14166 6.1159^ 20
2.65329 3.20713 3.86968 4.66095 5.60441 6.72749 21 2.78596 3.39956 4.14056
5.03383 6.10880 7.40024 22 2.92526 3.60353 4 43040 5.43654 6.65860 8.14027 23
3.07152 3.81975 4.74053 5.87146 7.25787 8.95430 24 3.22509 4.04893 5.07236 6
34118 7.91108 9.84973 25 3.38635 4.29187 5.42743 6.84847 8.62308 10.83470 26
3.55567 4.54938 5.80735 7.39635 9.39915 11.91817 27 3.73345 4.82234 6.21386
7.98806 10.24508 13.10999 28 3.92012 5.11178 6.64883 8.62710 11.16713 14.42099
29 4.11613 5.41838 7.11425 9.31727 12.17218 15.86309 30 4.32194 5.74349 7.61225
10.06265 13.26767 17.44940

The Construction of the foregoing TABLE I.
By the third Rule foregoing it is evident that the Interest of 100 l. for a
year being known, the Compound Interest for any other sum may be found out for
any number of years; According to which Rule all the numbers in the said Table
are found out, being the amount of 1 l. at Compound Interest for any number of
years, not exceeding 30, being put out at any of these Rates, viz. 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, or 10 per Cent. per Annum, which numbers are found out by the Rule of
Proportion thus,

^

By which means the four first numbers in the econd Collum of the Table (being
placed under the number 5 are found, and by a Continuation of the same
operation are all the rest of the numbers in that Collum found out; which is
indeed nothing else but a continual multiplication of the first number, (viz.
1.05) into it self 29 times, and so the last number in that Collum is the
thirtieth power of 1.05, and the same Collum may be continued to any other
number of years at pleasure above 30; the numbers in this Collum being the
interest of 1 l. at 5 per Cent. per Annum Compound Interest for 30 years.

The numbers in the third Collum under the Figure 6, are the increase of 1 l.
at ^ per Cent. per Annum. Comp. Int. for 30 years, and are found out by
multiplying 1.0^ into it self 29 times, according to the Rule of Continual
Multiplication. The like is to be understood of all the rest.

The use of the foregoing TABLE.
In the first Collum of the Table under the Title years, are expressed the
number of years from 1 to 30, and in the second Collum under the figure 5, and
against every respective year are expressed the increase of 1 l. being put out
at 5 per Cent. per Annum, Compound Interest.

In the third Collume, under the number 6 is expressed the yearly increase of 1
l. being put out at 6 per Cent. per Annum, Compound Int. And so in the 4, 5, 6,
and 7 Collumes, are the yearly amounts of 1 l. at 7, 8, 9, and 10 per Cent. per
Annum, Compound Interest.

All which numbers in the said Table are multiplyars, for the producing of the
amount or Increase of any other Sum being put out at Compound interest, at any
rate of Interest, and for any number of years therein expressed, as will appear
by the following Examples.

Example. 1.

I demand the full amount of 365 l. being put to Interest for 9 years, Interest
being computed after the rate of 6 per Cent. per Annum, Compound Interest?
Facit 616 l.-13 s. 01 d.

Here because the sum proposed is put out at 6 per Cent. and for 9 years, I
look in the Collume of 6 per Cent. which is the third Collum of the Table under
the figure 6, and just against 9 in the Collum of years, I find 1.68947 which
is the increase of 1 l. being forborne the same time, and at the same Rate of
Interest, wherefore, by the Rule of 3 I say

^

So that by the work I find that if the sum of 365 l. be all forborne to the
end of 9 years, and interest be computed for the same at 6 per Cent. per Annum
Compound Interest, it will then be increased to 616.65655 which is 616 l. 13 s.
1 d.

Example 2.

What will 128 l.-16 s.-08 d. be increased to? The utmost improvement thereof
being made for 15 years at 7 per Cent. per annum, Compound Interest? Facit 355
l.-09 s.-01 d.

First, turn the 16 s.-8 d. into the Decimal of a pound by the 2d Rule of the
2d Chapter foregoing, and you will find it to be.8333, so that the given sum is
128.8333, etc.

Now to answer the Question, I look into the foregoing Table, and in the Collum
of 7 per Cent: and just against 15 years I find 2.75903 which is the uttermost
increase of 1 l. for 15 years at 7 per Cent. Compound Interest, by which if you
multiply the given sum, the Product will be the answer to the Question, as by
the following work will plainly appear.

^

By the foregoing work the answer is found to be 355.4549, etc.=355 l.-09 s.-01
d.

But if any sum be put out at Compound Int. for months, or days over and
above the given number of years, then the work will be somewhat different from
the former; for first you must find out the amount of the given sum, for the
given number of years, and then by the 8th Rule of the foregoing Chapter find
out the Interest of that amount for the odd time, being either months or days
under a year, and that Int. being added to the foresaid amount, that sum will
be the answer to the Question; This is so obvious that it needs no Example.

IV. When a sum of Money due at the end of any number of years to come is to be
satisfied with present money, Of Rebate or discount at Compound Interest.
allowing Rebate at Compound Interest, there must be found a Rank or series of
Continual proportionals, more in number by one than the number of years for
which the discount is proposed, of which rank or series of proportionals, the
sum to be satisfied by present payment must be the first, and the second must
decrease from that after the same rate or proportion as 100 decreaseth from the
sum of 100 added to its interest for one year, after the Rate of interest
propounded; that is to say, as 100 proceeds from 106, or 108 if the interest
be 6 or 8 per Cent. and after the same Rate, or Reason must the third decrease
from the second, and the fourth from third, etc.

When a Question is stated for the Rebate of Money at Compound Interest, it is
solvable by as many single Rules of 3, as the number of years for which the sum
proposed is to be Rebated, and it is nothing else but the inverse of the third
Rule of this Chapter, as may be proved by the working of the following
Question, taken out of the said Rule, where it is proved that 350 l. being
forborne in the Debtors hands for 5 years at 6 per Cent. Compound Interest, it
will then be increased to 468.3800121^; now let the said Question be inverted
thus, viz.

There is a sum of Money, viz. 468.38001216 due at the end of 5 years to come,
now I demand how much present Money will satisfy the said Debt, Rebate being
allowed after the Rate of 6 per Cent. per annum, Compound Interest?

First, I say, as 106 is to 100, so is the sum due at the end of 5 years, viz.
468.38001216, to 441.867936, which is the sum due at the fourth years end, and
so is the sum due at the fourth years end, to the sum due at the third years
end, etc. as by the work appears.

^

So that by the foregoing work you see that if 468.38001216 l. be due at the
end of 5 years to come, and is to be satisfied by the payment of present money,
Rebate being allowed at 6 per Cent. per annum, Compound Interest, 350 l. is the
sum required.

And upon this Rule is grounded the Calculation of the following Table, which
shows what (...) l. due at the end of any number of years to come, not
exceeding 30 in worth in present Money, Rebate being reckoned at any of these
Rates, viz. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, or 10 per Cent. per an. Compound Interest.

TABLE II. Which shows the present worth of one pound payable at the end of
any number of years to come, not exceeding 30, Rebate being yearly allowed at
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, or 10 per Cent. per Annum, Compound Interest.
Years 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 1.952381.943396.934579.925925.917431.909090
2.907029.889996.873438.857338.841680.826446
3.363837.839619.816297.793832.772183.751314
4.822702.792093.762895.735029.708425.683013
5.783526.747258.712986.680583.649331.620921
6.746215.704960.666342.630169.596267.564474
7.710681.665057.622749.583490.547^34.513158
8.676839.627412.582009.540268.501866.466507
9.644608.591898.543933.500248.460427.424097 10
613913.558391.508349.463193.422410.385543
11.584679.526787.475092.428882.387532.350494
12.556837.496989.444012.397113.355534.318630
13.530321.468839.414964.367697.326178.289664
14.505067.442300.387817.340461.299246.263331
15.481017.417265.362446.315241.274538.239392
16.458111.393646.338734.291890.251869.217629
17.436296.371364.316574.270269.231073.197844
18.415520.350343.295864.250249.211993.179858
19.395733.330512.276508.231712.194489.163508
20.376889.311804.258419.214548.178430.148643
21.358942.294155.241513.198655.163698.135130
22.341849.277505.225713.183940.150181.122846
23.325571.261797.210947.170315.137781.111678
24.310067.246978.197146.157699.126405.101525
25.295302.232998.184249.146018.115967.092296 26
281240.219810.172195.135201.106392.083905
27.267848.207367.160930.125186.097607.076277
28.255093.195630.150402.115913.089548.069343
29.242946.184556.140562.107327.082154.063039
30.231377.174110.131367.099377.075371.057308

The Construction of the foregoing TABLE.
By the Fourth Rule of this Chapter is plainly shown the manner of finding the
present worth of any sum of money due at the end of any number of years to
come, Rebate being computed at Compound Interest, and after the same manner are
all the numbers in the foregoing Table found as you may see in the following
Example, where the four first numbers in the third Collum are methodically
found out by the Rule, that being the Collum of Rebate at 6 per Cent. per annum.

^

So that by the foregoing proportions, I say first, if 106 l. be decreased to
100 l. what will 1 l. be decreased to? Answer, to.94339 l. etc = 18 s. 10
(...). The five first Figures thereof being the first number in the third
Collum of the foregoing Table and it shows that the present worth of (...) l.
due at the end of one year to come, Rebate being allowed at 6 per Cent.
is.94339 l. = 18 s-10 d.

Secondly, I say by the Rule of 3, If 106 l. be decreased to 100 l. what
will.94339 etc. be decreased to? The Answer is.88999 l. etc. = 17 s. ^9 (...).
fere. And this is the second number in the third Collum of the said Table, and
is placed against 2 years in the first Collum, and shows the present worth of
1 l. due at the end of two years to come, Rebate being allowed after the Rate
of 6 per Cent. per Annum, Compound Interest.

And after the same manner are all the rest of the numbers in the said Collum
of 6 per Cent. found out, and also all the other Decimal Fractions in the
second, fourth, fifth, sixth, etc. Collums, (showing the Rebate of one pound
for any number of years not exceeding 30, at 5, 7, 8, 9, and 10 per Cent.
(mutatis mutandis.)

The Use of the foregoing TABLE II.
The first Collum is the number of years for the Rebate of 1 l. and the numbers
in the rest of the Collums, are Decimal Fractions, showing the present worth of
1 l. due at the end of so many years to come, as they are placed against in the
Collum of years; Rebate being allowed at the same rate of Interest under which
they are placed, the figures 5, 6, 7, 8. 9, and 10 placed at the top, denoting
the same. An Example or two will make its use more plain.

Example. 1.

I demand how much present money will satisfy a Debt of 684 l. due at the end
of 6 years to come, Allowing Rebate after the rate of 8 per Cent. per annum,
Compound Interest? To answer this Question, look in the Collum of 8 per Cent.
and against 6 years I find this number, viz..63017 which shows that if 1 l.
be due at the end of 6 years to come, its present worth is.63017l. Rebate being
allowed after the Rate of 8 per Cent. per annum, Compound Interest.

Therefore I say by the Rule of 3, If 1l. be decreased to.63017l. what will
684l. be decreased to at that rate? Facit 431.03628l.= 431l. 0s. 8 d. as by the
work appears?

^

So that you see the sum proposed being multiplied by the proper Tabular
number, produces the Answer to the Question, for the number 1, which is here
the first number in the Rule of 3 does not either multiply or divide, and
therefore the answer is found out by multiplication only. Observe the work of
the next Example.

Example.

What is the present worth of 164l.-15s. due at the end of 9 years to come,
allowing Rebate after the Rate of 6 per Cent. per annum, Compound Interest?
Facit 97l.-10s.-03. (...).

Look in the Table aforesaid in the Collum of 6 per Cent. and against 9 in the
Collum of years you will find this number, viz..59189 which is the present
worth of 1l. due at the end of 9 years to come, and is the proper multiplyar
for finding the answer to this Question, as by the work.

^

The answer found by the foregoing operation is 97.5138775=97l.-10s.-03.

But if the given time for the Rebate of any sum consists of odd months or
days, besides years, then in such case, the Rebate (at the given Rate of
Interest) for the odd time must be found (by the 9th Rule of the 12 Chap.
foregoing) for the given sum, and then the present worth of the given sum thus
decreased, must be found for the number of years as in the two last Examples.

Example 3.

There is 640l.-10s. due at the end of six year, and 3 months to come, what is
its present worth, Rebate being allowed at the Rate of 7 per Cent. per annum,
Compound Interest?

First, I find the decrease of 640.5l. for 3 months thus, viz.

^

So that I find the Int. of 100l. for 3 months at 7 per Cent. to be 1.75l.
which added to 100l. makes 101.75, then to find the decrease of 640.5l. for 3
Months: I say,

^

So that I find by the last proportion, that if at the end of 6 years, 3
months: There was due 640.5l yet at the end of 6 years there will be due but
629.484l. whose present worth by the foregoing directions will be found to be
419l.-9s. for,

^

Read the 9th Rule of the Twelfth Chapter foregoing, and you will easily
understand the method here used for solving Questions of this nature.

V. Questions in Rebate at Compound Interest may be Resolved by the First Table
of this Chapter which shows the increase of 1l. at Compound Interest, etc.
But as in the second Table you make the Tabular numbers multiplyars, to find
out the present worth of a sum; so if you will find out the present worth of a
sum by the First Table, you must then make those Tabular Numbers Divisors; The
Reason whereof is plain, for the First Table shows the increase of 1l. for 30
years, etc. But they may likewise serve to show what sum of money due at the
end of any number of years to come under 31 (allowing Rebate according to the
rates of Interest therein mentioned) 1l. present money will satisfy. Now to
Resolve Questions in Rebate by this Table, look in the Collum of the proposed
Interest, or Rebate, and against the proposed number of years is the Tabular
number for your work, which must be according to the following proportion, viz.

As the Tabular Number so found,

Is to 1,

So is the sum proposed to be Rebated,

To its present worth.

To make this a little more plain, I shall Answer the first Question in the Use
of the second Table, by the help of the first Table only, which is as
follows, viz.

I demand how much present Money will satisfy a Debt of 684l. due at the end
of 6 years to come, allowing Rebate after the rate of 8 per Cent. per annum,
Compound Interest?

Look in Table 1. in the Collum of 8 per Cent. and against 6 years you will
find this number* viz. 1.58687, Therefore the proportion is as follows.

^

So that by this proportion the Answer is 431.03719l. =431 l.-00-08 d. very
near to the answer before found by the second Table of Rebate.

VI. When an Annuity is in arrear, and it is required to know its utmost
Improvement, accounting Interest The manner of valuing Annuities that are in
arrear.
upon Interest for each particular sum from the time it becomes due, to the end
of the given Term of years. The manner how to work such Questions will be
apparent by the working of the following Question, viz.

There is an Annuity of 150 l. to continue to the end of 5 years, and the
utmost improvement thereof to be made after the rate of 6 per Cent. per annum,
Compound Interest; now I demand how much will then be due to the Creditor?

It is evident that there must be found out, first the amount of 150 l. for one
year, viz. that which is due at the end of the fourth year, it lying in the
Debtors hands all the fifth year.

Secondly, There must be accounted the improvement of 150 l. for 2 ^ears, viz
that which is (...) (...) the end of the third year* it lying in the Debtors
hands the years and fifth (...)

Thirdly, There must be accounted the improvement of 150 l. for 3 years, viz.
that which is due at the end of the second year, itlying in the hands of the
Debtor the third, fourth, and fifth years.

And in the fourth place there must be accounted the utmost improvement of 150
l. for 4 years, viz. that which is due at the end of the first year, it lying
in the Debtors hands thesecond, third, fourth, and fifth years.

And besides there must be acconnted 150 l. due at the end of the fifth year,
no Interest being reckoned for that, because it becomes not due till the
expiration of the last year, and then the sum of all these is the utmost amount
of that annuity.

The solving of Questions concerning Annuities at Compound Interest, will not
be any thing different in their operation, from the manner of solving a
Question concerning a single sum of money put out for years at Compound
Interest, by the third Rule before-going. As suppose that in stead of an
Annuity of 150 l. there was a single sum of 150 l. put out for 4 years at
Compound Interest, at 6 per Cent. what would be its utmost improvement at the
end of the said Term?

Here you will easily perceive that in solving the one, the other is also
solved.

See the work according to the foregoing third Rule.

^

Now if the foregoing proportions be well considered, you will find that

The Sum due at the end of the fifth year, being that years Rent is -- l. 150
And 150 l. due at the end of the fourth year will, at the fifth years end be
increased to -- l. 159 And 150 l. due at the end of the third year, will at the
end of the fifth year be increased to -- l. 168.54 And 150 l. due at the second
years end, will at the fifth years end be increased to -- l. 178.6524 And 150
l. due at the first years end, will at the fifth years end be increased to --
l. 189.371544 The sum of all these being due at the five years end is -- l.
845.553944

So that if an Annuity of 150 l. be all forborne to the end of five years, and
it be improved to the utmost after the rate of 6 per Cent. per annum, Compound
Interest, it will then be increased to the sum of 845.553944=845 l. 11 s. o d.

Now if the particular numbers in finding out the augmentation of the said
Annuity according to the manner before prescribed, be well viewed, and the
method in finding them out be well considered, it will appear, that if an
Annuity, payable by yearly payments, be all forborne to the end of any number
of years, and the utmost improvement thereof be made at Compound Interest, the
total then due at the end of the said Time, or Term of years, will be the sum
of a series, or Rank of continual proportionals as many in number as the years
of the Annuities forbearance, the first being the Annuity, or yearly payment it
self, and the second proceeding from the first after the same Rate or
proportion as 100 l. and its Interest for a year added together, proceeds
from 100 l. and after the same Rate does the third proceed from the second, and
the fourth from the third, etc.

The manner of Calculating the following Third TABLE.
And upon this Rule is grounded the Calculation of the following Table, which
shows what 1 l. annuity (being forborne to the end of any number of years to
come, not exceeding 30) will be increased to Compound Interest, being computed
after any of the Rates mentioned at the head of the Table.

But considering that as an Annuity increases yearly at Compound Interest, the
sum due at each years end, is the sum of a series of continual proportionals
equal in number to the yearly payments, and that the first number is the annual
payment its self, therefore may a Table to show the Annual increase of 1 l.
Annuity with great ease be made from the First Table, showing the yearly
increase of 1 l. at Compound Interest, as will plainly appear by what follows.

Let us pitch upon making the Collum of 6 per Cent. per Annum, in the third
Table? Look in the first Table, and you will find the Collum of 6 per Cent. to
have for its first number 1.06, and the second number 1.12360 etc. And to make
the Collum of 6 per Cent. in the third Table proceed thus, for the first number
in the said third Table put 1, or 1.00000, and for the second number in the
third Table, take the sum of the first number in the Third Table (which is
1.00000,) and the first number in the first Table (which is 1.06) and that
makes 2.06 for the said second number; then add the second number in the Third
Table, to the second in the first, and their sum is the third number in the
third Table; then add the said third number to the third number in the first
Table, and their sum is the fourth number in the third Table, etc. And after
this manner proceed till you have made all the numbers in the said Collum of 6
per Cent. And after the same method are the rest of the Collums made, (the
first number in each being 1. or 1.00000) mutatis mutandis.

But here note, that the numbers in the said first Table ought to be continued
to more places than are there expressed, to prevent the errors that else may be
found in the third Table, by adding of defective Decimals. The use of the said
Table is shown immediately after the same.

TABLE III. Which shows in Pounds and Decimal parts of a (...) the In^ or
Amount of 1 l. Annuity, to continue any number of Years not exceeding ^0,
Comp^d Interest being computed at 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 per Cent. per Annum.
Years 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 1 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 2 2
05000 2 06000 2 07000 2.08000 2.09000 2.10000 3 3.15250 3.18360 3.21490 3.24640
3.27810 3.31000 4 4 31012 4 37461 4 43994 4.50611 4.57312 4.64100 5 5.52563
5.63709 5.75073 5.86660 5.08471 6.10510 6 6.80191 6.97531 7.15329 7.33592
7.52333 7.71561 7 8.14200 8.39383 8.65402 8.92280 9.20043 9.48717 8 9 64910
9.89746 10.25980 10.63662 11.02847 11.43588 9 11.02656 11.49131 11.97798
12.48755 13.02103 13.57947 10 12.57789 13.18079 13.81644 14.48656 15.19292 15
93742 11 14.20678 14.97164 15.78359 16.64548 17.56029 18.53116 12 15.91712
16.86994 17.88845 18.97712 20.14071 21.38428 13 17.71298 18.88213 20 14064
21.49529 22.95338 24.52271 14 19.59863 21.01506 22.55048 24 21492 26.01918
27.97498 15 21.57856 23.27596 25.12902 27.15211 29 36091 31.77248 16 23.65749
25.67252 27.88805 30.32428 33.00339 35.94972 17 25.84036 28.21287 30.84021
33.75022 36.97370 40.54470 18 28.13238 30.90565 33.99903 37.45024 41.30133
45.59917 19 30.53900 33.75999 37.37896 41.44626 46.01845 51.15909 20 33.06595
36.78559 40.99549 45.76196 51.16011 57.27499 21 35.71925 39.99272 44.86517
50.42292 56.76453 64.00249 22 38.50521 43.39228 49.00573 55.45675 62.87333
71.40274 23 41.43047 46.99582 53.43614 60.89329 69.53193 79.54302 24 44.50199
50.81557 58.17667 66.76475 76.78981 88.49732 25 47.72709 54.86451 63 24903
73.10593 84.70089 98.34705 26 51.11345 59.15638 68.67646 79.95441 93.32397
109.18176 27 54.66912 63.70576 74.48382 87.35076 102.72313 121.09994 28
58.40258 68.52810 80.69769 95.33882 112.96821 134.20993 29 62.32271 73.63979
87.34652 103.96593 124.13535 148.63092 30 62.43884 79.05818 94.46078 113.28321
136.30753 164.49402

The Use of the third TABLE.
The numbers 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 at the head of the Table are the several Rates
of Interest, of 100l. for a year, and the numbers placed in the several Collums
under those numbers, show the yearly increase of 1 pound Annuity, at the same
Rate of Interest as it is placed under, and for so many years as it is placed
against in the Collum of years on the left hand of the Table; and the use of
these numbers will be manifest by the method used in solving the following
Question, viz.

There is an Annuity of 34l.-8s. payable by yearly payments, forborne unto the
end of Twelve years; Now, I demand how much is due at the end of the said Term,
Compound Interest being allowed at 6 per Cent. per Annum? Facit 580l.-6s.-6d.
and somewhat more as will appear by the following operation.

The increase of the said Annuity being proposed at 6 per Cent. I look in the
Collum which has the number 6 placed at the head of it, and against the number
12 in the Collum of years I find the number 16.86994 which shows that if 1l.
Annuity be forborne to the end of 12 years, and there be allowed Compound
Interest at 6 per Cent. it will then be increased to 16.86994=16l.-17s.-04d.
therefore I say by the Rule of Proportion.

^

Whereby it is apparent that those tabular numbers are only Multiplyars for the
producing of the amount of any given Annuity for any number of years not
exceeding 30, any Rate of Compound Interest, being allowed from 5 to 10 per
Cent. Inclusive, etc.

VII. Questions concerning the increase of Annuities at Compound Interest may
be likewise solved by the first Table in this Chapter, according to the
following method, viz.

When an Annuity is in arrear, and it is required to know to what sum it is
augmented, Compound Interest being computed, etc. Find out what principal will
in one year gain the Annual Rent proposed, allowing the proposed Rate of
Interest. Then (as is Taught in the use of the said first Table) find the
increase of the said principal for the number of years, and at the Rate of
Interest proposed, and from the amount thereof subtract the said principal,
then will that remainder be the amount of the given Annuity for the given time,
as will appear by solving the first Question of the sixth Rule before-going,
which is this, viz. there is an Annuity of 150l. forborne to the end of 5
years, what is its amount at 6 per Cent, per annum, Compound Interest?

Now to answer this, I find out a principal that at 6 per Cent. will gain 150l.
in one year, which I do by the following proportion, viz.

^

So that I find 2500l. to be the answer, then supposing the said principal
2500l. to be put out to Interest at 6 per Cent. Compound Interest for 5 years,
look in the first Table in the Collum of 6 per Cent. and against 5 years you
will find 1.3382255, etc. which being multiplied by 2500, produces 3345.563944
from which if you subtract the said principal 2500l. there will remain
845.563944 for the answer which is the same with that found before.

VIII. When an Annuity to continue any number of years is to be bought with
ready money, there ought to be paid so much money, as being put out at Compound
Interest, at any Rate, and for the time of the Leases continuance, its total
amount may be equal to the utmost improvement of the said Annuity, being all
forborne to the time of the Leases expiration, Compound Interest being Computed
at the same Rate. And The manner of finding the present worth of annuities,
Rebate being all^wed at Comp. Int.
the manner of finding out such a present worth, is as in the following
Example, viz. There is an Annuity of 468.38001216l. to continue 5 years what is
its present worth, allowing Rebate after the Rate of 6 per Cent. per annum,
Compound Interest?

Here it is plain that there must first be computed the present worth of the
said Annuity, due at the end of the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth
years, and the sum of all these present worths, will be the present worth of
the said annuity, as will appear by the following work which is wrought by the
fourth Rule of this Chapter.

The present worth of 468.38001216l. due at the end of the first year is -- --
l. 441.867936 The same sum due at the end of two years, is in ready money worth
-- -- 416.8556 The same sum due at the end of three years is worth -- ^93.26
The same sum due at the end of four years is worth -- 371 The same due at the
end of five years is worth in ready money. -- -- -- 350 The sum of all the said
present worths is -- -- 1972.983536

Which is the present worth of an Annuity of 4 8.3001216 to continue 5 year,
Rebate, being allowed at the Rate of 6 per Cent. per Annum, Compound Interest.

The construction of the following TABLE IV.
And upon the same grounds with the solution of the last Question is
calculated, the following fourth Table, which shows the present worth of 1 l.
Annuity to continue any number of years, not exceeding 30, and payable by
yearly Payments, Rebate being allowed after the Rate of 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10
per Cent. per An. Compound Interest.

But the nature of the following Table being rightly considered, you will find
the making of it to be easily performed by help of the numbers in the second
Table of this Chapter.

As for Example.

Let us pitch upon the making of the Collum of 6 per Cent. First, I turn to the
second Table, and by the numbers in the Collum of 6 per Cent. I do the work;
The first number in the second Table, I make to be the first number in the
fourth and so that fourth I ad^ the second number in the second Table, and
their sum is the second num^er in the fourt^ Table; then to this second number
^o I add the third number i^ the second Table, and ^eir sum is the third number
in the fourth Table, and after the same manner are all the rest of the numbers
in that Collum made, and also those in the rest of the Collums, mutatis
mutandis.

But remember when ever you caleulate one Table by the help of another, to
continue the Table you make use of, to more places than you intend the numbers
in your Table to consist of for fear of errors through the Addition of
Defective Decimals.

TABLE IV. Which shows the present worth of one Pound Annuity payable by
yearly payments, and to continue any number of years not exceeding 30, Reb^e
being allowed at 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, or 10 pre Cent. per annum Compound Interest.
Years 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. (...) 1. 95238. 9433. 93457. 92952. 91743. 90909 2
1.85941 1.83339 1.80801 1.80801 1.75911 1.73553 3 2.72324 2.67301 2.62431
2.62431 2.53129 2.48685 4 3.54595 3.46510 3.38721 3.38721 3.23971 3.16986 5
4.32947 4.21236 4.10019 3.10019 3.88965 3.79078 6 5.07569 4.91732 4.76653
4.76653 4.48591 4.35526 7 5.78637 5.58233 5.38928 5.38928 5.03295 4.86841 8
6.46321 6.20979 5.97129 5.97129 5.53481 5.33492 9 7.10782 6.80169 6.51523
6.51523 5.99524 5.75901 10 7.72173 7.36008 7.02358 6.02358 6.41765 6.14456 11
8.30641 7.88687 7.49867 7.49867 6.80519 6.49506 12 8.86325 8.38384 7.94268
7.94268 7.16072 6.81369 13 9.39357 8.85268 8.35765 7.35765 7.48690 7.10335 14
9.89864 9.29498 8.74546 8.74546 7.78614 7.36668 15 10.37965 9.71224 9.10791
8.10791 8.06068 7.60608 16 10.83776 10.10589 9.44664 8.85136 8.31255 7.82371 17
11.27406 10.47725 9.76322 9.12163 8.54363 8.02155 18 11.68958 10.82760 10.05908
9.37188 8.75562 8.20141 19 12.08531 11 15811 10.33559 9.60359 8.95011 8.36492
20 12.46220 11.46992 10.59401 9.81814 9.12854 8.51356 21 12.82115 11.76407
10.83557 10.01681 9.29224 8.64869 22 13.16300 12.04158 11.06124 10.20074
9.44242 8.77154 23 13.48857 12.30337 11.27218 10.37105 9.58020 8.88322 24
13.79864 12.55035 11.46933 10.52875 9.70661 8.98^74 25 14.09394 12.78335
11.65358 10.67477 9.82257 9.07704 26 14.375^8 13.00316 11.82577 10.80997
9.92897 9.16094 27 14 64303 13.21053 11.98671 10.93516 10.02657 9.23722 28
14.89812 13.40616 12.13711 11.05107 10.11612 9.30656 29 15.14071 13.59071
12.27767 11.158^0 10.19828 9.36960 30 15.39244 13.76482 12.40994 11.^5778
10.27365 9, 42691

The Use of the foregoing TABLE.
The first Collum is the number of years from 1 to 30; and the number 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, at the head of the Table are the Rates of Interest of 100 l. for a
year, and the numbers in each of these Collums under the said Rates of
Interest, are the present worths of 1 l. Annuity to continue for the number of
years which is placed against them, allowing Rebate after the rate of Interest
at the head of each Collum, and are Multiplyars serving to find the present
worth of any other Annuity, as will appear by the following

Example.

There is an Annuity of 48 l. to continue 12 years, and payable by yearly
payments, to be sold for present money, I demand what it is worth, allowing
Rebate at 6 per Cent. per Annum, Compound Interest.? Facit 402.424=40 l. 8 s.
05 d. which is thus found out by the foregoing Table, viz. look in the said
Table, in the Collum of 6 per Cent. and against 12 in the Collum of years, you
have this number, viz. 8.38384 which is the present worth of 1 l. Annuity to
continue twelve years, Rebate being allowed, etc. therefore by the Rule of
proportion, I say,

^

So that I find the answer to be 402.42432, which is found by multiplying the
said Tabular number by 48, as you see by the work.

Otherwise find a principal which may bear such proportion to the given Annuity
(that is to be Rebated) as 100 bears to the Rate of Interest allowed in the
Rebate. Then find the present worth of this principal so found, by the
Directions given in the use of the second Table of this Chapter, then subtract
the said present worth from the principal found as before, and the remainder
will be the present worth of the given Annuity, Rebate being allowed as
proposed.

Example.

What is the present worth of an Annuity of 50 l. to continue 3 years, allowing
Rebate at 8 per Cent. per Annum, Compound Interest?

First, I find a principal that shall be to the given number 50 as 100 is to 8
which I find to be 625 l. by the following proportion, viz.

^

Then by the second Table I find the present worth of 625 l. which is 496.145
l. which I subtract from the said principal 625 l. and there remains 128.855
l.=128 l.-17 s.-1d. fere. which is the present worth of 50 l. per annum to
continue 3 years, Rebate being allowed at 8 per Cent. per annum, Compound
Interest.

Moreover by the numbers in the foregoing fourth Table, you may at first sight
discover how many years purchase any Lease to continue any number of years, not
exceeding 30, is worth in ready money, Compound Int. being Computed on both
sides at any of the Rates mentioned at the head of the Table.

Example.

Suppose there were a Lease issuing out of Lands to continue 16 years to be
sold for ready money, allowing Rebate at 8 per Cent. per Annum, Compound
Interest, I demand how many years purchase the said Lease is worth?

Look in the Table 4, in the Collum of 8 per Cent. and against 16 years you
will find 8.85136 which shows that it is worth 8.85136 years purchase which
is somewhat above 8 years, and 3 Quarters; But if the said Lease had been of
Houses, and 10 per Cent. were thought a convenient allowance for the same, then
you will find it to be worth 7.82371 years purchase which is 7 years, and above
3 quarters purchase.

IX. When there is a sum of money propounded, and itis required to know what
annuity to continue any given number of years, it will purchase according to
any given Rate of Interest, you may suppose any annuity at pleasure, then by
the directions Of the purchase of Annuities at Comp. Interest.
given in the use of the fourth Table; or else by the eighth Rule of this
Chapter, find the present worth of the supposed annuity for the number of
years, and at the rate of Interest propounded, which being done, you may find
what Annuity to continue the same number of years, the sum propounded will
purchase by the following proportion, viz.

As the present worth of the supposed Annuity,

Is to the said Annuity,

So is the sum propounded,

To the Annuity required.

As for Example.

Let it be required to find out what Annuity to continue 4 years, 800 l.
present money will purchase, Compound Interest being computed at 6 per Cent.
per Annum? Facit 230.873 l.

First, Suppose an Annuity at pleasure, to continue for 4 years, as suppose 150
l. then do I find by the eighth Rule of this Chapter the present worth of the
said Annuity to be 519.76584 l. therefore by the Rule of proportion I say

^

The Construction of the following TABLE V.
Upon the Reason of the foregoing Rule is grounded the Calculation of the
following Table for the purchasing of Annuities; and it may somewhat more
readily be calculated thus, viz.

It is evident by the construction of the first Table of this Chapter, that 1
l. present is equivalent to 1.06 l. due at the end of a year to come; therefore
is 1.06 the first number in the Collum of 6 per Cent. of the following Table;
because 1 l. will purchase 1.06 l. Then it is also evident by the fourth Table
that the present worth of 1 l. Annuity to continue two years at the same rate
is 1.83339, etc. that is, 1.83339, etc. will purchase a Lease of 1 l. per Annum
to continue two years, Compound Interest, being allowed at 6 per Cent.
therefore by the Rule of 3 Direct, I say,

^

By which I find that 1 l. ready money will buy a Lease of.54543 l. per Annum
to continue 2 years, therefore it is the second number in the following Table.
Likewise by the fourth Table I find that 2.67301 is the present worth of 1 l.
Annuity to continue 3 years at the same rate of Interest, wherefore by the Rule
of proportion I say,

^

Whereby I find that 1 l. will purchase an Annuity of.37411, to continue 3
years. Compound Interest being allowed at 6 per Cent. wherefore.37411 is the
third number in the said Table; Whereby it is evident that if you divide 1, or
Unite by the several numbers in the said Collum of 6 per Cent. in the fourth
Table, successively, the several Quotients will give you the numbers
successively, for the Collum of 6 per Cent. in the fifth Table; And after the
same manner are all the numbers in the other Collums of the said fifth Table
found out (except the first number of each Collum, which must be the same with
the first numbers in each Collum of the first Table) mutatis mutandis.

But it is absolutely necessary that the numbers in the said fourth Table, be
continued to more places than are there expressed, to prevent the errors that
otherwise will arise, by dividing by defective Decimals.

TABLE V. Which shows what Annuity payable by yearly payments to continue any
number of years not exceeding 30, one pound will purchase, Compound Interest,
being computed at 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, or 10 per Cent.
Years 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 1 1.05000 1.06000 1 07000 1.08000 1.09000 1.10000 2.
53780. 54543. 55309. 56076. 56846. 57619 3. 36720. 37411. 38105. 38803. 39505.
40211 4. 28209. 28859. 29519. 30192. 30866. 31947 5. 23097. 23739. 24389.
25045. 25709. 26379 6. 19701. 20336. 20979. 21631. 22291. 22960 7. 17281.
17913. 18555. 19207. 19869. 20545 8. 15472. 16103. 16746. 17401. 18067. 18744
9. 14069. 14702. 15548. 16007. 16679. 17364 10. 12950. 13586. 14237. 14902.
15582. 16274 11. 12038. 12679. 13335. 14007. 14694. 15396 12. 11284. 11927.
12590. 13269. 13965. 14676 13. 10645. 10296. 11965. 12652. 13356. 14077 14.
10101. 10758. 11434. 12129. 12843. 13574 15. 09634. 10296. 10979. 11682. 12405.
13147 16. 09226. 09895. 10585. 11298. 12029. 12781 17 08869. 09544. 10242.
10962. 11704. 12466 18. 0855^. 09235. 09941. 10670. 11421. 12192 19. 08274.
08962. 09675. 10412. 11173. 11954 20. 08024. 08718. 09439. 10184. 10954. 11745
21. 07799. 08500. 09228. 09983. 10761. 11562 22. 07597. 08304. 09040. 09803.
10590. 11400 23. 07413. 08127. 08871. 09642. 10438. 11257 24. 07247. 07967.
08718. 09497. 10302. 11129 25. 07095. 07822. 08581. 09367. 10180. 11016 26.
06956. 07690. 08456. 09250. 10071. 10915 27. 06829. 07569. 08342. 09144. 09973.
10825 28. 06712. 07459. 08239. 09048. 09885. 10745 29. 06604. 07357. 08144.
08961. 09805. 10672 30. 06496. 07264. 08058. 08882. 09733. 10607

The Use of the foregoing Table V.
The use of the foregoing Table will appear in the solution of the following
Question, viz.

A Merchant has 1500 l. by him, which he is willing to lay out upon an
Annuity, issuing out of Lands to continue 20 years, beginning presently,
Compound Interest being Computed on both sides at 6 per Cent. per Annum. Now I
demand what Annuity the said sum will buy? Facit 130.77 l.=130 l.-15 s.-^5 d.
very near.

To answer this Question, I look in the Collum of 6 per Cent. of the foregoing
Fifth Table, and against 20 in the Collum of years I find.08718, which is the
annuity that 1 l. present money will purchase to continue 20 years, wherefore
by the Rule of 3 Direct, I say

^

X. Questions concerning the purchasing of Leases and Annuities may be solved
very well by the numbers in the fourth Table, if you make them Divisors instead
of Multiplyars.

Let the last Question be proposed, and solved by the fourth Table viz.

What Annuity to continue 20 years will 1500 l. ready Money purchase, Compound
Interest being allowed at 6 per Cent?

To answer this, I look in the fourth Table, in the Collum of 6 per Cent.
against 20 years; and there, I find this number, viz. 11 46992, which is the
present worth of 1 l. Annuity to continue 20 years, Compound Interest being
allowed at 6 per Cent. And if it be the present worth of 1 l. Annuity, I
conclude it will purchase 1 l. Annuity to continue the same number of years,
wherefore I say by the Rule of 3 Direct,

^

So that the Answer is the same with the former, which was found by help of the
Fifth Table.

All the foregoing Tables might have been continued to any greater number of
years at pleasure; But although these Tables are calculated but for 30 years;
yet may they be made serviceable for years above 30, as shall be showed by and
by.

Arithmetical Questions to exercise the Learner in the Precedent Tables.
Quest. 1. There is a Lease of 20 years to begin presently, which in ready
Money is worth 1200 l. But suppose the said Lease were not to begin till the
expiration of 8 years, I demand what would then be the present worth of the
said Lease Rebate, being allowed at 8 per Cent. per Annum, Compound Interest?

The main intent of this Question is to show the use of the second Table, for
if you find the present worth of 1200 l. due at the end of 8 years, at 8 per
Cent. the Question is answered, which according to the Directions given after
the said Table, will be found to be 648.3216 l. =648 l.-06 s.-05 d.

Quest. 2. A owes to B 600 l. to be paid in 6 years, viz. 100 l. every year,
but being weakened in his Estate, is not able to perform; but an Estate being
to come into his hands at the end of 10 years; B is willing to forbear it all
till then, and to be allowed Compound Interest at 8 per Cent. for his
forbearance; I demand how much will be due to B at the 10 years end?

This Question is solved by help of the third and first Tables; for first 100
l. is to be paid in the nature of Annuity for 6 years; therefore by the third
Table I find the amount of an Annuity of 100 l. to continue 6 years at 8 per
Cent. which is 733.592 l. and will be due at the expiration of 6 years, and
then is that sum to be forborne to the end of 10 years, which is 4 years after
the 6 years; which being a single sum, its amount is found by the first Table
to be 998.037 l. etc. which is the Answer to the Question.

Quest. 3. There is a Lease to continue 21 years to be sold for 1000 l. but the
Lessee desires rather to pay an Annual Rent: Now the Question is what that
Annual Rent ought to be, Compound Interest being computed at 10 l. per Cent.
per Annum?

The intent of this Question is to find what annuity to continue 21 years 1000
will purchase, at 10 per Cent. which is to be done by the Fifth Table, thus,

Because the time is for 21 years, look in the Collum of years for 21, and just
against it in the Collum of 10 per Cent. you will find.11562, by which multiply
1000, and the product is 115.62 l. and so much will 1000 l. purchase for 21
years at 10 per Cent. Compound Interest.

Quest. 4. A and B have each of them a Lease to continue 20 years; A has 80 l.
per Annum, and B 120 l. per Annum, and they agree to make an exchange, upon
this condition, that A shall pay in ready money the excess of his Estate,
allowing him Compound Interest at 8 per Cent. Now I demand how much ready money
A ought to give B upon this exchange, according to that condition?

Subtract 80 l. from 120 l. and the remainder is 40 l. and so much per annum is
the Lease of B worth more than that of A, therefore A must pay B so much money
as will purchase 40 l. per Annum to continue 20 years at 8 per Cent. which by
the third Table will be found to be 392.7256 l.

Quest. 5. There is a House to be let by Lease for 21 years, for which the
Lessor will have 50 l. fine, and 70 l. per Annum, but the Lessee is willing to
pay the greater fine, that he may have the Rent but 40 l. per annum, now I
demand what fine he ought to pay upon that condition, Compound Interest being
allowed at 8 per Cent. per annum?

Take the Difference between 40 and 70, which is 30, for the abatement in the
yearly Rent for 21 years; Then by the fourth Table find the present worth of 30
l. per annum for 21 years at 8 per cent. which is 300.5043 l.=300 l.-10 s,-01
d. which added to the said 50 l. fine makes 350 l.-10 s.-01 d. for the fine to
be paid upon the said Condition.

Quest. 6. There is a Lease to belet of 20 l. per annum, and 250 l. fine for 24
years, and the Lessee is willing to pay the greater Rent, that he may pay but
50 l. fine, now I demand what Rent he ought to pay upon that condition,
Compound Interest being computed at 7 per cent. per annum?

It is manifest, that if the lessor takes 50 l. fine, he abateth 200 l,
therefore find by the fifth Table what Annuity to continue 24 years, 200 l.
will purchase at 7 per cent. The Tabular number is.08718, which multiplied by
200 produces 17.436=17 l.-8 s.-9 d. and so much must the Lessee raise his Rent
if he will have 200 l. abated of his fine, to which if you add 20 l. the
proposed Rent, the sum is 37 l.-08 s.-09 d. for the yearly Rent to be paid to
satisfy the said condition.

Quest. 7. What annuity to continue 20 years, may I grant presently, for 900 l.
to be paid 6 years hence, accompting 6 per cent. per annum, Compound Interest?

First, find by the Second Table the present worth of 900 l. due six years
hence, at 6 per cent. which is 634.464 l.=634 l.-09 s-03 d.

Then by the Fifth Table find what Annuity to continue 20 years 634.464 will
purchase at 6 per cent. And you will find the Answer to be 55.31257152 l.=55
l.-06 s.-03 d. and so much I ought to grant yearly for 20 years for 900 l. to
be paid me at the end of 6 years.

Quest. 8 I have 6 years of an old Lease, yet to come, and would take a new
Lease in reversion for 21 years, after the expiration of the old Lease, the
annual Rent whereof is 40 l. But I would pay such a sum of money present as a
fine, that for my Lease in Reversion for the said 21 years, I may pay but 15 l.
per Annum, Now I demand how much present money I ought to pay the Lessor, to
satisfy these conditions, Compound Interest being computed at 8 per cent.

The difference between 40 and 15 is 25, and so much the Lessee desires to
have abated in his Rent, wherefore by the fourth Table find the present worth
of 25 per annum for 21 years at 8 per Cent. which is 250.42025 l.=250 l.-08
s.-05 d. Then by the second Table find the present worth of 250.42025 l. due at
the end of 6 years to come, at 8 per Cent. which is 157.807 l. etc.= 157 l.-16
s.-01 (...). And so much ought I to give to satisfy the said conditions.

Quest. 9. There is a Lease to be let for 12 years, for 20 l per Annum, and 200
l. fine, but the Lessee desires to take a Lease of the same for 21 years, and
to pay the same Rent; the Question is, what fine ought to be paid for the Lease
of 21 years, accompting Compound Interest at 6 per Cent? Facit 280 l.-12 s.-05
d.

By the Fifth Table seek what Annuity to continue 12 years, 200 l. will
purchase at 6 per Cent. which you will find to be 23.854 l. Then by the Fourth
Table find the present worth of 23.854 l. Annuity to continue 21 years at 6 per
Cent. which is 280.620 l. etc.=280 l.-12 s.-05 d. and so much ought the Lessee
to pay for a fine, to have his Lease for 21 years.

Quest. 10. A Gentleman has 1000 l. which he would lay out to purchase an
Annuity of 100 l. to be paid by yearly payments; Now the Question is, how many
years must the said Annuity continue, Compound Interest being allowed on both
sides at 8 per Cent. per Annum?

First, Divide 1000 by 100, and the Quotient will be 10, which shows that the
Buyer gives 10 years purchase for the said Annuity.

Then in the Fourth Table, and in the Collum of 8 per Cent. look for the number
10, which cannot be exactly found, but the nearest to it and less than it, is
9.81814 which is placed against 20 years, and the nearest to it greater than it
is, is 10.01681, therefore I conclude that the Annuity must continue above 20
years, but not 21 years, and to find out how much it must continue more than 20
years, I work thus, viz. First, I find the Difference between the said Tabular
numbers 10.01681 and 9.81814, which is.19867. Then I find the difference
between the lesser of the said Tabular Numbers, viz. 9.81814 and 10, the Number
that I would find in the Table, which is.18186, then by the Rule of proportion
I say

^

Which is as much as to say, as the greater Difference.19867 is to one year, so
is the lesser Difference to.9153 parts of a year, which is 47 weeks, and 5
days, therefore the number of years sought in the Question is 20 years, 47
weeks, and 5 days.

Quest. 11. A Gentleman bought a Lease of 100 l. per annum to continue 18
years, for 960 l. now I demand what Rate of Compound Interest was there employed
in such a bargain?

To Answer this, First, I divide 960 by 100, and the Quotient is 9.6 which
shows how many years purchase it was worth; Then because the Lease was to
continue 18 years, I look in the fourth Table in the Collum of years for 18,
and carry my eye exactly in the line against it, looking for the said Quotient
9.6 which I cannot find exactly, but the next (lesser) number to it, is,
9.37188 in the Collum of 8 per Cent. and the next (bigger) number to it is
10.05908, in the Collum of 7 per Cent. wherefore I conclude that the Rate of
Interest employed is between 7 and 8 per Cent. and to know how much it is more
than 7, I do thus, Take the Difference between the two said Tabular numbers
which you will find to be 68720 also subtract (9.6) the said Quotient, from
10.05908 (the greater Tabular number, and the remainder is.45908, Then by the
Rule of Proportion, I say,

^

That is to say, As the Difference between the two Tabular numbers is to the
lesser Remainder, so is 1 l. the Difference between 7 and 8 per Cent. to.668
the proportional part to be added to 7 l. which is 13 s.-04^d. so that 7 l. 13
s. 04^d. is very near the Interest required.

How to find out Tabular Numbers for years exceeding 30.
It may many times fall out, that the number of years proposed in a Question,
may exceed the number of years limited in the foregoing first, second, third,
fourth and fifth Tables, and in such cases that defec^ may be supplied by the
method used in the solution of the following Questions.

Quest. 12. Suppose 80 l. were put out to Interest at 5 l. per Cent. Compound
Interest for 40 years, I demand how much it will then be amounted to?

This Question is to be solved by the first Table, thus viz. Take any two
Numbers in the Collum of years, which together will make up 40, and then take
the Tabular numbers in the Collum of 5 per Cent. which stand against those two
numbers, and multiply them together, and then multiply that product by 80 l.
the given sum, and the last product will be the Answer.

As suppose you take 30 and 10, or 21 and 19, or 31 and 9, or 25 and 15 etc.

But we will pitch upon 30 and 10, and the Tabular number against 30 in the
Collum of 5 per Cent. is 4.32194, and against 10 is 1.62889 which two numbers
being multiplied, produce 7.03996, etc. which is the amount of 1 l. for 40
years at 5 per Cent. then I multiply 7.03996, etc. by 80 l. and the product is
563.197 l. etc. = 563 l.-03 s.-11 d. fere.

The Answer would have been the same, if we had pitched upon any other two
numbers to have made up 40. And for Trial hereof, let us pitch upon 25 and 15,
the Tabular number against 25 is 3.38635, and the tabular number against 15
years is 2.07892, and the product of these two tabular numbers is 7.0399, etc.
which multiplied by 80, produces 563.197 l. as before, and so much will 80 l.
be increased to in 40 years at 5 per Cent. per an. Compound Interest. The like
is to be understood for any other number of years.

Quest. 13. Suppose 420 l. to be payable at the end of 50 years to come, What
is its present worth, Rebate being allowed at 5 per Cent. per Annum, Compound
Interest?

This Question is of the same nature with those belonging to the second Table,
and is answered thereby, according to the method used in solving the last
Question by the first Table, viz. the given time being 50 years; I pitch upon
30 and 20, and the tabular number against 30 is.231377 and that against 20
is.376889 and the product of these two is. (...), etc. which is the present
worth of (...) l. due 50 years hence at 5 perCent. per an. wherefore I
multiply. (...), etc. by 420, and the product is 36.62544, etc.=36 l. 12 s. 6
d. and so much is the present worth of 4^0l. due 50 years hence at 5 per Cent.
per an. Compound Interest.

Quest. 14, An Heir being beyond the Sea, did not return till 36 years after an
Estate of 30 l. per Annum was fallen to him by the Death of the proprietor; the
Question is, what was then due to him, Compound Interest being computed at 6
per Cent. per Annum?

This Question is of the nature of those belonging to the third Table, and the
manner of solving it is thus, viz.

Find out (by the seventh Rule of this Chapter) what principal will in one year
gain 30 l. at 6 per Cent. by the following proportion.

^

Having found 500 l. to be the principal, seek (after the manner of the 12
Question) by the first Table the Amount or Increase of 500 l. for 36 years at 6
per Cent. which you will find to be 4073.5998 l. etc. from which if you
subtract the said principal 500 l. the remainder is 3573.599l. etc.=3573 l.-12
s,-00 d. fere. And so much was due to the heir at his return.

Quest. 15. There is an Annuity of 30 l. to continue 37 years, the Question is,
what it is worth in ready money, Compound Interest being computed at 6 per
Cent. per Annum?

By the second way of solving Questions under the fourth Table, find a
principal which will gain 30 l. in one year, at 6 per Cent. which is here 500l.
then according to the method used in solving the thirteenth Question foregoing,
find the present worth of 500 l. for 37 years at 6 per Cent. which will be
found to be 57.896537 which subtracted from 500 l. leaves 442.1034, etc.= 442
l. 2s.-0d. And so much is the present worth of the foresaid Annuity.

Quest. 16. What Annuity to continue 40 years will 500 l. purchase Compound
Interest, being computed at 6 per Cent. per Annum?

It is evident by the tenth Rule of this Chapter, that if you find out the
present worth of 1 l. Annuity for any number of years, and at any rate of
Interest, it may easily be found what Annuity to continue the same number of
years any other sum will purchase at the same Rate of interest by one single
Rule of 3 Direct: Therefore,

Find out the present worth of 1 l. Annuity to continue 40 years at 6 per cent.
by the method used in solving the last Question, which will be found to be
15.04632 l.=15 l.-00 s.-11 d. which sum of Money will purchase an Annuity of 1
l. to continue 40 years at 6 per cent. therefore to know what Annuity 500 l.
will purchase for the same Time, say by the Rule of Proportion.

^ which will be found to be 33.230 etc.= 33 l.-04 s.-07d. fere, and such an
Annuity to Continue 40 years will 500 l: purchase Interest being Allowed at 6
per cent.

FINIS,
Cockers ARTIFICIAL ARITHMETIC, SHOWING The Genesis or Fabric of the
Logarithmes and their use in the extraction of Roots, solving of Questions in
Anatocisme, or Compound Interest, and in the other Rules of Arithmetic, in a
Method not usually practiced.

Composed by EDWARD COCKER, late Practitioner in the Arts of Writing,
Arithmetic, and Engraving.

Perused, Corrected, and Published By JOHN HAWKINS, Schoolmaster at St.
George's Church in Southwark.

Nil tam difficile est quod non solertia vincat.

LONDON, Printed by John Richardson in the Year 1684.

The meaning of such Characters as are used in the Ensuing Treatise.
+ IS the sign of Addition, and is as much as to say plus, signifying that the
Numbers or Quantities between which it is placed, are to be added together as
4+7 signifies that 4 and 7 are to be added together.

- Is the sign of subtraction, and as much as to say minus, signifying that the
Number which follows it is to be Subtracted out of the Number which precedeth
it, as 8-5 signifies that 5 is to be Subtracted from 8.

x Is the sign of Multiplication, and signifies that the Numbers between which
it is placed, are to be Multiplied together, as 6x8 signifies that 6 and 8 are
to be Multiplied together.

= Is a sign of Equality, and signifies that the Numbers or Magnitudes between
which it is placed, are equal as 3+6=7+2 signifies that 3 and 6 are equal to 7
and 2: Likewise 18-6=4+8=12 and 4x7=28 etc. If this be not a sufficient
Explanation, read the 13, 14, 15, and 19 Sections of the First Chapter of my
Algebraical Arithmetic.

THE SECOND BOOK OF ARTIFICIAL ARITHMETIC.
I. ARtificial Arithmetic is performed by Artificial Numbers, very fitly
called Logarithmes.

II. Logarithmes are borrowed Numbers which differ among themselves by
Arithmetical proportion, as the Numbers which they signified differ by
Geometrical proportion

III. Logarithmetical Arithmetic is an Artificial use of numbers, invented for
ease in Calculation, wherein each natural Number is so fitted with an
Artificial, that what is usually produced by Multiplication of Natural Numbers,
is here effected by the Addition of their Artificial Numbers: And what Natural
Numbers perform by Division, is here effected by the Subtraction of their
Artificial Numbers, and what Natural Numbers do perform by long and tedious
operations in the extraction of Square, Cube, Biquadrate, etc. Roots, is here
easily effected. by Bipartition, Tripartition, Quadrupartition, etc. of their
Artificial Numbers, and so the hardest parts of Calculation is avoidede by an
easy prosthaphaeresis, as our Trigonometrical Calculators of late have
sufficiently experienced, by avoiding very tedious Multiplications and
Divisions in the use of the Tables of Natural Sines, Tangents, Secants to the
Everlasting Credit of the honorable The Lord Nepair, Baron of Merchiston in
Scotland.
Author of this late and incomparable invention.

IV. The parts of Artificial Arithmetic are the same with Natural Arithmetic,
but we shall treat of them in this order, viz. First of the Nature of
Logarithmes; Secondly of their Genesis, or the Invention of the Table of
Logarithmes And Thirdly, of the use of the logarithmes in Multiplication,
Division, the Extraction of Roots, etc.

CHAP. II. Of the nature of Logarithmes.
I. LOgarithmes are numbers so fitted to proportional numbers, that themselves
Retain equal differences.

Let there be assigned a series, or Rank of numbers in Geometrical proportion,
as those in the Collume A viz. 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, A B C D E 1 0 2 5 0 2 1 4 8
3 4 2 6 11 6 8 3 8 14 9 16 4 10 17 12 32 5 12 20 15 64 6 14 23 18 128 7 16 26
21 256 8 18 29 24 512 9 20 32 27 1024 10 22 35 30 2048 11 24 38 33 4096 12 26
41 36 etc. And let there be as many other numbers placed over against them in
Arethmetical progression, that is having equal Differences as those in the
Collums B. C. D. E. or any other numbers whatsoever of the like nature. Then,

Forasmuch as these numbers in the Collums B. C. D. E. are of equal difference
among themselves, therefore shall they be the Log^rithmes of the numbers in the
Collume A, each of the Respective number against which it is placed. So in the
Collume B. the number 4, is the Logarithme of 16 in the Collume A, and in the
Collume C the number 10 is the Logarithme of 16 in the Collume A, and in the
Collume D, 29 is the Logarithme of 256 in the Collum A, etc.

And as the Numbers in the said Collums B, C, D, E, are Logarithmes of the
Respective Numbers in the Collum A, so they may be Logarithmes of any other
Rank, or series of Numbers in Geometrical proportion.

II. If four numbers are Arithmetical proportionals, either Continued, or
Discontinued, the sum of the means, is equal to the sum of the Extremes.

Let us choose 8, 10, 12, 14, in the Collume C. I say that the sum of the
Extremes, 8 and 14, are equal to the sum of the two means, 10, and 12. For, 8
+ 14=10 + 12=22. Or if they are discontinued as, 10, 12, 22, 24, in the Collum
C; for 10 + 24 = 12 + 22=34. The like of any other, this being a peculiar
property of all Numbers that are Arithmetically proportional.

III. If four Numbers are in Geometrical proportion, either continued, or
discontinued, the product arising from the Multiplication of the two extremes,
is equal to the product of the two means.

So 4, 8, 16, 32, in the Collum of A are Geometrical proportionals continued,
and the product of the Extremes 4 and 32, is equal to the product of the means,
8, and 16, for, 4 x 32 = 8 x 16 = 128.

Also, 4, 8, 64, 128 are Geometrical proportionals discontinued, and the
product of 4 and 128, the extremes, is equal to the product of 8 and 64 the two
means, for 4x128 = 8 x 64 = 512.

Hence it follows, that what Geometrical proportionals perform by
Multiplication, the same will the Logarithmes (being Arithmetical
proportionals) perform by Addition.

Let there be given four Geometrical proportionals in the Collum A, viz. 8, 16,
128, and 256, and let their Logarithmes be 8, 10, 16, and 18 in the Collum C; I
say, that as 8 x 256, the product of the extremes is equal to 16 x 128 the
product of the means, so is 8 + 18 the sum of the Logarithmes of the extremes
is equal to 10 + 16 the sum of the Logarithmes of the means. Therefore,

If 3 Numbers are given to find a fourth proportional, it may be found by
Addition and Subtraction of their Logarithmes, (for, as in Natural Numbers if
you multiply the second and third together, and divide their product by the
first, the Quote will be the fourth proportional number so) if you add the
Logarithmes of the second and third together, and from their sum subtract the
Logarithms of the first, the remainder will be the logarithme of the fourth
proportional number.

Example.

Let there be given 2, 16. and 64, and let it be required to find a fourth
proportional number thereto, which is 512.

The Logarithmes of the given numbers are 3, 12, and 18, Now if you add 12 and
18 together (which are the Logarithmes of the second and third) their sum is
30, (which is the Logarithme of 1024, the product of the second and third) and
if from 30 the said sum of the Logarithmes, you substract, 3, (the logarithme
of the first) there will remain 27, which is the logarithme of the 512 the
fourth proportional number sought for.

^

And

^

IV. By what has been said, you may perceive that to natural numbers there may
be fitted diverse kinds of Logarithmes, but we shall pitch only upon that kind
which were framed by Mr. Briggs at the request of the Baron of Merchiston, who
has chosen these Geometrical proportionals, vi. 1.10. 100.1000. 10000.100000,
etc. To which Numbers he has assumed the logarithmes following, viz. for the
number 1, the logarithme 0.000000, for 10 the logar. 1.000000, for 100, the
logar. 2.000000 for 1000 the log. 3.000000, for 10000, the log. 4.000000, etc.
as in the following Table.

A B 1 0.000000 10 1.000000 100 2.000000 1000 3.000000 10000 4.000000 100000
5.000000 1000000 6.000000 10000000 7.000000 100000000 8.000000 1000000000
9.000000 10000000000 10.000000

The Numbers in the Collum A are a series of Geometrical proportionals, and the
Numbers in the Collum B, are the Respective logarithmes of each of those
Geometrical proportionals, themselves being Arithmetical proportionals, where
note that the Figures 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. which are separated from the rest by a
point or prick, are called the Indices, or Characteristicks of the logarithme,
because they declare how many places the numbers by them signified do consist
of; the Characteristick of any logarithme being always an unite less than the
number of places, which the number by it signified does consist of: As in the
foregoing Table you may perceive that the logarithme of 1, is 0.000000, and the
logarithme of 10 is 1.000000, and the logarithme of 100 is 2.000000, etc. so
that the Index, or Characteristick of 1, and of all numbersfrom 1 to 10 is 0.
and the characteristick of 10, and of all numbers from 10 to 100 is 1: And the
charasterick of 100, and of all Numbers from 100, to 1000 is 2. and the
Characteristick of each number being an unite less than the number of places of
which the number by it signified does consist, as was said before.

The logarithmes of this kind ought all to consist of an equal number of
places, that is to say they ought not to be, one log. of 10 places, another of
8, etc. but all of them to be of 6, of 7, of 8 etc. places.

CHAP. III. Of the Genesis or Fabric of the Logarithmes.
I. THE Logarithme of 1 being assumed to be 0.000000, and the logarithme of 10
to be 1.000000, the logarithme of 100 to be 2.000000, etc. In the next place it
will be requisite to show the way and manner of Calculating the logarithmes of
the intermediate numbers, viz. of the numbers between 1 and 10, which are 2, 3,
4, 5, etc. and between 10 and 100, which are 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, etc. and
between 100, and 1000, which are 101, 102, 103, 104, etc. which to do, observe
the following Rules.

II. Find so many continual means between 1 and 10, till that continual mean
which comes nearest 1, may be a mixed number less than 2, and so near 1, that
it may have as many Ciphers placed before the significant Figures of the
Numerator, as you intend your logarithmes to consist of places; But our
Directions here shall be for the making a Table of logarithmes to consist of 7
places; wherefore find so many continual means between 1 and 10, till the last
may have 7 Ciphers placed before the significant Figures of its Numerator, in
order whereunto, annex to the number 10 a competent number of Ciphers, (viz.
28, because the work may be the more exact) and extract the Square Root of that
number so enlarged, which being done, you will find its Square Root to be
3.16227 766016837, This being done, annex to the said Root 14 Ciphers more, and
extract the Square Root thereof, which you will find to be 1.77827941003892.

Again annex to the Root last found 14 Ciphers more, and extract the Square
Root thereof, which you will find to be 1.33352143216332, and thus proceeding
successively by annexing of Ciphers, and a continual extraction of the Square
Root, until you have found a Square Root, or Continual mean, having 7 Ciphers
placed before the significant Figures of its Numerator, which will be found
after 27 several Extractions to be 1.00000001715559.

So the 3 last continual means between 10 and 1 will be found to be
1.00000006862238 1.00000003431119 1.00000001715559


All which 3 continual means are less than 2, and so near 1, that there are 7
Ciphers placed before the significant Figures of each of their Numerators.

Having found 27 several means between 10, and 1, place them successively one
under the other, as in the Collum A, of the following Table; Then make another
Collum (B) to contain the Respective logarithmes of those continual means.

And because biparting the logarithme of any number produces the logarithme of
the Square Root of that number, therefore take the logarithme of 10, which is
1.000000, and place it in the Collum B over against 10, then bipart it, (that
is, divide it by 2) and you will have 0.500000 which is the logarithme of
3.1622776^ 016837 the Square Root of 10, then take half of that logarithme, viz
0.500000 which is 0.250000, and place it for the logarithme of 1.778279410,
etc. the second mean proportional, (or Square Root of 3.1622776^0, etc.) And so
by continu^ bipartition, you will at length find that 0.000000007450580, will
be the logarithme of the last continual mean, viz. the logarithme of
1.000000017 559, as in the following Table.

A Continual means. B their Logarithmes. 10.00000000000000 1.00000000000000
3.16227766016837 0.50000000000000 1.77827941003892 0.25000000000000
1.33352143216332 0.12500000000000 etc. etc. 1.00000006862238 0.0000000029802322
1.00000003431119 0.0000000014901161 1.00000001715559 0.0000000007405805

III. Any number whatsoever being given, how to make the Logarithme thereof.

When it is required to make the Logarithme of any number, extract so many
continual means between the given number and 1, until the mean which comes
nearest 1, may be a mixed number less than 2, and so near 1, that it may have 7
Ciphers placed before the significant Figures of its Numerator, which being
done, you may easily find out the Logarithme of that continual mean, by help of
the foregoing Table; and then by doubling, and redoubling the logarithme of the
said continual mean, as many times as you found continual means by extraction,
so shall you at last have the logarithme of the given number.

You may make the Logarithme of any number whatsoever by this and the last Rule.

As for Example.

Let us pitch upon the number 2, and make its Logarithme.

To do which, annex to the number 2 a competent number of Ciphers, viz. 28, and
extract the Square Root thereof, which you will find to be 1.41421356237^09 for
the first continual mean, to which said mean annex 14 Ciphers more, and extract
the Square Root thereof, and so proceed, by annexing of Ciphers and extracting
of Roots, till the nearest mean proportional number to 1, may have seven
Ciphers placed before the significant Figures of its Numerator, which after 23
several Extractions you will find to be 1.00000008262958.

Then to find out the logarithme of this continual mean, say by the Rule of 3
Direct.

As the significant Figures of the Twenty fifth mean proportional in the
foregoing Table, viz. 6862238.

Is to its respective Logarithme, 29802322.

So are the significant Figures of the last continual mean found between 1 and
2, viz. 8262958.

To its Respective Logarithme 35885571.

Now if you prefix before the Logarithme last found 8 Ciphers, it will be
0000000035885571, which being doubled and redoubled 23 times, (because there
were 23 continual means found between 1 and two) there will at last be produced
0.30102998797568, which is the logarithme of the number 2, which was Required,
but because we intend the Table of logarithmes to consist but of 7 places, and
because 2 nines follow the sixth place therefore make the figure 2 to be 3 and
so shall the logarithme of 2 be 0.301030 cancelling the following Figures as
superfluous.

The Logarithme of 2 being found, you may easily find the logarithmes of 4, 5,
8, 16, 20, 25, 32, 40, 50, 64, etc. by Artificial Multiplication and Division,
which is by adding and subtracting of logarithmes; for if you take the
logarithme of 2 out of the logarithme of 10, there will remain the logarithme
of 5 and the logarithme of 2 Doubled gives you the logarithme of 4, then add
the logarithme of 4 to the logarithme of 2, and you have the logarithme of 8,
and to the logarithme of 8 add the logarithme of 2, and it gives you the
logarithme of 16, and the logarithme of 5 added to the logarithme of 4, gives
he logarimthe of 20, and the logarithme of 5 doubled, gives the Logarithme of
25, etc.

In the next place you are to get the Logarithmes of 3, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23,
29, 31, 37, 41, ^3, 47, 53, 59, 61, 67, 7^, 73, 79, 89, 97, etc by help of
which all the rest may be Calculated.

IV. The first figure of every logarithme, which is separated from the rest by
a point or prick is very properly called the Index, or Char^cteristick of the
logarithme, which shows the Nature of the Number by it signified, viz.
whether it be positive, or negative, and if positive, of what number of places
it does consist, and if negative, what place of the Decimal Fraction the first
figure of the number by it signified, shall possess, as in the following Table,

So the logarithme of 46768 will be 4.670134 4676.8 3.670134 467.68 2.670134
46.768 1.670134 4.6768 0.670134. 46768 -1.670134. 046768 -2.670134. 0046768
-3.670134. 00046768 -4.670134

Whereby you may perceive that the logarithmes of absolute and defective
numbers are the same, only the Characteristick of a defective number is marked
with the note of defection, for the logarithme of the Absolute number 46768 is
4.670134, the Characteristick 4, showing the number by it signified to consist
of 5 places, as is already said in the fourth Rule of the second Chapter, and
the logarithme of the mixed number 46.768 is 1.670134 which is the same with the
former, only the Characteristick is 1, which shows the integral Number by it
signified, to consist of 2 places, the ^est being a decimal Fraction. Likewise
the logarithme of the Decimal.46768 is -1.670134, which is still the same with
the f^rmer, only its Characteristick being marked with a note of defection,
shows it to be the Logarithme of a Decimal Fraction, and because the
Characteristick is-1, it shows that the first figure of the number by it
signified does possess the first place of the Decimal; or place of primes:
Ag^in, the Logarithme -4.670^ is still the same, and if you look for it in the
Table of Logarithms, not regarding the Index, you will find it to be the
Logarithme of 46768, but because its Index is defective, I conclude it to be
the Logarithme of a Decimal, and because the Index or Characteristick is-4,
therefore I conclude that the first Figure of the number signified by it, must
possess the fourth place of the Decimal, wherefore place 3 Ciphers before it,
and you have.00046768 for the Decimal s^gnified by the logarithme -4.670134.
This being well understood, the rest will easily be attained by the following
Directions.

CHAP. IV. Of the Use of the Table of Logarithmes.
THE use of the Table of Logarithmes is twofold, viz. First, To find therein
the logarithme of any given number, or to find the number appropriated to any
given logarithme.

Secondly, To resolve diverse necessary problems in Arithmetic, Geometry,
Trigonometry, Astronomy, etc.

Concerning the first of these, I shall not meddle, because our Limits will not
afford sufficient room to insert a Table of Logarithmes, and the Tables already
published by others are sufficiently explained, in that point as Mr. Briggs,
Mr. Gunter, Dr. Newton, Mr. Wingate, Mr. Norwood, Mr. Phillips, etc. Every one
showing how by their own Tables to find the logarithme of any number, or the
number to any logarithme, therefore I shall proceed to show their use in
Arithmetic, viz. how to Multiply, Divide, and Extract Roots, etc. thereby. And
First,

To Multiply by the Logarithmes.

In Multiplication by the logarithmes there are 3 Cases, viz. the
Characteristicks of the logarithmes of the Factors are either both affirmative,
or both negative; or else they are the one affirmative, and the other negative?

I. When they are both Affirmative.

When the Characteristicks of the logarithmes of the Factors are both
Affirmative, then the sum of those logaithmes is the logarithme of the fact or
product.

Examples.

^

Note that if you carry ten to the Characteristicks, it is affirmative, as in
the last Example.

II. When they are both Negative.

When the logarithmes of the Factors have their Characteristicks both Negative,
or defective, then the sum of their logarithmes is the logarithme of their
product, the sum of their Characteristicks being also negative as in the
following Examples.

^

And here note, that when you carry ten to the Characteristicks it is
affirmative, and must be abated out of their sum as in the two last examples.

III. When they are heterogeneal, viz. the one Affirmative, and the other
Negative.

When the Characteristicks of the Factors are the one Negative, and the other
Affirmative, then add their logarithms together, and when you come to the
Characteristicks, take their difference, and place it for the Characteristick
of the Product, making it either Affirmative or Negative, according to the
affection of that wherein lay the excess; and here note, that if you carry any
thing to the Characteristicks, it is Affirmative, and must be added to the
affirmative characterist. As in the following Examples.

^

CHAP. V. Division by the Logarithmes.
I. TO subtract the Logarithme of one number out of the logarithme of another,
is the same (and produces the same effect) with Division in Natural Numbers,
the Logarithme remaining being the Logarithme of the Quotient.

II. In Division by the Logarithmes there are three Cases, viz. First, when the
Characteristicks of the Dividend, and of the Divisor are both Affirmative:
Secondly, when they are both Negative. And Thirdly, when they are heterogeneal,
viz. the one Affirmative, and the other Negative. Of which in their order.

I. When they are both Affirmative.

III. When the Characteristicks of the Dividend, and of the Divisor, are both
Affirmative, then if you subtract the Logarithme of the Divisor out of the
logarithme the Dividend, the remainder willbe the logarithme of the Quotient.
And if you borrow 10 from the Characteristicks, it is Affirmative.

Examples.

^

These Examples are so plain that they need no Explanation.

II. When they are both Negative.

IV. When the Characteristicks of the Dividend, and of the Divisor, are both
Negative, subtract the Logarithme of the Divisor from the Logarithme of the
Dividend, and the Remainder is the logarithme of the Quotient, and if you
borrow 10, it must be paid to the Index of the Divisor affirmatively.

Examples.

^

The first and second of the foregoing Examples are easily understood, and as
for the third and fourth, all the difficulty therein is caused by borrowing 10
at the next figure to the Characteristicks, as in the third Example, in
subtracting 5 out of 1. Now to make good the 10 borrowed, I pay 1 to the
Characteristick of the Divisor, and because the said 1 is affirmative, and the
said Characteristick negative, therefore subtract it from the Characteristick
of the Divisor, and there remains nothing; wherefore I take (o) out of the
Characteristick of the Dividend, and there remains-1 for the Characteristick of
the Quotient. The same is to be understood in the fourth Example, and in all
other of the same Nature.

A General Observation drawn from the third and fourth Rules foregoing.

V. If when the Characteristicks of the Dividend and Divisor be Homogeneal,
(that is, both affirmative, or both negative) the Characteristick of the
Divisor is greater than the Characteristick of the Dividend, then in this case
subtract the characteristick of the Dividend out of that of the Divisor,
placing the remainder for the characteristick of the Quotient, changing its
sign, viz. if it be affirmative, make it negative, and if it be negative, make
it affirmative. Remembering the Directions under the last Rule when you borrow
from the Characteristicks.

Observe the following Examples.

^

III. When they are Heterogeneal, viz. the one Negative, the other Affirmative.

VI. When the Characteristicks of the Dividend and the Divisor are
Heterogeneal, proceed as in the two First cases, till you come to the
characteristicks, and then instead of subtracting the one characteristick from
the other, add them together, so shall their sum be the characteristick of the
Quotient, and it is of the same kind with the Characteristick of the Dividend.

But here note that when you borrow 10 at the next figure to the
characteristick it must be paid to the characteristick of the Divisor
affirmatively viz. If the characteristick of the Divisor be affirmative, then
add 1 to it for that you borrowed, and if it be negative, subtract 1 from it.
As in the following Examples.

^

In the second of the foregoing Examples I borrow 1 (in the place next the
characteristicks) by subtracting 9 out of 8, wherefore to make it good, I
subtract 1 from-2 (the characteristick of the Divisor,) because it is Negative,
and the remainder which is-1 I add to 1 (the characteristick of the Dividend)
and their sum is 2 for the characteristick of the Quotient which is
Affirmative, because the characteristick of the Dividend is Affirmative.

And in the last Example, I likewise borrow 1 from the characteristick,
wherefore to make it good, I add 1 to the characteristick of the Divisor,
(because it is affirmative) and that makes it 3, which added to-1 (the
characteristick of the Dividend) makes-4 for the characteristick of the
Quotient, which here is negative, because the characteristick of the Dividend
is negative.

Other Examples for Exercise may be such as follow.

^

CHAP. VI. To raise the Powers of Numbers, viz. to find the Square, Cube,
Biquadrate, or Squared Square, etc. of any Number. Also to Extract the Square,
Cube, Biquadrate, etc. Roots of any Number by the Logarithmes.
1. BY the third Section of the Second Chapter of this Book it is evident, that
if you add the Logarithmes of two numbers together, the Sum will be the
Logarithme of their Product; And by the first and fourth Sections of the 9th
Chapter of my Decimal Arithmetic, it appears that any number multiplied by
it self, produces its Square, wherefore if you double (or multiply by 2) the
logarithme of any number, it will produce the logarithme of its Square, which
if duly considered you will find that to Square, Cube, etc. any number, is
nothing else but to multiply the Logarithme of the given number by the Index of
the Power you would raise it to, viz. If you would find the Square of any
number, multiply the logarithme thereof by 2, so shall the product thereof be
the Logarithme of its Square; and if you would find the Cube of any number,
multiply its logarithme by 3, and the product thereof will be the Logarithme of
its Cube; and if you would find the Biquadrate of any number, multiply its
Logarithme by 4, and it will produce the Logarithme of its Biquadrate, etc. As
in the following Example.

Let it be required to find the Square of 12

^

Which being multiplied by 2, produces 2.158362, which is the Logarithme of
144, viz. the Square of 12.

Again let it be required to find the Square of 94.

^

Which being multiplied by 2, produces 3.9462556, which is the logarithme of
8836, which is the Square of 94.

II. But if the characteristick of the Logarithme be negative, that is, if the
given number, whose Square, Cube, Biquadrate, etc. you would find be a Decimal
Fraction, observe, that in multiplying the next figure to the characteristick
the ten, or tens to be borne in mind are affirmative, and are to be deducted
out of the Product of the negative characteristicks.

Observe the several Examples following

^

The like is to be observed of all others.

To Extract the Square, Cube, Biquadrate, etc. Roots of any given numbers by
the Logarithmes.

III. From a due consideration of the first Section of this Chapter, it may
easily be perceived, that

To Extract the Cube Root of any number is to bipart (or divide by 2) its
logarithme, so shall that biparted logarithme be the logarithme of the Square
Root desired.

Examples.

Let it be required to Extract the Square Root of 75832.

^

Let it be required to find the Square Root of 4489.

^

In the first of these Examples the logarithme of 75832 is 4.879852 which being
biparted (or divided by 2) gives 1.826074 for the logarithme of (275.37) the
Root required.

And in the second Example 3.652149 (the logarithme of (4489) being biparted
gives 1.826074 for the logarithme of (67) its Square Root.

So will the Square Root of 36783 be found to be 191.789 fere, and the Square
Root of 3866 will be 62.17717 fere. And the Square Root of 95 will be found to
be 9.7468, etc.

To Extract the Cube Root of any number is to tripart (or divide by 3) its
logarithme, so shall this triparted logarithme be the logarithme of the Cube
Root required.

Examples.

Let it be required to Extract the Cube Root of 157464.

^

Let it be required to find the Cube Root of 187237601580329.

^

In the first of these Examples where it is required to extract the Cube Root
of 157464, its logar. is 5.197181 which being divided by 3, has for its third
part ^393 which is the logarithme of (54) the Cube Root of 157464, which was
required. And the same is to be observed in finding the Cube Root of 1872376015
80329 by the Logarithmes; or it any other positive number whatsoever as you may
see by the following Examples.

^

To extract the Biquadrate Root of any given number, do thus, viz. Take its
logarithme, and divide To extract the Biquadrat Root of any Number.
it by 4, so shall the fourth part thereof be the logarithme of the biquad.
Root required, as in the following Example.

Let it be required to Extract the Biquadrate Root of 256.

^

Here the log. of the given biquadrat number, viz. 256 is 2.408239 which being
divided by 4, gives 0.602059 for the logarithme of (4) the biquadrat Root
required.

In like manner if you would extract the Root of the fifth Power of any number
given, Divide its logarithme by 5, so shall the Quotient be the logarithme of
its Root. And if you would find the Root from the sixth power of any Number,
divide its logarithme by 6, and the Quote is the logarithme of the Root
desired, etc.

IV. But here you are to observe in Extracting the Square, Cube, Biquadrat, or
any other Root To extract the Square, Cube, etc. Roots of negative numbers by
the Logarithmes.
of a negative number, or decimal by the logarithmes, that if you cannot evenly
divide the Index or Characteristick of the logarithme without any remainder,
then add to the said Characteristick so many units till it may be divided
without any remainder, and place the Quotient for a new Characteristick,
(belonging to the Root;) Then look how many units you lent to the
Characteristick, and esteem them so many tens to be prefixed to the
logarithmetical figure immediately following the Characteristick, then proceed
to finish the work, so shall this new logarithme be the logarithme of the Root
required, which will also be negative.

Examples follow.

What is the Square Root of.144

^

What is the Square Root of.00324

^

What is the Cube Root of.000512

^

In the first of these Examples, where it is required to Extract the Square
Root of.144, its logar. is -1.158362, which (according to the third Rule) I
should bipart, (or divide by 2) And because its negative Characteristick (-1)
cannot be evenly divided by 2, I increase it by an unit, and it makes 2, then
will the Quote be -1 for the Index of the log. of the Root, then do I proceed
to the next Figure, to the Characteristick which is 1, and because I added 1 to
the Characteristick, therefore I increase the next Figure by adding 10 to it.
(or prefixing 1 before it) and then is it 11, etc. So I find the logarithme of
the Root to be -1.5755272, viz..37947

And in the third Example, where it is required to find the Cube Root
of.000512, the Index of its logarithme is -4, which cannot be evenly divided by
3, therefore I add 2 to it to make it 6, and the Quotient is -2 for the Index
of the loagarithme of the Root, then because I added 2 to the Index -4,
therefore I increase the next Figure to it with 2 tens, making it 27, etc. So
is the Cube Root required found to be.05.

Observe the like in extracting of any other Roots: Otherwise, you may make use
of the following Table.

^

The Use of the foregoing Table.
In the foregoing Table the Figures 2.3.4.5.6 placed on the left hand, are the
Indices of Powers, whose Roots are required to be extracted, or they are
Divisors by which to divide the logarithme of any given power, in order to find
out its Root: As the number 2 (which is the uppermost) is the Divisor for
finding the logarithme of the Square Root of any number: And 3 the Divisor for
the Cube; and 4 for the Biquadrat, etc. The Figures placed between the
perpendicular line, and the several lines of connection, and under A are the
Characteristicks of the logarithmes of Negative or Decimal Numbers, whose Roots
are required to be extracted; And the Figures placed on the right hand of the
perpendicular line under B, are the Characteristicks of the Logarithme of the
several Roots: And the numbers at the bottom of the Table, viz. 50, 40, 30,
etc. are the numbers to be added, or rather prefixed to the first Figure of the
logarithme next the Characteristick whose Negative Index is found in the same
series or Collum even with the Divisor, etc.

Example.

Let it be required to extract the Cube Root of.405224.

The Logarithme of the given Number is -1.6076951.

And the Divisor whereby to extract the Cube Root is 3, which I find in the
foregoing Table on the left hand; then on the right hand of its line of
connection, I find the Characteristick of the Logarithme -1.6076951 which is
-1, and just against it on the right hand under B I find -1 for the
Characteristick of the Logarithme of the Root, and in the bottom line under the
said -1, in the same series, I find 20 which is to be prefixed to the Figure in
the Logarithme next the Characteristick, etc. and having finished Division, I
find the Logarithme of its Root to be -1.8692317 which is.74.

So if the Logarithme -6.418426 were to be divided by 4, First find the Divisor
4 on the left hand of the Table, and find the Characteristick -6, behind its
line of connection just against which on the right hand of the perpendicular
line you have -2 for the Index or Characteristick of the Quotient; and at the
bottom, just underneath -6 you have 20, which being added to (4) the first
figure of the Dividend next the Characteristick makes it 24, in which the
Divisor 3 is contained 6 times, etc. See the work.

^

CHAP. VII. Of the Use of Log. in Comparative Arithmetic.
PROP. I. Having three Numbers given, to find a fourth proportional.
THis is nothing else but the work of the Rule of 3, and it may be thus
performed, viz.

Add the Logarithme of the second and third Numbers together, and from their
sum subtract the Logarithme of the first, so shall the remainder be the
Logarithme of the fourth, as in the following Example.

The 3 given numbers are 3, 24, and 108 unto which it is required to find a
fourth proportional.

^

The Operation by the Logarithmes.

^

Which is the Logarithme of 864. the fourth proportional required.

The former work may be somewhat shortened, if in stead of the Log. of the first
you take its Complement Arithmetical (which is nothing else but to set down
what every Figure wants of 9, till you come to that next the right hand, and
then set down what it wants of 10) and then add them all 3 together, and cancel
the first Figure of the sum on the left hand, and then will the sum be the Log.
of the Answer, as will appear by working the foregoing Examples.

^

PROP. II. Between two Numbers given to find a mean proportional.
When the Logarithmes of the numbers propounded are homogeneal, viz. both
Affirmative, or both Negative, add them together, then bipart that
Logarithmetical sum, so have you the Logarithme of the mean proportional
required, which logarithme so found is of the same kind with the Logarithmes of
the number given.

Let it be required to find a mean proportional between 18 and 6.

^

In this Example the Logrithme of 18, and 6 being added together make 2.02342
which is the Logarithme of 108, and that Logarithme being divided by 2 (which
is the same with extracting the Square Root of its significant number, as in
the third Rule of the Sixth Chapter) the Quotient is 2.02342, the Logarithme of
10.392 which is the mean proportional required.

Example 2.

Let it be required to find a mean proportional between.018 and.006.

^

II. But when the Characteristicks of the Logarithmes of the given Numbers be
heterogeneal, viz. the one Affirmative, and the other Negative; add the
Logarithmes together as before, till you come to the Characteristicks, then
subtract the lesser Characteristick out of the greater, (according to the third
Rule of the fourth Chapter,) which being done, bipart the Logarithmetical
production, so shall the Quote be the Logarithme of the mean proportional
required, which will always be of the same kind with that Logarithme of the
given Numbers, whose Index is greatest, as in the following Examples.

Example 1.

What is the mean proportional between 36 and ^5? Facit 4.2427.

^

Example 2.

What is the mean proportional between 12 and.75? Facit 3.

^

PROP. III. Between 2 Numbers given, to find two mean Proportionals.
Whether the Numbers given be Homogeneal, or Heterogeneal, subtract the
Logarithme of the lesser extreme from the Logarithme of the greater extreme,
then take 1/3 of the difference of the said Logarithmes, and add it to the
Logarithme of the lesser extreme, so will the sum be the Logarithme of the
lesser mean; then add the same Difference to the said Logarithme of the lesser
mean, and the sum will be the Logarithme of the greater mean; still observing
the Rules delivered in the fourth and fith Chapters of this book, in adding and
subtracting of Logarithmes.

Examples.

Ex. 1. Let it be required to find 2 mean proportionals between 144 and 12?

^

Example. 2. Let it be required to find 2 mean proportionals between.75 and.05?

^

Example. 3. Let it be required to find 2 mean proportionals, between 125
and.05?

^

PROP. IV. Three Numbers given to find a fourth in a Duplicate Proportion.
Take the Logarithmes of the two Numbers which have one and the same
Denomination, and subtract the lesser Logarithme from the greater, and double
the remainder, (that is multiply it by 2.) Then if the first number be less
than the second, add the said doubled difference to the Logarithme of the other
Number, so will the sum be the Logarithme of the fourth number, or number
required, as in Example.

The superficial content of a Circle whose Diameter is 14 Inches is 154 Square
inches, I demand the Content of another Circle, whose Diameter is 25 Inches?
Facit 491.07 square Inches. See the operation.

^

But if the first number be greater than the second, then instead of adding the
doubled difference to the other number, subtract it therefrom, so shall the
remainder be the Logarithme of the number required, as in the following Example.

There is a Circle whose Diameter is 28 Inches, and its superficial Content is
616 Square Inches, I demand what is the Superficial Content of another Circle,
whose Diameter is 25 Inches? Facit 491.07 Square Inches, as in the former
Example.

^

PROP. V. Having 3 Numbers given to find a fourth in a Triplicate Proportion.
Triple the Difference of the Logarithmes of the two given Terms, which have
the same Denomination. Then if the first Term be less than the second, add the
said Triple Difference to the Logarithme of the other Term, so shall the sum be
the Logarithme of the fourth Term required, as in the following Example.

There is a Bullet whose Diameter is 4 Inches, and its weight is 9 l. I demand
what weight a Bullet of the same metal will be, whose Diameter is 8 Inches?
Facit 72 l. view the following work.

^

But if the first term be greater than the second, then subtract the said
tripled Difference from the logarithme of the other Term, so shall the
remainder be the Logarithme of the fourth number required. As in Example.

There is a Bullet whose Diameter is 8 Inches, and its weight is 72 pounds, I
demand the weight of another Bullet of the same Metal, whose Diameter is 4
Inches? Facit 9 l. See the operation, it being the converse of the former.

^

CHAP. VIII. Of Anatocisme, or Compound Interest, wherein is showed how by the
Logarithmes to answer all Questions concerning the Increase, or present worth
of any Sum of Money or Annuity, for any Term of Years, or at any Rate of
Interest. According to the six Fundamental Theorems invented and laid down by
Mr. Oughtred in his Treatise De Anatocismo sive Usura Composita, annexed to his
Clavis Mathematicae.
I. WHen any Question in Compound Interest is proposed, it willfall under one
of the six Cases following, viz.

1. To find the Increase or Amount of any sum of money put out at Compound
Interest for any number of years, and at any Rate of Interest propounded. 2. To
find the present worth of any sum of money due at the end of any number of
years to come, Rebate being allowed at any Rate of Compound Interest. 3. To
find the Increase, or amount of an Annuity being forborne for any number of
years, at any Rate of Compound Interest. 4. To find what Annuity any Sum of
Money due at the end of any Term of years to come, will purchase at any Rate
per Cent. 5. To find the present worth of any Annuity to continue any number of
years, allowing Rebate at any Rate per Cent. 6. To find what Annuity any Sum of
Money will purchase for any number of years, and at any Rate of Interest
proposed.
II. When any Question in Compound Interest is propounded, find out the
Interest of 1 l. and let 1 l. with its interest be the Rate of Interest employed
in the Question, as if any Question were proposed at 8 per Cent. the Int. of 1
l. for a year is.08, and the rate of Interest is 1.08, if at 6 per Cent. the
Rate is 1.06, etc. of which find out the Logarithme.

III. When in any Annuity or Debt the payments be half Yearly, Quarterly, or
Monthly, etc. you are to divide the Logarithme of the said Rate by 2, 4, or
12, etc. so shall that Quotient be the Logarithme of the Rate, as suppose any
Question were propounded at 8 per Cent. the Rate of Interest here employed is
1.08, for ^

Which said Rate is for yearly payments, the Logarithme whereof is 0.0374204,
but if the payments are to be half yearly, then if you divide the said
Logarithme by 2, it will give you 0.0187102 for the Logarithme of the Rate, and
if the payments be Quarterly, divide the said Logarithme of 1.08 by 4, and it
will give you 0.0093551 for the Log. of the Rate, and if the payments be
monthly, then if you divide the said Log. of 1.08 by 12, it will give you
0.0031183 for the Log. of the Rate, etc. and this is generally the first thing
to be observed in every Question, as you will find by the following Examples.

CASE I.
To find the Increase or Amount of any Sum of Money put out at Compound
Interest for any Term of years, and at any Rate of Interest propounded.

Quest. 1. If 50 l. -16 s. be put out at 8 per Cent. Compound Interest for 7
years, I demand how much will then be due to the Creditor? Facit 87 l. -01 s.
-02 d.

IV. Multiply the Logarithme of the Rate by the number of years, and the
product will give you the Logarithme of the Amount of 1 l. for the proposed
Time, to which if you add the Log. of the Sum propounded, the sum will be the
log. of the Answer.

The operation by the Logarithmes.

^

Quest. 2. What is the amount of 76 l.-04 s. for 34 years at 8 per Cent? Facit
97 l.-17 s.-01 d.

The operation by the Logarithmes.

^

Quest. 3. If 50 l. be put forth at Interest for 20 years at 6 per Cent. I
demand how much it will be increased to at the end of the said time. Facit 168
l.-01 s.-10 d.

The rate of Interest here proposed is 6=6.25 per Cent. therefore to find out
the Rate of 1 l. for a year, say by the Rule of proportion.

^

So that the Rate of Interest employed in the Question fit for Calculation by
the Log. is 1.0625 according to the second Rule of this Chapter, behold

The Operation.

^ Which is 168 l.-01 s.-10 d. very near, and so much will 50 l. be increased
to in 20 years at 6 l.-5 s. per Cent.

CASE 2. To find the present worth of any sum of money due at the end of any
number of years to come, Rebate being allowed at any Rate of Compound Interest.
V. When it is required to find the present worth of any sum of Money, first
find the amount of 1 l. for the proposed time, and at the Rate of Interest
propounded, then find the Logarithme of the sum proposed to be Rebated, and
from it subtract the Logarithme of the amount of 1 l. (found as before) and the
remainder will be the Logarithme of the present worth of the sum proposed. As
in the following Example.

Quest. 4. What is 30 l. that is due 7 years hence worth to be paid presently,
allowing Rebate at 8 per Cent? Facit 17 l.-10 s.-01 d. as you may perceive by

The Operation by the Logarithmes.

^ which is 17 l.-10 s.-01 d. and so much is the present worth of 30 l. due 7
years hence.

Quest. 5. What is the present worth of 120 l. due 2 years hence, allowing
Rebate at 6 per Cent? Facit 106 l.-15 s.-11 d.

The Operation by the Logarithmes.

^ which is 106 l.-15 s.-11 d. and so much is the present worth of 120 l. due 2
years hence.

CASE 3. To find the Increase, or Amount of an Annuity, being forborne any
number of years, at any Rate of Compound Interest.
VI. For Resolving Questions concerning the forbearance of Annuities, you are
(by the fourth Rule) first to find out the Amount of 1 l. for the Time, and at
the Rate of Interest propounded.

Secondly, Find out the Logarithme of the said amount made less by 1, and also
the log. of the Rate made less by 1, and subtract the latter from the former,
so shall the remainder be the log. of the Amount of 1 l. Annuity for the term
of years propounded, to which if you add the Logarithme of the proposed
Annuity, the sum will be the Logarithme of the Amount, or Increase of the said
Annuity. As in the following Example.

Quest. 6. What will be the Amount, or Increase of 48 l.-16 s. per an. for 7
years, Compound Interest being Computed at 8 per Cent. Facit 435 l.-08 s.-05 ^
d. fere. See

The Operation by the Logarithmes.

^ which is 435 l.-8 s.-5 d. very near, and so much will be the Increase of an
Annuity of 48 l. 16 s. in 7 years at 8 per Cent. Compound Interest.

Quest. 7. There is an Annuity of 50 l. forborne to the end of 10 years, I
demand how much is then due, Compound Interest being computed at 6 (...) per
Cent? Facit 666 l.-16 s. as you will find by

The Operation by the Logarithmes.

^ which is 666 l.-16 s. and so much will be due at the end of the said time.

CASE 4. To find what Annuity any sum due at any time to come will purchase to
continue for any Time, and at any Rate of Interest proposed.
VII. The Operation in this Case is the same in every respect with that in the
former Case, only whereas in the last case you subtracted the log. of the rate
less 1 from the log. of the increase of 1 l. less 1, so in this you must
subtract the log. of the increase of 1 l. less 1, from the log. of the rate
less 1, as in the following Example.

Quest. 8. There is 705 l. due at the end of 7 years to come, I demand what
Annuity to continue 7 years, the same will purchase, Compound Interest being
allowed at 8 per Cent? Facit 79.015 l. = 79 l. -^ 00 s. as you may find if you
observe

The Operation by the Logarithmes.

^

Questions of this Nature may be solved at two Operations by the second and
sixth Cases; First, by the Rule in the second Case find the present worth of
the sum propounded, then by the sixth, find what Annuity such a sum will
purchase.

CASE 5. To find the present worth of an Annuity to continue any Term of years,
howsoever payable, viz. either yearly, half, yearly or Quarterly, Rebate being
allowed at any rate per Cent.
VIII. Find out the Logarithme of the Rate, and multiply it by the number of
Years or Quarters, according as the Annuity is payable, and that will produce
the Logarithme of the increase of 1 l. for the proposed time, to which add the
Log. of the Rate made less by 1, and subtract that sum from the Log. of the
increase of 1 l. made less by 1, so shall the remainder be the Log of the pre
sentworth of 1 l annuity for the time proposed to which add the logarithme of
the proposed Annuity, and the sum will be the Logarithme of the present worth
of the given Annuity. As in Example.

Quest. 9. What is the present worth of an Annuity of 30 l. payable by yearly
payments, and to continue 30 years, allowing Rebate after the Rate of 8 per
Cent. per Annum?

Facit 337 l. -^ 14 s. -^ 09 d. as appears in

The Operation by the Logarithmes.

^

CASE 6. To find out what Annuity to continue any term of years any given sum
of Money will purchase at any Rate of Compound Interest.
IX. When you would know what Annuity any given sum will purchase, first (as in
the foregoing Rules) find out the Logarithme of the Rate, which multiply by the
proposed time, so will that product be the Logarithme of the increase of 1 l.
to which add the Log. of the rate made less by 1, and from that sum subtract
the Log. of the said increase of 1 l. made less by 1, so will the remainder be
the Log. of what 1 l. will purchase for the proposed Time, to which if you add
the log. of the given purchase money, the sum will be the Log. of the Annuity
that the given sum will purchase. As in Example.

Quest. 10. What Annuity to continue 7 years, and payable by Quarterly payments
will 246 l. purchase. Allowing Rebate at 8 per Cent? Facit 12.297 l.

The Operation by the Logarithmes.

^

More variety of Questions might be stated, but these to the Ingenious are
sufficient.

FINIS.
Cockers ALGEBRAICAL ARITHMETIC, CONTAINING The Doctrine of Composing, and
Resolving an EQUATION, With all other Rules requisite for the understanding of
that Mysterious Art, according to the Method used by Mr. JOHN KERSEY, in his
incomparable Treatise of ALGEBRA.

Composed by EDWARD COCKER, late Practitioner in the Arts of Writing,
Arithmetic, and Engraving.

Perused, Corrected, and Published By JOHN HAWKINS, Writing-Master at St.
George's Church in Southwark.

Plato foribus Academiae inscribi jussit; Nemo Arithmetices Ignarus hic
Ingrediatur.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1684.

ALGEBRAICAL DEFINITIONS
CHAP. I. Concerning the construction of Cossick Powers, and the way of
expressing them by Letters, together with the signification of all such
Characters or Marks as are used in the ensuing Treatise.
1. THE Analytical Art generally called Algebra, is that by which, when a
Problem, or hard Question is propounded, we assume the Quantity or Number
sought, as if it were really known; and, with this assumed Quantity, and the
Quantity or Quantities given, we proceed by undeniable Consequences, until the
Quantity first assumed is found to be equal to some quantity or quantities
really known, and is therefore it self also known.

II. Algebra is either Numeral, or Literal.

III. Numeral Algebra is so called, because all the given Quantities in any
Question are expressed by Natural Numbers, and the number or quantity sought is
solely represented by some Letter or Character taken at the pleasure of the
Artist.

IV. Literal Algebra is so called, because when a question is resolved after
this method, the known or given quantities as well as the unknown, are all
expressed by Letters of the Alphabet, or some other Convenient Marks or
Characters, and this is also called Specious Algebra; and when a question is
resolved after this manner, at the end of the operation, there is discovered a
Canon, directing how the question proposed; or any other of the like nature may
be solved, and therefore is Literal Algebra, accounted more excellent than
Numeral Algebra, for that produces not a Canon without extraordinary
difficulty, because the numbers first given are by Arithmetical operations so
interwoven and confounded, that it may seem a task too tedious for the most
ingenious Artist to trace out their footsteps.

V. The Doctrine of Algebra consists in the knowledge of certain quantities
called Cossick Powers, which we shall immediately explain.

VI. In a series, or rank of Geometrical proportionals continued, proceeding
from Unity, or one, whether they be ascending, or descending, all the Numbers
or Terms except the first (which is supposed to be unity) are called Cossick
Numbers, or Powers, as for Example, in this Rank of continual proportionals,
viz. 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, etc. the second Term (2) is called the
Root or first Power, the third term (4) is called the Square or second power,
the fourth term (8) is called the Cube, or third Power; the fifth (16) is
called the Biquadrate, or fourth Power; 32 is the fifth Power, 64 is the sixth
Power, 128 is the seventh Power, etc.

In like manner if you take a Rank of Geometrical proportionals continued, and
descending from unity, viz. 1,,, 1/8, 1/16, 1/32, etc. or 1, 1/3, 1/9, 1/27,
1/81, etc. or 1,, 1/16, 1/64, etc. The second term is called the Root or first
Power, the third term is called the second power, the fourth term is called the
third Power, etc.

VII. Whence it is evident that the Square or Second Power is generated by the
Multiplication of the Root or first Power into it self, and the Cube or third
power is generated by multiplying the second Power by the Root, or by
multiplying the Root 3 times into it self, and the Biquadrate or fourth power
is produced by multiplying of the third power by the Root, or by multiplying
the Root 4 times into it self, and the fifth Power is produced by multiplying
the fourth Power by the Root, etc. As for Example.

If you take 2 for a Root, and multiply it by its self, it produces 4 for the
Square or second power of the Root 2: Again, multiply 4 by the Root 2, and it
produces 8 for the third Power, or Cube of the Root 2: Again, if you multiply
the Cube 8 by the Root 2, it produces the fourth Power, or Biquadrate of the
Root 2, etc.

In like manner if 3 were proposed for a Root, it being multiplied by it self,
produces 9 for the Square, or Second Power of 3, and 9 being multiplied by the
Root 3, produces 27 for the Cube, or third Power of the Root 3, etc.

And also if be proposed for a Root, and it be multiplied by it self, it
produces for the Square or second power of (the Root), and (the Square) being
multiplied by (the Root), it produces 1/8 for the Cube, or third Power of (the
Root) etc.

Whence it is evident that the 4, 6 or 7 powers of any Roots may be found out,
without any respect at all had to the intermediate Powers between the Root and
the power required; as suppose there were given the Root 3, and it were
required to find the fifth power of it. I take 3, and set it down 5 times in
order thus, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, and multiply them all into each other, according to
the rule of continual multiplication, and the last product (which is 243) is
the fifth power of the Root 3, which was required.

Again, let it be required to find the fourth power of 5, I take 5, and set it
down 4 times thus, 5, 5, 5, 5, then do I multiply them continually, and find
the last product to be 625, which is the fourth power (of the given Root) as
was required. The like may be observed in the finding of any other power of any
other given Root.

VIII. If there be a series of Geometrical proportionals continued, and against
each power there be placed numbers orderly representing the number or degree of
distance of each power from the Root, such numbers are called the Indices or
exponents of the powers, because they show how often the Root is involved into
it self for the production of such a power, as in the Rank, or Scale of
Algebraical powers placed in the margent, proceeding from the root 2, to the
tenth power thereof, which is 1024, under which is written the word powers, and
then against each particular power, on the left hand thereof, is expressed
Index, or Exponent of that Power, showing how often the Root is involved or
multiplied into it self to produce that Power: As for Example, against the
number 64, is placed the number 6, which shows that 64 is the sixth power of
its Root, or that its Root is multiplied 6 times into it self to produce the
number 64. The like is to be understood of any other. 1 2 2 4 3 8 4 16 5 32 6
64 7 128 8 256 9 512 10 1024 Indices. Powers.

Likewise if any two or more Indices, or Exponents be added together, their sum
will be an exponent showing what power will be produced by the multiplication
of those Powers belonging to those Exponents or Indices which you add together;
As in the foregoing Table let it be required to find out what power of the Root
2 will be produced by multiplying 128 (its seventh power) by 8 (its third
power,) in order to which I take 3 and 7, the respective Indices of the given
powers, and add them together, and their sum is 10, which shows that the
third power, and the seventh power of any Number, or Root, being multiplied
together, will produce the tenth power of that Root; so in our example 128
being multiplied by 8, produces 1024, which is the tenth power of the Root 2.

In like manner, the Indices 3 and 5 being added together, make 8 for a new
Exponent, which shows that 32 and 8 (the powers belonging to those Exponents)
being multiplied together, will produce the eighth power, viz. 256, as appears
by the said Table, the like of any other.

So that you see that the addition of Indices answers to the multiplication of
their Correspondent powers.

And in like manner will the subtraction of Indices, or Exponents, answer to
the Division of their correspondent powers, observing always to make the power
corresponding the subtrahend (or Index to be subtracted) to be the Divisor.

IX. When a Question is propounded, and its solution is to be searched out by
the Algebraick Art, the number or magnitude sought is generally called a Root,
and it must be represented or signified by some Character or Symbol, as must be
also all the powers proceeding from the said Root according to the tenure of
the Question, in order to which there may be taken some letter of the Alphabet
at the pleasure and discretion of the Artist, as a, b, c, or d, etc. to express
the said Root, but to avoid confusion in the operation, by the commixture of
known with unknown Quantities, our Modern Analysts have been accustomed to
assume vowels to represent unknown Quantities, and to put Consonants to
signify known or given quantities.

X. If for the number or quantity sought there be put or assumed the Vowel a,
then its Square will be aa, that is, a being multiplied by it self, produces
aa, that is a squared, or the square of a, for a time a is aa, and the Cube or
third power raised from the Root a, is aaa, that is, a times aa, is aaa, and
the fourth power accordingly is aaaa, and after the same manner may any higher
power of a be signified:

In like manner if for the quantity or number sought there be assumed, the
letter e, then shall the Square raised therefrom be ee, and the third power
eee, and the fourth power eeee, and the fifth power eeeee, etc.

Also if b, or any other Consonant, be put for a given or known Quantity, then
its Square will be bb, its Cube bbb, and its biquadrate bbbb, etc.

But by some Analysts the powers of a, or any other letter, Vowel, or
Consonant, are expressed by placing the Index or Exponent of the power in a
small Character, just after the Symbol, even with the head thereof, viz. a, a2,
a3, a, etc. signify the Root a, its Square, its Cube, and its Biquadrate, etc.
which may be further exemplified by the following Table.

A Table showing the Powers of Numbers, and how to express the Simple Powers by
Alphabetical Characters.
The Root, or first Power. 1 2 3 4 a a The Square, or second Power. 1 4 9 16 aa
a2 The Cube, or third Power. 1 8 27 64 aaa a3 The Biquadrat or fourth Power, 1
16 81 256 aaaa a4 The fifth Power 1 32 243 1024 aaaaa a5 The sixth Power 1 64
729 4096 aaaaaa a6 The seventh Power. 1 128 2187 16384 aaaaaaa a7 The eighth
Power. 1 256 6561 65536 aaaaaaaa a^ The ninth Power 1 512 19683 262144
aaaaaaaaa a9 The tenth Power. 1 1024 59049 1048576 aaaaaaaaaa a10

XI. The numbers made use of in solving of Algebraical Questions, are either
absolute Numbers, or Numbers prefixed.

Absolute numbers are those which are disjunct from any kind of Magnitude or
Quantity, either known or (unknown) required, but stand simply of themselves,
without having Relation to any thing else, as 5, 10, 20, 100,, and are called
absolute Numbers.

Numbers prefixed are such as are immediately prefixed to some letter or
letters, signifying an Algebraical quantity, either known, or required, such as
are 2a, 4a, 10a, 100a, a, a, 3aa, 5bbb, 3a^, 5b3; which numbers so prefixed,
show how often the quantity to which they are prefixed, is to be taken, as 4a
signifies that a is to be taken 4 times, and 5bbb, or 5b3, signifies that the
Cube or third power of b is to be taken 5 Times, a is half of a, and 2/3b is
two thirds of b; The like is to be understood of any other. And,

Note, that when you have any Algebraical Quantity, or Letter, or Character,
not having any number prefixed to it, then 1, or unity must be imagined to be
prefixed, as a, or 1a, b, or 1b, etc.

XII. As in Vulgar and Decimal Arithmetic, so in Algebraical Arithmetic, the
operations are performed either by Absolute Numbers, or by Alphabetical
characters, in all the fundamental rules, viz. Addition, Subtraction,
Multiplication, Division, and the Extraction of Roots: And note that

Where it is required to perform the work by absolute numbers, that the
operation is in every respect the same as in Common Arithmetic. But where it
is performed by Alphabetical Letters, there is an absolute necessity of using
some Characters, to signify the Operation, an explanation of which Characters
take as follows.

XIII. This Character (+) is a sign of affirmation or Addition, when it is
placed between two quantities, signifying that the 2 numbers or quantities
between which it is placed, are to be added together, and is as much as to say
plus, as 3+6 signifies the sum of 3 and 6, and is as much as to say 3 plus 6,
or 3 more 6, which is 9, and 4+7+9 signifies the sum of 4, 7, and 9, which is
20; so a+b+c signifies the sum of a, b, and c.

And here note, that when there is no Mark, or Character before any Letter or
quantity, then is it Affirmative, and the Mark (+) is supposed to stand before
it; as a, is +a, or +1a, and b is +b, or +1b, and bcd is +bcd the like of
others.

XIV. This Character (-) is a negative sign, and always belongs to the
Quantity or Number which follows it, denying it to be, and signifies a
fictitious Number, or Quantity less than nothing.

So-7 is a feigned number less than nothing by 7, viz. as the height of the Sun
above the Horizon may be affirmed to be 7 degrees. or +7 degrees. so when it is
depressed 7 degrees below the Horison, its height may be said to be-7 degrees. that
is, 7 degrees. less than nothing.

But when the said sign or Character is placed between two Numbers or
Quantities, it signifies that the number or quantity which follows it, is to
be subtracted out of some Number or Quantity going before it, as 12-8
signifies that 8 is to be subtracted out of 12, or it signifies the excess of
12 above 8, or the Difference between 12 and 8, which is 4, so a-b signifies
the excess of a above b, and it is as much as to say (a less b,) so a+b-c
signifies that c is to be subtracted from the sum of a and b.

XV. This Character (x) is the sign of Multiplication, and signifies that the
Numbers or Quantities between which it is placed, are to be multiplied
together, as 4x5 signifies the product of 4 and 5, which is 20; so 3x5x8
signifies the product of the continual multiplication of 3, 5, and 8, viz. 120.

Likewise bxc signifies the product of the multiplication of b by c, and bxcxd
signifies the product made by the continual multiplication of b, c, and d,
into each other.

But for the most part Analysts signify the multiplication of literal
Quantities by setting the letters together like letters in a word, as ab is the
same with axb, and abc is the same with axbxc and this indeed is to be
preferred before the other as most convenient and fittest for operation.

XVI. This Character (^) signifies the Difference btween the two quantities
between which it is placed, when it is not known in which of them the excess
lies. So b ^ c signifies the Difference between b and c, when it is not known
whether b be greater or lesser than c.

XVII. The said 4 Characters defined in the 13, 14, 15, and 16 Sections
foregoing, viz. +, -, x. and ^, may oftentimes have Relation to such a Compound
Quantity following the Character, as has a line drawn over each part of it, as
for example, ^, by which you are to understand that the Quantity (c,) is to be
added to the difference between the Quantities (b and d) in which of them
soever the excess lies.

Likewise ^ which signifies that the difference between b and c is to be
subtracted from the Quantity expressed by a.

Also ^ signifies that the sum of b and c is to be multiplied by the quantity
a, where take notice that in regard there is a line drawn over the two
quantities b and c, the sign x has reference to the multiplication of a into
the quantity c as well as the quantity b, which immediately follows it, but
if the said line were omitted, and the quantities were thus expressed, axb+c,
it would signify the quantity e to be added to the product of the
multiplication of a and b.

Furthermore ^ signifies that the quantities c and d are or must be subtracted
from the Quantity b, whereas if there were not a line over the quantities c and
d, it would signify that the quantity d is to be added to b-c.

And (^) signifies the difference between the quantity c, and the sum of d and
e, whereas if the line were not over d and e, it would signify the quantity e
to be added to the difference between c and d.

XVIII. This Character () is a radical sign, and signifies that the Square
Root of the quantity or quantities following it, is to be extracted as ^,
signifies the Square Root of 36, viz. 6.

So ^ signifies the Square Root of the product of the quantities a and b, and
^ is the Square Root of the product of the continual multiplication of the
Quantities, a, b, and c.

But when you would represent the Root of a Power that is higher than a Square;
then immediately after the said Radical sign, express the index, or exponent of
its power in a parenthesis, as follows, viz. ^, signifies the Cube Root of
64, which is 4; and ^ signifies the biquadrate Root of 81, viz. 3.

Also ^, signifies the Cube Root of the product of the multiplication of the
quantities, a, and b, and ^ signifies the Biquadrate Root of the Product of
the multiplication of the quantities, c and d.

And the said Radical sign does oftentimes belong to such a Compound Quantity
following it, as has a line over every part of it. As for Example, ^
signifies the Square Root of the sum of the Quantities b and c. So ^
signifies the CubeRoot of theremainder, when the quantity c is subtracted from
the sum of the quantities, a and b, and (^) signifies the Biquadrate Root of
the remainder, when the quantity c is subtracted from the Sum of the Square of
a added to b.

Likewise ^ signifies that to the quantity a is to be added the Square Root of
the remainder, when the quantity d is subtracted from the sum of the Square of
the quantity b, and the quantity c: And these and such like are by Analysts
generally called universal Roots.

After the same manner may be expressed the universal Square Root of ^ thus,
viz. ^ which signifies the Square Root of the sum when b is added to the
Square Root of ^.

XIX. This Character (=) signifies an Equation, or equality of the magnitudes
or quantities between which it is placed, and imports as much as these words,
viz. (is equal to) as in the following Example, viz. 3+4=7, which is as much as
to say, the sum of 3 and 4, or 3 plus 4 is equal to 7; so 7+9=12+4=16 imports
that the sum of 7 and 9 is equal to the sum of 12, and 4 which is equal to 16;
and 9=12-3, signifies that 9 is equal to the excess of 12 above 3.

Also 4x5=2x10=16+4=20 signifies that the Rectangle or Product of 4 by 5 is
equal to the Rectangle or Product of 10 by 2, which is equal to the sum of 16
and 4, equal to 20.

Likewise ^ signifies that the Quotient of 24 divided by 6, is equal to the
Quotient of 8 divided by 2.

Again a+b=c-d signifies that the sum of a and b is equal to the excess of c
above d, and ^ signifies that the sum c and d is equal to the Quotient of f
divided by g; and bxc=r-s signifies that the Rectangle of b and c is equal to
the excess of r above s, and ^ signifies that a is equal to the remainder,
when c or ^ is subtracted from the universal square Root of ^ this will be made
plain and easy to the ingenious practitioner by the ensuing Examples of this
Treatise.

XXI. This Character (^) stands for the word (greater) signifying the number,
or quantity standing on the left hand of the said Character to be greater than
that on the right hand thereof; as ^ signifies that 8 is greater than 3; also
^ signifies that the sum of a and b is greater than c, etc.

XXII. This Character (^) stands for the word (less) and it signifies that the
number or quantity standing on the left hand thereof, is lesser than that on
the right hand. As ^ signifies that the sum of 4 and 3 is less than the excess
of 20 above 8. Likewise ^ is thus read, viz. the remainder of d being
subtracted from c is lesser than the sum of b and e.

XXIII. This Character (^) is always placed in the middle between 4 Geometrical
proportionals, as in the following Examples, viz. ^ is thus to be read, viz. as
2 is to 4, so 9 is to 18; or after the manner of the Rule of 3, if 2 require 4,
9 will require 18. Also ^ is thus read, as b is to c, so is d to e. And ^ is as
much as to say, as the Compound Quantity a+e is to the quantity b, so is the
Compound Quantity c+b to the Quotient of the Compound Quantity bc+bb being
divided by a+e.

XXIV. This Character (^) placed after any number of quantities exceeding two,
declares the said numbers or quantities after which it is placed to be
continual Geometrical proportionals, so 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64 ^ signifies the
said numbers to be continual proportionals Geometrical, for, as 2 is to 4, so
is 4 to 8, and so is 8 to 16, and so is 16 to 32, and so is 32 to 64, etc. Also
these quantities, viz. a. b. c. d. e. ^ are continual proportionals
Geometrical, for, as a is to b, so is c to d. and so is d to e.

CHAP. II. Addition of Algebraical Integers.
I. AS in Common Arithmetic, so in Algebraical, Addition finds out the
aggregate, or sum of two or more given quantities however expressed numerally
or literally.

II. When the quantities given to be added are alike, and have like signs,
collect the numbers prefixed to each quantity into one sum, and thereto annex
the letter, or letters of any one of the given quantities, and then prefix the
sign of Affirmation or Negation, viz. + or - so shall the quantity thus found
be the sum desired.

And here note that every quantity which has no number prefixed to it, is
supposed to have the number 1 prefixed, so is a=1a, and b=1b.

Example.

What is the sum of 3b+b+2b? Facit 6b, for the sum of the numbers prefixed to
each quantity, viz. 3, 1, and 2. is 6, to which if I annex the Character b, it
will be 6b, which must have the sign + prefixed to it, or else it must be
imagined so to be, then will +6b be the sum of the given Quantities. So is 5ab
the sum of 3ab+2ab. And -4cd the sum of -3cd

More Examples of this Rule.

^

III. When the quantities given to be added together are alike, but have unlike
signs, then subtract the lesser number prefixed from the greater, and to the
remainder annex the letter or letters by which any one of the given quantities
is expressed, and thereto prefix the sign of + or - according to the sign of
that prefixed number wherein lay the excess, so shall this new quantity be the
sum of the quantities propounded.

Example.

Let it be required to add +5cd to -2cd, the sum will be found to be +3cd; for,
first, I subtract -2 from +5 and there remains 3 to which I annex cd so will
there be 3cd, to which I prefix the sign + because it belongs to the number 5,
wherein lay the excess, so have I +3cd for the sum required. See the work.

^

Again if it were required to add +4aa to -7aa the sum would be ^ found to be
-3aa, because the sign - belongs to the number 7 wherein lay theexcess, see the
work in the margent.

More Examples of this last Rule.

^

And here note, that if the numbers prefixed to the given quantity beequal, and
they have different signs, then their sum will be 0, so i^ it were required to
add +8bcd to -8bcd their sum will be 0, the negative sign destroying the
affirmative.

IV. When the quantities given to be added are more than 2, and having
different signs, then according to the second Rule of this Chapter, bring the
quantities having like signs into one sum, that is the affirmative quantities
into one sum, and the negative into another, then by the foregoing third Rule
add those two quantities together, so shall their sum be the number sought.

Example

Let it be required to and the sum of 3aa+7aa -2aa-5aa. First, by the said
second Rule I find the sum of 3aa+7aa to be 10aa; and the sum of -2aa-5aa to be
-7aa, then by the said third Rule I find the sum of 10aa-7aa to be 3aa, or +3aa
so that I conclude the sum of 3aa+7aa -2aa-5aa to be +3aa.

More Examples of this Rule follow.

^

V. When the Simple quantities given to be added together, be unlike, then (how
many soever there be) set them one after another in the same line without
altering their signs.

Example.

What is the sum of 4b added to 3cd? Facit 4b+3cd for the sum.

More Examples of this Rule follow.

^

Algebraical Addition of Compound Integers.

VI. The Addition of Compound Algebraical Integers is easily performed by the
help of the foregoing Rules of this Chapter, whether the Compound quantities to
be added are alike, or unlike; as you may easily perceive by the work of the
following Examples.

Let it be required to find the sum of 3a+b, and 5a+3b. their sum will be 8a+4b
for 3a+5a=8a, and 3b+b=4b, whose sum is 8a+4b by the second Rule of this
Chapter.

Also the sum of 6cd+3bb and 2cd-5bb will be found to be 8cd-2bb for (by the
second Rule of this Chapt. ( 6cd+2cd=8cd, and by the third Rule the sum of
3bb-5bb=-2bb which 2 sums added together by the fifth Rule of this Chap. will
be 8cd-2bb.

Moreover if it were required to find the sum of these Compound Quantities,
viz. 15gg+8a -20 and 3gg-3a+12 it will be 18gg+5a-8 for 15gg+3gg=18gg by the
second Rule, and the sum of 8a-3a=5a by the third Rule, and by the same
12-20=-8, the sum of which 3 sums is 18gg+5a-8 by the fifth Rule of this
Chapter.

And the sum of 8b-16+2cd and 24-5b+3cd is 3b+8+5cd. And here note that in
setting down of Compound quantities to be added together, it matters not which
of them you set first, so that to every quantity there is prefixed its proper
sign; as 3a+b-cc is the same with b+3a-cc and with -cc+b+3a, etc.

More Examples of the Addition of Compound Algebraical Integers.

^

CHAP. III. Subtraction of Algebraick Integers.
I Shall not here need to give you a definition of the nature of subtraction,
but shall only give you a general Rule for the finding out of the remainder,
excess, or difference of any two quantities, and that in all cases whatsoever.

I. When a Quantity Single or Compound, is given to be subtracted from another,
then change the sign, or signs of the quantity to be subtracted, into the
contrary signs, that is + into -, and - into +; which being done, add the two
given quantities together by the Rules of the foregoing second Chapter, so
shall their sum be the difference, or remainder sought.

Example 1.

Let it be required to subtract 3a from 8a.

The quantity here given to be subtracted is 3a, which according to the second
rule of the second chap. is +3a, therefore must its sign + be changed into -,
so will it be -3a, which being added to 8a (by the third Rule of the second
Chap. their sum will be 5a, for, 8a-3a=5a, and 8a and is the difference between
the quantities so much 3a.

Example 2.

Let it be required to subtract -3bc from 4bc.

Here because -3bc is the quantity to be subtracted, therefore must its sign -
be changed into +, so will it be +3bc, which being added to 4bc, by the second
Rule of the second Chapter, their sum is 7bc, for, 3bc+4bc=7bc, and so much is
the remainder when -3bc is subtracted from +4bc.

Example 3.

Let it be required to subtract -3bde from -9bde.

Here because -3bde is the quantity to be subtracted, therefore must its sign -
be changed into +, so will it be +3bde which being added to -9bde according to
the third Rule of the second Chapter their sum will be -6bde for +3bde-9bde
=-6bde, and so much is the remainder when -3bde is subtracted from -9bde.

Example 4.

Subtract 3cd from 8de. The sign of 3cd being changed, it will be -3cd, which
being added to 8de by the fifth Rule of the second Chapter, their sum will be
8de-3cd which is the remainder when 3cd is subtracted from ^ de.

Example 5.

What is the remainder when -3bc is subtracted from 2cd? Facit 3bc+2cd, or
2cd+3bc.

In all which Examples you see that the sign of the quantity given to be
subtracted is changed into the contrary sign.

More Examples of Subtraction of Simple Algebraick Integers.

Example 6. Example 7.

^

Example 8. Example 9.

^

And when it is required to subtract a Compound Integer from a Compound
Integer, the operation will not in any wise differ from the former, observing
always to change + into -, and - into + as will appear by the following Examples.

Example 10.

From 3a+4b let it be required to subtract 2a-b. Here 2a-b being the quantity
to be subtracted from the other; its signs must be changed into the contrary
signs. And then instead of 2a-b you will have -2a+b, which being added to 3a+4b
the sum will be a+5b=3a+4b-2a+b, and so much is the remainder, when subtraction
is performed according to the tenure of the Question. See the work laid down as
follows.

^

Example 11.

From 3aa-2dc+ab let it be required to subtract aa+3ab-3dc. The quantity here
given to be subtracted is aa+3ab-3dc, whose signs being changed, it will then
be -aa-3ab+3dc, which being added to 3aa-2dc+ab, the sum will be
3aa-2dc+ab-aa-3ab+3dc, which according to the sixth Rule of the second Chapter
is equal to 2aa+dc-2ab. See the following operation.

^

But when the given quantities are unlike, then place the quantity to be
subtracted immediately after the quantity out of which it is to be subtracted
in the same line changing its signs, which new quantity when the said quantity
is so annexed, is the remainder required, which will admit of no Contraction,
because the quantities are unlike.

Example 12.

Let it de required to subtract 3ab+2aa from 7bc+6cd, the quantity given to be
subtracted is 3ab+2aa which annexed to the other given quantity, changing its
signs, will give 7bc+6cd -3ab-2aa, which is the remainder required. See the
following work.

^

More Examples of subtraction in Compound Algebraick Integers.

^

As in Natural Arithmetic, the remainder and the sum subtracted being added
together, will be equal to the number from which the subtraction is made, so is
it likewise in Algebraical Arithmetic; for if you add the remaining Quantity
to the Quantity subtracted, the sum will be equal to the Quantity out of which
the subtraction is made. As in the first Example of this Chapter, where it is
required to subtract 3a from 8a, and the remainder is 5a; now if to 5a you add
3a, the sum will be 5a+3a=8a; And in the twelfth Example, where it is required
to subtract 3ab+2aa from 7bc+6cd; the remainder is found to be 7bc+6cd-3ab-2aa,
to which if you add the number subtracted, viz. 3ab+ 2aa, the sum will be
7bc+6cd equal to the given quantity out of which subtraction is made, for
2ab+1aa being added to -3ab-2aa they destroy each other, because their signs
are unlike, and this may serve for a sufficient (and indeed the only) proof of
the work.

CHAP. IV. Multiplication in Algebraick Integers.
I. IN Multiplication of Algebraical Quantities, there are always two
quantities given, to find out a third.

II. The two quantities given are called the Factors, and the third quantity
invented, or found by the said Factors, is called the Product, Fact, or
Rectangle.

III. When the given Factors are single quantities alike, or unlike, if they
have not natural numbers prefixed to them, the fact is discovered at first
sight, and is performed by joining both the quantities together in one, without
any Character between them, like letters in a word.

But special regard must be had to the signs of the given quantities, in all
kinds of Multiplication. whether by Simple or Compound Quantities. and whether
with, or without numbers prefixed to them; the nature of the product wholly
depending thereupon, viz. If the signs of the quantities to be multiplied
together be alike, that is, both + or both -, then the sign of the product or
fact will be +, but if they be of different kinds, viz. the one +, and the
other -, then the sign of the product will be -, as you will find by the
several Examples following.

Example 1. What is the Product of a multiplied by b? Facit ab.

Here because both the Factors are signed with +, therefore the sign of the
product is +.

In like manner, if the given Factors had been -a and -b the product would have
been (ab or ba) the same as before, because the signs of the Factors are both
alike, viz. both -.

But if the given Factors had been +a and -b, or -a and +b then the product or
fact would have been -ba or -ab, because the signs of the Factors are unlike
viz. the one + and the other -, observe the like in all cases whatsoever.

Example. 2. What is the Product of abc multiplied by cd? Facit abccd or +abccd.

And if you had been to multiply -abc by -cd, the product would have been the
same, viz. abccd, or +abccd.

But if the Factors had been -abc by +cd, or +abc by -cd, then the Fact would
have been -abccd, because the signs of the Factors are unlike.

More Examples of the like Nature.

^

IV. When the Quantities given to be subtracted are Single, or Simple
Quantities, (whether alike, or unlike) having natural numbers prefixed to them,
then in such cases let the natural numbers be multiplied together, and to their
product annex the product of the given Algebraical Quantities, they being
multiplied together as in the last Rule, so shall this new quantity found be
the product required. As in the following Examples.

Example 1. Let it be required to multiply 3a by 9a.

First, I multiply the numbers prefixed to both quantities, the one by the
other, viz. 9 by 3, and their product is 27, to which I annex the Letters
contained in both quantities, viz. aa, and they make 27aa, which is the
product, or Fact required.

Example 2. Let it be required to multiply 3aa by 4b. Here first I multiply the
numbers prefixed together, viz. 3 and 4, and they make 12; to which product I
annex the Letters of both quantities given, viz. aa and b, and they make 12aab
for the product required.

Example 3. What is the product of -3abc by -5cd?

Here first I multiply the given numbers prefixed, viz. 3 and 5, and they
produce 15, to which I annex the Letter in both the quantities, viz. abc and
cd, and they make 15abccd, to which I prefix the sign+, because the signs of
the given quantities were both alike, viz.-, and then will the product or fact
be +15abccd.

Example 4. What is the product of +6ab multiplied by -3cd?

First, multiply the numbers prefixed, viz. 6 and 3, and the product is 18, to
which I annex the Letters in both the given quantities, ab and cd, and it makes
18abcd, to which I prefix the sign - (because the signs of the Factors were
unlike, viz. the one+, and the other -) and then the product will be -18abcd.

More Examples of the like Nature.

^

V. When Compound quantities are to be multiplied, the operation (in effect) is
the same with multiplication of Simple Quantities delivered in the foregoing
Rules, for you are to multiply every particular quantity in the multiplicand by
each particular quantity in the multiplyar, (not regarding whether you begin
the work at the right hand or the left,) and then let the several products be
joined together according to the Rules of Algebraical Addition, and that sum
will be the product required. The following Examples will make the Rule plain.

Example 1.

In the first place let it be required to multiply (a Compound Quantity by a
Simple, viz.) ab+d by a. And in order thereto, First, I multiply a into ab, and
the product is aab, and then into d, and it produces ad, so is aab+ad the
product required, each member of the product being affirmative, because all
parts of the Factors were Affirmative.

Example 2. Let it be required to multiply ^ aa+ab-c by b. The Product of aa by
b is +aab, and the product of ab by b is +abb, and the product of -c by b is
-cb, all which particular products being joined, and one Compound quantity
composed thereof, it will give aab+abb bc for the product required. See the
work in the margent.

Example 3. Let it be required to multiply the Compound quantity ac+dg by the
Compound quantity c+d.

^

First, Multiply each member of the multiplicand by c, and the product is
acc+cdg, then multiply each member of the multiplicand by d, and the product is
acd+ddg, which two products being joined together by the Rules of Algebraical
Addition, the sum is acc+cdg+acd+ddg, which is the product required, as appears
by the operation.

Example. 4. What is the product of da+bc multiplied by da-ab?

^

First, Multiply the Multiplicand da+bc by da (the first member of the
multiplyar) and it produces ddaa+dabc, then multiply the said Multiplicand by
-ab (the second member of the multiplyar) and it produces -aadb-abbc, which
two quantities being joined together, give ddaa+dabc-aadb-abbc for the product
required. As you may see in the Operation.

Example 5. What is the Product of a+b-c multiplied by a+b-c?

^

First, Multiply each member of the Multiplicand by a (the first member of the
multiplyar) and it produces aa+ab-ac, then multiply each said member in the
multiplicand by b, (the second member of the multiplyar) and it produces
ab+bb-bc, then multiply each member of the said multiplicand by -c (the third
and last member of the multiplyar) and the product is -ac-bc+c^; which said
three products being joined together according to the Rules of Algebraical
Addition, will give aa+2ab-2ac+bb-2bc +cc which is the Square of a+b-c or
product required, as appears by the whole operation.

And if there are natural numbers prefixed to any of the Compound Quantities,
the operation will not be different from the foregoing Examples of this Rule,
regard being had to the fourth Rule of this Chapter, as will appear by the
following Example.

Example. 6. What is the Product of 3b+2c multiplied by 4b-3c?

^

First, By the fourth Rule multiply each member of ( 3b+2c) the multiplicand by
4b, and the product is 12bb+8bc; then multiply the said multiplicand by -3c,
and the product is -9bc-6cc, which being added to 12bb+8bc, the sum will be
12bb-bc-6cc which is the product required.

Example 7. What is the product of 2a+2c-8 multiplied by 2a-5?

^

First, 2a+2c-8 being multiplied by 2a, produces 4aa+4ac-16a, for 2ax2a=4aa
and 2ax 2e= 4ae and 2ax-8=-16a which is marked with -, because the signs of the
Factors are unlike, viz.-8 and +2a. Secondly 2a+2e-8 being multiplied by-5,
produces -10a-10e +40; for-5x +2a=-10a and -5x +2e =-10e, and -5x-8=+40, all
which quantities being joined together by the Rules of Algebraical addition
will give +4aa+4ae-26a-10e +40 which is the product required. See the work.

More Examples in Multiplication of Compound Algebraical Integers.

^

CHAP. V. Division in Algebraick Integers.
I. IN Division Algebraical (as in Division in Common Arithmetic) there are
two Quantities given to find out a third; which Quantity sought is called the
Quote, or Quotient; and of the Quantities given, that which is to be divided,
is called the Dividend, and the Quantity by which it is to be divided, is
called the Divisor?

II. When it is required to divide one number or quantity by another, if you
place the Dividend for the Numerator, and the Divisor for the Denominator of a
Fraction, that Fraction so composed is equal to the Quotient that would arise
by the real Division of the one by the other.

For if it were required to divide 4 by 5, the quotient would be 4/5, or if it
were required to divide 12 by 7, the Quotient would be ^. The reason of which
is the ground of the general part of Division in Algebra; for when one quantity
is to be divided by another, set the quantity that is Dividend for the
Numerator of a Fraction, and the quantity that is the Divisor set for the
Denominator.

So if it were required to divide the quantity b by the quantity a, I would
place them thus, viz. ^ which signifies the Quotient of b divided by a.

In like manner if it were required to Divide abe by cd, the Quotient would be
^. And if 5ac were to be divided by 3cd, the Quotient would be ^. And if bed
were to be divided by 7, the Quotient would be ^.

The same is to be observed in Division of Compound Algebraick Integers, for if
it were required to divide a+b by c, the Quotient would be ^, and if 5b were to
be divided by 3a+bed, the Quotient would be ^.

More Examples of Division according to the foregoing Rule.

^

III. When in any Quotient that is expressed according to the foregoing Rule,
there are the same Letter or Letters repeated in every part or member of the
Numerator and Denominator, you may cancel such Letter or Letters, but be sure
that what you cancel in one part, to cancel the very same in all the rest. So
shall this new Quantity be a true Quotient, equivalent to what it was before
the said Letters were cancelled.

Example. What is the Quotient of bd divided by b? According to the foregoing
Rule the Quotient is ^; but because the letter b is found both in the Numerator
and in the Denominator, therefore cancel b in both of them, and then you will
find the Quotient to be d, for ^.

Again let it be required to divide ab+ad by acd, the Quotient is ^, and
because the letter a is found in every member of the Numerator and Denominator,
cast it out of every one, and then you will have ^ for the Quotient.

Likewise if you were to divide ab+abc+abe by abd+abf the Quotient you would
find to be ^ which being contracted by cancelling ab in each member of the
Numerator and Denominator, there will be found ^ for the Quotient.

And bb+b being to be divided by b, the Quotient will be ^ and by cancelling b
in every part, there will be b+1 for the Quotient abbreviated, for ^ and by
cancelling b in every part, there will be ^ and ^.

The same is to be observed whether the signs be + or -; so if it be required
to divide ab^+ cbe, by bde-bce the Quotient will be ^ And because be is found
in each Quantity, I cancel it, and then the Quotient contracted, or abbreviated
will be found to be ^.

More Examples of Contractions or Abbreviations in Division of Algebraick
Integers according to the foregoing Rule.

^

IV. If when it is required to divide a Simple or Compound Algebraick Quantity
by a Simple Quantity, there be prefixed to every member a number, or numbers,
that may be divided by any other number without any remainder, then instead of
the given prefixed numbers prefix the Quotient of each of the said numbers
divided by the said common measurer, not neglecting to cancel any letter that
may be found in each part of the Numerator and Denominator, according to the
foregoing third Rule. As for Example.

Divide 16bc by 4bd. Here according to the foregoing Rule, the Quotient is ^,
but because the prefixed numbers 16 and 4 will admit of 4 for a common measure,
therefore I divide them both by 4, and the Quotients are 4 and 1, which I
prefix to the given Quantities instead of 16 and 4, and then the Quotient will
be ^, or ^, and because b is contained both in the Numerator, and the
Denominator, cancel it, so have you ^ for the Quotient required.

Moreover 15abc+12bd being given to be divided by 3bg, the Quotient will be
found to be ^.

For, I first discover that the prefixed numbers 15, 12; and 3, have 3 for
their common measure, by which they being severally divided, give 5, 4, and 1,
which being prefixed to the said Quantities after b, (which is found in every
quantity is cancelled) there will be ^ for the true Quotient required.

More Examples of Contraction in Division, according to the two last Rules.

^

V. When in Compound quantities one or more letter or letters is repeated in
every member, then will the remaining Letters in each quantity evenly divide
the said Compound quantity without any remainder, and the quotient will be the
Letter or letters repeated in each member as aforesaid. As for Example.

1. What is the Quotient of ba+ca divided by b+c? Here it is evident that the
Quotient will be a; for proof whereof take the Divisor b+c, and multiply by the
Quotient a, according to the fifth Rule of the fourth Chap. and the product
will be ba+ca equal to the Dividend.

2. Likewise if it were required to divide bad+cad by b+c, the Quotient will be
found to be ad.

3. Also by the same reason if you divide 2ab-2acd-2adb by b-cd-db, the
Quotient will be 2a, and if you divide the same dividend by 2b-2cd -- 2db, the
Quotient will be a.

More Examples of the like nature.

^

The reason why -1 is the last member of the last example is, because -c, or
-1c is the last member of the Dividend, for according to the thirteenth Rule of
the first Chapter, when a quantity has no number prefixed to it; it is
supposed to have the number 1 before it.

And here note, that as in Multiplication of Algebraick Integers + by +, and -
by - produces +, and + by - produces -, so in Division, if you divide + by +,
or - by -, the sign of the Quote will be +, but if you divide + by -, or -, by
+, the sign of the Quote will be -; so if 3ab be divided by 3a, the Quote will
be b, or + b, and if -3ab be divided by -3a, the Quote will be +b, for if you
multiply -3a by +b, the product will be -3ab by the third Rule of the fourth
Chapter foregoing. Also if you divide +3ab by -3a, or -3ab by +3a, the Quotient
will be -b, for +3a being multiplied by -b, produces -3ab, and -3a being
multiplied by -b, produces +3ab.

VI. From a due consideration of the manner of operating the Examples of the
last Rule, a way may be discovered to divide a Compound Quantity by a Simple,
or Compound Quantity, and to find out the true Quotient when it likewise will
be a Compound Quantity, the practice of which will be made plain by the
following Examples.

Example 1. Let it be required to divide ba+ca, by a. Having placed the
Dividend and Divisor as is usual in vulgar Arithmetic, and as you see in the
following operation.

^

The do I seek how often a is contained in ba, (the first member of the
Dividend) and the answer is b times, therefore I put b in the Quotient, and
thereby I multiply (a) the Divisor, and the product is +ba, which must be
subtracted from ba in the Dividend, (and therefore I change its sign into -ba
by the first Rule of the third Chapter, and there remains 0, then do I bring
down +ca the next member of the Dividend, and divide it by a, and the Quotient
is +c, by which I again multiply (a) the Divisor, and the Product is ca, which
subtracted from ca there remains 0, and so the work of Division is ended, and
I find the Quotient of ba+ca divided by a be b+c; for proof whereof if you
multiply b+c by a (the Divisor) the product will be ba+ca equal to the given
Dividend.

Example 2. Let it be required to divide ba+ca+be+ce by b+c.

Having disposed of the Dividend and Divisor in order to the work with a
crooked line behind which to place the Quotient, as in Common Arithmetic; then
first I seek how often b (the first member of the Divisor is contained in ba,
(the first member of the Dividend) and there arises a, which I put in the
Quotient, and thereby multiply each member of the Divisor, viz. b+c, and the
product is ba+ca, which place under the two first quantities of the dividend
toward the left hand, viz, under ba+be, and by the first Rule of the second
Chapter subtract it therefrom, so will the remainder be 0; to which I bring
down the remaining part of the dividend, viz. be+ce, and divide be by e, and
there arises in the Quotient e, by which I multiply the whole Divisor b+c, and
the Product is be+ce, which subtracted from the Dividend be+ce, the Remainder
is 0. See the whole work as follows.

^

So that the quotient is a+e, now to prove the work, multiply the Divisor b+c
by the Quotient (a+e) according to the fifth Rule of the fourth Chapter, and
the Product you will find to be ba+ca+be+ce which is equal to the given
Dividend; and therefore I conclude the operation to be truly performed.

Example 3. In like manner, if you divide ba+bd+ca+cd-ae-de by a+d, the
Quotient will be found to be b+c-e according to the following work.

^

The work of the last Example explained.

In the foregoing Example, First, I divide ba (the first member of the
Dividend) by a the first quantity or member of the Divisor, and there arises a
in the Quotient, which is +a, (because the signs of the Dividend and Divisor
are +) and thereby I multiply the Divisor a+d. and the Product is ba+bd, which
I place under the two first members of the Dividend as you see in the work, and
subtract it therefrom, and the remainder is 0, to which I bring down the two
next quantities, viz. +ca+cd.

Then do I divide +ca by a, and there arises in the Quotient +c, (because the
Dividend and Divisor are both signed +,) by which I multiply the said Divisor,
and the Product is +ca+cd which I placeunder the dividend, and subtract it
therefrom, and there remains 0, to which I annex the two next and last
members of the Dividend, viz. -ae-de; and divide -ae by +a, and the Quotient is
-e, (because the signs of the Dividend and Divisor are different, viz. the one
+, and the other -) and thereby I multiply the whole Divisor, and the Product
is -ae-de which subtracted from ( -ae-de) the Dividend, the remainder is 0, and
so the work is finished, and the Quotient arising by this Division is b+c-e, as
you may prove at your leisure.

If the quantities or members of the Dividend of the foregoing Example are not
placed in the same order that is there expressed the, effect of the operation
will be the same, as you may see by the following work.

^

First, I divide ba by a, and the Quote is b, by which I multiply the Divisor
(a+d) and the product is ba+bd which I subtract from ba+ca and the remainder is
(by the Rule of the third Chapter (ba+ca-ba-bd which being contracted by the
Rules of Addition is ca-bd, (for +ba and -ba expunge each other,) then to this
remainder do I bring down the two next quantities of the Dividend, viz. -ae+bd
which being annexed to the said remainder ca-bd it then (makes for a new
dividual) ca-bd-ae+bd, but -bd and +bd destroy each other, and therefore the
dividual contracted is ca-ce, which I divide by a+d as before, and the Quotient
is +c, by which I multiply the Divisor, and the Product is ca+cd, which being
subtracted from the said dividual ca-ae, the remainder is ca-ae-ca-cd which
being contracted, is -ae^cd, to which I join the two next quantities in the
Dividend, viz. -cd-de, and it makes (-ae-cd+cd-de)=-ae-de (for -cd and +cd
destroy each other) for a new dividual, which I divide by the said Divisor a+d,
and the Quote is -e, by which I multiply the Divisor, and the Product is
-ae-de, which subtracted from -ae-de (the dividual) the remainder is
-ae-de+ae+de=0, and so the work is finished, and I find the Quotient to be
b+c-e as before.

But here note by the way that it does not always fall out that you are to
divide the first member of the dividual by Note the first of the Divisor, but
by some other member which you can discover will do the work without making a
Fraction. As in the following Example:

Example. 4. Let it be required to divide aa-ee by a+e?

First, I divide aa by a, and there arises in the Quotient a, by which I
multiply the Divisor a+e, and the Product is aa+ae, which subtracted from the
Dividend (aa-ee) the remainder is -ee-ae for a dividual, and then I do not seek
how often a is contained in ee, for then the answer would be a Fraction, but I
divide ee by its correspondent Divisor +e, and there arises -e, to be written
in the Quotient next after a, but not +e, because - divided by + quotes -. Then
I multiply the whole Divisor a+e by -e, and the product is -ae-ee, which
subtracted from the said dividual -ee-ae, the remainder is 0, so is the work
ended, and I find the Quotient to be a-e. See the operation.

^

Example 5. If it were required to divide aaa+abd+baa+bbd by aa+bd by the
Quotient would be found to be a+b, as appears by the work.

^

Example 6. If aaa-abb+abd+baa-bbb+bbd be divided by a+b the Quote will be
aa-bb+bd, as by the operation.

^

Example 7, Let it be required to divide 18abbc+9bbcc+24bcc+24abc+16cc by
3bc+4c, the quotient will be found to be 6ab+3bc+4c. See the following
operation.

^

When Algebraical Division according to the Rules before delivered, will not
exactly perform the work without any remainder, then you may place the
Dividend and Divisor Fraction wise, which is indeed the most general practice
amongst Algebrists; or else proceed in Division as far as you can by the
preceding method; and then place the remainder for a Numerator over the
Divisor, as in the following Example, where aa-bb+ac is divided by a+b, and the
quotient is ^, the remainder being +ac.

^

CHAP. VI. The Doctrine of Algebraical Fractions. And First, Of Reduction.
1. HE that intends a considerable proficiency in this mysterious Art, must be
very well acquainted with the Doctrine of Vulgar Fractions, a mean knowledge
therein not being sufficient; for all operations whatsoever in Algebraick
Fractions have their dependence thereupon, being wrought in every respect as
vulgar Fractions they are by the help of the Rules contained in the several
Chapters foregoing, and there are very few questions solved Algebraically, but
what have one or more Fractions concerned in its operation.

To reduce Fractions, having unequal Denominators to Fractions of the same
value, having a common Denominator.

II. When you would reduce Algebraical Fractions to a common Denominator,
multiply the Numerator of the first Fraction into the Denominator or
denominators of the rest, so shall the ^ct be a Numerator equal to the
Numerator of the first Fraction, likewise multiply the Numerators of the
second, third, etc. Fractions into all the Denominators except its own, and the
several products shall be so many new Numerators, then multiply all the
Denominators continually, so shall the product be a common Denominator to all
the Numerators found out as before.

Example 1. Reduce ^ and ^ to a common Denominator. Multiply the Numerator a
(of the first Fraction) into the Denominator (c) of the second Fraction, and
the product is ac, for a Numerator = a, then multiply (d) the Numerator of the
second Fraction into (b) the Denominator of the first, and the product is db,
for a Numerator = d, then multiply the Denominators together, viz. b into c,
and the product bc is the Denominator common to both the Numerators, so will
the 2 new Fractions be ^ and ^ for ^ = ^ and ^.

Example 2. What Fractions are =^, ^ and ^, having an equal or common
Denominator? Facit ^, ^ and ^, for ax ax d= aad, = the Numerator a, and bx cx
d= bcd= the Numerator b, and cx cx a= cca= the Numerator c, and cx ax d= cad
which is the common Denominator.

To reduce an Algebraical Fraction to its lowest Terms equivalent.

III. When in the Numerator and Denominator of an Algebraical Fraction, the
same letter or letters is contained, then cancel the same in both, and if there
be any numbers prefixed, if you can discover any number that will divide them
both without any remainder, then prefix those quotients instead of the numbers
prefixed before; so shall this new Fraction be of the same value with the
Fraction proposed.

So will ^ be reduced to ^, by cancelling cb in the Numerator and Denominator.

Also ^ being reduced to its lowest terms will be ^ by cancelling bd in every
part, and dividing the prefixed numbers by 8. More Examples follow.

^

Or if you can (in a Compound Algebraical Fraction) discover a quantity that
will divide the Numerator and Denominator without any remainder, (according to
the sixth Rule of the fifth Chapter) then shall the quotients be a new
Numerator and a new Denominator equal to the Fraction in its given Terms. As
in the following Examples. ^

To reduce an Integral quantity to an Algebraical Fraction.

IV. Multiply the given Quantity by the intended Denominator, so shall the
Product be the Numerator required. As in the following Examples.

Let it be required to reduce the quantity b to a Fraction, having ad for its
Denominator. To do which I multiply the given quantity b by ad, and the product
is the Numerator, viz. bad, so shall ^ be the Fraction required, for ^.

Also if it were required to reduce the quantity e to a Fraction, whose
Denominator should be b+c, it would be ^.

V. If it be required to reduce a mixed quantity to a Fraction, multiply the
Integral quantity by the Denominator of the Fractional part, and join the
product to the Numerator of the Fractional part, so shall the sum be the
Numerator. As in Example.

Reduce ^ to an improper Fraction. Mult. the Integral part a+b by the
Denominator d, and the Product da+db which being added to the numerator c,
makes da+db+c for the numerator, to which placing d for a Denominator, it gives
^ for the answer.

VI. When you are to express an Algebraick Integer Fraction wise-without an
Assigned Denominator, then make the given quantity the Numerator, and 1 the
Denominator.

So will ab be^ and cd will be ^ and a+b will be ^, etc.

These things are so plain that they need no farther explanation by examples.

CHAP. VII. Of Addition and Subtraction of Algebraical Fractions.
1. WHen the Fractions given to be added together have an equal or common
Denominator, add the Numerators together, and place their sum for a Numerator
over the common Denominator, which new Fraction shall be the sum of the given
Fractions, but if they have not a common Denominator, reduce them by the second
Rule of the sixth Chapter, and then proceed as before.

Example 1. What is the sum of ^ and ^? Facit ^, the sum of the Numerators,
viz. a and ac is a+ac which placed over the Denominator b, gives ^ for the sum
required.

Example 2. So also the sum of ^ and ^ will be ^.

Example 3. And the sum of ^ ^ and ^ will be found to be ^ for the sum of the
Numerators is a+b-c+a+b+c+2a-2b =4a.

Example 4. What is the sum of ^ and ^? Facit ^ the given Fraction being
reduced to a common Denominator by the second Rule of the sixth Chapter, are ^
and ^ whose sum is ^.

Example. 5. What is the sum of ^ ^ and ^? Facit ^.

II. When it is required to gather mixed quantities into one sum, then add the
fractional parts together by the foregoing Rule, and likewise bring the
Integers into one sum, and the sum of these two sums will be the sum required.

Example.

What is the sum of ^ and ^?

The Sum of the Fractions being added by the foregoing Rule is ^ To which sum
if you add the Integral parts of the propounded mixed Quantities, the sum
required will be ^

Subtraction of Algebraical Fractions.

III. If the 2 given Fractions have not a common Denominator, then reduce them
to such by the second Rule of the sixth Chapter, then (by the Rule of the third
Chapter) subtract the Numerator of the Fraction to be subtracted from the
Numerator of the other Fraction, and place the remainder for a Numerator over
the common Denominator, which new Fraction shall be the remainder sought. As in
the following Examples.

If you would subtract ^ from ^, Take the Numerator ab from the Numerator bc,
and the remainder is bc-ab which being placed over the Denominator e, it will
give ^ for the remainder, or difference sought.

Also let it be required to subtract ^ from ^

The Difference of the Numerators of the given Fractions is ^ Which remainder
or difference being made a Numerator to the common Denominator will give the
difference sought which is ^

And if it were required to subtract ^ from ^. The given mixed quantities will
(by the fifth Rule of the sixth Chapter) be reduced to ^ and ^

Which will be reduced to these Fractions of the same value, having a common
Denominator, viz. ^ And if from the Numerator caae+abe you subtract the
Numerator cae+ccd-ccb there will be given for the remainder sought, viz. ^

In like manner if from a it be required to subtract ^. First by the fourth
Rule of the sixth Chapter, reduce the quantity a to the improper Fractional
Quantity ^ and therefrom subtract the given Fraction ^ so will you have the
remainder soughtwhich is ^

CHAP. VIII. Multiplication and Division of Algebraical Fractions.
I. When it is required to multiply two Algebraical Fractions the one by the
other, the work is the same as in Vulgar Fractions, for if you multiply the
Numerators of the given Fractions together, and likewise their Denominators
together, and place their Respective Products for a new Numerator, and a new
Denominator, that new Fraction shall be the Product required.

Example 1. What is the Product of ^ multiplied by ^? Facit ^, for 9a ab=9aab
which is the Numerator, and c b=cb the Denominator.

Example 2. What is the Product of ^ multiplied by ^? Facit ^; for 4cd^
3a+2c=12cda+8ccd which is the Numerator.

Example 3. What is the Product of ^ multiplied by ^? Facit ^; for ^ and ^ by
the Rule of the sixth Chapter, and ^ which is the Product required.

Example 4. What is the Product of ab multiplied by ^? Facit ^; for ^ and ^
which is the Product required.

II. If it so chance that you have a Fraction to be multiplied by an Integer
that is equal to the Denominator of the Fraction, then take the Numerator for
the Product

Example. What is the Product of ^ being multiplied by a-e? Facit aa-2ae+ee.
The reason of which is plain, for the Numerator being multiplied by the
Integer, and the same Integer being put as a Denominator to the Product, the
Quotient arising by the Division of the Numerator by the said Denominator, will
be equal to the Numerator of the given Fraction; so ^.

III. When it is required to divide one Algebraical Fraction by another, if
they have a common Denominator, cancel the Denominator, and divide the
Numerator of the Dividend by that of the Divisor, so shall that Quote be the
Quotient sought.

So if it were required to divide ^ by ^ the Quotient will be found to be ^,
for having cast away the common Denominator d, and divided (abc) the Numerator
of the Dividend by (bcc) the Numerator of the Divisor, the Quotient will be ^
which is ^ by cancelling bc in the Nemerator and Denominator.

IV. When the given Algebraical Fractions have not a common denominator, then
multiply the denominator of the divisor into the Numerator of the dividend, and
the product is a new numerator, also multiply the numerator of the divisor into
the denominator of the dividend, and the product is a new denominator; which
new Fraction is the quotient sought, and this is a general Rule in all cases
whatsoever, and is the same with division in Vulgar Fractions, only keeping to
the Algebraick Rules.

Example. What is the quotient of ^ being divided by ^? Facit ^* for cxa=ca,
(the new Numerator,) and a^b=ba (the new Denominator.

Likewise, If it were required to divide ^ by ^ the Quotient would be ^ for the
numerator of the dividend is 3a+b, and the denominator of the divisor is a+b,
and ^ ^ which is the Numerator; and the numerator of the divisor is 2bb, and
the denominator of the dividend is c, and 2bbxc = 2bbc, which is the
Denominator. The like is to be observed in all cases both in multiplication,
and Division of Algebraical Fractions.

CHAP. IX. The Rule of Three in Algebraick Quantities.
I. THE Rule of Three in Algebraical quantities represented by Letters,
(whether it be Direct or Inverse) differs not from the Rule of Three in Vulgar
Arithmetic, Respect being had to the Rules of Algebraical Multiplication and
Division, before delivered in this Book, for (in a direct proportion) if you
multiply the second term by the third, and divide the Product thereof by the
first, the quotient will be the fourth quantity sought in proportion.

Example 1. If b gives c, what will d give? Facit ^.

In this Example the second and third quantities are c and d, which being
multiplied together, produce cd by the Third Rule of the fourth Chapter, which
being divided by (b) the first quantity, the quotient is ^ which is the fourth
proportion sought for.

^

Which may be proved according to the proof of the Rule of Three Direct laid
down in the Tenth Chapter of my Vulgar Arithmetic: For,

The Product of the second and third Terms is cd. And

The Product of the first and fourth Terms is ^

And by 3d the Rule of the 6th Chap. ^ (the first Term) which was to be proved.

Example 2. If b+c require d, what will d+e require? Facit ^. For,

^

Example 3. If 12 require 36, what will 4ab require? Facit ^. For,

^

II. Nor will the operation be different from the former, if any of the 3 given
quantities be a Fraction, or if they be all Fractions, observing the Rules of
multiplication and Division in Algebraick quantities; or when any of the given
Terms is a mixed quantity, let it be reduced to the form of a Fraction, by
multiplying the Integral part by the denominator, and joining the product to
the numerator of the Fractional part and then multiply and divide as before.

Example 4. If ^ require d, what will ^ require? Facit ^? For if you first
reduce ^ to the form of a Fraction, it will be ^ and the second Term d being
set Fraction-wise, will be ^, then if you multiply (^) the third Term by (^)
the second Term, the Product will be ^, which being divided by (^) the first
Term, the Quotient will be ^, which is the fourth proportional sought. For,

^

I shall not need here to give any Examples in the Inverse Rule of proportion
in Algebraick quantities, the manner of the operation being the same with the
former, only the proportion flows backward, as in the Rule of Three Inverse in
Vulgar Arithmetic.

CHAP. X. A Collection of some easy Questions wherein the Rules hitherto
delivered are Exercised, taken out of Mr. Oughtred's Clavis Mathematicae, Chap.
11. Sir Jonas Moors Arithmetic in Species, Chap. 10, and Mr. Kersy's Elements
of Algebra, Cap. 10. of the First Book.
I. THere are two Quantities or numbers, whereof the greater is a (=4) and the
lesser is e (=2) What is their sum? What their difference? What the product of
their multiplication? What the Quotient of the greater divided by the lesser?
What the Quotient of the lesser divided by the greater? What the sum of their
Squares? What the difference of their Squares? What is the sum of their sum,
and difference? What is the difference of their sum and differences? What is
the Product of their sum and difference? What the Square of their sum? What the
Square of their difference? What the Square of their Product? 1 The sum of the
quantities proposed is ^ 2 Their difference is ^ 3 Their Product by
multiplication ^ 4 The quote of the greater divided by the lesser. ^ 5 The
quote of the lesser by the greater. ^ 6 The Sum of their Squares. ^ 7 The
difference of their Squares. ^ 8 The sum of their sum and difference. ^ 9 The
difference of their sum and difference. ^ 10 The Product of their sum and
difference. ^ 10 The Square of their sum. ^ 12 The Square of the difference. ^
13 The Square of their product. ^

II. There are two quantities whose sum is b (=12) and the greater of them is a
(=8.) I demand what is the lesser? What their difference? What is the product
of their multiplication? What is the sum of their Squares? What the difference
of their Squares? 1 The lesser is ^ 2 Their difference is ^ 3 The Product is ^
4 The sum of their Squares is ^ 5 The difference of their Squares is ^

III. There are two Quantities or Numbers whose difference is d, (=4) and the
greater of them is a (=8) I demand what is the lesser? What is their sum? What
their Rectangle or Product? What the sum of their Squares? What the difference
of their Squares? 1 The difference or excess being subtracted from the greater
gives the lesser ^ 2 Their sum is ^ 3 Their Product or Rectangle is ^ 4 The sum
of their Squares is ^ 5 The difference of their Squares is ^

IV. There are two Numbers, Magnitudes, or Quantities; whereof the Ratio of the
greater to the lesser is as r to s, (or as 3 to 2) and the greater of them is
a(=12.) I demand what is the lesser? What is their Sum? What their difference?
What their Rectangle, or Product? What the sum of their Squares? And what the
difference of their Squares? 1 The lesser is by the Rule of 3 ^ 2 Their sum is
^ 3 Their difference is ^ 4 Their Rectangle or Product is ^ 5 The sum of their
Squares is ^ 6 The difference of their Squares is ^

But if the Ratio between the lesser and the greater had been given as s to r,
(or as 2 to 3) and the lesser had been given e (=8) then,

1 The greater by the Rule of 3 would be ^ 2 Their sum ^ 3 Their difference ^ 4
Their Rectangle, or Product ^ 5 The sum of their Squares ^ 6 The difference of
their Squares, ^

V. There are two numbers or Quantities whereof the Rectangle or Product is b
(=96) and the greater quantity is a (=12) What is the lesser? What their sum?
What their difference? What the sum of their Squares? And what the difference
of their Squares? 1 The Product given being divided by (a) the lesser quantity
is ^ 2 Their sum ^ 3 Their difference ^ 4 The sum of their Squares ^ 5 The
difference of their Squares. ^

But if the Rectangle had been given b, as before, and the lesser quantity had
been given e (=8) Then

1 The greater would have been found by Division to be ^ 2 Their Sum ^ 3 Their
difference ^ 4 The Sum of their Squares. ^ 5 The difference of their Squares. ^

CHAP. XI. Reduction of Equations.
I. AN Equation is an equality between two quantities of different names,
whether the comparison of Equality be between Simple, or Compound Quantities,
or both; between which two Quantities there is always this Charactor viz. =.

So (...) ^his following Equation, viz. a= 3c, a is said to be the first part,
and 3c the second part of the Equation, and signifies that some Number or
Quantity represented by a is equal to three times another Number or Quantity
represented by c.

So a= b+c signifies that some Quantity represented by a is equal to the sum
of two other Numbers or quantities represented by b and c.

The manner of composing an Equation will be understood by solving of the
several Questions contained in this and other following Chap. But when known,
are mingled with unknown Quantities, in an equation they must be so separated
or reduced that the unknown Quantity or Quantities may remain entire on the one
side, or part, and the known or given Quantities on the other side or part of
the Equation, which to perform is the work of Reduction, and which is
contained in the several following Rules of this Chap.

Here note that the Quantity unknown or sought in every Equation is represented
by the Letter a, or some other Vowel, and the Quantity or quantities known or
given are represented by Consonants, as b, c, d, f, etc.

Reduction by Addition.

II. If equal numbers or quantities be added to equal numbers or quantities,
the sums or totals will be equal, and therefore If it be granted that ^ Then by
adding +8 to each part of the Equation there arises ^ Then because in the
first part of the Equation there is +8 and -8, they destroy each other by the
Third Rule of the Second Chap. and it follows that ^ Again let this Equation
be proposed to be reduced, viz. ^ Then by adding b to each part of the
Equation, there arises ^ And because -b and +b are in the first part of the
equation, they destroy each other, and the Equation is ^ Likewise if ^ Then by
adding b+c to each part of the equation there arises ^

Now from a due consideration of the premises it follows, that if in an
Equation there be any Number or Quantity proposed with the sign - before it,
then if it be transferred to the other side of the equation, and cancelled on
the side or part where it now stands, the effect will be the same as the
adding of that Quantity to each part of the Equation, and this by Artists is
called Transposition. As in the first of the foregoing Examples, where it is
granted That ^ And by transposing -8 on the other side of the Equation, making
it there +8 it gives ^ And in the second Example where ^ By transposing -b,
cancelling it on the first side of the equation, and making it +b on the other,
it is ^ And let it be granted that ^ Then by transposing of -bb and -d there
arises ^

Reduction by Subtraction.

III. If in any Equation there be any number or quantity signed with + (on
which side of the equation soever) if it be cancelled on that side, and placed
on the other side with the sign - prefixed to it, the work of Reduction is
truly performed, and this is also called Transposition, and is only the
converse of the foregoing Rule. Examples. Let it be granted that ^ Then if +8
be cancelled, and placed on the other part of the equation with the sign - it
will give ^ Which equation being contracted is ^ Again let be given ^ By the
Transposition of +b on the first side the Equation it is ^ And by Transposition
of aa on the second side of the equation it is ^ Also if ^ By Transposition of
b+c to the second side of the equation it is ^ And by the Transposition of ba
to the first side of the equation it is ^

Which method (in reducing of the premised Equation) is deduced from this
general Axiom, viz.

If from equal Numbers or Quantities, equal Numbers or Quantities are
subtracted, the remainder shall be equal.

So in the second Example there is given this equation, viz. ^ First by
subtracting b from each part of the Equation, there is ^ Then I subtract aa
from each part, and there remains ^

Reduction by Multiplication.

IV. When in an Equation one or both parts are Fractions, then let them be
reduced to a common denominator by the, 2d, 4th, and 5th Rules of the sixth
Chapter, and then casting away the Denominator, use only the Numerators, so
shall Equations expressed by Algebraical Fractions be reduced to other Equations,
consisting altogether of Integers. As in the following Examples. If ^ Then by
reducing 9 in the second part of the equation to a Fraction, having 8 for its
denominator, it is ^ And by casting away the denominator which is common to
both it is ^ Again if ^ Then by reducing a, on the first side of the equation
to to a Fraction having a+b for its denominator it is ^ And by casting away
the common denominator a+b the equation is ^ Likewise if ^ The quantities being
reduced to a common denominator are ^ And the common denominator cb being cast
away the equation is ^

V. When either part of an Equation is Composed of a mixed Quantity or
Quantities, let the Integral part, or parts be reduced to a Fraction or
Fractions, and then proceed as in the last Example. It is granted that ^ First
it is reduced to ^ Which Fractional equation being reduced according to the
foregoing Rule is ^

VI. When some power or degree of the number or quantity sought, is multiplied
into each part, and each member of an Equation, then let that degree or power
be cancelled in each part and member so will it quite vanish, and the Equation
will be reduced to more Simple Terms. As for Example. Let it be granted that ^
Forasmuch as a is a Factor in each part, and member of the equation, therefore
it being expunged in each, there arises this equation. ^

VII. When (according to the second, third, fourth, and fifth Rules,) an
Equation is reduced, and that some known Number or Quantity is multiplied into
the quantity sought; then divide each part of the Equation by that known
Quantity, to the end that the Quantity sought may have no quantity multiplied
into it but 1 (or unity.) As in Example. If it be granted that ^ Then because
the Quantity sought is (a) multiplied by b, I divide each part of the equation
by b, and there arises ^

VIII. When any one part of an Equation is composed of a surd Quantity, (viz.
such as has the radical sign prefixed to it,) and the other part is a rational
Quantity; then let that rational quantity be raised to the power signified by
the Radical sign, and then cast away the said Radical sign, so shall both parts
of the Equation be a rational quantity. As, If it be proposed that ^ Square 8,
and place its Square in the room of it self, casting away the radical sign from
the first part of the equation, and then it will be ^ Likewise if ^ Then by
raising the second part of the equation, to its Square, and casting away the
radical sign from the first part there arises this equation, viz. ^ Again, if
^ The second part of the equation being squared, and the radical sign cancelled
in the first, there arises ^

Reduction by Division.

IX. If equal Quantities be divided by equal Quantities, the Quotients thence
arising will be equal. For, If ^ Then by dividing each part of the equation by
a, there arises this equation. ^ And if ^ Then by dividing each part of the
equation by a there arises ^ And da in the second part of the equation being
transposed by the third Rule of this Chapter there ari seth this equation, viz.
^ And if ^ Then by dividing each part of the equation by b-c, it is ^

CHAP. XII. To Convert Analogies into Equations, and Equations into Analogies.
I. THis is deduced from this universal Theorem, viz. That if four quantities
are proportionals, the product of the two means is equal to the product of the
two Extremes, and if three numbers are proportionals, the product of the two
extremes is equal to the Square of the means. 1. Let there be proposed these
four proportionals. ^ Then by the said Theorem this equation will follow, viz.
^ 2 Let there be proposed these 3 continual proportionals, viz. ^ That is to
say ^ whence there follows this equation, viz. ^

II. From a due consideration of the premises it is evident that Equations may
oftentimes be resolved into proportionals, viz. when the Product of two
Quantities is found equal to the product of two other quantities: Then as any
one of the Factors in the first side of the equation is to any one of the
Factors in the second part of the Equation, so is the remaining Factor of the
second part, to the remaining Factor in the first part: And the Converse,
Suppose that ^ From thence may be drawn this Analogy. ^

The truth of which may be proved by the first Rule of this Chapter, for
thereby the said Analogy may be reduced to the given equation, viz. bc=ad.

Again if ^ Then from thence may be deduced this Analogy, viz. ^ or ^ or ^
Likewise if ^ Then may that equation be resolved into these proportionals. ^
And if ^ Then it will be found that ^

III. When it happens that there is an Equation between an Algebraical
Fraction, and an Integer, if the Numerator of the said Fraction can be resolved
into two such Quantities, as being multiplied the one by the other, will
produce the said Numerator, then will the said equation produce this
proportion, viz.

As the Denominator of the Fraction is to one of the Factors of which the
Numerator is produced, so is the other Factor to the Integer, unto which the
said Fraction is equal. Examples.

If it be granted that ^ Then may that equation be resolved into this Analogy.
^ For, ^ Again if ^ Then may that equation be resolved into this Analogy. ^ And
also if. ^ Then may the said equation be resolved into this Analogy, viz. ^

The Practice of the two last Rules will be plainly discovered in the next
Chapter (in the resolution of Questions producing simple equations) to be of
most excellent use in discovering or laying down of Theorems for the ready
solution of the Question proposed, or any other of the same nature, which
Theorems are to be reserved in store for the finding out of new, and the
confirmation of old Truths.

CHAP. XIII. The Resolution of Arithmetical Questions (Algebraically) which
produce Simple Equations
I. AN Equation is twofold, viz. First, Simple, and secondly, Adfected, or
Compounded.

II. A Simple Equation is when the Quantity sought (solely possessing one part
of the Equation) is either expressed by a Single or Simple Root, as a, or by a
Single or Simple Power as aa, or aaa, etc. as in these Equations, viz. a=32,
and aa=64, or 4aaa=256, and such like.

III. When a Question is propounded, and to be resolved Algebraically, Then for
the Answer put a, and for each of the given Numbers put Consonants, then
proceed according to the Tenure of the Question, by Addition, Subtraction,
Multiplication, or Division, until an Equation is Composed; and when the
Equation is composed, then proceed to reduce it, (according to the Rules
contained in the 11th Chapter) until the Quantity unknown (being a or some
power of a) do solely possess one part of the Equation, and the known or given
Quantities the other part, and then will the Quantity sought be also known.

IV. I shall in the Resolution of every Question proceed (gradatim) step by
step, according to the method used by Mr. Kersey, each step being numbered
orderly in the Margent, from the beginning to the end by 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. And I
shall only proceed in the operation literally, because otherwise this Treatise
would swell to a bigger Volume than is at present intended; but I shall give
the Learner a taste of Numeral Algebra, in the solution of two or three of the
first Questions thereby.

Quest. 1. There are two numbers whose sum is 48 (or b) and the excess of the
greater above the lesser is 14 (or c) I demand what are the Numbers.

The Solution literally.

1 For the greater number put ^ 2 From which if you subtract the difference (c)
you will have the lesser, which is ^ 3 The greater and lesser being added
together, will be equal to (b) the sum whence this equation ^ 4 And by the
Transposition of -c the equation is ^ 5 Then dividing each part of the equation
by 2, it is ^ And if from ^ you subtract (c) the excess of the greater above
the lesser, the lesser will be ^

So that the numbers sought are 31 and 17, for by the fifth step (a) the
greater is found to be=to ^ and b is given 48, and c is given 14, the sum of
which is 62, which divided by 2, gives 3^, for the greater, and by the sixth
step, if from the greater you subtract the difference (c) the remainder will
give the lesser, which is 17, for ^.

Now if the fifth and sixth steps are duly considered, they will present you
with this

Theorem.

The sum of the sum and difference of any two Numbers being divided by 2, will
give the greater Number, and the difference of any two Numbers being subtracted
from half the sum of the sum and difference, the remainder will give the lesser
number.

The Solution Numerally.

1 For the greater number put ^ 2 From which if you subtract the difference
(14) the lesser is ^ 3 Which added together, will be the sum, whence this
Equation. ^ 4 And by transposition of of 14 it will be ^ 5 And both parts of
the Equation being divided by 2, will give the value of (a) the greater. ^ 6
From which if you subtract (14) the Difference, the remainder will give the
lesser by the 2 step. ^

So that the Numbers sought are 31 and 17, which will satisfy the conditions
of the Question.

Quest. 2.

There are two Numbers whose Sum is 56 (or b) and the lesser has such
proportion to the greater, as 2 to 5, (or c to d) I demand what are the Numbers?

1 For the lesser number put ^ 2 Then by the Rule of Three find the greater,
viz. ^ ^ 3 Wherefore the sum of the 2 numbers sought is ^ 4 Which sum must be
equal to the given sum, whence this equation. ^ 5 Which equation being reduced
by the fourth and fifth Rules of the eleventh Chap. the value of a will be
found to be ^ 6 And by the first, second, and fifth steps the greater number
will be discovered to be ^

So that the numbers sought are 40 and 16 for (a) the lesser is found to be by
the fifth step ^ viz. the Product of (cb) 56 by 2 divided by (c+d) the sum of 2
and 5, viz. 7, which is 16, etc.

And if (according to the third Rule of the twelfth Chap.) the two last steps
be turned into proportionals, it will give this

Theorem.

As the sum of the Terms which represent the ratio of two Numbers, is to the
sum of the numbers themselves, so is the lesser term to the lesser number; and
so is the greater Term to the greater Number.

Therefore if the sum of two Numbers is given, and also their Ratio, the
Numbers themselves are also given by this Theorem.

The same Question solved Numerally.

1 For the lesser number put ^ 2 Then by the Rule of Three the greater number
is found ^ ^ 3 Then will their sum be ^ 4 And according to the tenure of the
Question, their sum must be equal to the given sum whence this Equation ^ 5 And
that Equation being reduced by the fifth and sixth Rules of the eleventh Chap.
the value of a will be found to be ^ 6 Which being subtracted from the given
sum, the greater number is ^

Quest. 3.

A Gentleman asked his Friend (that had 4 purses in his hand) what money he had
in each Purse? To whom he answered that he knew not but (quoth he) this I know,
that in the second purse there are 8 (or b) Crowns more than in the first or
least purse, and in the third 8 Crowns more than the second, and in the fourth
or biggest purse there are 8 Crowns more than in the third, and twice as many
as in the first or least, I demand what number of Crowns he had in each purse?

1 For the number of Crowns in the first purse put ^ 2 Then in the second there
is ^ 3 And in the third there is ^ 4 And in the fourth ^ 5 Which according to
the Tenure of the Question is double to that in the first, whence this Equation
^ 6 Then by the Transposition of a from the first side of the equation, it is ^
which discovers the value of a to be 3b, or 3 times 8, which is 24, etc.
which is the number of Crowns in the first purse, and consequently the number
of Crowns in each purse is 24, 32, 40, and 48, which will satisfy the
conditions of the Question.

The same Question solved Numerally.

1 For the Crowns in the first purse put ^ 2 Then in the second there is ^ 3
And in the third ^ 4 And in the fourth ^ 5 Which is double to the number of
Crowns in the first, whence this equation ^ 6 Which equation being reduced by
the transposition of a discovers the value of a, viz. ^

Quest. 4.

Three men build a Ship which cost them 2700l. (or b) Pounds, of which B must
pay double to what A must pay, and C must pay three times as much as B, I
demand the share that each must pay?

1 For the sum to be paid by A, put ^ 2 Then B must pay ^ 3 And C must pay ^ 4
The sum of these 3 quantities are equal to the total charge, whence this
Equation ^ 5 Which being reduced, discovers the value of a, viz. ^ which is the
sum that A must pay, viz. 300l. Therefore B must pay ^. which is twice as much
as A, and C must pay ^. which is three times as much as B.

Quest. 5.

There is a Fish whose head is supposed to be 9 (or b) Inches, and his Tail is
as long as his Head and half his Body, and his Body is as long as his Head and
his Tail, I demand the length of such a Fish?

1 For the length of the body put ^ 2 Then will the Tail be ^ 3 Then if to the
Tail you add the length of the head, viz. b, the sum is ^ 4 Which according to
the tenure of the Question is equal to the length of the body, whence this
equation ^ 5 And the second part of the equation being cleared of the unknown
quantity a by Reduction, gives the value of a the length of the body, viz. ^ 6
Then according to the Tenure of the question, if therefrom you subtract (b) the
length of the head, the remainder will be the length of the Tail, which is ^

By the fifth step the length of the Body is found to be 4b=36, And by the
sixth step the length of the Tail is discovered to be 3b=3x9 =27. So that the
length of the head is (given) 9 inches, the length of the Tail 27 Inches, and
the length of the Body 36 Inches, which numbers will satisfy the conditions of
the question, ^ So that the whole length of the Fish is 9+27+36=72 Inches.

Quest. 6.

A Father lying at the point of Death, left to his 3 Sons A, B, and C all his
Estate in Money, and divided it thus, viz. to A he gave, wanting 44 (or b)
pounds, and to B he gave 1/3 and 14, (or c) pounds over, and to C he gave the
rest, which was 82 (or d) pounds less than the share of B, Now I demand what
was the Fathers Estate?

1 For the Fathers Estate put ^ 2 Then will the share left to A be ^ 3 And the
share of B ^ 4 And by the third step the share of C is ^ 5 The Quantities in
the 3 last steps being added together, give ^ 6 Which must be equal to the
Fathers Estate, whence this Equation. ^ Which equation after due reduction and
Transposition of quantities the value of a is discovered to be ^ And
6b=6x44=264, and 6d=6x82=492, and 12c=12x14=168, now 264+492-168=588, so that
the Fathers estate was 588 pounds, of which A had 250 l. B 210 l, and C 128,
which Numbers do answer the conditions of the Question.

Quest. 7.

Two persons thus discoursed together concerning their Money, quoth A to B,
give me 3 (or b) of your Crowns, and I shall have as many as you; nay quoth B
to A, but if you will give me 3 of your Crowns, I shall have 5 times as many as
you. Now I demand how many Crowns had each person?

1 For the number of Crowns which A had put ^ 2 Then forasmuch as adding 3 (or
b) Crowns to A will be equal to the Crowns remaining to B after he had given 3
Crowns to A, therefore B will then have left ^ 3 And consequently if you add
thereto the 3 (or b) Crowns which he gave to A the sum will be the number of
Crowns which B had at first, which is ^ 4 Then if from the number of Crowns A
had at first (a) you subtract 3 (or b) crowns, there will remain to A a-b
crowns, and giving the same to B, he will then have ^ 5 Which according to the
tenure of the Question is five times as much as what A had left, whence there
arises this Equation. ^ 6 Which equation being reduced by the second and
seventh Rules of the eleventh Chapter, the value of a is discovered to be ^ 7
And by the sixth and third steps the number of Crowns which B had at first are
found to be ^

So that it is found that A had 6 Crowns, and B had 12 Crowns, which numbers
will satisfy the conditions of the Question. For,

^

Quest. 8.

A Labourer had 576 (or b) pence for threshing 60 (or c) Quarters of Corn, viz.
Wheat and Barley; for the wheat he had 12 (or d) pence per Quarter, and for the
Barley he had 6 (or f) pence per Quarter, I demand how many Quarters of each he
threshed?

1 For the quarters of wheat which he threshed put ^ 2 Then the quarters of
Barley will be ^ 3 The quantity of Wheat in the first step being multiplied by
its price produces ^ 4 The quantity of Barley in the second step being
multiplied by its price, produces ^ 5 The sum of the quantities in the two
last steps must be equal to the given price of the 60 quarters, whence this
equation ^ 6 Which being reduced by the second, third, and fifth Rules of the
eleventh Chap. the quantity of Wheat will be discovered to be ^ 7 And by the
second and fifth steps the quantity of Barley is discovered to be ^

So that the quarters of Wheat which he threshed were 36, and the quarter of
Barley 24.

The Proof.

^

Quest. 9.

A Gentleman bought a Cloak of a Sales-man, which cost him 3 l.-10 s. or 70 (or
b) shillings, and desiring the Sales-man to tell him what he gained thereby, he
said he gained (or c) of what it cost him, the question is what the Cloak cost
the first penny?

1 Suppose the Cloak cost ^ 2 Then he gained ^ 3 The first and Second steps
being added together, their sum will be equal to the sum which the Gentleman
gave for it, whence this equation ^ 4 Which Equation being reduced by the ninth
Rule of the eleventh Chap. the value of a will be discovered to be ^

So that it cost 56 shillings, of which is 14 shillings, and 56+14=70.

And if the quantity in the fourth step be duly considered, you will find that
if the gain had been any other part or parts of the first cost, if the price it
was sold for had been divided by the Fraction representing the part of gain,
increased by 1, the quote would have been the answer.

Quest. 10.

A Gentleman hired a Labourer to work for him for 40 (or b) days, and made this
agreement with him that for every day he wrought he should have 20 (or c)
pence, and for every day that he played he should forfeit 8 (or d) pence, and
at the end of the said 40 days he received 184 (or f) pence, which was his
full due. Now I demand how many days he wrought, and how many days he played?

1 For the number of days he wrought, put ^ 2 Then the number of days he played
will be ^ 3 And if the time he wrought (in the first step) be multiplied by 20
(c) it will produce the total he gained by work, viz. ^ 4 And if the time he
played (in the 2d step) be drawn into 8 (d) the product will be what he lost by
play ^ 5 And if the total loss (in the fourth step) be subtracted from the gain
(in the third step) the remainder will be what he received, whence this
Equation ^ 6 Which being reduced by the second and ninth Rules of the eleventh
Chapter, it will discover the value of a to be eighteen which is the days that
he wrought. ^ 7 And from the sixth and second steps the number of days he
played are discovered to be 22 days, viz. ^

So that by the sixth step it appears he wrought 18 days, and by the seventh
step it appears that he played 22 days.

The proof.

^

Quest. 11.

A person (in the Afternoon) being asked what a Clock it was, answered that 3/5
(or b) parts of the time from Noon was equal to 5/8 (or c) parts of the time
remaining to midnight, now, (supposing the time from Noon to Midnight to be
divided in 12 (or d) equal parts or hours) I demand what was the present hour
of the day?

1 For the hour sought put ^ 2 Then the time to midnight will be ^ 3 Then will
3/5 (or b) parts of the hour from Noon be ^ 4 And 5/8 (or c) parts of the time
remaining till midnight will be ^ 5 Therefore from the third and fourth steps
there arises this equation. ^ 6 Which equation being reduced according to the
second and ninth Rules of the eleventh Chap. gives the value of a (to be ^ the
hour sought) viz. ^

So that the hour sought was ^, and consequently the time remaining till
midnight was ^ hours, which two numbers will answer the conditions of the
question, for, 3/5 parts of ^, which is ^ is equal to 5/8 parts of ^, as you
may prove at your leisure.

Moreover, If the last step be converted into proportionals by the third Rule
of the twelfth Chap. it will give this

Theorem.

As the sum of the parts of any two Numbers (wherein there is an equality) is
to the sum of those Numbers, so is the given parts of any one of those Numbers,
to the other Number.

As suppose it were required to find out two Numbers, whose sum is 27, and
such, that of the one may be equal to 3/5 of the other, the same may be found
out by the said Theorem. For, ^ which number so found is the number sought,
whereof 3/5 is to be taken; and the other is 27-15=12, or it may be found by
the following proportion, viz.

^

Quest. 12.

One asked a Shepherd what was the price of his hundred Sheep, quoth he, I have
not an hundred, but if I had as many more, and half as many more, and 7 (or b)
sheep, then I should have just 100 (or c) I demand how many sheep he had?

1 For the number of sheep he had, put ^ 2 Which being doubled is ^ 3 And if to
the second step you add half the first, it is ^ 4 And if to the third step
there be added 7 (or b) the sum is ^ 5 Which quantity in the fourth step is
equal to 100 (or c) whence this equation ^ 6 Which equation being reduced by
the 5th and 7th Rules of the 11th. Chap. the value of a will be discovered to
be 37, viz. ^

So that the number of sheep he had were 37 for 37+37+37/2+7=100

CHAP. XIV. How to Extract the Root of a Square formed from a Binomial, and how
by having any two of the Members of such a Square given to find out the third.
I. A Binomial is a quantity consisting of two names or parts, as a+b, or a-b,
aa+ee, b+d, etc. And when a Square is formed from such a Root, it will consist
of three members or parts, viz. two Affirmative Squares of the parts of which
the Binomial is composed, and the double Rectangle of those parts, which double
Rectangle is sometimes affirmative, and sometimes negative, viz. Affirmative,
when the parts of the Binomial are both affirmative, or both negative, that is,
when they are both signed with +, or both with -; and negative, when one of the
parts of the Binomial Root is signed with +, and the other with -.

So if a+b were given for a Root, its Square would be aa+2ab+bb which is
composed of (aa and bb) the Squares of the parts of which the Root is composed,
and of ( 2ab) the double Product, or Rectangle made by the multiplication of
the said parts (a and b) one by the other. See the work.

^

So if it were required to find the Square of the Binomial a-b, or b-a it
(being multiplied by it self) would be aa-2ab+bb, which is composed of (aa and
bb) the sum of the Squares of the parts, and their double Rectangle, as before,
but ( 2ab) the Double Rectangle of the parts is signed with -, so that the
Squares of the difference of any two numbers or quantities is equal to the sum
of the Squares of the said quantities or numbers made less by their double
Rectangle. As by the work.

^

So if the Number 10 were divided into 8 and 2, viz. 8+2, its Square would be
64+32+4 = 10x10=100. And the Square of 8-2 is 64-32+4=6x6=36 for 8-2=6 and
6x6=36.

Note, That a Binomial Root having one of its parts signed with -, is by some
Authors called a Residual Root, as a-b, and c-d etc. are Residuals.

II. From what has been said concerning the Square of a Binomial, m^ be
inferred this

Theorem.

If a Compound quantity consisting of 3 members, whereof two are Squares of
different names, with the sign+prefixed to them, and the third is the double
Rectangle of the Roots of those Squares, having also the sign+prefixed to it,
then shall the Square Root of such a compound quantity be the sum of the Square
Roots of the said two simple Squares; but if the said double Rectangle has the
sign - prefixed to it, the Square Root of the said Compound quantity, shall be
the difference of the said Roots.

So the Square Root of aa+2ab+bb will be found to be a+b, for the Square Root
of aa is a, and the Square Root of bb is b, which two Roots added together,
give a+b.

Also the Square Root of aa+8a+16 will be found to be a+4, the 2 Squares in the
given quantity are aa and 16, and 8a is the double product of (a and 4) the
said Roots being multiplied the one by the other.

Likewise the Square Root of aa-2ab+bb is a-b, or b-a, not a+b, because the
double Rectangle ( 2ab) is signed with -.

Furthermore the Square Root of 9aa+12ba+4bb is 3a+2b: The two Square
quantities in the said Compound Square are 9aa, and 4bb, whose Roots are 3a and
2b, and 12bb is the double Product of 3a and 2b being multiplied together.

And the Square Root of aa-20a+100 is a-10, for the two Squares in this
Compound Square Quantity are aa and 100, whose Square Roots are a and 10, and
20a is the double rectangle of 10 and a they being multiplied together.

The foregoing Theorem being well understood will be of excellent use in the
Resolution of Questions, producing Quadratick Equations, as you will find by
the Questions contained in the next Chapter.

III. When it is required to extract the square Root of a quantity whose Root
cannot be exactly extracted, then prefix the radical sign to it, which shall
represent its Square Root. So the Square Root of bc is ^, or ^, and the Square
Root of ^ is thus represented, viz. ^, or ^, etc.

IV. From a due consideration of the foregoing Theorem, a way is discovered how
by having any two of the members of a Square formed from a binomial Root, the
third member may be found out. For,

When two Affirmative Square Quantities are given for two of the members of a
Square formed from a binomial Root, then take the Roots of those two Squares
and multiply them the one by the other, and double the Product, so shall that
Product doubled be the third member, which being annexed to the two given
Squares, either by +, or -, it will make an exact Compound Square, whose Root
shall be a Binomial.

So if aa+bb were given for two of the members of a Square, first, I find their
Roots to be a and b, which being multiplied the one by the other, produce ab,
and that Product being doubled gives 2ab, for the middle Term of the Compound
Square Quantity to make it a complete square, the Root whereof is a Binomial,
viz. aa+2ab+bb, if the said double product be joined to the said sum of the
Squares by the sign -, it will give the Compound Square Quantity aa-2ab+bb
whose Root is a-b.

Also if 25aa+16bb were given for two of the members of a Square, whose Root is
a Binomial. The said Square being completed, will be 25aa+40ab+16bb, or
25aa-40ab+16bb, whose Root is either 5a+4b, or 5a-4b.

V. When the two given members of a Compound Square Quantity, whose Root is a
Binomial, are the double product or rectangle, and one of the two affirmative
squares, divide half the said double product by the Root of the given square,
and square the Quotient, so shall that square be the third member sought, which
being joined to the two given Quantities with the sign +, it will give you a
complete square having for its root a Binomial.

As for Example. Let aa+2ba be proposed for 2 of the members of a square, whose
Root is a Binomial: First, I take half of ( 2ba) the said double product and it
is ba, which being divided by (a) the Root of (aa) the given Square, the
Quotient is b, whose square is bb for the third member sought.

Again, Let 25aa+40a be the two proposed terms of such a square, whose Root is
a Binomial, and let it be required to find the other square which shall make it
a complete square, raised from a Binomial Root; in order to which, first, I
take half ( 40a) the double Product, viz. 20a, and divide it by the Root of (
25aa) the given square, which is 5a, and the Quotient is 4, which being
squared, gives 16 for the third member required, which being joined to the
rest, gives 25aa+40a+16 for the square completed.

VI. When the two given members of a square raised from a Binomial Root, are
such that one of them is a square affirmative without any Number or Quantity
prefixed to it, and the other is the Root of the said square multiplied by some
other Quantity, then is that other Quantity by Artists called the Coefficient,
and if you square half the said coefficient, or, (which is all one) take of the
square of the coefficient, that shall be the third member required, which being
joined to the two given quantities by the sign +, it will give you a complete
square raised from a Binomial Root.

Example. Let the two given members of a square be aa+2ba, and let it be
required to find out the third member. Here the coefficient is 2b, half of
which is b, which being squared, gives bb for the third member which was
sought, so is the square completed aa+2ab+bb.

In like manner, if the two given members of a square were aa+ba, and it were
required to find out the third member.

Here the coefficient is b, half of which is b, or ^, whose square is bb, or ^
for the member sought. Also let the two given members of a square be aa+8a, and
let it be required to find out the third member. Here the coefficient is 8,
half of which is 4, whose square is 16, for the third member required, so is
aa+8a+16, a complete square, whose Root is a+4.

Again, if the two given members of a square be aa-ca, and the third is
required; First, I take half the coefficient c, viz. c, and then square it, and
it gives cc, or ^ for the member sought, and so is the square completed
aa-ca+cc, whose Root is a-c.

In like manner, if it were required to make aa+3ba a complete square, take
half the coefficient ( 3b) which is 3/2b, or ^, whose square is 9/4bb, or ^,
which being joined to the two given Terms with the sign +, it gives aa+3ba+
9/4bb, whose Root is a+3/2b.

The same Rule is to be observed for the squaring of half the coefficient when
it is a Fraction.

As for Example. Let the two members of a square raised from a Binomial given
be aa+ ^, and let. it be required to find the third member. Here half the
coefficient is ^ which being squared, gives ^ for the member sought, and so the
square being completed, is ^, whose Root is ^.

VII. When the Root of the given square has no coefficient then the number 1
is supposed to be the co-efficient, half whereof, (viz.) being squared, gives
() the third member sought to make it a complete square.

So aa+a being given for 2 of the members of a square raised from a Binomial,
its third member to make the square complete will be, for aa+a =aa+^a, where
the Coefficient is 1, whose half is, which being squared, gives for the third
member sought, so the Square being completed, is aa+a+, whose Root is a+.

This Chapter ought to be well understood before any further progress be made,
for the manner how to resolve Questions which produce Quadratick (or square)
Equations does principally depend thereupon.

CHAP. XV. Concerning the Resolution of Questions producing Quadratick
Equations.
1. QUadratick (or square) Equations, are such adfected or* Compounded
Equations as consist of three terms, the highest of which is a square, and is
called the highest term in the Equation, of which 3 Terms, 2 are always
unknown, and the third is always known; the first of the three is the square of
the Quantity, or Number sought, and the second Term is the Product of the
Quantity sought, being multiplied by some known Number or Quantity, and is
called the middle Term of an Equation, and the third Term is a Number, or
Quantity purely known.

So in this Equation, viz. aa+ba=d, the first and highest Term or member is aa,
which is the square of the Quantity or Number sought, and ba is the middle term
of the Equation which is the Product of the Quantity sought, it being drawn
into b (which is known,) and the third term or member of this Equation is b,
which is really known, and is usually called the Absolute Number or Quantity
given.

II. The Equations of this kind are of 3 Forms, which are laid down by Mr.
Kersey in the 15th Chapter of the first Book of his Elements of Algebra, as
follows, viz.

Equations of the first Form.

^

Equations of the second Form.

^

Equations of the third Form.

^

III. The Resolution of Equations which fall under the first Form.

When an Equation is composed after any of the three foregoing Forms, and any
known Quantities are mixed with unknown, let it be so reduced by transposition
(according to the Rules of the Eleventh Chapter) as that the known quantities
may possess one side, and the unknown Quantities the other side of the Equation.

Example. Let this Equation be given, viz. aa+b=-ba+bdc.

By the transposition of B on the first part of the Equation, and -ba on the
second part, it will be reduced to this Equation, viz. aa+ba= bdc-b, which is
an Equation of the first Form: And when your Equation is so reduced, add to
each part of the Equation the square of half the coefficient, and so will the
first part of the Equation be an Exact and complete square, then according to
the 2d and 3d Rule of the Fourteenth Chapter extract the square Root of both
parts of the Equation, and from the Square Roots of both parts of the Equation
subtract half the coefficient, and then you will discover the value of a. As in
the following Examples.

Quest. 1.

What number is that which being squared, and multiplied by 8 (or b) the sum of
the said Square and Product is equal to 384 (or c)?

Resolution.

1 For the number sought put ^ 2 Whose Square is ^ 3 Its Product by 8 (or b) is
^ 4 The sum of the second and third steps must be equal to 384 (or c) whence
this Equation. ^ 5 To each part of the equation add the square of (^ b) half
the coefficient, then will it be ^ 6 Then by extracting the square root of both
parts of the equation by the second and third Rules of the 14 Chap. it will be
reduced to ^ 7 By the transposition of b to the second part of the Equation the
value of a is discovered to be ^

Which Equation is thus expressed in words, viz. the number sought is equal to
the remainder, when ( b) 4 is subtracted from the square root of the sum of (c)
384 and of the Square of (b) 8 (added together) which is 16, so that the value
of a is 16. For c+bb=400 and ^. and 20-4=16.

Quest. 2.

What Number is that whose Square being multiplied by 4 (or b) and its
Biquadrate (or fourth Power) multiplied by 6 (or c) and the Products added
together, the sum is 3850, (or d)

Resolution.

1 For the number sought put ^ 2 Its Square multiplied by b is ^ 3 Its
Biquadrat multiplied by c is ^ 4 The sum of the second and third steps must be
equal to 3850 (or d) whence this Equation, viz. ^ 5 And because the highest
power of the equation is multiplied by c, therefore each part being divided by
c the equation is ^ 6 To each part of the equation add half the square of the
coefficient (^) and the equation will be ^ 7 Then the square Root of each part
of the equation in the sixth step, being extracted by the second and third
Rules of the 14 Chapter, the equation then will be ^ 8 And by the transposition
of ^ to the second part of the equation the value of aa is found to be ^ 9 And
because the equation in the 8 step is the value of aa, therefore if the square
Root of each part of that equation be extracted, the value of a it self will be
discovered to be ^ which in words is as much as to say the Number sought (or a)
is equal to the square Root of the remainder when (^) 1/3 is subtracted from
the square Root of the sum of 3850/6 (or ^) and 16/144 (or ^) being added
together, so that the value of a, (or the Number sought) is 5. For, ^ and
76/3-1/3 (^ and ^, which is the number sought.

The Proof.

^

You must remember always to reduce a Fraction to its lowest Terms before you
extract its Root.

III. The Resolution of Equations which fall under the second of the three
Forms before mentioned.

Quest. 1.

What number is that which having 8 (or b) times its self subtracted from its
square, the remainder* is 48 (or c)?

Resolution.

1 For the number sought put ^ 2 Then will its square be ^ 3 The first step
multiplied by b is ^ 4 If the third step be subtracted from the second, the
remainder will be 48 (or c) whence this equation ^ 5 To each part of that
equation add the square of ( b) half the coefficient, and then it will be ^ 6
Extract the square Root of each part of the last equation by the second and
third Rules of the 14th Chapter, and it is ^ 7 And by the transposition of b to
the second part of the equation, the value of a is discovered to be 12. ^ which
in words is as much as to say, the Number sought (or a) is equal to the sum of
the universal Square Root of the sum of 48 (or c) and a fourth part of the
square of b (or bb) being added to 4 (or) which is 12 for c=48 and bb=16, and
48+16=64 and ^, and 8+4 ( b)=12.

The Proof.

^

Quest. 2.

What number is that which having 12 (or b) times its square subtracted from
its Biquadrate, or fourth power, the remainder is 3328 (or c)?

Resolution.

1 For the number sought put ^ 2 Then its biquadrat is ^ 2 And its square
multiplied by 12 (or b) is ^ 4 The difference of the second and third steps
must be equal to 3328 (or c,) whence this equation, viz. ^ 5 Square half the
coefficient, and add it to each part of the equation, and then it will be ^ 6
Extract the square Root of both parts of the equation by the second and third
Rules of the 14 Chap. and then the equation will be ^ 7 By the transposition of
- b to the contrary Coast the value of (a) the number sought will be discovered
to be ^ 8 By extracting the square root of both parts of the equation in the
7th step the value of a is found to be 8. ^ which is as much as to say, that
the Number sought, (or a) is equal to the universal square root of the sum of 6
(or b) being added to the universal square Root of the sum of 3328, (or c) and
36 (or bb) which upon trial you will find to be 8.

For, c=3328, and b=12, and bb=36, wherefore 3328+36=3364, and ^, and 58+ ( b)
6=64, and ^, which is the Number sought.

IV. The manner of resolving Equations, which fall under the last of the three
forms beforementioned.

Let the equation proposed (if it falls under the third and last form) be
reduced to an equation of the second form, by the transposition of its terms,
as in the following questions, viz.

What Number is that whose square being subtracted from 12 (or b) times it self
the remainder is 32 (or c)?

Resolution.

1 For the number sought put ^ 2 Its product by 12 (or b) is ^ 3 If from the
second step you subtract (aa) the square of the first step, the remainder is ^
4 The remainder in the third step is equal to 32 (or c) whence this equation ^

Now by transposition I reduce to an equation of the second of the foresaid
forms. And First,

5 By transposition of aa to the contrary part, the equation is ^ 6 Then by
transposition of c in the fifth step, the equation is ^ 7 And by transposition
of ba in the sixth step, the equation will be ^

So that from a due consideration of the method used in reducing Equations of
the third form to Equations of the second form you may easily perceive that the
work of transposition in the fifth, sixth, and seventh steps is performed only
by changing the signs of all the Terms of the Equation in the fourth step, viz.
by changing + into -, and - into +.

So the Equation in the fourth step is ba-aa =c.

And by changing the signs of ba-aa on the first part of the Equation, and of c
in the second part into -ba+aa, and -c, the Equation will then be -ba+aa=-c, or
aa-ba=-c, which is the same with that in the seventh step, and it is now an
Equation of the second of the three foregoing forms, so that I now proceed to
the solution of the Equation

8 The square of half the coefficient (^ b) in the seventh step to each part of
the equation, it will then be ^ 9 The square root of each part of the last
equation being extracted by the second and third Rules of the 14 Chapter the
equation will then be ^ 10 And by the transposition of ^ b in the ninth step to
the contrary part, the value of a will then be found to be (8) ^ which is as
much as to say that the number sought (or a) is equal to the sum of 6 (or ^ b)
being added to the Square Root of the remainder, when 32 (or c) is subtracted
from 36 (or bb) which is 8: For, bb-c=4 whose square Root is 2, and 2+6 (or ^
b)=8 which is the number sought.

The proof.

^

And 96-64 (aa)=32 (or c) which was propounded.

V. The Resolution of various Questions producing Quadratick Equations.

Quest. 1.

There are two Numbers whose sum is 12 (or b) and the sum of their squares is
80 (or c) I demand what are those numbers?

Resolution.

1 For one of the numbers sought put ^ 2 Then the other will be ^ 3 Then the
sum of their Squares will be ^ 4 Which quantity in the third step is equal to
80 (or c) whence this equation. ^ 5 Which equation being duly reduced by the
Rules of the eleventh Chap. gives this equation. ^ 6 Which equation being
solved according to the third Rule of this Chapter, the value of a is
discovered to be ^

7 Wherefore I conclude the numbers sought are 8 and 4, for their sum is 12,
and the sum of their squares is 80.

8 Moreover the Equation in the sixth step will give this

Canon,

If from half the given sum of the squares you subtract half the square of the
given sum, and to the remainder you add half the given sum, the square root
thereof being added to the said half sum of the numbers, the sum of this
addition will give you the greater number sought, and the greater number being
subtracted from the given sum of the numbers, will give the lesser number
sought.

Quest. 2.

There are two numbers, the product of whose multiplication is 96 (or b) and
the sum of their squares is 208 (or c) I demand what are those numbers?

Resolution.

1 For one of the numbers sought put ^ 2 Then by dividing 96 (or b) by a, the
Quotient will give the other which is ^ 3 The square of the number in the first
step is ^ 4 The square of the other number in the second step is ^ 5 And the
sum of their squares in the third and fourth steps is ^ 6 Which sum in the
fifth step must be equal to the given sum of the Squares 208 (or c) whence
follows this equation, viz. ^

7 Which Equation in the last step beingduly reduced by the Rules of
theeleventh Chapter the value of a will be discovered to be ^

8 So that I conclude the numbers sought to be 12 and 8, for their product is
96, and the sum of their squares is 208.

9 Moreover the Equation in the seventh step gives this

CANON,

From of the Square of the given sum of the Squares subtract the Square of the
given Product of the Multiplication of the numbers sought, and extract the
square Root of the remainder, and to the said Square Root add half the given
sum of the said squares, and then extract the square Root of the sum of that
Addition, so shall that square Root be one of the Numbers sought, by which if
you divide the given Product, the Quotient will be the other Number sought.

QUEST. 3.

There are two Numbers whose sum is 12 (or b) and the Product of their
Multiplication is 20 (or c) what are the Numbers?

RESOLUTION.

1 For one of the Numbers sought put ^ 2 Which if you subtract from (12) b the
given sum, the remainder will be the other number, viz. ^ 3 And if the first
and second steps be multiplied the one by the other, the Product will be ^ 4
Which Product the Question requires to be equal to 20 (or c) from whence this
equation ^

5 Which equation is of the third and last form, mentioned in the beginning of
this Chapter, which being duly reduced by the Rules of the eleventh Chapter, it
will be ^

6 Which Equation being solved according to the method used in the fourth Rule
of this Chapter, the value of a will be discovered to be ^

7 So that I conclude the Numbers sought to be 10 and 2, whose sum is 12, and
their product 20, according to the conditions of the Question, moreover the
Equation in the sixth step, will present you with this

CANON,

From the Square of half the given sum of the Numbers sought, subtract their
given product, and extract the square Root of the remainder, and to its square
Root add half the given sum of the numbers sought, so shall the sum of that
Addition be the greater Number sought, which being subtracted from the said
given sum will leave the lesser.

QUEST. 4.

There are three Numbers which are Geometrical proportionals continued, the
mean whereof is 12 (or b) and the two extremes are such, that their difference
is 18 (or c) I demand what are those three Numbers?

RESOLUTION.

1 For the lesser extreme put ^ 2 Then the greater will be ^ 3 Then will the
product made by the multiplication of the extremes in the first and second
steps be ^ 4 Which Product (or Rectangle) in the third step must be equal to
the square (of (12 or b) the mean whence this Equation. ^ 5 Which Equation
being solved by the second Rule of this Chapter, the value of a will be found
to be ^

6 I say the extreme proportionals sought are 6 and 24, whose difference is 18:
For, ^

7 The Equation in the fifth step being well considered, will present you with
this

CANON,

If to the Square of the given mean you add the square of half the difference
of the extremes, or (which is all one) part of the square of the given
difference of the extremes, and extract the square root of the sum of that
Addition, and then from that square root subtract half the said difference, the
remainder will be the lesser extreme, and if thereto you add the given
difference, that sum will be the greater extreme.

QUEST. 5.

A Draper sold a piece of Cloth for 24 l. (or b) and gained as much per Cent.
(or c) as the cloth cost him, I demand how much it cost him?

RESOLUTION.

1 For the price which the cloth cost put ^ 2 Then will the gain by its sale be
^ 3 Then by the Rule of three find how much is gained per Cent. saying, ^, so
that his gain per cent. was ^ 4 Which quantity in the 3d step according to the
tenure of the Question must be equal to what the cloth cost in the first step
whence this Equation, viz. ^ 5 Which being reduced by the Rules of the eleventh
Chapter, it will be ^ 6 Which (being an Equation of the first of the 3 forms
delivered in the beginning in the fifteenth Chap.) being solved by the 2d and
3d rule the 14 Chapter, the value of a is discovered to be ^

I say the cloth cost 20 l. which is the value of a, for ^ and ^, so that he
gained 4 l. in laying out 20: For, ^ and so the conditions of the Question are
satisfied.

QUEST. 7.

A Merchant bought a certain number of pieces of cloth, and paid 30 pounds (or
b) per Cloth, and sold them again at such a rate per Cloth, that if the pounds
he sold a Cloth for be multiplied by the pounds he gained per Cloth, the
product will be equal to the Cube of the number of pounds gained per Cloth, I
demand what he gained per Cloth, and what he sold each Cloth for?

RESOLUTION.

1 For the number of pounds gained per piece, put ^ 2 To which if you add 30
(or b) the sum will be the number of pounds it was sold for per piece, viz. ^ 3
And if (according to the tenure of the Question) the second step be multiplied
by the first, the product will be ^ 4 Which Product in the third step, must
(according to the nature of the Question) be equal to the Cube of the pounds
gained per Cloth in the first step whence this equation, viz. ^ 5 Which
equation being reduced by the third and sixth Rules of the eleventh Chap. it
will then be ^ 6 Which equation in the 5th step being solved by the 7th Rule of
the 14th Chap. and the sixth Rule of this Chap. the value of a will be
discovered to be ^ which is as much as to say in words, a (or the gain per
Cloth) is equal to the sum when is added the Square Root of the sum of 30, and
added together, (viz. the Square Root of 30) which is ^.

I say he gained 6 pounds per Cloth, and he sold it for 36 pounds per Cloth,
which two numbers will satisfy the conditions of the Question.

The proof.

^

QUEST. 8.

A Brick-layer, and a Labourer wrought together at the building of a certain
house 42 days, (or b) and the labourer he wrought 4 (or c) days more than the
Brick-layer did to gain one pound, and at the end of the 42 days the
Brick-layer received for his work 1 pounds (or d) more than the Labourer, I
demand how many days each of them wrought for 1l.

RESOLUTION.

1 For the number of days which the Bricklayer wrought for 1l. put ^ 2 Then
according to the conditions of the question, the number of days that the
labourer wrought for 1l. will be ^ 3 By the Rule of proportion find how many
pounds the Brick layer received for the work of 42 days, as follows, ^ which
is ^ 4 Then find out by the Rule of 3 howmany pounds the Labourer received for
his work in 42 days thus ^ which is ^ 5 But the Brick-layer received 11/3 (or
b) pounds more than the Labourer for 42 days work, wherefore if to the 4th step
you add d (or 11/3) it will be equal to what the Brick-layer received in the
third step, whence this equation, viz. ^ 6 Which Equation being reduced by the
fourth, second, and seventh Rules of the eleventh Chapter, it will then be ^ 7
The Equation in the fifth step being solved by the Rule of this Chapter, the
value of a will be discovered, viz. ^ which is as much as to say a (or the
number of days which the Brick-layer wrought) is equal to the difference when
((...)) 2 is subtracted from the square root of the sum of ^ or 96 and ^ which
is 100=10-2=8.

I say the Brick-layer wrought 8 days for twenty shillings, and the Labourer
wrought 8+4=12 days, which two numbers will satisfy the conditions of the
Question as will appear by the

Proof.

First by the Rule of Three find what the Brick-layer received for the 42
days, saying,

^

Then find how much the Labourer received for his 42 days work by the Rule of
Three, saying,

^

So that I find the Brick-layer for his 42 days work received 5l.-5s. and the
Labourer 3l.-10s. which is 1l.-15, or 1 l. less than the Bricklayer received.

QUEST. 9.

A Gentleman bought a House, and sold it again for 280 pounds (or b) and by its
sale he gained so many pounds, that their Square being added to the square of
the number of pounds it cost him, the sum will amount to 52000 (or c) pounds,
now I demand how much the house cost him?

RESOLUTION.

1 For the number of pounds which the house cost, put ^ 2 Then will the gain by
its sale be ^ 3 The Square of (a) its first cost is ^ 4 The Square of the gain
by Sale is ^ 5 The sum of the two quantities in the third and fourth steps is ^
6 Which quantity in the fifth step is equal to 52000 (or c) whence this
Equation ^ 7 Which equation being reduced by the third and seventh Rules of the
eleventh Chapter it will be ^ 8 Which Equation being solved by the third Rule
of this Chapter, the value of a will be discovered, viz. ^ which is as much as
to say in words, (a) the price which the house cost is equal to the sum when
half what he sold it for is added to the Square Root of the sum of half the
given sum of the Squares added to a fourth part of the Square of what it was
sold for, that sum being made less by half the Square of what it was sold for;
which was 220 l. and he gained by the sale 60 l. For,

^, and ^, and ^, now 26000+19600=45600, and 45600-39200 =6400, and ^, and
80+(^ b) 140 =220, which is the number of pounds the house cost, and
280-220=60, which is the number of pounds he gained by the Sale of the house,
as you will find by

The proof.

^ whereby the conditions of the Question are answered.

QUEST. 10.

A Draper sold 2 pieces of Cloth (whereof one contains 6 (or b) yards more
than the other) for two equal numbers of shillings, the lesser piece he sells
for 2 (or c) shillings per yard more than the other, and the number of
shillings which one piece was sold for, did exceed the number of yards in both
pieces by 186 (or d) the Question is what was the Number of yards in each
piece, and what each piece was sold for per yard?

RESOLUTION.

1 For the number of yards in the least piece put ^ 2 Then will the yards in
the greater piece be ^ 3 Then will the sum of the yards in both pieces be ^ 4
Then if (according to the nature of the Question) to the sum of the yards in
the third step, you add 186 (or d) the sum will be the number of shillings
which each piece was sold for, viz. ^ 5 And if the quantity in the fourth step
be divided by (a) the quantity in the first step, the Quotient will give the
number of shillings that 1 yard of the least piece was sold for ^ 6 And if the
said Quantity in in the fourth step be divided by the number of yards in the
biggest piece, (which is the Quantity in the second step) the Quotient will
give the number of shillings that a yard of the biggest piece was sold for,
which is ^ 7 If to the Quantity in the sixth step you add 2 (or c) shillings,
it will then be ^

8 Which Quantity in the seventh step (as the Question requires) is equal to
the Quantity in the fifth step, whence this Equation, viz. ^

9. Which equation in the eighth step being reduced by the Rules of the
Eleventh Chapter, it will then be ^

10 The Equation in the last step being solved by the third Rule of this
Chapter, the value of a will be discovered to be ^

11 But if you consider well the Equation in the ninth step, you will find the
coefficient to be 0, for ^, and therefore ^, whence the middle term in that
Equation is 0, and therefore the middle term being removed, the Equation will
be ^ which is a simple Equation, and if the Square root of both parts of that
equation be extracted, the value of a will be discovered to be ^, which is the
same with the value of a in the tenth step, as you may easily find upon Trial,
wherefore I say,

The number of yards in the least piece is 24.

And the number of yards in the biggest piece is 24+6=30, which two numbers
will satisfy the conditions of the Questions as will appear by

The Proof.

The number of yards in both pieces is 24+30 =54, which if added to 186 (as the
Question requires) will give the number of shillings which one piece was sold
for, which is 54+186=240, and the least piece was sold at 10 shillings per yard.

^ And the price of a yard of the biggest piece was 8 s. For, ^ which is two
shillings per yard less than the lesser piece was sold for per yard, and
therefore the answer is true, and the conditions of the Question are satisfied.

CHAP. XVI. The Doctrine of Surd Quantities.
I. ALL Quantities or Numbers whatsoever, whether Integral, or Fractional, are
called Rational, but when the Root of any power cannot be exactly extracted,
such Root is called Irrati)nal or Surd, and is expressed by putting the Radical
sign before the number out of which the Root proposed ought to be extracted; as
or ^ placed before any Number or Quantity signifies the Square Root of the
Quantity or Number, and ^ the Cube Root, and ^ the Biquadrate Root, etc, So ^,
or or ^ signifies the Square Root of 12, and ^ its Cube Root, etc.

II. Surd Numbers are twofold, viz. Simple, and Compound; A Simple Surd
Quantity is when the Radical sign is prefixed to a Simple Quantity, as ^ or ^.

A Compound Surd Quantity consists of several Simple Surds, which are
connected together by + or -, as ^, and ^, and ^ which last Compound Surd is
usually called an universal Root.

III. To Reduce Simple Surd Quantities that have different radical signs to a
common radical sign.

Let the Indices of the given Powers be reduced to their lowest Terms by their
common measurer, and set the Quotients under their respective Dividends, and
multiply cross-wise, so shall the product be the Index required, before which
placing, it shall then be the common radical sign required; Then raise the
Powers of the given Roots to the powers signified by the said altern Quotients,
before which said Powers place the common radical sign found as before, so will
you have new surd Quantities equal to the given Quantities, and having equal
Radical signs.

Example. Let it be required to reduce ^, and ^ to two other Roots equivalent
to the former, having a common radical sign.

^

First, the exponents 6 and 8 are reduced to 3 and 4, which being placed under
the given exponents 6 and 8 as you see, and having multiplied Cross-wise. viz.
3x8, or 4x6, you have 24 for a new index, to which prefix, and it is ^ for the
common radical sign, and then raising 12 to the third power thereof, and 8 to
the fourth, you have ^ and ^ equal to ^, and ^.

So if it were required to reduce ^, and ^ to Surd Roots equivalent thereto,
having a common Radical sign, it will be as follows.

^

IV. Multiplication in Simple Surd Quantities.

1. If the Quantities given to be multiplied have a common radical sign, then
multiply them together without any regard to the sign, and to the product
prefix the given Radical sign, which new quantity shall be the Product sought.

So if ^ be to be multiplied by ^, the Product will be ^, and ^ by ^ produces
^. and ^ by ^, produces ^ and ^ by ^ produces ^. etc.

2. But if the Quantities given to be multiplied have not a common Radical
sign, let them be reduced to such by the third Rule foregoing, and then proceed
as before.

Example. What is the Product of ^ by ^? The said Quantities being reduced to a
common radical sign, will be ^ and ^ which being multiplied together, produce ^
which is the product sought.

So the ^ being multiplied by ^ they being Reduced to a common radical sign,
are ^, and ^ which being multiplied produce ^.

3. When a surd Quantity is to be multiplied by a rational quantity, then first
raise the given rational quantity to the power of the given quantity, whose
Roo^ is irrational or surd; and then proceed as before.

So if it were required to multiply ^ by 5, the rational number 5 being raised
to the second power is 25, and then you will have to multiply ^ by ^, whose
Product is ^.

Likewise ^ being to be multiplied by a, the Product will be ^, for a being
raised to the third power is aaa, and ^ by ^ produces ^ as before.

V. Division in Simple Surd Quantities.

1. Reduce the Surd Quantities given to be divided to a common Radical sign by
the third Rule of this Chapter, and then divide the Quantity following the
Radical sign of the Dividend by the quantity sollowing the radical sign of the
Divisor, and to the Quotient prefix the said common Radical sign, so shall that
Surd Quantity be the Quo-tient sought.

Example. There being given ^ to be divided by ^, the quotient will be ^. And ^
being to be divided by ^, the quotient will be ^ and ^ being given to be
divided by ^, the Quotient will be ^, for the given quantities being reduced to
a common radical sign, are ^ and ^.

VI. Addition and Subtraction of simple Surd quantities.

1. When the Surd Roots to be added together, are equal, multiply any one of
them by the given number of Surd quantities, so shall that product be the sum
required, before which prefix the radical sign given, so the sum of ^ and ^ is
^, for the given number of roots is 2, whose square is 4, and ^, so ^ being to
be added to ^, their sum is ^ and ^ being to be added to ^, and ^ their sum
will be ^ for the given Number of Surds is 3, and ^ being multiplied by 3, viz.
^ (by the third part of the fourth Rule) the Product is ^ which is the sum of
^, ^, and ^, which was required.

2. When two unequal Surd Roots which have the same Radical sign prefixed to
each of them, be to be added together, or when the lesser of them is to be
subtracted from the greater, Then you must first try whether they be
commensurable, or not; that is, if after they have been divided by their
greatest common measurer, the Quotients be rational Quantities, then multiply
the sum of those rational quantities by the said common Divisor, and the
Product shall be the sum of the Surd Quantities propounded; and i^ the
difference of those Rational Quotients be multiplied by the said common
measurer, then will the Product be the difference of the Surd Quantities
propounded.

Example. Let it be required to find the sum and difference of ^, and ^, their
greatest common measurer is ^, by which they being divided, the Quotients are
^5 and ^, viz. 5 and 1, whose sum is 7, which being multiplied by ^, the
Product is 7^ or ^, which is the desired sum of the Surd Quantities propounded.
And if the difference of the said Rational Quotients, viz. 5-2 (or 3) be
multiplied by the said common Divisor (^) the Product will be ^, which is the
difference of the Surd Quantities given, the lesser being subtracted from the
greater.

But if the simple Surd quantities given to be added, or subtracted, be
incommensurable, neither their sum nor difference can be expressed by any simple
Term, or Root, but their sum and difference must be expressed by + and -; as
suppose you were to add ^ and ^ together, their sum would be ^, and their
difference ^. The like of other quantities expressed by letters.

CHAP. XVII. The Parts of Numeration in Compound Surd Quantities.
I. Addition and Subtraction in Compound Surd Quantities.

THE Addition and Subtraction of Compound Surd quantities is the same with the
simple Surds, having respect to the signs of Affirmation and Negation, viz. +
and -.

So if to ^ you add ^ the sum will be ^ and if from ^ you subtract ^ the
difference will be ^.

Likewise if to ^ you are to add ^ the sum is ^ and if you subtract the latter
from the former, the remainder will be ^

These two examples are of Compound Surd quantities which are commensurable,
and the next is of Compound Surd quantities, partly commensurable, and partly
incommensurable. As

Let it be required to add ^, to ^ the sum will be ^, and if the former be
subtracted from the latter, the remainder will be ^.

The same is to be observed in Addition and Subtraction of Compound Surd
quantities altogether incommensurable. As in the following Examples.

^

II. Multiplication in Compound Surd Quantities.

^

III. Division in Compound Surd Quantities.

^

These Examples will not seem difficult to the ingenious, if what is before
delivered concerning Surd quantities be duly considered.

CHAP. XVII. The parts of Numeration in Universal Surd Roots.
WHen it is required to extract the Root of any Compound quantity, whether
Square, Cube, Biquadrat, etc. if they cannot be exactly extracted without any
remainder; then if to such given compound quantity you prefix the Radical sign,
such Roots are called Universal Surd Roots, and first, concerning

I. Multiplication in Universal Surds.

1. When any Universal Root is to be multiplied by a Rational quantity, or by
any Surd, multiply the Square of the Multiplicand by the Square of the
Multiplyar, when the Universal Radical sign is quadratick, or the Cube of the
Multiplicand by the Cube of the Multiplyar, when the Universal Radical sign is
Cubical, and before that Product prefix the given universal Radical sign, so
shall that new universal Root be the Product sought.

Example. Let it be required to multiply by 2 this universal Square Root, viz.
^ I take the square of 2, which is 4, and the square of ^, which is ^, and
multiply it by 4, and the Product is ^, whose universal square Root is the
Product sought, viz. ^

Also if ^ were to be multiplied by 2, or doubled, take the Cube of the
universal Root given, which is ^, and multiply the same by the Cube of 2, which
is 8, and the Product is ^, the Cube Root of which is the Product sought, viz.
^, and it is double to ^ the Surd Root given.

In like manner, if it were required to multiply ^ into its self, or to find.
its square; the squares of the parts are ^ and ^ the sum of which is 24, and
the Product made by the Multiplication of the parts one into the other, viz. ^
into ^ is ^, (for the difference of the Squares of 12 and ^ is 138 whose square
Root is ^, and the double of the said product is ^, which added to 24 (the sum
of the squares of the parts) makes ^, which is the square of ^.

Likewise if ^ is to be multiplied by ^, the Product will be found to be 20,
for if ^ (which is the square of ^) be subtracted from 36 (the square of 6)
there will remain ^ which is 20, the Product sought. Also ^, and ^ and 2x10=20
as before.

Again, if it be required to multiply ^ by a, the squares of the given
quantities are aa+bb and aa, which being multiplied the one into the other, the
Product will be aaaa+bbaa, the universal Square Root of which is the Product
ought, viz. ^ which may be more sompendiously expressed thus, ^.

II. Division in Universal Surds.

As in Multiplication you multiplied the Square of the Multiplicand by the
square of the Multiplyar, the given Radical sign being Quadratick, etc. So in
Division of Universal Surd Roots you are to divide the square of the Dividend
by the square of the Divisor, when the universal Radical sign is Quadratick,
and Divide the Cube of the Dividend by the Cube of the Divisor, when the
universal Radical sign is Cubical, etc. so shall the Quotient, when the
universal radical sign given is prefixed thereto, be the Quotient required.

Example. What is the Quotient when ^ is divided by 2? Here I divide ^ (which
is the square of ^ the dividend) by 4 (the square of the given Divisor) and
there arises ^ the universal square Root of which, viz. ^ is the Quotient
required.

Also if it were required to divide ^ by 2, the Quotient would be found to be ^
here the Cube of the given Dividend is ^ which being divided by 8 (the Cube of
2) there will arise ^, to which if you prefix the universal radical sign of its
Cube Root, it will be ^ which is the Quotient sought.

Likewise ifit be required to divide ^ by a, the Quotient will be found to be ^
for, the square of the Dividend is aaaa+bbaa, and the square of the Divisor is
aa, and when Division is ended, there will arise aa+bb the universal square
Root of which is ^ which is the quotient sought.

But when the work of Division in universal Surd Quantities happens to be
intricate, and its operation canno be finished without a remainder, you may set
the power of the Dividend for a Numerator, and the power of the Divisor for a
Denominator, and against the line of Separation, place, or prefix the universal
radical sign, which universal Root so signified shall be the Quotient sought.

As if it were required to divide ^ by ^ the quotient will be ^.

III. Addition and Subtraction in Universal Surd Quantities.

1. If two Universal Surd quantities that are commensurable are proposed to be
added together, or subtracted, the operation may be performed like simple
Surds. As for Example. If the sum and difference of ^ and ^ were required.

Here each of the said quantities being divided by their greatest common
measurer, ^ the Quotients are ^ and ^, viz. 2 and 1, which are rational Numbers
expressing the proportion of the Surds propounded, therefore if their common
Divisor be multiplied 2+1 (viz. 3) it gives ^ for the sum required, and the
said common Divisor being multiplied by (2-1) the difference of the said 2 and
1, it will produce ^ for the difference of the Roots proposed.

Likewise if it were required to find the sum and difference of ^ and ^.

The said Quantities being reduced, are ^ and ^

Therefore is their sum ^ and their difference is ^.

2. When the Root of a residual is to be added to, or subtracted, from the Root
of its correspondent Binomial, then may those Roots be connected together by
the signs + and -; and then the whole being multiplied by it self, the
universal Root of the Product shall be the sum or difference of the Roots
propounded.

As suppose ^ were propounded to be added to ^ the given Roots being connected
together by +, make ^ which composed Quantity being multiplied by it self,
produces ^, whose universal Square Root (^) shall be the sum of the Quantities
proposed to be added.

But if ^ be multiplied into it self, the product will be ^, whose universal
square Root is the difference of the two given Roots.

3. But if the universal roots to be added or subtracted are not commensurable,
etc, then they are to be added by +, and subtracted by -.

So if it were required to add ^ to ^ their sum would be ^

And the latter being subtracted from the former, the remainder would be ^

And the sum of ^ being added to ^ will be ^ and the latter being subtracted
from the former, the remainder will be ^

IV. The Extraction of the Square Root out of Binomials, and Reseduals.

Subtract the Square of the lesser part of the given Binomial, from the Square
of the greater part, and add the Square root of the remainder to the greater
part, and also subtract it therefrom, and then extract the square roots of the
Sum and remainder, and join them together by + if the quantity proposed be a
Binomial, but by - if it be a Residual, which roots so joined, are the square
root of the given Binomial, or Residual.

Example 1.

Extract the Square root of this Binomial, viz. ^ 1 From the square of the
greater, part 38, viz. from ^ 2 Subtract the square of the lesser part, viz. ^
which is ^ 3 The remainder is ^ 4 The square root of the remainder is ^ 5 To
which root if you add the greater part 38, the sum is ^ 6 The half of which sum
is ^ 7 The square root of the said half sum is the greater part of the root
sought, which is ^ 8 From the greater part of the given Binomial, viz. 38,
subtract the square root in the fourth step, viz. 12, the remainder is ^ 9 The
half of which is ^ 10 The square root of the said half remainder is the lesser
part of the root sought. ^ 11 To which if you add the quantity in the seventh
step, the sum will be the square root sought, viz. ^ which is the square root
of the given Binomial, but if the given surd quantity had been a Residual, viz.
if it had been required to extract the square root of ^, then the root would
have been ^.

Example 2.

Extract the square root of this Binomial, viz. ^ 1 The square of the greater
part 7, is ^ 2 From which subtract the square of the lesser part, (viz. ^0,)
which is ^ 3 The remainder is ^ 4 The square root of that remainder is ^ 5 To
which square root add the greater part of the given Binomial, viz. 7, and the
sum is ^ 6 The half of which sum is ^ 7 The square root of the said sum is the
greater part of the root sought, which is ^ 8 From the greater part of the
given Binomial, viz. from 7) subtract ^ in the fourth step, and the remainder
is ^ 9 The half of which remainder is ^ 10 The square root of the said half
remainder is the lesser part of the root sought, which is ^

11 Which being joined to the greater part of the root sought in the seventh
step by the sign +, the sum will be the square root sought, which is ^

But if the lesser part of the said root found in the tenth step be joined to
the greater part found in the seventh step by interposing the sign - instead of
+, it will then be the square root of the residual ^.

Example 3.

Let it be required to extract the square root of this Binomial, viz. aa+d
added to ^, supposing the greater part of the given Binomial, to be aa+d. Then,

1 The square of the greater part is ^ 2 From which subtract the square of the
lesser part (^) viz. 4daa, and the remainder is ^ 3 The square root of that
remainder is ^ 4 To which square root add the greater part of the given
Binomial, viz. aa+d, and the sum is ^ 5 The half of which sum is ^ 6 The square
root of which half sum is the greater part of the root sought, which is ^ 7
From (aa+d) the greater part of the given binomial subtract the square root
found in the third step (aa-d) and the remainder is ^ 8 The half of which
remainder is ^ 9 The square root of which half remainder, is the lesser part of
the root sought, viz. ^ 10 Which said root being joined to the greater part
found in the sixth step by the sign +, it will be the root sought, viz. ^ but
if the quantity in the ninth step be joined to the quantity in the sixth step,
by interposing the sign -, it will then be the square root of the residual,
aa+d less ^.

Example 4.

Let it be required to extract the square root of supposing the greater part to
be ^ ^ 1 The square of the greater part is ^ 2 From which subtract the square
of the lesser part, which is ^ 3 And the remainder is ^ 4 The square root of
that remainder is ^ 5 To which if you add the greater part of the given
binomial, the sum is ^ 6 The half of which sum is ^ 7 The square root of the
said half sum is the greater part of the root sought, which is ^ 8 From the
greater part of the given binomial subtract the square root found in the fourth
step, and the remainder is ^ 9 The half of which remainder is ^ 10 The square
root of the said half remainder is the lesser part of the root sought, which is
^

11 If to the greater part of the root sought in the seventh step, you join the
lesser part in the eleventh step, by interposing the sign +, it will then be
the root sought, which is ^

But if the two said quantities are joined together by the interposition of the
sign -, it will then be the square root of the residual ^ less 2ed.

V. Some Questions to exercise the Rules of this and the foregoing Chapters.

QUEST. 1.

Let it be required to divide 100 (or c) into two such unequal parts, that 100
multiplied by the lesser part may be equal to the square of the greater.

RESOLUTION.

1 For the greater number put ^ 2 Then will the lesser be ^ 3 By which if you
multiply 100 (or c) the product will be ^ 4 Which quantity in the 3d step must
be equal to the square of the Quantity in the first step, whence this equation.
^ 5 Which Equation being reduced by the rules of the 11 Chap. and solved the
value of a will be discovered to be ^ which Equation in the last step being
duly considered, will present you with this

Theorem.

To the Square of the given line or number add a fourth part of its Square, and
extract the Square root of that sum, then from the said square root subtract
half the given line, so shall the remainder be the greater segment, or number
sought.

QUEST. 2.

What Number is that whose square being made less by the Rectangle of it self
drawn into 12 (or b) the remainder is equal to f?

1 For the number sought put ^ 2 The square of which is ^ 3 The Rectangle of a
in b is ^ 4 If the quantity in the third step be subtracted from the quantity
in the second step, the remainder is equal to f, whence this Equation. ^ 5
Which Equation being solved by the rules of the 11th Chapter the value of a
will be found to be ^

The Proof.

6 If ^ 7 Then by subtracting b from each part of the equation there remains
^ 8 Then by squaring each part of the equation you have ^ 9 And by subtracting
bb from both sides of the equation there remains ^ which was to be proved

QUEST. 3.

1. Let c and d be put for two such known Quantities that d not ^, and let a be
put for a quantity unknown, and let it be granted that ca-aa=d what is the
value of a?

2 The given equation in the first step is one of the third form mentioned in
the beginning of the fifteenth Chapter, and it will be found that the 2 values
of a are ^ By either of which values of a the Equation propounded in the first
step may be expounded, as will appear by the

DEMONSTRATION,

1 If ^ 2 Then by the transposition of c to the contrary coast, it is ^ 3 And
by squaring each part of the last equation, it is ^ 4 And by subtracting cc
from each part of the equation, it is ^ 5 And by changing the signs on the
quantities on each side of the equation it is ^ which was to be demonstrated. 6
Again if ^ 7 Then by transposition of ^ to the other side it is ^ 8 And by
transposition of a it is ^ 9 And by squaring each part of the equation it will
then be ^ 10 And by subtracting cc from both parts of the equation, it is ^ 11
And the quantities on both sides of the equation being transposed to the
contrary coast, and the signs of each thereby changed, the equation will then
be ^ which was likewise to be proved.

QUEST. 4.

Let it be required to divide 100 into two such parts that if each part be
divided by the other, the sum of the Quotients may be 3. This is Quest. 1. of
the ninth Chapter of the second Book of Kersey's Elements of Algebra, and it is
thus wrought, viz.

1 For one of the parts sought put ^ 2 Then will the other be ^ 3 Each of which
quantities in the first and second steps being mutually divided by each other
(according to the import of the question) this equation arises ^ 4 Which
equation being duly reduced, gives ^ 5 Which is an equation of the third form
mentioned in Chap. 15. and being solved according to the method there given the
two values of a will be found to be ^ which you may easily prove at your
leisure.

CHAP. XVIII. Algebraical Questions Resolved by various Positions.
MR. Kersey in the Twelfth Chapter of the second Book of his Elements of
Algebra, has laid down Rules for the solution of Questions Algebraically by
various Positions; assuming a peculiar letter to represent every one of the
Quantities sought, viz. a for one unknown Quantity, e for another, and y for a
third, etc. and for the performance of the work he has laid down 3 Rules which
are as follows, viz.

RULE 1.

When many Quantities are sought in a Question, let them be represented by
various letters, and let the tenor of the Question be represented by Equations,
which done by Transposition find what any single letter in the first equation
is equal to; Then wheresoever that Letter is found in the other equations,
instead thereof, take what it is found equal to, so will that letter quite
vanish out of the following Equations; Then by Transposition set a second
letter alone in one of those equations out of which the first letter was
cancelled and poceed as before, so at length one of the letters will be made
known' by help of which the rest will be easily discovered.

RULE 2.

When the same Quantity, (suppose a) is found in two several Equations, and
equal numbers are prefixed to those Quantities, then if their signs be both +
or both -, subtract the lesser Equation from the greater, but if the signs be
one +, and the other -, then add those two Equations together, so will the said
Quantity a quite vanish.

RULE 3.

When the same Quantity, (suppose a) is found in two several Equations, but the
numbers prefixed to those equal Quantities are unequal, those two Equations may
be reduced to two others which shall have equal numbers prefixed to the said
Quantity a thus, viz. Multiply all the Quantities in the first Equation by the
number prefixed to a in the second equation; and also multiply all the
quantities in the second Equation by the number prefixed to the same quantity a
in the first Equation, so by such alternate multiplication two new equations
will be produced, wherein the numbers prefixed to the said quantity a will be
equal to one another, and then proceed according to the second Rule, and expel
the same quantity out of the Rest of the Equations; proceed in like manner with
a second Quantity, until at length some one Quantity, be made known; by which
all the rest may be found out. The three foregoing Rules will be exercised in
the Resolution of the following Questions.

QUEST. 1.

Divide 100 (or c) into two such numbers, (viz. a and e) that ^ may be equal to
30 (or d) I demand the numbers a and e?

RESOLUTION.

1 If ^ 2 And ^ 3 Then by transposition of e in the first step, you will have ^
4 By reducing the Equation in the second step, so as a may solely possess one
side thereof, you will have ^ 5 If instead of a in the 4th step you take what a
is equal to in the third step, you will have this Equation, viz. ^ 6 The first
part of the Equation in the fifth step being multiplied by 5, will give ^ 7 By
the transposition of -5e it is ^ 8 And by the transposition of 15d in the last
step, you have ^ 9 Each part of the Equation in the last step being divided by
2, will give the value of e, viz. ^

I say the value of e is 25, and the value of a is 100-25=75 which will answer
the conditions of the Question. As appears by

The Proof.

^

QUEST. 2.

There are two Numbers (a the greater, and e the lesser) whose difference is 4
(or b) and the difference of their Squares is 64 (or c) what are the Numbers?

RESOLUTION.

1 If ^ 2 Then by the transposition of e you have ^ 3 And if ^ 4 Then by
transposition of ee it is ^ 5 If both parts of the equation in the second step
be squared, it will be ^ 6 And if instead of aa in the fifth Equation, you
place what it is equal to in the fourth step, the equation will then be ^ 7 By
subtracting ee from both parts of the last equation you will have ^ 8 By
dividing both parts of the last equation by b, you will then have ^ 9 By
transposition of b in the last step, the Equation will then be ^ 10 And if both
parts of the equation in the last step be divided by 2, the value of e will
then be discovered to be ^

I say the value of e (the lesser number) is 6, and by the second step (a) the
greater number is e+b=6+4=10, which two numbers, (viz. 10 and 6) will satisfy
the Conditions of the Question, as will appear by

The Proof.

^

QUEST. 3.

A Maid being at Market sold 10 dozen of eggs, and twelve Pounds of Butter for
thirteen shilling, and at another time, and at the same rate, she sells Eight
dozen of Eggs, and 18 pounds of Butter for 16 shillings, I demand how she sold
her Eggs per dozen, and her Butter per pound?

Let a represent the desired value of a dozen of Eggs, and for the price of a
pound of Butter put e, and then may the Question being abstracted from words be
stated thus, viz.

1 If ^ 2 And ^

What are the values of a and e?

RESOLUTION.

3 By transposition of 12e in the first step, that equation will be ^ 4 And
both parts of the last equation being divided by 10 it is ^ 5 By transposition
of ^8e in the second step that equation will be ^ 6 Each part of the last
equation being divided by 8 will give ^ 7 If instead of a in the sixth step,
you place what it is equal to in the fourth step the equation will then be ^ 8
Both parts of the last equation being reduced to integers will give ^ 9 By
transposition of 180e and 104 in the last equation each to the contrary coast
the equation will then be ^ 10 If each part of the last equation be divided by
84 the value of e will be discovered to be ^ which is 8d for the price of 1
pound of butter. 11 By the 10th step the value of e is discovered to be 2/3s.
by which means the value of a (by the quantities in the fourth and sixth steps)
is found to be 6d. for the 4th step is ^

And it has been found before that ^ so that ^ and ^ so the maid sold her Eggs
at 6d. per dozen, and her Butter at 8d. per pound, which will answer the
conditions of the Question.

QUEST. 4.

Three Men, viz. A, B, and C discourse thus together concerning their Age,
quoth B to A, your age added to mine is 54, (or b years) quoth C to B, and my
age added to yours makes 78 (or c) years, and quoth A to C my age added to
yours is 72 (or d) years, I demand the age of each person?

Let the Age of each person be represented by the letters a e y, viz. for the
age of A put a, for the age of B put e, and for the age of C put y; and the
Question being abstracted from words, will be as follows, viz.

1 If ^ 2 And ^ 3 And ^

What are the values of a e and y?

RESOLUTION.

4 By transposition of e in the first step there will arise ^ 5 Ifinstead of a
in the third step you put what a is equal to in the fourth step, there will
arise ^ 6 By the transposition of d and e in the last step, there arises ^ 7
And if instead of e in the second step you take the latter part of the sixth
step, there will then arise ^ 8 In which last equation there is no unknown
quantity but y, and therefore the equation being duly reduced, will discover
the value of y to be ^ 9 If in the sixth step in stead of y you take the latter
part of the equation in the eighth step, the value of e will be found to be ^
10 And if instead of e in the fourth step, you take the latter part of the
Equation in the ninth step, the value of a will be discovered, viz. ^

And thus the work is finished, and the equations in the Eighth, ninth, and
tenth steps present you with this

CANON,

From the sum of every two of the three given Numbers subtract the third number
remaining, so shall the three remaining numbers being divided by 2 be the
numbers sought. So the numbers sought in the Question, viz. a, e, and y, are
found to be 24, 30, and 48, viz. the age of A is 24, the age of B is 30, and
the age of C is 48, which three numbers will satisfy the conditions of the
Question for 24+30=54, and 30+48=78, and 48+24=72:

QUEST. 5.

What two numbers are those whose sum is 20, (or b) and their difference 4 (or
c)?

Let a be put for the greater number sought, and e for the lesser, and then the
Question being extracted from words may be stated thus, viz.

1 If ^ 2 And ^

What are a and e?

RESOLUTION.

3 Forasmuch as+1^ is found in each of the equations in the first and second
steps, therefore (by the second Rule) they being subtracted, do give this
Equation, viz. ^ 4 And by dividing both parts of the equation in the third step
by 2, the value of e will (...) ^ 5 And if instead of (...) the second step you
put what* is equal to in the fourth step, you will have this equation, viz. ^ 6
By the transposition of -^b and+ c to the contrary coast, the value of a will
be discovered, viz. ^

From the fourth and sixth steps is raised this

CANON,

If from half the sum of two numbers you subtract half their difference, the
remainder will be the lesser number, and if to half their sum you add half
their Difference that sum will be the greater number, whereby the two numbers
sought in this Question are found to be 12 and 8; for, 12+8=20 and 12-8=4.

QUEST. 6.

What 3 Numbers are those that if to the first there be added 121 (or b) the
sum will be equal to the sum of the first and second, and if to the second
there be added 121, the sum will be equal to do ble the sum of the first and
third, and if to the third there be added 121, their sum will be triple the sum
of the first and second?

If for the number sought you put a, e, and y, viz. for the first number a, for
the second e, and for the third y, then the Question being abstracted from
words may be stated thus, viz.

1 If ^ 2 And ^ 3 And ^

What are the numbers a e y?

RESOLUTION.

4 By the transposition of y in the first equation, there arises ^ 5 And if
instead of e in the second equation you take what is equal thereto in the
fourth equation there arises. ^ 6 The last equation after due reduction will
be ^ 7 And if instead of 3e in the third equation you take the triple of what e
is found equal to, in the fourth step, you will find the following Equation to
arise, viz. ^ 8 Which equation after due reduction by transposition the
quantities will be found to be ^ 9 And both parts of the last equation being
divided by 4 there arises. ^ 10 Then if instead of 3y in the sixth equation
there be taken the triple of the latter part of the ninth equation there
arises ^ 11 After due Reduction of the equation in the tenth step, the value
of a will be discovered, viz. ^ 12 Again, if instead of a the sixth Equation
you put the latter part of the Eleventh Equation, there arises ^ 13 After due
reduction of the equation in the twelfth step, the value of y will be
discovered to be ^ 14 And if for a and y in the fourth step there be put their
equals in the 11th and 13th steps there will arise ^ 15 The Equation in the
last step being duly reduced, will discover the value of e, viz. ^

From the Eleventh, thirteenth, and fifteenth steps is gathered this

CANON.

If the number given to be added to the three numbers required be divided by
11, the Quotient will give the first number, and its Quintuple (or Product by
5) being divided by 11, will give the second number, and its septuple (or
product by 7) being divided by 11, will give the third number.

By which Canon the numbers required in the Question are 11, 55, and 77, (the
second being 5 times as much as the first, and the third is 7 times as much as
the first) which said numbers will satisfy the conditions of the Question, as
will appear by

The Proof.

^

which was to be done.

QUEST. 7.

What two numbers are those that if to 10 times the greater there be added six
times the lesser, the sum will be 228 (or b) and if from 4 times the greater
you subtract 2 times the lesser, the remainder will be 56 (or c)? for the two
numbers put a and e, and then the foregoing question being abstracted from
words, may be stated thus. viz.

1 If ^ 2 And ^

What are the numbers a and e?

RESOLUTION.

3 The first equation (accordding to the third Rule) being multiplied by 4,
which is prefixed to a in the second equation, produces ^ 4 And the second
Equation being multiplied by 10, which is prefixed to a in the first, it
produces ^ 5 And if from the equation in the third step you subtract the
equation in the fourth step, because 40a is found in both (according to the
second Rule) there arises this equation, viz. ^ 6 Both parts of the equation
in the fifth step, being divided by 44, the value of e will be discovered to be
^ 7 If in stead of -2e in the second step, you put double the latter part of
the equation in the sixth step you will have this equation. ^ 8 The seventh
equation being duly reduced, the value of a will be discovered to be ^

By the sixth and eighth steps the numbers sought are ^8 and 8, which will
answer the conditions of the Question as you may perceive by

The Proof.

^

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

