Fatal Friendship. A TRAGEDY.

As it is Acted at the NEW-THEATRE IN Little-Lincolns-Inn-Fields.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Saunders at the Blue-Anchor in the Lower-Walk of
the New-Exchange, School.

TO HER Royal Highness THE PRINCESS.
MADAM,
MY happy success in one bold Attempt, not only encourages but forces me to a
much greater, aspiring to lay this Triffle at your Royal High^ess's Feet; when
a Woman appears in the World under any distinguishing Character, she must
expect to be the mark of ill Nature, but most one who seems desirous to
recommend her self by what the other Sex think their peculiar Prerogative.
This, Madam, makes me fly to the Protection of so great a Princess, though I am
sensible so high an Honor must raise me many more Enemies, making me indeed
worthy of Envy, which I am but too well secured from in my self (though an
undertaking so few of my Sex, have ventured at, may draw some Malice on me) but
it is my happiness that the thing which will most reasonably make me the object
of Enmity, will be my safety against the effects of it. What insolence dare
injure one they find in your Royal Presence, and under your Illustrious
Patronage?

Nor need your Highness disdain to look Favorably down upon this humble
Present; though I have hitherto seemed to offer it only for my own security, I
may say it in some measure merits your regard, though the performance much
unworthy of it, its End is the most noble, to discourage Vice, and recommend a
firm unshaken Virtue; that must receive your Royal Highnesses Approbation,
since it is the same Great design as that of your own Admirable Life, but with
what disadvantage imitated! how must I Blush for the Copy when I cast my Eyes
upon such an Excellent Original!

But here permit me, Madam, to decline attempting your E^comium, as a mark both
of the most profound respect, and highest Admiration, best expressed by an
awful silence, which confesses you above all Praise; but were it possible for
some Nobler Pen to reach the height of your Perfections, the Work would be
Superfluous, since they need not even the Luster of your Rank to make 'em
co^spicuous to the World, or to engage Mankind in your Service; nor be
offended, most Illustrious Princess, if I say, it is they more even than your
Royal Birth, make me Ambitious with all Submissive Duty, to be allowed the
Title of

Your Royal Highness's Most humbly devoted, Most Obedient Servant, Catharine
Trotter.

TO THE AUTHOR, ON HER Tragedy, called Fatal Friendship.
GReat Sappho, with some few that shared her Glory,
Kept the bright Character they had in Story,
With doubted right; till after-ages came;
By fair examples to assert their Fame:
As when the tribute of our praise we give,
They by your worth to endless Fame Survive:
Nor can I silently my thoughts delay,
The joys too exquisite, and will have way;
Though greatest Beauties, less in praise appear,
It Is hard, to see, be charmed, and not cry out she is Fair:
Your Play with an exalted Genius shines,
And charming numbers every thought refines;
But sure thy mind was meant the Court of Love,
Soft as the joys that yiedling Virgins move;
There every Grace does to thy Pen repair,
Firing the Brave, melting the rigid Fair;
Nor less in Honor's School have thou been read,
Thy Men with equal steps, the tract of glory tread;
As when some Master-Hand a Cupid draws,
With pointed Arrow in a Lovers cause;
On the other side a Mars with many grace,
Expressing right and Victory in his Face;
The sporting Fair who now despised his art,
Feels from the shadow a resistless dart;
And He --
Who for inglorious ease could Fame forego,
Roused at the sight starts forward to the Foe:
Nor does thy rules for Life alone excel,
You Have taught the harder task of dying well;
Safe from the gingling folly of our time,
Whose Heroes die in simile and rhyme
It Is thus you may support the sinking Stage,
Thus learn the Scriblers that infect this Age;
To Mourn how Nature stinted their poor lot
And leave for humbler arts their Plays and Plot:
Let Congreve, Granvile, and the few who yet,
Support the credit of our Poets Wit;
With you the Empire of the Stage maintain,
Nor suffer Fools so often to usurp your reign;
Then perfect Plays would perfect joys inspire,
Touch to the Soul, and waken dead desire:
Deny each chatt'ring Ape his fancied part,
And teach us to revere your Sacred Art.
P. Harman.
To my much Esteemed Friend On her PLAY called FATAL-FRIENDSHIP.
WIth what Concern I sat and heard your Play,
None else can Judge, but such a Friend sure may.
The Indian Mother could not feel more pain,
Whose Newborn Babe's thrown headlong in the Main,
To prove him lawful: at whose welcome Rise
(Her fears dispersed) Joy gushes at her Eyes.
Were I but Judge enough I Would do thee Right,
Though yet much more, I want Poetic flight,
And 'twere his folly to repeat a new
Who light a Taper the bright Sun to show,
Shou' ^ I attempt your Praise, but as a Friend,
^' Express my thoughts, is all that I Intend.
Your fable's clear, no rule you have transgrest,
Chaste all your thoughts, yet Nature still expres^,
Your numbers flow, as if the Muses all
Consulted nothing, but their Rise, and fall,
Your Characters are just, and with such art
Your Passions raised, they gain the unwary heart,
And what you feign, effectually Create,
Who was unmoved, at sad Felicia's Fate?
Scarce could the stubbornest deny their Tears,
All felt your Heroes miseries, as theirs,
But as a faithful Friend, he touched me most;
By life's most noble, best of blessings, lost;
O Heaven, this my fondest wish Decree!
Our mutual Friendship, may never Fatal be.
TO THE AUTHOR OF FATAL-FRIENDSHIP.
THe famed Orinda's, and Astrea's Lays,
With never dying Wit, blessed Charles's Days,
And we supposed Wit could no higher rise,
Till you succeeding, Tear from them the Prize,
More Just Applause is yours who check the Rage,
Of Reigning Vice, that has debauched the Stage,
And dare show Virtue in a vicious Age;
With Eager wishing Eyes the Day we sought,
When to its first Design the Dramma might be brought,
Now an unusual Charm our Hearts has seized,
For we at once both profit, and are pleased;
And you may boast, that by your skillful Hand,
You Have done what Senates did in Vain Command:
For such Examples bear a mighty sway,
Since none in vicious Paths will choose to stray,
When Wit, and Beauty Ioin to lead in Virtues way.
To the Ingenious AUTHOR, ON HER Tragedy, called Fatal Friendship. Sent by an
Unknown Hand.
AS when Camilla once, a Warlike Dame
In bloody Battles won immortal Fame;
Forsook her Female Arts, and chose to bear
The pondrous Shield, and heave the massy Spear,
Superior to ^er Sex; so swift she flew
Around the Field, and such vast Numbers slew,
That Friends and Foes alike surpised behold
The brave Virago desperately Bold,
And thought her Pallas in a human Mold.
Such is our Wonder, matchless Maid! to see
The Tragic Laurel thus deserved by thee.
Yet greater Praise is yours; Camilla shines
For ever bright in Virgil's Sacred Lines,
You in your own; -- where to the World's last Date
You shall survive, and Triumph over Fate;
Nor need you to another Bounty one
For what your self can on your self bestow.
So Monarchs in full Health were wont to rear
At their own charge, their future Sepulcher.
Who thy Perfections fully would commend
Must think how others do their Hours mispend,
In Trifling Visits, Pride, Impertinence
Dress, Dancing, and Discourse quite void of Sense.
To twirl a Fan, to please some foolish Beau,
And sing an empty Song the most they know,
In Body weak, more Impotent of mind --
Thus some have represented Womankind;
But you your Sexes Champion are come forth
To fight their Quarrel, and assert their Worth.
Our Salique Law of Wit you have destroyed,
Established Female Claim, and Triumphed over our Pride;
While We look on, and with repining Eyes
Behold you bearing off so rich a Prize,
Spite of Ill Nature we are compelled to approve
Such dazzling Worth, and spite of Envy love.
Nor is this all the applause that is your Due;
You stand the first of Stage-Reformers too.
No Vicious Stains pollute your moral Scene;
Chaste are your Thoughts, and your Expression clean.
Strains such as yours the strictest Test will bear:
Sing boldly then! nor busy Censure fear;
Your Virgin Voice offends no Virgin Ear.
Proceed, in Tragic Numbers to disclose
Strange Turns of Fate, and unexpected Woes!
Reward and punish; awfully dispense
Heavens Judgments, and declare a Providence!
Nor let the Comic Muse your Labors share;
It Is Meaness after this the Sock to wear.
Though that too merit Praise, it is nobler Toil
TO extort a Tear, than to provoke a Smile.
What Hand that can design a History
Would Copy Low-Land Boors at Snick a Snee?
Accept this Tribute Madam! and excuse
The hasty Raptures of a Stranger-Muse.
PROLOGUE, Written by Mr Harman, and spoke by Mr Bowen.
Your Servant Sirs,
COnscious of many favors from the Town,
And that he poorly pays who does but own,
I Am come to save each of you half a Crown.
(Our Author truly would invite your stay,
And if you will be all such Fools you may, To the side Boxes.

There Is some are wiser, and will walk away.
For I who have heard the tale within can tell ye
A worse disaster never yet befell ye;
A Critic yonder has been stating Rules,
To gain the Wise, and scorn the Herd of Fools;
To which 'twas said, one Friend would raise ten Foes,
And that is too dear as common Friendship goes;
Success with both is found no human task;
Who please the Boxes will affront the Mask;
To Charm, and to instruct's too great a trouble,
It Is hard for Pegasus to carry double.
I argued much to entertain the Fools,
They are the Poets and the Players Tools.
Are sown so thick over Gallery, Box, and Pit,
Can give success without the help of Wit;
For one Grimace more favor will dispense,
Than for whole Scenes that boast of stricter sense;
Even I by help of Band and cropped disguise,
Can reach your hearts as Love does through your Eyes;
Well the Fools Coat, the Fools defect supplies.
But still Poetic Fate attends the Muse,
This thriving Council did our Fool refuse,
She Would please no Crambo Critic, with dull Chime,
Preferring sense, even to engaging Rhyme;
Nor little Lord who still affects to be
Learned in the knacks of visiting Gallantry.
With scraps of Scandal, and Pert Repartee.
On ruin bent I left her to her Fate,
And stole to warn you for what treat you sat.
If to the Wits alone our Plays are Writ,
And Authors will allow so few have Wit,
Why should they grumble at an Empty Pit.
Since I have been thus frankly dealing now,
But one request for my dear sake allow.
With Crowded Benches we shall grace our Play,
If each who thinks himself a Wit will stay.
The Persons Represented.
MEN.
COunt Roquelaure. Mr. Kynaston. Gramont, His younger Son. Mr. Betterton.
Castalio, Gramont's Friend. Mr. Verbruggen. Bellgard, Brother to Felicia. Mr.
Thurmond. Bernardo, a Neopolitan, an Officer under Castalio. Mr. Arnold.
WOMEN.
Lamira, A young Widow. Mrs. Barry. Felicia, Privately married to Gramont. Mrs.
Bracegirdle. Marian, Woman to Lamira. Mrs. Martin. A Soldier, and Servants.
THE Fatal Friendship.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Bellgard and Felicia. Bell. FElicia, You are young, and full of hopes,
Unknowing how the World will disappoint 'em,
But I have seen such strange unlooked for Chances,
Such fatal blasts to blooming expectations,
As teaches me judiciously to fear,
And cautiously advise; Can I remember
Our Noble Family in dazzling Splendors,
As Rich, as Ancient, made the mark of Envy,
Now (by an Enemies successful Faction
Maliciously unjust) without regard,
Reduced so low, that I (the only left,
To keep our name from falling with our Fortune)
Have but sufficient means, with thrifty care,
Just to preserve you, and your infant Sisters,
From asking help at charitable Hands,
Can I consider this,
And not use all a Brothers interest in you
To move you to embrace a happy offer,
To place you sure in that exalted rank
Which both by Birth, and Merit is your due.

Feli, You have so dear an interest in my Heart,
That though you had not all Authority,
Yet ever where I could Control my self,
You still should govern me; but oh my Brother,
There is a strong reluctance in my Soul,
Which to my self deny's me my consent,
For this unequal match.

Bell. It Is true the Count Roquelaure has not the Charms of Youth,
But then consider he is without their faults;
I Have weighed it for you with a Brothers Love,
and find the youthful balance far the lighter;
Marriage requires a steady, ripened virtue,
Judgment to choose, solidity to fix,
Prudence to govern, all by experience perfected.

Feli. It Is not the Counts grave years makes me abhor the Match,
But some more secret cause, yet to my self unknown,

Bell. Sister I fear you know the cause too well,
He Is Father to Gramont; Ha? that conscious blush
Confesses I have guessed it,
A shameful Witness of your Childish passion;
Is it not time throw away the Toy's
You cried for when a Girl?

Fell. Forgive me an involuntary fault,
Love took possession of my infant Heart,
Grew up with me a dear, familiar Guest,
And now refuses to remove his Seat.

Bell. Reason must dispossess him.

Fell. Could reason tell me I had placed my Love
On a vile Object; half the work were done,
But you have owned he merits all your friendship,
Nay, 'twas your fondness for him, first raised mine,
And all that can be offered now against him,
Amounts to this, that he is a younger Brother,
Whose fortune is injurious to his Worth.

Bell. Could yours repair the wrong his fortune does him;
I would with joy bestow you to your wishes,
But am too fond, too tender of you both,
To give consent that you should Starve together;
For shame Felicia, let not passion sway you
Thus to your ruin,
I have till now given way to all your folly,
In hopes that time, and absence would destroy it.
Nor ever pressed you to a second choice
These full two years since first I knew your Loves,
And made Gramont, forbear to visit you,
But must no longer thus indulge your weakness.

Fell. If for two years I have forborne to see him,
Is not that sacrifice sufficient from a Sister?
Must I be made the next to one I hate?
You cannot be so cruel, do but defer it,
Who know's the turns of fortune?
You have seen you say a fatal one in ours,
Why may not those who now are at the lowest,
By some more happy chance, be raised as high?

Bell. There Is not a ground to hope for young Gramont^
He meant to raise his fortune as a Soldier,
And might have reached the Noblest height in War,
Had not that fatal quarrel, in which he killed
The Generals only Son, soon stopped his Progress,
In whose revengeful Father, he will find
An Enemy, as powerful at Court,
As in the Army.

Fell. 'Twas well he 'scap'd with Life.

Bell. For the security of the Surviver,
They would not fight in France;
And yet the General at his return
By Arbitrary Law, condemned, and would have shot him,
Had not his Noble Friend the brave Castalio
Charged on his guard, freed him and kept the fight
Till he escaped in safety.

Fell. For which may he or never need, or always find a Friend. Aside.

Bell. You see the desperate State of his affairs,
Therefore be Wise, and Tempt not your ill Fate;
Either resolve to marry Count Roquelaure;
Or share a beggars Fortune with his Son.

Fell. Why would you force me to a wretched choice?
You have been hitherto a Parent to me,
How am I grown so burdensome a charge;
That you would cast me from you, though to ruin?

Bell. I would prevent your ruin and my own;
And if you would have me still a Parent to you,
I shall expect the obedience of a Daughter,
Or else by Heaven, I Will turn you to your Lover. Exit Bellgard.

Fell. Then I must Perish with him; Alas my Brother
Thou little think to what thou do persuade me;
My Husbands Father? O my Barbarous Stars!
For sure Love could not shoot so cross a Dart:
What Is to be done? should I confess our Marriage?
O no his fiery Temper could not brook it!
And how would my Gramont's harsh Father use him. Enter Gramont.
Oh he is sent by Heaven to my relief!
My dear Gramont!

Gra. My dearest Wife, what sadness hangs upon thee?
Am I not welcome to those weeping Eyes?

Fell. More than the light; but they have cause to weep
^or you, and me, and for our helpless infant;
My Brother has been pleading for your Father,
Threatens if I refuse to Marry him,
To throw me as a stranger from his Care.

Gar. My poor Felicia, what thou bear for me?
How shall I recompense thy suffering virtue?
O what a line of woes I fixed thee to
When Hymen drew the knot!

Fell. Do you repent that knot?

Gra. By Heaven, my Love, I cannot^

Fell. Then I am happy.

Gra. Nothing is so that is placed within my fate,
A Wretch but born to scatter Miseries,
On all whom Love brings near enough to reach 'em.

Fell. Have you received no News yet of our Child?

Gra. None for this full three Weeks, which much concerns me;
But I have sent a Messenger express
To learn its health, who will return this day.

Fell. Heaven guard the tender Babe.

Gra. Oh my Heart bleeds for that dear part of me,
Now I am Lost to all my hopes of Fortune,
Precariously depending on my Father,
How may it be exposed to wants, and Cares,
Farewell, my Dear, I must not stay with thee,
To morrow we will give some hours to Love,
Where shall I see you?

Fell. Here if you please, my Brother will be early ou^.

Gra. I will not fail.

Fell. Let it be early then you bring me joy,
And I have need of it.

Gra. Impatient wishes
Eager as in our first soft stealths of Love,
Will keep me waking till the Longed for hour.

Fell. But how my dearest durst you venture now?

Gra. I met your Brother going to Lamira's,
And took the advantage just to steal a Look,
And beg the dear appointment for to morrow,
He expects me there, where he imagines I design
To make Addresses, being a Young, Rich, Widow,
But thou art all the Treasure I can covet.

Fell. My Life, you will not forget to morrow Early.

Gra. Can I forget my only Happiness? Exeunt several ways,

SCENE the Second, Lamira's House.
Enter Bellgard, and Lamira. Lam. You Have counseled like that Friend I ever
thought you,
A Friend both to my Honor, and my Interest.

Bell. Not my own Honor can be dearer to me,
With pain I see your hours of rest disturbed,
By jealous Spies, or crowds of hoping Lovers,
Regardless of your fame, for their own interest.

Lam. O how much happier and to be envied,
Is she, whose humble Fortune enough supplying
Natures wants,
Has not exposed her to the treacherous Arts,
And false pretenses of designing Men.

Bell. The hard conditions by which you possess
So large a Fortune, gives you equal means
To free your self from those designing Lovers.

Lam. For which I have intended to declare
The Secret of my Husbands jealous bounty.

Bell. You Have prudently resolved, but why, Lamira,
Are you regardless of Castalio's Vows?
He Loves and seeks you for your self alone,
Nay when I told him you refused all offers,
Forfeiting if you wed your best possessions,
With eager Words, and Eyes that sparkl'd joy,
Pressing me in his Arms he said, O Friend,
How much more dear to me would such a sacrifice
Make the adored Lamira! could I hope
She would for me abandon all her glittering Fortune,
To reward my Love with nobler Treasure,
How would I then improve your Kings regard for me,
How welcome all his Bounty, and his Honors,
To doubly recompense what she can Lose,
And make her great beyond my own Ambition.

Lam. 'Twas generously spoke,
Deserving all esteem, and gratitude,
That as a Debt his merit claims I pay
But 'twere to Tempt ill fate, to strip my self
Of what I now possess secure from hazard,
To run the uncertain Fortunes of a Stranger,
Depending on the breath of a Kings Favor,
Which should he Lose, he will never return to Naples.

Bell. You Have urged as an Objection, that which most
Should recommend him, where can he be a Stranger?
What Monarch would not cherish such a Subject?
What Nation not be proud to 'dopt a Son so Worthy?
He that to the last of a Large Fortune
Supplied the Public wants, whilst there was hopes
To free his Country from the invading Spaniard;
Then courted by the Conqueror, disdains
All Obligations from his Countries Tyrant;
But banishing himself seeks nobler refuge
In a foreign Court;
Still let me speak him, for he is brave in all:
With what a modest greatness he refused
All Honors which our King pressed his accepting,
But what were in the Army,
Seeming to scorn the Lazy gifts of Favor,
As if all glories were below his virtue,
But what in Arms he forced from unbrib'd Fame.

Lam. We have cause to bless the choice, for he is said
To have done im^ortant service in the War.

Bell. The Court have styled him France's better Genius,
The Soldiers Idolize him, and as Admired,
He Is Loved by all, unless the General,
Who looks with Envy on his rising Fortune.

Lam. A Dangerous Enemy.

Bell. He has indeed with all a Soldiers heart;
The Closer Malice of a Subtle Statesman,
And the Contempt of his Authority.
Castalio showed in forcing from the Guards
His Friend Gramont, by him unjustly sentenced,
I fear may rouse his hatred to revenge.

Lam. It was a Godlike Action; his Friendship
For Gramont, shows he not only knows himself
To merit, but value it in others.

Bell. The choice his heart here makes is the best proof of that;
But let what you admire give softer Thoughts,
And whisper to your heart, If for Gramont
He could do thus, what would not Love inspire!

Lam. I prize it to its height, but when you would plead
Castalio's cause with me name not Gramont.

Bell. Not name him! Why is that an Obstacle.

Lam. No matter, nothing, 'twas a half formed Thought,
I know not what it meant, you may speak of him.

Bell. Let me by any Argument prevail
At least to know, if he has leave to hope.

Lam. Then think not that I wrong Castalio's worth,
When I declare, he has not, cannot have
An interest in my heart, I value him,
But 'twere unjust to give him hopes of more,
Love is not in our power.

Bell. Madam, I Have done, though grieved at my success^
Since it is in vain, I Will touch this Theme no more.
You have reason now, delivered from the Tyrant
Your Parents forced upon your tender years
To let your heart direct your second choice.

Lam. O I fear the heedless partial guide,
Would blindly Lead me on some Fatal ruin.

Bell. Unjustly you distrust it, tell me whither,
Where would it direct you?
And I may better judge how faithfully.

Lam. Perhaps I have not ventured to consult it,
It Is safest not to ask, or hear advice,
When it is as pleasing as it is dangerous.

Bell. True, if we can avoid it;
But Inclination's an Officious Counselor,
That waits not to be asked, and will be heard;
Tell me, Lamira, what has yours been saying?

Lam. Nothing.

Bell. Is this your Friendship? (for I would not plead
Our Kindred Blood but a more near Alliance)
Is this your boasted truth, and trust in me?

Lam. I would not hide from you,
But what I would conceal from my own heart.
Let me, Bellgard, yet O I fear, I fear,
It speaks too much, and loud, not to be heard,
And plain enough for you to understand.

Bell. If I have leave to guess, I think I could,
May I interpret what your Eyes have spoke,
And some late words confirm?

Lam. O my shame! in such a fruitful Harvest
Of voluntary growth, untoil'd for hearts,
T'ave cast my own upon a barren soil
That yields me no return.

Bell. You know not that, Gramont may love in secret,
Not daring to reveal it, or hope success,
Where he beholds the noblest Offers scorned,
Sees mighty Fortunes every day rejected;
Does not his late assiduous Visits, speak
All that a Fortune low as his should dare?

Lam. Suppose it did, what though our hearts were one,
If we must live at an Eternal distance?

Bell. What hinders you to be for ever joined?

Lam. Are not the Obstacles invincible?

Bell. Is any such to love?

Lam. My Husbands Will;
And yet I could submit to his severity,
Throw all my Titles, and my Treasure from me,
And think Gramont too full a recompense;
But then to see him miserably poor,
Wretched for me, my Love could never bear it.

Bell. Generous and tender, all I see that is left
For Friendship now to undertake, or hope,
Is not to cure, but satisfy her love;
There may be found away, both to secure
Your happiness, and Fortune.

Lam. How whilst my Husbands Sister lives? you know
I forfeit all to her, upon a second Marriage.

Bell. But if you keep it secret, who shall claim the forfeit?

Lam. How kindly you indulge my fondest wishes,
How Carefully contrive my Happiness;
But Alas, vainly my busy, pleased imagination,
Has Leaped at once over all difficulties,
When yet the first, and greatest is unpass'd,
He does not, and perhaps will never love me.

Bell. Not Love you! those Eyes that with their native fires
Scorched so many, now Love has added his,
What heart so frozen not to feel their heat!
Gramont, I think will presently be here,
For so he promised, will you for a while
Leave us together and permit me sound his Thoughts?

Lam. What court him for me!

Bell. You have not used to doubt
The safety of your honor in my hands. Enter Marian.

Mar. Here Is a Gentleman without to wait upon your Ladyship.

Lam. Admit him. I^ it is Gramont,
I am too much disordered yet to see him,
Make my Excuse, and, my best Friend, remember
I trust you with the nicest, dearest parts of me,
My Love, and Honor. Exit Lamir^

Bell. Both shall be my care;
Her satisfaction chiefly I regard,
But since she is resolute against Castalio,
This New design which way so ever I view it,
Gives me a pleasing prospect; Gramont I love,
And for his interest wish it; next for Felicia's,
Her little rest of hopes and eluded thus,
May turn her Thoughts on Search of certainties,
And make Roquelaure appear a happy refuge.

Enter Gramont. Gra. Alone Bellgard, where is the fair Lamira?

Bell. Some small affairs detain her for the present,
She Will not be long.

Gra. It Is pity she should bear the weight of business,
Her youth, and charms, would fit more soft Employments.

Bell. That youth, and Charms will well reward the Man
Who frees her from that weight; what think you of it?
Could you not bear the Toil, for such a Prize?

Gra. Nothing would seem a Toil, or difficult,
To one that could have hopes of gaining it.

Bell. Prithee attempt it.

Gra. What vanity can make me hope success,
When those who much excel me every way,
In merit as in fortune, yet are slighted?
I could have no pretense for such presumption.

Bell. Your noble Birth forbids that Imputation,
And the Alliance of so great a Family
As yours, may well be coveted;
Lamira values you, and such Esteem,
When Love, and youth like yours together plead,
Is quickly raised to passion and desire.

Gra. If so, why are those more deserving Lovers,
Who have with youth, charms that I want, refused?

Bell. You know my interest in her, perhaps the Friendship
I Have expressed for you, may've turned the balance,
Where merit was but equal, how ever it be,
Not one of those who long have Languish'd for her,
Does she receive with half that Complaisance,
Or speak of in such Terms of Admiration,
As I have heard her when your name was mentioned.

Gra. She fears to give encouragement to her adorers,
Should I commence the Lover, like them I should be used.

Bell. Is it a Prize of such low Consequence,
Not worth the hazarding of a refusal?
Unless your faith already is bestowed,
Let me engage you to it, on our Friendship.

Gra. My faith! I must not leave him that suspicion. Aside.
There needs not sure so dear a Conjuration,
To make me aim at what all France contests for,
An ample fortune, with so bright a Beauty.

Enter Lamira. Lam. My blushes own me guilty of a rudeness,
Though, Sir, I hope my Cousin has excused me.

Bell. I Will leave you now to make your own Apology. Exit Bell.

Gra. We have been lamenting, Madam, that so long
You have Condemned your self to bear alone
The painful load of Business.

Lam. I had rather much sustain that load for ever,
Than seeking ease only to change my Burden
For a much worse, and Heavier?

Gra. Among the many would be proud to bear it,
Can you not find out one, on whom to throw it
Upon easier Terms, or may I ask,
Why you who can dispose of thousand hearts,
Let all alike be wretched?

Lam. Had high ambition been my darling passion
I had been tempted to exalt my fate,
But my own honors bound my largest wishes,
And fortune has not been a niggard to me;
Therefore all pleas, but merit, unconsider'd,
My heart bestows me freely on the Man
Whom it shall speak most Worthy.

Gra. What vain presumer dare pretend, or think
To merit such a wonder? this resolution known,
What forward lover would not c^ase his suit,
In just despair of ever gaining it?

Lam. Either you flatter me, or are too modest;
Whither was I going? I have observed
The most deserving ever most distrustful
Of their own worth, which if it be a fault;
It is the only I Have remarked in you,
But all that diffidence, and modesty,
Speak louder for you, than the Boasts of others.

Gra. Then it must speak, for you have silenced me,
Hence forward I shall only dare to wish,
That you were less divine, or I more worthy.

Lam. You're worthy all that you can dare to ask.

Gra. I never shall dare to ask, a Prize too noble
For any mortal aim. Exit Bowing.

Lam. So cold!
Or its the Character of awful Love?
If so, my words were kind, and plain enough
To chase away his fears;
It Is now too late, that humble way to move,
Respect is rudeness, when we offer love. Exit Lam.

ACT II. SCENE I.
Roquelaure's House. Enter Bellgard, and a Servant of the Counts^ Serve. BE
pleased to stay here, Sir,
My Lord will wait upon you instantly;

Bell. You have told him I am here.

Serve. I did, and hear him coming. Exit Serve.

Enter Roquelaure. Roq. You're welcome, my Bellgard, the only Man
That can give comfort to my tortured Heart.

Bell. None can be prouder, or more joy'd to serve you.

Count. I Am just returned from visiting your Sister,
Whom I have seen in such a graceful Sorrow,
As heightened all her Charms, and my desire
More than it moved my pity.

Bell. And how my Lord
Has she received the honor you design her?

Count. With such aversion as she would meet her fate;
At first I found her in a solemn sadness,
Her Eyes all Languishing, fixed on the ground,
But roused at my approach, the flowing blood,
Flushed to her Cheeks, yet soon again forsook 'em;
Thus pale, and trembling, we met alike disordered,
Though with such different passions, hate in her
Produced the same effect as Love in me.

Bell. Hate, my Lord,
Can you suspect her of so great injustice?

Count. What else can make her so inexorable?
Upon her knees she fell, and grasping mine,
She weeping begged me to desist my suit,
With such engaging Action, and words so moving,
As whilst they made me wish I could obey her,
Deprived me of the power.

Bell. Stubborn Girl.

Count. Finding me more enflamed, and still persisting,
She said I might expose her to your anger,
And all the ruin you had lately threatened,
But there was such an Obstacle in nature,
As never would permit her to be mine.

Bell. So positive, my Lord, I Will make her find
There Is not an Obstacle but I can vanquish.

Count. I fear her early kindness for my Son,
Which we too long neglected,
Though they seem parted now, their rooted loves
May join, and still produce fresh springing hopes.

Bell. Then we must strive to blast 'em; I could wish
Gramont were married to yours, and his own liking;
What think you of Lamira for a Daughter?

Count. So well, I must not think of it.

Bell. My Lord, I Have a relations interest in her,
And more that of a Friend, on which relying,
I have proposed it to her, and may tell you
She much Esteems your Son, and would be proud
Of your alliance, which if desired by you,
I know she will not refuse.

Count. It Is generously offered, and here he comes Enter Gramont.
To join with me in thanks. Your looks are sad,
My Son, is there a cause?

Gra. There is, my Lord, if I have any sense
Of honor, Gratitude, or Friendship; Castalio
Is this day brought here, a prisoner to the Castle,
Where he is kept in chains, as he were guilty
Of some flagitious action.

Count. For what is he so used?

Gra. For me, you know, my Lord,
He saved my life, with hazard of his own,
For which the General Committed him,
And representing to the absent King
The case as he thought fit, next had him ^in'd,
Three thousand Crowns, and keeps him thus secured
Till it is discharged.

Bell. Some such mean vengeance,
I apprehended from his barbarous nature.

Gra. Castalio of a generous Soul,
Knowing no use of Wealth but to bestow
On others wants, scarce mindful of his own,
I know must needs be unprepared for this.
Tho his great services, and merit plead,
Malice in power will be heard against 'em,
And his reward be there to Starve neglected.

Count. Honor forbid.

Gra. Honor, justice, gratitude, and Friendship,
All forbid, yet I the unhapyy cause
Look on, and suffer it, unable to assist him.

Count. He must, he shall be aided, and by you,
For whom he suffers all.

Gra. O my honored Father, more than Father now,
It Is more than Life you have given, like that unasked,
Restored a Friend to me, preserved my honor,
How shall I pay my thanks.

Count. To save you that be all the Act your own.

Gra. Would heaven but give the power.

Count. Give it your self, and lose not time in wishing,
A Friend, and Father, point you out the way,
You know, Lamira.

Gra. Ha! what of her, my Lord?

Count. She may be yours.

Gra. Mine, my Lord.

Bell. One thing it is fit you know ever you determine;
Her deceased husband, by nature jealous, and severe,
Left the considerablest part of her Estate,
Conditional that she remain unmarried,
The terms to one so young, unreasonable,
And unjust, therefore I think 'em not in honor
Obligatory, only to keep the Marriage secret
Whilst her Sister lives, to whom she forfeits,
If so you can approve it.

Gra. Far be it from me, to expose Lamira
To such a hazard of her ruin;
'Twill be impossible to keep it secret.

Bell. Her long refusal of the greatest matches,
Has raised in many different Conjectures;
All which to end, she will suddenly declare
The true conditions of her husbands will,
That will prevent all pryings, or suspicions
Of her Marriage.

Count. Especially to him, a younger Brother
Will never be thought an Object for her choice,
And prudence must direct the management
Of future accidents, that may occur.

Bell. My Lord, I Will leave you to consult together. Exit Bell.

Count. You seem not much to relish this proposal;
Could you expect a match so advantageous?

Gra. Marriage, my Lord, I hold a sacred bond,
Which should be made for nobler ends than interest;
Hearts should first be joined.

Count. And who deserves your Heart more than Lamira?

Gra. It is not merit only gives us love,
Else every heart would take the same impression,
But each we see receives a different Image,
As it were fitted for that stamp alone;
Hers is perhaps of too refined a nature
To strike this grosser mold, I cannot mend it,
And hope you will not press a monstrous Union
Of things by nature not agreeing.

Count. By heaven a mere rebellious Sprit moves thee
To this refusal, had it not been offered,
Thy own desires would have prevented us.

Gra. Can I so far forget my filial duty?
My Lord, I honor you, and your Commands
Equal almost to heavens; but you have told me,
A state so lasting should be well considered
Ever resolved on, and that Marriage bonds
Were of too ponderous weight, for youth to bear.

Count. Are you still a Boy? I have considered for you,
Your part is to obey.

Gra. I have yet too large a Stock of coming years,
To be laid out upon one hasty purchase.

Count. Go satisfy your Friend thus, tell him the last
Of that fine fansied stock, shall be laid out
For his relief.

Gra. O Castalio!

Count. You Love him well indeed ungrateful wretch,
Insensible of every benefit,
What an indulgent Father have I been?
When thy Extravagance had left thee Friendless,
Persu'd by many, by the rest abandoned,
I took thee to my bosom, sheltered thee
Even from Royal anger; used all my interest
With vast expense to gain thy pardon,
And this day, resolved to pay the exacted sum
For which 'twas granted, but ungracious Boy,
I Will not so dearly buy thy Liberty,
Till thou can find a better way to use it,
Than disobeying me.

Gra. I know I don't deserve it, give me up
To Death, to Banishment, or Slavery,
I Will own your Justice, but let not poor Castalio
Suffer for my fault;
His Freedom will not cost you half so dear,
Nor he be so ungrateful.

Count. Impudent request! what Friendship do I owe him,
For sending me such a rebellious Son?
You may go to him,
And rot for me together in a Dungeon;
Hence from my House, and till thou art obedient,
By heaven if thou were Starving at my gates,
I Would send thee no relief; the first I do,
May it become to both eternal ruin.
Now foolish Boy, go seek a better fortune. Exit Count.

Gra. Cast from the field, the Court, and my own Father,
Where should I fly! to poor Felicia's Arms,
She Is kind, and will be fond to share my misery;
Alas too soon she must, thus she will be used,
For so her Brother threatened; cruel thought!
Must I behold that tender part of me,
exposed to all the extreamities of want,
My helpless Infant asking food in vain^
O fate! O heaven! you cannot mean it;
They Are innocent, how, how have we deserved your anger?
If there be a Guilt it must be mine.
Why then ye Powers,
Must she be involved in my unhappiness?
O you are just, and cannot suffer it,
Thus prostrate I implore, O spare her heaven,
Wreck, Wreck on me your vengeance; but she is part of me,
And so must share it:
O let me fly from thought, or from the World,
Ever this impetuous ruin over whelm
My sinking reason. O I shall grow mad! Exit.

SCENE II. A Prison.
Castalio solus Cas. No, proud insulting Spain, not even thus
Can I repent my leaving Conquered Naples;
Thy Pageant freedom, and precarious honors,
Were heavier baser slavery than these chains;
And I am less ashamed of them, though here,
Perhaps the Object of Lamira's scorn.
Ha! what of that? by heaven I cannot form
One thought for Glory, since I knew that Woman,
But still it is mixed with Love, with passion stained.
And makes the best, and bravest of my Actions,
But glittering frailties; -- she is strangely Charming,
Well is it not enough to think her so?
Or say I wish her mine?
But why thus fix my Soul upon a Woman?
Why these tumultuous ravings, hopes, and fears? Enter Gramont.
Gramont! I blush as if I thought he saw my heart,
Ashamed to own my self for what I am;
Stifling my passion may extinguish it.
No more of this. -- My Friend, this welcome sight
Makes all my wrongs, and pains insensible,
That thou art f^^e, and safe, is to Castalio,
Easy and Liberty.

Gra. Dearer than either, how do I enjoy 'em,
Whilst purchased at the sad expense of yours!
How can I look upon a Friend thus ruined,
By saving me at his extremest peril,
Whilst I but Mourn for him, with aidless pity?

Cas. No my Gramont;
It Is not for freeing thee that I am thus,
Occasions had been found, though this not given
TO exert the Generals malice; but do not grieve,
His Triumph is but short, I shall be free.

Gra. You hide a truth you fear to afflict me with,
I know that public Spirit, which at Naples
Made you in favor of the common interest
Neglect your own, has moved you here as nobly,
Your frequent bounties to the murmuring Soldiers,
Must have disabled you for the discharge
Of such a sum.

Cas. I could no less than give to your Kings Service,
What he so frankly had bestowed on me;
And being just upon the point of Battle,
'Twas then the only way to quell the Mutiny;
But can I doubt to find him grateful now,
Whose generosity when undeserved
I have so far experienced?
I every hour expect Bernardo's coming,
And doubt not but he brings me Liberty;
That faithful follower of my fortunes hearing
The General had left the Camp, and ordered
My removal hither, hastened to Court,
That he might there in Person answer ought
Alleged against me, in Confidence the King
When well informed of the injustice done me,
Will soon command my freedom.

Gra. You Will find you have a subtle Enemy,
Though in his hate bare faced, close in revenge,
Which having failed when against me directed,
I fear will now be bent with surer aim,
And fall with double force on you.

Cas. He should indeed have made my ruin sure,
Or not have dared so much.

Gra. What can his motive be of sending you from the army?

Cas. He durst not in his absence trust me to
The Soldiers love, which he had found when present,
Scarce his Authority could balance; that chiefly,
But in part he serves his malice, pleased
Whilst he can to make me bear the hardships,
And inconvenience of a common Prison;
He has intended me the vilest usage,
Alotting me a dark and noisome dungeon,
Though I Am by stealth allowed the freedom of this Air. Enter Bernardo.
Bernardo returned already; what News from Court?

Bern. That you have been too honest.

Cas. I shall not repent it.

Bern. By Heaven, I had rather seen you led in Triumph
A Slave to Spain, they might have showed you
As an Enemy, but had not called you Traitor.

Cas. Ha! but thou talk with rage, speak to my understanding.

Bern. My Lord your pardon, it is my hearty Love,
Makes me forget all method, and respect,
I Have been at Court, where sure no honest Man
Can keep his Temper.

Cas. Why, what reception found you there?

B^rn. Such as they would give a man the Plague had seized;
All shunned me as I passed, and those in office,
When I desired admittance to the presence,
Would not know me.

Cas. Denied to see the King!

Barn. I would not be denied.

Cas. Be brief to your success with him.

Barn. He asked me coldly if I came to speak
In your Defense; I said I hoped 'twas needless
To defend an Act which all brave Men,
And Friends to justice, must admire.

Cas. What did the King return?

Barn. He owned Gramont had been unjustly Sentenc'd^
And therefore had his pardon;
But 'twas of ill example to oppose
In such a hostile way a Generals orders,
And might encourage others if your fine
Should be remitted; I urged your Services,
And lastly, that you had not asked for favor,
But that to keep his Soldiers in their duty
Who mutiny'd for pay, you had stripped your self
Of what might now discharge you; he said you would been
Too zealous in his Service, so abruptly left me.

Cas. By Heaven I think he is in the right, if zeal
Be thus rewarded.

Barn. My Lord, the King's abused,
The treacherous General has found a Spring
That will supply his malice whilst you have any virtues,
He makes 'em all appear as Arts put on
TO ingratiate with the Soldiers, on design
To serve the Spanish interest.

Cas. How, taxed with Treason! the basest too,
Made blacker by the ingratitude; he dares not say it,
Nor would the King believe it.

Barn. Somewhat that way his last words seem to import,
But what I, further learned was from an officer
That honors you, and whom the General trusts;
A correspondence held with Spain is talked of,
With hints of proofs to be produced against you.

Cas. Impossible, my words, my heart, and Actions,
Have been open, there is such unartful plainness
In my nature, as cannot be suspected.

Gra. There Is no security against such malice
As makes your highest virtues seem your Crimes;
And Prince's ever in jealousy of power,
Give easy credit to reports of danger.

Barn. Doubtless he will not fail of Evidence
To back his accusation; in short my Lord,
Unless you know, or find some speedy way
To free your self, and face your base detractors,
I would not answer for your Life.

Gra. O Fate!
All this to oppress a wretch already loaded,
Ruin on ruin heaped!
Is It not enough to have determined mine,
But I must pull all that surround me down,
To crush me in my fall, and with my own,
Bring all the weight of their destruction on me;
It is not to be born? what to be made
Ill fates crust instrument, distributer
Of direst miseries, and bane of virtue!
I am all this, I, I, Castalio, am.
The balefull Planet, whose malignant influence
Ruins your fortunes, blasts your spreading Glories,
And all your kinder Stars had purposed you defeats.

Cas. You share too much my wrongs, but have not caused 'em^
Let your resentment strike where justice bids,
I must not see you rashly loose your passion
Against a Man I love, my only Friend.

Gra. Alas you do not know with how much reason
My passion spoke, nor what a wretch I am,
Abandoned by my Father, banished his House,
And with his Curse if ever I return.

Cas. For ever?

Gra. It must be ever, the only terms
Of my admittance, never can be performed.

Cas. It Is cruel, what cause can you have given him to proceed
To such extremities?

Gra. You know the dearest secret of my Life,
My long concealed, and unsuspected marriage.

Cas. It Is then discovered.

Gra. Not that, nor dare I own it,
My Father loves Felicia, not knowing her
My Wife, and has commanded me to accept
Another, whom Fortune, Birth, and Nature,
Have left without Objection, which my refusing
Has thus irreconcilably incensed him.

Cas. Your case indeed is hard.

Gra. Yet there is worse behind,
I Have not disclosed the wound that grieves me most,
Not spoke how you're involved in my undoing;
My Father was disposed in gratitude
For a Sons life and liberty received,
To have performed the Terms of gaining yours,
But thus offended at my disobedience,
Your saving me appears an injury,
His hate extends to you, and now he is fixed
Not to relieve though he should see you perish.
Heavens should the fate of such a Man,
By which the Worlds might rather be determined,
It self be influenced by any others?
But why must I be made his destiny?
Yes, yes, trace back through all the windings of your fortune,
And you will find that I alone have been
Your evil Genius, that you have cause to curse
Your Fatal Friendship, the unlucky hour
You saved my Life, or that which gave me Birth;
O that it never had been. I want the patience
To support this load of wretched Life,
That growing heavier as it wastes, leaves not,
A hope of ease; tell me Castalio, Friend,
Through all this Gloom of endless Miseries,
Is there a dawn of any comfort left me?

Cas. Nor endless, my Gramont, nor Comfortless,
No Man can be to that degree unhappy,
That has on any Terms his fortune in his power,
For his rejecting that when virtue bids,
Shows there is a good in her, that would not fix,
Unless it could reward his choice.

Enter a Soldier. Sold. My Lord, I beg you will retire to your Chamber,
The Governor will be returned this minute,
And must not know you have had this Liberty.

Cas. I thank thee, honest Soldier. Farewell my Friend,
Remember Death's the worst we have to fear.
And that whilst we unmoved preserve our virtue,
Rather to be desired. Cas. goes within the Scene, Gra. Advances, a Scene shuts
representing the outside of the Castle. Manet Gramont.

Gra. To be desired indeed, since virtue here
Is ever thus oppressed, without relief,
But in its future prospect.

Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, I am s^nt with an unwelcome Message
From my Lord your Father; the time you took,
For payment of your fine being now expired,
It Is rigorously demanded, and by my Lord refused;
He says he would advise you so to act
That it may be discharged, if not you must
Deliver up your person, for he vows
He never will assist you.

Gra. Tell him I will obey him, this alone were light,
But added to the rest compleats the weight.
What News have thou? how does my little Son? Enter another Servant.
Thy looks forebode me ill, if my Child is dead,
Smile when thou tell me, for he is happy.

Serve. Sir, he lives, but in a wretched state;
The place you sent him to being near the Sea,
His Nurse walked often with him on the Shore,
But most unhappily, some weeks ago
Was by our famous Pirate, seen, and seized,
And with her infant charge carried on board.

Gra. O fatal accident! a strange one too;
What can the Villain gain by such a prize?
Methinks it should be more a burden to him,
Than advantage.

Serve. They say he does it, Sir,
In hopes of a Considerable ransom,
If his young Captives prove of quality;
But if he finds they will not be redeemed,
He throws 'em to the mercy of the Waves.

Ora. Ha! what pains the fates are at to make a Villain of me!
Must it be so? shall I give up my honor,
To save my self, and all I love from ruin?
No, that is in my own power, the rest in fates,
And spite of fate I Will keep my honesty;
Though my best Friend must be for me undone,
In Fame, in Fortune, and perhaps his Life
A Sacrifice to treacherous revenge;
My infant by inhumane Pirates Murdered,
The dearest fruit of my Felicia's Love.
My Wife too, O my Wife! she will be thrown out
To wander through the World, poor, and distressed,
To cu^se her fatal love, to curse her Husband,
The wretched source of bitterest miseries,
Who sees her starving, and can give no succor?
I cannot bear the thought, it shall not be;
I Would pluck these Eyes out rather than behold it,
So dear I hold her, I could cut off these limbs
To let her piece meal feed upon my flesh;
I must, I must prevent at any rate
This dismal Scene of misery, and ruin,
Turn Villain, any thing when she is at stake,
My Child too, and my Friend, I could by Heaven
Suffer a thousand racking death's for each;
And should I Sacrifice 'em all, to keep
A little peace of mind, the pride of never straying?
Walk on by Rules, and calmly let 'em perish,
Rather than tread one step beyond to save 'em?
Forbid it Nature, no^ I Will leap over all.
Castalio, my suffering Babe, and Loved Felicia
See how dear you're to me, how strong my Love,
When it can turn the Scale against my Virtue;
Nay now it is plain, not I but fate resolves it, Enter Bellgard.
He Is ^urely sent just at this very point^
To keep me warm, and firm for villainy,
Welcome Bellgard, where is Lamira? where my Father?
Tell him I will be his, and hers, and yours,
Mold me as you please, but take me quickly,
For now I grow impatient, when shall it be done?

Bell. Gramont, I love you, and am much rejoiced
To see you fond of your own happiness,
But yet must wonder at this new impatience.

Gra. I dare not trust delays, they are dangerous,
May hinder, or reveal the fatal secret,
That you know would ruin us;
But let us not confide in our best Friends,
Or near relations, shall we swear to it?
You Will not discover it where you most could trust
Your Sister, or if any one is dearer.

Bell. On my honor, but there needs no Oath,
My Friendship to you both will tie me stricter.
I was just going to my Lord your Father,
Shall I tell him? but we'll go together,
Since you are for dispatch, he best can forward it.

Gra. I Will wait on you, it is done, I Am entered now,
And to plunge through, must leave all thought behind me,
No happiness I for my self expect,
But would preserve my Friends from ruin;
Let me without a Partner be unfortunate,
It Is all the privilege, I beg from Fate. Exeunt.

ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Count Roquelaure, and Lamira. Lam. It Is I my Lord, am honored in your
choice,
To make me sharer of your noble blood.

Count. We shall esteem our House with greater Cause,
When it can boast of such an Ornament;
But as the happiness is most my Sons,
He best can pay you our acknowledgments,
For what he wanted confidence to ask.

Lam. He seems to want no virtue for perfection,
But a just sense of his exalted worth,
He comes, and now that fortune joins with it,
My heart grows bold, and tells me he has Charms, Enter Gra. and Bell.
Which it must love, and will not be controlled.

Count. Bellgard, your fair relation has consented
To all our wishes, though beyond our hopes.

Bell. She has obliged us all, but you Gramont
Will have the greatest sense, as well as share
Of the good fortune.

Gra. It Is so above what I can say, or think,
I could not hope, nor ought to'ave aimed at it.

Count. You must not wonder, Madam, if my Son
Is eager to secure a happiness
Which want of merit makes him fear to lose;
He pressed me ever I came, if I prevailed,
To beg you would not delay to Crown his wishes^

Lam. So small a prize, would not be worth the price
Of a long expectation.

Gra. It might reward an Age of expectation.

Count. But happiness can never come too soon;
May not the account of his, begin to morrow?

Lam. Nay now you are too hasty.

Count. Bellgard, you will join in intercession with us.

Bell. If but to avoid suspicion, it were best
To use dispatch.

Gra. O Felicia? Aside

Count. Ha? methought he named, Felicia,
We must not let him cool; since all is agreed,
What hinders that it be to night?

Lam. To night.

Gra. Why not to night? it cannot be too soon,
Since it must be. Aside.

Lam. Why must our Sex seem shy of what they wish? Aside.

Bell. Dare you trust your Chaplain with the secret?

Lam. I know none ^itter.

Bell. Then all is ready for the Ceremony,
Come Lamira, you should be above
This little affectation, this Maiden Coyness,
Away with it, you must not now deny,
There Is no pretense for it.

Lam. You have an absolute command of me,
But methinks this is too sudden.

Count. O the more unexpected the more pleasing.

Bell. I had designed before an Entertainment
Of Music here to night, most fortunately
On this occasion,
'Twere best to have it in this Antichamber,
Whilst we within conclude the happy Union,
Come Gramont, you will lead your Bride.

Count. Have, you lose time the night is almost spent.

Lam. How pleased we are with importunity,
That makes our own desires seem condescension;
Who pleads a cause like this can never fail,
If not their Arguments, Love will prevail. Exeunt.

After a Consort of Music.
The Scene draws and discovers Gramont, sitting alone. Gra. It must not be,
'twere base to wrong her so;
Ha base! why what is the part I have already acted?
Am I not now initiated Villain?
Have I the smallest claim to honor left?
Or can it be possessed by halfs? no,
Indivisible, it like the Soul
Must animate entire, in every part,
But one base Act compleats that Character,
Stamps Villain on the whole, be then a Villain
-- Ha? Felicia, my love! how could I think it!
How once Imagine it were possible
For one possessing all thy Heaven of Beauties,
To take another to his loathing arms;
No, in this Shipwreck of my honor, virtue,
I Will save the treasure of my Faith to thee,
It Is all I have left of good, my Darling store,
And I will hug my self, and pride in that.

Enter Lamira. Lam. Is it not time, Gramont, to think of rest?
The morning breaks upon your nights Devotions.

Gra. Perhaps I have some cares that keep me waking,
With which I would not load your peaceful breast.

Lam. O can you think that I behold you thus,
And keep my peace? thus given up to sadness,
And for untimely thought, neglecting me,
What is it? speak your griefs, what cause so pressing
To allow no respite upon a time like this?
Which for the wretched'st pair that fate ever joined,
Used to put on at least a form of joy.

Gra. Mine is indeed a most uncommon cause,
But do not seek to know it.

Lam. No, I need not,
Now it speaks it self, you do not love me,
That, that alone could keep you from me thus.

Gra. Suppose the idea of a suffering Friend,
For me this instant bearing cruel hardships,
Had checked me from indulgent though^s of ease,
Would that excuse me to you?
How clasped in those soft arms could I be called
The Friend, the other half of poor Castalio,
Whose fainting limbs, rude circling Irons load.

Lam. I know your Friends misfortune, and his worth,
I know you owe him much,
And will not tax you of too nice a gratitude,
Be such a lover, as you are a Friend;
This cause of sadness shall be soon removed
Three thousand Crowns will give Castalio freedom,
Which shall be sent him instantly. Within there, Marian.

She talks aside with Mar. Gra. Down, down proud, swelling heart, why should
thou mount
Above my Grovelling fate?
Thou, can not raise it to thy height, yield then,
Be vile as that.

Lam. Bid him have, and say Gramont has sent him. To Mar. who goes out.
Let him not mention me. Still are you sad? Advancing.

Gra. I Am but correcting a proud Rebel here,
That would not be obliged; I shall have peace
When I have taught it to be as ungrateful,
As I must be.

Lam. To whom.

Gra. Madam, to you.

Lam. Why to me? why must you be ungrateful?
Can you not love me?

Gra. You know not what a Bankrupt you have trusted,
So poor, so ruined, that for all he owes you,
The kindest, best return that he can make,
Is thus to shun your Bed.

Lam. Am I then your aversion.

Gra. Believe me, it is the highest Mark of value,
That neither your resentment can provoke,
Nor all your Beauties tempt me to abuse you.

Lam. Abuse, is that a Husbands language? how?
What mean you? speak the cause of this behavior.

Gra. It is not to be told, let it suffice
that as the present circumstances are,
If I should take a Husbands Privilege,
The consequence would be to you most fatal;
Ask not the cause, I cannot tell you more.

Lam. Say, only say, it is not want of Love,
And I will seek no further.

Gra. Were all the fire of every Heart you have enflamed,
Raging at once in mine, this were ^he greatest proof
That I could give you, of true affection.

Lam. O could I be convinced of that Gramont,
I should not envy the most happy Bride,
I have no thought, no wish beyond your Love,
Make me secure of that and I am blessed;
Why art thou thus unmoved, thou cruel Savage?
Have thou no Sensibility, no Fire in thy Soul?
Or have not I the Art to blow the Flame?
Instruct me then, if ^tis not yet too late,
If it is not kindled at another's Charms;
That was an Injurious Thought, chide it away,
Tell me you could not be so false, so base,
You do not answer!
Nay then, I fear I am abused indeed;
Speak quickly, Swear I am not; the very fea^'s
Distracting, not to be born, Swear you are thus by Nature^
Thus cold, Insensible to all the Sex,
As you are now to me, swear that
And I Will complain no more of your Indifference;
But with submissive Duty, tenderest Care,
And most unwearied Love, still strive to move
Thy cold, obdurate Heart; is there a Hope to gain it?

Gra. Madam, You set it at too high a rate,
It is not worth your least concern or thought.

Lam. Why, why Inhumane do thou answer thus;
Regardless of the Doubts that rack my Soul?
O speak; reply to them, ever they distract me;
It Is enough, enough thy silence speaks,
The dumb Confession of a guilty Mind;
Ay, there ^t is, thou ^alse, perfidious Man,
It Is to a Rival I am sacrificed;
But think thou I will tamely bear my wrongs,
And let her triumph in 'em? Dare not to see her,
For if thou do, I Will find the Strumpet out;
Confusion! Slighted, for another too!
O how I Will be revenged! I Will know this Sorcere^s,
Make her most infamous;
I Will be your plague, anticipate your Hell.

Gra. Why all this for a bare Imagination?

Lam. Is it no more? Then you may join with me
To curse this Creature of my fancy;
Let all united Mischiefs light upon her,
Diseases make her loathsome to your arms,
Deformity, a Horror to your Eyes;
May pinching Wants bring her to Beggary,
And Infamy divert all pity from her.

Gra. O hold! You stab my Soul: If you must curse,
On me let all your Imprecations fall,
For I alone am Guilty.

Lam. Why thus concerned for one that has no Being,
But in a bare Imagination? Dissembling,
Vilest Wretch; thou thing below my anger;
There have been glorious Villains, that may look
With scorn on thee, disdaining thy low ends;
A paltry bait of Fortune, poor Spirited,
Mean Traitor; what Indigent abandoned Creature
Is this, that hopes to vaunt it in my Spoils,
Yet must be purchased at no less a rate
Than such an insolent Disdain of me?
What are your terms? what she? And what her Charms?
Let Us know the State, and reason of this Preference --
Stubborn and Dumb; am I not worth an Answer?

Gra: What, Madam, can I answer to your Rage?

Lam. My wrongs, thy own upbraiding guilt thou can not answer.
I do not rage, nor is there any rage
For Injuries like this.
All that has had the name of Passion, Fury,
Even to Madness, here is highest Reason;
So basely used! a Rival's property!
Unvalu'd, thus despised for her, tormenting^
What easy Fool did think thou have secured?
Mistaken Man thou have roused a Woman's Rage;
In spite of all thy hardened Villainy,
Thou shall repent thou did provoke me thus;
I Will haunt your Steps, and interrupt your Joys;
Fright you with Curses from your Minions arms;
Pursue you with Reproaches, blast her Fame;
I Will be the constant Bane of all your Pleasures,
A ^arring, Clamorous, very Wise to thee,
To her a greater Plague, than thou to me.

Exit Lam. Gram. Let my Felicia escape her jealous fury,
And with whatever force her Vengeance, strike,
It is not worth my fear: She must be yet
Too much transported with her rage t'observe me,
I Will take the occasion, and somewhere near Bellgard's
Remain unseen, till I may have admittance
To my Love;
Her Nature's calm, by no rough passions tossed,
A Harbor from this Tempest; upon her gentle Bosom
All the Disorders of my Soul will cease,
Or I despair ever to find my Peace. Exit.

SCENE Bellgard's House.
Felicia Sola. It Is yet too soon t'expect him, the sprightly Day
Cannot move swift enough for Loves impatience.
Doubtless my kind Gramont is wishing too
For the blessed Minute, waiting as he is wont,
Like a fond Lover, ready to seize the first
That gives us Liberty: O that dear Man!
Who that were so beloved, would grudge to bear
More than I suffer for him? That Kind, that faithful
Partner of my Griefs.

Enter Bellgard. Bell. So Early up Sister.

Feli. I was not much disposed for sleep this Morning.

Bell. Perhaps my coming home so late disturbed you.

Feli. 'Twas late indeed.

Bell. The Occasion may excuse it.

Feli. Am I to know the occasion?

Bell. Only a Friends Marriage. 'Twill be fit Aside.
To let Felicia know Gramont is married,
But not to whom; whilst that is unsuspected
The Secret's safe.

Feli. May I ask what Friend? Or is it a Secret, Brother?

Bell. It Is indeed a Secret, Sister; but you
Should know it, if I were sure 'twould not disturb you.

Feli. That I dare promise you;
It is not in the power of any one
To raise the least concern in me that way.

Bell. Then I may safely tell you, (but with charge
Not to reveal it) Gramont last Night was married.

Feli. Gramont! You jest with me.

Bell. On my faith I Am ser^ous.

Feli. What can he mean? To whom, Brother?

Bell. For that you must excuse me; I Have given my Honor
Not to disclose it to my dearest Friend.

Feli. Unless you tell me that, I shall believe
You said it but to try me.

Bell. Were it not a Secret of Importance,
Or if my own, I would not hide it from you;
None but his Father, and my self were trusted,
My Faith, my Honor, Friendship, are engaged
To keep it with the last Fidelity^

Fell. With what concern he speaks; and yet it cannot be.

Bell. I conjure you, Sister, not to mention this.

Fell. Why such a Secret? But you're not in earnest.

Bell. Why should you doubt, when I affirm it thus
Not from Report, but my own certain knowledge?
My self was present at the Nuptial tie,
A Witness of their Vows.

Fell. If there is faith in Man, this cannot be truth;
I fancy, Brother, this is but designed
To t^y how I could bear it.

B^l. Those are Women's Arts, I understand 'em not;
Heaven knows no greater truth than what I Have told you.

Fell. Swear by that Heaven, you're sure Gramont is married,
And I will doubt no longer.

Bell. Am I not worth your Credit? Why all this Doubting?
By every name that is good, Gramont is married,
I saw him married.

Fell. Wretched Woman!

Bell. How Felicia!

Fell. O I must not think it;
He cannot be guilty of so base an action.

Bell. What foolish Passion's this?

Fell. And yet my Brother swears it, swears he saw it:
O Gramont! Is all my Love and Faith rewarded thus?

Bell. For shame at least conceal your ^olly;
This Fondness for a Man who cares not for you,
Perhaps scarce thinks of you.

Fell. O, to be so abused!

Bell. What said you? So abused

Fell. He has wronged me basely.

Bell. Ha! Have thou not wronged thy self, given up
Thy Honor to him?

Fell. O forgive me, Brother --

Bell. Dare thou own thy Infamy, yet hope to be forgiven?

Fell. I am married.

Bell. No Strumpet, he but served his Lust with thee,
And now has paid thee as thou do deserve,
Too wise to Marry where he found not Virtue.

Fell. Can you suspect me of a thing so vile!
No, by all Goodness, I am not dishonest;
But by all Lawful Bonds, his real Wife.

Bell. O curse! What do I hear! What have I done!
Base Dog, so to betray, abuse my Friendship;
Whether does all this lead? Where can it end?
It Is Misery, Dishonor without end,
And I the Instrument of all this Ruin.
Villain, perfidious Villain! Ay, Traitress, weep,
Weep for thy Shame, thy Si^^ thy Disobedience,
Rebellious Girl, pollution of my blood.

Fell. O I deserve all this, that could deceive
And disobey the best of Brothers.

Bell. You Have met a just return of your Ingratitude
To all my Love and tender Care of you.

Fell. I have indeed: I have no Husband now;
And where, alas, where will my little Son
Now find a Father!

Bell. A Son! Is then this cursed
Unhappy Marriage of so long a date?

Fell. Two Years I Have been his Wife, and brought in secret
A wretched Infant to partake our Sorrows,
And now they are completed. O my Brother,
Tread me to the Earth;
Double your Anger on me; it is but just,
That I may fall a Load of Miseries,
And never, never rise.

Bell. Alas, she moves my Soul -- Prithee no more;
Thy Fault was great, but now thy Punishment
Has so exceeded it, I must forgive thee.
Rise, Felicia; I am still a Brother;
Wipe off these Tears; thou shall have Justice done thee,
Trust me thou shall.

Fell. O you are too good. But my dear Brother,
For whom am I so treacherously abandoned?

Bell. O that gives double edge to my Resentment!
The other innocent, and more abused,
Shares in our Blood as well as Injuries.
What, did the Villain think our Family
Were Women all, whom he might poorly wrong,
Safe from the avenging Hand of Manly Justice?

Fell. Is she a Relation? What, Lamira?
Now I reflect on it, he spoke last Night
Of some Addresses there.

Bell. Sister, be satisfied; my Honor is
Too nearly touched to let you be abused;
With that compose your self. But poor Lamira,
Who can bear this fatal Story to her!
I who have been th'unlucky Instrument,
Dare not speak it, till with the Villain's Blood
I Have washed off the Dishonor. Exit Bell.

Fell. Is this the Joy the longed-for Morning promised!
Are all those tender, charming Ecstasies,
And soft Embraces which my Love expected,
Now given to another! O it is death!
This very Minute she holds him in her Arms,
Thinks him all hers; he lies transported too,
With perjured Breath gives all my Vows away.
Can I endure it! O Gramont!
He must be mine: I Will pierce his faithless Heart
With my Upbraidings. O she shall not have him;
I Will tear him from her; I will, I will;
She shall not, must not have have him. Ha! As she is going out, Lamira meets
her.

Lam. Why start you? Is there ought in me to fright?

Fell. Lamira here!

Lam. Is that so strange? I come to seek your Brother:
The Hour's indeed unusual; but my Business
Will well excuse to him this early Visit.

Fell. Early indeed for Lovers so newly joined to part.

Lam. Ha, does she know it? (Aside.) What Lovers do you speak of?

Fell. Too well you know; would I had died e're known it:
Why must I live to speak his Infamy!
Faithless and perjured, he is still Gramont,
Once so beloved, so kind, and seeming true.

Lam. Is It then Felicia? She whom Nature meant
A Friend, my Rival, cause of all my Unhappiness:
But how am I betrayed to her!
How this cursed Secret known!
If once so kind, who tells you he is false?

Fell. Heaven would not leave such Baseness undetected;
The sacred Vows he made last Night to you,
Were mine before:
And O how often in Ecstasies of Love repeated!
How pressing me in his fond Arms, he has swore
They never should embrace another.

Lam. Too faithful, Villain. (Aside.)
What of this? Suppose he liked you once,
Does that oblige him not to mend his Choice?
Is he to blame if you want Charms to fix him?

Fell. Madam, I Will not dispute with you my Charms,
But urge my Right in him; that Plea's sufficient,
Whatever I am, to make your Loves a Crime.

Lam. Because he swore to you, think you that Men
Remember Oaths in their loose Pleasures made?
What can you hope for from so vain a Plea?
It Is wi^e in one who sees her self abandoned
To mourn in silence: Pursuits, Reproaches, or Complaints,
May lose her Fame, but never retrieve the Lover.
Had you beheld last Night what wondrous Love he showed,
You Would be convinced his Heart's too deeply fixed
Ever to be moved, and cease your vain lamenting.

Fell. Such wondrous Love! O I know too well
How many tender ways he has to charm,
And make himself believed:
But could he be all that for any other,
So soft, so nice, so passionately fond,
So much transported as I Have seen the Charmer?

Lam. Poor credulous Creature, when he seemed so fond,
You should have been less kind to have secured him,
Or made him more than swear.

Fell. What means all this?
You speak as if you thought me not his Wife.

Lam. His Wife?

Fell. Why with that Scorn? His Wife, his lawful Wife,
As firmly as the Holy Priest could make me.

Lam. Felicia, it is too much, if he is false,
He has gone too far to leave you that Pretense,
Nor will it be believed.

Fell. I have sufficient Witness, and every legal Proof
Of what I say, But let himself appear,
Let him look on me, and try if he has Courage
To disown his first, his only Wife.

Lam. Then what am I!
If this is truth, is it your part to rai^?
Am not I most abused, dishonored, ruined!
But it cannot be. What, by a Priest?
Legally Married, said you?

Fell. Heaven witness that I am.
But yesterday I saw him too,
All Love, all Tenderness, and full of me.
Sure some cursed Arts must have been practiced on him;
Some Philter he has drank, no other way^
You could have charmed him from me.

Lam. Are there such Arts?
Indeed the mighty Fondness you so boast of,
May make it out of doubt.

Fell. Alas, my Arts
Have been of little force; for I have lost him:
O have I lost for ever all the Joys
I found in him! The solid Happiness
Of Minds united, must we never again
With equal Wishes, equal Transports meet?

Lam. Never, never; I henceforth forbid it.

Fell. What Right can you pretend to of forbidding?

Lam. The Right which one that is injured has to Vengeance.
The Ungrateful Traitor that abused my Love,
Shall give, nor know no Joy in any others.
Think you I Would patiently behold the Villain
Possessing, and possessed, by a loved Rival?

Fell. Madam, I think you neither have the Right,
Nor Power to hinder it, if we agree.

Lam. You dare not; my Wrongs shall rise and check the very Wish,
Strike him with Shame, and you with Jealousy,
That shall prevent, or poison all your Joys.
But if thou art so poorly spirited,
T'accept and yield t'adulterated Love,
I Will disappoint your Wishes when their highest,
Fired with full Hope, and nearer Expectation,
When all thy eager Senses are at once
Crowding to feast on his delusive Charms,
E're thou can taste, I Will stab him in thy Arms. Ex. Lam.

Fell. Alas, we never can meet in Joy again:
Nay, now perhaps he means no more to see me:
I would but once, but live to see him once,
Take my last leave of him, and then the World;
For when I Am his no more, I would be nothing. Exit.

ACT IV. SCENE I.
The Scene opens, Felicia alone, Gramont enters to her. Gram. I Waited long, my
Love, to find you free,
And had almost despaired of seeing you.

Fell. A Sight you could have been most willingly
Dispensed from.

Gram. Why do thou say so? It Is unkind; thou know
I ever thought the Hours I passed with thee,
The happiest of my Life.

Fell. Perhaps you did,
Perhaps you loved me once.

Gram. And do not still!

Fell. O Gramont, would you had never said you loved,
Or I had never believed you.

Gram. Not Love! If I have any good in me,
It Is the sincere Affection which I bear thee:
What means my Dear?

Fell. Have I not been a fond, a faithful Wife?

Gram. Not Malice can deny it.

Fell. Why am I then forsaken for another?

Gram. Forsaken!

Fell. You who a thousand times
Have sworn, our Marriage was the weakest Bond
That held you to me: You to break 'em all.

Gram. Ha!

Fell. Or though you had not loved me, could you do
So base a thing?

Gram. O don't upbraid me; that thou know my Shame,
Is Punishment enough.

Fell. Could you be false to me that doted on you?
Ungrateful Man! How can I live without him!

Gram. Thou break'st my Heart.

Fell. You have broke my Heart, and may I not complain?
Unkind Gramont!

Gram. O turn thy Eyes away,
For their Reproaches sting me to the quick.

Fell. Nay, then I Will fix 'em till your Heart relent
With Pity, for the Miseries you have caused:
Look on me, look upon your wretched Wife!

Gram. A Wretch like me should be excluded ever
From the blessed Vision! I dare not look on thee.

Fell. Then tell me, if I ever deserved your Love,
What have I done to lose it?

Gram. Lose it! If I had not loved thee tenderly^
I had not been a Villain.

Fell. For love of me?

Gram. For thee? t'avert the Miseries
Which threatened thee, and our unhappy Infant,
I sacrificed my Honor.

Fell. What Miseries would not I share with you,
Rather than share your self with any other!
I would have starved first, or have begged you Food,
T'ave kept you mine: But now you are Lamira's.

Gram. I am unworthy to be thine, Felicia:
All I can ask thee now, is to forgive me.

Fell. Alas, what is my Forgiveness! My Brother and Lamira
Will pursue you: She does not love like me.

Fell. No matter; their Resentment I can bear,
But not Felicia's. See, thy wretched Husband
Kneels at thy Feet, to beg Compassion of thee;
Entreats thee, when he falls beneath his Griefs,
Or by thy Brother's Vengeance, to bestow
Some Pity on him; think, remember still
'Twas love of thee made him unworthy of thee --
But if she can forgive, she must be good;
And then must hate me too, despise, contemn me. O Cu^se!
Let me grow here, become one Piece with Earth,
Lost to my self, all Eyes, and all Remembrance.

Fell. O I cannot bear to see you thus; O rise!
What would you have me to do for you?

Gram. For me! Use me like what I am, a Dog,
Fit to be spurned, kicked from you like a Curr.

Fell. Don't distract your self.

Gram. What, outlive my Honesty, and not be mad!
Lose thy Esteem, lose my Felicia's Heart,
Deserve to lose 'em too, and not be mad!

Fell. O Gramont!
If you had loved but half so faithfully
As your Felicia does, she had not lost you.

Gram. Thou did; but now you cannot, must not love me.

Fell. O I never knew till now how much I love you!
Be what you will, or use me how you will,
You Have fixed your self so firmly to my Heart,
I cannot divide it from you:
It Is full; it is breaking now with Fears for you.

Gram. Thou dear Example of Fidelity, Rising.
What do thou fear? Come to my Arms, and tell me.

Fell. O ^ly to mine, and then I can fear nothing;
I^ll hold thee here, and Fate shall never reach thee.

Gram. Not if thou love me. O I see thou do;
And circled thus, I Am happy once again.

Fell. How have you swore no other ever should thus embrace you!

Gram. I swear again, none ever did, or shall.

Fell. Tell me not that. Last Night -- think on last Night.

Gram. Base as I was last Night, I could not break that Vow.

Fell. O Gramont! do not deceive me more;
Lamira boasts the wondrous Love you showed.

Gram. To her? If it were Love not once to touch her,
Or even approach her Bed: -- By Heaven I did it not.

Fell. I will believe you.

Gram. Thou may, my Love. I think thou do^st forgive me too.
O let me keep thee then for ever thus!
For whilst I am possessed of so much Goodness,
I shall believe I Am honest. Am I not, Felicia?
No, thou know I am not:
Why do thou touch me then? Fly, fly away,
Or thou art lost; not Innocence can save thee.

Fell. Alas, what mean you?

Gram. It Is dangerous to be near me:
If Fate should now be hurling Vengeance on me,
Might it not strike thee too?

Fell. Heaven avert it ever: I would fain
Hope all may yet be well.

Gram. Well! Can thou redeem my Honor, clear my Fame?
I shall be pointed at; a noted Villain,
Where can I fly from the reproaching Sight
Of all that once esteemed me? Or how endure it,
When the very Thought strikes such Confusion?
Better I might have born the worst of Miseries
That threatened me; which not the meanest Wretch
That begs, or toils for Bread, but can support,
And does not truck his Honesty for Fortune:
Thou, Coward, durst not. Now how wil'st thou bear
The Infamy thy Baseness loads thee with?

Fell. Alas, it is I have caused your Infamy;
My inconsiderate Passion has exposed you.
What Madness moved me to reveal the fatal Secret!
Was that a Remedy! what could I intend,
What Consequence expect, but your Destruction!
O I can never enough revenge it on my self,
Nor you enough reproach me!

Gram. You Are not to blame.

Fell. Indeed I am; it was my Duty as your Wife,
Whatever I suffered not to have accused you:
And as I loved, I should have had no thought
Of my own Misery, whilst you were happy.

Gram. How can thou speak so kindly to a Man
That has undone thee! Thou do not sure look forward
On thy Ruin, or thou could never forgive me:
Nay, by Heavens, it stains thy Virtue as I am now,
To use me with such Tenderness.

Fell. Would you not have me love you?

Gram. It is not for thy Honor to show Affection
For one thou must despise: I will not let thee
Wrong thy self so much, but leave thee to reflect;
And thou will meet me next, as I deserve,
With Coldness, Anger, and Disdain.

Fell. Impossible -- You are not going thus!

Gram. I should, and thou should not retain me.

Fell. I would retain thee ever.

Gram. O Felicia! --
Yet I will go -- Look not so killing soft;
Think on thy Honor; think I am a Villain;
Learn to despise me; struggle with thy Heart;
Strive thy ill-plac'd Affection to remove,
As I now tear my self from all I love. Ex. Gram.

Fell. Is it a Fault to love him? If it be,
In punishing impute his Crime to me;
I Will pay for both a double Penalty,
However cruel Heaven intends his Share,
Beyond what Life, all, all that Love can bear. Ex. Fell.

Scene Lamira's House. Lamira and Marian.
Lam. When will these struggling Passions cease to rage,
Anger and Love, Pity and Jealousy!
Whilst each are striving to possess me wholly,
They rend my Soul among 'em.

Mar. Neither must now have any share in it.
Since, Madam, you're resolved to leave the World,
Heaven claims your Heart entire.

Lam. Yes, Marian; I have vowed my self to Heav'n^
The safe Retreat from Fears and vain Desires.
But something must be done to satisfy
The discontent of my disordered Thoughts,
That no unruly one may there disturb me.

Mar. The Place will be your Sanctuary from 'em,
A holy Cloister, Gates, shuts with the World
All human Passions and Reflections out.

Lam. What, can I there
Think tamely on my Injuries,
And be pleased the Villain 'scap'd unpunished?

Mar. Do you imagine, Madam, then Bellgard
Will not revenge you?

Lam. Ha, Bellgard!
Good Heaven forbid; his way would be too fatal;
Not clear my spotted Honor,
But stain it worse with Blood: A wicked Justice
To punish his, by a more horrid Crime.
I dread to think it! Bellgard is violent,
And may do sudden Mischief, if not hindered.

Mar. Felicia may perhaps have Power to calm
Her Brother's fierce Resentments; she is mild enough,
Soon to forgive, and plead for him that wronged her.

Lam. Felicia plead! Felicia save his Life!
And he be her Reward blessed in each other!
O what a torturing Thought! Can I endure it!
Nor Love nor Honor can.

Mar. You're neither pleased that he should die, or live:
What way would you dispose him?

Lam. Rather to death than her. But there is yet
Something I would be at, I know not how,
Scarce what. Ha, is it Gramont! Enter Gramont.
Come thou t'insult over one whom thou have ruined?
Or think thou yet thy Baseness undiscovered?

Gram. Not to conceal, but to confess my Crime;
Not to insult, but to implore forgiveness,
thus approach you.

Lam. How dare thou hope I can forgiv^ such Wrongs?

Gram. Unless your Goodness, Madam, I must own
My Hopes has no Foundation:
I Have naught to plead but what must more incense you,
If I say Castalio's Sufferings moved me,
Should I to serve a Friend abuse your Love;
Or if I urge Felicia's dearer interest,
Th'excuse can but inflame your hatred to me.

Lam. Is it then so? Let me hear thee speak
Thy self a Villain, Is she your Wife?

Gra. To her Misfortune, and my Shame, she is.
Fool, not to think her happiness enough;
Whilst she was mine, how could I fear to want it?

Lam. Tortures and Death! What brutal Insolence!
Gramont, it seems you came not to incite
My Pity, but my Vengeance.

Gra. Neither, Madam;
I am too guilty to deserve your Pity,
And need not urge Revenge, since you can have
No greater than I mean to give you soon;
I only beg your anger may not survive me,
Or curse pursue me farther than the Grave.

Lam. Is is to hinder that you take such pains
To let me know to whom I owe my ruin,
That I may turn my Curses o^ Felicia?

Gra. Heaven forbid! She Is Innocent, and wronged
As much as you.

Lam. What are her wrongs? How offered to be named with mine?
No, Traitor, thou may know mine are unequalled,
When even thy Basene^s could not make 'em greater.

Gra. Madam, I think I had the power to wrong you more,
Which my not using may, I hope, in part
Atone, for what I did.

Lam. I know 'twas nor respect for me, nor Honor
Stopped thee in thy course of Mischief;
Thy Inclination lagg'd e're 'twas complete,
Or thy firm Villainy would never have failed thee.

Gra. Can there be such stupidity in Nature,
To be insensible to so much Beauty?

Lam. Ay, now thou have it; Fawn, and Flatter w^ll;
Daub over my Injuries with soothing words,
And make me take 'em all for Obligations;
Say how you Love; say with how much regret
You sacrificed your wishes; Is it not thus?
Have not my Charms done wondrous execution?

Gra. Had not Felicia first --

Lam. No more; thou will'st not suffer me one moment
To fo^get that hated name, lest thou
Should be alone the Object of my rage;
But fear not, she shall share it.

Gram. O rather double it on me.

Lam. Fond, doting Fool,
Thou do but show me in thy care for her,
The near and surest way to thy Destruction,
And I will strike where I may wound thee deepest,
Add all the Fury of a slighted Rival,
To the calm justice of Revenge on thee.

Gram. Madam, I find whatever I can say,
But more foments your Anger, therefore leave you,
I go to satisfy your just resentment
But if my Death's too little to appease it,
Rather than punish others for my crime,
Still hate me, let your rage without control,
Load me with Curses, till they sink my Soul. Exit Gramont.

Lam. Perdition seize it; Despair
And all the Racks I feel revenge me on thee;
No fears, no tenderness, but for Felicia;
Is this the way to appease my just resentment,
To tell me 'twas for love of her he wronged me.
There Is then no other way to punish him
But by the loss of her. They must be parted -- Enter Castalio.
Did I not order none should be admitted?

Mar. I did not hear you, Madam.

Lam. No matter, you might have thought it was not proper.

Cast. With all the awe of one that fears to offend,
And knows not whether he offends or not,
I pay this Duty, impatient, and yet more
In dread to know my fate
From her that is Mistress of it.

Lam. Unseasonable importunity!
My Lord, I cannot think this meant to me,
I have no power, alas. not of my own,
Much less another's fate.

Cast. Your fate is Heavens care, and, Oh that mine
Were yours as much, as it as much is in your power.

Lam. You know not what you wish; but let it end,
It Is a Discourse I Am not disposed to hear;
And if, my Lord, you value my repose,
You Will not pursue it further.

Cast. Then I am doomed, Doomed to Despair for ever,
Since but to hear of Love from me offends you.

Lam. From you, or any other, I hate the Name,
And fly from all that wear a Form of kindness,
For it is in that alone Men can deceive.

Cast. It Is often indeed put on for a Disguise,
Yet must be worn by those who would be known
For what they really are.

Lam. There Is no Reality, no Truth in Man,
But where it most appears, and seems least feigned;
It Is there the Masterpiece of Villain lies.

Cast. You speak as if some one whom you had trusted
Had deceived you.

Lam. Yes, I have been deceived.

Cast. Who durst attempt it?

Lam. One in whom you, and all Mankind have been
Deceived; O Traitor! Who could have suspected
That modest show of Honesty and Honor,
Exquisite, Finished, O ungrateful Villain!

Cast. The thought disorders you, it must be sure
Somewhat of weight, that can transport you thus.

Lam. I had forgot my self --
It Is true, I have some cause to be disturbed,
But pardon me that I so ill acquit my self
Of the respect I owe you, thus to expose it.

Cast. Madam I Will take my leave if I constrain you,
But wish you could esteem me worth your trust,
As one by whom all your concerns are held,
More than in equal balance with his own.

Lam. What use of Friendship, Trust, or to complain
Of Injuries for which there is no redress?

Cast. There Is then Revenge.

Lam. But that you cannot give.

Cast. I think I shall not boast to say, there is no one.
In your C^us^ s^all dare beyond me.
Speak who the Traitor is that has abused you;
And if to do you Justice^
There be an Obstable, or Danger I re^use
T'encounter, let me be branded for a Coward

Lam. There is an Ob^tacle has greater force
Than any Danger can, it is one you love,
Whom if I named you would not credit me;
One you esteem your Friend, your nearest Friend.

Cast. My Friend! Who durst usurp that sacred name,
And injure me where I Am most sensible;
This gives me double right to seek revenge:
You must not, will not now conceal him from me.

Lam. E're long the public Rumor will inform you,
This cursed adventure will be blazed among'em;
I shall be made the common Theme and Mirth,
My Honor lie at every whisperers mercy,
That Is pleased to pass his censure on my conduct.

Cast. Permit me then to ask it from your self,
That if I hear rash tongues too bold with it,
I may with more assurance vindicate you.

Lam. It Is the most strange unhappy Story, so fu^l^
Of Baseness, heightened with all the aggravations
Of vilest Treachery and Ingratitude,
For he had such endearing obligations,
I hazarded my Ruin, all for him,
O'er-rul'd by a destructive Passion, nay 'twas Madness,
The blot of Life, and stain of all my glory.

Cast. Was he beloved, and yet could injure you!
How? In what Nature? 'Twas impossible
For one so blessed, not to return affection.

Lam. Would that were all his crime, but he has basely
Deceived, Abused, wronged me in such a Nature, --
I cannot speak it -- Conscious of my folly,
For I have been as weak, as he perfidious,
Press me no further to declare my shame.

Cast. Then name the Traitor to me, and I will tear
The Secret from his Heart, with Life extort it.

Lam. A Villain's Life's too mean a Sacrifice;
No, let me think -- Somewhat I had designed
Of lasting t^rment suited to his Crime --
That first I Will try; but if without success,
May use your Friendship,
Till when, I beg you will enquire no further.

Cast. Madam I must obey, and will no longer
Trouble you in this Disorder, but when you are pleased
To let me know the Man you have been deceived in,
You shall have proof
My Soul disdains all Friendship with a T^aytor. Exit Castalio.

Lam. Yes, thou shall live, to see thy self abandoned,
And taste with me the Pangs of hopeless Love.
That one who could be guilty of this Baseness,
Should know to love with such Fidelity!
O what a Happiness to possess that Heart,
So fond, so true! Could it have first been mine!
What full delights has not Felicia known?
Eternal woes succeed 'em; be they remembered
But to increase the Curse of Deprivation,
The stings of Shame, and causless Jelousie
Sharpen the Pains of everlasting absence
That I decree 'em; Bellgard must be advised with,
And won, if I have any power with him,
To set his Rage the Bounds I have given mine,
I Would not be cruel, nor too tamely bear;
Both the Extremes are shunned in this Design,
And therefore it is but just to hope success;
What can Revenge, Honor, and Love, have less?

Exit. ACT V. SCENE I.
Felicia alone. DIstracted with some dismal apprehension,
In vain I seek ^or Ease to change the Prospect;
What ever way I turn my roving thoughts,
It Is still but a new Scene of Misery:
Were my Gramont safe from my Brother's rage
And the World's censure, 'twere yet impossible
Ever to reconcile him to himself. Enter B^ll. and Lam

Lam. Whatever can satisfy my injured Honor,
May well, Bellgard, be thought for yours sufficient.

Bell. I don't dispute it, Madam.

Lam. Nor do you grant it.

Bell. Honor gives different Laws to different Sexes;
Mine says this Sword alone can do me justice. Apart^

Feli. What can this unexpected Visit mean?

Lam. You seem to take me for an Enemy,
Perhaps you look on me with Rival's Eyes,
But I am come in Friendship.

Feli. It Is what, indeed, I did not hope, and scarce dare credit.

Lam. You're Innocent to me, as I to you,
Tho both each others chief unphappiness;
But there is another guilty cause of that;
Him only we should hate, let us be Friends;
Disgusted with the World, I have resolved
The short remainder of this wretched Life,
To be a strict Recluse by Holy Vows,
And leave to you, Felicia, the Possession
Of all that Fortune I am Mistress of.

Feli. This is amazing, Madam! How have I
Deserved from you such kindness?

Lam. Your Merit is unquestioned, and to me
You are a near Relation;
My Gift is only charged with one Condition,
The same I have imposed upon my self,
That you shall never see Gramont again,
In which I have consulted both our Honors.

Feli. It were not much, indeed, for yours to see him;
But what in you is Virtue, would in me,
Who am his Wife, be Impious.

Lam. Not since he first has broke his Faith with you;
By that you are absolved.

Fell. The Marriage-Vows are not conditional;
The Tye's as strong, my Duty still the same,
However he fail in his.

Lam. It cannot oblige you to depend on one,
Who wants assistance to support himself.

Feli. Yes, Madam, I must share my Husband's Fate,
However wretched:
When he is deprived of every other Comfort,
In that Extremity he will need me most.

Bell. And think thou he shall keep thee; be advised,
Felicia, you may lose him on worse terms.

Feli. To me all terms in losing him are equal.

Lam. She dotes upon him.

Bell. Infamously dotes.
I tell thee, by my Honor, thou shall lose
Both him, and me, wander wherever thou can
I will not know thee in the last distress:
And for thy Villain, Husband --

Fell. Let him but wander with me, I ask no more;
And we will take our weary steps somewhere remote,
Where we can never be more a Burden to you,
Nor shall you ever hear that there is such
A wretched pair in being.

Bell. Do not hope it; for by my Life I swear,
If thou dare now refuse to abandon him,
Wherever you think to fly from my resentment,
There Is not a Place so distant can contain you,
But I Will pursue you to, and tear thee from him.

Fell. Do you grudge us even Misery together?

Lam. Together! It Is a Word, tho joined with Death,
I cannot hear thee Name. Madam, accept
My offered Friendship, or you shall find
I can resent the slight, and if provoked,
Am not a despicable Enemy.

Fell. Your hate can execute no worse
Than what in Friendship's Name you have proposed,
For it is the utmost Fate can do against me.

Bell. Shameless creature, to confess this fondness
For a Man thou know'-st to be a Villain.

Fell. Alas! what fondness? Have I asked ought for him
But what the worst of Enemies in malice
Would condemn him to?
To taste the Bitterness of Poverty,
Roving like Vagabonds about the World,
For ever banished from our Country, Friends,
And all we hold most dear.

Lam. But one another, there you expect to find
An ample recompense for all you lose,
And be instead of all the World to him;
Is that a State for such a Criminal?
What satisfaction to my injured love?
No, he shall share the Torments he has caused,
Languish in fruitless wishes, cursed with Despair,
Eternally deprived of all he loves;
Oh I have felt, and know it is Death, it is Hell,
That, That Is a Vengeance fit for me to take,
Tho much too gentle for the Traytor's crime.

Fell. How has he merited such Cruelty?
Had he last night when all was in his power,
Taken advantage of consenting love
On your unguarded Honor, this Resentment
Would well become you then, and were but just;
You know how far he was from such a Thought.

Lam. Then he boasts, and maks a Merit of it
To my Rival.

Fell. I thought it one to you,
It seems you do not.

Lam. No, since 'twas meant a Sacrifice to thee,
Even Honor is my scorn when I must owe it
To that blind Dotage which I see thee proud of.
But tho thou triumph'st now, know, Rival, know,
That stupid Constancy in ill-plac'd Love,
Ever long to both, the greatest curse shall prove.

Bell. I Will attend you, Madam, to the Count Roquelaures.
Now hear inglorious Girl, mark my last words,
Thy Obstinacy but confirms my Hate,
Undoes thy self, and wings thy Husband's Fate. Going.

Fell. O do not go thus cruelly resolved!
Stay, Brother, on my bended knees I beg you;
Cannot these trembling hands a while retain you;
Give but some days to a poor Sisters tears,
But till the fierceness of your Rage abate;
Till you can calmly weigh the wrong he'as done,
With all the Miseries that led him to it;
O think what would become of you your self,
If Heaven were thus severe for every fault committed,
And as you hope for mercy from above,
Now show it to a Brother's first offense.

Bell. To one that Heaven detests! No, may I never
Find Mercy there, if ever I forgive him.

Exit with Lam. Fell. He Is bent on Death, and nothing can avert it;
I Have done, and here will lie to wait the wound
That through Gramont's, will shortly pierce this Heart:
I shall behold him soon, Stabbed, Mangled, Murdered.
O barbarous Brother! O Gramont -- He Is lost,
I never shall see him more, but Cold and Ghastly;
Breathing his last, and weltring in his Blood,
Then there is an end of all my Miseries,
For that I cannot outlive: O must I live to see it! Weeps.

Enter Gramont. Gra. Upon the Floor! O most afflicting sight!
Thither the weight of Woes I Have heaped upon thee
Has pressed thee down; this is a Scene of sadness
More expressive, than the most moving words.
Why art thou thus, Felicia? Thou should not so
Indulge thy griefs, be calm and well consider,
As now thy Circumstances are, what way
May best be thought to make thee least unhappy:

Fell. There Is not a Medium:
I can have no Misfortunes if I Have you,
Nor ever think of Happiness without you.

Gra. Alas, Felicia!

Fell. You pity me, as if
You knew how cruelly I have been used,
How deaf my Brother is to all my Prayers.

Gra. Do not offend him, there is hopes, my Love,
When I am gone, he will still be careful of thee.

Fell. Gone! Then you can think of going from me;
Of leaving your Felicia.

Gra. In Life I never can leave thee;
And there is not a Pain in Death, but that.

Fell. You speak, methinks, as one resolved on Death!
Must you conspire too with those that hate me?

Gra. Thou'st cause to wish, l'ad died before thou knew'st me.

Fell. I could not then have felt the loss,
But now the very fear is insupportable;
'Twas that had filled my bursting heart overwhelmed,
And laid me on the Earth, as now you found me:
And it is the only blow of fate, I have not strength to bear.

Gra. How can I hear thee speak so tenderly,
And think I have undone thee! O Felicia!
Thy love gives double weight to my afflictions:
What is there should induce me then to live?

Fell. If you have any love for me, the Thought
How miserable I shall be without you.

Gra. I know too well thy tenderness of Nature,
Know I am too much loved; but thou may learn
By thy unhappy Husband, there is not a State
So miserable, but may with greater ease
Be suffered, than Dishonor; would thou not blus^
To live with one distrusted, shunned and looked on
As a Knave by all Mankind? Can I,
Or would thou have me bear it?

Fell. I could for you:
The World's Opinion would not weigh with me
Against your least disturbance.

Gram. Why will you plead so earnestly a Cause,
In which if you believed you could prevail,
You would your self despise me?

Fell. There was a time
When I might be assured I should prevail;
When the least show of Discontent from me,
Had power to shake your firmest Resolution;
But then you loved me.

Gram. Do I not love you!

Fell. You see me drowned in Tears, overwhelmed in Grief,
Hear me implore, and bare it all unmoved!

Gram. Unmoved! You know not what a War you have raised within me^
There Is not a word you speak, but would overcome me;
But when I think thou'^t share in my Disgrace --
For that I know thy Love would make thee do.

Fell. No, no, Gramont, were your Concern for me,
'Twou'd most be shown where I am most concerned;
But there you are insensible, or think not,
Or care not, what I shall suffer.

Gram. O it is a Thought divides me from my self,
Staggers my Resolution, makes me wish
The greatest Curse, that thou could hate thy Husband;
Every, every way; I must undo thee;
It Is only left me now to choose the noblest,
And that should be endured with least Affliction^

Fell. You Have found the way indeed to shorten mine;
Already your Unkindness breaks my Heart!

Gram. Thou art unkind to use such wounding words,
That know my Heart too tender to endure it.
What would thou have me do?

Fell. O what indeed! For what should I entreat,
Now all that soft, that dear Affection's lost,
That once could have denied Felicia nothing!
What have I more to lose?

Gram. I can deny thee nothing: where will thou lead me^
Every Tear thou shed'st draws with it my Heart's Blood;
Rather than see thee thus, I Would bear with Life,
With Infamy: Must I, Felicia? shall I?

Fell. Nothing for me; I am not worth your Care,
And Death will quickly free me from my Woes.

Gram. Thou art my only Care; take, take me to thy Bosom.
There hide me from my Shame, and from my self;
Do with me what thou will, but let me never think --

Fell. Would you forsake these Arms,
That tremble with delight whilst they embrace thee?

Gram. Talk on, and let me gaze on thee for ever,
Till I forget there is ought on Earth besides,
And thou art Goodness, all, all Joy and Blessings.

Fell. Would you forget there is ought on Earth but me?
Then sure you could for me forsake the rest:
Could you for ever leave the busy World,
To seek with me some unknown, distant Refuge,
Whither the Ills we fear can never pursue us?

Gram. Alas, thou talk but as thy Love would have it;
Thou know too well it is not in my Power.

Fell. Had I not thought it was, I should not have proposed it.

Gram. Could I provide thee even but the bare
Necessities of Nature, what is beyond,
I know thy generous Kindness well could spare:
But can I take thee hence to see thee perish,
Under the Extremities of griping Wants
Thou have not felt, and can not apprehend
The smallest of those Hardships, to which thou would expose
Thy tender Body, does far surpass thy Strength?

Fell. Love will supply my Strength; and as I can,
I Will labor for our Food, or beg an Alms;
And we shall find some friendly Barn to shelter us
At nig^t, whilst we repose our weary Limbs.
But could you, my Gramont, endure your share?
And i^ the Product of our Toils falls short,
Take cheerfully the Scraps of Charity?
Sometimes perhaps your Sleep may be disturbed
By a poor hungry Infant's Cries; could you
With patience bear it? Could you in such a state
Find any Joy in me? Would you not leave me,
Leave me, and my poor Condition? -- My Love,
Why this? The Tears are starting at your Eyes!

Gram. Is this thy Fate at last? and must I see thee
Suffer all the Miseries, which when
I did but fear, for thee, o'ercame my Virtue!
'Twas this Idea, and have I brought 'em on thee!
Made thy Ruin more inevitable!
Give me Patience, Heaven; that I should force thee
To this wretched state!

Fell. It Is my choice;
I have preferred it to a splendid Fortune,
Which now is offered me.

Gram. What Fortune? Or how offered?

Fell. Lamira's; she leaves the World, and would have bribed me
With her trifling Gift to part with you.

Gram. Did you refuse it?

Fell. Could I do otherwise?

Gram. 'Twas reproaching me, did you not then think?
By Heaven I know you did. With scorn you thought
This was the Bait, this Bait which I despise,
'Twas that seduced my Husband.

Fell. Not from your Faith to me; that you preserved;
Though by provoking her you hazarded
The loss even of the Bait that tempted you.
Have I done more for you?

Gram. Yet there is a cause
That will induce you to accept the Offer;
Your Son, Felicia, he must perish else?

Fell. He must submit to share his wretched Parents Fate.

Gram. His Fate is yet more cruel! I durst not tell thee,
Loath to increase the Sorrows that too deeply pierced thee;
But since it is in thy power to redeem him --

Fell. Redeem him!

Gram. From Pirates hands: But yesterday
The fatal News was brought me.

Fell. O it is too much!

Gram. Weep not, but think how thou may ransom him.

Fell. Alas, have I thee means?

Gram. Thou may: But I, I always am an Obstacle,
Where any Good's propos'd^ Turn, turn, Felicia,
All thy Tenderness, upon that dear,
Innocent part of me; thou do misplace it here.

Fell. At any other rate I would preserve him;
But in exchange for you, he is only dear to me,
As he is yours.

Gram. Then as he is mine, I beg thee to relieve him.

Fell. O it is the strongest Trial! But to part with you,
That, that is the hard Condition! Impossible!
Is there no other hope? no way to free him?
Somewhat I must endeavor; perhaps your Father
May compassionate his Innocence.
Though his unhappy Parents have offended.

Gram. Try, my Felicia, if there is any mixture
Of the least Tenderness in his hard Nature,
Thou have Power to extract it.

Fell. E're this he knows our Marriage,
Thither Lamira going hence intended.

Gram. Then haste, my Love, before the impression taken
From her Resentment, strike too deep for thee ^'efface.

Fell. I will, but dare I leave you: Will you promise,
Till my return, to shun my Brother's sight?

Gram. What need of Promises? Thou know thy Power.

Fell. May I rely upon your Love?

Gram. Thou would, if thou could know with what reluctance
I now part with thee, scarce could it be
More sensible, if we were never to meet again.

Fell. Perhaps we never may.

Gram. Why said thou that?
Thy sad foreboding Words stuck to my Heart
As if Fate had pronounced 'em.

Fell. Then I fear
Fate has indeed pronounced 'em.

Gram. We'll disappoint it,
Cling to each other thus, and never part.

Fell. We shall not at this rate; unless you throw me
From your Arms, I have not power to leave 'em.

Gram. No, thou shall not.

Fell. Is then your Son forgot?

Gram. Alas, my Child! it will be so; it is vain
To strive, for Destiny's irrevocable.

Fell. And we must part.

Gram. But must I lose thee too!

Fell. If Destiny will have it.

Gram. You Are gone!

Fell. O my Gramont!

Gram. Farewell.

Fell. I fear for ever. Ex. Fell.

Gram. For ever! Never see thee! O Felicia! Enter Castalio.
Castalio! the Man I most would shun:
How shall I look on him, or how receive him!

Cast. This is beyond my hope: I came to ask
Where I might find my Friend, and I have met thee.
Let me embrace thee, give thee thy Castalio,
Thine my Gramont; for it is from thee I hold
My Freedom, Life, and Honor, I Have nothing that is my own,
Nothing of worth but what I owe to thee.

Gram. My Lord, you owe me nothing.

Cast. Is this the way to meet my clasping Arms?
You answer too with an unusual Strangeness,
And wrong me with a Title less than Friend,
The only one I glory in.

Gram. Yet it is the only one dishonours you.

Cast. To be called your Friend?

Gram. When you know me, you will disdain the Name.

Cast. It Is therefore I am fond of it, because I know yo^

Gram. For what I seemed; but till this day I never
Rightly knew my self.

Cast. I know you better than you do your self.

Gram. Do you know me for a vile, a coward Wretch,
That dare not look Ill Fortune in the Face,
And only sides with Honor till Interest clashes with it.

Cast! You give me the Reverse of what you are.

Gram. I said you did not know me.

Cast. Not in that Character:
I know you firm to Honor, have seen you dare
The worst of Fortunes, Malice: Is It not for Honor
You have now incurred a Father's Anger,
And exposed your self to all the Ruin
That must follow it.

Gram. Perhpas that was my Mind of yesterday^
I may have changed it since; rely on no Man;
He that this Hour is honest, the next may be a Villain.

Cast. I think you're changed indeed; your Words are wild,
Your Looks disordered; Heaven preserve your Reason.

Gram. Heaven rather take it from me: It Is the best wish
For me, unless I could recall the past:
There Is nothing now in future Fate but Madness
Can give me any ease.

Cast. It greives my Soul to hear you! Have better Hopes,
I may have power to serve you; why thus reserved?
We Have used with Friendship to beguile our Griefs,
Whilst we discharged 'em on each others Breast.

Gram. Let me forget I ever had your Friendship^
It Is now the greatest Torment of my Thoughts,
When you no more can cheer or pity me,
Can be that Friend no more.

Cast. Not less a Friend for being more unhappy,
I Am still the same to you.

Gram. Oh, O Castalio! were I still the same!
But now --

Cast. What now?

Gram. Spare me this Heaven; drive me where I may never
Behold this Man, and let me be exposed
The public Scorn, marked out for Infamy,
And hooted by the gaping multitude,
Not all the Ignominy the united World
Could heap on me, would half so much confound me
As but to look on him, and think what once
I was in his esteem, and O what now I am^

Cast. Am I so dreadful! Trust me I Will use you gentlier,
Than you would your self; what is it you labor with?
Shall I assist you in the Pang of Birth?
Somewhat you have done amiss which you repent of;
Let me be Judge, for you are too severe:
I know you ever would condemn your self
With strictest Rigor for the smallest Frailties.

Gram. Is It me you speak of?

Cast. I Have chid you often, and yet I loved you for it.

Gram. And would you then have thought I could commit
The basest, meanest, the most treacherous Action?

Cast. Impossible.

Gram. I thought so too; it seems we were mistaken.

Cast. What have you done? I have a Friend's Concern,
And ought to know it.

Gram. Indeed I don't deserve your least Concern;
But for your Peace of Mind inquire no further;
Believe I am unworthy of your Friendship,
And think of me no more; but if you hear my Name,
Avoid the Story that must follow it;
For you would hate your self, if you should know
How ill you had placed your Kindness.

Cast. You make me still
More eager to enquire; by our past Friendship,
I conjure you tell me, your Heart seems bursting
With the fatal Secret, and yet you will not vent it.

Gram. Can you not guess?

Cast. I cannot; nor let me longer
Importune to learn it from your self.

Gram. Have you not some remembrance what yesterday
I said my Father had proposed?

Cast. Which you refused?

Gram. Perhaps I did not.

Cas^. Did not what.
I mean what was not in your power t'accept.

Gram. What Is that?

Cast. The Marriage.

Gram. Why not in my power?

Cast. Because it would have been the highest Baseness.

Gram. Are base things never done?

Cast. You could not do it.

Gram. O Friend!

Cast. I Will not believe it.

Gram. You think too well of me^

Cast. I Am sorry for it.

Gram. Now then you know me rightly.

Cast. Could you --

Gram. Urge not my Crime against me, it needs not;
Your awful Virtue checks, and strikes me deeper
Than your Reproaches can.

Cast. I Have thought too far; it cannot be yet completed;
You Have only given Hopes you would comply,
Perhaps a Promise.

Gram. It Is done; less had not gained my end,
Which partly is accomplished; you are free;
I had no other means of serving you.

Cast. And did you think I prized my Honor less
Than Liberty, that I would have it purchased
On dishonest Terms? You know Castalio
As little as I have hitherto known you.

Gram. In what I did, I gratified my self,
Nor aimed I at Acknowledgments from you.

Cast. You might have made your own Advantagehen
But what had I to do with your mean Tricks?
Was It not enough I suffered in my Friendship,
But you must undermine my Honor too,
And draw me for the Prize of Villainy?
I Will not endure it.

Gram. All the Dishonour's mine.

Cast. Can I share the Profit, and not the Infamy!
Who is there seeing me enjoy this Freedom,
That will not think I Am pleased, nay, was Accomplice
In the Guilt that wrought it? The Air I breathe,
The every Step I tread reproaches me,
The Terms on which 'twas gained, 'twas basely done.

Gram. There Is not a Term that is vile enough for me;
But 'twas a Villainy too much my own
To reach your Fame. How could you be Accomplice?
Nor is it known what means was used to free you:
It cannot reflect on you.

Cast. It shall not;
I disdain t'accept inglorious Liberty:
Take back the shameful Ransom; I Will to Prison,
And resume my Chains; bestow the Purchase
Of your Treachery on Knaves, I Will none of it.

Gram. Stay, stay, my Lord, there is yet a surer way
To clear your Fame, the Blood of him that stained it:
Take, take my Life, it is a just Sacrifice,
You owe it to your self, to Honor,
And the Name of Friend so long abused.

Cast. Is this the Man
I called my Friend! And was I thus deceived!
I find indeed Lamira well observed,
There Is the least Truth, where most it does appear.
Ha! that thought has roused one that alarms my Heart;
She said 'twas one esteemed my Friend that wronged her;
Is It possible that he, the Man whom I
Preferred to all the World, should be ordained
The Ruin of the only thing besides
That could be dear to me!

Gram. What said you, do you love her?

Cast. Whom, what her? It Is not Lamira thou'st abused.

Gram. Nothing but this could aggravate my Crime,
Or my Remorse; and was it wanting, Heaven!
Must every Blow which I, or Fate strikes for me,
Fall heavier still on him! Why, why is this!

Cast. That I alone may have the right of Vengeance,
Which now my Injuries are ripe for: Traitor,
Defend thy Life.

Gram. A Traitor's is not worth defending;
Freely I resign it; it is a Burden
Which I would bless the Hand that frees me from.

Cast. Coward, thou wou'st preserve it; thou know I scorn
To take it thus unguarded.

Gram. You ought to take it as a Criminal's;
Nor dare I lift my Hand against a Man
Whom I have so much wronged, as if I meant
To justify my Baseness.

Cast. It Is all the Satisfaction thou can make,
And I demand it of thee.

Gram. My Life I offer,
I open to your Point, and stand your Justice

Cast. Is It thus you should maintain a Lady's Favors?
Not with this Coldness you received her Kindness,
Whilst in her Arms you revell'd. Death and Hell!
That such a Villain should, though but one Moment,
Be possessed of all that Bliss! O it is a Heaven to think,
And 'twas all his, all the transporting Beauties
In his Power! Cursed, torturing Thought!

Gram. You causlesly torment your self: I Have not possest^

Cast. How Is that? You said you had married her.

Gram. It Is true; last night.

Cast. And not possess! Come, doubly damn thy self,
Forswear the Wickedness thou have committed;
Swear thou have not enjoyed her.

Gram. I swear by all things Sacred.

Cast. Thour't perjured.

Gram. May then the Perjury be never forgiven,
If I have falsely sworn.

Cast. What could prevent it?
It Is unusual to leave a Bride
Upon the Wedding-night. Where were you then?
For I must know the truth.

Gram. With her.

Cast. Do you trifle with me?

Gram. No; what I have sworn, is truth^

Cast. Could she be so reserved not to consent
When it might bear the Color of a Duty?
Impossible!

Gra. I did not ask.

Cast. That Is more impossible;
Do not abuse me
With a soothing Tale;
I am too much concerned to be imposed on,
And be assured will clear to the least doubt;
Answer me then, what hindered you to ask?

Gra. My guilt already hung too heavy on me.

Cast. But how? On what pretense? How would she bear the slight?
Once more I say, I will not be deceived;
Therefore 'twere vain t'attempt it --
But now I will be calm, and as a Friend,
Conjure you tell me punctually what past.

Gra. I made some weak excuses, which, at first,
She seemed to take, till having further proved
With little Arts the temper of my heart,
She imputed it to indifference for her,
Then grew suspicious of some prepossession
To which she thought her self a Sacrifice;
Some words that slipped from me confirmed her in it,
And worked her to a Rage, in which she left me.

Cast. And did you calmly, firmly, stand all this!
Th'insinuations of her softer Passion,
Her pangs in Jelousie, and her Resentment,
What Man could have the force!

Gra. 'Twas your good Genius, doubtless, gave it me,
I have nothing of my own, but Weakness, Baseness.

Cast. This were enough to cancel yet a Greater,
To see her in the height of all her charms,
Loosned to Love, and languishing desire,
And not be tempted! By Heaven, I think I had
My self been lost; not all my Honor could
Have guarded me against so strong a Trial;
Instead of the Reproaches I designed,
I must confess an awful Admiration,
Amazed and conscious of superior Virtue.

Gra. What Virtue was it in me? I looked not on her
With a Lover's Eyes: O that I had known you did,
But I was never worthy of your trust.

Cast. Fearful of my success, I would have hid
My weakness from my self, yet in the hopes
Bellgard might influence her, to him alone
I ventured to disclose i^.

Gra. To Bellgard!

Cast. He promised to assist me with his Interest.

Gra. To assist you^

Cast. You know his Power with her.

Gra. Too well I know it; 'twas he proposed, nay urged
This Fatal Marriage, which but for him
Would never have been thought on.

Cast. Is It possible?

Gra. Most true.

Cast. Perfidious! Bellgard, You have betrayed me basely. Enter Bellgard.

Bell. Betrayed you!

Cast. Basely I said, and thus maintain it; Draw.

Bell. I scorn a Baseness; You tax me most Unjustly.

Cast. Then right your self.

Bell. My Sword would be employed
Much better to my choice, against that Villain.

Cast. If Villain be the Mark, mine is as well directed.

Bell. Ha!

Cast. Were you not Instrumental in his Marriage?
You pressed it on; nay, were the first Proposer.

Bell. I was; but knew I then --

Cast. You knew enough
To make it a base Injury to me,
If you dare vindicate the Treachery;
Guard well your Life, for that must answer it.

Bell. What I have done will bear a calmer Test;
I would be justified, for yet I Am tame.

Cast. Say rather, you are a Coward.

Bell. Provoke me not,
Or to your cost you will find I am no Coward.

Cast. I Have found you to my cost a Viler thing;
Dissembling, False, and Faithless to your trust.

Bell. As free from either as your self, Castalio.

Cast. He that dares say it, Lies.

Bell. Nay then -- Bell. Draws. They fight, Gra. interposes.

Gra. Bellgard!
Castalio! What means this Rashness? Am not I
The Cause of your Debate; the fittest object
Of your rage? On me your Points should turn;
Or hear at least what each has to allege;
My Lord, I beg you hold.

Cast. You have your wish. Gram. ac^identally wounds Cast.

Gra. By all my Crimes, this cursed Hand has struck him!

Cast. Methinks I feel it is too the hand of Fate;
It seems to have reached at Life.

Gra. Heaven forbid!
But is it to be doubted? Did I e're
Endeavor the prevention of an Ill,
But I became the Cause, and made it surer?

Bell. A Curse attends the best designs of wicked Men,
And did thou hope to prosper?

Gra. Castalio! I have killed him; my blood is chill'd^
With horror of the Deed;
Now is it time
To sink me to th'abyss? Or I have yet^
More mischiefs to perform?

Bell. No, it is thy last;
But I must clear my self to you, Castalio;
Then for Revenge. Be witness for me Heaven,
That I not only did acquit my self
With honor of the Trust reposed in me,
But with the Zeal of a most heaaty Friend;
Nor ceased I till Lamira had declared
She never could return your Love, and owned
Her folly there.

Cast. Gramont has every way been my destruction.

Gra. What a Heart breaking sound! Was it for this^
You saved my Life? Is this the best return
A Friend could make? Happy for both you had^
Been less a Friend, then you had lived to bless
Mankind, and I had died without their Curse,
And all this weight of guilt upon my head:
But blood attones for blood, it shall be so.
O it is too sure! Life staggers in his Eyes!
Yet, yet support it, one moment to behold
A Justice done you.

Bell. It Is well thought on; haste then to give it him. Offering to fight.

Gra. No more of that; you said I had done already
My last Mischief; now for the first good Action
O^ my Life, this to Castalio's Wrongs. Stabs himself just as Roquelaure, Lam.
and Felicia enter^

^ast. It Is too much.

Fell. O Heaven!

Lam. Desperate remorse!

Roq. O my Son!

Fell. Now you are satisfied, now you have killed him;
Inhumane Brother, Tigers, Murderers, Devils!

Gra. O my Dear! Thy Grief's my sharpest wound.

Fell. Is this the Promise you in parting made me!

Gra. Look there, and tell thy self if I could keep it.

Fell. Castalio Dying!

Gra. Murdered by this hand.

Cast. An Accidental blow.

Roq. Unhappy Son, of a more wretched Father!

Gra. My Lord, a Dying Son dares ask forgiveness -- Enter B^^.
Bernardo! Thou art come to imp my ascending prayers
With juster Imprecations: behold what I have done.

Bern. O my dear Lord!

Cast. If thou have loved me, express it not in grieving,
But in endeavoring to defend my Fame
Against the Malice of my Enemies.

Bern. It needs not, the General's treachery is detected
By those he had suborned, and he disgraced,
A Messenger is from the King arrived,
Inviting both Gramont and you to Court,
With high Expressions of his Royal Favor;
And offers of what satisfaction you demand
For all your Injuries.

Cast. Bear him my dying thanks; now I am ready:
It Is enough my Honor will survive me,
And I was born to dye. Dies.

Gra. O what a Wretch was I, that could not wait
Heavens time; the Providence that never fails
Those who dare trust it, durst I have been honest,
One day had changed the Scene, and made me happy.
But O your Son, Felicia!

Roq. I Will take him to my care.
I Have been to blame in using thee so harshly;
But all that is thine shall find my kindness doubled;
Felicia's now my Daughter, as thy Wife,
She shall be dearest to me.

Gra. Then all my car^s are ended. Be happy, my Felicia,
If thou would have thy Husband's Spirit rest. Dies.

Roq. He Is gone for ever!

Fell. O! O!

Roq. It Is Heavens will, my Child -- Some help she swoons.

Lam. How tenderly she loved him, poor Felicia! Fell. Swoon upon the body,
Women, Attenda^^ ^^^ne abo^^ her.

Roq. Pity from one who needs it more her self
What Reparation can be made, Lamira?

Lam. The World can make me none; there is nothing here
But a Vissicitude of Miseries:
If there is any Joy that is permanent,
It must be in that calm, that heavenly State,
To which my future days are dedicated.

Bell. It Is the best Asylum for humane Frailty,
Of which Gramont is a most strange Example,
He was by Nature Honest, Just, and Brave,
In many Trials showed a steady Virtue;
Yet by one sharp Assault at last was vanquished;
None know their Strength, let the most Resolute
Learn from this Story to distrust themselves,
Nor think by Fear the Victory less sure,
Our greatest Danger's, when we are most ^ecure.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE, Spoke by Mrs Barry.
FIrst Ladies I am sent to you, from whom
Our Author hopes a favorable Doom,
As Friends to Virtue, since 'tas been her End
Vice to discourage, Virtue recommend;
You Have seen revenged an injurd Woman's Cause,
And to such Justice cannot deny Applause,
Felicia too expects you should approve
A Wife's Fidelity, and Tender Love;
Protect her Character as you would be thought
The Bright Originals from which 'twas wrought.
Next to the Men I come, but cannot plead
Your likeness as a motive to succeed,
We rather hope none here will be offended
Because none here could think himself himself intended;
Not one of you so sullenly would slight
A yielding Fair, at least not the first night,
You could not have the hearts, nor I believe
Would you to such a height as he deceive,
'Twou'd startle you no doubt, for not to wrong ye,
One Wife is thought too much by most among ye.
Since I have done you justice, be this Day
As just to us in censuring our Play,
Not with Grimace, and words all noise, and Huff,
Damn it, a Woman's! that must needs be Stuff;
At Reason's Great Tribunal she would appear,
Though she has most from her decree to fear,
But so condemned, conscious of Justice done,
Perhaps she will mend, at least her faults, she will own.
If they are such as care may well correct,
No pains to please you better she will neglect,
But if what she believes Poetic Rage,
Is found the infection of a Seribling Age,
For ever she will forsake the Darling S^^ge.
BOOKS Printed for Francis Saunders, at the Blue-Anchor in the New-Exchange.
THE Temple of Death, a Poem by the Marquess Normanby. Horace of the Art of
Poetry, made English by the Earl of Roscommon. The Duel of the Stags, by Sir
Robert Howard, with several other Poems by the Earls of Rochester and Orrery,
Sir Charles Sedley, Sir George Etheridge, the Right Honorable Mr. Montague,
Mr. Granvill, Mr. Dryden, Mr. Chetwood, Mr. Tate, and Madam Wharton.

An Essay on Poetry, by the Marquess of Normanby in English. The same in Latin
by another Hand, with several other Poems of the Right Honorable Mr. Montague,
Mr. Stepney, Mr. Arwaker, and Mr. Tate.

Poems on several Occasions. By Mrs. Behn, with a Voyage to and from the Island
of Love.

Heroic Love. A Tragedy, by the Honorable Mr. Granvill.


