TO THE READER.
HOw profitable it is to observe those Forms which the Law approves, daily
Experience does sufficiently demonstrate; for that hereby all Assurances are
rendered plain and manifest to every Capacity, and fortified against all
exceptions. But the captious Age wherein we live, that so busily examines and
eagerly pursues all advantages and shifts whatsoever, will certainly drive
every man to his just Defense, and make this Book as welcome as it is
undoubtedly necessary.

Here is presented to thy Hand a faithful Collection of Presidents of all
sorts, which for the variety will fit every Man's Occasions: and for the
clearness will be useful to any Understanding, who may at all times readily
find these sound Instructions; If either the distance of his Abode, the haste
of his Business; or any other cause do withhold him from further Advice: For
those Instruments which are usually drawn in Latin, here you shall find the
proper Cases both for the Names of the Persons, their Additions, the Sums of
Money, with the Day of the Date, only observing this throughout the Work; if A
be bound to B, then is A the Obligor, and B the Obligee; and if A acknowledge a
Recognisance to B, then is A the Conusor; and B the Conusee.

And in this Fourth Impression, to complete the Design that was intended by
this Book, are added the best Presidents of all manner of Concords, of Fines,
and Directions how to sue out a Fine, with many remarkable Observations therein
will appear: Also Directions of Writs of Habeas Corpus. Writs of Error, etc.
To the inferior Courts in the several Cities, Buroughs, Hundreds, and
Bailywicks of England, and the respective Mayors, Bailiffs, and Governors
thereof; for default whereof, and error wherein, so many Nonsuits do daily
happen, and Writs of Error are afterward brought to the indangering of the
whole Cause, and perplexity and vexation of the Client, which all ingenious
Practisers as they desire, so here are rightly instructed how to avoid. There
is also a Supplement to the Names both of Men and Women, with their several
Trades and Employments rendered into Latin; so that nothing is wanting to answer
every Occurrence or Emergent Occasion whatsoever of this nature.

Hereby it will not be easy to mistake, and cheaper than this no man can
purchase greater quiet and security.

Farewell, J. H.

THE TABLE.
A.
ATtornment of Tenants to be endorsed on a deed, Page 13 An Affidavit that a
man is seized in Fee free of all Encumbrances, ibid. Acquittance for the
consideration of Money in an Indenture; and a Release of the Estate, Page 54 An
Assignment of an Annuity for years. granted out of a Lease for years, Page 58
Attornment of Tenants, Page 64 Another of the same ibid. An Acquittance for
receipt of money upon a Sale, Page 67 Articles of Agreement for enjoyment of a
quiet Lease, as Tenants in Common, Page 42 An Acquittance for the Redemption of
a Mortgage, Page 46 -- For Rent. ibid. -- For a Legacy for Money received to
pay to another, Page 47 An Assignment of a Lease by Endorsment. Page 69 An
Assignment of a Mortgage by Endorsement by a Friend in Trust, for one that
purchased the same, to keep it in force, Page 71 An Acquittance and Receipt for
a Legacy given by will to the Executor thereof. ibid. An Affidavit that Lands
are free from all Encumbrances, Page 72 An Assignment of a Bond, with a Letter
of Attorney verbatim, as in the Bond, An Acquittance for part of a Debt, An
Affidavit, the form.
B.
Bishoprics in order. Page 149 A Bond to the King. Page 81 A Bill of Sale of
Goods to be void, upon payment of a sum of money with Interest, Page 24 --
Single without a penalty, Page 25 A single penal Bill, Page 26
C.
A condition from One to One, to pay a sum of money at several payments,
without a Clause if any payment be unpaid, the Bond to be forfeited, Page 14 A
Condition of a Bond of Arbitration from Two to Two, without an Umpire, Page 15
A Condition of a single Bond of Arbitration, without an Umpire, Page 16 -- Of a
double Bond to pay a sum of money at several payments, with a Clause, if any
payment be behind, the Bond to be forfeited, Page 17 -- Of a single Bond to pay
a sum of money at a place certain, Page 18 -- Of a single Bond to pay a sum of
money without a place certain, ibid. -- Of a treble Bond to pay a sum of money
at one payment, Page 19 -- Of a double Bond to pay a sum of money at a place
certain, ibid. -- Of a Counterbond from two to a third person, who was bound
with them, Page 20 -- Of a Counter-bond from one to one, Page 21 -- To perform
Covenants in Articles of Agreement, Page 22 -- To perform the Covenants in an
Indenture, ibid. -- To stand by the Award of Arbitrators, with an Umpire
certain nominated, Page 26 A Charter-part of an Affraight, Page 38 A Covenant
from an infant, to engage him to execute a Conveyance at age, Page 50 A
Condition of a Recognisance to pay Costs in Chancery, Page 68 A Condition to
seal a Deed by a certain day, and perform the Covenants therein, Page 47 A
Condition that the Heir shall enter into Bond at his full age to pay another,
Page 48 -- That the Administrator not present shall seal a Deed, Page 49 A
Declaration of an Obligee, that his Name is used in trust, Page 84 A Codicil to
a Will, Page 88 Cities, Page 151 Counties. Page 152, 153
D.
DEed of Gift, Page 27 Defeazance of a Statute for performance of Covenant,
Page 52 A Declaration that money lent in one man's Name, is the proper moneys of
another, Page 55 A Discharge of a Bill, the Bill being lost, Page 65 A
Defeazance upon a Judgment, with a release of Errors, Page 70 A Defeazance
upon a Statute Staple for payment of money, Page 74 A Discharge of money
decreed in Chancery, Page 80 -- To Trustees for money by them received, Page 81
A Deed of Feoffment upon a Sale, Page 83 A Deed to declare that the Name of the
Obligee in an Obligation is used in trust for another, Page 84 The several
Dates for Bonds, Page 15, 156 Directions for suing out of Fines, and making the
Concords thereof, with several necessary Notes thereupon, Page 89 Directions
for Writs, Page 169
E.
AN Exchange by an Indenture of bargain and sale, with Livery and Seisin, Page
69
F.
THe form of a Will. A Fine from one to one of a Message and Garden, A Fine
from a man and his Wife to one Cognisee of two Messuages, one Yard, one
Backside, etc. ibid. A Fine for two Cognisors, or the wife of one of them to
two Cognisee, of Messuages, Barns, Gardens, Orchards, Lands, Meadows, Pasture,
Common of Pasture for all manner of Cattle. Page 92 A Fine by a Knight and his
wife, to an Archbishop, and another of their Manors, Messuages, etc. the
Advowsance of a Church, and view of a Frank pledge with General Warranty. Page
94 A Fine by one and his wife to one, of one Manor, Messuages, etc. and the
Advowsance of a Church by turns, Page 95 A Fine of a Rent by an Earl and his
wife, Page 97 A Fine of a third part of a Rent. Page 98 A Fine of a Personage,
excepting the Advowsance of the Vicarage of the same Personage, Page 99 A Fine
of one Message, one Barn, Land, Meadow, Pasture, and 55, Rent the Personage of
B. and the Advowsance of the Vicarage of B. Page 100 A Fine by an Earl and his
wife, of a Manor, Advowsance, Liberty of Foldage, free Warren and free
Fishing, etc. Page 101 A Fine from three and their wives, to one, with several
Warranties. Page 102 A Fine of nine Messuages, nine Gardens, etc. and the
moiety of one Water-mill, one Dovehouse, etc. Page 103 A Fine be a husband and
wife, and another to one who grants and renders the same again to one of the
Cognisors for 21 years, to begin at a time to come, reserving a Rent with
clause of Distress; and afterward the Cognisee grants the Reversion to the
husband and wife Conusors, and the Heir of the Husband. Page 104
I
AN Indenture being a Defeazance of an Assignment of a Bond. Page 78
K.
EVery Kings Reign, with the year of our Lord annexed to the year of their
Reign. Page 160, etc.
L.
A Letter of Attorney to receive a sum of money, very usual Page 28 -- To
receive money due upon Bond, Page 33 A Letter of Attorney to receive money due
upon several Bonds, allowing the Attorney reasonable charge out of the money he
shall receive, etc. Page 34 A General Letter of Attorney to let, set, and
dispose etc. Page 36 A Leter of Attorney to recover Livery and Seisin according
to the Feoffment, Page 58 A Lease of Ejectment, ibid. Livery and Seisin to be
endors'd on a Deed. Page 58 A Letter of Attorney from the Husband to the Wife
upon his Voyage. Page 6^ A Letter of Attorney to be added to the end of a Sale.
to give power for the Vendor to another to deliver possession in seisin to the
Vendee, Page 64 A Letter of Attorney to receive Seisin of Land, Page 77 -- To
receive money decreed in Chancery, Page 79 A Lease of a house, Page 100
M.
A Mortgage of a house, Page 75 A Mortgagee's assignment of his Mortgage to the
Mortgagor, to be endorsed on the Deed, Page 62
N.
THe Names of Officers in order, Page 148 The names of the Moneys, Page 156 The
proper Names of Men in Latin and English, in the same cases as they are to
stand in the Recognizance and Obligation, Page 119
O.
An Oligation from one to one, Page 3 An Obligation from one to two, Page 4 An
Obligation from one to three, ibid. -- Two to one. ibid. -- Two to two, Page 5
-- Two to three, ibid. -- Three to one, Page 6 -- Three to two, ibid. -- Three
to three, Page 7
R.
A Recognizance from one to one, Page 7 -- One to two, Page 8 -- One to three,
Page 9 -- Two to one, ibid. -- Two to two, Page 10 -- Two to three, Page 11 --
Three to one, Page 12 -- Three to one, ibid. -- Three to three, Page 13 A
General Release from two to two, Page 23 A General Release from one to one,
Page 24 A Release of Errors upon a Judgment in the Common-Bench, Page 31 -- In
the King's Bench, ibid. A Release of Personal Actions, Page 50 -- Of a Ward to
his Guardian when he is of age; Page 56 A Release from the Father to one that
bought the Son's Land, Page 63 The Returns of the Four Terms, Page 116, 117
S.
A Surrender of a Lease, Page 66 A Surrender of the Lessee's term, to be
Indorsed on the Lease, Page 79 A Schedule to a Will, Page 88 The several sums
of money, Page 157
T.
TRades and Professions of Men and women in their proper case to fill up the
Bonds and Recognizances, Page 143 The Titles of Men and Women, Page 150, 151
U.
AN Umpirage, Page 45
W.
A Warrant of Attorney to confess a Judgment in King's Bench, Page 29 -- To
acknowledge satisfastion upon Record for a Judgment recovered formerly, Page
30 A Warrant of Attorney to appear for one in the King's Bench, Page 33 The same
in the Common Pleas. ibid. A Warrant to confess a Judgment upon a Bond, if the
money be not paid on the day. Page 34 A Warrant to a proctor by the Son, to
permit a Stranger to administer upon his Fathers Estate, Page 57 A Warrant to
an Executor, Page 68 A Warrant of Attorney to confess a Judgment in Chancery
for privileged persons, Page 42 A Will. Page 87 A Writ of Covenant for the
King of Tythe-Corn, Page 99
THE YOUNG CLERKS TUTOR ENLARGED.
OBSERVATIONS Touching the firm making of Covenants, Contracts and Agreements,
etc.
A Covenant, Contract, Agreement, etc. is the mutual consent of One, Two, or
more person or persons by a formal Deed in writing, containing an Agreement of
the parties, whereby One or more do Promise and Covenant with another to give
or do somewhat in such sort as they have concluded of amongst themselves: and
to the firm making thereof, it is to be observed, 1. That the person or persons
be of the full age of one and twenty years; for it must be noted, that Infants
which are supposed not to understand what is done, can therefore make no
Obligation or Covenant, etc. (yet such as be of the age of discretion, that is,
Males of the age of fourteen years, and females of twelve years, may in some
cases covenant, and be bound, and be liable to perform; As for necessary Food,
Apparel, Schooling, etc. and in Marriage also, or as an Executor to another.
Vide Duct (...) and Stud. I^b. 2. Cap. 27. 2. Though they be of full age, yet
they must be compotes mentis; and that at the time of making such Contract,
they have not these defects of the Mind (viz.) Madness, Lunacy, Idiocy; nor
these defects of the Body, as Dumbness, Deafness, Blindness, especially if they
be Natural, for in such case they can in no wise consent.


The nature of a Bond, Bill, or Obligation, and Directions for the true making
thereof.

1. A Bond, Bill, or Obligation, is a Deed in writing, and the nature thereof
is to bind one man to another, or two to more or many (as occasion is) to pay a
sum of money, or to give, do, or perform something: whereupon it is desined to
be the right of a person, by which he has another person bound unto him to pay
that which he owes him. Right therefore is the chiefest cause of an
Obligation; the Act of man that seals and delivers such Obligation, is only the
remote or secondary cause: Now that which is called an Obligation, is the same
with that which is commonly and vulgarly called or termed a Bond; and it is
also the same with a Bill, only the Lawyers make this difference betwixt them,
(viz.) when it is in English it is called a Bill, and when it is in Latin a
Bond or Obligation, from the Latin word Obligatio, coming of Obligo to bind;
and it may be made either with or without a Penalty: where note, that if an
Obligation or Bill be made, whereby the party bound is enjoined to do or
perform any thing which is either unlawful or impossible, then such Obligation
or Bill is void of it self, and of none effect.

2. In an Obligation, he to whom the Obligation is made, is called the Obligee
or Creditor; and he who binds himself or is bound in the Obligation, is called
the Obligor or Debtor; and to according to the sundry sorts of Obligations and
Contracts, the persons therein mentioned are and must be s^yled by such
significant and legal terms as are appropriate to such Deed, Contract, etc, as
Obligor, Obligee, Feoffor, Feoffee, Lestor, Lessee, Grantor, Grantee, Donor and
Donee, Vendor, Vendee, etc.

3. For the making of an Obligation there are these things to be regarded: 1
The names of the parties concerned in the said Obligation, both names of
Baptism and Surnames, their style, degree or quality, whether Lord, Knight,
Esquire, Gentleman, Yeoman, Artificer, etc. 2ly, The Town, place of abode, and
County wherein they are at present, or for the most part resident. 3ly, The sum
of money due, which is usually double in the Obligation.

An Obligation from One to One.
NOverint universi per praesentes me A. B. de C. in Com. D. generosum, teneri
and firmiter obligari E. F. de G. in Com. H. Armigero in Centum libris bone and
legalis monetae Angliae, solvend. eidem E. F. aut suo certo Attorn.
Executoribus, Administratoribus, vel Assignat. suis: ad quam quidem solutionem
been and fideliter faciend. Obligo me, Haeredes, Executores, and
Administratores meos firmiter per praesentes. Sigillo meo sigillat. dat. primo
die Aprilis Anno Regis Domini nostri Caroli secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from One to Two.
NOverint universi per praesentes me A. B. de C. in Com. D. generosum, teneri
and firmiter obligari E. F. de G. in Com. H. Yeoman, and I. K. de L. in Com. M.
Yeoman, in Centum libris bonae and legalis monetae Angliae, solvend. eisdem E.
F. and J. K. sen eorum alteri, vel eorum certo Attorn. Executor. Administrator.
vel Assignat. suis: ad quam quidem solutionem been and fideliter faciend.
Obligo me, Haeredes, Executores, and Administratores meos firmiter per
praesentes. Sigillo meo sigillat. Dat. primo die Aprilis, Anno Domini 1662.
Annoque regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from One to Three.
NOverint universi per prasentes me A. B. de C. in Com. D. generosum, teneri
and firmiter obligari E. F. de G. in Com. H. Yeoman, I. K. de L. in Com. M.
Yeoman, and N. O. de P. in Com. Q. Yeoman, in centum libris bonae and legalis
monetae Angliae, solvend. eisdem E. F. I. K. and N. O. vel alicui little, aut
suo certo Attorn. Executoribus, Administratoribus, vel Assignat. suis: ad quam
quidem solutionem been and fideliter faciend. Obligo me, Haeredes, Executores,
and Administratores meos firmiter per praesentes. Sigillo meo Sigillat. Dat.
primo die Aprilis, Anno Domini 1662. Annoq^ regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi,
Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, fidei Defensoris,
etc. Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from Two to One.
NOverint universi per praesentes nos A. B. de C. in Com. D. Generosum, and E.
F. de G. in Com. H. generosum, teneri and firmiter obligari I. K. de L. in Com.
M. Armigero, in centum libris bonae and legalis monetae Angliae, solvend. eidem
I. K. aut suo certo Attorn. Executoribus, Administratoribus, vel Assignat.
suis: ad quam quidem solutionem been and fideliter faciend. Obligamus nos and
utrumque nostrum, per se, pro toto and in solido, Haeredes, Executores, and
Administratores nostros firmiter per praesent^s. Sigillis nostris Sigillat.
Dat. primo die Aprilis, Anno Domini 1662. Annoque Regni Domini nostri Caroli
secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, fider
Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from Two to Two.
NOverint universi per praesentes nos A. B. de C. in Com. D. Generos. and E. F.
de G. in Com. H. generos. teneri and firmiter obligari J. K. de L. in Com. M.
Armigero, and N. O. de P. in Com. R. Armigero, in centum libris bon^e and
legalis monetae Angliae, solvend. eisdem I. K. and N. O. sen cor. alteri, vel
eorum certo Attorn. Executoribus, Administratoribus, vel Assignat. suis: ad
quam quidem solutionem been and sideliter faciend. Obligamus nos and utrumque
nostrum, per se, pro toto and in solido, Haeredes, Executores and
Administrator^s nostros and utriusque nostrum, sirmiter per praesentes.
Sigillis nostris Sigillat. Dat. primo die Aprilis, Anno Domini 1662. Annoque
regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae Regis, fidei Defensorts, etc. Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from Two to Three.
NOverint universi per praesentes nos A. B. de C. in Com. D. gener sum, and E.
F. de G. in Com. praedict. gener^sum, teneri and firmiter obligari H. J. de K.
in Com. H. Yeoman, M. N. de O. in Com. praedict. Yeoman, and P. Q. de R. in
Com. praedict. Yeoman, in centum libris bonae and legalis monetae Angliae,
solvend. eisdem H. I. M. N. and P. Q. vel alic^i little, aut suo certo Attorn.
Executoribus, Administratoribus, vel Assignat, suis: ad quam quidem solutionem
been and fideliter faciend. Obligamus nos utrumque nostrum, per se pro toto and
in solido, Heredes, Erecutores, and Administratores nostros and utriusque
nostrum, f^rmiter per presents. Sigillis nostris Sigillat. Da^, primo die
Aprilis, Anno Domini 1662. Annoque regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi, Dei
gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, fidei Difensoris, etc.
Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from Three to One.
NOverint universi per praesentes nos A. B. de C. in Com. D. Generosum, E. F.
de C. praedict. generosum, and G. H. de J. in Com. K. generosum, ten^ri and
s^rmiter obligari L. M. de N. in Com. W. Armigero in c^ntum libris b^^^^ and
legalis monctae Angliae, solvend. eidem L. M. out s^o certo Act (...).
Executoribus, Administratoribus, vel Assignat. suis: ad quam quiden solution^^
be^^ and s^^^liter ^aci^nd. Obligamus nos and quemlibet nostrum per se pro^t^^^
and in so^^^o, Haeredes, Executores, and Administratores nostros and cuj^^^ibet
nostrum firn iter per praesent^s. Sigillis nostris Sigillat. (...) primo die
Aprilis, Anno Domini 1662. Annoque Requi (...) no ri Caroli secundi, Dei
gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Francia, and Hiberniae Regis, fidei Disensoris, etc.
Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from Three to Two.
Nov^rint universi per praesentes nos A. B. de C. in com. D. Generosum, E. F.
de C. praedict. g^n^rosum, and G. H. de J. in com. pr^^^^^^. generosum, teneri
and firmiter obligari K. L. de M. in Com. N. Armigero, and O. P. de Q. in Com.
R. Armigero, in centum libris bonae and legalism netae Angliae, solvend. ^^sdem
K. L. and O. P. s^^ little alteri, vel little certo Attorn. Executoribus,
Administratoribus, vel Assignat. suis: ad quam quid^m solution^m been and
fideliter faciend. Obligamus nos and quemlibet nostrum per se pro toto and in
solido, Haeredes, Executores and Administratores nostros and cujuslibet
nostrum, firmiter per praesentes. Sigillis nostris Sigillat. Datprimo die
Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1662. A^^^que regai Domini nostri Caroli secundi, Det
gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, fidei Defensoris, etc.
Quartodecimo.

An Obligation from Three to Three.
Noverint universi per praesentes nos A. B. de W. in com. L. gener s^^, C. D.
de W. predict, generosum,, and E. F. de S. in Co^. pr^dict. gener s^m t^^^ri
and firmiter obligari G. H. d. J. in Com. K. Yeoman, L. M. de (...) praedict.
Yeoman, and N. O. de P. in Com. S. ^^oman, in c^ntum libris bonae and l^galis
monet^e Angliae, solv^nd. ^isd^m G. H. L. M. and N. O. v^l ali^ui little, ant
suo c^rto Attorn. Ex^^utoribus, Administraturibus, vel Assignat, suis: ad quam
q^id m^solution^m bone and fideliter sa^^end. Obligamus nos and quemlib^t
nostrum per se pro toto and in solido, ^^^^des, Execut^res, and Adminisratores
nostros etc jusli^^^ nostrum, firmater per ^^^sentes. Sigillis nostris
Si^^^^at. Dat. primo (...) Aprilis, Anno Domini 1^^2. Anneque r^g^i D^rini
nostri Caroli secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae
Regis, Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance From One to One.
RIchardus Whelden de Hampton. in Com. Middles. Pistor, coram Domino R^g^ in
Cancellaria sua personaliter constitutus, recognovit seipsam d^b^re Arthuro
Hogsden, de Fulham, in Com. predict. Armigero, quadring^nt as libras bone and
legalis monete Angliae, s^l^^nd. eidem Aithuro Hogsden, aut suo certo Attorn.
Executoribus, vel Administratoribus suis, in Festo Natalis Domini prox. sutur.
post Dat. praesentium. Et praedict. Richardus vult and concedit pro se,
Haeredibus, Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis, per praesentes, quod si
desecerit, in solutione praediclae summae pecuniae, Quod tune praedict a summa
pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de se, Haeredibus, Executoribus, and
Administratoribus suis, and de omnibus and singulis Maneriis, Messuagiis,
Terris, Tenementis, Hereditamentis, Possessionibus, Bonis and Catallis, ipsius
Ricardi Whelden, Haeredum, Executorum, Administratorum, and Assignat. suor.
Test dicto Domino Rege apud Westminster. II. die Aprilis, Anno Regni ejusdem Domini
Regis Caroli secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae
Regis, Pidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from One to Two.
RObertus Alger de Kirton in Com. Lincoln Generosus, coram Domino Rege in
Cancellaria sua personaliter constitutus, recognovit seipsum debere Johanni
Lark, and Richardo Sparrow de Kirton praedict. Generosis, centum libras bonae
and legalis monetae Angliae, solvend, eisd^m J. I. and R. S. sen eorum alteri,
vel eorum certo Attorn. executoribus, vel administratoribus suis, in Festa
Annunciationis beatae Mariae Virginis prox. sutur, post dat. praesentium: and
praedictus R. vult and concedit pro se, haeredibus, executoribus, and
administratoribus suis per praesentes, quod si defecerit in solutione praedict.
sum pecunie, quod tune praedicta summa pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de se,
haeredibus, executoribus, and administratoribus suis, and de Omnibus and
Singulis Maneriis, Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis, Haereditamentis,
Possessionibus, Bonis and Catallis ipsius Roberti, haered. executor. and
administrator. suorum, ubicunque invent. fuerint, ad solum and proprium opus
and usum ipsorum Johannis Lark, and Richardi Sparrow, Haredes, Executores,
Administratores, and Assignat. suor. Tiste dicto Domino Rege apud Wes^m. II.
die Januarii, Anno Regni ejusdem Domini Regis Caroli secunai, Dei gratia,
Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc.
Tertiodecimo.

A Recognizance from One to Three.
ANtonius Badwer de London Generosus, coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua
personalater constitutus, recognovit seipsum debere Carolo Dunch de London,
Armigero, Edvardo Burdet de London Generoso, and Francisco Stoe de London
Generoso, Ducent as libras bonae and legalis monetae Angliae, solvend. eisdem
Carolo Dunch, Edvardo Burdet and Francisco Stoe, vel alicui torum, ant sun
certo Attorn. executoribus, vel administratoribus suis, in Festo Sancti Marci
Evangelistae prox. futur. post dat. praesentium. Et praedict. Antonius vult and
concedit pro se, Haeredibus, Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis, per
praesentes, quod si defecerit in solutione praedict. summae pecuniae, quod tune
praedicta summa pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de se, haredibus, executoribus,
and administratoribus suis, and de omnibus and singulis Maneriis, M^ssuagits,
Terris, Tenementis, Haereditamentis, Possessionibus, Bonis and Catallis ipsius
Antonii, haered, executor. and administrator. suor. ubicunque invent. fuerint,
ad solum and proprium opus and usum ipsorum Caroli Dunch, Edvardi Burder, and
Francisci Stoe, haered. executor. administrat. and assignat. suorum. Test
dicto Domini Rege apud Westminster. II. die Februarii, anno Regni ejusdem Domim Regis
Caroli secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis,
Fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from Two to One.
JOh'es Toogood de Ixland in Com. Hunt. Generosus, and Will'us Hewler de Ixland
praedict. Generosus, coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua persenaliter
constatuti, recognoverunt seipsos, and uterque ipsor. recognovit seipsum debere
Henrico Oxburt de London Generoso, centum libras bonae and legalis monetae
Angliae, solvend, eidem Henrico Oxburt, ant J^o certo Attorn. Executoribus vel
Administ, suis, in vel super primum di^m Maji prox. sutur. post dat.
praesentium. Et predict. Joh'esand Will'us volunt and concedunt pro seipsis and
utroque ipsorum, Heredibus, Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis and
utriusque ipsorum per praesentes, quod si defecerint in solutione praedict.
summae pecuniae, quod tune praedicta summa pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de
se, and utroque ipsorum, baeredibus, executoribus, and administratoribus suis,
and utriusque ipsorum, and de omnibus and singulis Maneriis, Messuagiis,
Terris, Tenementis, Haereditamentes, Possessionibus, Bunis and Catallis ipsorum
Joh'is Toogood and Will'i Hewlet, and utriusque ipsorum, baered. executur. and
administrator. suorum and utriusque ipsorum, ubicunque invent. fuerint, ad
solum and proprium opus and usum ipsius Henriei Oxbutt, haered, executor.
administrator. and assign. suorum. Test dicto Domini Rege apud Westminster. quarto
die Aprilis, anno Regni ejusdem Domini Regis Caroli secundi, Dei gratia,
Angliae, Scotiae, branciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc.
Quartodecimo:

A Regognizance from Two to Two.
ARthurus Belger de, etc. Generosus, and Christopherus Dry de, etc. Generosus,
coram Domino Rege in Canoullaria sua personaliter constituti, recognoverunt
seipsos, and uterque ipsorum recognovit seipsum debere Hearsco Eun de London,
Generoso, and Francisco Sweeting de London, Genereso, antum libras bone and
legalis monetae Angliae, solvend eisdem Henrico Eun and Francisco Sweeting, s^u
little ^^teri, vel little certo Attorn. executoribus, vel administratoribus suis,
in vel super decimum diem Augusti prox. suture. po't. dat. praesentium: and
praedict. Arthurus and Christopherus volunt and concedunt pro seipsis and
utroque ipsorum, beredibus, executoribus, and administratoribus suis, and
utriusque ipsorum per praesentes, quod si defecerint in solutione praedict.
summae pecuniae, quod tune praedicla summa pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de
se and utroque ipsorum, haeredibus, executoribus, and administratoribus suis,
and utriusque ipsorum, and de omnibus and singulis Maneris, Messuagiis, Terris,
Tenementis, Haereditamentis, Possessionbus, Bonis, Catallis, ipsorum Arthuri
Belger, and Chrislopheri Dry, and utriusque ipsorum, ubicunque invent. suerint,
adsolum and proprium opus and usum ipsorum Henrici Bun, and Francisci Sweeting,
haered, executor, administrator. and assignat. suor. Tesle dicso Domino Rege
apud Westminster. primo die Aprilis, Anno Regni ejusdem Domini Regis Caroli secundi,
Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris,
etc. Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from Two to Three.
AAron Bell de etc. Cenerosus, Dan. Rich, and Robert Cree de etc. Generosus,
coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua personaliter constituti, recognoverunt
supsos and uterque ipsorrecognavit seipsum debere Richardo Den de etc.
Armigero, Willielmo Pea de, etc. Generoso, centum libras bonae and legalis
modetae Anglia, solvend. eisdem Richardo Den, Willielmo Pea, and Danieli Rich,
vel alicui little, aut suo certo Attorn-executoribus, vel administratoribus
suis, in vel super vicesimum diem Septembris prox. sutur. post dat.
praesentium. Et praedict. Aaron and Robertus volunt and concedunt proseipsis
and utroque ipsorum, baeredibus, executoribus, and administratoribus suis, and
utriusque ipsorum per praesentes, quod si desecerint in solutione praedict.
summae pecumae, quod tune praedict a summa pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de
se and utroque ipsorum, haevedibus, executoribus, and administratoribus suis,
and utriusque ipsorum, and de Omnibus and Singulis Maneriis, Messuag^is,
Terris, Tenementis, Haereditamentis, Possessionibus, Bonis and. Catallis
ipsorum Aaronis Bell, and Roberti Cree, and utriusque ipsorum, b^^redum,
executor. and administrator. suor. and utriusque ipsorum ubicunque, invent.
fuerint ad solum and propreum opus and usum ipsorum Richardi Den, Willi. Pea,
and Danielis dicto Domino Rege apud Westminster. vicesimo secundo die Aprilis, anno
Regni ejusdem Domini Regis Caroli secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from Three to One.
RObertus Book de London, Generosus, Will'us Finch de, etc. Generosus, etc.
Henricus French de, etc. Generosus, coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua
personaliter constituti, recognverant seipsos, and quilibet ipsorum recognovit
seipsum debere Francisco Henner de, etc. Armigero, centum libras bonae and
legalis monetiae Angliae, solvend. eidem Francisco Hennet, aut suo certo
Attoruat. Executoribus, vel Administratoribus suis, in vel super decimum diem
Octobris jam prox. futur. post dat. praesentium. Et praedict. Robertus, Will'us
and Henricus volunt and concedunt pro seipsis and quolibet ipsorum, heredibus,
executoribus, and administratoribus suis, and cujuslibet ipsorum per
praesentes, quod si desecerint in solutione praedict. summae pecuniae, quod
tune praedista summa pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de se, and quolibet
ipsorum, baeredibus, executoribus, and administratoribus suis, and cujuslibet
ipsorum, and de omnibus and singulis Maneriis, Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis,
Haereditamentis, Bonis and Catallis ipsorum, Roberti Book, Will. Finch, and
Henrici French, and cujuslibet ipsorum, haered. executor. and administrator.
sourum, and cujuslibet ipsorum, ubicunque invent. fuerint, ad solum and
proprium opus and usum ipsius Francisci Hennet, baered. executor.
administrator. and assignat. suorum. Test dicto Dumino Rege apud Westminster. primo
die Aprilis. anno Regni ejusdem Domini Regis Caroli secundi, Dei gratia,
Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, fidei Defensoris, etc.
Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from Three to Two.
ARnoldus Helper de etc. Armiger. Bernardus Jenney de, etc. Armager. and Drugo
Kelp de, etc. Armiger. coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua personaliter
constituti, recognoverant seiplos, and quilibet ipsorum recognovit seipsum
debere Edmundo Lam, de, etc. Generoso, and Frederico Man, de, etc. generoso,
Mill libras bonae and legalis monetae, Angliae, solvend. eisdem Edmundo Lam,
and Frederico Man, seu eorum alteri, vel eorum certo Attorn. Executor. vel
administrator. suis, in vel super vi^esimum primum diem Septembris jam prox.
futur. post dat. praesentium. Et praedicti Arnoldus, Bernardus, and Drugo,
volunt and concedunt pro seipsis and quolibet ipsorum, Haered. Executor. and
Administrator. suis, and cujuslibet ipsorum, per praesentes; quod si defecerint
in solutione praedictae summae pecuniae, quod tune praedicta summa pecuniae
levetur and recipiatur de se and quolibet ipsorum, baeredibus, executoribus,
and administratoribus suis, and cujuslibet ipsorum, and de omnibus and singulis
Maneriis, Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis, Haereditamentis, Possessionbus, Bonis
and Catallis ipsorum Arnoldi Helper, Bernardi Jenney, and Drugonis Kelp, and
cujuslibet ipsorum, haered. executor. and administrator, suorum and cujuslibet
ipsorum, ubicunque invent. fuerint, ad solum and proprium opus and usum ipsorum
Edmundi Lam, and Frederici Man, Haered. Executor. Administrator. and Assignat.
suor. Test dicto Domino Rege apud Westminster. primo die Maii, Anno regni ejusdem
Domini Regis Caroli secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae Regis, fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

A Recognizance from Three to Three.
HEnricus Dover de, etc. Armiger, Joh'es Butler de, etc. Armiger, and
Laurentius Carey de, etc. Generosus, coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria sua
personaliter constituti, recognoverunt seipsos, and quilibet eorum recognovit
seipsum debere Edvardo Dunstable de, etc. Generoso, Petro Darcy de, etc.
Generoso, and Jacobo Sackle, vel alicui eorum, aut suo certo Attornat.
executoribus vel administratoribus suis, in vel super tricesimum diem Decembris
prox. futur. post dat. praesentium. Et praedict. Henricus, Joh'es and
Laurentius volunt and concedunt pro seipsis and quolibet ipsorum, Haeredibus,
Executoribus, and Administratoribus suis, and cujuslibet ipsorum per
praesentes, quod si defecerint in solutione praedict, su^ me pecuniae, quod
tunc praedicta summa pecuniae levetur and recipiatur de se, and quolibet
ipsorum, heredibus, executoribus, and administratoribus suis, and cujuslibet
ipsorum, and de omnibus and singulis Maneriis, Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis,
Haereditamentis, posse^lio^ibus, bonis and catallis ipsorum Henrici Dover,
Joh'is Butler, and Laurentii Carey, and cujuslibet ipsorum, biered, executor.
and administrator. suorum, and cujuslibet ipsorum, ubicunque inven. fuerint, ad
solum and proprium opus and usum ipsorum Edvardi Dunstable, Petri Darcy, and
Jacobi Sackle, biered. executor. administrator. and assign. suorum. Test dicto
Domino Rege apud Westminster. quarto die Aprilis, Anno Regni ejusdem Domini Regis
Caroli secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis,
Fidei Defensoris, etc. Quartodecimo.

A condition from One to One, to pay a sum of money at several payments; with
a Clause if any payment be unpaid, the Bond to be forfeited.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden John
Donew, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, do and
shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the above named James Fisher,
his Executors, Administrators, or Assigus, the full and whole sum of three
hundred pounds of good and lawful money of England, in manner and form
following; that is to say, the sum of One hundred pounds, part thereof on the
first day of July next ensuing the Date above written: One hundred pounds more
thereof on the first Day of January then next following: and One hundred pounds
more residue thereof on the first Day of July, which shall be in the year of
our Lord 1663. Then this Obligation to be void and of none effect; But if
default be made in paymont of any the said several and respective sums of money
abovementioned, or any part of any of them, or any of the said several and
respective Days or Times of payment above-limited, contrary to the true intent
and meaning of these Presents, Then this Obligation to be and remain in full
force and virtue.

Sigillat. and deliberat. in praesentia.

A Condition of a Bond of Arbitration from Two to Two, without an Vmpire.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden James
Free, and William Slow, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, for their
and every of their parts and behalfs, shall and do in all things well and truly
stand to, obey, abide, observe, perform, fulfill, and keep the Award, Order,
Arbitrament, Judgment, final end and determination of Jacob True Love, and James
Hartling of London Merchants, Arbitrators indifferently chosen, elected, and
named, as well on the one part and behalf of the above-bounden James Free, and
William Slow, as of the abovenamed John Roe and Richard Holdfast, to
Arbitrate, Award, Order, Judge, and determine of, for, upon and concerning all,
and all manner of Action and Actions, Cause and Causes of Actions, Suits,
Bills, Bonds, Specialties, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Quarrels,
Controversies, Trespasses, Damages, and Demands whatsoever, at any time
heretofore had, made, moved, brought, commenced, sued, prosecuted, done,
suffered, committed, or depending by or between the said parties, or any of
them; so always as the said Award, Arbitrament, Order, Determination, final End
and Judgment of the said Arbitrators, of, for, or upon the Premises, be made
and given up in writing, indented under their Hands and Seals, ready to be
delivered to the said parties, on or before the second day of May, next ensuing
the Date above-written Then this Obligation to be void and of none effect, or
else to stand and remain in full force and virtue.

A Condition of a single Bond of Arbitration without an Vmpire.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden Joshua
Lee, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, for his and their parts and
behalfs, shall and do in all things well and truly stand to, obey, abide,
observe, perform, fulfill, and keep the Award, Order, Arbitrament, Judgment,
final end and determination of John Shakeapple of Alaxon in the County of
Wilts, Gent. and Hugh Sweeting of Alaxon aforesaid, Gent. Arbitrators
indifferently chosen, elected, and named, as well on the part and behalf of the
above-bounden Joshua Lee, as of the abovenamed James Fritter, to Arbitrate,
Award, Order, Judge, and determine of, for, upon or concerning all, and all
manner of Action and Actions, Cause and Causes of Actions, Suits, Bills, Bonds,
Specialties, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Quarrels, Controversies,
Trespasses, Damages, and Demands whatsoever, at any time heretofore had, made,
moved, brought, commenced, sued, prosecuted, done, suffered, committed, or
depending by or between the said parties; so always as the said Award,
Arbitrament, Order, Determination, final End and Judgment of the said
Arbitrators, of, for, or upon the Premises, be made and given up in writing
indented under their Hands and Seals, ready to be delivered to the said
parties, on or before the second day of May, next ensuing the Date
above-written, Then this Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else to
stand and remain in full force and virtue.

The Definition of Conditions to Obligations.

A Condition is generally a Rule, Law, or Bridle annexel unto men's Actions,
bridling as it were, staying and suspending the same until a certain time; so
that a Condition o^ an Obligation, Recognizance, etc. is such an agreement of
both parties t the same, as stays and delayeth the effect thereof, making it
an uncertai^ty whether it shall take effect or not, until the Condition happen
to be fulfilled or elapsed; so that by the nonperformance or our doing
thereof, the parties to the Condition shall receive pre^udice and loss, and by
performance, commodity and advantage.

Note, that it beho^eth that the Condition be po^sible in Law, otherwise the
Agreement is void.

A Condition of a double Bond to pay a sum of money at several payment, with a
Clause if any payment be behind, the Bond to be forfeited.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden John
Mak^-peace, and Richard war, or either of them, their, or either of their
Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, or any of them, do, and shall well and
truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed Drew Hold-Jtast, and
Richard Lamb, or either of them, their, or either of their Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, the full and whole sum of threescore pounds of good
and lawful money of England, in manner and form following; That is to say, the
sum of twenty pounds, part thereof on the first day of June next ensuing the
Date above-written; twenty pounds more thereof on the first day of December
then next following; and twenty pounds more, residue thereof, on the first day
of June, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1663. without Frand or Convin:
Then this Obligation to be void and of none effect: But if default be made in
payment of any the said several and respective sums of Money abovementioned,
or any part of any of them, or any of the said several and respective days or
times of payment above-limited, contrary to the true intent and meaning of
these Presents: Then this Obligation to be and remain in full force and virtue.

Sigillat. and deliberat. in praesentia.

A Condition of a single Bond, to pay a sum of money at a place certain.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden John
wright, his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, shall and do well and truly
pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed William Wrong, his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, the full sum of one hundred pounds of good and
lawful money of England, on the twentieth day of June, next ensuing the date of
these Presents, at or in the now dwelling house of the said William Wrong,
situate in Thame^tre^t in London, without fraud or further dalay; Then this
Obligation to be void and or none effect, or else to be and remain in full
force and virtue.

Sigillat. and deliberat. in praesentia.

A Condition of a single Bond, to pay a sum of money without a place certain.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden Joseph
Fathack, his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, shall and do well and truly
pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed James Halfpenny, his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, the full and whole sum of one hundred pounds of
good and lawful money of England, on the twentieth day of December next ensuing
the date of these Presents, without any fraud or further daley; Then this
Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else to be and remain in full
force and virtue.

Sigillat. and deliberat. in praesentia.

A Condition of a Treble Bond, to pay a sum of money at one payment.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden Peter
Potter, John As^ew, and Thomas T^truth, or any of them, their, or any of their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, shall and do well
and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed Je^^ry what head, his
Executors, Administrators, or Adic^^s, the full, whole, and entire sum of fifty
pounds of good and lawful money of England, on the tenth day of O^^ober next
ensuing the date of these Presents, without any fraud or further delay: Then
this Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else to be and remain in full
force and virtue.

Sigillat. and deliberat. in praesentia.

A Condition of a double Bond, to pay a sum of money at a place certain.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden John
Lark^s, and William Sparrow, or either of them, their, or either of their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, shall and do well
and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the abovenamed Thomas Tooron good, his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the full, whole and entire sum of one
hundred pounds of good and lawful money of England, on the twentieth day of
June next ensuing the date of these Presents, at or in the now dwelling house
of the said Thomas Tooron good, situate and being in Cutpurse-Lane in London,
without any fraud or deceit: Then this Obligation to be void and of none
effect, or else to be and remain in full force and virtue.

Sigillat. and deliberat. in praesentia.

A Condition of a Counter-Bond, from two to a third person, who was bound with
them.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the abovenamed Good, a
me, at the special instance and request of the above be unden Alex. B^rt, and
Christopher Deu, and for their only Debt, Duty, Matter and Cause, together
with them the said Alex. B^rt and Christopher Deu, is held and firmly bound
unto John To^good of Appl^by, in the County of York, Gent. in and by one
Obligation, bearing even date with these Presents, in the penal sum of one
hundred pounds of lawful money of England, conditioned for the true payment of
50 l. and 15 s. of like lawful money, unto the said John T^ogood, his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, on the 20 day of May next ensuning the
date of the same recited Obligation, as by the same Obligation and the
Condition thereof (relation being thereunto had) does and may more fully and at
large appe^r. If therefore the said Alex. Burt, and Christopher deu, or either
of them, their, or either of their Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, or any
of them, shall and do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said
John T^ogood, his Exceutors, Administrators, or Assigns, the said sum of fifty
pounds and fifteen shillings of lawful money of England, on the said twentieth
day of May next ensaing the date of the same recited Obligation, in discharge
of the same Obligation: Then this present Obligation to be void and of none
effect, or else to be and remain in full force and virtue.

Sigillat. and deliberat. in praesentia.

A Condition of a Counter-Bond from One to One.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the abovenamed Is^^
Bora^^^, at the special instance and request of the above-bounden Willam
Goodenough, and for his only Debt, Duty, Matter and Canse, together with him
the said william Goodenough, and John Riayose of Balshead in the County of
C^^^^^^ Gent. is held and firmly bound unto Samed Goodman of Creathe^ook in the
County of Lancola Yeoman, in and by one Oblitation, bearing even date with
these Presents, in the penal sum of two hundred pounds of lawful money of
(...), conditioned, for the true payment of one hundred pounds of like lawful
money, unto the said Sam^el Goodman, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns,
on the twenty sourth day of F^ly next ensuing the date of the same recited
Obligation, as by the same Obligation and the Condition thereof, (relation
being thereunto had) does and may more fully and at large appear: If therefore
the said William Goodenough, his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, or any of
them, shall and do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said Samuel
Goodman, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the sum of one hundred
pounds of lawful money of England, on the said twenty ^ourth day of J^ly next
ensuring the date of the same recited Obligation, in discharge of the same
Obligation: Then this present Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else
to be and remain in full force and virtue.

Sigillat. and deliberat. to praesentia.

A Condition to perform Covenants in Articles of Agreement.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden John Do,
his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, shall and do for
his and their parts, in all things well and truly observe, perform, fulfill,
accomplish, pay, and keep all and singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles,
Clanses, Proviso's, Payments, Conditions, and Agreements whatsoever, which on
his and their parts and behalss, are or ought to be observed, performed,
inls^^ed, accomplished, paid, and kept, comprised and meantioned in certain
Articles of Agreement Indented, bearing eve^^ are with these Presents, made or
expressed to be made between the said John Do of the one part, and the a (...)
an ed Robert Re^^ of the other part, and that in and by all things, according
to the con^^^t, purposes, true intent and meaning of the same Articles, without
fraud or covin: Then this present Obligation to be void and of none effect, or
else to be and remain in full force and virtue.

A Condition to perform the Covenants in an Indenture.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden Arthur
Butler, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, shall and
do for his and their parts in all things well and truly observe, perform,
fulfill, accomplish, pay, and keep all and singular the Covenants, Grants,
Articles, Clauses, Proviso's, Payments, Conditions, and Agreements whatsoever,
which on his and their parts and behalfs, are or ought to be observed,
performed, fulfilled, accomplished, paid, and kept, comprised and mentioned in
one pair of Ind^^^^res, bearing even date with these presents, made, or
expressed to be made, between the said Arthur Butler of the one part, and the
abovenamed Christopher Dowas of the other pare; and that in and by all things,
according to the contents, purposes, true intent and meaning of the same
Indentures, without fraud or covin: Then this present Obligation to be void and
of none effect, or else to be and remain in full force and virtue.

Not, If to perform the Covenants in an Indenture Trip^r^^te, or Quadrupartite,
then it must be expressed in the Condition thus; to wit, to perform the
Covenants comprised and mentioned in certain Indentures Tripartite, or
Quadrupartite, bearing date with these presents, made between A. B. of the
first part, C. D. of the second part, and E. F. of the third part; and that in
and by all things, etc. as before is expressed.

A General Release from Two to Two.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That we John Makepeaes of London,
Gent. and Heary Woodbegood of London, Gent. have, and either of us has
remised, released, and for ever quit-elaimed, and by these Presents do, and
either of us does, for us, and either of us, our, and either of our Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto
John Highon of London, Esquire and Nicholas Longman of London, Gent. their
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, all and all manner
of Accounts, Actions, Suits, Debts, Bills, Bonds, Accounts, Reckonings,
Judgment, Executions, Trespasses, Controversies, Damages and Demands
whatsoever, both in Law and Equity, which against the said John Higdon and
Nicholas Longman, ever we, or either of us, have had, now have, or which our
Heirs, Executors, or Administrators hereafter shall or may have, claim,
challenge, or demand, for any matter, cause, or thing whatsoever, from the
beginning of the world, until the day of the date of these presents. In withess
whereof, etc.

A General Release from One to One.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I Lawrence Lovelittle of Mea^^^am, in the
County of Kent Gent have remised, released, for ever quit-claimed; and by these
Presents do for me, any Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, all remise,
release, and for ever quit-claim unto John Hoar of London Gent, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, all and all manner of Actions, Cause and Canses
of Actions, Suits, Bills, Bonds, Writings Obligatory, Debts, Dues, Duties,
Accounts, Sum and Sums of Money, Judgments, Executions, Extents, narrels,
Controversies, Trespasses, Damages, and Demands whatsoever, both in Law and
Equity, or otherwise howsoever, which against the said John Hoar I ever had now
have, or which I, my Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, shall on (...) ^ay
have, claim, challenge, or denta^^d, for or by reason of means on any matter,
cause, or thing, from the beginning of the World, unto the day of the date of
these Presents, (...), etc.

A Bill of Sale of Goods to be void upon payment of a sum of Money with
Interest.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I Philip Havenough of Ready, in the
County of H^^^ ord Yeoman, for and in consideration of the sum of twenty pounds
of lawful money of England, to me in hand paid by Jessery Catchpole of Longrack
in the County of Frant. Gent. whereof I do hereby acknowledge the Receipt, and
my self therewith fully fatisfied, Have bargained, sold, and delivered, and by
these Presents, in plain and open Market, according to due form of Law, do
bargain, sell and deliver unto the said Jessery Catchpole, one silver Basin
weighing twelve Ounces, six Silver Spoons weighing one Ounce apiece, and two
Feather Beds, with Bed-steads, Bolsters, and Pillows, etc. To have and to hold
the said bargained Premises, unto the said Jessery Catchpole, his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of the said
Jessery; Catchpole, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns for ever. And I
the said Philip Have-enough, for my self, my Executors, and Administrators, the
said bargained Premises unto the said Jesser. Catchpole, his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, a against all persons, shall and will warrant and
for ever desend by these Presents: Provided nevertheless, That if I the said
Philip Have-enough, my Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of us, do,
and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said Jessery
Catchpole, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the sum of twenty one
pounds and four shillings of lawful money of England, on the ninth day of May,
which will be in the year of our Lord I (...). for redemption of the said
bargained Premises: Then this Present Bill of Sale be void, or else to remain
in full force. in witness whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal, the
seventh day of May, A^^^ Do^^ini 1662. and in the Beign of our Sovereign Lord
King Charles the Second, of England, etc.

A single Bill without any penalty.
BE it known unto all men by these Presents, That I A. B. of C. in the County
of D. Gent. do owe and am indebted unto E. F. of G. in the County of Hunt.
Gent. the sum of twenty pounds of lawful money of England, to be paid unto the
said E. F. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, at or upon the first day
of June next ensuing the date hereof. In witness etc.

A Single Penal Bill.
BE it known unto all men by these Presents, That I Alex. Fish of Henslow, in
the County of York, Gent. do owe and am indebted unto Robert Herringrose o^
London, Cordwainer, the sum of ten pounds of lawful money of England, to be
paid to the said Robert Herringrose, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns,
at or upon the Ninth day of September next ensuing the date hereof: to which
payment well and truly to be made, I bind my self, my Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, to the said Robert Herringrose, his Executors, and Assigns, in
the penalty of twenty pounds of like money, firmly by these Presents: In
witness, etc.

A Condition to stand by the Award of Arbitrators, with an Vmpire certain
nominated.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden Anthory
Bartlet, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, do and
shall, for his and their parts and behalfs, stand to, obey, abide, observe, and
in and by all things well and truly perform and accomplish the Award,
Arbitrament, Order, Determination, final End and Judgment of Chri^lopher
Dowdeswell of London, Merchant, and Edwar: Fairclough of Westminster, Gent.
Arbitrators indi^^erently chosen, elected, and named, as well on the part and
behalf of the said Anthony Bartlet, as on the part and behalf of the above
named Solomon Crofts, to award, arbitrate, order, judge, determine; final end
to make of, for, upon, and concerning all and all manner of Actions, and causes
of Actions, Sults, Debts, Strifes, Accounts, Reckonings, Sum and Sums of Money,
Trespades, Variances, Quarrels, Bonds, Specialties, Matters and Demands
whatsoever, had, made, moved, risen or depending, having been, or now being
between the said parties; so always as the said Award, Arbitrament, Order,
Determination, final End and Judgment of the said Arbitrators, for, or upon the
Premises, be made and given up in Writing indented under their Hands and Seals,
ready to be delivered to the said parties, on or before the twenty fourth of
June next ensuing the date above-written: And if the said Arbitrators shall not
make and give up their Award and Arbitrament, of and upon the Premises, on or
before the said twenty fourth day of June; If then the said Anthony Bartlet,
his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, do, and shall
stand to, abide, observe, perform, and keep the Award, Umpirage, final End and
Judgment of George H^le of London, Esquire Umpire indifferently chosen betwixt the
said parties, for the ending and composing the differences aforetaid; so as the
said Umpire do make and give up his said Award, Umpirage, and Determination by
writing indented under his Hand and Seal, ready to be delivered to the said
parties, on or before the tenth day of June next ensuing the date above
written, without fraud or covin: Then this Obligation to be void and of none
effect, or else to stand and remain in full force and virtue.

A Deed of Gift.
TO all Christian People to whom these Presents shall come, I A.B. of, etc.
Gent. send greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know ye, That I the said A. B.
for the love and affection that I the said A.B. do bear unto C.D. Son of I. D.
of, etc. Innkeeper, I the said A. B. being in perfect memory, Have given,
granted, and confirmed; and by this my present Writing, do fully, freely, and
absolutely give, grant, and confirm unto the said C. D. all and singular my
Goods, Chattels, Leases, personal Estate whatsoever, Utensils, Housholdstuff,
Implements, and Things whatsoever, of what nature, kind, or property soever the
same be, or can be found within the Realm of England: To have, hold, levy, use,
dispose of, take, and enjoy all my said Goods, Chattels, Leases, personal
Estate, Housholdstuff, and Implements; and all other the Premises aforesaid,
unto the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, from henceforth
for ever, without any manner of claim, challenge, or demand whatsoever, of or
by any person or persons whatsoever. And I the said A. B. all and singular the
said Goods, Chattels, Leases, Implements, and Things whatsoever, and all other
the Premises, unto the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
against all people, shall and will warrant, and for ever defend by these
Presents. Of all and every which said Goods, Chattels, Leases, and Promises, I
the said A. B. have put the said C. D. in full and peaceable possession, by the
Gift and Delivery of one silver Salt, which to the said C. D. the day of the
date of these Presents, I have given and delivered, in the Name of Possession
and Seisin of all and singular the said Premises. In witness, etc.

Sealed and delivered, and quiet Possession and Seisin given and delivered by
the said silver Salt, parcel of the said Premises, according to the effect of
this present Writing, in the presence of

A Letter of Attorney to receive a sum of Money very usual.
TO all Christian People to whom these Presents shall come, I A. B. of, etc.
Gent. send greeting; Know ye, that I the said A. B. for sufficient causes, and
valuable considerations me hereunto especially moving, Have made, ordained,
constituted, and in my stead and place, put and deputed, and by these Presents,
do make, ordain, constitute, and in my stead and place, put and depute C. D.
of, etc. Gent. my true and lawful Attorney irrevocable, for me, and in my Name,
and to my use, to ask, demand, sue for, recover, and receive of I. F. of, etc.
Gent. all such sum and sums of money, debts, and demands whatsoever, which now
are due and belonging unto me the said A. B. by and from the said I. F. and to
have, use, and take all lawful ways and means in my Name, or otherwise, for
recovery thereof, by attachment, Arrest, Distress, Re-entry, or otherwise; and
to compound and agree for the same, and Acquirtances, or other sufficient
Discharges for the same, for me, and in my Name, to make, seal, and deliver,
and to do all other acts and things whatsoever, concerning the Premises, as
fully in every respect, as I my self might or could do, if I were personally
present; and Attorneys one or more under him, for the purposes aforesaid to
make, and again at his pleasure to revoke. And I the said A. B. do hereby
ratify and confirm whatsoever my said Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to
be done in my Name, or otherwise, by force of these Presents. In witness, etc.

A Warrant of Attorney to confess a Judgment in the King's Bench.
To T.W. A.W. T.I. and H.G. Gentlemen, Attorneys of his Majesty's Court of
King's Bench at Westminster, or to any one of them, or any other Attorney of the
same Court. These are to desire and authorize you, or any of you, to appear for
me Arnold Briggs of London Gent. in the said Court, at the Suit of Walter
Hughes of Gray's Inn, in the County of Midlesex Esquin Easter-Term now next
ensuing, and confess a Judgment against me unto him, for the sum of six hundred
pounds Debt, besides cost of Suit by Non sum informatus, nil dicit, or
otherwise: and for your, or any of your so doing, this shall be your sufficient
Warrant. Witness my Hand and Seal, this 24th day of March, Anno Dom, 1661. and
in the Fourteenth year of the Reign of our now Sovereign Lord King Charles the
Second, of England, etc.

Note, you may alter the direction aforementioned to this following, and it is
a warrant in the Common-Bench.

To P. G. T. M. T. A. and H. L. Gentlemen, Attorneys of his Majesty's Court of
Common-Bench at Westminster; or to any one of them, or any other Attorney of
the same Court.

A Warrant of Attorney, to acknowledge satisfaction upon Record for a Judgment
recorded formerly.
To T.W. A.W. T.I. and H.G. Gentlemen, Attorneys in his Majesty's Court of
King's Bench at Westminster; or to any one of them, or to any other Attorney of
the same Court.
Whereas I Walter Hughs of Gray's Inn, in the County of Middlesex Esquire in
Easter-Term now last past, did obtain and recover a Judgment in the said Court
of King's Bench, against Arnold Briggs of London, Gent. for six hundred pounds
Debt, and thirty shillings for Damages, or costs of Suit, as by the Records
thereof remaining in the said Court more at large may appear: Of and for which
said Judgment, and the Debt and Damages thereby recovered, I the said Walter
Hughs do hereby acknowledge my self to be fully satisfied and contented. These
are therefore to entreat and authorize you, or any of you, to acknowledge
satisfaction upon Record in the said Court, of and for the said Judgment, and
the said Debt and Damages thereby recovered: And this my Writing shall be your,
or any of your sufficient Warrant and Discharge in this behalf. In witness
whereof, I the said Walter Hughs have hereunto set my Hand and Seal, this four
and twentieth day of May, Anno Domini 1662. and in the Fourteenth year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, of England, etc.

This Warrant, altering the Style of the Court, will serve to acknowledge
satisfaction in the Common-Bench at Westminster.

A Release of Errors upon a Judgment in the Common-Bench.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I Arnold Briggs of London, Gent. have
remised, released, and for ever quit-claimed; and by these Presents do remise,
release, and for ever quit-claim unto Walter Hughs of Gray's Inn in the County
of Middlesex, Esquire his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, all and all
manner of Error and Errors, Cause and Causes of Errors, Misentries,
Mistakes, and Jeofails whatsoever, which is, or has happened in the Record or
Proceedings of one Judgment for six hundred pounds Debt, and thirty shillings
for Damages, or Costs of Suit, which is obtained and gotten against me the said
Arnold Briggs, at the Suit of the said walter Hughs, in his Majesty's Court of
Common-Bench at Westminster, in Easter-Term now last past, or for or by reason
of the not suing out, or filing of an Original Writ; or the filing a Warrant or
Warrants of Attor^^^, or other fault in any of the Entries or Proceeding
^^^^ereupon, or relating thereunto. In witness whereof (...) have hereunto set
my Hand and Seal, the four and twentieth day of May, Anno Domini 1662. and in
the fourteenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second,
of England, etc.

A Release of Errors upon a Jedgment in the King's Bench.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I William Goodman of Tilmanston in the
County of Kent, Gent. do by this present Writing, for me, my Heirs, Executors,
and Administrators, remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto Thomas Crofts
of Kingwould, in the County of Kent, Yeoman, and all and all manner of Error
and Errors, and Misprision of Error and Errors, which are or may be in one
Judgment remalning upon Record in his Majesty's Court of King's Bench at well
m^n^^^r, against the said w^ll^dm Goodman, at the Suit of the said Thomas
crosts, for one hundred pounds Debt, and two pounds seventeen shillings three
pence Charges, or thereabouts, or in any the Premises or Proceeding of the sa^d
Judgment or Suit, In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal, the
eight and twentieth day of May, Anno Domini 1662, and in the fourteenth year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive Money due upon a Bond.
KKow all men by these Presents, That I Robert Belsey of Colch^ster in the
County of Es^^r Gent. have assigned and ordained, and made, and in my stead and
place by these Presents, put and constituted my trusty and well-beloved Fr^^nd
John Edmands of London Gent. my true and lawful Attorney, for me, and in my
stead and name, and to the use and behoof of hun the said J^^^ E^munds, to ask,
recover, receive of John Cole of High gate, in the County of Mi^ldlesex Gent.
Thomas Lee, and John Plodw^l of Ha^^^^smith, in the same County Esquires, the
sum of five hundred pounds, due unto me for non-payment of two hundred and
fifty pounds of like money, on the 28th day of May, 1662. last past before the
date of these Presents, as by one Obligation, with Condition thereunder
written, bearing date the twelfth day of May 1661. in the Thirteenth year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, etc. more plainly
appears: Giving, and by these Presents granting unto my said Atrorney, my
full power and lawful authority in the Premises, to do, say, perform, and
finish, for me and in my Name, as aforesaid, all and every such act and acts,
thing and things, devise and devises in the Law whatsoever, for the recovery of
all the Debts aforesaid, as fully, largely, and amply in every respect, as I my
self might or could do, if I were personally present; and upon the Receipt
thereof, Acquittances or other Disecharger for me, and in my Name, to make,
seal, and deliver; ratifying, allowing, holding firm and stable, all and
whatsoever my said Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be done, in or about
the Execution of the Premises, by virtue of these Premises. In witness, etc.

A Warrant for a Attorney to appear, etc.
To R. A. D. E. Attorney of the Court of Common-Bench at Westminster, or any of
them.
THese are to Authorize you, and I do hereby desire you, or either of you, to
appear for me I.S. in the said Court, at the Suit of M. N. in an Action o^,
etc. to imparle unto the said Action, and afterward to plead, etc. and for
your so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant.

Witness my Hand and Seal, this (...) day of (...) 1662.
A Warrant for an Attorney to appear, etc.
To A. B. C. D. Attoneys of the Court of King's Bench at Westminster, or any of
them.
THese are to Authorize you, and I do hereby desire you, or either of you, to
appear for me I.S. in the said Court, at the Suit of M. N. in an Action of,
etc. to imparle unto the said Action, and afterward to plead, etc. and for
your so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant.

Witness my Hand and Seal, this (...) day (...) of 1662.
A Warrant to confess a Judgment upon a Bond, if the money be not paid on the
day.
To E. C. and A. G. or to any other Attorney of His Majesty's Court of
King's Bench at Westminster.
THese are to Warrant and Authorize you, or either of you, to appear for me
william ^^lken, at Rosse, in the County of Ba^ks, Esquire at the Suit of Peter
Bolter, in the County of Berks, Baronet, and to receive a Declaration in an
Action of Debt for One thousand pounds, as of Micha^lm^s Term last past, and to
confess Judgment by (Non sum informa^^s, ^i^il dici^) or otherwise at your
diseretion: and for your so doing, this shall be your inflicient Warrant in
that behalf. In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal this ^oth
of April, Anno D^m. 1662. and in the Fourteenth year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Charles the Second, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive money due upon several Bonds, allowing the
Attorney reasonable charges out of that money which b^ shall receive, to
satisfy himself of such moneys as are due to him from him which makes this
Letter.
TO all men to whom these Presents shall come, W. R. of Tattersel, in the
County of Lincol^, Yeoman, sends Greeting: Know ye, That I the said W. R. for
diverse good, su^ticient, and reasonable Causes and Conditions me hereunto
moving; but especially for and in respect of certain several sums of money
heretofore to me paid by C.H. of T. in the said County of ^incoln, Gent. have
authorized, constituted, nominated, made and ordained; and by these Presents do
authorize, constitute, nominate, make, ordain, and in my place put the said
C.H. my true, faithful, lawful, undoubted, and irrevocable Attorney, from
henceforth for me, and in my name to ask, receive, gather, and take all such sm
and sums of money as are already due, or her easter shall or may become due
unto the said (...) from any person or persons herein hereafter mentioned and
expre^ed; as also all such sum and sums of money as were due unto F. my now
Wise, in her Widowhood, or hereafter may or shall be due unto her, by any
person or persons whats^ever, and herein hereafter mentioned and expressed, by
ver^ue of any Bill, Bond, or any other Writing or way whatsoever, that is to
say, To ask, gather, receive and take of A. B. of C. in the County of E.
Yeoman, the sum of ten pounds of lawful English money, due into me by virtue of
one Bond or Writing Obligatory, from the said A. B. to me the said W. R. dated
the last day of June last past before the da^e hereof, as in and by the
Condition of the said Obl^^at^on, reference being thereunto had, more plainly
and at large it does and may app^ar^^^ also forty shillings of lawful Engli^h
money, from, etc. [Then name every particular sum, and set them down according
to their several names, sums, and dates, as they are, and insert these
Covenants following, as in and by the several Conditions of the said Bonds,
whereunto relation being had, more plainly and at large it does and may
appear.] For the Recovery of all which said several sums of money which shall
arise or grow due unto me the said W.R. by virtue of any or either the said
Bonds yet in arrear, due and unpaid, I do by these Presents give full power and
Authority unto the said C.H. for me and in my name, and to my use as aforesaid,
to receive; and upon non-payment of them, or any of them, to bring, sue, and
prosecute for me, and in my name, all and all manner of Actions whatsoever, as
well real as personal, and the same to prosecute and follow by Suit, Arrest,
Imprisonment, Judgment, Condemnation, Execution, or otherwise. And one Attorney
or more for the doing of the Premises to make, and the same at his will and
pleasure to revoke, and new in his or their place to be put, in as ^a^ge and
ample manner as I might do, if the same were by me in proper person done,
commenced, sued, or taken, to the only benefit and behoof of me the said W. R.
allowing to the said C. out of the said sum or sums of money so by him
received, his reasonable, lawful, and necessary expenses and charges laid out,
or disbursed in hand, or otherwise, in or about the recovery, getting and
procuring of the said sums of money, or any of them, with allowance and payment
of all such reckonings, sum and sums of money as are due to him the said C. by
me the said W. as shall or may appear upon any Reckoning, Bill, Bond, or
otherwise under my Hand and Seal, or by sut^icient Witness. And I do by these
Presents covenant, promise, and grant to and with the said C his Executors,
etc. that I, my Heirs and Assigns shall and will at all times here^f^er,
ratify, confirm, and allow whatsoever my said Attorney shall do, or cause to
be done, in or about the Premis^es. In witness whereof, etc.

A general Letter of Attorney, to let, set, dispose, etc.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, I Ja^es Rich
of etc. send Greeting. Know ye, That I ^h^ said I.R. for diverse good Cau^es and
Considerations me hereunto especially moving, have made ordained, constituted
and in my stead and place put and deputed, and by these Pr^^^ts do make,
ordain, constitute, and in my stead and place put and depute my loving Friends
R. C. of etc. F.G. of (...) to be my true and lawful Attorney and Attorneys
irrevocable, for me, and in my name, and to my own proper use and behoof, to
ask, demand and require, sue for recover, and receive all such Debts, Duties,
Sum and Sums of Money, Rent, proper Rents, and Arrearages of Rent and Rents,
yearly Payments, Merchandises, Goods, Chattels, Legac^es, Money due or to be
due upon my Bill or Bills of Exchanges, or otherwise, and all other demands
whatsoever, which now are or hereafter shall be due, payable, or any way
belonging unto me, by, or from any person or persons, or B^dies Corporate or
Politic whatsoever, or howsoever; and for default of payment of a^y Rent or
Rents, or Arrearages of Rent or Rents which (...) is, or hereafter shall be
(...) to me, to eater into all or any o^ my Me^^nages, Lands, Te^^^nents,
Hered^taments, or any of them, or any part the^co^, and to Distrain for the
same Rent or Po^^^ and Arrea^a^es of ^ent or Rents; and for default of payment
thereof, to ewer in the name of the whole, and so ^^^on thereof to ta^e, and to
make, seal, and d^^^^er in my name, any Lease or ^^^es of Ejectment thereupon,
for any term or number of years, as in such Cases is ^^ital, and to ta^e and
use all lawful ways or means for recovery of the Premises: And to pay any sum
or sums of money; and to cont^^ct for, set, ^ot, bargain, and sell all, or any
of my Mesi^^ges, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, Goods, Char^els, or Estate
whatsoever, for any term or number of years, or otherwise, as he shall think
sit; and to sue, implead, and make answer, presecute and desend in any Court or
Courts of Law or Eqi^ty, and before any Judge or Justices, or other person or
persons in any Suit, Action, Ma^ter or Cause, with me, for me, or against me,
as the Cause shall require; and to deal and intermeddle in any Actions, Suits,
A^airs, and Eusi^e^^es, any way touching or concerning me, as may Agent or
Factor, or otherwise: giving and by these Pres^^ts granting unto my said
Attorneys, my full and whole Power and lawful Authority in the execution and
per^o^mance of all and singular the Premises, and to make my Composition or
Agreement for and concerning the Pr^^nises; and to make, seal, and deliver, or
otherwise execute any Acquittance or Acquittances, or other sufficient
discharges or Releases concerning the Premises, or any part thereof, for me and
in my name, or otherwise, as the Cause shall require: and Attorneys one or more
for the purposes aforesaid, or any of them, under them to make and again at
their pleasure to revoke; and generally to so, accomplish, determine; and
execute all and every such further, and other lawful and reasonable act and
acts, thing and things, devise and devises whatsoever, which in or about the
premises shall be unto my said Attorneys thought fit to be done, as fully and
amply in every respect, as I my self might or could do, if I my self were
personally persent: ratifying and allowing for firm and effectual, all that,
and whatsoever my said Attorneys shall lawfully do, or cause to be done in my
name, or otherwise, by force hereof. In witness, etc.

A Charter-party of an Affraightment.
IN the Name of God, Amen. This Charter-party of Affraightment, indented, made,
and agreed upon the etc. Anno Domini 1663, and in the fifteenth year of the
Reign of, etc. Between James Wakefield of Deal in the County of Kent, Mariner,
part-owner of the good Barque or Vessel called the, etc. of the Portage or
Burden of Forty Tuns, or thereabouts, now riding at Anchor in the River of
Thames, within the Port of London, and Master (under God) of the said Barque or
Vessel, for her now intended Voyage, on the one part, and Thomas Chapman of
London, Merchant, of the other part: WITNESSES, That the said party-owner and
Master, for and on the behalf of himself, and the rest of the owners of the
said Barque or Vessel, Has granted and let to Freight the said Barque or
Vessel unto the said Merchant; and the said Merchant has hired the said Barque
or Vessel, for a Voyage with her to be made, in manner and form following: That
is to say, The said J W for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does
covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said T C, his Executors and
Administrators by these presents, That the said Barque or Vessel, with the
first wind and weather that God shall send, after the tenth day of this instant
January, shall depart from the said Port of London, with such lawful Goods and
Merchandises, as it shall please the said T C, or his Assigns, in the mean time
to lade aboard her: and that it shall be lawful to and for the said T C, his
Factors and Assigns, in the mean time to lade aboard her all such lawful Goods
and Merchandises as he or they shall think sit, which she may reasonably carry
and stow, over and above her Victuals, Tackle and Apparel: and that the said
Barque or Vessel shall, by Gods grace, directly as wind and weather will serve,
sail unto the Port or Harbor of Dublin in Ireland, and there deliver unto the
said T C, his Executors, Administrators, Factors, or Assigns, all such Goods
and Merchandises as shall be laden aboard of her by the said T C, his
Executors, Administrators, Factors or Assigns, dry and well conditioned;
danger of the Seas, Fire, Enemies, and Imbargo of Princes, only excepted: And
after her clearing, and right discharge of such Goods as she shall receive into
her, within the said Port of London, shall receive into her at the Port of
Dublin aforesaid, her full lading, in such lawful Goods and Merchandises as it
shall please the said T C, his Executors, Administrators, Factors or Assigns
to lade, or cause to be laden aboard her; and after such her full lading at
Dublin aforesaid, shall directly sail, as wind and weather will permit, to the
said Port or Harbor of the City of London, and there deliver unto the said T
C, his Executors, Administrators, Factors, or Assigns, within the space of
seven working days hereafter mentioned, the said Goods and Merchandises, so
received into her at Dublin aforesaid, dry and well-conditioned, and make a
right Discharge and end of the said Voyage; the perils of the Seas, Fire,
Enemies, and Imbargo of Princes, only excepted. And that the said Barque or
Vessel, after her arrival at Dublin aforesaid, shall stay at anchor there for
her unlading and re-lading as aforesaid, thirty working-days, and shall stay at
an Anchor at the said Port of London, after her return again, and arrival here
from Dublin aforesaid, by the space of seven working-days, for the delivery of
the said Goods, so to be laden aboard of her at Dublin aforesaid. And the said
T C, for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does further covenant,
promise and grant, to and with the said J W, his Executors and Administrators,
and also warrant by these presents, that the said Barque or Vessel, at her
departure from the said River of Thames, and during the said Voyage, shall be
strong and staunch, and well and sufficiently victualled, tackled, and
apparelled, and furnished with Masts, Sails, Sail-yards, Anchors, Cables,
Ropes, Cords, Tackle, Apparel, Boat, and all other Furniture whatsoever,
requisite or needful for such a Barque or Vessel for such a Voyage; together
with an able Master, and three sufficient able Seamen, and two Boys which
shall be ready at all times, upon every request, with the Coket-boat of the
said Ship, to serve the said T. C. his Executors, Administrators, Factors and
Assigns, to and from I and, during the said Voyage: And the said T. C. for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with
the said I.W. his Executors and Administrators, not only to un-lade, relade,
and dispatch away the said Bark or Vessel, at and from Dublin and London
aforesaid, within the time and times before therefore limited and agreed upon,
but also for the Freight or Hire of the said Barque or Vessel, for all the said
Voyage, viz. From London to Dublin, and from thence back to London, well and
truly to pay, or cause to be paid unto the said I. Wakefield, his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, the sum of 120 li. sterling, in manner and form
following, (that is to say) 30 li. thereof at the said Port of Dublin, within
twenty days next after the arrival of the said Barque or Vessel, and delivery
of the said Goods well-conditioned, at Dublin as aforesaid; and 90 li. more,
residue of the said 120 li. at London aforesaid within seven days after the
return again and arrival of the said Barque or Vessel from Dublin to London,
and the delivery of the said Goods so to be received into her at Dublin of the
said Goods so to be received into her at Dublin aforesaid, unto the said T.C.
Merchant, his Executors, Administrators, Factors, or Assigns, at London
aforesaid, well conditioned as aforesaid, together with Avarage and Primage,
and petty-lo-gunnage, according to the use and custom of Merchants in such
cases used; and shall and will then also give unto the said J. W. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, twenty shillings sterling for his care
and pains to be taken in the Premises during the said Voyage, over and above
the said 120 li. And the said T. C. for himself, his Executors and
Administrators, does covenant and grant, to and with the said J.W. his
Executors and Administrators, by these Presents, that in case the said Barque
or Vessel shall through the default of the said J.W. his Factors or Assigns,
stay for her unlading or re-lading at Dublin aforesaid, or for her Lading at
London aforesaid, before her departure from thence; or for her unlading at
London aforesaid, after her return and arrival from Dublin aforesaid, to London
as aforesaid, after the several days therefore above-limited: that then the
said T. C. his Executors, or Administrators, shall and will pay or cause to be
paid unto the said J. W. his Executors or Administrators, the sum of thirty
shillings for every working day that the said Barque or Vessel shall either
stay at Dublin aforesaid, for her un-lading and re-lading, or at London
aforesaid, for her lading or un-lading, after the days above-limited and agreed
upon. And to the performance of all and singular the Covenants, Grants,
Articles and Agreements abovementioned, which on the part and behalf of the
said J. W. his Executors or Administrators, are to be performed in all things
as abovesaid; the said J. W. binds himself, his Executors and Administrators,
and especially the Barque or Vessel aforesaid, with her Freight, unto the said
T. C. his Executors and Administrators, in the sum or penalty of 200 li. of
lawful money of England, well and truly to be paid, by these Presents; and
likewise for the performance of all and singular the Covenants, Grants,
Articles, Payment and Agreement above specified, which on the part and behalf
of the said T.C. his Executors and Administrators, are and ought to be
performed in all things, as is above recited, the said T. C. binds himself,
his Executors and Administrators, and Goods, unto the said J. W. his Executors
and Administrators, in the sum or penalty of 200 li. of like money of England,
well and truly to be paid by these Presents. In witness whereof, the parties
first abovenamed to these Charter-parties indented, interchangably have set
their Hands and Seals, the day and year first above-written.

Articles of Agreement for enjoyment of a quiet Lease, as Tenements in Common.
ARticles of Agreement, indented* made, and agreed upon the, etc. Between W. S.
of, etc. and S. U. of, etc. in manner and form following; Tha^ is to ^ay,
First, whereas H. A. of, etc. being heretofore ^o^sed in Fee of and in all
that, etc. And being so seized by his Indenture of Lease, bearing date the,
etc. for the considerations therein mentioned, did demise, grant, and to farm
let unto one A. B. etc. of, etc. the said Message, etc. for term of, etc. at
and for the yearly Rent of, etc. payable as in the recited Indenture of Lease
is mentioned, as by the said Indenture, relation being thereunto had, more a^
large may and does appear: which said Indenture of Lease, and the Interest,
Estate, and term of years of the said A.B. of, in, and to the said Pieces or
Parcels, etc. and Premises thereby demised; the said W. S. and S. U. by several
Indentures of Assignment, now jointly have, and are thereof possessed. Now this
Indenture ^itnesseth, That the intent, purpose, and true meaning of the Parties
to these presents, is; And it is hereby declared between them, that no
advantage or benefit shall be had or taken by the said W.S. and S.U. by means
or reason of survivorship of either of them, for or concerning the Interest of
the said Lease or Term of years, and Interest respectively granted by and from
the said Henry A^kins to the said A.B. as aforesaid: but that either of the
said Parties, his and their executors and Administrators, shall and my have,
and take the equal benefit and profit arising and coming of the said piece and
parcel of Land yearly, and every year, during the continuance of the said term,
to the said A. B. granted as aforesaid, in such and the like manner, as if they
were Tenants in Common. And it is therefore mutually covenanted, granted,
concluded, and agreed by and between the said parties to these Presents; and
each of them the said Parties to these Presents, for his own part, severally
for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does covenant and grant to and
with either of them, his Executors and Administrators respectively, by these
Presents; That he, his Executors or Administrators, shall and will at any time
hereafter, during the said term of years, by the said Indenture of Lease made
from the said H. Askins granted, pay, and discharge one Moiety of the Rents and
Charges, to grow due or payable, for or by reason thereof; and shall do or
cause to be done, any manner of act or acts, or as^ent unto any act or thing
whatsoever, which shall, or any way may forfeit the said Lease, or the Terms,
Interests, or Estates of the Parties to these Presents, of or in the said
pieces of parcels of Ground and Premises thereby demised, or mentioned to be
demised, or any part thereof; But that the Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, of such of the parties to these Presents, which shall first die, shall
be permitted and allowed to take and enjoy the moiety, or one half of the said
Lease and Premises thereby demised, and the Rents and Profits thereof, in like
manner, as if he so dying had lived together with the Survivors of them,
according to the true intent of these Presents, without any manner of let,
interruption, molestation, eviction, or expulsion of the Survivor of them, his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them; and that the Survivor of
the said parties to these Presents, shall and will, at the reasonable request,
costs, and charges of the Executors, or Administrators, of him or them that
shall first happen to die, by sufficient conveyance and assurance in the Law,
grant and assign the one moiety of the Premises to the Executors or
Administrators of him so first dying, clear of all Encumbrances done by him.
Also whereas by the mutual consent and agreement of the said W. S. and S.V. the
said W.S. has the custody and keeping of the said Indenture of Lease, and
Indentures of Assignment, the said W.S. does now covenant, promise, and grant,
for him, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, to and
with the said S. V. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of
them, by these Presents, That he the said W. S. his Executors, or
Administrators, at all time and times hereafter, after reasonable warning to
him or them to be given, and request therefore to him or them to be made by the
said S. V. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, at the equal costs and
charges of them the said W. S. and S. V. their Executors or Administrators,
shall and will deliver unto the said S. V. his Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, true Copies of the said Indenture of Lease, and Indentures of
Assignment: And at all and every time and times hereafter, and from time to
time, upon reasonable waring to be given, and request to be made as aforesaid,
shall and will bring and show forth the said Indenture of Lease, and Indentures
of assignment, in all and every Court and Courts, and unto and before all and
every such Judge of Judges, or other person or persons, as by the said S. V.
his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall be reasonably required, for
the better maintenance, showing forth, and approving of the Interest, Estate,
Right, Title, and term of years of them the said W. S. and S. V. their
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, in and to the said Indenture of Lease,
and of, in, and to the said piece or parcel of Land and Premises, as any
needful occasion shall be or require, during the rest and residue which is now
to come and unexpired of the aforesaid term of years, in and by the said
indenture of Lease granted; as also as occasion shall serve or require, upon
the request and warning as aforesaid, shall and will produce and show forth in
all Court or Courts, and before any person or persons, the Counter-part of the
Indenture of Lease made by the said A. B. to the said A. D. and that from time
to time, during the continuance of the said Lease. In witness, etc.

An Vmpirage.
TO all Christian People, to whom this present Writing shall come, I R. C.
Citizen and Stationer of London, Umpire indifferently chosen by F. W, etc. and
T. C. of, etc. having deliberately heard and understood the griefs and
allegations, and Proofs of both the said Parties; and willingly, as much as in
the lies, to set the said parties at unity and good accord; do by these
Presents arbitrate, award, order, deem, decree, and judge, That the said F. W.
his Executors, and Assigns, shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto
the said T. C. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, at or in the, etc.
the full sum of, etc. of lawful money of England, on the tenth day of, etc.
next ensuing the, etc. And that upon payment thereof, either of the said F. W.
and T. C. shall seal, subscribe, and as his several Act and Deed deliver unto
the other of them a General Release in Writing, of all Matters, Actions, Suits,
Causes of Actions, Bonds, Bills, Covenancs, Controversies, and Demands
whatsoever, which either of them has, may, might, or. in any wise ought to
have, of and against the other of them, by reason aforesaid, or means of any
matter, cause, or thing whatsoever, from the beginning of the World, until the
30th day of June now last past, and in the Fifteenth year of, etc. In witness,
etc.

An Acquittance for the Redemption of Lands Mortgaged.
BE it known unto all men by these Presents, That I A. B. of, etc. Gent, have
received, and have this present day, at the now dwelling house of John Williams
at the Star in Fleetstreat, London, between the hour of, etc. of B.C. of L. in
the County of K. Yeoman, 30 li. for the redemption and full satisfaction of all
and singular those Lands and Tenements, with the appurtenances, in the Parish
of, etc. in the said County, called, etc. contained and specified in in the
Fifteenth year, etc. made between the said B. C. of the one part, and me the
said A. B. of the other part, of, for, and concerning the Bargain and Sale of
all and singular the said Lands and Tenements conditionally, as by the same
Indentures more at large may appear; of which 30 li. in full payment as is
above recited, I the said A. B. acknowledge my self well and truly contented,
satisfied, and paid thereof; and of every parcel thereof, I clearly acquit and
discharge the said B. C. his Heirs and Executors by these presents. In witness,
etc.

An Acquittance for Rent.
December 30.1663.
REceived then of A. B. of, etc. for this half years Rent, due at the Nativity
of our Blessed Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, last past, the full and just sum
of 40 li. for Houses and Lands in the County of, etc. the day and year written.
By me,

An Acquittance for a Legacy.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That we A. B. and C. my Wife,
Daughter, etc. have received and had, the day of the making hereof, of C.W. and
W. C. Executors of the last Will and Testament of T.D. 20 li. of, etc. in full
payment of 20 li. given and bequeathed by the said T. D. in his said Testament;
of which said sum of 20 li. in full payment and satisfaction of all bequests
and Legacies to us given in the said Testament, we acknowledge our selves fully
satisfied, contented, and paid. In witness, etc.

An Acquittance for Money received to pay another.
THis Bill Witnesses, That I A. B. of, etc. have received and had on the day
of the making hereof, of C.D. of, etc. in the, etc. Yeoman, by the hands of,
etc. the sum of, etc. to be paid and disbursed by me the said A. B. for the
said C. D. to be paid and disbursed in such sort and manner, as the said C. D.
has appointed. In witness, etc.

A Condition to seal a Deed by a certain day, and perform the Covenants therein.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas in and by one Indenture, bearing date, etc.
made or mentioned to be made between the above-bounden A.B. C.D. and E.F. of
the one part, and the abovenamed G. H. of the other part; It is mentioned,
That for the considerations therein expressed, the said A. B. C. D. and E.F.
have granted, bargained, sold, and demised unto the said G.H. the Manor, etc.
and other Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, in the said Indenture mentioned,
in the said County of, etc. for one thousand years from the making thereof, at
a Pepper-Corn Rent; and with and under the Proviso, Conditions, and agreement;
therein contained, as by the same Indenture may at large appear; which
Indenture is only signed, scaled, and delivered by the said A. B. and C. D.
and not by the said E. F. Now if the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, do procure the said E. F. on or before, etc. to sign, seal, and
deliver as his Act and Deed, the before-recited Indenture; and do also from
time to time, and at all times, well and truly hold, observe, perform, and keep
all and every the Covenants, Grants, Provisoe's, Conditions and Agreements,
which on his or their parts and behalfs, are and ought to be held, obseved,
performed, and kept, comprised and contained in the before-recited Indenture;
and that in all things according to the purport, true intent, and meaning of
the same Indenture: Then this, etc.

A Condition that the Heir shall enter into Bond at his full age, to pay
another.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above-bounden, O. H. procure R. H. his Son and
Heir apparent, within one Month after he shall have attained the age of one
and twenty years, to enter into one Obligation, together with the said G. H.
wherein the said G. H. and R. H. shall be jointly and severally bound unto the
abovenamed L.M. in the penal sum of, etc. conditioned for the true payment of
the same, etc. unto the said L.M. his Executors or Assigns, on the, etc. at or
in, etc. And if the said G. H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the
said L. M. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the said sum of,
etc. on, etc. at the place aforesaid: Then, etc.

Condition, that an Administrator not present, shall seal a Deed.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas in and by one Indenture, bearing even date
with these Presents, made between, etc. mention is made, that G.F.
Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of H. P. at and by the request and
appointment of the said W. G. for the consideration of the sum of, etc. therein
mentioned to be paid to the said W. G. by T. B. has granted and assigned unto
the said T. B. for the term of years therein mentioned, the Manor, etc. as
thereby appears. And whereas the said G. F. has not yet sealed or delivered
the said Indenture, and by reason of his employment, etc. it will be some time
before he can be procured to seal: If therefore the said G.F. shall at any time
hereafter, within the space of, etc. seal and deliver the said Indenture as his
Act and Deed; or if he happen to die, or his Addition to be repealed, before
such sealing and delivery of the said Indenture: If then some other
Administrator of the Goods and Chattels of the sald H. P. not administered by
the said G.F. do and shall within the said space of, etc. well and sufficiently
grant and assign to the said T.B. his Executors or Assigns, the said, etc. in
manner as the same is mentioned to be assigned by the said Indenture, and
according to the purport and effect thereof. And if the said Assignment so
sealed and delivered, shall be within the said space of, etc. delivered in to
the hands and custody of the said T.B. unaltered and undefaced. And if thesaid
T. B. His Executors and Administrators, shall in the men time, quietly and
peaceably have, hold and enjoy, perceive and take the annual Rent of the said
Manor and Premises aforesaid, without any let or interruption of or by the
said G.F. and the said W. G. or either of them, or any other person or persons,
claiming by or under them, or either of them, or the said H. P. deceased: Then,
etc.

A Covenant from an Infant, to engage him to execute a Conveyance at age.
KNow all men, etc. That I A. B. of, etc. in pursuance of the intentions of,
etc. expressed in his last Will and Testament, bearing date, etc. as otherwise,
do hereby promise and engage my self to C.D. that I shall and will, at any time
or times after I shall attain the age of 21 years, upon the request, and at the
costs and charges of the said C.D. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, make
and execute such Conveyances and assurances, for the settling, conveying and
assuring unto, and upon the said C.D. his Heirs and Assigns, all that, etc.
whereof or wherein I have any Estate, Right, Trust or Equity whatsoever, as by
the said C. D. his Heirs of Assigns, shall be reasonably devised, or advised
and required; and that the same at the time of such conveyance or assurance
shall be free and clear, of and from all Estates or Encumbrances made, or
wittingly and willingly suffered by me the said A. B. In witness, etc.

A Release of Personal Actions.
TO all, etc. A. B. sends Greeting: Know ye, that the said A. B. has
remised, released, and quit-claimed, and by these presents, for him, his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, does remise, release, and for
ever quit-claim unto C. D. of, etc. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators,
and every of them, their and every of their Lands, Tenements, Goods, and
Chattels, all and all manner of personal Actions, Suits, Debts, Duties,
Reckonings, Accounts, Sum and Sums of Money, and Demands personal whatsoever,
from the beginning of te World, until the day of the date hereof. In witness,
etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive Livery and Seisin according to the Feoffment.
TO all, etc. A. B. and C. D. of, etc. send Greeting: Know ye, That the said A.
B. and C. D. for diverse good causes and considerations them thereunto moving,
have made, constituted, and in their place put G. F. of, etc. and A.H. of, etc.
and either of them jointly and severally our true and lawful Attorney and
Attorneys, to enter into the Manor of, etc. and other the Lands. Tenements,
and Hereditaments, mentioned in one Indenture, bearing date, etc. and mentioned
to be made between R. G. and G. W. of, etc. of the one part, and us the said A.
B. and C.D. of the other part, purporting a Feoffment of the said Manor and
Premises, to us and our Heirs, or into any part of the said Premises, and
Possession and Seisin thereof, for us, and to our uses, from them the said R.G.
and G.W. or their Attorney or Attorneys in that behalf, to take, receive and
kep, according to the tenor, from, and effect of the said Indenture;
ratifying, and by these presents confirming all, and whatsoever our said
Attorneys, or either of them, shall do, or cause to be done in the Premises, as
fully and effectually as we could do, of we were personally present. In
witness, etc.

A Lease of Ejectment.
THis Indenture, etc. witnesses That the said A. B. for good considerations
him hereunto moving, has leased, set, unto Farm let; and by these presents
does lease, set, and to Farm let unto the said C.D. all that, etc. To have and
to hold the said, etc. unto the said C. D. his executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, from the feast of, etc. for and during the term of, etc. form thence
next ensuing, fully to be complete and ended, yielding and paying therefore
yearly the Feat of one Pepper-corn at the Feast of, etc. only if the same be
demanded. Provided always, That if the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, do and shall at any time hereafter,
pay or tender, or cause to be paid or tendered, unto the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or to any other person or persons, to
his or their use, the sum of 12 \ d. of lawful money of England, to the intent
to make void this present Indenture; that then and at all times from
thenceforth, this present Indenture, and the Lease hereby made, shall cease,
determine; and be void; any thing herein before contained to the contrary
notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

Defeazance of a Statute, for performance of a Covenant.
THis Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of the one part, and C. D. of the other
part: Whereas in and by one Recognizance, in the nature of a Statute-Staple,
bearing even date with these presents, taken and acknowledged before, etc. the
said C.D. is and stands unto the said A.B. in the sum of, etc. payable, as by
the said Recognizance may at large appear. Now this Indenture witnesses, That
it is nevertheless covenanted, conditioned, and agreed by and between the said
parties to these presents: And the said A.B. for him and his Heirs; Executors,
and Administrators, does covenant, conclude, and agree, to and with the said C.
D. his Heir and Assigns, by these presents, That if the said C. D. his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, and every of them do and shall well and truly
pay, perform, observe, fulfill, and keep all and every te Payments, Covenants,
Conditions, and Agreements, which on his and their parts and behalfs, are and
ought to be paid, observed, performed, fulfilled, and kept contained in one
Indenture, bearing date, etc. and made, or mentioned to be made, between the
said A. B. of the one part, and the said C.D. of the other part; and that in
all thing according to the true intent and meaning of the same Indenture; then,
and at all times from thenceforth, the said Recognizance or Statute-Staple
shall be void and of none effect, and shall be delivered up, to be at the costs
and charges of the said C.D. his Heirs and Assigns, vacated on Record. In
witness, etc.

Attornment of Tenants, to be endorsed on a Deed.
WE whose, names are hereunder subscribed, being the present Tenants of the
within mentioned Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, understanding the effect
of the within written Grant thereof made unto the within named H. P. do a^ent
and agree unto the same Grant, in every respect, as the same is within written;
and do thereunto attorn. And in testimony of such Attornment, each and every of
us have hereunto subscribed our Names, the day, etc.

Affidavit that a man is seized in Fee, free from Incubrances.
A B. of, etc. makes Oath that he as seized of and in the Manors, etc.
contained and specified in one Indenture, or Writing indented, bearing date,
etc. made between, etc. and thereby demised, or mentioned to be demised, to the
said C. D. for the term of, etc. under the Conditions and Agreements therein
contained, of a good and indefeazable Title, and lawful Estate, to him and he
Heirs of the said A. B. in Fee-simple, as he conceives; and that the Premises
are called or known by the Names and descriptions in the said Indenture of
Demise expressed, and are of the full and clear yearly value of, etc. above all
Reprizes; and free and clear of and from all manner of former Estates, Titles,
Rents and Arrerages of Rents, Judgments, Recognizances, Statutes, and other
Encumbrances, except the Rents and Services to the Lord or Lord of the Fee, etc.

Acquittance for the consideration of Money in an Indenture, and a Release of
the Estate.
TO all, etc. A. B. sends Greeting: Know ye, That the said A. does hereby
acknowledge to have before the sealing and delivery of these presents, had and
received of and from D. E. of, etc. the sum of, etc. which said sum of, etc. is
the same sum, which in and by one Indenture, bearing date, etc. made between
the said A. B. of the first part, and the said D. E. of the other part, is
mentioned to be paid to the said A. B. and to be the consideration for the
Purechase of the Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments therein mentioned
to be thereby granted unto the said D. E. and his Heirs; of which said sum of,
etc. the said A. B. does hereby acknowledge himself fully satisfied, and does
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, acquit, release, and discharge
the said D. E. his Heris, Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, by
these presents. And further in consideration thereof, the said A. B. does by
these presents remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto the said D. E. and
his Heirs, all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Claim, and Demand
whatsoever, of him the said A. B. of, in, and into all and, singular the
Manors, Mesuages, Closes, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, to the said
D.E. granted, or mentioned to be granted, in and by the beforementioned
Indenture; and of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof. In witness, etc.

A Peelar (...), that Money lent in one man's name, is the peaker Moneys of
another.
THis Indenture (...), etc. Between A. B. of the first part, C.D. of the second
part, and E.F. of the third part. Whereas by Indenture (...), bearing date,
etc. made between J. F. of the first part, the said A B. of the second part,
and the said C. D. of the third part; It is mentioned, that the said J.F. in
consideration of 4500 li. therein mentioned to be paid unto him by the said A
B. and C.D. Has demised, granted, bargained, and sold unto the said A. B. etc
C. D. all that etc. and other Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, in the said
Indenture mentioned, for the term of years therein mentioned, at a Pepper. Corn
Rent; redeemable nevertheless, and to be redeemed by the re-payment of the sadi
4500 li. with Interest, in manner as therein is expressed; as by the said
recited Indenture may at large appear. Now this Indenture witnesses, That it
is declared and a knowledged by the said parties to these Presents, That the
said principal sum of 4500 li. was the proper moneys of the said E. F. and was
paid by him, and not by the said A. P. and C. D. or other of them. And
therefore it is further declared, That the said A. B. and C. D. their
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, shall and will stand and be possessed
and interested of, and in the said Manor and Premises, and all other
Securities made or given, for securing of the said 4500 l. And as to and
concerning the said 4500 li. and the Interest and Proceed of the same upon
Trust; and for the benefit of such person or persons, as the said E. F. by any
Writing or Writings, under his Hand and Seal shall appoint: and in default
thereof upon Trust, and for the benefit of the said E. F. his Executors, and
Administrators. In witness, etc.

Release of a Ward to his Guardian, when he is at age.
TO all, etc. A. B. sends Greeting: Know ye, That the said A. B. for good
Causes and Considerations him thereunto moving, has remised, released, and for
ever quit-claimed, and by these Presents does remise, release, and for ever
quit-claim unto F.F. his Executors and Administrators, all and all manner of
Actions, Suits, Debts, Duties, Reckonings, Accounts, and demands whatsoever,
which he the said A.B. now has, or at any time hereafter shall or may have
against the said T. F. his Executors, or Administrators, for, touching, or
concerning any the Rents received, and Profits of any the Manors, Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments of the said A.B. or touching or concerning any-Wood
sales, upon or our of the said Manors and Premises; or any of them, or for any
other matter, cause, or thing whatsoever, made, committed, or done; or for any
Receipts or Payments, of or touching the said Manors and Premises, or any of
them, during the minority of the said A. B. or at any time sithence, until the
day of the date of these Presents. In witness, etc.

What a Deed of Feoffment is.
FEoffment, Feoffamentum, or rather Feoffamentum, signifies (dona^ ^^^em
^eudi) and it signifies a loving and free Gift or Grant of any Honors,
Castles, Manors, Messuages, Lands, or other moveable things of like nature, to
be hereditary to another and his Heirs for ever; and thereof delivers Livery
and Seisin, or Possession of the thing given, or else nothing shall pass by the
Grant. And in every Feoffment, the Giver, or he that makes the Feoffment, is
called to Feoffor, Feoffator; and he to whom it is made, Feoffee, Feoffatus.
Now because there can be no Feoffment good without Livery and Seisin, I will
show you what Livery and Seisin is, and the manner how it is performed.

Of Livery and Seisin.
LIvery and Seisin is a certain Ceremony in our Law, used in the conveying of
Lands, Fenements, or other things corporal, by Feoffment from one man to
another, either in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, or for term of Life. It is a
Testimonial of that willing departing of him which makes the Livery, from the
thing whereof Livery is made. And it was ordained at first, that the Common
People might thereby have notice of the alteration and passing, or Estates,
that they might surely know in whom the right thereof remained, for their own
peace and quietness: Perkias 209, 210 Braci. lib. 2. cap. 18. Sect. 12. The
usual manner of Delivery of Seisin of Houses, Lands, Tenements, etc. is thus:
The Feoffor and Feoffee (if they be present) or in their absence, their
Attorneys (sufficiently Authorized in Writing) do come to the House or Place
whereof such Seisin is to be Delivered, and there in the Presence of sundry
good Witnesses, declares the Cause of their meeting there; and then openly
reads, or causes to be read the Deed of Feoffment, (and Letter of Attorney, if
by Attorney) or to declare the very effect thereof before them in English;
which being so done, the Feoffor or his Attorney takes a Clot of Earth, or a
bough or a Twig of a Tree thereupon growing, the Ring or the Hasp of the Door
of an House, and delivers the same with the said Deed unto the Feoffee, or his
Attorney, saying, I deliver these unto you in the name of Possession and Seisin
of all the Lands, Tenements, etc. contained in this Deed, to have and to hold,
according to the form and effect of the same Deed: And if the Feoffment be
without Deed (as it may well be) then at the time of Delivery of Seisin, the
party must declare by word of mouth before Witnesses, the very State which the
Feoffee must have thereby; and then delivers Seisin and Possession in manner
aforesaid; and then the date and manner of Seisin must be Endorsed.

Livery and Seisin to be Endorsed on a Deed.
MEmorandum, That peaceable and quiet Possession and Seisin of the Lands and
Hereditaments within mentioned to be granted, was had and taken by the
within-named A. B. the Attorney within-mentioned, and by him was delivered to
the within-named M.G. the Bargainee in his own proper person, To hold to him
the said M.G. and his Heirs, to the use of him the said M. G. and of his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, according to the tenor, form, and effect of the
within-written Deed, in the presence of us.

An Assignment of an Annuity for years granted out of a Lease for years.
TO all Christian People, to whom these Presents shall come, E.L. of, etc. and
W.S. of, etc. send Greeting. Whereas by Indenture of Lease bearing date, etc.
for the consideration therein mentioned, did lease, betake, and to farm let
unto M.L. of, etc. and E. his Wife, all that, etc. and diverse other Messuages
or Rents, or Hereditaments in the said Indenture mentioned, for the term of,
etc. concerning, etc. at and for the yearly Rent of, etc. payable as in the
said Indenture amongst other things does and may appear. And whereas the said
J. T. by one Indenture of Lease, bearing date, etc. And whereas the said M.L.
by Indenture, bearing date, etc. for the Consideration therein mentioned, did
bargain, sell, alien, assign, and sell over unto R. L. of, etc. as well the said
several Indentures above recited, as the Premises therein and thereby demised;
as also all his Estate, Right, Title, and Interest of, in, and to the same, as
by the said Indenture of Assignment more at large may appear. And whereas also
the said M.L. and R.L. by their Indenture of assignment, bearing date, etc. for
the Consideration therein mentioned, did bargain, sell, assign, and set over
unto W.B. of, etc. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, the said several
Indentures and Premises; as also all their Estate, Right, Title, and Interest
of, in, and to the same: To have and to hold the said several Indentures and
Premises unto the said W.B. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, from
the day of the date of the said last recited assignment forthwards, for and
during all the term, and rest and residue of the respective terms then to come
and unexpired, contained and expressed in the said several Indentures, and
every of them, upon a Proviso and express agreement and Covenant nevertheless
in the said Indenture of Assignment contained, That in lieu and further
(satisfaction, or) consideration of the said agreement, he the said, ^.B. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, should and would pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said M.L. his Executors, and Assigns, for and during all the rest
and residue of the said terms of 21 years, and 13 years granted as aforesaid by
the said J.T. and to the end of the said term of 13 years, being the longest
term of those Leases, as being in reversion after the said 21 years should be
expired as aforesaid, yearly and every year, the sum of 26 li. of lawful money,
etc. at the four most usual Feasts in the year (that is! ^ay) at the Feasts,
etc. or within 14 days next after every of the said Feasts, by even portions,
the first payment thereof to be made in the, etc. or within 14 days then next
ensuing, with a Clause of Entry and Distress, if it should happen the said
yearly Rent or Sum of 25 li. or any part thereof to be behind and unpaid by the
space of 14 days next after any Feast or Term of payment thereof abovelimited,
in which the same ought to be paid, being at the said great Message called the
White Lion, lawfully demanded. And with a Clause that the said last-recited
Indenture, and the Assignment therein contained, should be utterly void, and
re-entry, if it should fall out that no sufficient Distress should be there
found, or that the same could not be come at to be distrained, after the said
14 days should be expired, and the said payments respectively should be
unsatisfied at the end of one Month next after any Feast or Term of payment
thereof aforesaid, in which the same ought to be paid, being at the same
Message called the White Lion, lawfully demanded at the end of the said
Month, as in and by the said last recited Indenture, relation being thereunto
had, may more at large appear. All the Estate, Right, Title and Interest, of
which the said M.L. of and in the said annuity or yearly sum or 26 li. is now
by good and sufficient Conveyance and assurance in Law, come unto, settled, and
vested in the said K. L. and W. S. or one of them. Now know ye, That for, and
in consideration of the sum of, etc. to the said K. L. in hand paid, by E.D.
of, etc. before the sealing and delivery of these Presents, and of 6 d. of like
money to the said W.S. in hand also paid by the said E.D. before the sealing
and delivery of these Presents, whereof they do hereby severally and
respectively acknowledge the Receipt, and thereof do severally and respectively
acquit and discharge the said E. D. her Executors and Administrators, for ever,
by these Presents: They, the said K. L. and W. S. have, and either of them has
bargained, fold, released, assigned, and set over; and by these Presents do,
and either of them does fully, freely, and absolutely bargain, sell, release
and assign, and set over, and for ever quit-claim unto the said E. D. her
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as well of the said annuity or yearly
sum of 26 li. as also all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Power of
Distress, Re-entry, Claim, and Demand whatsoever, which they the said K. L. and
W. S. or either of them, have, or has, or in any wise might, should, or ought
to have, of, into, and for the said annuity or yearly sum of 25 li. or any part
or parcel thereof, in or unto the said Messuages or Tenements, and Premises, or
any part thereof, by force, virtue, or means of the said several recited
Indentures, or otherwise whatsoever. To have, take, perceive, receive, and
enjoy the said annuity or yearly sum of 26 li. and Premises hereby mentioned to
be assigned unto the said E. D. her Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, to
her and their own proper use and uses forthwards, for and during all the rest
and residue now to come and unexpired of the said term of thirteen years. And
the said K.L. for her self, etc. does covenant, promise, and grant, to and with
the said E.D. her Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, by these Presents,
That the said E.D. her Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall or may from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, during all the rest and residue now
to come and unexpired of the said term of 13 years, fully, peaceably, and
quietly have, take, perceive, receive, and enjoy, to and for her and their own
proper use and uses, the said annuity or yearly sum of 26 li. and Permises
hereby mentioned to be assigned, and every part thereof, without any lawful
let, suit, trouble, molestation, release, discharge or interruption of, or by
the said K.L. her Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, or of
or by any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming, or to claim
by, from, or under them, or any of them, by, from, or under the said M.L. In
witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney from the Husband to the Wife, upon his Voyage.
BE known unto all men by these Presents, That I A.B. of, etc. Esquire do hereby
assign, ordain, authorize, constitute, and in my stead and place do put,
appoint, and depute my loving Wife C.B. to be my true and lawful Deputy and
Attorney, for me, and in my Name, and to my own proper use, benefit, and
behoof, to ask, demand and require, sue for, recover and receive all such
Debts, Duties, Sum and Sums of Money, Rent and Rents, and Arrearages of Rent
and Rents, yearly payments, Merchandises, Legacies, money due, and to be due
upon Bill of Exchange, or all other demands whatsoever, as now are, or
hereafter shall be due and payable, or belonging, or to be delivered unto me,
by or from any person or persons whatsoever, or wheresoever; and to pay money
for me, and to contract for, demise, and let to Farm at the accustomed Rents,
or more, all or any of my Messuages, Lands, tenements, or Hereditaments
whatsoever: and for default of payment or delivery of any Rent or Rents, or
other sum of Money, or other thing or things to me due, or to be due or
belonging, to use all lawful ways and means for recovery thereof, be Action,
Suit, Arrest, Bill, Plaint, Attachment, Distress, Reentry, or otherwise, as
fully and amply in every respect, as I my self might or could do, if I were
personally present; and to sue, implead, make answer, prosecute and desend in
any Court or Courts of Law or Equity, and before any Judges or Justices, in any
Suit, Matter, or Cause, with me, for me, or against me, as the Cause shall
require; and to deal and intermeddle in all Actions, Suits, Aflairs, and
Businesses, any ways touching or concerning me, as my Agent or Factor; or
otherwise giving, and by these Presents granting unto my said Attorney, full
and whole, and lawful Authority in the execution of all and singular the
Premises. And to substitute and appoint one or more Attorney or Attorneys in
any of the Premises, and the same again at her pleasure to revoke, and to make
and give any Acquittance, Release or Discharge upon the Recovery and Receipt,
of any Debt, Sum or Sums of Money, Rent or Rents, or other thing whatsoever, as
the Cause shall require. And generally to say, do, execute, compound, conclude,
agree, determine, and finish all and every other act and acts, thing and thing
whatsoever, which in or about the Premises, shall be requisite or needful to be
had, made, or done; and that in as large and ample manner, and as full and
essectually to all intents and purposes, as I my self might, ought or could, if
I were present in mine own person: ratifying, allowing for firm, effectual, and
irrevocable, and whatsoever my said Attorney shall do, or cause to be done in
and about the Premises, by virtue of these Presents. In witness, etc.

A Release from the Father to one that bought the Sons Land.
TO all Christian People, to whom these Presents shall come; I A. B. etc. Know
ye, That I the said A. B. for diverse good Causes and Considerations, me
hereunto moving, have granted, surrendered, remised, released, and for ever
quit-claimed, and by these Presents do for me, my Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, grant, surrender, remise, release, and for ever quit-claim unto
R.C. of, etc. in the County, etc. Yeoman, and to his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, all that parcel of ground, with the Appurtenances, lying and being within
the Parish of, etc. in the said County of, etc. commonly called or known by the
name of, etc. containing, etc. now in the Occupation of, etc. and also all my
Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Use. Possession, Reversion, Property, Claim,
Benefit, and Demand whatsoever, of, in, and to the same: to have and to hold
the said piece and parcel of Ground, and all and all other the Premises before
hereby metioned to be granted and release, and every part and parcel thereof,
with their and every of their appurtenances, unto the said R. C. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, to the sole and only proper use and behoof of the said R. C.
his Executors and Assigns for ever. And I the said A. B. for my self, my Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, do covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the
said R. C. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and very of them by these
Presents, that he the said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and may from time
to time, and at all times for ever hereafter, lawfully, peaceably, and quietly
have, hold, occupy, possess, and enjoy all the said piece or parcel of ground
and premises hereby mentioned to be granted, released, and receive the Rents,
Issues, and Profits thereof to his and their own use, without any lawful let,
suit, trouble, or interruption whatsoever, of or by me the said A.B. my Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or of, or by any other person or persons
whatsoever, lawfully claiming, or to claim by, from, or under me the said A.B.
or by my means, Estate, Act, Default, Neglect, or Procurement. In Witness, etc.

Attornment of Tenants.
The 8th of January, 1663.
MEmorandum, That the day and year abovesaid, M. G. Tenant to the House and
Lands within mentioned, did attorn to this Grant, and assent thereunto, and did
pay 6 d. in Name of Seisin of his Rent, to the within-named A. B. in the
presence of H. M. etc.

Attornment of Tenants.
MEmoradum, That the 26th day of Jan. Anno xv. etc. A. B. and C. being Tenants
of the Lands and Hereditaments within mentioned, or some part thereof, did
severally agree to this Grant, and attorn Tenants to the Premises, to the
within-named T. M. according to this Grant; and either of them did pay unto the
said T. M. 6 d. in the Name of a Seisin, and in part of payment of the Rent, in
the presence of T. C. H. B. and G. H.

A Letter of Attorney, to be added to the end of a Sale, to give power for the
Vendor to another to deliver Possession in Seisin to the Vendee.
ANd moreover E. B. has made, ordained, and constituted and appointed, and in
his stead put, and by these presents does make, ordain, constitute, and in his
stead put T. C. of, etc. and J. F. of, etc. his true and lawful Attorneys
jointly and severally, for him, and in his Name and stead, to enter into the
aforesaid pieces or parcels of Land and Premises, or any part thereof, in the
name of the whole; and in his Name and stead, to expel and put out all other
person and persons, and full and peaceable possession and siesin of the
Premises, for him, and in his Name and stead to take; and after such possession
and seisin so thereof had and taken, full and in his Name and stead to deliver
over unto the said R. O. and his Heirs, or to his certain Attorney, to hold to
him and his Heirs, to the only use of him and his Heirs for ever, according to
the true intent and meaning of these Presents; ratifying and allowing
whatsoever my said Attorneys, or either of them, shall do in the Premises. In
witness, etc.

A Discharge of a Bill, the Bill being lost.
TO all Christian people, to whom these Presents shall come, I F. S. of, etc.
send Greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas V. L. of, etc. in the
County, etc. by one Bill under his Hand and Seal, dated, etc. in the year, etc.
did become bound unto me the said F. S. in 40 li. for payment, etc. of which 20
li. is paid; and the said Bill being lost, now I the said F. S. do hereby
acquit and discharge the said V. E. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators,
and every of them, of and from the said sum of 20 li. and the said Bill so
entered into, for payment thereof as aforesaid, and of and from all Actions,
Arrests, Costs, Damages, and Demands whatsoever, concerning the same. In
witness, etc.

A surrender of a Lease.
TO all Christian People, to whom this present Writing shall come to be seen,
read, or heard, F. R. sends Greeting, etc. Know ye, That the said F. R. for
diverse good Causes, and valuable Considerations, him the said F. R. hereunto
moving, has granted, bargained, sold, surrendered, and released; and by these
Presents does grant, bargain, sell, surrender, and release unto T. J. of, etc.
his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, all his Lease, Estate, Right, Title,
time and term of years, yet to come and unexpired, Use, Possession, Rent,
Reversion, Property, Claim, and Demand whatsoever, of, in, and to all that
Message or Tenement, etc. as in the Indenture of Lease, etc. To have and to
hold the said Message or Tenement, etc. as in the said Indenture of Lease; and
all his Estate, Right, Title, Interest, term of years yet to come and
unexpired, Use, Possession, Reversion, Property, Claim, and Demand, of, in, and
to the same, unto the said T. J. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, from henceforth, from and during, and unto the full end and expiration
of the time and term of years yet to come and unexpired, granted unto the said
F. R. by the said T. J. by his Indenture of Lease, bearing date, etc. in as
large and ample manner, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as he the said
F. R. should or might have held and enjoyed the same, if this present Surrender
of Release had never been hereof had or made. In witness, etc.

An Acquittance for Receipt of Money upon a Sale.
REceived the, etc. in the year of, etc. by me, etc. of R. C. of, etc. the full
sum of, etc. of lawful money, etc. being the consideration and in full
satisfaction of and for all that, etc. now bargained and sold by me the said T.
W. to the said R. C. and his Heirs, by Indenture, bearing date the day of the
date above-written, made between, etc. of which said sum of, etc. I the said T.
W. do acquit and discharge the said R. C. his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, for ever, by these presents. In witness, etc.

A Warrant to a Proctor by the Son, to permit a Stranger to Administer upon his
Fathers Estate.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I R. D. of the age of 15 years, but under
the age of 21 years, Son of A. B. and C. B. both late of and in the County,
etc. deceased, do elect and choose T.H. of, etc. my Curator or Guardian, to
take Administration of the Goods of my said Father, left unadministred by my
said Mother for my benefit, during my minority, and to all other effect of Law
whatsoever; and I do give power and authority to Mr. T. M. and Mr. T. C.
Proctors of the Court for Probate of Wills, and granting Administrations,
jointly and severally, to appear for me, before the Judges for Probate of
Wills, and granting Administration, lawfully authorized, and in my Name, to
pray and obtain the said T. H. to be assigned my Curator or Guardian as
aforesaid; and what they or either of them shall do herein, I do promise to
hold firm for ever by these Presents. In witness, etc.

A Warrant to an Executor.
KNow all men by these Presents, That whereas R. C. late of, etc. in the, etc.
Widow, the Relict and Administratrix of the Goods of T. C. late of the same
place deceased, made her last Will and Testament in Writing, bearing date, etc.
and therein made and named P. D. of, etc. Now I E. C. eldest Son of the said T.
C. deceased, and R. C. his wife deceased, to consent, that the said P. D. do
prove the said Will, and take upon him the execution thereof, and
administration of her Goods, and of my said Fathers Goods she left behind her
at her death unadministred, for the benefit of me and my Brother W. C. In
witness, etc.

A Condition of a Recognizance to pay Costs in Chancery.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the above bound R. C.
being Plaintiff in the said Court of Chancery, against R. M. and T. N.
Defendants, shall pay such Costs to the said Defendants without Suit, as the
Court of Chancery shall award, if they shall see cause to award any; This
Recognizance to be void and of no effect, or else to stand and be in full
force, power, and virtue.

Acknowledged by the Recognizor the 10th day of January, and in the 15th year,
etc. before me, JOHN GOOD.

An Assignment of a Lease by Indorsement.
MEmorandum, That the within named T. R. toward satisfaction of 20 li. by me
now due, and owing unto S. H. Ge^^. have granted, a signed, and set over, and
do hereby grant assign, and set over unto the said S. H. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, as well this present Indenture, all the Message
or Tenement and Hereditaments within mentioned, to be demised: as also my
Estate, Right, Title, and Interest of and into the same, either by force,
virtue, or means, of this present Indenture, or otherwise howsoever.

Witness my Hand and Seal, the 4th day, etc.
An Exchange by Indenture of Bargain and Sale, with Livery of Seisin.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between, etc. Witnesses, That the said A. B. has
granted, bargained and sold, and by these Presents, does grant, bargain, and
sell unto the said C. D. all that acre of Land, etc. To have and to hold unto
the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to be holden of the chief Lord
or Lords of the Fee or Fees thereof, etc. And the said C. D. in consideration
thereof, has granted, bargained, and sold; and by these Presents does grant,
bargain, and self unto the said A. B. etc. all that Acre of Land, etc. To have
and to hold, etc. to be holden of etc. a Covenant from each party, that they
have power to sell, and are seized in Fee, etc. a Pro^iso, That if either party
shall be lawfully evicted of either of the said Acres, by any former Sale: Then
this Deed of Bargain and Sale, and Exchange, to be void; And then it shall be
lawful to re-enter, and the same to have again, etc.

A Defeazance upon a Judgment, with a Release of Errors.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between, etc. of etc. of the one part, and C. D. of
etc. of the other part, witnesses, That whereas the said A. E. in this present
Michaelmas-Term, has recovered a judgment against the said C. D. in the Court
of Common-Bench at Westminster, for 200 li. Debt, besides Costs of Suit; as by
the Records thereof remaining in the said Court more at large it may and does
appear. Nevertheless the said A. is contented and pleased, and by these
Presents does covenant and grant, for him, his Executors, and Administrators,
to and with the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns,
That if the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any
of them, (...) shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said A. B.
his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the full sum of 100 li of lawful
money of England, on the day of, etc. which shall be in the, etc. That then he
the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, shall and will, upon
reasonable request, and at the Costs and Charges of the said C. D. his
Executors or Assigns, acknowledge or cause to be acknowledged satisfaction upon
Records, of and for the said Judgment, and the Debt and Damages thereby
recovered; and shall not, nor will not take out, or cause to be taken out, any
Execution or Executions upon the said Judgment against the said C. D. his
Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, or any of them, or against his or their
Goods, Chattels, Lands, or Tenements whatsoever, or wheresoever: and the said
C. D. has remised, released, and for ever quit-claimed; and by these Presents,
for him, his Executors and Administrators, does remise and release, and for
ever quit-claim unto the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
all and all manner of Error and Errors, Cause and Causes of Error, Jeofails,
and Demands whatsoever, for or by reason of the said Judgment, or for or by
reason of any Entries or proceedings thereupon, or relating thereunto In
witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Mortgage, by Endorsement by a Friend in Tru^^, for one that
purchased the same, to keep it in force.
MEmorandum, That I the within named T. E. in consideration of the ^m of, etc.
of lawful money, etc. i^ hand paid M. G. of, etc. by the appointment and
direction of the within named (...), to me paid by A C. have assigned and set
over, (...) do thereby a^^ g^^^^ set over unto the said A. C. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, as well this present Indenture, and all the
Message or Tenement, and Herediraments within mentioned to be granted: As also
my Estate, Fight, Title, and Interest, of, in, and to the same, either by
force, virtue, or means of this present Indenture otherwise howsoever: To have
and to hold the premises unto the said A. C. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, during all the residue now to come and unexpired of the term of 500
years within mentioned; to be granted, in trust, and for the only benefit of
the said M. G. his Heirs and Assigns, and to extend upon the state of
Inheritance of the Premises, which the said M. G. has purchased.

Witness my Hand and Seal, in the year, etc.
An Acquittance and Receipt for a Legacy given by a Will to the Executor
thereof.
REceived the, etc. in the year of, and. by me L. M. of, etc. of N. O. etc. of,
etc. Executor of F. R. etc. the full sum of, etc. of lawful money, etc. being a
Legacy given unto me the said L. M. by the said F. R. in and by her last Will
and Testament: Of which said sum of, etc. and all other Debts, Duties, Sum and
Sums of Money, and Demands whatsoever, I the said L. M. do acquit and discharge
the said N. O. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and every of them for
ever, by these Presents. In witness, etc.

An Affidavit that Lands are free from all Encumbrances.
RObert Fall of Rochester, in the County of Kent, Butcher, makes Oath, that
all that parcel of ground, with the appurtenances, lying and being in the
Parish of etc. in the County of Kent, commonly called and known by the Name of,
etc. containing by Estimation six Acres, more or less now bargained and sold
from the said Robert Fall, to Thomas Giles of, etc. in the County aforesaid,
Yeoman, by Indenture, bearing date the day of, etc. now are and were at the
realing and delivery of the said Indenture, and so shall continue, free and
clear of, and from all, and all manner of former and other Bargains, Sales,
Gifts, Grants, Releases, Statutes, Recognizances, Estates, Acts, Titles, and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, or done by the said R. F. or any
other person or persons whatsoever, to his knowledge, or by his order, means,
authority, consent, or procurement.

An Assignment of a Bond, with a Letter of Attorney verbatim as in the Bond.
TO all Christian People to whom these Presents shall come, I A. B. send
Greeting. Whereas E.S. of, etc. by one Bond or Obligation, bearing date, etc.
in the year, etc. did become bound unto me the said A. B. in the penalty of,
etc. of lawful, etc. conditioned for the true payment, etc. of like money, at
such days and times, and in such manner and form, as in the Condition of the
said recited Bond or Obligation is mentioned; as by the said Obligation and
Condition, relation being thereunto had, more at large may and does appear. Now
know ye, That I the said A. B. for diverse good Causes and Considerations me
hereunto especially moving, have assigned and set over, and by these Presents
do assign and set over unto W. C. of, etc. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, the said recited Bond or Obligation, and the said sum of, etc. therein
mentioned; and I the said A. B. have made, ordained, constituted, etc. and
deputed the said W. C. my true and lawful Attorney, for me, and in my Name, but
to his own proper use, and behoof, to ask, demand, sue for, recover, and
receive of the said E.S. all such sum and sums of money as are, or shall be due
to me by virtue of the said recited Bond or Obligation; and to have, use, and
take all lawful ways and means, in my Name, or otherwise, for recovery thereof,
by Attachment, Arrest, Distress, or otherwise; and to compound and agree for
the same, and Acquittances, or other sufficient Discharges for the same, for
me, and in my Name, to make, seal, and deliver, and to do all other act and
acts, and things whatsoever concerning the Premises, as fully in every respect,
as I my self might or could do, if I were personally present. And Attorneys one
or more under him for the purpose aforesaid, to make, and again at his pleasure
to revoke. And I the said A. B. do covenant for me, my Executors, and
Administrators, to and with the said W. C. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, by these Presents, That I have not received, releated, or discharged
the said Bond, or any of the money therein mentioned, neither will I, my
Executors, or Administrators, acquit, discharge, or receive the same, or any
part thereof, but shall and will justify all such lawful Actions, and
Proceedings in Law and Equity, as shall be brought, prosecuted, or defended
concerning the same, or by reason thereof; and will not nonsuit, disavow, or
discontinue any such Action, Suit, or Plaint. And that it shall be lawful to
and for the said W.C. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, to receive
and enjoy to his own use, all such sum and sums of money as shall be duly
recovered by virtue of the said Obligation, or the Condition thereof, without
any account to be given concerning the same; and that neither I the said A.C.
my Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall or will revoke this Letter of
Attorney or Writing of Assignment, but that I, my Executors, and
Administrators, shall and will upon every reasonable Request, do, acknowledge,
execute all and every such further Act and Acts, thing and things whatsoever,
be it by making a new Letter of Attorney or Assignment, or otherwise howsoever,
for the better enabling and authorizing him the said W.C. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, to recover and receive to his own proper use, all
such sum and sums of money as shall be due by virtue of the said Obligation, as
by the said W.C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or by his or their
Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or advised, and
required, so as for the doing thereof, they being nor compelled to go, or
travel further then the Cities of London and Westminster, or any of them. And
to the true performance of all and singular the Covenants herein contained, I
the said A. B. do bind my self, my Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, to the
said W. C. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, in the penalty of 200
li. of lawful money of England, by these presents. In witness, etc.

Insert not the Penalty, if it is not agreed by the Assignee.

A Defeazance upon a Statute-Staple for payment of Money.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between, etc. Witnesses, That whereas H. M. and R.
M. by one Recognizance in the nature of a Statute-Staple, bearing date, etc.
are become bound unto the said J. M. in the sum of 200 li. of lawful money,
etc. payable as by the said Recognizance or Statute-Staple more at large
appears. Now nevertheless, etc. by and between, etc. and the said J.M. is
contented and pleased, and for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does
covenant and agree to and with the said H.M. and R.M. their Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, to these Presents, that if the said H. M. and R.
M. their Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, do and
shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said J. M. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the sum of, etc. on the etc. next
ensuing, etc. that then the said Statute-Staple shall be utterly void,
trustrate, and of none effect, or else to stand and remain in full force and
virtue. In witness, etc.

A short Mortgage of a House.
THis Indenture made, etc. between C. B. of the one part, and J. H. or the
other part, Witnesses, That the said C.B. for and in consideration of the sum
of, etc. of lawful, etc. to him in hand paid by the said G. H. at and before
the sealing and delivery or these Presents, whereof he does hereby acknowledge
the Receipt, and thereof, and of every part thereof, does acquit and discharge
the said J.H. his Executors and Administrators, and every of them for ever, by
these Presents, Has granted, bargained, and sold, and by these Presents does
grant, bargain, and sell unto the said J.H. all that Message, etc. and the
reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders thereof: And also all the
State, Right, Title, Interest, property, possession, claim and demand
whatsoever, of him the said C.B. of, in, and to the said bargained Premises,
and of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances: And
also all Deeds, Evidences and Writings that concern the same Premises, or any
part thereof. To have and to hold the said Message or Tenements, and all and
singular other the Premises, with the appurtenances, unto the said J.H. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, from the day before the date of these
presents, unto the full end and term of 99 years from thence next ensuing, and
fully to be complete and ended, without impeachment of, or for any manner of
waste: yielding and paying therefore yearly the Rent of one Pepper-corn on the
24th day of June, it the same shall be lawfully demanded, and no more. Provided
always, and upon Condition nevertheless, That if the said C.B. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, do well and truly pay,
or cause to be paid unto the said J. H. his Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, at or in the Common Hall, etc. the full sum of, etc. free and clear,
of and from all and all manner of Charges, Taxes, Assessments, and Impositions
whatsoever or howsoever; That then and from thenceforth this present Grant,
Bargain, and Sale of all the Premises, shall cease, determine, and be utterly
void, frustrate, and of none effect; or else the same shall stand and remain in
full force, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding. And the said C.B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, does covenant, promise, and
grant, to and with the said J.H. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, by
these Presents, That in case default shall be made of or in payment of the said
sum of, etc. before herein mentioned, or any part thereof, at the day, time,
and place before specified, That then and from thenceforth, and at all times
aftewards, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said J. H. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, to enter into, have, hold, use, occupy, possess,
and enjoy, all the said Message of Tenement, and all other the Premises,
during all the said term of 99 years, by these Presents granted, without any
lawful Let, Suit, Trouble, Denial, Disturbance, or Interruption, of or by him
the said C.R. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them,
or of, or by any other person or persons whatsoever. And that then he the said
C. B. shall and will make, do, knowledge, suffer, and execute all and every
such further act and acts, thing and things, devise and devises whatsoever, for
the further and better conveying and assuring of the said Message or Tenement,
and other the Premises, by these Presents granted unto the said J.H. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, during the said term of 99 years, as by
the said J.H. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or by his or their
Counsel Learned in the Law shall be devised, or advised, or required. And it is
agreed by and between the said Parties to these Presents, That it shall and may
be lawful to and for the said C. B. his Heirs and Assigns, to receive and take
all the Rents, Issues, and Profits of the Premises, until default shall be made
in payment of the said sum of, etc. without any Let, Suit, Trouble, Denial or
Interruption of him the said J. H. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns,
In witness, etc.

A Letters of Attorney, to receive Seisin of Land.
TO all Christian People, to whom this present writing shall come; We R. O. and
T. T. send Greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know ye, That we the said R.
O. and T. T. have made, ordained, constituted, and in our steads and places put
and deputed: And by these Presents, put and depute N. D. of, etc. our true and
lawful Attorney, for Us, and in our Names, full and peaceable possession and
Seisin of all that Message or Tenement, etc. which by Indenture, bearing date
the, etc. was granted, bargained, sold, alienated, enfeoffed, or confirmed; or
mentioned to be granted, enfeoffed, and confirmed unto us the said R. O. and T.
T. and our Heirs and Assigns, to the use of Us and our Heirs, by R. Y. of, etc.
to take and receive to and for our own use, of the aforesaid R. Y. or his
certain Attorney in this behalf; ratifying and confirming all that, and
whatsoever our said Attorney shall lawfully do or cause to be done in our Names
concerning the Premises: In witness, etc.

A Declaration of an Obligee, that his Name is used in Trust.
TO all, etc. H. P. of, etc. sends Greeting. Whereas H. A. of, etc. by his
Obligation, bearing date, etc. stands bound unto the said H.P. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, in the sum of, etc. conditioned for the payment
of, etc. upon the, etc. as by the said Obligation may more fully appear: Now
know ye, That the said H. P. does hereby acknowledge and confess, That the said
Obligation is so taken in his Name, only upon Trust, for the only proper use
and behoof of G. F. of, etc. his Executors and Administrators. And that the
Moneys secured by the said Obligation, were the proper moneys of the said G. F.
In witness, etc.

An Indenture, being a Defeazance of an Assignment of a Bond.
THis Indenture, etc. between A.B. of the one part, and G.D. of, etc. of the
other part: Whereas the said C.D. is, and now stands really indebted unto the
said A.B. by his Bill Obligatory, bearing date, etc. in the full sum of, etc.
to be paid, etc. And whereas R. G. of, etc. by his Obligation bearing date,
etc. became bound to the said C.D. in his penal sum of, etc. with Condition
there underwritten for the said R. G. paying unto the said C.D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, the sum of, etc. upon, etc. as by the said Bond
more at large may appear. And whereas the said C.D. has by Writing under his
Hand and Seal, bearing date, etc. constituted and appointed the said A.B. to be
the said C.D's lawful Attorney in his stead and Name, but to the use of the
said A.B. to ask, levy, recover, demand, and receive the money due on the said
Bond, when it shall become payable; as by the said Letter of Attorney, among
other things therein contained, may appear. Now this Indenture witnesses, and
it is the true intent and meaning of the Parties to these Presents, That the
said Letter of Attorney so made by the said C.D. to the said A.B. as aforesaid,
is, and is hereby declared to be made for the said A.B. farther and better
security of the said sum of, etc. so owing from the said C.D. to the said A.B.
as aforesaid. And the said A.B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, does covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said C.D.
his Executors and Administrators, and to and with every of them, by these
Presents, That if the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, or
any of them, do, and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the
said A.B, his Executors, Administrators, or Asigns, the said sum of, etc. of
lawful money of England, at or upon the, etc. that then upon Receipt thereof,
he the said A.B. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall and will
deliver up the said Letter of Attorney, and the Bond aforesaid, whole and
uncancelled, unto the said C D. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, Any
thing in the said Letter of Attorney contained to the contrary thereof, in any
wise notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

A Surrender of the Lessees Term to be Endorsed on the Lease.
KNow all men by these Presents, That the within named G. F. of, etc. has
granted, assigned, surrendered, and yielded up; and by these Presents does
grant, assign, surrender, and yield up unto the within named H.P. of, etc. all
that the Manor, etc. ( prout in the Lease) and all other the Premises within
demised, or mentioned to be demised by the said H.P. unto the said G.F. And
also all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Property, Claim, and Demand
whatsoever, of him the said G. F. of, in, or to the said Manor or Premises; or
of, in, or to any part thereof: To have and to hold the same unto the said H.
P. his Heirs and Assigns, to do therewith at his and their free will and
pleasure. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive Money decreed in Chancery.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I H. P. of, etc. for diverse good Causes
and Considerations me thereunto moving, Have made, constituted, and appointed,
and by these Presents do make, constitute, and appoint G.F. of, etc. my true
and lawful Attorney, for me, and in my Name, and for my use, to ask, demand,
and receive of J. B. of, etc. all that sum of 1000 li. of lawful money of
England, which by a Decree made in the High-Court of Chancery, in a Cause there
depending between me the said H. P. Complainant, and the said J. B. Defendant,
bearing date, etc. he the said J.B. is to pay unto me; and upon Receipt of the
said sum of 1000 li. to give and deliver unto him the said J. B. one
Acquittance or Release, bearing, date the day of the date hereof, made, sealed,
and delivered to me to their use, testifying the Receipt thereof, and in full
of all Demands touching the same; Giving, and by these Presents granting unto
the said G. F. full power and lawful authority for me, and in my name, stead,
and place, to do, or cause to be done, all and every such other act and acts,
thing and things, as shall be requisite or needful to be done in the Premises,
in as full and ample manner as if I my self were at the doing thereof
personally present; ratifying and confirming all and whatsoever my said
Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be done in or about the Premises. In
witness, etc.

A Discharge for Money Decreed in Chancery.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I H. P. of etc. do hereby acknowledge to
have had and Received of I. B. of, etc. the full sum of 1000 li. of lawful
money of England, adjudged to be paid unto me by a Decree made in the
High-Court of Chancery, the first day of, etc. in a Cause there depending
between me the said H. P. Complainant, and the said I. B. Defendant; being in
full of all Matters in Question and Demand in the said Causes. And I do for my
self, my Executors and Administrators, acquit, release, and discharge, the said
I. B. his Executors and Administrators, of and from the said 1000 li. and every
part thereof, and of and from all Interest, Damages, and other Demands, for,
touching, or concerning the same. In witness, etc.

A Bond to the KING.
NOverint universi per praesentes me H. P. de, etc. teneri and farmiter
Obligari Serenissimo Principi, and Domino nostro Carolo secundo, Dei Gratia,
Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regi, Fidei Defensor, in mill libr.
legalis moneta Angliae, Solvend eidem Domino Regi, Haered. vel Successor. suis.
Ad quam quidem solutionem been and fideliter faciend. obligo me, heredes,
Execut. and Administrator. meos firmiter per praesentes. Sigallo meo Sigillat.
Dat. promo die Jan. An. Regni dicli domini nostri Caroli secundi Regis, decimo
quarto, etc. Annoque Domini, 1662.

A Discharge to Trustees for Money by them received.
Whereas G. F. of, etc. did by his Indenture, dated, etc. Demise and Lease
unto H. P. of, etc. and others, diverse Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments therein mentioned: To have and to hold the same unto the said H.
P. and the rest of the Lessees therein named, for the term of 99 years, if the
said G. F. should live so long, upon Trust, that the said Lessees should
dispose the Profits of the lands demised to the several purposes in the said
Indenture mentioned, as by the same Indenture may at large appear. Now know all
men by these presents, That I the said G. F. do hereby acknowledge, signify,
and declare, That all such Moneys as have been received by the said H. P. by
virtue of the said Lease, have been all paid and satisfied by him the said H.
P. according to my Directions and Appointment, and according to the Tenor of
the said Lease; and I do hereby acquit and discharge him the said H. P. his
Heirs, Excutors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, of and from
all such Moneys as aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof. In witness,
etc.

Warrant of Attorney, to confess a Judgment in Chancery, for privileged
persons.
To, etc. or nay other of the Six Clerks belonging to His Majesty's High-Court
of Chancery.
WHereas I A. B. of, etc. became bound by Obligation, bearing even Date with
these Presents, to C. D. of etc. in the penal sum of 100 l. for the payment of
50 l. of lawful Money, on, or before the, etc. If in case I the said A. B. do
not satisfy and pay, or cause to be paid unto the said C. D. his Exccutors or
Administrators, the said sum of 50 l. on, or before the, etc. then I the said
A. B. do hereby give warrant, and authorize you the said, etc. or any other of
the said Six Clerks, to appear for me at the said Court unto an Action or Suit
there to be brought or commenced against me the said A. B. by the said C. D.
his Executors or Administrators, upon the said Obligation; and thereupon to
acknowledge and confess a Judgment in Hillary-Term, next ensuing the date
hereof; and for so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Witness my
Hand and Seal, etc.

A Mortgagee's Assignment of his Mortgage to the Mortgagor, to be endorsed on
the Deed.
KNow all men by these Presents, That I H. P. of, etc. the Lessee within named,
for and in consideration of the sum, etc. unto me in hand paid, by the within
named G.F. Have granted, assigned, and set over, and by these Presents do
grant, assign, and set over unto the said G.F. all that the Manor of, etc. and
all and singular other the within-mentioned Premises, with their, and every of
their Appurtenances; and all my Estate, Right, Title, Term and Interest
therein, as fully and amply as the same were granted or demised unto me from
the said G.F. by the Deed or Writing within-written contained: To have and to
hold the same unto the said G. F. his Heirs and Assigns, to do therewith at his
and their free will and pleasure. And I the said H. P. do hereby covenant and
grant to and with the said G. F. his Executors and Administrators, That I have
not made, done, or willingly suffered and Act or Thing, whereby the Premises
within-mentioned, or the Estate or Term hereby granted or demised, shall or may
be in any wise discharged, impeached, or encumbered. In witness, etc.

A Deed of Feoffment upon a Sale.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, greeting:
Know ye, That I W. B. of, etc. in part of performance of the Covenant mentioned
in one Pair of Indentures, bearing date, etc. made between me the said W. B.
and F. my Wise, of the one part, and G. H. of, etc. of the other part; Have
given, granted, enfeoffed, and confirmed; and by these Presents, do give,
grant, enfeoff, and confirm unto the said G. H. all those, etc. several
Meswages, Tenements, or Cottages, etc. and the Reversion and Reversions,
Remainder and Remainders, Rents, Issues, and Profits of all and singular the
Premises; and all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Benefit, Claim, and
Demand whatsoever of me the said W. B. of, in, and to the same: To have and to
hold the said Messuages, Tenements, or Cottages, and all and singular other the
Premises, with their and every of their Appurtenances beforementioned to be
granted unto the said G. H. and his Heirs, To the use of the said G. H. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever. And I the said W. B. have granted for me and my
Heirs, That we will grant unto the said G. H. and his Heirs, the said
Messuages, Tenements, or Cottages, and Premises, with the Appurtenances,
against all People for ever by these Presents. In witness, etc.

An Acquittance of part of a Debt.
BE it known unto all men, etc. That I A. B. etc. in the County of etc. have
received and had the day of the making hereof, of, etc. R. W. etc. in the said
County, Yeoman, 6 l. etc. due to me on the Feast Day, of, etc. last past before
the date of these Presents, in part of Payment of a greater sum, contained and
specified in a writing Obligatory, wherein the said R. W. with others, stand
bound unto me; the which 6 l. as abovesaid, I do by these presents acknowledge
to have received, etc.

A short Deed, to declare that the name of the Obligee in an Obligation is used
in trust for another.
TO all Christian People to whom this Present Writing shall come, I S. B. of,
etc. send Greeting, Whereas J. T. and J. G. of, etc. by Obligation, bearing
date, etc. stand jointly and severally bound unto me the said S. B. for the
true payment of, etc. on the, etc. as by the, etc. (recite more, if there be
more) Now know ye, That I the said S. B. do hereby signify and declare, That
the several sums of Money in the conditions of the said several Obligations
mentioned, were and are the proper Mon^ys of A. B. of, etc. And that my name is
used in the said several Obligations in Trust, and for the only benefit of the
said A. B. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns; and therefore I^h^ said
S. B. do hereby authorize and appoint the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, to receive and take all the; several sums of Money
to his and their own proper use and behoof, without any Account to be given
concerning the same, and to use all lawful way^s and means for recovery
thereof; and to compound and agree for the same; and to acquit, discharge, and
deliver up the said several Obligations, as fully in every respect as I might
or could do, if I were personally present. In Witness, etc.

A Form of a Will.
IN the Name of God, Anem. I A. B. of, etc. being in good health of Body, and
of sound and perfect Mind and Memory, Praise be therefore given to Almighty
God, do make and ordain this my Present Last Will and Tistament, in manner and
form following (that is to say); First and principally, I commend my Soul into
the Hands of Almighty God, hoping through the Merits, Death, and Passion, of my
Savior Jesus Christ, to have full and free Pardon and Forgiveness of all my
Sins, and to inherit everlasting Life; and my Body I commit to the Earth, to be
decently buried at the discretion of my Executor hereafter named. And as
touching the disposition of all such Temporal Estate, as it has pleased
Almighty God to bestow upon me, I give and dispose thereof, as follows:

First, I will, That my Debts and Funeral-Charges shall be paid and discharged.

Item, I give unto, etc. (here set down all your Legacies that you intend to
give, and then write,

All the rest and residue of my personal Estate, Goods, and Chattels
whatsoever, I do give and bequeath unto my loving, etc. (here name the person)
full and sole Executor of this my last will and Testament.

And I desire, that my Body may be buried in the, etc. And I do hereby revoke,
disanul, and make void all former Wills and Testaments by me heretofore made.
In witn^ss whereof, I the said A. B. to this my last Will and Testament, b^ing
contain^d in five Sheets of ^aper, set my Hand, to the top and last Sheet
thereof, yet my Seal the, etc. In the year, etc.

A Codicil or Schedule to a Will.
BE it known unto all Men by these presents, That whereas I A. B. of, etc. have
made and declared my last Will and Testament in writing, bearing date, etc. I
the said A.B. do by this present Codicil, confirm and ratify my said last Will
and Testament; and do give and bequeath unto I. E. of, etc. the sum of, etc.
and my will and meaning is, That this Codicil or Schedule be, and be adjudged
to be, part and parcel of my said last Will and Testament; and that all things
herein contained and mentioned be faithfully and truly performed, and as fully
and amply in every respect as if the same were so declared and set down in my
said last Will and Testament. In witness, etc.

The Form of an Affidavit.
INter R. L. quer. and R. R. Defend. in ejectione firmae de duobus Messuagiis,
etc. in, etc.

A. B. makes Oath, That he this deponent upon the 20th day of January, now
last past, did deliver unto R. C. who was then Tenant in possession of the
Tenements abovementioned, a Copy of a Declaration made by the Plaintiff
against the Defendant in this Cause; whereupon there was written as follows,
or to the same effect, R. C. this Declaration is for Trial of the Plaintiffs
Title, etc. verbatim, as on the back of the Declaration.

Directions for suing out Fines, and making the Concords thereof; with several
necessary Notes thereupon.
IT is called a Fine, Et Finalis concordia, quia imponit sinem litibus.

Fines are Instruments of Record, of Agreements concerning Lands or other
Hereditaments made most usually upon Writs of Covenant in the Court of
Common Pleas; and are of such force and efficacy in Law, that they are
perpetual Bars to all Parties to the same Fines, and Estrangers, not
prosecuting their Right in due time.

He who acknowledges the Fine, is called the Conusor; and he to whom the Fine
is levied, is called the Conusee.

If the use of a Fine be not declared before nor after the Fine levied, it
shall be intended to the use of the Conutor, and his Heirs.

Infants (that is, all persons under the age of one and twenty years) ought to
have special care how they levy Fines: for unless they be reversed by the
Infants themselves before they come of Age, they are good.

If a married Woman under Age levy a Fine of her own Lands, she may not reverse
it, unless her Husband dye before she come to full age.

If a married woman levy a Fine of her Jointure, she will thereby lose both
that and her Thirds, if the Jointure were well settled before marriage.

It is requisite, that either the Conusor, or the Conusee, be seized of the
Land in the Fine at the time of levying thereof, otherwise the Fine is void.

Persons Outlawed, or waved in personal Actions, may alien by Fine.

To sue out a Fine by Dedimus potestat. to Commissioners in the County, you are
first to draw your Praecipe of the Writ of Covenant in Paper, and then write
under, your Commissioners Names, four or more, whereof one is to be a Knight,
thus:

S. ss. Pr. A. B. quod just, etc. teneat C. D. con. etc. de uno Messuagio, uno
Horreo, uno Gardino, and december acris ter. cum pertin. in E.

De. po. F. D. Militi H. I. L. M. N. O. P. Q. generosis.

Carry this to the Cursitor of the same County, and he will make your Dedimus
Potestatem to take the Fine.

When you have your Ded. Pot. then make ready your Concord to be fairly
engrossed in Parchment; and see that the Land be exactly named, as in the
Dedimus: The Forms of which Concords next follow.

A Fine from One to One, of a Message and Garden.
PRaecipe A. B. quod just, Sussex. ss.
etc. teneat C. D. con. etc. de uno Messuagio, and uno Gardino, cum pertin, in
M. E. nisi, etc. Et est Concordia talis, scilicet, quod praedict. A. recogn.
praedict. tenementa cum pertin. esse jus ipsius C. ut illa quae idem C. habet.
de dono praed. A. Et illa remisit and quiet. clam. de ipso A. and haered. suis
praefat. C. and haered. suis in perpetuum. Et praeterea idem A. concessit pro
se and haered. suis, quod ipse warrant. praefat. C. and haered. suis praedicta
tenementa cum pertin. contra ipsum A. and haered. suos in perpetuum. Et pro
hac, etc.

A Fine from a Man and his Wife to one Conusee, of two Messuages, one Yard, or
Backside, one Garden, Land, Meadow and Pasture.
Southt. ss PR. Henr. B. and Mariae uxori ejus, quod just, etc. teneant
Johanni B. con. etc. de duobus Messuagiis, uno curtilagio, uno Gardino, december
Acris Terrae, quinque Acris prati, and sex Acris Pasturae cum pertin. in M. Et
nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scilicet, quod praed. H. and Mariae recogn. praedict.
tenementa cum pertin. esse jus ipsius Johannis, ut illa quae idem Johannes
habet de dono praedict. Henr. and Maria. Et illa remiser. and quiet. clam. de
ipsis Henr. and Mariae and haered ipsius Hen. praefat. Johanni and haered. suis
in perpetuum: Et praeterea iidem Hen. and M. concesserunt pro se and haered.
ipsius Hen. quod ipsi warrant. praefat. I. and haered. suis praed. tenement.
cum pertin. contra ipsos Henr. and M. and haered. ipsius Hen. in perpetuum. Et
pro hac, etc.

Note, That where there there be diverse Conusors, the Release and Warranty must
be from the Heirs of one of the Conusors only, as in the last mentioned; and
also when a Fine is levied to diverse Conusees, the right shall be limited to
one of them only, and the Remise and Warranty to his heirs only, whose Right it
is acknowledged to be.

A Fine from Two Conusors, and the Wife of one of them, to Two Conuseet, of
Messuages, Barns, Gardens, Orchards, Land, Meadow, Pasture, and Common of
Pasture for all manner of Cattle.
Southt. ss PRecipe Nicholao Gibbons generoso, and Ric. Henet, and Annae uxori
ejus, quod just, etc. teneant I. S. Armigero, and D. F. con. etc. de quatuor
Messuagiis, duobus Horreis, duobus Gardinis, duobus Pomariis, Viginti Acris
Terrae, una acra Prati, octo acris Pasturae, and Communia Pasturae, and
omnimod. averiis, cum pertin. in Warbleington and Emesworth. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scilicet, quod praedict. Nich. and Ric. and Anna
recog. pradicta tenementa and communiam Pasturae, cum pertin. esse jus ipsius
I. ut illa que iidem I. and D. habent de dono praedictorum Nich. and Ric. and
Annae. Et illa remlserunt and quiet. clam. de ipsis Nich. and R. and A. and
haered. ipsius N. praedictis I. and D. and haered. ipsius in perpetuum. Et
praeterea idem Nich. concessit pro se and haered. suis, quod ipsi warrant.
praedictis J. S. and D. F. and haered. ipsius J. G. praed. tenementa, and
communiam Pasturae, cum pertin.contra praedict. Nich. and haered. suos in
perpetuum. Et ulterius iidem Ric. etc Annae concesser. pro se. and haered.
ipsius R. quod ipsi warrant. praedictis J. and D. F. and haered. ipsius J. G.
praed. tenementa and communiam Pasturae, cum pertin. contra praedict. R. and A.
and haered. ipsius R. in perpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

Note, That in the Concord all the special names of the things contained in the
Writ, are not to be rehearsed, but only the general words thereof, as Manor,
Tenements, Rents, Fishing, Warren, Advowson, Common, Moity, third, fourth, or
fifth Part; view of Franck-Pledge, Rectory, Tithes, Fairs, Markets, etc. as in
the seveal Presidents you may observe.

A Fine by a Knight and his Wife to an Archbishop and another, of three
Manors, Messuages, Tofts, Cottages, Mills, Barns, Gardens, Land, Meadow,
Pasture, Wood, Furze, Heath, and Rent; the Advowson of a Church, and view of
Frank-Pledge, with general Warranty.
PR. J. L. Militi and M. uxori ejus, quod just, Midd. ss.
etc. teneant Reverendo in Christo Patri T. Y. permissione divina Archiepiscopo
Eborac. Angliae Primati, and G. L. Armigero, con. etc. de Maneriis de R. K. and
M. cum pertin. ac de quinquaginta Messuagiis, quingentis Toftis, ducentis
cottagiis, sex molendinis, quingentis horreis, quingen. gardinis, quinque mill
acris Terrae, mill acris Prati, sex mill acris Pasturae, mill acris bosci,
december mill acris Jampnorum and bruere, ac de quinquaginta libris reddit. cum
pertin. in R. C. A. alias S. T. V. W. and E. ac de advocatione Ecclesiae de E.
predict. ac de visu Franci plegii de R. G. etc A. praedict. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scilicet, quod praed. J. and M. recogn. praedict.
maneria, tenementa, reddit. advocationem and visum Franc. Pleg. cum pertin.
esse jus ipsius Archiepiscopi, ut illa quae idem Archiepiscopus and G. habent
de dono praedictorum J. and M. Et illa remiserunt, and quiet. clam. de ipsis J.
and M. and haered. ipsius J. prafat. Archiepisco and D. and haered. ipsius
Archiepiscopi in perpetuum. Et praeterea iidem J. and M. concesserunt, pro se
and haered. ipsius J. quod ipsi. warrant. prafat. Archiepiscopo and G. and
haered. ipsius Archiepiscopi praedict. maneria, tenementa, reddit. advocationem
etc visum Franc. Pleg. cum pertin. contra omnes homines in perpetuum. Et pro
hac, etc.

Note, That although a married Woman cannot covenant by Deed, yet she may
warrant by Fine.

Note, If a Manor extend into diverse Towns er Villages, you must express all
the Towns whereunto it extends; or if you omit any of them, no part of the
Manor in such Town omitted passes; yet a Fine of a Manor cum pertin. without
naming any place where it lies, is good, and passes the whole Manor.

Note, A Mill will pass by Molendinum alone; but it is better, and more usual,
to add Ventosum or Aquaticum.

Note, That Personages, Rectories, Advowsons, Vicarages, or Tithes impropriate,
pass not by the names de advocatione Ecclesiae, but de Rectoria Ecclesiae de A.
cum pertin. But when it is of a presentation only, it must be advocatione
Ecclesiae de A. and not cum pertin.

A Fine by one and his Wife to one, of one Manor, Messuages, Tofts, Cottages,
Barns; a Water-mill, a Fulling-mill, a Windmill, a Dove-house, Gardens,
Orchards, Land, Meadow, Pasture, Wood, Furze, Heath, Moor, fresh and salt
Marsh, Rent, free Fishing, the advowson of a Church by turns.
PR. Johanni H. Armigero, Sussex. ss.
and Ursulae uxori ejus, quod just, etc. teneant Roberto P. generoso, etc. de
manerio de B. cum pertin. ac de Viginti Messuagiis, duobus Tostis, sex
Cottagiis, quatuor Horreis, uno Molendino aquatico, uno Molendino fullonico,
uno Molendino ventoso, uno Columbario, Viginti Gardinis, quindecim pomariis,
ducentis acris Terrae, Centum acris Prati, Mill acris Pasturae, December acris
Bosci, Centum acris Jampnorum and bruere, triginta acris More, december acris
Marisci frisci, duodecim acris Marisci salfi, and december Marcis reddit. cum
pertin. in B. C. and D. necnon de libera piscaria in aqua de S. ac de
advocatione Ecclesiae de P. alternis vicibus cum acciderit. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scil. quod praedict. J. and V. recognoverunt maneria,
tenementa, red. and liberam piscariam praedicta cum pertin. ac advocationem
praedictam esse jus ipsius Roberti, ut illa que idem R. habet de dono
praedictorum J. and V. Et illa remiserunt and quiet. clam. de ipsis J. etc V.
and haered. ipsius V. praedicto R. and haered. suis in perpetuum. Et praeterea
iidem J. and V. concesserunt, pro se and haeredibus ipsius V. quod ipsi
warrant. praedicto R. and haeredibus suis praedicta maneria, tenementa, reddit.
and liberam piscarlam cum pertin. ac advocationem praedictam contra ipsos J.
and V. and haeredes ipsius V. in perpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

A Fine of a Rent by an Earl and his Wife.
PRaec. Johanni Comiti Devon. etc Dominae Kathess rinae uxori ejus. Ebor.
Comitissae. D. quod just etc, ten W. C. con. etc. de quadraginta libris an^ui
redditus cum pe^tin: exuntis de manetio de E. Et nisi, etc,

Et est concordia talis, seil. quod praed. Comes and Comitissa recognover'
redditum praedictum cum pertin. esse jus ipsius W. ut illa quae idem W. habet
de dono praedictorum Comitis and Comitissae. Et ill. remiser. and quiet clam.
de ipsis Comite and Comitissaet haered. ipsius Comitis praefat. W. and haered.
suis imperpetuum. Et praeterea iidem Comes et Comitissa concesser, pro se and
baered. ipsius Comitis quod ipsi Warrant. praefat. W. praedict. reddit. cum
pertin. contra ipsos Comitem et Comitissam et haered. ipsius Comitis
imperpetuum. Et prokac. etc.

A Fine of the third part of a Rent.
PRaec. A. B. et C. uxori ejus; quod just etc. tent D. E. militi Balnei con,
etc. de tertia part quinque librarum, sex solidorum et octo oenarl reddit, cum
pertin. exeun. de Maneriis de F. et G. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scil. quod praedict A. et C. recognover. tertiam
partem praedictam cum pertin. esse jus ipsiut D. ut illam quam idem D. haber de
dono praedict. A. et C. Et illam remiser. et. quier. elam. de ipsis A. et C. et
haered. ipsius A. praefat. D. et haered suis imperpetuum: Et praeterea iidom;
A. et C. concesserunt pro se et haered, ipsus A. quod ipsi Warrant praefat D.
et haered. suis praedictam tertiam partem cum pertin. Contra praed. A. et C. et
haered. ipsius A. imperpertuum, etc. Et pro hac, etc.

A Fine of a Personage, excepting the Advowson of the Vicaridge of the same
Personage.
PRaec. A. B. Generoso, quod just etc: teneat c. D. con etc. de Rectoria de E.
cum pertin, except. advocatione Vicariae Ecclesiae de E. Et nisi, etc.

Et ast Concordia talis, scil. quod praed. A. recognovit Rectoriam praed. cum
pertin. (except, praeexcept.) esse jus ipsius C: ut ill. quam idem C. habet de
dono praed. A. et ill. remifit et quier. clam. de ipso A. et haered. suis.
praefat. C. et haered suis imperpetuum. Et praeterea idem A. concessit pro se
et haered suis, quod ipsi Warrant praefat, C. et haered. suis Rectoriam praed.
cum pertin. (except, praexcept.) contra ipsum A. et haeted, lpsius imperperuum.
He pro hat, etc.

A Writ of Covenant for the King, of Tythe-Corn.
PRaec. A. B. et C. D. quod tencant nobis con. inter nos et praefar. E. ss.
A. et C. fact. de omnibus et oranimod, decimis granorum crescen. provenien,
sive renovan, infraparochiam de Hoten. Et nisi, etc.

Note, This Writ is endorfed thus, Galfridus Palmer Miles, Attorn. Dom. Regis
generalis, pro eodem Dom. Rege se quitur boe breve,

A Fine of one Message, one Barn, Lana, Meadow, Pasture, and five shillings
Rent; the Personage of B, and the Advowson of the Vicaridge of B.
PRaec. J. G. et M. uxori ejus, S. ss.
quod just etc. ten. R. R. Militi con. etc. de uno Messuagio, uno Horreo,
quindecim acris Terrae. sex acris Prati, Viginti acris Pasturae, ea quinque
solidis redd. cum. pertin. in B. ac de Rectoria de B. praedict. cum pertin,
necnon de adyocatione Vicarae Ecclesae de B. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scil, quod. praed. J. et M. recognpraed. tenement.
redd. et Rectoriam cum pertin. ac adyocationem praedict, esse jus ipsius R. ut
illa quae idem R. habet de done praed. J. et M. Et illa remiser. et quiet.
clam. de ipsi I. et M haered. ipsius I. piaefat. R. et haered. suis
imperpetnums: Et praeterea iidem I. at M. concesserunt pro se et haered. insius
I. quod ipsi Warrant. praed. R. at heared. suis praed. tenements, redd, et
Rectoriam cum pertin, ac advocationem praed. contra ipsos J / et M. et heared.
ipsius I. ippertertuum, Et pro hac, etc.

A Fine by an Earl and his Wife, of a Manor, Advowson, liberty of Foldage,
free Warren, and free-Fishing, etc.
PRaec. Thoma Comiti Sussex. and Francisae uxori ejus, Sssexss.
quod just ten. W. C. Ar. con. etc, de Manerio de B. cum pertin. ac de
octoginta Messuagiis, quinquaginta Cottagiis, december Tofus, Centum Gardinis,
sexaginta Pomariis, quadringentis acris Terrae, septuaginta acris Prati,
decentis acris Pasturae, viginti acris Bosci, quadragintu acris Jampnorum and
bruerae, ducentis acri. Morae; Centum acris alneti, and viginti solidis reddit.
cum pertin. in Billing ford, alias Bellingforth, and Bylow, alias Byling,
necnon de advocatione Ecclesiae, de B. ac de liberate unius foldagii ad duas
mill Oves, liber a Warrenna, libera piscaria in B. etc. Et nisi etc.

Et est Concordia talis, sell. quod praedicti Comes and Francisca recogn.
praed. Manner. Tenement. and reddit, cum pertin. ac advocationem, libertatem,
liberam Warrenam and liberam piscariam praed. esse jus ipsius We ut illa quae
idem W. habit de dono praedict. Comitis and F. Et illa remiser. and quiet.
clam. de ipsis Comite and F. and haered. ipsius Comitis, praefat. W. and
haered. suis imperperuum. Et praeterea iidem Comes and Franeisca concesserunt,
pro se et haered. ipsius Comitis, quod ipsi Warrant. praefat. W. et haeredibus
suis Manerium, Tenements, et redd. praed. cum pertin. ac advocationem
libertatem, liberam Warrenam et liberam piscariam praed. contra praed. Comitem
and F. and heared. ipsius Comitis imperper. E nisi, etc.

A Fine from Three and their Wives, to One, with sever al Warranties.
PRaec. A. B. et c. uxori ejus, S. ss
D. E. et F. uxori ejus, et D. H. et I. uxori ejus, quod just etc. ten. W. C.
con. etc. de duobus Messuagiis, duobus Gardinis, uno Pomario, triginta acris
Terrae, viginti acris Prati, 40 acris Pasturae, et sexdecim solidis redd. cum
pertin in W. et D.

Et est Concordia talls, scil. quod praed. A. et C. D. et F. et D. et I.
recogn. praed. tenementa et redd. cum pertin esse jus ipsius W. ut illa quae
idem W. habet de dono praed. A. et C. D. et F. et D: et I. Et illa remiser
quiet clam. de ipsis A. et C. D. et F. et D. et I. et haered. ipsius A.
praefat. W. et haered. suis impepetuum: Et praeterea iidem A. et C.
concesserunt, prose et haered, ipsius A. quod ipsi Warrantizabunt praefat. W.
et haered. suis praed, tenementa et redd. cum partin. contra ipsos A. et C. et
haered. ipsius A. imperpetuum. Et ulterius iidem D. et F. concesserant, pro se
et haered. ipsius D. quod ipsi Warrant. praefat. W. et haered. suis praedict.
tenementa et reddit. cum pertin. contra ipsos D. et F. et haered. ipsius D.
imperpetuum. Ac etiam iidem D. et I. concesserunt pro se et heared, ipsius I.
quod ipsi Warrant. praefat. W. et hared. fuls praed. tenementa and redd. cum
pertin: contra ipse D et I. et heared. D. Ipsius impe pet. Et pro hac, etc.

Note, That several Purchases may be put in one Fine, though there the several
Purchasors, be passing all the Lands so purchased, and making all the Sellers
Cognisors, and all the Buyers Cognisees, with a several Warranty against every
Cognisor and his Heirs; and declaring the use of the Fine to the several Buyers
for their several parts: or where there be many purchasors, two of them only
may be named in the Fine, and afterward by Indenture declaro the use as
aforesaid, to the rest.

A Fine of nine Messuages, nine gardons, etc. and the moiety of of twenty
Messuages, one Water-Mill, one Dovehouse. etc.
PRaec. I. P. Generoso and E. uxori ejus, Dorset ss.
quod just etc. teneant Nic. Covert. genesis con. etc. de novem Messuagiis, novem
Gardinis. trecentis acrae terrae. 100 acris Prati, Centum acris pasturae, and
100 acris Jampo. amp;c bruerae, ac de mediecate viginti Messuagiorum, 100
Gardinorum, unius Molendini aquatici, unius Columbarii, 60 acrarum Terrae, 200
acrarum Prati; 300 acrarum Pasturae, 60 acrarum Bosci. and 100 acrarum Jampn.
et bruerae, cum rertin, in M. C. B. D. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, seilicet, quod praed. I. P. et E. recognoverunt praed,
tenemonta and medietat, cum pertin, esse jus ipsius N. ut illa quae idem Nio:
habet do dono praedict, I. et E. Et illa remisuerunt and quiet. clam. de se et
haered. suis pe aedict N. et haered. suis imprepetuum. Et praetereaiidem I. et
B. concesseiunt prose et haered. ipsius I. quod ipsi Warrant. praefat. N. et
haered. suls praed. tenementa and medietarem. cum pertin, coners ipsos I. et E
echaered. ipsius I. imperperutim. Et pro hac, etc.

Here might be added many, examples of Fines, with Entails, Renders, Clauses of
Distress, etc. which being seldom used at this day, and more likely to confound
than help those for whom I intend this Work, I purposely omit, adding only one
of them, which follows next,

A Fine by Husband and Wife, and another, to One who Grants and Renders the
same again to one of the Cognisors for 21 years, to begin at a time to come,
reserving a Rent, with Clause of Distress; and afterward the Cognisee Grants
the Reversion to the Husband and Wife Cognisors, and the Heirs of the Husband.
PRaec. J. P. and B. uxori ejus, S. ss.
R. D. quod just etc. ten. R. B. con. etc. de Manerio de C. cum pertin. ac de
duobus Messuagiis 40 acris Terrae, 100 acris Prati, quingentis acris Pastuiae,
200 acris Bosci, and 40 acris Jampnorum and bruerae cum pertin, in w. Et nisi,
etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scilicet, quod praed. J. B. and R. D. recogn. manerium
and tenementa praed. cum pertin, essc jus ipsius R. B. ut illa quae idem R. B.
habet de dono praed. J. and B. and R. D. Et illa remiserunt and quiet. clam. de
ipsis J. and B. and R. D. and haered. ipsius J. praedict R. B. and haered. suis
imperpetuum. Et praeceren lidem J. and B. concesserunt pro se and haered:
ipsius J. quod ipsi Warrant praedict. R. and haered. suis manerium and
tenementa praed. cum pertin. contra omnes homines imperpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.
idem R. B. concessie praefat. R. D. manerium and tenement^ praedict. cum
pertin. Et illa ei reddidit in cadem Cur. habend. and tenen. eidem R. D. a
festo St. Michaelis Arch-Angeliquod erit in Anno Dom. 1563. usque ad finem and
terminum 21 annorum, extunc proxime sequen, and plenarie complend, Reddend.
inde annuatim. praedict R. D. and haered. suis viginti and septem libras and
sex solidis legalis monerae Angliae ad Fcsta Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, and
Annuntiationis beatae Mariae Virginis, per equales portiones annuat. solvend.
prima solutione inde fiend. ad Festum Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, quod crit in
Anno Domini 1563. Et fi contingat praed. redd. 27 li. 1 5. a retro fore
insolut. in part vel in ^oto post aliquod festum fostorum praed, quo (ut
praefertur) solvi debeat, quod tune been licebit praefat. R. D. and jaered. uis
in manetium and tenementa praed. cum pertin. introre and distringere,
districtionesque sic inde cap. and habet. licite abducere, asportate, effugat.
and penes se retinere quousque de praed. redd. 27. li. 6 solid. cum averagiis
ejusdem si quae fuerint, plenarie fuerint satisfact: and persolut. concessit
etiam icem R. B. praed. J. and B. reversionem mancrii and cenementorum praed.
cum pertin. ac praed: reddit: superius expressum and reservat. and ill. cis
reddidit. etc. Habend and tenend. eisdem. J. and B. and haered. ipsius J. de
capitalibus dom. fcodi illius per servitia, etc.

When the parties come to acknowledge the Fines, let all the Cognizors set
their Hands to it, and then let the Cominissioners ask them if they be willing
to pass the Fine, and read unto them the substance; and then the Parties having
made Recognizance accordingly, write under the Record thus.

Capt. and Cognit. apud Civitatem Cicestr. in C. S. di. etc. Anno Regni. Dom.
Caroli Secundi nune Regis Anghae, etc. 16 coram.

And then let the Commissioners subscribe their Names which must be two at
least: Then write on the back of the Commission thus;

Executio istius brevis pater in quadam Schedula eidem brevi annexa; And let
the Commissioners subscribe their Names there.

According to the Tenor of the Writ, the Commissioners should set their Seals
to the Concord, which seems the best way although it be often omitted at this
day.

If a married Woman be a Cognlzor, the Commissioners are to examine her
privately, whether she be willing to pass the Fine, and do it without Threats
or Fear of her husbands displeasure? which if she confesses, the Commissioners
ought not to take her Cognizance.

If all the Cognisors cannot conveniently come to acknowledge the Fine at the
same time, the Commissioners may take the Cognizance of such as are present;
and the same Commissioners, or others, may take the Cognizance of the rest at
another time, and then write under the Concord thus;

Capt. et cognit per supra dictors A. et B. apud C. in Com. S. prime die Iulis,
Anno Regni Dom. C. Secundi Regis Angliae, etc. decimo quinto, coram

Whereunto the Commissioners must set their Hands as before; and when the rest
have acknowledged, let them, or other Commissioners named in the Dedimus, write
the like for the rest, and let all the Commissioners who have taken the Fine,
set their hands to the back of the Bill.

Note, That this Dedimus potestatem has no certain Return, so that if you
execute it any time within a year after it is sued our, it will be well enough.

Your Fine thus acknowledged, you must File the Dedimus and Concord together,
and then carry it to the Curfitor for that County (at the Cursitors Office in
chancery Lane, over against, Lincoln-Iun) who will thereupon make your Writ of
Covenant, which ought to bear Test before the Dedimus, because it is supposed
by the Dedimus to be then depending? but whether it be returnable before or
after Caption of the Fine is not material, though they usually make it
returnable after the Caption: Your Writ of Covenant thus made, you are to carry
to the Alienation Office, where you are to compound for your Fine, according to
the value of the Land, with one of the Commissioners there sitting If all that
is passed in your Fine be not worth forty shillings by the year, you must have
one to make Affidavit of it before the Doctor there, and then you shall pay no
Fine for Composition: Or if you know the value of the Land, or the Purchase
money, you are to inform the Commissioners, that they may rate the Fine
accordingly. If any Fine of the same Lands has been passed not long before,
you are to show that, whereby you may persuade the Commissioners to tax it
somewha^ the less, The Fine thus rated, you must go into the Receiver in the
same Office, and there pay the Fine of Composition, and six pence over for
entering in the Receivers Book, and his signing the Writ. But if the Fine were
taken by my Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, that fix pence is not to be
paid to the Receiver.

When you have paid the Fine, you carry the Writ to one of the Clerks in the
same Office that sits next Mr. Crow, who does Indorse the Writ, for which you
pay four pence; then Mr. Cretr's hand, four pence; to the Clerk that sits next
by, who enters it, and has six pence; But if it be after Term, a shilling,
Then get two of the Commissioners Hands to your Writ, for which you may pay
nothing.

Having thus done at the Alienation Office, you are to carry your Writ again to
the Cursitor, who writes under the Writ thus,

Pro. dim. marc. solut. pro Fine, or othewise as the Fine is, and will then get
it sealed for you; for which, when you fetch it away, you pay him two shillings
six pence, and then he will deliver you your Concord and Dedimus again, which
you left with him at the bespeaking your Writ of Covenant.

Next you are to make your Warrant of Attorney in Parchment, as follows,

D. ff. A. B. po. lo. suo N. C. Attornat. suum ad prosequend. breve con. versus
C. D. and E. uxorem ejus de tenementis came perin. in E.

You are to carry your Warrant of Attorney, together with your Writ of
Covenant, to the Clerk of the Warrants, who has for filling the Warrant and
signing the Writ, four pence.

Next you are to carry your Writ to the Office, called Ione's Office in Bink
Court, Middle Temple, ho will return your Writ, and enter it, and has for
that, one shilling six pence.

Note. For more expedition you may return your Writ your self, before you carry
it to the laft mentioned Office, it is done thus:

Toward the upper end of the back of pleg. de Johannes D^^. the Writ. proc.
Richardus Roe.

Toward the Middle Sum. Johaanes Denn.

Toward the Middle Sum. Richardus Fenn.

Toward the bottom, the A. B. Miles

Sheriffs Name Vic.

Note, It must be the Sheriff that was in Office when the Writ was Returnable.

Having, gone thus far, you are to file your Writ of Covenant; Dedimus and
Concord together, and carry them to the Office of Cus^os B^evium, there the
Secondary, or his Clerks will ^enter it in his Book, and Endorse the Writ, for
which you pay three shillings eight pence; from thence you carry it to the
Kings Silver-Office in Lincolns-Inne, where the Fine for the value of the Land
is entered, for which you pay in Sussex fourteen pence, Surrey ten pence, most
of the Western Countries eighteen pence, etc. Hence you are to carry it to the
Secondary at the Chirographers Office, who enters it in his Book, and has for
it in Term time five shillings eight pence, after Term six pence more.

Then are you to deliver it to such of the Clerks of the same Office, who write
for the County where the Lands lie, who will Engross the Indentures of your
Fine; which, when you fetch from him, some convenient time after he will demand
of you three shillings six pence, if it be with one Warranty only; otherwise
six pence a piece for every Warranty more: How justly these Clerks demand this
Fee of three shillings six pence, I know not, formerly they never received more
than two shillings six pone.

And thus I have led you through the several Officers where your Fines pass: At
many of which you shall be enforced to wait long, and often to go and come
again two or three days after the Clerks; hoping thereby to extort somewhat out
of you for expedition; which, I conceive, non expedit, for you cannot justly
demand it of your Client. It is best therefore to begin with your Fines as soon
in the term as you can which will save you many po^^ Terminus'^

Note, You may acknowledge a Fine in open Court, or before the Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas ou^ of Court, or before any other Judge of that
Court; or before the Justices of Assize in the Country, as well as by special
Dedimus potestatem. And if you can conveniently have it acknowledged any of
those ways, it will be less charge to the Client.

The Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas may, ex ^^ficio, our if Court take
the acknowledgments of Fine without any Dedimus, etc. but none other; if
therefore you are to acknowledge it before him, you must draw out the Praecipe
and Concord fairly in Paper, and let the Cognisors set their Hands to it; then
go to my Lords Chamber, and deliver your Concord to him, who (the Parties being
ready) will take their Acknowledgments, for which you pay eleven shillings
eight pence; and my Lord himself will keep the Concord thus made in Paper, and
you are to go to his Clerk some time after, who will Engross it in Parchment
and get my Lords hand to it, which when you have from him, you are to go on
through the several Offices as before.

Note, For more expedition, you may Engrost your concord in Parchment before
you go to acknowledge the Fine, and then have my Lords Hand to it at the some
time when you carry your Concord in Paper; which my Lords Clerk will better
like, and will be less trouble to you.

If you acknowledge a Fine before any other Judge, you must go with your
Concord in Payer as before, and then after the Fine acknowledged, you may sue
out a general Dedimus potestatem; directed to that Judge that took the Fine;
which if you carry to his Clerk, he will Engross the Concord upon the back of
the Dedimus, and get the Judges Hand to it, for which, besides the Judges Fee,
you pay his Clerk sixceen pence, and no more, if be a Fine in several Counties:
Thence you are to proceed as before is directed.

A^ ordinary Lease of a House in London.
THis Indenture made the etc. between I. A. and M. his Wife. etc. of the one
part, and R. M. of etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That as well for and in
consideration of the sum of etc. As also in consideration of the Rents and
Covenants hereafter in these presents, mentioned, on the part and behalf of the
said R. M. his Executors and Assigns, to be paid, done, and performed; Have,
and either of them has, demised, granted, and to Farm-ler, unto the said R. M.
all that Message or Tenement, etc: and all and singular Shops, Cellar^,
Sollers, Chambers, Rooms, Lights, Easements, Watercourse, Commodities, and
Appurtenances whatsoever, to the same Message or Tenement belonging or
appertainings together with the use of all and singular the Goods and
Implements, Partitions, and other things remaining, and being, in and about the
same Message or Tenement, mentioned in a Achedule or Inventory indented,
hereunto annexed; except and always reserved our of this present Demise, Lease
and Grant, all that etc. To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, and
all and singular other the Premises (except before excepted) unto the said R.
M. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, from the 24th day of June, next
ensuing the date of these presents, unto the full and and term of 31 years,
from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, yielding and
paying therefore yearly, and every year during the said term, the yearly Re^^
or Sum of 30 li. of lawful money of England, at the four most usual Feast-Days,
or Terms in the year hereafter mentioned; that is to say, The Feast-days of St.
Michael the Archangel, the Birth of our Lord God, the Annunciation of the
blessed Virgin Mary, and the Nativity of St. John the Baptist; by even and
equal portions. And the said R. M. for himself, his Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, and every of them, does covenant, promise, and grant to and with
the said I. H. and M. his Wise, and the Heirs and Assigns of the said I. H. by
these Presents, That he the said R. M. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, the sald
yearly Rent of 30 li. before hereby reserved, at the days and times before
herein limited for payment thereof, during the said Term. And also shall and
will from time to time, and at all times during the said term of 31 years
hereby dimised, as often, and when as need shall be or require, at his and
their own proper costs and charges, well and sufficiently repair,
upholdsupport, sustain, Glaze, amend, and maintain the said Message or
Tenement, and all and singular other the Premises with the Appurtenances, in,
by, and with all and all manor of needful and necessary Reparations and
Amendemnts whatsoever, as well with principal Timber, as otherwise. And also at
his and their like cost and charges, all the Walls, Pavements, Gutrers, Kinks,
Privies, Seidges, and Widdraught of and belonging to the said demised Premises,
shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, when, and as
often as need shall be, or require, during the said Term, well and
sufficiently, pave, purge, scow^e, cleanse, amond and keep. And the said
Message and Tenement, and all and singular other the Premises with the
Appurtenances, so well and sufficientle repaired, supported, upholden,
sustained, amended, paved, purged, sco^^ed, and kept as aforesaid, in the end
of the said term, or other sooner determination of his present Lease, which
shall first happen, shall peaceably and quietly leave, surrender, and yield up,
together with all such Goods, Chattels, and Implements, as are mentioned in he
Sch^dule, or Inventory hereunto annexed, in as good case and condition as the
same are now, reasonable use and wearing hereof, in the mean time always
excepted; and that is shall and may be lawful to and for the said I. H. and M.
his Wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of the said I. H. with Work men, or others
in his, her, or their Companies, or without, twice in every year yearly, during
the said term, or of^ner, at conve^ient times in the daytime, to enter and
come into, and upon he said demised Premises, or every, or any part thereof,
there ^o view, search, and see the estate of the Reparations of the same; and
of all defects and wants of Reparations then and there found upon such View,
from time to time, to give or leave notice or warning in Writing, or otherwise,
at the said demised Message or Tenement, unto and for the said R. M. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, to repair and amend the same within the
time and space of four Months then next following; within the time and space
of which, four Months, the said R. M. for himself, his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, does Covenant, promise, and
grant, to and with the said J. H. and M. his Wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of
the said J. H. to repair and amend all and every the same defaults and wants of
Reparations which from time to time, upon every or any such View, shall be so
found; and notice or warning thereof given or left in Writing as aforesaid,
during the said term, Provided always, That if it shall happen the said yearly
Rent of thirty pounds or any part thereof to be behind and unpaid in part, or
in all, by the space of fourteen days next over and after any of the said
Feast-days above mentioned for payment thereof, being lawfully demanded, or if
the Reparations of the aforesaid Premises, whereof notice or warning shall be
given or left as aforesaid, shall not be well and sufficiently made and amended
from time to time, within the said space of four Months, next after every or
any warning to be given as aforesaid, during the said Term; Tha^ then, and from
thenceforth, in either or any of the said Cases, it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said J. H. and M. his Wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of the said
J. H. into the said Message or Tenement, and all other the Premises with the
Appurtenances, above by these Present^^ demised, or any part thereof, in the
name of the whole wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain,
repossess, and enjoy, as in his, her, and their first and former Estate. And
the said R. M. his Executors and Assigns and all other the Occupiers of the
same, thereout, and from thence utterly to expel, put out and amove, this
Indenture or any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And the said J. H. and M. his Wife, for themselves, their
Heirs, Exicutors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, do covenant
and grant, to and with the said R. M. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, by these Presents, That the said R. M. his Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, paying the said yealy Rent of 30 l. in manner and form aforesaid;
and observing, performing, and keeping all and singular the Covenant Grants,
Articles, and Agreements, before in these presents contained, on his and their
part and behalf to be performed, fulfilled and kept, sahll and may from time to
time, and at all times hereafter during the said term of 31 years before in
these presents demised, lawfully, peaceably, and quietly, have, hold, occupy,
possess, and enjoy the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other
the Premises, with the Appurtenances above in these presents demised, or
mentioned to be demised, and every part and parcel thereof, without any
lawfuller, trouble, eviction, ejection, disturbance, or interruption, of or by
them the said L. H. and M. his Wife, or either of them, or the Heirs or Assigns
of the said J. H. or by any other person or persons lawfully claiming, or to
claim, by, from or under him, her, them, or any of them, or by theirs, either,
or any of their means, act, default, or procurement, In witness, etc.

An Exact Table, showing how many years Purchase a Lease or Annuity, to endure
for a term of years, under 33, is worth presently at Interest upon Interest, at
six in the hundred; and showing plainly how to discount any Lease in being and
the true value of the Reversion after any number of years.
The use and Explanation of this TABLE.
Years of a Lease. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Years 0 1 2 3 4 4 5 6
6 7 7 8 8 9 9 0 Months. 1 9 8 5 2 11 7 2 9 4 10 4 10 3 8 1 Dec. Parts. 0 9 1 9
5 0 0 5 6 3 7 6 3 6 5 3 The first Column toward the left hand, shows the
years of a Lease or Annuity, and right against each year, is the Years,
Months, and Decinal parts of A Months Purchase, that such a Lease or Annuity
is worth. Example. Suppose a Lease or Annuity to continue ten years, and you
would know how many years Purchase it is worth in present money; look into the
Table for ten years of a Lease to the left hand, and against the same, you
shall find 7.4.3. which shows such a Lease to be worth 7 years, a months,
and 3 tenth parts of a months Purchase. Years of a Lease. 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 Years. 10 10 11 11 11 12 12 12 12 13 13 13 13 13
13 14 14 Months. 5 9 1 5 9 0 2 6 9 0 2 7 9 11 1 3 Dec. parts. 8 9 3 7 3 5 6 6
4 0 5 1 9 2 0 0

Again, are you to take or buy the Reversion of any Lease of Annuity.
WOrk thus; Suppose the Lease to be 30 years in all, you find in the second
Table, and right hand against it 13 Years, 9 Months, and a tenth parts of a
Months Purchase; this it were worth, were it in present possession: but
suppose there be a Lease of five years (more of less) before your commence,
look in the Table against the 5 years, and there you sind 4 years, 2 months,
and 5 tenth parts, half a months purchase; take this out of the sum against
thirty, which is 13.9, 2.4, 2.5, the remainder is 9 years, 6 months 7 tenth
parts of a month, and so much in the Reversion after 5 years, worth the
Remainder of 30 years: this is useful, and very easy


