FIFTEEN SERMONS PREACHED upon Several Occasions, AND ON Various Subjects.

By JOHN COCKBURN, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for William Keblewhite at the Swan in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCVII.

PREFACE.
PRefaces are employed commonly to give the Reasons for publishing the Book:
And it does seem needful, that what is prefixed to this should be of that
Nature, seeing there is no want of Sermons; the Booksellers Shops are already
filled with them, and they lie upon their hand as a heavy Drug. And when there
are not only many Sermons, but also Volumes of them, preached by known,
learned, and able Men, it may seem strange to some, what Reason or
Encouragement there could be for Printing these, which are liable to diverse
Prejudices, some drawn from the Author, and others less reasonable and just,
upon the account of his Country and its Dialect. But Prefaces stuffed with
Reasons and Excuses for Writing and Printing are, methinks, so fulsome and
useless, that rather than write such an one, though it be common, I will leave
the inquisitive to guess what they please, and will run the hazard of a Censure
for doing so.

A Book becomes not either more intelligible, or more useful, by knowing the
private Motives of the Author for publishing it; and therefore an Enquiry into
them is to very little Purpose, and the Knowledge of them in very few cases
material. It was long since observed, by the wisest of Men, That of making of
Books there is no end, which slews, that Mankind in this as well as in other
things, has been always much the same in all Ages and Parts of the World. This
humor of Writing, which flowed from different Motives, though it has had several
ill Consequences, yet it has had also this good Effect, That by this means
Truth has been preserved and propagated; and many useful Instructive things
amongst the Ancients conveyed down to us. To instance in some thing relative to
the Subject of the following Sermons, if it were not for the Writings of those
in former times, how could we prove the Antiquity, and Constant, Catholic, and
Uninterrupted Tradition, of the most material Points of our Holy Religion,
which some have the Impudence to brand with Novelty?

I will both own, and steadfastly maintain the Doctrine of these Sermons, as
Orthodox and necessary to be believed: But I will not promise that all the
Words and Phrases are current in this Nation. I cannot avoid the Dialect of my
Country, where I have lived so long: And they must be very peevish who will
make a Quarrel on that Head. Neither did all the Grecian Authors write by the
Standard of Athens, nor the Roman by that of Rome: There are interspersed in
the Writings of the best, particular Idioms of their native Soil, which yet is
no matter of Prejudice to the Wise and Judicious, nor does it lessen the Esteem
which is due to them. The Idioms of a Language ought to have the Reception of
Money amongst Merchants and Traders, which they do not reject, though it bear a
foreign Stamp* if it be good in it self, and of full weight: So neither ought
the Dialect of another Country to be despised, if it be Expressive and
Emphatical.

Indeed, when things are well expressed, they are heard and read with Delight:
But there always ought to be a greater Regard to the Sense and Meaning than to
the Expression; which yet cannot be complained of justly, if it clearly deliver
the Sentiments of him who speaks or writes, for then the true end of Speaking
or Writing is observed. And I am of Opinion, that he who understands his
Subject thoroughly, and has a clear and deep Sense of it, cannot be straightened
much how to express himself clearly and convincingly. Obscurity (except when it
proceeds from the Sublimity of the Matter) generally is a shrewd Sign of
confused and indigested Notions: I say generally only, because of the Instances
which may be given in the learned Mr. Thorndike, and other eminent Men: Which
Defect in them perhaps was occasioned by their great Retirement, and the
confining their Thoughts altogether to one particular Study. For Conversation
and Acquaintance with diverse Subjects are a great help to Discourse, furnishing
one not only with Copiousness of Words and received Expressions, but also with
various Similitudes and Allusions for clearing his Sentiments, without which
one can never be very eloquent.

The Style and Eloquence proper for Sermons are not so easy as most imagine,
nor have we many perfect Examples of them, and therefore if I fall somewhat
short, it is no great wonder. It is hard to observe at once, all the Rules and
Measures which are necessary in every Sermon, to gain it a just Commendation,
that is, to make it useful and edifying to all who hear it.

The Design of Preaching, is to teach the Truths of God, the great Mysteries of
the Gospel, the wonderful Contrivance of Divine Wisdom for Man's Salvation, and
all that is necessary to it: And he who preaches, that he may answer this
Design, ought to express his own Zeal, Passion, and Concernment for these
things; and he should so frame his Discourse, that it may be suitable to the
Gravity, Sublimity, and Importance of the Subject, and so accommodated to the
different Capacities of the Hearers, that at the same time it may instruct,
convince, and persuade both the meaner and better sort. He who speaks only to
the learned, the wise, and the noble, that is, he whose Language and Notions
such only can understand, forgets that he ought to preach the Gospel to the
poor, and he does exclude from the Kingdom of Heaven those who were first
called to it: Again, he who has no regard to the nice and delicate
Understandings of the learned, of Persons of good Sense and Quality, and only
utters mean, sorry, and coarse things, he begets a Prejudice in them, and so
becomes the unhappy occasion of their not entering into Life, because of their
Contempt of the Means that are necessary to it. Ill daubed Sign-posts can never
allure Persons of Judgment and Skill; they are only taken and pleased with what
expresses Art, Beauty and Life, and what does show these, will also be admired
and preferred by those of the least Skill. The Christian Religion, which is the
only proper Subject of Sermons, is so perfect, so just and reasonable, so
august and venerable, that a due Representation of it, deserves the most
respectful Attention of the greatest in the World, either for Learning, Wisdom,
or Quality: And yet the same Representation may be intelligible by those who
have any Degree of Understanding and common Sense. Indeed, there are Mysteries
in our Religion, which the wisest cannot comprehend; but as we are only
required to believe them, so the Truth and Certainty of them is most evident:
There are others also which are inexhaustible, that is, the deepest search
cannot get to the bottom of them, and the more one searches into them, he still
does find the more matter of Admiration; but then these are like deep Wells,
which are also top-full, so that the weakest may draw good, pleasant, and
refreshing water out of them. Our Religion was designed for all, and it is
fitted for all sorts of Men: And seeing the Auditories, either in City or
Country are neither all of the meaner sort, nor yet all of the better, but mixed
with both, therefore the Art of preaching is to captivate both to the Obedience
of the Faith; and who has this Art is truly Master of his Profession.

The Subject of most of the following Sermons is peculiarly Christian, that is,
the things treated of in them are only delivered by the Gospel. We should study
these at all times, but rather now, considering the Attempts of Atheists,
Deists, and others, who endeavor to dwindle away the Christian into Natural
Religion, by divesting it of its Peculiarities, which, to them who understand,
are not only admirable and excellent, but also matter of greater Comfort and
Satisfaction than what is possible to be drawn from Nature, Reason, or any
thing else. As these things are only discovered by the Gospel, so they are only
discernible by the Light of it: Philosophy and humane Reason do but obscure
them: And certainly neither the Truth of them had been so much questioned, nor
had there been so many Heretical Notions about them, if some arrogant and
presumptuous Men, both in this and former Ages, had not endeavored to
accommodate them to the several Systems of that vain Philosophy which they
espoused. Philosophy and humane Reason are not proper Standards for divine
Wisdom, by those we can never know the Perfection of this; and yet the
Christian Religion does not require us to lay aside our Reason, but rather
calls us to use it: Nor can our Reason be improved by any Study or Speculation,
so much as by that of the Gospel.

How I have handled those important Points of Christianity, which are the
Subject of some of the following Sermons, I leave others to judge. The required
Brevity of a Sermon, and the confining my self to the particular Argument of
the Text, have caused me to give only short hints of that which may satisfy
any reasonable Person about these Matters: But what is wanting in them, shall
be made up, and more fully extended in the third part of the Enquiry into the
Nature, Necessity, and Evidence of Christian Faith.

This, which I promised before, would have been published before this time, if
some unforeseen Accidents had not hindered it: And it must yet be delayed a
little longer, to give way to another Task which is imposed upon me, which is
thought fit to have the Preference, not because the Subject is better or more
important, but because it is believed that none has undertaken it. He, who gave
an Advertisement of this, is (notwithstanding of his Complement) more capable
of performing it, as appears by his accurate and laborious Treatise, in Snake
in the Grass.
which he has fully discovered the gross Errors and Delusions of the QUAKERS,
which were hitherto much neglected and little enquired into: And that was one
Reason why they spread so fast: But I hope in God they shall spread no more:
And that his Labors shall be blessed to be the happy Means both of preventing
their further Growth, and also of drawing off some of the more honest of that
deluded Party: And I have good Reason to hope for this, because he was engaged
into this Affair by a visible Providence. The Province given me is somewhat of
the same Nature, to lay open the Errors and Delusions of another Party, but
which are a little more subtle and refined, and therefore the less
discernible: By these I mean the Enthusiastical Delusions of Madam Antonia
Bourignon and her great Disciple. Monsieur Poiret, who have not many Admirers
and Followers in their own Country, but too too many in this Island. This
contagious Distemper has seized several Persons, especially in Scotland, whose
Judgment, Learning, and Sense (one would have thought) might have preserved
them. But alas! What are the Wisest and Greatest when left to themselves? They
are as soon and as easily seduced as others, when they do not hold by the
certain and stable Rule of Truth, the Scriptures, but grasp at other things
which it does not propose. There is so much Disposition at present to the
entertaining of Errors both Ancient and Modern, that it would seem these
Nations are lying under that fatal Doom threatened, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 11. When
temporal Judgments are ineffectual, God inflicteth spiritual, and then his
Anger is kindled to a high Degree. The final Ruin of that People is not far
off who are delivered up to Lies and Delusions; therefore all who have any
Concernment either for Truth or their Country, should contribute their utmost
Endeavors to suppress and extirpate those manifold Errors, Heresies and
Delusions, which have been sown amongst them. I am not so vain, as to think
that my Labors may be more effectual than others: But seeing I am engaged to
give the two Treatises presently mentioned, I will do all I can to hasten them,
if God grant me Health and Life: Both which were lately in Danger: Nor am I yet
well recovered.

The first Seven of the following Sermons were never printed before: The rest
were published at Edinburgh, some six Years ago. I heartily wish, that they,
who are at the Pains to read them, may receive some Profit and Advantage by
them.

The CONTENTS.
SERMON I. Matthew. XI. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest. Page 1 SERMON II. Matthew. XI. 28, 29. Come unto me all
ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest: Take my yoke upon
you and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest
unto your Souls. p. 27 SERMON III. On Christmas Day. Phil. II. 6, 7, 8. Who
being in the form of God, thought it not Robbery to be equal with God, But made
himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made
in the likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself
and became Obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. p. 64 SERMON IV.
Phil. II. 8. And being sound in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became
Obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. p. 95 SERMON V. On Good -
Friday. Luke XXIII. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. And there followed him a great company
of people and of women, which also bewailed and lamented him. But Jesus turning
unto them, said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your
selves and your Children; for behold, the days are coming in the which they
shall say, Blessed are the barren and the wombs which never bare, and the Paps
which never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains fall on
us, and to the hills cover us, for if they do these things in a green tree,
what shall be done in the dry. p. 123 SERMON VI. On Easter - Day. 1 Pet. I. 3,
4. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to
his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead. To an inheritance incorruptible,
and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you. p. 166 SERMON VII. On
Easter - Day. 1 John V. 12. He that has the Son has life, and he that has
not the Son of God has not life. p. 195 SERMON VIII. On Easter - Day. 1 Cor.
XV. 19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable. p. 228 SERMON IX. Rev. II. 17. He that has an ear, let him hear
what the Spirit says unto the Churches: to him that overcomes, will I give to
eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a
new name written, which no man knows saving he that receives it. p. 261
SERMON X. Luke VI. 46. Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I
say. p. 296 SERMON XI. A Preparation to the Holy Communion. Heb. X. 22. Let us
draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our Bodies washed with pure Water. p.
340 SERMON XII. Hosea X. 12. Sow to your selves in Righteousness, reap in
Mercy, Break up your fallow Ground, for it is time to seek the Lord, till he
come and rain Righteousness upon you. p. 385 SERMON XIII. Hosea V. 13, 14, 15.
When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his Wound, Then went Ephraim to
the Assyrian, and sent to King Iareb: yet could he not heal you nor cure you of
your Wound. For I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to the
house of Judah; I, even I will tear and go, I will take away and none shall
rescue him. I will go and return unto my Place, till they Acknowledge their
Offense and seek my Face: in their Affliction they will seek me early. p. 416
SERMON XIV. Micah VII. 8, 9. Rejoice not against me, O mine Enemy; when I fall,
I shall arise; when I sit in Darkness, the Lord shall be a Light unto me. I
will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him until
he plead my Cause and execute Judgment for me, he will bring me forth to the
light, and I shall behold his Righteousness. p. 446 SERMON XV. 1 Timothy V. 23.
Drink no longer Water, but use a little Wine for thy Stomachs sake, and thine
often Infirmities. p. 479
SERMON I.
On Matthew. XI. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest.
THESE words are worthy of all acceptance; they ought to be listened to most
earnestly, and deserve our most serious Consideration, if either we regard the
Person who uttered them, or the Matter contained in them. For here is promised
what all Men seek after; here is a free and gracious Invitation to what all Men
would be at, to that which they toil and labor for with all their might. The
Wise and the Unlearned, the High and the Low, and all the World pursue this;
though they entertain different Sentiments, and follow various Courses, yet still
they agree in this, that they all would be at rest. Rest to the Soul is a
common End which all aim at; for without this there is no happiness.

What is the true way to this has been the Enquiry of Philosophers, and of all
wise and thinking Men in all Ages. The several Sects of Philosophers pretended
to teach it; and the same is done by all the Parties who now divide the World:
One alleges the way to rest and happiness is with them; another says it is
with them. But we may trust him who speaks here; we may safely rely on his
Word, and have reason to believe him with an implicit Faith; for he neither
can be deceived himself, nor will he deceive others. He who gives this
Invitation, and makes this Promise of Rest is the Blessed Jesus, that is, the
greatest Person who ever appeared in Human likeness, the very eternal Son of
God, Wisdom and Truth it self. No Falsehood can come from him; and he is
willing that all come to the Knowledge of the Truth. He loves us, and wishes
our happiness more than we our selves do. He had no other Errand to this World,
but only to procure our happiness, and to direct us in the way to it. We ought
therefore to receive his Instruction; and when he promises rest, we have all
reason to expect it, and no cause to fear the missing it. O! with what joy
should we hear these words from him; Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, etc.

First, you see the Invitation is general A General Call to all Persons.
to all Persons whatsoever. Jesus Christ excludes none from his Mercy who do
not exclude themselves by their contempt, hardness, and impenitency. As his
Benefits are highly to be valued, and most desirable, so they are freely and
kindly offered to every one; he is willing that all partake of them. The
Favors of Kings and Princes are reserved to a few special Friends and
Favorites, either because they would exhaust themselves if they bestowed many,
or because they are afraid of rendering them contemptible, if they make them
common. But as Jesus Christ is an inexhaustible Treasure of all desirable
riches, as he is a Fountain which can never be drained; so he does not shut
himself up, he freely communicates of his fullness to us. If we be miserable,
we have only our selves to blame; if we lack any thing, it is because we do not
ask; if we cannot rest, it is because we do not apply unto him. We find him
complaining of Men's backwardness to their own happiness, but there was never
any instance of his hardheartedness. Ye will not come unto me Joh. 5. 40.
that ye may have life. And to give all Confidence and Encouragement, and to
manifest his free and unlimited Goodness toward all, therefore it is written
by the Prophet, Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he
that has Isai. 55. 1.
no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea, come buy wine and milk without money, and
without price. Again, And the Spirit and Rev. 22. 17.
the Bride say, come, and let him that hears say, come. And let him that is a
thirst come; and whosoever will let him take the water of life freely. So here
it is, Come unto me all ye that labor, etc. The adding this, does not restrain
the Invitation, or make it less general: for this Epithet may be made of equal
extent with Mankind it self; for (says the Son of Sirach) great travel is
created for every man, and an heavy yoke is upon the Sons of Adam, from the day
that they go out of their mothers womb, till the day that they return to the
mother of all things, Ecclus. xl. 1.

By the words of laboring and being Why all Men are said to Labor and to be
heavy Laden.
heavy laden, our Lord points at the present miserable condition of Mankind,
and designeth to represent not only his own mercifulness in offering them rest
so freely, but also the great need they stand in of it, that they may be the
more easily persuaded to accept his offer. Rest is very acceptable to them that
are weary; to them who are lying under any great weight of pressure, ease is
very comfortable. O how desirous then should Men be of ease to their Minds? How
glad ought they to be of rest to their Souls? Seeing they are now by their very
Birth put into a state and condition, which obliges them to Labor and be
heavy laden, that is, they are all of them miserable, and do either actually
groan under their misery, or they have abundant reason to do it. If any do it
not, it is not because their state is singular and so much better than others,
but because their misery has stupefied them; their Senses are benumbed, which
makes their condition worse and more dangerous, because not so easily cured.
Now, because Men use to value things only according to the sense of their own
need of them; therefore, that we may not slight Christ's offer here, that we
may not contemn his rest, but be very desirous of it, and be thankful for his
Kindness, I shall in the next place show the Misery, which (as Men) we labor
under, and are laden with, and which should make the very News of Rest and Ease
most welcome and acceptable.

First, The blessed Jesus addresseth himself I. Because of Afflictions.
to Men, and calls them to him under the title of them that labor, because
of the Afflictions and Calamities with which they are visited. Afflictions and
Calamities are called Burdens in Scripture, and are esteemed such in the Common
Judgment of the World. The Judgments with which God threatened the Nations, are
by the Prophets called the burden of those Nations. Crosses and Afflictions go
under the Name of (...), labor, 1 Timothy iv. 10. and Rev. xiv. 13. It is said,
Blessed are the Dead who die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors,
thereby meaning the Troubles and Difficulties of Life. Now as they may be said
to labor and be heavy laden who are in a state of Trouble and Affliction; so
all Men, as Men, are in such a state, none are exempted from it. Man (says
Eliphaz) is born to trouble, as the sparks flee upwards. And Job tells us, That
man who is born of a woman is of few days and full of trouble, Job v. 7. xiv.
1. The truth of this will be attested by every Man's Experience: For (as an
Ancient has it) dicant omnes, loquantur cuncti, etc. Let all appear and speak,
let every one come and give in his Verdict; let old Father Adam rise up with
all his Children; ask them all and they will declare, that, in this Life, they
have not found Joy without Sorrow, Peace without Strife, Quietness without
Fear, Health without Infirmity, Light without Darkness, Laughter without
Mourning. Some have more than others; but none are without some kind and
degrees of Troubles; neither the highest nor lowest condition of Life can
secure one altogether. An uninterrupted Comfort, and a perfect Satisfaction of
all things relating to this Life never any had, nor is it to be expected. And
therefore, because all have some burden of external Trouble and Affliction upon
them, therefore all do labor, and may be said to be heavy laden.

But Secondly, Even abstracting from II. The Emptiness and Vanity of Life.
supervenient Troubles and those accidental Crosses, Man is truly miserable in
this World, because he constantly labors under a burden of Emptiness and
Vanity. Not only the infliction of positive Evils, but the abstraction of any
real and positive or necessary Good will render one miserable, and make his
Life wearisome.

As Diseases, and an external weight and pressure upon the Body will cause
pain, and force groaning, so also will the want of Food and necessary
Sustenance: They who have felt it say, that Hunger, Thirst, and Famine, are of
all Troubles the most grievous; they render the Spirit very impatient, and are
ill to be endured. How restless then must the Soul of Man be in this World? how
impatient? how discontented when it finds it self deprived of the Good it
craveth? Its desires are never answered, its longing is never satisfied, nor is
its Appetite ever full, but is always tormented with Emptiness and Vanity.
There is no State, or Enjoyment, or Work which can give true Contentment or
solid Satisfaction: but after much Travel and frequent Experiments the Soul
still returns unsatisfied; she only wearies herself with Lies, as the Prophet
speaks. Something Ezekiel. 24. (...)2.
we meet with, which amuses and deludes us a while, but nothing to satisfy us
to the full. In our best state and circumstances, it is only as when a hungry
man dreameth, and behold he eats; Isa. 29. 8.
but he awaketh, and his Soul is empty: Or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and
behold he drinks; but he awaketh, and behold he is faint, and his soul has
appetite. What Profit has a Man of all Eccl. 1. 5. 9.
his Labor which he takes under the Sun? All things are full of labor, man
cannot utter it; The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with
hearing. Therefore (says the Wise Man) I hated 2. 17.
life, because the work that is wrought under the Sun is grievous unto me: for
all is vanity and vexation of spirit. I praised 4. 2, 3.
the dead which are already dead, more than the living which are yet alive.
Yea, better is he than both they, which has not yet been, who has not seen
the evil work that is done under the Sun. He tried all States, considered every
Condition, and tasted every Enjoyment, but was never satisfied with any; for he
found Vanity and Vexation intermingled with all. The Book of Ecclesiastes
contains his Observation, drawn from his manifold Experiences, which if we read
seriously, and take pains to compare what is said there, with our own
Experience, we will soon be persuaded of the truth of all which that Wise Man
says* viz. That Man all the days of his Life labors under Vanity and
vexation of Spirit: That our Souls live in a Famine of true Satisfaction; and
wherever we turn our selves, we find a want of that Good and Solid
Contentment which we would be at, and which is necessary to keep the Mind and
Soul from Languishing. The wiser Persons are, the more they allow themselves to
think, the more they are persuaded of this; Therefore Wife and thinking Persons
usually contemn and undervalue all worldly Pleasures and Enjoyments; nor do any
set a price upon them, or are fully satisfied with them, but such as are
degenerated into a brutish Nature, who do not exercise their Reason, nor give
themselves to thinking, but like the Beasts are at rest, when their Bellies are
full.

But to go on: A Third Misery and III. The fear of Death.
Burden which Men labored and groaned under, was the Fear of Death; their
imagination of things to come, and the day of death trouble their thoughts, and
cause fear of heart, said the Son of Sirach, Eccl. xl. 2. And the Apostle tells
us, that through fear of death they were all their lifetime subject to
bondage, Heb. ii. 15. They saw it was appointed for all men to die; they
understood that the Sentence of Death was passed upon all Men; and none knew
how soon, or after what manner this Sentence was to be executed upon himself,
so that they stood in jeopardy every Hour: Neither Youth, nor Health, nor
Strength, nor Vigor, nor any natural or acquired Virtue and Endowment could
secure Men from Death: and what was to come after it, they knew not; their
hopes of another better Life were faint; for it was not yet revealed.
Therefore, as they were daily liable to Death, and had cause continually to
apprehend it; so the fear of it, and the uncertain consequence of it (as every
one's Experience witnesses) damped their Joys, and filled them with
Melancholy, and embittered their Life. The terrors of the Mind are more
burdensome and grievous than outward weights and pressures upon the Body. Now,
nothing is so terrible to Men as Death; it is called the King of terrors, Job
xviii. 14. And again it is said, Chap. xxiv. 17. they are in the terrors of
the shadow of Death. My heart (said David) is sore pained within me, and the
terrors of death are fallen upon me, Psalm. lv. 4. Aristotle and other Heathens
have declared, that it is of all things most terrible; and certainlv it is, and
shall be, and must be so to all who believe not in Jesus; who are Strangers to
him, his Doctrine and Promises: until Men come to him, take his Yoke upon them,
and learn of him, the fear and terror of Death must make them to labor and be
heavy laden.

Fourthly, The great Evil which Men IV. Sin.
labor under, and which is the Cause of all other Evils, is Sin. As this lies
upon all Men; (for there is no Man who has not sinned, except the Man Christ
Jesus) so this indeed is a heavy burden, and most grievous, whether we consider
it in it self, or in its Consequences. The load of Sin which is upon us is
great enough to press us down to Hell, and to crush us in pieces. It is Sin
which makes us to travel all our days with pain; the guilt of this is uneasy
to the Mind, and disturbeth its rest, and also makes us liable to the Wrath of
Almighty God, which is a weighty burden, too heavy for the strongest Shoulders.
This burden of Sin, though it be of all others the heaviest, yet few are sensible
of it, many do not feel it, though it be ready to sink them, because the weight
of it has benumbed their Senses and stupefied their Spirits. But they who are
sensible of it, complain most heavily, O wretched man, that I am, (says St.
Paul) who shall deliver me from the body of this death, Romans vii. 28. And David
upon this account utters this grievous Lamentation; Thine arrows stick fast
in me, and thy hand presses me sore; there is no soundness in my flesh because
of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin: for
mine iniquities are Psalm. 38. 2.
gone over mine head as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. I am
troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long, Fools make a
mock of sin; but who have a due sense of it, find it is not to be sported with,
or set light by: for certainly it is the greatest and saddest of Evils: No
Misfortune which befalls us, is so great as that of Sin. He that is not
sensible of this, let him take a view of our Savior in the Garden, and repair
to a dying Person, and consider what inward Agony and Torment such suffer for
Sin? And if this do not affect him, he must be very insensible. The guilt of
Sin is unsupportable, no Man has sufficient strength to bear it. Therefore,
(says Solomon) the spirit of a man may Prove. 18. 14.
sustain his infirmity; but a wounded Spirit who can bear?

Thus you see, that all Mankind is liable to a fourfold Misery: Four several
Burdens are lying upon every Man that comes into the World, viz. The Burden of
Affliction, the want of true Satisfaction in things relating to this Life, the
fear of Death, and the guilt of Sin; each of which is enough to bear down the
Spirit of Man, and to crush or break it. O then how heavily are they laden,
when they have the weight of all these upon them? how weary may they be? how
much stand they in need of Rest and Ease? how desirous should they be of it?
And how thankful to him who offers it unto them?

And thus I come to consider the gracious How Christ gives rest.
Promise which our Lord here makes to miserable Men whom he invites to himself,
come to me, and I will give you rest. Rest is very desirable; but no rest so
desirable as this. An ease of those Burdens which were presently set before
you, would exceedingly lighten the Mind, and quicken and cheer up the Spirit.
But none can give this Ease, but Jesus who here promises it. Some Philosophers
have proposed some Antidote against Afflictions; but for the most part they
talked impertinently when they spoke of the other Three. But as the greatest
and truest Comfort under Afflictions comes from Jesus Christ, so it is he only
who can satisfy the large Cravings of the Soul; who can take away the Fear of
Death, and the Guilt of Sin. And as he can, so he will; for he has promised it
here; Come, and I will give you rest. This rest must certainly imply a full and
perfect Ease of all Misery which lies upon Men: For if all were not taken
away, if any part of it did remain, the Soul could not be at rest. Now, because
the very News of Rest is Matter of Comfort; and it is yet more comfortable to
be assured of it, I will confirm this gracious and comfortable Promise by other
Places of Scripture, and also show the Reasons why we may expect and look for
Rest from Jesus, with a Respect to that Fourfold Misery which is upon us.

I will invert the Order which was I. From Sin.
used in enumerating those Burdens we groan under, and will take the last
first, because it is the greatest, and that the Removal of it prepares the way
for taking the rest away. That the Burden of our Sins shall be taken away by
Jesus, is evident from his Name and the Reason why he got that Name; for he was
called Jesus, because he was to save his people from their sins, therefore also
he is called the Lamb of God which takes away the Sins of the world, when one
sick of the Palsy was brought unto him, he said to him, Son, be of good Matt.
9.
cheer, thy Sins be forgiven thee. And he said, so that they might know the Son
of Man had power to forgive Sins. This (says St. Paul) is a faithful saying
and worthy of all Acceptance; that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners of whom I am the chief, 1 Timothy And if the chief be saved, others have
no cause to fear. The blood of Jesus Christ (says St. John) cleanses from all
sin. 1 John i. This is that Fountain which was opened to the House of David,
and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for Sin and Uncleanness. The Reason why
Jesus can ease us of the Burden of Sin, and take away the Guilt, and free us
from the Punishment of it, is, because he has in his own Person born our Sins,
and satisfied for them; he was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for
our Iniquities, and by his stripes we are healed, and God laid on him the
Chastisement of us all. Isa. liii. The Just died for the Unjust; and he who
knew no sin was made sin for us, that we might become the righteousness of God
through him.

In the next place, as Jesus Christ takes II. From the fear of Death.
away the guilt and burden of our Sins, so he freeth us from the fear and
terror of Death. For as much (says the Apostle) as the Children are partakers
of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same, that
through Death he might destroy him that had the power of Death, that is, the
Devil; and deliver them, who through fear of Death, were all their life time
subject to bondage, Heb. ii. 14, 15. Jesus Christ has brought Life and
Immortality to Light; he has discovered a Life far better than this, a State
in which there is fullness of Joy and Rivers of Pleasure for evermore; a Life
which admits neither Hunger, Thirst, Nakedness, Cold nor Heat, and where all
Tears are wiped away: And he has made Death the necessary Passage to this
blessed State; so that instead of fearing Death, Men desire to Depart: And
whereas before it was reckoned a loss to die, now it is counted gain. O death
where is thy sting! O grave where is thy victory! The sting of death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the law: but thanks be to God who gives us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. XV. 55, etc. He has purchased to
himself the Keys as of Hell and Death, so of Life and Immortality, and has
Power to admit whomsoever he pleases. It is he that has the key of David,
that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens. Rev. 3. 7.
Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the last day, says Christ. And again, I am the resurrection
and the life; he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live;
and whosoever lives and believes in me shall never die.

But Thirdly, Jesus Christ not only III. Under the Vanity of this Life.
gives rest to the Soul and ease to our Minds, by begetting in us a lively
hope of future Bliss, but also he greatly refreshes us at present, by settling
our Minds in Peace, and giving them a secret Pleasure which cannot be uttered.
The Happiness of a Christian is not all in Reversion, he has some in hand, that
the deferring of his hope may not make him faint, he has a present Possession
given him, which yields abundant Satisfaction to stay the longing of the Soul,
and to prevent its languishing. That Contentment which Men do in vain seek
among the Creatures, is only to be found in him; therefore St. Paul counted all
things but loss and dung to the knowledge of Jesus Christ: He is a Fountain of
living Waters; and none but he can quench or satisfy the thirst of the Soul.
Whosoever shall drink of this water shall thirst again: but whosoever shall
drink of the water that I shall give, shall never thirst; but the water that I
shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up to eternal life,
said he in his Conference with the Woman of Samaria, Joh. iv. 13. My flesh
(says he) is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, that is, true Meat and
Drink which both nourish and satisfy; for it is proper and well suited to our
Natures. Every Creature has its proper Food; nothing but that can satisfy it;
when that is wanting it languisheth. So our Souls, which are of a spiritual and
heavenly Nature, cannot feed upon earthly things; nothing can be Food to them,
but that bread which came down from Heaven. The Contemplation of Christ and his
Doctrine can only cheer them up. These things have I spoken unto you, that my
joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full, which (St. Peter
says) is a joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Lastly, Jesus Christ gives his Disciples IV. From Troubles and Afflictions.
rest under Afflictions. Indeed, he does not promise them an exemption from
Trouble and Affliction; nay, on the contrary they are forewarned to look for
this more than others; but he makes them very light and supportable by the
Strength and Instruction which he gives. He does not suffer them to be tempted
above what they are able, and with every temptation sends a way by which they
may escape, that they may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. X. he abates the Grief and
Molestation, which Troubles and Afflictions were wont to procure, by clearing
the Divine Economy in disspensing them, by showing the Nature and Use of them,
and by giving Rules how to improve them to our Perfection and Happiness. So
that what was wont to fright Men, is now become matter of Joy and Gladness.
Count it all joy (says St. James) when ye fall into diverse temptations.

Thus you see what a blessed and desirable Rest may be expected by coming to
Christ. O fortunatos nimium! O happy we, if we knew our own Happiness! Here is
the place where we may put off all that burden which lies heavy upon us. Here
is an opportunity of being eased of all the Misery, which we are born to,
Bodily or Spiritual, Temporal or Eternal. Here we may refresh our wearied
Minds, and get that perfect rest we would be at: there is nothing to let or
hinder us; there is nothing to obstruct this Happiness, but our own carelessness
and contempt. We are freely invited; and shall we refuse? Do we sit still
unconcernedly? Will we delay so great Happiness? Shall we be so ungrateful to
him who makes the offer as to slight it? Shall we be so cruel to our selves as
to neglect rest when it may be had? Will ye thus requite the Lord, O O foolish
people and unwise? O ye sons of men, how long will ye love vanity, and seek
after leesing? How long will ye spend your Labor for that which profits not?
How long will it be e're ye have pity on your own Souls? Turn ye, turn ye, why
will ye die? Why will ye weary your selves in a vain and dangerous Chase? The
World, where you have been all this while hunting, is a dry and barren
Wilderness, in which you may perish before you catch any thing that can
recompense your Labor. Come hither therefore, solace your selves and take your
rest. I hope none of us is so Unwise, as not to know how precious and
desirable rest is; therefore, let us be so Wise as to embrace the Call. To
day, while it is called to day, let us hearken and not harden our hearts, lest
the opportunity pass away, and God swear in his wrath that we shall not enter
into his rest. I will not trouble you with any Exhortation to accept Christ's
offer; for there will be no need of it, if we be sensible of Misery, or feel
our burden, because then we will be forward enough; this sense and feeling will
prompt us, and our Exhortation would be to no purpose, if there be no sense or
feeling of these things as yet.

But as I hope, we all desire rest, and The necessary Qualification to the rest
Promised.
are ready to embrace it, so that we may not be disappointed, let us qualify
our selves for it, by embracing the terms and complying with the Conditions, on
which it is promised, which is the last thing here to be considered. Some of
these are only implied here, and supposed as necessary; others are expressly
required.

I shall begin with what is supposed necessary in order to the receiving rest,
and that is, the being sensible of our own Misery, and the groaning under it.
This is implied in the Designation of the Persons invited; ye that labor and
are heavy laden: For these words not only point at the natural condition of the
Persons Called, but also at their sense of it, and carriage under it. The
Conjunction And is to be taken causally here, as frequently it is used. So,
labor and heavy laden, is, to labor and grieve, because being so laden; it is
to be wearied, because burdened; it is to groan by reason of the Misery which
is felt: In a word, it is to have a deep sense of all that Misery we are born
to, and involved in, whether Sin or Punishment. Without this there can be no
Expectation of this blessed Rest, nor will Christ bestow it; for then he would
contradict his own Precepts, which forbid to give what is holy unto Dogs, or to
cast Pearls before Swine. When the worth of a thing is not understood, it is
undervalued and slighted; and Men will not be sensible of the worth of this
offer Christ makes, until first they be sensible of their own Misery without
it. A Physician is welcome and acceptable to him who feels himself Sick: but he,
who feels it not, cares not for him. When one's Brain is infected, he not only
does not perceive his Distemper, but he is in love with it, and does think
himself happy in that, for which others think him miserable. Mad and Melancholy
Persons love their Disease, and spurn at those who would cure them. Without
therefore a sense of our Misery, we are neither capable of Relief nor worthy of
it. What, do you think Christ will bestow the rest, which cost him so dear,
upon those who undervalue all he has done and suffered, who think he troubled
himself to no purpose, as wicked worldly Men must do? Shall we think, that
Christ will entertain such as glory in that which brought him to shame, who hug
and cherish those Sins which pierced his Soul, which filled him with Agony, and
which created him a bitter and bloody Passion. Let us not deceive ourselves:
the hardened, impenitent, and insensible Sinner shall never enter into God's
rest; nor yet they who mind Earthly things, and aspire after no greater
Happiness: all such shall be kept out. But you who are sensible of your Misery,
and who groan under your trouble; you who are wearied at the Vanity of the
World, and long for some other Happiness than what can be had here; you who
complain of your Sins, and who earnestly desire to have them pardoned and
removed; you whose hearts are broken upon that account, and whose Spirits are
rendered contrite; for you, and for you only is this rest prepared; you are the
Persons invited; it is you whom Jesus means by them that labor and are heavy
laden. Come ye therefore unto him, and he will give you rest. Take his yoke
upon you; learn of him; for he is meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find
rest to your souls. And for your Encouragement, you shall find his yoke easy
and his burden light.

Now unto him who has thus loved us, who has Pardoned our Sins, healed our
Diseases, Delivered us from our Fears, eased us of our Troubles* and purchased
for us Everlasting Consolation, and a good Hope, even unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, with the Father and Blessed Spirit, be all Honor, Glory, and Praise,
both now and ever. Amen.
SERMON II.
On Matthew. XI. 28, 29. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and
lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your Souls.
IF it be true, that the full Soul loathes the Honeycomb; that Men use to
despise that which they have no need of, or are not sensible that they have,
then this gracious offer in the Text will not be much regarded by the World;
they will slight it: for if we may take our measures from Men's outward
Behavior, if by that we may adventure to guess at their inward state; then we
may conclude, that the most are happy enough, or at least think themselves so.
Few complain, the most are merry and well pleased, if not altogether with their
own outward condition and circumstances, yet at least with themselves. They do
not labor under spiritual Infirmities; they do not groan, because their Soul
loatheth the Pleasures of the World, and longs and languisheth after better
Dainties than what this World can afford. Sometimes indeed, they may be heard
to grudge, that the World goes not so well with them as they could wish, and
expressing fears of a change of their condition: But help the one, and guard
against the other, and then they would be at ease, they would sing a Requiem to
themselves, their Souls would be at full rest, and they would be as well
satisfied as if perfectly happy. Except when outward trouble is upon them, few
Persons are weary, they are not sensible of other Misery, they are not laden
with their Sins, nor born down with the dreadful Consequences of them. The
burden of Sin is commonly thought no burden at all; Men bear it easily; nay,
they can take on the heaviest load of it, and walk as sturdily as if it were a
light thing, as if its weight lay merely in fancy. This never troubles them,
nor upon this account would they seek rest to their Souls. The Charms of the
World lull Men asleep, and render them insensible; the noise and hurry of
Affairs divert them from serious Reflections on their Misery, even as Company
keeps the Sick and Pained from the actual sense of their Disease and Pain. But
as Company does not cure, it only seems to give ease; so when it is gone,
when the Night comes that the Sick is left alone, then the Person grows weary,
because he feels his Trouble, and is sensible of his Pain, and gets nothing to
divert it. Just so, if Men would retire from outward Diversions, if they would
seriously look into themselves, and consider their Condition, they should find
themselves very loathsome, they should see in themselves great Cause of Grief
and Sorrow; this would make their Souls restless and weary: then would they
turn from side to side, and cry out of their wretchedness; then the words of
Rest and Ease to the Soul would be acceptable and heard with delight; then our
Text would be received as a Sovereign Cordial; and indeed, it is prepared only
for such. It speaks of rest, shows where it is: but none are invited but such
as are sensible of their Misery, the weary, they who labor and are heavy
laden. And if such please to listen, if such will receive these words and obey
them, their Minds shall presently be disburdened, they shall be eased of all
their Grief. For the Words of Jesus cannot fail; his Advice cannot choose but be
Proper and Effectual, and he has said, Come unto me, take my Yoke upon you,
learn of me; for I am meek and lowly, and ye shall find rest to your Souls.

In the former Discourse on this Text I showed what was meant by laboring and
being heavy laden, and upon what account this Appellation may be given to all
Mankind. I showed, that all are under the Burden of a fourfold Misery, viz.
Affliction, Vanity, and Dissatisfaction, the Fear of Death and the Guilt of
Sin. As also that a due sense of this Misery was required as a Disposition to
the Cure, and a necessary Preparation to the obtaining true Rest and Ease to
our Souls.

I intend, at this time, to consider the other Conditions required, which you
see are Three, viz. 1. Coming to Christ. 2. Taking his Yoke. 3. Learning of
him. The Conditions are not many, and they are very reasonable.

I will begin with the First, which is, I. Coming to Christ, is
Coming to Christ. None can be so ignorant as to understand this of the
Approach of our Bodies toward Christ; for they to whom he spoke, could not
come nearer unto him: And we now cannot approach him with our Bodies. The Rest
to which we are called is a Rest of Soul; and therefore to obtain this, the
Motion of the Soul and not of the Body, is requisite and proper.

By this First is meant, the giving our 1st. To follow his Counsel.
selves up entirely to his Counsel and Management. The Sick are bidden go to
the Physician, and they who are injured and oppressed to the Lawyer. The
meaning of which, is not that they should gaze upon their Persons, look them in
the Face, and hear them talk; for what Ease or Relief can that be either to the
one or the other? But thereby is understood the receiving their Instruction,
and following it: And it is Folly to make Application, if one be not resolved
to take Advice. What good can the Physician do, if the Patient be willful, if
he will only receive the Potions which relish with his vitiated Palate, and not
what the Physician judges best and most proper. If one desire to be cured
thoroughly and speedily, he ought to yield himself absolutely to the Physician's
Skill. Even so, if we would have our Souls cured, if we would have them eased
of all the Trouble with which they labor, we ought to apply our selves to
Jesus Christ, who is the true and only Physician, who only can restore Health,
and give Peace. But then our Application ought to be an entire Resignation to
his Conduct, and should be attended with a full Resolution to be guided by him
in every thing. We ought not to carry toward him, as some peevish and
humoursome Patients to their Physician, who judge his Prescriptions, approve
and condemn them, as if they had studied the Art, and did understand all the
Rules of Medicine as well as he. Alas! Many are of the same unreasonable
Temper, and do behave themselves thus toward Jesus the great Physician of
Souls! They come to him, but they bring their Humors with them, which they
will not part with: And if his Advice and Prescriptions agree not with their
Humors, they reject and condemn them: And hence it is, that they are not the
better by coming to Christ. Indeed, when we have to do with Men, there is no
Reason that we should altogether lay aside our own Judgment, and follow them in
every thing; for the most knowing is fallible: But Jesus is Infallible, he
cannot be mistaken. Can he err in whom are all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge? And can any doubt of his Concernment for our Health? Will not he
love us, who has done so much for us? Will not he seek our good, who spared
not his own Life for our sakes? He has all the Skill, and Knowledge, and
Affection, and Concernment which can be desired. Therefore we ought to come to
him, and to come without Reserve; we ought to lay aside all Prejudice, and
should yield our selves wholly to his Conduct and Management, that we may the
sooner be sensible of his Skill, and feel (to our Comfort) that he is a
Physician of great Value.

But Secondly, By coming to Christ 2d. To believe in him.
is meant believing in him; for so we find it expounded in Scripture, as
appears by these Places, Heb. ii. 6. He that comes to God, must believe that
he is. I am the bread of life; he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he
that believes in me shall never thirst* And as by this and other places, it
appears, That coming to Christ, is to be understood of believing in him: So the
absolute Necessity of Faith in Christ, in order to the Participation of his
Benefits, may be made evident many ways.

First, From express Texts of Scripture. I shall instance but in a few of some
Hundreds which might be produced. Thus, John iij. 14. As Moses lifted up the
Serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. ver. 16.
For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting live. ver. 18. he that
believes on him is not condemned; but he that believes not is condemned
already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of
God. 1 John v. 12. he that has the Son, has life; and he that has not the
Son, has not life. To whom swear he that they should not enter into his rest,
but to them that believed not? so we see, that they could not enter in because
of Unbelief. Heb. iij. 18, 19. There is not a Chapter in all the New Testament,
in which the Necessity of Faith, and the Danger of Infidelity is not held
forth. It is the express Condition of all the Promises; and without Faith it is
declared, That we cannot look for Mercy, Pardon, or eternal Life. And this is
not a new thing introduced by the Gospel.

But the Divine Economy, from the beginning of the World, did require Faith,
which is a Second Proof of its being absolutely necessary now. As it appears
now to be the chief Condition required of Men under the Gospel, so it was under
the Law, as St. Paul declares, Heb. ii. Nay, before the Law, as appears from
Abraham and the other Patriarchs. Of Abraham it is said, That he believed in
the Lord, and he counted it to him for righteousness, Genesis xv. 6. Moreover
Faith was exacted of Man even before the Fall, while he was in a State of
Innocence. For the two Trees of Knowledge and of Life, which God set apart in
Paradise, and the Interdiction of the First by that severe Sanction, in that
day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die, was to try and exercise Man's
Faith. Thus the Divine Economy, before the Fall, and ever since; before the
Law, under the Law, and by the Gospel, has always required Faith as a
necessary Condition to the obtaining God's Favor. In respect to the certain
and unalterable Order and Method of which Economy, it is that St. Paul says,
without Heb. 11. 6.
faith it is impossible to please God. And though the Counsel of God be secret,
and his Methods for the most part unaccountable, yet the Reasonableness of this
does appear from this, that without Faith, in this present State, we neither
can acknowledge all the Divine Attributes, nor yet worship him with all our
Faculties. His Veracity, Truth, and Faithfulness, cannot be owned otherwise
than by Faith, by believing his Word, assenting to his Declarations, relying on
his Promises, and trembling at his Threatenings. And as all those Divine
Attributes can only be acknowledged by Faith, so it is only by Faith that we
worship him with our Understandings. It is reasonable that we worship God with
the whole Man, all our Faculties ought to pay him Homage. But how can he have
Homage from our Understandings, unless we believe? It is only by Acts of Faith
that we declare the Submission of our Judgment to God; for if we will admit or
receive nothing but what is demonstrable, and what we can clearly comprehend,
then we deny God's infinite Wisdom and Knowledge, and refuse to own his Reason
to be above our own, which is intolerable Pride and Insolence. For this Cause,
even to try our Faith, and to give us occasion to pay him this due Homage of
our Reason and Understanding, it is that God proposes to us Mysteries which
are incomprehensible; and hence it is also that he often absconds himself, as
it were, he works not always in a God-like manner, that is, in a splendid,
glorious, or such a visible Way as may force Acknowledgment from Men, but often
after a secret and covert manner, under the Shadow of Means and Instruments of
diverse sorts, that hereby it may be proved, whether we believe him Almighty and
the wise Disposer of all things, and Author of all Events. In the other World
Faith shall cease, there will be no place for it, because there will be a
present, immediate Intuition of the Divine Nature and Attributes; but now that
we are absent from the Lord, we walk by Faith. Thus, you see, that as Faith is
required here, so it is necessary; and why it is so, I have also briefly laid
before you. And as the Text obliged us to speak of this, so the times, we live
in, make it necessary; for Atheism and Infidelity are setting up their Heads;
and some have the Impudence (in this licentious Age) to dispute both the
Reasonableness and Necessity of what God has clearly revealed. As for you, My
beloved, I beseech you, build your selves up in your most holy Faith, and let
not the weak Efforts of insolent Wits shake your Faith. Stand up, and strive
vigorously for the Faith of the Gospel, which has been confirmed by so many
Miracles and Prophecies, by such evident Demonstrations of the Spirit and
Power, that if it be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of
this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, least the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them.
Take heed, 2 Cor. 4. 3.
Brethren, (says St. Paul) lest there be Heb. 3. 12.
in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God.
When we let go Faith, and entertain an Heart of Unbelief, we depart from God,
lose the Promises, forfeit Heaven, render our selves incapable of Mercy, and
give our selves to a reprobate Mind here, and to Damnation hereafter. He, that
lays aside Faith, may also put off the Name of a Christian; and all the
Pretensions which that Name may give to Blessings earthly or heavenly, bodily
or spiritual, temporal or eternal: For Faith is necessarily employed in that
Name, and as requisite to him that would deserve it, as the Skill of Law or
Physic to one that sets up for a Lawyer or Physician, or Philosphy to a
Philosopher. Seeing therefore we own our selves to be Christians, that we may
be worthy of so sacred a Name, let us evermore pray God (with the Man in the
Gospel) Saying, Lord, increase our Faith, and help our Unbelief.

But now it may be very pertinently 3d. What Faith is.
asked, what this Faith is which is thus required? In answer to this, St. Paul
has told us the first and lowest Acts of Faith, when he says, He that comes
to God must first believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them who
diligently seek him. We must begin with the Belief and Persuasion of God's
Existence, Power, Wisdom, Providence, and what else Reason and the Light of
Nature teaches of him. But then, that our Faith may be perfect, we must add to
it Knowledge and extend it to all the Manifestations which God has made of
himself from time to time, we must embrace all the Divine Revelations, and what
they contain. All the Declarations, Laws, Promises, and Threatenings in God's
Word are proposed as Objects of Faith, and by Faith we ought to receive them,
that is, we must own and acknowledge them to be of God, and by a constant
regard to them in all our Actions testify the Firmness and Sincerity of this
Belief and Persuasion.

More particularly, our Faith must respect the Person, Offices, Doctrine, and
Actions of the Lord Jesus Christ, we must receive him as the Person who was
promised to Adam, Abraham, and the Patriarchs; who was foretold by the
Prophets, prefigured by the Law, expected by the Jews, and even waited for by
the Gentiles; we must receive him and rely upon him as the Son of God, and
Savior of the World: we must embrace him as the Person whom God has set forth
to be a Propitiation for Sin, and the Mediator, by whom and through whom only
we have access unto God. I am (says Christ) the way, the truth, and the life;
no man comes into God but through me. Ye believe in God, believe also in me.
Him has God the Father sealed; And therefore, he who does not receive him nor
believe in him, gives God the Lie. If (says St. John) we receive the witness
of men, the witness of God is greater. For this is the witness of God, which he
has testified of his Son. He that believes on the Son, has the witness of
himself; he that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes
not the record that God gave of his Son. And again, Who is 1 John 5. 9.
a liar but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? Whosoever denies the
Son, the same has not the Father. To deny Chap. 2. 22, 23.
Jesus Christ, will infer a denial of God himself; the same Prejudices against
the one, will obstruct a sound and sincere belief of the other. They who have
not had the Gospel offered unto them, are not in the like Circumstances: But
they, who do not believe after it has been duly and fairly represented to
them, are shrewdly to be suspected of Atheism as well as Infidelity. Mere
Deists are not far from Atheists. The Truth of the Gospel and its Doctrine
concerning Jesus Christ, is almost, if not altogether, as demonstrable as the
invisible things of God, from things visible. And to say, That this vast frame
of the World, its various Parts, and the variety of Creatures inhabiting those
Parts, was all the Effect of blind Chance, and the Product of a confused
jumbling of senseless Atoms; to say this, is no more absurd than to say that
the admirable Harmony betwixt the Old and New Testament; Books which were
written by different Men, at very distant times, that the wonderful
correspondence which the Life and Actions of Jesus Christ had to what went
before, that the Prophecies and their Accomplishment, that all these, I say,
were only the Dreams and Contrivances of Men: the one choaks Reason as well as
the other. For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made
known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were
eyewitnesses of his majesty. For he received from God the Father, honor and
glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven
we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount. We have also a more sure
word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your
hearts: Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. i. 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21.

Having thus spoken to the First thing required in order to the obtaining rest,
viz. The coming to Christ; and showed both what it is, and why it is exacted. I
proceed to

The Second Condition or Means of II. Taking the Yoke.
Spiritual Rest, which is said to be the taking Christ's Yoke upon us. By Yoke,
in a Metaphorical sense, is understood that Service which Superiors and
Conquerours impose upon those who are subjected unto them. Thus, 1 King. xii.
4. The Service, which Solomon imposed upon the People, is called their Yoke. So
the Yoke of Christ is his Laws, Precepts, and Injunctions which he gives to his
Disciples: These are scattered up and down every where through the Gospels; but
most copiously set forth in the Sermon on the Mount; to which we must add the
Epistles of the Apostles, which are infallible Commentaries upon the Divine
Laws of their Master Jesus Christ.

In a word, The New Testament is the Codex, or Corpus Iuris Christi, the Body
of the Christian Law, which must be carefully studied by all who would know the
Will of their Lord concerning them, and the Duty which he requires of them. And
by this it clearly appears, that Jesus has reinforced the Natural and Moral
Law, cleared it from the misprisions of Men, discovered its full Latitude, and
brought it to all the Perfection which it is capable of: So that to some it
appears, as if he had superadded to it, and commanded Duties which Men were not
obliged to formerly: Whether it be so or not, I will not debate it now. But, by
the Laws of Jesus Christ, all Sin whatsoever is forbidden, the Sins of the
Heart and Thoughts as well as the outward Man; because both the one and the
other fall under the Cognizance of Almighty God, and are known to him. And Sin
is so peremptorily and severely Prohibited by the Christian Law, that to shun
it, we are bid cut off our right hand and our right foot, and pluck out our
right eye, that is, to choose to deprive our selves of the Nearest or Dearest,
or greatest Satisfaction, rather than to run our selves into the danger of Sin,
by adhering to the same. As all Sin is thus strictly forbidden, so all Virtue
and Holiness are expressly required. The Laws of Jesus call for the greatest and
most ardent love to God, for an entire Submission to his Will, a cheerful
Resignation to his Providence, an active Zeal and Concernedness for his Glory,
and an anxious Care to please him. They require a contempt of all Earthly
things, and the minding Heavenly things; Contentment with every Condition, and
a Patient bearing of every Affliction: Nay, they exact the taking up the Cross,
that is, that we suffer rather than Sin, and freely undergo any trouble, rather
than either decline our Duty, or offend God. By the Precepts of Christ, we are
obliged to love our Neighbor, that is, all Men as our selves, and to do to
others as we would be done to. We must abstain from all Injuries either to Soul
or Body, to Name or Estate, and must lay our selves out to do all the good we
can: we must wrong no Man, and Pardon those who have wronged us. Whatever may
seem to be the Voice of Nature, or the Sentiments and Practices of Men, Christ
says to us, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that
hate you, and pray for them who despitefully use you and persecute you. And
certainly Revenge is every way as inconsistent with Christianity, as Theft,
Murder, or Adultery; and Whoremongers and Adulterers shall as soon enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, as the Revengeful: And unless the Gospel be a mere Sham,
or to be read backward, neither the one nor the other shall be saved, unless
they have reconciled themselves to God, by serious Repentance. In a word, the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. And finally,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoevor things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
the Gospel of Christ requires us to think on these things.

This is the Yoke of Christ, and to put on his Yoke is to observe these things.
It is to give Obedience to those his Laws, which you see is made a necessary
means to rest, that is, to true Happiness. He says here to them that labor
and are heavy laden, who would have rest to their Souls; take my yoke upon you.
He says not, take my Name, my Profession, but my Yoke; and he bids them not
consider it, talk of it, or keep it by them, but put it on, that is, wear it;
which we then only do, when we give all sincere Obedience to his Laws, and make
Conscience of observing all his Precepts. We mistake it, if we think it
sufficient to make us Christians, or to obtain the happiness of the Disciples
of Jesus Christ, to be Baptized, to take up the Name and Profession of
Christianity, to frequent the outward Ordinances, and to contend for the Truth
of the Gospel, or the Purity of its Doctrine. All this is good, and must be
done; but we must do more, else we do not enough. We must moreover add
Obedience; for why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things, I say? Luke
vi. 46. Not every one, who says to me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven. Every one
(says Christ) that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not, shall be
likened unto a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand, and the rain
descended, and the wind blew, and floods came and beat upon that house, and it
fell, and great was the fall of it, Matthew. vii. 21. 26, 27.

There is indeed mention made of a Christian Liberty, and we are required to
stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. But this is not a
Gal. 5. 1.
Liberty to Sin, it is not an Exemption from the Moral Law; it is not a
Dispensation from the Duty which that Law requires of us toward God and Man:
it is only a Liberty from the bondage of Moses's Law, from the curse of that
Law which was given to our first Parents; a Liberty from the bondage of Satan,
and the servitude of Sin. The Liberty given us is, the Liberty of the Sons of
God: but the Liberty of Sons does not discharge from honoring and obeying the
Parents. Ye have been called unto liberty (says St. Paul) only use not liberty
Gal. 5. 13.
for an occasion unto the flesh. As free (says St. Peter) and not using your
liberty for a 1 Pet. 2. 16.
cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God. So we are still the
Servants of God, and therefore bound to obey him; there can be no Dispensation
from that: neither God can give, nor is it our interest to seek it. Think not
that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy but
to fulfill: for verily I say unto you, etc. Let no Man deceive himself and
think, that all may be compensated by believing: for though Faith be necessary,
yet faith without works is dead, and will not avail a Man. That Faith which is
acceptable to God, and which will avail to Salvation and Justification, is a
Faith which works by love, and which keeps the Commandments. True Faith and
Obedience are inseparable; for Obedience is the necessary Consequence of Faith,
the proper Fruit and Effect of it; and the only Evidence which can be given of
it. As the Tree is known by its Fruit, so Faith by its Works. Show me thy faith
without thy works? says St. James; which is as much as if he had said, how is
it possible to show Faith without Works? Can the sick Man believe the Physician
to have both skill and honesty to cure him, when he neither will use his
Remedies, nor commit himself to his Conduct. And how can Men be said to believe
in Christ, when they will not regard his Word, nor observe his Injunctions? And
what does he enjoin us? Nothing, but what himself has practiced. He is not
like the Pharisees, who did bind heavy Burdens, and lay them upon other men's
Shoulders, but they themselves would not touch them. He lays no heavier burden
upon us than what himself has born; he puts us to no harder task than what
himself has wrought. Can the Servant expect to be greater than his Lord? If he
then fulfilled the Law, ought not we also to set our selves to do it? If he
could not be exempt from Obedience, how can we expect it? Jesus is not like the
Rulers of this World, who do not observe their own Laws: The Laws they make and
Pass, are for the People, and not for themselves. But Jesus observes his own
Laws; he himself did bear that Yoke, which he here commands us to take up: And
we may learn all our Duty from his Example, as well as Doctrine. Which leads me
to

The Third and Last thing required III. Learning of Christ.
in the Text, in order to the obtaining rest of Soul, viz. Learning of Christ.
The word in the Original signifies to become a Disciple in general: But because
it is joined here with two particular Virtues of Meekness and Humility;
therefore, by the current consent of Interpreters, it is to be taken in this
place for the imitation of Christ, and endeavors after a conformity to his
Example, particularly in these two Instances here made mention of. The thing
enjoined here, is not that we should learn his Doctrine or conn his Sayings by
heart, but that we should study his Life, imitate his Practice, and labor to
be like him. The Necessity and Usefulness of this Duty, is set forth in many
places of Scripture. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, take
up his cross, and follow me. Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for
so I am. I John 13. 15.
have given you an example that ye should do as I have done unto you. Let the
same mind be in you which was in Christ, Phil. 2.
says St. Paul; And St. Peter, If when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take
it patiently, this is acceptable with God: for even hereunto were ye called;
because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should
follow his steps, 1 Pet. ii. 20, 21.

Men are better taught, and more easily led by Example than by Precept. Example
both gives greater encouragement, and also teaches more clearly. (...)
conformity to him is the Character of God's chosen ones, and without this we
cannot claim, either the Title of the Sons of God here, or the Glory which is
prepared for them hereafter. For, as the Apostle says, whom God did foreknow
he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might
be the firstborn among many brethren, Romans viij. 29.

O what an excellent thing is it to be like Jesus! for he is the brightness of
the Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person; so that to be like
him, is to be like God.

By the Imitation of Jesus, we recover what our First Parents lost and
forfeited to themselves and us, even the Image of God. Therefore the Imitation
of Jesus brings more Honor and Glory, than any, or all earthly Dignities.
Likeness to God is the highest degree a Creature is capable of; therefore if we
understood our selves and our interest, we should be more ambitious of this,
than of all the Titles and Dignities, which either Kings or People can bestow.
If the Imitation of Christ were impossible, it would not have been enjoined us:
but neither is it so difficult as some at first may imagine: besides, that the
Difficulties may be surmounted through the Grace of God, the thing will become
both easy and pleasant, if we will but converse with Christ, contemplate and
meditate on him frequently. They who converse much together, we see use to
slide insensibly into the Manners, Fashion, and Behavior of one another. Even
so, if we take this Method, we shall soon find our selves changed into a
resemblance with Jesus Christ. But we all (says the Apostle) with open face,
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image,
from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. iij. 18.

But now as it is our Duty, our Honor, our Interest to follow Christ, and to
labor to be like him. So it is fit to consider wherein we should follow him.
Some Imitations are indiscreet, unreasonable, and so far from obliging that
they provoke. A King loves to be imitated by his Subjects, because it is a
Testimony of their Love and Respect, and the greatest Honor they can put upon
him: But he would not have them to imitate the Peculiarities of Royalty and
Sovereignty. Imitation should not be in things peculiar, but in these things
which are common, which may agree to, and suit with both. So we must not
attempt to follow Christ, in what was peculiar to him as the Son of God and the
Savior of the World; we must not imitate the Acts of his Almighty Power, or
what was proper to his Mediatory Office. It is no part of our Duty to imitate
him in his Miracles, in his walking on the Water, commanding the Winds and
Seas, casting out Devils, fasting Forty Days, and the like. What we ought to
imitate is the Divine Virtues which shined forth in his holy Life, and which
appeared in all his Actions. Wherefore (he says) learn of me; for I am meek
and lowly in heart.

These Words may also be considered as an Encouragement, for coming to Christ,
taking up his Yoke, and learning of him; because he is a meek and lowly Person,
gentle and easy, no wise rigid and severe; therefore Men may come to him
readily, and ought to come willingly; for they need not fear hard Usage; he
will not treat them roughly, nor impose grievous Tasks upon them. He is a kind
and loving Master, who consults the Good and Ease of his Disciples, and who
will not exact any Service, which is not both reasonable and also for their
Interest, as is clearly insinuated in the last Words, my yoke is easy and my
burden is light.

But seeing Jesus requires us to imitate him, and is frequently proposed as an
Example to us; and seeing in this very place, in which he bids us come and
learn of him, he recommends himself as a meek and lowly Person; therefore we
ought to consider those Virtues of Humility and Meekness as particularly
proposed for our Imitation. Jesus Christ had all other Virtues as well as
these, he was a true Pattern of Love to God, of Zeal, Submission, Obedience and
heavenly Mindedness; of Charity, Mercifulness, and good Will toward Men; of
Chastity, Purity, Sobriety, Patience, and Contentment; and in a Word, of every
thing which is Praise worthy in the Sight of God or good Men. By his Life as
well as Doctrine, we may learn how to behave our selves in all Circumstances
and Conditions, in Poverty and Affliction, under Contempt and Disgrace, when we
are hated and persecuted. And though he possessed not outward Plenty and
Grandeur, yet several of his Actions show the true end and use of these, and do
teach those who possess them to employ them more for the Glory of God and the
Good and Comfort of others, than for their own private Satisfaction. From his
Practice and Example we may learn our Duty to Superiors, Inferiors, and
Equals. But though he be a Pattern of all Virtue and Goodness; yet he instanceth
only in Meekness and Humility, either because these comprehend all other, or
are the chief and first to be learned, and which, if they be learned, will draw
all other after them. All Virtue and Religion either respects Man or God, and
without Meekness and Humility it is impossible to carry our selves aright
toward either of them: But he that is truly humble and meek, will certainly
endeavor to please both. Nay, the very Exercise of these two comprehends all
our Duty to God and Man, as we may learn from Micah vi. He has showed thee, O
man, what is good, and what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but that
thou should do justly, and love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God.

Meekness cannot be either better or more briefly described, than in the
Characters of Charity given by St. Paul: It suffers long, is kind, envieth
not, vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly,
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil; bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things. For these
Characters belong to Charity, because it softneth our Natures and renders us
meek; Meekness is a Branch of Charity, and naturally flows from it. These two
are inseparable, and we may certainly conclude the one is not, where the other
is wanting. Love smooths our Natures, and carries off all Ruggedness of Temper;
it disposes us both to please others, and also to be well pleased with what
they do; it makes the Persons and Actions of others acceptable, and even when
any thing is amiss in either, it excuses or censureth gently. If Christian
Love did abound more, there would be more of Meekness and good Nature in common
Conversation: But because that is very much wanting, therefore there is so
little generous Complaisance to be seen. The most are very selfish, and have
but very little Concernment for others, and this is the Cause why they are so
surly and morose, so peevish and wrathful, why their Temper is so stiff and
uneasy, and their Behavior so rough and blustering; they love themselves too
much, and others too little, and therefore they can hardly condescend to
gratify others, and are but seldom satisfied with what is done to themselves.
As Meekness proceeds from Love, so from Humility, and therefore they are fitly
joined together here; a proud Man can never be meek, and he who is lowly in
Heart cannot be of another Temper. So if we would learn Meekness, we must study
Humility.

And we may soon be persuaded into this if we but hearken unto Reason, for that
demonstrates that we have nothing to be proud of, because we have no good but
what we have received; and therefore if we glory, we should glory in the Lord.
Humility is not to undervalue ones self, but not to think above what we ought
to think: And if the Thoughts of our selves be just, not higher than they
ought, they will not be high nor lofty, nor will they show others at the
distance of Contempt and Scorn, for we all stand upon the same Level, have the
same Original, Nature, Frame, Constitution and End. And as this makes the
Condition of every Man much the same, so it does not afford Matter of boasting
to any; our Extract and Original is from the Dust, and to it we must return;
our Frame and Constitution is frail, and easily disordered; our Strength and
Beauty, like the Flower of the Field, is withered before Noon; We carry our
Breath in our Nostrils, and it goes out as a Vapor. We are Children a Third
part of our time; and the other Two parts are consumed in Sin and Vanity; all
our Actions are either grossly Evil, or to little Purpose; our Righteousness is
as the Morning Cloud, and as the early Dew that passes away, not being able to
endure the Heat of the Sun. Men of low Degree are Vanity, and Men of high
Degree are a lie; lay both the one and the other in the Balance, and they will
be found altogether lighter than Vanity. Surely every Man, (even the best of
Men, in their best State) is nothing but Vanity and Emptiness, when set in the
Sight of God. Sin is indeed Matter of true Humiliation; but the deepest and
truest Humility arises from the Contemplation of the Infinite Nature and
Perfections of God. He, who proposes himself as a Pattern of Humility and
Lowliness here, knew no Sin; he had all the Weakness of Flesh and Blood; he was
surrounded with the Infirmities of our Nature, but he was altogether free from
the Corruption of it, and never did any thing amiss; and yet he was lowly in
Heart, because of his intimate Union with God, and did bear about with him a
full Idea of his glorious Attributes: For as the Glory of the Sun extinguishes
the Glory of the Stars, so all created Excellencies must disappear, upon a View
of the uncreated Glory of God, whose Perfections can never be found out. When
even the most perfect and upright Job does see this with his Eye, he abhors
himself, and does repent in Dust and Ashes. Job xlii. 5, 6.

If we have these two Virtues, Meekness and Humility, we will not murmur at the
Commands of Christ as if any of them were grievous; then we shall be sensible
of the Reasonableness and Equity of them; then we shall find his Yoke easy and
his Burden light: For besides the new Strength and Vigor that we shall
receive from above for the bearing of it, we shall then clearly discern, that
it is most just and reasonable, admirably adapted to our Nature, and well
accommodated to our Interest, wisely contrived, to give us all Peace and
Satisfaction at present, and to prepare us for perfect and Eternal Happiness
hereafter.

Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good Work to do his Will, working in you
that which is well pleasing in his Sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be
Glory for ever and ever. Amen.
SERMON III. ON Christmass-Day.
PHIL. II. 6, 7, 8. Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be
equal with God. But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form
of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men. And being found in fashion
as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the Cross.
THERE are in our holy Religion two Sublime Mysteries, which, as they can never
be fully comprehended, so they can never be too much, or too frequently thought
upon: For nothing can make more for the Glory of God, nothing can be of more
Comfort and Profit to our selves: they enlighten the Understanding, warm the
Heart, add vigor to all the rational Faculties, and so cherish and strengthen
the Spiritual Life, that by these means we may become able to walk straight,
and to run with Patience, without fainting, the Race that is set before us. By
these I mean, the Mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God, and that of his
Passion and Death, both which are jointly spoken of in the Text; as the Day and
the Action we intend to set about call us to consider both; the Day being, by
the Appointment of the Catholic Church, the Anniversary of our Lord Jesus his
Birth; therefore the Incarnation is a proper Subject for it. But some of us
intending at this time, and others against the next day, to make that solemn
Address to God, by the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; this also makes it fit
to think upon his Death: Nor is it Unsuitable to commemorate his Death upon the
Festival of his Nativity; for the one was the End and Reason of the other: His
Birth was in order to his Death; and if he had not died, his Birth could not
have profited us. This Sacrament is a proper Christmas Feast: to feast
devoutly by Faith upon the Sacrifice which Christ offered upon the Cross is the
best Entertainment we can give unto God, or make for our selves. This will put
more Joy into our Hearts, than either Wine or Oil, or any of the Delicacies of
richest Banquets.

By this it appears, that the Text is I. The Scope and Coherence of the Text.
suitable: but before I enter upon the Explication of it, it will be fit to
show you the scope of the Apostle in this place, and upon what occasion he
utters these words. In this place, the Apostle sets himself to persuade the
Philippians to Humility and a generous Charity, or such a mutual concernedness
for each other, as might make every Man ambitious to serve his Neighbor as
himself, and even to prefer others to himself. This is an excellent temper of
Mind, and the very height of Virtue: but withal the Practice of it is hard, and
the Attainment very difficult. This gives a true resemblance and conformity to
the Divine Nature; and therefore is not easily arrived at, seeing now by the
corruption of our Natures we are removed to a great distance from God. The
things, which St. Paul requires here, are directly opposite to the Nature of
Man, in his present Natural or Corrupt state; for in this state the Soul of Man
has no generous Expansion or Enlargement toward others, but is almost
altogether pent up in it self, and is become so peevishly selfish, that it
cannot move but by the narrow springs of Self-love. Now, all Persons and Things
are only considered with a relation to one's self, and a Concernment for them
is more or less, according as they are found more or less useful. Consider Men
in their present Natural state, before the Grace of God and true Religion
inspire and enable them, all their Actions are performed only with a respect to
themselves and their own particular Interest; they look only to their own
things, and providing these things be well, they are not concerned how it fare
with others; nay, are so far from thinking themselves obliged to those Virtues
the Apostle is recommending, so far from looking upon this humble and
charitable serviceableness as commendable or praiseworthy, that they are ready
to condemn it as a mean silly officiousness; some think it far below them, that
it is a debasing of themselves and their Quality and Character, to serve
Inferiors, to bestir themselves for their Advantage, especially if their
former Carriage and Behavior has been a little provoking, and not so obliging.
Wherefore, St. Paul, to take off Men's prejudice against these Virtues of humble
Charity or charitable Humility, to persuade them to the practice of them, he
shows they are Divine and God-like; and for a proof of it, he proposes the
example of the Lord Jesus Christ. Nothing readily will more convince, inflame,
and animate, than the Example of some great Person. And if the Example of Men
have a powerful Influence, what ought the Example of God himself to have? And
if it be not below the Deity; if it has not been thought unworthy of the
Godhead to condescend to serve Man; nay, if the Godhead has accepted the
occasion for furthering its Glory, and upon that account has been employed in
very humble Offices, how ambitious should Men be of this temper of Mind? how
ready and forward to embrace the occasions of showing it? Can Men act more
honorably than to act like God? Can any thing more become them, than to
imitate and resemble him? Now, that by humbling themselves to serve others, to
give them true Pleasure or Profit, that this way they come to resemble God,
does eminently appear from the Lord Jesus Christ, who being in the form of God,
etc.

Thus you have a view of the Words with a reference to the Scope and Purpose of
the Apostle in this place.

We proceed next to consider them abstractly, II. The Truths contained in the
Text.
and so they hold forth those Three very important Points of our Religion.
First, The Pre-existence and Godhead of Jesus Christ, ver. 6. Secondly, His
Incarnation and Humanity, ver. 7. Thirdly, His Humiliation and Ignominious
Death, ver. 8. So that from the Text alone all the Ancient and Modern Enemies
of our Blessed Lord and Savior may be clearly baffled, and all those damnable
Heresies which either divest him of his Godhead, or deprive us of the comfort
of his powerful Mediation and meritorious Death; I say, such damnable Heresies
may from this Text be plainly refuted.

So pat is this Text against the Socinians, III. The perverse disingenuity of
the Socinians in their Explication of this Text.
that they are exceedingly gravelled with it, and use a great many Subterfuges
to shift the force of it: by which they discover their own disingenuity, and
show, that their not embracing the Truth, proceeds not from want of sufficient
Conviction, but because they bear not love and good will to the Truth. Thus,
say they, the word which is rendered Form, in the 6. v. imports never any
reality of substance, but only a mere semblance and appearance; and so Jesus
being in the form of God, is no more, than that there appeared some Rays of
Divinity in him, and about him; that he was vested with some shadow of Divine
Power, while in the mean time he was in himself, and in his Nature, only a weak
Man as others. Thus they play with the word Form, as if it were exclusive of
all reality: And by this means, what St. Paul says here of Jesus, might be
with as great truth said of some of the Prophets, and especially of Moses. To
this is replied by Dr. Hammond, and other learned Critics, that the word
(...), is never used for an external or accidental appearance, but for such
visible tokens as flow from, and are the Effects of a real Essence; and so
according to the common acceptance of Authors, the word which we have for
Form, is all one with Nature, or it does signify the external or visible
appearance of an inward and real or natural Essence. I shall not trouble you
with Instances to prove this. But even the Unlearned may see this from the
Text; for as St. Paul speakketh of the form of God, so of the form of a
Servant, and sets those two in opposition: If therefore the one was real, why
not the other? If by the one all acknowledge the Nature of Man, why should not
the Nature of God be understood by the other? And seeing the Apostle does not
ascribe to Jesus Christ the form of a Servant, more positively than the form of
God; therefore unless we turn the whole Gospel into a Sham, and all its
Mysteries into imaginary Dreams and Visions, and make the Apostles, who
published them, so many Visionaries, we must say, that Jesus Christ was as
really in the form of God, as in the form of Man; that is, was God as really as
Man, and did partake of the real Essence and Nature of the one no less than the
other.

Again, to give you a further instance of the Socinians Dis-ingenuity in this
place. As they dwindle the other words (he thought it not robbery to be equal
with God) into just nothing, and endeavor to put this gloss on them, viz. That
he would not boast himself equal to God, nor retain those Rays and Appearances
of Divinity communicated to him, to the prejudice of the Godhead, which is to
pervert the Apostles plain words, and to put a contrary sense on them. So they
contend, that all this 6th. Verse is to be understood of Jesus Christ after he
was Born, and had made his appearance among Men, that is, he was Man before he
was in the form of God, or in that state in which it was no Robbery, or no
Presumption and Usurpation in him to pretend an Equality with God: And if this
be not to wrest the Apostles words, to make him speak Nonsense, and to give the
Lie to his plain Assertions, I know not what may be said to do it. When I
consider how the Socinians treat this, and other Passages of Holy Scripture,
how they rack their Invention to do force and violence to the plainest Texts:
and rather than own or receive the Truth, they will father Nonsense,
Absurdities, and palpable Contradictions upon the Penmen of Scripture: I
cannot but look upon them as willful Resisters of the Truth, who are without
all excuse. If one search for the Truth, but cannot find it, he is to be
pitied; if he show good will, and only holds off, because he wants sufficient
Instruction, or that the Truth appears not to him with clearness and evidence,
there is place for Charity; for in that case the defect is in the Judgment and
not in the Will, the Head and not the Heart is to blame. But there is no place
for Charity it self, when one will not lay aside his Prejudices against the
Truth, when he employs his Wit to raise Objections, and to find Shifts, when
the plainest Assertions will not prevail, but rather than yield, will do
violence to his own reason and other Men's. Such were the Scribes and Pharisees
of old; they would not receive Jesus as the Messiah, though he came at the time
appointed, and with all the Evidence that could be desired. The Socinians now
are rather more guilty; they also wilfully resist the Truth and the holy Spirit
of God who is the Author of it, and therefore deserve to be abhorred; they are
among the Number of those false Teachers, who privily bring 2 Pet. 2. 1.
in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them; and therefore
bring upon themselves swift destruction, as St. Peter speaks. I wish what he
subjoins there may not hold true of these times we live in, especially amongst
our selves, viz. That many shall follow their pernicious ways. There is a time,
of which it is said, that every Man does whatsoever is right in his own Eyes;
and there is a time not much unlike the other, in which Men take liberty to
speak what they please, to teach and vent whatever Fancies come in their Head.
When the Order and Unity of the Church is broken, when its Pastors and
Governors cannot exert their Authority; then the Enemy steps in, and sowes his
Tares, then false Teachers arise and diffuse their Poisonous Doctrines. We have
not only reason to fear this, but cause enough already to bewail and lament it;
for it is actually done. This, and other Damnable Errors came in with the late
Troubles, and they spread and grew up mightily under Cromwell his Usurpation,
which made Maresius utter these remarkable words, O deplorandam conditionem
Anglioe, quoe post Reges exactos, ipsi Christo Regi Regum mandat exilium, nec
videtur majorem libertatem magno cruore redemptam anhelasse, quam ut Licentiam
consequeretur and faceret quidlibet audendi, Hydra Socinianismi, Tom. 2. Praef.
quidlibet scribendi, quidlibet credendi. O the deplorable Condition of
England, which having driven out their Kings, now constrains the King of Kings
to be Banished, and it seems that they have panted after a Liberty even at the
expense of much Blood, only to obtain a License of Hearing, Writing, and
Believing what they please. I would not make this Remark, if it was not
necessary, if these Errors were not Dangerous and Damnable; if they did not
strike at the root of our holy Religion, and did not overturn all the hopes
which the Catholic Church have been Building for near these Seventeen Hundred
Years.

The Deity of Jesus Christ is not an idle Speculation which one may be safely
ignorant of, and which no body is obliged to know, believe, or profess, as an
insolent Unworthy Author, in a late Naked Gospel.
Blasphemous Pamphlet is pleased to talk. No certainly, it is a Truth of the
highest Importance, which shines in the Scriptures with all clearness and
evident Splendour, and where every one that reads may see the express Belief and
Acknowledgment of it required as absolutely necessary to Salvation. Wherefore
let us take care to build our selves up in this Faith; and to do it this Day is
not improper; nay, it is very proper; for we cannot commemorate his Birth with
sufficient Admiration and Thankfulness, if we do not believe the Dignity of his
Person; our Joy and Gladness will fall low and vanish into nothing, if we be
not persuaded, that the Child which was this Day Born, and given unto us, was
truly Immanuel, or God with us. And what small hopes can we raise to our selves
from the Sacrament which is to be Administered, if we be not assured, that, by
it, is communicated and applied unto us the Merits of one who is God as well as
Man, and so both able and willing to save to the uttermost such as come unto
him.

For evincing of this Important, Useful, IV. Of Jesus Christ his Pre-existence,
and Deity.
and Comfortable Truth, I need not go beyond the Text; for there it is plainly
and fully asserted. For, 1. You see that here the Apostle declares Jesus Christ
to have pre-existed, or to have had a Being before he was Man: for unless he
had subsisted before, it could not have been said that he took upon himself the
form of a Servant; and that in so doing, he made himself of no reputation; for
what is not in being, cannot assume to it self an Existence, nor make choice of
the manner and condition of its Existence. 2. It is clear by what the Apostle
says, that the state in which he pre-existed was preferable to, and more
glorious, than that, in which he was made or found in the likeness of Men;
otherwise it could not be true that he made himself of no reputation when he
became Man. By which expression also it appears, that the Apostle evidently
referrs to some pre-existent state; for unless he debased himself, by
submitting to be Born, he cannot be said to debase himself by any after Act;
for neither his Birth nor first Years were so glorious as his last, in which he
appeared as a Prophet at least, and a very eminent one too, full of Power and
Authority. 3. We see clearly here his Divinity and Godhead, in that it is said
expressly, he was, or subsisted in the form of God, and in that state thought it
not Robbery to be equal with God. By subsisting in the form of God, there must
be understood, 1. A real participation of the Divine Nature and all its
essential Attributes, as Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Eternity, etc. for the form
of a thing is its Essence; and to partake of the form of any thing is to have
the Essence of that thing. 2. This comprehends the Majesty, Glory, Authority,
Splendour, and Dignity which agrees to the infinite and incomprehensible Nature
of God, and all those Acts, Signs, and Tokens by which the great God manifests
himself to the heavenly Inhabitants: for the form of a King is not the Name or
Simple Right to hold that Name; but it comprehends the Marks, Badges, and
Emblems of Royal Dignity, as the Purple, the Scepter and Diadem, the Throne and
Guards, and what else the Laws of Nations, or the particular Custom of Kingdoms
make declarative of Majesty and Kingly Power. This is the form of a King; and
he who does not possess this, cannot be said to be in the form of a King. So
the form of God, is the Glory, Dignity, Majesty and Greatness which is due to
so high a Name: And by ascribing to Jesus Christ the form of God, is declared,
that he not only in himself did partake of the Divine Nature, but also that
before his Incarnation he appeared in the Heavens, invested with all the Glory
and Majesty proper and peculiar to God; as Creating the World, Upholding and
Governing it, receiving Worship and Adoration from Angels, and the like. I
might confirm this by several other Texts, but I shall only mention two. The
First is, Heb. i. 3. Where it is said, that he is the brightness of God's
glory, the express image of his person, and upholdeth all things by the word of
his power. The other is, John 17. 5. Where Jesus Christ makes mention of a
Glory, which he had with the Father before the Foundation of the World.

Now, that we may know, that he held all this of right, and by virtue of his
Nature, and not otherwise, the Apostle adds, that he thought it not robbery to
be equal with God, that is, he did not reckon it Usurpation, Arrogance, or
Presumption to hold an Equality with God, and consequently he is truly God. For
if Jesus Christ was not by Nature God, if he was a mere Creature, though never
so excellent, it would be great Robbery, and the highest Presumption and
Usurpation for him to entertain the least thought of an Equality with God: And
it would be no less than Blasphemy, for St. Paul or any other to talk so of
him. But seeing not only here, but every where throughout the Scripture, we
find such high Speeches of Christ, which exalt him above all Creatures, even to
an Equality with God; therefore it is an evident Demonstration that he is God
in the strictest Propriety of Speech: For it is contrary to the Scope and
Tenor of the Scripture to magnify Men, or Angels, or any other Creature above
what they are in their own Nature, whatever Excellency God has bestowed upon
them: The Scriptures teach to set all Creatures, even the highest, at an
infinite Distance from God; It represents as Idolatry, the exalting Creatures
to a Partnership of the Divinity, the conferring on them the Names, Titles,
Attributes, and Worship which belong to God: It shows, That God will not give
his Glory unto another, and is Jealous of others doing it, that he cannot
endure the Appearance of it: Therefore, the Doctrine and Purpose of the
Scripture is thwarted and contradicted by those Expressions we find concerning
Jesus Christ, if they be not founded upon his Nature, that is, if he be not God.

Consider, I pray you, that all the Revelations which God has made were
designed to reclaim the World from Idolatry, one great Instance of which was
the Deifying of Men. If therefore Jesus be not God, if he be only Man (as the
Socinians hold) then there is ground to impeach this last and greatest
Revelation, as destroying the Design of the former, at least of not being so
wisely managed as to serve the common end of all: For in the other
Dispensations, the Men whom God used as his Instruments, were carefully
represented to the People to be Men of like Passions and Infirmities with
themselves; nay, their Sins and Failings are put upon Record, that none might
be ensnared to conceit them Gods. But as to Jesus, there are such
Representations of him, such Speeches concerning him, as may persuade and
incline both learned and unlearned to think him God, and every Scruple removed
which may obstruct such a Belief. Either therefore the Design of the Gospel is,
That we should receive him as God, and consequently he is such, or it does not
sufficiently prevent the falling into this Error (if it be one) but on the
contrary lays a Snare for it, and tempts to the Belief of it, and so does
not suit with its own Design, it is not adapted to its own end; for it
ensnareth to the committing of Idolatry in the Person of Jesus, which is very
absurd. To conclude this Point, I would fain know of any who call this Truth in
Question, what would satisfy them? Supposing Jesus is God, what Evidence would
they have of it? What Proofs or Demonstrations? Could Reason ask more than
plain and simple Assertions, the ascribing to him the Name, Titles, Attributes,
and Works peculiar to the true God, and finally, the enjoining all the Worship
of the outward and inward Man, which is only due to him; and therefore let us
conclude, That Jesus is God, blessed for ever.

Having thus fully evinced the Deity V. Of his humane Nature and Humiliation.
of Jesus, I proceed to speak of his Humanity or Incarnation, which is declared
in the 7th. and 8th. Verses. He whom we have declared to have been in the Form
of God, and to be equal with God, was pleased to become Man, not by ceasing to
be God, but by taking to himself the Nature of Man, a Body and a Soul as other
Men, with the common natural Qualities and Properties of both. He did not
exchange the Nature of God, for that of Man; but he assumed to the Godhead the
humane Nature, and became strictly united with it, so that in the Person of
Jesus Christ there was an Union of two Natures, the divine and humane. In him
dwelt the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. ii. 9. The word (says St.
John) was made flesh, and dwelt among us. In former times this same Son of God
assumed to himself a visible Shape, by means of which he appeared to Abraham
and the Prophets, which he also laid aside again, when he left off talking with
them. But now he has taken the humane Nature to him in Reality and Truth, and
is become so personally united to it, that he is never more to lay it aside,
but is to abide so for ever and ever. This is a stupendous and incomprehensible
Mystery, but the Truth of it is as evident as Scripture can make it. For as St.
Paul, in this place, does evidently assert the Deity and Godhead of Jesus, so
he sets forth the Reality of his humane Nature. He took (says he) the form of
a servant, that is, the Nature of Man, and all that is essential to it. And
lest any should imagine a Difference betwixt him and others, he adds, he was
made in the likeness of man, and found in fashion as a man, that is, he was in
all things just as other Men, except Sin, which is an adventitious Quality, and
not essential to our Natures. And because he would be as other Men, and
demonstrate the Reality of his humane Nature as others; therefore he came not
to the World by immediate Creation as Adam, but derived his Being from others.
He was conceived in the Womb of a Woman, and shut up in that dark and narrow
Cell, all the time which Nature has prescribed to others. He was brought forth
after the ordinary manner, and treated like the Children of Men, swadled in
Clothes, laid in a Cradle, and put to suckle at the Breast. He did not grow up
hastily, and ripen after an extraordinary manner, but arrived at the Stature of
a Man, after the usual Years of Infancy, Childhood, and Youth. He was not
nourished by Miracles, nor was his Body exempt from the Frailties and
Sufferings of other Men's: For he was no less than others subject to Hunger and
Thirst, Cold and Heat, Fainting and Weariedness, and all the other things which
Nature or Providence has made us liable to. As he espoused our Nature, so he
espoused it with all its Weakness and Infirmities, and with all the Trouble
which ordinarily attends it. Nay, which is more, he not only submitted to all
the unavoidable Infirmities of our Nature, but also to all the Misery which
attends the meanest Condition of Men, which the Apostle points at by the Form
of a Servant.

The form of a servant implies somewhat more than the Nature of Man simply; for
every Man is not a Servant. Jesus Christ has carried his humane Nature to
Heaven, but he is not there in the Form of a Servant, for he is exalted above
all. When therefore St. Paul says, he took upon him the Form of a Servant, he
remembers us of the low and contemptible Condition in which he appeared. For he
came not to the World in Pomp and Splendor, in the Form of a King or some
great Person: Nor did he aspire after a State of Grandeur, Power, and Command
over others, but chose to be born of mean and poor Parents, who were totally
divested of the Glory which by their descent they might have pretended to. He
was lodged with a Carpenter, brought up in his House, learned his Trade, and
wrought with his own hands for his Bread: And though it be lawful for Men to
endeavor to better their Condition, if they take honest means; yet he never
made a Fortune to himself; the foxes had holes, and the fowls of the air nests,
but the Son of Man had no place or possession of his own where to lay his head.
When he entered upon the Exercise of his Ministry, his Retinue was a dozen of
poor Fishermen, instead of splendid Walls and Schools, he taught in Deserts, on
the Tops of Mountains, and from the sides of small Ships and Boats. He was born
under the Law, and subject to it; he wore the heavy Yoke of Moses, and
religiously observed all his Laws. He was also subject to the Romans, and
obliged to pay them Tribute, though he owed them none. In a word, while he was
in the World, his outward Condition was base, ignoble, and contemptible; and in
that Condition he was treated like a Slave, forced to endure more Hardship and
Misery than ever any Slave was put to. He was mocked, beaten, and cruelly and
unmercifully used; he was loaded with Contempt, Injuries, Reproach, and all the
Evils which Men or Devils could invent. And yet, like a good and faithful
Servant, he never declined his Duty, nor shifted the Commands which were laid
upon him; but humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death
of the cross.

This is the last Point of the Text. But I cannot enter upon it now; I must
pass it till another time. The two Points I have handled are sufficient for the
present; to add more would perhaps be too great a burden to our weak Minds.

I have laid before you a Mystery VI. Inferences from the Nature and Quality of
Jesus Christ.
which was hid from the Foundation of the World, but is now revealed by the
Gospel; a Mystery which the longest and most profound Meditation can never
exhaust: A Mystery which may give to all Eternity matter of Admiration 1st.
Admiration.
both to Angels and Men: A Mystery which (as our Apostle says) to all that are
Perfect, shows both the Wisdom and Power of God. These Divine Attributes were
never so admirably manifested. The Power of God is clearly seen, and evidently
set forth in the Creation of the World; the erecting such a vast Fabric out of
Nothing, the conconjoining its Parts, so that they neither interfere nor breed
Confusion, and the adorning those various Parts with an infinite Variety of
Creatures to Inhabit them, is a great instance of Divine and Almighty Power. So
is the Production of Man, the Contrivance of his Body, the Faculties of his
Soul, and the Union of two so different Species, as Matter and Spirit into one
Composition. But yet it is more astonishing, and more incomprehensible to see
the Creature Deified, the Godhead Embodied, and the Humane and Divine Nature
united together in one Person. And as the Power of God is hereby seen, so his
Wisdom in contriving this Way, to confound Satan, to destroy Sin, to save
Mankind, to declare his own Justice, and to keep up the Authority of his
righteous Laws. Lord, what Admiration may this breed! How ought the
Contemplation of this to transport us!

But Admiration ought not to be the 2d. Love.
only Effect of this Contemplation; it should also engender Love: and indeed,
if our Hearts be not hard as an Adamant, and as insensible as a Stone, it will
inflame them with ardent love to God, who has so highly regarded us, as to
dignifie us beyond the Angels, and any Creature in Heaven or Earth. He is
infinitely above us, and stands not in need of us, and yet he has had a
particular Concernment for us, and has honored us beyond Expression: And that
too, when we were Rebels, and Apostates, and guilty of a Thousand Indignities
done to the Deity. If he had cast some Pity upon us, or showed some
Commiseration, after we had crouched and humbled our selves, and bewailed our
Sins with weeping and sorrowful Hearts, it had not a little showed his
Goodness, even in this Case his Mercy would have been abundantly declared. But
what superabundant Mercy was it, to seek us first, nay, to court and woo us,
when we hated him, and were running away from him, and that too, by no meaner
Person than his own Son. God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke
in time past to the Fathers, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son,
whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds.
Lord, how little did Man deserve this! And what Obligations does this lay on
Man, to love, fear, and serve God!

Again, how should our Hearts cleave to Jesus Christ? What a strong and
passionate Affection should we have for him? Who, for us, and for our sakes,
made himself of no Reputation: Who, to serve us, and procure our good, laid
aside the Glory which he had before the Foundation of the World, and being in
the Form of God, and in a State in which he thought it not Robbery to be equal
to God, did yet take upon him the Form of a Servant. All this was his own
proper deed, and the mere effect of his free Love. You see all is ascribed to
himself, and indeed there was no Force to constrain him; wherefore so great and
so free Love in him, requires the greatest Measure of Love from us. Do you
think what he has done nothing? Seems it little to you, to exchange the Form of
God for the Form of a Servant? The Glory of Heaven for the Miseries of Earth?
Is it nothing think you, for Omnipotency to be confined to the Weakness of a
Child? For the Lord of all things to toil like a Slave, and to wander up and
down as a Beggar? For him whom the Angels worshipped, to be reproached,
injured, and ill treated by Men?

What stupendous Humility was here! What wonderful Condescension was this!
Especially when the profit did not redound to himself, but to others who little
deserved it at his hands. Has not Jesus by this, showed himself a kind and
loving Lord? Is not he that careful Shepherd, who, to get the strayed Sheep,
left the Ninety and Nine who never went astray? Is it not time now to ask, what
shall we render to the Lord for all this Love and Kindness? Alas! We cannot
requite him, though we give our selves, and endure the greatest Hardships for
him, it is but a small and a sorry Recompense. Yet such is his Goodness, that
he will accept of any sincere Returns of Kindness from us. And we cannot make a
better Return to him than by preserving the Dignity of our Natures, which he
has now consecrated by this Assumption of it unto the Divine. Indeed this
lays indispensible Obligations on us, to sanctify our selves, to put away
all Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, and to adorn our selves with all manner
of Holiness. To walk in sin, to give way to Ungodliness and worldly Lust, to
pollute our selves with Excess, Uncleanness, and other Vices, is, not only to
debase our selves, but to dishonor Christ. These Sins are become now more
sinful. To let the Devil, the World, and the Flesh reign in us, and as it were,
incorporate with us, by the entire Possession of our Hearts, is to rob Christ,
and to give away what is his Right: For though the Son of God be only united
personally to one, yet he has thereby purchased a Right to all Mankind. And
will ye thus requite the Lord, ye foolish people and unwise.

Finally, The Incarnation of the Son III. Comfort against Tentations and
Afflictions.
of God may afford great Comfort to us, both against Temptation to sin, and all
the Afflictions which in this Life we are liable to. He who has taken our
Nature upon him, and by that means is become our Kinsman and Brother is the
Almighty and all-sufficient Lord, who can help us in the time of our need. He
knows, by becoming Man, our Weakness, and will pity our Infirmities, and will
not suffer us either to be tempted or afflicted above what we are able; but
with both will send a way whereby we may escape, that we may be able to bear
it. If we do not surrender our selves to Sin, it can now never prove our Ruin;
if we do not yield basely, no Temptation can prove over strong; if we do not
betray our selves into the hands of the Devil, he cannot hurt us, for Christ is
stronger than he. Ye who are afflicted consider, That Jesus the Eternal Son of
God, knows by his own Experience what such a State is, and cannot but have a
fellow-feeling with all that are in it, and therefore will not fail to afford
suitable Comfort and seasonable Relief: And if he suffer any, who love him, to
fall under the hand of their Enemies and Persecutors, let us not therefore
conclude, That he has deserted them, it is only that they may have the greater
Conformity with himself, and be more capable of triumphing with him in the
Kingdom of his Father. He may suffer his Servants to die, but he will not let
them perish; for he has Power to raise them up at the last Day. Now unto him
who was in the Form of God, and who for us made himself of no Reputation, and
took upon him the Form of Man, even to Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God,
with the Father and Holy Ghost, be Eternal Praise and Glory.

Amen.
SERMON IV.
On PHIL. II. 8. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.
WHEN Men reflect on their own Souls, and seriously consider them, they are
sensible that they stand in need of some better Support and Comfort, than these
outward things of this World; for the Nature of these things are not adapted to
the Spiritual Nature of Man, and are not sufficient to procure quiet and
satisfaction to the Mind. In reference to Man's inward Peace, which is true
Happiness, Haman's Verdict holds certainly true of all that is in the World,
all these things avail me nothing. But what the World cannot give, the
Scripture discovers and shows the way to; therefore the Psalmist says, in the
multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts only delight my soul; that is,
his Soul neither had, nor could find true Delight, but in that light and
instruction, those Divine Consolations and Promises wherewith his Word
abounded: and if the Word of God was so Useful, and of such Advantage to the
Psalmist, it may be yet much more to us; for its light is brighter, it shines
more fully and clearly, abounds with greater Discoveries, and reveals what was
then kept hid. The Divine Economy of the World and the Redemption of Mankind
are now clearly revealed, from which only we have clear Instructions about our
Nature and Happiness. It is the Contemplation and Belief of these, which only
can ease the Conscience, and pull out the sting of Sin; it is this, which can
only disburden the Heart of Cares and Fears, balance the Soul, and keep it
equal, and strengthen it to endure the toil, labor and trouble of Life,
without fainting and wearying. In a word, who would have at present, Peace of
Mind, and the Comfort of a good Hope against the other World, should enlarge
his Knowledge of these things, and Confirm his Faith in them.

For this end, I am resolved to entertain you at present, both with a Discourse
of what is so very profitable and necessary, and also with sensible Signs and
Tokens of it, which alas! now adays we have seldom occasion to receive. And I
pray God, upon whom the success of all things depends, to grant us his
Blessing, that the present Ministry of his Word and Sacraments may prove
Effectual for our present Peace and future Salvation.

As the Text is suitable to the Design and Occasion of our present Meeting; so
that it may be handled more profitably, I shall first show you the Person of
whom the Text speaks, with the Character which is here given him. Secondly, I
shall consider what is here said of him, that is, his Actions and Sufferings.
Thirdly, I shall endeavor to set before you the End and Reason which moved
him, and the Good which we may draw from the Consideration of what he is here
said to have done.

As to the First, It is evident, from I. Of Jesus Christ, his Person, Nature,
and Quality.
the 5th. and 9th. Verses, that the Person here spoken of, is none other than
Jesus Christ: it is of him, that it is here said, he was found in fashion as a
Man, that is, he was truly and really a Man, by all the Evidence, Proofs, and
Demonstrations that others appear to be Men; having a Soul and Body, of the
same Nature, Qualities, Properties, and Passions with others, liable to the
same things, and standing in need of the same Support: And in a word, like to
others in all things, except Sin; so that he may be justly and in strict
propriety of Speech, styled the man Christ Jesus, and well deserves that
Epithet, which is often given him in Scripture, viz. the Son of man. As also
his Actions and Sufferings are to be considered as the Actions and Sufferings
of a Man. We must not (with the Ancient Heretics) deny the Humanity of Jesus,
or Fancy that all his Actions and Sufferings were only in appearance, and no
wise real: for he did partake of the Humane Nature as much as any of us, and
was of the like innocent Passions and Infirmities with our selves. But then
again, least we think meanly of this man Christ Jesus, least we reckon no more
of him than of other ordinary Men, we must remember all his Character, and
consider, that he who was at this time found in the fashion as a Man, was
formerly in the form of God, and thought it not Robbery to be equal with God.
This Son of Man was also the Son of God, the Godhead dwelt in him, and both
the Divine and Humane Nature were personally united in him, and that too after
such an intimate manner as we see Soul and Body for composing the Person of a
Man. Therefore as in respect of his Godhead he is called the eternal Son of
God, the only begotten of God the Father, over all God blessed for ever. And as
in respect of his Manhood or Humane Nature, he is called the Son of Man, the
Son of David, the seed of Abraham, and the seed of the Woman: So because of the
intimate Union and Conjunction of these two Natures into the one Person of
Jesus Christ, he is said to be God manifested in the flesh, the word made
flesh. When Gal. 4. 4.
the fullness of time was come (says our Apostle) God sent forth his Son made
of a woman; made under the Law. Hence also it is, that the Attributes and
Works, peculiar to the one true God, are ascribed to Jesus; thus he is said to
have created the World, to uphold all things by the Word of his Power, to know
the secret Thoughts, etc. And what was done by him is attributed to God, though
it was only proper to the Humane Nature. Thus Act. XX. 28. St. Paul says, God
purchased the Church with his own blood. Upon this account all the Prophecies,
which went before, pointed at both his Divinity and Humanity. As for instance,
the very first, calling him the seed of the woman, shows his Humane Nature, and
his Divinity is declared by the other Clause, which says, that he should
bruise the serpents head. Behold, (says Isaiah) a virgin shall conceive, and
Isa. 7. 14.
bear a son: that is, a Man: but it being added, and shall call his name
Immanuel, which signifies God with us, this imports, that he was also to be
God. So his Humane Nature is set forth in these 9. 6.
words, Unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given: But his Godhead no
less by what follows, viz. His name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the
mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

For this cause also the Divine Economy toward him, after his appearance in
the World, was so ordered as to attest both his Humanity and Divinity. He was
conceived in the Womb of the Virgin, but by the Power of the Holy Ghost, that
this Holy One which was Born might be called the Son of God. After his Birth he
was swadled and laid in a Manger, to hold forth the quality of a Man: but at
the same time Angels were sent from Heaven to declare his Birth, who sung
Divine Hymns for it, that thereby might be represented his quality as God. In
his Baptism, like a Man, he is dipped into Water by John the Baptist: but to bear
Witness of his Divinity, the Heavens open, and a voice cries, This is my
beloved Son. When he is in the Desert as a Man, he suffers Hunger and Thirst,
but as a God the Angels minister unto him. And as his Death showed him to be
Man, so the darkening of the Sun, the rending of the Veil, the trembling of the
Earth, the opening of the Graves, the rising of the Dead, and his bestowing
Paradise upon the Thief who died with him, were Signs that he was God.
Moreover, the Truth of his Divine and Human Nature is declared and set forth by
most of his Actions, especially his Miracles; as the Blessing the five Loaves
and two Fishes, and by that making them to multiply to the feeding of Five
Thousand. The bidding the Sick take up his Bed and walk; the weeping over
Lazarus's Grave, and yet raising him after he had been Four Days in it; the
sleeping in a Tempest and Storm, and the making it Calm when he was awakened.

By these, and many other instances, it is evident, that the Person our Text
speaks of, Jesus Christ, is both God and Man, that in him both the Godhead and
Humane Nature were personally united. Which (as St. Paul says) is without
Controversy a great Mystery, 1 Timothy iii. that is, a wonderful and an ineffable
thing, which passes the understanding of Man either to explain, or fully to
comprehend. We shall never be able to comprehend this fully till we come to the
other World, where all Mysteries will end in clear Visions, and where we shall
not see as it were through a Glass darkly, as at present. But yet, if at
present we take a view of this Mystery, with a reference to the end to which it
was adapted, we shall discover convincing Instances of the admirable and
unsearchable Wisdom of God. The Design was to save lost Mankind by the means of
a Mediator, who was to make an Atonement for their Sins, and so to make up the
breach betwixt God and Man, as that Man might be saved, and yet neither the
Honor, Justice, or Authority of God or his Laws impaired, so that it might be
thought there was any force or necessity upon God to be reconciled to Man, as
the Kings of the Earth are obliged to make Peace with their Rebellious
Subjects. It were a little too bold to say, that God had no other way to
compass the Salvation of Men: But sure this way is admirably contrived, both
for the Glory of God and the good of Mankind: Man could not desire or devise a
better, a more equal, a more easy Method; and it is every way honorable for
God; it is made Effectual for Man; and not only the Mercy and Goodness of God
do hereby abundantly appear, but also his Wisdom, Power, and Justice; and all
those Attributes which may excite Fear and Reverence, or procure Love, or
oblige to Obedience. Who so proper to ransom Mankind, as one of the Race, who
did participate of the Humane Nature, and who was descended from the same
Parents? Who but Man could bear the Punishment inflicted by the Law, or make
that Satisfaction which the Honor and Justice of God required? Angels could
not; for their Spiritual Nature makes them incapable. And what Man could have
made an Atonement for the rest? Seeing every Man was guilty in the sight of
God. What Man was sufficient for, or worthy of the office of Mediator? Suppose
one had all the Advantages and Excellencies which Nature could bestow, and free
of Sin too, which must necessarily be supposed in this case; yet it would have
been too much Presumption, even for such an one, to take upon him to Mediate
betwixt God and his Rebellious Creatures. Mediators and Arbitrators ought to be
either Superior to both Parties, or at least equal to the offended Party, and
independent in some manner from it, for without this Qualification they have
not sufficient Authority, nor a powerful enough Influence to oblige the Parties
to agree and accept of Peace* And this requisite Qualification excluded, not
only all Men, but Angels and all Creatures from being Mediator and Umpire
betwixt God and Man. As therefore it behoved our Mediator and Savior to be
Man, that he might do and suffer what was proper and incumbent, and have the
Interest, good Will, and Concernment necessary to such a Person; so it behoved
him to be God, that he might be worthy of so high and honorable a Function,
and to the end his Mediation might be meritorious and effectual. And as it
behoved our Mediator and Peacemaker to be thus and thus qualified, so the
Wisdom and Goodness of God has provided us of one with these Qualifications,
and so contrived it, that he, who thought it not Robbery to be equal with God,
should be made into the Likeness of Men. For this end, the Eternal Son of God
became Man, who is this Jesus the Text speaks of, by whose Name we are all
called. O! the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! Romans ii. 33.

The Socinians, who reject this Mystery, and deny the Divinity of our Savior,
and the Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in the Person of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which I have made most evident from Scripture, now, and at the last
Occasion, they make the Economy of the Gospel to signify little or nothing,
either for the Glory of God, or the Comfort of Man: And as they give God the
Lie, who has attested the Truth of this so clearly and fully, so they rob him
of the Praise which is due to the greatest Manifestation of his Goodness, and
to the most wonderful Contrivance of his Wisdom. From which, and such damnable
Heresies good Lord deliver us.

Having considered who the Person is, II. His Actions and Sufferings.
of whom our Text speaks, and what is his Character, it follows next, according
to the Method proposed, that we take into Consideration what he did and
suffered, which is here represented in these Words; he humbled himself and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.

From which Words we may First observe, They were voluntary.
That all which happened to Jesus Christ in this mysterious Economy, was his
own Choice. His Sufferings as well as Actions are the pure Effect of his own
Will; there was no force or necessity upon him to oblige his Obedience and
Subjection to these things. We must not think it was with Jesus Christ as with
other Men. The Birth and Quality, the State and Condition, the Death and Exit
of other Men fall not under their own Cognizance, nor is the same any part of
their Choice: But all is unknown to them, and imposed upon them by Nature or
Providence, or those to whom Nature and Providence have subjected them: And the
greatest Praise due to any Man, is that he can bear his State and Circumstances
thus imposed, patiently and cheerfully, though he neither would have desired
them, nor yet made Choice of them, if it had been in his own Power. But as to
Jesus Christ, all was his free Choice, his voluntary Act and proper Deed: The
meanness of his Birth, the Contemptibleness of his State, the Troubles of his
Life, and the Shame and Bitterness of his Death, were all known beforehand to
him, and set before him, and he freely and willingly submitted himself to them;
and therefore, there is more Merit and Praise due to him than can be to any
from mere Patience or Passive Obedience. Therefore, does my father love me
(says Christ) because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man
takes it from me, Joh. 10. 17, 18.
but I lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it down, and I have power to
take it again. And again, he said to Pilate, thou could have no power at all
against me except it were given thee from above.

Secondly, It is to be considered, that What his Humiliation referrs to.
the Humiliation of Jesus Christ in this Verse referrs to some other thing than
that which is made mention of in the former. When before it is said; he made
himself of no Reputation, that referrs to his Pre-existent State, and Godhead,
and thereby is set forth his Debasement by his Incarnation: For by becoming
Man, his Godhead was put under the Veil of Flesh, and the Majesty and Glory
which belonged to him were for so long time eclipsed; which was certainly a
stupendous Debasement, and an astonishing and most wonderful Instance of his
Love to those for whom he was thus debased. But the Humiliation in the Text, is
posterior to the Incarnation, and referrs to what he did after he was become
Man; therefore, it is said, being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself.

What is meant by humbling himself is His great Obedience.
explained by what follows, viz. That he became Obedient unto Death, that is,
he entirely subjected himself to the Will of God; and all the Methods of his
Counsel, and all the Contrivances of his Wisdom for manifesting his Mercy and
good Will to Mankind, and for effectuating their Redemption and Salvation, to
which he was not otherwise obliged than by his own voluntary Undertaking. Jesus
Christ, by his Divine Nature, being equal to God, was therefore free,
independent, and subject to none: And though, as a Man, he owed Obedience, yet
being altogether free from Sin, he was not liable to the Curse of the Law, nor
obnoxious to those Evils, Troubles, and Calamities which for Sin are inflicted
on other men. Therefore, it was a great Act of Humility in him to submit to
those things, who might have pleaded an Exemption from them. It was great
Humility in him to put himself into a State of Subjection and Obedience, who by
Nature was subject to none, but as God himself, supreme Lord over all in Heaven
and Earth. What Humility would it be in a freeborn Prince, one whose Birth
gave him Right to a Scepter, Crown, and Sovereign Command, and whose State and
Circumstances put him in a Condition of keeping the same against all Rebellion,
Encroachment, and Usurpation; I say, what Humility would it be in such a
Person, for the good of his Subjects to divest himself of Majesty, to lay aside
the Pretensions to Royalty and Sovereignty, and to put himself in the State of
a Subject, in which he should be obliged to obey the Laws and Orders which he
had Right to give, and which were in force only by Virtue of his own Authority!
How would men stand amazed at this? And yet such, and greater Humility has
Christ showed for us men; for while he was Heir of all things, he made himself
empty and poor for us. When he had a sovereign Authority over all in Heaven and
Earth, he became subject and obedient both to the Laws of God and men. And it
was for this very end that he became man; therefore it is said of him, Psalm.
40. mine ears have thou opened or bored, alluding to that Custom of boring the
Ears of those who resolved to be Servants for ever. Which St. Paul (in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. X. 5. to render the thing clearer) has expressed
thus; a body have thou prepared for me: And in both it is added, Lo I come, in
the volume of thy Book it is written of me, to do thy will, O God, I take
delight.

And as Obedience was the end why he became Man, so from his Birth he paid a
ready, sincere, and punctual Obedience to the Laws of Nature, the Decrees of
God, the Acts of his Providence, and the Statutes of Men. In his Infancy, he
was subject to his Parents; when he was grown up, he was obedient both to the
Roman Governors and Jewish Magistrates; he observed all the Law of Moses; and
was both, in Civil and Religious Matters, the greatest Example of a cheerful
and universal Obedience, which ever the World saw. He did all things without
murmuring, without Reluctance; he never disputed the Reasonableness of the
divine Commands, or the Justice of his Providence: But knowing, That God has an
absolute Authority over Men, and that he can command nothing that is not just;
therefore having put himself in the Condition of other Men, that is, in a State
of Subjection to God, he obeyed his absolute Authority without Reserve: Nay,
rather than give Scandal or Occasion to any to refuse Obedience, he would
render it, when it was not due, and where it could not be (without Rigor)
exacted; nay, when he could easily have avoided it. Thus he would be baptized
of John the Baptist, for fulfilling of all righteousness, though John refused
it, and that there was no need of it for him. Therefore also, after he had
convinced Peter, that he ought not to have paid Tribute; notwithstanding (said
he to him) lest we offend, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take up
the fish that first comes up; and when thou have opened its mouth, thou shall
find a piece of Money, that take, and give unto them for me and thee, Matthew.
xvii. 27.

It was his meat and drink to do the will of God: Nor did he take Pleasure
therein, only when it was easy and about pleasant Matters, but also when the
Commands were severe, heavy, troublesome, such as Nature struggled with, and
was averse to. When his Soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto Death, upon the
sad Apprehensions of his Sufferings, he went and prayed, O my Father, if it be
possible let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. And again, O my Father, if this Cup may not pass away from me, unless I
drink it, thy will be done. Sometimes free and independent Princes have
subjected themselves to others; but then it was for some noble Employment, and
general Command under them, whereby they had a Prospect of getting to
themselves Glory, Praise, and Renown in the Earth. But behold, Jesus submitted
himself to the Condition of the meanest Servant, to Misery, Pain, Shame,
Reproach, Disgrace, and all the evil, vile, and unjust Usage which the most
barbarous and most wicked could invent, and which an ingenuous and noble Soul
would abhor. He yielded himself to be a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with
Grief; to be smitten of God, and afflicted by Men; to be despised, set at
naught, oppressed and killed: And yet he never opened his Mouth; he was brought
as a lamb to the slaughter; and as a sheep before his shearers is dumb, so he
opened not his mouth.

He was obedient to the death: And His Death.
that we may the more admire this Obedience of his, the kind of Death to which
he submitted is set before us, even the death of the Cross. This was a Death
well known in those times, in which the Apostle lived, and wrote this Epistle.
And it was known to be the very worst kind of Death that the Laws of Men could
inflict on the greatest Malefactors. It was a painful Death, and the more
painful, because it was lingering: It was so vile and shameful, that by the
Laws, none could be put to it, except Slaves, not a free man, or any of honest
Birth, whatever might be their Crime. This was the Death to which Jesus
surrendered himself, and he yielded to this Death, not only when there was no
Mitigation of the usual Pain, Shame, and Bitterness, but also when
extraordinary Pain, Shame, Torment, and Agony were superadded. Let any take a
View of our Lord his Death and Passion, what went before, and what accompanied
his Cross; what Treachery and Ingratitude he met with; with what Malice and
Cruelty he was pursued; what base Calumnies he was loaded with; what horrid
Crimes of Blasphemy, Sedition, and Conspiracy against Church and State, were
falsely charged upon him; how he was deserted by his Friends, mocked by his
Enemies, and despitefully used by every Body, it will be found that never any
Sorrow was like unto his Sorrow, nor any Cross so grievous as his. He sustained
the Wrath of God, the Weight of Sin, the Malice of Devils, and the Spite of
Men. His Death was both base and bitter, sad and shameful beyond all
Expression: But withal it was voluntary. Which leads me to the last thing
proposed.

Which was to show the End and Reason III. Why Jesus abased and humbled himself.
why Jesus, who was the Son of God, thus abased and humbled himself, and became
obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. In Prosecution of this it
cannot be expected, that either I can mention all, or insist at large on any;
for the time allowed will not suffice for such a Task. I shall propose briefly
some few, which may satisfy, and leave the Prosecution of them to your private
Meditations.

In general then all this was done, for For the Glory of God and Man's
Redemption.
setting forth the Glory of God, and for effectuating the Redemption of
Mankind; therefore it is called the Mystery of Redemption; and the Gospel which
declares it, is called the word of Salvation: And for this cause that
admirable Person (of whom we have been speaking) is called our Savior and
Redeemer. Behold (said the Angel to the Shepherds) I bring to you tidings of
great joy, which shall be to all People: Unto you is born this day, in the City
of David, a Savior, who is Christ the Lord, Luke ii.

But to be more particular. This was To demonstrate God's Love and Mercy.
done, to declare and demonstrate the infinite Love and Mercy of God, who
rather than that Mankind should perish, would suffer his own Son, and his only
Son to be thus abased and humbled. God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son unto it, that the world through him might not perish, but
that those who believe might have eternal life. John iii. 16. and Romans v. 8. It
is said, That God commends his love toward us in that while we were yet
sinners Christ died for us. Mankind is but one part of the Creation: And though
he make a considerable Figure in this lower World, yet if we knew all the other
parts of the Creation and their Inhabitants, perhaps we should find him
contemptible and inconsiderable; he is certainly inferior to the Angels; what
a Demonstration therefore is it of the Mercy of God to his Creatures that he
would not suffer such inconsiderable ones to perish? But to prevent their
eternal Ruin was pleased to give his Son to do and suffer so many things for
us. And how does it heighten his Love to us the Sons of Men, that he has showed
more Kindness to us than to the Angels, who by Nature are so much better than
we! He passed by the Angels, and has had pity on us; he has left them to perish
in their Apostasy and Disobedience, but has sent his Son to save us.

Secondly, Hereby God has declared His Justice and Authority.
his Justice, his uncontrollable Authority, the Vigor of his Laws, and the
Certainty of his Threatenings. By this it appears, that God is just, and will
not clear the guilty; that he will not suffer his Authority to be contemned,
nor his Laws to be broken; and that what he peremptorily threatens to the
breakers of them shall come to pass. Heaven and Earth may pass away, but one
Jot or Title of the Law shall not fall; and rather than the Transgression of it
escape unpunished, he will make his own Son an Example. Like that King, who
having threatened the Loss of both Eyes to such as should be guilty of Adultery:
And his Son having committed that Crime, he, (to keep his Royal Word, to
maintain the Vigor of his Laws, and to strike Terror into his Subjects, but
withal to show some Mercy to his Son) pulled out one of his Son's Eyes, and
gave another of his own. God would not remit the Punishment of Sin, but to save
Sinners he laid the Weight of the Punishment on his own Son.

Thirdly, Hereby is declared the heinous The heinous Nature of Sin.
Nature of Sin, how odious it is in the Sight of God, how impossible it is to
be reconciled to him, or to expect his Favor, unless it be expiated. Let Fools
now make a mock of Sin if they dare. Let Men consider what the Son of God has
done and suffered to take away the Sins of the World; let them call to mind
what Obedience, what Agony, what Shame and Pain the Holy and Innocent Jesus
has been put to; what it has cost him to take away the Guilt of it, and to
free Men from the Punishment of it: And when they have seriously considered all
this, let them say (if they can) whether Sin be to be sported with, whether it
may be safely cherished and indulged.

Fourthly, This sets forth the Dignity The Dignity of Humane Nature.
of the Humane Nature. How highly is that to be esteemed, which God has thought
worthy of so strict an Alliance with himself, and to save which, the Eternal
Son of God, the Second Person of the blessed Trinity, he who thought it not
Robbery to be equal with God, even he was pleased to make himself of no
Reputation, to take upon him the Form of a Servant, to humble himself, and to
become obedient unto Death. This is Immortal Honor unto Mankind, which the
Devils envy, and which the highest Angels admire, and therefore it is said that
even they desire to look into it. This is the Glory of Man, and that which sets
him farthest above all his Fellow Creatures in this World: The Bodies of other
Animals are not much inferior to ours, for they are all of almost the same
Nature, Composition, and curious Contrivance; and whatever be the inward
Principle of their Life and Actions, whatever it be that guides them, their
Actions are more regular than ours, and certainly the Effects of greater
Reason, Knowledge and Wisdom, than what we can by Speculation, Study, or
Experience arrive at. But neither Cherubim nor Seraphim, nor any of the
Celestial Order of Intelligent Beings can boast a Privilege above, or even
equal to what Man has by the Incarnation of the Son of God, and what followed
upon it. He took not on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. God
has espoused our Nature, and thereby made us more honorable than other
Creatures; and as we have by this the highest Honor, so all the Happiness that
can be desired: For what greater Happiness! What can we desire more, than what
the Love and Friendship and Favor of God can bestow?

Fifthly, As this shows the Dignity of The Perfection of it.
the humane Nature, so wherein the Perfection of it consists; even in a perfect
Obedience unto God, such as we showed that Jesus Christ did pay unto him. Adam
ruined the humane Nature by his Disobedience, Jesus Christ has repaired it by
being entirely obedient even unto Death, and no Man can arrive at Perfection,
but by the Imitation of Jesus in a perfect Subjection to the Will of God. To
make Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof, is never to aim
higher than Beasts and inferior Animals; to walk by Sense, will stifle our
Reason; to follow the Imaginations and Devices of our own Hearts, or only what
our own Reason suggests, we shall never surmount a natural imperfect State, nor
have any other Perfection than what comes from our selves: But if we give our
selves up to the Conduct of God, if we will follow his Will and Providence, and
never dispute or cavil at his Pleasure, we shall far outgrow our natural State,
our minds shall receive the Light of Divine Illumination, our Spirits shall be
fortified by the Almighty Spirit of God, and we shall at last become Partakers
of the Divine Nature, which is as high as any can aspire.

Sixthly, I will only give one Instance The Exaltation of Jesus Christ.
more, which is that the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, his Obedience and
Sufferings, were appointed to the end that he might merit the Glory, Honor,
and sovereign Power which God had designed for him before the Foundation of the
World. Wherefore (as it follows our Text) God has highly exalted him, and
given him a Name which is above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every
knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to the
Glory of God the father. And for this Cause, let us not with some rebellious
Spirits, quarrel at this Divine Economy; let us not dispute the Reasonableness
of his eternal Purposes, nor abdicate him to whom God has given sovereign
Power; let us not speak against his Person, Merits, or the Acts of his supreme
Authority: But as Interest and Duty oblige us, let us be subject unto him, let
us love, fear, worship and obey him. This is the way to work out your
Salvation, and if you follow this Method, God will work in you to will and to
do of his good Pleasure.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has loved
us and has given us everlasting Consolation and good Hope, through Grace,
comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good Word and Work. Amen.
SERMON V. Preached at EDINBURGH ON GOOD FRIDAY, March 25. 1692.
LUKE XXIII. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. And there followed him a great company of
people, and of women, which also bewailed and lamented him. But Jesus turning
unto them said, Daughters of Jerusalem weep not for me, but weep for your
selves and for your children. For behold the days are coming, in the which they
shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs which never bare, and the paps
which never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, fall on
us, and to the hills, cover us. For if they do these things in a green tree,
what shall be done in the dry?
THERE is in many too great an Inclination after such Shows and Sights, and
such kind of Conversation, as may divert. them with Mirth and Laughter: Whereas
the Contemplation of that which does affect the Heart with Grief and Sadness is
more profitable. For (says the Wise Man) it is better to Eccles. 7. 2, 3, 4.
go to the house of mourning, than to the house of feasting. Sorrow is better
than laughter; for by the sadness of the countenance, the heart is made better.
And from hence he observes, That the heart of the wise is in the house of
mourning, but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth. The Spirit of Fools
is Light and Frothy, and only fond of Airy things; whence it is that they are
in love with the House of Feasting, where ordinarily there is more Noise than
good Sense, more of foolish Jesting and ridiculous Mirth, than of solid
Instruction: But the Wise prefer the House of Mourning; because it adds to
their Wisdom, rendering them serious, and giving them a right sense both of
themselves and other things. Now to make us thus Wise, the Reasonable Custom of
the Ancient Church appointed this Season to be a time of Mourning and
Sorrowing, and the Practice of the Catholic Church at present proposes to our
Consideration this Day, that which may, and will (if any thing can) affect our
Hearts, and move the Passions of Sorrow and Grief: for that Soul must certainly
be stupid and senseless, and incapable of Grief, who does not show it upon the
representation of the Cross of Christ, his sad Death and Sufferings, of which
this Day is the Anniversary.

It is indeed, long since this was done, but yet it is never to be forgotten.
The Death and Sufferings of Jesus should carefully be kept in Memory; for though
these things happened many Ages ago, yet we shall find that we our selves were
Accessory to them; and therefore if not upon Jesus's account, yet at least upon
our own we ought to lament and bewail his Death and Passion, that the shedding
of innocent Blood may be remitted, and not charged upon us. Some can look upon
the Calamities and Disasters of others, and never be concerned; they are only
moved, when Trouble and Misery draw near themselves. Now even Persons of this
temper may see it their Interest to mourn on this occasion; for sad and heavy
Judgments are ready to fall down upon those who are guilty of the Blood of
Jesus, and who do not repent of it. So that if there be any who have such hard
Hearts, that they cannot be affected with the Cross and Sufferings of Jesus
Christ, if his Shame, and Sorrow, and Pangs will not pierce them, yet sure they
must not only be hard but lifeless, without all sense and feeling, if they be
Proof against their own Doom, and unmoved at the sight of their own Calamities:
who will not commiserate the Sufferings of the Holy and Innocent Jesus, may yet
take Compassion on themselves; if we will not shed Tears for his Sake; Let us
do it for our own, as he advised the Women who followed him to the place of his
Crucifixion. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves
and for your Children.

The Cross of Christ has too large Dimensions to be commensurated all at once;
his Sufferings were so many and so great, that we cannot take them up at one
view, nor is it possible to Discourse in one Hour the History of our Lord's
Passion: wherefore I have fixed on one particular Passage for our present
Meditation, which has this Advantage, that it contains Instructions how to
moderate our Grief and Passions on this occasion.

For the more profitable handling of this Passage, and to make it work the
better upon our Affections, these particulars are to be observed. First, The
Women's Behavior, and the Reason or occasion of it. Secondly, Our Lord's Check
to their Grief upon his Account. And Thirdly, His requiring it, and making it
necessary for themselves and for their Children.

As to the First: It is said of the Women, I. The Women's Behavior.
that they bewailed and lamented him. And it does not appear that any other did
so: or if any besides them were affected with Grief, they either concealed it,
or made no such Public and Remarkable Expressions of it. The City was full of
People at this time, because of the approaching Feast, and (as is usual on such
occasions) a very great Multitude followed our Savior to the place of
Execution; some out of Curiosity, merely to see what was done, others to glutt
and satisfy their Malice and Revenge: But only these Women went out of
Compassion. His Disciples had forsaken him; Nicodemus, and other Persons of
Quality, who believed in Jesus, absconded themselves at this time, they
dissembled their Sentiments, and would not appear for him, being overaw'd by
the fear of the Priests and Scribes, and the giddy furious Multitude who were
now gathered into Tumultuary Mobbs, demanding him to be Crucified; and who, in
this their Rage, were ready to fall upon any that seemed to oppose it, as
Enemies to the Public Good of the Nation. None offered to Plead for him, nor
did there remain any to commiserate him save these Women in the Text; who, by
their Weeping and Lamentation did Remonstrate against the Madness of the
People, and the Injustice of the Scribes, Pharisees, and Priests.

None of the Circumstances of either A Comfort to Women.
our Lord's Birth or Death are accidental, but were, ordained beforehand by
the Infinite Wisdom of God, to give us either Comfort or Instruction: So this
Constancy and generous Public Concernment of the Women must not pass
unobserved. For as the Revealing of his Birth to the Wise Men in the East, was
a Comfort to the Gentile World, and a sign that they were to be called to a
share of that Salvation which he brought with him; So God ordered the Behavior
of these Women for a Comfort to all their Sex; God gave them this tender Love
to his Son, which prompted them to wait upon him, even to the last minutes of
his Life, when he was deserted by all the rest of the World, to bewail his
Sufferings when Men were mocking and scoffing him; and finally, to seek him
early the Third Day at his Grave, that they might do him honor there: They
were made Compassionate Witnesses of his Death, and the first Messengers of his
Joyful Resurrection, to assure the Faith of Women, and to confirm their Hope of
Salvation by Christ, though it was by Woman that Sin entered amongst Men. The
Devils who were the Authors of Sin are Reprobated, and are never to find Mercy:
but Women have found Grace in the sight of God: And though Adam was not deceived,
but the Woman being deceived was in the transgression, notwithstanding she
shall be saved (by him that was Born and died) if they continue in faith, and
charity and holiness with sobriety, 1 Timothy ii. 14, 15.

Again, This passage informs us of An Example in dangerous times.
the wise Providence of God, who never leaves himself without a Witness amongst
Men: but always, even in the times of greatest Defection, either from Truth or
Holiness; in the midst of the greatest corruption of Doctrine, and greatest
wickedness of Manners, he preserves a Remnant pure from the public Contagion,
and also moves some, more or less, to reprove such General Apostasy from the
Principles or the Practice of Religion, either directly by open and plain
Rebukes, or indirectly by their own manifest Stedfastness. At this time the
Rulers, Priests, and People were combined in a Conspiracy against the Lord, and
against his Anointed; they were all of them persecuting him to Death, as an
Enemy to God, Church, and State, and the common Interest of the Nation. So bent
was the Multitude upon this Wickedness, that to show their Inclinations, and to
press the Roman Governors to it, they gathered themselves together
tumultuously, and not only officiously consented to his Death, but sought it as
a favor to themselves and the Nation. Such was the Malice and Prejudice
against Christ, that like a torrent it carried all away with it, some few only
excepted (and they were but very few) who kept their Integrity, and detested
this Villainy. But the few, who did so lurked in private, and as they did not
concur, so neither did they oppose the Multitude nor their wicked Designs. But
behold, while Courage and Integrity failed amongst Men, some few Women appear,
abhor the Villainy, and by public bewailing and lamenting testify against
it. Fear might have detained them, if they had considered their own weakness,
and the madness of the Multitude at this time; they might have apprehended that
their tears would have provoked the Multitude to trample them under foot: but
Love knows no Difficulties; nor did these Women consider the Difficulties they
run, by paying their Just respects to their hated and persecuted but very
Innocent Lord. And from the Example of those Good Women, let us learn how to
behave our selves in times of Danger and Difficulty; let them teach and
encourage us to a stedfastness in the Truth, and to a constant adherence to
that which is Just and Right, though all the World about us take a contrary
course, and that Error and Iniquity have the common Vogue. Politicians will
tell you, that Dum furor est in cursu cedendum est furori, that it is Wisdom to
yield to the Evils which are not in our power to remedy; that it is safer to
comply with Peoples inclinations when violent, though Unjust and Unreasonable,
than to resist them; for by opposing them we provoke their Fury, and hazard our
own Ruin, whereas by complying we leave our selves in a capacity of rectifying
things at another occasion. And so by these, and the like Maxims, Men are
taught to turn with every Tide, to serve different and contrary Interests,
notwithstanding of particular ties and obligations, and to give way to the
greatest Injustice for pleasing Men, and diverting the Wrath and Fury of a
prevailing Party. But these Maxims are calculated with a respect to Men's
temporal Interest, rather than for keeping a good Conscience; for they who
would do that and please God, must resolve never to turn their Back upon that
which is right, or to consent to that which is Evil. Indeed every one has not a
Call to resist a wicked Course, or to punish the Authors and Promoters of it;
nor is it in the power of private or particular Persons to do it: but it is in
every Man's power to withdraw his consent and refuse his concurrence. Though we
cannot hinder others, yet we ought to keep our own hands clean; and as Prudence
directs us, according to the Nature and Importance of the thing, we should own
that which we are persuaded is right and good; which if we cannot favor
otherwise, we should at least (with the Women here) bewail and lament the loss,
and miscarriage, and the wickedness of Men which occasions it to be so; though
by this we incurr a popular Odium, and run other Inconveniences. Plutarch
tells of a certain Woman, that being questioned how she could attempt a thing
Prohibited by the Tyrant under whom she lived, and which would highly incense
him? She answered resolutely, It pleases the Gods, with whom I intend to live
longer than with the Tyrant. If our Design be to live with God for ever; if
Eternal Life or his Favor be our Expectation, we should search out his Good,
Perfect, and Acceptable Will, and cleave to that, whatever the World think of
it. And if the fear of Men begin to prevail, we should consider how much wiser
it is to fear God. I say unto you, my friends, be not afraid of them which kill
the body, and after that have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you
whom you shall fear; fear him who after he has killed, has power to cast into
hell; yea, I say unto you, fear him. Luke xii. 4, etc.

But to return to the Women who are The Greatness of the Women's Sorrow.
said to bewail and lament Christ as they followed him. The words in the
Original import the greatest measure of Grief and Sadness, and are never used
but when the very height of it is expressed: the Consternation of Sinners at
the Day of Judgment, their sad Apprehensions of the Terror of that Day, and the
Melancholy Effects it works in them, are set forth by the same words, Matthew.
xxiv. and Rev. i. 7. So that it seems, the Sorrow of these was not small, nor
the Expressions of it mean; their Hearts were swelled up with Grief; their
Souls were inwardly pierced with excessive Sorrow, which abundantly appeared by
all the ways by which People use to express their sorrowful Thoughts, and sad
Apprehensions; smiting their Breasts and rending their Garments, which the
Greek word (...), signifies; howling and mourning with the Voice, which is the
signification of (...).

Now, it will be worth the while, and The Cause of it.
very proper for the Day, to consider what it was that moved them to all this.
Indeed, the Hearts of Women by Nature are soft and tender, and their Passions
are sooner, and more easily moved than those of Men: but if we view the Object
of their Grief, we will not think it strange, that these Women did thus bewail
and lament; it will be much more strange, if we can restrain our Passions, and
refrain from weeping at the account of it: and yet all know, that the sight of
a thing touches more sensibly than the hearing of it does. These Women had
seen all which our Lord had hitherto suffered at the hands of wicked and sinful
Men, and had lively Apprehensions of what he was yet to suffer; for the Death
he was going to, was known and ordinary, but known only to be a vile, shameful,
and most painful Death, as upon other accounts, so upon this, that it was not a
speedy but a lingering Death. If they themselves were not Witnesses, yet they
well enough understood, how he was seized in the Garden as a Thief, when he was
most serious in Devotion and Prayer, and dragged from thence to the
High-Priest's Palace, which ought to have been a Refuge to Innocence, and a
Safeguard against Indiscretions and an Unmerciful Threatment: But alas! even
there they saw him unjustly used, and most indiscreetly Handled; falsely
Accused, illegally convicted of Blasphemy and other Crimes, and all the rules
of Discretion, Civility, and Good Manners broken in treating him. He was Spit
upon and Buffetted, Blindfolded and smitten on the Cheek, with a, Prophecy who
it was that smote thee? By the break of Day he was hurried away to Pilate, from
him to Herod, and back again to Pilate, every one making their Sport of him.
After some Mock-Formalities of Law and Justice, these Women saw him delivered
to the Roman Soldiers, (a sort of Men who took Pleasure in Blood and Cruelty)
and then they beheld him dressed like a Fool, with a Crown of Thorns, a Purple
Robe, and a Reed instead of a Scepter, because he was said to be the King of
the Jews. They saw him stripped of these Ornaments of mocked Majesty, and
unmercifully Whipped and Scourged by the same Soldiers, with Cords, till Furrows
were made in his Back, and the Blood ran down his innocent Body: And when all
this would not satisfy the Malice of his Enemies, they saw him given in
exchange for a Villain and Notorious Robber, and against all Law and Reason,
merely upon the importunity of an unreasonable Multitude, condemned to a
Violent and Cruel Death; and contrary to all Equity, denied any respite or
breathing time, but instantly forced away to the place of Execution, and made
to bear that Cross on which he was to hang and pine away his Life in Pain and
Torment.

Represent all this to your selves, and consider if it be not sad and doleful;
who would not shed Tears at such a Sight? May not this force Tears either from
Man or Woman? Suppose Jesus had been as bad and criminal as his Enemies would
have made him, yet such cruel and unmerciful Usage called for Compassion. Quod
non homini, detur humanitati. Even when it is necessary to satisfy the Law,
and to execute Justice, Pity should be shown to the Offender. But if Pity and
Compassion be due to Calamity and Misery, even when there is guilt to deserve
it, what should be shown when there is no Guilt at all? If it should touch our
hearts to see any of our Fellow Creatures suffer, though it be no more than the
just Punishment of their Sins, how should we be affected? How should our
Passions be stirred, when unspotted Innocence and Virtue suffer?

These good Women knew, that Jesus had no Crime, they saw his very Enemies
could not fix any upon him, and that they were baffled when they undertook to
prove any against him. Nay, he was not only innocent, but also perfectly
righteous; he not only was guilty of no Ill, but also he was one who went up
and down doing good, and had done many great, and good, and wonderful Works.
The Malice of his Enemies was not occasioned by any Fault of his, but only by
the Truth, and Purity, and Powerfulness of his Doctrine, and by the Holiness
and Integrity of his Life, both which reproved their Errors, their false
Teaching, their Hypocrisy, and their Covetousness.

Add to all this, his Quality, which was the greatest in the World: For though
these Women were not yet instructed fully about his eternal Generation, nor yet
perhaps believed him to be the true Son of God, equal with the Father, (as the
Catholic Church does teach, and has always taught, and which must be
believed, if the Scriptures be true and genuine) yet they believed him a
Prophet, and knew him to be a good Man, mighty in Word and Deed; they were
persuaded that he was the Messiah, and trusted that it was he who should have
redeemed Israel. Judge, I pray you then, what cause of Grief was here? The
greatest Dignity trampled upon and affronted! The greatest Innocence condemned!
The greatest Righteousness punished! The greatest Meekness reviled! The
greatest Charity and Beneficence persecuted! The Man who preached the Word of
God with Authority; who showed them the true way to Life; who comforted them in
their Affliction; who cured their Diseases; who restored their Children and
Friends to Life; who fed them with Miracles; and from whom they expected the
Salvation promised by all the Prophets; to see this Man mocked, scourged, and
put to Death before their Eyes! Lord, what matter of Grief was this! What
Occasion for Weeping, Mourning and great Lamentation!

But though all this was more than sufficient to afflict and grieve the minds
of these Women, yet there was something more than all this, which Jesus
suffered, which they knew not; he suffered in his Soul and Spirit, by the
immediate Hand of God, which none was sensible of, save himself. Inward Trouble
and Disturbance of the Soul is much more sad and weighty than Pains and
Torments in the Body. The spirit of a man may sustain his Infirmity, but a
wounded spirit who can bear? Jesus was at this time drinking the Cup of his
Father's Wrath and Displeasure against Sin, and the Sin not of one or two, but
of all Mankind. What it was that he suffered in his Soul, on this Account, we
do not know; but that he did suffer in that part is certain; and that he
suffered heavily, appears from his sweating Blood in the Garden in a cold
Night; from his praying three times, Father, if it be thy will let this Cup
pass from me; and from these disconsolate Words which his inward Sorrow and
Anguish extorted, while he hanged upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me! The Sufferings of Jesus cannot be reckoned up; no Man can
describe, no Tongue can express all the Particulars of his bitter Agony, and
bloody Passion, and cruel Death. The Words of the Prophet are applicable to
him; and as they were spoken prophetically of him, so in him only they were
fully accomplished. Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by? Behold, and see,
if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith
the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger. From above he has
sent fire into my bones, and it prevails against them; he has spread a net
for my feet, he has turned my back; Lam. 1. 12.
he has made me desolate and faint all the day. Who then, that beheld this
could? Or who that hears, and lays it to heart, can refrain from weeping?

Tears indeed are due to the Memory II. Our Lord's Check to the Women's Sorrow.
of Christ's Death and Passion: But yet our Lamentation and Weeping must not be
as that in Rama, spoken of by the Prophet; Like Rachel weeping for her
children, who would not be comforted, because they are not. We may, and should
weep at the Remembrance of what Christ suffered; but our Sorrow should not run
to an Excess merely on his Account: Wherefore, you see, that our Lord turned
about, and checked the excessive Sorrowfulness of these Women, saying,
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, which was the Second thing I promised
to speak to.

This is not a total Prohibition of weeping The Prohibition not absolute.
for Christ; the Negative Particle ( Not) is not always to be taken so
peremptorily; for frequently it imports only Rather, or not so much; as when it
is said, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, the Meaning is, Mercy rather than
Sacrifice, or not so much Sacrifice as Mercy. So here, weep not for me but for
your selves, is only as much as to say, weep for your selves rather than for
me, or not so much for me as for your selves. Thus, all Weeping is not
forbidden: And as I have shown it to be very just, proper, and suitable, so we
find it made both a necessary and an acceptable Duty, Zach. xii. 10. And I will
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit
of Grace and of Supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have
pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only Son, and
shall be in bitterness for him as one that is in bitterness for his first born.

However, we should so bewail his The glorious Effects of Christ's Death.
Death as to keep within a certain Measure: Not as those good Women, in the
Text, who apprehended that all their Hope, and all their Comfort would have
perished in his Death. The Death of Christ is not to be lamented like the
Tragical end of Pompey, Caesar, and other Heroes of the World, whether Ancient
or Modern, whose Deaths were sad and convincing Instances of the Changeableness
of Fortune, of the Vanity of the World, and of the Uncertainty of humane
Affairs. When they died, their vast Designs and Projects were defeated, and the
Expectation of their Friends frustrated; in that very Day all their Thoughts
perished; they instantly ceased to be either the Hope of their Friends, or the
Dread and Terror of their Enemies, and left nothing behind them save a faint
Memory and uncertain Conjectures. But the Death of Jesus Christ is quite
another thing: As our Lord still lives, so he reigns, and it was by his
Death that he advanced and secured his Kingdom. His Death was glorious, and the
Issue of it was eternal Praise to God and himself, and everlasting Advantage to
all the World. Never any Triumph was so illustrious as the Death of Christ: The
greatest triumph in the World, was only over Beasts and weak Men, and set forth
with the Spoils of earthly Kingdoms: But Jesus at his Death triumphed over
Devils, he conquered Hell and the Grave, made Spoils of Principalities and all
the Powers of Darkness. By his Death he quenched the Fire of God's Wrath,
blunted the Edge of the Law, weakened the Strength of Sin, loosned the Bands of
the Grave, ransomed Sinners, and opened the Kingdom of Heaven to Penitents and
Believers. His Death gave Life to the World, and renewed Nature; so that the
Face of things is altered ever since. Thus, as upon one Account there is Reason
to lament the Death of Jesus Christ, so upon another, there is no less Reason
to rejoice; for by it God is glorified, Jesus exalted, and Mankind saved.

But when we leave off to mourn for III. Why Jesus Christ requires us to mourn
rather for our selves than him.
Christ, we should continue to mourn for our selves: So you see here, that our
Lord bids the Women moderate their Grief upon his Account, but still
requires it for themselves, which was the third thing proposed. Weep not for
me, but for your selves. And very good Reason; alas! There is more than
sufficient Cause for this Mourning: For though Jesus Christ has merited Salvation
for us, yet our natural Wretchedness, our Original and Actual Guilt is no less
than it was; both which are deplorable, and neither of them can ever be enough
lamented. And if we are not sensible of the heinous Nature of these, let us
look upon the persecuted, reviled, mocked, buffetted, scourged, and crucified
Jesus; let us call to mind his bitter Death and Sufferings, and these will
instruct us: For all these things befell him for our sake, and upon our
Account. The Jews, who crucified him, and put him to so vile and shameful a
Death, were only the Instruments: But otherwise every one of us, as well as
they, were the Cause and Occasion of all that evil which befell him. They are
to be considered only as the common Executioner, who executes the Law and the
Will of the Judge, and consequently our Rage and Indignation should not be
against them, but against the Crimes which caused and required so heavy a
Punishment. Now, they were not his own Crimes for which he suffered; for he
knew no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth; he was a Lamb without Spot
and Blemish: But he was made Sin for us. Surely (as the Prophet speaks) he has
born our griefs, and carried our sorrows; Is. 5. 3, 4, 5.
he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was laid upon him, and he received stripes, that we
might be healed. Let us not go about to clear our selves of all Accession to
the Death of this good and righteous Person, because we are come to the World
so long after it fell out, and are not of the Race of those who laid wicked and
violent hands on him: For though Jesus died but once, yet he did bear the Sins
of all, and was charged with the Sins of all that went before, or shall come
after. From the time that he was set apart to be the Sacrifice for Sin, he
bears the Iniquity of Men; and that is from the beginning; wherefore he is
called the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, that is, appointed to
be slain. And therefore our sins come in among the rest; and consequently we
have all Reason to deplore his Death, and to bewail our own Wretchedness and
Sin, which was in part the Cause of it. O ye Children of Men, ye of the sinful
Race of Adam, come and behold the wretched and deplorable State of your Nature;
look upon the Cross, and let thine Eyes see Jesus bleeding and dying on it, and
then consider that Blood was shed to wash away thy natural Filthiness; and his
Life taken, to redeem thee from Death. O how unreasonable! How insolent a thing
is Pride in Man! Art thou Proud, who have an evil Disease cleaving to thee, and
inherent to all thy race, which cannot be cleansed but by the precious Blood of
the Eternal Son of God? Art thou vain, who art born such a slave, that nothing
could have ransomed thee, except the Death and Sufferings of the Lord of Life
and Glory? Pride, Arrogance, and Boasting are no wise suitable to Persons of
our Condition, but Mourning and Weeping are very proper, especially considering
the guilt we have contracted since our coming to the World; the heinousness of
which the Cross of Christ will also show us: for that heavy Cross was laid on
him to take away the guilt of those Sins which we daily commit. The Son of God
was humbled and Crowned with Thorns, to make atonement for our Pride and
Ambition; he was stripped naked, because of our Covetousness; he was unmercifully
treated, that he might bear the Punishment of our Revenge and Cruelty toward
our Brethren. The inward agony of his Soul was occasioned by our wanton Mirth
and Lasciviousness; and that he might be a Propitiation for our Excess and
Riot, there was nothing left him but Vinegar and Gall to drink. His Bowels, his
Hands and Feet were pierced upon the account of our Oaths and Blasphemies; In a
word, he was mocked, had no pity showed him, was Scourged and put to Death,
contrary to Law, Justice, and Equity, because we are false and treacherous, and
have no respect to the Commands of God. Ye Fools, who make a mock of Sin, and
who think it but a Sport to commit Iniquity, come hither, be instructed, and
learn to be Wise. Is the Shame and the Pain? Is the Agony and Grief? Is the
Death, and are the unspeakable Sufferings of Jesus the Son of God only a Sport?
Are these things only matter of Laughter? Has any the Impudence either to say
it, or to think it? No, sure. But then, if these be bitter Sport, what shall we
think of our Sins which produce it? for the Sufferings of our Lord are only the
Effects of our Sins. Does it not trouble every honest and thinking Man, when he
is so unfortunate as to be the occasion of any Evil and Mischief to another?
Casual Murder or Manslaughter by an accidental Rencounter, the throwing of a
Stone, the shooting of a Bow or Gun, or the like, do not infer guilt, the
Actors are innocent when they have no design of that Nature in their head; and
yet no Man, who has not lost Humanity, but will be affected when any such
Misfortune falls in his hands, and his Grief will be so much the greater as the
Person whose Death is occasioned is worthy and deserving. What cause of Grief
then have we? who not accidentally, but wittingly and willingly, by our
deliberate Sins and Transgressions have drawn Death on the Innocent and
Righteous Jesus; and that too the worst of Deaths, the most shameful, the most
painful, and the most bitter Death of the Cross? Have we not reason to weep for
our selves? Can we ever bewail enough either our misfortune or wretchedness by
Nature, or our guilt through our actual Transgressions? Certainly we should
lament our condition on all occasions, should set apart times for it, and
especially at occasions of this Nature, when our guilt and the sad Effects of
it is represented to us, we should mourn and weep. This is the only way to
clear our selves, to lessen our guilt, and to keep innocent Blood from being
charged upon us. Blessed are they that thus mourn, for they shall be comforted.
They who sow in tears, shall reap in joy. Jesus shall bear the Iniquities of
those who regret his Death, and their own guilt which caused it, and made it
necessary; his Blood shall wash away their guilt, and his Death shall prevent
their Eternal Death, for he who knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we might
become the righteousness of God through him, 2 Cor. v.

But as the Death and Sufferings of Jesus Christ procures Mercy to the humble
and Penitent, so his Blood calls for vengeance upon the hardened and
impenitent. Which leads me to IV. The dreadful Effects of the death of Jesus
Christ upon the Impenitent.
the last thing in the Text, for upon this account he added, and weep for your
Children; for behold the days are coming, etc. by this intimating that the
Imprecations of the People were ready to light upon them: for as they cried out
and wished, his blood be upon us and our Children; so to revenge it, sore and
heavy Calamities were impending over the City and the whole Nation. Jesus spoke
not these words from any Spirit of desire of Revenge, nor out of any
complacency at those sad Evils which were to befall them for the Injuries done
to himself. It is a fault which too many are guilty of, when they think
themselves wronged, and cannot at present either revenge or remedy it, they
delight and please themselves with the thoughts of God's revenging their
quarrel. But Jesus was far from this temper; for we find in the 19th. of this
Gospel, That when he beheld the City, he wept over it, out of Compassion of
those Evils which he saw would come upon it. And they who have the same Mind in
them which was in him, will neither desire the destruction of their Enemies,
nor rejoice at it; but will both pray against it, and fear and tremble when
they see it unavoidable. But our Lord uttered these words to testify his
Divinity and Godhead, and his Love and good Will even to those sinful Men; his
Divinity in that he knew what was to come; for none knows future things but
God alone; his Love and good Will in that he forewarned them of their Danger,
that being forewarned they might (if possible) either prevent it, or obtain a
delay and suspension of it.

When he bids them weep for their Children, he does not mean the Children of
these Women only or particularly, but the whole Generation of the Jews; for he
speaks to those Women in the Name of the whole Inhabitants of Jerusalem, or
rather of all the People of Iudaea; therefore they are called Daughters of
Jerusalem, which is as much as to say Israelites; for Jerusalem was the Chief
or Mother-city, and to be styled after it did import their relation to, and
interest in that state. The word Behold, denotes the certainty of what he
foretells, by saying, the days are coming, he lets them know that the Calamity
approaches and is not far off, as indeed it fell out within Forty Years. The
greatness and dreadfulness of that Calamity he holds out, by telling that it
shall be then said, Blessed are the barren, and the womb that never bare, and
the paps which never gave suck. For these words are not to be taken absolutely,
but with a respect unto these Evil days. In times of Peace, in the days of
Prosperity it is a great Blessing and Comfort to have Children; and especially
it was thought so among the People of the Jews: But in times of grievous
Trouble and sad Calamity, when War, or Famine, or Pestilence rages, they who
have Children, are more heavily afflicted than those who want them: for besides
the Evils which they suffer in their own Person, they suffer also in the
Persons of their Children, and are affected with their Misery. Moreover, Women
who are either with Child, or who have young Ones sucking at their Breast,
cannot so easily escape Calamities, or provide against them as others. Some
also do think that this may have a particular reference to what afterward fell
out at the Destruction of Jerusalem, viz. That during the strictness of the
Siege, some were reduced to that strait, that to preserve their own Lives they
Eat the flesh of their own Children, which could not but be very grievous to
Parents. However, it is to be interpreted not with any relation to Peoples
Spiritual or Eternal State; for in respect of that, there is no difference
betwixt the having and wanting Children: but it is to be understood wholly as
to this Life, and that too, only in relation to Times of great Trouble and sad
Calamity.

As to what follows, that then they shall begin to say to the Mountains, fall
on us, and to the Hills, cover us: This is a further intimation of the dreadful
Calamity of these Days, for People shall then be in such Consternation and
Fear, that they shall wish Death rather than Life, and any kind of sudden
Death, rather than to live to see, and feel such unspeakable Misery. And as all
this was foretold here, and Matthew. 24. so whoever is pleased to read Josephus
his History will find, That all was actually accomplished upon Flavius
Vespasian and Titus his Son their Invading Iudaea; Besieging and Sacking of
Jerusalem. For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in a
dry? As it is a Proverbial Speech, so it is here used by our Lord, both for a
Proof of the Prediction, and also as a Reason why such Evils are inflicted.
Green Wood is neither proper nor profitable fuel: but sure if they be forced
to cut it down and make use of it, they will not pass by what is dry, and
withered, and good for nothing; so seeing God has suffered his own Son to be
thus treated, who never displeased him, they might assure themselves, that such
gross and notorious Sinners would not escape. As St. Peter says, If the
Righteous scarcely are saved, where shall the Wicked and Ungodly appear. Our
Lord, by comparing himself here to a green, flourishing, and fruitful Tree,
does point out the greatness of their Sin, who thus treated him, and persecuted
him to Death with such Malice and Cruelty: And he also clearly intimates to
them, that for this Cause all these Evils would come upon them. A little before
this time, he laid it more plainly home to them, by the Parable of the wicked
Husbandmen, who, when they saw the Son, said, This is the Heir, come, let us
kill him, and seize on the Inheritance. And accordingly they caught him, and
cast him out of the Vineyard, and slew him. The Doom of these Husbandmen, the
Jews pronounced with their own Mouth: for when our Lord asked, when the Lord of
the Vineyard comes, what will he do unto these Husbandmen? They replied, He
will miserably destroy these wicked men, and will let out his Vineyard to other
Husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their season. Upon which, he
instantly added, Did ye never read in the Scriptures, the stone which the
Builders refused, the same is become the head of the corner. This is the Lord's
doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. Therefore I say unto you, the Kingdom
of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof. Whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever
it shall fall it will grind him to powder. The Application was so plain, and
the meaning so obvious, that it is said, that the Chief-Priests and Pharisees
perceived that he spoke of them. Matthew. xxi. 38, 39.

These Predictions, and the Event Jesus may be Crucified again.
which in all things answered them, declare, what a heinous Crime it is to be
guilty of shedding the Blood of Jesus, and what a Provocation it was to the
great God to see his Son crucified by Men. But some may perhaps say, what is
all this to us? This was the Sin of the Jews, long since committed, and which
can never be acted over again, seeing Jesus the Son of God has his abode in
Heaven, and so is out of the reach of Men: and therefore it is impertinent to
insist now upon it. They, who say or think so, must give me leave to say, that
they are mistaken, and do deceive themselves; for Christ may yet be Crucified,
and with as great Provocation to God, nay, with greater than was before. Does
not St. Paul tell us, Heb. vi. 6. of some who crucify to themselves the Son of
God afresh, and put him to open shame: and both by that Chapter and the 10th.
we are made to understand who they are that do it, viz. They who Sin wilfully
after they have received the Knowledge of the Truth; They that undervalue the
Death of Jesus, and are not so affected with it as to hate and forsake Sin,
which was the cause of it; but on the contrary, cherish, indulge, and love it:
for they who do so, by an after Act, consent to his Death, and are guilty of
his Blood.

Not to speak what Jesus suffers in his Servants and Members, by the
Persecutions which they meet with, for his Sake, and for their Observance of
his Laws: Jesus still suffers immediately in himself, when his Doctrine is
despised, his Authority affronted, and his Power resisted. They who question
the veracity of his Doctrine, confirmed by Miracles and Prophecies, laugh at
the Truth and Mysteries which he has revealed, and quarrel at his Ordinances
and Institutions, these Persons do violence to his Prophetical Office: They who
lessen the Merits of his Death, and the worth and price of that Sacrifice which
he offered; they who advance their own Righteousness, and put little or no
Confidence in his Mediation, and make the Mediation of others as necessary,
they affront and do violence to his Priesthood. They who dispute the Justice,
Reasonableness, and Necessity of his Laws; they who refuse to walk by them, and
who resist the Motions of his Spirit, even they do violence to him as King. All
of this Spirit and Temper would have concurred with the Jews in crucifying him;
they are Enemies to our Lord, and (as the Apostle says) crucify him afresh,
and put him to open shame, And who do thus crucify him, their Sin is rather
more grievous and more provoking than that of the Jews before. For St. Peter
says, that through ignorance they did it. And St. Paul, that if they had
known, they would not have crucified the Lord of life and glory. But now he has
appeared with such Light and Evidence, that he cannot but be made known to all
who have Eyes to see, or Hearts to understand, or a desire to be informed. And
therefore great is the guilt now of crucifying him, and putting him again to
shame. He that despised Moses Law died without mercy, under two or three
witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy
who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the
Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite
unto the Spirit of Grace? Heb. x. 28.

What then shall we think of these V. The Application.
Nations and of our selves, who are Chargeable with this very great Sin? What
cause of Mourning, and what cause of Fear have we upon this very account? I may
say, where has there been more clear, and more frequent Instruction? And where
has it been less observed? What contempt of God and Religion? What open
Profanity, and avowed breach of the Laws of God have been among us? How often,
and how horridly has the Sacred Name of God been Blasphemed both Publicly and
Privately? How little regard has been showed to Jesus Christ, or to any thing
he did or suffered for us? To what purpose has his Blood and Wounds, his Agony
and Passion been declared and set forth to us? Whose hearts have they touched?
How few have been prevailed upon by these to forsake Sin? but on the contrary,
even in spite of them, they go on and continue in it. And all the use which
some make of them is, to take occasion from them, to forge New and Different
Oaths for setting off their Profane and Idle Discourse. Have not some run up
to that height of Impiety, as not only in common Conversation, to mock the
Doctrine and Institutions of Jesus Christ, to droll upon his Person and
Actions, but also deliberately, in Writing, to publish Blasphemies that could
not be tolerated amongst Mahumetans? How many Scandalous Pamphlets have been
written of late, which either by plain Assertions, or clear Innuendo's, divest
him of his Godhead, spoil him of the Merits of his Death, represent him as an
Impostor, and all the System of his Gospel as a Cheat, though the whole
contrivance is not only highly worthy of God, but does as fully and as
evidently set forth his infinite Wisdom and Power, as the Universal Frame of
this Material World. But though all have not been so grossly wicked, yet all Ranks
and Orders of Men, Rulers, Pastors, and People have, one way or other, less or
more, been guilty of grieving the Holy Spirit of God, and the Righteous Spirit
of Jesus Christ: And therefore we have reason to fear, that his Anger will
break forth and fall down in some heavy Judgment upon these Nations, as it
happened to the Jews. I do not pretend to any peculiar Privacy into the Secret
Councils of God, nor to be acquainted with his Purposes toward the public
state of these Kingdoms; wherefore I shall not denounce any particular
Judgments in the Name of God, having no special Warrant for it: but I must say,
that if his Word, and the Methods of his Providence be a Rule; if we may take
any measures of Conjecture either from his Nature or his Threatenings, or the
Example of others, there is too much reason to look for some grievous
Calamities to these Lands, unless a speedy and Universal Repentance prevent it.
We are not the safer that we are secure: Nay, our Security is a sign that our
Ruin and Calamity are not far off. At this time, when our Lord gave this
Warning, the Jews were very secure; they thought of nothing less than the utter
destruction of their Nation and State. When God has been provoked to determine
the Ruin of a People, he uses to possess them first with a Drowsiness, and to
cast them into a Slumber, that they may be incapable to prevent it. Make the
heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, least
they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their
heart, and convert and be healed, said the Lord to Isaiah, Isa. vi. 10.

God has been of a long time punishing Nations and Kingdoms about us; but the
voice of the Rod upon others has not awakened us, for all this we have slept
on in our Sins. Wherefore he has drawn a little nearer, and he has laid his
Judgments at our own Door; he has shaken the Foundation of our State, and with
that shake, tumbled many Persons from their Honors, their Preferments, their
places of Ease, Comfort and Subsistence: and yet still there is little or no
awakening. As with Men who are suddenly interrupted in their rest, and whose
Sleep is hastily broken, there is so much sense as to fret, repine, and
complain of Uneasiness, and to be angry with those who disturb us: But there is
no awakening to true Repentance, no Rouzing up to Provide for our Safety, and
to prevent the Danger threatened. He that mocked God, and laughed at Religion
before, does so still; He that uttered Oaths and Blasphemies, continues to do
so; the Drunkard continues his Drinking; he that was Filthy, Unjust, or Unholy,
is so still; every one continues his former wicked course, and few break off
their Sins by Righteousness, or their Iniquities by showing mercy to the Poor.
Surely it is meet to say unto God; I have born Chastisement, I will not offend
any more; that which I see not, teach thou me; If I have done iniquity, I will
do no more. But who says this? Alas! there be Few to stand in the gap to
deprecate God's Wrath, but too too many who by their hardness and impenitent
heart treasure up to themselves and to the Nations Wrath even in this day of
Wrath. If I had time, I could draw a Parallel betwixt our selves and the Jews,
our Temper and Behavior and theirs, before all those Evils came upon them.
But, God forbid, that our End be as theirs, or as some other Churches of the
East, who as they followed them in their Sins, so they were Partakers of their
Judgments.

But whatever be the Public Fate of these Nations, and though all may escape
Temporal Judgments in this Life; yet how do Impenitent and Incorrigible Sinners
think to escape the eternal Judgments of the other World? The Destruction of
Jerusalem was a Type of the Day of Judgment: the Calamity of the Jews, the
Horror and Consternation they were in, when the Romans utterly ruined them,
though it had no Precedent, nor has any thing fallen out since like it; yet all
was but a faint Shadow of the Day of Judgment, but a sorry figure and
representation of that. Then it is that Men will cry most Pathetically, and
with the greatest earnestness, to the Hills and to the Mountains to fall on
them, and to cover them from the sight of the Lamb. They had better meet with a
Bear robbed of her Whelps, or a Lion roaring, than the Lamb of God that Day: for
then he will be Terrible, and nothing can shelter them from him. None shall
find Mercy then, or be acquitted, save such as have Jesus for their Advocate,
and who are sprinkled with his Blood. But do incorrigible and impenitent
Sinners expect this? Or dare they ask it of Him? Will they, or can they employ
Him, whom all their life they have affronted, and grieved, and resisted? Or,
Suppose that they should have such Impudence, would it prevail? Will He plead
for them; nay, He will plead against them* and his Blood will speak no other
thing in behalf of them, than that of Abel's; it will even call for Vengeance.
Jesus Christ, in that Day, will only take part with the Penitent Believers: All
others shall be left to the Wrath of God; which, as a Consuming Fire, shall
devour them. O consider this ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces,
when there shall be none to deliver. Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die? Now is
the day, now is the acceptable time. Seek the Lord while he may be found, and
call upon him while he is near. O know and consider, in this your day, the
things that belong to your Peace, lest they be hid from your eyes. And may the
Merciful God add his Enlightening and Converting Grace to this Exhortation, and
these Instructions, that they may prove Effectual to our Conversion, for the
magnifying of his Mercy, and the Saving of our selves from the Wrath that is to
come.

Amen.
SERMON VI. ON EASTER DAY.
1 PETER I. 3, 4. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. To an inheritance incorruptible
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you.
THESE Words are a Form of Thanksgiving proper to be used on such Occasions as
this, which has now brought us together; and a due Consideration of them may
be sufficient to excite in us most grateful Sentiments of God's Goodness to us,
and of our Obligations to him. They were first uttered in Behalf of the
dispersed Jews, but only upon the account of their being Christians, and called
to the Hope of Glory, which Privilege is common to us; and therefore the Text
is no less applicable to us than it was to them. Even upon our account it may
be said, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. In which
words we may take notice of these particulars. First, the Author of our
Happiness, viz. God and the Father, etc. Secondly, the Motive which induced him
to bless us, his abundant mercy. Thirdly, the special Benefits conferred on us,
which are, the begetting us again unto a lively hope, an inheritance, etc.
Fourthly, the means by which the same is wrought and assured to us, viz. the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. All these are important things,
worthy to be known; and therefore (God willing) I shall speak to each of them:
And I beseech you to lend an attentive and unprejudiced Ear.

To begin with the First. As Nature I. The Author of our Happiness, God.
teaches us to be thankful; so that we may acquit our selves of this Duty, it
is necessary to know, whom we are obliged to; for if we make an Acknowledgment
to any other than to him who bestowed the Benefits, we defraud him who bestowed
them, and act as foolishly and unjustly as he who pays a Debt to another than
the Person to whom it is owing. Now, we are directed here to pay our Thanks to
God; and indeed he is the only Author of all the good we have of whatsoever
Sort, whether Spiritual or Temporal. Do not err, my beloved Brethren, every
good and Jam. 1. 16, 17.
perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights, with
whom is no variableness neither shadow of turning. We have nothing but what we
have received from him. It is true, all things are not given us immediately by
the Hand of God himself; oftentimes Blessings are dispensed by the means of his
Creatures: But whatever way, or by whomsoever Good comes to us, God is, and
ought to be acknowledged the Author thereof. Good comes not to us by chance,
nor from any other than God; if any other thing be used in the bestowing it, it
is only as an Instrument in his Hand: Neither Devils, nor Men, nor any other
Creature can do us hurt, unless God give them leave: Nor can any do us good,
but as they are prompted and empowered thereto by God. If Medicines cure, it is
because he blesses them; if our Industry and Diligence enrich, it is because
his Providence accompanies it; if Friends and Acquaintance are beneficial, it
is because he puts it in their Heart and enables them. Does the preaching of
Paul or Apollo convince thy Conscience, work in thee Faith and Repentance? It
is only because God works with them; it is his Spirit only which makes their
Ministry effectual; for what is Paul? And what is Apollos? The one may plant,
and the other may water, but the Increase is from God. Let none therefore
sacrifice unto their net, or burn incense unto their drag, though by them their
portion is fat, and their meat plenteous: Neither let them boast of Men, and
make all their Acknowledgments to them, for either spiritual or temporal good
which comes by their means; but both for the one and the other, let all look up
to God, who gives to all liberally; let us give Thanks and Praise to him; for
it is he, and he only who makes us glad by his Work: As he made us, and not we
our selves, so from him are all our present Comforts, and the Hope of what is
to come.

But as all our Acknowledgments are God and the Father.
due to God, so that it may appear they are directed aright, to the one true
God, we ought to address them in, and by Jesus Christ, to God and the Father of
Jesus Christ, as St. Peter teaches us here. When he says, God and the Father,
etc. He does not mean distinct Persons; the Conjunction ( and) here is
explicative, and thereby the Apostle points out whom he meant by God, viz. the
Father of Jesus Christ, that is, he who sent Jesus Christ into the World, and
has manifested himself to Men by him. This Manifestation is the fullest and
most glorious, and so particular, that it is a certain Mark to distinguish the
true God from false Gods, and the Worshippers of the one from the Worshippers
of the other. Jews, Turks, and Pagans, and all those (who worship their own
Imaginations) will readily say, Blessed be God: But none will add, the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, but such as know and own the true God indeed. Ever
since this Manifestation of the true God, he has styled himself by it, and
will have all to acknowledge him under this Title: And they who own it not, not
only dishonor God, and rob him of a great deal of Glory, which thereby
redounds to him, but also they may be said to revolt from the Knowledge and
Acknowledgment of the true God. He that honors not the Son, honors not
the Father which has sent him, says Christ, John viij. 23. And St. John
himself tells us, Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father, but
he that acknowledges the Son has the Father also. 1 Epistle ii. 23. Qui
(...)udam Dei Majestatem extra Christum mente concipiunt, Idolum habent Dei
loco, sicut Iudaei and Turcae; proinde quisquis verum Deum vere cognoscere
cupit, hoc patris Christi titulo ipsum vestiat, nisi enim quoties men's nostrae
Deum quaerit, Christus occurrat; vaga and confusa errabit, donec prorsus
deficiat. Calvinus in locum.
Wherefore such Acts of Worship as do thus particularly discriminate the true
God, and are so appropriate to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
they are applicable to none other are very necessary: For this Reason our
Initiation into the Worship and Service of the true God is, by baptizing us
into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: And for the same Reason we
ought often to receive the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, for hereby we
make an express and peculiar Acknowledgment of this one true God, viz. the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. By this also it appears, how suitable a part
of Christian Worship the usual Doxology is, and how proper to annex it to the
Psalms of David, whereby they are adapted to the New Revelation of the Gospel,
and rendered so much Christian, that neither Jews, nor any but Christians will
join in the Use of them. II. The Motive which induced God.


Having thus considered the Author of our Happiness; the Motive which induced
him to bless us comes next to be considered. The Obligation which arises by
the conferring a Benefit is more or less, according to the Motive or Cause
which prompted it; if it was extorted by Force and Compulsion, if one be so
driven to it that he cannot shun a Courtesy, scarce any Obligation accrueth
thereby; if it be done out of respect to after Requitals, it is but a mercenary
Kindness, and though it obliges somewhat, yet the Obligation is none of the
greatest, it only binds us to make some Recompense, and particularly that
which the Person might have an Eye to, if it be reasonable, as the Services of
Servants binds to the paying their Wages, which is all they have before them;
and when that is done, the Obligation of their Services cease. But if a
Favor be conferred freely, out of pure Love and good Will, the Obligation is
both perpetual and of the highest Nature: Such a Favor ought never to be
forgotten; and if it be great in it self too, it binds to the utmost Love and
Thankfulness. Now, such is our Obligation to God; for as he has blessed us
with the highest Blessings (as shall be seen afterward) so he has done it
most freely, merely out His abundant Mercy.
of his abundant mercy, as the Text says: And the same is intimated every
where throughout the Scripture. Through the tender mercy of our God the day
spring from on high has visited us, said Zachary, Luke i. 78. Of his own will
begat he us, says St. Paul; Titus iii. 5. and Romans ix. 15. I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion, so then that it is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy: Therefore in the same Chapter, they who
are saved and prepared unto Glory are called Vessels, not of Justice or of
Righteousness, but of mercy, to teach us, that if it had not been for Mercy
none would have been saved Posset Apostolus ( says Fulgentius) vasa
misericordiae potius vasa justitiae nuncupare. Sed si vasa justitiae
vocarentur, forsitan ex seipsis habere justitiam putarent. Nunc autem cum vasa
misericordiae dicit, proculdubio quid ipsi fuerint, non tacuit, quare quid eis
a Deo collatum sit evidenter ostendit. Lib. de Praedest. p. 58.
.

And indeed to what can our Salvation be ascribed but to the Mercy of God? It
cannot be said, that he was constrained thereto by some external Cause; for who
can compel the Almighty? Who can prescribe Laws to the absolute Sovereign of
Heaven and Earth? It was not the Hope of Profit that moved him; for (as Eliphaz
said) Can a Man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable
unto himself? Is it any Pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous? Or is
it gain to him, that thou make thy ways perfect? My Goodness extends not to
thee, says David; for if thou be righteous what give thou him? Or what
receives he of thine hand? Thy wickedness may hurt a Man as thou art, and thy
righteousness may profit the Son of Man. But we cannot make God either better
or worse: He stands in no need of us; nor is it possible for any either in
Heaven or Earth to add, or take from his Greatness, Happiness, or Glory; for
what can be added to, or impaired from an infinite Being? Suppose God was
obliged to give those celestial Mansions to such as could merit them, yet who
could claim them even on that Account? His Angels he charge with folly, What
is Man then that he should be clean? And he which is born of a Woman, that he
should be righteous? If he did enter into Judgment, who could stand? What Man
could be justified in his sight? Whatever God would have been obliged to, if
Man had continued innocent, yet sure considering us in our lapsed State, it
must be acknowledged that it is Mercy only which saves us, unless we say, that
he is obliged by Rebellion, Treachery, impious Affronts, wicked Insolences and
continued Provocations: But being these can only be thought to irritate his
Anger; therefore we ought to conclude with the Scripture, that it is of the
Lord's mercies that we are not consumed: And that we are not only not consumed,
as we deserve, but moreover called to Glory and eternal Life, is not Mercy
simply, but abundant, yea superabundant mercy, as our Text speaks. Would you
but take a View of your Hearts and Actions for one Day, and consider not only
the lesser Follies and Impertinencies you are guilty of, but the grosser
Faults, the unclean and wicked Thoughts which arise in your Hearts, the rash
and evil Words which proceed from your Mouth, what Sins are committed, and what
Good is left undone, in how many things you offend altogether, and how light
the best Actions would be if they were weighed in the Balance? I say, were
those impartially examined, the Guilt of one Day would be found exceeding
great; and then what would it be if the Sins of all the Days and Years we lived
were added? And seeing our Case is such, tell me, is it not Mercy only which
tieth the Hands of Divine Justice, nay, abundant Mercy which makes God to pass
over so many and so great Offenses, and not only to spare us, but to be willing
to make us happy. Thus we see how free God's Love is to usward, and that
nothing but his own abundant Mercy could move him to set his Heart upon us, and
to do us good, which partly increases the Obligation of his Benefits, though
they be in themselves too, as great as can be, as will appear by taking a View
of this Sum of them that St. Peter gives us here. Which was

The Third Point proposed. The III. The Benefits conferred.
Apostle designed not to give a Catalogue of all God's wonderful Works to us
the Children of Men; this would have swelled his Epistle much beyond what it
is. He passes by the many Thousand Mercies he has done, and daily does for
our Bodies and bodily Life, and only takes notice of what he has done for our
Souls; because on their Welfare our Happiness mainly depends. The good of the
Body and present Life would yield small Content if the Soul were lost: And if
the Soul be saved, if it have those things which are agreeable to it, and which
perfect it, there is abundant Matter of rejoicing, though the Comforts of the
Body be much wanting. Wherefore we see the Apostle here teaches those to whom
he writes, (who were Strangers scattered abroad, and often persecuted) to
rejoice notwithstanding; because through the abundant mercy of God they were
begotten again to a lively hope, etc.

The first Benefit reckoned up here is, Begotten again.
that we are begotten again; and indeed it is the Foundation and Beginning of
all our Happiness; without this, it were simply impossible to make us not
miserable. Now, by this is meant the giving us a New or Second Birth, a putting
us into another State than what we are in by our present natural Generation. If
any ask, what needed this? Were we not well enough before? It might suffice to
answer, That there was great need for it, seeing God thought fit to do it, and
that his doing it is made an Instance of his great Mercy; for Deus and Natura
nihil faciunt frustra. But if this satisfy not, the Necessity of this and the
Greatness of the Benefit will evidently appear to such as view the Wretchedness
of our State by ordinary natural Generation; I say, ordinary natural Generation
and not our first Creation; for Man as he came first out of the Hands of God
was in a good State, he was like his Maker, Wise, Holy, Pure, and Innocent. If
he had kept this State, there would have been no need of renewing it, or of
making him over again. But he kept not this first State, but fell into a State
of Sin and Corruption; he lost the Favor of God, incurred his Wrath and
Displeasure, and became liable to his Wrath and Curse; and all the Miseries of
this present Life and that which is to come. And as all Mankind are descended
from those first Parents since they fell from their original Righteousness and
Purity, and have been propagated in a State of Sin and Corruption, so all are
generated Sinners, filthy and corrupt. The sinful Leprosy of Adam is inherent
in all his Children, and the Curse he brought on himself is entailed on all his
Posterity. Behold, says David, I was shapen in Iniquity, and in sin did my
Mother conceive me, Psalm. li. 5. And our Savior tells us, That which is born
of the flesh is flesh; for if the Fountain be corrupt, what flows from it must
be corrupt too; who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, not one? It is
said, Genesis v. that Adam was made after the Image of God, but that he himself
begat a Son in his own Likeness, viz. in a State of Sin and Corruption. And as
this befalls all of us, for Sin is an inseparable Consequent of ordinary
natural Generation, so that it renders us most ugly and loathsome. Sin is the
Disease of the Soul, and causes as great Deformity and Vileness to the Soul,
as the worst of Diseases to the Body. If any be not sensible of this, it is,
because it is so common and ordinary, and is, in a manner, natural to them; for
so we see long Custom and Familiarity will lessen the Horror of things which
ought to be abhorred. But whatever they think, whose Senses are benumbed with
Sin, yet others nauseat and abhor Sin as the worst of Evils. Sin is so
abominable in God's Sight, that his Eye cannot behold it. Saints, and such as
are begotten again, complain heavily of this Defilement of their Nature, and
look upon it with Grief and Indignation. David sets it forth under the
Similitude of a most filthy bodily Disease, Psalm. xxxviii. and Ezekiel. xvi. This
our natural State is elegantly compared to an exposed Infant of wretched
Parents, lying wallowing in its Blood and natural Pollution, and wanting those
good Offices which are necessary to make it live.

But as there is Filthiness in this State, so likewise much Pain and Misery:
All the Anguish and Trouble of our Spirits proceed hence; from this Corruption
and Depravation of our Natures come those inward Torments and Vexations of Mind
which we feel; were it not for this we could draw Contentment and Satisfaction
from any external Condition; as a Man in perfect Health can sleep soundly upon
any Bed: And if one be pained with the Gout, Stone, or other Disease, how
unreasonable were it to cast the blame of his Trouble and Uneasiness upon the
Bed he lies, or the House he dwells in! So the Cause of our Grief and Trouble
is more within than without us, it is more to be ascribed to the Disorder of
our Minds by Sin, than to the outward Inconveniences of our external Condition
in the World. But besides the inward Pain of Sin, which is the Result of its
Nature, it is loaded with external Misery; for it is prosecuted by the Wrath of
Almighty God, and his Displeasure falls heavy upon it. Upon the wicked he shall
rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the
portion of their cup, Psalm. ii. 6. Now this Wretchedness of our first natural
Generation shows both the Necessity and Advantage of being regenerated. How
happy a thing is it to be washen from the Guilt, and cleansed from the Filth of
Sin, to be delivered from the Punishment, and freed from the Power and Dominion
thereof? That is, to be begotten again in the Language of the Text; for all
that is implied in these Words, Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven,
whose sin is covered. Blessed is the Man unto whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity, and in whose Spirit there is no guile, Psalm. xxxii. 1.

But though this be considerable, ye(...) it is not all. God has not only
delivered us from the Miseries of a sinful State, but he has also designed for
us greater Glory and Felicity than what we lost by Sin: The actual Possession
hereof is not till hereafter; for at present we are in the State of Children or
Heirs while they are Minors; and therefore now only we have Hope; but it is a
lively hope, as the Text expresses it. A lively Hope.
It is Hope which enliveneth the Soul, it quickens the Spirit, and rejoiceth
the Heart; but without Hope the Spirit flags, and the Heart faints and
languisheth. It is Hope which stirs up to all Endeavors; Hope is the Wheel
which moves all Designs, it sets them on and keeps them a going. The Labourer
plougheth and sows, because he has Hope; the Merchant ventureth to the Sea,
and the Soldier to the War out of Hope; and it is this which makes others
follow the Court. But these Worldly Hopes are much inferior to this Christian
Hope to which God has now begotten us. This is far more than any or all of
them together: And there is more Reason to rejoice and be glad of this Hope
than of these other: For neither the Object of them is so great, nor the Ground
of them so certain. What worldly Men hope, or what any Man hops of these
things which relate to this World, when narrowly examined, amounts to no great
matter, often times we are as well without these things as with them, and
sometimes better. And however how uncertain a thing is worldly Hope, and how
soon and how easily is it blasted? What Men trust to for effectuating their
Hope is vain, and deceitful, and withal weak and unable to resist and overcome
those Difficulties which fall in, in the Prosecution of our Designs. So that we
see daily many ashamed and disappointed of their Hopes, and not only come short
of them, but also to meet with the quite contrary. Thus Shame and Wounds fall
to the Soldiers share instead of his fansied Booty and Preferment; the
Labourer expected a rich crop, and is reduced to Cleanness of Teeth; the
Merchant turns Bankrupt, who was blown up with the Hopes of great Wealth; the
Courtier is forced away with Disgrace instead of the Honor and Command he
promised himself, and that Alliance which was enterprized with such
Earnestness, and was begun with so fair and big Promises produces nothing but
continued Vexations and Grief. This is often the end of worldly Hope, and
therefore it may be called a dead Hope; but the Hope of a Christian is a lively
Hope; for it never dies till it end in Fruition: And in the mean time it has
more Life and Vigor in it to quicken and animate the Spirit of Man. The hope
which we have, says St. Paul, is an anchor of the Soul both sure and steadfast,
Heb. vi. 19. for it is founded upon two immutable things, viz. God and his
Promises; his Power can never fail, and his Word as little; but as he is still
able, so he is ever willing to accomplish what has gone out of his Mouth.

But let us see what is our hope; it is, An Inheritance.
says the Text, to an inheritance. This is more than the World gives to her
Children: All in this World are not born to Inheritances, even those Fathers,
who have Lands and Possessions, bestow not the Heritage of them on all their
Children, one only of the Sons gets it: but our heavenly Father gives to every
one of his Children an Inheritance. Fear not, little flock, says Christ, it is
your Father's will to give you a Kingdom. And as we have an Inheritance, so an
Excellent one, for its Kind and Quality. Some Kingdoms and Inheritances are
petty and inconsiderable, and afford small matter to brag off: but this
Inheritance is so great, that there is none greater, nor any comparable to it.

For, First, It is said to be Incorruptible: Incorruptible.
this respects the duration of it, and the like cannot be said of any other
Inheritance. The Psalmist tells us, Men's inward thoughts is, that their houses
shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations, and that
therefore they call their Lands after their own names, Psalm. xlix. 2. but who
sees not the Vanity of this thought? What Chapping and Changing of Inheritances
is daily made? How do they run away, that no Foresight, nor Law, nor Wit can
secure them? How many famous Kingdoms, and Monarchies, and Noble Families are
extinct, that there is no memory of them, except in some old dark Records? It
must therefore add much to the worth of this Inheritance, that it is Immortal
and Unchangeable.

But yet the next quality is better, for if a Possession is little worth, it is
no great matter though it pass away: but if it be good and excellent, the
perpetuity of it is much to be desired; wherefore that this Inheritance is
incorruptible is matter of great Joy, seeing it is also undefiled: by which is
meant, that Undefiled.
it is so pure as to yield nothing to give the least disgust to the Inheriter.
O rare and singular quality! No perfectly pure Enjoyment is here to be found;
all are full of unpleasant mixtures, or attended with troublesome
inconveniences which damp and spoil the Pleasure and Satisfaction of them. No
Rose is to be found but upon a Thorn, nor any Delight without some Molestation;
what takes one Sense, grates another: neither in Company or Retirement,
Solitude or Public Employment, Celibacy or Marriage, high Stations or low
Places, City or Country, nor in any condition of Humane Life is matter of full
and perfect Contentment to be found, but whatever pleases one way, displeases
another. It is the Property only of this Inheritance, here spoken of, to afford
perfect Satisfaction to the Soul, because neither its Pleasures are gross to
cloy the Mind, nor are they mixed with improper and disagreeable Ingredients to
give any disgust. It is altogether pure and Undefiled, and so the joy it yields
must be both full and pure. In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right
hand are rivers of pleasures for evermore, Psalm. xvi.

But to proceed; it is further added, that this Inheritance fades not away. In
the Original it is (...), which It fades not away.
is the Name of a Flower that never withers, but keeps always fresh and
green; and by naming this Inheritance so the Apostle designed to hold forth the
continued Vigor and Flagrancy thereof. As it lasts long, so it never waxes
old: the Infirmities and usual Appendages of Age never overtake it; it never
suffers any decay in its Strength, Beauty, Glory, or Virtue. There be many
things which at first, and while they are New, are taking and splendid, but
within a while they fail, and answer not Men's expectations as at first: But it
is not so with this Inheritance, it fades not; when Thousand thousand Ages are
past, it is still gay and flourishing, never diminished in its quality. As it
is Eternal in its Duration, so its Pleasures, Riches, and all other Advantages
are Eternal. You will ask, where lies this Inheritance? If you In the Heavens.
look for it in any of these lower Regions, you will meet with a
disappointment; neither this, nor any other Country, the Old, nor the New found
World can yield it. Many Discoveries have been made of late of Plants, Stones,
Minerals, and the like, which were not known before, but no place is found with
the Qualifications of the Text. This is only to be looked for above; it is,
says the Text, reserved in the heavens; and that it is there, we are the surer
of it; for no destroying Fire arises there; no boisterous Wind blows there;
nor does Subtilty, Malice, Cunning, and Oppression take place there; it is
without the reach of Men and Devils; and therefore we need not fear either to
be put by it, or to be justled out of it. O happy Inheritance! How blessed are
they who are called to such an Inheritance! The very hope hereof does give
greater joy than the actual Possession of all Earthly things. How little may
one be cast down with the loss of Temporal things, who has this heavenly
Inheritance ensured to him. Let not thy Crosses and Sufferings overwhelm thee
with Grief, seeing so great and so glorious an Inheritance awaits thee.

But then it will be enquired, how IV. The ground of Assurance. Jesus his
Resurrection.
came I to know it, and by what means may I be assured of it? Truly this is no
Delusion, there is undoubted Evidence of the Truth thereof, viz. the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. All this is done, says St. Peter, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead. Though the Resurrection be only
mentioned, yet all the former acts of Jesus Christ are included, as his
Incarnation, Birth, Life, Sufferings, and Death. But because the Resurrection
was the last act of his Mediatorship upon Earth, gave a luster to the rest, did
demonstrate the Merit of them, and was an evidence of their acceptance,
therefore it is put here alone instead of all the rest. Jesus Christ, by coming
in the Flesh, and by what he did in the Flesh, has wrought a perfect
Redemption for us; he was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for
our Justification, Romans iv. 25. And as he died to become a Propitiation for our
Sins, so he arose to witness that he had made a perfect atonement, and that
there is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit: for as by the offense of one, judgment
came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, the
free gift is upon all men unto justification of life, Romans v. 18. I say, to all
who believe: for as Jesus Christ by his Death and Resurrection has purchased
Salvation for us, so it is necessary that we have Faith in him, his Death, and
Resurrection, to the end we may partake of his Merits. Faith in his Death takes
away the guilt of our Sins; and Faith in his Resurrection begets us to a lively
Hope, and entitles us to this Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and which
fades not away. He, that believes, has as great assurance as the Word of God
can give him; If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
Confession is made unto Salvation, Romans x. Faith unites us to Christ, and
brings us where he is; if we believe, we shall also rise with him, and sit down
with him in heavenly places at the right hand of God. Our Thoughts therefore
should much run upon the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ; and in
particular we should frequently make remembrance of them by this Ordinance of
the Lord's Supper; which was appointed for this end, both because those means
wrought our Salvation, and that the Effects of them are conveyed to us through
Faith in them, and the serious Meditation of them. Men use to produce their
Evidences and Rights to their Earthly Heritages, and diligently to consider
them when they are brangled or like to be justled out of their Possession. Now,
the Devil, the World, and the Flesh envy this Happiness which has befallen us,
and seek daily to put us by it, by filling us with doubts and fears, and making
us question the greatness or certainty thereof. Is it not fit, nay, necessary,
then to view the means by which this was effectuated, and thereby strengthen
our Faith in them, that we may not lose our Hope, but maintain it, and assure
to our selves this blessed Inheritance.

There is no place for doubting a Matter of Fact, of which there is some
public Monument, attested by an uninterrupted Tradition, and to Commemorate
which certain Days and Ceremonies are observed. He who doubts after this, is
not to be convinced; It is in vain to reason with him, for he affronts both
Sense and Reason, by refusing his consent to reasonable things. Things past
cannot be seen, they can be proved only by Tradition or History, or some
visible Effects; He is most unreasonable who asks another Proof, or who is not
satisfied with this. Now as there is an Universal uninterrupted Tradition of
the History of Jesus Christ, as it is witnessed by the Testimony of both
Friends and Enemies to the Christian Religion; so the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper which we have this day Received, is a solemn, public, visible and
authentic Memorial of it: for no other account can be given of its
Institution, no other Reason for the devout Celebration of these Sacred Rites
from the beginning, but the Death and Sufferings of Jesus Christ; and his Death
had never been so devoutly commemorated by the Apostles and Primitive
Christians; nay, they had been ashamed of it, if there had not been clear
Conviction and Undoubted Proof of his Resurrection. By this then, it appears
that the Gospel is no cunningly devised Fable, that the History of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ is certain and true: and if this be true, our Faith is not
in vain, nor is our Hope ill grounded; then it is certain, that we have an
Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and which fades not away.

Why then do we stagger through unbelief! why are we faint and wearied in our
Minds? why do we suffer Afflictions to overwhelm us? why are we so backward to
run the Race which is set before us? why do we loiter so much about the things
of this World? and why are we so afraid of Death which is a necessary Passage
to that blessed state to which we are called. That we may not mar our own
Happiness, that we may not deprive our selves of the greatest Consolation even
of this present Life, that we may have courage to encounter Afflictions and
Death it self, and that at last we may obtain the Possession of that
Inheritance to which we have a Right and Title, let us not doubt but believe;
let us entertain a full assurance of Faith, and look unto Jesus the Author and
Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the Shame, and is set down at the right hand of God: Finally,
let us be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord,
for our labor is not in vain.

Now the God of Peace that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good Work to do his Will, working in you that which
is wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be Glory for ever
and ever. Amen.
SERMON VII. ON EASTER DAY.
1 JOHN V. 12. He that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son of
God has not life.
THE Yoke of Christ is so far from being heavy and troublesome, that on the
contrary, it is very Light and Easy: His Commands are so far from being
Grievous, that they are very Profitable; and in keeping of them there is great
Reward. It is no less our Interest than our Duty to become Christians: and we
cannot show our selves more Wise, more Careful of our own Welfare, than when we
give our selves up to be the Disciples of Jesus Christ, and to follow him
whithersoever he leads us: For, by doing so, we secure to our selves all
desirable Happiness. What is more desirable than Life? Now, He that has the
Son has Life, but he that has not the Son of God has not Life.

The Meditation of these words can never be Unseasonable, it may always be
Useful and Profitable: but it is especially very proper and pertinent for the
Day and Work which we are now setting about. I pray God we may so clearly
understand these words, and so seriously consider them, that we may not, from
any constraint, or formality only, but cheerfully and heartily join our selves
to the Lord Jesus Christ, and resolve to maintain, not only an External
Communion with him in his Sacraments and Ordinances, but an Internal one also
by Faith, Love, and Obedience; that, by so doing, we may obtain that Life, and
all the Blessed Fruits and Benefits of it, which is in and through him.

Now, That we may Treat of this Text the more profitably, we shall first
Explain the Phrases, here used, of having the Son, and of Life, and then shall
show, how True it is, That he who has the one has the other also.

As to the First: By the Son of God, I. Jesus Christ is the Son of God.
we are to understand here the Lord Jesus Christ, the History of whose
miraculous Conception and Birth and Death and Resurrection and Ascension we
have fully Recorded, and plainly set down in the Four Gospels; that this is the
Person which St. John designs and points at here is so Evident, that it needs
not to be proved: who Reads the Epistle, or but takes notice of the 1, 5, and
20 Verses of this Chapter, will find it past all doubt. In this Epistle Jesus
Christ is not only frequently styled the Son of God: but the Necessity of
believing it is also clearly held out by the Apostle thus, Chap. ii. 23.
Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father; but he that
acknowledges the Son has the Father also. And a little before our Text; He
that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself: he that believes
not God has made him a liar, because he believes not the Record which God
gave of his Son. And This St. John insists the more upon, because, even in his
time, there were some ( Cerinthus and Ebion by name) who began to spread
Damnable Heresies, denying the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and giving him out to
be only a mere Man: In Refutation of whom, it is said also, that he wrote his
Gospel at the desire of the Asian Bishops: And in it indeed he sets himself
more, than any other of the Evangelists, to advance this great Truth, That
Jesus is the Son of God, not by Adoption, or upon the account of his Sanctity
and Divine Mission, which has given the Title to other Men, but after a
peculiar and ineffable manner, so that None other is, or can be the Son of God
as he is; for he does evidently hold him out to be the only begotten Son of
God, and declares his Eternal Generation and Godhead, by clear and Undoubted
Testimonies. St. John does not only with the other Evangelists, Record such
Actions and Speeches of Jesus Christ, from which his Deity may be inferred and
deduced, they speaking out both an Omnipotency and Omniscience: But he expressly
calls him God, and brings in our Lord frequently asserting his Oneness and
Equality with the Father, in plain and clear terms, and both suffering some,
and calling upon others to pay him equal Homage and Worship with the Father,
which he would never have done, but would have guarded against, if he had not
been the Son of God in that sense, which the Catholic Church has believed it:
for then it would have been Idolatry, and a downright robbing of God. Jesus
could not be Ignorant whether he was the Son of God or no, neither can we
suppose him to swerve from the Truth, or to go about to persuade Men to believe
in the least what was not True, for if he had not been Truth, God would not
have born Witness to him by so many Prophecies before he came to the World, by
so many Audible Voices and Wonders when he was in it, by raising him from the
Dead, and finally by confirming the Preaching of the Gospel, both with Signs
and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost. If we
receive the witness of Men, the witness of God is greater; and this is the
witness of God which he has testified, That Jesus Christ is his Son: And who
will not believe and receive the Testimony; which God has given to his Son,
makes him a Liar. He, who refuses this, opposes himself to the Truth of God,
and so reproacheth and dishonors him who has so positively and so many ways
testified of him. And Therefore it is said by this Apostle, as we cited before,
Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father. And in the following,
Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God.

And as the Denying of Jesus Christ to be the Son of God is a Reproaching the
Truth of God, so also it is a Despising of his Wisdom, and an Endeavoring to
baffle and Undervalue all the admirable contrivances thereof, and all the Wise
and Wonderful Dispensations of his Providence, and the Eternal Purposes of his
Counsel. For as all things are of Christ, and through him, so all things were
designed with a respect to him. The Creating of the World, the permitting of
Man to fall, the Miraculous Constitution of the Jewish Nation, and the no less
wonderful Preservation thereof for so many Years, the Shame, Ignominy, and
Banishment, which that People suffer now, the Calling of the Gentiles, all
God's Dealings with Men and Angels, and in a word, all that has hitherto
fallen out, and all that is to be any time hereafter, and the End and
Consummation of this visible Frame at the last Day; all these things, I say,
and more than we know, were designed for the Glory and Honor of Christ: And as
they have all a reference to him, so the Beauty, and Wisdom, and Goodness of
those Divine Transactions are not, cannot be seen, but by Establishing the
Incarnation of the Son of God; and Therefore, to reject this great Mystery is
to set at naught the Eternal Purposes of God, and all those Glorious Designs
which his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness have Devised. This is to smother the
Divine Wisdom and Goodness which is conspicuous in these things, and to deny
and deprive him of that Glory which so much Wisdom, and so much Goodness, and
so many and so great Expressions thereof, do bring unto him. Wherefore, not to
acknowledge Jesus to be the Son of God, our Lord and God, as it is wilful and
unaccountable Obstinacy, there being so many Irrefragable Testimonies and
unquestionable Proofs thereof; so it is inexcusable Impiety and downright
Rebellion against God. He who does not receive the King's Vicegerent, nor will
own him whom he Deputes and Entrusts with the Government, both affronts the
King's Authority, and reproacheth his Conduct, he reflects alike on his
Prudence and Authority: And is he not guilty of the same Crime? Is he not
equally wicked against God who rejects his own Son whom he has sent into the
World? for to this purpose God has highly exalted him, and given him a name
which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should Philip.
2. 9. 10, 11.
bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth, and
that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God
the Father.

Now, this owning and acknowledging II. What is meant by Having the Son.
of Jesus Christ, the receiving him as the Son of God, is what the Apostle
calls the having the Son; as appears from the following Verse, where he
expounds it by believing on him. And in the following Epistle, Verse 9. he
makes it to be the abiding in his Doctrine. He then has the Son who believes
in him, who receives his Gospel, who gives a full and hearty assent to the
truth of all that is said of him, either as to his Nature or Offices, the
Dignity of his Person, or the Power and Privilege he has received from the
Father: In a word, he has the Son, who steadfastly believes whatever he has
Revealed concerning God or Man, our present Condition or Original State, our
Duty here or Reward hereafter: for if we believe him to be the Son of God, we
will believe also whatever he has delivered, and will not fail to adhere to
this Belief and Persuasion.

Thus we see, That it is Faith in Christ True Faith described.
to which Life is here promised: But we deceive our selves, if we think it any
kind of Faith, a bare knowledge or naked Speculation of Gospel Truths, a mere
and simple assent to them, which rests in the Brain and Understanding, and goes
no farther. No; this is not that Faith which is so magnified in Scripture, and
to which so many glorious things are promised. Many may have all that this
comes to; and yet fall short of Life. Many will say to me in that day (says
Matthew. 7. 22.
Christ) Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast
out Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful Works? And then I will profess
unto them, I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work iniquity. True Faith
is always Lively, Active, and Operative; it is not barren and Unfruitful; it
ever works by Love and keeps the Commandments; it purifieth the heart of
Pride and Lust, and casts down Imaginations, Cor. 10. 5.
and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
brings into Captivity every thought to the Obedience of Christ; it rectifies
all inward Disorders, and makes us New Creatures, framed according to the Image
of God in Christ; it so renews us to the Spirit of our Minds, and so conforms
us to the Son of God, that our Thoughts are his Thoughts, his Ways our Ways; we
love what he loves, hate what he hates, believe what he Promises, and obey what
he Commands, so that our Life is hid with Christ in God. And of every true
Believer it may be said as St. Paul says of himself, I am Crucified with
Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I but Gal. 2. 20.
Christ lives in me, and the life which I live in the flesh, I live by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Look what those
Saints and Worthies, recorded in the Epistle to the Hebrews, did through Faith,
they subdued Heb. 11.
Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions,
quenched the violence of Fire, escaped the edge of the Sword, out of weakness
were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies of
Aliens, etc. Was not this a strong and a noble Faith? Now, such must our Faith
be; for as our Apostle tells us Verse 4. of this Chapter, it must overcome the
World; he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God, he it is that overcomes
the world, and all that is in the world, viz. the lust of the Flesh, the lust
of the Eyes, and the pride of Life. Thus you see what Faith is, that it is no
mean and silly thing, that it is no dull, lazy, unactive Principle, but that it
is strong and mighty, quick and powerful in its operation. Be not deceived
then, my Friends; Examine well whether you believe in Christ, whether or no you
have the Son of God dwelling in you by Faith, and do not flatter your selves
with the conceit, unless it be so indeed. Consider, O Man, and tell me, Art
thou sensible of thy Misery by Nature? of thy guilt through thy manifold
Transgressions? Do thou feel the Necessity of a Savior? Do thou run to
that Fountain which is opened to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants of
Israel for Sin and for Uncleanness? Do thou hope in the Mercy of God, and
rely upon the Merits of Christ? And art thou therefore humble and penitent, and
ready to forgive, and resolved to amend thy Life? Do thou, or art thou
sincerely resolved to resist the Devil, and wrestle against all Temptations,
not in thy own, but in the Name and Strength of Christ? Can thou despise the
Vanities of the World, all sublunary Riches and Pleasures, can thou freely
quit them rather than offend thy God? Is thy Heart with God, and can thou
confidently trust him with thy self and all thy Concernments, and wait for the
accomplishment of his Promises? Is thy Care* are thy Thoughts and Endeavors
chiefly employed about the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, how
to grow in Grace and the Knowledge of Christ? how to abound in good Works, and
to bring forth Fruit unto Holiness, that thy End may be Eternal Life? Can
thou answer to those things positively? Do thou find thy self thus disposed,
thus inclined, thus resolved? And is this any ways to be seen in thy Life and
Conversation? Then be of Courage, thou have true Faith, and see thou take heed
to preserve what thou have, to cherish and increase it. But if thou can not
show thy Faith by such Works and Fruits as these, thy Faith is vain, it is dead
and life-less, and will not avail thee; for these Works and Effects do as
necessarily flow from true Faith, as Light and Heat from the Sun: And as our
Lord says, ye may know the Tree by its Fruit. Every good tree brings forth
good Fruit, but that which bears no fruit is barren and useless, it cumbereth
the ground, and is only fit for the fire.

This, some will say perhaps, is severe Doctrine, but it is true; it makes
many Christians to be nothing but Infidels; which is sad indeed, but who can
help it! We must not alter the Nature of Faith to make Men Believers, but ought
rather to exhort them not to deceive themselves with Shadows and Appearances,
with mere Fancies and Conceits, but to seek seriously after that Faith which is
true and unfeigned. In all other things Men's Persuasions appear by their
Actions; and why should not Faith in Christ do so too? He who is inwardly
affected and delighted with Honor, is always seeking after Preferment; he who
thinks it a fine thing to be rich, is ever catching at Gain; he who is
persuaded of the Evil of any thing does certainly forbear it, and who
apprehends any thing to be good will not fail to endeavor the getting it. Must
then Faith in Christ, the Belief of the Gospel, be the only Idle, Dull, and
ineffectual Persuasion? No certainly, it is impossible but this will be active
as well as the other. Consider, I pray you, and you cannot but acknowledge that
Barrenness in good Works, and especially the Habit and frequent Practice of Sin
is inconsistent with a true Faith and hearty Belief of the Gospel: For I ask if
any Person should pretend a Kindness and Affection for you, and yet neither
defend your Interest, nor Reputation, nor any way bestir himself in your
behalf, when he had fair Occasions for it, would you believe him? And if he
should be easily drawn to pick a Quarrel with you, to side with your Enemies,
to molest and trouble you, would not you challenge him of Falsehood and
Hypocrisy? Now make Application to the Case in hand, and tell me then how can
he be freed of Hypocrisy who pretends to believe in Christ, and yet refuses
to be directed by him, never minds what is pleasing to him, but is, with every
small Temptation, carried to the Transgression of his Laws.

Let me therefore beseech you not to rest in a lazy, sluggish, unactive Faith,
if such a thing should be called Faith: But rather seek after that true Faith
which will abide the Test, and hold good, though never so narrowly searched and
examined, and whose Fruits are not Words and an outward Profession only, but
Obedience and a sincere Compliance with all the parts of the Gospel also. If
you ask, how this is to be attained. I answer (with St. Paul) faith Romans 10. 17.
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Give a diligent Ear to the
Word of God, read and meditate on the Scriptures frequently and seriously,
consider their inward Evidence and those unquestionable Testimonies have been
given for evincing their Authority; lay aside all Prejudice, hearken
attentively to Christ himself; for he is Light and Truth, and none can deeply
contemplate him, but shall be convinced and constrained to believe in him. But
this we must do often and seriously; for, by short, light, and inconsiderate
Thoughts, we cannot learn the Truth of any thing almost. Let us love the Truth
and be desirous to know the Truth, and it shall not be hid from us; For God is
willing that all men come to 2 Cor. 4. 3.
the knowledge of the Truth. If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which
believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image
of God, should shine into them. Be not selfish, nor weded to any Lust, pray to
God for the Spirit of Grace, cherish and be tractable to its Motions, and then
no doubt he will remove from you all Infidelity, work in you Faith, and make
that the Word of Christ shall richly dwell in you in all Wisdom.

Thus we have seen what the Apostle means by having the Son, that it is, to
believe in Christ, to have him dwelling in our Hearts by Faith, and that the
necessary Fruits and Effects thereof is the living to him and for him, the
doing all things for his Glory, and the studying carefully to demean our selves
always according to his holy Word.

It follows next that we consider what that Life is which is here promised and
assured to every one who has the Son.

Life has diverse Acceptations in Scripture. III. Life explained.
Sometimes it is taken for our natural Life, and the Comforts and
Accommodations thereof in this World. But though it be true that he who has
the Son has this Life, yet this is not the Apostle's Aim here. This Life is
neither the End nor the Reward of our Faith; Christ came not to the World to be
a Provisor for it. It is true, to free us from immoderate Care and Anxiety, he
has given us some Assurance of necessary Supplies: And as St. Paul says,
Godliness has the promise of this 1 Timothy 4. 8.
life. But these things are given in common to the Wicked and to the Godly, to
Believers and to Infidels; yea sometimes their Share is greater: And therefore,
the same Apostle says, If in this 1 Cor. 15. 19.
life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable; and that
not only upon the Account of those many Crosses and Persecutions which our
Faith and sincere Profession of Christ sometimes expose us to: But also,
because Faith raises our Thoughts higher than this Life; it begets in us a
disgust of this World and all that is to be found in it, and even to despise
Life it self, except that it affords the Occasion and Capacity of better
things. What a poor, mean, silly thing is it for one to live only that he may
eat, drink, and walk abroad, and behold a great deal of impertinent noise and
stir about Trifles and things of no Moment? What is there here to be seen, but
a dull ill acted Tragedy, a constant Scene of Folly, Impertinency, and Sorrow?
How languid and grievous must such a sight be? And especially when we cannot be
simple Spectators and Beholders, but are often necessitated to be Actors and
Partners also. A mere Heathen, through natural Philosophy and the Improvement of
his Reason may bring himself to despise and undervalue this present Life, and
much more a Christian, who sees by a better and clearer Light. The present
Dispensation of Providence in making Man's Life so much shorter now than what
it was at first in the Patriarchs timse, is so far from being a Matter of
Complaint, that it is indeed a great Blessing. He who must run will not
complain of the shortness of the Race, especially if the way be not good but
rough and uneven. The shortest Life is long enough if it be well employed. If
we can be so wise as to live well, it is our Happiness to die soon; for then
Death is but the ending of our Misery, and a wafting us over to eternal Bliss.

And this is it which St. John here calls Life, it is that glorious and happy
State in the other World, which God has prepared for all true Believers. That
it is this which is here meant, we need no further Proof than to look to the
Verse before and after our Text; for there he names it expressly Eternal Life.

This is indeed the End of our Faith, the Completion of the Promises, the great
and last Design of Christianity. All other are subordinate to this. Whatever
else is given is either to further the Attainment of this, or to cherish the
Hopes of it. For this end Christ was born; for this end he died and rose again;
for this end the Gospel was preached, and thither tend all the Dispensations of
the Divine Providence, even to bring Men to Eternal Life, which also is called
by other glorious Names in Scripture, as Heaven, the Kingdom of God, the
Kingdom of Glory.

If you ask why the Apostle should call Why Heaven and the future State of the
righteous is called Life.
this State, Life simply, when Men do live who are not in this State? The
Answer is; he calls it Life by way of Eminence and Excellency, no State being
comparable to it. It is deservedly called Life, if we either consider the
Felicity or Duration of it. First, it deserves the Name of Life upon the
Account of the Felicity and Happiness it affords: for Life and Happiness are
often used as Reciprocal Terms, as Words of one Importance, according to that
Saying, non est vivere, sed valere vita; to live merely to have a being and no
more, is not worth the Name of Life: A Man would choose to be dead rather than
miserable. Wherefore it is also that St. Paul calls this Life a dying daily.
He only 1. Cor. 15. 31.
is said to live truly who lives happily: And there is no true Happiness but
in this Life which the Apostle here speaks of.

What, and how great this Happiness is, is not yet known. Some late Enthusiasts
Mad. Antonia Borignian, and some others.
and Visionaries have taken upon them to describe this future State, as
particularly as if they had already lived some time in it: But St. John says,
It does not yet appear what we shall be; and we have Reason to believe, that
there was as much revealed to him as to them. What he says is certain, what
they add ought to be rejected as presumptuous Dreams and Delusions. God has
revealed clearly that there is another Life, and has assured us, that it is
more than a sufficient Recompense for all our Labors and Services, and that it
will afford perfect Contentment and Satisfaction: But the particular
Circumstances of that Life are yet kept secret, partly because we could not
conceive or comprehend them: We are not capable of a full Discovery of that
Life, for it exceeds our highest Thoughts and best Apprehensions. Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the 1 Cor. 2. 9.
heart of man the things which God has prepared for them that love him. The
Scripture speaks to us of Rivers of Pleasure, Kingdoms, Scepters, and
uncorruptible Crowns: But we are to understand this no otherwise than as
Similitudes representing something of exceeding great Worth and Value. As our
greatest Thoughts of God fall short of what he is, so also all our
Apprehensions of Heaven; for the Happiness of Heaven is infinite like the
Nature of God. Kings and Princes study to have their Courts answerable to their
Magnificence and Dignity. How Glorious and Magnificent then must Heaven be, the
Court of the great King? Whose Power is Almighty, whose Wisdom is Infinite, and
all whose Perfections are past finding out, either by Men or Angels. Surely God
shall there display himself and his Attributes, most clearly and most fully to
all Beholders. St. John, who had a clearer Prospect of Heaven than ever any
mortal Man, tells us, That there is no manner of Imperfection there. The city,
says he, had no need Revel. 21. 23. 22. 5.
of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the glory of God did
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. And there is no night there, and
they need no candle, neither light of the Sun; for the Lord God gives them
light. There is also (he tells us) a Freedom and absolute Exemption from all
Misery, Pain, and Trouble; they who are there shall Rev. 7. 16.
hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them,
neither any heat; for the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed
them, and lead them to living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all
tears from their Eyes.

There we shall not be clogged and fettered to a weak, infirm, sickly Body, as
now; for then this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal
immortality, and Christ Jesus shall change this vile body, that it may be
fashioned like 1 Cor. 15.
unto his glorious body, whereby he is able Philip 3. 21.
even to subdue all things to himself. And if our Bodies shall suffer such
glorious Changes, what think you shall be done to our Souls those precious and
better parts of us? It is not to be doubted, but they also shall be highly
exalted and perfected; we shall not be liable to Ignorance and Error, but shall
be enlightened with the Knowledge of all Truth; for (as St. Paul says) Now we
see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; now 1 Cor. 13. 12.
we know in part, but then shall we know even as we are known. There shall be
excellent, choice, and most desirable Company, not only all Saints, and the
Spirits of just Men made perfect, but Angels and Archangels, Cherubims and
Seraphims: And we shall not only have the Pleasure of their Company, but shall
be equal unto them, as our Savior Luke 19. 36.
tells us. Nay, which is yet more, there we shall enjoy Christ and God; and not
only enjoy them, but be transformed into their Likeness. Beloved (says St.
John) now we are the Sons of God, and it does not appear what we shall be, but
this we know, that when he does appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see
him as he is. Seeing this does appear, what needs more, there is no climbing
higher. God is the Height of Perfection, and the Fountain of all Happiness: And
it is impossible to conceive greater Felicity, than what this Enjoyment of God,
and Likeness to him amount to. The highest Creatures are not capable of more.
The aspiring to be as Gods was the Sin of our first Parents, and did tempt them
to eat the forbidden Fruit, and was the Occasion of all that Misery which came
upon them and us both. But behold we are now to become as God, in a higher,
better, and truer sense than what they aimed at, or could have come to by any
Fruit, though it had not been forbidden. Behold what manner of Love is this,
wherewith the Father has loved us, that we should be called the Sons of God!
What ineffable Glory! What high Dignity is this that Man is now exalted to!
Lord, what is Man that thou art so mindful of him? And the Son of Man that thou
visitest him? Thou have made him but a little lower than the Angels here in
this World, and hereafter thou designest to make him equal to them, yea like
unto thy self! How astonishing are the Thoughts of this! What Admiration may
they breed!

Especially when all this Glory and Honor is not for a Day, a Month, or a
Year, but to all Eternity. The Duration of this State is another Reason why the
Apostle calls it Life. What is short and momentany deserves not the Name of
Life; and therefore our Life in this World is reckoned, in Scripture, but as a
Breath, a Vapor; it is to be esteemed but as a Puff of Wind. But that Life
above suffers no Changes; it is unalterable, it never has an end; it lasts not
only a thousand thousand Years, but for ever and ever. Here we think much if we
have a few Days Peace and Contentment: But they who are in Heaven are eternally
happy.

Thus we see what sort of Life it is Jesus Christ the Discoverer of this Life.
our Text speaks of. If you ask, to whom are we indebted for it? Look to the
preceding Verse, and there you will find it. This is the Record, that God has
given to us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son. It is to Jesus Christ
only that we owe the Obligation; it is by him, and through him, and for him
that we come to Life; for he only is the Discoverer of it; he only is the
Author of it, and only has the disposing and giving of it. First, he is the
Discoverer thereof; he has brought Life and Immortality to light through the
Gospel. 2 Timothy 1. 10.
Before the Gospel was published, Men were ignorant of this Life; neither the
Certainty nor Nature of it were known. The Wise Heathens indeed had some Notion
of a Life after this; they judged it reasonable, that the Soul should survive
the Body. But however, all they talked were mere Conjectures; they had no
Assurance of the Truth. And though it be certain, that the Jews had the Promise
of Eternal Life, as well as temporal good things; and that all the pious and
holy Men among them lived in Expectation of it, yet it was so darkly revealed
even to them, that you know, there was one Sect amongst them who denied the
Resurrection altogether, and even those who believed it had no very right and
worthy Thoughts thereof, or else they might have soon refuted the Sadducees
gross Apprehensions. But whatever Knowledge either Jews or Heathens of old had
of another Life, it is to be ascribed to Christ; for he is the Light which
lights every man that comes into John 1. 7.
the World. And now he has put this Matter clearly out of Doubt. Neither the
Resurrection from the dead nor the Life hereafter needs now be disputed as
doubtful Problems; for Jesus Christ has given evident Demonstrations of the
Truth of them, by his plain Assertions and express Promises, and his own
Resurrection.

But Secondly, Christ is not only the And the Author of it.
Discoverer of Eternal Life, but the Author thereof also. There was more
required to the attaining this than the mere Discovery of it. This was above
humane reach: It was too great a height for Man of himself to climb to. If any
had attempted this, trusting in his own worth, he had been certainly baffled
and defeated: His Boldness as it served to be laughed at, so it should have been
punished. But as Christ has showed us this, so he has purchased it for us. It
is the Merits of Christ which have opened the Kingdom of Heaven; and it is by
his Strength that we perform the Conditions of entering into it. And when we
have performed the Conditions it is even he himself who bestows it on us; for
he is that holy one who has received the key of David, who opens and Rev. 3.
7. Rev. 2. 10.
no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens. It is he who puts on us
the Crown of Life. When we have done our Work it is from him that we receive
Reward: and this Reward is promised to all who believe.

Which leads us to the last particular; namely, to show, That all who have the
Son have Life. This is a Point we need IV. Faith gives a right and title to
Life.
not stand much upon; for it is so clear and evident, not only through this
Epistle, but the whole New Testament: there is not the least shadow of pretense
for the doubting of it. Verily, verily, I say Joh. 5. 24. 3. - 18.
unto you (says Christ) he that hears my word, and believes on him that
sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into Condemnation, but is
passed from death unto life. And again it is said, he that believes on him is
not condemned, but he that believes not is condemned already, because he has
not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. Believers have full
assurance of Eternal Life; for their Faith unites them to Christ. He that
eats my flesh and Joh. 6. 56. John 17.
drinks my blood, that is, believes in Christ, dwells in me and I in him.
See also Chap. xvii. Now Christ and his Members will not be divided; where the
one is, the other will be also. Father, I will that they also whom thou have
given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have
given me. And we are sure, the Father hears the Son. Believers also have good
ground to hope for Eternal Life; for Faith is the very Seed and Principle from
which it flows. The Life of Faith is the beginning of the Life of Glory; the
one is but the Perfection and Completion of the other. Blessed is he therefore
who believes; for there shall be a Performance of those things which are told
him from the Lord. It is Faith then, and Faith only which gives us a title to
Eternal Life; such a Faith, I mean, as was formerly described. He that so
believes on the Son has everlasting life, and he that believes not the Son
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. They who do not, and
will not embrace Christ here, shall not be Embraced by him hereafter. They who
refuse his Yoke in this World, shall in the World to come be cast out of his
glorious Kingdom, and thrown to that place of darkness, where there is weeping,
and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth.

Now, that we may draw to a close; V. Practical Inferences.
what an Influence should these Considerations have upon our Souls? What a 1.
holy disdain should they work in us of those Sublunary and perishing things?
How much should we despise and undervalue those empty and fading Vanities,
seeing we have such infinitely better things prepared for us, and waiting upon
us? Does he, who is called to a Kingdom, mind Sticks and Straws, Trifles and
petty inconsiderable things? Remember (O Christian) what thou art, and what
thou art called to; keep up the Decorum that is suitable to the dignity of thy
Person, and walk worthy of the Vocation whereunto thou art called. Do not creep
upon thy Belly, and lie grovelling upon the Ground; lift up thy Head, and let
thy Heart be where thou see thy Treasure is. Be not like the foolish Indians,
who sell their Gold, and their Pearls and other precious things for Brass, and
Iron, and Glass Beads. Do not seek to fill thy Belly with Husks, when thou
may have fullness of Bread in thy Father's House. Do not grasp so fast, but
let go those painted Vanities, those mere shadows of Delight, and make sure to
thy self that fullness of Joy, and those Rivers of Pleasure, which are at God's
Right hand for ever and ever.

Secondly, Consider those things, that 2.
thou may have Comfort in thy Afflictions, that thou may bear up, with a
cheerful Spirit, under all the Crosses that are laid on thee. The hopes of
Heaven do lighten the burden of Affliction; they take away the heavy pressure
thereof. How light should we consider our Affliction, which is but for a
moment, seeing it is followed by a far more exceeding and Eternal weight of
Glory? Look unto Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith, who, for the joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is now set
down at the right hand of the throne of God. Now, if we suffer with him, we
shall be also Heb. 12. 2.
glorified together with him: And I reckon (says St. Paul) that the sufferings
of this Romans 8. 18.
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed in us.

Thirdly, Consider what a mighty Encouragement 3.
this Blessed life is, and what a powerful inducement it should be to Prayer,
Meditation, to all Holy Duties, and, in a word, to a hearty compliance with the
whole Gospel? We are not commanded those things in vain, for naught; all the
pains we are at this way shall be well rewarded. Do we toil and sweat for the
Bread which perishes? And shall we not labor for that which endures to
Eternal Life? Do Men venture upon Merciless Seas? Do they throw themselves upon
the Points of Swords, and before the mouths of Cannons for a little Gain or
some small piece of Honor? And shall we refuse to walk Circumspectly, to live
Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, for Heaven and Eternal Life. Be ashamed (O
Christian) of thy Sloth and Laziness; blush to see some taking more Pains for
Earth than thou art for Heaven, for Perishing thant hou art for Eternal Riches.
You see your Labor is not in vain; be steadfast therefore and immovable, and
always abounding in the Work of the Lord; run with Patience the Race that is
set before you, and run so that you may obtain. Do not faint and weary in
well-doing, but persevere therein to the very End. Be thou faithful unto the
death (says Christ) Rev. 2. 10.
and I will give thee a Crown of life.

Finally, Let what has been said raise 4.
your Appetite, and stir up in you a Holy and Sincere Desire of this Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper, which strengthens your Faith, cherishes your Hope, gives
you the Increase of Grace here, and is to you a sure Pawn and Pledge of Glory
hereafter: For this Holy Sacrament is the Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus, not
the Sacred Symbols and Representations thereof only, but the conveyance of the
Merits of his Death and Sufferings also. Now, Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Eat therefore (O
Friends) Drink, yea Drink abundantly, O Beloved, that your Souls may be
satisfied and live for evermore.

Now unto him who has loved us, and given himself unto the Death for us, and
who has opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers, even unto Jesus Christ,
with the Father and Blessed Spirit, the Glorious and Incomprehensible Trinity,
be all Praise, Honor and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
SERMON VIII. ON EASTER DAY, 1689.
1 COR. XV. 19. If in this Life only we have Hope in Christ, we are of all Men
most miserable.
WHAT the Church Commemorates in this great Festival of Easter, solemnly
celebrated by all Antiquity, St. Paul evidently proves in this Chapter, viz.
That important Article of our Creed, the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And from this, necessarily he deduceth another most material Point, which is
the Certainty of our own Resurrection. The firm Belief of both these Points,
are not only absolutely Necessary, but also the serious and frequent
Consideration of them is most useful, that we may be strengthened and
encouraged in our Temptations, comforted in our Troubles, and animated to a
cheerful Laboring in every work of the Lord. The certainty of an after state,
as well as the Quality thereof, is only known by the Gospel, it is Jesus Christ
only who has brought Life and Immortality to Light through the Gospel; The
Heathens had some knowledge thereof, but it was very faint; It was only as a
Dream and Imagination: for when our Apostle taught it at Athens, he was counted
a Babbler, and was mocked there even by the Philosophers themselves. And among
the Jews there was the Sect of the Sadducees who believed neither Resurrection
nor Spirit. St. Paul attacks these Epicurean and Sadducean Principles in this
Chapter, for it would seem that some of the Church of Corinth, were corrupted
with them, and said, That there is no Resurrection of the Dead, though the
belief of this point be so essential to a Christian, that he ceases to be one
who denies it.

The words of our Text are one of those Arguments, St. Paul makes use of, for
evincing the Truth and certainty of our Resurrection, and it is an Argument
taken ex absurdo; which is accounted a demonstration even in the strictest
Science; for there be many Propositions of the Mathematics which cannot be
otherwise demonstrated, than by showing the absurd Consequences of their being
false.

I shall endeavor to demonstrate the strength and force of this Argument of
St. Paul for another Life: But first let us consider the Truth of his Assertion
here, that we, that is, Good and Sincere Christians, would be of all others the
most miserable, if there were no more expected than what this Life does afford.

St. Paul, says here, that if Christians I. Misery and Trouble not peculiar to
a state of Christianity.
had no hope but in this Life they would be of all Men most miserable: He does
not say, they would be the only miserable Persons, whereby he clearly
insinuates, that others as well as they are liable to Misery in this World. As
some Ignorant and Unjust Men charge Religion, with Commotions and Mischiefs in
the World, and make it pernicious to Commonwealths and Civil Societies, though
its Principles, if truly understood, and heartily received, and heartily
obeyed, would certainly tend to their Peace, Settlement and Security; So there
be some who count Religion a great obstruction to the Happiness of private Men,
that it imbitters our Lives, that it only damps our Pleasures, and that it does
render Men wretched, by obliging them to much inward Sorrow, and Contrition,
and exposing them to much outward Trouble and Affliction. There be who think
and allege, that Men would have an uninterrupted Happiness, and a constant
Pleasure and Satisfaction, if it were not for the restraints that Religion and
the Laws of God lay upon them. But we may see the contrary, from daily
Experience, they who are farthest from God, and the observing his Laws, are not
the farthest from Misery and Trouble; Nay, oft-times Men, by forsaking God, and
his Commandments, have involved themselves into inextricable Trouble, and
brought upon them Misery and Punishments, less supportable than what has
befallen any for their strict adherence to God, and the Laws of Christianity.
It is true, the way of Religion is narrow, and set with Thorns; but the broad
way has its uneasiness too, and in it Men meet also with mischievous and
hurtful Accidents. The wicked man travelleth with pain all Job 18. 20.
his days, says Eliphaz. And Isaiah, Isai. 57. 20.
compares the wicked to the troubled sea, which is still casting forth mire and
dirt. The Distempers and Diseases, which follow intemperance and excess in Meat
and Drink, are more troublesome, even to the flesh, than Fasting and
Mortification, and the other Severities which Religion prescribes. I shall not
name that shameful Disease which is the ordinary Reward of unclean Persons; but
only observe, that as it is dishonorable, even among the Devil's Votaries, so
certainly it is more grievous to be born, than Persecution or Martyrdom for the
Name of Jesus.

But not to insist further on these particular II. They are Common to the state
of Mankind in this World.
Evils, which follow Vice and Sin; let us consider Men in general in this
World, and we shall see, that they are liable to many Temporal Miseries, and
that though they would renounce Christianity, they could not secure themselves
from Trouble and Sorrow. Job speaking of Mankind in general, says, That man
that is born of a woman, is but of few days, and full of trouble. Which is a
Truth, that all the World will assent to, from their particular experience: Our
Bodies are subject to Diseases, our Goods are exposed to Violence and Rapine,
the Country we live in is liable to be infested with Wars, Pestilence and
Famine. It were too tedious for me to reckon up all the particular Troubles,
Crosses and Afflictions, which Man's Life is exposed to in this World, and some
one or other of them, every Man is daily encountering. Great travel is created
for every man, and an heavy yoke is laid upon the sons of Adam, from the day
that they go out of their mothers womb, till the day that they return to the
Mother of all things; says the wise Son of Syrach, upon which account Solomon
praised the dead, which are already dead, more than the living which are yet
alive; Yea, says he, better is he than both they Eccl. 4. 23.
which has not yet been, who has not seen the evil work which is done under
the Sun. So that it seems, he thought it better not to be born, than to be born
and to live only to see and feel the Miseries of this Life, which is certainly
true, if Men be only destinated for this present temporal Life. What S. Paul
says of Christians, that of all others they will be the most miserable, may be
said of Mankind in general, with a respect to other Creatures, if all
afterhopes shall be taken away, and that they be not considered with a relation
to the other World. The Beasts and brute Creatures; are more happy than we,
they are brought forth with less pain, and brought up with much less care; they
come sooner to perfection, and arrive at the sensible Pleasures, proper to
their several beings with more facility and less travel; they are liable to
fewer Calamities, and are not so much interrupted in their Enjoyments; they
live easily without Reflection, and die without any regret or trouble; so that
certainly, if there be no respect to another World, Man is a more vain and
miserable Creature than Brutes, and still the more Miserable, as he is, the
more Wise and Good. Wherefore it is that the Apostle says here of Christians,
That if in this life only we have hope, etc.

For first, Besides these general Calamities, III. Christians and Good men more
liable to be miserable in this Life than others. And the Reason why it is so.
which, as Men, they are liable unto; Christians are exposed to many particular
Troubles and Afflictions, upon the account of their Profession: For the
Doctrines they teach and believe, the Rules which they follow themselves, and
prescribe to others, are so contrary to Flesh and Blood, and so opposite to the
Interests and common Sentiments of corrupt Men, that they are still drawing
upon themselves Storms of Persecution. Our Savior not only forwarns his
Disciples of these Persecutions that would arise, for the Gospels sake, but he
makes the cheerful undergoing of them, the indispensible condition of being his
Disciple, and prescribes it as the first Lesson to be learned of them; If any
man (says he) will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross
and follow me. As the Jews were greatly mistaken in their expectation of a
Messiah, thinking he was to establish a Temporal Kingdom and to bestow Temporal
Rewards; So Christians will be much mistaken if they think by coming to Christ,
to secure themselves of Wealth, Honor, Riches, Preferments, and other Worldly
Advantages: For oftentimes they who cleave to Christ are forced to part with
These, and who cannot let them go on some occasions, must part with him; for
both cannot be kept together. As in one place, our Savior says, He that
loves father or Mat. 10. 37.
mother more than me, is not worthy of me, and he that loves son or daughter
more than me, is not worthy of me; And he that takes not his Cross, and
follows after me, is not worthy of me. So in another place, he says plainly,
If any man come to Luke 14. 26, 27.
me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife and children, and brethren
and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple, and whosoever
does not bear his Cross and come after me, cannot be my Disciple; which our
Apostle and his other fellow Apostles, and the Primitive Christians found to be
true by their own Experience; for, by becoming the Disciples of Jesus Christ,
they not only forfeited the common Comforts and Conveniences of this Life, but
they also suffered all the Torments, Indignities, and Cruelties, which enraged
Men could inflict, They were tortured, and had trial of cruel mockings and
scourging; yea, and of Bonds and Imprisonments, they were stoned, sawn asunder,
tempted, and slain with the sword, they wandered about in sheeps skins, and in
goats skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented. And though the World
was not worthy of them, yet they were made to wander in Deserts, and in
Mountains, and in Dens, and Caves of the Earth. Now this being the Condition of
Christians, St. Paul says, they would be, of all others, the most miserable,
if they had hope only in this present life, for he speaks this with a relation
to the Persecutions and Afflictions they were then made to suffer, as appears
from the 31. and 32. Verses of this Chapter, where he tells of being in
Ieopardy every hour, of his dying daily; that is, daily he was not only exposed
to Death, but made to suffer such things as would make Death more sweet, as is
made out by what follows, that he fought with beasts at Ephesus.

But then it will be alleged, that this Speech of St. Paul holds not always
true. It might be true that Christians were most miserable in the days of the
Apostles, and sometime after, when Persecution raged against them. But the like
cannot be said at other times, when they are allowed to live at Peace, and in
Quietness. To which we reply that there is always reason to pronounce this of
Christians, even upon the Account of the Crosses and Afflictions, they are
exposed to more than others: For in all times, Sufferings of one kind or
another attend either the Profession or Practice of Christianity. All that will
live 2 Timothy 3. 12.
godly (says our Apostle) shall suffer Persecution. And again, he says, we
are appointed 1 These. 3. 3.
to Affliction. The taking up the Cross, is a Duty which Christians are always
bound to, and in the best and most peaceable times there is still Occasion for
it.

Nunquam bella piis, nunquam certamina desunt,
Et quo cum certet, men's pia semper habet.
In the World (said our Savior to his Disciples) you shall have trouble. There
will still be Trouble, though not always of the same kind, nor in the same
measure. From the beginning, He that was born after the flesh, persecuted him
that was born after the spirit, and it is even so now, (says St. Paul) and it
will be so still to the end of the World. God suffers not the Hatred and Malice
of the wicked, to rage alike hotly against his People, nor does he let the
storms of Persecution fall always down in a furious violent manner; but he
gives his People some respite, lest they should faint. However these Storms are
always breeding: And it is the Duty of all true Christians to expect them, and
to be preparing for them. The World in its calmest Mood, is to be regarded, as
the Mariners do the Sea, which, though it sometimes puts on a fair and smooth
Face, yet of it self it is a dangerous and uncertain Element, easy to be
disturbed and apt to rage, so that they, who are upon it, are never secure,
they move in continual danger, and every hour are liable to a thousand Hazards
and Mischances, which oblige them to be always on their guard: Thus the Life of
Christians in this World, is more a Warefare than that of other Men, they
struggle continually either with actual Persecutions, or with the Fear of them,
which may prove no less incommodious and prejudicial to their Peace and Quiet.

But here it may be asked, if such be the Life and Condition of Christians, how
is this consistent with those Temporal Promises which the Scripture abounds
with? Does not the same Apostle say, that godliness is profitable to all 1 Timothy
4. 8.
things, having the promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to
come? For answer hereto, you must know, that Religion and Godliness do, in
themselves, directly and naturally tend to procure us temporal Happiness, but
the Disorders which sin has raised, and the general Wickedness of the World,
do interrupt this natural Order and Course; as in a well ordered Civil State
and Commonwealth, Innocence, and upright and righteous Dealing is ones best
Security from civil Punishments, whereas in a corrupt and degenerate State*
where there is no respect to Justice, or Equity, that will not save a Man;
Money, Favor, Interest, and base Deeds, will prevail more than the greatest
Integrity. Moreover, God gives the temporal Promises, to take us off from
immoderate Care and Anxiety for temporal things; and to confirm our Dependence
on him, by assuring us, that he will provide what of these things he sees
convenient. But we are not to interpret them as Assurances of an Affluence of
Worldly Enjoyments; nor must we accuse him of Breach of Promise, when we do not
flow in Earthly Pleasures. He may very well keep his Word, though these outward
things do not so much abound, if with a little external Measure he give much
inward Peace and Contentment, as he does always to his own Children: For, he
makes the little Psalm. 37. 16.
of a righteous man to be better than the riches of many wicked: Under the Law
God's Favor was expressed much in external Blessings and Advantages; But it is
otherwise now under the Gospel. It is true, there are temporal promises in the
Gospel, but they have an express Clause of Reservation of the Cross and
Persecution, as you may see, Mark X. 30.

However, the Text still holds true. Consider, true Christians, whatever way
you please; let them be never so well sheltred from Persecution, and outward
Crosses; let them have this Life, and all its Advantages, yet if they have no
ground of Hope beyond it, they are still miserable and more miserable than
others, who come short of their Knowledge and Perfection: For by the Doctrine
of the Gospel they are made sensible of the Vanity of all sublunary things, are
taught to despise and contemn them; they have their Desires raised after a
nobler Felicity than any here below, which yet they can never obtain, but must
still despair of, if so be there be no Life after this: And therefore they can
have no true Pleasure in this, because they see themselves in an Impossibility
of getting that good which their Souls crave. He cannot choose but be
discontented, and consequently miserable, who can never have that State and
Condition suitable to the Greatness of his Mind: What a Torment is it to a
Great Spirit, and one of an Heroic Mind, to stoop to mean silly things? how
uneasy would it be to one who has improved himself in all Wisdom and Learning,
and other Moral Endowments to be confined always to Boyish Exercises. Now the
Plays of Children are not so far below Men of Age and Understanding, as the
best State and chiefest Employment of this World, is below a true Christians
Mind, who is improved to a Capacity of a Communion with God; and whose holy
Ambition aims at no less.

Who considers this Life only as a Place of Improvement for that better Life
above, may be contented and satisfied in every State, because there is no State
which does not afford abundant Occasions of recommending ones self to God, and
acquiring those Qualifications necessary to Eternal Life: But abstract from
this, what a dull thing is Life, and how tedious and irksome must it be to
every wise and good Man? if it were not in order to another Life, this would
not be desirable, and the shortest Life would be preferable to the longest; to
be condemned to Methusalem's Life, would be no small Affliction; to be obliged
to live for Nine Hundred Years in a Bedlam, and to dwell always among Fools and
Knaves, for the World generally is no better, where there is daily repeated the
same Scene of Impertinence and Villainy: This I say, would be very grievous to
wise and thinking Men. Wherefore it clearly appears that if there were no hope
beyond this Life, the best and wisest men would of all others be the most
miserable; and that in this case, Knowledge and Virtue would not at all be
desirable, because they would serve only to beget in Men a disgust of this
Life. The most brutish would then be the most happy, because as they aim no
farther than the present Life, so they want the sense to perceive the Meanness
of it.

Now the Truth of St. Paul's Assertion, IV. The Force of St. Paul's Argument
for the Proof of another Life.
in the Text, being thus cleared, I proceed next to show the Forcibleness
thereof, for evincing another Life. That Men should be more miserable than
other Creatures; and the best Men the most miserable Men, is a gross Absurdity.
And who asserteth it, fixes an Imputation upon God, which cannot be mentioned
without the horridest Blasphemy. Wisdom and Goodness are essential Attributes
of the Deity: But neither of them would appear, if Men were less happy than
Beasts, and the best of Men more miserable than the rest. What a vain thing
were Man, if he were altogether mortal? And how unlike the product of an
infinite Wisdom? Where were infinite Wisdom, if a Creature, capable of
Immortality, made only some short Appearance upon a Stage of Vanity and Misery,
and then removed and turned into nothing. If the Faculties of an Angelical
Life, and the Capacities for the highest Perfection, were given to one who
could never step beyond the Meanness of an Animal and Sensual Life. And where
were Divine Justice and Goodness, if there were no difference betwixt good and
bad? If it fared alike with the worst and with the best; if they who feared,
loved, and served God, should not partake more of his Favor than they who had
no regard to him, nor to his Laws. If then it be inconsistent with the Wisdom
and Goodness of God to make Men less happy than Beasts, and to suffer the best
of Men to be more miserable than the worst, and that it would be certainly so,
if there were no other Life, then certainly there must be another better Life,
to make the vast Difference that should be betwixt Man and other Creatures, and
good and bad Men. Therefore, the Miseries of Mankind in this World, but
especially of good Men, are an evident Proof, that there is another Life to
come. Quod erat demonstrandum.

Having thus laid before you the solid V. Inferences.
ground of a Christian's Hope, and the strong reasons why we should look for a
better Life to come, I will next proceed to draw some necessary Inferences from
this great important Truth.

And first, we may learn hence the First.
true Rules of measuring our own, and other Men's Happiness, which is to regard,
not always things present, but that which is to come. It is no great matter to
discern who has the greatest Wealth, the highest Honor, and largest
Possessions: But from these we cannot conclude, who is the happiest; for Man's
Happiness Consists not in the abundance of these outward things, which he
possesses, but in the sure and well grounded Hopes of that better life to
come. The outward things of this World, can neither secure the present Life,
nor make it comfortable to a truly wise considering Man: It is only the hope of
Heaven and Eternal Life, which yields true Contentment and Satisfaction to
the Soul: Who wants this Hope is miserable, how splendid soever his outward
State be. And though one possess nothing of this World, but live in the want of
all outward Comforts; Yet if he be nourished with this inward Consolation, if
he be filled with a lively hope of that Life which is above, and demean himself
so, as that he certainly shall come to it. There can be none more happy, his
happiness is beyond Expression.

2dly. This shows that the wicked Second.
and ungodly are truly miserable, and the good and upright always happy; for
the last have what the other cannot have, a hope beyond this Life. As St. Paul
says here, that he, and such as himself, would be of all others, the most
miserable, if their hope were only in this Life; so they must be of all others,
the most happy, because their hope is not confined to this Life, but reaches
far beyond it. Wherefore look not altogether upon Men's outside, neither let
your selves be deceived with the present Prosperity and Success of the wicked,
nor scared with the Crosses and Afflictions of the Godly, let not these things
tempt you, to say, That it is vain to serve God, and what profit is it to have
kept his ordinances, and to have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts?
Call not the proud happy, neither magnify them that work Wickedness; nor
despise the Good as Fools, and mean spirited Persons; suspend your Judgment
until you have seen, and considered the end of both; For what Solon said to
Croesus, is most true, no Man can be counted happy before Death. Then shall ye
return and discern betwixt the righteous and the wicked, between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not, for they shall be mine says the
Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a
man spares his own son that serves him. But behold, the day comes that shall
burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be
stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts;
that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

But the good and upright have not only the Advantage of the wicked in the
other World, they have it also in this; for the Prospect of Eternal Life, and
the sure Hopes they have of it, give them greater Joy and Satisfaction, than
the wicked can receive from their Pleasures and Enjoyments: What results from
the one is dull and insipid in Comparison of the other. And as the wicked have
less Joy and Satisfaction even here, so they are disquieted with many vexing
Cares and tormenting Fears, wherewith the Souls of the righteous are never
affected: For not to speak of the Terrors of Hell, which sometimes seize them;
they place all their Happiness in these outward things, which are daily liable
to a Thousand Hazards; and therefore it is that they are never at rest, but
miserably tossed with Cares and Fears. The difference betwixt the godly and the
wicked, may be compared to that of two Persons at Sea in a most dangerous
Storm, where there is Hope of saving Life, but nothing else. But the one has a
goodly Inheritance, to live upon, when he comes to Land, and therefore cannot
be much cast down; whereas the other having lost his whole Stock and Substance,
is not only miserably damped with Grief for the Loss of that, but also quite
confounded with the Thoughts of his after Poverty and Misery.

Thirdly, This Doctrine of the Certainty Third.
of another better Life, serves greatly to comfort us under the Miseries and
Calamities of this; and therefore that we may have this Comfort, let us both
firmly fix the Belief of it in our Hearts, and also frequently meditate
thereon. It is in vain for any to expect to pass through this World without
Trouble and Affliction, and there is no true support under any Affliction, but
the lively hope of that glory which is to be revealed; with this, one may bear
the heaviest Cross cheerfully; and without it, the lightest Affliction may
overwhelm the spirit; For this cause, says St. Paul, we 1 Cor. 4. 16.
faint not, for though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed
day by day; for our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Cheer up thy Spirit whosoever
thou art, that lie under the pressure of any Affliction, if thou repentest of
thy Sins, if thou love God, and be resolved to walk so as to please him, why
should thou be cast down? Lift up thine Eyes unto yonder Regions above, and
consider what an Interest thou have there? what a blessed Inheritance is there
reserved for you? Is thy condition here uneasy and troublesome, and art thou
still tossed about? remember when thou come there, thou shall have all Rest
and Peace. Art thou hated by Men, and persecuted with their Hands and Tongues,
let not that vex thee, seeing thou art Beloved of God, and have Friends Above
who will shortly receive thee unto their everlasting Habitations, where are
good things which neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor can the heart of
man conceive them. Take the spoiling of your Goods joyfully, knowing that ye
have in Heaven a better and an enduring substance. Do thou here suffer the
want of all things, bear it for a while patiently, for when thou ascendest
Heaven, and enter'st into the presence of God, thou shall find fullness of joy,
and rivers of pleasures for evermore. The bitterness of this Life shall be
abundantly recompensed, by the sweetness and happiness of the other; There it
is where we shall be comforted for all the days wherein we have been afflicted:
For there men shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the
Sun light on them, nor any heat; for the Lamb Rev. 7. 16, 17.
which is in the midst of the Throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto
living fountains of waters; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.
When Columbus set first out to Sea, in order to discover a New World, he
suffered unspeakable Straits, Hardships and Difficulties. The very reading of
them is astonishing, yet he still bore out, by the hope of discovering Land,
which was very faint and uncertain; for he only conjectured that there might be
such a thing. Now, if such a faint and uncertain hope of an Earthly Country,
could make one run upon so many Hazards, and bear up under such Disasters, what
a support to our Minds, and a Comfort to our Spirits, should the hope of an
Heavenly Country be? a Country whose Riches, and Glory and Felicity, we poor
Mortals cannot conceive, much less express: And which is no Dream, or
Conjecture, but which is clearly demonstrated to us, by the Word of God; And
from which nothing can obstruct us, if we be but steadfast and immovable, and
always abounding in the work of the Lord. Death might have prevented Columbus's
Discovery, and robbed him of that Satisfaction; but Death cannot impede our
passage unto Heaven; for it is the very means of entering into it; It is the
very loosing of the Fetters, and removing the Cloggs, which detain us in this
miserable Life, and a setting us at Liberty to return to God, whence we came,
and to take possession of that glorious Life, which Christ has purchased for
us.

Fourthly and lastly; Is there a Life Fourth.
after this, and a blessed Life too? Then certainly it becomes us to give all
diligence to secure it for our selves; it is no less our Interest than our Duty.
It will not fall to our Lot by Chance, and without we use true endeavors after
it. It is true, Jesus Christ has purchased this Life for us, and paid the
price of it, without which no Man could ever have expected it: But still it
lies on us to qualify our selves for it, by the Performances of those
Conditions on which it is granted, and these are Faith and Holiness.

First, We must have Faith, for without this, says the Scripture, it is
impossible to please God; And if it be impossible to please him without Faith,
it is impossible to expect Heaven without it; for he will never admit one there
who does not please him. He that believes Joh. 3. 36.
on the Son, has everlasting life, and he that believes not on the Son, shall
not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

If you ask what Faith is. It is to believe the Existence of God, his Almighty
Power, his Infinite Wisdom, his Incomprehensible Goodness, and his most Wise
and Watchful Providence; It is, to give a most hearty assent to the Truth of
his Word, to the Authority and Goodness of his Laws, to the ineffable greatness
of his Promises, and to the Justice of his Threatenings; It is to receive, with
Zeal and Affection, the Lord Jesus Christ, to own the miraculous Nature and
Dignity of his Person, and to acknowledge the Necessity, Virtue, and Usefulness
of his Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King: Finally, it is to admit, by a
profound Humility, the Incomprehensible Mystery of the Trinity, and to depend
upon the Influence and Operation of the Holy Spirit, the third Person of the
Godhead. Our Faith must comprehend all this: And without this Faith no Man can
be saved: For unless a Man believe all that God has clearly proposed, he not
only does not honor God as he ought, but he actually dishonours and affronts
him.

Now the true evidence of this Faith is Holiness, which is also the other
Condition required of those that would be saved, Faith without works, says St.
James, is dead; And without holiness, says St. Paul, no man shall see the
Lord, Heb. xii. 14. How fit and proper unsanctified Persons may be for settling
and propagating Christ's Kingdom upon Earth, I do not well know, but this I
know, and am sure of, that none shall share of his Heavenly Kingdom, but they
who are pure as he is pure; Every man that has this hope in him purifieth
himself, even as he is pure.

The absolute necessity of Holiness, will, I suppose, be acknowledged by all,
but I fear many mistake what it is, and wherein it consists. Some think, that
it lies in varnishing a little the outside, the putting on a form of Godliness,
like the Pharisees whom our Savior resembled to whited Sepulchers, which
covered rottenness and filth; Some think they are holy enough, if their
Opinions be sound, and that they are in Communion with an Orthodox Party, and a
Zeal to promote that Party which they think so, is all the Sanctity which
others aim at. I heard of one who said of a certain Person, That she was a
Saint indeed, because, she had the Vocabula Artis; What he meant thereby, I do
not well know, except it was, That she spoke the Dialect, and used the Phrases
peculiar to some People. Indeed he that is Holy, will take heed to his words;
but I know no kind of Language sufficient to sanctify one; and if there were,
then there needed not great violence in taking the Kingdom of Heaven. But not
to pursue these manifold sad Mistakes of Men, true Holiness regards God, our
neighbors, and our selves. As it regards God, it consists in loving him
sincerely above all things, being ready to part with any thing rather than
offend him; In being zealously concerned for his Glory and Interest according
to Knowledge and Equity: For evil must not be done that good may come, who does
so, says St. Paul, their damnation is just; to drive on things per fas and
nefas, is so far from honoring God, that it occasions him to be Blasphemed.
Finally, he truly loves God, and is holy toward him, who makes Conscience of
keeping his Commandments, O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes!
Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect to all thy Commandments, Psalm.
cxix. 5, 6.

But, Secondly; He that is holy toward God, will be holy also in all manner of
Conversation toward Men; these two God has joined together by his Word, and
Men must not put them asunder: Now Holiness toward Men is to honor all men,
and to love the brotherhood; to deal with others as we would be dealt with, to
be unjust to none, but to render all their due according to their several
Places and Relations: And if I have not quite mistaken the Moral of the
Christian Religion, it takes in Subjection and Obedience to our Superiors, and
lawful Governors, in things lawful. Moreover, Holiness toward our Neighbor,
comprehends Mercy and Charity. We ought to have Compassion upon him, to relieve
his Wants according to our Ability, to forgive his Faults, and to cover his
Infirmities as much as possible. A holy Man will not be hard-hearted and severe
toward his Neighbor in his Transactions with him, nor will he Treat him with
the utmost Rigor, especially when it cannot be done without his ruin. And St.
James tells us, He shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no
mercy, James ii. 13.

Lastly, To complete our Holiness, we must look well to our selves, and
carefully preserve our selves unspotted from this World, we must walk honestly
as in the day, not in chambering and wantonness, not in gluttony and
drunkenness, not in strife and envy, nor making provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof. Frequent or habitual Excess and Rioting, Whoredom and
Uncleanness, Lascivious Looks and Speeches, not only spoil the Beauty of
Holiness, but quite deface it. As to our selves; Holiness is Chastity and
Purity, Modesty and Humility, Temperance and Sobriety, the taking care to
suppress the Corruption of our Nature, and to improve our selves in the
exercise of every Grace. Thus I have given you a true Scheme of that Holiness
to which Eternal Life is promised: And having such a Promise, let us therefore
Cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. vii. 1.

By these things we must study to qualify our selves for that other better
life, otherwise we do in vain expect it. Whether it be fit and proper to
employ. Wicked and Unhallowed hands in rearing up the Temple of God in this
World, I shall not now determine; but sure I am, such shall never inherit the
Kingdom of God in the other: Let Men be never so active and zealous for
Christ's Kingdom upon Earth, though they Prophecy in his Name, and in his Name
cast out Devils, and do many wondrous Works; yet if they be workers of
Iniquity, he will say unto them, Depart from me, I never knew you. As the
certainty of an after happy state, is clearly demonstrated in Scripture* so
there is nothing more plain and evident, than that holiness thorough Jesus
Christ is the only way that leads to it. What a strange thing then is it, and
how unaccountable, that those who profess a Desire and Hope of this Life, do
not walk in this Way thereto? We have at present a great deal of talk about
Religion, but there was never less of the Practice thereof. There was never
more Profession, nor was there ever so little of the fruit of Godliness to be
seen. Religion and Truth are in every Bodies Mouth; but very few endeavor a
conformity to them. Some are altogether careless of Holiness, as if they knew
some By-path* or nearer or easier Way to Heaven. Others, as if they had no hope
but in this Life, are only concerned for a present Temporal Interest; as if
Christ's Kingdom were only in this World, they only lay themselves out for
advancing and establishing the external Policy of the Church: And this too
Quovis modo, by any means whatsoever, they will do ill, that good may come, and
do think that the end will hallow the means, though never so unlawful. But, my
Friends, be not deceived, suffer not your selves to be cheated and deluded out
of the hope of Heaven and Eternal Life: And that you may not fall short hereof,
and lose this comfortable Expectation, let me entreat you to talk less, and do
more: be less anxious about the outward Forms of Godliness, and be more careful
to show the power thereof in your Life and Actions; trust God a little more
with the Care of his Church and Truth, and be somewhat more concerned to set up
the Kingdom of Christ within you, without which, you shall both forfeit your
part in that glorious Kingdom above, and also the honor and privilege of his
Kingdom here on Earth: Therefore say I unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be
taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. This
Judgment we have deserved, and we have great cause to fear it: Nothing will
prevent it, but our timely and unfeigned Repentance, a serious turning to the
Lord, and bringing forth the fruits of Holiness and Righteousness. If we do
this, God will yet have mercy upon our Nation, settle the State, preserve the
Church, and render her illustrious in Order and Purity, and will make Religion
and Truth to flourish, to our Praise and Renown Abroad, our Peace and Comfort
at Home, and to further and facilitate our attainment of Eternal Life hereafter.

Amen.
SERMON IX.
On REV. II. 17. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto
the Churches: To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna;
and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no
man knows, saving he that receives it.
THESE words were first directed I. All Christians are concerned in this
Advertisement.
to the Church of Pergamus, but they were not intended for that Church only,
for every one is required to give ear to them. We have all the same Vocation,
the same Obligations are on us, and the same rewards are proposed to us, and
therefore likewise we are all tied to the same Duty. The different Stations and
Orders of the Church, do indeed call for some difference in Persons behavior;
but otherwise all Christians have the same task enjoined them, and what is
spoken to one, is spoken to all.

The first thing here called for, is, an II. Of Hearing.
Attention to the Voice of God, a listening to what his Spirit says unto us,
Let him who has an ear hear, etc. So likewise began the Law and the Prophets;
for their usual Preface was, Hear, O Israel. Hearing is a sign of a ready and
willing Mind, and is necessary to prepare the way to those other Acts and
Exercises required of us. It is, indeed, neither the only, nor the main thing
we have to do, and therefore they who are only Hearers deceive themselves; as
St. James speaks. As the Body would be deformed if it were all Ear, so that
Man's Religion is misshapen, which is wholly exercised in Hearing. But however,
Its Necessity*
Hearing is necessary, it must not swallow up all other Parts of the Christian
Service; but neither must it be slighted and neglected. He who turns away his
Ear and will not hear, shows an averseness to his Duty, and though he would set
himself to it, he could not go rightly about it, for all our knowledge of
Spiritual things comes by Hearing: This is not to be fetched from within; and
therefore he, who hears not, must continue in gross Ignorance. We should
begin with Hearing, and we should never cease to hear, that we may be informed
of our Lord's Will, that we may be kept in Mind of it, and finally quickened to
it; as Servants wait daily on their Masters, to know their Pleasure, and to
receive their Commands, so should we wait on God. I will, says the Psalmist,
hear what God the Lord will speak. This is every ones Duty, none are exempted
from it; not the Ignorant to be sure, nor yet he who thinks he has Knowledge:
The Man of leisure and he who is retired from the World can pretend no excuse,
nor will the Man of business be excused if he neglect to hear: As many as have
Ears and Faculties to perceive are obliged and commanded to hear; for the words
of our Text are, Let him who has ears, which certainly comprehends all and
every one.

But as we are obliged to hear, so we The manner of doing it.
ought to take heed how we hear, as it is Luke viii. 18. That we hear aright,
else we had better not hear at all. Now he hears not rightly, who lets only the
Voice or the sound of the Word strike his Ear: But who suffers it to pierce
through to his Mind and inner Man, and to leave an impression there. Wherefore
as we must hear, so we ought to have our Ears well purged of whatever may stop
what is spoken from going to the Heart, or hinder its working there: For the
hearing here required is, opus animi non auris; It Is a pondering with the Mind
as well as harkening with the Ear. Wherefore, as St. James advises, we ought
to lay aside prejudice and filthiness, and all superfluity of naughtiness, and
to receive with meekness the ingrafted Word of God. And sure none can refuse
this, who considers either the dignity of him who speaks, or the excellency of
what is spoken: He who speaks is greater than Socrates or Plato, or any of the
ancient Philosophers, whom many traveled far to hear speak. He is greater than
Solomon, whom the Queen of Sheba was so desirous to hear. And what is delivered
does not tickle the fancy, but satisfies and ravishes the Mind; It is not airy
Notions, and fruitless Speculations which we are bid hear, but a Word which is
able to save our Souls.

And that we may hear this joyful Whom we should hear.
and comfortable Word, we must not listen to the dictates of our corrupt
Nature, nor to the Maxims of a degenerate World, nor to the particular
Traditions of Elders; for these do often misguide us, and though sometimes they
seem to speak fair, yet they only flatter, that they may the better deceive and
ensnare us, to make void the Commandments of God. Neither the Clamours of the
People, nor the Calls of the Court, are always to be hearkened to; for the
Psalmist tells us, that both the one and the other have sometimes consulted and
conspired against the Lord, and against his Christ. We must not answer every
Voice, nor believe every Spirit, for there be many Lying and false Spirits in
the World: But we must only hearken to what the Spirit of God says, and then
we are sure, not to be deceived. This holy Spirit sometimes speaks to us by
inward Motions and Inspirations to Truth and Goodness, and would certainly do
it oftener if we were rightly disposed, and careful to attend to them: but it
always speaks to us in the Scriptures; they are the Voice of God which we
ought to hear; for no Scripture is of private Interpretation, neither did the
Penmen of Scripture speak and write of their own Head, but as they were moved
by the Holy Ghost: So then it is not Man who speaks to us in the Scripture, but
the Spirit of God: And seeing God is not like Man, that he should alter his
Mind, seeing his Will, as his Nature, is unchangeable; therefore nothing is
from God which contradicts what is said to us in the Scripture, and therefore
also whatever Voice we hear, whether within us, or without us, we ought to
compare the same, with what the Spirit says to the Churches in the Scripture;
If it agree therewith, we have reason to believe and obey it: But if they sound
not alike, if there be no Harmony, but a perfect Discord betwixt them, then
that is not from God. It is but a Cheat and Delusion which disagreeth with the
written Word, and ought to be rejected, whoever brings it. But it is to be
remembered, that the quoting Texts of Scripture, and the speaking in Scripture
terms, is not a certain sign that they who do so are true Prophets, or that
their Doctrine is true, and from God; for Men may, and often do wrest the
Scripture, and use it ignorantly and impertinently. The Devil, when he tempted
our Savior, quoted Scripture; but we ought to look to the nature and tendency
of the Doctrine, and consider whether it agree to the Scope of the Scipture in
its particular Precepts: for that is the true Standard and Measure; Ye shall
know (says our Savior) the tree by its fruit.

Now the sum of what the Spirit says to the Churches, and to us by the
Churches in the Scripture, is, what we have in the Text, viz. To him that
overcomes, etc. In handling of which words, we shall first explain, what is
meant by overcoming; Then Secondly, what is the Reward here promised to him
that overcomes.

As to the First, seeing there is mention III. Of Overcoming.
here of overcoming, that necessarily supposes Fighting; for there can be no
Victory without Fighting; and if there must be a Fight, there must also be
Enemies; for we cannot fight, but against Enemies.

And by this it appears that the Life Christianity is a Warfare.
of a Christian is a Warfare, and that by coming to Christ we become Soldiers,
who are engaged to fight. Idleness and Ease is not the End of our Calling; nor
are we listed merely for show and ostentation; for we are called to Wrestle and
Fight, and that so stoutly and valiantly, so constantly and steadfastly, until
we overcome. It is not enough to begin, to make ready, and present our selves
to the Battle; nor yet to Fight a while, to hold out against two or three
Onsets, but we must never turn back, never yield, or give over; but must hold
out to the end, and so too as to carry away the Victory, for the Promise is
here only to him that overcomes. As in the Olympic Games, none got the Prize
until he had first got the Mastery over his Antagonists; and as among the
Romans a Triumph was granted, not to him that had essayed the War, but to him
who had come off Victorious. So Christians are not to expect these glorious
things here proposed, unless they have not only enterprized the good Fight, but
gained a Victory therein. If any man turn back, (says God) my soul shall have
no pleasure in him. But blessed is he who endures to the end for the same
shall be saved. Heb. x. 22.

But then you will ask whom we are to The Nature of the Christian Warfare.
fight with, and after what manner? In the first place, our Text speaks not of
Carnal Fighting; we are not to understand it of Mustering Human Forces, of
Encamping Armies, setting of Battles, laying of Sieges, making Assaults upon
Cities to take them, nor of using these, or any other Stratagems of War, where
there is occasion of showing Military Art and Valor, and where only Carnal and
Material Weapons are used. The Rewards of these Earthly Victories are Conquests
of new Dominions, the Submissions of the Conquered, acquirements of great Power
and Riches, the erection of Trophies in the places of Victory, Public
Triumphs, and the result of all Vainglory and false Renown, which reach not
further than this lower World: But the Manna, the white Stone, and new Name,
and the Glories signified by them, are true, substantial, and eternal, and
regard the life to come, which is Everlasting.

And though doubtless some great Warriors are in Heaven, some great Conquerours
will triumph with the Lord Jesus at the last Day; yet most of those who
acquired Kingdoms in any Ages here below will lose that above, and be condemned
at the last Judgment, as Thieves, Robbers and Murderers for Plunder, and
Rapine, and shedding of Blood. But as for those few warlike Princes who have
gone to Heaven, they have not got thither by their mighty feats of Arms, but by
the Justice and Equity of their respective Causes for which they took up Arms,
and by using of them with Mercy and Tenderness, and with a sincere intention
for Peace; or else, if their Wars were Unjust, by true and serious Repentance
for all the Violence committed in them, and by making Restitution and
Satisfaction for all Injuries to their utmost power. But the Spiritual
Conquerours cannot fail of Heaven; their very Conquest entitles them to it, and
all the Glories of it; because it is a Spiritual Conquest, and the Weapons of
their Warfare are not Carnal but Spiritual; and the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, the Enemies which they conquer, are Spiritual Enemies, against which
they Arm themselves, with the whole Armor of God; with the Girdle of Truth,
the Brestplate of Righteousness, the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation,
and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; because (as the Apostle
says) we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities,
against Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this World, against
spiritual wickedness in High places. Ephesians. vi. 12.

More particularly, if we do well consider these Letters to the Seven Churches*
which our Lord shuts up with these words, to him that overcomes; we shall find
the Enemies he proposes to be encountered, are such as go about to destroy our
Faith, to defile our Worship, to extinguish our Charity, and to stain the
Purity of our Christian Life and Conversation. Persecutions, and Trouble for
the sake of the Gospel or any part of it, Idolatry and Superstition, Heresy
and false Doctrine, the Corruption and inordinate Lusts within us, and the
Pollution and wicked Practices of the World without us, are the things we have
to struggle and wrestle with. And the word, overcome, in our Text, has a
reference to a perpetual War, which ought to be maintained against all and
every one of them: For it is not enough to attack or resist stoutly any one of
them, if we do not withstand all; He does not overcome according to the Text,
nor can he claim the Reward promised therein, who strikes in with any one of
these, or meanly yields to it; though he stand never so stiffly out against the
rest: As for Example, He cannot be said to overcome, who resists Error and
false Doctrine, and yet suffers himself to be captivated by Vice or Sin, nor is
he to be accounted Victorious who meets Trouble and Persecution with Courage
and Undauntedness, and in the mean time is not careful to keep a sound Faith
and a good Conscience; it is Treachery and Cowardice to yield to, or make an
Agreement with any Enemy whatsoever.

But wherein, will you say, does this What Christian Victory is.
Victory properly consist; Does Christ require us to destroy the Superstitions
and Idolatries of the World? to amend the Corruption of the Age we live in? and
to stop Persecution and Trouble which come upon the Church? For, according to
the usual way of speaking, he overcomes that gets the upper hand of his
Enemies and ruins them. Truly, the Church of God should not suffer Idolatry and
Superstition to creep into its Worship, and should guard its Discipline and
Constitutions from being vitiated, and if it were in her power to deliver her
self from Persecution by ways just and lawful, the Motions of Nature would
induce thereto, and Nature in this, is not contrary to the Gospel. But of a
Truth, Christ requires not of his Church and People, what is not in their
Power. God only can pull down the Temples consecrated to Idols, and the Idols
set up in Men's Hearts, and purge the World of its Corruptions, and suppress the
Hatred and Boldness of the Enemies of the Truth, and bind up their hands that
they persecute not those who make Profession thereof. But it is our own selves,
and not others, we are commanded to conquer. The Victory of our Text is within
us and not without. The faithful overcome when they keep themselves from being
overcome with their Enemies: Their Glory is not to give way to any Temptation
whatsoever. In War, he who is attacked is overcome, if he yield; but he who
attacks is overcome, if he succeed not: To be thrust from an Enterprise; to be
forced back from an Assault, is to be conquered by the Adversary. And on the
contrary, not to suffer a Repulse, is to carry a glorious Victory. Even so as
it is the Devil and the World who attack us, by endeavoring to draw us to the
Service of false Gods, by alluring us with the Bait of filthy Pleasures, and by
frighting us with the Horror of Trouble and Persecution; so if we resist
steadfastly all these Temptations and maintain a sound Faith, a pure Worship, a
holy Life, and Patience until the end, we have overcome, and our Enemy seeing
all his Attempts upon us thus in vain, will be constrained to retire with
shame. Wherefore St. Paul said, He had fought the good fight, because he had
kept the faith, 2 Timothy 4. 7.

Thus you see what Enemies we are to fight with, viz. The Devil, the World, and
the Flesh, the Temptations to Sin and Error, and all the hindrances of Virtue
and Holiness: And that he obtains a Victory over them that keep the Faith,
and a good Conscience maugre all these Oppositions. He overcomes, who
notwithstanding the Devil's Activity, and that he lives in a crooked and
untowardly Generation where Sin does abound, where Vice is more fashionable
than Virtue, where Error and false Tenets prevail, and the Truth is born down,
and perhaps persecuted; I say, he overcomes, who notwithstanding of this
adheres to the Truth, neither swerves from the Belief, nor Profession thereof,
but continues constant to both; he overcomes, who carefully keeps himself
unspotted from the World, and who walks uprightly in the ways of God,
sincerely obeying whatsoever is his Will and Pleasure; Finally, he overcomes,
who waits cheerfully upon God, and preserves a firm Patience of Mind,
notwithstanding his own Trouble, or the Afflictions of other godly Persons, and
the Success and Prosperity of the wicked.

And as this is to overcome in the sense No Victory so honorable.
of our Text; so he, who thus overcomes, gains a noble and a most glorious
Victory. All other Victories are nothing so desirable as this; nor does any
Victory, over any Enemy whatsoever, speak out such Wisdom and Valor as this
does. It is more glorious to overcome the Devil, than to subdue Men or Beasts,
and it requires greater Art and Valor to oppose his Assaults, and to render
his devices ineffectual, than to resist the Armies of Men, or to defeat the
boldest and most cunning Stratagem of War. There is really more Wisdom and
Courage shown in mortifying Lust, the bridling a Passion, and the resisting the
Temptations to Sin and Error, wherewith the World abounds, than in defending or
taking a City, the scaling of Walls, the venturing through the Enemies Forces,
combating wild Beasts, or in any of those Acts whereby Men ordinarily gain
Renown: For who have been strong and able enough for the last, have been too
weak for the first. The Alexanders, Coesars, Antonys, and other famed Heroes,
have often been led captive by silly Women, they wanted Courage to resist the
Charms of Beauty, or to encounter with Affronts, Disgrace, or other Disasters.
The Saints and Martyrs are more illustrious for their Patience, Constancy,
Contempt of the World, and severe Virtue, than all the renowned Warriors for
their Victories and Conquests. He that is slow to anger Prove. 16. 32.
is better than the mighty, and he that rules his spirit, than he that rules
a city, says Solomon. Those Heroic Acts so much spoken of in History, are
perhaps as much to be ascribed to a hardy Temper of Body, as to true
Magnanimity of Spirit; and Men's Success proceeds more from what we call Fortune
or good Luck, or to speak more agreeably to the Principles of Christianity, to
some favorable Juncture and Concurrence of Providence, than to their own
Valor and Prudence. But this spiritual Victory can never be carried on without
the Knowledge of the Truth, and Acquaintance with true Wisdom, and a settled
undaunted Resolution: Wherefore this Victory is certainly most preferable, it
is most to be gloried in, and there is more Praise and Honor due to it, and
also it is attended with a greater Reward, which leads us to the Consideration
of what remains in the Text;

I will give to eat of the hidden Manna. This is an Allusion to that usual
Custom IV. Of the hidden Manna. It is an Allusion to the Custom of entertaining
Conquerours, and to what the Jews fed upon in the Wilderness.
of feasting Conquerours and successful Warriors. As they who gain Earthly
Victories use to be treated sumptuously: So the Lord Jesus gives us here to
understand, that he will make an honorable Entertainment to such as obtain the
spiritual Victory formerly mentioned; he will feast him that overcomes, with
great, excellent, and desirable Delights. What is to be set before them is
here named Manna, with a Reference to what the Children of Israel fed upon in
the Wilderness. By giving it the Name of Manna, either the excellent Nature and
Quality of this Entertainment here promised, is set forth, or the Entertainment
it self is particularly pointed at.

First, hereby is set forth the excellent The Nature and Quality of the
Entertainment appointed for Christian Conquerours.
Nature and Quality of this Fare and Entertainment, as it is Heavenly: For as
Manna was not produced out of the Ground like other Grain, but came down
immediately from Heaven: so what Satisfaction is designed for our Souls, is not
grounded upon Earthly Possessions; it arises not from these outward and
sensible things, but flows merely from God, and is the Result of an immediate
Fellowship with him: Which farther makes out the Solidity and Purity of this
Joy and Delight. For earthly Pleasures are built on things vain, brittle, and
which daily fade; wherefore, they are not true solid Pleasures, they are rather
but shadows of Pleasure; but the Joy and Pleasure of the Text coming directly
from God himself, it therefore must be most firm and solid. And as for Earthly
Delights and Entertainments they are not pure, they have all some Allay in
them, some Mixture of what does disgust and displease, as every ones Experience
witnesses: But no such thing is to be found in that Entertainment which is
from Heaven, because all things there are pure and perfect. Again, as Manna was
not only good for Food, but pleasant to the Taste, the Scripture says, it
tasted like honey, and the Jews have a Tradition, that it answered every Man's
Taste, that is, it relished according to each Man's particular Appetite,
affording every one that Satisfaction in his Taste which pleased him best: So
the Joy afforded us upon the gaining this Spiritual Victory shall be most
ravishing, it shall fully answer all the Desires of our Souls, and shall yield
us that full Satisfaction they would be at; wherefore, it is called a Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory; and our Lord tells us, that they, who taste
thereof, shall not hunger or thirst any more; Whosoever shall drink of this
water Joh. 4. 13.
shall thirst again, but whosoever shall drink of this water that I shall give
him shall never thirst. Moreover as there was Plenty of Manna, so we shall not
have this Heavenly Joy in narrow and scanty Measures, but it shall flow and
abound beyond all Expression. Therefore, it is said in Scripture, to pass all
understanding, that is, the height and greatness thereof can never be
sufficiently comprehended. Finally, as Manna was permanent, it lasted all the
while the Children of Israel were in the Wilderness, that is, so long as they
needed it, neither was it possible for their Enemies to hinder it; so this Joy
shall never cease, our Enemies Malice and Power cannot reach it, but it abides
for ever: All earthly Goods are liable to Rapine and Violence, our Enemies may
bereave us of them: But they cannot take away the Consolations of the Spirit of
God here, these we may enjoy in the midst of Bonds, and Imprisonment, and
Afflictions; and much less can any stay that joy, and those Pleasures which
shall be bestowed hereafter. And as these are the Reasons why the Joy prepared
for those who overcome is called Manna, so it is called hidden Manna, alluding
to the Pot of Manna laid up in the Ark, or else because the Nature, and
Quality, and Excellency of this Joy is without the reach of Sense: Our bodily
Sense, does not discern it, nor can humane Reason scan it. Strangers do not
intermeddle with this joy. None understand it but they who possess it. Eye has
not seen, nor ear heard; neither have entered into the heart of Man, the good
things which God has laid up for them that love him.

But I said by Manna, are not only Jesus Christ is the hidden Manna.
set forth the Nature and Quality of those Delights, he, who overcomes, is to
be feasted with; but also the particular Entertainment, which affords such
excellent Joy and Delight is pointed at. And therefore by Manna here we are to
understand Jesus Christ himself, for Manna was a Type and Figure of him, and he
is expressly called Spiritual Manna, 1 Cor. x. 3. And as a Pot of Manna was
laid up in the Ark, so Jesus Christ is kept and reserved in the Heavens, which
were figured by the Ark; and therefore he is called hidden Manna. Now they who
overcome shall have Christ to feast upon, not after a corporal and carnal
manner, eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, as some senselesly dream,
they do in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; nor yet sacramentally as all
true Believers do in this World, in the Elements of Bread and Wine: For
hereafter in Heaven, which is here pointed at, there is neither place for, nor
need of Types, Figures, and Symbols; which would not be suitable Entertainment
for such a pure and perfect State. But the meaning is, they shall feast on
everlasting Bliss, the Purchase and Merits of his Blood, the Fruits of his
Incarnation, Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, and whatever he
did, or suffered to purchase Eternal Happiness for us. There is no proper Food
but this. He who wants it is utterly miserable; for nothing but the Enjoyment
of Christ in Heaven can give Life or Pleasure to the Soul of Man: And the Soul
that is entertained in his beatifick Presence, is entertained in the Fullness
of Joy, and cannot but be happy; for there is no Grief, or Sadness in that
glorious Place, where he is, but perfect Delight, Joy, Pleasure, and
Satisfaction, as will appear by what follows, which is the effect of this
Entertainment: He who gets to eat of this hidden Manna, shall also get a white
Stone.

When St. John had this Revelation he V. Of the white Stone.
was in Patmos, an Isle in the Egean, or Egarean Sea, and here he alludes to a
Custom practiced or well known there; for in Asia, and other Eastern Countries
they were wont to give their Votes, for acquitting or condemning such as were
accused by casting white and black Shells, or Stones; the white as an Emblem of
Innocence, was for the Persons Absolution and Justification, as the black
betokened Guilt, and declared for their Condemnation, which Ovid has thus
delivered;

Mos erat antiquis, niveis atrisque lapillis, Ovid Metam. Lib. xv.

His damnare reos, illis absolvere culpa.
By the white Stone then is meant a Sentence of Absolution, and so our Savior
here promises, to absolve and justify such as overcome, from all that may be
laid to their Charge: He will take away their Guilt, wash them from their Sins,
and deliver them from the Death that is due to them. And O what a Happiness is
this! What matter of Joy is there in this Promise? It is as Health to the sick,
Ransom to the captive, and a Remission to him who is ready to be led forth to
Execution. If any be not affected herewith, it is because they are not sensible
of their Guilt, and do not consider the heinous Nature of Sin, or the Misery
which attends it: But they who have laid this to Heart will prize it
exceedingly. What would a troubled Conscience give for the least Assurance or
smallest Hope of this Comfort? O Who will deliver me from this Body of Death,
says St. Paul, and David, who roared all the day long because of his Sin; and
on that Account found God's Hand Day and Night heavy upon him, cries out,
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, Psalm. 32. 1.
whose Sin is covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity. Despair not because thy Sins are many and great, for be they never so
numerous or heinous, Christ is able to take them away, and here he promises to
absolve thee. Be of good cheer, O Sinner, thy Sins shall be forgiven thee, for
there is now no Condemnation to them that Romans 8. 1.
are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

But there is here promised, not only VI. Of the New Name.
a white Stone, the Sign of Absolution, and a Deliverance from Death due to us,
but also something more, which we could never deserve, and which exceeds all
Expression. In the Stone there shall be a New Name, which is still an Allusion
to the Custom of these former times, and Eastern Countries, where Letters and
Words used to be written also upon the Stones, they cast into the public Urn.
What is the Importance of this New Name, we will know when we have found out
whose Name it is, whether of him who gives it, or of him who receives it? In
the following Chapter, verse 12. There is express mention of Christ's New Name:
By which we are to understand the new, clear, full, and perfect Manifestation
of the Truth, and Importance of his Name, Jesus Christ; for as when God
appeared to Moses, Exodus vi. 3. He called Jehovah a New Name, not known to the
Patriarchs, because he executed the Promise made to them, and so manifested his
Faithfulness and Unchangeableness signified by that Name: For otherwise it
cannot be said, but that this particular Name was known before, as well as that
of Almighty. So because hereafter there shall be a clear Discovery of the
Signification of Jesus Christ, and of the Truth of that Signification, because
the Salvation and Redemption implied in this Name, shall be fully revealed;
therefore it is called his New Name. At present we call him Jesus Christ, our
Lord, but hereafter we shall see and feel him effectually to be so; now the
Salvation he has purchased, is the Object of our Hope, but then we shall
behold it with our Eyes, and be made to contemplate the Glory of his Kingdom,
to our unspeakable Comfort and Satisfaction. But seeing it is said, a New Name,
and not my New Name; therefore it would seem, that we are to understand it of
the Name of him who receives it; and seeing Names are the Marks of things, and
are often taken so in Scripture, therefore, by New Name, we ought to understand
the New State and Condition which the Saints, and those whom God honors,
shall be put into. The Name given to the first Man was Adam, and it is common
to us all, for it shows our Original and Condition to be earthly; we came
from the Dust, and to the Dust we must return. Our present State is
corruptible, and makes us liable to Death. The Immortality Man would have had
in Paradise, if he had continued his Integrity, would not have been the Effect
of his natural Force, but of a supernatural Virtue; for the natural Composition
of our Body tends to Corruption. But when this corruptible State is done away,
there shall succeed another better State, even an Heavenly and Incorruptible
one, which is implied by this New Name. As is the earthy, such are they also
that are earthy, and as is the heavenly, such are they also, that are heavenly;
and as we have born the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of
the heavenly, for this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal
must put on immortality, 1 Cor. xviii. 48, 58.

There remains no more to be explained, VII. How these words, No man knows
but he who receives it, are to be understood.
but the very last words of the Text, the sense of which seems not to be very
obvious; for if the white stone and new name be to be understood of our
Justification and Glorification, as I have said, how then can it be said, that
no man knows it, but he who receives it? For, will not our Absolution be
pronounced before all the World? is not God to justify us in the General
Assembly of Angels and Men? Will not the Devil and Damned behold the Saints
entrance into Glory, which will not a little aggravate their Misery. The
Triumph of Jesus Christ is too glorious to be concealed, and the Glory which he
will bestow on his faithful Servants, is too Splendid to be hid. But to this it
may be replied, First, That indeed the matter of this Joy and Glory may, and
will be known unto others, but none except those who possess it, can have a
true sense of it, or understand it. The Sentence of our Absolution shall,
indeed, be pronounced before all the World: The wicked, yea, the Devils
themselves, shall hear these blessed Words which proceed from our Savior's
Mouth, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you; but
none, except those to whom they are spoken, shall understand or comprehend the
fullness of the Consolation which they give. The outside of Men's Condition may
be seen, and the external matter of their Happiness may be known; but no view
of things can make any taste the sweetness of them, or be sensible of the
Delectation which they afford; any who has the use of Reason may persuade
himself, that the state of the Saints in Heaven will be magnificent and
glorious, even to Admiration: But without the actual possession of that State,
it is simply impossible to conceive, or to have any true sensation of the Joy
and Delectableness thereof; as none can have a true Idea of the Beauty of
Colors, or the Harmony of Music, or the Sweetness of Honey, but by Seeing,
Hearing, and Tasting of them. Notwithstanding of what has been revealed of
Heaven, St. John says, It does not yet appear what we shall be.

But Secondly, Some put another gloss upon the words, and considering that they
run in the Present Tense, and not in the Future; for it is, None knows it but
he that receives, and not, none shall know, but he that shall receive;
Therefore they conclude, that the Receiving and Knowledge meant of, relate to
something in this present Life, and not to that which is to come; and that so
the meaning must be, that none at present knows these things, or has any
sense or apprehension of them, but they who have received, by the Grace and
Spirit of God, an earnest of them, that they are unintelligible Mysteries to
all, except to them who believe. None other do regard them, or are sensible of
the worth of them. As the Cross of Christ is a stumbling block to the Jews, and
foolishness to the Greeks; so the Glory and the Happiness of the other Life,
are reckoned Dreams and Ravings by the Men of the World, who are void of Faith;
whereas Faith both discovers the certainty, and also gives some fore-taste of
the unspeakable excellency thereof; For faith is the substance of things hoped
for, and the evidence (or Conviction) of things not seen. As God gave Moses a
sight of the Land of Canaan, on the top of Pisgah, so Christians by Faith have
a sweet and desirable Prospect of Heaven, and the Happiness of the other
World. It not only assures them that there is such a thing, but also makes them
sensible that it excels all the Delights and Enjoyments under the Sun, that
nothing in this World is worthy to be compared unto that which is to be
revealed. As Faith is the chief Weapon and Instrument to be used in gaining
this Spiritual Victory; so it ascertains us of our Reward, and convinces us of
the greatness thereof. If we have Faith, we shall easily overcome, and also be
fully persuaded that our labor shall not be in vain.

Do you Believe? I hope you do, why VIII. The Application.
then sit you still? Why go you not out to fight the Battles of the Lord?
Arise, I pray you, and prove your Strength and Valor against his Enemies, and
your own; they are now busy, and there is no Truce to be granted unto them.
Bestirr your selves therefore, suffer them not to catch any advantage over you,
but be sure to carry away the Victory. If the Devil assault you, resist him
till he flee from you. Are you persecuted, troubled, and afflicted? maintain a
Christian Courage and Magnanimity, bear all with an invincible Patience, and
suffer the utmost, rather than do what is dishonorable, what may offend God,
or wound your own Conscience. Does the wind of false Doctrine blow from all
quarters, let us take heed that we be not carried away therewith; let us search
for the Truth, and never suffer Lies and Falsehoods to have any Impression upon
us. And that other Errors may not find entrance, let us shut out that great and
gross one, and the Mother of many, viz. That it is no matter what Men think or
believe, that Opinions are not dangerous, for the Apostle tells us, That there
are some Heresies damnable. All Truths are not to be alike accounted of, nor
are all Errors dangerous: But certainly some Truths are of such importance, and
are delivered with such evidence, that to deny or question them, is to resist
God, and question his Veracity; and there are some Errors which debauch the
Understanding as much as Vice does the Heart, and the one does alienate from
God, as well as the other. If we be tempted to mingle our Devotions with
Idolatry and Superstition, that the Worship of God may be splendid and
magnificent, let us not yield; for God is not to be Worshipped with that which
pleases him not, nor must we study to Honor him by ways which he has
forbidden. Neither out of a pretext of shunning this, let us be carried to the
other extreme of Indecency, Irreverence, and of a nasty Familiarity. Whatever
be in vogue among others, let us both in public and in private keep up that
Worship which is grave, serious, and deliberate, which is suitable to the
Majesty of God, and proper to beget in us great and worthy thoughts of him;
which kindles our Love to him, heighteneth our Reverence and Esteem for him,
which instructs us in his Will, and quickens our Obedience to his Commands.
Finally, and particularly, let us with all care escape the Pollution that is in
the World, through Lust; let us stave off Vice, and withstand the wicked
Practices of this Age we live in, and study to be found the Children of God,
without all rebuke even in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation,
whatever be the practices of others, let us make it our business to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly, in
this present world, looking for the blessed hope, and glorious appearance of
the Son of God. If we do not strive to overcome in this last particular, our
Victory in the rest will be to little purpose. What will it avail us to stand
out against Persecutions, to resist Error and Heresies, Idolatry and
Superstition, if we be Slaves to Lust, and suffer Sin or any manner of Impiety
to reign in us. All our Zeal for Christ's Kingdom without will profit us
nothing, if we do not set it up within us. Though we Prophecy in Christ's
Name, and in his Name cast out Devils, and in his Name do many wondrous Works;
yet if we do the works of Iniquity, he will say to us in that day, Depart from
me, I never knew you.

Thus you have seen your task, and what, as Christians, is required of you.
Your task, indeed, is great; but your Assistances are as great: and if you
resolve to acquit your selves well, you must be active and diligent. There is
no place for Idleness or Loitering. You have much to do; but however, do not
despond; for there shall be strength given you from above. He that is with you
is greater than any that can be against you. If you have the heart, be ready
and willing. God will enable you to overcome the greatest Goliath of the
Philistines. And if at any time you should faint, look unto Jesus the author
and finisher of your Faith; let his Example direct and encourage you: and as he
did also look unto the Recompense of Reward, consider what shall be done to you
if you overcome: You shall not be so meanly rewarded* as they were who obtained
the Mastery in Olympic Games, who only got Crowns of Flowers, Laurels, and
Myrtles, nor yet as the Romans when they returned Victorious over their
Enemies, who only had the Honor of a days Solemnity and Triumph; nor is it a
Crown of Gold which shall be bestowed on you, which is the greatest reward to
be expected in this World; but it is a Crown of Life, Glory and Righteousness.
I have fought a good fight, (says St. Paul) I have finished my course, and
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. Nothing is
reckoned more August and glorious than a Crown; some have been at great Pains,
and have run many Hazards to win one. But there is no Crown so glorious as this
which awaits us in the other World: The splendour of it is represented by the
Whiteness of the Stone in the Text; Its Excellency and Magnificence by the
weight thereof, and its Duration and Continuance by the firmness of it; Be ye
therefore steadfast, and immovable, and abounding always in the work of the
Lord; Forasmuch as you see that your labor is not in vain: And unto him who is
able to make you overcome, and who has promised thus to reward you if you do
overcome, be Glory, Honor and Praise for Ever and Ever.

Amen.
SERMON X.
On LUKE VI. 46. Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?
THE Name of Lord is not only a What the Name of Lord does import.
title of Honor, but it implies Dominion and Authority; so that to call one
Lord, is to acknowledge him Superior, and to profess Subjection to him. Christ
is called Lord by David, Psalm. cx. And is almost always designed so in
Scripture: This Name is due to him both by virtue of his Nature and Office, so
that to call Jesus Lord, is to receive and Acknowledge him for the Son of God,
the Messiah or Christ, and the Savior of the World; For these Reasons he is
our Lord, and is called so in Scripture, and they do not understand what they
say, who do not mean these things when they call Jesus Lord.

By the things which Christ says, is to What is meant by the things which
Christ says
be understood the whole Doctrine of Christ, as it respects both Faith and
Manners. A true Disciple will receive whatever his Lord says, and will own all
that his Authority is concerned in: But he is disobedient and rejects his
Authority, who rejects either the Truths required to be believed, or the things
commanded to be done. To do then what Jesus says, is to frame both the inward
Temper and Sentiments of our heart, and our outward Conversation according to
the Doctrine of Christ, it is to receive by a Sincere Faith, all the Truths
revealed by him, and to make Conscience of observing what he has commanded. The
Credenda or things to be believed are summed up in that short summary and form
of sound words, called the Apostles Creed: The Agenda or things to be done are
contained in the Ten Commands given to Moses, that excellent Commentary thereon
we have in the Sermon on the Mount, and may be learnt from his other
Discourses, and the Epistles of the Apostles. All which in short teach us to
forbear Evil and to do Good, to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live
Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World: The Laws of Christ
discharge all Sin and Wickedness both in the inward and outward Man, and do
require Purity of Heart and Life; they teach us to lay aside all Covetousness
and inordinate Desires, to despise this present Life, and to set our hearts
upon the things above; they order the putting off Wrath, Malice, Anger, Envy,
and to put on Bowels of Charity and Compassion toward our Brethren. To
conclude, the sum of what Christ says to us for directing our Morals is, that
we should deny our selves, that is freely and heartily renounce any thing,
though never so dear, than offend God; That we should take up our Cross, that
is cheerfully and willingly, patiently and contentedly submit to whatsoever
Afflictions God is pleased to lay upon us, and to undergo the trouble which
cannot be avoided without Sin. And lastly, that we follow him, viz. In the ways
of Devotion, Zeal, Affiance and Love toward God; of Humility, Meekness,
Forbearance and Charity toward Men, in which he has gone before us; and that
we labor carefully to imitate that perfect example of Lowliness and Purity
which he has left unto us. This is the sum of what Christ has said, and these
are the things he would have observed by all who call him Lord.

But what God has joined together, The Profession and Practice of Christianity
ought to go together.
Men have learned to put asunder* God has united the Profession and Practice
of Christianity, he has commanded that all who call and own him for their Lord
and Master, should also carefully do his Will: But this is not much looked to,
these things Men separate from one another, how contrary soever the same be to
the Divine Institution. In our Savior's time we read of some who really
believed in him, they were inwardly persuaded, that he was the Messiah, but yet
they would not profess him openly for fear of being cast out of the Synagogue.
But now the Scene is altered, and as there is no hazard in making a public
Profession of Christ, so many avowedly do it, yet withal they refuse to obey
him; they own his Name, but never mind his Will and Pleasure; they confidently
call him Lord, Lord, but the doing what he says, is the least thing in their
thoughts. In These days, Christ wants not Followers, he has Disciples enough,
the number of Christians is not small; but they are such as are so only nomine
tenus, only by Name and Profession, unless that they say so, it could not be
well known that they were the Disciples of Jesus Christ; unless they were
sometimes seen in the Church, and heard to cry Lord, Lord, they might readily
be taken for Turks, Pagans, and the Enemies of Christ. Now the Church is indeed
pretty numerous, but if the secret Atheist and the openly Profane, if the
impious Scorner and sneaking Hypocrite, if the Glutton and Drunkard, the
Fornicator and Adulterer, the Covetous, Unjust and Dishonest Person, the
Malicious, Revengeful and Common Swearer; in a word, if the careless and
indifferent, and such persons were removed as are destitute of Piety and Good
Works, and such who are ordinarily guilty of gross Scandalous Crimes, which are
altogether inconsistent with the Sincere Belief of the Gospel, I fear the
remainder would then be but few, and the Church would become as thin as now it
uses to be throng. I shall not be so peremptory as to say that there should
scarce be so many behind in every Parish, City, and Congregation, as Abraham
desired to find righteous Persons in Sodom, but sure I am, the Number would be
very small and inconsiderable!

Now that they whose Lives are contrary to the Rules of Christianity* and who
in their Works deny Christ, should yet profess him with their Mouths, and
confidently pretend to all the Privileges of his true Disciples, is somewhat
strange and unaccountable, for whatever does persuade and excite us to believe
in Christ, does also oblige us to obey him; that which binds to the one, makes
the other also necessary. And if our obedience may be any ways dispensed with,
it matters little whether or not we adhere to the Profession of the Gospel, as
our Savior intimates to us plainly in the words of our Text, Why call ye me
Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say.

Which words may be understood either by way of Question, or as an
Expostulation. I intend to consider them both ways.

And first, as it seems a Question, and I. The Text considered as a Question.
taking it so, it is as much as if he had said, What mean you by professing my
Name, and giving me out to be your Master, when you do not my Will, neither
offer to keep my Commandments? What end do you propose to your selves in this?
What advantage do you expect thereby? Can you show any reason for this
behavior of yours? If you be not ingenuous when you call me Lord, what makes
you flatter me? And if you really think I am your Lord and Master, why is not
your Practice suitable and consonant to your Belief and Profession? Consider, I
pray you, and think with your selves and see if ye can give any satisfactory
account of this.

This, I say, is the sense and meaning II. The true Motives to believe in
Christ or to profess him, do also oblige to pay Obedience to him.
of the Text when we construe it as an Interrogatory, the scope and design of
which is to show the great absurdity and unreasonableness of making a
Profession of Christ, without accompanying that Profession with a suitable
Practice, seeing whatever does induce us to the one, does also oblige us to the
other. We have the same obligations to both; and that this may more clearly
appear, we will consider a little the True and Reasonable Motives which
persuade us to the embracing of Christ, and shall show that if we be ingenuous
in owning and acknowledging them, they cannot but stir us up to pay him all
due and holy Obedience.

But in reckoning up these Motives, III. The Custom of the Country is not
sufficient to wise and reasonable Men.
we do not think our selves obliged to count that as one, which yet perhaps is
the most common and general inducement, I mean, the Custom and Fashion of the
Country. The generality of Christians are so, only because Christ is believed
and professed in those Countries where they have been born and bred; and they
do profess the Christian Religion for the same reason that others do
Mahumetanism and Paganism, because this was the Religion of their Forefathers,
and that generally those about them do the like; So that if it had been their
luck to have been born in another Country, and under another Climate, they
would have owned another Lord, and been of another Religion. I say, we will not
consider this as any true Motive to the receiving of Christ; Because it is
neither sufficient nor reasonable, and he who embraces Christ upon no other
grounds than this, his Religion is little to be valued or regarded. Neither is
it matter of wonder, that such an one yield to the prevailing Tentations of
Sin, and refuse compliance with the Precepts of a strict and holy Living,
especially when he perceives them fallen into desuetude, and that Vice and
Ungodliness are more commonly practiced; for he that in these things has no
other Reason or Motive than the Custom and Fashion of the place he lives in,
will no doubt be still carried away with the Tide: But what a shameful and
unworthy a thing is it, to be guided and directed in Matters of so great
moment, only by the Practice of others, and the Custom of the place we live in?
The Apostle St. Peter commands us to be always ready to give an answer to every
man who asks a reason of the hope that is in us: And truly it is a very
slender and poor one, when we have no other but that we were so Educated, and
that this Faith and Religion were professed, and in fashion where we were Born
and Bred. Indeed, it is no small Happiness to be Born within the Church, and
under the light of the Gospel, and among those who may educate us in the
Christian Faith, because hereby we have an early occasion of acquainting our
selves with those great and important things which concern our Eternal
Salvation. And therefore we have always good reason to bless God for these
excellent Advantages of our Birth and Education, without which, it is like we
should have never come to the true Knowledge of Christ. But yet this does not
excuse us from a reasonable Enquiry and Search into the Truth and Grounds of
the Christian Faith: when we come to Age and the Years of Discretion, we should
be ashamed to pin our Faith upon our Grand-mother's Sleeve; we ought to fix it
on a better bottom than mere Education, we should search into the Grounds and
Reasons why we should rather be of the Christian Religion, than of any other;
and should labor to understand what Obligations are upon us to choose Christ,
and none other to be our Lord and Master: For unless we do this, we do not act
like Men, our Faith is neither reasonable nor divine, but unworthy both of Men
and Christians, and which will never endure the Shock of any Temptation.

That which should chiefly persuade IV. The first great Motive to profess
Christ, is his being sent from God.
us to profess Christ, and to become his Disciples, is, the Consideration of
his being sent from God, and a serious Reflection on those undoubted Truths and
irrefragable Testimonies, we have received thereof. Jesus Christ was foretold
by the Prophets, and when he was in the World, God bare Witness unto him by the
Appearance of Angels, and several Voices from Heaven, and diverse other
astonishing Signs; he wrought many Miracles and did many things, not only
beyond humane reach, but beyond the reach of Nature it self, and he gave others
Power to do the like; his Death was accompanied with many amazing Wonders,
especially that of his Resurrection, so that the World was astonished at it.
For Death had no Power over him, for he rose from the dead and appeared unto
many, and last of all, was seen to ascend up into Heaven. When he was gone,
what he foretold his Disciples, came to pass, and as they preached the Gospel
which he had taught them, so God gave Testimony unto them by Signs and Wonders
and diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which followed them: So that
the whole World was constrained to receive and believe their Doctrine. We have
as great Evidence, and Certainty for these things, as is possible to be had,
and is sufficient to reason any Man into the Belief of them. And by these
things, it does appear that Christ is no Impostour, nor the Gospel, a cunningly
devised Fable, but a certain Divine Truth; which teaches us that God has
highly exalted Jesus Christ; and given him a Name, which is above every Name,
Phil. 2. 9.
that, at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and
things in Earth, and things under the Earth, and that every tongue should
confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father. If we
believe in Christ, if we own him to be our Lord, it should be for these
Reasons, and upon these grounds, otherwise our Faith is not valid.

This is the first and true Inducement Which requires absolute and universal
Obedience.
to the receiving Christ, and if we embrace him, and make him our Lord for this
reason, because he is sent of God, and has received all Power in Heaven and in
Earth; then we cannot but conceive an indispensible Necessity of yielding all
Obedience and Service: For God has not made him a titular Lord, he has not
given Him a Name of Dominion and Power only; but he has constituted him such a
Lord as must be served and obeyed, and the Power and Dominion which he has
received is not nominal, but real, actual, and effective: And consequently the
Subjection which is required to be given him, must be something else than Words
and Complements; it must be more than a barren and empty Profession, it must be
real Deeds, faithful Services, and an impartial and universal Obedience to his
Laws and Commands; or else whatever we profess or say, he will never own or
acknowledge us to be his true Subjects and Servants. A son honors his
father, Mal. 1. 6.
and a servant his master, if I then be a father, where is my honor? And if I
be a master, where is my fear? says the Lord by the Prophet Malachy. If we do
really acknowledge another to be Lord and Master, we must also acknowledge our
selves to be his Servants: And Servants owe Obedience, therefore we reproach
our selves so often as we call Christ our Lord; and yet refuse to obey him. Our
Ingenuity in calling him Lord* can never appear so long as we do not heartily
and readily obey him: For as God speaks in the forecited place. Offer it now
unto thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? Try, I
pray you, and see if any Man will be put off as thou think to put off
Christ, when thou have no mind to obey him. Will any Prince look upon those as
good Subjects, who pay him no Homage, and refuse him the Acts and Testimonies
of their Allegiance? Will any Master count him his Servant, who never minds his
Will, but does his own? And how unreasonable then art thou not to serve and
obey him whom thou call and believe to be thy Sovereign Lord and Master?
If we be persuaded that it is necessary to receive him, whom God has sent,
lest we be esteemed Rebels for resisting the Ordinance of Heaven: We ought also
to believe and be persuaded, that it is absolutely necessary to obey him; for
it is all one not to own Christ, and not to obey his Will. Disobedience to a
lawful Lord and Master is a great Crime, and passes not unpunished. Ye Joh.
13. 13.
call me Master and Lord, (says Christ) and ye say well, for so I am. If he
then be your Lord and Master, see that ye do whatsoever he has commanded you,
else he will be sure to punish your Disobedience. These my Servants that would
1 These. 1. 8.
not that I should reign over them, bring them hither to me, and slay them
before mine eyes. The Lord Jesus Christ will one day appear with his mighty
Angels in flaming fire, to take vengeance on them that know not God, and obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Lord will accept of nothing
instead of this, neither Prayers, nor Sacrifices, nor Professions will make
Compensation for it: For as Samuel said to Saul, has the Lord as great delight
in burnt-offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold,
to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams; for
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and
idolatry, because thou have rejected the word of the Lord, he has rejected
thee, 1 Samuel xv. 22.

Thus we see, That our embracing of Christ, and taking him for our Lord,
because we are assured he is sent from God, and is ordained by him the Lord of
Angels and Men, that the same does in its Nature, also tie and oblige us to
honor him, not only with the calves of our Lips, not only by professing with
our Mouths, that he is our Lord and Master, but by doing him real and hearty
Service, and rendering all due Obedience to his Will and Pleasure.

But further, is it Love to Christ that V. A second Motive to profess Christ,
is Love.
ties us to him, and which makes us adhere to the Profession of his Name? If
so, then this will oblige us to serve and obey him. We read of some Servants
under the Law, who so loved their Masters, that they would not part from them,
and who though they might have had their Freedom, yet would not accept of it,
but suffered their Ears to be bored through, that they might stay with their
Masters for ever. And certainly Christ is such a Master, as deserves to be thus
loved: For never any did so much for gaining the Affection of their Servants as
he has done to gain ours: He has first loved us, and that with an admirable
and astonishing Love. Greater love than this has no Man, than that a Man lay
down his Life for his Friends; and he has not refused this Expression of Love
to us, for he laid down his Life, and shed his precious Blood for our sakes.
There is therefore all the Reason in the World, that we should love him, and
adhere to him. Besides what Obligation the Commandment of God lays upon us,
to take him for our Lord, the Sense of his Love should oblige us to do it, we
are very ungrateful if we do not love him, who has so highly loved us, and who
has bought us at so dear a Rate, not with corruptible things as Gold and
Silver, but with his own most precious Blood.

Now if it be Love which moves us to No Love without Observance.
call Christ Lord, Lord, to make Profession of his Name, and Gospel, then
certainly this will excite us also to do his Will, and observe his
Commandments. It is the very natural Result of Love, the proper Fruits and
Expressions of it, to be observant of the Person who is loved, to take a
delight in doing their Will and Pleasure. Love does always discover it self
this way, and it is simply impossible for it not to do so, and it is most
certain they have little or no Love who cannot show it this way: Hereby a Wife
manifests her Affection to her Husband, and Children their Love and Respect
to their Parents, and one Man to another, and when this Method is not followed,
and these Evidences given, do we not presently conclude that the Persons have
little Kindness or Regard for each other? Now our Love to Christ must follow
the same Course, and express it self in the same manner; If ye John 14. 15, 21,
23, 24.
love me, says he, keep my Commandments. And again, He that has my
Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me; if a Man love me, he
will keep my Words; but he that loves me not, keeps not my sayings. And
therefore, if Love be the Motive of our professing Christ, it will not rest
there, it will carry us further, even to the doing whatsoever he has commanded
us.

Besides the two Inducements already VI. A third Motive is the Hope of Reward.
mentioned, there is one other Motive which may persuade us to come to Christ,
and to yield our selves his Disciples, and that is the Hope of these Rewards he
has to bestow. These Services are much sought after which are honorable and
profitable, and truly there is none which has more either of Honor or Profit,
than this of the Lord Jesus Christ: There is more advantage of having him our
Master, than in serving Kings and Princes, or the greatest in the World: For
besides the Temporal Benefits and Spiritual Blessings, which he gives in this
present Life, he gives Glory and Eternal Happiness in the Life to come, and
therefore we may with good Reason, say with St. Peter, when our Lord asked him,
Will ye also go away Joh. 6. 68*
from me? to whom shall we go? thou have the Words of Eternal Life. The Hope of
Reward then may reasonably excite us to own and profess Christ, but we do in
vain look for his Reward, without paying him due Obedience.

What, I pray you, is there any Man Which the Disobedient cannot expect.
that will pay his Servant his Wages, when he has not performed his Work, do
we think our Lord will bestow upon us the Eternal Rewards of the other World,
when we have done nothing for it? He told the Woman of Canaan, that it was not
meet to take the childrens bread, and cast it to the dogs, and we may be sure
he will never think it just to make the Children of Disobedience to share
alike, as those that do sincerely obey him; Not every one that says unto me,
Lord, Lord, Mat. 21. 22, 23.
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father
which is in Heaven. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name have cast out Devils? and in thy Name
done many wonderful Works? And then I will profess unto them, I never knew you,
depart from me ye that work iniquity. He is a just Heb. 5. 9.
Judge who will have no respect of persons, but will certainly render to every
Man according to his deeds; to them who by patient Continuance in well-doing
seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, he will Romans 2. 6.
give eternal Life; but unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the
truth, but obey unrighteousness, he will give indignation and wrath.

And as Christ will never bestow Heaven, Nor are they capable of it.
and that Eternal Weight of Glory which is above, upon those who do not obey
him; so none but those who keep his Commandments are capable of them. The
Dignities and Enjoyments of this present World may be possessed by any: Both
good and bad we see can be invested with them, but as for the Heavenly Glory
none can enjoy it, but such as are worthy thereof. As the Eye is required to
Seeing, and the Ear to Hearing, and the Palate to Tasting; so the previous
Dispositions of Holiness and Righteousness, are requisite and absolutely
necessary to the Enjoyment of Heaven and Eternal Life: Without Heb. 12* 14.
holiness (says the Apostle) no man can see God. Seeing it is certain that we
keep in the other World the same Temper and Inclinations which we have in this,
therefore he who is not prepared and disposed beforehand by the Exercise of
Virtue, and the leading a Life according to the Commandments of God, is no more
capable of Heaven and the Pleasures thereof, than a Beast is of the
intellectual and rational Enjoyments of Men. Heaven is not to be considered so
much under the Notion of some glorious Place, as of a State which brings us
near to God, and makes us Partakers of his Divine Nature. It is a Life of
perfect Holiness and Purity. Wherefore they who seek for Heaven without the
Desires and Endeavors to be truly holy, are wholly ignorant of, and do quite
mistake the thing, and do not know what they would be at. Let any Object or
Enjoyment be in it self never so good or excellent; yet if it be not agreeable
to the Faculties, and suitable to the Inclinations of him who has it; it
affords no Satisfaction or Delight: And if he has any Aversion thereunto, it
disgusts and procures Trouble and Pain. The covetous Worlding, the lascivious
and intemperate Person, relish no Pleasure in the Church, in the Exercises of
Devotion, and in the Company of pious and devout Souls, who are wholly
mortified to the World and the things thereof; these are irksome, painful, and
wearisome things unto them. And we may be sure Heaven would be yet far more
troublesome, because it would be a greater Violence to their Inclinations.
Therefore could we suppose a wicked Man translated into Heaven, he yet would
find no Heaven of it, I mean he would not look upon himself as happy there,
because he would find nothing agreeable to his mind, or grateful to his
Inclinations; he would taste as little Pleasure in all that that place could
afford him; as a Swine would do to be wrapped in Odours, and fine Linen, and
decked with all manner of precious Ornaments: As that Beast would still count
the Mire and Puddle more delicious, so a wicked and ungodly Person would esteem
the lowest, the most brutish and sensual Pleasures here to be preferable to the
Joys of Heaven it self. Heaven certainly is as much the natural Consequence of
a holy and good Life, as it is the Reward obtained for our Obedience: And Hell
is no more the determined Punishment of Sin, than it is the necessary result
and effect of it. As a Weight naturally presses toward the Earth, so Sin
sinketh a Man necessarily into Hell, that is the outmost Misery. Whereas true
Goodness and Righteousness put him without the Reach of it, in that they
elevate and raise him toward God, who is the Fountain of all Happiness.
Holiness therefore, and Obedience to Christ, is the true and only way to
Heaven, he that treads not this Path shall never come there.

Thus we have considered the Text as it seems the Proposal of a Question, or
interrogatory, asking the Reason and Cause why those who own and acknowledge
Christ, to be their Lord and Master, do not sincerely obey Him, and keep his
Commandments? From which Occasion has been taken, to show the unreasonableness
and Absurdity of disjoining these which should be conjoined together, I mean
the Profession and Practice of Christianity; seeing that which moves and
exciteth to the one, does also call for the other. Now, before I leave this
Point, allow me to ask you a few Questions, and to reason the matter a little
with you. What is it that persuades you to call Christ Lord? Is it that you
may please God, by receiving him, whom he has so highly exalted? If this be
the reason, do you not see that by the same reason you are obliged to serve and
obey him? For this also is the Will of God. Is it Love to Christ which makes
you adhere to him? You see Love and Obedience are inseparable, and that Love
cannot be ingenuously professed, if Obedience be denied. Finally, do you
embrace Christ on the account of that rich Reward which he has promised? But
do you not see that this cannot be expected, without keeping his Commandments,
and performing that Work which he requires, and has entrusted to you. What
Reason can be given for refusing an entire Subjection to the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ. Is there any Motive or Inducement to believe, which does not equally
persuade to obey? It is evident then, that if the matter be laid home to Men
they can answer nothing, but must stand speechless. Out of thine own Mouth thou
shall be condemned, O wicked and slothful Servant; for thou ought to have
obeyed him whom thou know and believe, to be thy Lord? Should thou not
study to please him whom thou professest so much to Love? And ought thou not
to have done thy Work if thou would have had thy Wages? What a shameful and
unworthy a thing is it for Men to act so unlike Men? To show so little Reason;
nay, to walk so contrary to all Reason, in these matters of the greatest Moment
and Concernment? The Practice of Heathens and Infidels is not so absurd as this
comes to; they do not obey Christ, because they do not believe in him, or they
will not profess him, because they have no mind to obey him, So one tells us of
the Men of Congo, That at first they were easily persuaded by the Portugueze to
embrace Christianity, and were baptized in great abundance: But afterward,
when they found it did require some Strictness, which they had no mind to bear,
that they must leave their Heathen Practices, particularly their Multitude of
Women, they came back to the Church, renounced what they had done, and returned
back to their indulgent Heathenism. For they knew not how to reconcile the
Christian Vow with living in the open Breach of it, being too honest for such
Practices. And certainly it is far more reasonable to declare that we do not
believe in Christ, nor yet own him; than to profess both, and in the mean time
continue disobedient to him, if we lay aside our Obedience, let us lay aside
our Faith and Profession too; for that but makes us the more guilty and liable
to a greater Condemnation.

And thus we are brought from considering VII. The Text may be considered as an
Expostulation or Reproof.
the Text Question-wise, to consider it as an Expostulation, or sharp Reproof
made to all empty and barren Professors, and such as rest in a mere Historical
Faith and speculative Knowledge of Christ, without offering to bring forth the
Fruits of Obedience and Holiness. Now taking the words thus (as it indeed
appears they ought to be taken so) they may be thus Paraphrased; Why call ye me
Lord, Lord, and do not those things which I say? That is, Why should you take
my Name in your Mouth, seeing you hate Instruction, and cast my Words behind
you? How dare you be so bold, as to call me your Lord, seeing you refuse to
obey me? Do you not know what a Presumption this is? And how highly it
displeases me? I had far rather you would disown me. And it would please me much
better that you forsake my Service altogether, than to say, and not to do. What
do, you fancy I am ignorant of your ways? Or, do you think I am altogether such
an one as your selves; one who does secretly countenance and approve of Vice
and Sin? Do you think I will sit down with such an Affront? No certainly, I
will not pass it; I will both reprove you, and punish you; either therefore do
those things which I say unto you, or else cease to call me Lord, Lord.

This is the sense and meaning of the words, and we need not think it very
strange, that Christ should so passionately reprove, and expostulate with such
Disciples, as are unobservant of his Will, and negligent to keep his
Commandments: For their carriage and behavior is very provoking, it throws a
great deal of dishonor and reproach upon our Lord, and is very prejudicial to
his Interest; because it does very much obstruct the Advancement of his Kingdom.

First, I say, the Disobedience and the VIII. The Disobedience of Christians
very provoking.
naughty Lives of those who call themselves Christians, cannot but very much
provoke the Lord Jesus Christ: For he being really a Man as well as God,
therefore we must think, he has all the Passions which are natural unto Men,
and which are not the effects of the present Corruption and Disorder of our
Nature by Sin: and it is not only natural even to the best to be grieved and
irritated, when they consider how unworthily they are dealt with by those who
are strictly obliged unto them: But also to be so provoked and grieved upon
such a just occasion, is consistent with the most perfect virtue. Unless
therefore we make a Stoical Apathy to be true Perfection, it is impossible but
that Jesus Christ must be displeased and troubled when his own Disciples slight
and neglect him. No Man can take it well to be slighted and abused by any: But
the ungratitude and undutifulness of Servants and Children, is an insolency
which none can patiently bear with. The wickedness of the rest of the World is
indeed grievous; but that the Disciples of Jesus Christ should commit Sin and
prove Ungodly, cannot but be thought highly offensive. The Heathen know not
what they do, and therefore they deserve Pity and Compassion: Our Lord does not
expect Obedience from them, or any regard to his Will and Pleasure, because he
is not yet made known unto them; which does somewhat excuse them. But I pray,
what excuse can be pretended for those to whom he has manifested himself, and
to whom his Majesty, Power, and Glory have been revealed? That they should
resist the Power of his Doctrine, despise his Laws, and work Wickedness; and
run into all Excess and Riot, is a most irritating, insolent, and inexcusable
thing. This cannot but stir up his Anger, vex and grieve his Spirit.

Especially, considering in the next IX. It does dishonor Jesus Christ.
place, what reproach and dishonor he receives thereby. It Is well known how
much the carriage of Servants and Friends tends either to a Man's Credit or
Disgrace. He has honor whose Family is kept in good order, whose Servants and
Children behave themselves virtuously and discreetly; but when they are vicious
and unruly, he is put to shame affronted. Thus the Patriarch Jacob said to his
Sons Simeon and Levi, because of their Cruelty committed upon the Shechemites,
Ye have troubled me to make me stink among the Inhabitants of Genesis 34. 30.
the Land. And certainly corrupt and bad Christians do the same dis-service
unto Christ their Lord; they occasion him to be dishonored and lightly
esteemed, by such as are Strangers unto him. God told David, That the Murder
and Adultery he had committed, had given great occasion to the Enemies of the
Lord 2 Samuel 12. 14.
to blaspheme. And the same Enemies, (I mean the Heathens) do still Blaspheme
our God and the Lord Jesus Christ, upon the account of those and the like
Enormities and Abominations, which abound among us who call our selves his
Servants, and do profess to worship him: For by these things they cannot be
persuaded that he is the true God, more than those they serve; and are tempted
to think as well of their false Gods and petty Deities. Some tell us, that in
some places it is ordinary for People, when their Honesty and Integrity is
called in question, to vindicate themselves by Swearing and Professing they are
no Christians; which is a most horrid shame and disgrace to us and our holy
Profession. It is well known what a contempt and reproach the Spaniards brought
upon the Christian Religion, when they first discovered America, the poor
Indians saw their Covetousness so exorbitant, their Cruelty so horrid, and all
their Practices so filthy and abominable, that they could not but loath and
disgust them, and upon that account they abhorred the God whom they adored, and
the Religion which they professed; and one of them peremptorily refused to go
to Heaven, because the Spaniards said they were to be there: For he could not
think that a good place into which such bad persons were admitted. And now tell
me, I pray you, what can be imagined more offensive and displeasing unto God,
than the making him liable to be thus blasphemed and evil thought of? That he
should be thought a Friend to, and favourer of the most wicked and wretchedly
debauched Persons. Sure the Wounds which our Savior received upon the Cross,
were neither so deep nor so sore as those which such Reproaches give him; and
we may be sure he will resent them. The Wounds he received upon the Cross, he
suffered willingly, but these are against his Will; The first he forgave
freely, for they made for his Honor and Glory: But we cannot think he will
forgive the other, which cast such a stain upon his Holiness and Purity. He
that despised Moses Law died without Mercy, under three witnesses: Of how much
sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden
under foot the Son of God, who has crucified him afresh, and put him to open
shame, who has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified
an unholy thing, and does despite unto the Spirit of Grace? Know ye not that
Vengeance belongs unto the Lord, and that he has said, he will recompense
it. Heb. x. 28.

But Thirdly and Lastly, when these X. It is prejudicial to the Interest of
Jesus Christ.
who call themselves Christians, deny Obedience to Christ, and instead of doing
his Will, do the contrary, obey Sin and the lusts of the Flesh; I say, this is
prejudicial to his Interest, and obstructs the Advancement of his Kingdom in
this World: It does both keep it from being further extended, and also from
arriving to its true height, where it is established. Evil communications
corrupt good manners; and one wicked perverse Servant may debauch the rest,
draw them from their Service, and the faithful and punctual Attendance upon
their Master: So a very few persons professing the Name of Christ, but careless
to do his Will, may have a very bad influence upon other Disciples. This
tends to beget in them a persuasion that they may belong to Christ, though
they be Wedded to the World, Slaves to their Lusts, and drowned in Sensual
Delights. Ever since the Church Doors became so patent, that one might have the
Name and Rank of a Christian, without giving Proofs of a Sincere Conversion, or
showing the Testimonies of an Holy and Upright Life, all Zeal and Care for
Serving of God have been very much cooled and slackned: And ever since too,
Religion has been at a stand, and made no further progress in the World. While
those who called themselves Christians, made their light to shine before Men,
whilst their good Works and holy Life were clearly seen, many embraced our holy
Faith and glorified our Heavenly Father: The Holy and Innocent Lives of the
Apostles and Primitive Christians, were so taking, that it allured the World,
and made Men ambitious and desirous to embrace that Religion, which taught and
enabled People to live so well: But now that the lives of Christians are so
mean and sordid, so corrupt and profane, no body enquires after our Religion,
they search not into the truth and certainty thereof; they neither concern
themselves about its Author, nor do they enquire what Advantages it offers
beyond the other Religions of the World. The wickedness of Christians has drawn
a bar upon the progress of Christianity, by raising and nourishing such
Prejudices in those who are Strangers to it, so that it is now a very rare
thing to see one leave his Native Superstition, and come over to embrace Christ
and his Worship. Perhaps there are more Apostates and Renegadoes from
Christianity, than there are Converts to it: And however the one is as ordinary
as the other.

And now having seen what evils flow XI. The Application of all.
from a bare barren Profession, and a Noncompliance with the Precepts and Laws
of Jesus Christ, how insolent it is in it self, what dishonor it brings to our
Lord, and what a prejudice it is to his Interest in the World, I say, when we
consider this, we need not wonder why he should so sharply reprove and inveigh
against it as he does here in our Text: Certainly he has all reason to do so,
and we his Ministers cannot be answerable if we neglect to expostulate with
those who are guilty of this fault. And O, how few among us can plead not
guilty! Let me use a little freedom with you, be not angry if I ask, (would to
God you would seriously ask your selves) what you are, what you Profess, in
whom you do believe? I know what the answer will be, all will say, we are
Christians, we profess and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; but, I pray, how
do ye show it? What signs and proofs give ye thereof? Can you make out this by
the Works of Obedience? Is it evident that ye do those things which he says?
If so, you have all reason to call him Lord, and you speak but the truth when
you call your selves his Disciples, but not otherwise. Be not deceived, think
not external Baptism, frequenting the Church, hearing Sermons, or making
Prayers, are sufficient for holding the Dignity and Privilege of Christians, or
for laying Claim and Title to the Lord Jesus Christ: Indeed, they are not
Christians who cannot show these, but they may have them and yet not belong
unto Christ; The veriest Hypocrites may go thus far, and such as Christ will
never own in the great Day of his Appearance: For certainly, he will reckon
none his Disciples, nor will he reward any as such, but those who heartily and
sincerely obey him. I know my sheep, says he; Joh. 10. 27.
and that we may know them too, he tells who they are, My sheep, says he, hear
my voice and they follow me. Now can you say, that you have hearkened sincerely
to the voice of this Shepherd? Have you followed whither he leads you? Have
you indeed performed the Commandment of this your Lord? O that you could all
answer Affirmatively. But then, as Samuel said to Saul, What means this
bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?
What means the ridiculing of the Doctrine, and Mysteries of the Gospel? What
mean the Taunts and Scoffs cast upon its Precepts? How comes Sin and Iniquity
to abound so much? Why does lust so much reign and prevail? What mean your
Oaths and your Curses, your rash and idle Speeches, your Slandering and your
Backbiting, your Wrath, Malice, and bitter Envyings, your Covetousness and
Uncharitableness? Whence is it that Whoredom and Uncleanness, Gluttony and
Drunkenness, Pride and Wantonness, Falsehood and Dishonesty abound so much and
are so frequent? Have you thus corrupted your selves, and do you yet presume to
call upon the Name of the Lord? Know ye not that 2 Timothy 2. 19.
every one that names the name of Christ, must depart from iniquity? Or do you
think these but the spots of Children? You are mistaken, they are not the spots
of Children, they are not consistent with the sincere Belief and Profession of
Christ, they who love him, will not be guilty of them: for they bewray a
contempt of him and his Gospel, and occasion it to be evil spoken of by others.
It is Zeal for God, and Charity to Men. It is Self-denial and Innocence, Purity
and an Universal Holiness; it is fruitfulness in all manner of good Works,
which only can show us to be true Disciples of Christ: These are the Badges of
Christianity, who puts on these is a Christian indeed; but he who lacks
and despises these, he who has neither love nor regard unto them, may as well
renounce his Profession. Let me entreat you therefore to examine and try your
Hearts, and when you have done that, declare your Sentiments and Resolutions.
Why do you halt and hover so much? Speak your Mind freely, be plain and
ingenuous. Are you for God? Will you accept Jesus Christ to be your Lord and
Master? Declare it, and let it be seen by your works and Conversation; If you
think him a hard Master, one who imposes a Burden you cannot endure; If you
think his Laws grievous, rigid and severe, I pray you renounce your Covenant
with him, quit his Service, and go serve some other Lord. For why do you stay
with him you cannot Serve? Why do you own him you resolve not to Obey? Why do
you call him Master whom you cannot agree with, and with whose will and
pleasure you can never comply? You who are covetous and wedded to the World,
why come you to him who teaches and commands to undervalue and trample upon
all Sublunary Enjoyments? You Proud and Vainglorious, why do you engage with a
Master, who is humble and lowly, and who requires all his Servants to be so?
You who are Malicious and Disdainful, and ready upon every occasion to slight
and contemn others, how can you take upon you to be the Servants of him who is
Meek and Affable, and who will have all his Servants to be kindly affectioned
one toward another? You who are easily blown up to Wrath, and who cannot sit
down with any injury without revenging it, what a Presumption is it for you to
become his Disciples who strictly Commands, the loving of Enemies, the blessing
them that curse us, the doing good to them that hate us, and the praying for
them that persecute and spitefully use us? What reason have you who wrong,
cheat, and defraud your Brethren, to engage with Jesus Christ who has
established this as a certain Law amongst his Disciples, that every one do as
they would be done to? Finally, you who cannot be weaned from excess in Eating
and Drinking, and voluptuous Pleasures, from Profane Jesting and filthy
Communication, from licentious and ungodly Practices; I say, why do you call
Christ your Lord? Why pretend you to his Service, seeing you know that he
hates, and has discharged all these things, and has enjoined that we be holy
in all manner of conversation, even as he himself who has called us is holy.
What think you? Does Christ only require a large Muster-roll? Does he ask only
that Men list themselves under him? is he content they serve him by halfs only,
or think you he will be pleased that instead of doing his own Will, they do the
quite contrary? If therefore you have no Mind to comply with the Will of
Christ, that is, to be truly Just and Honest, Sober and Temperate, Good and
Merciful, Holy and Upright before God and Man: You had better not own Christ,
not pretend to have any thing to do with him; otherwise you shall draw greater
Guilt and Punishment upon your selves: for you have seen how much this does
provoke him, and what dishonor and prejudice it does to him.

It is our proper business, and the proper business of this place, to persuade
Men to embrace Christ, and to be reconciled unto God, we are sent out upon this
very Errand, but if Men will not be persuaded to leave their Sins, nor to turn
Holy and Righteous, we must entreat them not to embrace Christ; we must desire
them to profess Atheism, Infidelity, any thing they please except the Christian
Religion: And sure, next to a hearty and real Compliance with the Laws of the
Gospel, this is the best Service can be done unto God; For so long as Men deny
Christ, and will not own themselves to be his Disciples, their fruitfulness in
Sin, and their barrenness in Good Works, disappoint neither God nor Man, nor is
the occasion of any reproach unto the Christian Religion. But when Men call
themselves Christians, it is still expected they will walk as such; while they
call unto Christ Lord, Lord, it is hoped and believed they will do what he
says; Even as Christ looked to have found Figs upon the Tree which brought
forth Leaves; and therefore, if this Fruit be wanting in them, they both mock
God and delude Men. And will ye thus requite the Lord, ye foolish people and
unwise? Will ye mock and deal deceitfully with him who has done so many and so
great things for you? If ye do him no good, I pray you, do him no wrong; If you
will not glorify him by your good Works, I pray you, do not dishonor him by
your evil Deeds; If ye will not serve him your selves, do not hinder others
that would: His Love, the laying down of his Life for you, ought to melt you
into Love, and to engage you to Obedience; but if you think him not worthy of
such a Return, I hope you will not think it just, to render him Evil for Good,
Hatred for Love: He deserves better usage at your hands, than to have his
Spirit wounded and grieved by you; his Name reproached and calumniated, and his
Interest weakened and prejudged. And yet all these things ye do unto him when ye
call him Lord, and do not those things which he says. Oh, far be it from us to
be guilty of such monstrous Ingratitude, and to deal so inhumanely with the
Lord Jesus Christ, who has showed us such astonishing Love and Kindness, and
who is most desirous of our good and happiness: Wherefore let us sit down, and
deliberate what we will do, whether we will adhere to the Profession of Christ,
and join thereto Obedience to his Laws; or if we shall renounce both together.
The First certainly would please him best, but the Second would please him
better than a bare barren Profession of his Name with the practice of Sin and
Wickedness. Choose you then this day whom ye will serve, whether Christ the
Lord, or the Devil, the World and the Flesh? Ye cannot serve him and them too:
No man can serve two Masters. If you cleave to him, you must forsake them: If
you will adhere to them, let him go. I know you will answer as the people did
Joshua, when he put the like question unto them, God forbid that we should
forsake the Lord to serve other gods. But remember and consider what Joshua
said again unto them, Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy God, he is a
jealous God, he will not forgive your transgressions nor your sins. That is, he
will not connive at them, or bear with them; he will by no means be induced to
indulge you the practice of them; If ye forsake the Lord and serve strange
gods, that is, if while you profess your selves his Servants, you obey any
other, and do any thing which is evil in his sight, then he will turn and do
you hurt, and consume Jos. 24. 16.
you after that he has done you good. Lay your hand therefore on your heart,
and resolve either to part with your Sins, or with him whom you call your Lord.

But what, shall sin separate us from God? Shall any thing be dearer to us than
the Lord Jesus Christ? Have we greater ties to the Devil, the World and the
Flesh, than to him? Shall we think our selves happier in their Service than in
his? God forbid: Was it not by these that we were brought into misery and
thraldom? Shall we deliberate then to whom we shall yield our selves Servants,
whether of sin unto sin, or of obedience unto righteousness? Is the balance
equal? Is there not more weight on the one side than the other? Why then do we
not choose, why do we not prefer that which Reason, Interest, and Duty persuade
to! What fruit have ye in these things whereof you are now ashamed, is not the
end of these things death? for the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God
is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Let not therefore sin reign any
more in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof,
neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but
your members as instruments of righteousness unto God. Be not afraid or
discouraged at his Laws, for there is none of them grievous, says the Apostle
St. John. The law of the Lord is perfect, (says David) Converting the soul,
his statutes are right, rejoicing the heart, they Psalm. 19.
are more to be desired than gold; yea, than much fine gold, sweeter also than
honey or the honeycomb; And in keeping them there is great reward. For if
being made free from Sin, we become Servants to God, and have our fruit unto
Holiness, our end shall be everlasting Life; to the which God bring us all in
his good time.

Amen.
SERMON XI. A PREPARATION TO THE Holy Communion.
HEBREWS X. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith,
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our bodies washed with
pure water.
THese Words are an Inference or The Scope of the Text.
Conclusion drawn from a Doctrine formerly delivered, as appears from the
illative Particle [ Therefore] in the 19th. Verse: And there you have also the
Sum of the Doctrine it self, viz. That there is now free access unto God
through Jesus Christ, which the Apostle declares in figurative Expressions,
with an Allusion to the Jewish Temple, not only because he was writing to
Hebrews, but also because that Temple, and the way of entering thereinto, was a
Type of this great Truth, which is revealed by the Gospel. That Jesus Christ is
a true, and the only Mediator betwixt God and Man, that by him Men may
confidently draw near to God, and hope for Acceptance, St. Paul has asserted
and endeavored to make out in the former part of this Epistle; and indeed he
has proved and made it most evident, so that there can remain no doubt
thereof, except in those who obstruct their own Conviction, not desiring to be
convinced. Now the proper and practical Improvement of this certain, important,
and most desirable Truth, is what you have in the Words of our Text: For they
contain an Exhortation to lay hold on this gracious Privilege; and with all
they show us how, and after what manner we should do it, so as to obtain it.

I shall first speak to the Exhortation it self, next of the Qualities here
required of such as design to comply with the Exhortation, and lastly make
Application of all to the present business of the Sacrament.

To begin then with the Exhortation, I. The Exhortation, Let us draw near.
which is in these words, Let us draw near. To what or whom we should draw
near, is not here expressed, but is to be gathered from what goes before,
whereby we understand that it is God to whom we are here desired to draw near.
And seeing it is so, by drawing near here cannot be meant any Motion of our
Body toward God; for as to his Glorious and Majestic Presence in the Heavens,
we cannot approach it though we would; and as for his other Essential Presence,
neither can we avoid it though we would too, for he fills both Heaven and
Earth. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Or whither shall I flee from thy
presence (said David). If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: If I make my
bed in hell, behold, thou art there. To draw near to God, therefore, is a
metaphorical Speech, and must be understood not of any natural Action of the
Body, but of some moral Action of the Soul, viz. The Desires and Endeavors
after Peace, and Reconciliation with God. For, because those who are Enemies
and at variance together, use to keep a Distance, and shun each other's
Company; therefore in Scripture, they who never think of God, take no Care to
please him, and those who make no Difficulty to offend him, are said to be far
from God, and to go a whoring from him: And on the other hand, because those
who lay aside their Enmity, and are desirous to be made Friends, usually meet
and resort to one another Company, therefore drawing near to God in the
Scripture Language, is put for the Inclination of our Souls toward him, the
seeking to have all manner of Enmity betwixt God and us quite removed, and that
a true, firm Peace be made up with him.

Sin is the Cause and Occasion of that Enmity which is fallen out betwixt God
and Man: And one would have thought that all the Difficulties of Reconciliation
with God, should have been on his part; That his Justice, his Honor, his
Authority should have interposed, and not only not suffered him to accept of
Peace, but also to have obliged him utterly to destroy those despicable, silly
Creatures, who had the foolish Insolency to rebel against him, and to
counteract his Will and Pleasure. But behold Jesus Christ, has removed all
Difficulties on God's Part, he has found out means to satisfy the Justice,
and to salve the Honor and Authority of God, though Man be not destroyed,
though his Sin be passed over and pardoned; God's Wrath is pacified; he now
looks favorably upon Man, and is willing to receive him into Favor, and to
renew a Covenant of Grace and Peace with him, whereby he obliges himself to
deal with Man as if he had not sinned, as if he had never rebelled against his
Maker. Now could it have been expected that such a gracious Offer should not
have been readily embraced: But which is unaccountable Man stands out, and will
not be reconciled to God. God has made great Condescension, and Man will make
none; God wooes and entreats, and Man draws back and runs away; God calls and
sends Message after Message, and the other will not hear, he stretches forth
his Hands, but no Man regards; he waits, but they will not come or draw near.
Thus each acts as 'twere, not his own part, but what in all Appearance does
more properly belong to the other: God acts as if he were in Man's stead, and
Man behaves himself as if he were in the Place of God; for as if God were the
poor, the needy, the inferior, and miserable Party, he sues and humbles
himself first, and as if Man were an independent Sovereign and All-sufficient
Being, who needed no Aid from any, he rejects all the Treaty, and disdains this
proffered Friendship. O! Wonderful Condescension of God? And O the Stupidity,
and Foolishness, and Madness of Man? What Words are sufficient to hold out
either of these? And how hard is it to determine which of the two is most
astonishing? Whether God's Behavior toward Man in seeking him, offering
Pardon and Peace, or Man's Behavior toward God, in refusing and slighting the
same? Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish People and unwise? O ye sons of
men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? how long will ye love vanity,
and seek after leesing! Do ye slight God, set at naught your Maker, and court
the World? Are ye taken up with Toys and Trifles, and will ye despise Life, and
cast behind you eternal Bliss. Be astonished, O ye Heavens at this! And be
horribly afraid, be ye very desolate says the Lord, for my People have
committed two great evils; they have forsaken me, the fountain of living
waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no water. O!
that Men were wise, O! that they did understand, O! that they would but
seriously consider this!

Come, I pray you, let us reason together, call in your Thoughts, consult your
Knowledge, advise with your Experience, and then tell me what you have ever
found preferable to God? Is there any thing more worthy your Thoughts or Care:
What is it that does equal his Favor and Love: Or, what can compensate the
Loss thereof? Will Riches, will Honors, will Pleasures, or will any thing else
be profitable as God? Can we expect to draw from them either separately or
jointly, as much Comfort and Satisfaction as from him? Behold every Day lets us
see that all these things are frail, brittle, and uncertain; and that there can
be no fast hold of them: But though they were more certain and stable, yet
being unsuitable to the Nature of our Souls, it is impossible to draw from them
alone that good which our Souls crave. It is indeed somewhat hard to convince
Men, but though they should act over all the Experiments of Solomon, and prove
what good is under the Sun, they could not draw another Conclusion than what he
has left us, viz. That all things are vanity and vexation of Spirit, and that
Man's chief and only good is to seek God, and to delight themselves in him. The
Lord is my portion, says my soul, Lam. 2. 24.
therefore will I hope in him.

O consider what an Honor it is to be admitted into Favor and Fellowship with
God. The Psalmist falls into Admiration when he beheld Man but a little lower
than the Angels, and invested with Dominion over the Fowls of the Air, the
Beasts of the Field, and the Fish of the Sea. And whatever Reason there be for
Praise and Admiration in that Case, yet Angels being but Fellow Creatures, and
the other destitute of Reason and Understanding, and so far below us, this is
nothing so considerable as to be advanced into Communion with God himself, this
is indeed a Height and Dignity which may both amaze the Beholders and those on
whom it is conferred O anima rationalis miserabilis creatura, quo te dejicis,
terram diligis, and melior es, coelum contemplaris and altior es, solo tuo
creatore tu inferior. Says St. Augustine.
. To be made the Friends of God, is truly an Honor to our Nature, nothing else
can give any Luster or Glory to us, but this is the highest can be aspired to,
either by Angels or Men, and therefore we have great Reason to cry out, Lord,
what is Man, that thou should be so kind to him? And so kind too after he
had turned Rebel and Traitor is indeed beyond Expression. Behold, what manner
of love the father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the sons of
God. Constantine had good Reason to say, that he gloried more in being a Member
of the Church, than in being Head of the Empire, for to be a true lively Member
of the Church does unite us to God, and so is more to be desired than the
greatest Dominion, or an universal Monarchy. For hereby we are not only highly
honored, but greatly enriched; we have not only an honorable Title and
Relation conferred on us, but also the largest Emolument. Eliphaz advised Job
to seek unto God, that he might be relieved out of all his Trouble, and if he
got him his Friend, he told him he should be in League with the stones of the
Field, and the beasts of the Field should be at peace with him; for God will
certainly oblige all his Creatures to keep Peace, with those with whom he is at
Peace, as a King makes Peace not only for himself, but for all his People, or
if he let any of them break Peace, it is that he may make those his beloved and
peculiar Friends to be the more glorious by gaining a Victory over them. He
that draws near to God is sure of his Hearts wish; Delight thy self in the
Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart. What can any wish for
more, than what an infinite Wisdom can contrive, an infinite Power act, and an
infinite Bounty bestow? Now he who has God his Friend, is allied to infinite
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, which will ever interess themselves in all his
Concerns. Happy are the People whose God is the Lord; blessed is the Man who
chooses God for his Inheritance, for he will give grace and glory, and will
withold no good thing from him. All things shall work together to the good of
them that love God: Trouble as well as Prosperity, and the saddest Affliction
as well as the greatest outward Plenty. Many say, who will show us any good?
But says David, Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us. Thou
have put gladness in my heart more than in the time that their Corn and Wine
increased. They who draw near to God have Joy which the World cannot rob them
of: the Ground of their Happiness and Comfort is not liable to Rapine or
Violence, nor does it ever decay. Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto
you, says Christ, but not as the World gives give I unto you; that is, he
gives neither so inconsiderable, nor yet so brittle and uncertain a Peace as
what the World gives, but what is more solid and substantial, wherefore he
adds, let not your hearts be troubled neither be afraid. If we have Peace with
God through Christ we need not startle at any thing, neither at private
Personal Disasters, nor at public Calamities: Because God is our refuge and
present help. The Children of God cannot be without Crosses and Afflictions;
but God will not suffer these to mar either their present inward Comfort, or
after Happiness, their Joy cannot be taken from them. He will let them be
tossed up and down with the Waves of Trouble, but they shall not be swallowed
up, they shall have a joyful exit. Mark the perfect, and behold the upright,
for the latter end of that Man is Peace, Psalm. xxxvii. When Men draw near the
end of their Life, when their Days are near a Period, whether through Age or by
any Accident, they have need of some comforting Cordial to keep them from
fainting; and nothing is possible to administer this, but the Hopes of Peace
with God. The Sense of God's Favor and Love will make Death appear without a
frightful Visage, though generally it is esteemed the King of Terrors; this
will make one to be so far from abhorring Death, as in many Cases to be even
glad of it, because it opens a Door to eternal Rest, unspeakable Joy, and
Fullness of Glory. Is it not then good for us to draw near to God?

But if so much real good, as thus accrues by drawing near to God, be not
Motive enough to engage us to do it, I pray consider the Danger of neglecting
it, which is no less than utter Misery and certain Destruction, for lo they
that are far from thee shall perish (says the Psalmist) thou have destroyed
all them that go a whoring from thee. It may certainly be matter of
Astonishment, how Men can rest, be merry, or enjoy any Quietness while they
live in Enmity with God, and have no Assurance of Peace with him. Men are
troubled if they understand any Alteration of their King's Favor toward them,
nay if but some Difference fall out between them, and some Favorite of the
Court, though the King's Anger may be many ways avoided, and that before the
Sun has finished his Course twice, the Favorite may be turned out of Court,
and put in a Condition which obliges him as much to depend on others, as others
now on him: But however, is the Wrath of frail mortal Man so much to be feared?
Is their Displeasure so carefully to be avoided? And should the Wrath of God be
little regarded? How much more Reason have we to fear God than Man? There is no
concealing ones self if he search out, nor is there any resisting his Power, if
he be resolved to punish, and who may stand before him if his anger be kindled
but a little. Ye who will not be persuaded to draw near to God, how think ye to
save your selves, how can ye escape if ye neglect so great Salvation as is now
tendered you? Can you muster Forces equal in Strength and Number unto God's?
And if you cannot, why do you not seek Peace before he come in Wrath to revenge
himself, for the Affront you have done him in rejecting so great Love and
Kindness, as he has proffered by his own Son? Ye Atheists and Profane, who
now laugh at Religion and make a mock at Sin, what will ye do or say for your
selves when God enters into Judgment with you? Do you think to put on then your
present Boldness, and unmannerly Impudence? or will you make God retire by your
Profane drolling and jesting, as you use now to affright all sober and modest
persons from your Company? Then your Tongues will be bound up, your Wits will
fail, shame shall cover your faces, you shall stand trembling, and shall feel
that power to your confusion, which at present you scorn and little regard; Ye,
who cannot find time to seek God, who have no leisure to Pray, to read the
Scripture, or to attend God's Public Worship or Ordinances, how do ye think to
come off? will ye say that ye had your Business to wait on, that ye were taken
up with the pursuit of Honors and Riches, that ye were drawn away with
Pleasures, with Gaming and Sporting? That is, to tell him plainly, you loved
him not, you preferred all things before him, and thought it time enough to
seek him when you had nothing else to do. Or, do you imagine to bribe him, but
he will not be bribed; and though he could, what would you give? you have
nothing, you leave all behind you, you pass naked into the other World: There
is no Remedy then, but submit you must, and you can expect no Mercy for it is
out of time, and when it was offered, you contemned it. O consider this, ye
that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, when there shall be none to
deliver! Now is the acceptable time, now is the day of Salvation, now you may
have Peace; be wise therefore, and let not such opportunities slip, but seek
the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near. Draw near
to God, and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and
purify your hearts, ye double minded.

I have now spoken to the Exhortation, and proposed what may make it take
effect, and I hope you are thereby moved to draw near to God. It follows II. Of
the Qualifications of those who would draw near to God.
next, that we consider the manner how we should draw near, for this we should
also look to, otherwise we will be disappointed of Peace with God. He is ready
and willing to accept of any who come aright as they ought, He that comes to
me, I will in no ways cast out, Joh. 6. 37. But yet every drawing near will not
find acceptance, some come and are rejected, not for the want of good will on
God's part, but for the want of those Qualifications and Conditions on their
own, which are necessary and requisite to recommend them to the favor of God.
1. A true Heart.


Now what these are the Apostle shows you here. The first is, a true Heart. The
Heart is not made mention of, with a design to exclude the Body, for that is
also required, as appears by what follows: But because God is a Spirit who
searches the heart and tries the reins, who knows the inward Thoughts of
Man, the inward Temper and Disposition of their Minds, and with what Designs
and Affections they present themselves before him, therefore the Heart is in
the first place mentioned, that Men may not presume to mock God by outward
Fawnings and Caresses, whiles in their Hearts they have no true Kindness for
him, nor sincere Love to him. God will not value the Bowings and Prostrations
of Men's Bodies, their sad Looks, mournful Tone, fair Words and Professions, if
these proceed not from the Heart, and be not the real intimations of the inward
Purposes and Affections of their Soul: But if in the midst of these, they
retain any secret aversion to God, his Will, or his Ways; or if there lurks
with them some love and inclination to what offends him, then he will abhor
them and all their Offers and Services. This people draws nigh Mat. 15. 8.
unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but their heart is
far from me, therefore, says God, in vain do they worship me. There is no true
Friendship where there is not an Union and closing of Hearts: Indeed, sometimes
Enemies will meet, shake hands, and make many fair Protestations, and yet their
old Grudge and Quarrel will continue, which cannot be reckoned a cordial
reconciliation, it is only a patcht agreement to please some third Person, or to
shun some present inconvenience, which will never last. But as there is nothing
to oblige God to patch up a Peace with us, against his Will, or contrary to his
Honor; so there is no Peace with him who is the Father of Spirits, but when it
is with the Heart, neither will he look favorably upon any heart, except a
true heart, that is a sincere heart, free of Hypocrisy and Deceit, he who
draws near to God must be like Nathaniel, a true Israelite in whom there is no
guile; that is, who sincerely and in good earnest loves and desires that which
he professes, and pretends to seek. One Man may deceive another, he may make
him believe what is not in his Mind; for the East is not more distant from the
West, than sometimes the Heart of Man is from his Mouth, his Intention and
Affection from his Words and Actions. But be not deceived, God will not be
mocked, there is no deluding of him into a belief of what is not really true,
he knows well enough whether we be ingenuous; and if Ingenuity be wanting, he
will have nothing to do with us. As false deceitful Friends are more odious
than professed Enemies, so God hates Hypocrites as much, nay, more than
Profane Persons: For in Scripture the portion of Hypocrites is mentioned as
the dreadfullest Punishment, they shall have their portion with hypocrites, as
if that were the very height of Misery. If then ye draw near to God, see that
it be with true hearts, for he desires truth in the inward parts. Now, what one
seeks sincerely and in good earnest, he values and prizeth highly, he will
spare nothing within his Power to the obtaining it, and will labor to remove
whatever may obstruct it: Thus he who sincerely seeks and desires Health, will
be at any cost or pains for it, will cautiously guard against that diet, and
weather, places, or what else may prejudge it. And he who is covetous reckons
little of the greatest toil and drudgery if gainful, nothing is sordid to him
which brings Profit, and he avoids and hates all actions and places which call
him to lay out Money; the like may be said of other things. And hereby we may
know whether we seek God with a true heart: Do we in our hearts love God, and
value him aright, that is, above all things? Can we prize God as a chief
Treasure, and count all things else in comparison as but loss and dung? Are we
ready to part with any thing rather than lose him or his favor! Do we hate
whatever offends him, and is inconsistent with fellowship with him? Can we
freely embrace his Will, his Ways, his Word, which are inseparable from him? In
a word, do we love what he loves, and hate what he hates, and are his thoughts
our thoughts? If so, then our hearts are true to God, but otherwise they are
not right, they are not according to God's Heart, and while they continue so,
no Peace and Reconciliation can be expected. Many draw near to God, as the
Children of Israel came out of Egypt, they came forth with their Bodies, but
they left their hearts behind them; and, though they were necessitated to move
forwards, yet it was still with reluctance, and they would fain have returned
to the Onions and Fleshpots of Egypt; so many draw near to God, but not
cordially, it is somewhat unwillingly, for they would be content to be freed of
the necessity of seeking God; and in the midst of their Religious Services they
remember the Pleasures of Sin with some delight, they cast favorable glances
upon them, and wish for a freedom to enjoy them. God knows this, and do you
think he will be pleased? Will he accept of such Persons? No certainly, the
fate of these Israelites tells us their Doom, for as those whose hearts were so
glewed to Egypt, and who in their heart despised Canaan, were never suffered to
enter it, or to taste the Pleasures thereof: So Hypocrites, such as do not
willingly and cordially draw near to God, shall never find Grace in his sight,
they shall never be admitted into the Holy of Holies, but shall be for ever
thrust out.

The second Thing required in those 2. Full assurance of Faith.
who draw near to God, is, That they approach in full assurance of Faith. In
the Original it is, (...), which Phrase is Metaphorical alluding to the
Practice of Mariners, who when they are bound toward any Port, use so to order
their Sails that the Wind may extend and fill them, to the end they may have a
pleasant and speedy passage, for when the Sails flap and are not filled with
the Wind, the Ship neither makes speed, nor keeps an even course. Now seeing it
is Faith which brings us to God, and makes our Union with him; for without
faith it is impossible to please God, for he that comes to him must believe
that he is, and that he is a rewarder of those who diligently seek him, as the
same Apostle tells us hereafter, Chap. xi. 6. and in the Third of this Epistle,
he plainly declares, that to have an evil heart of unbelief, is to depart from
the living God, and that some could not enter into God's rest because of
unbelief: Now, I say, seeing it is so, seeing Faith is thus necessary to lead
us to God, therefore in the Text it is required that we be full of Faith, that
we let Faith actuate all the Powers and Faculties of our Souls, and enliven all
our Actions, that like a Ship whose Sails are full blown, we may hold a steady
and pleasant Course, and at last obtain a safe and happy Arrival at that high
and holy Port we would be at: We are justified by Faith, and have Peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans v. 1.

If you would know particularly what A Belief of the Mysteries of the Gospel.
this Faith is, it comprehends two things. First, A Belief of the Mysteries of
the Gospel. Secondly, A Belief of our Acceptance with God. First, Our Faith
must respect the Mysteries of the Gospel, these we are to look upon as certain
and undoubted Truths; and that they are so, might be easily made out. If I were
speaking to Infidels, I could clearly show that the Gospel is no human Device,
no cunningly devised Fable, but a thing most sure and faithful, as it is worthy
of all acceptance, it being every way agreeable to the Nature and Majesty of
God, and having clear Prophesies going before, and manifold undoubted Miracles
following after, to testify that it is from God: But seeing my Auditory is
Christian, there is no need of proving what they already profess to believe, at
least such a Discourse would not be pertinent at this time: But we ought not to
consider the Mysteries of the Gospel as Truths only, but as Truths of the
greatest Importance and Concernment, Great (says the Apostle) is the mystery
of godliness; it is not only true, but a great weighty Truth, in which the
Wisdom, the Power and all the Attributes of God are contained, and which shows
to Sinners the way how they should recover themselves, and be saved from the
Wrath that is to come. This is life eternal to know thee, the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Wherefore if we believe this, our
thoughts should be much taken up therewith, we should frequently contemplate
these Mysteries, and be over-joyed with the Contemplation of them. I believe
the Wars of Julius Coesar, the Discoveries of the Indies, those Transactions of
Foreign Princes reported in our Gazettes and News-Letters, and many other
things, but I think it not worth the while to ruminate much on these things, I
do not make it my Business to consider them, and to talk of them, because I do
not look upon them as matters of such moment in themselves, or of such
concernment to me: But believing the Truth of the Gospel, and knowing the
importance of what is revealed therein, I find it my duty to esteem it as my
necessary Food, and that it is as proper and necessary to refresh my Soul with
serious and daily Meditations thereof, as to give my Body those repasts which
Nature daily calls for: This made our Apostle desire to know nothing save Jesus
Christ and him crucified, and to say, doubtless I count all things but loss,
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win
Christ.

And as such a Faith is required in all the Mysteries of the Gospel, so more
particularly in the Mystery of the Cross, the Death and Sufferings of Jesus
Christ, and that Satisfaction he has made thereby for Sin: These we should have
an Eye to all in our Addresses to God, and more especially such solemn
Addresses as those we are now to make. For he who believes this relies thereon,
and by virtue thereof draws near to God, does confess himself a great Sinner,
that it had been just for God to have damned him eternally, that it is only for
the sake of Christ he is saved, and that the Wisdom and Mercy of God is highly
to be magnified, in finding out such excellent Means and Methods for the
Salvation of Man, and by such Acknowledgments the greatest Sinner endears
himself to God, and conciliates his Favor and Kindness: But he who denies
this, or has no respect thereto when he draws near to God, must either not own
himself a Sinner, or not think it necessary to satisfy God's Justice, or to
repair his Honor which is provoked and affronted by Sin, or he must not
believe that Jesus Christ has done this for us, and that he is the only
Mediator betwixt God and Man, but must fancy he can come to God by himself, or
through some other besides Christ, and which soever of these persuasions he
has, he is so far from finding acceptance, that he at once both exasperates
God, and provokes him who had undertaken to make his Peace, and who only could
do it: I am the way, the truth and the life; no man comes to the Father but by
me; therefore it is said, He that believes on him is not condemned, but he that
believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of
the only begotten Son of God.

Secondly, I told you the Faith here A Belief of our own particular acceptance
with God.
required must also have a respect to our acceptance with God; that is, we must
not only be firmly persuaded of God's Mercy, and his good Will to save Sinners:
But that we our selves in particular shall find Grace in his Sight, if we
approach as we ought, and bring no Impediment along with us, and 'twould seem
the Translators of our Bible have chiefly respected this act of Faith in the
Translation of this Text. Christ required of all those who came to him to be
cured of their bodily Distempers, Faith both in his Power and good Will. And
13. 58.
St. Matthew tells us, He did no mighty works in his own country, because of
their unbelief. St. Mark says further, that he 6.
could not do it; Which we are not so to understand, as if our Lord's Power
could be restrained by any, or that he depended upon Men for the exercise
thereof, but only that the want of this Faith rendered those Men unworthy of his
Benefits, and indisposed them for receiving them. And as these temporal and
bodily Benefits were not commonly conferred without this precious Faith, so
neither will spiritual and temporal Blessings, as Mercy and Salvation, be
granted except to those who are disposed for them by earnest Desires, and a
sincere belief of God's being ready and willing to bestow them, or at least if
they be given to any other, it is not according to those ordinary Rules and
Methods of the Dispensation of Grace which we ought to walk by; For this Faith
is always required as a necessary condition, All things whatsoever ye shall ask
in prayer, Mat. 21. 22.
believing, ye shall receive, says Christ. And St. James says, Let not that
man, who wants Faith, think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. This
Faith is requisite both to animate our Endeavors after the means of Grace and
Salvation, and also to excite God's love, and to incline him to be merciful to
us. It Is natural to love those who put confidence in us, and he has no spark of
generosity who will not do his utmost for those who altogether rely on him; if
a Sinner can confide in God, notwithstanding that he has offended him, if he
throw himself at his Feet, and can but believe that God has so much Mercy as to
forgive him all his Sins, and upon his Repentance to receive him into Favor
for the sake of Christ: He by this act so honors God, and so obliges him to
Mercy by his trust in him, that he will not, he cannot abandon him. This is set
forth to us in the Parable of the Prodigal, for when the Penitent Son was yet a
great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his
neck and kissed him. And as this Faith enclines God to Mercy, so it animates
our Endeavors, it excites and quickens us to a cheerful Performance of all the
Means and Conditions of Salvation. The Husbandman sows when he has Hope, and
the Merchant Tradeth when he has Hope of Gain, and every Man plyeth heartily
what he believes will succeed: but Men are discouraged, and made to give over
their Endeavors, when they take up a Persuasion that they shall but labor in
vain. A double minded man (says St. James) that is one who hangs in suspense,
who is tossed with Doubts and Fears, he is unstable in all his ways. Such an
one is inconstant, he pursues not his Enterprises, but desists; he is not
steadfast and unmovable, and always abounding in the work of the Lord, as
every one ought to be, and as he will be who knows and believes that his Labor
is not in vain.

When therefore we draw near to God, let us do it in this full Assurance of
Faith, that we may do it heartily, so as to please God; let us not entertain
Doubts and Fears which but disquiet our own Minds, and cast dishonor upon God.
Would not a Servant reflect either upon the Ability or Honesty of his Master,
if he questioned his Reward for the sincere Performance of his Service? If ye
who are evil and sinful, think your selves obliged to love and be faithful to
those who seek to please you, will not God, think you, be more faithful and
just to forgive us, and to receive us into his Favor if we approve our selves
unto him? Is there any thing surer than his Word? Are not all his Promises Yea
and Amen? Why art thou perplexed? Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? Would
thou be reading thy Destiny in the hidden Books of Fate? Would thou fain know
what these secret Decrees say of thee? O foolish Soul Why so curious to know
things too high for thee, which are hid from thee, and therefore hid because
the Knowledge of them is of no Use to thee, nor would it give thee any
Satisfaction? Whatever be the secret Decrees, they do not, they cannot
contradict those Eternal and Immutable Purposes which are revealed, viz. That
they who repent and believe, and obey the Gospel, shall be saved; this Sentence
cannot be reversed. Believe thou this? if you believe, do accordingly, and
there is no Cause of Fear; whatever come of others, you are surely
predestined to Eternal Life. If thou can believe, all things are possible.
Blessed are they who believe, for there shall be a performance of those things
which are told them of the Lord. Some are not contented with this Assurance,
That God has certainly declared his infallible Purpose of accepting returning
Sinners, but they would be infallibly assured that they themselves are actually
accepted and justified, which I confess would be a great Comfort, neither do I
doubt but some Men have this Infallible Assurance, but it is an unreasonable
and preposterous thing for any to expect it at their first Approaches to God;
or in the beginnings of their Conversion. This were to ask Fruit before the due
time, as if one should seek Fruit on the Tree he has but newly planted. This
Assurance never goes before our Reconciliation to God, though sometimes of his
extraordinary Mercy it may follow after; and therefore we cannot expect it, let
us desire it never so much until we have really performed the Conditions here
required. If thy Assurance be built on another Foundation, it is not to be
trusted to; and if thou know that this Foundation is laid, if thou can say
that in all Sincerity thou have done what was sought of thee, what makes thee
not to have a rational and comfortable Assurance? All Doubts of our Salvation
should only arise from our Doubts of performing our part: And if upon a strict
and impartial Examination of our selves, we find that we have performed our
part, then we ought to have such a comfortable Degree of Assurance as may quiet
our Consciences, and support us against our natural Fears, because God cannot
but perform his most gracious Promises. But that particular, infallible sort of
Assurance, which some Men cannot be satisfied unless they have, is an
extraordinary Gift, which God is pleased sometimes to give, though he is not
bound to give it. He has sometimes refreshed the Souls of Martyrs and
Confessors with it, to support them in the midst of their Torments, but it is
not of ordinary Dispensation, and therefore not to be expected, because it is a
miraculous Gift, which is not to be asked, but with great Submission to the
Will of God, who knows when it is fit for the Support and Consolation of a
pious Soul. But to proceed, III. The Heart sprinkled from an evil Conscience.


The Third Qualification here, is that we have our hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience, which with what follows is the inseparable Effect of the two
former; they cannot be first, and the other cannot be without them; we must
have true and believing Hearts, before we can be sprinkled from an evil
conscience, or have our bodies washen, but once having this, the other will
follow, for Light and Heat may be as well disjoined from the Sun, as Purity of
Heart and Holiness of Life from true Faith and a sincere Mind to God. Many
pretend Faith, but the tree is known by its fruit, hereby may it be known
whether thy Faith be good, if so be thy heart be sprinkled from an evil
conscience. In this Speech the Apostle alludes to the Rites and Ceremonies
under the Law: 'twas the Custom then to sprinkle both the Priests and the
People in their Solemn Approaches to the Lord, sometimes with Blood, sometimes
with Water, Oil, or Ashes: But now these legal Ceremonies are laid aside, yet
the thing signified by them is still required, viz. What the Apostle makes
mention of here, that our hearts be sprinkled from an evil conscience. By the
heart is meant the Soul, or inner Man, by the evil conscience, those things
which pollute the Soul, which keep one from having a good conscience void of
offense toward God and Man, such as brutish Lusts, inordinate desires,
unworthy Passions, evil Thoughts and sinful Inclinations, whether born with us,
or contracted afterward. All these must be mortified and purged out, before we
can be thoroughly reconciled to God; for as Iehu said to Ioram, when he asked,
Is there Peace? what peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Iezabel, and
her witchcrafts are so many! So I say to those who draw near to God, how can
they look for Peace from him, while their Pride, Vainglory, Malice, Wrath,
Covetousness, and other filthy and ungodly Lusts, live and reign in them? God
is willing to be reconciled to our Persons, but not to our Sins; we must part
with them, or if our Sins and we cannot be separated, we must give up
Fellowship with God. Truly God is good to Israel, but it is to such only as are
clean in heart. He cannot love foul polluted Souls, he cannot choose but loath
and hate them, for he is not a God that has Pleasure in Wickedness, neither
shall evil dwell with him. As therefore when we entertain great Persons, we use
to remove all things nasty and unhandsome, and whatsoever may readily offend
them, or shame our selves, and are careful to have all things about us decent
and fashionable; so being to approach the holy Presence of God, let us lay
aside every thing offensive and unsuitable, viz. the Love and Inclination to
every Sin, for he is of purer eyes than that he can behold iniquity, he
naturally abhorrs it; and let us give all Diligence to adorn our Souls with
holy Thoughts, and heavenly Dispositions, for the righteous Lord loves
righteousness, his countenance does behold the upright. But if this be wanting,
we can have no Acceptance. If I regard iniquity in my heart the Lord will not
hear me (says David) Psalm. lxvi. 18. Even David shall be rejected if he regard
Iniquity. Some will say, if the Case be thus, none can have Hopes, or who can
say their Heart is clean? It Is true in our present State, our Hearts cannot be
so clean as to have no Blemish, there will be ever some Remainders of Sin in
us; and now and then perhaps some sinful Motions will arise in the best; but
this will not be imputed to us, neither hinder our Reconciliation with God,
unless we regard them with Love and Delight, cherish and follow them. If we
look on these Irruptions of our corrupt Nature with Sorrow and Regret, if we
take care to prevent and suppress them, and are filled with Grief when they at
any time prevail, God will not condemn us. They are innocent and clean
according to the Gospel, who inwardly hate and loath Sin, and keep a continual
War with it, and who love Holiness, and constantly aim and endeavor after it,
and he who is so clean inwardly will give an outward Manifestation; and
therefore it is added, that we have, IV. The Body washed with pure water.


In the last place, our Bodies washed with pure water. The former Clause as we
have seen referred to the inner-Man, and this relates to the outward Man, for
both must be made clean in the Sight of God: We must cleanse our selves from
all filthiness both of the flesh and spirit, neither of them singly will do
well: God has united Spirit and Flesh together to make up one Person, and
therefore what God has thus joined together, ought not to be put asunder. Our
Minds and Spirits must ascend to God, but the Body must not be left behind
wallowing in the mire and filth of Sin and Uncleanness, else the other will not
speed, they will not get Access unto God. We ought to glorify God both in Soul
and Body, for both are his; therefore as under the Law Men were tied to
frequent washing of their Body, that they might be legally clean, and fit to
enter the Temple, or approach the Altar, from which they were debarred, if they
had any corporal Filthiness upon them, or had touched any unclean thing; so in
Allusion to this, the Apostle here exhorts us to purify our Life and Actions,
to sanctify our outward Conversation in the World, by breaking off the Course
of Sin, and conforming our Words and Actions to the Word of God, for that is
like pure Water to cleanse us from all Spiritual Filthiness. By what means
(says David) shall a young man cleanse his way, by taking heed thereto
according to thy word, Psalm. cxix. 9. Now until we be thus cleansed both
inwardly and outwardly, we are not fit to draw near to God, nor thoroughly
disposed for Reconciliation with him, without holiness (says our Apostle) no
Man can see God. There must be both outward and inward Holiness to render us
worthy of Peace with God, we must be endued with holy Minds, and the Beauty of
Holiness must appear in our Lives and Conversations; and if the outward Man
have not a holy Face and Countenance, the inward Man is much to be suspected:
Scabs and Ulcers in the Skin, betoken corrupt and impure blood in the Veins.
It Is great Hypocrisy to pretend change of Heart, when there is no Change of
Life, for Persons to say they are regenerate within, when no Reformation
appears without. When Saul pretended a Performance of the Command which the
Lord gave against Amalek, Samuel said to him, what means then this bleating
of the Sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen which I hear? For that was an Evidence
against him: So I would ask those who say their Heart is right, they have a
good Conscience toward God, and yet walk in Sin; what means their evil
Speeches, their Cursing and Swearing, their Reviling and Backbiting, their
obscene Talk, and immodest Behavior, Revellings and Drunkenness, Injustice and
dishonest Dealing, Cruelty and doing Injury to others, and the like Crimes? For
does not our Savior tell us, that these proceed from the Heart. He whose Heart
is perfect and upright with God* is always careful to do that which is good in
his Sight. It Is true, the beginnings of Conversion to God, do not always
visibly appear, as the Recovery of the Body from Sickness is not at the first
discernable to others; But in Process of time a sincere Conversion will
certainly manifest it self in the Life and Actions. The path of the just is as
the shining light, which shines more and more unto the perfect day.

Men and Brethren, Sin was the Cause why we were cast out of God's Favor, and
there is a Necessity of laying aside Sin before we can recover it. Indeed
Christ died to take away the Guilt of Sin, but he has not taken away the
intrinsic Evil of it, that remains still; he by his Death, has made Sin
pardonable, but not allowable; and therefore we must not continue the Servants
of Sin: We must quit a vain and wicked Conversation, turn every one from his
Iniquity, die to Sin and live to God, and yield our selves to be Instruments of
Righteousness according to his Will and Pleasure, and then we shall please him,
and he will greatly love us. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your
doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well; seek
judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the Widow, and
then come (says the Lord) though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as
white as Snow, though red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool, Isa. i. 16, etc.

Thus we have explained the Conditions of obtaining Reconciliation with God,
and if you please to make Reflections on them, you will find them most just and
reasonable, and as easy as can be required. God could not pass these without
renversing the Order of Nature, and laying aside his Holiness and Honor which
was impossible; nor could any Terms be more proper for Man, nor better
accommodated to the State and Condition of all: If many expensive Sacrifices.
rich Gifts, or Sums of Money had been required, what would become of the poor,
who make the greatest part of the World? But now neither the Rich are received
upon the Account of their Riches, nor the poor rejected for their Poverty: But
both the one and the other are accepted according to their Faith, Repentance,
and Obedience. Some there are, who will not allow us this Privilege, whatever
we believe or practice, because we are not of their Church: But as the Italian
Proverb is, Better be condemned by ten Physicians, than one Judge: So certainly
it is better to be condemned by any Number or Quality of Men, than to be
condemned by the Word of God; the Word of God you see condemns none who has the
Qualifications in the Text, but encourages them to draw near to God, and gives
them Assurance of Acceptance. If then through the Grace of God, we come to be
so qualified in the Union and Communion of the Catholic Church, we need not
fear what they say, who themselves are Schismatics from the Catholic Church.
We have all the reasonable Assurance we can have of our Salvation, we may be
more sure of it, than if we had the Pope's Bull for it, a thousand Indulgences,
ten thousand Masses daily sung for us, and all the Church treasure of Merits
bestowed on us: And if we lack this, that will not, cannot be compensated with
Pilgrimages, Processions, Pennances, Bowings, Prostrations before Altars,
Crossings and Sprinklings with Holy Water, nor yet the Absolution of Priests;
for as our Apostle says, bodily exercises profit little as to Salvation: and
by what has been said, you may understand, that the Religion which recommends
us to God, must be somewhat more Spiritual than what these amount to. But to
leave this, and come to an Application.

This Text in both parts may be accommodated Application.
to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: These words, Let us draw near, may be,
without stretching, applied to our coming to this Ordinance, for this is one
way of drawing near to God, and the most solemn we can make in this Life, and
an earnest of that intimate admission into his glorious presence hereafter; and
hereby also is set forth that which procured us this gracious Privilege, viz.
The Death and Sufferings of Jesus Christ. Wherefore those who desire to draw
near to God, and would have the comfort of his Favor, and the hopes of
everlasting Glory, should embrace readily and cheerfully the occasion of the
Sacrament. And to speak freely to you, I know nothing can keep People from this
Sacrament, and make them slight it, but the want of a true desire after God,
and the little concern they have for their Eternal Salvation. I pray God
forgive those who have made some believe it a mark of Religion, or greater
Sanctity to withdraw themselves from our Communion. I entreat you be not easily
deceived, believe not every Spirit, but examine well what you hear, whether it
be agreeable to Truth. None that knows the Truth, or loves the Purity of the
Gospel, can join in Communion with the Church of Rome: But I appeal to all your
Consciences, if there be any Doctrine taught in this Church, or any thing
practiced in our Worship, disagreeable to the Word of God? And if there be not,
why should Persons withdraw from our Communion? And what can excuse such
withdrawing? These Tables are indeed too seldom covered; but when they are
covered, let them be filled with Guests; and if they be not, what a shame is
it? Let not this poor Church be miserably torn with needless and unwarrantable
separations, whereby we become both a prey and a laughing stock to our Enemies.
How comely a thing is it (says the Psalmist) for brethren to dwell together in
unity; and it is as profitable as comely. Are the Times bad? We should meet to
pray God to make them better: Is this a wicked generation! That should not make
us forsake the assembling our selves together, but we should the rather do it,
to provoke one another to love and good works. Let not any pretend a liberty of
doing what they please, or say they are not accountable to us whether they go
or come: Consider, I pray you, that you are all accountable to God; as also as
Christians and Members of his Church, you are all accountable to his Ministers,
especially to his Supreme Ministers under Christ, the Bishops, to whom you are
subject as to your Spiritual Superiors, and ought to obey them. This is his
Command, and therefore you are obliged to do what he Commands, and not what is
right in your own Eyes, or in the Eyes of others, let therefore his Laws be
punctually observed, and his Ordinances waited on. And let none take to
themselves a Dispensation from any of these, lest they incurr his displeasure,
which of all things is most to be feared.

But though I wish all would come to this Sacrament, yet I would not have any
to come unworthily and without due Preparation, for St. Paul has told us the
sad danger of that. Now what is required to render one worthy, you may learn
from the Text, he has the wedding garment who has the qualifications in the
Text. Let me therefore beseech you all to retire Home, to lay aside the
thoughts of other Business, and in all seriousness to examine how it stands
between God and you; see whether you be already adorned with these
Qualifications here spoken of; if you have them, rejoice and bless God, and
come up to Morrow to the House of God, and to this Sacrament, that they may be
confirmed and perfected in you. If as yet ye are Strangers to these
Qualifications, do not resolve to withdraw, for that is to continue in your
sin, and so without God; but be ye rather more earnest this Night in acquiring
them: In so short a time, it is true, you cannot bring them to Perfection, but
you may have them in Sincerity, which for the present will be admitted. O!
rouse up your Faith, and let it operate in your Minds, besprinkle your selves
with the Tears of true Contrition, and cleanse your selves with steadfast
Purposes of departing from all Iniquity, and of keeping ever hereafter the
Commandments of God; and if you do so, you shall go back justified in God's
Sight.

Amen.
SERMON XII.
On HOSEA X. 12. Sow to your selves in righteousness, reap in mercy: break up
your fallow ground: for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain
righteousness upon you.
THESE words contain a sound The Scope of the Text in reference to the Jews*
and wholesome Advice to a miserable People, lying under the weight of God's
Anger, and threatened with many sad and grievous Judgments. The People were
Israel, the Children of the Ten Tribes, with whom God had a Controversy,
because there was no Truth, nor Mercy, nor Knowledge of God in the Land: They
had cast off the Service of the true God, and corrupted themselves with the
Idolatry, Superstition, and other Abominations of the Heathen Nations among
whom they dwelt: For which, God's Wrath was kindled against them, and this
Prophet was sent forth to intimate the Divine Displeasure, and how severely it
would fall on them. But the Divine Threatenings are for the most part like
Ionathan's Arrows, shot for Warning rather than Destruction: In the midst of
Wrath he remembers Mercy, and when he denounces War, he intends to spare, and
therefore denounces it that Men may be awakened to their Duty, and so prevent
(if not the Temporal Evils which they deserve) yet their Eternal Ruin, which is
worst of all. Wherefore it is that the Prophet so often intermixeth his
Threatenings with Exhortations to Repentance, Obedience, and seeking the Lord,
as here in our Text.

This Advice has no particularity in It is applicable to other People.
it to restrain it to those to whom it was here given; but it may very well
suit with any other People, who are desirous of God's Favor, and have reason
to fear his Displeasure: Nay, here is laid down the general and indispensable
Conditions on which any People may expect Peace, and Reconciliation with God,
and the sure means of obtaining good things from him, and so they are proper to
be considered by you at this time.

Hosea speaks here in Metaphorical The Expressions are borrowed from Husbandry.
terms borrowed from Husbandry: which as it is the most ancient Employment of
Mankind: So according to Cicero, it is of all others most becoming and worthy
of a Gentleman, and has employed the Pens of the As Varro, Cato, Virgil, etc.
greatest among the Romans; and there is a great deal both of Grace and Force
in the terms of it, to carry the things recommended by the familiar use of them
home to the Minds of Men, and render them more effectual: Upon which account
nothing is more usual in the Scripture. St. Paul calls Believers God's
husbandry or tillage, 1 Cor. iii. 9. And here we have proper Directions, how to
manage it with Skill and Profit. Plowing, Sowing, and Reaping, are main parts
of Husbandry, and should be well looked to by all that would thrive at the
Trade; he that neglects them, or is ignorant how to go about them, will
certainly come both to Poverty and Shame. They are as essential in the
Spiritual Husbandry, as the Natural, and therefore should be well studied by
all, who wish well to themselves. I pray God we may learn and practice the
Lessons here laid before us, and we shall become both perfect and happy thereby.

The Prophet begins with Sowing, I. What is meant by Sowing.
though it be not the first part of Husbandry, something must go before it;
however, we will not change the Prophets words, but take them as they lie, it
being no great matter what be first or last taught, providing all be carefully
heard and observed. Sowing then in a Moral sense, signifies Action, whether
internal of the Mind, or outward of the Body; for as Sowing is always followed
with some Crop, the Grain thrown by the Husbandman's Hand, though it be covered
with Earth does not perish, it rises again, and produces an answerable
Harvest: So Men's Thoughts, Words, and Actions, do not vanish as soon as they
pass from them, they remain as the Seed does, and will spring up again either
to their Shame and Confusion, or Comfort and Glory. It therefore concerns us
very nearly to look well to all we think, do, and say: A good Husband man will
not sow at random any thing that comes nearest him, but will consider what is
the best time, and will choose out the best Seed: So a wise Man will not live
at random, speak and do whatever is suggested to him, or comes in his Head, but
studieth the fittest times and season of things, and he takes care to give
every time and season what is suitable thereto. As Cockle and Darnel is never
to be sown; so neither ought Sin to be sown at any time, or upon any account,
but whether we eat or drink, or whatever we do, we ought, says the Apostle, to
do it all to the glory of God. And therefore the Prophet here bids us, Sow in
righteousness, or righteousness it self, for we cannot carry on the Glory of
God, or sincerely intend it any other way: God can and does turn the Wickedness
of Men to his Glory* but when he does so, he is not beholden to us for it, and
therefore the only way we ought to seek his Glory, is to adhere closely to
Righteousness.

When the Prophet says, Sow righteousness, II. What is implied by
Righteousness.
or in righteousness, (which is all one, for some make it To, others leave out
the Hebrew Particle as Redundant) He holds forth* the quality of the Seed or
Grain we should sow. And by Righteousness, here is not only meant the virtue of
Justice and Honesty in our dealings with Man, but it is taken in a larger sense
of equal extent with Holiness; which includes all Acts of Piety and Devotion
toward God, of Justice, Charity and Kindness toward Men, and what is good and
comely for our selves: St. Paul's Injunction to the Philippians iv. 8. is a
good Paraphrase on Sowing in Righteousness; Whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if
there be any virtue, or any praise, think on these things. What things are so,
must be learned from the Scriptures, the Word of God is the Rule of
Righteousness, it is the very good and precious Seed which we ought to sow, and
to sow in Righteousness is nothing else, but to live and do according to the
Word of God, to practice what it teaches: Qui mandata veterit in opera seminat
in justitia. Jerome. Whosoever expresses in his actions the Commands of God,
sows in Righteousness. And as we must thus look to the Quality of what we
sow, that it be Righteousness, things agreeable to the righteous Word of God;
so we ought to take heed to the Quantity, that we do not sow sparingly, but
plentifully. This some will have to be the only meaning of the Words, but there
is more reason to refer the Expression to the Quality, as we have done:
However, this must be taken in too, for he does not sow in Righteousness
sincerely and with delight, that does not abound therein. His Heart is not
right who serves God by halves, who does only some few good things: But he is
a truly righteous Man, who sets himself and gives all diligence to abound in
the Work of the Lord.

And we have all reason to do so, for The Reasonableness and Advantage of
sowing Righteousness.
it is our Interest and Advantage. Men use to ply well what redounds to their
particular Profit, what they think will certainly benefit them; and truly we
are sure of this, it will fall particularly to our share. It is remarkable,
that the Prophet calls the sowing righteousness, a sowing to or for our selves,
as if nothing else could be reckoned so. And, indeed, Men may be frustrated of
all their other Labors, but they can never be disappointed of this. In the
things of this World, one may sow and another may reap; what one builds and
plants, another often takes possession of. Most Men labor for others. If the
most busied would cast up his accounts, he should find but a very small part of
his Travel and Projects to redound to himself. It is not only the meanest sort
of People that are to be esteemed Drudges to others; but Men of all ranks from
the highest, are truly Servants of a different kind: And the more Faithful and
Diligent any one is in his Station or Employment, he becomes thereby only the
more useful Servant to the rest of Mankind. He only truly lives to himself, who
makes it his business to be found upright before God, and to do that which is
right in his sight. He that neglects this, quite neglects himself, and carries
away no Profit of all his Labor under the Sun. What can the Wisest, the most
Industrious, and most fortunate Worldling boast of? at the best but a poor
transitory enjoyment of perishing things. In that Night his Soul is taken from
him, what reckoning can he make of his Barns, Goods and Store? whose are all
these things? not his to be sure, and perhaps they fall into the hands of one
who has little kindness for him, or his Memory. When he dies, says the
Psalmist, he shall carry nothing away; his glory shall not descend after him.
And then to how little purpose has he endeavored to be made Rich, and to get
the Glory of his House increased. But he that is steadfast and immovable, and
always abounding in the Work of the Lord, his Labor shall not be in vain, the
gain shall redound to himself. What one does in this, is, extra Fortunam, not
liable to any hazard, runs not the fate of other things, a Man is sure of it.
Sow Righteousness and ye shall sow to your selves, none shall come betwixt you
and the blessed Fruits which is produced by that sowing.

Wherefore it is here added, and reap III. Of reaping Mercy.
in mercy. Because the Verb here is the Imperative Mood, some will have this a
Command, for a farther Progress in doing that good we have explained to be
contained under the first Head: But this cannot be admitted, for besides the
Tautology, we must put a strained and unusual sense upon Reaping. Wherefore
certainly in this Phrase is set forth the gracious Reward wherewith God will
bless Sowing in Righteousness; Reaping follows Sowing, and is the natural
effect thereof; so, who Sows in Righteousness, shall Reap in Mercy, though what
they thus Reap, be neither the necessary natural effect of what they sow, nor
yet the just desert thereof; if they merited what they Reap, it should not be
called Mercy: But it is so called, that they may not think what is given them
to be their due. If Men would consider themselves and their actions
impartially, and lay aside all proud thoughts, they would adjudge their merits
to' be small, and that little belonged to them on that account. However, all
who ply Sowing in Righteousness sincerely may look for Mercy, as the
Husbandman does for a Crop after he has sown; nay, they may assure themselves
of it, which he cannot do, they may claim it as their Privilege by virtue of
the Divine Promise which can never fail. With respect to which Promise, and the
undoubted certainty thereof, the Prophet bids them here Reap Mercy: Reap is
Imperative, to denote the certainty of the thing, as if there were no more
requisite, than to put forth the hand and take it, in which sense the
Imperative is usually taken in Scripture, as Ezekiel. xviii. 32. They have not the
promise, nor are they capable of Mercy who sow not in Righteousness.
Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, shall be upon every soul of man
that does evil. Romans ii. 9. As therefore Sowing must go before Reaping, so
Sowing in Righteousness must be previous to the Reaping in Mercy; this is
necessary, not that we may merit, but that we may be fit objects of Mercy. And
as naturally the Crop exceeds the measure of the Grain which was Sown; so the
Gifts and Expressions of God's Mercy toward righteous Persons, shall
infinitely exceed the Works done by them. Wherefore a Jewish Doctor has not
ill expressed it, Sow, etc. Do that which is good in mine eyes, and the good
Reward which ye shall receive of me, shall be far greater than your good Works,
as he that sows a Bushel, hopes to reap two or more; and therefore in the
Command for sowing, he uses the word Justice; but in the promise of Reaping
the word Chesed Mercy or Benignity, which is more than Justice, or what in
strict Justice can be required.

The Mercy which they who Sow in Righteousness shall Reap, is like God himself
the Author thereof, infinite, and so cannot be expressed: We cannot
particularize all the ways whereby God will show his Mercy to such Persons. It
is written, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man the things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor.
ii. 9. As long before the Harvest the Husbandman is refreshed with the sight
and savor of his Field, so God comfort and refreshes the Souls of the
righteous even in this World, and hereafter he Crowns them with unspeakable
Glory, and blesses them with eternal Life. The Light of God's Countenance even
in this Life, where its beams are often intercepted, do yet afford more Joy
than in the time of Harvest, when Corn, and Wine, and Oil abound with Men: And
what will it do in the other World, where it shines fully and clearly, and
without interruption, and where there is nothing to obstruct the Power and
Efficacy thereof: Lord! What Joy is there in the very prospect of this Harvest?
How happy and blessed are they who are sure of it? What a kindness is it that
we have liberty to throw in our poor stock into such a profitable Bank? and a
Privilege to Sow, where we may Reap so much? With what Face can any refuse the
Occasion? or what Excuse is sufficient? Have Men by their many Inventions found
out any higher Felicity, than what God and his Superabundant Mercy can confer?
or is there a nearer way, or more proper to this, than that which the Prophet
directs to, the Sowing in Righteousness? Is it better to labor for Temporal
than Eternal things, for that Meat which perishes, than that which endures to
Life everlasting! Will ye plough Wickedness, and reap Iniquity* and eat the
Fruit of Lies? that is, will ye die rather than live? This were a mad and
shameful Choice; and yet one of them we must make, for there is no middle
Course left us: It is certain the Wages of Sin are Death, and that there is no
way to Everlasting Life, but to have our Fruit unto Holiness. Be not deceived;
God is not mocked; for whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he also reap. He
that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that
sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. vi. 7.

The Prophet having told them what IV. Of breaking up the fallow Ground.
they would reap, returns to exhort them to the Use of those means which are
requisite in order to it, and to the Performance of those Duties to which
reaping in Mercy is promised; which People have need to be put in mind of, for
ordinarily they are very slack and negligent; Many would be at reaping, but few
set themselves to the Work and Labor that must go before it; they would be
putting in the sickle in Harvest-time, though they have not sown, nor made any
Preparation for it. But those who sow not shall not reap, and that our sowing
may be successful, we are bid first, break up our fallow ground, for
Interpreters make the Prophets Speech Elliptick, and will have First or After
that, or some such Word to be understood.

If the Ground be not prepared, sowing is to no Purpose; the Seed was lost that
fell on stony ground, among thorns, and in the highway. The good and precious
Seed to be sown is the Word of God, our Hearts are the Ground which must
receive it, and they cannot receive it till they be made honest and good, as
our Savior speaks, Luke viii. 15. and in order to this they must be prepared,
Pains must be taken on them. Break up your fallow Ground. If the Husbandman
did not till his Ground, cast Furrows in it and root out the Weeds thereof, he
needed not sow, and would in vain expect a Crop: So our Hearts by their natural
Constitution, are like fallow ground which was never labored, which is
indisposed for receiving Seed from the Sower, and of it self brings forth only
Thorns and Briars. The natural Product of Men's Hearts is only Sin and
Wickedness. God saw that the wickedness of Man Genesis 6. 5.
was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his
heart was only evil continually. Naturally Men's Hearts are hard and averse to
all good; The natural Man receives not the things 1 Cor. 2. 14.
of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know
them because they are spiritually discerned. But as hard and bad as they are,
they may through the Grace of God be changed, and improved to the better, if
due Pains be taken on them. The Evil and Naughtiness of our Hearts will not
excuse us from being or doing good, though many pretend it. What a silly Excuse
were it for an Husbandman to turn his back upon his Labor, that his Ground of
it self yielded nothing but Briars and Thorns, and other Weeds? Should he not
labor for all that, and by Art and Industry make it do, what of it self it
cannot do? So, though our Hearts be as fallow Ground, yet let us break them up
and weed them; let us by continued Care and Diligence, bear down their natural
Growth, and render them susceptible of better things; let us pluck up the
Prejudices of our Nature, throw away the choking Cares of this Life, and break
off the Course of Sin: Let us ply our Hearts continually with Prayer,
Meditation on the Word, Use of our Reason, the serious Consideration of our
Ways, and an Attendance on those Means and Ordinances God has appointed, and
in Process of time through the Grace of God, our Hearts will be broken and
changed from their natural Barrenness, to be fruitful in Holiness and good
Works. This is the way to break up our fallow Ground, to make our Hearts
tractable and obedient, capable of receiving and nourishing the good Seed of
the Word, and unless this be done, our Hearts will be as a Wilderness barren
and altogether unfruitful in good: Break up your fallow ground, says Jeremy,
Jer. 4. 3.
and sow not among Thorns. What a Folly is it to sow in a Ground overgrown with
Thorns and Briars; and what can be expected from Men, whose hearts are as hard
as an Adamant, who refuse to hearken, Zach. 7. 11.
and pull away their Shoulder and stop their Ears, that they should not hear:
As the Prophet Zechariah speaks? There are many Complaints now adays against
the Sower, but there is more Reason to retort them upon the Ground, I mean to
cast the Blame of not profiting upon the People themselves rather than the
Preacher; you are oft-times indisposed, your Hearts are not duly prepared,
therefore it is that the Word Preached has so little effect in you. Mortify
therefore your Lusts, subdue your Passions, daily cultivate your Hearts with
Acts of Repentance and Contrition, and the fore mentioned Exercises of Prayer,
Meditation, etc. That they may be softened and fitted for the Seed of the Word,
and that it may prosper and spring up and bear Fruit.

Thus you see your Task, and that we V. Of seeking the Lord.
may be excited with all Speed and Diligence to go about it, and also
encouraged with Assurance of Success, it is added, For it is time to seek the
Lord, until he come and rain Righteousness upon you. By seeking the Lord is
meant the seeking his Favor which is the Ground of all our Comfort and
Happiness, or his Help and Assistance without which we labor in vain, and all
we do is ineffectual: And we then seek both the one and the other, when we
heartily practice the Duties enjoined us; for his Favor returns upon our
Repentance and Obedience, and his Grace and Assistance is bestowed as we labor
and endeavor; he works together with us.

Now, (says Hosea) It is time thus to seek the Lord, which implies first a
proper Season or Opportunity for it; Opportunity should be laid hold on, every
thing should be taken in its time, and Men are encouraged to work and labor so
long as the time of doing it is not past. The Season for sowing and breaking up
is all the time of Life, while God allows the Use of Reason, the means of
Grace, while he makes offers of Salvation, and calls by his Providence, it is
time to seek him: Seek the Lord therefore Isa. 55. 6.
while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near. If any have been
negligent, if hitherto he has loitered and slept away his time, neither
labored nor sown, but let his Heart lie all this while fallow, that it is
quite overgrown with Weeds, it is a great Fault, and calls for mourning; but it
is no ground to despair nor Reason to lay aside the Thoughts of this necessary
Work. Art thou sensible that thou have been too long a beginning? Do thou
wish that thou had been more wise? Arise, the Day is not yet done, work while
it is Day; the Season is not wholly past, lay hold on it and double thy
Diligence to recover misspent time; which if thou do, it shall be yet well
with thee, according to the common but wise Proverb, Better late than never.
Remember they who wrought but one Hour had their Hire. If the wicked will turn
Ezekiel. 18. 21.
from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my Statutes, and do
that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die, says
the Lord. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the Isa. 55. 7.
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God and he will abundantly pardon.

But secondly, by saying it is time, the Prophet lays before them, that it is
full time, and so not to be let slip; it is now time, but it will not be always
so, it is time, but this time is ever running and will once be at an end, and
therefore Delays are dangerous. It is indeed time yet, but not to sleep and
stand loitering; it is high time to awake out of Sleep, to gird up our Loins,
and to set about our Work lest the Night come in which no Man can work. It is
the great Folly of many, that they think they have Times and Seasons in their
own hand, at least they act as if it were so: But we neither have always Time
and Opportunity, nor can we always Command Grace to use it aright, and
therefore should take it when it may be had and fear to deferr and put it off.
Sometimes Men come to that, that they can neither seek nor work, have neither
Strength of Body or Mind, no Use of any Faculty so much as to desire what is
good for them? Sometimes they seek and find no Acceptance, desire and
endeavor, but have no Success. It is hard to tell peremptorily the precise
time when it is so with any, but the Scripture forewarns us of this, and bids
us fear it. When you spread forth your hands, Isa. 1. 15.
I will hide my face from you, yea when you make many prayers I will not hear.
I will Jer. 11. 11.
bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape, and though they
shall cry I will not hearken unto them. They shall go with their flocks and
with their herds to seek the Lord, but they shall not find him, he has
withdrawn himself from them. Wherefore as the Apostle enjoins, Let us Heb. 3.
13.
exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened with the deceitfulness of sin. You that are stricken in Age, will, I
hope, readily acknowledge, That it is time (if ever) for you to seek the Lord,
and mind the business of your Salvation: for your time is near spent, your Sun
is ready to set, and your Day is almost at an end. The Husbandman uses to be
busy when the Season is almost at a close, especially if at first he has
loitered and been idle. And you that are young have no less Reason to fall to
work quickly, for though by the Course of Nature you may live a considerable
time; yet you know that Course may and has been often interrupted, and none
knows how soon this may befall him. Wherefore let neither young nor old give
Sleep to their Eyes, or Slumber to their Eyelids; but let both young and old
seek and labor with all Diligence. To day, says the Holy Ghost, if ye will
hear, harden not your hearts. But to go on;

In the last place, we have here an Encouragement VI. He will come and rain
Righteousness.
to what is called for, proposed from the Certainty of the Success, He will
come and rain Righteousness upon you. In worldly things Men often seek and
labor, but do not obtain what they would be at. But, says the Lord, I said
not unto the house of Jacob, seek ye Isa. 45. 19. Heb. 11. 6.
me in vain. He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. He is sometime
found of them that seek him not; and therefore it is not to be doubted, but he
will be found of those who seek him aright, and in due time. It is true, he is
not always presently found, but though he hide himself for a while, he will not
do it for ever, and therefore we ought not to be weary, but to wait patiently
till we find him whom our Soul loves.

Seek, (says the Text) till he come, which requires Constancy in seeking.
There is need of patience to them that have Heb. 10. 36.
done the will of God, that they may receive the promise. It is childish and
unreasonable Peevishness, to fret because we are not presently answered, to
desist from our Work, because we do not instantly reap the Fruit thereof. They
make too great haste to their Doom, who conclude themselves forsaken and
reprobate, because presently they find not God's Presence and the gracious
Tokens thereof. What is delayed is not denied, God knows his Hour, and
waits till it come, and so should we; he puts off, to try our Faith and
Constancy, to exercise our Patience, to quicken our Desires; Be patient
therefore brethren unto the coming of the Lord. Behold the Husbandman waits
for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it, until he
receive the early and latter rain. Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts for
the coming of the Lord draws nigh, Jam. v. 7.

Now what is the Lord to do when he comes? He will (says the Text) rain
Righteousness upon you. The Allusion to Husbandry is still continued, all know
how necessary Rain is to the Husbandman, without it he labors and sows to no
Purpose: But if the Heavens rain upon him, his Labors prosper, he sees the
Fruit thereof, eats and is satisfied. The Dew of Heaven is no less necessary to
our spiritual Husbandry, it also depends entirely on the Blessing of God,
without that all our labor is in vain. Without me (says Christ) ye can do
nothing. But John 15.
as God gives Rain and Snow from Heaven to water the Earth, to make it bring
forth and bud, that it may give Seed to the Sower, and Bread to the Eater, so
in spiritual Blessings he will not be wanting to those who are not wanting to
themselves. To those who would sow in Righteousness, and labor to break up
their fallow Ground, and seek him to bless their Labors, he will come and rain
down Righteousness upon them, that is, his Grace and Spirit shall fall down
(like the Rain) upon them whereby they may increase and abound in all Truth and
Righteousness. Blessed are Mat. 5. 6.
they who hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.
This is Isa. 54. 17.
the heritage of the Servants of the Lord, and their Righteousness is of me,
says the Lord. But though our Righteousness be of God it should not make us
supersede our Labors and Endeavors; We must not, Scougall's Life of God, page
75.
as one says, lie loitering in the Ditch, waiting till Omnipotence pull us
out. It Is God who causes the Grass to grow, and Herb for the Service of Man,
are therefore the Labors of the Husbandman useless? Put thy self in the way
of Grace, and Grace shall be given thee. Up, and bestirr thy self, commit thy
way unto the Lord, trust in him, and he shall bring forth thy Righteousness as
the Light, and thy Judgment as the Noon day, Psalm. xxxvii. 56.

But secondly, Some understand these Words of Christ, and not without Reason,
for he that comes, or is to come, and will come, are his frequent Titles in
the Scripture. St. John the Baptist asked if he was the Christ under this
Designation, Mat. xi. 3. And the main end of his coming was to teach and give
Righteousness. He is called the Lord our Righteousness. Jer. 23. 6.
Who shows the way of Righteousness, who works it in us, and who, by the
Merits of his own Righteousness has obtained for all true Believers, that
their honest and sincere, though imperfect Righteousness should be accepted of
God, as perfect, and that they should be dealt with by him, as if they were
perfectly and completely righteous. As it is written in the Old, and applied by
the Apostle in the New Testament, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to
him for righteousness, and he was made sin, or a Sin offering, for us that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him; that is, that we heartily
believing in him, and as Believers heartily and sincerely obeying of him, might
be reputed as perfectly righteous in the Eyes of God, through the Merits of his
Blood, who was perfectly and completely righteous, without spot or blemish.
Here then is a Promise of Christ, and the Benefits of him, as a Savior, that
they who are truly sanctified with inherent Righteousness, have it imputed to
them through the Merits of Christ for perfect and complete Righteousness, though
it is not so, but defective and short of that absolute Perfection which the Law
requires; as it is written, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's
Elect? It is God that justifies: Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that
died, yea, rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God,
who also makes intercession for us.

Fear not little flock, it is your Father's will to give you a Kingdom. A
Kingdom of more Glory than all the Kingdoms of the World, and it is a Kingdom
which shall never end. This is the Reward which God will certainly bestow on
his righteous Servants and Children; of which Reward some make the raining
Righteousness in the Text a Promise; for they take Righteousness to be the
Reward of it, as in the following Verse Iniquity is taken for the Punishment
thereof. But whether that be the main intent of the Words, certainly it may be
comprehended in them, for the Fruits and Effects of Righteousness are always
given where it self is given. Holiness and the glorious Reward of it, cannot be
disjoined; so that he who has the one, is sure of the other. The Wicked cannot
inherit Glory, nor can the Righteous be excluded. Instead therefore of
perplexing our selves, what shall come of us, whether we shall go to Heaven,
let us cheerfully do our Duty, and heartily endeavor to be righteous in the
sight of God, for hereby we may be assured of eternal Life. The one is the
Earnest and Pledge of the other.

Hitherto I have handled and applied VII. An Application to the Public.
the Text, with a respect to Men's private and personal state. But as was said
in the beginning, the Prophet delivered this Advice, with a regard to the
public state of his People, both Civil and Ecclesiastic: And so it proposes
the true Way and Method, of preventing and removing public Calamities and
Disasters from Church and State; which is, to put away Sin and Wickedness, and
to encourage and promote Piety and Godliness. As the Prophet forewarns them of
very sad and heavy Judgments, so all along he plainly inculcates the cause
thereof, viz. Their Pride and Wantonness, the neglect of God and of his
Worship, and a gross contempt of, and disobedience to his Righteous Laws. For
this cause he told them they were to be so exemplarily punished, and that
nothing could save them from utter Ruin, or procure the lengthning of their
Tranquillity, but the ceasing from Sin, and the doing that which is right in
the sight of God. Both the Preservation and Ruin of Kingdoms and public States
is of God, and he is moved to the one or the other, according as they are
righteous or wicked: For, as Solomon says, Righteousness exalts a Nation,
but sin is Prove. 14. 34.
a reproach to any people; which Maxim of the Wise Man is clearly exemplified
in Sacred History, and was wisely observed in relation to the Jews, in the
person of Achior, the Captain of the Sons of Ammon; for in the Speech which he
is said to have made to Olofernes, he told him, That whilst they sinned not
before their God, they prospered, because the God that hates iniquity was with
them; but when they departed from the way which he appointed them, they were
destroyed in many sore Battles, and were led Captives into a Land that was not
theirs, and the Temple of their God was cast to the Ground, and their Cities
were taken by the Enemies. From which wise Observation he concluded, as wisely,
his Advice to the same Olofernes: Now therefore my Lord and Governor, if there
be any Error in this People, and they sin against their God, let us consider
that this shall be their ruin, and let us go up and we shall overcome them. But
if there be no iniquity in their Nation, let my Lord pass by, lest their Lord
defend them, and their God be for them, and we become a reproach before all the
world. Righteousness Judith 5* 17.
is the greatest Security of a People, it is the strongest Bond of Union
amongst themselves, and will defend the Frontiers better than Garrisons or
Armies can do: For it secureth the Protection of the Almighty, who can defeat
the strongest and most numerous Forces, and who when a man's ways please the
Lord, makes his enemies to be at peace with him. If therefore we have any
concernment for the Church and State whereof we are Members, if we would have
God to do good to our Zion, and to build up the walls of our Jerusalem; if we
would have him to settle Peace within their Walls, and Prosperity within their
Palaces, let every one of us return from the Evil of our ways; let us seek God
with all our heart, retrieve true Piety, and true Religion, and by the works of
real Righteousness study to please God. If we do this, then his Heart will be
toward us, and his Delight will be in us; then we shall become his Pleasant
Vineyard, which he will fence and plant, out of which he will gather the
Stones, and in which he will build a Tower for himself; he will cherish our
Church and State, and do all that can be desired for their Beauty Order and
Peace. But if instead of the pleasant Grapes of Righteousness, we yield the
sour Grapes of Iniquity; if instead of Judgment God see Oppression; if instead
of Righteousness he hear a cry; if instead of the sweet smelling savor of a
Christian Conversation, we send forth the noisome and stinking scent of Sin and
Impiety, Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, then he will utterly abandon us: I will
tell you what he will then do to his Vineyard, I will, says the Lord, take
away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up: and break the wall thereof
and it shall be trodden down. And I will lay it waste: It shall not be pruned
nor dug, but there shall come up briars and thorns: I will also command the
clouds that they rain no rain upon it, Isa. v. 5. Our Land will always be made
to mourn so long as Sin and Iniquity abound in it: Public Peace and Prosperity
cannot be expected till there be a return of Righteousness, of true and solid
Piety: Till that appear, we need not look for good. Let us therefore seek the
Lord, and by fervent and effectual Prayers beseech him to give Repentance unto
all People, and to Rain down true Righteousness upon all Ranks and Orders of
Men, that it may be well with every one of us, and with the Land we live in:
For then our case should be happy, and then both Sion and Jerusalem would have
reason to rejoice, for the Lord then would strengthen the bars of their gates,
he would bless the people within them, make peace in their borders, and fill
them with the finest of the wheat. Now unto him that is able to do this for us,
unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise God, be Honor and
Glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
SERMON XIII. Preached at St. Giles Church in EDINBURGH, On October 16. 1687.
HOSEA V. 13, 14, 15. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound:
then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Iareb: yet could he not
heal you, nor cure you of your wound. For I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and
as a young Lion to the house of Judah: I, even I will tear and go away: I will
take away and none shall rescue him. I will go and return unto my place, till
they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face: In their affliction they will
seek me early.
EPHRAIM is put here for the An Explication of the Text.
whole Ten Tribes, who revolted from the House of David, and embodied
themselves into a distinct Kingdom. Under Judah, is here comprehended also the
Tribe of Benjamin; which two Tribes, as they kept close in Allegiance, and
Expressions of Loyalty to their lawful King, so they made Profession of Serving
the One true God, in that way, and after that manner prescribed by his Word.

By the Sickness of Ephraim, and the Wounds of Judah, is meant those
Afflictions and Calamities which God sent upon the several States, because of
their Sins and Transgressions: And by considering this Prophecy, and the
History of these several Nations, we find the Judgments they were visited with,
and which are here especially pointed at, to have been a withdrawing the
Necessaries and Comforts of Life, Factions and Divisions within, and
Oppressions from Neighbors without.

By Ephraim going to the Assyrian, and Judah sending to King Iareb; The same
thing is understood by all Interpreters, for they make Iareb either the proper
Name of the King of Assyria then reigning, or an Appellative title given to all
the Kings of that Nation, as Pharaoh was the title of the Kings of Egypt, and
Coesar or Augustus of the Roman Emperors; or it is thought to be the Name of a
City in Assyria, where the Kings resided; and that he is called King Iareb,
because he lived there; or finally, considering the Etymology of the word, some
will have the King of Assyria so called, because the Jews and Israelites
expected he should have vindicated and defended them; wherefore the Translators
of the Bible have put into the Margin, Or to the King that should Plead. But
which soever of these ways be taken, all conclude that Assyria is meant, and
that respect is had to what we read 2 Kings xv. 19. xvi. 17. 2 Chronicles. xxviii.
16. Where we see how both Judah and Israel entered into a League with Assyria,
and studied by Money and Presents, both to procure his own Peace, and also
Assistance to curb and restrain others who infested them.

And when it is said, he could not heal you, nor cure you, thereby it is
represented how ineffectual this Method was for their relief, for they were not
put in a better state by his means, so far from that, that even he from whom
they expected Ease, became an Instrument of more Mischief and Trouble unto
them; as the Sacred History plainly shows. The reason hereof is given in the
14th. Verse, to wit, because God was angry with them and resolved to punish
them, he was determined to be as a Lion to Ephraim, and as a young Lion to
Judah, to tear them, and take them away; That is, as these Beasts are strong to
catch their prey, and when they have set upon it do devour it, and it is in
vain to think to get it safe out of their clutches, so God being incensed, he
will show himself able and strong to punish those who had done it: And it was a
most foolish thing to think by Men, or any other Means, to prevent the Mischief
he certainly determined: It was like the offering to take back a prey from the
Jaws of a hungry and raging Lion. Who can rescue out of his Hands? When he
declares War, who can make Peace? Men may fight with Men, but it is in vain to
strive against God, or to think that any Means or Projects will prosper where
he is the Enemy. And as these Savage Beasts, when they have caught their prey
and eaten it up, use to retire to their Dens and Coverts and lurk there; so in
allusion to this, God says in the last Verse, he will return to his place;
that is as it were shut himself up in Heaven, that the Earth should no more
feel his gracious Presence, or the comfortable Effects thereof. He would so
leave them and forsake them, by withdrawing the favorable Expressions of his
Providence, as that they should be tempted to think he had confined himself to
Heaven, and would no more visit the Earth, nor the Children of Men. But all
this God did not so much out of Wrath, and for Destruction, as out of Love,
that he might at last save them, and make them Partakers of his great goodness.
They were so perverse as to resist his gentle Methods, so stubborn as not to be
wrought upon by his former Acts of Kindness, that he was provoked and (if it
were proper to speak so of the Almighty) constrained to take up the Rod, and to
deal with them thus roughly and severely. But still his intent was, not to cut
them off utterly from him, but rather to bring them into a stricter Union with
him afterward: He let his anger out now upon them, that they might afterward
be made capable of his Love, to wit, when they became sensible of their Sin and
Folly, in forsaking the Commands of God, and resolved to seek him seriously in
all time coming; This, says he, I will do, till they acknowledge their offense
and seek my face.

And as God had this end before him in their Punishment, so there is here a
gracious intimation, that the Punishments laid upon them should be effectual
for this purpose; In their afflictions they will seek me early, which words are
not so much a Prediction of what probably they would do, as a Promise what he
would then by his Grace make them do: Afflictions have, indeed, some natural
tendency to soften Men, to render them tractable and obedient, but then only
this is truly effectuated, when God sanctifies Afflictions, and gives his
Grace with them; And when Afflictions produce this, when People are so happy as
to be converted by them, then God lays aside all Quarrels, he puts off his
anger, and puts on Bowels of Love and Compassion; he hides his Face while
Men continue in their Sins and Transgressions: All the time they are going
astray from God, he retires within his Place, as is here said; But when they
begin to acknowledge their Offenses, and in all sincerity seek his Face, then
he comes forth of his Place, and lifts the light of his Countenance upon them,
and speaks comfortably unto them; his going forth is prepared as the Morning,
and then he comes unto us as the rain, as the latter and former rain unto the
Earth, which both refreshes it, and makes it fruitful.

Thus I have explained the words, and given you the genuine Scope and Purport
of them. In the next place, I intend to propose plainly such Instructions as
they afford; and as I judge them both useful and seasonable; so I pray God,
they may be heartily heard, meekly received, seriously considered, and
carefully observed.

First then, We may read and discern I. Sin is the Cause and Occasion of all
the Evils which befall either private Persons or public States.
here the Cause and Occasion of all the Evils and Mischief, which come either
upon private Persons, or on public States, viz. SIN. This is the bitter Root
which shoots out all kind of Misery. If Man had not known Sin, he would never
have felt Punishment. We should never have been made to taste the bitter Fruits
of Trouble, if Sin had not been planted in our Natures, and if it did not shoot
out and mingle with our Life and Actions. It Is to this, we must ascribe all the
Diseases which infest both particular Persons and public States, and where Sin
is cherished and does abound, we may certainly conclude, that Trouble and
Calamity will follow; for the one is the necessary consequence of the other;
Ephraim's Sickness, and Judah's Wounds proceeded from their Sins; as appears
both by the Text and Context, they first suffered the Malignant Humor of Sin
to creep into their Veins, and to ferment there; and thence it was that they
drooped and languished, and felt so much Pain and Sorrow. Our first Parents no
sooner tasted the forbidden Fruit, but they were filled with Shame and
Confusion: which are the inseparable Effects of Sin. The Body cannot but be
sick and pained which is disordered, disjointed, and which suffers Convulsive
Motions; no more can they who are infected with Sin be without Grief and
Anguish. Therefore Eliphaz said truly, That the wicked man travaileth with pain
all his days; this is but what is agreeable to the very Nature of his
Constitution. And besides the Misery and Trouble which is naturally interwoven
into the very Constitution of Sin, it makes one liable to the Wrath and Anger
of Almighty God, it necessarily draws down his Displeasure: And who will not be
Sick and Wounded who groans under the pressure of God's Wrath. As the light of
his Countenance puts more Gladness into a Man's Heart, than when Corn, Wine and
Oil does abound. So the Abstraction of his Favor is more grievous than the
withdrawing Health, and all outward Comforts and Conveniences; but because Men
are a little dull to perceive this, therefore God teaches them how miserable it
is to be without his Favor, by depriving them of outward Comforts, and what
they apprehend to be the ground and matter of their Happiness: His Favor is
the foundation of all Felicity, and the cause of all the Good we enjoy; and his
Displeasure is ever attended with outward Punishments. No sooner did Adam
offend God, but he was cast out of Paradise; and had the Earth cursed for his
sake; and as this is the Original of these common Calamities, which our life is
liable to while in this World; so whoever tread the footsteps of these common
Parents, and imitate them in their disobedience to God, shall share of their
lot, and not go unpunished; for the face of the Lord is against them Ps. 34. 16.
that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth. Lo, they that
are Ps. 73. 27.
far from thee shall perish, thou have destroyed all them that go a whoring
from thee. We must not indeed conclude them the greatest Sinners who meet with
the greatest outward Trouble and Affliction in this World. Our Savior has
taught us the contrary: And the History and Example of Job is a clear proof
that it is not so: But certainly God is so just, as never to inflict
Punishment, but where there have been previous Faults to call for it: And as
some of the best of Men have had the greatest share of Troubles and Affliction;
so the best have been guilty of Sin, and the least measure of this guilt is
sufficient to justify the greatest measure of Punishment which can be
inflicted upon any in this World: and if some of the greatest Sinners have
escaped exemplary Punishment here, it is because God reserves them to a more
sad and heavy Doom hereafter.

But however it be with particular Persons, it is certain in the general that
Sin offends God, and never goes unpunished; and however particular Persons may
escape exemplary Punishment in this Life; yet Nations, Kingdoms, and public
Societies are always visibly punished in this World, when they are corrupted
and defiled with Sin. Crosses and Afflictions have been laid upon particular
Persons, sometimes more for trial than for Punishment: But general Judgments
and Calamities never came upon a Nation or People, till they were first ushered
in by Sin and Iniquity; nor is it possible to give one instance of the escape
of any Nation where Sin and Iniquity abounded. God does sometimes forbear till
the Cup of their Iniquities be full, as he said of the Amorites; but when
People have filled up the Cup of their Iniquities, then God is ever sure to
make them drink of the Cup of his Wrath. Nor did number, or multitude, or
greatness, or splendour ever prevail with God for an Act of Indemnity, where the
continuance and multiplication of Sin cried for Judgment, as may be evidenced
in the old World, in Sodom and Gomorrah, in Pharaoh, and Nebuchadnezzar,
Nineveh and Babylon, and several others which may be drawn from Sacred and
Profane History. Nay, near Alliance and Relation to himself never made any be
spared, as appears from this instance of the Jews and Israelites. Indeed God
has many Favors in Readiness to bestow upon his People, but they are such, as
are worthy of his holy Nature, but to grant them an Indulgence in Sin, is
inconsistent with his essential Holiness, and therefore the most honorable
Relation of being the peculiar People of God, as all truly Catholic Churches
are, is so far from securing of them against his Displeasure, that it gives his
People greater Cause to expect Judgments when they are guilty of Sin: As we may
learn from these Words, spoken by the Prophet Amos, You have Amos 3. 2.
I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore I will punish you for all
your Iniquities.

Judgments and Calamities, threatening a Nation, and impending over it, are
certain Declarations that Sin and Iniquity abound in it: And the abounding of
Sin and Iniquity, is a certain Prognostic that the Judgments of God are not
far off. These things mutually prove one another: If therefore we have Reason
to fear public Calamities, we have as much Reason to conclude that we are
great Sinners; if we see the public Body, whereof we are Members, sick and
wounded, we may easily guess the Cause of its Distemper; and if we discern a
general Corruption and Depravation of Manners, throughout the Kingdom, and
among all Ranks, without great Foresight we may foretell a Visitation of the
Divine Judgments. If the general Pulse of the Nation beats Vice and Sin, as it
is no great wonder we feel inward Pangs and Throws; so it needs no great Skill,
only a little Acquaintance with the Word of God, and the general Course of his
Providence, to declare that the Body will be seized with sore and dangerous
Fits, that it will be sadly tossed and shaken.

Sequitur superbos semper a tergo Deus. Secondly, we may observe hence, II.
People commonly are insensible of the Cause of their Evils.
how dull generally Men are in taking up the Cause of their Maladies and
Distempers. They easily perceive the Evils which touch them, but are not so
soon sensible of the Cause and Occasion, which make them groan longer under the
Distemper. Ephraim perceived his Sickness, Judah felt his Wound; their Senses
taught them both these, but they had not Understanding enough to discover,
whence these things came; they had no Sense of their Sins and Transgressions,
and were slow in considering that the Reason they were so pinched and infested,
was because they sinned and would not frame their Doings to turn unto their
God. And it is just so with the Generality of the World at this time. Men have
sense enough to perceive the outward Evils that are upon them, but scarce any
to discover the Hand which inflicts them, or the Cause which procures it. Touch
a Man in his Body, in his Fortune, or in any thing dear unto him, he will be
quickly sensible of it, and ready enough to complain: But there be few so wise,
as to acknowledge that the Root of the Matter is in themselves. People
ordinarily throw all the Blame of their Trouble from off themselves upon other
external things; he that is sick finds fault with his Diet, or his riding and
traveling unseasonably, and in unwholesome Weather; he that is wronged and
oppressed, charge and accuses such and such Persons, as perhaps are the
immediate Instruments thereof; in times of public Calamity and Disasters, all
the Talk is, how they began, and after what manner they proceeded; if the
Plague enter a Place, the Inhabitants curiously enquire about the first Person
who brought it in; if Fire take hold of a City, the Discourse is about the
small Occasion of its beginning, and the Unwariness of the Servant who kindled
it. Statesmen and Politicians resolve Wars, civil Broils, and Factions,
Oppressions, and other things of the like Nature, into Political Causes:
Philosophical Heads exercise their Wits in finding out natural Reasons of
Famine, Pestilence, immoderate Drought, excessive Rains, and other such
Judgments, according to the uncertain Hypothesis of some vain System they have
imbibed. And thus Men's Thoughts are carried off, from the serious Consideration
of the true, that is, the moral and meritorious Cause of all the Evils that are
upon them. They reflect not upon their own Sins, nor the Sins of the Land they
live in. They say not with David, Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand
presses me sore, there is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine Psalm. 38.
2.
anger; neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin. For mine
iniquities are gone over mine head, as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for
me. It Is long before People come to lay to Heart, that the Evils which are upon
them, are because the Lord has a controversy with the Inhabitants of the
land; because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land;
that it is by reason of swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and
committing adultery, and other abominations, that the land is made to mourn. To
take only Notice of the immediate Instruments of our Trouble, without enquiring
into this chief Cause thereof, is just but to act like Children, and to do what
the common Rabble do at public Executions, who only consider how the condemned
Person is led to the Scaffold, and after what manner the Executioner proceeds
to put him to Death, never reflecting upon the Sentence of the Judge, nor the
Transgression of the Law, which yet ought chiefly to be considered. Hear ye
therefore the Rod, and him who has appointed it; as ye feel the Evils which
are laid upon you, so call to mind from whom they come, and for what Cause they
are sent, otherways Ease and Relief is not to be expected. It Is necessary in
order to the removing of bodily Distempers, that there be first a Knowledge of
the Nature and Cause of the Disease, without this there can be no Cure, all
Applications are ineffectual; even so the first step to remove the Wrath of
God, and the sad Effects of it, is to find out those Sins and Transgressions
which have occasioned it: till this be done, it is in vain to struggle, and to
use Endeavors for the saving our selves; it is but as the common Proverb is, a
striving against a stream, which is too strong for us.

And thus I am brought to a third Observation, III. The common Custom of
Mankind is, to run to second Causes, before they address to God.
and it is this, That when God is visiting with his Judgments, people are
seldom so wise, as to address themselves first to God; but they ordinarily in
the first Place, have recourse to second Causes and humane Endeavors, which
tends but to their greater ruin and mischief. Ephraim and Judah here, instead
of making Application to God, sent to the King of Assyria, and addressed to
King Iareb. So when Sickness comes upon Men, the Physician is sent for, and he
is required to use his Skill, and to apply his Remedies; and with the Woman in
the Gospel, who had the bloody Issue, they seek not out for Christ, till they
have spent much upon the Physicians to no purpose, and that their Art and Skill
has been quite baffled. When Men are oppressed and born down, all their Thoughts
are, how to get an Interest in some great Personage; and engage him to espouse
their Cause, and thereby counter-balance the Power of the Person that oppresses
them. In a word, every one considers the nearest and likeliest Method and
Means, of procuring to themselves Ease and Relief; and when they have
discovered the same, they are wholly bent on it; and the Eagerness of Men to be
saved by those means, which their own Prudence has suggested, keeps them from
exercising that Trust and Dependence on God which is necessary. Men have not
Faith enough ordinarily to commit their cause entirely to God, and they walk so
much by Sight, that they can put little Trust, where they see no visible Means;
and because ordinarily God works by rational means, and has established in the
World a settled Order, and a Series of Causes, for producing certain Effects,
they too much imagine that these things work necessarily, and that they cannot
be disappointed of the Effects, while they make use of the Means and Causes
which ordinarily produce them: Whereas all things depend upon the Blessing of
God, and only work and take effect as he is pleased to give the Word unto them.
I do not say that prudent Means and Methods should be neglected, or that Men
should expect Deliverances miraculously when these other may take Place: But
that in seeking to save our selves from any Danger or Judgment, we ought to
apply our selves to God, and as we ought never to use any means for our safety,
but what is lawful; so in the Use of the most lawful and most proper means, we
ought to depend entirely upon God for the Success, else we may expect these
Means to be blasted, or what is worse to turn to our Hurt and greater Damage:
As we see here befell the Israelites, for the King of Assyria whom they sent to,
not only could not heal them and cure them, but he brought upon them more
Trouble and Mischief than what they sought him to prevent. Cursed is the Man
that Jer. 17. 5.
trusts in Man, makes Flesh his Arm; and whose heart departs from the
Lord, for he shall be like the Heath in the desert, and shall not see when good
comes. All humane Helps without the Lord's Assistance, are but as the Staff of
Egypt, a broken Reed whereon if a Man lean, it will go into his hand and pierce
it. Winds, Rains, and Storms, the Malice of Men and Devils, and whatever
infests Mankind, are all at God's Command and under his Power: They break not
out till he give the word; they are his Officers sent forth to execute his
Pleasure: And as they go when they are sent, so they will not retire till he
call them back. It Is both Folly and Treachery to tamper with the Officers and
Soldiers of the King, without seeking to satisfy the King himself. If People
be at War with some mighty King, they cannot expect to be freed from the
Invasion of his Armies by Land, or from the pilfering and robbing of his
Pirates by Sea: Peace should be first sought with the King himself, and then
these other Molestations will cease of their own accord. It was wisely as well
as devoutly done by Hezekiah, when he received the threatening Letter of
Rabshakeh, he went to the House of the Lord, and spread it before the Lord, and
prayed; he first tried to secure God's Favor, knowing that if he found
Acceptance with him, Rabshakeh could not hurt him, and that all his Brags and
Boasts would prove but empty puffs, which made a great noise, but could do him
no harm. There is certainly no Security, but in the Favor of God; And let none
Pride themselves, that whatever fall out they have this, and the other thing to
lean to, and upon this account think themselves safe enough; for if they lean
not to God, and make not him their Friend, all their other props will fail; and
they shall receive but the surer and the greater fall, the more they have
trusted to them. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye scornful Isai. 28. 14,
Men; who say, we have made a covenant with death, and with hell we are at
agreement, when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come
unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our
selves: Behold, says the Lord, judgment will I lay to the line, and
righteousness to the plummet; and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies,
and the waters shall overflow the hiding place, and your covenant with death
shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the
overflowing scourge shall pass through, then shall ye be trodden down by it.
When a man's ways please the Lord, then and then only, he makes his enemies to
be at peace with him. Which leads me to,

A Fourth Observation from the Text, IV. How Peace with God may be obtained.
concerning the Terms and Condition on which we may make our Peace with God, to
wit, the acknowledging our Offenses, and the seeking his Face. By this means,
we may both prevent Evils threatened, and remove them when they are inflicted.
As Sin brings on the Rod, and as it is continued to make Men sensible of their
Sins; so it is laid aside when they have learned a due sense of them, and do
unfeignedly repent of them: For God takes no pleasure in the death and
destruction of sinners, he does not grieve willingly, nor afflict the children
of men. He would spare the Rod, if Men would be Dutiful without it; and even
when he is provoked to lay it on, he still retains the natural bowels of
affection, which a Father has toward his Children, and would be glad of the
occasion of treating them more gently. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How
shall I deliver thee, Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set
thee as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together. And when he is here in our Text threatening to withdraw himself, you
see he limits it to the time they should acknowledge their offense, and seek
his face: thereby declaring that whenever they did that, he would return to
them, and with his Presence bring along all those comforts and good things they
had been deprived of. The Men of Nineveh, when they were threatened with an
utter overthrow, and that within Forty Days too, they nevertheless builded
themselves hope upon this merciful Nature of God, and his readiness to be
reconciled to Men when they are reconciled to their Duty; and therefore having
proclaimed a Fast, and enjoined Repentance, they comforted themselves with
these words, saying to one another, Who can tell if God will turn and repent,
and turn from his fierce anger, that we perish not. And that any Nation may
take Courage though never so much threatened, that there is no reason to despair,
but certain ground of hope, if we forsake our Sins and turn to the Lord, is
clear from Ier. xviii. 7. where God says, At what instant I shall speak,
concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down,
and to destroy it, if that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them: From
which he makes this Inference, now therefore go to, speak to the men of Judah,
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, thus says the Lord, behold, I
frame evil against you, and devise a device against you, return ye now every
one from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings good. In Levit. xxvi.
God says there to his People, if when these Plagues there mentioned are upon
them, they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers,
with their trespasses which they trespassed against me, and that also they have
walked contrary unto me, if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and
they then accept of the Punishment of their iniquity, then will I remember my
Covenant with Jacob, and also my Covenant with Isaac, and also my Covenant with
Abraham will I remember, and I will remember the Land. But he says also in the
same Chapter, If ye will not be reformed by me by these things but will walk
contrary unto me, then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will Punish you
yet seven times more for your sins, Verse. 23, 24.

Now to draw to a close, let us make V. The Application.
an Application of all. We have discovered, the Cause of all our Maladies and
Diseases, and the true proper way of curing them; what remains then, but that
we presently with all possible care and speed, look to our selves, and take
that course which is absolutely necessary To private Persons.
for our safety. If there be any particular Persons here, groaning under the
weight of any trouble, diseased in Body, or distressed in Fortune, or any other
ways afflicted; Let me beseech them, as they wish their own well, to search
freely their ways, and to labor to find out that accursed thing which they are
guilty of, and which provokes God's Anger against them: And when they have
found their guilt, let me also beseech them not to hide the same, by excusing
and extenuating it; but to make an humble and ingenuous Confession unto God,
and to testify an unfeigned Repentance, by a sincere care to bring forth the
fruits meet for Repentance; Let them rectify what they have done amiss, and
make an amends for their past Negligence, by an exact Diligence hereafter to
keep all the Commandments of God: Which if they do, I may assure them that God
will no longer hide his Face and Favor from them; he will no more frown, but
smile, and give them comfortable words, that they may be made to rejoice for
the days wherein they have seen Affliction.

In the next place, I would make Application, To the public state of the
Nation.
to the public State of this Nation and Kingdom, whereof we are Members, and
in whose welfare Religion and Interest oblige us to be concerned. I think it
needs surprise none, if I say, That God is angry with us, and that his
judgments are hanging over these Lands, for who is so blind as not to see it?
The present bad Harvest is one instance: the Evil threatened in the Tenth Verse,
we may say, is literally like to be inflicted upon us, He is pouring down his
wrath upon us by water; which threatens to wash away the Food both of Man and
Beast. What other Calamities are impending either on Church or State, I leave
to the Consideration of wise Persons. But without danger, or the imputation of
indiscretion, I may bid you read the Sins of the Land, and by that foresee what
is to be feared. It would be no great stretch, though I should offer to draw a
Parallel betwixt the Sins that abound amongst us, and those of Judah and Israel
complained of in this Prophecy; and would one charge the several Ranks and
Orders amongst us, with the same Faults our Prophet lays upon the Priests, the
Rulers, and Princes and People of his time, no great Injury would be done to
Truth: But such an unusual freedom, perhaps would not be well taken, especially
from a Stranger. But certainly it is a Kindness to give warning of a common
Danger, and it is the Duty of all to provide for our common Safety. Though we
would flatter our selves, it would not go better with us. Was Judah and Israel
punished because they would not frame their doings to turn unto the Lord, and
do we think to Escape? If we imitate their Sins, is there not reason to fear a
being made to share in the like Judgments? Is God arisen to Judgment? Is he
going through the World with the Rod of his Wrath in his hand, visiting Nations
for their Iniquities: and do we think that we shall not have our turn? That he
will pass by us, when we are as guilty as any other? No, so long as Sin thus
continues and increases amongst us, it will never be well with us; our state
shall still move from evil to worse. If then we would either prevent the Evils
which are yet a coming, or heal the Wounds already received, let us join our
Endeavors to stop the Current of Sin and Iniquity, and to cleanse the Land of
the Abominations that are amongst us. It avails little to apply external
Plasters while the Arrow's Head sticks in the Wound. In this, and the former
Ages, the People of these Lands have been ever crying out of Grievances, but
they have had little of the Spirit of Discerning, to find out the great Cause
and Ground of them, viz. Their Sins and Transgressions against God; For which,
if they had heartily grieved, they had never had so much matter of making other
Complaints. In our Fathers days, all the Fault was laid upon the Government,
and Governors in Church and State, which through the instigation of Factious
and Seditious Men, made People restless until they had overturned the
Government, and thrust the chief Ruler, and perhaps the best of Men, not only
from his Throne, but out of the World in a most barbarous manner: But as this
increased their Guilt, so it did not heal their Sores, nor ease their Pain;
they rather felt more smart and grief, which disposed them to seek again unto
David their King. And if together with that, the People had seriously sought
the Lord also, all had been well. But alas, that is yet to do! whatever Change
and Revolution we have suffered, there has never been cordial Endeavors, to
introduce that best and most desirable Change from Vice to Virtue, from Sin to
Holiness and Godliness. Blessed be God there has been a Reformation in our
Doctrine, and our Worship has been rectified and purged from the Superstition
and Idolatry which had crept into it, through the Ignorance and unwariness of
Men: But to our shame it must be said, that our Practice and Conversation is
not Reformed, but continues much the same, and perhaps in some things worse
than what was before that other happy Reformation of Doctrine and Worship came
in. There was certainly reason to descry and run down the Hypocrisy and forms
of Godliness fashionable in the late times, but it had been more commendable to
have endeavored with greater Vigor to set up the Life and Power thereof. And
would to God we were at last sensible of our Error and Omission, and convinced
that hitherto we have very unskilfully set about the curing our Maladies. O
that all who profess the same Truth, would be persuaded to lay aside all other
Contests, and to contend together for maintaining the Purity of the Faith, and
joining therewith the Purity of Life and Practice. If we would thus by true
Piety, and sincere Obedience return unto the Lord, he would return unto us, and
put us in a happy and glorious state; as he has torn, so he would heal us; as
he has smitten, so he will bind us up, that we might live joyfully in his
sight. But if this be neglected or delayed, and if instead of this we take
Methods and Devices of our own for saving our selves. I dare not say what is to
be feared, Judgments of all sorts we may expect to be visited in our worldly
Concerns; and those two sadder Calamities which are mentioned, Amos viii. 11. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 11, 12. may be looked for, which God avert; Plead with your mother,
plead, says God by this Prophet, for she is not my wife, neither am I her
husband; let her therefore put away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her
adulteries from between her breasts, lest I strip her naked, and set her as in
the day she was born, and make her as a wilderness, and set her like a dry
land, and slay her with thirst. He that has an ear, let him hear what the
Spirit says unto the Churches.

Amen.
SERMON XIV. Preached at St. Giles Church in EDINBURGH, April 13. 1690.
MICAH VII. 8, 9. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall
arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. I will bear
the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead
my cause, and execute judgment for me: He will bring me forth to the light, and
I shall behold his righteousness.
THE Prophet speaks here in the The Occasion, Scope and Meaning of the Text.
Name of the Church, and with respect to her present Circumstances, and what
was shortly to befall her. Her present Condition was very sad and lamentable,
if you consider her inward State, there was no Health nor Soundness in her, but
much Disorder, Confusion, and Corruption, as is complained of throughout the
whole Book; but which is expressly declared and set forth in this Chapter, from
the First to the Sixth Verse. This Sickness and inward Distemper could not be
without grievous Pangs and Convulsive Fits: But besides, they were lying under
sad pressures from without; the Assyrians oppressed them, and by frequent
inroads, wasted their Wealth, and made great Devastations of their Country: The
Ten Tribes were already carried Captive, and the Captivity of the other Two,
together with the destruction of the glorious Temple of Solomon were
approaching. The Prophet being sensible of what had already happened, and
foreseeing by the Spirit what was to come, he does here, in the Name of the
Church obviate those Misconstructions Men would be ready to put on this her
deplorable Condition; and also instruct us how it was to be received and
entertained. The Idumeans, Chaldeans, and Babylonians, and other Enemies
without, who envied the former Prosperity of Israel, were glad at these
Disasters and Calamities which befell them, they rejoiced at their Misery; they
took occasion to mock them, saying, Where is now the God in whom they trusted,
who had saved them heretofore, and done so many great things for them in Egypt?
Thus in stead of fearing God, and trembling at his Judgments he had inflicted
on his own People for their Sins, they made them matter of profane Mirth and
Laughter; and not understanding the Wisdom and Justice of his Dispensations,
they even accused God himself, and darted up Blasphemous Speeches toward
Heaven. But the Prophet bids them here be sober, and advises them to moderate
their mirth, and to lay aside their profane and insulting humor: for things
would not always be at this pass, God would not always deal so roughly and
harshly with them; Experience taught them not to despair, but to hope for the
recovery of a better state: Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy; as if he had
said, Make not our Calamities and Disasters the subject of your Mirth and
Laughter, which should rather strike you with Dread and Fear, for if we the
peculiar People of God, whom he had chosen for himself, have suffered such
things because we sinned against him, what may ye expect who were never in
Covenant with him, and who have always provoked him? Neither insult over us as
if we were utterly and eternally ruined, and that it were impossible for us
ever to recover, so as to deserve any regard from you.

Common Humanity should teach People to pity one another, and to have
Compassion on the Miserable: And if ye consult Experience, it will show that
all Persons, and all things under the Sun are liable to changes; that there is
none so exalted, but he may be abased, nor any so low, but he may be exalted:

Nemo confidat nimium secundis,
Nemo desperet meliora lapsus.
None can secure his State, and therefore the most Happy and prosperous ought
not to brag; nor should the most abject and miserable despond and give over
hope. None stands so secure but he may catch a fall, nor is any fallen so low,
but God by his Providence is able to raise him up again.

And as for me (to go on with the Prophets words) when I fall I shall rise, or
as it may be rendered, though I fall I shall arise. As if he had said, Think not
my case desperate, or that I have so fallen that I cannot recover; I am not
destitute of Hope, for as low and miserable as I am at present, my God abides
still, who is Almighty to save, whose Hand is strong and always ready to
relieve the distressed. It Is true, he is at present angry with me, but his
anger will not last always, he does not cast off for ever; His Mercy is
everlasting, and I know his Promise cannot fail, which is, If they break my
Statutes and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their Transgression
with the Rod and their Iniquity with Stripes, nevertheless my loving kindness
will I not take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. I have had often
experience of this kind dealing of his, I have fallen and I have risen again.

It Is so in the Original, and though there be nothing more ordinary than the
promiscuous using the Preterite and Future Tenses, so that our Translators
might very well render it here in the Future, yet some render it, I have
fallen, I have risen, as if the Jewish Church, or the Prophet in her Name, had
gathered Hope from Experience, and said to her insulting Enemy, Conclude not me
utterly lost and irrecoverable, because God has brought me low; look back to
the times past, and consider that God never left me to perish, that as he
visited me with his Rod, so he always showed me his Salvation. I trust he will
do so now, and in the mean time when or while I sit in Darkness, the Lord will
be a Light unto me. Darkness in Scripture language signifies Trouble and
Affliction, and Light is put for Joy and Comfort. And so the Prophet by this
Expression declares his assurance, that God would afford his people seasonable
tokens of his favor, even in the midst of their Tribulations, for the comfort
of their Hearts, and the support of their Minds, until the time of their
Deliverance come. Now the Prophet having thus answered the profane Scoffs and
Mockings of the Heathens about them,

In the next place, he draws his Peoples thoughts more home, and requires
them to look into themselves, and to consider their own hearts and ways,
instead of these mis-constructions of the Divine Judgments, by Men unacquainted
with the ways of God: And whatever their Enemies said, he himself resolves and
teaches the rest of his People, to take all these Calamities and Afflictions
from God, as the Effects of his Displeasure, and the Punishment of their Sins,
to which they should submit, and which they ought to bear patiently. I will,
says he, bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him.
And as their Calamities were thus to be received and entertained, so he
encourages to it, by a Promise that they should be but for a time, and that
thereafter God would plead their cause, and execute judgment for them, that is,
Defend and vindicate them, right their wrongs, repay their injuries, and do
justice on those who had been the Instruments of their Misery, he would set
them at Liberty, and restore them to their Prosperity and Glory, which is meant
by bringing them to the Light. And then to their great comfort and joy, they
should behold, and understand his righteousness; that is, That he is just and
righteous in all his ways, true and faithful in his promises, and wonderful in
all he does, as David said, I know, O Lord, that all thy judgments are right,
and that out of faithfulness thou have afflicted me, Psalm. cxix. 75.

Thus I have explained and cleared the Text, and shown you the Occasion, Sense,
and Scope thereof. Observations from the Text.


I proceed next, to draw such Observations and Instructions as the words
afford, and as are useful and proper for our consideration. I. To rejoice at
the Afflictions and Calamities of others, is both the Sign and Effect of a
Profane Ungodly Spirit.


And First, To rejoice at the Calamities and Afflictions of others, and to
insult over them who are in Misery, is a sign of a Profane and Ungodly Spirit.
They who rejoiced at the Calamities of the Israelites, were the Idumeans,
Chaldeans, and Babylonians, who were no greater Enemies to them, than they were
to God and the true Religion. And Psalm. lxix. 26. among other Characters of the
Wicked, this is one, That they persecute him whom thou have smitten, and talk
to the grief of those whom thou have wounded. When Job declares his Integrity,
he gives this as one proof thereof, Job 31. 29, 30.
That he rejoiced not at the destruction of him that hated him, nor lift up his
soul when evil found him. Neither (says he) have I suffered my mouth to sin,
by wishing a curse to his soul. To make God's Judgments on others, though
Enemies, a matter of Laughter, does very much bewray a want of the Spirit of
God, and is inconsistent both with the true Fear of God, and that Love and
Concernedness for others, which Religion requires and inspireth. They who truly
fear God, will tremble to see him Angry; though it be not against themselves but
others. When the Destruction of the Wicked is foretold, it is said, That the
righteous shall Psalm. 52. 7.
see and fear. And accordingly the Prophet Habakkuk foreseeing the Evils and
Calamities that were to light upon the Tents of Cusham, and the Land of Midian,
was so far from rejoicing and insulting thereat, that he tells us, when I
heard, my belly trembled, my lips quivered Hab. 3. 16.
at the voice, rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my flesh.
Indeed it is added in the forecited place, That the righteous shall also laugh:
And Psalm. lviii. 10. it is said, the righteous shall rejoice when he sees the
vengeance. But hereby is meant, that as the righteous is careful to remark all
the Acts of the Divine Providence; and in particular, his exemplary Punishments
on notoriously wicked Persons, so he will Applaud the Justice and Equity of
them, and he will be glad to see such evident and convincing proofs of a Deity
and Providence, for silencing the Atheist, and restraining the wickedness of
men: though still his joy is mixed with a secret regret at the occasion, and
such an aweful apprehension of the Power and Justice of God, as forbids him to
mock at the Effects and Expressions of his Displeasure; Even as a wise and good
Citizen rejoiceth at the good Government of his City, and finds a satisfaction
in the procedure and execution of Justice, which are too grave and important to
be mocked at.

Again, the rejoicing at the Calamities of others is inconsistent with the
Spirit of Religion, which is a Spirit of Love and Humility, and which requires
the greatest Love and Sympathy, that can be among Men; its Precepts are, love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them that persecute you and despitefully use you. Rejoice with them
that rejoice, and weep with them that weep. If thine enemy hunger feed him, if
he thirst give him drink. Now how little do they observe these Precepts, and
how little have they of that Spirit which enjoins them, who can contrive and
work Mischief to their Brethren, and when it falls on them behold it with
Pleasure? We may say to such, what our Savior said to his Disciples who would
have been calling for Fire from Heaven on those who would not receive them, you
know not what manner of Spirit you are of. The Miseries and Distresses of
others call for Pity and Compassion; and one must have put off very much of the
Man, who draws Pleasure from the Miseries and Afflictions of other Men, though
they be Enemies. Our Savior knew the Wickedness of Jerusalem, and that he was
to be crucified therein, yet as he drew nigh to it, he wept over it by Reason
of those sad Calamities which were coming upon it. It was David's Interest that
Saul was dead, yet he did not rejoice at his Death, but because the manner
thereof was deplorable he mourned for him. As it makes Herodias infamous that
she rejoiced to see the Head of John Baptist in a Charger; so it is recorded to
the Commendation of Alexander and Julius Coesar, that neither of them insulted
over the Defeat and Distress of their Enemies; the first was touched with
Compassion, when Darius his Mother, Wife and Children, were taken Prisoners,
and brought to him, and afterward when Darius himself was killed. And the
other wept when Pompey's Head was brought to him. I know some charge these
Tears of Coesar with Hypocrisy, seeing he was the Man who pursued Pompey to
Death; but who knows, but the Bowels of Nature at that time overcame his
Ambition and other Passions.

Thirdly, They who insult and rejoice in this wise, are ignorant of themselves,
and also of the End of these Divine Judgments, they cannot know they are
Sinners, and that others are so and so punished in their sight, to fill them
with Fear and to lead them to Repentance, otherwise they would make other Uses
thereof, and would behave themselves otherwise. When a Father chastises a
Child, is it to give Mirth to the rest? Or is it not, that they may stand in
Awe of him, and forbear those things which may bring the Rod on their own Back.
When any Criminal is laid hold on, and brought to public Punishment, should
they who are equally guilty, stand by and laugh either at the Misfortune of
their Fellow, or the Execution of Justice? What Stupidity were this! Should
they not take Warning and Fear, and forsake those Ways which are attended with
such Shame and Pain! When some told our Savior of those Galileans whose Blood
Pilate mingled with there Sacrifices, he answered them; Suppose ye these
Galileans were Sinners above all others, because they suffered such things, I
tell you nay, but except ye Repent ye shall all likewise perish. And in Truth
they who set light of the Afflictions of others, and entertain the Rods on
other Men's Backs with Scorn and Derision, shall hardly escape themselves. Laugh
no Man to scorn in the bitterness Eccl. 7. 11.
of his Soul, for there is one who humbles and exalts, says the wise Son of
Syrach. And Solomon, whose Words have yet greater Weight, says, whosoever mocketh
the poor, reproacheth his Maker, Prove. 17. 5.
and he that is glad at Calamities shall not be unpunished. So the Prophet
Habakkuk says* That he was humbled at these Disasters of Midian and Cushan,
that he himself might rest in the day of trouble. Who wisely and seriously
consider the Instability of humane Affairs, will neither be lifted up with
their own Prosperity, nor will they insult over their Neighbors Misery: For
what is the ones Case to Day may be the others to Morrow. Who at present braves
it out with Pride and Scorn, may within a little time come to be contemptible.

Quem dies vidit veniens superbum, Seneca.

Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem,
Res Deus nostras celeri citatas turbine versat.
Secondly, We see here that the Church II. The Church and People of God, are
often visited with the Rod of Afflictions.
and People of God are often visited with the Rod of Afflictions. The Text
declares it, and if any Persons doubt it, let them read the History of the
Church, and they shall be fully convinced. As for the Jewish Church, 'twas
first sadly oppressed in Egypt, and thereafter for the space of forty Years,
'twas exercised in a barren Wilderness with diverse kinds of Afflictions. After
they came to Canaan, during the time of the Judges, they were often brought
low. They had Peace a part of David's, and all Solomon's Life; but afterward
it was continually interrupted, till they were carried Captive to Babylon. When
they were brought back, and restored to their own Land, they were not settled
without hot Debates and Contests with their Neighbors; and after their
Settlement, they had severe Wars, and were kept in continual Exercise with
diverse sore Troubles until Christ, as appears from Josephus and the History of
the Maccabees. And as for the Christian Church, Trouble sprang up with it, and
continually attended it; for the space of Three Hundred Years, it suffered Ten
severe General Persecutions, besides many sad particular Conflicts. And though
after that the Emperors and Rulers turned Christian; there was no general
Persecution for the Name of Christ, and the Sake of the Gospel; yet there was
no particular Church or People without the Rod of Correction: They have been
visited either with Foreign Wars, or Intestine Divisions; with Pestilence or
Famine, or some other Calamity. No Nation or People can boast of an Immunity
from such Disasters, but for the space of One Hundred Years. As Man in his
private Capacity, so States and Societies are born to Trouble: Nor is an
Exemption from the same among the Privileges of the People of God. The Roman
Church makes Temporal Felicity one of the Notes of the true Church. But her
Infallibility appears as little here as in other things: For as it is no where
promised in Scripture, so no Church can de facto show it; She her self would
fail if she were put to prove her self the true Church by this, for where was
her Temporal Felicity, when Rome it self was sacked, and the Pope shut up in
Prison. Calamities and Afflictions do indeed indicate that they who suffer them
are Sinners: But they do not prove them to be Reprobates and Cast-aways, for
the People of God may expect them as well as others; nay, they may look for
them more than others, because God is more jealous of them, and his glory is
more concerned to Punish Sin in them.

Thirdly, We may observe here, that III. When God is provoked to punish, he
does not lay aside his Kindness and good Will.
even when God is most provoked, to lay on his afflicting Hand, and to Punish,
he does not forbear to show Kindness: And that in the extremest Misery, there
is still ground to Hope in God for a Deliverance. None ever provoked God more,
than the People of Israel and Judah in the days to which this Prophecy referrs,
nor did any Peoples case look more desperate than theirs, when carried Captive
by the King of Assyria: And yet you see here, that the Prophet in regard to
them then, says, when I fall, I shall rise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord
shall be a light unto me. As God casts down with one Hand, he lifts up with
another.

Soepe premente Deo fert Deus alter opem. Thus when he cast the Israelites out
of their own Land, he made them to find favor with the People among whom they
were dispersed. God wisely tempereth his Punishments, so that while they
vindicate his Holiness and Justice, they also serve to manifest his Mercy and
Good Will. God has no pleasure in Wickedness, and therefore when he sees it,
he punishes it: But all his hatred being against the Crime and not the Person,
therefore he saves and comfort them, and makes their very Afflictions tend
to their Good, unless they have made themselves altogether incorrigible, and
have hardened their Hearts against all his Methods, and then indeed he gives
them up to Destruction. When he sees it necessary to withdraw external and
worldly Comforts, he doubles inward and spiritual Consolations. So the Prophet
Isaiah having denounced Judgments against Israel, he adds, And therefore will
the Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be
exalted, that he may have mercy upon you. And though the Lord give you the
Isai. 30. 18.
bread of adversity, and the water of Affliction; yet shall not thy Teachers be
removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers; and
thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, this is the way walk ye in
it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left. The felicity
of the Soul is to be preferred to the welfare of the Body; and Spiritual
Consolations to Worldly Advantages: Now because ordinarily People are
insensible of the former, and indisposed to receive them while the latter
abound with them; Therefore he takes away this, that they may seek the other,
and be capable of them; so that we really gain by our losses, and our light
affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory. Thus it is said, Hos. ii. 14. Therefore behold, I will
allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her,
and I will give her her vineyards from thence, and the valley of Achor for a
door of hope, and she shall sing there as in the days of her youth, and as in
the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt. These words show that God
comfort his People in their Afflictions, and therefore afflicts them that
he may make them sensible of his Kindness, and have occasion to speak
comfortably to them: As also that in due time he will deliver them, and make
them to rejoice for the days wherein they have been afflicted. It is good that
a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. There is
always ground to hope, and never reason to despair, be our condition never so
low, perplexed and troubled: For he is Omnipotent in Power, and Infinite in
Goodness, and can do for us above what we either can ask or think. When all
Humane help fails, there is help in God, and then he uses to help and
deliver, when relief can be expected no where else, that we may know it his
doing, and that he only may have the Praise and Glory. Thus he delivered
Joseph, when all the World had forgotten him. He saved Moses when his Parents
could hide him no longer. He redeemed his People, when Pharaoh exercised the
greatest cruelty toward them; and always when they were lowest and most
oppressed by their Enemies, he raised up Deliverers for them, and he returned
this Captivity when there was least appearance of it, and when it was not so
much as thought upon, except by some few who remembered and believed the Promise
by the Mouth of Jeremiah, Chap. xxv. 12. So likewise when the Persecutions
against the Christians came to be bitterest, he always brought about a
mitigation and relentment. And when that most severe one under Dioclesian and
his Colleagues, had proceeded so far that 'twas thought the Name of
Christianity was quite extinct, and accordingly Trophies were erected for it;
he first turned the Heart of Constantius Chlorus, to protect Christians, and
thereafter raised up Constantine the Great, who not only gave them full
liberty, but made the Christian Religion the professed Religion of the Empire.

Fourthly, We learn hence how to IV. The Right uses which people ought to make
of Calamities and Afflictions.
receive, how to entertain, and how to improve all those Calamities and
Afflictions which befall us, so that they may turn to our good, and become
means of reconciling us to God. The Prophet teaches us this* by his own
example, when he says, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him: Which teaches us, first, to receive all our Evils and 1.
To acknowledge God the Author of them.
Troubles as from the hand of God. And indeed there is no evil in the city
which the Lord has not done, Amos iii. 6. Who ever or what ever be the
Instrument, he is the Author: He cannot indeed be the Author of the Evil of
Sin, but he is always that of Punishment: He orders, disposes, and determines
all that falls out in the World. What ever disposition there be in Men,
Devils, or any Creature to Mischief, yet they cannot stir or move but when they
are allowed, and as they are directed: As in a well-disciplined Army, the
Soldiers go not out on any Expedition, but when they are commanded. So Joseph
ascribed to God his being sold into Egypt, though it was through the Malice
and Envy of his Brethren. And Job acknowledged God the Author of all his
Disasters, though some were committed by the Sabeans and Chaldeans; The Lord,
says he, gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.

Secondly, As we are here taught to acknowledge 2. To own Sin to be the Cause
and Occasion of them.
God the Author of our Afflictions and Calamities, so our Sin's the cause and
occasion of them. When God corrects man, it is always for iniquity; For he is
more righteous than to punish when there is no fault: He does not grieve the
Children of men willingly, nor afflict them; and therefore when he does it, it
is because they have sinned against him, and consequently they who are
afflicted should acknowledge their Sins which have kindled the indignation of
the Lord against them: So does Daniel, Chapter ix. 5, 6, 7, 8.

Thirdly, To bear the Indignation of 3. To suffer them Patiently.
the Lord, is to fuffer patiently without murmuring. A thing may be imposed on
a Man, but he cannot be said to bear it who does it not willingly, and he does
not bear it willingly, who frets, murmurs and complains. And why should a
living Man complain, a Man for the Punishment of his Sins? Would it be
reasonable in a Criminal to accuse or murmur against the Judge for giving out
Sentence, when it was yet less than his Crimes deserve; Now certainly no Man
suffers or can suffer in this life so much as his Sins merit. Furthermore,
says the Apostle, we had fathers of our flesh who corrected us, and we gave
them reverence; shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of
spirits and live? Heb. xii. 9.

Fourthly, To bear the Indignation of 4. To repent of Sin and to sorsake it.
the Lord because of Sin, implies a hearty grief for it, and a real turning
from it. He that is sensible that the Evils he suffers, are the Effects of
God's displeasure for his Sins, cannot but have a remorse for them; and if he
have a true remorse for them, he will also abandon them, and show all care to
serve God better. Until we do so, we never accept the Punishment of our Sins.
They despise the Rod, who do not amend, neither become more dutiful by it. And
such shall bring greater Punishment upon themselves. But they who thus receive
and use their Chastisement, shall be eased and delivered: He will plead their
cause, and execute Judgment for them, and bring them forth to the light. Humble
your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in
due time, 1 Pet. v. 6.

The last Observation I shall draw from V. The Judgments of God, when rightly
understood, do declare his Righteousness.
the words, is, That when these Divine Dispensations, I mean, the Afflictions
and Calamities which befall his People, are well considered and rightly
understood, there will be found much Righteousness in them. There is too much
proneness in Men to censure the Actions of Providence, which speaks out the
greatest rashness and presumption imaginable: See Enquiry into the Nature, etc.
of Faith. Essay 5th.
For what are we? Where is either our Authority or Capacity, that we should
take upon us to canvass the Actions of the Almighty, or to rectify the
Contrivances and Determinations of Infinite Wisdom! A Child is fitter to pass
Judgment on the actings of a wise understanding Man, and a dull Country Clown
may with less arrogance examine the Maxims of a Matchiavel, and other famous
Politicians; Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right! said Abraham.
Certainly he cannot but do it, he can do nothing amiss: But indeed to
illustrate this, and to make out the Righteousness of his particular
Providence, is for the most part above Human reach: For as the Psalmist says,
Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the great Waters, and thy footsteps are
not known. O the depths, says the Apostle, of the riches both of the Wisdom
and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past
finding out! But when they are found and discovered, they will appear most
Righteous. He has made every thing beautiful in his time, says Solomon, also
he has set the world in their hearts, so that no man can find out the work
that God makes from the beginning to the end, Eccl. iii. 11. Look the best
piece of Arras on the backside, and its handsomness will not appear: Nor will
the beauty of the finest Picture be known, unless it be set in a due light. So
we cannot understand the Righteousness of God's Providence, without knowing the
reason and ends thereof. And these are often hid from us, till the event
declare them; and then we are forced to approve and applaud what before we were
ready to condemn. As Fines, Imprisonments, and other Punishments are necessary
to a Commonwealth, so Calamities, Troubles, and Afflictions are now necessary
to the World. By them God keeps up his Authority, defends his Laws, curbs Sin,
prevents some from going astray, and reclaims others who have already erred
from the ways of his Commandments. Hereby he exercises his Peoples Virtue,
Integrity, Faith, Patience, and other Graces, and makes them to acquire the
Growth, Stature, Vigor, and Understanding of perfect Men, which they would not
do if softness and ease and plenty were always indulged them. As Winds serve to
purify the Air, and Frost, and Snow, and Rain, to moisten and fatten the
Earth, that it may be fruitful; so God sends Calamities and Afflictions, that
they who are barren may be made to bear fruit, and that others may bring forth
more fruit. If an ignorant and unskilful Person saw a Gardener pruning his
Trees, and lopping off the Branches with Axes and Knives, he would perhaps
suspect him of madness, or think he intended the destruction of the Garden:
Whereas he thereby prevents their overgrowing and undoing one another, and
renders his Garden both more comely and more profitable. So God by Afflictions
prunes his People, he keeps down those Corruptions and Disorders which
otherwise would break out amongst them, and disposes them to bear proper fruit
in their season. It is good for me that I was afflicted, said David. The
Psalmist was once tempted to think that God was unkind to his Church and
People, because he afflicted them: But on second thoughts he checks himself,
and concludes, that truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean
heart. That is such dealing with his People do not prove that he has no
kindness for them: For he is still good to them, and their Afflictions testify
it, and such as are of a clean heart shall certainly find it so.

Now seeing these things are so, let us VI. Application.
not complain of the present Providence of God; let us not murmur against, nor
bear impatiently those Evils which are upon us: For we have truly sinned
against God, and he does justly punish us, whatever may be said of many of the
Instruments of our Trouble and Calamity. I must not flatter you, certainly our
Princes, our Nobles and Great Ones, the Pastors and People, and all Ranks
amongst us, have corrupted themselves, and done wickedly, and therefore God
has justly brought Evil upon our Land: And they who have smarted by this
Revolution, have suffered justly at the hands of God. Let us therefore humble
our selves before him, acknowledge our Offense, and the Justice and
Righteousness of his Judgments, and then he will be ready to plead our Cause. I
beseech you, in the words of Hosea; O Israel! return unto the Lord thy God, for
thou have fallen by thine iniquity, take with you words, and turn to the Lord,
say unto him, take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will we
render the Calves of our Lips; and then we shall hear him saying, I will heal
your backsliding, I will love them freely; for mine anger is turned away from
him. And as he says in another place, Come and let us return unto the Lord,
for he has torn, and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up.

And as this is the only proper Advice for our selves, so I would advise those
to whom the present times seem a little more favorable, I mean, our Brethren
of the Presbyterian Party, whom I call Brethren, though their usage and
treatment of us have showed them Enemies, seeing they have overthrown the
Church, and treated her Bishops and Priests with Contumely and Reproach; I say,
I would advise them not to be over vain and confident, for they know not what a
day may bring forth.

To rejoice at our Affliction, and to insult over our Misery, does not favor
much of Religion, to which they make so high pretenses: And unless they could
chain their present State by irreversible Decrees; there is as little Prudence
as Religion in despising us thus, and trampling so much upon us: For it may
come to pass, that they may yet be forced to seek shelter under the Shadow of
our Vine. They know it is not long since another Party, I mean those of the
Roman Communion, boasted and bragged, and aimed too at more than was fit or
meet, or what Discretion would have required, which brought on their Ruin, and
which has occasioned their Loss of that Peace which otherwise they might and
would have enjoyed. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall. I believe, that thou shall arise, O Lord, and have mercy upon Zion,
when the time to favor her, when the set time is come. Though our Case were
more desperate in the Eyes of the World, yet I would not despair, though we were
at a lower pass, and had fewer Friends, I yet would not let go my Hope; for God
is able to do for us above what we can ask or think. It is true, we have
provoked the Lord, and though he leave us we cannot complain; But we know also,
that our God is merciful, and with him is plenteous Redemption. He will not
cast off for ever. Therefore they who are his people should still hope in him.
And we are his People, as much for any thing I know, as any other Christians in
the World can pretend to be, for the Church of Scotland is a sound Member of
the Holy Catholic Church, professing the same Faith, that the Churches in the
most ancient and purest Ages did, and has the same Ministry and Government,
even that very Ministry and Government, which in those times were thought
necessary to the being of a Church; and in, and under that Ministry, we also
have the holy Sacraments purely administered, by which we are bound to God, by a
Covenant, which is more solemn and sacred than any of Man's inventing can be.
If therefore we return to the Lord, and acknowledge our Offenses, he will have
Mercy upon us, and surely visit us with his Salvation: For we are his Zion, a
part of his Catholic Church, or peculiar People, and he will not always be
angry with us. We may take up this Hope both by our own Experience, and the
Experience of others. Have we not fallen heretofore? And have we not risen
again? Have we not seen the Church invaded, her Essential Order and
Subordination demolished, her Pastors exiled, her Temples profaned, her Beauty
defaced! And have we not seen all these repaired and restored again? Is there
any thing impossible unto God? Can he not suddenly alter the securest State,
and put a stop to the most violent Career? ANNO 58, and 59, neither King nor
Royal Family durst be owned, and then it was a capital Crime to pray for them?
And yet you all know that within a Year or two, our King was wonderfully
restored without Sword and without Bow; and even they who had banished him were
forced to concur in the calling him back; This was the Lord's doing, and it was
then wonderful in our eyes. Now he that was able to do this, what is he not
able to do? The stone which the builders have refused, he has made become the
Head stone of the Corner. And so he may cause them who are at this time
rejected, as Gibeonites and Samaritans (so one was pleased lately to term the
Episcopal Clergy) to be courted and received as chief Builders of the Temple.
People may come to be convinced, that their present Prejudice and Aversion are
unreasonable, so that Love, Respect, and Good Will may take place instead
thereof. Now when those who have stated themselves our Enemies shall see this,
what will they say? Shall I say, as it follows our Text, Shame shall cover
them? God forbid! that we should wish any other Shame to them, than that of
Penitents and Converts, which is profitable for themselves, and acceptable unto
others. Far be it from us to wish or contrive any Persons Confusion, or to
harbor Thoughts of Revenge, we have not so learned Christ. God forbid! that we
should wish any thing, save the Glory of God, the Peace of the Church, and the
common Good of all; and in order unto these, the promoting of Truth, the
retrieving true Piety, the establishing a decent, reasonable Worship, and a
comely Order, and good Government. Though our Sins hinder these Blessings at
present; yet we hope God will sometime grant them. And that it may be so, let
us frequently address him by hearty and serious Prayers; and especially let us
study to please him by a holy and upright Conversation. Now our Lord Jesus
Christ himself, and God our Father, who has loved us, and has given us
everlasting Consolation and good Hope, through Grace, comfort your hearts, and
establish you in every good Word and Work.

Amen.
SERMON XV* Preached before the Clergy of DALKEITH.
1 TIMOTHY V. 23. Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy
stomach's sake, and thine often infirmities.
THE Letter of the Text needs not much Explication, nor has the Original any
thing more Emphatical or material than this Translation, so that any Analysis
that could be made of the Words, would be merely Grammatical; and therefore
I Will not trouble you with it (though it may be usual in these Exercises)
because it would be a very dry and bare Entertainment.

This Verse contains a particular Precept I. An Enquiry into the Coherence of
this Verse with the Context.
to Timothy, concerning his bodily Health, and so it is a matter of some
Difficulty, to find out the Reason why it comes in here, among so many grave
and important Directions about the Government of the Church, and especially why
it should be cast in before the 24th. and 25th. Verses, which have evidently a
Relation to the 22d. whereby the Apostles Discourse is interrupted, and what
should be joined together is divided asunder. The Opinions of some proposed and
rejected.


To take away this Difficulty, some fancy that the Order of the Apostles Words
has been changed, and misplaced by some ignorant and unwary Transcribers, which
is no ways to be admitted; nor can there be alleged any ancient Manuscript, or
modern Copy of a different Reading, from this which is used by us, upon which
such a Conceit may be grounded. The general current of Interpreters give no
other Reason, for the inserting this particular Precept among so many general
ones, but St. Paul's Friendship for Timothy, and the great Concernment he had
for one, who was so eminently useful to the Church of God. They do not allow it
any Connection with what goes before, and frankly acknowledge that it has no
manner of Relation to the Apostle's Purpose in this Place, and do think it a
vain thing to search for it, it being very usual with the Apostle to make
Digressions, to bring in things abruptly, to fall from his Purpose and to
return to it again; which the learned Daille justifies, saying, That it is the
way of Writing used by the other Divine and Sacred Authors of the Scripture,
and besides, that it is evident, that the best, and most ancient, and the most
admired Authors in the World have also practiced it, as may be seen in those
Works of theirs, which remain with us, wherein these great Men have not tied
themselves to the strict Rules of Logic and Rhetoric, invented by the
Weakness and Subtilty of modern Spirits, but do, in their Writings, especially
in their Epistles, keep almost the same Order, the same Air, and the same
manner of speaking which is usual in common Discourse and ordinary
Conversation, whereof Writings, especially the more familiar Epistolary sort of
Writings, should be the Image and Picture. In the Conferences and Discourses
which we hold viva voce, there is nothing more ordinary, than to break off the
Subject begun, and to reassume it again after some Pauses and Digressions. And
why should this Liberty be denied to those that write, particularly to those
that write Letters? But with a due Deference to this great Man's Judgment, I do
think, that a greater Coherence, betwixt Men's Thoughts and Words, may be looked
for, when they write, than when they speak. In Conference we are obliged to
follow others, and ordinarily the Company casts in something or other, which
necessarily draws us off the main Subject; whereas when one writes he has all
Freedom for his Thoughts, and it is not to be supposed, that a wise and knowing
Person will interrupt his Purpose, or cast in any thing in the handling of it,
which does not serve for an Illustration, the obviating an Objection, the
preventing a Mistake, or the like. And such Coherence must not always be
denied, when it is not apparent to every Reader. If we understood the Scripture
truly, and had a particular Knowledge of the Scope and Purpose of the several
parts thereof, I doubt not but there would be found a more admirable Union and
Coherence, than what is commonly believed, though it is chiefly to be regarded
for the great and important Truths delivered therein. Upon which very account
it is more to be valued, than all the most accurate and closely written Books
in the World. The true Reason why St. Paul gives this Advice in this place.


As to the present Text, I do not think it comes in so abruptly, and without
any Relation to what goes before, as is commonly alleged; for I would make it
to be delivered on this Occasion. In the former Verse St. Paul charge Timothy
to lay hands suddenly on no Man, that is, to beware of admitting any hastily
into the Office of the Ministry, for, if through his Carelessness any unworthy
Person crept in, he would have an Accession to all the bad Effects of their
Ministry; their Miscarriages and Maladministration, their Sins and their
Scandals were to be charged on him: And seeing every Man will find burden
enough of his own Sins, therefore he advises him to take Care, that he be not
by this means Partaker of other Men's Sins; and from thence takes Occasion to
exhort him to keep himself in all things unspotted in the sight of God: Keep
thy self pure, says he, which in the first place refers to the former
Instance, of not admitting of unworthy Persons into the Ministry, or any one
hastily: But withal it is to be extended farther, to the avoiding all things
which may stain or pollute us; for there is nothing more ordinary in Scripture,
than to take Occasion from particular Duties to recommend a general Sanctity,
an Instance whereof we have, Mat. v. 48.

Now least such a serious Exhortation to Timothy, who was forward enough of his
own accord, should have made him over-do in his Acts of Temperance and
Abstemiousness, the Apostle wisely casts in this Caution, Drink no longer
water, etc. Thus I would construe the Words, and make them cohere with that
which goes before.

Before I consider the Apostles Precept II. Inferences from the Occasion of
delivering this advice. The first, to caution against the Abuse of Doctrines.
in it self, I think it will not be amiss to draw some Observations from the
Occasion of delivering it.

And first, This shows what Care Pastors should take in their Teaching, both
publicly and privately, to adapt their Discourses to the Hearers, and so
wisely to caution their Doctrine, that they may not give Occasion to any to
entertain, or to run into Errors and Mistakes. The very Scriptures, St. Peter
tells us, are wrested by the unlearned and unstable; and how much more readily
will such wrest the Words of Men: And though it is not possible to prevent
altogether the Abuse of our Doctrine, and the perverting our Words, yet it
becomes us to guard against it as much as we can, and by timeing our Doctrine
aright, and seasoning our Discourses so well with the Salt of Divine Wisdom, to
keep our selves free of all Accession to such Abuses, as ignorant and perverse
Men may make of what we deliver. There be some general things which we cannot
press enough, and which may be largely insisted on, as Faith, Repentance, Love,
Charity, Holiness, and the like; But particular Duties have Bounds and Limits
which must not be leapt over, for the Excess proves vicious, as well as the
Defect, which Solomon may have an Eye to, when he says, Be not Righteous over
much, neither make thy self over-wise. Eccl. vii. 16. In refuting Errors, Care
should be taken so to state the Truth, that those we would reclaim may not run
into the contrary Extreme, which falls too often out, because it is little
heeded. When we comfort the drooping and disconsolate, we should beware of
blowing them up into Presumption, or of turning them careless or secure, and
should so apply the Threatenings and Terrors of the Gospel to such as seem
careless and obdurate, as that they may not be driven to Despair. The Necessity
and Efficacy of God's Grace should be so taught, as that Men may not think
their own Endeavors needless. And in pressing Persons to work out their own
Salvation, we should take heed of weaning them from a Dependence upon God. Zeal
should be so taught, that People may not think themselves bound to leap out of
that Rank and Order, wherein Providence has placed them: And in restraining
them from these Disorders, we should be careful not to render them unconcerned
and lukewarm. Obedience to Superiors should be so stated, that People may see
themselves tied to things lawful, and in which the Superiors have a Right to
command, and no more: And when there is Occasion of calling them to obey God
rather than Man, it should be so done, as that they may not think Religion
requires them to break their Ranks, and to take more upon them than what
becomes them; to resist their lawful Governors, or to refuse Obedience to
their lawful Commands; to wrest the Government from them, or to treat their
Persons with Contempt. Things indifferent may become sometimes very useful, and
then they ought to be recommended, but not so as to ensnare the ignorant into a
Belief of their being absolutely necessary, or some way meritorious. In a word,
we should so deliver our Doctrine, so temper our Exhortations and Reproofs,
that our Hearers may neither come short of their Duty, nor yet go beyond what
is proper in any particular incumbent on them, but may be made to go on
straightly in the way of Truth and Righteousness, without turning to the right
or the left Hand.

Secondly, We may learn hence what The second, the true expressions of
Friendship.
are the best and truest Expressions of Friendship; Friendship is the very Soul
of Life, as one says, it exceedingly sweetens it, and where this is wanting,
there can be but small Satisfaction: But then true Friendship does not spend it
self, in a fantastic Dotage on the Person of our Friend, nor should it
evaporate into idle Words and Complements. Friendship does not consist in
Flatteries, nor is he the truest Friend who is most obsequious, who humors his
Friend in all things, who is like Agesilaus, of whom it is said, That he was so
partial for his Friends, that he would not have any thing they did found fault
with, whether it was right or wrong. Such, for the most part, are the
Friendships amongst the Men of the World; but they scarce deserve the Name,
they are hardly a Shadow of it. True Friendship designs the Good and Happiness
of the Friend; but these draw on his Ruin and Destruction. St. Paul understood
well what the sacred Name of a Friend imported, and therefore he expresses his
Friendship for his beloved Timothy, by giving him Instructions how to behave
himself aright in his Place and Station, and by correcting his Mistakes and
Faults, that he might become useful to the Church of God, and loved and admired
of all. If then we would have a true Friend, let us choose such an one, as may
further us in the Attainment of Wisdom and Virtue, who as he will be careful*
to approve of us when we do well, so will not fail to admonish us when we do
amiss. These are the true Offices of Friendship, he abuses and betrayeth it
who does not use them, and he is not worthy of a Friend, who will not admit of
them.

Thirdly, Consider what a Concernment The third, a Concernment for useful and
eminent Persons.
all should have for Eminent and Useful Persons, and how desirous they should
be of their Safety and Preservation. St. Paul was at a distance from Timothy,
but yet carefully tenders his Health, and remembering his Sickness and
Infirmity, does prescribe him Remedy, even in the midst of those great and
weighty Directions about the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Government of the
Church. The Affairs of the Church, and the Interest of the Gospel, are
certainly of more moment than any particular Man: Yet you see when the Apostles
thoughts were most taken up with these things, he is mindful of Timothy's
particular health, and puts in a prescription for it amongst the other: Which
he did not so much, because he was his beloved Friend, but because he
considered him as one very serviceable to the Church of God, and as one on
whom, under God, the Prosperity of the Church somewhat depended. As in the
natural Body, all the Members should be had a care of, but those especially
should be regarded and tendered, which are most useful and important, and which
might hazard the whole, if ought ailed them; Even so every Member of Church and
State should share of our love, but those whom God has raised up, and by his
special Gifts and Graces has singularly fitted for preserving, recovering or
advancing the good of Church and State; I say, they should be much esteemed,
and their particular welfare should be carefully sought after, by all who
regard either Religion or the Civil Peace; for when it is not well with these,
the other are in hazard. In an Army the lives of private Soldiers should be
secured as much as is possible; But Heroes, and valiant Generals and Captains
much more, because if they should be cut off, the other would be soon
scattered; and if they be preserved, they can by their Valor and Conduct,
recover a loss sustained amongst the common Soldiery: It is true, Man can do
nothing without God, but God ordinarily works in and by the means of Men.
Such Men therefore should be much respected and cared for, whom God has marked
out, to be fit Instruments of conveying his Blessings, to whom he has given
Wisdom, and Zeal, and Courage, and other proper Endowments, for propagating
Truth, stopping Error, the curbing of Vice, and the right ordering the House of
God: which brings a general Blessing upon the Land, and tends to the
Temporal and Eternal welfare of every individual.

I come now to consider the Precept III. The Advice of not drinking water
considered.
in it self, in which you may take notice of what St. Paul advises Timothy,
and then the reason he gives of that advice: What he advises him is, To drink
no longer water, but a little wine; The reason he gives, is for his Stomach's
sake, and his often Infirmities.

I begin with the First, Drink no longer 1. It only regards Timothy's Case and
Practice.
water. This is no positive Prohibition of the use of Water, but it has a
particular reference to Timothy's Practice, which must be considered for the
better understanding of the Apostle's meaning. It would seem that Timothy had
heretofore made use of no other sort of Drink but Water, not certainly that he
was not able to procure Wine to himself, nor yet from any scruple about the
lawfulness of using that Liquor: For so great a person as Timothy was, to whom
St. Paul gave so high Elogies every where throughout his Epistles, and whom he
thought worthy of the Trust of the Church of Ephesus, could not be so Ignorant
as not to know that every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused if
it be received with thanksgiving. No doubt St. Paul taught him early, that the
Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in
the Holy Ghost: And being so taught, he would be far from placing Religion in
such kind of Abstinences. But his continued use of Water, was either because he
was so brought up by his Parents, or out of his great Temperance and Sobriety;
and that by this means, in imitation of his great Master St. Paul, he might
keep his Body under, and bring it into subjection, lest when he preached to
others, he himself should be a castaway; as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. ix.
27. But whether upon this, or any other Motive it was, that Timothy did (...),
continually drink Water, St. Paul observed, that it did prove prejudicial to
his Health, and either occasioned or increased those bodily Distempers he was
so much subject to, and therefore he advises him here to forbear the so much
and so frequent use of Water.

This Practice of Timothy which moved 2. A Reproof of the Luxury of this Age.
St. Paul to insert this Direction here, affords us a fair occasion of
reproving the Epicurism and Luxury of the present Age, and of recommending
Temperance, and subduing of the Body by Fasting, Abstinence, and other Acts of
Mortification. The Primitive Christians kept their Bodies under a severe
Discipline, which is now adays worn altogether out of fashion: We are not so
far behind them in time, as we fall short of their strictness and severity,
which is the reason that we come so short of their Devotion and Piety, and
those other Christian Virtues which rendered them Illustrious. An account of
their Severities and Mortifications would be thought fabulous; Men accustomed
to such softness and looseness as we of this Age would hardly be induced to
believe it, and if any of them were returning back to this World, they would
have as great difficulty of believing us to be Christians, seeing we work so
much the will of the Gentiles, and walk in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of
wine, revellings, banquettings, and do run easily and forwardly as they do to
the same excess of riot. And indeed, if our ease, voluptuousness, and loose
manner of living be suitable enough to the Joys of Heaven, and consistent
enough with the Graces which are necessary to fit one for it, then Paul and
Timothy, and all the Primitive Christians were Fools and Madmen, as an Italian
Monk said once wittily, Preaching before two Cardinals. But the imputation of
folly falls certainly on us, and not on these great Lights of the World. Our
Apostle thought Chambering and Wantonness, Gluttony and Drunkenness, only
agreeable with the Night of Heathenish Ignorance, but we practice them in the
broad Day of the Gospel, we make these Works of Darkness face the clearest
Sunshine. So little are the Men of this Age acquainted with Abstinence and
Mortification, that I fear they would brand a Man with Heresy that would
recommend them. There is no restraint put upon the Appetite; but occasions are
industriously sought out to gratify and regale them, insomuch, that it is
counted miserable not to be able to entertain them with the best things to
Satiety and Repletion. Back and Belly take up the thoughts of Poor and Rich,
and most Men's Contrivances, the very end of their Life, is that they may lie
softly, and fare deliciously every day. This is the fashion of this Age, after
this manner do Men now frame their Lives: But this is not the way to imitate
the Primitive Christians, nor yet to walk by the Rules of the Gospel. If Man
was only Flesh, if he could taste no higher Pleasures than what come to him by
the Sense of the Body, this were not so unreasonable, though it be reported
even of Epicurus, that he established Sobriety and Temperance by his
Principles. If a Mohammedan Paradise were all our Expectation hereafter, I would
not either think it unlawful or improper, to give way to our Appetites, and to
cherish voluptuous Desires, whereby we may be disposed for those Sensualities
which are promised there: But seeing our Heaven is of another sort, and that we
are assured that God will destroy both the Belly and Meat, and are told of pure
Spiritual Joys to be tasted even in this Life, excess, surfeiting, and a full
feeding daily are most unseemly; to pamper the Body is to ruin the Soul; for
thereby those Lusts are cherished and strengthened, which war against the Soul
and destroy it. We need no greater Enemies of our Salvation, than what are
lodged within our selves; If all the Enemies without were removed out of the
way, our own Flesh and Blood are enough to precipitate us into Perdition: Have
we not then great reason with St. Paul and Timothy, to subdue the Flesh, and to
keep our Bodies under; if these two eminent Saints did this, lest they should
have been Cast-aways; certainly we should be afraid to neglect Abstinence and
Exercises of Mortification, whereby the Flesh is kept from rebelling against
the Spirit, or at least disabled from gaining a Victory over it. If our Body be
not kept in subjection, if restraints be not put upon our Appetites, they will
turn unruly, and at last involve us into utter Ruin. As Bridles should be put
into the Horses mouths, so (says St. Augustine) our Bodies should be bridled
and kept in with Fastings, Watchings and Prayer: Nam quemadmodum aurigae, si
fraena laxaverint per praecipitia ducuntur, ita and anima nostra cum ipso
corpore, si ei fraenum non imposuerimus ad inferni praecipitia dilabitur.

The Wantonness of the Rich, their insolence toward God, their contempt of
others, and all their ungodly Dispositions and Actions, St. James ascribes to
their living continually in pleasure, and to the nourishing their hearts every
day as in a day of slaughter, that is, they make every day a day of Feasting
and Rejoicing, and set no days apart for Fasting and Mourning. They let loose
their Sensual Appetites, and are still making Provision for the Flesh and its
Lusts, which carry their Thoughts quite from God and the things of another
Life; so that they are both prompted and induced easily to commit those Crimes
which render them obnoxious to the Divine Wrath.

God does not grudge us the fat and sweet, he does not envy us Lawful and
Innocent Pleasures: And there are no Real Pleasures but such. He is willing
that every Man take his Portion, that he enjoy his Labor, and rejoice in his
Works. This (says Solomon) is the gift of God: but also he requires us so to
moderate the outward Enjoyments of this Life, as that they may not be
prejudicial to the Soul and its Eternal Happiness, nor yet hinder those inward
Spiritual Comforts, which he is ready and willing to bestow, and which put more
gladness into the Heart, than Corn, Wine, and Oil. You may feed the Body, but
in the mean time take care that you do not starve the Soul, whose nourishment
is deep and serious Meditations upon God and his Word, to which a cramb'd and
glutted Body is no wife disposed. They whose Hearts are overcharged with
Surfeiting, and Drunkenness, and the Cares of this Life, are neither mindful
of, nor capable to use the means of Salvation. Wherefore it is necessary to
intermix Days of Fasting and Retirement from Worldly Business, that we may have
time for Prayer and Meditation, for instructing our Minds and examining our
Actions; We should curb our Sensual Appetites, and sometimes deny our selves
the Enjoyments of this Life, that our Desires after God and Heaven may be the
more keen; We should mortify the Body by Abstinence and other suitable
Exercises, that it may not be a Clog to the Soul, nor a hinderance to the right
Performance of the several Acts of Religion. Upon this account, the Church, in
former times, did wisely enjoin Vigils, and Fasts, and Times of Abstinence, as
Lent: And the practice of Pious Men, in all Ages, do recommend Private Fasting
once a Week or Month. While these things were observed, Religion flourished, a
Spirit of Devotion appeared in People, and they were susceptible of Impressions
from the Truths revealed in the Gospel: And the common Neglect of these things
is one great Cause of the present Decay of Piety amongst us; which Neglect did
proceed from a blind and indiscreet Zeal against Popery, which did not
distinguish betwixt the due Use and Abuse of things.

But however useful it may be sometimes, 3. Cautions to be used in Abstinence
and Mortification.
and for some persons, to exercise Abstinence, and other Acts of Mortification:
From what St. Paul advises Timothy here, we learn in the next place that the
use of these things should be always managed with Prudence and Discretion, that
they may neither prove prejudicial to our Health, nor yet degenerate into
Superstition. Fasting and other corporal Austerities are not things in
themselves absolutely necessary, but become fit and good, according as they are
subservient to other things which are so; they are to be accounted Religious
Acts only when they serve to the great ends of Religion, and as they further
the attainment of those Virtues and Graces which Religion strictly enjoins:
When they are not profitable this way, they profit nothing at all: If they
prove rather hindrances than furtherances of those Moral Duties, to which
either our general or our particular Calling obliges, then they are wholly to
be laid aside. An excess in the observance is no ways commendable, and
sometimes more hurtful than the total neglect of them. The Flesh with its Lusts
should be crucified, but the Body by no means is to be destroyed; It Is fit to
keep the Body under, but it ought not to be so enfeebled as that it cannot
discharge the Functions of Life, wherefore they bewray a great deal of
Ignorance, Weakness, and Superstition, who make a scruple of forbearing the
Fastings and Abstinences which they prescribe to themselves, when their
circumstances seem to require it, as when they are under any indisposition of
Body, or when abroad and cannot perform them without some signs of ostentation,
some more than ordinary trouble to themselves, and inconvenience unto others;
for when by these or the like reasons, things of the like Nature cease to be
useful, or prove noxious, they also cease to be acceptable unto God.

Fasting, Abstinence, and Acts of Mortification, are not of the Nature of
Justice, Charity, Humility, Meekness, Selfdenial, and other like Christian
Virtues, which are good in themselves, indispensably necessary, and which ought
to be practiced at all times, and in all places: Nor yet are they like Prayer,
which as it is a Duty we are commanded to perform without ceasing; so it is
agreeable and proper to all Persons, States, Circumstances, Seasons and Places.
Fasting and external Acts of Mortification are not valuable in themselves, they
are only commendable and Praiseworthy, according to the Prudent Management of
them, and the Ends proposed by them. Sometimes they are in no wise suitable and
proper; wherefore our Lord would not suffer his Disciples to fast while he was
with them: When Strife and Envy, Vanity and Ostentation are the Motives, they
are, to speak in the Scripture Phrase, Abominations; and they degenerate into
Superstition, when they are observed out of an opinion of any particular Merit
in them, or that they please God otherwise than as they are designed and made
means of subduing the Flesh and its Lusts, of quickening the Spirit of
Devotion, and of fitting our selves to watch, pray, and to perform aright the
other Acts of Religion.

And hence it appears, how little Reason the Church of Rome has, to boast of
the Fastings, Penances, and other Severities practiced by those of her
Communion, and that the Treasure of Merits, pretended to be amassed from these,
has no real Foundation, but is Imaginary; as I have said, there is no
intrinsic goodness in these things; and if the mere external Performance did
Merit any thing, some of the Ancient Heretics might have stood as high upon
this point as They; Nay, There are at this very day Pagans, which come nothing
short of the most Religious in the Church of See amongst others Tavernier's
Travels.
Rome, in Abstinence and corporal Austerities; yea, they often out-doe them.
They who make Religion to consist in these Bodily Exercises, do neither
understand the Nature of God, nor the true Way of worshipping him; and they are
yet farther mistaken, they mock God and deceive themselves, who think that
these can be a Compensation for their Sins and the omission of Moral Duties. If
(says St. Austin) thou macerate thy Body by long-fasting, and yet perseverest
in ill, Magis horres quam placeas Deo. Then shall thy Fasts be acceptable, when
thy Conscience is purged from Sin, and thy Life adorned with good Works. Cur
enim Corpus fame discrucias, cui turpiter peccando blandiris?

But besides that the Church of Rome does over value Penances and Corporal
Austerities, and that the Generality of her Communion rest in the bare
Performance of them; It is further to be observed, that the Fasts of the
Papists, for the most part, are not real Fasts; for though all be enjoined to
fast Fridays and Saturdays, yet on these Days they neither abstain totally from
Food, nor so much as from Delicacies: They only forbear Flesh, but are allowed
to eat Fish, and other things which pamper the Body and provoke Lust as much as
Flesh does, if not much more. Is a simple change of Meats to be esteemed a
Fast? Does he mortify himself, who feeds upon palatable and luxurious Food?
Are not Flesh and Fish alike before God? Why should there be a Religious
Distinction made betwixt them? Full meals of Fish are as inconsistent with
Fasting, as eating of Flesh: and he who feeds constantly upon Fish, is no more
temperate and abstemious, than he who eats Flesh, provided he do it moderately,
and not to Excess. Wherefore the New Regulation of the Religious Orders, which
restrain them wholly to Flesh, does not serve the Ends of Religion more, nor
yet does it mortify the Flesh better, than if they had been still allowed the
use of Flesh: Nay, it is not agreeable to the Precepts and Nature of
Christianity, to make such distinction of Meats, and place more Virtue and
Religion in one than another. And as for the Severities of La Trap, and one or
two more, which both increase the Distempers of those who enter into them, and
also do bring new ones upon them. This very Text without straining it, does
show that they are not at all to be approved, and that the Imposition of them
is a cruel Superstition: For though Sickness, when it is inflicted by God, ought
to be received with an humble Submission, yet every one ought to take care of
his own and Neighbor's Health as well as Life, and they who do Violence to
either, commit a great Sin. Sickness, Pain, bodily Infirmities, and
Indispositions, do hinder one from being useful and serviceable, and very
often, also, they render the Mind dull and indisposed for Devotion.

But to go forward with the Text, as IV. of Drinking Wine.
the Apostle advises Timothy, to forbear the continued use of Water, so he
enjoineth the use of Wine, whereby he establishes The use of it lawful.
the lawfulness of the use of that Liquor against the Manichees, Encratitoe,
and other ancient Heretics, and Mahomet, who makes Abstinence from Wine, one
of the principle Articles and Characters of his Religion. Our Savior long
before warranted the use of it, by his own practice; and if it had not been
lawful to drink Wine, he would not have made a Miracle for furnishing it to the
Wedding of Cana. This, and all other the like Superstitions, concerning Meats
and Drinks, are clearly and fully refuted by that Assertion of the Apostle in
the former Chapter, Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused,
if it be received with thanksgiving. But I suppose, there is none here inclined
to any such Heresy, and therefore I will insist no more upon it.

But as there is no question to be made The Excess Unlawful.
of the Lawfulness of the use of Wine, so there is as little to be made of the
Unlawfulness of the abuse of it, which is, alas, but too too common, and which
St. Paul cautions against, in the words of our Text, when he enjoins but a
little Wine: He mentions a little, not for Timothy's cause, for there was no
fear of his running into excess, but for the sake of others, into whose hands
this Epistle might come, that none might pretend the Apostles warrant, for
going beyond a due measure. A little Wine is good, it makes glad the heart of
Man; and therefore Solomon bids give it to those that Prove. 31. 6.
are of heavy heart. But too much is dangerous, for then it enflameth the
Spirits, disordereth the Blood, distorteth the Countenance, and does violence
to the whole frame of the Body, and makes it an unweildy instrument for the
Soul, and by frequent Excesses of this kind, the Mind is at last besotted, and
the inward Faculties worsted: Wherefore the Apostle had good reason to say, Be
not drunk with wine wherein there is Ephesians. 5. 6.
excess. And lest it should be thought that only weak Heads, who cannot bear
Drink, but are soon intoxicated, fall under these Prohibitions, the Scripture
denounces a woe unto them, that rise up Isai. 5. 11.
early in the morning that they may follow strong drink, that continue until
night till wine inflame them. The Creatures of God are good indeed, but the
abuse of them is evil; they are created for our use, but they are not to be
lavished away without all Reason, Necessity, or Convenience: The quaffing off
as much as another, is in the style of Drunkards and Bon Companions, called, a
doing one reason; but certainly it is against all reason to abuse the good
Creatures of God, or our selves by an immoderate use of them, contrary to his
express and peremptory Command.

I cannot adduce all that can be said The Evil of Drunkenness.
against this Vice of Drunkenness, for that would carry us far beyond the
measures of a Discourse. I shall pass over what Heathens have said, and what
the very common light of Nature may furnish us with, and shall only give one or
two Instances peculiar to Christianity. It is first then, contrary to that Duty
of Watching against our Spiritual Enemies, which our Holy and Christian Calling
obliges us to: They are base and treacherous Soldiers, who fall to Eating and
Drinking when they know the Enemy is close at hand, and ready to give Battle;
we are begirt about with many, and subtle Enemies, and therefore should be
ashamed of Excess and Intemperance in Eating and Drinking, which incapacitate
us from defending our selves or resisting them. Be sober, be vigilant, (says
St. Peter) 1 Pet. 5. 8.
because your adversary the Devil as a roaring lion, walks about seeking whom
he may devour. Secondly, It is disagreeable with a patient waiting for Christ:
That Servant has little regard either to his Master, or his own Credit and
Interest, who by debauching away his Sense and Reason, puts himself out of a
Condition of coming to his Lord when he is called, and of giving that account
which is asked of him. O the horror and confusion of being hurried out of this
World, and carried before the Tribunal of God, in a Fit of Drink and Excess!
And yet this has often happened unto Drunkards. Take heed therefore to your
selves, (says Christ) lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day come
unawares. If the servant say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, and
shall begin to beat the Menservants and Maidens, and to eat and drink and to
be drunken, the Lord of that servant will come in a day when he looks not for
him, and at an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will
appoint him his portion with the unbelievers, Luke xxi. 34. xii. 45.

Thirdly, It is inconsistent with those Spiritual Exercises our holy Religion
calls for, and indisposeth one for receiving that holy Spirit, whereby he is
to be sealed unto the day of Redemption. Be not drunk with Wine, says St.
Paul, wherein is excess, but be filled with the Spirit: In which words, he
establishes a direct opposition betwixt these two, so that the one necessarily
thrusts out the other. The Heart which is moved by Wine, cannot be sensible
of the Motions of the Spirit: Nor can the Head be filled with the Spirit, which
is darkened and overcast with the fumes of Drink. The Holy Spirit can only
reside in pure and holy Souls, upon these accounts, and many more that might be
alleged, there is hardly any thing more unbeseeming Christians than
Drunkenness, though alas, it be too too ordinary. And that a Clergyman should be
guilty hereof, is not only most unbeseeming, but abominable: The very
Supposition is horrid; That he should be given to this, who has not only
himself to watch over, but many others; who ought to wait his Lord's coming,
not only to give account of himself, but of all under his Charge. The burden
of our Holy Calling is too great to be sustained by our own Strength: Who,
says St. Paul, is sufficient for these things? None therefore have more need
of the Aids of the Holy Spirit than we, and therefore also none ought to be
more careful to avoid what may grieve this Holy Spirit, and provoke it to
desert us. And consequently Ministers should not be given to too much Wine,
that they may be in a capacity of receiving the Spirit of God: And that when it
comes, it may reside with them to direct, strengthen, and comfort them.

I come now to the Reasons St. Paul V. The Reason of S. Paul's Advice to
Timothy considered.
gives for prescribing Timothy a little Wine; to wit, his Stomachs sake, and
his frequent Infirmities. It was not upon the account of Conscience, for upon
this account Wine and Water are things indifferent; Neither the one nor the
other is contrary to Piety, providing Water be not drank to Superstition, nor
Wine unto Excess: But the Apostle considering Timothy's weak Stomach, and the
Diseases to which he was subject, for correcting the one, and preventing the
other, he prescribed him the use of a little Wine, which is certainly a
Cordial, to be either drank alone or mingled with Water.

From which we may observe, That 1. It shows the true Ends and Rules of
Eating and Drinking.
the Rules of Eating and Drinking, either as to the Quantity or Quality, should
be taken from the Health and Vigor of our Bodies, that we may be enabled to
discharge either the General Functions of Life, or the Particular Duties of our
Calling. We should not take Pleasure in Eating and Drinking for themselves, but
out of a regard to the ends for which they were ordained, and to which they are
subservient; nor should the most delicious Meats and Drinks be lusted after,
but what conduces best to Health: And if God afford wholesome Meat and Drink,
we ought to be content, though our Table be not furnished with Dainties.

Secondly, we may learn hence the 2. The Lawfulness of the Use of Means to
remove Afflictions.
Lawfulness of using natural Means for the removing of bodily Distempers, and
other outward Afflictions. Diseases as all other Afflictions are of God, it is
his Hand which inflicts them, and therefore we ought to bear them patiently:
But yet we may seek the Removal of them, and use what is fit and proper in
order thereunto, without walking contrary to that Submission we owe to God.

Thirdly, it does hence appear, that 3. The Gift of Healing not always used.
the Gift of Healing bestowed on the Apostles, and others at first, was not
always used at the Arbitriment of him who had it, but upon some special
Direction of the Spirit, and at some particular Occasions; when it tended to
the Confirmation of the Gospel, or the making way for Men's Faith in it. For if
St. Paul might have healed every Person, and at all times, he neither would
have suffered his beloved Timothy, to be so much troubled with the bodily
Distempers here spoken of, nor yet Epaphroditus his fellow labourer, to be sick
nigh unto death, as we read, Phil. ii. 27. Which shows the Vanity of some
Popish Doctors, who that the healing promised by St. James, as the Effect of
Prayers, and anointing with Oil, may not be referred to bodily Health, as is
generally alleged by Protestants, say that then it would follow that none died
in those Days, which is ridiculous: Whereas we see clearly here by the Example
of St. Paul, That those who were endued with the Power of working Miracles, did
not heal all the Diseases they met with, but did only exercise that Power on
such Persons and at such times, as the Spirit of God directed them to, for the
Advancement of the Glory of God, and Honor of the Gospel; which also affords
us a Reason why Miracles are ceased, for they being given at first only for
demonstrating the Truth of the Gospel, and evidencing that they who preached it
were of God, now that this has fully appeared, there is no more need of
Miracles.

Lastly, The Apostles making mention VI. An Enquiry into the Reasons why God
suffers eminent and useful Persons to labor under bodily Infirmities and
Diseases.
of Timothy's Sickness, and being liable to frequent Infirmities of Body, gives
us occasion to treat of a very important Question, viz. how it can be
consistent with the Wisdom and Goodness of God, to inflict sore and heavy
Diseases, and the like Disasters on eminent and useful Persons, such as Timothy
was, whereby they are disabled from the Exercise of their Functions, and
hindered from promoting the Great Work of the Gospel, and the Salvation of
Souls? If a King be engaged in War, does he employ crazy and sickly Generals,
and Captains? Would he not wish them perfect Health and Strength of Body, that
they might be in a Capacity of disciplining the Army, and of going about to
exhort and encourage the Soldiers? How then comes it to pass that the Champions
in the Christian Warfare, that the Generals and Captains in God's spiritual
Militia, should be so much liable to bodily Distempers and Infirmities and
other grievous Afflictions, nay more liable commonly than any other sort of
Men, so that they cannot make those Advances and Progress which otherwise they
would? The great St. Chrysostom starts this Question upon this very Text, and
handles it at great length in a particular Discourse, but I shall be very brief
upon it, having been so large already, and shall only touch a little at those
things which come properly under this Head.

First, Then for Answer to this Question, First Reason.
the same Reason may be given for the Sickness and bodily Distempers, of the
Ministers of the Gospel, even the most eminent, which the Scripture gives in
general for the Afflictions of the Children of God, viz. That hereby they may
be tried and perfected. God will not have his Children and Servants soft and
effeminate, but wise and well experienced, which cannot be without putting them
to diverse Temptations and Afflictions. The Captain of our Salvation was
perfected by sufferings, and by the same means we must all arrive to true
Perfection.

Secondly, This is done to keep these Second Reason.
Servants and Favorites of God in all Humility, and to preserve them from
Pride, which would cast them out of his Favor. Men are naturally inclined to
be proud, they are apt to be vain and lifted up, for the very common Endowments
of Nature, and how much more ready would they be, to be exalted in their own
Conceit, for the special and much more valuable Blessings of Grace, if
something were not done to them at the very time, to convince them of their
Frailty and Meanness? After St. Paul was caught up into the third Heavens, and
had so many special Favors bestowed on him, he tells us, Lest I should be
exalted above measure, for the abundance of the Revelations, there was given to
me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be
exalted above measure. Some make this thorn in the flesh to be a grievous Pain
in the Head, but I have not leisure to examine that matter.

A Third Reason, is, That other Men Third Reason.
may not think of them above what they ought to think. The World has been
generally too much inclined to magnify their Heroes overmuch; they have made
Gods of mere Men, because of the Eminency that appeared in them, and upon the
Account of the Benefits they had from them: Now God to restrain his People from
such Absurdity, and that none of his beloved Servants employed by him, might
become a Snare to others, or a Means of dishonouring himself: he therefore
stamps them with visible Marks of humane Frailty: He makes them bear in their
Body the signs that they are Men, that none may be so senseless as to Deifie
them.

Fourthly, God thus deals with the Fourth Reason.
Servants whom he employeth in his special Work of the Gospel, that he may
bring the greater Glory to himself; His strength is made perfect in weakness:
The more weak, mean, and silly the Instrument is, the more does his Wisdom and
Power appear, which atchieve great things thereby. The Excellent and Heavenly
Treasures of the Gospel are committed unto Earthen vessels, that the excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of men: He chooses the foolish things of
the world to confound the wise, and the weak things of the world to confound
the things that are mighty: that no flesh should glory in his presence; but as
it is written, he that glories, let him glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. i. 27.

Fifthly, The Divine Providence orders Fifth Reason.
these harsh Dispensations to these his Servants, to manifest the Truth and
Sincerity of their Heart to all the World: How that they do not serve him for
temporal things, as the Devil thought Job did: Of whom God said to the Devil,
That he was a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God, and escheweth
evil, who still holds fast his integrity although thou movest me against him
to destroy him without cause; and to make this fully and clearly appear, God
suffered all these Disasters to befall him.

Sixthly, One end of this Providence, Sixth Reason.
is to keep People in hopes of a Resurrection and future Rewards: For if the
Justice and Goodness of God, cannot but reward those who faithfully serve him,
and that they receive not their Rewards in this Life, therefore it is certain
there must be another, wherein they are given. If in this life only we had
hope, we are of all men most miserable, says our Apostle. And because it were
most absurd to make him, and others like him, the most miserable of Men,
therefore their Miseries are a most convincing Argument of a better Life.

Seventhly, God lays Diseases on Timothy, Seventh Reason.
and such other eminent Servants, that the weaker and meaner ones may have
Comfort and Encouragement. Man is apt to despond in Adversity. Afflictions are
ordinarily construed Signs of the divine Displeasure, and Proofs of God's
Rejection, which be of dangerous Consequence, and ready to run the weaker and
ignorant sort into Despair: Therefore God to comfort such, he afflicts his
most beloved, that it may be seen whom he loves he chastises, and corrects
every son that he receives; and so none may either despise or murmur against
the Chastisements of the Lord.

Finally, God suffers his chosen Servants, Eighth Reason.
and whom he designeth to be Leaders of his People, to fall into frequent
Infirmities; not only that they may give Example of Patience unto others: But
that all other People may be excited and encouraged, to imitate and follow
them, in all other Virtues which shine forth in their Life. If the Prophets and
Apostles, if the Timothys and other eminent Lights of the Church, had been
exempted from the common Calamities and Infirmities of humane Nature, People
would have concluded them, to have been something more than Men, and so would
have excused themselves from the Imitation of them: But now that we see
clearly, they are Men of the like Passions and Infirmities with our selves,
what can we say? What Excuse can we pretend for not showing the like Zeal and
Devotion, and Piety and Charity, and Patience, and Courage which they
manifested on all Occasions? The Weakness of our Natures needs not hinder it,
for we see that those who were naturally as weak as our selves, have attained
to these and all other Graces, wherefore we ought to lay aside all Excuses, and
to wrestle through all Difficulties, and to go on with St. Paul, fighting the
good fight, and endeavoring to do all things commanded us through Christ that
strengthens us.

More Reasons might be given, but these are sufficient, not only to clear the
Divine Wisdom, and Goodness of all Imputation, but also to make them appear
eminently in such Dispensations toward his best and most beloved Servants.

When I first entered on this Discourse, Conclusion.
I intended to have taken in the two following Verses, not thinking that this
one would have furnished matter enough for a Discourse; but you see how far the
handling of it has carried us, and how without digressing from the Purpose of
the Text, or doing Violence to the Words thereof, several material and
important Observations have been drawn: From which we may see as St. Chrysostom
observes, the fullness of the Scripture, and that an inexhaustible Treasure of
Wisdom and Knowledge is contained in it, when one single Verse, and so barren
at the first Appearance, can afford so many and so useful Instructions. If one
Verse can do such, what may the whole do? Surely, It is able to make us wise
unto Salvation, and beyond all Question, is profitable for Doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the Man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. God grant that this
Word of his may dwell in all Christians richly in all Wisdom; but especially in
the Ministers of the Gospel, whose Office it is to instruct others therein.

Amen.
FINIS.

