THE COBBLER TURNED COURTIER. BEING A Pleasant Humor BETWEEN King HENRY the
Eighth AND A COBBLER.

LONDON, Printed for F. Haley, in the Year, 1680.

A Pleasant and Delightful Story Of KING HENRY the 8th And the COBBLER.
How King HENRY the 8th used to visit the Watches in the City, and how he came
Acquainted with a Merry and Jovial Cobbler.
IT was the Custom of King Henry the 8th to walk late in the Night into the
City disguised, to take notice how the Constables and Watch performed their
Duty; not only in carefully Guarding the City Gates, but also in diligent
Watching the inward parts of the said City, that so they might prevent those
Disturbances and Casualties which often happens in great and Populous Cities in
the Night. This he did oftentimes, without the least discovery who he was.
Returning home to White Hall early in the Morning. Now in his return Home
through the Strand, he took notice of a certain Cobbler, who was constantly up
and at work, whistling and Singing every Morning, he therefore resolved to see
him, and be acquainted with him: in order to which, he immediately knocks off
the Heel of his Shoe, by hiting it against the Stones; Having so done, he
bounced at the Cobblers Stall. Who Is there? Cries the Cobbler. Here is one, says
the King. With that the Cobbler opened his Stall Door, and the King asked him,
If he could set on his Heel again? Yes that I can, says the Cobbler. Come in
Honest Fellow, and sit thee down by me, and I will do it for you strait; the
Cobbler scraping his Awls and old Shoes to one side, to make room for the King
to sit by him. The King being hardly able to forbear Laughing at the kindness
of the Cobbler, asked him if there was not a House hard-by which sold a cup of
Ale, where the People were up? Yea, (said the Cobbler) there is an Inn over the
way, where I believe the Folk of the House are up; for the Carriers go from
thence very early in a Morning. With that the King borrowed an old Shoe of the
Cobbler, and went over to the Inn, desiring the Cobbler to bring his Shoe to him
thither, so soon as he had put the Heel on again; the Cobbler promised he would.
So making what haste he could to put the Heel on, he carried it over to the
King, saying, Honest Blade, here is thy Shoe again: I Will warrant it will not
come off in haste. Very well, said the King, What must you have for your pains?
A couple of Pence (answered the Cobbler). Well, said the King, because thou art
an honest merry Fellow, here is a Tester for thee. Come, sit thee down by me, I
will drink to thee a whole Pot; Here Is a good Health to the King. With all my
Heart, said the Cobbler, I will pledge thee, were it Water. So the Cobbler sat
himself down by the King, and was very Merry, and drank off his Liquor very
freely: He also sung some of his merriest Songs and Ketches; whereat the King
Laughed heartily, and was very Pleasant and Jocond with the Cobbler: Telling him
withal, that his Name was Harry Tudor, and that he belonged to the Court, and
if he would come and see him there, he would make him very Welcome, because he
was such pleasant merry Company; and charged him to be there, and not to forget
his Name, but to ask any one for him about the Court, and they would bring you
to me: For (said the King) I am very well known at the Court. Now the Cobbler
little dreamed that it was the King which spoke to him much less that the
King's Name was Harry Tuder. Therefore with, a great deal of Confidence, he
stands up and pulls off his Hat, and makes two or three fine Scrapes with his
Leg, gives the King many Thanks; withal, telling him, that he was one of the
honestest Fellows he ever met withal in his Lifetime. And (though he had never
been at Court) yet it should not be long before he would make a Holy Day to
come and see him. Hereupon the King discharging the House for what they had
drank, would have taken his leave of the Cobbler. But the Cobbler taking him by
the Hand, said, By my Faith, you must not go yet, you shall first go and see my
poor Habitation; I have there a Tub of good Nappy Ale was never Tap yet, you
must geeds go and taste of it: For you are the honestest merriest Blade that I
ever met withal, and I love an honest merry Companion withal my Heart.

How the Cobbler entertained the King in his Cellar, and of the Disturbance they
had by the Cobler's Wife Joan.
SO the Cobbler took the King with him over the way, where he had a Cell^r
adjoining to his Stall, which was handsomely and nearly Furnished, for a poor
Man of his Profession: Into this Cellar he had the King, There, says he, sit
down, you are Welcome; but I must desire you to speak softly, for fear of
waking my Wife Joan, who lies here hard by (showing the King a close Bed made
neatly up at one corner of the Celler, much like unto a Closet) and if she
awake, she will up with such a Juniper Lecture, will make your Ears ding again.
At which speech of the Cobblers, the King Laughed, and told him, He would be
mindful to observe his Directions. With that the Cobbler kindled a Fire, and
fetched out his brown Loaf, from which he cut a lusty Tossed, which he set a
baking at the Fire, then he brought out his Cheshire Cheese, Come (says the
Cobbler) will you eat some Cheshire Cheese; there is as good fellowship in
Eating, as well as Drinking; which made the King admire the honest freedom of
the Cobbler. So having eat a bit, the Cobbler began a Health, to all true Hearts
and merry Companions: At which the King smiled, said, God-a-mercy Friend, I
will Pledge you. In this manner they Eat together, until it was almost break of
Day; the Cobbler being very free of his Liquor, and delighting the King with
several of his old Stories, insomuch that the King was highly pleased with the
manner of the Cobler's entertainment. When of a sudden, the Cobler's Wife Joan
began to awake, Efaith (says the Cobbler) you must be gone now, my Wife Joan
begins to Grumble, she will wake presently; and I would not for half the Shoes
in my Shop, she should find you here. So taking the King by the Hand, he led
him up Stairs, saying, Farewell honest Blade, it shall not be long before I will
make a Holy Day, and come see thee at Court: You shall be welcome, replied the
King. So they both parted, the King on his way to White Hall, and the Cobbler to
his Cellar, putting all things to rights again before his Wife Joan arose, went
to Work again Whilstling and Singing, as merrily as he use to do. Being much
satisfied that he had happened on so good a Companion, and much pleasing
himself in his Thoughts, how merry he should be when he came to Court.

How the Cobbler prepared himself to go to Court, and how he was set out after
the best Manner; by his Wife Joan.
NOw as soon as the King came Home, he sent out Orders about the Court, That if
any enquired for him by the Name of Harry Teuder, they should immediately bring
the Person before him wherever he was, without any further Examination of
him. Now the Cobbler thought every Day a Month till he had been at Court, to see
his new Acquaintance was much troubled how he should get leave of his Wife
Joan, for he could not go without her knowledge, by reason he did resolve to
make himself as Fine as he could; for his Wife always kept the Keys of his Holy
day Clothes. Whereupon one Evening as they sat at Supper, finding her in a very
good Humor, he began to lay open his Mind to her, telling her the whole story
of his new Acquaintance; repeating it over and over again, that he was the
honestest Fellow that ever he met withal. Husband (quoth she) because you have
been so ingenuous to tell me the whole truth, I will give you leave to make a
Holy Day for this once; you shall go to Court, and I will make you as Fine as I
can: So it was agreed that he should go the next Day. Whereupon Joan arose
betimes the next Morning to brush up her Husbands Holy Day Clothes, and to make
them look as smug as she could: She washed and iron'd his Lace Band, and made
his Shoes shine that he might see his Face in 'em. Having done this, she made
her Husband to arise and pull off his Shirt, then she washed him with warm Water
from Head to Foot, putting him on a clean Shirt; afterward she dressed him in
his Holy Day Clothes, pinning on his Lace-Band in Pimleco.

The Cobler's Reception at Court, with the manner of his Behavior before the
King.
THe Cobbler being thus set forth, strutted through the Streets like a Crow in a
Gutter, thinking himself as Fine as the best Courtier of them all. In this
manner he came to Court, staring on this Body and that Body as he walked up and
down, and not knowing who to ask for Harry Teudor; at last he espied one as he
thought in the habit of a Serving-man, to him he makes his Address: Saying,
Do thou hear honest Fellow, do you know one Harry Teuder, which belongs to
the Court? Yes, said the Man, follow me and I will bring you to him; with that
he had him up into the Guard-Chamber, telling one of the Yeomen of the Guard,
there was one that enquired for Harry Teuder. Replied the Yeoman, I know him
very well, If you will please to go along with me, I will bring you to him
immediately. So the Cobbler followed the Yeoman, much admiring the finery of the
Rooms he went through. He thought within himself, that the Yeoman was mistaken
in the Person he enquired after: He therefore pulled him back by the Coat, and
told him that he did believe, he was mistaken in the Person whom he enquired
after. For (says he) him who I look for is a plain merry honest Fellow; his
Name is Harry Teudor: We drank two Pots together not long since. I suppose he
may belong to some Lord, or other about the Court. I tell you, Friend, replied
the Yeoman, I know him very well: Do but follow me, and I shall bring you to
him strait. So going forward, he came at last to the Room where the King was,
accompanied with several of his Nobles who attended him.

As soon as the Yeoman had put by the Arras, he spoke aloud, saying, May it
please your Majesty, here is one that enquires for Harry Teudor. The Cobbler
hearing this, thought he had committed no less than Treason, therefore he up
with his Heels and runs for it. But not being acquainted with the several
Turnings and Rooms through which he came, he was soon overtaken and brought
before the King, whom the Cobbler little thought to be the Person he enquired
after: Therefore in a trembling condition, he fell down upon his Knees, saying,
May it please your Grace, may it please your Highness, I am a poor Cobbler, and
enquired for one Harry Teudor, who is a very honest Fellow, I mended the Heel
of his Shoe not long since; for which he paid me nobly, and gave me two or
three Pots to boot: And I had him over afterward to my Cellar, where we drank
part of a Tub of Nappy Ale, and was very merry, until my Wife Joan began to
Grumble, which put an end to our Merriment for that time. But I told him, I
would come to the Court and see him as soon as conveniently I could. Well, said
the King, be not troubled: Do you know this honest Fellow again if you see him?
Yea, that I do from a thousand (replied the Cobbler). Then, said the King, stand
up and be not afraid, but look well about you, peradventure you may find this
honest Fellow amongst this Company. Whereupon the Cobbler arose and looked
wishfully upon the King, and the rest of his Nobles, but to little or no
purpose. For though he saw something in the King's Face which he thought he had
seen before, yet he could not immagine him to be Harry Teudor, whose Heel of
his Shoe he had mended, and who had been so merry with him, both at the Inn,
and at his own Cellar. He therefore told the King, he did not expect to find
Harry Teudor among such fine Folks as he saw there; but that the Person that he
looked for, was a plain honest true hearted Fellow. Adding withal, That he was
sure, that did Harry Teudor but know that he was come to Court, he would make
him welcome. At which speech of the Cobler's, the King had much ado to forbear
Laughing outright; but keeping his Countenance as steady as he could, he spoke
to the Yeoman of the Guard, Here (says he) take down this honest Cobbler into
my Cellar, and let him drink my Health, I will take order that Harry Teudor
shall come to him presently. So away went the Cobbler ready to leap out of his
Skin for Joy, not only that he had come off so well, but also that he should
find his Friend Harry Teudor.

The Cobler's entertainment in the King's Cellar; and how he met with his
Friend Harry Teudor; and how he came to know him to be the King.
THe Cobbler had not been long in the King's Cellar, before the King came to him
in the same Habit which he had on when the Cobbler mended the Heel of his Shoe;
whereupon the Cobbler knew him, and run and embraced him: Saying, Honest Harry,
I have made a Holy Day on purpose to come and see you; but I had much ado to
get leave of my Wife Joan, who was loath I should lose so much time from my
Work: But I was resolved to see you, I therefore made my self as Fine as I
could. But (I Will tell you Harry) when I came to Court, I was in a peck of
troubles how to find you out; but at last I met with a Man who told me he knew
you very well, and that he would bring me to you; but in stead of doing so, he
brought me before the King, which had almost frighted me out of my seven
senses. But in Good-faith (added the Cobbler) I am resolved to be merry with
you, since I have had the good fortune to meet with you at last. I, I, that you
shall, replied the King, we will be as merry as Princes. With that he called
for a large Glass of Wine and drank to the Cobbler, the King's good Health. God
a mercy, said the Cobbler, honest Harry, I will Pledge thee with all my Heart.
Now after the Cobbler had drank about four or five good Healths, he began to be
Merry and fell a Singing some of his old Songs and Ketches; which pleased the
King very much, and made him Laugh heartily. When of a sudden several of the
Nobles came into the Cellar, extraordinary rich in Apparel, who all stood bare
to Harry Teudor, which put the Cobbler into a great amazement at first, but
recovering himself, he looked more wishfully upon Harry Teudor; when presently
he knew him to be the King, which he saw in the Presence Chamber, tho in other
Habit. He immediately fell down upon his Knees, saying, May it please your
Grace, may it please your Highness, I am an honest poor Cobbler, and mean no
harm: No, no, said the King, nor shall receive none here. He commanded him
therefore to arise up, and be as Merry as he was before. And though he knew him
now to be the King, yet he should use the same freedom with him, as he did when
he mended the Heel of his Shoe. This kind speech of the King's and three or
four Glasses of Wine more, made the Cobbler to be (...) as good Humor as he was
before, telling the King several of his pretty Stories, and singing some of his
best Songs; very much to the satisfaction of the King and his Nobles.

How the Cobbler became a Courtier.
NOw the King considering the pleasant Humor of the Cobbler, how in^olently
merry he was, and free from any Designs, and that he was a Person that Labored
very hard, and took a great deal of pains for a small Livelihood, was pleased
out of his Princely Grace and Favor, to allow him a liberal Annuity of forty
Mark a Year, for the better support of his Jolly Humor, and the Maintenance of
himself and his Wife Joan, and that he should be admitted one of his Court, and
that he might have the freedom of his Cellar when ever he pleased. Which being
so much beyond the Cobblers expectation, did highly extenuate the Cobler's
Humor, much to the satisfaction of the King. So after a great many Legs and
Scrapes, he returned Home to his Wife Joan, with the joyful News of his kind
Reception at Court; which so well pleased her, that she did not think much at
the great pains she took in tricking him up for that Journey.

FINIS.

