A JUST VINDICATION OF THE Covenant and Church Estate OF CHILDREN OF
Church Members: As also of their Right unto Baptism. Wherein such things as
have been brought by diverse to the contrary, especially by Ioh. Spilsbury, A.
R. Chapter Blackwood, and H. Den, are Revised and Answered. Hereunto is annexed a
Refutation of a certain Pamphlet, styled, The plain and wel-grounded Treatise
touching Baptism.

By THOMAS COBBET Teacher of the Church of Lyn in NEW ENGLAND.

Contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints,

Jude 3. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made with me an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my
salvation and all my desire, although he make it not to grow

2 Samuel 23. 5. What God has cleansed, that count thou not common,

Acts 10. Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of
such is the kingdom of Heaven, etc.

Luke 18. London, Printed by R. Cotes for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at
the Green Dragon in Paul's Church yard 1648.

To the Reader.
THis learned Treatise has met with many hindrances and difficulties
attending its coming forth into the world. First, through too slow a Midwife,
it has stuck too long in the birth; and for two years space been shut up in
darkness, as if unworthy of Public light: Then, in the delivery of it in the
Press it had received too many bruisings through mistakes, as this catalogue
of Errata's collected by the Author himself nine Months since does witness.
And after all, it was in danger to have come first abroad, like some
illegitimate birth, without a Parents blessing with it: The Title and Preface
prefixed by the Author, giving light and luster thereunto, being for a while
missing, and thought utterly lost; but just as it was a coming forth found and
recovered again.

But Reader, though it be (as Paul complains of himself) Thus born out of time,
and comes forth last in comparison of many other Treatises upon this argument;
yet I cannot but think, (when I consider the weight and solidity that is in it)
That God has in a wise disposure reserved it last as a Coronis to all the
former.

It is often seen in Persons, (and so why not the like in the Writings and
Works of Persons?) that are designed by God to greatest use, That in their
births or forepart of their lives, they have been clouded with obscurity, and
environed with sad disasters in their emergency into the public.

Thou that art a serious intelligent Reader, and a searcher of the Truth in
this great controversy, read and peruse it: And let these Errata's be ever and
anon consulted by thee, if thou at any time art at a loss for the Authors
meaning. And as thou read, (or before) let those wounds and bruisings it
has received (those especially that are more killing and mortal to the sense)
be healed and removed by thy applying the Authors collections with thy Pen.

I commit thee and it to the blessing of God. THO. GOODWIN.

THE AVTHORS EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian and Courteous Reader,
IT is the unhappiness of our age, That old rotten Errors are even raised out
of their Sepulchers, and anciently avowed Truths become the ball of contention.
Nor is this any new thing, that when any glorious Work of Reformation is
attempted in any place, that it should be attended with some such encumbrances.
If Nehemiah will build for God, he need not wonder if he find or meet with
much rubbish. Rev. 12.
It Is an old trick of the Dragon, to watch when the Woman clothed with the Sun,
adorned with the twelve Stars, and treading the Moon under her feet; is in pain
of travail, and ready to be delivered: that if it may be, he may devour the
child; or if woman and child escape his throat, yet to pour out floods of
Satanicall Doctrines, carried on with the Dragons subtilty, if that way
possibly both may be destroyed. In which case, whatever the whole earth can
afford, it would not be denied. It Is a moving speech of Solomon in another
case; Prove. 24.
If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn to death, etc. If thou say,
Behold we knew it not, does not he which pondereth the heart consider it, etc.
Me thinks too great a portion of the professing part of our dear native
Country, are even ready to be slain, they are drawn to a worse death then that
of the sword: Rev. 9.
There are killing waters, and killing words. False Teachers may endanger the
life of souls; Prove. 11. 9
and it is sad to be started from that rest of wearyed souls, the Word; Ezekiel.
13.
then a man, is like a bird flying from bough to bough, not knowing where to
rest: Verse 20.
They are hunted souls caused to fly. 2. Tim. 3.
It may be ever learning, and never coming to the knowledge of the truth, never
established: And where should such rest, which are, as it were, out of their
proper place, discentred?

For my own part, I profess my self to be slow of speech to utter, and slow of
heart to apprehend; and therefore not to be nimble enough for such a rescue of
hunted souls. Yet being rowsed up by Neighboring Elders, together with other
Brethren, and my heart having been long troubled much to see and hear of the
mischiefs of corrupt Opinions, and amongst others of that of Anabaptism: I have
not been unwilling, if I might hope to do any service to Christ by debating,
detecting, and disproving thereof, at least to endeavor the same. I remember
him that said, 1. King. 8.
It was well it was in thy heart to build my House. There are many abler and
better hands at work, I hope, in that Cause of the Foederall and Church-right
of the children of Believers, which are in visible political Church estate;
but being so much urged upon it, I cannot but fall to work with ethers, and
help to dig up the old Wels of Abram, which some (although not Philistims I
hope many of them; yet verily in this matter they act a Philistin-spirit) have,
at least, attempted to stop: and it may be they will not suffer the servants of
God to dig them up in quiet. But, I hope, Christian Reader, thou will take
acceptably endeavors from the weakest and unworthyest of the Laborers of God in
so necessary a work at this time. I have endeavored in what I have attempted
this way, to stand, as they sometimes did, with Trowell in one hand, and Sword
in the other at once, to build on for God and his people, and to beat off such
principles and Tenants as would undermine the Work. Nehem: 4.
Christ himself was stirred in the Cause of the Children of pious minded
persons, and why should not every one which loves him be moved too therein?
Suppose some who would interrupt the approach of such Babes to Christ for his
blessing, are otherwise precious men and godly, yet herein they are to be
chidden and withstood. It Is not the first time that Satan can prevail, even
with Peter, to give dangerous counsel: He can now stir up in far better
men an Amalekite-like spirit to hinder the weakest, and so the younglings of
Isreal's camp at their first entrance unto the Mount of God, where he appointed
to be more solemnly worshipped. Ever since that word of old; Gen: ^:
I will put enmity betwixt thee and the Woman, and betwixt thy seed and her
seed, Satan has had a special spite at the seed of the Church: 1 Ioh: 3:
witness that act of Kain, who was therein of that evil one, in killing his
brother Abel: whence also that project of Satan, all the ways that may be, to
lay foundations of corrupting, and in time ruinating the seed of the Church by
unequal marriages, etc. Genesis 6. 1, 2. Nehem. 13. 23, 24. Whence also that act
of his, in stirring up his Instruments to deride little Isaak: Whence also that
Satanicall practice of seeking to cut them off by Pharaoh, Exodus 1. by
Edomites, Psalm 137. by Babylonians, Jer. 9. Syrians, Dan. 8. Herod, Mat. 2.
etc. Or if they be not cut off in such sort, yet to stir up persons under
pretense of Religion to devote them unto the very Devil, Jer. 7. 31. etc.
Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21, 22. 23, etc. Or if they live, yet to persuade to their
detainment under an Egyptian estate, and exclusion from any Church care or
privilege, Exodus 10. 10, 11. And even now adays how busy is he to persuade
that they are to be excluded the covert of the promise, and from Church care as
such, yea, that they are not to be taught whilst little the use of Scripture
passages, or to pray, etc. least so they come to profane the name of God, etc.
who sees not how Satan does seek by such suggestions to undermine the
succession of the true Religion, and of true visible Churches, which have used
to be continued in and by the Church seed: and what is Satan's fetch, to bring
this about, but the old trick, to create (as I may say) scruples in the hearts
of Gods people, knowing well that it is a taking wyle first to bemiste through
such legerdemain the eyes of the mind, and then to spoil them of truth. It
took with our Grandmother Eve, and was the inlet of all error and evil. Genesis 3.
Has God said it: was the old Serpentine insinuation to blind and buzzle, and
so corrupt first the judgment in point of warrant of this or that practice: He
spoke not at first conclusively, God has not said it, there is no Word of God
for it: but after he had so moved* the question, that it bred some waverings,
then he charge home, and directly contradicts the mind of God, Genesis 3. How
many precious Professors, to outward view at least, did at first entertain some
scruples about the external interest of Church Members children in the
Covenant, and initiatory seal of it, which now peremptorily censure the same
as Antichristian and humane inventions. Let my advise be grateful to thee thus
far, Christian Reader, to take heed of unnecessary Discourses and Disputes
with Satanicall suggestions, under what promising and plausible pretenses
soever they come: 2 Tims 2. 16, 17.
the Word of error is very apt to infect, and then to spread: there is a kind
of juggling in Error: Ephesians. 4. 14.
seducing persons can play underboard, Rev. 21.
there is spiritual sorcery with such, and so closely carried, as it is hard
to be espied. Gal. 3.
Who has bewitched you? was the Apostles quaerie: yea, persons unapt at any
thing else, raw in main principles of Grace, are instruments sit enough for
such a purpose; any body, almost any woman will serve Satan's turn well enough
to lay such leaven. Mat. 16 12.
Thou may hear Scriptures pretended, Christian Reader, 1 Thessalonians 5.
but try all things, and hold fast that which is good. It Is not the first age
or time that in Satanicall suggestions, Thus it is written, and, Thus says the
Lord, has been propounded: Christ himself met with such dealing, Mat. 4. Thus
says the Lord, and, He says it: to prefixe his name unto their lies, what
more usual in false Prophets mouths of old, Jer. 28. 2. 1 King. 22. 11. Jer.
23. 31. and 29. 9, 16. compared. Yea, sometimes men of better hopes have been
hereinto blame, 1 King. 13. 17, 18, 24, 25, 26. Yea, who more confident
therein, as if all were in an error but themselves? It is revealed to them, and
which way went the spirit from them to others? 1 King. 21. 24. and what warrant
have you for the contrary? The old way of the most notorious heretics,
Eutichians, Nestorians, Novatians, Arians, Pelagians, etc. all abusively urge
Scriptures for what they hold, and call for Scriptures to the contrary: Aug. l.
contr. Maxim.
as Maximus the Arian^ pleaded, Produce Scripture if you can for that --: And
-- where read you in Scripture, That the Spirit was adored, is another plea,
etc. much like to that plea of our Opposites in this Controversy: As if
Scripture consequence and scope were not as well Scripture, as express words
are so: But I hope such promises as Esaias 25. 6, 7, 8. and 35. 8. and 30. 21.
and such like, shall now be ver^fied to such, as through weakness of light, and
strength of temptation have been misled. Phil: 3 15.
If any thing which I have herein endeavored, may be so far blessed by the
God of Truth, as to establish thee if yet kept of God close to his Truth
herein; or if beginning to stumble, it may help to make thy way plainer; or if
newly fallen, if God shall vouchsafe occasionally by any thing I have said, to
lend thee his hand, and raise thee up, he will have his glory thereof, as it is
most meet he should, thou will have the peace of it, and I have then reward
enough. Be not offended at the length of the Treatise, being occasioned from
variety of oppositions from diverse, which I was unwilling to pass over in
silence. Thou may, courteous Reader, meet with the same thing often inculcated,
but impute it unto renewed occasions of like Objections from diverse persons,
which yet in substance were but what others said to like purpose, albeit not in
the same expressions, or not so fully sharpened against our principles. I have
often made use of the word [Inchurched] more briefly to express what in other
words might have been set down, intending therein a person or persons in
visible Church Estate. In this also I crave thy favorable acceptance, what I
have quoted in the last Part out of humane Authors, it was as thereto
challenged by others, and not as if the Cause needed more then Scripture
strength to clear and confirm it. Now unto the Father of lights I leave thee,
to discover the full of his mind of Grace to thee. Resting

Thine in Him to serve thee, THOMAS COBBET.

ERRATA.
First Part.
PAge 5. line ult. put were before of, l. 6. read yea, p. 10. l. 2. so, l. 10.
r. and, p. 11. l. 38. r. in, p. 15. l. 36. r. in any, p. 18. l. 1. add as, l.
21. r. which some who, p. 19. l. 30. r. inference, p. 28. l. 36. after to say,
add then what, p. 32. l. 24. r. invisible, p. 33. l. 34. r. then, p. 40. l. 14.
r. things, p. 42. l. 6. r. form, l. 26. for yours, r. the, p. 55. l. last, r.
do: they, p. 56. l. 1. for, and this, r. which, l. 32. r. invisible, p. 64. l.
27. for accepted, r. once had, l. 38. for, bend, r. be rid, p. 69. l. 10. after
but, add not, l. last, r. not, p. 71. l. 18. r. deifie, p. 72. l. 2. r.
heart-answer. p. 75. l. 1. blot out as, p. 77. l. 25. r. respects, p. 78. l.
31. r. for answer to, p. 80. l. 31. r. faith, l. 36. r, dischurched, p. 86. l,
11: for or, r. verse, p. 87. l. 17. r. Esaias 65. l. 25. r. curse, p. 91. l. 5,
and 6 r. invested with Church Covenant, l. 20, and 21, r. believing, p. 104. l.
21. r. way, p. 107. l. 34. r. believing, p. 112. l. 11. r. thereunto, p. 113.
l. 12 r. asserting, l. 16. r. many. p. 114 l. 28, r: evasions, p. 115: l: 36:
r. scil. p. 117. l. 25. r. nor, l. ult. for for, r. so, p: 118. l. 3. r: doves.
Dove, l. 17. r: is God, p: 119. l: 38. r. speeches, p: 120. l. 13. personal
faith -- they may, l. 35: r: is this, p: 123: l: 30: r: which, p: 124: l: 28:
r: were.

Second Part.
Page 131, l, 3, r, Subsistences, p, 138, l, 29, blot out and sense, p, 140, l,
7, add now, l, 9, blot out now, p, 142, l, 8 r, or, p, 143, l, 15, r, ever, p,
149, l, 38, r, our, p, 152, l, 19, r, selecteth, p, 162, l, 13, blot out as, l,
31, r, circumcised, p, 167. l, 8, r, were, l, 18, r, Witness there, p, 174, l,
31, blot out and, p, 175, l, 4, blot out as, p, 178, l, 37, r, rational, p,
183, r, notion, p, 184, l, 12, blot out way, p, 186, l, 9. r, ere, l, 11, r,
with, p, 19^, l, 33, r, start, l, 35, r, covenant, p, 207, l, 14, r, the.

Third Part.
Page 215, l, 3, put the comma at for, p, 216, l, 4, r, time, p, 237, l, 23, r,
Martin, p, 239, l, 2, r, we, l, 29, blot out and, p, 240, l, 8, for is, r, ex,
p, 245, l, 8, r, it: sinlesse, p, 247, l, 29, r, Beda's, p, 248, l, 5, r,
Turonensis, l, r, mentioning, p, 249, l, 1, r, the, l, 9, r, is for, p, 255, l,
4, for either, r, as, l, 29, r, the, l, 30, r, perverted, p, 254, l, 1, r.
whispers, l, 21, r, Tr^ctus, l, 39, r, or, p, 257, l, 8, r, council, l, 18, r,
comment, l, 37, blot out not, p, 258, l, 18, r, Tuitiensis, so l, 23: l, 29,
blot out in his p 262, l, 15, r, commonly, l, 28, r, this, l, r, even, p, 266,
l, 28, r, spurious p, 268, l, 26, r, Cocl^, p, 281, l, 12, r, no, l, 36, r,
ideo, p, 282, l, 30, 1444, r, 144, p, 283, l, 35, add it, p, 286, l, 2, r, who,
l, 36, for man, r, manner, p, 284, l, 4, r, C^rinth. l 9, blot out of, l, 17,
r, with, l, ult. r, innumerable, p, 289, l, 3, blot out (...), p, 290, l, 18,
r, Guagri^, p, 291, r, Bruit, l, 29, r, Cluniacensis, p, 294, l, 31, r, from,
p, 295, l, 18, r, occasionally, p, 296, l, 23, for 4, r, 3, l, 27, r, ever.

PART I. A Discourse of Federall and Ecclesiastical holiness of Children of
Persons visibly believing, and In-churched; Occasionally from 1 Cor. 7. 14. [
But now are they holy.]
CHAP. 1. Sect. I. The Explication of 1 Cor. 7. 14.
THE Church of Corinth, having written to Paul about some cases of conscience
touching matrimony, with which some of the members had acquainted the Church;
the Apostle in this Chapter returns answer thereunto from Verse. 1. to 15. To
the first question, Whether a Christian in such a time as then it was, might
marry, he answers affirmatively, they may, Verse. 1, 2. The second question,
What due benevolence Christian yokefellowes do owe to each other, is answered,
Verse. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. A third case, much like to the first, viz. How far it is
meet for widowers, or other unmarried persons to remain so, is answered
further, Verse. 8. 9. A fourth case, touching the lawfulness or unlawfulness
of divorce, is answered, Verse. 10. 11. A fifth case, Whether persons being
unequally yoaked, the believing party may abide with the Infidel, or with a
good conscience may continue cohabitation and communion; this is answered from
Verse. 11. to the 25. In which answer, you have first, The Instructor, viz. not
the Lord Jesus immediately and personally, who albeit he spoke by word of mouth
to that other case of divorce, Matthew. 5. 39. and 19 9. yet to this other case
last mentioned, he expressly spoke not (not the Lord) but I Paul, speak
rather expressly by word of mouth to this last case, albeit what I also herein
speak, I speak by divine Inspiration from the Spirit of the Lord, Verse. 40.
Secondly, you have the matter of this divine mandatory answer; and therein, 1.
An Inhibition of any such refusal of desired conjugall communion and
cohabitation with an Infidel yoke fellow, verse. 12, 13 This he confirms by 4
reasons. 1. Because no pollution of conscience arises from such conjugall
cohabitation unto the believing party, but rather a sanctification of the
infidel. 2. Because inward and outward peace is furthered by such cohabitation
Ver. 15. 3. Because thereby an opportunity is offered of gaining the Infidel
party to the faith, Verse. 16. 4. Because each Christian is bound to be content
with their calling, Verse. 17. whether respecting national, Verse. 18, 19, 20.
or personal references, Verse. 21, 22, 23, 24. 2 A ^oleration and grant of
liberty in a passive way, in case of being wilfully and hatefully rejected by
an Infidel spouse, to the believing party. This rather needing the check and
bit, then the loosing of the reins, he does but touch it. In the first reason
of the Inhibition lay the weight of the scruple of sundry of the Corinthian
Church Members troubled consciences, and therefore Paul backeth that reason
with another distinct reason to confirm it, in the later end of the
foureteenth Verse. viz. else were, etc. but now, etc. where the words (...) used
in Argumentations, as 1 Cor. 5. 10. and the particle (...), in like sort used 1
Cor. 12. 18. 20. so Romans 3. 21. Heb. 8. 6. and 9. 26. and 11. 16. do declare
that that sentence is annexed in way of Argument to the proposition immediately
before.

SECT. II.
ERe we launch into this deep, so variously coasted and sounded, let us premise
some few things.

1. That the persons moving this scruple, were not persons then to marry, as if
that were inquired: whether it were meet for a believing party to match with an
Infidel, forbidden 2 Cor. 6. but they were parties actually married, husband
and wife.

2. That such as moved the case, were not couples whereof both were Infidels,
and out of the Church: nor yet both visibly believing and in Church Fellowship:
but persons unequally yoaked; one believing Christian, and of the Church: the
other Infidel, Pagan, and without.

3. That it was not the case properly and originally of the whole Church, but
of some members in it, like as the former cases about persons which were to
marry were the cases only of some.

4. That the ground of the believing parties scruple touching abiding in a
conjugall way with their Infidel Yokefellowes lay in their perplexing fear,
lest their souls might come to be thereby polluted; as having fellowship with
such whose unbeleefe of it self tended to make such a course in it self
lawful to become unsanctified, Tit. 1. 15. Prove. 15. 8. and 21. 4. And some
other way they doubted they might run hazard of participation and reflection
of guilt by intimacy of Communion, as Nebem. 13. 25, 26. or the like.

5. That the whole Church of Corinth engaged and imbarqued themselves in this
case of some of their particular members, so far as to write for satisfaction
about it, 2 Cor. 1. 2. compared with Chap. 7. 1, etc.

6. That by the words foregoing, husband, wife, is intended only the believing
parties, whether husband or wife: and that also they were considered in this
passage, of such, as to, in, or by whom the Infidel parties were sanctified,
not merely as husbands and wives, but as believing. The former I think none
will deny: For what had the Church to do with those couples whereof both were
without? or what likelihood was it, that Pagan couples should scruple such
abode upon any ground of pollution of conscience, which they feared? Besides,
the occasion of this Verse. 12. The husband having such a wife is expressly
called a brother, verse. 15. in the resolution of the matter in case of wilful
rejection, what liberty may be taken: The parties chiefly interessed, are
called by the name of brother and sister. The second is as evident, that in
this case, they are considered as believers, both by the opposition of them to
the unbeleeving parties, in regard of whom they scrupled pollution: and in that
that being sanctified, is not appropriated in any way of efficiency to the
unbeleevers; thus. The wife is sanctified to, in, or by the unbeleeving
husband, or the husband is sanctified, to, in, or by the unbeleeving wife; as
if the unbeleeving party were chief in this; but contrariwise, rather the
unbeleeving husband is sanctified in, to, or by the wife, etc. Finally, when in
the 16. verse the case is understood of a person, which is as well a believer,
as an husband or wife, by whom it is said the other infidel party may come to
be saved, yet that party is barely named wife or husband, not believing wife
or husband; will any now say, that there can be no other reason thereof
rendered, but this; that albeit the party intended were both an husband or wife,
and a believer: yet in that particular the party is considered, not as a
believer, but as an husband or wife? I suppose here the absurdity would be so
gross, that none would own it, no more let any truly judicious speak that
way of that here mentioned; the unbeleeving husband is sanctified by, or to, or
in the wife.

7. That the words (...) or (...), are thus to be understood, by the particle
[(...)] in, or to, or by, as our translators have rendered it, for so also that
particle is frequently used, for (...), per, or by, as John 1. 4. life in, or
by him: So Romans 5. 15. The Gift, in or by grace: So 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. in one
verse, it is by man, and by man, verse 22. expressed, die in Adam, in Christ
made alive, or by him. So, 2 Cor. 6. 6, 7. in or by knowledge pureness, etc.
and verse. 7. in, or by the word of truth, there it is [(...)] in the next phrase
it is (...). In the same sense by the power of God, etc. But I contend not, if
rendered in, or to, the husband or wife.

By [ Sanctified] is not meant made Gracious, or Converted. This might be
possible, verse. 16. yet uncertain; not known: but this is so, de praesenti,
the unbeleeving husband is sanctified.

2. Nor is it meant barely, being made a lawful husband or wife, of whom the
other party might make lawful use: John Spilsbury is right in that: That the
Corinthians never scrupled that, but that marriage fellowship was honorable,
and the bed undefiled. This was so, to and among all, Pagan or Christian,
equally or unequally yoked in the days of the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 13.
4. This was no such puzling case, that they need write to an Apostle so
solemnly about it from learned Corinth, where they had so much, if not too much
civil and common Law. And to what purpose were it to make so narrow a
Plaster, as that of civil lawfulness of conjugall use to so broad a sore, as
a troubled conscience: knowing, that many things may be by civil Laws
lawful, yet tender consciences dare not take liberty to make use thereof
accordingly* some Laws, even amongst Gods people, were made rather for their
hardness of heart, as that of divorce, Matthew. 19. 8. then otherwise; yea this
was to give Physic which did not suite with the malady: The Corinthians not
being troubled about the matter of lawfulness of marriage fellowship. That bed
was to all Corinthians, as well as others, counted in it self undefiled. But
rather, whether that use was sanctified to them; so, as that which was in it
self lawful, did not by the Infidels sin become defiled, yea, so far, as
that they partaking with them in that marriage use, should partake with them in
some defilement of conscience. The Apostle when speaking to the case as
believers were Interested in it, he says more in that, the unbeleeving
husband or wife is sanctified to the other party; then thus: that such become
lawful husband or wife to such, or their conjugall use lawful. Believers in
all lawful things have all which others have, scil. lawful use thereof: as
men: but they have more then any unbeleeving Infidel persons have, or can
have, whilst Infidel, even a holy use thereof also as believers; To the pure
all things are pure: scil. not only lawful, for so meat, and drink, and
physic, and marriage, etc. are to others, but holy in and for the use thereof:
Each one which has a lawful use of a person or thing, has not therefore an
holy use thereof. To the impure and unbeleeving many things, as plowing,
apparel, conjugall cohabitation, etc. are in themselves lawful, yet nothing
is pure to them, but their consciences are defiled in the use thereof, Tit. 1.
15. Prove. 24. 4. whether the promise give right to such and such blessings, or
no, or whether ever the blessing of the blessings be pleaded for in prayer, or
no, men may have a lawful use of their meat and sleep, etc but such have the
holy use, or every thing is sanctified to such by the word and prayer, which
improve the same for that end, 1 Timothy 4. 5. for so he gives meat to them
which fear him, as mindful of his covenant, Psalm. 111. 5. and so he gives
his beloved sleep, Psalm. 127. 2.

The eighth and last thing premised is, that the Apostle in the Argument which
he uses here to confirm that of such yokefellowes, being thus sanctified to,
or by the believing parties, he changes the person, from the third to the
second: as concerning and nearely touching the body of the Church collectively;
especially such as were parents and had children. The case might originally
respect some few: yea, but he argues about it not thus: Else their children
were unclean, etc. but else your children were unclean, but now are they
holy, as extending it to all the children of the Church, and to the children of
the members of it, whether the parents were both fathers and mothers of the
Church, as it was the case of many, or whether the fathers or mothers only
were in the Church, which was the case of some.

SECT. III.
ANd now to ascend the Watchtower. Albeit Gigantine Casuists have done
worthily, yet let a dwarf on their shoulders mention what roaving fancies he
discovers to miss, and what explication he observes to hold a right and
straight course, and to weather, and directly to fall in with, and come up to
the point of divine truth, circumscribed in the clause mentioned, [Else your
children were unclean, but now they are holy.]

And here, but barely to name explications of the words, unclean, and holy, to
which our opposites stick not: As when holy is used as opposed to corporally
unclean by actual lusts; as 1 Samuel 21. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4. or holy, as actually
holy for office, Numb 16. 7. or holy, for a person borne without sin, and so
not inherently unclean: So only the Child Jesus, was not unclean, but holy,
Act. 3. Prove. 20. Job 23. Albeit, grosser Anabaptists some of them have not
doubted to affirm this of other children also; or holy for one personally
holy, or truly gracious and godly, we contend not to determine of all
believers children, that they are thus. Albeit, we are charitable in our
thoughts and hopes this way, of this or that particular child: or holy, for
persons elected or saved: we do not positively affirm this neither of all
them considered together: Albeit we hope the best of the particular children
presented to us: and yet we judge that a most unsound and uncharitable speech
of I. S. in his book against Infants-Baptisme, p. 3. That Infants in respect
of their nonage are neither subjects of election, nor subjects capable of
glory; Me thinks these words do savor much of the Popish Arminian Tenet of
foreseen faith.
Contrary to that Romans 9. 10, 11, 12. Esaias 65. 20. some believers Infants die
Infants: will any say, they are all damned? God forbid. Yea, but if supposed to
be saved, then to be glorified, unless some Limbus Infantum be imagined,
which is neither the place of glory, nor of damnation. And if supposed to come
to glory, they are capable subjects of it, unless God order any to glory, whom
he fitteth not for it. If supposed to be said, then also elected, and so
subjects of election, or persons in whom election is partly subjected; unless
it be supposed either that some reprobates, or persons not elected, nor capable
of being elected are saved, or that there is some middle state betwixt Jacob
have I loved before he had done good, and Esau have I hated or rejected before
he had done actually evil. Contrary to Romans 9. And supposing that such
Infants dying Infants, are elected and glorified, it must be concluded, that as
Infants, they were subjects of election, and are capable of glory, unless any
will fondly imagine that God in choosing them eyed them as other persons then
ever they lived to become, or glorified other persons, then ever they were in
glorifying of them; for dying Infants they never came to be other then Infants.

Nor by holy, is meant ceremonially holy; of which holiness the Apostle
speaks, as is evident by the mention of the isntrumental means of
sprinkling of bulls and goats blood, Heb. 9. 13. which Mr. B. would seem to
draw as if intended of outward holiness now visible to the Church, when it is
evidently spoken of that branch of Jewish ceremonial holiness now abrogated.

Nor by holy, is meant here persons which possibly may be converted; but this
is but a may be in respect of all such children: whereas the Apostle says
peremptorily, they are, not they may be holy.

Nor by holy, is meant persons that may be religiously educated, as I do not
remember such use of the word holy in Scripture: however, it is not here the
thing intended; for the Apostle positively says, they are, not, they may be
holy; whereas many believers babes never live to be holy by holy education.

Others expound it thus, in reference to that inhibited separation, verse 12,
13. that if you stay together, the children will be counted legitimate, but if
you part, they will be accounted bastards. This is far-fetcht, nor de jure, in
cases of lawful divorce for adultery, ought the children begot of the divorced
Wife in lawful wedlock before her adulterous pranks, and divorce for it, be
counted bastards.

SECT. IV.
BUt there are three other Expositions of this clause, which are more usually
urged, and pleaded by opposites to Infants federall holiness.

First, some make this clause [ Else your children, etc.] to be a reason
enforcing that inhibition, verse 12, 13. and not of the sanctifying of the
infidel spouse in the other. Thus, if you divorce your yokefellows, you must
put away your children also, as they did, Ezra 10. 44. And Hen. Den makes
the meaning of your children are holy, to be the same with the unbeleeving
husband or wife is sanctified, scil. They are not to be put away. Whereas the
immediate connection of this clause to that passage, verse. 14. in way of
arguing; and not to verse. 12, 13. shows it to be a reason of the former, not
of the other in verse. 12, 13. The case of putting away came in question, but as
a supposed remedy of pollution of conscience by conjugall communion: the
unlawfulness of which remedy, being so expressly mentioned, verse. 12. 13. and
confirmed by four reasons, verse. 14, 15, 16, 17. there needed no more weight
put there. But since the fear of pollution of conscience, did occasion that
case, verse. 12, 13. and that fear is so fully taken off in the first of the 4
reasons against such putting away mentioned in the former part of the 14 verse.
meet it was to strengthen that reason in especial: which so directly met with
the bottom scruple, as it was in this very clause, Else, etc. but now, etc.
And to imagine this to be the Apostles inference: If you put away husbands or
wives, you must put away children too, etc. supposes an Apostle to reason
impertinently and unsoundly, since in the case of divorce of spouses, it does
not necessarily follow, that the children begotten of them be also put away.

For 1. even in lawful divorces for adultery, no word of the enjoining
childrens being put away, Matthew. 19. and Chap. 5. nor was it so practiced: the
husband need not own his wives bastard indeed, as his other children, but must
own those begotten of his own wife before her divorce, Deuteronomy. 21. 15, 16, 17.
compared with Chap. 24. 1.

2. The children lawfully begot, partaking of the believing parent as well as
Pagan; Reason will plead as strongly with nature, and more strongly with grace
in the divorcing party, putting away the other when desirous to abide, verse
12, 13. that the children are rather to be detained by the believing party, as
suppose the father, etc. for higher and holyer ends, then by putting them away
to hazard their own childrens souls welfare.

3. If there had been any weight in their fear of pollution, by retaining the
infidel yoke fellow, yet no color of pretense of pollution of conscience, by
retaining their little ones; whom they might better season with their own
Christianisme, then fear being leavened by their paganism, or the like. There
needed not therefore any such supposed remedy of pollution, by removing their
children also. As for that parallelling of that, Ezra 10 44. with this case, it
is very unsuitable; That was a case of persons inchurched having an express
prohibition to the contrary, not to join with such, as persons betwixt whom
and themselves, there was a partition wall yet doing it. This is a case of
persons, all of one sort Pagan, when first married, and under no such
prohibition; only after they were married one party embraces the faith: now
to make the intervening of grace as a sole occasion of such breakings of
families in pieces were sad and scandalous: yet to suppose Pagans to be under
such a prohibition, as the Jews to match with Pagans, had been to make them
wholly prohibited marriage at all.

2. Others expound it only of legitimacy or illegitimacy of the children in
reference to the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the spouses, some, as I. S.
consider the believing spouse, as such, in both effects of the spouse being
sanctified unto them, and the childrens being holy, or lawful producing, Tit.
1. 15. To the pure all things are pure, or lawful use, as he expounds it.
Others of whom Beza speaks in his notes upon 1 Cor. 7. extend it to the
children of both parents Infidel: that they are not spurious, but legitimate,
which he refuteth from the supposition of the Apostle. For wherefore, says
Beza, should he discourse of bastards, or of both spouses Infidel? which
makes me the more wonder at Beza as quoted by some for matrimonial sanctity,
as here understood, if taken of civil sanctity or lawfulness, Beza
professedly disclaimes it, for says he, the Apostle discourses not of civil
policy, but touching conscience. And I grant, says he, that the marriage of
Infidels is civilly lawful: It Is not fornication before God. But what is this
to Paul's scope, discoursing touching conscience? and Beza professedly argues
against any supposall, that because the believing party is not mentioned, Verse.
14. yet that therefore not understood in the present case as such, as some
expound this place, which yield that he speaks of persons, one a believer,
the other infidel, but say, that in this case, he considers not the person as
a believer, but as any other lawful man or wife. This Beza by Argument
refuteth. C. B. he seems to propend to this later exposition, that the
Apostle considers them not here, as one a believer, the other not, but merely
as husband and wife.

As for the conjecture of I. S. it has already appeared, that, Tit. 1. 15.
intends more then a bare lawful use, common to all Infidels, as the opposition
shows. [But to the unbeleeving is nothing pure when yet many things are
lawful. And so here, when the Apostle speaks of persons as such, one whereof
is a believer, in, and to whom the other is sanctified, he intends more then a
bare lawful husband or wife to them; and for their children also more then
civilly legitimate. And it were too absurd in an Apostle, to lay that for a
cause of legitimacy which is not: But Gods ordinance rather, not faith, Pagans
marriages being as lawful as Christians. And it were absurd to reason: That
unless one be a believer, the children are bastards, when the children of
each man and wife, Pagan or Christian, are as Adam and Eve, which herein were
radically considered in reference to all such like couples, such whose children
are a seed of God, or of his institution, in general approbation, as Mal. 2.
15. truly proves. This was unheard of doctrine, Heb. 13. 14. and tended rather
to destruction in all families, where such doctrine should come, then to peace.
And if there had been any ground of scruple in these cases of the Corinthians
considered only as man and wife, what need they trouble Apostles with such
civil cases? or what has Christ and his Disciples; as such, to do in civil
matters? Luke 12. 2 Timothy 2. The Apostles would not be cumbred with
Table-service, Act. 6. 4. much less with the civil law intricacies.

And whereas Mal. 2. 15. is urged as a proof by some; it proves that which
was not questioned, scil. legitimacy of children of any lawful man and wife,
but disproveth such a Tenet, that unless the couples be one or both
Inchurched believers as were these, 1 Cor. 7. 14. their children are not a seed
of God, a legitimate seed. In that God eyed all the sons and daughters of
Adam and Eve, as conjugally united in the same common reference, as of duties
in common, of love, care, etc. in the husband and subjection in the wife, and
fidelity in both; so in this fruit of such lawful conjugall fellowship,
legitimacy of children; wherein both parties, as lawful man and wife, have
equal share, without any such peculiar believing Covenant and Church respect,
as any Isntrumental cause thereof, whereas the Apostle speaks of a case of
holiness of children, arising from some peculiar consideration of some one
parent and not the other, or if of both, yet not of both in that common way of
mere civil lawfulness of matrimony, but with peculiar reference to an
isntrumental cause of an higher nature.

And so we come to the other opinion, to which answer is made, in the sixth
and seventh considerations before mentioned: as the Apostle speaks of
Inchurched parents, at least one of them, so he considers them at least (as)
Ecclesiastical believers, visibly in Covenant with God and his people, and
holding forth faith in God, and in his Covenant, (as) believing brethren and
sisters, and not barely as lawful man and wife, as the context and proofs
formerly urged declare. But let us hear the reasons, why meant of them as man
and wife, and not as believers in the case propounded.

Obj. 1. When the Infidel party is spoken of, he is named, and so is not the
believing party, but is barely mentioned under the common name of man or wife;
therefore, so to be considered in the case there spoken to.

An. This has been formerly answered. That as much is expressed in that case,
Verse. 16. man and wife only named, but it were absurd to reason, that
therefore in that case there mentioned, they are considered as man and wife,
not as believing: nor in that concealing of the word believing, in the mention
of the believing party, is it said, the wife or husband is sanctified, in, or
to, or by, the unbeleeving party, as if they as such, had an influence in this
sanctifiednesse of the other spouse, but still the phrase is rather thus, the
unbeleeving husband is sanctified in, or to, or by the wife, and the
unbeleeving wife by the husband, evidently pointing out the wife or husband, as
the subject of that sanctifiednesse, which in the other is an effect, and
applied to them as the object.

Obj. 2. The word (...) [hath been sanctified] in the preterperfect tense twice
repeated, therefore probably relating to their estate, when both were
unbeleevers.

Ans. He repeateth the word twice, as being to speak of the unbeleeving
parties, in some couples the husband, in others the wife: as sanctified in,
unto, or by the other parties believing: for, as such, the wife or husband, to,
or by whom the Infidel party is sanctified, are considered, (as before
proved) now, in the preter-perfect tense, such were so sanctified, not whilst
both unbeleevers: since not then an unbeleever sanctified to a wife believing,
but in reference to past time, since their coming to the faith, and to the
Church Estate, which was some good space of time as in which many had sundry
children.

Obj. 3. The same word is used in 1 Timothy 4. 5. concerning the creatures, being
lawful to use: that therefore is the sense here.

Ans. If that had meant only lawfulness of use, for the way there mentioned,
as in some other Scriptures some such use of the Greek word here used, may be
found; yet it is not therefore consequent, that here, as it is circumstantiated,
it must be so meant likewise. But as for the place in Timothy, the confirmation
it yields to this text, is rather for us then against us; since intending a way
of the creatures becoming not barely lawful to use, as it is to others, which
makes no improvement of the word of Covenant as well as command in prayer, but
of a way of a holy use to such as take that holy course for that end. And even
so it is here, of which more anon. As much is mentioned in another phrase to
like purpose, Tit. 1. 15. but the opposition to unbeleeving persons shows,
that albeit many things are lawful to them, yet is nothing pure, as it is to
the Saints, namely in a preter-naturall way holy to their use.

Obj. 4. But this is most pertinent to the Apostles scope, of encouraging to
abide together.

Ans. The Apostles scope is not to speak to a case of civil lawfulness of
such abode, then indeed it had been lawful to have spoken in that sense: but
to a case of persons troubled in conscience about pollution, even by a
communion which out of doubt was amongst all, and so to them civilly lawful,
Heb. 13. 4. This therefore were but to beat the air to tell them for
satisfaction to their troubled conscience, of a matter of which they never
doubted: and of which, if never so well assured by what they knew, now or
before, yet still their wound is not healed, but might bleed and fester for all
that, in as much as many things lawful, in respect of civil use amongst men,
yet are not always such things, by the use whereof the Saints may not be in
conscience polluted, as in the case of divorce of old tolerated.

Obj. 5. He speaks of things not as contingent, and possibly never likely to
be, but of things certain in order to effects necessarily following, and so of
civil lawfulness of spouses, a certain effect of the ordinance of marriage.

Ans. And so is the sanctifiednesse of a lawful spouse as certain a sequel
in reference to the other, making improvement of the word of Gods covenant as
well as commandment by faith in prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5.

Repl. Yea, but it is not so certain a sequel, that the holiness of children
should follow from that spiritual condition and consideration of the parent,
as it is necessary it should, if the Apostles reasoning hold good from the cause
to the effect: since, then it must necessarily follow, or else he reasons
impertinently: nor will it reach the trouble of such, which never had, nor it
may be through age or other natural inabilitie might never have children: or
how could their faith sanctify their conjugall communion in reference to
children?

Answ. The Apostle reasons from cause to effect, ex natura rei, and not barely,
ex natura eventus rei. It does not follow that such a cause is not in its
nature a cause of such an effect, or that one may not pertinently reason from
the cause to the effect, because that sometimes a second cause may be
suspended in its full operation, either by the first overruling cause, or by
secondary impediments.

But to come to the matter propounded. We will suppose it meant of matrimony,
which as Gods ordinance is a certain cause as of legitimacy of the husband to
marriage use, so of the children begotten in, and by marriage fellowship. This
you will say will satisfy all sides. But will it indeed? Is it certain, all
married people should have children? Is it not a very contingent effect? how
can you reason from cause to effect rationally? Are not many married persons
past having of children by each other? or naturally disabled from generation?
what satisfaction is it to such persons, to tell them of an effect so unlikely,
and naturally so unpossible? All will answer here, yea, but in the nature of
the ordinance, it is such a cause tending by Gods appointment to such an
effect: and ex hypothesi, supposing the object to be qualified with that
effect of legitimacy, scil. children actually begotten by marriage fellowship,
then the effect is not contingent, but always follows. And all married
persons may be encouraged to their condition, in that the ordinance has not
influence alone upon the spouses in reference to their marriage-fellowship, but
upon such children as God pleases to bestow upon married persons, for that
both became lawful, and not unlawful. As much say I in this case. That a
faithful man in covenant with God and his Saints, he by improvement of Gods
word, etc. has this certain to him, and for his encouragement, whether he
stand in relation to a spouse only, and have yet no children, yet he has a
sanctified use of his spouse: or if God make his spouse fruitful, he has a
sanctified use of her, yet further in a reference to any child by her, to which
he stands in relation as a parent; That as another effect of the covenant
improved, and of faith also therein, he has this privilege of a Federall and
Ecclesiastical condition of his child, and this is a comfortable encouragement
to all such persons, that there is such an influence of the word of God
improved by faith, that as marriage-use is sanctified by it: so children
begotten in marriage are Ecclesiastically and Federally holy; when the Apostle
says, All things are pure to the pure, Tit. 1. and every creature is
sanctified by the word and prayer, 1 Timothy 4. he does not thereby weaken or
falsify the groundwork from cause to effect, or weaken their comfort thence;
because it may be said, it is very contingent, yea impossible, that one
believer should have all things or creatures, etc. but it suffices ex
hypothesi, what ever he has more or less, its pure to him: And if he have
any thing more, which he had not, that then it becomes actually pure to him, so
in this case: Therefore the Apostle does not reason thus, else you should have
no children, but supposing you have children, it would follow they were else
unclean, but now they are holy.

Obj. 6. But he speaks of an holiness incident to an unbeleever, remaining
an unbeleever, and therefore of a civil holiness?

Ans. When the Apostle says, every thing is sanctified by the word, etc. 1 Timothy 4. and Tit. 1. 15. All things are pure to the pure, will any say that he
speaks of a purity merely civil and natural in reference unto the pure? say
an Indian servant, yea say a beast, to whom this purity is attributed, remain
Heathen or irrational, in themselves, and are civilly pure only to the
unbeleeving, yet they are in a more peculiar and spiritual respect said to be
pure to the pure, else why is there put such a distinction between them
therein, Tit. 1. 15? It is in a peculiar way and sense that the creatures 1 Timothy 4. and the Infidel spouse, 1 Cor. 7. are sanctified to the faithful.

Obj. 7. Yea, but he speaks of an unbeleever, as a joint cause of the
childrens holiness, therefore that is but civil holiness or legitimacy.

Ans. He is a joint cause of the child properly: but of the child thus
privileged, he is not any proper cause, as an unbeleever, but as an
unbeleever sanctified to his believing spouse.

3. I. S. has some further expression tending to the same end, that the
children are holy to use, as are other creatures to the Saints, and concludes,
that the holiness of the parent, and child is the same in nature, scil. the
holiness of the creature, in a natural, not in any spiritual respect. That
is, they are made lawful to use, as before he spoke when he showed in what
sense the husband was sanctified, scil. made lawful to use, or as others say,
as C. B. does; That children in this Text are not holy, with any holiness
distinct from Idolaters, as appears in the repetition of the word sanctified,
and that holiness, he afterward says, it is civil holiness.

Ans. Albeit this has been in substance objected before, and answered, yet let
me give a distinct answer to it.

1. Then, I deny that the same word used touching the parents, is repeated in
mention of the children, if we speak Grammatically. Yea, but they are of the
same root, one the verb, the other the noune. And what then? is there no
difference in the use of the words? non sequitur. Aquinas is right in that:
touching the meaning of words says he, non tam attendendum est, a quo, quam
ad quid. We must not so much heed the root whence they are derived, as the
use to which in common speeches they are applied. Sanctified in, or to a
person, is one thing, and holy is another. Afflictions, persecutions, yea the
falls of the Saints are sanctified to them, but they are not holy. It Is Paul's
wont when intending that use of the word sanctified either expressly or
implicitly, to mention to whose use the person or thing is sanctified: As here,
twice in this verse, ^ sanctified to the husband, and to the wife, so Tit. 1.
15. To the pure, all things are pure, and 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5. mentioning prayer, he
notes out Gods suppliants, etc. to whom the cretures are sanctified. But here
is no mention to whose use the children are holy: yea in that holy for civil
use, they are holy to the infidel parent as well as to the believer, he may
make a lawful use of his child: yet being unbeleeving, the child is not
sanctified to his use, as Tit. 1. 15. shows.

2. Suppose it of an holy or sanctified use of the children strictly taken, as
incommunicable to others then to Saints for use: yet why rather your children
holy, then others, then other Pagans children? since to the members of Corinth,
the Pagan Cities children might be said holy for use, and they might make a
holy use of them many ways in prayer, etc. Yea, why not instancing as well as
any other creature, as holy, thus, as well as the children of the members of
Corinth Church?

Obj. It was more suitable to instance in children, being to prove, that the
Infidel parents were thus sanctified in their believing parents.

Ans. Yea, but if that be the question, it is not one particular instance like
it would prove the same: unless an induction of more particulars: that the
husband is thus sanctified: for so are the children, so are such and such
things, etc. therefore so is the Infidel husband, or wife to the believing
party.

SECT. V.
HAving thus removed and cleared such mistakes in the expounding this Text, we
come now to what I conceive to take up the full meaning of what is said of
these children of the body of the Corinthian-Church-members, that they are
holy. Some take it of Federall holiness, some of Ecclesiastical and
Church-holinesse: I would exclude neither: It being spoken of the children of
parents in such sort in the Covenant of Grace, as it is invested with
Church Covenant also, explicit or implicit, and in the same respect the
children are Federally holy, as the Covenant of Grace is clothed with
Church Covenant in a Political visible Church Way.

And thus I conceive of the Apostles inference and argument [else your children
were unclean, but now they are holy] Scilicet, That unless your Interest in
the Covenant of Grace, which you hold forth, and your faith therein, which you
in a Church Way profess, have so much influence upon your yokefellowes, as to
sanctify them in, and to, your conjugall use: But that there be invaliditie
and privation of influence thereof, in that your conjugall relation; then must
you be as well to seek of any validity thereof, in another relation also:
scil. in your parentall relation to your children: even there also, shall the
covenant, and faith have no influence unto such an effect of holiness of your
children. If they produce not such an effect in the former, by which yet the
Infidel party have no personal privilege, how will they produce the later,
by which children have according to you an unquestioned personal privilege,
that they are holy? he that will question, or cast off the force of such
instruments influences in one thing, he by the same distemper, will cast the
same off in another. Yea, if it be groundedly and really for that the Covenant
of Grace which believers lay hold of together with their faith therein, have no
efficacy in one condition, or relation, it is as well true in another, only
reserving the diversity of influences, as diversely elicited or expressed. If
they are not effectual to produce something peculiar to believers in a
conjugall relation differing from all Pagan spouses, they will neither produce
any thing peculiar to them in a parentall relation to their children. But as
your spouses shall be to you as all other pagan spouses, in common to each
other: merely lawful to use, so your children, with, and to you shall be in
your parentall relation, but as pagan children are unclean or profane, which
to all were absurd: But now, rather they are holy; namely, Federally, and not
as other Pagans children, profane. Now, when I mention in this exposition the
Covenant, as in part having some influence in both relations, as well as faith,
I do it, as not daring to sever faith from the word of faith, which even
gives strength to faith it self: And besides, God having made a Covenant with
Abraham, and with his spiritual seed in their Generations, as well as with the
Jews: And that in such sort also, as with respect to Church estate, and as
invested with Church Covenant, hence it is, that the [meere] Infidelity of a
Pagan spouse abiding Pagan when the other comes to the faith, shall not hinder
the course and force of Gods Covenant to In-Churched believers seed, witness
the example both of the son of Moses, Exodus 4. 24. etc. and of Eunice, Act. 16.
1, 2, 3. even many personal sins of the Saints hinder it not, much less do
other personal sins evacuate the same.

Hence, so long as this Covenant Interest holds in force, that either it be
not rejected by the parents, as it was by those Jews Romans 11. 20. or that they
be not justly, for covenant breaches dispoyled of Church benefit by it by some
Church-censure, so long the covenant is Ecclesiastically of force to the
childrens federall and Church Estate. So in the case of those Idolatrous
Church Members, being not discovenanted, and discharged by Gods hand, or by
Ecclesiastical authority, their children were federall, and Church-seed, the
Churches children borne by her unto God, Ezekiel. 16. 8. 20, 21, 23. compared.
That holy Covenant produces that respect of holy persons, Dan. 8. 24. compared
with 11. 28. 30. 32. Hence the Covenant and Church Estate of Covenant and
In-churched parents, is firstly the parents privilege, and so to be
considered. Hence also I conclude then that the little ones of visible
believing and In-churched parents, such as these mentioned in the Text were, 1
Cor. 1. 1, 2. with 1. and 14. they are Federally and Ecclesiastically holy. In
this sense the word holy is frequently used, yea, of many persons, which were
neither inherently holy, nor imputatively holy in a strict sense, no nor so
much outwardly holy in point of lively expressions of personal holiness, yet
are called holy, scil. Ecclesiastically, and in external respect to the
Covenant, and that not a Covenant of works, for that calls no sinners holy,
nor by any mere ceremonial holiness, but by virtue of Abraham's Covenant,
Genesis 17. 7. with Ezra 9. 2. They are called the holy seed, and the same phrase
in the same Covenant and Church respect, is in Scripture frequently used, with
respect to such Infants, the holy people destroyed by Antiochus, Dan. 8. 24.
were the Jewish children as well as grown persons. The children were a part,
and a special part, of that chosen, beloved, and people redeemed from Egypt,
which were called holy. Hence both Deuteronomy. 14. 2. and 26. 18, 19. and 28. 2. 9.
speaking of the whole people as holy: it is in the phrases, thou, thee, loved
and established. Thee, that thou may be an holy people, etc. Adoption
belongs to the little ones as did the promises, as well as to the rest of
Paul's kindred, Romans 9. 4. They were children of the Church, and borne to God,
as husband to the Covenant Church, Ezekiel. 16. 8. 20, 21. 23. compared with Jer.
2. 2. and 3. 1. and Esa. 54. 4, 5. nor was this as I intimated a ceremonial
matter, no more then either Abraham's Covenant was with some which oppose us
confess did belong in special sort to the Jews, and that Covenant was the
very Covenant of Grace, and therefore that did by this grant in special wise
belong to them, nor was it more ceremonial, then was that, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. 11,
12, 13, 14. which the Apostle makes the very doctrine of faith, which they
preached, as by comparing that with Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. we shall God willing
declare. This was not as the ceremonies against them, but for the good of them
and theirs, and avowed by the Apostles after Christ's ascension, Act. 2. 38, 39.
of which afterward. And as 1 Pet. 2. 9. which Interpreters agree relates to
Exodus 19. 6. spoken of them not as an invisible Church, but visible, such as
had officers over them, which the invisible Church, as such has not. For
supposing a company with Church Officers, they are now not an invisible but
visible C^us, see, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. and 4. 10, 11. he calls them elected;
such they were to the judgment of charity and in respect of visibilitie; so
that visible Church of Babylon, he calls it elected, 1 Pet. 5. 13. yet were
there in that visible Church as in others, some tares, and vessels of
dishonor. Some things mentioned in Peter, of their obedience, exercise of
faith, etc. are not actually appliable to Infants, yet that hinders not, but
that Infants are intended, in that Inchurched part of the 10. Tribes, as Calvin
and Ames think, in reference to James 1. 1. and Hos. 1. 10. or in that
In-churched part of the Gentiles, as Oecumenius, Aretius, etc. think, since in
Exodus 19. 6. to which this place is to be referred, this condition of that
Covenant-priviledge, scil. Actually and personally to keep Gods Covenant and
to obey his voice indeed, Exodus 19. 5. was applyable only to the grown part,
yet the Infant part were in that account of an holy people, etc. and as much
may be conceived of 1 Pet. 2. 9.

SECT. VI.
AGainst what is usually brought from 1 Cor. 7. 14. That is objected, that
children of parents, not sanctified by faith, in their matrimonial fellowship,
as Pharez and Zarah of Judah and Thamar, Jepthah of Gilead, and many others,
were within the Covenant both of saving grace, and Church-priviledge. Therefore
faith sanctifying of the use of the marriage bed, is not such a cause of
sanctifying of the children Federally and Ecclesiastically, so as that unless
that be, the children are unclean in that respect.

Ans. This objection may seem to make a fair flourish against such as give
the Apostles meaning, as only such. But me it hurts not, who make the maine
spring of the holiness of the children, not to be the sanctifying of the
unbeleeving yoke fellow to the believing, but the grace of the Covenant to the
believer, and his seed; even the sanctification of the believing yoke fellow
springs from the grace of the Covenant, sanctifying believers seed, by virtue
whereof, the infidelity of the yoke fellow, becomes no overpowering let
thereunto, and so in part by virtue of that Covenant, as well as faith in it,
such a yoke fellow is sanctified so far forth, nor is the Apostles influence
from the cause to the effect of that communion, but rather from a like effect
of the Covenant and faith in another relation of a believer, as a parent to
children, unto that in that relation of an yoke fellow: that if the influence
of the Covenant and faith be wholly denied in the one, it may well be wholly
denied in the other, and that he makes account was an absurdity in the sight
of all.

Concerning the assertion, that Bastards were Interested in the Covenant of
saving grace, I will not now dispute it, but reason ex suppositis. That
Covenant interest of those bastard-Infants, it was not from the parents faith
sanctifying of that communion: Whence was it? It could not be from any actual
faith of the babes, they had it not; it was surely from the force of Abraham's
Covenant, at least as invested with Church Covenant, from which the parents
being not cut off by Gods hand, nor cast out by the Churches power; their
Covenant relation still stood so far in force, that is, they were interessed
externally therein and so their seed with them: and thus in foro Ecclesiae, the
force of the Covenant took off even that impediment according to that position
of the objectors; and how much more does the same force of the Covenant take
off any impediment of a Pagan parents infidelity, in the Texts case of lawful
conjugall followship, so that such children of a Gentile Corinthian
Church Members, have an interest at least external in the saving Covenant of
Grace and Church-priviledge.

Obj. Whether the parents believe or not, the children may be in the Covenant,
and regenerate, therefore that is no cause thereof.

Ans. We speak not of the inherent holiness of the child, as regenerate,
that is, immediately from God, but of holiness Federall and Ecclesiastical,
which may be applyable to persons unregenerate, as Psalm. 50. 5. 16. 17. Of
which more afterward. The parents visibly believing and Inchurched, are
isntrumental causes of that holiness of their children, yea whether believers
in verity, or only visibilitie. It suffices thereunto, nor are little ones
thus in Covenant with God and his Church, without either the visibilitie of
faith in the parents past or present: personal holiness consists not with
living in known sins, but Federall holiness may, Ezekiel. 16.

Obj. The Text is a reason of the question, which was not about Federall
holiness, but living together.

Ans. The former part of the Text is a reason of that, and none pleades for the
Infidel spouses Federall holiness, but the latter part is a confirmation of
that reason from another ground. And Mr. B. knows in proof of conclusions,
we take diverse mediums.

Obj. Yea, but if the child be Federally holy, then the Infidel wife is holy,
with covenant sanctification?

Ans. It follows not. The word sanctified in and to another, and being holy,
differ and signify different things, as before said.

Obj. If Federally holy, then Abraham's seed, and then they have faith, Gal. 3.

Ans. We shall in due place I hope prove, that they are Abraham's seed without
actual personal faith of their own, and so as Abraham's seed federally holy.

Obj. The Apostle speaks of an outward holiness common to reprobates also,
Heb. 9. 15. and not of holiness known to the Church, for which persons ought
to be baptized, and it is either inward holiness which the Church deals not
with, or outward, of which Baptism is not a sign.

Ans. Outward holiness, scil. that which is visible to the Church, is sealed
in Baptism. The Church deals not with inward holiness, therefore with
outward, unless there is an holiness which is neither invisible nor visible,
Hebr. 9. is of Ceremonial holiness; This of Federall and Church-holinesse,
known to the Church, and holiness visible or known to the Church is common
to Reprobates, unless any will say the Churches judgment erres not, and
confound visibilitie, and infallibility.

CHAP. II. Sect. I. Touching the Explication of Act. 1. 38, 39.
ANother Scripture confirming the Doctrine of Federall holiness of children of
In-churched parents, as approved and held forth by the Apostles, is that Act.
2. 38, 39 where Peter directing his speech chiefly to the Jews, verse. 22. and
36. says, the promise is to you and to your children: not, was to you, etc. as
intending any legal blessing, but, a promise then in force after Christ's
ascension, to effect some chief promised blessing; [(...)] used to signify
the free promise, or Covenant of Grace, to which they had visible right.

SECT. II.
THe promise here I. S. conceives to be meant only of the Messiah which was
the promise to be sent; and by children, to be meant allegorical children,
which others enlarging, express these two ways. 1. That the promise made unto
Abraham, was then fulfilled, Act. 2. in sending Christ to them, and to their
children, and to all that are afar off; namely, those of the dispersion, as
many as the Lord our God shall call, that they may be turned from their
iniquity, and be baptized into his name, for the remission of their sins.
Secondly, supposing the promise to be of a saving grace, of Christ sent, of
the outward ordinance of baptism, of the extraordinary gifts of the holy
Ghost, etc. It is none of these ways true, but with that limitation, scil. If
they repent: For neither God promised saving grace, nor outward ordinances, nor
extraordinary gifts, nor sent Christ to them, their children, or all that were
afar off, without calling them, and every of them. Hen. Den speaks to like
purpose as this second particular has first, the promise is to you upon
calling; to them that are afar of upon calling; and so to their children upon
calling, and no otherwise; of which he gave a reason before, that by the
promise to the children, was not meant the seed after the flesh, the Copy of
believers being not larger then that of Abraham was in respect of the eternal
Covenant, which belonged not to his seed after the flesh, but after the spirit,
which he expounds to be such as Mark. 3. 32. and Mark. 16. 16. scil. that
obey the words of Christ that believe and are baptized. To like purpose A. R.
in his second part has the same, scil. that the promise is equally made to
them and to their children, and to them that are afar off. But those that are
afar off, are not in the Covenant by the promise, until they believe;
therefore, neither those children; which he further confirms, that if then
they were in Covenant, thou had they been also of the Church of the Gospel: But
that they were not of: For it is said afterward, verse. 41. that they were added
to the Church, as many as believed, and therefore were not of it before. C. B.
has diverse senses of it. Expounding children to be men, by Mark. 10. 44. John
8. 39. Gal. 4. 19. But the meaning he makes to be no other promise, then of
remission of sins, as the only salve of guilty consciences, he makes it
not as others, to be the promise of the Messiah, nor as A. R, etc. in his
book expounds the promise it self to be meant of that promise cited by
Peter, as then fulfilled, which is mentioned, Joel 2. scil. of the gifts of the
holy Ghost. But C. B. makes it not a promise, but a proffer of a promise, to
persons not actually converted, verse. 37, 38, 39, 40. And if there were any
promise, yet being of remission of sins, it was not to their children, since
many godly persons children prove wicked, and so God must either fall from his
promise, or they from Grace. And that this promise was no more to them that
were pricked in their hearts then to those afar off, (whether from them as
Gentiles, or from the promise as unregenerate persons) even as many as the Lord
our God shall call. And in this particular Mr. B. jumpeth with some others
mentioned: as he did in that, that this was spoken to comfort guilty
consciences cast down, Matthew. 27. 25.
as well in regard of that bloody wish against their children, as in respect of
other bloody acts against Christ. In these different apprehensions it is hard to
reconcile persons, either to others of their judgment, or else to themselves.

SECT. III.
COme we then to the first opinion, touching the words. First, the promise is
to you, that is, it is fulfilled to you, accordingly as made to Abraham, for
sending of Christ, etc. here wants Scripture proof, to make this sense of the
promise is to you, ( i. e.) is fulfilled to you, nor yet does that in Act. 3.
25, 26. ye are the children of the promise, etc. prove this sense. Secondly,
it is sending of Christ, or of Christ sent. But let it be considered. 1. That
the Apostle does not say, the p^omise was to you, as in reference to the time
of making it to the fathers, with respect unto them, or in reference to Christ,
who was not now to come, but already come, as the Apostle proves, from ver. 3.
to 37. nor is it the use of the Scripture, when mentioning promises as
fulfilled, to express it thus in the present tense: the promise is to you, or
to such and such, but rather to annex some expression that way, which evinceth
the same, for which let Romans 15. 8. 1 John 2. 25. Ephesians. 3. 6. Nehe. 9. 8. 23. 2 Chronicles. 6. 15. 1 King. 8. 56. Act. 2. 16, 17. 33. and 13. 32, 33. Josh. 21. 45.
and 23. 14. Matthew. 1. 22, 23. and 21. 4. Luke 1. 54, 55. 68, 69. and Psalm. 111.
9. Romans 11. 26, 27. be considered. 2. They knew already to their cost, that
Christ indeed was sent amongst them, and to be that Jesus or Savior of his
people from their sins, Act. 22. 36, 37. compared with Matthew. 1. 21. And this
was cold comfort to them, to tell them of that which wounded them, unless
there be withal some promise annexed, and supposed in his being come. The
promise merely of Christ's coming could not comfort them, unless also in and
by Christ come in the flesh, there be some promise made to them, touching the
removal of those burdens of guilt which lay upon them. 3. The blessing
principally propounded to them, for their reviving, healing, succor, and
support, it was not Christ's sending, nor his being sent, but remission of
sins, verse. 38. wherefore unless the Apostle argue impertinently, this may
not be excluded, but must be one principal thing intended. 4. It is that
promise to which Baptism the seal is annexed, now the seal is ever to the
Covenant, which is not barely to Christ's being sent in the flesh, but to the
benefits contained in promises by his coming. The third thing they say, it is
to those of the dispersion, those of the ten Tribes, as others have expressed
it, and why not also of the Gentiles as well? since spoken indefinitely of all
that were afar of; which the Scripture expressly applies to the Gentiles,
Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. Suppose those other Jews were as the Gentiles, not a people
actually in Covenant with God, so much as externally, as being long divorced
from God, and his Covenant, and Church-liberties, yet the Gentiles in the maine
of their outlawry condition, were as one with them. Yea, but the conversion of
the Gentiles was not yet revealed, till Act. 10. in that vision. What? had not
Christ before this Sermon of Peter's declared his mind to all his Apostles
touching the discipling, and In-churching of the Gentiles? only they knew not
whether it might be by joining them first by way of addition, as proselytes to
the Jews, rather then by gathering them into other distinct Churches. 4. It Is
affirmed, that this promised sending of Christ was to them, their children, and
those afar off, as many as our God should call, that they may be turned from
their iniquity, and be baptized for remission of sins, and yet also that
the promise, what ever it be supposed to be, was to them all, with that
limitation, that they repent, or that they be called. What? is it to as many as
the Lord shall call, or convert or cause to repent? and yet is it, that they
may be turned from their iniquity? is it to persons called, and yet also to
uncalled persons? is it to them, that they may be called, yet the persons to
whom the promise is, are as many as are supposed to be called? how can these
two be right? yea it is said, it is to them all, upon condition that they be
called, and yet also, that it is to them, that they may be called. Why, if it
be to them, that by Christ they may be called, then is that promise to persons
as yet uncalled, and their calling is an effect following their interest in
that promise as a cause, and not preceding their interest in the promise as a
condition. As touching this, whether the sole condition of this being of the
promise to them, etc. we shall examine that anon, God willing.

SECT. IV.
AS for Hen. Dens exposition, of children, here not to be those after the
flesh, but spirit, even believers, I cannot see how it is pertinent to the cause
propounded touching the children mentioned, Act 2. he does not intend it thus,
your children, ( i. e.) Abraham's children: for Abraham is considered rather by
him as a pattern, having the precedentiall copy of the Covenant mentioned. And
it had been incongruous to have said; It is to your children, that is, to
Abraham's children: Abraham's children, were not all their children, nor were
their children alone all the children which Abraham had: and besides Hen. Den
confesses it is to comfort them concerning their own children, against whom
they had wished that curse, Matthew. 27. 25. now taking it then of their
children, how will Hen. Den. make these Jews, whom he cannot but eye at this
present, when these words, Act. 2. 39. were applied to them, to be such
spiritual fathers to any children of theirs, or sustain the relation of such
fathers at that instant unto such children; themselves not being yet such
relates, as believing fathers, nor having such correlata, as children after the
spirit? nor was Abraham's charter less then what here avowed by the Apostle,
scil. that the promise even of remission of sins, did belong to the Jews,
and to their children in respect of external right and administration, and no
more is pleaded for: and so much is to Gentile believers in their generations;
of which more elsewhere. Nor will C. B's exposition of children hold, as if
here taken for men, because in some other Scriptures so used; he says, that to
the farther scruple of the Jews, about their wish, of Christ's blood on their
children, Peter answers, The promise is to you and to your children: What
were their children grown to be men in two months space, since they made
that cursed wish? Or had they no children but such as were men grown? or if
they had, did they intend that curse of blood to be on their grown children,
and not as well on their babes? on their children indefinitely? To like purpose
is A. R's conceit, that by children are meant their grown children, according
to that in Joel, your sons and your daughters: but as has been intimated,
this plaster is too narrow for their wounds rising from the guilt of blood
wished upon all their children, including, and not excluding their babes. Nor
will the conceit of I. S. and some others hold: that by children are meant
allegorically such as imitate, and walk in their footsteps of faith and
repentance, etc. for which end Scriptures are urged, where fathers are taken
for such as are patterns to others, and children for such as imitate them.

But 1. Is it the use of Scriptures to propound comforts to such kind of
persons by allegories?

2. If it be supposed, that the natural children are excluded, and only
allegorical children understood, there needed no such circumlocution. But it
might have been plainly thus, The promise is to you, and to your children, even
to such as are afar off, as many as God shall call: whereas he speaks
distinctly of all three; it is to you, and to your children, and to such as are
afar off, as many as God shall call.

3. These convinced Jews at present could not be such fatherly precedents to
others that should be called to follow their instant faith, and repentance,
which as yet they acted not, nor does Peter say, the promise is or belongs to
you, for you have repented, and consequently believed; for that is rather
mentioned, as exerted, after many words besides, ver. 40, 41. But repent and
be baptized, de futuro, for the promise in praesenti is to you, scil. in
respect of external right.

4. It would rather have discouraged then encouraged; stumbled, then satisfied
them, for Peter thus to bid them to their loss. All the Jews, as visibly in
Covenant with God, were in some sense fathers to the Gentile Church Members, 1
Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. All our fathers, scil. of you of this Church of Corinth
and of me Paul, and yet withal these were fathers too, from Abraham's time
downward, to conveigh Abraham's covenant, and its privileges to their own
natural seed, Romans 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 29. 1. 14, 15. 29. and 30. 6.

SECT. V.
NOr will C. B's apprehension of the phrase, the promise is to you, etc. ( i.
e.) not the promise but the proffer of the promise, hold consonant to himself,
or to the truth, for he grants that promise to be to those that were pricked
in heart, but no more then to them afar off, etc. as many as God shall call;
nor know I what Scripture he builds upon for such an exposition of the phrase
[the promise is to you] when it is offered to you. Albeit others speak as much
in effect, when they say, the promise made to Abraham of sending Christ, and
now fulfilled, is to them. But deal ingenuously, is that all which in Act. 3.
25. 26. is understood, by that, [yee are the children of the Covenant made with
the fathers, etc.] ( i. e.) God has fulfilled the promise made to the fathers,
concerning Christ's coming, whom now he offers to you? Why are the Jews
only such children, and not the Gentiles, all kindreds as well, albeit Christ
was first sent to them? For verse. 25. all kindreds of the earth are mentioned,
as those that should be blessed in Abraham's seed. Yea, do not such as so
speak, affirm before, that this promise of sending Christ, was to them, their
children, and those afar off? which notion Paul, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. applies to
the Gentiles. They are the children of the Prophets, Act. 3. and he does not
say thus, and of the fathers, with whom the Covenant is made, as if it were
meant in respect of bare natural relation, but, and of the Covenant made with
the fathers, to show, that it is meant of Church, and federall interest in them,
as Covenant fathers, and dispensers: yea, to show, that the Covenant was as
seed, by virtue whereof, they considered as federally and ecclesiastically
privileged, did spring. I had thought that these parallel phrases, that
[children of the Covenant] of grace, mentioned, Act. 3. 25. and [children of
the promise] Gal. 4. 28. was not merely applied to either Jews or Galatians,
because Christ according to the promise of God to Abraham, etc. came into the
world; that blessing might be offered to them, through him the promised seed.
But because they had a visible interest in the promise of blessing by him, and
therefore both Jews and Galatians were so styled; sure I am, Paul's phrase of
the Jews, Romans 9. 4. To whom belongs the adoption and the promises,
comprehending Genesis 17. 7. Jer. 31. 33, 34. holds forth no bare offer thereof,
but at least an external interest therein. And C. B. who makes the promise to
be the offer of it to them, their children and those afar off, as many as the
Lord shall call, will not easily reconcile himself to others of his mind,
denying that the Scripture has to do with children that way, in that they
understand not. And how then is the offer of the promise at present [the
promise is] to your children] unto those children, many of which were but
Infants? Besides, those afar off from them, as were the Gentiles, how was the
promise to them then in the offer thereof, when as yet it was not offered to
them, until afterward, that the Jews came to reject the same, Act. 13. 46,
47. unless in respect of some few sprinklings and first fruits, which yet was
after this also, Act. 8. 10. Or, if he do stretch it to the future, with
others, scil. that it is to them upon that limitation that they be called,
namely effectually; surely he will not say, that the promise, i. e. the mere
offer thereof is to believers. Now, to come to that wherein A. R. and Hen. Den,
and others do center, scil. That it was no otherwise to the Jews, then to
those afar off, and so, and no otherwise to their children, or (as A. R.
phraseth it) it was equally to all three sorts, scil. when they believe, then
they are in the Covenant, etc. But why are all made equal herein? Act. 3. 25,
26. even as it is expounded by our opposites, will give the Jews the
prioritie, the Text is express, and to you first, etc. all are not then equal
therein. The Gentiles come not in, but by occasion of the Jews casting out,
and then they considered as in Olive or Church Estate, partake of no other
Church fatness, for substance, then did their predecessors the Jews, Romans 11.
12. 15. 17. no other kingdom for the nature of it, and in the essentialls of
the external right, and administration of the royal Covenant to the Gentile
successor, then was to the Jewish predecessor, Matthew. 8. 11. 12. and 21. 43. In
a sense then, the Jews are preferred and not made equal, albeit in another
respect of essential samenesse of Covenant privileges, we have now proved
and yielded them to be equal, yet so, as it makes against A. R. and others,
more of which anon.

SENT. VI.
BUt A. R. I suppose forgets himself, when he makes the sole condition of the
promise, to be equally to Jew and Gentile, scil. believing, meaning
saving-beleeving. For he expounds this Text, Act. 2. 38, 39. to be the
promise mentioned in Joel 2. of pouring out the extraordinary gifts of the
spirit upon them. Now does A. R. suppose the same reason of pouring out such
gifts on the Gentiles to be called to the worlds end, as was in those first
times of planting the Gospel? or would he have all believers now expect such
extraordinary gifts, as having according to his exposition, this place and
promise for it? I suppose not, why then does he make them all equal? And if
effectual calling be the only condition of obtaining these promised gifts,
those that cast out devils in Christ's name, etc. might have had something more
to say they plead, Matthew. 7. 31. But why does any speak so exclusively, when
express mention is made of remission of sins, Act. 2. 38. in confirmation
also whereof, the promise is partly occasioned, verse. 39. And for further
discovery of this mistaken exposition, let it be considered. 1 That the very
confessed occasion of this here spoken to these heart-pierced Jews, was the
guilt of heinous sins, and of that cursed wish, Matthew. 27. 25. They were not
troubled for want of such extraordinary gifts, and to tell them of such gifts,
was both impertinent and unsatisfactory, and it could minister but little
comfort to sin-sick souls, to promise them such gifts, which they might have,
and yet die in their sins, Matthew. 7. 23. 2 As the maine thing propounded,
Act. 2. scil. of remission of sins, is not so much as named, Joel 2. so
neither is that in Joel set down in this order, I will pour out my spirit
upon you, and upon your children; or thus, you and your sons and daughters
(only) shall prophecy. 3. The subjects instanced in Joel 2. are not reducible
to the notions, as here mentioned, [you and your children] your sons and
daughters might fall under the notion of you and your children, but not your
old men and servants. It were absurd to explain your children, that is, your
old men, as if they were these hearers children. And thus much to that wherein
A. R. is singular.

SECT. VII.
AS for that wherein he joyneth with the rest, that the children are put in
the same skale with those afar off, etc. The promise is to them all upon
condition of effectual calling: True it is, that the phrase, The promise (is)
to you, and (is) to your children, and (is) to those afar off, etc. is the
same; but non sequitur, that ergo it is to them all alike, and in the same
sense. It is at present to them all, that is evident by the word (...) in the
present tense, but not alike to all. The notion of the other as persons afar
off, intimates that these Jews and their children were not all accounted
afar off too, scil. strangers from actual external interests in the
Covenants of promise and commonwealth of Israel, or the visible political
Church, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12, 13. but rather nigh in that sense, and yet the
promise is to them afar off intentionally and quoad deum, even whilst afar
off and uncalled; but to the other the Jews and their children, the promise is
to them actually, and quoad hominem. To all Paul's kindred, Infants or elder
Jews, belonged the adoption and the promises indefinitely, Romans 9. 1, 2, 3, 4.
nor is it unusual in Scripture to express covenant grace, made over as in
present, to diverse persons, some whereof are future and to come, others are in
present existence and view, Deuteronomy. 29. 14, 15. neither with you do I make this
Covenant, but with him which stands here this day, scil. the Jew and
Proselyte, and the little ones present, and with him, that is not here this
day, scil. with the persons unborne, coming of you, or of the Proselyte. The
phrase is alike to them, which were actually existent in Church estate and
humane being, and to others which were not so, with both do I (at present)
make my Covenant, etc. In the one it is verified actually, and quoad homines,
in the other intentionally, and quoad deum. And this promise here mentioned,
Act. 2. 38, 39. containing in it remission of sins, and so the righteousness
of faith, on which faith pitcheth, Romans 4. 7, 8. with 11. what was it other,
then that which by circumcision was visibly sealed unto them and their
children, by Gods own appointment? Circumcision being in the Sacramental
nature of it, a visible seal of the righteousness of faith it self, and not
merely in a personal respect to Abraham, as applied by his faith to his
justification. And albeit believers came with Abraham to have the saving
experience of it, Romans 4. 7, 8. 11, 12. yet to the rest, Circumcision was a
Covenant, or a Sacramental sign or seal of Gods Covenant, Act. 7. Genesis 17.
even of that his Covenant mentioned, verse. 7. I will be a God to thee and thy
seed, which contains that promise of justification, Jer. 31. 33, 34. Nor will
it suffice to say, that Covenant was a mixed Covenant. It held forth temporal
things indeed, but by virtue of a Covenant of Grace, Psalm. 111. 5. as does the
promise now, 1 Timothy 4. 8. but it holds forth also spiritual things in the
external right and administration thereof as to all, albeit in the internal
operation, as to some. The promises are to them all, Romans 9. 4. sci. in the
former sense, and yet ver. 8. some only are the children of the promise, and
the choice seed in that general Covenant, scil. in respect of the saving
efficacy of the Covenant upon them, verse. 6. And the same distinction is now
held out in such sort, amongst persons in Church Estate: unless any will say,
that there are none in the Covenant, as well as in Christ the Vine, John 15. 2.
externally only, which I suppose will not be affirmed. And in this sense
Peter speaking to these Jews before they had actually repented or believed,
verse. 38. with 40, 41. says, the promise of remission of sins is, or
belongs to you, scil. in the external right and administration of it, the
Apostle calls upon them to repent, and be baptized, not because then the
promise should be theirs, but because the promise was theirs already, in the
sense mentioned, repent and be baptized: for the promise is to you, or belongs
to you: as Romans 9. 4. has it. Both baptizing and repenting are joined as
duties unto which, upon this Covenant ground they are called, and not as
conditions of their coming by external right in the promise, none will say of
the one branch, that be baptized was a condition propounded by Peter to them
of their coming to right in the promise; since baptism as a Covenant Seal,
presupposes a Covenant right; yet is the duty of being baptized, as well as
of repenting, alike urged on the same ground upon the Jews. Yea but Peter
having exhorted them to repent, etc. would not have baptized them, unless they
had repented: therefore it was not their Covenant-right, which he looked at.
Admit he would not, yet that does not make void, either their Covenant, or
Church-right thereto: because being adultmembers under offense, and admonished
thereof by Peter: they might for their obstinacy against such an admonition
notwithstanding Church, or Covenant-right, have been debarred that seal. If
one of our members be under offense, and the Elders admonish him to repent
thereof, and he does not, he is debarred the seal of the Lords Supper, and
his children of Baptism the while; not that he is not a Churchmember, and so
has Church-right as well as covenant-right thereto; but in that this
intervening obstinacy does suspend his [ jus in re] albeit otherwise considered
he had [ jus ad rem:] so in the case of these offensive members of that Jewish
Church, which was a true visible Church, and not yet dischurched and divorced
by the Lord; which makes way for answer to A. K. that if they were then in
Covenant, they were then in the Church of the Gospel; if he mean it, of being
internally in the Covenant, it is not that we plead for: it of being
externally, or quoad homines, we have proved, they were so in Covenant and
Church estate also; as being yet in the Olive and kingdom of God, and not cast
out, until their unbeleefe, or total, and final rejection of the Covenant,
as ratified in Jesus of Nazareth as that promised Messiah, Romans 11. 20. to
which the Jews had not as yet come, and this Church was a Gospel Church
visibly interested in the Covenant of Grace, the subject of the Gospel, and
the same essentially with that Gospel, or Christian Church; unless, whilst the
Jewish Church stood, any will say, there was no Evangelicall visible Church in
the world, but a legal Church: for there was no other visible Church, then
that of the Jews: that then something further was required by Peter, of the
Adult-Jewes, to actual participation of baptism, and it was not because their
Church of which they were members, was no true visible Evangelicall Church:
since it was Gods only visible Church, in the time of Christ's incarnation, of
which he lived and dyed a member: and none will say, he was no member of any
Evangelicall Church, but of a legal; nor was it because the seal of Baptism
was not administrable, in, or by, or to that Church of the Jews: for it is
evident that the Commission of Baptism was first given by God, to John
Baptist, in reference to that Church of the Jews, as a seal of their
membership therein; the same God that told him, who should Baptize with the
holy Ghost, he sent him to Baptize, John 1. 33. the Pharisees themselves could
not deny John's baptism to be from heavens authority, Matthew. 21. 25, 26. and
Baptism being a Church-Ordinance, to be in ordinary dispensation or
administered only in and by a Church of Christ, that baptism was at that time
the Jewish Church-Ordinance, so far forth, there was no other floor, wherein
all sorts which John baptized, whether they proved chaffy hypocrites, or solid
grain, upright ones, were in his and Christ's time interessed, Matthew. 3. 11.
12. this was then, the only floor, or visible Church of Christ, (for in the
visible Church is no chafe) [his] floor; he shall purge [his] floor. Into
this Church fellowship also did Christ's own Disciples by that new way of
initiation, visibly seal persons, which were the reformed part of that Jewish
Church, continuing still their relation to those officers of the Jewish Church,
and their fellowship in the Church-Ordinances, then dispensed, and not
separating from the same: Matthew. 10. 6, 7. and 16. 24. John 10. 16.
either gathering into distinct Churches, or calling to them other ordinary
Church Officers; which yet were not actually given by Christ, until upon his
ascension, Ephesians. 4. 8. 11, 12, etc. but the reason rather was partly because
(as was said) they were under such offense: and partly because albeit their
Church were a true Evangelicall Church, yet it was not so pure and perfect, but
had many gross mixtures both of mere ceremonial administrations, which were
now to be laid aside, and of most palpably and openly corrupt, and rotten
members: and partly because it was now requisite, not only to acknowledge the
promised Messiah of Abraham's loins, to be he alone, which by his blood should
come, actually, as well as virtually, to ratify the Covenant of grace, visibly
made with them, as they did in receiving the seal of Circumcision, but that
they own the Lord Jesus, who was crucified by, and among them, as he which a
lone did thus: which amongst other testimonies Baptism witneseth, therefore
more was now required of the adult-Jewes, then formerly; which yet was not
required of their unripe Children: even as when we are to receive members of
other visible Churches, into complete fellowship of all Church privileges, and
ordinances with us: we require some satisfaction of the grown persons, to
testify their repentance of their former Church-sinnes, and personal
scandalls, therein committed, and their willing subjection unto the government,
and worship and doctrine of Christ, as administered amongst us; not because we
question the truth of their Church Estate elsewhere, but, because those
Churches, albeit true, yet very corrupt, and themselves then scandalous; and
withal being desirous, not to be with us barely, as transient members, by
virtue of Communion of Churches, but being to be of us, as fixed members, we
rest not in their former Church engagements; but require of such, some new
engagements, in reference to us; and yet we require not this of their children,
which are not sui juris, nor capable of giving personal satisfaction, but
admit them to the initiatory seal of baptism with: us so was it with them,
Acts the second, being to be incorporated into a purer company, exhibiting the
Ordinances of Christ in a more perfect evangelicall way. Nor must that needs
follow, which A. K. says, that because it is said, they were added to the
Church, that therefore they were not of the Church before, but after Peter
spoke those words, Verse. 39. the promise is to you, etc. for this is as well
spoken after that expression that they were baptized, as after that mentioned,
of their receiving the word gladly, and yet will our opposites conclude, that
therefore they were not of the Church, nor in the Covenant before they were
baptized, but came into that estate by baptism? if Baptism were the form of
the Church, or that which they so much urge wholly failed; that a person must
be first discipled and so in Covenant and Church Estate before he be baptized.

Nor is that cogent, which is urged against the Childrens right in the promise
and unto Baptism, that they should be so privileged, when they came to be
effectually called, and to be turned from their sins, as if this were quoad
homines, their only rule of judging of persons visible interest in the
Covenant of grace, or visible right to the initiatory seal thereof: or at
least the only way of having such a visible interest in the visible Churches
Court. For besides that it was not so of old, in applying of circumcision, as
Gods appointed seal of the parties visible Covenant estate and right: even
with us also, it is not the rule in Foro Ecclesiae: for then none are by the
Church to be by rule admitted to baptism, but such as are effectually called:
and then, John which knew, that the most of them which he baptized, would be
as chafe in the floor, he kept not rule, in baptizing of them. Or if calling
be taken for external inviting, in the word preached, and offer of Christ,
that I suppose will not be pleaded: for then every hearer should be forthwith
baptized, albeit an Indian or Black a more; but calling as taken in reference
to baptizing unto remission of sins, seems to be rather calling into
visible Covenant, and Church Estate: unto which some, whose was the promise
intentionally, yet were afar off from that estate actually at present, but when
called to it, they were then to be baptized. And yet further to evince, that
the little ones of these Jews, not then capable of actual repenting, were not
in defect of that repentance, excluded from the promise mentioned Act. 2. 38,
39. Consider,

1. Such a supposed exclusion of their babes, as here intended, or employed by
that speech of the Apostle [to as many as God shall call] had been, to lay an
occasion, and addition of more cumbers and trouble to the darkened disquieted
spirits of his hearers, then to clear and ease them, supposing as is
undeniably evident, that their wish against their poor children, pressed them
sore, as well as other guilt. It was all along thitherto, a received truth,
that God was a God to their seed externally, by virtue of Abraham's Covenant
they were his adopted Children, Ezekiel. 16. 21. and the Churches children, which
she bare to the Lord, verse. 20. See Deuteronomy. 29. 29. and it was evident, by Gods
own appointment of Circumcision, to be the initiatory seal not to a blank
but to his Covenant of being a God to them, whilst babes, and before
circumcised in heart, so as actually to repent, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. this their babes
had external right unto, whilst these their parents were unconvinced or
unwrought upon, remaining uncut off by censures from the Church; as of old,
Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. is mentioned of those Idolaters. Now if not so when their
Parents are wrought upon by Peter's Sermon, as the parents were thus far
losers, by Christ and his Gospel, and the efficacy thereof, losing that
precious parentall privilege which they had before this of their childrens
federall interest, and privilege of Abraham's Covenant, so also their children
are losers too, by their parents coming so far on to Christ; coming now thus
to be excluded their former Covenant right, and neither Parents, nor children,
to have any Covenant right, and privilege in lieu thereof. How such doctrine
might well stumble, and trouble such Parents, let any sober and judicious mind
judge; to be sure they have laid a load of guilt, and given a deadly wound
unto their poor babes, by that curse of theirs; now if they are as Pagan
strangers from the Covenant, then is there no hope, in reference to ordinary,
and revealed grounds and ways of hope and life, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12, 13. Yea but
they might repent: True, if they lived to years, but they may more likely die
in Infancy: and what then? why Christ was according to promise unto Abraham
sent, etc. True, but what is that to our babes if not interested in his
Covenant or testament, in regard whereof alone, he is a mediator to any? Heb.
9. or what ordinary means of sanctifying and justifying our babes, or saving
efficacy upon them, if not by and through the word of Covenant? Ephesians. 5. 25,
26. Romans 9. 6. Yea but the promise is to them in Christ; True, but you tell us
it is with this only limitation, that they be effectually called, and turned
from their sins, of which our Infants in ordinary course are not capable.
Guilt there is in an ordinary and revealed way conveyed to our babes, but no
revealed and ordinary way is left by this doctrine visibly to confirm us that
it may be taken off, so that their bleeding wound is unstanched.

2. The Apostles which as yet preached not, for the abolishing even of
Mosaicall rites, would much less at that time, so publicly hold forth,
implicitly at least, the exclusion of the Jews babes, from Abraham's Covenant,
Genesis 17. 7. And verily the Apostles which so long after, were so tender of the
better and more pliable part of the Jews, that they would have Paul to take
off that aspersion, as if he should as yet lay a necessity upon the Jews,
not to circumcise their children, Acts 21. 20. 22, 23, 24. would much less
give such manifest and just offense to them, as to hold forth an exclusion of
their babes, from right in that Covenant of Abraham it self, whereof
Circumcision was a visible seal; as the places quoted in Genesis 17. 11. 13. and
Acts 7. 8. declare.

3. If Peter should intend by that clause, such an exclusion at present, of the
Jews babes from that external interest in the Covenant of grace, it were to
be cross to Paul's doctrine, Romans 15. 8. who makes it Christ's end not to
evacuate, undermine, or abolish by his coming [the promises] indefinitely made
to the fathers, whether in Genesis 17. 7. or Deuteronomy. 30 6. or the like, as
respecting parents or children, but to confirm the same, Ibid.

But some will yield the case as verified in those Jewish children, as being
never before denied to be visibly in Abraham's Covenant: but what is this to
our childrens federall interest in the days of the Gospel?

An. Yes it is very much. 1 It proves that by the Apostles since Christ's
ascension, this tenent of the children of visible members of the Church are
visibly interested in the Covenant of grace is of divine authority, and is no
humane invention. 2. These Jews are eyed by the Apostles, as persons to
partake of privileges of a Church of Christians, as was baptism; and
therefore what extent of federal right and privilege is granted by the
Apostles to them, and theirs in that way, is equally belonging to Gentiles in a
like way. 3. To suppose God by Apostolical ratification, to allow to children
of Jewish parents coming on to Christ, etc. a larger privilege then to
Gentile parents, as came on to Christ, etc. is to make God a respecter of
persons. 4. The force of the words seem to carry it, that the same promise
which was to those Jews actually in Church and Covenant estate, was
intentionally to those afar off which were strangers actually from a like
estate, whether those of the ten tribes, or rather those of the Gentiles, and
should be actually to them, when they came to be called actually into the
fellowship of that Covenant and Church estate. Now what promise was that?
Verily a promise, which carried with it a partial reference unto their
children: The promise is to you, and to your children: And the same is unto
them afar off, whom God shall call, scil. in reference to their children also.

CHAP. III. Sect. I. The Explication of Genesis 17. 7, etc.
ANother Scripture holding forth the former doctrine of the Federall holiness
of such children is Genesis 17. 7. a place that in these later days, has been
through men's distempers like Isaacs well, an Esek for contention about the
waters in it. Touching which, and so the whole doctrine of Federall holiness
propounded, let us make use of a few distinctions, and then set down some few
conclusions, and withal take off what is brought to the contrary. The Covenant
of grace is considered either nakedly, or as invested with a visible political
Church Covenant, if not explicit, yet implicit. We are to consider this
place, Genesis 17. not so much in the former, as in the later sense; God making of
it with reference to the Church, which was to remain in the posterity of
Isaac, verse. 18, 19, 20, 21. albeit at present it be to be contained in
Abraham's own family, whence also he ordains an initiatory seal, and way of
restipulation, to which they submitting together, as one selected body,
collectively, and as members thereof, distributively, they did implicitly make
confession and promise to God, and bind themselves in a nearer religious tie
one unto another. Hence often renewed, Deuteronomy. 29. 2 Chro. 15. and 30. and 34.
Nehem. 10. Ezekiel. 16. 8.

Again, that Covenant of grace is considered either in it self, or in its
administration; to which purpose circumcision is called the Covenant, partly,
because it was the sign and seal of the Covenant of grace, Genesis 17. 11, 12,
13. Partly too, because it was the Covenant of grace in the administration of
it, Jer. 13. 11. and Esaias 24. 5. and Zach. 11. 10. has reference to the
Covenant of grace both as invested with Church Covenant, and in respect of
Church-administration thereof.

Concerning persons being in covenant, some are said to be in the covenant
intentionally, so children of the Church, which are yet unborne, Deuteronomy. 29. 15.
so those afar off, the promise was to them at that time, Acts 2. 39. so the
Jews also which yet were to come in, were in Paul's time holy Federally, Romans
11. 15, 16. or actually, so were the Jews holy which were not cut off in Paul's
time, Ibid. so Deuteronomy. 29. 14. we attend rather to the later then the former in
this discourse.

Persons actually in covenant, are either internally and savingly in covenant,
as are all true believers, and their children which belong to Gods election:
and as were many of those included in that phrase, Romans 11. 16. and as were
Isaac and Jacob, which were not only children of the promise, intentionally,
before they were borne, Romans 9. 9, 10, 11. but actually, as soon as borne; God
revealing his mind of covenant-grace in such sort, as never reversing the same,
after they were actually borne, hence that Gal. 4. 23. 28. compared, albeit
many of the Galatians were but such, in point of visibilitie, as appears. Or
they are such as are only externally in the covenant, thus even Ishmael was,
for circumcision was even to him also Gods covenant or visible seal thereof.
This distinction is the Apostles, Romans 9. 4. he speaks of some to whom the
promises belonged, scil. only externally, and of others to whom they belonged,
in respect of the saving efficacy thereof, Verse. 6, 7, 8.

Such as are externally in covenant are either such as are so upon their own
personal right merely, as many proselytes, Exodus 12. 44, 45. Deuteronomy. 29. 10,
11. even those Gibeonites: so were the souls in Abraham's house which he
gained to his religion, according to Ainsworth, Genesis 12. 5. such as he had
commanded to fear God, Genesis 19. 19. as appears by their free submission to
that ridiculous painful ordinance to flesh and blood, Genesis 17. 27. Or such
as withal are externally in Covenant, so considered as invested with
Church Covenant, in their parents right: as the Jews and Proselytes Children,
Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11. God accepting the actual owning of his Covenant by the grown
part, and parents instead of the children also. So of all collectively is that
spoken, not only that God that day avouched them to be his people, Deuteronomy. 26.
18. both parents and children, as also Deuteronomy. 30. 16. and 29. but thou have
avouched the Lord to be thy God, Verse. 17. thou collective Israel, yet it was
acted but by the grown part in their own, and in their childrens stead.
Abraham's seed is either taken for the head and principal as was Christ, and so
rather intended, Genesis 12. 3. and 22. 18. or for the head and body together even
Christ mystical, so Genesis 22. 15. Thy seed shall possess the gates of thine
enemies, and so Gal. 3. 16. Jew and Gentile but one seed with Christ the head
of the Church. Again, Abraham's seed is either taken collectively, or
distributively; collectively, either his seed by propagation, or proportion. In
the former sense the Jews in their generations, were the seed mentioned, Genesis
17. 7. that is, parents and children, for they are seed in their generations:
seed by proportion, were the Proselytes of old in their generations, and
visible inchurched believers in their generations, scil. parents and children
together. And both again are considered specifically, or individually:
specifically, so some of that sort of parents and grown persons and some of
that sort of children are as well internally and savingly in the covenant as
externally: albeit many individual persons of both sorts are only externally;
thus, Deuteronomy. 29. 14. with [him] that is here and with [him] that is not here:
him, not them, as noting a collection; yea a certain species, or sort of
persons grown or babes, and of babes borne or unborne: according to a
different respect of Gods making his covenant with them. So in Genesis 17. to thy
seed indefinitely, God absolutely covenanting thus, as Verse. 7. with them in
their species and sorts: conditionally in respect of the individual persons of
each sort. Or more briefly, the seed of Abraham, are either his choice seed in
special, or his Church seed indefinitely, we consider herein the later and
not so much the former.

SECT II.
1. COnclusion, that Covenant, Genesis 17. 7. was a Covenant of grace, and the
same in nature, with that Covenant of grace now held forth to us. Neither of
the branches of this conclusion I think are denied by the more judicious of our
opposites, albebeit both have been by some of the more vulgar sort, making that
covenant in Genesis 17. to be a Covenant of works, etc. that it was a Covenant
of grace, may appear by the quality of the persons, betwixt whom the covenant
is made, scil. not God as a Creator, and men as innocent, as in that covenant
of works made with Adam, but God as gracious, justifying ungodly persons in the
sense of the Law, or such as cannot become legally godly, perfect in themselves
or workers, covenanting with such like non-workers, Romans 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
s^il. God and Abraham, yea God and Isaac, yea God and the spiritual seed of
Abraham to whom with him the promises indefinitely were made, and so this also,
Gal. 3. 16. 2 By the matter promised on Gods part, scil. I will be a God to
thee and to thy seed, holding forth more then any legal covenant, as 1. to
tender and give to them his ordinances according as they should be capable of
them, as their peculiar privilege by right of Covenant; hence these two
coupled, Lev. 26. 11, 12. Rev. 21. 3. I will be a God to them, I will set my
tabernacle amongst them; hence any without these or any external right to
them, are according to men said to be without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 11,
12, 13. 2 That he will dwell amongst them, and manifest his special presence
with and in his Ordinances, and providence among them; hence being a God to
any and Gods dwelling with them, are coupled together, Exodus 29. 45. Lev. 26.
11, 12 Rev. 21. 3. 3 That he will tender them deliverances as their federall
right, and be really forward to give such deliverances from all sorts of
miseries, and from the causes of the same; yea actually to work such
deliverances, so far as is meet, and suitable to their present conditions: hence
God, his being a God to any, and his removing sad mournful thoughts from any,
are joined; Revel. 21. 4. see Levit. 26. 41. 42. 45. Deliverances from common
providence are common to all, even Pagans; but not such as spring from the
virtue of the Covenant, Zach. 9. 11. 4 so as to give to such an external
covenant right at least; as to temporal blessings; hence giving Canaan, and
his being a God to them joined, Genesis 17. 5. 7. 8. see Psalm. 111. 5. so to
spiritual mercies, as justification, Jer. 31. 33. 51. Adoption 2 Cor. 6. 16.
18. also owning after death, Exodus 3. 6. compared with Luke 20. 37, 38. and
glory after all: hence as to the former, so to this, is joined, God his being a
God to any, Heb. 11. 6. All this is included as by virtue of Gods covenant
offered to such as he is a God to, yea and as that which according to men, and
as men are in charity to judge, is with all the visible right of such. Albeit,
the former two senses suffice, to the visible administration of the covenant,
as their right; in that God does hold forth that he is a God to such in
covenant, to whom he gives his ordinances, and with whom he vouchsafes his
presence therein as their external covenant right. 3. By the condition
propounded and promised to adult Abraham, with whom God was now in this solemn
wise to enter into this Covenant, not with him alone but with his, scil. the
exercise of faith, and Evangelicall uprightness or perfection; Walk before
me and be upright or perfect, Verse. 2. And I will make my Covenant between
me and thee, Verse. 4. as for me, behold my covenant is with thee, etc. this
is my part of the covenant, that was thine, and Verse. 7. I will establish my
covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations,
etc. Now that the same covenant is to us since Christ's ascension, appears by
the former: in that it being the covenant of grace, it is an everlasting
covenant: hence Genesis 17. 3. and Heb. 13. 20. hence too, when God would express
the matter of his Covenant, since Christ's incarnation, he uses and annexeth
the old phrase, and form of promise; I will be a God to such or such, 2 Corin.
6. 18. Heb. 8. 10. Jer. 31. 1. spoken in reference to our times: So when
speaking of the Jews and their children, which hereafter are to come into
Church estate actually he uses the same phrase, Ezekiel. 37. 25. 27. compared.
Hence the same language in mentioning new Jerusalems condition and privilege,
I will be a God to them, I will set my tabernacle among them, Revel. 21. 3. The
Covenant then of the Gospel, has outward privileges of Gods tabernacle
annexed, as well as Abraham's Covenant, yea in that it is the same with it. By
this which has been said, it appears how short and unsafe the speech of Mr.
B. is, who in answer to the argument from Genesis 17. says that Genesis 17. the new
Covenant is promised but not covenanted, even as it was before to Abraham, Genesis
12. 3. bringing Jer. 31. 35. where God says, not I have made, but I will make
a new Covenant, which was made good at the death of Christ as the Apostle makes
it appear, Heb. 8. 9, 10. I confess I have met with such a notion in Cameron
de triplo foedere, These. 20. distinguishing of faedus gratiae promissum et
promulgatum, or sancitum, proving it by Genesis 3. 12. 15. But with reverence to
so worthy a man be it spoken; I cannot readily subscribe to his notion, and
proof thereof; in that the covenant made with Abraham, is called both by the
name of promises made to him, Verse. 16. and the covenant confirmed before of
God in Christ, that mediator of the new covenant, Heb. 12. 24. 430. years
before the Law; which exactly considered refers us to Genesis 12. 3. so that
though God said, Jerem. 31. Not I have, but I will make such a covenant, this
proves not, that it was first made good, or verified, in Heb. 8. 10. etc. For
it was confirmed in Christ long before, says Paul, Gal. 3. In respect of the
virtue and efficacy of Christ's blood, in which it was ratified; else neither
Abraham nor Isaac had been saved, see Heb. 13. 20. and Revel. 13. 8. albeit
actually and fully accomplished afterward, he had not made it, in so many
words expressly, as Jer. 31. notes, but in substance he had both, Genesis 12. 3.
and 7. 7. and Deuteronomy. 30. 6, etc. those particulars in Jer. 31. being branches:
1. Of being blessed in Christ. 2. Of God his being a God unto them. 3. Of
circumcising their hearts to love him, etc. He had not made that covenant in
that way in Sinai, upon their coming out of Egypt, which is there hinted, Jer.
31. 32. but that he made no more Evangelicall a covenant, then at Sinai before
or after with the Jews, it follows not: not according to the covenant made
with your fathers, when I took them by the hand to bring them out of Egypt;
not according to it, scil. for external dispensations with thunder and
lightnings, and in the former of the ten words, etc. but he says not, that it
should not be according to that Covenant with Abraham, for the matter which,
or sorts of persons, to which it was dispensed, or as if he had made no
covenant of grace with them before their coming out of Egypt, in Abraham's
covenant, etc. or that the covenant made with Abraham, was not the covenant of
grace, which was made with him above four hundred years before that time
Jeremy speaks of, Gal. 3. 16. Exodus 19. 1, 2, 3. 20. 1, etc. and 12. 2. 6. 40,
41. and Genesis 15. 13. and 21. 9. and 12. 3, 4. compared together. A. R. is also
too presumptuously bold with Christ, that faithful and true witness, when not
content to vent his own unsound notions, but he will needs father them upon
Christ himself and bring him in as speaking thus to the Jews, from John 8.
You see then how the Covenant of Circumcision, made with Abraham, and you his
natural seed, was to be an everlasting covenant in your flesh, to wit, in
me, who was to come of your flesh, Genesis 17. 13. And to this end, to this
covenant of circumcision, was that covenant of the Law added, etc. by which you
plainly see, how that circumcision, was to you natural Jews, both a
covenant, and yet also but a sign of another covenant, Genesis 7. 11. scil. of
that everlasting covenant, made with Abraham, and all his spiritual seed. But
how dares A. R. to father such unsound things upon your faithful Prophet of
the Church, as these are; first, that by that your flesh is meant, him, or
Christ who was to come of their flesh; whereas the context speaks thus of all
and every male in their generations, stranger or other, borne in their house or
bought with money amongst them; yet this should be his covenant in their
flesh: that is Christ, who was to come of their flesh even of Ishmael and Esau
and of the strangers of other countries; will Christ own this as his doctrine
at the last day? Yea restrain it: of your flesh, that is of you Jews of all
the Tribes, when yet Christ came of the tribe of Judah only: Would Christ
speak so heterodoxly? Secondly, that there were three distinct covenants,
besides that covenant of nature made with Adam in innocence, and so four
covenants, besides that with all the creatures, Genesis 9. and besides these there
are three distinct covenants here mentioned; first, that of Circumcision,
secondly, that superadded of the Law, thirdly, that everlasting covenant unto
which Circumcision was but a sign, will this doctrine be owned by Christ? Nay
do not these sayings cross each other? scil. That the covenant of
circumcision was to be an everlasting covenant in their flesh Christ: and yet
it was not that covenant. The Text says, for my covenant shall be in your
flesh, etc. that is, as here Christ is said to affirm the covenant of
circumcision: This covenant then of circumcision being in their flesh, scil.
Christ: it seems there is some other covenant ratified in Christ then that
which is the covenant of grace; even this covenant of circumcision, which this
Pseudo-Christus affirms to be another covenant distinct from the everlasting
covenant, scil. the covenant of grace. I dare not see the Lord Jesus Christ
thus abused. Thirdly, that was plainly to be seen, that circumcision was to
them a Covenant, and yet but a sign of another covenant, scil. that of grace.
As if these two expressions were as wide as a covenant, which circumcision it
self was, and a sign of another covenant; when every one that has read
catecheticall doctrine will say, that when in one verse it is said of
circumcision in their flesh, that it was his Covenant in their flesh: it is a
usual Metonymy in speaking of Sacraments to call the outward sacramental
sign and seal, by the name of the thing signified and sealed. As the cup is
called the testament of Christ's blood, 1 Cor. 11. 25. that is, the visible
sign or seal of it. The bread is called Christ's body, ver. 24. So in
mentioning that extraordinary sacrament, the rock is called Christ, 1 Cor. 10.
and here in Genesis 17. 11. Circumcision is called a token or sacramental sign
of the covenant, in Romans 4. 11. The seal of the righteousness of faith, where
the Scripture speaks plainly, and explicitly. Yet here A. R. will have
Christ himself to hold forth other doctrine then is usual in speaking of
Sacraments. Fourthly, that God made with Abraham and those Jews another
Covenant distinct from that everlasting covenant, scil. that covenant of
circumcision. And yet also made with Abraham and his spiritual seed that other
everlasting covenant, of which the circumcision of Jews was a sign; as if God
at one and the same time made with one and the same person Abraham two distinct
covenants, one which was not the everlasting covenant or covenant of grace,
namely the covenant of circumcision, as it is called; and the other which was
that everlasting covenant it self: And likewise that circumcision was given by
God who said it shall be a sign to them, to be a sign of a covenant made,
not between God and them that by his appointment were thus circumcised, but of
a covenant made betwixt God and others: when the letter of the Text is thus,
Genesis 17. 11. It shall be a token of the covenant between me and you. What
covenant was that? was it that Verse. 10. where it is said, This is my covenant
which you shall keep between me and you and thy seed after thee? nay, that was
a duty and condition of the covenant rather, which they were to keep or
observe, as it follows: this is my covenant, every manchild amongst you shall
be circumcised, Verse. 11. ye shall circumcise the foreskin of your flesh: So
then circumcision is but a branch of the covenant or a condition of the
covenant on their part, which in the sacramental nature of it is a sign, not
of that mentioned which was their duty in being circumcised, and so
circumcising their flesh, Verse. 11. should be a sign of being circumcised,
Verse. 10. which were absurd; But rather it is a sign of the covenant of God,
even that covenant mentioned Verse. 7. scil. of Gods becoming a God to them:
which is essentially the very everlasting covenant of grace. And whereas A. R.
his Pseudo-Christus says, that circumcision in their flesh was to be an
everlasting covenant in their flesh, and yet to be but a sign of that
everlasting Covenant, etc. grounding upon that Verse. 13. my covenant in your
flesh shall be for an everlasting covenant: As if it should mean, that that
eternal covenant was not made with them that had that sign of the covenant at
the present, but yet it was to be made with others, when yet the same phrase
used in mentioning the sign is used in expressing the form of the covenant it
self, Verse. 7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee in their generations (...) in faedus seculi, unto or for a covenant
of perpetuity, to be a God to thee and to thy seed after thee. Here the
phrase for an everlasting covenant evidently notes, not any future covenant,
which is not here held forth, but the qualification rather of that covenant,
which God says he will establish at present with Abraham and his seed; for
having mentioned the covenants, he expresses the qualifications of the
covenant it self, that it is of no temporary but of an everlasting nature. And
then sets down the matter of his Covenant thus made with him and his seed,
scil. that he will be a God to them, and that verse. 13. is but a Sacramental
phrasing of the same thing.

SECT. III.
Conclu. 2. THat the covenant of grace in Genesis 17. is to be considered as
invested with Church Covenant, and therefore mention is made of this covenant
as to be kept by them, verse. 9. which is further expressed in one particular
thereof, verse. 10. Not as if this were all which God required of Abraham and of
his seed, but because this was the first initiating condition, and that which
did as an initiatory sacramental sign, in a more peculiar way, incorporate
him and them into one instituted Church-body at present, which should more
fully be carried on for after time in Isaacs time, ver. 19. 21. and 21. 12.
Besides, this made them further capable afterward of partaking of other Church
ordinances. Hence also if others desired to partake of that Church ordinance of
the passover, albeit they might be otherwise godly, yet they might not be
admitted to the same, unless by circumcision initiated into their Church body,
Exodus 12. 44. 48. Hence when the Scripture would speak of the Jewish Church,
it sets them forth by that name, those of the circumcision, Act. 11. 2. Romans
15. 8. and 3. 30. Gal. 2. 17. But verily in requiring circumcision many other
duties lay upon them virtually. As first, the knowledge of their own undone
estate by nature: as being persons whose blood not of one member of their body
alone, but even of their whole man, the life of body and soul might in justice
be required of them, and this not so much in regard of actual sins of their
own, as in regard also of Adams sin derived to them by propagation; if they
had no more guilt then that they deserved to die. Secondly also, knowledge of
their extreme need of Christ, whose blood as the blood of the principal seed
of Abraham, was to be shed in fullness of time, and by virtue whereof that
covenant was at present ratified, Gal. 3. 4. 17. Hence also faith was required
of them to apply that benefit of Christ and his blood, Romans 3. 30. Those of the
Jewish Church had faith required of them to justification, as well as the
baptized Gentiles; all duties and branches and acts of repentance and
mortification, were therein required also, of persons admitted to the seal of
circumcision; hence such exhortations thereon grounded, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. All
inward acts and branches of renovation and sanctification were therein also
involved as that which they were bound to endeavor and attain, Romans 2. 29.
And all outward obedience of faith to the Law as a rule of life, was therein
also required. Whence that, Romans 2. 25. The profitable use of circumcision is
to keep the Law, the righteousness of it: What, as that whereby they should
be justified? No verily, God gave it not to them for that end, but such a
keeping thereof as the godly gentiles, who being not circumcised but baptized,
it shall be all one as if they had been externally circumcised, Romans 2. 26,
27, 28.

SECT. IV.
Conclu. 3. THat there is a bare external being in the covenant of grace of
persons who possibly never shall be saved. Hence the promise is said to belong
to those Jews, Romans 9. 4. on whom yet the word took no saving effect, verse.
6. hence by opposition to the Gentiles they were those which were not strangers
to the Church, but of it. They were not strangers to the covenant of promise,
but in the same, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. hence God says he makes his covenant with
them all; Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 12, 13, 14, 15. speaking there of that solemn renuall
of the covenant of grace, as Deuteronomy. 30. 6. 10. 12, 13, 14. compared with Romans
10. 6, 7, 8. evinceth. So Ezekiel. 16. 8. he made a Covenant with that Church and
people, many whereof proved very base, as that Chapter shows. Now this was a
covenant of grace, albeit invested with Church Covenant, as appears in that
verse. 60. that God for that his covenant sake considered as his, will deal so
graciously with them after all their provocations, as verse. 62, 63. Albeit, he
did not thus properly for the sake of that investure of his covenant annexed:
scil. Thy covenant, the Churches covenant abstractively considered verse. 61.
see more Ezekiel. 36. from verse. 17. to the Chapters end. There is an external
being in the covenant of grace, as there is an external being in Christ, John
15. 2. and partaking of Christ, hence that of Heb. 13. 14. An external
belonging to Christ: hence those Jewish refusers to believe in Christ, yet
called his own, John 1. 11. As there is an external being called, Matthew. 22.
14. an external being sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, Heb. 10. 29. an
external being purged from sin, 2 Pet. 1. 9. an external being purchased by
Christ, 2 Pet. 2. 1. an external Saintship, Deuteronomy. 33. 3. And therefore both
are joined, being Saints, and making a Covenant with God, Psalm. 50. 5. and such
as had Gods covenant made with them to glory of, verse 16. yet what persons
many of them were that Psalm does declare. There are those invisible Churches
which are as Isaac was, children of the promise, Gal. 3. 28. children of the
Gospel Church, verse 31. and 26. this must be verified in all the members of
the Galatian Churches, unto whom Paul wrote that Epistle, Gal. 1. 2. for he
spoke this of them all; Jerusalem which is the mother of us [all] verse 26, 27,
28. compared: They then were all such either effectually and savingly: And then
there were some particular visible Churches in which were no hypocrites.
Contrary to the very scope of the parable of the Tares, and Net, and Virgins,
and Wedding, and variety of vessels in the Church visible as an house of God,
1 Timothy 3. 15. compared with 2 Timothy 2. 20. Yea then there should be a
possibility that such as are savingly interessed in the covenant of grace
should end in the flesh, Gal. 3. 3. suffer many things in vain, verse 4. have
Apostolical labor bestowed on them in vain, Gal. 4. 11. fall from grace, and
have no profit to salvation by Christ, Gal. 5. 2. 4. for if there were not a
possibility of some such members and cases to be found in the Galatian
Churches; why does the Apostle speak such things as there are mentioned? but
there is no possibility of fatal seducing the elect one, savingly interested
in the covenant and Church. 2 Timothy 2. 16. 19, 20. 1 John 2. 19. Matthew. 24. 24.
So then it must needs follow that according to God, some were such indeed, but
externally and according to men all were children of the promise. In which
sense the promise of grace and glory may be to one as ones legacy, or portion
externally, and according to men, of the saving good whereof it is possible one
may fall short, Heb. 4. 1. 4. When Antipaedobaptists admit any to the seals of
Church and covenant fellowship, is it not possible that some false brethren may
creep in unawares, Jude 4. some wolves enter in, and of their own selves some
turn seducers? Act. 20. 29, 30. can it be otherwise but that in visible
Churches with us or them, there will be some unapproved ones to God? 1 Cor.
11. 18, 19. yet you admit them to the fellowship of covenant, but without
ground, unless to them they are in covenant. Will you ordinarily put seals to
blankes? and the seal must follow the covenant, Genesis 17. 7. 9, 10, 11. 13.
Acts 2. 38, 39. 1 Cor. 11. 25. You will surely say, they appeared to us, to be
in the covenant of grace; we judged them to be in it: else we had not
admitted them. So then according to your selves, persons may be externally and
quoad homines in the Covenant of grace, which are not savingly so; I plead for
no more; we are then thus far agreed; I yield no more advantage to Arminius,
nor undermine perseverance in grace, nor the Polemicall doctrine of our choice
Divines more then you do, nor then Amesius, Chamier, Luther, Calvin, Beza, and
then your own Tertullian, as you count him, does; who in his book De Anima,
Chap. 21, 22. urges that Text, 1 Cor. 7. 14. for a peculiar cleanness of
believers children by privilege of seed, as the rest which I have named: to
whom Pareus, Peter Martyr, Bucer, Melancton, Mr. Philpot, besides many others
might be added, who pleading for Infants baptism, urge it from their interest
in the Covenant. As many of the ancients, Cyprian, Gregory, Nazianzen, Jerome,
Austine and others which plead for Paedobaptisme from the argument of
circumcision, must need implicitly, if not expressly, maintain Infants Covenant
estate, to which the baptism of the one as the circumcision of the other was
ex natura rei, a sacramental sign, Genesis 17. 11. And yet they held not, that
all such were infallibly saved, and therefore must maintain with me, an
external inbeing of some in covenant which possibly may never be saved.

But leaving humane authorities to return to Scripture proof of this third
conclusion; let our opposites consider of Gods breaking that gracious Covenant
which he had made with his people of old, which was as his staff of beauty,
Zach. 11: 10, whether it can be verified of a legal covenant of works and not
rather of his covenant of grace in respect at least of the external
administration thereof amongst them, as verse 9. and their external right in
that his covenant. And whence else is there any supposall of some interested in
that same covenant of God wherein the upright are faithful, stable, and
perminent, but others are false, treacherous, and apostatising? Psalm. 44. 17.
Dan. 11. 30, 31, 32, 33. If they were never in this holy covenant, how came
they to forsake it, to deal falsely in it? or was this Covenant wherein they
together with those true believers were interested in communion, other then the
covenant of grace? If it were not that from Sion, was it that from mount Sinai,
which are the Apostles membra dividentia of the covenant, Gal. 4. 24. If so,
then believers, which as believers must necessarily be in the free covenant of
life and grace, yet also at the same time are under a contrary covenant of
bondage and death and curse; if this covenant in which they were with true
believers were a covenant of grace, as is evident, then were hypocrites
externally in it, for internally and efficaciously they were not; and whence
else were they charged with breaking the everlasting covenant, cat^exochen, if
they were never in that bond; And if in it, it was but externally, else had
they never so fatally broken this covenant which is thus plainly described by
the old periphrasis of Abraham's covenant, Genesis 17. 7. 13. and whence also are
some charged with not believing the faith or engaged truth, the covenant of
God, Romans 7. 3. if it were not plighted with them? which notwithstanding took
saving effect only in the elect and in the believing: Nor will any say that it
was other then the covenant of grace which took such effect, Romans 9. 6. And
what need that preoccupation of the Apostle, when speaking before of the
promise indefinitely, as belonging even to those refuse Jews, he says: not
that the word of God took none effect, scil. in the persons to whom it
belonged: As if his meaning were thus, to prevent all objection, I yield that
many to whom the word of Gods gracious covenant did externally belong, never
got any saving good by it, as appears by their sad case at present, verse 1,
2, 3. but yet this will not follow, that Gods covenant had none effect at all,
namely in others which were savingly interested therein. And the reason he
gives is added, for they are not all Israel which are of Israel: as if he
would say, they are indeed Israelites; or of called, covenant, in-churched
Israel, verse 4. and 6. compared, but they are not all elected Israel; so then,
that the word of covenant takes not savingly in such like persons, it is
neither in that they were not in that covenant externally; for the promise
belonged to them, verse 4. nor that the word of Gods covenant is not per se
efficacious; since it does take effect in as many as are the choice seed,
principally intended in that Covenant; but here rather is the secret ground of
it: They are not, nor never were elected of God, and such as in his secret
counsel he intended and ordained to extend eternal mercy to: for had they
been of that number they could never (according to the objection included) have
so fallen as to reject and cast off so irrecoverably the revealed grace and
mercy of Gods covenant as ratified in Christ, Romans 15. 8. Acts 4. 45, 46, 47,
48. and Romans 11. 20. and 9. 31, 32, 33. 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. compared: This here
said may serve for answer to Mr. B. his distinction of the Covenant of grace
and an outward Covenant, etc. they are not two distinct covenants, but the
covenant of grace made with the elect in respect of their saving interest in
that, I will be a God to them; the same is made with others, in respect both
of visible interest, and the visible administration of it; nor is Genesis 17. 10.
a proof of an outward covenant, distinct from the covenant of grace, verse 7.
but it is the covenant or conditional part and duty of the same covenant on
their parts. As God had before told Abraham what was his part of the covenant,
both more personally respecting Abraham, verse 4, 5, 6. As for me, or my part:
behold my Covenant is with thee, and more parentally and radically in respect
to him considered with his seed, verse 7, 8. So verse 9. he tells Abraham,
what is his and his seeds part of the covenant, thou shall keep my covenant
and thy seed etc. If Abraham demand, What is that his and his seeds part? It is
answered verse 10. etc.

From the same principle may sundry objections of I. S. against the truth in
question be answered; as, that there is but one way of entering into covenant,
scil. by a true and lively faith. The contrary whereof here appears in that
persons may be said to be in covenant with God in respect of external right
which never came to believe actually nor savingly. Of like nature is that; the
promise being yea and amen in Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 20. such as have not true faith
in him, as Infants etc. have not, they cannot be interested in the covenant,
to which purpose also, Gal. 3. 9. 27. 29. is brought; now taking that of saving
faith, we see others may be called the children of God, Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. 23.
Romans 9. 4. yea children of the promise, Acts 3. 25. Gal. 4. 28. then such as
do attain to saving faith, as before was cleared. Of the like nature is that,
that we by our doctrine do set up another way of salvation then by
regeneration; which is a mere non sequitur, since unregenerate persons may be
in covenant with God, on whom the word never takes effect, Romans 9. 4. and 6.
compared, and no other is our doctrine; we disclaim that conclusion, that all
that are externally in covenant attain salvation; nor does that sequel of
universal redemption follow from our doctrine of Federall holiness since we
maintain no other but that whatever such are quoad homines counted redeemed of
the Lord, and sometimes so styled, as that visible Church of Ephesus is said to
be purchased by the blood of Christ, Acts 20. 28, etc. yet in that and other
visible Churches many prove otherwise, even rent-members, verse 29, 30. so 2
Pet. 2. 1. If these had not been externally in Covenant, they had not been in
the Churches. And albeit they were so, yet the effect proved they were not
internally of the number of redeemed ones. Hitherto that Dilemma being reduced
may receive answer. That according to our doctrine believers children being in
the covenant of grace: that covenant is made with them, either conditionally or
absolutely; if conditionally, then either on condition of faith, or works. Not
of works, none will affirm that, then of faith: and that is nugatory to say
this Covenant is to believers seed, if believers; to which branch we answer,
the Covenant is theirs externally, and quoad homines: considered as invested
with Church Covenant, and in reference to Covenant Ordinances, whereof they are
capable, as of old they were of Circumcision, and are now of baptism.

Thus it is theirs at present, in respect of the visible faith and interest of
the parent or parents in the Covenant, and for the future, it is theirs in the
further grace of the Covenant, upon condition of their believing if they live
to years of discretion: If absolutely, then God either keeps it, and so all
the seed of believers should be saved, which is false, or he does not keep
what he absolutely covenanted, which to affirm were blasphemy. We answer,
God may be said absolutely to covenant with believers seed, collectively and
specifically considered; and yet all the Individual children not saved. It is
absolutely made, and made good, that that sort of persons shall be and are
saved by virtue of Gods Covenant, for some of them are infallibly saved: The
Covenant is to the indefinite collective seed or children, in respect of the
internal saving interest: else none of them dying Infants should be saved.
Supposing they are the Israel of God, a part of the elect seed, yet the means
of saving effect in and upon them is the word of Covenant, Romans 9. 6. It Is
thorough the effectual word and engaged truth of God that that part of the
Church are savingly purged, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. The Covenant is to the
individual seed, all and each of them in respect of external interest, and
yet many of them not saved, nor yet is Gods faithfulness impeached or
impaired, nor need the faith of believers be shaken, if this or that child
should prove, live and die wicked, the force of the Covenant is not to be
measured by the fatal miscarrying of many of Abraham's Church seed. To be sure
it takes in some of his Church-seed, as the Apostle reasons, Romans 9. 4. 6.
compared, Whether our doctrine herein or the adversaries which deny any
interest at all to any believers Infants in the Covenant, be more
uncomfortable, let the world judge. And therefore to affirm with Paul, if
taken in the strict of elect ones, and of sincere believers, that they only
are Abraham's choice seed, yet it is no other then Gospel to affirm as much as
we have done of others: ye they also are Abraham's Church seed.

SENT. V.
4. A Fourth Conclusion is, that the Church in dispensing an enjoined
Initiatory seal of the Covenant of grace, looks unto visibilitie of interest
in the Covenant to guide her in the application thereof. Nor is it the saving
interest of the persons in view which is her rule by which she is therein to
proceed. The matter to be dispensed is not an Initiatory seal of the Covenant
before it be commanded, as before Circumcision or baptism be commanded: but
supposing that de facto they are commanded, the rule of judging of the jus of
persons propounded to the Church, with desire of her admission by her officers,
to the fellowship of the initiatory seal of the Covenant; it is not the
internal and saving state of the party, or parties, but the visibility of
covenant right and estate; saving right, consisting in Gods electing act which
is a very secret: in saving interest in Christ and his death: in saving
influences and operations of his spirit and the like, all which incur not to
outward discerning, nor can be infallibly known by man being things per se
invisible to others, John 3. 8. John Baptist did and might lawfully baptize
those multitudes, albeit in the general he knew that many, yea most of them
would prove false and frothy, Matthew. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. It suffices
that albeit he were persuaded in the general, that many were unworthy members
of that floor, and Church of Christ amongst them all; yet they having
appearances of a better estate, and he not being able to say in the particular
persons presented to baptism, which of them notwithstanding would prove
chaffie and vile, he baptized them. Albeit we may think in the general that
to be sure in all visible Churches there will be some vessels of dishonor
sometimes, and yet Ministers which are the Churches, as well as Christ's
servants, they are not therefore to refuse, to dispense Church-Ordinances;
since they are in the face of the Church, such utensils, as the Lord may have
and has need of. Hence the Apostles which as extraordinary persons, knew the
guile of persons secret from the Church, witness that act against Ananias and
Saphira, Act. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. to 11. Yet in administering the Church-seale of
Baptism they refused not Ananias and Saphira, no nor Simon Magus, Act. 8. nor
thousands of others of the Jews, amongst whom, how many proved false, let Acts
2. 41. and 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. compared, 21. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 28. 30, 31. 36. and
22. 20. 22. and 23. 12, 13. witness. Nor could the Apostles imagine otherwise
in the general, but many of them would prove such. Yea Christ himself, who by
his divine knowledge, knew Judas to be a devil, John 6. 70, 71. and 13. 18.
yet he ministered to him that Supper; whether the Pascall Lamb or the Lords
Supper, Verse 1. 2. 26. and 21. compared with Luke 22. 19, 20, 21. I determine
not; one of them it appears it was; Austin and others think Judas was
admitted to the Lords Supper, and that he did partake of the bread of the Lord,
albeit, not of the Lord that spiritual bread: so thinks Mr. Cartwright from
that connection, Luke 23. 19, 20, 21. but if admitted by Christ to the Passover
which Christ administered to him formerly, and at that time, it suffices to our
purpose. Christ ministering as man, deals with Judas in his ministration of
the Sacrament as man, and as Judas was according to man, and to the rest of
that family to which he then in special sort ministered. Ishmael God
discovered by a divine revelation to Abraham, Esau to Rebeckah, not to be Gods
elect seed of the Covenant; yet Abraham and Isaac as Prophets and Priests at
that time to the Church in their families, circumcise them; extraordinary cases
brake not ordinary rules. If Peter kill bodily any persons, or Phinehas or
Elias; It Is not a warrant for Ministers to be executioners, or orderers of
civil justice: It Is the Magistrate is to do that by ordinary rule. Romans 13. If
Ananias a private Disciple by extraordinary call in a vision, baptize Paul, yet
it is no cross to that ordinary rule of ministering baptism only by preaching
ministers, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. So here in extraordinary cases persons to be
admitted to the seals of the old or new Testament, may be discovered to be
false hearted as was Ishmael, Esau and Judas: yet that hinders not, but being
in facie Ecclesiae visibly interested in the Covenant, the seals are to be
administered unto them. The Church in Abraham and Isaacs house had not that
revealed to them touching Ishmael and Esau; as neither the family of Christ
knew that of Judas: therefore as to them they had visible right to those
seals, so were they administered to them. A Minister may see much good or evil
in persons which are to partake of the seals: yet if this be not as well
visible to the Church, as to himself, he cannot of himself admit or reject
them regularly; he is not the Church, but acts in admission and rejections
to or from the fellowship of Church-Ordinances such as the seals are, by and
with their consent. A person Ecclesiastically holy is admittable, and he may
not refuse them upon his own private surmises. It were to breed confusions in
Churches, and lay foundations of enthusiasmes. The ordinary Elders of that
visible Church of Ephesus must feed the Church in the dispensation of the word
or seals occasionally. Albeit, many admitted to that fellowship, many among
themselves will prove Apostates, Acts 20. 28, 29, 30. If particular persons
saving interest in Gods promise and Covenant of grace were the rule, it were
either to necessitate ministers to come under guilt of sin or Anomie, breach
of rule or for avoiding of that, which they must needs do with such breach of
rule, never to administer any Church-ordinances; since they sometimes shall
break that rule in administering the same to hypocrites, and albeit they do
sometimes administer them to elect ones, yet not being able to know that secret
infallibly, they observe not that rule in faith, but doubtingly, and so can
have little comfort of any such of their administrations.

If this therefore be not the rule of Church administration of the Initiatory
enjoined seal of the Covenant; then the other of visibility of interest is
that which we must go by therein. Which may suffice for answer to what A. R.
suggested to the contrary. And I say, visibility of the parties interest in the
Covenant, I say not mere visibilitie of faith or repentance. The Initiatory
seal is not primarily and properly the seal of man's faith, or repentance or
obedience, but of Gods Covenant rather; the seal is to the covenant, even
Abraham's Circumcision was not primarily a seal to his faith of righteousness;
but to the righteousness of faith exhibited and offered in the covenant; yea
to the Covenant it self or promise, which he had believed unto
righteousness; hence the covenant of grace is called the righteousness of
faith, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. The righteousness of faith speaks on this wise,
verse 8. and it is called the word of faith: hence albeit Abraham must walk
before God, who is now about to enlarge the Covenant to his, as well as to make
it to him, in a Church reference, Genesis 17. 1. etc. yet the Initiatory seal in
his as well as in their flesh is Gods Covenant, verse 13. or a Sacramental
sign firstly and expressly of Gods Covenant, Verse 11. and 7. compared; albeit,
it implicitly oblige him and them to other duties formerly mentioned. Hence
Act. 2. 38, 39. the seal of baptism is put to the promise, as the choice
matter and foundation in view, and as that was a ground of repentance it self.
Repent and be baptized, for the promise is to you: Not, for you have repented,
as if that were the thing to be firstly sealed by baptism, but the promise
rather: and when we speak of visibilitie of Covenant right, as such a rule to
go by, we exclude not the lowest and least degree of visibilitie, since
degrees do not vary the species of any thing; if we propound a higher degree
where shall we stay and pitch? Why not a higher degree as well as that? we
must look to it, that not the least of Gods Covenant little ones be left out
unfolded in the Church visible. We were better seem to be remiss in respect
of Church care of 99. which are but seemingly just ones, then neglect any, and
leave out any which possibly is savingly as well as seemingly of the flock of
the covenant Church; the least of Gods visible family or Church must have their
portion as of the family; if Ministers be faithful in their office; the least
visible measure of grace must occasion our judgment of charity to judge them
gracious, so the least degree of visibilitie of covenant right may challenge
the like charity; not in word and in tongue but in deed and act of expression,
We put a difference betwixt those in Heb. 6. 4. and Infants in degrees of
visibilitie of this right, but in the nature of the visibilitie we say they
are all one, all are visibly in covenant, albeit that visibilitie in point of
degree be not in all equal. God puts a difference in point of degree of
faith in justified persons, but in his act of justifying of persons he puts no
difference, the least spark in Flax is enough that way: For if it were more it
would flame as well as make a smoke, and yet if but so much it is not slighted
by the Lord. I might apply the same in point of degrees of visibilitie of
Covenant right, in reference to the Churches act of approbation; It Is a higher
degree indeed of visibility of interest in the Covenant to make personal
profession and confession of faith in the Covenant, as it is in Adultis, then
to have only the visible testimony of God in his word of Covenant expressing
his mind of grace, touching the seed of Abraham to be a God to them. And to
add the^ ^sible testimony of his providence, that these children are of the
race and parentage* to which also Abraham and other inchurched parents, by
visible owning of the covenant in the Latitude upon the terms of it, and as
now Christian Parents do make profession of their parentall faith in the
Covenant as made to them and their children, and this profession of theirs may
not be (possibly) sincere, yet it is visibly a federall confession, and such an
avouching of God to be their Covenant God as takes in their children, as that
did, Deuteronomy. 26. 17. and that Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, etc. And this is to the
Church a degree of their childrens visibilitie of covenant right and Church
right; albeit, not so high as the former, and not varying the species of
visibilitie, it suffices, not to vary the species of Church admission to
fellowship of the initiatory Church-seale. Judgment of charity reaches
further then to judge of persons estates by their own personal words or
works: Charity believes all things in way of testimony if they give any
testimony; as that of God who testifyeth more absolutely for that species of
believers children, that they are such as he does covenant to be a God to
them. And the parents testify als^ for them in the profession of their faith
in that covenant of God for their seed. The Churches also own them as visibly
such, leaving secrets to God; which particular Infant is not the elect seed
principally intended; here charity as it believes all things witnessed, so it
hops all things of the particular persons which are themselves dumb, but are
included in the testimony of others mouths opened for them, nothing being of
counter-force to the contrary touching this point of visibilitie of their
covenant and Church interest. And I the more wonder that any which confess
that it is not to be denied, that God would have Infants of believers in some
sense to be accounted his, to belong to his Church and family, and not to the
devils, as true in facie ecclesi^ visibilis, etc. yet do oppose us in this
particular now in question.

SECT. VI.
Conclus. 5. THat Christ is in Scripture considered as head of the visible
Church in which are many members of Christ the head in that respect, which
prove unsound, as well as in other respects, he is considered as head of the
visible Church, wherein are none but elect ones: And when Gal. 3. 16. it is
said, to Abraham and to his seed, which is Christ, were the promises made, it is
not meant of Christ personal, as if the promises, as that of pardon of sin,
etc. were made to Christ personally considered: or the promises were first made
to Abraham and unto Christ personal, as the Text has it.

Promises were made to Abraham and to his seed Christ. Nay Christ personally
considered is rather Abraham's seed, not to, but in which the promises are
confirmed, Gal. 3. 17. with 16. But rather of Christ with his body the Church,
whether of Gentiles or Jews, Gal. 3. 14. which though many personally yet make
but one seed, and not many seeds, being all one in Christ the head of the
Church, Verse 16. 28. compared, like as Genesis 3. 15. the seed of Eve, is Christ
with his members in and with him, So 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. the name of Christ is
not ascribed to the head the Lord Jesus without his body the Church: or to the
Church of Jews and Gentiles without him the head, but collectively considered.
Quaeritur, whether this in Gal. 3. and 1 Cor. 12. be spoken of the visible or
invisible Church. I answer, to me it seems that the places admit of the
consideration of the Church as visible. First, in that the Apostle speaks of
all the Galatian Church Members as well as others, as one in Christ, Gal. 3.
28. Now were all those members elected, will any say? I suppose not, yet all
are one in Christ their head. Secondly, in that he speaks of them all as
Sacramentally one with Christ in baptism, Gal. 3. 27, 28. compared, so 1 Cor.
12. 12, 13. Now albeit, the spirit be the cause of the internal and saving
union with Christ, in all which are united: As Ecclesiastically all the
Corinthian members were judged to be; yet indeed and in truth there were many
of them not approved to God, 1 Cor. 11. 18, 19. compared. But in both places
the Apostle considering them as a baptized Caecus: intimates the consideration
thereof as a visible, and not as an invisible Church: Baptism being the seal
committed to the visible Church by her officers to be dispensed, and not to
the invisible Church which has no Officers in it, as such. And baptism being
by the Church administered to persons as visible, and not as invisible members
of the Church. Thirdly, in that Christ has head-like influences into the
officers and members, many whereof are not savingly joined to him. Fourthly, in
that it is the Church wherein he has set diversity of Church Officers, which
are not set in the invisible, but visible Church: that Church being not
invisible but visible where Church Officers are set and chosen, and act. From
this consideration it follows, that albeit a man's own personal faith
uniteth him to Christ, in respect of saving and invisible union, yet the
profession and confession of faith before and in a visible Church, in reference
to visible communion therewith, this does unite a person to Christ as head of
the visible Church; whether the party be sincere or no. Hence also a Parent,
making profession of faith in the covenant of grace, as invested with
Church Covenant in reference to his children it does unite them also to Christ,
as head of the visible Church so far, as to give right to solemn imitation
of them, into the fellowship of the Church in circumcision as of old, or
baptism as now. Parents acts in this case being in the face of the vi^ble
Church, their childrens acts, as the places quoted, Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18. and 29.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 16, 16, 17 declared. Whence contrariwise, the parents
neglect of ci^cumcision of a babe, not capable of personal neglect, was
c^unted the child's neglect, the uncircumcised manchild, whose flesh of his
foreskin is not circumcised [that soul shall be cut off from his people [Hee]
has broken my covenant. And as in other cases the Lord Christ who required
personal faith in grown ones to their cure, yet in case of children is
contented, that their parents believe on their behalf, John 4. Mark 9. from
verse 12. to 18. so Matthew. 15. 22. to 29. so is it in the case of this
external Church benefit. Albeit, the just only live an effectual life of
grace, and attain the virtue of the seal by their own faith, yet that
hinders not, but a child may attain, as it were a Church-life, and partake of
the visible interest and use of that initiating Church-seale, by his parents
covenant and Church faith, or that faith which is such to the Church. Nor yet
do we hereby establish (as some say) a meriting faith, no more then we make
visibilitie of personal faith, to merit personal right to baptism, etc. But
rather the parents professing to apply the covenant as made to him and his,
there does result a parentall as well as a personal right. Such weight there
is in the covenant applied, as by virtue of the covenant of grace invested with
Church Covenant thus professedly applied, there does arise such a union, as of
the parent, so of the child ( quoad homines) unto Christ, as head of the
visible Church. And look as the covenant laid hold upon, by the lively faith
of gracious parents, as made with respect to their children has mighty force
to effect very gracious things in the elect seed, yea albeit dying young, as
sundry of those elect ones of Abraham's race did, Romans 9. 6. yea so as to make
their outward washings to become effectual in Christ to an inward clensing,
Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. yea so as to bring in and bring home many of such covenant
children. Whence those revolters beloved for their covenant fathers sake, as
such, Romans 11. 28. and hence made as a ground of their return, verse 15, 16.
So is there such validity in the covenant invested with Church Covenant,
albeit but unworthily ofttimes held forth by the parents, which does beget upon
the children an external filial relation unto God, and to his spouse the
visible Church; whence that respect of children of God and his Church, by
virtue of that Espousall covenant, Ezekiel. 16. 8. Even in the children of
Idolatrous members, verse 20, 21. 23. Great is the force of this way of the
covenant so clothed. Albeit many unworthy members are girt up in it, to hold
them and theirs in external Church Communion, Jer. 13. 11. until either that
Church be divorced from God, or the particular members disfranchised by some
Church censure, of such a Church Covenant privilege. This consideration with
the former mentioned in that first conclusion, may also satisfy M. B. that our
doctrine touching Infants covenant and Church-right to baptism does not
necessarily produce, either that absurdity of a state of grace and remission of
sins before calling, or of birth grace (as J. I. has it) conveyed from
parent to child: understanding it of grace absolute and grace in them and not
of grace upon them, or relative grace. And if of grace upon them, yet if
understanding what he says as meant of justification and saving adoption, and
not of external adoption and covenant administration, the former they convey
not, as neither does a free Denison his personal gifts of wisdom, etc. the
later he may; not as a man barely, but with this reduplication, considered as
a parent in covenant and Church and spiritual city estate; for so by virtue
of the covenant he is in, together with the professed parentall application
and challenge of it, as to him and his, he may convey such an external right
formerly mentioned. Nor is that absurdity ours, that we make such visible
members of Christ's church before calling, for if he mean it of effectual
calling; he, if invisible Church fellowship will come under that absurdity
too; unless he could wholly exclude hypocrites from visible Churches, or
suppose such a Church where neither are nor can come any false brethren. If he
intends it of external calling, so visible believers and in churched parents
Infants, are with and in their parents call, to the external fellowship of
Church Covenant, implicitly called with them. As before they were a far off
together from covenant and Church, so now are they made nigh together th^s
far. Of the like nature is that imaginary absurdity, of entailing grace to
generation not to regeneration or of upholding a national Church; he knows
we in New England which hold the one, yet do not maintain the other in the
usual sense of a national Church. And this which has been here said also may
answer that of I. S. that Infants have not union with Christ, as not having
faith, and therefore may not have any communion in Church-ordinances; if he
intend it of saving faith, his sequel is weak, since many which do not
savingly believe are in respect of their in-being in the visible Church, to
which also Christ is head, in Christ as the head of that body, in which they
are visible members, whence also that John 15. 2. But to speak to the
proposition it self, I say Infants without actual faith, are of Christ's body
the Church, of which more afterward, and so in Christ as the head of the
visible Church. Their parents professed application of the covenant with
reference to them, as well as to themselves, they are together with themselves
Ecclesiastically one with Christ as the head of the visible Church.

SECT. VII.
Conclus. 6. THat the body of the Jewish Church to old was under the covenant
of grace, as invested with Church covenant, in respect of external interest
therein. It was not (as some say) that they only had a covenant of grace among
them, which was made to some choice ones among them, but that which was made
with and dispensed to the body of the Jews, was a covenant of works and not of
grace; for the contrary appears, 1. In that the covenant was made with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in reference to their whole seed at least in respect
of external and ecclesiastical right, as before we proved. And hence God
appointed them all to receive the visible seal thereof, see Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13. and 26. 3, 4, 5. and 28. 12, 13, 14. either then these covenant
fathers receiving the covenant in reference to their children, had a contrary
covenant of life and death, grace and works, made with them, and so at one and
the same time were externally under the blessing and curse of God, and so were
not one root to their seed, nor first fruits of one sort; but as their branches
and lump in the body of them, are supposed to have the covenant of works
dispensed to them, so are they to them as a legal root and first fruits of
that sort: yet sundry of the branches being elect ones, to them they are an
Evangelicall root, and first fruits of another sort, contrary to that letter
of the Text, Romans 11. 16. or if not both, then either receiving a covenant of
works alone, in reference to them all elected, or not: or it must be granted,
that they received the covenant of grace with Ecclesiastical respect to them
all.

2. The very substance of the covenant made and enjoined to be sealed upon all
the children of those fathers, Acts 7. 8. with Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, 10. was (as
has been proved) not a Legal but an Evangelicall covenant. It was not, Do
this and live, or else be accursed, Gal. 3. 10, 11, 12. but I will be a God
to thy seed, not to Isaac of Abraham alone; nor to Jacob of Isaac alone, in
that Church-right and way, but to thy seed in their generations. It was their
covenant-right to have the Tabernacle of God, or Ordinances as their
privilege, yea and his presence therein. Hence that Exodus 40. 34, 35. 38. and
Number. 6. 6. 9. and Levit. 9. 14. hence that filling of their Temple with smoke,
with the glory of God, 1 King. 8. 10, 11. so Isa. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. hence that
same testifying of the presence of God in the Churches, after Christ's
ascension, in a way of mercy to his people, and for their sakes in a way of
justic^ against his and their enemies, Revel. 15. 8. Hence the frequent answers
made to them, and for them by Oracle from Gods mercy-seate, Exodus 23. 21, 22.
see Deuteronomy. 4. 7. Christ himself went with them whither soever they went, 1 Cor.
10. 4. whence they are said to tempt him, verse 9. see Exodus 33. 15, 16.
besides those extraordinary Sacraments in which they shared as spiritual
things, 1 Cor. 1, 2, 3, 4. only those fathers so partaking of them, which to
Egyptians, and beasts were not of that nature. It was their covenant-right to
have such deliverances flowing thence, as that from Egypt, Exodus 6. 7. albeit
afterward too God continued in other respects as well as that, their covenant
God, Exodus 29. 45, 46. Levit. 26. 11, 12. so in and after that Babylonish
deliverance, Ier. 24. 7. which deliverances of theirs, were not of any common
nature to other people, but by virtue of Christ the Anointing, the Mediator
(virtually) of that cove^ Isa. 10. 27. see Ier. 24. 7. and 15. 17, 18, 19, 20.
see more Deuteronomy. 29. with 30. 6. Acts 2. 38, 39. hence that, Romans 3. 29, 30. see
Heb. 4. 1, 2. Acts 3. 25. Romans 9. 4. not meaning the Law or two Tables of it,
but distinguishing those promises from the other; nor was Canaan all which God
promised them, as some have said. For,

First, it was promised them as an everlasting possession, when yet many, even
the best of them, never enjoyed it constantly, if at all, Heb. 11. 9, 10. Number.
20. 12. the promise of Canaan was ratified in Christ, as are other temporal
blessings to us now, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. hence Christ's said to drive out their
enemies thence from them, Exodus 23. 20, 21. hence called Immanuels land, Esaias
8. 8. hence sundry of them excluded thence for that Gospel sin of unbelief,
Heb. 3. last compared with Chap. 42. Hence God promised to be a God to them,
and as one branch thereof, instanceth in giving them Canaan, Genesis 17. 7. 8. yet
to show that was not all he promised, he again adds after that; And I will
be a God to them. Hence those expectations of faith beyond the same, Heb. 11.
9, 10. Ps. 142. 5.

Secondly, the Proselyted strangers were to have Abraham's covenant sealed to
them and theirs by Circumcision, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, ^0, 11, 12, 13. yet they
might not have lots there, nor keep them, ^t return them at the Jubilee,
Josh. 13. 6. Numb. 36. 2. and ^.53.

Thirdly, Christ was the mediator of that covenant of Abraham made with them
and so held out to them all, witness their sacrifices expiatory, and
propitiatory, enjoined the whole congregation in case of sin, Levit. 4. 13.
unto 22. witness the two Goats, one for a sin offering for the whole
congregation, and the other the escape goat, over which all the sins of the
children of Israel, were confessed by the Priests, and then it was in a
typical way to carry away all their sins, into a place far remote, Levit.
16. 15, 21, 22, etc. what this did externally signify, none is ignorant which
knows the Scriptures. And albeit all made not effectual use of it by saving
faith, yet God herein testified what a covenant they were under, even that of
grace confirmed in Christ, and to what they had according to men external
right. Hence the high Priest in type of Christ, bare the names of the 12.
Tribes, and made intercession and atonement for them upon the like ground.
Adam, with whom that covenant of works was made, had no such sacrifices, Gal.
3. 16, 17. the Apostle speaking of the promises to Abraham, not excluding this,
Genesis 17. albeit more especially relating to Genesis 12. 2. 31. says not, they
were [to be confirmed] in Christ, as if not at all ratified in Christ to them
of old: but says the covenant [was confirmed] long before the Law in Christ,
so as that could not disanull the validity of it, and Acts 3. 25. they are
said to be children of the Gospel promise, Genesis 12. 3 hence Luke 1. 54, 55.
67, 68. unto the 76 Verse, and Christ as a Minister, not of circumcising, for
he neither circumcised, nor baptized personally, John 4. 1. but of the
circumcision, that is the Jewish Church and people, Gal. 2. 7. he came
actually and personally to confirm those promises made to the fathers, as Genesis
17, 7, 8. which he had before virtually confirmed, Gal. 3. 16, 17. And which
is observable, the Apostle, Romans 15. 9, 10, 11, 12. brings in four reasons, to
prove the receiving in of the Gentiles to the fellowship of the covenant and
Gospel, as that which was opposed much, but to confirm that of the Jewish
covenant estate, verse 8. he brings no further reason, then that, taken from
one end of Christ's coming in the flesh: as if to deny the former were to
question the later. And how can it be imagined that such an Evangelicall
covenant as that, Genesis 17. 7. made with reference to them, should be made
without respect to Christ, in whom salvation was really exhibited to the elect
among them, Acts 4. 10. 1 Pet. 23, 24 with Isa. 40. 8. Psalm. 115 8. to 16. and
111. 3, 4 and 44. 17, 18. 22 with Romans 8. 36 Heb. 11. per totum. John's converts
were but turned to the wisdom or faith of their righteous fathers, Luke 1. 17
and to the rest externally ministered in the visible seals and types thereof;
to show, it was their visible covenant and Church-right also, if they had
hearts to improve it, and that they should answer dearly for rejecting their
own mercy if despisers, etc. as they afterward did, Romans 11. 20. hitherto was
their injunction of the brazen Serpent, and their looking upon it, Numb. 21. 7,
8, 9, 10. with John 3. 14, 15.

Fourthly, the covenant of works holds out no pardon or mercy to
transgressors, as did this covenant made and dispensed to the Jews, Genesis 17.
7. as before we showed, so Acts 2. 38, 39.

Fifthly, the covenant of works required not either faith in Christ or
repentance, those Gospel duties Mac. 1. but perfect personal obedience, much
less did it offer grace inabling to repent, but this their covenant did both
require and offer the same, Deuteronomy. Chap. 30. Verse 6. as I. S. confesses, see
more Acts Chap. 3. Verse 25, 26.

Sixthly, No salvation at all to any, by acceptance of the terms of the
covenant of works, nor possibility of it, Gal. 3. 10. but h^re was rest and
salvation in the word to them dispensed, if they had hearts to have improved
it, else none had ever been saved by it, contrary to Heb. 11. yea chap. 12. 1,
2. they are mad^ our patterns and leaders that way, that was Gospel, even glad
tidings of salvation by Christ to come, which was dispensed to them; albeit it
were not Gospel strictly taken for the revelation of Christ as actually
incarnates and personally ratifying the same, Romans 1. 16, 17. Revel. 14. 6.
Heb. 4. 2. compared with 2 Timothy 1. 10. and 1 Pet. 1. 10.

Seventhly, all the Jews best and worst, had the same dispensers of the
covenant, as their Ministers in whom they were all interested, and by whom they
were ministerially urged, with their covenant-right in common, Exodus 19. 5, 6.
and 24. 7, 8. with Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17. 20. Psalm. 50. 5. 16. and 44. 17. Isa.
24. 1. Ier. 31. 37. and 33. 25, 26. Ezekiel. 16. 8. 59. 60. 62. Zach. 9. 11.

Eighthly, the covenant of works was made with all men without distinction in
Adam, but this covenant was a peculiar covenant, made with the seed of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, as before was showed.

N^thly, the cause of the Jews not profiting by the Gospel so ministered to
them as their privilege was, not their not doing, (which is the defect of the
condition of the legal covenant) but their not believing, or want of the
condition of the Evangelicall covenant, H^b. 4. 2 And lest any should say: yea
true, the Gospel was preached to them, as it is or may be to Indians with us,
which have not so much as external right in it; I say, they were cast off from
their Evangelicall covenant privileges, not for not doing, but for not
believing, hence cut out of their root, and cast off from the privilege of
their first fruits Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, not as begetting, and natural
fathers: for they are still their children thus, even the worst of them, John
8. 37. but from them as covenant spiritual fathers, Romans 11. 20. And observe
that he speaks, that if the worst part of the Jews, as if they accepted
interest in the proper object of faith, scil. the covenant, not of works but
of grace, out of which they are broken by their Gospel sin of unbeleefe.

Tenthly, the refuse Jews thus cut and cast off, I demand from what they are
cast, and into what estate they are now put? to the former, none will say they
are cut out and cast off from a visible right, or estate of a covenant of
works, and the dispensation thereof: that were well for them, if so: So then
their former privileged estate for their covenant fathers, from which they
were cast by reason of unbeleefe, was not barely a ceremonial yoke, the which
our opposites urge as grievous to them all and a privilege rather to bend
thereof: Nor the bare subservient covenant at Mount Sinai, (as Cameron calls
it.) For first, the branch privilege which they had in reference to those
covenant fathers, as such was long before Moses or his fathers were borne, and
that is that to which Romans 11. 15, 16. 28. speaks to, as even our opposites
will confess. Secondly, according to Camerons grounds de Triplici faedere,
These. 68. many things are in that subservient covenant, which was 430. years
after the promise to Abraham, Genesis 12, etc. which are not applyable to that
covenant, Genesis 17. 7. as that: that convinced of sin and cleared divine
justice: but that covenant of grace tendered pardon, etc. And so did that
covenant, I will be a God to thy seed, as before: that shows duty, but not
grace to perform, as does the covenant of grace: yea and as did that, Genesis 17.
7. as before, yea, and as did that covenant made with all Israel. After and
besides that covenant in Horeb, Deuteronomy. 29. 1, 2. with 30. 6. that had the
stipulation of Do and live, not so in the covenant of grace, Genesis 17. no nor
in that, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. see Genesis 12. 3. with Gal. 3. 8. That was a carnal
Symboll of the Jewish Church (comparatively) but that in Genesis 17. and Deuteronomy. 30.
6. more spiritual; that showed sin and misery, but this happiness in
remission of sins, as well as misery without it, Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. 11. 13. of
that was Moses, of this was Christ, Mediator, Gal. 3. 16, 17. Romans 15. 8. Hence
those of the first borne of that Hebrew Church of old, Heb. 12. 23. privileged
in the blood and Mediator, verse 14. That Covenant was imbondaging, not so that
in Genesis 17. 7. we now inheriting the same by faith in him, not bondage in or by
it, nor sorrow, but comfort, see 2 Samuel 23. 4, 5. that shows the way of
worship, but this grace to act it as before, so Genesis 17. so Deuteronomy. 30. 6. that
was against us, yea but this was for us, Genesis 17. 7. as is evident, and so was
for them, whence the same subjects in that Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Even parents and
children; That held out Temporalls, yea but this Eternalls, Genesis 17. 7. with
Heb. 11. 16. Matthew. 22. 31. hence Abraham's bosom is heaven, opposed to hell,
Luke 16. 22, 23. Hence heavens glory, is sitting down with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob in Gods kingdom, Luke 13. 25. 16. 27. Yea all our opposites contend for
the rigor and burdensomnesse of Sinai's covenant, no such sore punishment of
Jewish unbeleefe to be rid of that: nay they count it their glory at this day
to retain it and be zealous for it, but as was said they were discarded a
former right and privilege and cast into a contrary estate. I enlarge here to
clear mistakes.

11. The better part of the Jews which abode in their covenant estate from
which they were not broken off, Romans 11. 7. 17. 20. they changed not their
estate in the substantialls of it, but abode therein unbroken off. Now I
demand, was this their privilege estate in which they abode, an estate of a
covenant of works; or at best was it an estate of a subservient Sinai
covenant, as Cameron phraseth it, the condition whereof was no other according
to him, then do and live, or else die, which if so, was in effect as the
covenant of works strictly taken, I suppose none will affirm that: verily
then what ever ceremonial vailes were super-addded in Moses days, yet that
could not invalidate Abraham's covenant, in which they with the rest of their
fellow members then cast out, were interested in common; albeit these had a
more peculiar benefit thereby, which the other fell short of by that unbeleefe.

12. The Gospelled Gentiles stood in that very condition by faith, and came
into the very same kingdom estate, for the nature or essentialls of it, out of
which the worser part of the Jews, were broken and cast, they were gaffed in
(...), in the place, or room of those broken branches: as Beza has it, Romans
11. 17. see verse. 19, 20. Matthew. 8. 11, 12. and 21. 43. but such Gentiles are
not in such a preternaturall way, Romans 11. 24. brought under a bare covenant of
works, or at most under Sinai covenant considered in the legal part of it:
but into a state of the covenant of grace, and the external right and
privilege thereof. Therefore in the essentialls of that covenant estate the
same. Lastly, God remembered the worst of them for good, when in the worst
estate by sin, and made it as I may say frequently a motive to himself, to
show them this and that especial favor, even the respect to his covenant with
them, and with their fathers in their stead. If this covenant made with them
had been as Adams or Sinai's covenant, in the legal part of it, a covenant of
mere doing, and living by it, or else perishing, etc. that being minded by
God, would have called for justice against them in their just destruction, and
have urged God, even for respect to his justice, to have then cut off all such
Idolatrous Apostates. But verily, in that it was a covenant prevayling for
mercy and grace, rather to be freely extended to them, albeit so unworthy,
what was it other, then that free covenant of Gods grace, which when they
failed of their part of the covenant in all Ecclesiastical respects, Ezekiel. 16.
8. 59. 6, etc. yet God will out of respect to his own part of the covenant
made with them, show them favor? verse. 60. 62, 63. so Ezekiel. 36. 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. and 31, etc. And mark what the phrase is, speaking
to that church-body, of which Ezekiel. 16. 67. 8, 9, etc. he says, I will
remember my covenant made with [thee:] not with this or that particular Jew:
but with them all in an Ecclesiastical way, and in respect of external right:
albeit some only had the saving benefit thereof, as being the select
covenanters mainely intended. So Esaias 48. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. God considers that
people as Iron sinewed, and refusing to hear, etc. Yet for his own name or
covenanted grace and truth and honors sake, he says, he will extend such and
such patience and mercy to them, verse 9, 10, 11. Against this are objected.

SECT. 8. Objections against the Jews covenant-state removed.
1. Object. They were the children of the flesh, not of God, and of his
promise, Romans 9. 7, 8.

Answ. If we take children of God, for such as were savingly regenerate and
adopted, or children of the promise, for such as were of the elect seed, in
whom the promise took saving effect: So it is true only of some of the Jews,
John 1. 12, 13. Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. etc. But if you take it of the Church-seed of
the promise, and such as were externally adopted of God, and instated in the
covenant of grace, as invested also with Church Covenant: so they were children
even of that free covenant of blessing in Christ, Acts 3. 25, 26. and had the
promises indefinitely, as Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Jer. 31. 37. Genesis 17. 7, etc. belonging
to them, Romans 9. 4. and were children of God, Christ's own, etc. even the worst
of them, John 1. 12. Deuteronomy. 32. 19, 20. Isa. 1. 2. and 43. 6. Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21.
23. Matthew. 15. 26. Christ's chickens, Matthew. 23. end; not Gods children merely
by creation, as neither were that Church-seed of old, called the sons of God
for that, Genesis 6. 1, 2. in opposition to the daughters of men, or of those
without the Church: For so all were of God, Mal. 2. 10. Heb. 12. 9. nor yet by
regeneration, and saving adoption such: but by external filiation, and
adoption. The argument then is a dicto secundum quid. They are not children of
the promise, or of God, savingly and in respect of the effect of the promise,
and of their covenant and Church estate to salvation, therefore not at all
children of God or of his promise, which follows not.

2 Object. They were children only after the flesh, and of the Sinai-covenant,
John 8. Gal. 4. now Abraham's spiritual seed only are in the covenant of
grace, Romans 9.

Answ. If children after the flesh be taken properly, so even Isaac and Jacob
were such. They had Abraham to their father, as well as the Jews. If taken
exclusively, as if no more but children of the flesh, we have already proved,
in what sense they were children of God, and of his free covenant. If children
of the flesh allegorically, so I deny that the Apostles intent, Gal. 4. is to
compare the state of the Jews from Abraham's time downward, to Ishmaels of
Hagar, as neither were they as Ishmael of Hagar the bondwoman, but of Sarah the
freewoman, even as Isaac was, Esa. 51. 1, 2. Hebr. 11. 11, 12. Esa. 10. 22. 23.
So neither does the Apostle consider them, in reference to their first covenant
estate in Abraham, but to their degenerate estate into a legal frame and way,
scil. as adhering to the moral Law, delivered in mount Sinai, not as a rule of
holy life, as there it was propounded and intended; but as the substance of the
covenant of works, so as to look for life by it, in which way God never
intended it to his covenant people. And likewise considering them, as abusing
the ceremonial law, not as given of God at Sinai, to represent the Messiah,
before his coming in the flesh, as one, in whose blood virtually they might,
and ought to have looked for life and grace, and by it to be led to him, when
come in the flesh, as he, in whom all those shadows were fulfilled and so to
cease; but they abusing both moral and ceremonial Law, so as to seek to be
justified, after Christ's coming thereby, and not by Christ, and persecuting
such as held forth the contrary, in this allegorical sense, not Jerusalem, or
the Church of old, but Jerusalem which then was, when Paul wrote this, long
after Christ's time; As might be showed by comparing Gal. 1. 17. 18. and 2. 1.
with other Scriptures. This Jerusalem which then was, and her children,
Jerusalem which now is and her children, and verse 29. and so it is now, not
so was it of old, verse 29. Those which did as Romans 9. 31, 32, 33. and 11. 20.
which were enemies to the Gospel Church, v. 21. 1 These. 2. 14, 15, 16. These
which would be under the Law, in that sense, not under Christ, Gal. 4. 21. to
26. These were the persons here intended. Yea, it is evident, that he
considers not the Jew-Church of old, as in covenant with God, but that
Allegorical Jerusalem, in that he applies this to all Legalists, whether
Jews or Gentiles. Those of Galatian Churches which are and will be of that
strain, they were such children also, Gal. 4. 21. Tell me, says Paul to
them, [yee] that desire to be under the Law, etc. where he applies that
further, verse 2, 3, 4, etc. whence also that, Gal. 5. 2, 3, 4, etc. In a word,
it is one thing to be under the moral or ceremonial Law, as a tutor, another
thing to be under it as a parent, both the Church-seed of Abraham, and his
choice elect seed, were all in common under the Law in the former sense, and so
to the outward face of reason, and comparatively, they were as servants, Gal.
4. 1, 2, 3, 4. scil. not so free from vayles and manifold ceremonious burdens
and services. They were a royal nation, under a Princely covenant and estate,
Exodus 19. 5, 6. They were then children, yea and heirs as to Canaan, so to
greater things also: in respect of external right, Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3. But yet as
Princes children at school, or as great men's sons, at a kind of service.
Thus they were under the Law as a Tutor. ibid. but under it as a parent and
mother, v. 23, 24, etc. scil. such as were only of the Sinai covenant in the
legal part of it, and were to inherit by virtue thereof, or no way. Thus those
Jews, as of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob considered as covenant-fathers, they were
of other manner of seed, scil. such like as Genesis 17. 7 and Deuteronomy. 36, etc. and
were externally instated to another manner of inheritance.

3 Object. They were under the old and first covenant, which was formerly, etc.
and not under the new, or in the covenant of grace.

Answ. Even that Sinai covenant could not disanuall that covenant formerly made
with them in Abraham, as being much later then it, Gal. 4. 16, 17. That was
upon their coming out of Egypt, Jer. 31. 32. This above 400. years before it.
The covenant of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in reference to their Church seed,
was in the essentialls of it, the same with that dispensed to us now, and as to
them before Abraham, an everlasting covenant and Gospel, Heb. 13. 20. Rev. 14.
6. The Lord, as others which are wise and not variable, made but one testament,
or covenant, or will of grace, yet he caused it to be writ in diverse
characters, and some more legible and perspicuous. The royal charter and grant
was and is the same, but renewed: so that the phrases [new and old] import not,
new, in nature and substance, but in accidents and qualities, or new, that is,
renewed. As the same grace in nature, it is said to be new or renewed every
morning, Lam. 3. 22, 23. so the commandment of love, the same in nature, both
old from the beginning, and yet also new, ^ John 2. 7, 8. so, the new way, Heb.
10. 20. yet the old way too, Heb. 13. 8. 20. Christ is not two ways but one
way, John 14. 6. so new heavens and earth, scil. refined: new churches, yet the
same essentially with those of old, as we sometimes call garments new, which
are but old ones new trimmed. When the covenant is said to be new and old, it
is not divisio generis in species, but subjecti in adjuncta: So the phrases
[first, and second] Heb. 9. note that two testaments specifically different,
but numerically, as the first and second person in the Trinity are called
first and second, yet are not two Gods essentially, but one. Besides, it is
called a first and second testament, scil. in order of succession. So, the
former is said to be faulty comparatively, not absolutely. In a word, in way
and manner of dispensation, that was different from the covenant now dispensed,
in respect of ceremony of administration, not in the essentialls. And this
which has been said, may take off diverse empty scruples, which may make
against Gods covenant of old, with the Jews, as if not of any force to our
purpose.

4 Object. It was not the same covenant made with them, as with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob.

Answ. It was a covenant made for ever, and the same with that unto Abraham,
and with that oath unto Isaac; and it was that which God remembered, for their
good, and so an Evangelicall covenant; yea, it was a sovereign commanding word
of grace, and certain. Therefore said to be commanded. For which see, Psalm.
105. 8, 9, 10. And of the phrase of commandment, taken for the promise, see
Psalm. 119. 54. 66. 92, 93. 96. and Psalm. 94. 19. and 133. 3. meaning of the Law
of faith or of the promife, Romans 3. 27. which is mighty to effect,
notwithstanding other lets, Romans 3. 3. True, you will say, in respect of Canaan
promised, there was such a covenant with them, Psalm. 105. 11.

Answ. That covenant was of another nature, then merely such: else, not
lasting in such sort to 1000. generations, verse 8. whereas Matthew notes but
42. generations from Adam to Christ.

5 Object. It was a national covenant, say some, Ergo, a covenant of works.

Answ. It follows not ex natura rei; for that Gospel covenant, Gal. 3. 8.
was of a national nature, Genesis 12. 2, 3. being a promise to Abraham, to make a
nation of him; and not excluding a Church respect of that nation, yet did not
God make two contrary covenants of works and grace with him; nor if it had
been a covenant of works, which was made with that nation, as it had not held
them so long together by the strength of it, Ier. 13. 11. so neither durst any
have pleaded it in the revolted estate of that Church, as he did Ier. 14. 19,
20, 21.

6 Object. It threatened and executed corporal punishments, as well as rewards.

Answ. And so does the Gospel also, John 3. 18. 36. Mark 16. 15, 16. 2 These.
1. 8. Rev. 11. 3, 4, 5, 6. Hebr. 2. 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 11. 29. 1 Timothy 4. 8, etc.

7 Object. That admitted of a fleshly seed, and such as proved carnal, this
only of a spiritual seed, and such as believe.

Answ. That, as invested with Church covenant, admitted none but a Church-seed,
and Church Members, to the fellowship of the covenant externally dispensed: And
so much, and no more is done, if rightly done now. Again, if the Author take
fleshly seed, for s^h as came of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; so in admitting all,
it must needs admit the elect seed of Abaham also, unless any deny, that there
were any such of that Church. Contrary to Romans 9. 6, 7, 8, etc. And so it did
not admit only of such as proved carnal, but as well of believers also. If he
take it in an allegorical sense, as Gal. 4. so also it admitted of others,
then such. And on the other side the covenant now, as invested with
Church Covenant, and so most authoritatively administered; it admits, as of
children, which come of good parents, so of carnal hypocrites, yea of fleshly
legalists, which defy ordinances, and rest in, and trust unto them, and to
their Church, and family, and closet duties, etc. the Galatian Churches had
such legalists, Gal. 4. 21, 22, 23. Many are called into covenant fellowship,
which are not chosen, Mat. 22. 13.

8 Object. That was in the flesh, this in the heart.

Answ. Was that only in the flesh? was not the word of Covenant as well in
their heart? as Moses judging ecclesiastically avoweth of Israel, Deuteronomy. 29. 10,
11, etc. with 30. 11, 12, 13, 14. so Isa. 51. 7. Gods covenant now, is to write
his Law in our hearts, Heb. 8. but is not all that included in this, I will be
your God? whence all is closed up in that phrase, ibid. or was not this first
made to the Jews after their return from captivity more expressly, Ier. 31.
as before more implicitly, Genesis 17. Yea, but God did not actually write such
holy dispositions in them. Suppose he did not: that is the execution of the
covenant, as for the very berith, or covenant it self; it is the promise
hereof dispense to them, and this they had, both Genesis 17. and Deuteronomy. 30. 6. To
circumcise the heart to love God, is to imprint gracious dispositions; to
promise the same to them is to covenant to imprint it, and so he did covenant
with them and theirs, ibid. Besides, is not Gods covenant now also
Sacramentally on our bodies too, and in many no further? which are only
baptized with water, but their souls filthy and chaffie, Matthew. 3. 11, 12.
which have barely the washing of the flesh, not the heart. Answer, as some call
it, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

9 Object. That was in their Generations, Genesis 7. not so now.

Answ. As that was to Abraham and Isaacs seed in their generations, till they
actually became obstinate, perversely rejecting the covenant-grace and Christ,
so it is now, Romans 11. from 16. to 24. As In-churched Cain, who was of Adams
house-Church, was then together with his, and not till then, rejected, Genesis 4.
15, 16. compared with Genesis 6. 1, 2. where his posterity are called daughters
of men, as contra-distinct from the children of God, or of the Church. Then
also, and not till then, was Ishmael, together with his rejected, scil. when
he mocked at both the head Christ, and the body the Church, in Isaac, in whose
race it was promised, the covenant should be confirmed, and by them carried
on, see Genesis 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. compared with 21. 9, 10, 11, 12. and Gal. 4.
And then, and not till then, was Esau, with his rejected, Hebr. 12. 15, 16, 17.

10 Object. That was a conditional covenant, this an absolute. That had a
commandment, as the isntrumental means, or cause of interest in the
Covenant, and that required only a male of eight days old, to interest them
in the covenant of their fathers, and for that end to be circumcised, etc. but
now, not so.

Answ. If the intent of the objectors be to exclude all conditions, surely now
the Gospel requires faith and repentance, and so it did then. To external
interest personal faith was not required, witness that, Deuteronomy. 29. and 30. 6.
But to effectual interest, it was in adultis, Heb. 4. 2. But it is false to say
the commandment gave right to covenant interest, since covenant-right was
first premised and declared, to be the ground of that commanded service, of
the initiatory seal, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. Thou shall therefore keep
my covenant. He does not say you must be, or are circumcised, and therefore
will be your God: But I will be a God to thee and thy seed, therefore thou and
they shall be circumcised; the nature of a seal supposes a covenant to be
sealed. Again, that also is of like truth, which is said, that it required
only a male of eight days old. The promise being made indefinitely to the
seed, whether male or female, and not to the eighth day old seed, but to the
seed, albeit but a day old, else, what had become of them, if they died then,
in respect of that ordinary covenant means of their good? Romans 9. 6.

11 Object. That promised temporal things to both seeds, as Canaan; this
spiritual.

Answ. Was not Canaan typical to both seeds, as you call them? Else, why were
any condemned for their unbeleefe? Heb. 3. last, and 4. 1, 2. compared. Or were
temporal things all that was promised, in this [I will be your God?] or was
hearts circumcision promised them, Deuteronomy. 30. a temporal thing? or does not the
Gospel now promise, and exhibit temporal things also? 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. 1 Timothy 4. 8.

12 Object. With the Jews, the Church and the State were the same, but not so
now.

Answ. God never confounded Church and civil state, either then or now. Who
dare make God the author of confusion, which is the God of Order? He then kept
them several, paling in the civil state with the judicialls, with which the
Church as such, dealt not, but as civil cases came under a
Church-consideration. She had her ceremonialls and moralls to regulate her
Kings and Princes, Priests, Levites, and Elders, had their proper work, and
moved only in their own spheres. The Elders of the assemblies knew and acted
in their places Ecclesiastically, without interruption from civil officers, or
intruding upon civil offices, as such, Josh. 9. and 16. 1. 2. Act. 14. Luke 4.
the matters of the King and of the Lord, were carefully bounded and sundred, 2 Chronicles. 17. 11.

And because I. S. makes many of these objections, let us see whether what
himself affirms, will not necessarily confirm much of what we have said,
and undermine many things, which he and others of his mind do hold. [To be a
God to them] says I. S. was to fulfill his promise to Abraham in particular,
or to his seed in general. Citing for that, Nehem. 9, 8. Psalm. 105. 9, 10, 11,
42. Luke 1. 72, 73, 74. In token of which God annexed Circumcision as a seal
to confirm the same, Genesis 17. 11. And again, unto which covenant circumcision
was added, to put the people always in mind of the said covenant, Genesis 17. 11.
and a seal to confirm the covenant on both sides, God to be a God to them, as
aforesaid, and they to be his own people above others, and so to perform the
same condition of faith and obedience, as Abraham their father did, and to
walk as such circumcised in heart, unto which they were engaged by that
ordinance, Romans 2. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. otherwise that covenant stood not in
force, etc. First then, there was a covenant of grace, which only requires
faith and repentance, made with Abraham's seed in general, and so with the body
of the Jews, Infants and all, as being then particulars of that seed of
Abraham in general: God anexing circumcision in token thereof as his mind
touching them whilst Infants, visibly to confirm the same to them whether they
proved elect or reprobate, Genesis 17. 11. Secondly, then the Initiatory seal of
the covenant of grace, was not always of present actual grace in the party
sealed, but unto future grace, and with condition of future actings of faith
and repentance: Albeit, not then able practically and personally to restipulate
otherwise then passively, and in their parents. It being confessed to be a
seal on both seeds of Gods being a God to them, etc. And putting the people
circumcised in mind, scil. afterward of the covenant, and to perform the
conditions of it, of faith, and repentance etc. 3 Then circumcision sealed
spiritual things, even that covenant [I will be a God to them] and so fulfill
my promises to them: such like as Luke 1. 72, 73, 74. In token whereof
circumcision was annexed to confirm the same. And surely it confirming a
promise of such mercies as Luke 1. 72, etc. it did confirm very spiritual
things to them, and so not temporal things only, as Canaan, etc. as sundry
have affirmed. Also, then circumcision, engaging the circumcised persons to
believe as Abraham did, and to be in heart circumcised, etc. as I. S. cited
that place for that purpose, Romans 2. 25. to the end: He elsewhere
contradicts himself, affirming that faith in the blessed seed, was not
required either in Abraham or others to be circumcised. If it engaged them to
his faith, then he and adult proselytes stood prae-ingaged to the same faith.
Likewise Infants, albeit not actually believing at present, yet that seal was
on them virtually, as a present engagement to after faith etc. Nor does this
accord with what I. S. elsewhere affirms, that circumcision required, not the
second birth but first. Since, it engaging to the hearts circumcision, this
could not be without a second birth supposed. This which has been said,
accords with much of that which we speak, touching baptism, that it
seals the covenant indefinitely to all sorts, and that it seals on Infants
present federall Grace, and unto future grace: likewise unto grown ones, it
seals personal grace less principally, covenant grace principally.

From what has been said in this sixth proposition it appears, that the
Infants of Abraham, Isaac and Jacobs loins, were as well as their covenant and
Church-seed as any others; Genesis 17. 7. and 26. 3, 4 and 28. 13, 14.
hence the covenant runs in the indefinite notion of seed, and the same seed to
which Canaan was to be given for an outward inheritance, whereof children were
heirs as well as parents; hence upon that ground of Gods being a covenant-God
to them, was the injunction of their being sealed by Circumcision, Genesis 17. 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, etc. hence in that way is the Covenant of grace renewed to all
Israel in the terms of you and your seed, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. I have been the larger
in this matter of Gods covenant with the Jews as conceiving the contrary
opinion to have been a great ground both of Anabaptisme and Familisme.

SECT. IX. The Childrens Covenant estate in Gospel.
Conclus. 7. THat the Covenant interest, at least external and
ecclesiastical, of Infants of inchurched believers, is Gospel as well as such
covenant interest of grown persons. Now because Antipaedobaptists, or rather
Anabaptists wholly deny the Covenant-right of Infants of believers; let us here
also addesome particulars for further clearing of this proposition. But first
let us consider of that place, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. 11, 12, 13, 14. compared with Romans
10. 6. 7. 8. the matter of the promise, scil. inward power of grace, inabling
to love the Lord entirely, to purge away and mortify heart sins, and shows
it was a very Gospel promise like that, Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12. of writing the Law
of grace in the heart: now this was made to the seed or children of these
Church Members assembled, as Chap. 29. 14, 15. here is not any evasion as is
usual in mentioning Abraham's seed, to say he meant their Allegorical and
their spiritual seed, etc. this people to whom this was made being not so
spiritual themselves. Nor was it some bare tender, but it was in way of
special Covenant and oath on Gods part, as Deuteronomy. 29. 14, 15. shows, nay it
was of a sovereign nature, to bring about what God in his secret counsel
intended, hence called a commandment, Deuteronomy. 30. 11. like that Psalm. 105. 8.
the covenant and the commanded word were one; and lest any doubt should arise,
how this should be ratified and made good, Moses prophetically sets out
Christ as dead and risen in whom this covenant was virtually ratified, verse.
12, 13. all which the Apostle further explaineth: when to set forth the way of
Gods free Covenant grace in Christ without works, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. calling it
the righteousness of faith or Covenant of grace in Christ, which justifying
faith is to improve the righteousness of faith speaks on this wise: say not,
who shall, etc. where was this spoken, but in Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14. That
commandment or covenant was not far off, that any should say, who, etc. but
it was nigh them, etc. and that commandment which was not far off, verse. 11.
that any need speak as verse 12, 13. who shall ascend, etc. was the same word,
which was nigh them in their mouth and heart, verse. 14. this the Apostle
expounds to be the righteousness of faith, Romans 10. 6. and word of faith,
verse 8. or covenant and promise of grace in Christ descending into the grave,
noting his humiliation, ascending into heaven, noting his exaltation, verse 6,
7. which faith was to believe, and that very doctrine of faith, was that which
the Apostles preached: as Paul says, this is the word of faith which [wee]
preach, this then, albeit called in Deuteronomy. 30. a commandment, yet was it a
covenant, and that not of works, nor a bare subservient covenant, but the very
Gospel covenant ratified in Christ, the very object of faith, and that which
the Apostle preached; now what this commandment or Covenant was, that
circumstance notes, Deuteronomy. 30. 11. this commandment or covenant which I have
commanded this day: for Moses had that day propounded it in a Church Way, and
as a mutual covenant betwixt them and God, as well as God and them, the
parents stipulating therein in behalf of themselves and children; and so in
reference to them also, a conditional covenant made that day in the plains of
Moab, Deuteronomy. 29. 1. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 29. and 30. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14. so that the places compared evidently prove, 1. That the covenant
interest of inchurched stipulating parents children is Gospel. And secondly,
that the Apostles preached this doctrine. Thirdly, that believers are to eye
the Covenant in such a latitude, as to their children with them by faith?
Fourthly, that the essentials of the Covenant of grace, in the latitude of the
extent thereof to covenant parents with their children, held forth in the old
Testament, was delivered and held forth as valid to the faith of the Saints in
the new, and after Christ's incarnation. This second and fourth particular here
mentioned might be further confirmed both by rule, in that it being proved to
be Gospel by the places now compared, it must needs be, that the Apostles
preached the same; being enjoined to preach the Gospel, Mark 16. unless they
either disobeyed Christ's charge; or hid some part of Gods Evangelicall mind
from his people; contrary to Romans 10. 15. 18. and Acts 20. 27. 2 In that also
Peter being to call upon his hearers to repent, and consequently to believe,
he propounds the word of their faith in such a Latitude as with reference to
their children, Acts 2. 38, 39. The like doctrine does Paul hold forth to the
Saints at Rome, and inchurched believers there touching such children, Romans 5.
14, 15. even touching the abounding of the graces of Christ to them. And the
like virtually also is held forth by him, Romans 11. 16, 17, 18, 19. as elsewhere
is proved, and so 1 Cor. 7. 14.

First then, that which believers, as such, have, do and ought to believe as a
branch of the covenant of grace, that is Gospel; but this is of that nature,
ergo. The major needs no proof: the former Texts also clearing the same: the
minor, de jure, it is evident: they ought to believe the whole Covenant made
with them, as is evident, faith must be as large as it is object, the Covenant
is the word of faith. A believer in the exercise of faith should as well have
respect to the whole covenant, as in the exercise of the obedience of faith;
respect the whole word of commandment, he does not else believe rightly which
does not desire and endeavor this: this therefore being one branch of Gods
Covenant, to believers as believing and inchurched, as these Scriptures
compared show they ought to believe this, which respects their seed, as well
as that which respecting themselves if they believe aright. God in making a
covenant, in a Church reference especially, as was that with Abraham, Genesis 17.
7. he takes in their seed or children as joint covenanters. Hence the phrase
of seed in their generations: taking in parents generating and children
begotten, as those in and by whom Churches are likely to be continued; whence
God, when to speak in reference to the Church seed, as well as to the choice
elect seed of Isaccs line in which the visible, and not merely the invisible
Church was to be continued, he says, he will establish his covenant with
Isaac, not with Ishmael; Ishmael was Abraham's seed too, and therefore
externally in the covenant, and therefore sealed; but God knowing that Ishmael
would reject this, he warns Abraham of it a little before, that it might not
trouble him afterward: It is not to be with him in his generations: for that
cause, Genesis 17. 18. compared with Genesis 21. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. but with Isaac in
his generations; God not opposing therein Isaac to his Church-seed, but to
Ishmael, who by rejecting the covenant will and did come, he and his to be
cast out; hence when God speaks in reference to our times after Christ's
incarnation when a woman compast a man, Jer. 31. 22. he says, he will be a
God, not to the families in Judah or Israel merely, but to those throughout the
earth. It Is the old phrase in Abraham's covenant expounded and enlarged: I will
be a God to thee and to thy seed, in their generations. He says not barely,
to thee and to thy seed in regeneration, but, in their generations. Now in that
Abraham's seed were to be gentile believers also, in their generations: in
Jeremy it is, I will be a God to the families of all the earth, scil. where
the Gospel shall take so far place to bring on the parent or parents to him
and to his Church; not but that it may fall out, that in a believers family,
some may come to hate their parents, as Matthew. 10. for Religion, yet ordinarily
it should be and is otherwise; and God speaks of things as they ordinarily
come to pass: extraordinary cases break not square here. Yet even in that
case too it follows not but that the children were externally in covenant and
Church estate when very children: But apostatising when grown up, they prove
the desperatest enemies to the Gospel, even to persecute their own parents. So
it may be the wife may remain a Pagan, and so an enemy. But usually the
Gospel when it comes seasoneth the wife as well as the husband, and so
servants as well as masters. Hence such frequent mention in holy story, when
speaking of persons which had families to whom the Apostles came, that their
families were Gospelled as well as themselves; witness that of Cornelius,
Stephanus, Crispus, and the Jayler, etc. And even Anabaptists deny it not to
be verified in all the adult persons of the families mentioned usually: then
by their own confession wives and servants were usually others at present, at
least then Pagans, or persecuters, which suffices to for answer Hen. Dens
objection, touching the desparitie of yokefellowes or masters and servants. It
was usually otherwise, and God speaks of things as they usually prove:
extraordinary occurrents cross not such a rule, hence that testimony of the
Angel to Cornelius, Acts 11. He shall speak words unto thee whereby thou and
all thy house shall be saved, verse 14* And so Paul's phrase runs in that
notion, Believe in the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved, and thy house, Acts
16. 31. so Christ's testimony is to like purpose, This day is salvation come to
this house, inasmuch as he also is become a son of Abraham; where by the
coming of salvation to the house, he does not mean the bare coming of
Christ, who is called the salvation, Luke 2. 30. to the material house of
Zachaeus, as if that were such a notable privilege of Zacheus as a believer;
since Christ went to many other houses then such as were the believing sons of
Abraham, Luke 14. 1. and 7. 36. 39. and yet no such singular note upon the same
as here. Nor by salvation come to his house is meant the coming of salvation
to himself: as if he and his house were all one: nor do I know any parallel
Scripture speaking in such language, that when the scope and intent is to
mention the coming of such or such a mercy to such a person, that phrase is
used to denote the same; that such or such a mercy is come to his house. What
need such a circumlocution? If so intended, the word might more plainly have
been set down, this day is salvation come to this Publican, this person, this
man, or the like, inasmuch as he also is become a son of Abraham: And what
though the Greek word be used in Acts 2. 45. and 4. 35. for secundum
according as, yet not for quatenus or in quantum: forasmuch as; the Texts and
sense thereof are clear, that it notes proportion of such administration, not
merely the cause or reason thereof. Or if it be supposed to imply the cause or
reason thereof, it is evident it notes the proportion also, they gave to every
one as, or according as the needed, scil. proprortionably to their need: It
being regular as to give to the needy, so to give them according to the measure
of their present necessity. But how that sense will here be fitly applicable
I see not, to say that salvation is come to his house or to him according as
he is a believer, but rather as our translaters render it, it is to be taken as
a reason of the former, salvation is come to this house forasmuch as he is a
son of Abraham. Yea, but will it not then follow that one man's faith saves
others as well as himself? No verily. Paul when he spoke so to the Jailer, If
thou beleevest thou shall be saved and thy house, Acts 16. 31. he speaks
more likely to such a purpose, as it may seem; yet verily he intended not any
such doctrine, of others being actually saved only by his faith; but that he
embracing the covenant of grace in Christ, and by faith laying hold of the
same, his whole house, even wife or servants and all (as it is usual) shall
fare the better, and come in the Gospels way: but if he have children which
are the continuers and upholders of the house in especial, there is a more
direct Covenant-line, and therefore ordinary means of salvation runs unto them
by virtue of Abraham's Covenant, and so if he believe, not barely in the Lord
Jesus, without reference to the promise, but as held out in the promise of
ratifying of the promise, or covenant of grace, in this sense his house,
Synecdochically, shall be saved, and brought within this covenant road and
ordinary mean of salvation. None ordinarily can be saved but in such a way.
It Is the word of covenant which must instrumentally be effectual thereto,
that is Gods order, Romans 9. 6. and Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. and so in the ease of
Zacheus; whence that periphrasis of his being a believer, that he was become a
son of Abraham, and so an heir of Abraham's covenant, Genesis 17. 7. Nor is this
sense of salvation, for covenant means of salvation, or the covenant and
promise it self unusual in Scripture. The salvation which Christ and his
Apostles preached, and those, Heb. 2. 3. neglected, was not barely salvation it
self, but the promises holding the same forth, for Acts 28. 28. the salvation
to be sent and heard by the gentiles was the promises, and covenant and
Gospel holding the same forth, this was that mercy, and riches, and salvation
also which came to the Gentiles, as rejected by the Jews, Romans 11. 11, 12, 17.
19 30. Verses compared. So Esaias 51. 6. 8. Gods salvation is his promise, or
covenant on which their salvation did depend, Calvin in locum. 2 Samuel 23. 5.
David speaking of his house or posterity, which albeit it were not so orient
then, yet God had made a covenant with him, scil in reference to his house
ordered in all things and sure; And this, scil. this covenant with me and my
house, is all my salvation, and all my desire, albeit he makes my house not to
grow or flourish in such sort: this covenant then was his salvation, objective
causaliter or Instrumentaliter. Albeit a parents faith be not a principal
cause, yet it may be an occasional means to stave off destruction from and
to further the salvation of their children; hence the faith of Moses parents
preserved him in the waters, when a babe, Heb. 11. 23. hence that typical
sprinkling of the houses, representing the preservation of the first born, from
other manner of destruction then merely bodily: yet Moses his faith with other
believing Israelites, as verse 27. 25. compared shows, had a great stroke
therein. And the like in that typical passage of theirs with their children
through the red Sea, verse 28. As much might be said of that case of the
beleeling Ninivites, Jon. 3. and 4. So in that typical saving of Noah's house
by Noah's faith, Heb. 11. 7. But to return to the houses mentioned, shall it
then be yielded, that such benefit should come as was before spoken of, to
adult servants of the house, etc. and is here no reference to the poor babes by
reason of their tender age? has the merciful God revealed no ordinary help
for them? They are excluded from that actual rejoicing and believing Jaylours
house, Acts 16. whence Anabaptists do therefore exclude them from the baptized
house of the Jaylour; and why not as well exclude them by reason of want of
actual faith, from the saved house of the Jaylour? verse. 31. which I suppose
they will not do. Nay, why not rather so? since it is peremptorily said, He
that believes not shall be damned; and, Without faith it is impossible to
please God, Mark 16. and Heb. 11. when it is no where said that, without faith
it is impossible to be baptized; or, he that believes not shall never be
baptized. Surely the Apostle adding that as an encouragement to the troubled
Jaylour to believe, because of the saving of his house in such sort at least as
we mentioned, it had been little encouragement to suppose an outward way and
mean of the good of his very servants by occasion thereof, and no such mean
at all thereby to his own children. For the Apostle speaks as supposing even
that also: children being most usually supposed to be included in that notion
of the house: and if he had none, yet the Apostles speech reaches them as if
he had them. Some will say, the children might be elected and that might
comfort him: or they might be included amongst the redeemed by Christ. Yea,
but these are all secrets, here is nothing visibly to comfort him, in respect
of any isntrumental means of their good; as was intimated in the case of the
servants. And they are revealed, not secret things which believers as such must
look to in respect of their children, Deuteronomy. 29. Nor is it expressly said that
the Jaylours house believed before they were baptized, but afterward; and
suppose they did so before, yet it follows not that what is applicable to the
adult persons in the house, scil. that joy of faith, must exclude the children
of the house from baptism, whereof they were capable; no more then when it is
said, Deuteronomy. 12. 7. that they and their households were to eat before the Lord
and to rejoice in all they put their hands to, etc. because therefore their
little children could not so actually express joy in what they put their hand
unto, therefore they were none of the household which did eat before the Lord.
Anabaptists would not like this arguing: which urge the joint communion of the
Jewish children in all sorts of Church ordinances. Suppose a man's household,
men, women and children, all diseased and cured at the Bath, and afterward the
household expresses their joy for it by leaping and dancing for joy; and it be
said, such a man, he and all his were washed at such a Bath, and he and his
whole household afterward even danced for joy: None will say, that because his
little ones could not so leap for joy, and are excluded from the notion of the
[whole houshold] in this latter, therefore they were not in the account of [all
his] in the former. Who will say that Jacob carried not the little children in
his family to Bethel, from that imminent danger to his house, because that the
household at Bethel are said to be such which had their strange gods, but upon
his motion they put them away, which is not applicable to little ones, Genesis 34.
30. with Chap. 35. 1, 2, 3, 4. Sure I am it is most usual in Scripture in
mentioning this and that as done in or to the house, when speaking of such
things which are applicable to Infants, to intend them therein, albeit not
expressed, as Genesis 30. 30. and 45. 11. 18. with 19. Exodus 1. 1. 1 Samuel 27. 3.
Prove. 31. 15. Luke 12. 42. It would be too much to cite the many Scriptures
which speak this; nay the Scripture oft-times in such things under the notion
of house intends, if not only, yet chiefly the children in it, as 1 Samuel 20.
15. and 2 Samuel 9. 9. 1 King. 17. 12, 13. 15. compared, Psalm. 127. 1. 3. Prove.
12. 7. Esaias 31. 2. Hos. 1. 4. Hab. 2. 9, 10. 1 Timothy 3. 4, 5. and 5. 4. 8.
compared, also verse 14. 2 Timothy 1. 16. And sometimes again when some parts of
the family are expressly instanced in, and children not withal mentioned: yet
they are included and intended, as Genesis 14. 16. And there is more reason to
conceive the same in cases of this nature; since the children are the ordinary
instruments as to perpetuate and continue and hold up the house in natural and
civil respects, so in religious and Church respects also; they are builders of
the house both ways, as the Hebrew radix [(...)] from whence the word used for
sons and daughters comes, does signify; whence also that phrase of Gods
building the women houses, Exodus 1. 21. Yea the covenant expressions of seed,
and seed in their generations, do more directly reach them, as such; then
either wives or servants as such, Genesis 17. 7. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Esaias 59. 20, 21.
compared with Romans 11. 26, 27. Esaias 65. 23. Thus much for further clearing of
that, so much questioned by some, how children are included in that notion of
house and families, and if so the covenant made, Jerem. 31. 1. in reference to
these times, reaches them as instated, at least externally and
Ecclesiastically therein: as much appears too from Ezekiel. 16. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8. that live-making covenant and not that killing letter and ministration of
condemnation which was again and again made to the fathers long before, yet
was it made with reference to those Jews, in Ezekiels time; for in those
covenanting fathers of old, he said to that Jerusalem then, Live: as in the
same fathers he had said to the Israelites of old, Live: the same mercy and
truth engaged to Abraham and Jacob, did God both swear to other Jew fathers of
families, and bound himself to perform to those of their loins in Micahs
days long after, Mica. 7. 20. neither was it other then the covenant of grace,
thus engaged: even such a covenant wherein pardon of sins and subduing
iniquities, etc. was, at least externally, made over to them, and therefore
pleaded there for that end, verse. 18, 19. that covenant which God made in
Bethel, Genesis 35. 9. to 16. he spoke it not barely to, but with them, or
covenanted it with them, in Hoseahs time which were of the posterity of Jacob,
Hos. 12. 4. God found him in Bethel and there he spoke [with us.] As much
might be said of that, 2 Samuel 23. 4, 5. the covenant was made with David the
father: yet in reference to his house or children, whence it was that his
faith, as a believing father of his family, was the evidence of things not
seen. He believes that whatever his house be at present, yet it shall
excel in grace, both of Gods fear and justice, Verse. 3. as in the glory of
government, etc. nor was this other then a covenant of grace here mentioned,
since it had not else been to him as all his desire and salvation; whence it
was that in saddest times this covenant was pleaded by the Prophets, in behalf
of David's posterity, Psalm. 89. verse. 38, 39. 49. 50. see more, verse. 20. 28.
and so on: if the parents and the children both may thus act forth, and must in
the covenant so made, it is a sign parents and children were jointly interested
therein. And so I come to instance as well in such as de facto have done so, as
to show, de jure they should do it; to let pass David's example here, the
instance of our grandmother Eve is past exception: her son Cain being
discovenanted and discharged he and his, and Abel slain, she believed the
promise of God, Genesis 3. 15. at first made to her: and when infant Seth was
borne, she believed that God had for his covenant sake looked on her in that
covenant babe: and therefore as soon as borne, she calls his name Seth: for
says she God has appointed me another seed in stead of Abel whom Cain slew,
Genesis 4. 25. she spoke not thus, in reference to him, as a mere natural babe
borne of her as a sinful woman, but as of a Covenant and Church seed,
therefore comparing him to Abel, not to Cain: and calls him by such a name as
signified her faith touching the Covenant estate of this babe, even whilst a
very babe; nor did she fail in her faith therein as appears by the sequel,
verse. 26. whence the Church seed continued in his loins, externally at least,
albeit much degenerating, as that distinction of sons of God and daughters of
men does show, Genesis 6. 1, 2. And as Eve believed this way, so did Lamech, Genesis
5. 28, 29. as soon as Noah was borne, he from says in that promise of God,
Genesis 3. 15. See Geneva Bible notes on the place.
gave the babe that name of Noah; believed that that child should be a root,
as it were, to the Church, albeit that corrupt world were to be destroyed.
Another example of the Saints faith touching their childrens federall estate,
see in Psalm. 102. 25, 26, 27. with Heb. 1. 10, 11, 12. which referred unto
Christ as in whom they pleaded, and expected this touching their children. And
it is evident, that those Saints did express their faith in Christ, touching
their children and seeds being established before him, nor did they exercise
their faith touching the vanishing temporal good of their children barely,
verse 25, 26. but in reference to enduring mercies of Christ to them, lasting
when heaven and earth should dissolve. Now did they take the rise of this their
faith from possibilities of election or redemption without foothold from the
covenant? verily no, they ought not to ground their faith on any thing but God
his revealed will touching themselves or theirs, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. the Covenant and
promise, is that which faith in its acts of believing, does build, and rest
upon, and faith, albeit it must go as far, yet no further that way then the
word of faith, Romans 10. 8. secrets of possibilities of election, and redemption
of the children would not, might not, have caused in them, such a conclusive
apprehension of faith, but the revealed covenant, and testament, and will of
Gods grace in Christ, election and redemption, though things which faith
believes, yet not grounds in themselves considered without reference to the
covenant revealed of any man's faith touching himself or others, as being
secrets; It Is not the election of faith, but the word of faith, nor belief of
election as such: for as such it is a secre^ act of God: hid within himself;
but the belief of the truth, or revealed promise. Another argument of the
federall interest of believers Infants to be Gospel, and therefore of
perpetual validity, now as well as at any time, may be, in that it was held
forth as Gospel in the beginning of the world, and so will be in the purer
times of the Gospel, toward the very end of the world, and therefore it is
Gospel to us now. The consequence is evident, both from the everlastingnesse
of the Gospel, and covenant of grace, of which this was, and will be made a
branch, which covenant of grace is Gospel, Heb. 13. 20. Revel. 14. 6. and from
the essential samenesse, and oneness of the covenant of grace from the
beginning of the world to the end: for so far forth as any thing partaketh of
everlastingnesse, it partaketh so far of immutabilitie. Now the covenant is
not in nature the same, if the covenant, the confederate persons are not
specifically the same, the covenant in the nature of it supposing God as one
party, and such or such a sort of persons as other parties betwixt whom that
covenant is drawn, and made; if it were supposable that there were not the same
God covenanting with man, or not the same sorts of persons, specifically
accepted of by God into terms of covenant grace with him, the covenant were
not in nature the same. Albeit it be not shut up in families, as of old in
Adams, Seths, Enoshes, Kenans, Mahaleels, Jareds, Enochs, Methuselahs, Lamechs,
Noah's, etc. or in the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in respect of
Church interest in, and administration of it, but enlarged to all the families
of Gospeld persons, yet if the persons admitted to covenant, be not
specifically the same, even that sort of inadult, as well as adult persons,
whether male or female, bond or free, then is not the covenant in nature the
same. Now to prove the proposition in both its branches; and first that it was
held forth as Gospel, that the species of the Infants of believers in
Church Estate were taken into the verge of the covenant of grace, Genesis 3. 15.
shows. Adam and Eve were eyed by God, as a seminall visible Church, by whom,
as well the Church, as the world was to be built up, and God, that he might
especially glorify his grace, even in the weakest, mentions Eve as one,
touching whom, he first expressed his revealed mind of grace to her, and her
seed, not intending merely the principal seed Christ, in and by whom it was
ratified, and fulfilled, but her Church seed whom the same promise also did
comprehend togegether with Eve, in whose hearing, God uttered these things to
the Serpent. And hence Eve, by faith did thus interpret the scope of that
promise, as made in refernce to her Infant Church seed, as was Seth, as before
we proved, Genesis 4. 25, 26. And the opposition shows what kind of seed the
promise reached, scil. Infant, as well as adult seed, the Serpents seed being
as well the least Snake, etc. as the most venomous, and overgrowne; and the
antipathie being natural and forcible between even little children, and any
sort of Serpents, as is evident, this then was held out as Gospel, even in the
beginning of the visible Church and world: hence also in the beginning of the
renewed world, as I may call it, after the flood, the same doctrine is
implicitly held forth, Genesis 9. in the opposition of the servill condition of
Canaan, or 25, 26. to the future Church estate of Japhet, verse. 27. the one
accursed parent and child to servitude, so that Chams babes as soon as borne
were to be slaves, but Japhet, parent and child, are prophetically devoted to
Church estate in Sems Tents, so that inchurched Japhets babes are actually
within Sems tents, so soon as borne; As God would accurse collective Canaan,
Noah prophesies that God would enlarge, or cause collective Japhet to turn
into the Tents of Sem; which interpreters expound of the joining of the
Gentiles unto the visible Church. Now visible Church estate, supposes visible
covenant estate, as is evident. The like opposition was allegorically made in
the primitive times after Christ's ascension, Gal. 4. 23, 24. between
collective natural Ishmael of the bondwoman in type, and collective legal
Ishmael, in antitype: And collective natural Isaac in type, and collective
Evangelicall Isaac in antitype. In the types, the opposition is undeniably
verified: that Ishmael with his children are expunged and cast out from a
civil family privilege, and portion in Abraham's house; and only Isaac and
his children are to have that civil and natural privilege of inheritance
therein: The son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with my son Isaac, Genesis
21. 10. And in the antitype, even persons formerly in Gods family the Church,
if rejecting Christ and the covenant in him, and embracing and adhering
obstinately to any thing in a way inconsistent with him, such are cast out, and
dischurched, they and theirs, as was verified in that legal Jerusalem and her
children, even the body of the Jews, adult and Infant. Thus far a typo ad
veritatem, the argument is undeniable; and what reason then to make the other
branch of the allegory dissonant only, that there a typo ad veritatem, the
argument holds not, that all inchurched persons, which are gospelled, hold
forth the free covenant in reference to Gospel Church estate; are as Isaac and
his posterity, visibly privileged, and instated in the Church heritage of the
Lords family, the visible political Gospel Church? As in Isaac, Abraham's seed
natural is called, in point of civil heritage all of them, and as in the same
Isaac, not Ishmael, Abraham's Church seed was called, and so all of them called
to the external fellowship, of covenant, and Church; and as in a restrained
sense, Abraham's elect seed were called not in Ishmael but Isaac, Romans 9. 7. so
in the Ecclesiastical Isaac, as I may say, in these days, the Church seed are
counted, and not in pagans without the Church: and according to ordinary
dispensation, and in man's count, in the same line are Gods elect seed counted;
all the individual children in the former: that species of Church children,
and none other in the sense mentioned, are of the latter account.

But to hasten to the latter branch, that the same doctrine is held forth as
Gospel to be dispensed and fulfilled in the purer times of the Gospel,
toward the latter end of the world, that Esaias 56. 20. is a promise referring
to the purer times of the Gospel Church, and probably to the times of the
coming in of the Jews, verse. 17, 18, 19. when albeit there may be some
accursed ones, yet the Churches children though Infants of days, not
allegorical Infants in humility or by imitation of believers, etc. that sort
of persons too dying in Infancy, yet God promises they shall die in a holy
maturitie of covenant grace, and bliss, as if elder by many years. When elder
ones, some die ripened for the cause of God: the like singular account does the
Lord expressly make, as of parents in his Church, so of their offspring, verse.
13. see Esaias 61. 9. God promises not only that the grown persons should be
had in account, but their seed and offspring, not meaning it of allegorical
seed, amongst the Gentiles; for it is not said they shall be known to convert
Gentiles, etc. but their seed shall be known among the Gentiles: yet not
meaning pagan Gentiles, but rather inchurched Gospelled Gentiles, the Hebrew
word for knowing, being used to signify special owning of persons either by
God, Jer. 24. 5. or by men, Psalm. 142. 5. Ruth 2. 10. 19. Deuteronomy. 21. 17. and 1.
17. Prove. 24. 23. now none will say the worser part of the Gentiles would thus
own the members of the Church, or their children, with such choice respect,
but the better part rather of the Gentiles, they are then the persons
acknowledging the seed, not the allegorical seed acknowledged; so Ezekiel. 37.
20, 21. 27. when all the scattered of the Tribes of Israel, and Judah shall
become as the two sticks joined in one in Ecclesiastical respects, at least,
under the discipline of Christ, God in reference to that time re^ the old
Charter of Abraham's covenant to be a God to the (...) which promise he
includes their children, they being a^ their parents scattered among the
heathen, verse. 21. and to be gathered to their Land, and parts of the nations
and kingdoms, as of old to be then joined, yea verse. 25. expressly their
children, and childrens children are by covenant put under Christ as their
Prince, with them is the covenant of peace made, and that of no temporal but
of an everlasting nature, and all this in reference to Church estate and
administration, whence that branch of the old Charter now actually renewed of
setting his Tabernacle and Sanctuary in the midst of them, verse. 26, 27. and
that in a very glorious and perspicuous manner, as persons thereto, ex
confesso, to the very heathen, sanctified and sequestered by the Lord, verse. 28.
the very same [they] which shall dwell in the Land are children with their
parents, [their] Prince will David or Christ be, with [them] is that
everlasting covenant of peace, verse. 26. amongst [them] will Gods Sanctuary and
Tabernacle by virtue of covenant be placed, verse. 26, 27. [their] God will God
be, and [they] shall be his people, or he their covenant God, and they his
covenant people, verse. 27. and all this in reference to Church administrations
of Sanctuary and Tabernacle ordinances, as they are capable thereof, by which
they shall become a visible Church or sanctified and sequestered people in the
very view of the heathen, which cannot, nor do not attend to gracious
efficacies, but external administrations, and dispensations and privileges;
and the like, see verse. 28. other places to like purpose might be quoted, but
I forbear.

3. Argument, if the Infants and little ones of visibly believing parents in
church estate before they can make any personal confession or profession of
faith in the Covenant, yet then are Abraham's Church seed, then is it Gospel
that the promises belong to them; but the former is true, Ergo the latter. The
major is in substance the Apostles, Gal. 3. 16. to Abraham and his seed are the
promises made: the minor is proved; 1. In those of Abraham's loins, in the
elect seed. I should think it should not be questioned but yet it has by
some; that Infants while Infants and till believers are not in the covenant,
etc. and by such other speeches of our adversaries in this point, the covenant
right not only of the individual Infants of believers, but the covenant
estates of that species, and sort of persons is wholly denied, and so since
it is evident and acknowledged that some are elected of that sort, yet it is
denied that they have part in the word of Gods Covenant, so that if they die in
Infancy, as many of the choice seed of Abraham and Isaac, and Jacob did, etc.
yet that ordinary means of saving efficacy in all the saved elect is denied
them, contrary to that principle, Romans 9. 6. but more hereof anon: but Romans 9.
7, 8, 9, 10, 11. is so clear for it, I wonder any deny it, Isaac and Jacob are
made precedentiall instances of interest not only of election, but of Gods
calling unto the fellowship of his free covenant, without respect either to
their desire, or endeavor of it personally, verse. 16. It was that God might
show, not barely in the act of his choosing of them in his secret counsel, but
in the act of his covenanting grace likewise, that it was not of their works
but of him that called them unto that covenant estate: in the example of Jacob
most fully; when God would show the rise of that his covenant grace to him the
younger, that he should have the pre-eminence, verse. 12. he verse. 11.
instanceth in the time when that was revealed, with so personal a reference to
Jacob, even whilst in the womb, and expresses the forenamed cause as the
reason why: and so God expressly mentions his covenant as to be established
with Isaac in Infancy, or with Isaac to be borne the next year of Sarah, Genesis
17. 21. And hence when Isaac was grown, and was actually a believer, he has
indeed then more actual benefit of his own improvement of the covenant by
faith, but he did not then first enter into covenant, but he had interest in
the covenant before made to his father with reference to him; that being to be
minded in covenant expressions uttered, the persons spoken unto, and
understanding what is spoken: are not the only covenanters engaged, but as well
the persons spoken of with covenant reference in the declaring of the covenant;
so in Genesis 17. 7. 21. and 21. 12. and 26. 3, 4. and 20. 13, 14. and Deuteronomy. 29.
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, etc. Now that Isaac had such a former covenant
interest appears in that, Genesis 26. 3. when God spoke so expressly to him
touching his covenant, he says not, I now make a covenant with thee, or
swear to do such and such things for thee, but I will perform the oath, which
I swear to Abraham thy father, he refers him to a former grant and
engagement of grace to him, see verse 4, 5. he does not retract any thing, but
confirms in solemn wise the validity of the former bond, and the like might
be said of all the rest of the elect seed: if all the elect seed were not
involved in that covenant, Genesis 7. 7. then the Apostles reasoning should be
undermined, Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. who is so far from denying the elect seed to be
these choice children of the promise, Genesis 17. 7. and 21. 12. that he makes
that choice company of the children of the promise to be the only elect seed;
now if all the elect seed be included in that, Genesis 17. 7. and 21. 12. then
since some of Abraham's and Isaacs seed died in Infancy, either none of those
were elect and saved, which none dare avow, or if some be supposed to be
saved and elect, then were they in Infancy, and as Infants of Abraham and
Isaac, children of the promise; Since the promise and covenant runs to them as
Abraham's seed, not as elect, also supposing they were circumcised before they
died, that was no seal to a blanke, albeit they being Infants had no actual
faith, etc. but rather a seal of the covenant of grace or promise, of which
they most properly were children. Yea to all the rest which were in an
Ecclesiastical respect, children of the covenant: that enjoined circumcision
was to be that his covenant or the visible Sacramental sign and seal of the
righteousness of faith, or the covenant of God holding the same forth, Genesis
17. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Romans 4. 11. and 10. 6, 7, 8. and Deuteronomy. 29. and 30.
6. 11. 12, 13, 14. compared. And what is true of them, of Abraham's and Isaacs
loins as Infants of Abraham and Isaac considered as believing, and inchurched,
is true of the Infants of others, as believers and in church estate, the
formalis natio of the interest of the Infants of the former, as such, is as
valid in those of the latter, the formalis natio being the same in both, as
also the covenant of grace in the essentialls thereof, is the same, and
therefore Abram had then first his name changed to Abraham, and then first was
called a father of nations, in reference to this covenant of grace to be made
with him and his in this political Church way and latitude of Church interest,
and dispensation thereof, as Genesis 17. 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. compared, and then first
propounded as a father, and exemplar to other believers of other nations, Romans
4. And albeit it were a name given him before he was actually circumcised, yet
it was not to intimate that there was no need of a visible seal to his
children and seed, whether of his loins or otherwise, for he was a father
as well of those of the circumcision, Romans 4. 11, 12. But to show that he was
not a father to those which were bound to be circumcised only, but withal, a
father to the Gentiles, albeit neither circumcised by actual taking away of
the flesh of their foreskinne, nor yet bound thereto, verse. 12. It was not then
spoken to evacuate the force of reasoning from right to the promise, as
invested, or Church promise or covenant unto right to the seal, or to show
that albeit Gentile believers did not partake of the initiatory seal of the
covenant, yet having the promise they therefore have the seal in Abraham their
father, albeit they never are, nor may be sealed in their persons; the
Apostles discourse clears it to be otherwise, his scope being not to
infringe any Gospel right to the Gospel seal, but to take off any reasoning
in point of justification from any work of the Law considered apart from
Christ; as the five first verses evince: and because that of circumcision was
chiefly gloried in by the Jews, he takes off any reasoning that way in
opposition to faith which is all in all rather, in point of justification,
whether of Jews or Gentiles; for which end Abraham's example in the way, and
manner of his justification is propounded, as verse 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. declare,
as for the sealing of Abraham's believers children the Gentiles, in Abraham's
sealing, if that were intended, as much might have been affirmed of the
believers Jewish children of Abraham, as they were such, and so the
circumcising of such Jews, at least, had been more then needed, so far
forth. Yea but the Jews were commanded to be circumcised; true, and so were
the Gentiles to be baptized: yea but they were to be circumcised, when Infants;
yea, and when adult too, in case, as Joshua 5. and in that case at least many
of them, being actual believers, Joshua 5. and 6. compared with Heb. 11. 30.
might have pleaded exemption, as being, quatenus believer, circumcised in the
circumcision of their father Abraham. It was not then spoken at all to weaken
the bond to an initiatory sealing of Gentiles, but to [that] initiatory sealing
up of the covenant to them by circumcision of the foreskin of their flesh; thus
much by the way in answer to what some thus object. But to return to the
proof of that propounded, let us show that even in the days since the time of
the fathers before Christ's time, such children mentioned were, are, and will be
eyed by divine approbation as covenant and Church-seed of Abraham, God has
promised to bless the inchurched nations in Abraham's seed Christ; behold
Christ by an outward Symbol testifying that the little ones of inchurched
visible believers are in Church account such, witness that act of his, and his
offense that any such should be hindered from any approach to him, in the use
of any means to attain, at least externally, that blessing of him the
promised seed, Luke 18. 15, 16. 7. with Mark 10. 16. hence in the purer days
of the Gospel: It was of old prophesied that such children should be accounted
the seed which the Lord has blessed as well as their parents should come under
that account, by the Gospelled Gentiles, Esaias 61. 9. yea God himself
expresses his account as of such parents so of their children, to be such
Church and covenant seed: both are under one account so far forth, Esaias 65. 23.
besides, that if such parents, suppose Jews or Gentiles, be Abraham's
spiritual seed, Anabaptists will grant, then are their children also; the
parents being not merely abstractively considered, the covenant seed, Genesis 17.
7. but as in reference to their children with them, for the seed of Abraham to
whom the covenant, Genesis 17. 7. is made, is the seed in their generations, which
necessarily imply, and suppose as the parents generating, so the children
begotten of them, the parents make not the generation alone, nor the children
alone, but jointly considered together. Here Anabaptists sever the subject
parties taken into the covenant consideration, they agree it is Abraham and his
spiritual seed, but leave out that notation of the seed, scil. seed in their
generations, the proselyte gentiles in Abraham's house, they were not his
carnal seed; why are they then sealed? but as they were rather Abraham's
spiritual and Church seed. Yea but their babes also have the visible seal of
Abraham's covenant, yet are they not his fleshly seed: nor yet are they his
actual believing seed, and yet have they the feale of Abraham's seed, surely
then, in and with their parents they are Abraham's Church and spiritual seed.
You will say, God commanded them to be sealed, and therefore sealed. Answ.
Suppose it so, yet God commanded their circumcision to be on them, also his
covenant or the Sacramental sign of that his covenant sealed to Abraham, and
to his seed, in their generation, Genesis 17. 7. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. either then
they which in one sense were not of his seed or loins, v. 12. yet were of his
covenant and Church seed, verse. 7. or else God solemnly enjoined a seal to a
blanke or a seal to no covenant of his: no other covenant being then in
mention to be sealed, by circumcision which was enjoined to be his covenant
or the Sacramental sign of his covenant, verse. 11, 12, 13. Yea but they
partaked not of the covenant, many of them at least, in their Infancy. Answ. If
ye speak of saving actual efficacy upon them, then neither did many others,
no not of the elect seed which lived to maturitie of years, so partake of the
covenant in their Infancy, nor does that hinder but that circumcision in the
nature of it, and in the institution of it, was a visible seal of the covenant
of grace, that which Moses phraseth touching circumcision, that it was a sign
of the covenant, Paul explaineth, that it was a seal of the righteousness of
faith; scil. not so much, subjective as objective, Romans 4. The baptism of
Simon Magus was in the nature of it, and in Gods institution, a visible seal
of the most spiritual part of the covenant, and yet did not Iscariot and Magus
partake of the spiritual part of the Covenant. It is peculiar to the elect to
be in the covenant, in respect of participation of the saving efficacy of it,
Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. But it is common to Iscariot, and reprobates, adult or
Infants, to be externally in the covenant in the face of the Church; as verse
4. of which before. But as for the visible seal it self, whether to elect, or
reprobate, to such as partake of the spiritual good of the covenant, or not;
this varieth not, nor multiplyeth, nor nullifieth the nature of the seal. The
nature of it depends on God the author, not upon the sealed persons
worthiness, or unworthiness, sex or age. Circumcision was not covenants, but
one and the same covenant, ex natura rei, nor was it a part, but the covenant,
even the whole covenant Sacramentally, to elect or reprobate Infant or adult
circumcised. The commandment of God did not put, or cause any difference, but
enjoined it all equally to all sorts. The covenant sealed was but one, not two
covenants: albeit, God did hold forth variety of covenant blessings, as does
the Gospel; some more common to all, and some more peculiar to a few; and so
the seal it self was to Infant and adult, elect or reprobate, but one in
nature: albeit in use and efficacy it were various, according as the Spirit of
God and faith made thereof improvement, or not.

To add one word more in way of proof, that Gentile-inchurched-beleevers
Infants they are the seed of Abraham: this being wholly denied by Anabaptists.
If I prove that this species or sort of persons, are Abraham's spiritual seed,
without personal actual faith, by which only they say persons come to be
Abraham's seed, quoting for it Gal. 3. 7. 6. 9. 16. 27, 28, 29. it suffices.
Now the place to me is full proof thereof: whole Christ mystical, in all the
parts of his body, the Apostle makes it to be the seed of Abraham, but that
sort of persons the Infants of believers are a part of Christ mystical, or
Christ considered with his body the Church, as Christ is in Gal. 3. and 1 Cor.
12. 12. compared, as has been proved, Ergo that sort of persons as well that
other of actual believers are Abraham's spiritual seed. And here supposing
according to them, that Christ is considered there as with his body, the
invisible Church; it makes still more for what I am to prove: since, if that
sort of persons be not of the invisible Church whereof Christ is head, there
can none of that sort, not believers children at all be saved; since out of
the invisible Church is no salvation at all, as some of the most judicious of
our opposites do speak, in way of answer to what is brought by our friends,
that extra ecclesiam non est salus, that is, say such, extra ecclesiam
invisibilem, non visibilem. But we will go yet further, and take this as
meant of Christ considered with his body the visible Church, according as
formerly it was proved to be considerable: And I say, to exelude that sort of
persons, scil. believers infants, from being a part of the visible Church in
general: is to exclude them from any ordinary state and way of salvation, Nay
I will go further, and say; that for any to suppose all the individual Infants
and each of them which come of such inchurched parents, not to be also parts
of this body of Christ the visible Church, and consequently, not to be
Abraham's spiritual seed, is to exclude them from a state and way of salvation,
in respect to the ordinary course thereof, and so to leave them all under the
consideration of such a way to be saved in, as is only extraordinary:
ordinarily they are not to be supposed to be saved, as at least it is not to
be supposed, that ordinarily or that in any ordinary way, any Pagans, or
Turks, out of the visible Church, or any in and of Rome, as Tridentine, and
Antichristian, should be saved: yet God may, and sometimes does, and will have
some souls brought on to him thence, and even from amongst Mahumetans, etc.
but all will yield I suppose that this is an extraordinary case: and so
crosses not that rule, that without even the visible Church there is no
salvation; scil. taking the maxim in reference to ordinary times, and withal
to the ordinary course and way of attaining unto salvation.

Such then as exclude all Infants of believers, one or other from the notion of
Abraham's spiritual seed, from Covenant and Church estate, they put them in
the Pagan Gentiles estate, of which Paul speaks, who being they and theirs
strangers from the promise and covenants, and from the visible Church: they
place them in that respect in an estate of persons that are without God in the
world, and so under the devil the God of the world, and in an hopeless
estate; neither they nor any for them, can have any grounded hope of them, they
are without hope, in regard at least of any ordinary way or mean of salvation,
Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. Nor let it seem grievous that our friends and brethren in
the Lord, of name and worth in the Church, have, as it seems, urged, that in
case of such an exclusion of believers children, they are made as Turks or
Indians so far forth, in regard that being not in covenant, nor Church
estate, the Apostle truly states such persons cases, they are without hope,
and without God in the world. He makes no distinction of potentia remota and
propinqua, in that case. Yea but he speaks of Pagan parents, we of
Christian, and there is not the same reason of the childrens estate which are
of the one, as of the other. Tell me the difference supposing them actually
excluded from covenant and Church estate. It is not in their parents prayers,
or in the Churches nakedly considered, without reference to any covenant or
Church estate of theirs: for they pray as well for Indians, etc. as for them.
Nor is it barely in their instruction, and education of them: for if they have
any Indian or Black more bond servants in their house, they must instruct both
them and their children in Gods fear as they are capable thereof. Yea but for
the one their prayers and instructions, come from a nearer bond, and are
carried on with more strength, then in the other: grant that, yet this is but
more and less, and they vary no species of any formal reason of difference;
yea but they may believe more for the one then for the other: and why so?
because usually the one sort prove religious, when the other is not usual.
This confirms what I am to prove, that God is a covenant God to the children
of his people, and Church; because, albeit sometimes some prove vile enough,
yet usually they prove religious and pious: and God speaks of things as they
more frequently prove. Yea I demand, what is the ordinary revealed
isntrumental means of the saving efficacy which is upon any children of Gods
people and Church, especially supposing they die very young: is it not the word
of Gods covenant as has been often said from Romans 9. 6. and Ephesians. 5. 25, 26.
Yea I would know whether if believers have hope, to take hope most properly,
concerning their childrens good, or glorious resurrection by Christ, if they
die in Infancy, have they other ground then that of Gods being a God to them?
This is Christ's demonstration in that case: Luke 20. 36, 37, 38. Is it any
other then Scripture hope or comfort that way, or must they sorrow as persons
without hope? If they draw any waters with joy, Esaias 12. 3. must it not be out
of the wells of salvation, the promises? not other promises which concern not
the case, they will not help at such a dead lift, but promises pertinent to
the case of their children. Yea can they have such hope without faith, or can
they have well-grounded faith where they have not a word of faith for it? and
when they cannot believe that God should be so much as externally, much less
internally and savingly a covenant God to them? or can they conjecture that
ever any were saved ordinarily, if at all, touching whom God never made any
promise, neither in respect of internal and saving, no nor so much as in
respect of external right therein.

I conclude then, that such children are Abraham's spiritual seed, and that
therefore the promises belong to them at least externally. And so much for
proof of this seventh conclusion, wherein I have been the longer, in that it
is the very hinge of the controversy.

It is not then the Gospel of any mortal man deriving its rise from
Zwinglius, or any such sinful son of man, albeit precious in the sight of
God and his Saints; nor is it any other Gospel which may be anathematized, I
should fear to be anathematized of God if I said so. It Is Gospel that
believers are Abraham's seed, Gal. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9, etc. true but that is not all,
and only the Gospel: this part of the Gospel; their childrens covenant
estate, at least ecclesiastically, this is Gospel too, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8,
compared with Deuteronomy. 29. and 30. as before: yea the rather is this Gospel,
because the other is: one depends and follows upon the other as has been
showed.

SECT. XI.
1 Object. BY what has been now said, answer is ready to what I. S. objecteth.
That if Infants be visibly in the covenant of grace, then at one and the same
time one may be visibly under grace, and yet as Ephesians. 2. under wrath by
nature, and so by nature be under two contrary covenants of works, and of
grace. Mr. B. also has a like objection.

I answer, they are not under two such contrary estates by nature, taken in the
same sense: but by nature taken in a diverse sense, they may: take nature for
corrupt sinful nature, and so Paul a Jew and all other Jews, or Gentiles,
[Wee says Paul] are by nature children of wrath. But take nature for a birth
estate of covenant-Ancestors: and so Paul and others of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, were not sinners or strangers from the covenant of grace, as were those
of the Gentiles; but they were Jews by nature, inchurched persons. And in
their confessing parents confessors and professors, as the word Jew is used,
Romans 2. 9. 28. and Est. 8. 17. Rev. 3. 7. they became Jews, that is, joined in
a Church estate, etc. sinners they were in that sense, they had by sinful
nature sin in them, but sinners in opposition to a Jew, or Church and
covenant estate, at least externally they were not: not Jews barely, scil.
persons of that nation, without further Ecclesiastical respect, to the
administration of the covenant: for then the notion of sinners of the Gentiles,
had been unsuitably added; It had sufficed to have said, we that are Jews by
nature, and not Gentiles, but Jews by nature rather as above; the elect seed
of Abraham of which yet many died in infancy, they were the choice children of
that promise, Genesis 17. 7. with Romans 9. 7, 8, 9. yet they were also by nature
children of wrath. Isaac was visibly the child of the promise in Infancy borne
by promise: interested in the promise, expressly made with reference to him, as
soon as borne actually; as before intentionally; yet also by nature, as a
son of Adam, a child of wrath; but as a son of covenant- Abraham, a child
of promise. The like may be said of David in the former sense conceived in
sin, Psalm. 51. in the latter a child of promise: So of the other Infants of
their loins, whence enjoined whilst Infants to be sealed with the seal of
Abraham's covenant. Yea some of our opposites grant, yea urge it as a reason
against the exposition of 1 Cor. 7. 14. which some give thereof: that children
of parents whereof one was not matrimonially sanctified to the other, but came
together unchastly, as Pharez and Zara, of Judah and Thamar, Jephtah of Gilead,
and many others, were within the covenant of saving grace, and Church
privileges. Now the author intended not this thus; that they came into the
covenant of grace, when they were grown, and came actually to believe: for
then there were no color of argument against Paedobaptists reasoning from 1
Cor. 7. touching such Infants covenant estate: and that annexed, that they were
in the covenant of saving grace, and Church privileges, shows that to be
his meaning; since all confess that the Jews children, did whilst Infants
partake of the initiatory Church seal of circumcision, which the author
elsewhere counts their privilege, saying, that they had that privilege to
be reckones in the outward administrations, as branches of the Olive by their
birth, by virtue of God his appointment, etc. albeit the author I suppose
forgate himself: speaking of branches by nature, says, that it seems to him
to import, not that the Jews were in the covenant of grace by nature, but that
they had this privilege to be reckoned in the outward administration, as
branches of the Olive by their birth, etc. when yet even those illegitimately
born of Jews mentioned, are confessed to be in the covenant of saving grace,
as well as Church privileges, which as was said, must be spoken of them, as
Infants borne of such parents, or else it is not any argument against them,
which plead for birth federall holiness from 1 Cor. 7. 14. So then here are
persons by nature children of wrath, but by privileged nature and birth in the
covenant of saving grace.

2 Object. If Infants, says I. S. be in the covenant of grace, and borne so,
then such Infants were borne in the covenant, and never out. And besides Gods
covenant of saving grace, being absolute and undertaking to give* saving grace
to such as are in covenant with him: all such must be saved, unless God fail
of his truth.

Answ. 1. That covenant of grace, as I. S. acknowledges it to be mentioned,
Deuteronomy. 29. it was made with little ones then unborne intentionally, verse. 14,
15. as well as with those then present actually: So that when they were borne,
they were born in that covenant and never out: as much may be said of the
Infant elect seed, or children of the promise dying Infants, they were borne so
and never out of that estate after they were actually existent; yea the rest
were all girded in the covenant, Jer. 13.

2. Gods covenant did not barely offer, or promise to covenant, but made a
covenant a covenant and an oath with them that day, Deuteronomy. 29. 12, 13, 14, 15.
and amongst other promises engaged himself to circumcise their heart, Chap.
36. 6. yet were not all in heart circumcised, and yet the promise of God failed
not; being in the general propounded to them conditionally, and not as it is
said here absolutely; at least as it had reference to them all in common. The
word of promise took not effect in as many of the Jews, to whom the covenant
promises externally belonged, yet it followed not, that therefore it took no
effect at all, and that God was unfaithful: for it took effect in others,
Romans 3. 3. and 9. 6, 7, 8. so here.

3. This argument supposes, that one cannot be within the covenant of saving
grace externally, but they must be in a saving estate, the contrary whereto
appears, Conclus. 3. And it is said of sundry illegitimate Jewish children,
that they were within the covenant of saving grace, namely externally: for the
author cannot mean other. And yet of all such who will say, they were all in a
saving estate? even Esaus birthright was more then right to Isaacs temporal
estate, as borne of Isaac: why else does the Apostle apply Esaus example of
selling his birthright, in such sort, as Heb. 12. 15, 16, 17. he propounds
his example to deter the Hebrews which were in Church estate, Heb. 10. 25.
and 12. 17, 18. from the mischief of falling short of the grace of God, not of
mere temporal blessings; nay expressly, the thing he fell short of as his
birth heritage, as Isaacs first borne, is said to be the blessing
indefinitely, even Abraham's blessing to his seed, the same blessing, whereof
he rejecting his external right, Jacob his younger brother came to possess:
which was a Church blessing as well as natural and civil, Genesis 28. 3, 4. as
for temporal blessings he had store of them notwithstanding, nor was Isaacs
trembling, when he saw how strangely God had ordered the blessing of the first
borne to Jacob the younger son, Genesis 27. occasioned from a bare disappointing
him of the external right to temporalls, but withal to spiritualls, and
ecclesiastical good also, whence the Apostle calls him for his contempt, a
profane person, Heb. 12.

3 Object. But says I. S. the covenant of grace being a covenant, there must
be mutual agreement betwixt the covenanters, and so knowledge, and
consideration of the terms thereof, and restipulation, as in men's covenants.
Hen. Den, a little differently, makes a necessity of the persons entering into
covenant with God, scil. by faith, unto covenant right, and not merely Gods
entering into covenant with the creature, for so he entered into covenant with
the beasts, etc. Genesis 9. 10.

Answ. To which I answer, the covenant of grace is as well a testament, 1 Cor.
11. Heb. 9. Now a testament may be, and uses to be made in reference to
little ones without knowledge; nor do any use to deny a child's right in the
testators will, because it was taken in amongst other legacies in the
bequeathed legacies, before it understood the same, nor will it be denied in
the case of the elect seed, the choice parties in Gods covenant, Genesis 17. that
they many of them dying Infants, without actual knowledge, were not therefore
children of the promises, or that that solemn covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15. and 30. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. with that people, wherein
conditions also were propounded on their parts, that therefore the covenant was
not made betwixt the little ones there present, because they neither understood
nor could actually subscribe to the conditions, the contrary being there
expressed: no rather it sufficed, that the childrens covenant estate being the
parents privilege, whence the encouragement to Abraham to walk with God, Genesis
17. 1, etc. From that amongst other encouragements, that God would become his
seeds God also, etc. verse. 7. and so, Deuteronomy. 29. and 30. amongst other
encouragements to the parents that is one, verse. 6. that God will do thus for
their seed also: yea the children being reckoned as in their parents, as Levi
paid tithes in Abraham, etc. yea the external avouching in a covenant way of
God, being owned as the childrens, Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17. yea the childrens
circumcision being as well the covenant duty: Whence called the covenant, or
the covenant parties, covenant part or duty as well as the token of Gods
covenant, Genesis 9. 7. 9, 10, 11. they restipulate in their parents knowing
acceptance of the covenant, and professed owning of it upon the covenant
terms, as well on their childrens part as their own, and they restipulate in
a passive reception of the covenant condition, and bond to after imitation of
their father Abraham's faith and obedience; to which purpose I. S. confessed
circumcision was annexed to the covenant. Yea the bastard children of Judah,
and Gilead and others, are acknowledged to be in the covenant of saving grace,
which yet could not personally restipulate, in a way of actual knowledge or
faith, or the like.

4 Obj. Your doctrine would make God the author of sin, partly in causing
persons to believe untruths: partly in promising life to the wicked, and so
keeping of him from returning. I.S. C.B. I.S.C.B. C.B.
Besides, it will make every believer an Abraham, and make Christ's body to
consist of dead members, and even confound the world and the Church as if one.

Answ. To the first we require the parents in reference to the Church and
covenant estate of their children to make confession of their faith in the
covenant of God as made with them, and their seed indefinitely according as the
terms of the covenant are, and being the terms of the covenant, it is no
untruth or sin to believe it, in foro dei, or confess that faith in foro
Ecclesiae; which of the believers children is elect or saved, or not, it is to
us a secret, and our doctrine requires them to believe revealed things, as are
those indefinite words of the covenant, leaving secrets to the Lord; and no
other was Moses doctrine, having propounded the covenant of God as with parents
and children, and being yet further to enlarge, he joyneth the former and
latter part of his speech with that item, that secret things belong to God, but
things revealed, scil. touching this his mind of grace indefinitely, these are
for us, and for our children. And for further taking off of this cavil
together with the second, I answer, when some say that even bastard children
were in the covenant of saving grace, and even I. S. which objecteth the same
confesses that God promises to be a God or to fulfill his promises: even
such as Luke 1. 74, 75, etc. and gave them circumcision to confirm the same on
both seeds, requiring them to walk in the footsteps of Abraham's faith, etc. I
demand, were the carnal seed saved? I. S. will not say so, yet God promised
and gave circumcision as a seal, to that end that he would be their God,
requiring them to believe, etc. did not then God fail in his promise, or in
requiring them to believe an untruth? surely no, so when they were on that
ground according to I. S. to walk in the footsteps of Abraham's obedience, and
circumcision of heart was required of them, did not this rather further, then
hinder their repentance? is it not the Apostles argument to the Jews to
prevail with them to repent? Repent, for the promise is to you, etc. Act. 2.
38, 39. Nay does not our doctrine holding forth the interest at least external
of such in covenant thereby hold forth as well an external interest in that
which is in its self a most effectual means to further their saving good, and
to be as a seed of regeneration, and faith, etc. unto them, 1 Pet. 1. to the
end, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Romans 9. 6. and do not our opposites rather block up so
far the ordinary way, and debar believers children from the ordinary means
of their chief good, by denying them interest in the word of promise, the
which is such a means? Nor do we by our doctrine make every believer an
Abraham, we confess many things in Abraham's covenant, Genesis 17. to be more
personal, and some more peculiar to those times, yet this no way infringeth
the covenant right of Abraham's spiritual seed, on the samenesse of that
covenant with us in the essentialls of it: then there was such a particular
land promised to him and his; the Gospel holds forth temporal mercies to us
as well as spiritual, 1 Timothy 4. 8. 1 Cor. 3. end, 2 Cor. 1. 20. 1 Pet. 3. 10,
11, 12. albeit not such a particular land; so the multiplying of Abraham, etc.
was of such a peculiar consideration, yet that hinders not oneness of the
covenant, now: that the promise made with Abraham long before the Law should
not be to his spiritual seed, our opposites themselves being Judges, the like
may be said of the promise of blessing all nations in his seed, etc. Gal. 3.
8. yet verse. 16, 17. the promises are to the whole seed, so God says to
Abraham, I will make thee a father of many nations, Genesis 17. 4, 5. he never
said so to Isaac or Jacob, etc. what, were not they therefore children of the
promise and heirs of the covenant of Abraham, that God will become a God as to
them, so to their seed? none will say so, or in that they were fathers of the
covenant to their posterity, Romans 11. 16. 28. that therefore they were
Abraham's, or that those Jews assembled, Deuteronomy. 29. to whom God makes that
promise of circumcising their seed, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. as one part of his covenant,
Deuteronomy. 29. 14. so Ezekiel. 37. 25, 26, 27, 28. God will be a God to those
mentioned parents and children, so is Jesse a covenant root to David, Esaias 11.
1. yet are not these therefore made Abraham's, no more are inchurched believers,
by any doctrine of ours. Nor do we by our doctrine make Christ's body such a
body, or make such confusion of world and Church thereby, no more then did God
of old, which yet ordained the Jews children to be his, and his Church
covenant children, Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21, 23. and how we distinguish Church and
world, let our practice judge and our doctrine which holds forth the covenant
of grace as invested with Church covenant, if not explicit, yet implicit, to
distinguish the political Church and its members from all others.

5 Object. Some in a more Familisticall way object against our proofs as most
what in the old Testament, which they make account are not valid, unless the
same things were come over in the new.

Answ. 1. We have as well brought grounds of these conclusions touching Genesis
17. from the new Testament. Secondly, Christ came not to evacuate the moral
Law in the old Testament, no not in a title of it, but to fulfill it, and by
expounding it in the very spirit of it to establish it, Matthew. 5. 17. to the
end; and the Law it self is established through faith, Romans 3. 31. and it is
spiritual, not carnal, Romans 7. 14. and what then is the Gospel of which this
point in question is part as was showed, or would Christ make void a title of
the Gospel in the old Testament, as if in, and of it self not valid unless
come over again in the new? of what force then would many precious promises
be, in the old Testament expressed, but never again expressed in the new, as
Esaias 12. 3. Ezekiel. 36. 26. and such like?

Thirdly, if such proofs are not valid, why keep we a weekly Sabbath, as
the Lords day is called, Matthew. 24. 20? why keep we solemn thanksgiving
days, etc? why do the Apostles refer us for proof even of the new
covenant, Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, etc. to what God says, scil. in the old
Testament, as in Jerem. 31. or why does Christ fetch his usual proofs of the
maine matters of faith thence, John 5. 46, 47. Luke 24. 44, 45, 46? see more in
such way of proofs, Acts 10. 43. and 28. 23. Romans 1. 16, 17. Romans 4. 6, 7, 8.
and 10. 14. and 16. 16. besides many other like which the Apostles urge this
way.

Fourthly, if such proofs be invalid, we must blot out such charges and
testimonies touching their perfection and validity, as Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12. spoken before the new Testament was, and yet so perfect was it, and so
efficacious, and precious: so John 5. 39. 46, 47. and Romans 10, 6, 7, 8. and
Luke 16. 29. 31. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. Paul makes account the Scriptures, scil. of
the old Testament little else being then written, were of sufficiency to all
uses, whereof a Minister stood in need to make of the word, as Cartwright on
the place expounds it, and 2 Pet. 1. 1. 19, 20, 21. speaking of Scripture by
men inspired of old, those of the old Testament: Peter makes them more valid
then extraordinary voices from heaven, touching Christ, etc. and charge them
to be in perpetual request with the Saints, see Ames and others in locum. If
Hen. Den. within his first part of Antichrist unmasked, had kept to his
testimony which he brings from 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, 21. against the argument used
by Dr. Featly taken from the harmony of confessions, be had never so
miscarried, as in his second part, page 25. as to say, this is the Prophets, to
declare repentance as a means of remission, Ezekiel. 18. 21. 22. but this is not
the Gospel, etc. And the Law and the Prophets teach is to repent [for]
remission, but the Gospel, repent [unto] remission, etc. to let pass his abuse
of the testimonies he alludeth to, this I observe that Prophets, with him, of
the old Testament are set in opposition to Gospel as if inconsistent with it,
the absurdity of which is apparent enough in the very naming it.

Fifthly, if they be invalid unless come over in the new Testament, then must
all the Saints question their faith and comfort which was occasioned more
immediately from grounds in the old Testament, not eying at that present, nor
possibly afterward, this or that like passage in the new, touching the
discovery of their good estate, or otherwise of their spiritual support,
contrary to Romans 15. 4. which Scriptures then mentioned, were of the old
Testament.

Sixthly, if so, how did John Baptist and the Apostles convince the Jews,
before yet the new Testament was existing of such, and such things touching
their peace, and touching Christ's kingdom, and government, yea, what ordinary
means is left to convince the Jews, when they are to come in, they denying
the new Testament to be valid? see Acts 18. 26.

Seventhly, the primitive converts and disciples thought not so, touching such
was of old testament Scripture proof, Acts 17. 11. by Scriptures, meaning
those of the old Tastament, as those places, John 5. 39. and 10. 35. and 7. 38.
and 2. 22. Gal. 3. 8. 22. and 4. 30. Romans 9. 17. and 10, 11. and 11. 2. and
here let me not forget what A. R. in his second part of Vanity of childish
baptism, brings cross to what we have said, he says that no believers
are fathers, scil. in such covenant and Church respects to their children which
we have mentioned, but Abraham only; and he makes Abraham rather a pattern
father in other respects to believers quoting Scriptures to that end.

But does A. R. indeed think that no others were covenant and Church-fathers
but Abraham only, the Apostle calls all those inchurched Jews of old our
fathers, fathers to him and to the Gentiles, Corinthian members, 1 Cor. 10. 1,
etc. Yea will he say that Isaac and Jacob, etc. were not such fathers to their
seed also as was Abraham in covenant, and Church respects, because that was
neither said to Isaac or to Jacob, I have made thee a father of nations? how
then are the Jews said to be beloved for their [fathers] sakes? surely it was
not for their sakes as men, and natural fathers, but as spiritual and
covenant fathers, Romans 11. 16. 28. compared, of which more hereafter; yea the
covenant is expressly made in those terms to Isaac, and to his seed; to Jacob;
and to his seed, Genesis 26. 3, 4, 5. and 28. 13. 14. In respect therefore to
their seed they are covenant fathers, yet in respect to Abraham, they
themselves were Abraham's covenant and Church seed, to whom together with their
father the covenant was made, even with a Church reference Genesis 17. and so are
gentiles inchurched believers: fathers, as such, to their children; yet seed
also in reference to Abraham: nor is it more contradiction to say thus, that
the same persons may be Abraham's seed, and yet fathers in diverse respects,
then to say the same man may be a son, and yet a father in diverse respects,
a son in respect of his father, and a father in relation to his child. Nor
can I perceive otherwise but that A. R. himself, lays in the same place a
groundworke cross to his own assertion this way: the covenant (says he) was
not made with Abraham and with his seed, merely for his being a faithful man,
but for his being such a faithful man whom the Lord pleased to choose to make
a pattern to all believers; hence to me it seems, that Abraham is considered
in a threefold respect.

First, as a faithful man having seed. Secondly, as a faithful man having the
covenant made with him, and his seed. Thirdly, as one, with whom and with his
seed the covenant is made, not merely as a faithful man, but as a pattern to
all believers, which to me undeniably seems to be an unwilling grant that as
Abraham's seed in covenant with him admit a distinct consideration from all
actual believers, as such, whether Jews or Gentiles: So that Abraham in that
consideration of such a faithful man, with whom the covenant was made, and
with his seed so distinguished from all believers, whether of Jews or
Gentiles, was therein a pattern to all believers actually, whether of Jews or
Gentiles, yea that he was especially in such sort a pattern to them all, and
had the covenant so made with him, and with that his seed, that he might be,
or because he should be, therein a pattern to all believers whether Jews or
Gentiles: and this is the very truth, which we affirm, that Abraham in the
essentialls of the covenant, was a pattern of interest of believers and their
children in the covenant of grace, at least externally, and ecclesiastically:
but this is cross to A. R. elsewhere, yea in the same place as follows.

Object. All believers, and only believers, are Abraham's seed, in that as Romans
4. 16. it is affirmed that the promise is sure to all the seed, and so all the
seed are saved.

Answ. But suppose that Abraham's seed intended in the promise were all saved,
and so no others but they the seed, yet will it not follow, from what the
Apostle says that the promise is sure to all the seed, that therefore all
actual believers, and only such are saved; we have before proved from Romans
9. 6, 7, 8. that all in whom the force of the covenant took, so as that they
were saved, were the choice intended children of the promise, or all elect
Israel, which came of Abraham, Isaac and Jacobs loins; yet did not all those
live to become actual believers, many such elect ones dying in Infancy. But
to come to A. R's. assertion it self, I demand whether the members of the
visible Church, of which A R. is officer, or member, be all and each of them
Abraham's seed; for if not, I urge his own plea against us; what right have
they to the seal of the covenant made to Abraham's seed? if they be all
Abraham's seed, then by A. R's. ground, they must needs be all and each of them
saved, it is not possible there should be any reprobates and hypocrites in a
particular visible Church, which to affirm is ridiculous, but let him quit
himself thereof from his own principle if he can: the Apostle says of the
Galatian Churches, and members thereof to whom he wrote, Gal. 1. 1, 2. that
they were children of the promise and of the free woman, and that Jerusalem
above was the mother of him, and them [all] Gal. 4. 26. 28. 31. and that they
were Abraham's seed, Gal. 3. 29. now then I demand whether we must not conclude
of them all that they were in a sure estate, and infallibly saved, according to
A. R's. ground, comparing Romans 4. 16. and Heb. 6. 16, 17. with Gal. 3. 29. Yea
but why then does Paul fear and question so much the estate of persons, so
sure and infallible, if so it were, because called all Abraham's seed: for he
fears lest he had bestowed his labor in vain, Gal. 4. 11. and that any
saving work, in many of them at least, was not so much as yet begun, that he
must be feign to travail again with them in birth, till Christ be formed in
them, verse. 19. yea why does he suppose any possibility of their suffering in
vain, of their ending in the flesh, Gal. 3. 3, 4, 5. of Christ's becoming of
none effect to them, Chap. 5. 4. many of them being of such spirits and way
whom he there intended, as appears by Gal. 1. 6, 7, 8. and 3. 1. and 23. 4, 5.
and 4. 21? How will A. R. salve it? not by saying he spoke thus in a
collective sense only, understanding the former, of the elect part, and the
latter of others. Yea but why then does he mention their being baptized into
such an estate, Gal. 3. 27, 28, 29? were none but true believers and elect ones
in that Church baptized? for all that were baptized are said to be one in
Christ as having put on Christ, and if Christ, then Abraham's seed: either then
there were none but elect ones and true believers in those Churches, which were
absurd, and cross to the Scriptures before named, or if there were any
hypocrites or reprobates in that Church, they were left unbaptized, which were
as absurd, to avow it; for how knew they so exactly to distinguish of such
divine secrets, in so infallible a way? were they Gods to know the secret guile
of hearts? Now if not unbaptized, then they also in baptism putting on Christ,
and putting on Christ, being one with Christ, and so Christ's, and being Christ's
were Abraham's seed; now A. R. must conte with us to say, that when it is said
that all baptized persons put on Christ, Gal. 3. 27. it was verified in
general of them all Sacramentally and Ecclesiastically, and so when said to
be all one in Christ, and to be Christ's and Abraham's seed, and all children
of the promise and of Jerusalem which is above, etc. he must distinguish of
persons being such in foro dei, and of persons which are such, in foro and
facie ecclesiae visibilis. In the former sense, only the elect amongst them
were such, in the latter sense, all in common, sound and unsound members, of
the Church, they were such; and that the Apostle speaks such things of them in
common not by a mere infallible Apostolical dictate and sentence, as
concluding them to be all such savingly, but ministerially to hold forth what
such as members of Christ, as head of the visible Church, were Ecclesiastically.

Object. But will it not be said that whereas, Genesis 17. 7. makes but two
subjects of the covenant God made, scil. Abraham and his seed, which Paul
expounds to be believers, we by our doctrine do make three subjects and
parties, Abraham and believers, and the Infant seed of both.

Answ. To which I answer, that we do not make three such distinct subjects
now any more then of old there was made before Christ was incarnated; then
Abraham and his believers, grown children, and the Infant seed of both made
but Abraham and his seed, and so is it with us. Secondly, that the covenant
being made with Abraham and his seed, Abraham sustaining the person of all
believers, Jews and Gentiles, which in a sense also were his seed in that
covenant, hence therefore the covenant still is only between Abraham and his
seed.

CHAP. IIII. Sect. I. Touching the Explication of Luke 18. 15, 16, 17.
ANother Scripture holding forth the Federall and Ecclesiastical right and
holiness of inchurched visible believers little ones is, Luke 18. 15, 16, 17.
where the Lord affirms of the children offered to him by those pious minded
parents, that of such is the kingdom of God, as Matthew has it, Chap. 19. of
such is the kingdom of heaven, which is here taken for the visible Church, so
Matthew. 8. 11. 12. and 13. 24. and it seems evident from Luke 18. that he
mentions the kingdom of God three ways, First, a kingdom of which such
Infants and such like persons are; namely, as subjects. Secondly, a kingdom
which such actual subjects of that kingdom do receive. Thirdly, a kingdom
unto which in an ordinary way and means they come to enter. The first is meant
of the visible, not of the invisible Church, and of them as members of the
former, and not so properly of the latter; touching which, let it be remembered
that this was not a bare temporary, and present charge, in reference barely to
those very children, and only to that very present approach to Christ, but did
respect after approches of such like persons unto Christ, he says not, suffer
these little children to come (at this time) to me, for of these is the
Kingdom of God, but indefinitely, rather suffer little ones, scil. of this
sort, such as these are to come to me: nor would A. R. and others, which apply
it to such like persons for humility, etc. restrain it to the occasional act
at that time, but enlarge it in reference to any such persons at any time in a
like case that they should not be hindered from Christ. Now as for the members
of the invisible Church, as such they are invisible, and fall not under the
proper cognizance of the sons of men to know, which or where they are: and to
suppose an injunction of not hindering their approach to Christ, unless they
came under a visible respect of members of the visible Church that they might
be discerned, and it might be known how and when, and in whom this rule of
suffering such to come to Christ, were kept or broken, it were very
incongruous, and it is a very improbable conjecture, that Christ spoke thus of
these very Infants, by an act of divine knowledge of them to be the elect of
God: as if a company of children should be by an unwonted providence, singled
out to be brought to him, which were every one of them elected to eternal
life, and not any of them, in a contrary estate. And by the latitude of the
extent of Christ's speech, as before we showed in reference to after and other
times, and examples of like nature as to the present case it appears, he
neither spoke thus as God, or as a mere extraordinary inspired Prophet, but
delivered as in ordinary administration of the mind of God, as at other times,
an ordinary rule of ordinary practice and use afterward, in reference not
barely to those very little ones then brought, but to others like them;
wherefore such evasions of C. B. in his fourth answer to this place are
frivolous. And why should there be such startling at this place as if it were
uncouth doctrine, that children of inchurched members should be counted
subjects of Gods kingdom, or members of his visible Church? the Jews children,
as well as parents which were cast out together* Matthew. 8. 11, 12. were surely
in that kingdom together, out of which they came to be cast afterward; the
uncircumcised man child was of the people or Church of God in visible account,
else not cut off from his people in that case of neglect, Genesis 17. 14. and in
the purer days of the Gospel, yet expected, the children are put under David
or Christ their Prince as King, and head, and Lord of his visible Church, as
well as the parents, as before we showed from Ezekiel. 37. 25, 26, 27. and God
accounted them even in very corrupt time, children of his covenant spouse or
visible Church, Thy children which thou barest to me, Ezekiel 16. 8. 20, 21.
23. witness the setting to of the initiatory Church seal of circumcision to
those children of Abraham, Isaac and Jacobs loins; and no wonder, in that they
were all interested in the covenant of grace, as invested with Church Covenant,
which is even the very form of the Church, giving Church being to persons
therein interested; nor is it likely that these children were other then such,
being either proselytes children, joined to the Jewish Church, or children of
Jews, either of them formerly circumcised, and in facie ecclesiae of the
Church, the Apostles which used to be questioning any thing obscure, which
they understood not, or seemed to them strange, would in likelihood have
inquired after satisfaction therein, of Christ, as their manner was, if it had
not been very clear, convincing, approved, received doctrine, which Christ
urged as his reason of reproof of their act in hindering the little ones
approach to him; he which himself forbad them, Matthew. 10. to go into the way
of the Gentiles, no not into Samaria, and when himself took up the Gentile
Canaanite in such sort at first, albeit she a believer, Matthew. 15. 22. if these
had been other then visible believing inchurched persons, yea though Gentiles
yet inchurched proselytes which brought these children, he would not have so
roundly, and sharply taken up his Disciples, for assaying to hinder them from
him, when the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 14. speaks thus to the Church, and not to
the city as such, which writ to him, and to whom he writ this back again;
he says else [their] children, as appropriating external adoption, as well
as formerly, to others of that sort, Romans 9. 1, 2, 3, 4. they were the children
of that Spouse of Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2. 3. as those were formerly of that
Church, Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. she brought forth other children by the ministry,
Psalm. 87. 5. albeit, not so many as now, and hereafter, Esa. 54. 5. but that
way also did the Church bear children to the Lord. And are purer Gentiles
Churches wombes in that respect shut up; or does the Lord less affect
communion with his Church in that expression of his love now, then he did to
the Church of old? surely no; the Corinthian members as a Church body, had
their Church children, and seed: also, the Apostle takes order with the women,
1 Cor. 14. Let [your] women keep silence in the Churches; but why [your]?
what, because they were the members wives only? no verily: since some such
were Pagans, and without the Church, and he protests against any Church
dealing with such, 1 Cor. 5. end; what have we to do with them from any
Church care, or respect? but rather [your] women as being of the Church, and so
here, not [your] children holy: scil. barely of your members in a common
natural way: but yours in a Church relation rather. And let the Apostles
division be further attended, 1 Cor. 5. placing all persons as either within
or without the visible Church: For if his division be regular, as who will say
otherwise, of the wisest dictates of the holy Ghost? then these membra
dividentia take up the whole division, and there is no middle or neutrall
estate actually of persons. And albeit the persons chiefly intended, be adult
persons, yet it must hold, as well of others, or else it is not a complete
division. So then the little ones which are borne of inchurched persons, they
are either actually within the Church, or actually without at present, only
some possibilities as some suppose of their being actual members, afterward at
most: but at present their actual estate must be the one, or the other; if
actually within the Church, I have what I seek, if only potentially such as
may come in, but yet actually without, 1. then the children of the Church in
primitive times were such as the Apostles, as extraordinary, and now Elders as
ordinary officers in the Church, were not, nor are to take any special Church
care of; since the tie of that Church care, as such, depends upon covenant
and Church relation, either extraordinary, as that of the Apostles, to all the
Churches; or ordinary, as that of the officers of this or that Church. 2. Then
Churches and their officers are not to deal with any such children more then
with pagans in any Church way of instruction or admonition when grown up. 3.
Then are such so far forth to be left as persons without actually, to the
more immediate judgment of God; what have we to do with such? God judges
them, and the phrase of Gods judging them, how sad a case it notes, see Heb.
3. 4. and 10. 29, 30, 31. 4. Then such children being actually without, they
are actually and at present amongst the number of such persons of whom is
little hope: as Mark 4. 11, 12. to them without: if hardened persons, in
parables: so Revel. 22. without are dogs. The persons left out of Church
fellowship by the new Jerusalem are of the worst sort, ^vel. 22. 15. 5. Then
the Jewish Church is supposed to have a larger share in the charity of God,
and his people, so that their children in relation to Church estate are called
and counted God and his Churches children, purer Gentile Churches have no such
charity allowed toward the members children: which absurdities if any will
swallow, let them enjoy their conceits.

SECT. II.
ANd thus far of the dispensing kingdom of God, as it seems to be
included, and intended in the first expression, Of such is the kingdom of God:
which may serve to answer the scruples of some, as if such an assertion of
children of believers, to be of Gods kingdom, should cross the course of
providence, many proving wicked: For this hinders not, but they belong to the
visible Church: no more then Christ's assertion of all the Jews, to be the
children of the kingdom of heaven, into which the Gentiles from all parts
should come after the rejection of the Jews, Matthew. 8. 11, 12. nor is this any
more cross to Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. then that is; yea suppose the Kingdom of
heaven be taken for that of glory; yet in that covenant and Church estate is
theirs, so far also is glory theirs, scil. in foro ecclesiae. And we have
before proved that Christ spoke this as man, not merely as God, as he said
before of the Jews, Matthew. 8. 11, 12. and after this spoke to like purpose,
Matthew. 21. 43. they were as externally adopted, Romans 9. 4. externally inrighted
to that promise of glory, the promises indefinitely being thus far theirs, and
that promised heritage being thus far theirs. If they had not Gods kingdom, in
respect of this estating of theirs in it, and right to it; how came they to
have it taken from them? was not that in respect of any external Church right
actually theirs unto, or to the dispensation of the covenant holding the same
forth? they were all heirs, albeit under tutors, Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3. but to me
the former sense is rather most unquestionable, that of such is the kingdom of
God, or of heaven, scil. the visible Church as before was proved; and this may
also satisfy that which is objected, that he might speak this in reference
to the future; that is, that they were elect ones, and should in time be of
Gods kingdom, that is, believers, or in that they were such as God would
bless: For Christ's words are not, Of such may, will or shall be the kingdom
of God, nor that they were of his kingdom, because such as he would bless;
but rather that they should not be hindered from being blessed of him, because
of such [is] the kingdom of God; as the context and force of that reason in
reference to the occasion shows: and as for that assertion of their being all
elect, the improbabilitie thereof has before appeared; nor does Christ seem
to speal: of the kingdom of God as taken for the invisible Church of actual
believers* but of visible members of the visible Church, as before was showed.
He affirms that those little ones, de praesenti, were of the kingdom of
God, yet were not they actually believers, he asserteth as much of the Jews to
be rejected afterward, that yet at present they were the children of that very
kingdom of heaven, whereinto the Gentiles, even the very best of them come to
sit; the Church estate in both was the same in the essentialls, and the
covenant estate the same essentially: the external right to grace, and glory
the very same essentially, and so the reason of the grant here, and assertion,
is the same in reference to the little ones, of other visible believers, as of
these which brought their children to Christ, unless God should be made a
respecter of persons; their Infants must come to Christ, and not be hindered,
because they were Federally and Ecclesiastically privileged, or because of
such is Gods kingdom; the same is valid now, since as adult persons externally
in covenant and Church estate, must not according to our opposites minds be
hindered from Christ, because such like as these little ones; so neither
believers little ones being also such like as well; they may not be hindered
from any such way of initiatory approach to Christ as they are capable of, as
is external baptizing in the name or fellowship, as of the Father, so of
Christ the Son, and also of the holy Spirit; to which purpose I suppose our
Divines had reference, in urging this place for Paedobaptisme, nor was this an
affirming of Infants being saved by their parents faith, but an assenting of
their external Church right, by virtue of the latitude of Gods covenant
applied by the parents, and by occasion of their holding forth of that faith,
which did, foro ecclesiae, unite them, and their little ones to Christ, as head
of the visible Church, in which may by external adoption and insition are
interested, which are not saved as before we showed; nor will that take off
what it seems, some worthy Divines, have lately urged from hence for
Paedobaptisme; that if Christ's mind had been that Infants should have been
baptized, he would have commanded these little ones to have been baptized for
an example: for according to the principles of C. B. and others, Christ did
love these little ones with his everlasting love, they received heaven of free
gift, as all that will be saved must do: theirs was the kingdom of glory
really, and Christ as God, and as an extraordinary Prophet of the Church knew
all this, etc. now why should not, or were not these Infants, at least
baptized? C. B. will answer, Infants of believers may die in their Infancy, and
they may live to commit actual sins, etc. and we not knowing which will
live or die, cannot baptize them, what then according to C. B. it seems the
uncertainty of Infants deaths, whilst young, or living to grown years, is an
impediment to their baptism. Where did C. B. here or ever read in Scripture or
of such a just bar to Infants baptism? but suppose it were so to us, which
know not this, yet C. B. will not say but Christ knew all herein, how matters
would prove, therefore that was no just hinderance in the nature of it thereto;
for then he to whom this could be no hinderance touching these children about
whom C. B. says he revealed his Fathers eternal live, and good will, he had
caused at least these little ones to have been baptized. Yea I demand upon the
grant of those things mentioned, whether C. B. or others opposing
Paedobaptisme, would deny that such as Christ receives, and blesses, and
allows, the kingdom of heaven in their sense, that is, that of glory, to be
theirs, if grown ones, should not therefore be baptized. Now if this will not
be denied, as I suppose, why, supposing the like case of any little ones, and
Infants, shall the same be denied where there is the same ground of baptism
in both sorts? Nay suppose that by extraordinary revelation, C. B. and others
of his mind did know as much as here is mentioned, in Mark 10. and Luke 16.
that such and such children were Gods chosen ones, that they were received, and
blessed of Christ, not in any common way, but as the very heirs of glory, as
these Infants are by them supposed to be, and so were actually blessed with
the spirit of grace, etc. would not they baptize these Infants? I suppose the
more judicious would, and have said that, in that case, they would do it,
because such an extraordinary revelation would suffice to warrant the act of
baptizing such Infants without profession of faith, and because of Peter's
principle, Act. 10. 47. Can any forbid that these should be bapzed which have
received the holy Ghost as well as we? and the institution of baptizing
Disciples, would in this case bear it out, such sanctified persons being
Disciples, etc. Nor indeed could it be denied by them rationally; since in
this case Infants are not merely supposed to be capable thereof, but really
to have received the sublime things visibly sealed in baptism, even the spirit
of grace, love, and blessing of Christ, the promise of grace and glory, etc.
And therefore not to be denied baptism, especially seeing this their
receiving of the thing signified, is also manifested, and so all usual
occasions that way removed. Now then to come to apply what here is granted;
First, then persons may come under the notion of Disciples which were never
outwardly taught, and cannot personally hold out actual faith, which our
opposites elsewhere deny. Secondly, that it is not contrary to Christ's mind,
and to the rule, that persons, without personal profession of faith should be
baptized. For as the former notion of Disciples, if natura rei, it were not
otherwise applyable, then as not ordinarily, so neither extraordinarily: and
whether ordinarily, or extraordinarily, if applyable so; it is not simply to
be denied; so I say in the latter: albeit, extraordinary things done besides
rule cross not ordinary rule; yet neither extraordinarily nor ordinarily, is
any thing to be done, which is in it self contrary to rule. It was beside rule
for a Priest to kill Zimri and Cosbi, but not a breach of rule, or any thing
contrary to rule. Thirdly, that there was ground why Christ might command those
little ones brought to him to be baptized, yea it was his mind, and according
to his will they should be baptized, albeit it be not mentioned that they
were baptized: who could forbid water that they should be baptized, which
received the holy Ghost, which were Disciples? Christ's extraordinary knowledge
of it himself, and revelation thereof to his Apostles then present, which used
to baptize others, John 4. 1. 2. it is granted was sufficient warrant, albeit
there had been no rule for it, when yet in this case the rule of baptizing
Disciples, John 4. 1. also might suffice. Let it then be no more said, that if
it had been Christ's mind, that Infants should be baptized, he would have
commanded those, Luke 18. to be baptized, since according to the acknowledged
principles, those little ones either were, or might groundedly have been
baptized. But we will suppose Christ did not then expressly injoyne those
little ones baptism, or that they were not then baptized, yet will it not
follow that it was not his mind such babes to whom he expressed such love
should not be baptized, or were not baptized; he that had his time of
blessing them, was free to take his time of injoyning their baptism. Yea he
gave not any express charge, touching any care to be had of them, by those
which brought them: nor touching their being further instructed, in the way of
God, and many other things of that nature: And yet none will thence reason
that, Ergo, it was not his mind, that any special care or religious
endeavor, touching their further good should be used. No more does the former
follow that it was not his mind that either those or any other such like
persons should be baptized, because he did not then express his mind that
way touching those little ones. There might be diverse other reasons* why
Christ might not then injoyne the same: possibly their parents themselves,
albeit circumcised, yet not baptized, or if baptized, their children also might
be baptized when they were. And his reasons to prove that by kingdom of heaven
is rather meant that of glory then of grace, are as weak still. First, Because
they understand not the Laws of the kingdom of grace. Secondly, because this
kingdom is a local kingdom, as appears by the word entering in. But does C.
B. which says these Infants did receive the kingdom of God by gift, think
that they received not the kingdom of grace, at present before their entrance
into glory, they were not yet entered heaven, but on earth then, and long after
it may be, yet he says those little ones received it of gift; in what way,
or by what means could they receive it? without any covenant right? surely no:
For there is no inheritance of glory other then that promised inheritance,
hence the promise put for glory promised, Heb. 10. 36. nor eternal life, but
such as is promised, Tit. 1. 1, 2, 3. yea could they receive it, without the
Spirit? which yet they must also partake of by promise, or no way: none are
made partakers of the Divine nature in any respect but by the promises, 2 Pet.
1. 4. now if thus really, and effectually interested in the covenant of grace,
and partakers of the spirit, then the kingdom of grace too was theirs: albeit
they understood not the Laws of it. Yea does Mr. B. think that the kingdom
of glory belongs to any to whom that of grace belongs not? must not that be
first ours before the other? yea does not the phrase of receiving the kingdom
note out, that the kingdom of glory is received, in and by the receiving of
that of grace, or of the word of the kingdom the promise, and covenant, etc.
else is it not improper to say that those Infants before they entered into Gods
kingdom of glory they did receive it? It Is a Local kingdom, as Mr. B. has
it, and is it proper to say that a man receives a place, before he come at
it, otherwise then by word of mouth, or writing, or some equivalent engagement?
I conclude then that the kingdom that they received was rather that of grace,
even the covenant of grace, if not also grace of the covenant, wherein was
plighted, and engaged some right to that of glory, or that it was the kingdom
of glory, in reference to such plighting and pledge of it. Nor does Mr. B. his
other reason conclude against what I have said, they were at least externally
of Gods kingdom, in that first sense, scil. considered, as his kingdom
dispensing, scil. his Church. Secondly, they received his kingdom in a second
sense, scil. considered as dispensed in the revealed way of Gods plighting of
it by word, and initiatory seal at last of Circumcision, if not of Baptism;
and how ever in the external right to both they are such, which according to
men at least should enter into glory in respect of actual fruition of it,
which is the kingdom in a third sense, scil. the kingdom to be possessed,
and to which a entering in, in the Text has indeed reference; but else Mr.
Blackwoods reason would not enforce it, that because of that local expression
of entering in; the kingdom must ergo be a local kingdom, or heaven it
self: there are local expressions very full, Matthew. 8. 11, 12. sitting down
of some in the kingdom of heaven, out of which others are cast: yet will not
Mr. B. conclude that even the Jews were in heaven, and so cast out thence, if
they had not been first in, they had not been thence cast: in, and out, are
here relatives. It was some other kingdom, scil. that of grace in the
external subject of it, the visible Church; and engagement of it, the covenant
of grace and dispensation of it: the administration of Church ordinances, etc.
in which they were by external adoption and incision, and out of all actual
privileges whereof they were afterward cast. As for that which others object
against us in this point of childrens federall and ecclesiastical estate from
hence, scil. that Christ says not of these, but of such, and such like, scil.
as A. R. has it, such like in humility, etc. is the kingdom of God, etc.
this is as groundless an interpretation as some others mentioned.

For first, it is evident that Christ makes these little ones patterns to
others like them, in that interest in Gods kingdom, of such or such like is
Gods kingdom; now samples must have that verified in themselves, in some sense
in which they are examples to others; secondly, they are inclusively made
examples of such an initiatory receiving of the kingdom of heaven, as tends
to a more full fruition, and enjoyment thereof, Luke 18. 17. Mark. 10. 15. and
and therefore at least externally such, and so qualified themselves now will
their paralelling this with, Matthew. 18. 3, 4, 5, 6. hold good therein, to say
nothing, that that, Matthew. 18. 6. may be read from the Greek, these little
ones (...), of persons believing or of believers in me, scil. of parents
believing in Christ, which little ones are not to be slighted but received in
Christ's name, verse. 5. scil. unto Church communion as well as others, as that
phrase implies, Romans 15. 7. This is undeniable that the occasion of that
speech in Matthew. 18. and of this in Matthew. 19. Mark 10. Luke 18. was
different, and at diverse times uttered as the Texts compared show, nor says
Christ in Matthew. 18. as here, he that receives not the kingdom of God as a
little child, but thus; unless ye be as children, scil. in humility, etc.
verse. 3, 4. compared; and that likewise in Matthew. 18. does not conclude, ergo
the interest of such children, more then unto Doves, or sheep unto whom
subjects of Gods kingdom are like, but here as he says of such like is Gods
kingdom: for withal, he says that others must receive Gods kingdom as they
do, making them patterns as well of receiving of, as interest in Gods
kingdom, which was never affirmed of sheep or doves are harmless, if
patterns of it. Actual guile, malice and envy are removed from Infants, they
act not such sins if they are patterns to others therein, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3.
compared, they are low and little in their own eyes, not minding great things,
etc. if patterns of it, Matthew. 18. Psalm. 131. 1, 2. so here they are
interested in Gods kingdom, do receive it externally at least, both those
here mentioned, and such like Infants, if they were made patterns thereof unto
others, else the sense of Luke 18. 17. would be thus, Unless any receive
Christ's kingdom as a child does, scil. in a bare resemblance of reception
thereof without any realitie therein, so much as supposed, he shall not enter
into it. Thirdly, Christ brings this as a reason why his Disciples should not
hinder little ones as profane from him, but rather further the approach of
those babes, because of suchlike Infants, like them in covenant, and Church
interest in God his kingdom. Now if this had been Christ's only reason
thereof as is imagined, because not of these out of such like little ones by
resemblance in humility, and harmelesnesse, etc. is Gods kingdom, therefore
further, and do not hinder their coming to me; then one might upon the same
ground argue, that since often persons like good seed, and good fish for
usefulness and fruitfulness, etc. is Gods kingdom, Matthew. 13. 24. 38. 47.
49. and since of persons like Eagles for renovation, sight, and seed, etc. Gods
kingdom does consist, therefore further, and do not hinder the bringing of
such seed, fish, and Eagles unto Christ; this were ridiculous. Yea suppose any
other thing short of what I have formerly mentioned touching these babes,
wherein some of these creatures are not all out fully resembling the Saints,
yet if not interested more then those creatures in the kingdom mentioned, it is
not the degrees of more or less like which will alter the force of that
formal reason of not hindering these creatures therefore from Christ, scil.
because bare resemblances of the Saints, as our opposites interpret this.
Fourthly, as Christ taking them up in his arms, as the word is translated,
shows they were little ones indeed, of whom he spoke, and not metaphorical
little ones, even grown persons like them; so other acts show that he
expressed as much in effect touching those babes in his acts about them, as in
his words he spoke touching them, the expressions of Christ's love toward those
persons, whether he took them up in his arms or embraced them, it was no
complement in Christ, but a most significant expression of his love; and his
blessing of them, do declare that they had some more peculiar interest in some
respects, at least in an Ecclesiastical and Federall way, in him the King, and
in that his kingdom mentioned, then to be bare semblances of others which had.
Fifthly, the Greek article (...) in reference to (...), Luke 18. 15, 16, 17.
the little ones, and not (...) in reference to the parents, as Beza notes on
the place, seems to show, that he intended not such allegorical little ones,
as the bringers of them, but the little ones brought in that assertion
mentioned.

Object. Yea but Piscator makes that an argument, in that he called the
little ones, verse. 16. that ergo they were not babes: and beside, the word
(...) signifies a child capable of teaching, as 2 Timothy 3. 15. from a child thou
have learned the Scriptures, etc. and so your purpose fails to apply this
against Anabaptists denying the covenant, and Church right of babes of
inchurched believers.

Answ. 1. It Is said he called them, scil. in calling their parents which
brought them, albeit, they might not be all capable of understanding that
invitation; it is usual in Scripture because of parents nearest interest in
their children to ascribe things to their children, which are rather to be
understood of the parents, as when it is said Levi paid tithes in Abraham, Heb.
7, etc. Secondly, albeit, that phrase be used in Tim. thou have known the
Scriptures from a child, yet it follows not, that therefore (...) does not in
the very natural proper, and constant use of it signify a babe more then the
like phrases used in Scripture should not have their proper signification,
because something there mentioned is not in strict acceptance applyable
thereunto; as when it is said, thou made me hope upon my mothers breasts (...)
or when I was upon my mothers breasts, so Psalm. 58. 3. the wicked are estranged
from the womb, they go astray as soon as they are borne speaking lies: in
these places will it be hence argued that the Hebrew words rightly translated,
and so constantly used as translated, signify other then from mothers breasts,
and womb, etc. in that a very sucking or newborn child is not capable of
actual hoping in God or going astray actually from him, but rather persons
grown up more in years; here all will say these species are hyperbolicall,
showing that these things were acted thus by them very early, and very soon;
so what though a little one, which is not a suckling but can speak and
understand is capable of knowing the Scriptures, yet it follows not that
(...) signifies any other then a babe, but it shows that Timothy was so
trained up very early, he does not say, thou even a child [(...)] did know,
but (...) from a child, that is, very soon and early in thy age. Thirdly, the
Apostles did not use to hinder little ones which could go and speak, from
coming to Christ, but further them rather: whether the parents were Jews of
Gentiles, yea, and those not proselytes: witness that act Mark. 9. Matthew. 15.
this therefore was an example as they apprehended tending to trouble Christ
more then ordinary to meddle with poor shiftlesse babes. Fourthly, if they had
been little ones which could go, yet it suffices to prove what Anabaptists
deny: that before persons could actually hold forth personal. Faith or
repentance, may be actually in covenant with God and inrighted to the
initiatory seal of it, and that albeit Christ did not actually cause these
babes then to be baptized, that they had therefore no right to be baptized, it
follows not.

But I. S. he acknowledges those children to be of that kingdom or members
of that Jewish Church, and therefore have right as well as others to temporal
blessings, and that these children were brought to Christ for cure producing
some Scriptures for that end, where prayer and imposition of hands was used
upon that occasion; but does the Text say, of such or such like was [that]
kingdom? no verily, but indefinitely, of such is [the] kingdom of God; and
what though those children were of that Church, since Christ inlargeth his
speech, as we showed, to such like persons, and so to other babes of like
condition with those; and had the Jews, and their babes only right to
temporal blessings will I. S. say: when that Abraham's covenant of God his
being a God to them, scil. to fulfill his promises: instancing in that, Luke 1.
73, 74, 75. as one is acknowledged by I. S. elsewhere, to be by circumcision
visibly sealed upon both seeds, as he terms them. True it is that as, 2
King. 5. 11. Matthew. 8. 3. and 9. 18. Luke 4. 3^. 40. one way of healing was
putting on of hands, and prayer, but is all here meant? the Lord blessed them,
scil. in way of cure only, or the like: other Scriptures mention imposition of
hands, and prayer in that way of curing; true, but here is no mention either of
the diseases or of the cure of the little ones following upon Christ's
imposition of hands, as there is in the other Scriptures in other cases; no nor
is here prayer mentioned: the parents desired him to pray, Matthew. 19. but he
blessed them says Mark, whether in prayer way, it is not said, yea since the
Scriptures mention these acts of blessing, and imposition of hands in way of
ratification of covenant right, and privileges of the covenant of grace as
externally, at least, the heritage of such and such, witness that Genesis 27. 17.
and 28. 1. 3, 4. and 48. 14, 15, 16. why should not we on better grounds look
at this as comprehended in this act of Christ? and why is I. S. so uncharitable
to limit the requests of these pious persons entreating Christ to pray,
indefinitely, for the little ones: that this was only to move him to desire
temporal things for them? Christ does not seem to make any such
interpretation of their request when he blessed them, as Mark says, what was
that only in regard of temporals? who would limit Christ's blessing within so
short a compass? nor was it the Disciples use to hinder, but further the cure
of persons children brought for that end, as the instances in Mark 9. Matthew.
15. show.

Object. But if you make Infants of inchurched believers to be actual members
of a visible Church, do you not destroy the usual definition of a visible
Church; given by Divines, that it is a company of persons professing the faith,
etc.

Answ. Musculus, Aretius, Melancton, Calvin, Beza, Bucer, Dr. Ames, Mr. Cotton,
Dr. Whittaker, Peter Martyr, and generally all our Divines which define a
visible Church severally, but in substance to like purpose, they yet make that
no undermining of their own doctrine, de ecclesia, or of the descriptions
visibilis ecclesiae which they do give; when the same authors maintain from
Scripture grounds that such Infants are actually members of the visible Church,
and externally in the covenant of grace, and such as are to be baptized: yea
such Infants being of the Church; It is not therefore not a company of
professors of the faith, since Infants are fideles, as they are rationalls, as
some say, scil. actu primo, non secundo; yea they confess and avouch the Lord
in their parents avouching of him, as they did of old, Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17, 18.
and 29. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. they promised to stand to those conditions in
their parents promise made with respect to them.

Object. But if they are of the Church, and in the covenant, and have right to
the Seal, then to both as well as to one, to the Lords Supper as well as
Baptism.

Answ. We do not say they are complete members of the Church, but incomplete as
Ames speaks to this purpose in his Medulla, and having interest in the Church
and covenant, we say they have right to the initiatory Seal: but not
therefore to all memberly privileges of voting in Church censures, elections,
admonitions, etc. even grown persons that are with us as transient members by
communion with other Churches, yet are not reckoned as in full Church communion
with us, in all Churches privileges, as in choosing officers, censuring
offenders, etc. Nor will Mr. B. his paralleling of Baptism, and the Lords
Supper prove that if to be admitted by Church interest unto the one, then also
unto the other: for suppose one, and the same thing be sealed, yet not by one
and the same way: the former only being the initiatory seal of covenant and
Church interest, not the latter: nor is it true that the same preparations is
required to the former as to the latter: since no where spoken so exclusively
of persons to be baptized as to come to the Lords Supper, Let a man examine
himself, and so no otherwise, let him eat; nor does it follow that because
there is but one excommunication, there is but one communion; excommunication
being properly of persons in full communion of all Church privileges in this
or that Church where the offense is committed. For to instance in no other
case, but in that of a brother in another Church which is in Church communion
in Mr. B's Church by virtue of communion of Churches, yet not in complete
membership, and full communion of all Church privileges there: he offends;
will Mr. Blackwood now put him out of Church communion with his Church by
actual censure from his Church? I suppose not: in that the party has not
personally submitted yet to the Churches power: but they will withdraw
communion rather: this then is a different way of discommunicating, and by Mr.
B's grounds, ergo argues a different communion, and so not the same, which was
that he assayed to prove; nor do his proofs evince but that others were
baptized then did partake of the Lords Supper.

Object. Before we pass further, let me remove another objection which I
meet with, scil. that if we make Infants members of a visible Church, which
do nothing from whence to denominate the same, but are merely passive: It
will follow that there may be a visible Church, consisting only of Infants of
believers. For a number of visible members make a visible Church.

Answ. This follows not, since the maine force of such denomination lies in
the grown Citizens of God, which use in all City acts public to carry it
personally, and not from the children, which yet are free Deuisons. As for a
Church of only Infants: it is not supposable their Church right depending upon
inchurched parents; nor are the Infants such perfect members of the Church as
others: nor do a number of believers regularly, make a visible political
Church, but in such a way of actual combining together either explicitly or
implicitly, as in all other bodies politic. Whence a more peculiar relation
one to another, and a peculiar ground of memberly care for, and power one over
another, in a brotherly way to watch over, or seasonably to admonish each
other, and the like.

SECT. III.
TO conclude, let such as oppose us in this doctrine of the faederall and
Church holiness of inchurched believers little ones, consider of the
absurdities which their opposite Doctrine exposes them unto.

As first, the denial of any ordinary way or means of the salvation of
believers Infants, as being neither actually in the visible Church, out of
which ordinarily there is no salvation, nor being actually any of them in the
covenant of grace, so much as externally, and so excluded from any ordinary
means, or way, or estate of salvation, as before in part we showed: The
promises being made to the Church, and the covenant being the Spirits
instrument, by which to convey good unto such as ordinarily partake of it. Even
before the world was: God, ordered all good to be conveyed to us in a way, and
by virtue of his covenant, therefore also called the everlasting covenant, and
Gospel, Heb. 13. 20. Revel. 14. 6. hence God was said to be in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19. hence eternal life said to
be promised before the world was, Tit. 1. 2. Hence that, Ephesians. 3. 8, 9. even
Christ himself is his peoples no otherwise then in way of covenant, Esaias 42.
6. and 49. 6, 7, 8. his blood is the blood of the everlasting covenant, no
interest in it, nor in himself, but by way of covenant with it seals, as that
wherein, and whereby salvation is engaged, Heb. 13. 20. man's salvation is only
in his name, Act. 4. 12. and reconciliation in his blood, Colos. 1. 19, 20, 21.
and that blood is the blood of the covenant as before, see Zach. 9. 11. he is
a mediator of the new covenant, and Testament, Heb. 9. 15. Heb. 12. 24. if
believers Infants have not interest in that covenant, no interest in him as
Mediator: for he is no other Mediator but of such a covenant, his business as
Mediator is to confirm a covenant to such to whom he is a Mediator, Deuteronomy. 9.
24. Romans 15. 8. none can partake of the Spirit, nor any influence of it but by
the promises, 2 Pet. 1. 4. nor of a glorious resurrection, but by virtue of, I
am their God, Luke 20. 36, 37. nor of glory, but by virtue of the same, Heb.
11. 16. see of both, Act. 26. 6, 7. if therefore that species or sort of
persons, covenant inchurched parents Infants, are excluded from right in the
covenant, unless they come actually and personally to believe therein: actum
est de salute eorum, they are given for lost irrecoverably, and all the
individual Infants of such persons are left in as bad a case.

Secondly, that sort of grown gentiles being supposed only to be made nigh
by the blood of Christ in covenant, and Church respects actually: it will argue
that that sort only were actually strangers before, and not their children
with them, not only individually, but specifically considered, since the same
sorts at least of Gentiles, formerly strangers, are made nigh, Ephesians. 21. 11, 22,
13. compared.

Thirdly, then is it supposed that Christ took down the partition wall which
stood between grown Jews and adult Gentiles, but as for the believing
Gentiles Infants, either there was no such partition wall betwixt them and
their parallels the Jewish Infants inchurched, or if there were, it so far
remains untaken down as concerning that sort of Infants.

Fourthly, then Divine justice is supposed to have a larger latitude in
involving the little ones of such as respect the Covenant under the expressions
and visible dispensations of divine displeasure, as in Caines, Ishmaels,
Esau's, the Jews rejection together with their little ones; then divine grace
has in the expressions and dispensations thereof, unto the little ones of such
as took hold thereof; contrary to all former examples: how long did God
continue external adoption, and sonship in Seths line, Genesis 6. 1. how long in
Abraham's, Isaacs and Jacobs, Romans 9. 4. and not rejecting them till rebelling
universally, and fatally?

Fifthly, then it is supposed, that there are two covenants of grace, one with
them of old, another with us now, essentially different, which is absurd as
before was showed, and may be further evinced in that baptism, that new way
of initiatory sealing of the covenant, when first instituted, it was instituted
precisely with sole respects to the Jews, John 1. 33. Matthew. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
John 4. 1. compared with Matthew. 10. 5, 6. to show that there was no other
covenant to be sealed by baptism, then that which was made with the Jews in
the substance of it, Luke 24. 44, 45, 46, 47. Act. 2. 38, 39. the same promise
first sealed by baptism to them before was to them afar off, and no other to
them afar off to be sealed by baptism then that promise which was to them,
and to their children; now if one covenant essentially, then either the Jews
children were not in covenant, no not so much as externally; contrary to what
we showed before from Acts 2. and in the conclusions laid down: or if they
were, it was merely ceremonious; now supposing ceremony in the way of sealing,
by circumcising of the flesh of their foreskin; yet what ceremony was in the
principal part of the covenant it self, I will be a God to thee and to thy
seed after thee in their generations? or if it were one part of the covenant,
then, but is now abolished by Christ, then it seems Christ by his coming has
abolished one material part of the covenant of grace, without any other thing
equivalent to parents as covenant parents in stead thereof.

Sixthly, then God is made a respector of persons looking at Jews with theirs
in covenant respects, but not so eying covenant inchurched Gentiles: Yea he is
made to speak things at large, to be a God to all the families of the earth,
Jer. 31. 1. yet when it comes to be Analyzed, he is not a covenant God to
any more then particular persons actually believing only: no covenant respect
is had so much as externally, no not so much as to the choycest part and prop
of the families, scil. children.

Seventhly, then is all former distinction, ever used to be so carefully
observed, and held forth, and mentioned, laid aside. Seed of the woman, and of
the Serpent in the younglings of both are confounded, no distinction of sons
of God, and of men, of seed of Isaac and Ishmael in the Infant part thereof. No
Church distinction of children clean or incleane; Albeit, that we mentioned
not to the State, but Church at Corinth, as a Church to whom the contrary was
noted as absurd; else even the children were as Pagans unclean, but now they
are holy. So Acts 2. To you, and your children, not to others; as afterward:
actually to others with theirs Some only were nigh in covenant, and political
Church respects; the rest far off: nay do not C. B. Hen. Den, and some
others ground upon Romans 5. 18. whereby to put believers children in the same
estate without any difference, as such, from any others children? Nay C. B.
would know why Turks, and believers Infants being alike free from actual
sin and guilt of original, that they may not partake of the same benefit of
free grace, and albeit in them there be something worthy of damnation, yet it
appears not from Scripture that any were damned for original sin only, and
would know why we should not think as much of Infants in general, dying
infants, as was said of David's child, 2 Samuel 12. 23. thought by Divines to be
saved, bringing Romans 5. 18. for a proof of such general redemption of dying
Infants. Strange charity beyond all bounds of regular judgment, to all
Infants dying, and none to believers Infants in general, so much as of their
external interest in the covenant; but does Mr. B. expound deaths reign over
Infants, Romans 5. 14. to be only restrained to that of the first death? or
might Babylons little ones be accursed if not under wrath, as such? does Mr.
B. imagine that all the Infants destroyed in the flood, in Sodom and Gomorrah,
in the last destruction of Jerusalem, etc. that it is so much as probable they
that were saved? are all by nature the children of wrath, and yet all dying in
that estate, and under no covenant of grace, so much as externally it is, so
much as probable that all such are saved? Is there any Mediation of Christ, but
as a Mediator of a covenant? and are Turks Infants under the covenant, when as
their parents are not? were all Gentiles of old, young and old, being strangers
from the covenants of promise and of the Church, without God, and Christ, and
hope: and now the case is so altered that the chrildren of strangers from the
covenant are to be judged hopeful? Does Mr. B. startle at 1 Cor. 7. 14. that
the children of believers, yea though dying Infants, yet as believers children,
they are no more but civilly clean, and in covenant respects as profane, yet
are Pagans children clean in respect of Covenant mercy? for else how can they
be saved as before we proved? as for Romans 5. 18. our Divines have used to
answer Arminians, that [all] is taken for [many] as before, verse. 15. But here
Mr. B. in the case of dying Infants will have it universal: and if universally
true of dying Infants, why not so of all living Infants, why not of all men
simply, where will there be a restraint? If all men simply, in one sort of
persons dying be understood, and not all men that is many: whereas we are
used to be upbraided with the absurdity of universal redemption; I fear Mr.
B's doctrine rather. And so much of the first part of this discourse touching
the covenant and Church estate and right of Church members children.

PART. II.
CHAP. I. Sect. I. Touching Childrens Baptismall right.
HAving discoursed of the doctrine of the Federall and Ecclesiastical
holiness of the Children of visible believing and inchurched parents and
cleared the same, let us address our selves a while to consider of the
external and Church right of such little ones, unto the initiatory seal of
such covenant and Church right, which follows thence. The initiatory seal
follows the covenant, we speak not of an extraordinary time of the Church,
when either it has no particular express initiatory seal distinct from
another sealing ordinance; as before that solemn covenanting of God in
reference to the Church in Isaacs race, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, etc. with 19. so
there is some peculiar state of the time not appliable to the ordinary time and
way of a visible political Church and its administrations: as then also were
family Churches, as that in Melchisedecs and Jobs family; which not being
successively to continue, were not so immediately eyed in point of solemn
institution and Church laws, as was this of Abraham, Isaac and Jacobs race,
wherein the visible Church was to be continued: such extraordinary cases and
times, are very impertinently urged by some to infringe the force of ordinary
rules, and principles: they know an extraordinary case of eating shewbread by
such as were not Priests, of plucking ears of corn on the Sabbath day, of a
private Disciple's baptizing upon an extraordinary and immediate call, as did
Ananias, Acts 9. of Zipporah's circumcising, and these do not nullify and
invalidate ordinary rules and principles, touching circumcision or baptism, or
the sanctification of the Sabbath, etc.

This proposition then I shall lay down for further proof: that in ordinary
times and cases, respecting the political visible Church, and its
administrations; such little ones as are of parents in such visible Church
estate, they have external right unto the enjoined initiatory visible seal,
of which they are outwardly capable, and ought not to be denied the use and
benefit thereof; ordinary times then and not extraordinary are here considered:
let none object then, children of members of an ordinary political visible
Church are here considered: let none object an extraordinary case of Johs or
Melchisedecks family; a visible seal enjoined, not a case wherein actually any
such seal is not enjoined is here also considered; but either actually
enjoined, or at least in view at the present making of the covenant with Church
reference as in the case, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, etc. let none object Adam and Noah's
time and cases against our thesis, external right in such a Church seal is
propounded; let none confound this with internal and saving right, which is
visible to God and not to mere men; the initiatory visible seal is
propounded, not all the seals or Church privileges; as choice of officers,
and voting in other Church occasions, etc. A male child of eight days old
might be circumcised, but was never intended to be enjoined personal
appearance at the solemn celebration of the passover, there to go up, and
not to be carried or to have others appear in their stead, Deuteronomy. 16. 16, 17.
all the males which were to be at that feast were as well to be at the feast
of tabernacles, Ibid. where such as kept that feast were to carry boughs to
make Booths or Tabernacles to dwell in, Deuteronomy. 16. 16, 17. compared with Levit.
23. 34, 35. 38, 39, 40. which none will say was Infants work. Let none then
object, that you may as well plead for Infants coming to the Lords Supper, as
in Cyprians time, and was the corruption of the time, as was crossing,
rebaptizing, etc. in use in his time too, and as the Jews Infants partooke of
the passover, the contrary whereof appears in a word we spoke of initiatory
sealing of persons outwardly capable thereof: otherwise albeit the parties have
a covenant right unto it in the general; yet in that case of incapability,
it is peculiar and their jus in re: justly suspended from being personally
elicited, and this does not make the ordinary rule and ground of right to the
initiatory seal to be invalid: suppose an adult believing Pagan or Turk to
join to our opposite Churches; who make total immersion essential to
baptism, and that they were banished into Freezeland or Greenland or some such
cold country: if this person be very weak and sick, yet desires to join to
them ere he die, I demand whether he has right to baptism or no? this will
not be denied: Yea but is this right to be elicited? surely no, unless they
would be guilty of his death. But why not baptized? because you will say it is
not simply necessary to salvation: There being no contempt of it, but only a
natural and corporal incapacitie thereof; but this crosses not that ordinary
rule, ground, and way of baptizing. Very true, but then let none object against
such Infants covenant right to the initiatory seal; the case of the females of
Abraham's seed, which albeit in Abraham's covenant yet not circumcised: for when
God enjoined cutting away of the superfluous foreskin of the flesh to be the
seal of his covenant, the very nature of the command does in reason, if the
notion of males had never been expressed, reach the case of the males, which
have such a superfluous foreskin of their flesh, and not the females which are
naturally and corporally incapable thereof: as having by nature no such
superfluous foreskin, and so in that case as in some others, that law of
circumcision had some things peculiar in it, albeit it had other things in
common with that of baptism. For the clearer handling of this thesis
propounded we shall lay down a few other propositions or conclusions.

SECT. II.
1. THat mixed commands of God having some part circumstantiall, and vanishing,
some part substantial and abiding, the latter is binding to us, since Christ's
time, albeit the former be not. A seventh day which God shall single out to be
holy is binding to us; not the very seventh day of the week to be that day, he
that commanded the sanctification of the seventh day, he commanded a seventh
day of his own choosing, and that to be that seventh day: the former stands
in the fall of the latter. He that commanded a strict holy worship on the
Sabbath, Exodus 34. 21, etc. he commands suitable worship to the day and
strictness of worship, in such and such a manner of expressions; the former
was perpetual, the latter temporary; the morality of the second commandment
inforceth all the substantialls in seals or worship enjoined, nor does Christ
in that sense abolish a title of the Law.

SECT. III.
THat consequentiall commandments grounded on Scripture are Scripture
commandments; as even consequentiall articles of faith are articles of faith:
and in a word all consequences drawn as necessarily flowing from, or grounded
upon Scripture principles, these are of Scripturall warrant. Paul, Act. 13. 46,
47. makes a promise, yea an old testament promise, to be virtually a command,
yea a new Testament commandment: Lo we turn to the Gentiles; why so? For
God has so commanded us; How does that appear, or where? It follows, so
has God commanded, saying, I have set thee for a light to the Gentiles, that
thou should be my salvation to the ends of the earth: this was spoken too
in Esaias 42. and 49. and it was a gracious promise in the letter of it; yea but
Paul rightly drew the force of a command as included in it, according to the
old rule; He which promises the end, he commands the means tending to
that end; but of this more hereafter, but here we see what ground work is
made use of in way of authorizing so great and weighty a matter upon. It Is
verily the mind of God and Christ that Baptism and the Lords Supper should be
administered to the worlds end; yet is it only to be drawn by Scripture
consequence from such like places, as Matthew. 28. 19, 20. and 1 Cor. 11. 26. So
when it is said, As often as ye do this: our Divines make account it is a
virtuall command to celebrate the Lords Supper often: and not, as in some
places, twice or thrice a year. That sisters as well as brethren should in
case be ecclesiastically censured it is of Scripture warrant; yet by
consequence only; for the rule is of a brother offending, etc. nor is
[brother] of the common gender, Matthew. 18. 15. 2. These. 3. 6. 14. And as in
matter of practice, so of faith, it is thus; in Christ's time there was no other
Scripture, how then should that great article of the resurrection be
convincingly proved, even to learned Sadduces which deny it? verily an old
Testament proof Christ makes account suffices, as that Matthew. 22. 29. 31,
32. compared with Exodus 3. 6, etc. and Luke 22. 37. yet this was but drawn by
consequence. Thus the orthodox fathers dealt against the Arrians denying Christ
to be essentially one with the Father, they held him forth to be (...)
consubstantiall or coessentiall with the Father, yet no direct Scriptures are
for the same expressly: so in reasoning against such as denied the deity of the
holy Ghost, or that he was to be worshipped they did the like: And where is
it otherwise then by consequence to be drawn from Scripture, that there are
three distinct persons or substances in that one God? or that Christ has two
natures essentially distinguished, and yet united in one Person, etc?
Circumcision is called a sign of the covenant, how did Paul in speaking of
Abraham mention circumcision as the seal of the righteousness of his faith?
whence drew he that, that circumcision was in the nature of it; else it had
not been so to Abraham or any other, any such thing? verily it was from
Scripture consequence. And as in matters of faith and practice, so in matters
of fact, the same rule holds, Acts 4. 4. there were four thousands (...)
virorum, not (...) hominum, a word of the common gender, which believed: What
no woman among them, none of their wives? that were very strange, but were they
not baptized? Anabaptists will yield surely they were, yea but that must be
drawn by consequence. The Church of the Philippians, Colossians, Ephesians,
etc. surely had the Lords Supper administered among them, so the Thessalonians,
the seven Asian Churches had baptism administered to and among them, yet this
must be drawn by consequence, or no way, according to that true rule all this
is regular, scil. Scripture is not the letter alone, but the mind and intent
thereof drawn by consequence, according to the Analogy of faith, and by this
rule we are to hold forth the doctrine of faith and rule of manners and
worship, etc. Romans 12. 6. Else as well many absurdities would follow. Must we
actually sell all, taking up a Gibbet daily, lend freely, looking for nothing
again, turn the other cheek to him which smites one, pluck out our eyes,
cut off right hands, etc? Analogy of faith must help here. Hence Evangelicall
duties are not always grounded upon express commandments, either in old or
new Testament, but from consequences drawn from either: such as are praying
morning and evening in the family, and also in the closet alone; constant,
daily and set meditation; daily reading of the Scriptures in the family: holy
vowing, setting a part solemn days in private or public for thanksgiving,
etc. much less are many of these come over again, as some phrase it, in the
new Testament, with mention of the persons thereunto obliged: thereby
receiving their binding virtue; nor is that therefore sound that in point of
worship that is excluded which is not expressed; do not such even grant
consequences?

SECT. IIII.
3. THat Federall ordinances, such as are the seals, are as well privileges
as precepts; hence circumcision is reckoned as the fathers privilege, Acts 7.
2. 8. hence Romans 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. see more Acts 2. 38, 39. this some which oppose
us acknowledge when such speeches as these are used: that it is certain the
Jews had by Gods appointment the privilege of circumcision, and the covenant
made with Abraham did belong to them in special manner, and that children of
parents not matrimonially sanctified, as Zara and Pharez, were in the covenant
of saving grace, and Church Priviledges; surely then circumcision was one,
which these babes did partake of. [And] the Jews had this privilege, to be
reckoned in the outward administration as branches of the Olive: and one of the
ways of that administration was circumcision, was it not? [And] the
privileges in respect of the administration of the covenant are now many ways
enlarged, and made more honorable; and a little before, the promises of the
covenant of grace being of the substance, not of the administrations, are
privileges and the same now to believers, and as large and honorable as then.
These speeches indeed seem not so consonant to some passages before, and some
after: that it is no privilege to us, to have any thing in lieu of that
administration, but Christ already come, who is in stead of all. But let me
reason of these things a little, the covenant of Abraham in special wise
belonged to the Jews, and that was a covenant of grace, scil. to be a God to
them and theirs, as I have proved; was this no privilege to them? or was that,
Deuteronomy. 29. 14. with 30. 6. no privilege? was it no privilege for this namesake
of God to have such engagements, not merely for temporalls but spiritualls,
even when they had provoked him? Ezekiel. 36. from the 17. to the end. Were they
with theirs so peculiar a people in these respects, and yet were these no
privileges? Deuteronomy. 14. 2. see more Chap. 7. 6, 7, 8. it is reckoned as a choice
fruit of his love: And were even sundry Infants of theirs base borne, in the
covenant of saving grace, and Church privileges, and was this no privilege to
them, if so? since the promises of the covenant of grace, are privileges, and
the same now to believers, and as large and honorable as then, either these
promises to their children mentioned, Deuteronomy. 30. 6, etc. were not of the
substance of the covenant of grace; and then how could even base borne children
be in the covenant of saving grace? or they are no privilege; neither of
which I suppose will be affirmed: if these promises to Church children be not
barely of the administration of the covenant: for so are the Church privileges
rather, which are before made distinct from their inbeing in the covenant of
grace, but of the substance. Then why not now the same and larger rather? Why
are believers children then excluded the covenant? And are the privileges in
respect of administration of the covenant now enlarged, etc. Then either that
administration of the covenant initiatory seal, as such, to their children,
was no privilege: or there must be such a like privilege and not straightened,
at least not wholly excluded, as that of a like, I say not the same, but a like
administration of the initiatory covenant seal to inchurched believers
children now. And suppose it be no privilege to have any thing in lieu of
circumcision of Infants, but Christ; yet is it no privilege to have any other
thing then Christ to believers themselves? Circumcision is confessed to be an
appointed seal of initiation to them that entered into covenant with God
before Christ's incarnation, and baptism such a seal since; and that it
signified sanctification by the Spirit, justification and salvation by Christ,
and faith in him, but as to come, and baptism as come, etc. and is this no
privilege to believers, that now they have not that manner of initiation by
circumcision; yea but in a better way they have, scil. by baptism? Christ
indeed was then to the Saints, and so he is now all in all ordinances and
privileges; the Chieftaine, that first, or principal one, Esaias 41. Cant. 5.
Psalm. 73. 25. but it was not therefore no privilege, nor is now the like, to
have together with Christ many precious ordinances dispensed to them and us:
and verily the Scripture in old and new Testament, accounts it no small
privilege, to have Gods Tabernacle and Sanctuary, Church and Church ordinances
with us; and persons to be in and under the same; hence promised as a reward
and a fruit, yea part of the ratification of his covenant with them, Levit. 26.
9. 11. and therefore in the choice times of the Gospel, it is so reckoned,
Revel. 21. 3. yea and as of old the childrens Church estate and privilege was
therein included as of that nature: so in reference to the other times
mentioned, was the same of the same account, as we have showed from Ezekiel. 37.
25, 26, 27.

SECT. V.
4. THat Baptism is now the only initiatory visible seal of the covenant;
which being once administered, there needs no more renewing of it.

First, it is a seal of the covenant, no bare badge of Christianity as some
have said, albeit the more judicious of our opposites yield this, that the
covenant of grace is said properly to be sealed in Baptism, and that Baptism
since Christ's incarnation, is the appointed seal of God to such as enter into
covenant with him. And it appears so, 1. In that it agrees in the essentialls
with circumcision as an initiatory seal, Col. 2. 11, 12. whence baptized
Gentiles are said to be of the circumcision, Phil. 3. and Jews said to be
baptized, 1 Cor. 12. hence first instituted for a seal to the circumcised
Jews; to show it was in the essentialls of sealing Abraham's covenant to them,
but the same with circumcision in a manner; only as that sealed it to them
visibly in Christ, as to come, this did it in like sort in reference to Christ
as come: that was the seal of the righteousness of Abraham's faith, or that
whereon his faith acted to righteousness of justification, Romans 4. 11. even the
promise of grace in Christ, Romans 10. 6, 7. with Deuteronomy. 30. 14. hence when Christ
is called the Minister of circumcicision, it is thus explained by the end of
the sign administered, scil. to confirm the promises made unto the fathers,
Romans 15. 8. Acts 7. 8. Genesis 17. 11. hence the promise premised, and then
baptism annexed as the seal, Acts 2. 38. hence that washing annexed to the
word, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. 2. It Is a Baptizing in the name or covenant fellowship
of God the Father, Son and Spirit: he having exalted his word above all his
name, Psalm. 138. 2. 3. It Is a seal of remission of sins, and therefore of
the promise tendering the same, hence joined, Acts 2. 38, 39. Acts 22. 4. The
nature of it shows the same, it being a Gospel Sacrament, and that is a
visible seal, and the seal is to the covenant, hence called by the name, Acts
7. 8. 1 Cor. 11. 25.

Secondly, it is an initiatory seal: as first, annexed to the Gospel
dispensed, with reference to covenant fellowship with God in Trinity; not
first, Disciple them, and then, let them come to my Table, but baptizing them,
scil. so soon as ever brought into covenant and Church estate, and seal them
up thereby unto covenant fellowship with the Father, Son and Spirit. Hence
repent and be baptized, for the promise is to you; not, repent and come to the
Lords Table; for the promise is to you. Hence that order observed of communion
in breaking of bread after they were baptized, verse. 41, 42, 43, 44. there John
began in any sealing way, Matthew. 3. Mark 1. As of old circumcision long before
the Passover, hence called the washing of regeneration; metonymically
attributing the thing sealed, to the visible seal, Tit. 3. 5. the new birth is
the first fruits of the spirit of promise: nor is this ascribed to the other
Sacrament as that which is its proper Sacramental work initiatorily to seal;
albeit after it be thus initiatorily sealed by baptism, the other does also
virtually confirm it.

Thirdly, this being once administered needs never be renewed, as if two
initiations or beginnings, or regenerations, or first enterances into covenant,
or first ingraffings into Christ, etc. as there was not Iterations of
circumcision. It were but to take the name of God in vain, and a wilworship
indeed, if ever before dispensed in the truth of the essentialls of the
ordinance, and it were unsafe to say, we may renew that one baptism, as we
may renew that one faith of ours, unless as many times in a day: and as in
variety of occurrents, changes, services, sufferings, temptations, ordinances,
businesses, etc. we are to renew our faith, so we should renew our baptism,
nor will the 19. of the Acts bear out any such practice. Luke mentions Paul's
discourse touching the manner of John's baptism, scil. to hold forth the duty
which God required in reference to the Lord Jesus, and accordingly they were by
John baptized into the name of Jesus, whom John held forth, as verse. 4, 5.
compared shows, and as the annexing of Paul's name, 1. to this declaration,
verse. 4, 5. and then 2. to his act which he then did, verse. 6. ^inceth: It Is
not said, then Paul baptized them, but then Paul laid his hands upon them. It Is
said of the other seal, As often as ye do this, 1 Cor. 11. But not a whisper
that way touching being often baptized. The Apostle in mentioning of one spirit,
body, hope of our calling, metonymically put for the thing hoped for, even
glory, which is but one essentially, as one faith: which I suppose is taken, as
often in Scripture, for the doctrine of faith, which is but one, Gal. 1. 6. 7, 8.
Jude 3. and so one Lord and one God: he mentions one baptism: and why does
he not as well say one Lords Supper too, which albeit often renewed to the same
persons, yet it is but one institution and the same ordinance still: if no
further matter be in that oneness of baptism, but to signify, that it is one
and the same baptism indeed, but yet so as that it hinders not, but it may
often be renewed upon one and the same person warrantably, though it were
before orderly administered to him.

Fourthly, that baptism is the only initiatory seal: I never heard this yet
so much as questioned by any which deny it not to be a seal, therefore I need
not speak any further in confirmation thereof.

SECT. VI.
5. THat the Application of such an initiatory seal of the covenant of grace
made in reference to an ordinary political visible Church which God shall
appoint, and whereof the several parties in that covenant are capable; this is
an external condition of that covenant, and to be so far forth kept by all
that are externally interested in the same, and that for that very reason and
ground, because they are in such sort interested in that covenant. Ere we
confirm this, let us premise that, that covenant Genesis 17. was a covenant of
grace, and it was made with reference to an ordinary political visible Church,
as we have before showed. And albeit that Church, qua such a political Church
and national, etc. differ from congregationall Churches: yet qua visibil^
ecclesia politica, and ordinaria; so it was essentially the same with ours;
hence then needs no scrupling or startling. As for their external interest
also in the covenant of saving grace, it has been likewise cleared, and that
also need not breed contention upon the point of disparity.

This being premised, the proposition may more easily proceed, Genesis 17. 7. God
propounds his gracious covenant, verse. 9. he informs of one external
condition to be observed, by persons taken into that gracious covenant, and
infers the condition upon the premised covenant: thou Abraham and thy seed
after thee: and when Isaac with whom -- this covenant is established, verse. 19.
as in whose race the Church and Church seed is to be continued has seed; then
it is thou, and thy seed: and when Jacob has his seed, it is still the same,
thou and thy seed, in such covenant language, what he speaks to one father
he speaks to others; all are but Abraham and his seed still: yea and as then
the same to Abraham's believing seed with their children, so it is but the same
now; thou believer and thy seed after thee, are the same parties as Abraham and
his seed; yea thou Abraham and thy seed after thee, scil. in their generations;
wherein fathers and children begetting and begotten are comprehended: And so
now Abraham's spiritual seed in their generations, are Abraham and his seed;
thus far it is the same: yea, but what must Abraham and this his seed do, and
therefore do because in covenant? they must keep the covenant. But some are
Infants there intended in the seed after thee, and seed in their generations,
how can they keep covenant? Yes verily in the sense intended they may, scil.
receive such a covenant and Church initiatory seal, as he shall appoint to
them, according to their outward capacity, else to imagine any other external
way of their keeping of covenant, it were vain. Abraham and his adult
believing seed, which so far forth he as communis persona did therein
represent, they may keep Gods covenant many other ways; but the Infant seed
of Abraham and of his believing children, then or now cannot externally and
actually keep the covenant and external condition thereof otherwise.

And let it be attended, that the wise, gracious covenanter, and Law giver of
his Church, he distinctly lays down; first, this general rule and
principle with the ground of it; before he instance in, or pitch upon any
particular way or branch thereof. Wherefore this general being with greatest
wisdom thus laid down, it must have its distinct consideration and weight
by, and in it self, absolute, as well as any particular branch thereof may,
and does admit of the like, or as even this general may have its consideration
also, comparate, in reference to any such particular. He that were to preach
of this Text, Genesis 17. 9. might and would so handle it, and raise distinct
observations from it: if one were to deal with an adult person, a seeker;
which denies all visible Church ordinances, etc. and only pleads interest in
the promise, in Christ, and the Spirit and Father, spiritual illuminations,
and consolations, and quicknings promised; this Scripture ground amongst
others, might now be urged: Thou shall therefore, even because of the promise
and covenant, keep my covenant, says the Lord. Yea suppose it were some Jew
that should be converted, and not deny the ordinances of Baptism, but like as
many in former times, as Constantine, Theodosius, and diverse others did upon
unwarrantable grounds, he should defer his baptism too long, and nelect it
too much, pleading the fullness of the covenant: and that all in all ordinances
is their and in the branches of it, the promises, as in the well-springs, Esaias
12. 3. this, Genesis 17. 9. might be very pertinently urged to him, Thou shall
therefore keep my covenant; either then he must deny this Sacrament to be
any external condition of the covenant, on our parts, as well as a visible
seal thereof on Gods part; which were ridiculous or if it be yielded to be a
duty on man's part externally in covenant, then it is manifest indignity to
God, yea a breach of covenant to neglect it, as receiving the initiatory
Sacrament, is a special branch of keeping Gods covenant, so neglect or
contempt thereof, must be acknowledged to be a special breach of it, and as
much might be urged in respect of neglect or contempt of the initiatory
sealing of their seed, or children; both are equally made Gods covenant to be
kept, or the covenant condition and duty which most immediately and necessarily
and properly does follow thence. Hence this is firstly, and principally here
included, as the keeping of Gods covenant, by the persons interested therein
according to their outward capacity of it.

This royal general covenant Law, was not ceremonial, nor was the ground
work of it ceremonial: that covenant, I will be a God to thee and thy seed, was
not ceremonial and vanishing, but an everlasting, and if everlasting then an
immutable covenant, even the same to the worlds end; that inference of this
covenant duty, laying upon such as were externally interested in it, as
propounded with Church reference; Thou shall therefore keep my covenant, and
thy seed after thee; this was not ceremonial. That covenant duty in the
general, and the keeping of it, I mean an initiatory visible seal of the
covenant, and the receiving of it, was not in the nature of it ceremonial; for
then every species of this subalterne genus an initiatory covenant seal, had
been abolished by Christ's coming, and so not circumcision only in the
symboll, and circumstance of it, but in the genericall nature of it as an
initiatory seal and sense of the righteousness of faith, interest in the
covenant, etc. and so baptism too, had never been instituted: because it had
been then to revive abolished ceremonies, etc. this general Law was never
repealed or abolished. Say then that particular way of initiation first pitched
upon on this ground work: namely cutting away of the foreskin of the flesh,
and that of males of eight days old, etc. were ceremonial, yet this general
covenant Law, must not run parallel with it too. I conclude then that
particular way also of initiation unto covenant, and Church fellowship by
Baptism of confederate parents and their seed as it is a covenant duty, of
which more anon, so it depends upon external covenant interest; nor let any
here interrupt the proceeding hereof with the old cavil touching covenant
females; it has been said their natural incapacity of that former way of
initiation, exempted them then, and yet not now. Nor yet does that any way
invalidate the conclusion propounded, no more does the objecting of Job. It Is
likely he had a family Church which was not to abide, and was a peculiarity of
those times, and no ordinary visible political Church in reference whereunto
we speak: So to what some object about any believers in Rome or India, etc.
we say, such pearls are not ordinarily looked for in such dunghils, nor would
any seek such living ones amongst those dead persons, they are not a formed
matter of a political visible Church, but they are as materia informis. They
are quoad homines actually without, and not within any political visible
Church. The covenant of grace nakedly considered gives a person which is
actually in it, a remote right to the initiatory seal, but it does not give an
immediate right thereto, for so the covenant of grace as invested with Church
covenant only gives this proximate right to that seal. God being the God of
order, will have that his Church seal to be attained in a way of order; as of
old strangers might not be circumcised, but with some submission to that
Church order explicitly or implicitly, and so now; the orderly and ordinary
dispensation of the seal is committed to the visible Church, Matthew. 28. 19,
20. so that what ever right any have to the seal, which are not of any
particular visible Church, yet they must come by the use of their right in a
way of order.

Object. Yea but the Catechumens were in covenant and visible Church estate,
yet were not presently baptized.

Answ. If they were in covenant and Church estate, they had then and thereby
right so far forth to the seal: but there might be some other actual
causes why such adult new comers on from Paganism, might be suspended a
while, the use and actual benefit of their right; yet that hinders not but
that in covenant Infants, in whom there are no such actual impediments, that
they should be suspended, much less wholly denied, as by Anabaptists they are,
either any right, or use of their right to Baptism.

SECT. VII.
6. ANd because in this particular, some stresse of the maine case is put, 1. I
shall endeavor yet further to confirm it, that covenant interest carries a
maine stroke in point of application of that seal, to persons interested
therein, and not incapable thereof in any bodily respect.

First, then it is the ground work given to the general Law, about an
initiatory covenant duty, scil. application of some enjoined initiatory seal,
and therefore must be of like force in the particular branches and ways of
such initiatory sealing, as circumcising then and baptizing.

Secondly, the covenant in such sort invested with Church covenant, now it is
the form of a political visible Church body; giving therefore, both a Church
being as I may say, as natural forms do a natural being, and withal the
privilege of a member of such a Church body, suitable to its memberly estate,
as is this of the Church initiatory seal, even to the least member thereof,
although they are not yet so perfect in all actual energy of complete members,
and so neither in all actual privileges of such complete members. I suppose
what ever others deny this way, yet our opposites do not deny, that Church
covenant explicit or implicit is the form of a visible political Church as
such; so that till that be, they are not so incorporated as to be fit for
Church dispensations, or acts of peculiar Church power over each other, more
then over others, over whom they can have no power unless they had given
explicit, or implicit consent thereto: as reason will evince.

Thirdly, even in doubtful cases, where the extent of the command is
questionable, yet interest in the covenant casts the scoales. As for instance,
in strangers which proved religious, albeit not of their family servants, and
so under the Law, Genesis 17. 12, 13. they might be circumcised, if they desired
other Church ordinances, etc. yet were they else free, unless in such a case
of their own desire that way, Exodus 12. end. Hence Cornelius a godly Gentile,
living near the Jews, yet not circumcised, as Acts 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. compared
with Chap. 11. 3. 14, 15. 18.

Yea but if the command bound them, why were they at such liberty? and if no
binding command for their circumcision, why were they circumcised? suppose
Exodus 12. gave some liberty to the Church guides that way, for such strangers
as more usually dwelt amongst them; yet such as 1 Kings 8, 41, 42, 43. which
came from far, in a mere transient way, for some temporary religious worship
at the Temple, as that proselyted Eunuch, Acts 8. 27. those were surely
circumcised, else how admitted to temple worship? since that was counted an
abomination, for any other so much as to come there, Acts 21 28. and if
circumcised at any time by any of the godly Church guides consent, what gave
them right to it? not the commandment, Genesis 17. 12, 13, 14. no nor that Exodus
12. what was that to an Eunuchs case and others which never sojourned with them
for any space? were they then unlawfully circumcised? no verily, no whisper of
that in Scripture, God allowed of that passage in Solomon's prayer, touching the
strangers temple service, 1 Kings 8. and 9. explained. It was then their
external interest in Gods gracious covenant, which gave rise to that
application of the seal, and not the commandment; contrary to what* some say,
that not the covenant but the commandment of God only, was the ground of
circumcision.

Fourthly, it appears from the nature of an initiatory seal of the covenant,
which must be as large as the covenant, and so reach all the parties
comprehended actually by virtue of covenant; according as such children are, as
before declared: especially since it is the seal of Gods people, and visible
Church as before showed, given first for the Church, in giving of pastors and
teachers only to the Church, which alone can administer the seals in ordinary
dispensations, Matthew. 28. end, and giving them withal to the Church, as from
her to be dispensed by her officers, to such as desire the same. Now Gods
people are known, either by actual personal profession and confession of
their own, as adults are; or by Gods promise, and by parents avouching God as
theirs in covenant and their childrens, Genesis 17. 9, 10. thou shall do thus and
thus, and thy seed also; to which he submits afterward, and so his also
with him, and after him, besides the maine in the initiatory seal to be
firstly and properly attended, as it is a covenant and Church seal, is
covenant and Church interest. Hence called by the name of covenant, when yet it
is but a Sacramental sign and seal of it, Genesis 17. 13. Acts 7, 8. that is
first held out and sealed as the convoy of all other desired good, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
But especially in that initiatory seal, the signatum of the covenant, is of
more considerable weight, then the external Symboll, ceremony and
circumstance: either of cutting or washing absolutely, or relatively
considered. If washing of a person in the name of the Trinity be a clearer,
and easier Symboll then that of cutting the flesh, yet not of such weight as is
the covenant sealed, both by the one and by the other, And to show that the
covenant is the maine thing considerable therein; hence it is that the covenant
is first propounded as the groundworke of the commandment it self, as of
circumcision, so of Baptism, and much more of the application of either, to
any in covenant, Genesis 17. 9, 10, 11. Therefore, scil. because I have said I
will be your God, I command you to do thus and thus, not because I have
commanded you, that I therefore promise to do this for you, or do you thus
and thus at my command, and then on, therefore I will do so and so for you. So
the Gospel prophecy and promise is prefaced, and put in the preamble to that
injunction of their Baptism, by John, Luke 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Hence the
Gospel, and so the covenant of grace, h^ld out as grounding Baptism, Acts 2.
38, 39. And childrens covenant right, was held out as one branch of that
Gospel, as we proved; and from the same principle, that they were also to be
sealed by Baptism; yea albeit the Apostles urged repentance, yet the seal is
propounded as to the promise; Peter said, Be baptized, for the promise is to
you; and this was no mere moral motive but a Scripturall groundworke
enforcing it, as it was a Scripture groundwork virtually injoyning and
requiring them to repent; for the promise is to you, so Act. 10. Peter says
there is no let to their baptism; and thereof he makes the visibilitie of
that covenant grace, although common to reprobates also in those first times,
his groundworke; gathering thereby, that they were not now as formerly
profane, unclean and outlaries from the covenant, as Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. but
clean, and nigh as they themselves were. Washing of regeneration is not
grounded on any thing in us or without us, so much as on Gods grace, and so
covenant favor, Tit. 3. 5. Hence also by Baptism persons are not sealed into
any thing in them so much as into the name of the Father, Son and Spirit,
even into the covenant name of grace, whereby he is known, and into covenant
fellowship with the blessed Trinity, to which every baptized person, prove he
elect or reprobate, yet is thus externally sealed. That fellowship with Christ
as head of the visible Church by the Spirit in the judgment of verity, or
charity such; it is all but covenant grace and blessing. Of old the consequent
cause of the seal was grace in them and theirs; but the antecedent cause was
Gods covenant grace to them and on them, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. and Deuteronomy. 30. 6. and
so now, that part of Abraham's covenant was not then appliable to Infants, scil.
Walk before me, etc. but yet that was then appliable; I will be their God, I
will circumcise their hearts, and that sufficed them, as Deuteronomy. 30. the Analogy
holds now; in a word the seal, is a seal not of nor to the commandment, but
covenant; this therefore is the maine and principal in the application of it.

It is the covenant which has the maine isntrumental force, in the fruit of
the initiatory seal, and the application of it, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. and why
shall not the external interest in the covenant, have chief influence into
the external interest, as well of the application of the initiatory seal? by
external interest in the covenant, persons so interested come to have
external interest at least, to the final causes of Baptism, as covenant
mercy and blessing, the Spirit, Christ's resurrection, etc. Tit. 3. 8. 1 Cor.
12. 12, 13. 1 Pet. 3. 21. and therefore as well so far inrighted in the
initiatory seal of it, whether they are adult or Infants.

CHAP. VIII.
7. THat the covenant privileges of grace are even to be expounded in the
favor of the principal, or less principal counter-parties unless any
exception be made of persons or privileges by him, which was the covenant
maker. It Is so in all other royal patents, and grants of princely grace, and
bounty, and so here in this, which is of that nature: unless any will say it
was no privilege of divine grace to have so peculiar and distinguishing
covenant, to be made with first reference unto that people of Abraham, Isaac
and Jacobs race; and that it was no privilege to have the same visibly
confirmed upon them, and theirs after them; the contrary whereof has been
granted by some which oppose us and has been before cleared: What though they
many of them made no good use thereof, yet the privilege was peculiar, and
precious; Hence Exodus 19. 16. Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7, 8. Amos 3. 2. hence such peculiar
judgments brought on them, and theirs for gross contempts and rejectings
thereof, Dan. 9. 12, 13. Romans 11. 20. Matthew. 21. 43, 44. and 23. 37, 38, 39.
Acts 13. 40, 41, 42. 45, 46, 47. 1 These. 2. 15, 16. fulfilling that prophecy,
Zach. 11. from 6. verse to the end. Hence that of such peculiar use, fruit and
efficacy in many others of them, Romans 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. and 2. 25. and 9, 4, 5, 6.
Royal grants, patents, crowns, immunities and heritages may be basely used,
and forfeited and lost, yet are they peculiar privileges; so here, but of this
before. As touching exceptions, we see if God will except Ishmael and his
race, for being such a Church seed, as with whom the covenant privilege shall
abide, he is so excepted: and it was accounted a sore punishment to him and
his, as if the contrary were a choice privilege, Genesis 21. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
with Gal. 4. 22, 23, 24, etc. by allusion; before that he was ecclesiastically
discovered, the covenant is sealed upon him personally, but before ever he
have children, he is discovenanted, and dischurched for his wickedness, by
Gods hand; etc. Genesis 21. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, etc. and that was his punishment
that he is a discovenanted, and externally dischurched and open excommunicate
person when he came to have children, and so they have no benefit. Caines
external discovenanting, and dischurching in a parentall as well as personal
way, was his sore punishment, Genesis 4. 12, 13, 14. with 6. 1, 2. his posterity
have the common name of children of men, and not as those of Seth, children of
God; such exceptions did God use some way or other, to express where he
intended not this covenant privilege; Verily so long as Gods gracious covenant
made with Church reference, to inchurched confederate parents, and their
generations to Abraham and his spiritual seed in their generations for an
everlasting covenant, his mind of grace touching an external initiatory
sealing, establishing and ratifying the same to them, abides: nor may any
change, or repeal the same, or infringe, or curtaile the latitude of it,
unless himself do it, as it is in all other royal grants, and laws
standing in force, until repealed by them, by whom granted and made; hence
that sign is called by the name of the covenant, as virtually in it, and
annexed ordinarily to it; extraordinary times as those before, infringe not the
ordinary course, as before showed; hence even that sealing said to be for an
everlasting covenant; partly in that it was a seal of that covenant so
enduring, and partly because presidentially and in the genericall nature of it,
to abide, the Church and covenant people of God combined, being never after to
want an external initiatory seal of the covenant. Hence also among other
causes God instituteth baptism, first for the Jewish Church, and so continued
the use of it to, and amongst Gentile Churches; there was no interstitium, nor
was it ever accounted a branch of the exhibition of New testament grace and a
privilege of covenant inchurched parents, to have their children want, and be
deprived of any external covenant, and Church interest; but rather that
initiatory sealing of inchurched parents, little ones have ever been accounted
by all true visible Churches to be an external way of exhibition of the grace
of God and Christ. Surely, there being so many passages mentioned formerly
touching this part of Gods mind of grace once, if they were intended to be
invalid in any such way now, and yet God never expressed his mind for repeal
of such substantial branches of his mind of Grace, toward his people and
Churches; there are so far stumbling blocks laid before them to occasion
mistakes: For who will not take the same for granted, which considers the same
advisedly, as indeed the Churches of old have done before? And when was it a
fitter time to make exceptions of Infants, then when the inchurching of the
Gentiles is mentioned, Matthew. 28. 19? Why should even then the old phrase of
nations be used, if no intent at least of the specificall parts of the nations
to be inchurched? what though circumcision be left out, yet the species of the
persons circumcised are plainly included? If all nations be to be blessed in
Christ, that sort of persons in the nations, scil. little ones, as well as that
of adult persons are included: how else come any of either sort to be blessed
in Christ, or saved by him? so in this case, Matthew. 28. 19.

SECT. IX.
8. THat the childrens federall interest and right; it is firstly the
confederating parents privilege. Hence, given as an encouragement to Abraham
to walk in faith and truth with God, Genesis 17. 1. In that God also would be a
God to his seed, verse. 7. and the like was spoken in way of encouragement also,
unto those Israelites and proselytes, Deuteronomy. 30. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. And
the like course is taken by the Apostles after Christ's ascension, Act. 2. 38,
39. Hence, the covenant blessing of Jacob, pronounced in a prophetical, as
well as parentall way upon the sons of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasseh, and
their children after them, scil. that the name of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob as
covenant and Church fathers, must be called on them, albeit they had other
personal names, as of Ephraim, etc. Now this is yet called Jacobs blessing of
Joseph their father, Genesis 48. 15. he blessed Joseph, scil. in his childrens
covenant blessing, verse. 16.

SECT. X.
9. THat visibly believing and covenanting parents, they are enjoined the use
of the initiatory covenant and Church seal, in reference to their childrens
initiatory sealing together with them, according as they are outwardly capable
thereof. As it is their privilege to have it so, so is it their charge and
duty to take wise, faithful and seasonable care that it be so done. Abraham
alone is not to be circumcised, but his seed also, which are naturally capable
thereof, are to be so initiated and sealed unto covenant and Church fellowship.
It was only Abraham to whom God then appeared, and declared his covenant and
mind of grace touching his and his seeds sealing, yet Abraham is not spoken to
in the one or other respect, as to a mere particular man, but as to a common
and representative person also, embracing and owning a gracious covenant, and
the general condition at least of it: As on his own particular behalf, so on
the behalf both of the choice seed of his loins in their generations,
together with the rest of his Church seed by Isaac in their generations: as
also with general reference, in the essentialls of both covenant and condition
of it, unto his spiritual seed in their generations, after Christ's ascension,
which were to be of the Gentiles, and of the Jews: both before their
rejection, and upon their re-ingraffing into visible Church estate. Hence in
mentioning that particular way of initiation by circumcision, first pitched
upon, plural phrases are used, when Abraham only is in presence. The covenant
which ye shall keep, And each manchild amongst you, And my covenant shall be
in your flesh, And it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you,
verse. 10, 11, 12, 13. Abraham must see all this performed, and he did so, so
far as it could be done at present, verse. 23. Abraham enters into this holy
bond, and thereby the obligation became of force upon his children which were
not then present. Hence, the parents act of neglect, is temporally at least
corrected in the little child, even as the parents bond was the child's
obligation, Genesis 7. 14. Hence too, that God might further evince it to be
mainly the parents duty, even godly Moses the parent is endangered for the
neglect of the sealing of his child, Exodus 4. 2. 4, 5, 6. where by the way, let
it be noted, that albeit upon some ceremonial grounds, the mind of God being
that way made known, their marriages of old with heathens became so far
unlawful, that even their children also were discarded, yet was it not morally
and of it self of that nature, even amongst the members of that Church, that
the children of such Church members, begotten upon heathen wives, not of the
Church, were unclean, and not to be sealed by that initiatory Church seal.
For God himself is angry with Moses here, because his son by that Egyptian
wife was not circumcised. And long after it was counted offensive if the son
of a Jewish wife, even by a Grecian husband, were not that way initiated, Acts
16. 1, 2, 3, which is the very controverted case, occasionally mentioned, 1
Cor. 7. 14. But to return to the proposition before laid down.

From the same ground mentioned it was, that when Peter moved his hearers to
be baptized, he groundeth that motion, not barely upon their own interest in
the promise, but withal upon their childrens joint interest with them, Acts 2.
38, 39. Be baptized, for the promise is to you, and to your children: why
puts he that groundworke so largely, but to show that the visible
initiatory seal of the promise must be as large as the promise? Their
childrens baptism is virtually called upon too, as well as their own. The
parents are to take care of their baptism as well as their own: the children
being capable of external baptism, that new way of initiation into covenant
fellowship, as well as themselves. As they were also to carry home, as it were,
the same charge upon the same ground touching repentance; urging that upon
their children, as they should be capable of it, from the same covenant
ground, as themselves had been urged thereto. Noah alone must not be baptized
in that extraordinary and typical baptism, but his children with him must in
like sort be baptized, Genesis 7. 1. with 1 Pet. 1. 3. 21. God will have all
these fathers, some whereof at that time mentioned were babes, yet in respect
to after ages were fathers, to be baptized in that extraordinary baptism in
the sea, and in the cloud, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. Exodus 12. 44. If a stranger-servant
be circumcised himself, he may eat the passover: for he was not so bound
as the Jews, by command to either circumcision or the passover; but he is to
circumcise his males, with that reason annexed: For no uncircumcised person
shall eat thereof. What is the meaning hereof? Is it thus? else none of those
his males or male children; for they are most properly his, and in the case of
stranger, which was an household servant, reason will tell us, such a one had no
servants of their own, none of these being uncircumcised, should eat the
passover? No verily. For 1. That was not the case mentioned, of such a
strangers desiring that his males should eat of the Passover, but that
himself might do it, if he, not if they, will eat of the Passover: and the
Text is clear otherwise; let his males be circumcised, and then let him, not
let them come near and eat the Passover. 2. The rule touching one that
eats the Passover is there laid down; Let him eat the Passover, to the
Lord, scil. with holy actual obedience to the Lords mind, and aims at his
ends, etc. which Infants are not capable of performing: which by the way, note
against such as tell us, the Jewish Infants did eat the Passover, when as the
law herein is expressly said to be the same to Israelites as to strangers, and
what that Law was we have now seen, verse 48, 49. compared. But who then is
the uncircumcised person, which may not in this case eat the passover, if not
the male children? Verily, the stranger parent mentioned, which albeit he be
circumcised himself, as is supposed in verse 44. yet if it be the case of one
circumcised himself, which has male children to be circumcised; albeit as
personally circumcised, he might eat, verse. 43, 44 yet in this case of
desiring the Passover, but refusing or slighting the mention of circumcising
his males, he is as if himself were uncircumcised in that resp^ct; his
contempt and disregard of Gods covenant mercy to be sealed upon his children,
makes his circumcision to be uncircumcision: and the covenant of grace, by
which himself especially came to have any right to the initiatory seal: That
is not wholly sealed if he neglect the sealing of his children, jointly
interested in an external way together with him. In which respects he is as
one uncircumcised; he may not eat the passover. Hence, when the Lord was to
express his covenant, in reference to the initiatory sealing of it, as on
Abraham, so on his Church seed in their generations, he then and never before,
that I find, delivered the Evangelicall covenant in that form, I will be a God
to thee, and to thy seed after thee in their generations, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. And Abraham now has that propounded, as a groundwork of initiatory
sealing, thou shall therefore keep my covenant, thou and thy seed after thee.
And then and not before, is his name changed to Abraham, and he has then and
not till then, the name of father of many nations. As if herein God made him as
a common person, as before I said, as well in reference to us inchurched
Gentiles, as to the inchurched Jews, and proselytes: in point of covenant
interest, and engagement from covenant interest, unto the receiving of Gods
initiatory seal by parents and children. And the reason is consequentiall: If
parents and children be considered, as one covenant party on the one side,
admitted to covenant grace externally at least, with God the principal
covenanter, or covenant maker on the other part: Then, if the parents only be
signed with the initiatory covenant seal, and the children which are capable
of that seal are neglected, as opportunity is offered, to be likewise
sealed; the whole covenant of grace is not sealed unto them so far, not
completely, as I may say sealed on themselves. The circumcision of Abraham, his
a lone, was not that covenant or the sign of it, but with respect to the
circumcision of his seed also. The circumcision of his seed also, was that
covenant of God, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. In Abraham's initiatony sealing unto
the covenant, that covenant, I will be a God to thy seed, as well as to thee,
was sealed, and so his childrens right with his own, is thereby sealed in
part, but not completely, and fully without their sealing also, as capable of
it. So in the childrens being circumcised, not only their own right in that,
I will be a God to thy seed, was externally sealed, but Abraham's covenant
right in that, I will be a God to thee, was also sealed. So sweetly were they
both knit up in one common girdle, and that marked with one and the same mark
of God, Jer. 13. 11. As the covenant was one, and not two covenants, sealed on
both, Genesis 17. 11. So their sealing was one collective and joint condition of
the covenant, v. 8. And what I say of Abraham and that his seed, the same was
true in Abraham's spiritual seed in their generations, those proselyted household
servants, for such proselytes they were, as has been showed, with their
children; and such families de jure at least, the rest were to be afterward
according to that p^tterne family of Abraham's.

Some in way of reply to the answer given by some famous Ministers of Christ,
to the objection about women being not circumcised, yield, that if a virtuall
sealing or baptizing were all that they would prove: We may grant that say
they, we may say Infants are virtually baptized in their parents, yet it may
be unlawful to baptize them actually notwithstanding. But why virtually, and
not as well actually? since their interest in the covenant, and general
condition of receiving such an initiatory seal as God shall appoint, and they
be capable of upon that covenant ground, does jointly concern both as has
been proved: yea do not such in their exposition, which they rightly give of
having a thing virtually, gr^t as much, that if they have baptism virtually in
their parents, they have a right as well to receive baptism actually
themselves? For he is said, says one learned antagonist, virtually to have a
thing by another, as by a proxey, or Attorney, that might receive it by
himself. Yet quoad effectum juris, another receiving is as if he had
received it. It Is granted, that an Infant may be sealed or baptized virtually
in his parent, that is, as is expounded, he has the thing [Baptisme] by
another as by a proxey, scil. by, or in his parent, which might receive the
same thing, scil. Baptism, by himself. Surely, all will grant, that any man's
Attorney receiving in his absence such a conveyance or such a sum of money,
or the like, the man himself does indeed virtually receive this by his
Attorney, but yet if he himself were personally present, he might very
regularly and lawfully receive the said conveyance, or sum, actually
himself, so in the case mentioned.

SECT. XI.
10. THe Churches or Church officers in admission of believers children to the
initiatory seal of Baptism, one way of solemn coming into the fellowship
and family of the Trinity, Matthew. 28. 19. they are not to expect a convincing
ground, that this or that child to be baptized is internally and savingly
interested in the covenant; but it suffices, that that sort or species of
Infants, scil. such like Infants are in deed and in truth of Christ's kingdom.
For when Christ would give a reason, why those Infants offered to him to bless
them should come to him, he gives this, for of such or such like, even in
respect of saving interest also, is the kingdom of God, Luke 18. so, when the
Lord prefaceth that covenant ground unto the Application of circumcision to
Infants, he says not, he will be a God to this or that child of Abraham's
loins, in the internal and saving interest and efficacy thereof, but to some
of that sort, included in that indefinite promise, I will be a God to thy
seed, it is sufficient, that all such have assuredly an external right in that
covenant, and so to this seal of the fellowship of it; wherefore we may not
exclude any of them, lest any of the children of the Kingdom, which be the
peculiar heirs, thereby be indammaged, or endangered. Better 99. who happily
have not so peculiar a title thereto, be folded up in the Church, then that
one of such Lambs* be left out in the wide Wilderness; the proportion of
that case, Matthew 18. holds in this.

CHAP. II. Sect. I. The Explication of Romans 11. 16, 17, etc.
LEt us now go on to some proofs of that general truth propounded, removing
objections intervening, and then come to the particular of baptism. Let us
then a little more fully clear that place, Romans 11. 16, 17. so far as it
concerns the matter in hand. Our opposites in this point, would have the
place only to be applyable to the personal estate of this or that believer,
Jew or Gentile, and of the personal way of their inserting by true faith. But
we affirm, that as the Chapter in other parts of it has reference to the
Jews or Gentiles in the fruition or deprivation of covenant privileges; it is
in a collective, and not merely a distributive way, so are those Verses
mentioned taken in the like collective reference. And first, as the discourse
has relation to the Jews, either in their admission or exclusion from Church
privilege; it is in a collective, not bare personal respect, as appears by
these reasons.

1. In that those are intended, whose fall was the occasion of the Gentiles
salvation, and their casting away was the life of the world, verse 11. 15. and
on whom God showed such severitie, verse 22. now none will restrain these to
this or that particular persons casting away, but must understand it of the
people, whether parents or children.

2. In that those are intended, of whom it may be verified, that they are in
such sort, and so long cast away as is from the first coming in of the
Gentiles to their fullness, which is the space of many ages. Now none will say,
that this can be affirmed of one and the same person or persons, but must
apply it to the people, parents and children successively, hence expressed by
that collective name of Israel, verse 25.

3. In that those are intended of whom it may be verified, they are cast away,
and yet to be reconciled, verse 15. cut off, and yet to be re-ingraffed,
verse 20. 24. enemies, yet beloved, verse 28. which cannot be verified of this
or that person, but must be taken of that people.

4. In that they are intended, whose receiving in, scil. to actual fruition of
covenant and Church privileges from which they are now de facto excluded, v.
24. will be to the inchurched world as life from the dead, verse. 15. which must
be taken collectively of that people, not distributively of such a person, or
persons amongst them.

5. It is intended of those whom God from the first chose unto himself, which
yet all the space from the coming in of the Gentiles, till their fullness,
abode enemies, verse. 25. 28. compared. Now none will restrain this to such or
such elected persons to whom blindness could not happen so long, yet
afterward be removed, as the phrase, until, shows: but must be applied to
Gods act of election of that people, as some judiciously observe upon the
place; many thousand persons of this people, lived and died, and ^ill do live
and die in this while: The space being yet not accomplished in their sins.
Then it seems, some that are subjects of election may live and die in their
sins. Yea verily, this absurdity must follow, if you take election, verse.
28. strictly in reference to such and such persons among them, and not largely
in reference to that people. There is a twofold act of divine election, the one
more general, whereof the body of such or such people is the adequate subject,
by this act God subjecteth such a people from all other peoples to himself;
and yet sundry particular persons amongst such a people may perish: Thus the
people of the Jews were, collectively considered, enemies to the Gospel, yet as
touching election beloved, for their covenant fathers sake, verse. 28. of this
electing act of God, see Deuteronomy. 7. 6. The other more particular and special,
whereby God makes, as I may say, a second draught, and out of such or such
selected people culleth such or such particular persons to be saved by Christ:
Now such as are the subjects of election in this sense, can never perish, and
in this sense, the election among the Jews attained it, and the rest were
blinded, see Romans 12. 5, 6, 7. see John 10. 3. 11. 14. 27, 28, 29. Apoc. 13. 8.

6. In that it was intended of those, to whom the Gentiles are opposed, and in
whose stead they are inserted; and against whom the Gentiles must not boast,
verse. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 17, 18. But it were improper to oppose in such sort,
such a world as they are called, verse 14, 15. compared, to such or such
particular Jews.

As the Jews are thus collectively considered, so the Gentiles coming into
their Olive estate, are taken in a collective sense, therefore called the
world, verse. 15. the Gentiles, verse. 12. notions not to be restrained to the
grown sort of them, but necessarily including the species of Infants among
them. Hence also, the collective notion of Thou and Thee often used, verse. 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22. 24. And that this singular is not distributively taken of
some one or other Gentile, but of the people of the Gentiles, he therefore in
other verses speaking to the same people mentions them plurally, Gentiles,
verse. 11, 12, 13. 25. Hence, the phrase Ye, and Your, applied to them, verse.
28. 30, 31. Besides, they are still set in opposition to the Jews which fell,
verse. 11. 12. which were cast away, verse. 15. and broken off, verse. 20. 24. 28.
Now none will say, that those refuse Jews are taken distributively, but
collectively, as was proved, and much less that the Jewish parents only,
excluding their children, were understood; so then, if the opposition be
suitable, and direct, the opposite parties must be collectively taken also, and
Gentiles children received in with their parents, as opposed to Jewish children
excluded with their parents. Nay they are not only opposed, but the Gentile
body is received in instead of the Jew-body broken off, verse. 17. (...) in
ramorum defractorum locum, Beza on Romans 11. 17. and verse. 19. They were broken
off, says the collective Gentile, that I might be graffed in. The Apostle
yields this as truth; well, [(...)] as if he would say, it is true; now grown
ones among the Jews were broken off: who came in their stead? grown Gentiles.
True, but Jewish babes and little ones too, amongst other branches and sprigs,
are broken off, that Gentiles might come into covenant and Church estate in
their stead. What Gentiles? grown ones? nay room is made for them in the
breach of the grown Jews. Verily then such a like species of Gentiles unto
those rejected Jewish sprigs, scil. Gentile babes and little ones, must
necessarily be thus inserted and admitted into that covenant and Church estate
out of which the other were broken. So then, as Jews were, so Gentiles are
considered in this Chapters discourse touching communion in federall and Church
ordinances and privileges, under the notion of Olive fatness, etc. not in a
bare personal way, but in reference to people of both kinds, and persons of
all sorts, and species younger or elder, which is a strong argument that God
never intended to limit the benefit of his covenant grace to grown ones, or
parents personally, but rather extends it to them in a parentall way at least.
Hence when that commission, Matthew. 28. 19. was given, for this end, it is in
the old term and notion of nation, a large word, and subject. God delights to
enlarge his grace in these times, and his very intent in Matthew. 28. is
enlargement of Gospel mercies. The more cross are their minds to Gods thoughts
who from that very place would conclude a straightning such a Gospel mercy as
this mentioned, was and is both to parents and children, and for which they
have nothing equivalent in stead thereof. The Apostle it is confessed brings
in Romans 11. 16, 17. as an argument to prove the receiving in again of the
Jews, scil. unto actual fruition of all covenant and Church privileges,
verse. 15. For if the root be holy, so are the branches, verse. 16. and so
verse. 28, 29. To the same purpose now, if the covenant with godly ancestors be
so forcible to fetch in such Apostates after so gross and long a time of their
desperate revolts from, and contempts of covenant grace in Christ; is it not
much more of force to the receiving in of the babes of next believing parents
unto the visible fellowship of covenant grace? God forbid, that any should
obstinately gainesay it.

SECT. II.
BY root, I. S. says in that, Romans 11. 16. is meant Christ personal, and yet
the same author elsewhere would have it meant mystically considered; and
elsewhere, of union and communion with God in ordinances; and elsewhere of
Abraham in his faith; and elsewhere of believing parents in part; for he says
not only believing parents are the root, etc. not only [in part, then such
parents are the root.] But indeed this author refuteth himself, in that he
knows not where to fix. Abraham in his faith as latherly, and eying the
covenant in this latitude, as to him, and his seed of Isaac by propagation, and
to the believing Gentiles with their seed by proportion, thus he might be a
root in his faith; but if Abraham's faith be considered in a mere personal
respect, so neither Jews nor Gentiles are properly, said to be inserted into
that, but rather into his faith with its object the covenant. It is improper to
say of the Gentile that they stood in it, scil. in the root of faith, by faith,
or that the Jew was broken off from Abraham's personal faith by unbelief.
Abraham's faith was a saving faith, if this therefore had been in them all, or
they in it, they had not fallen as many Jews and Gentiles privileged by
external covenant right, did and might; or supposing the root to be meant,
not of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, but of Christ, as Mr. B. also affirms, who
is elsewhere called a root, Apoc. 22. 16. and 5. 5, etc. if they had been in
him, by any proper and invisible union, neither those of the Jews had been,
nor so many of Gentiles could have been broken off, as they were, and whole
Churches of these are, witness this Church of Rome, to which the Apostle wrote
this. But otherwise, if understood of impropper and visible union with Christ,
scil. a visible union with Christ mystical; thus indeed many such may fall
away finally, as did these. Hence that John 15. 2. now in this sense parents
and children Inchurched, whether Jews or Gentiles, by being in the holy root
of those covenant fathers, they are visibly in that holy root Christ, or Christ
mystical, as was showed. I. S. will and does confess the first fruits, of
whom yet the same holy effect is affirmed, Romans 11. 16. to be these fathers,
and why not then as well the same fathers to be the root? since the context
clears it, that the Apostle intends the same of the selfsame persons under
diverse Metaphors. Either then Christ is the first fruits, as well as root
intended, or those fathers are the first fruits, as well as the root
mentioned. Verily covenanting Abraham in reference to his seed is called a
rock, whence that Church, as a Church was hewn; for in that sense the Prophet
speaks to them, Esaias 51. 1, 2. yet is Christ the rock of the Church too in
another sense; and why is not Abraham then a covenant root to such Church
branches, as that from whence they in that sense do spring? And what I say of
Abraham, is as well to be referred to Isaac and Jacob in the same respect, as
being other veins, making up this one root, the Isntrumental means and cause
of the mercy offered and exhibited both to Jews and Gentiles, in regard that
to them all this large covenant was made over in a radical way, see Genesis 17.
2. 7. and 22. 18. compared with Genesis 26. 3, 4, 5. and 28. 13, 14. whence such
frequent mention in Scripture of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in reference to
covenant blessings, yea their names are pleaded in prayer for that end, Exodus
32. 13. Deuteronomy. 9. 27. see more 2 King. 13. 23. and Mich. 7. 20. etc. This was
not in respect of any personal holiness of theirs, or barely in respect of
their personal faith, but it was by reason of that large covenant made with
them in this reference, as the places quoted show; see further for this end,
Luke 1. 71, 72. Romans 15. 8. Deuteronomy. 4. 37. and 10. 15. with other like
Scriptures. Hence too, they are made here a radical means of the Jews
receiving in again, Romans 11. 15. grounded on this reason, verse. 16. compared
with verse. 28. Whence also, the Jews which are called holy branches, by virtue
of their holy root, verse. 16. they are termed natural branches too, scil. of
that root, and Olive tree, verse. 24. not natural branches of Christ as the
root. Our very opposites will say, that were improper to affirm; nor merely of
Abraham, but Isaac and Jacob also; nor is it proper to call one Abraham
[fathers] verse. 28. or first fruits, verse. 16. Now as to Jews, so to Gentiles,
were those covenant [fathers] and root; God says to Abraham and Jacob
distinctly that he would bless all nations, and families, as in their seed,
so in them, Genesis 12. 2, 3. In thee [ Abraham] Genesis 22. 28. in thy seed, and
Genesis 28. 14. in thee [ Jacob] and in thy seed How in them at all distinct from
the seed Christ, who is the sole author, worker, and meritorious cause of all
covenant blessing? Verily in respect of the covenant made with them, in
reference as to the nation of the Jews, and the families therein, so to
Gentile nations and the families therein, to be by virtue of that covenant
partakers, at least visibly, of the covenant blessing. Hence we Gentiles are
said to come and sit down with those fathers, Matthew. 8. 11, 12. as inserted
branches are in some sense seated and settled in and with the root. Hence
likewise, this root is said to bear the Christian Gentiles collectively taken,
and for that cause the Gentile is not to boast against the Jew branches:
branches of what? of the root mentioned: what root? Christ? That were improper
to affirm: but rather, of those fathers.

SECT. III.
THe Olive tree, some take it of the Fathers also in opposition to the other
wild Olive tree out of which the Gentiles were cut, verse. 24. scil. Their
wild ancestors, or ancestors estranged from the covenant, Ephesians. 2. 12. The
Jews indeed are cut out of these fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, as
covenanting in respect of any present actual benefit of the covenant, but yet
are not cut out of those fathers as begetting, as it is evident, they are still
Abraham's stock; which by the way observe against that distinction, by which
some use to avoid our arguments in this business; They say Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob were only a root to the body of the Jews, as natural and begetting
fathers, and not as spiritual and believing fathers, or fathers by faith
embracing the covenant made with the Jews also. Surely such men would
frustrate the ground of the Apostles discourse here, supposing so sad an
exclusion of the Jews from a former sweet and sappy Church estate, yea such as
into which the Gentiles could not come but by a preter-super, yea
contra-naturall way, verse. 24. if they were in those fathers as begetting
fathers only, so are they still their natural children, and then not cut off
from them at all, contrary to this express Scripture. Others would have the
Olive tree, to be meant of the visible Church distinguished from the root,
verse. 17. see Jer. 11. 16. spoken of the Jews in their Church, as well as
civil relation: into which as into their own Olive, by that general covenant
right, Romans 11. 16. 24. they shall be re-ingraffed, in so far as they are
federally holy, verse. 16. scil. intentionally, in so far is a Church right
their own; with which latter respect of the Olive I fully close; but of this
more afterward.

By [ingraffing into the Olive] seems to be meant, an actual interesting,
and instating into the visible Church, or into those covenant fathers in
reference to the Church, whence also arises the actual fruition thereof. By
Olive fatness mentioned, verse. 17. must needs be meant such covenant or
Church blessings, privileges, and ordinances, etc. whereof all sorts of Church
members, even such as may be fatally cut off, may partake of as well as
others: which are not the graces of the Spirit, for they flow not immediately
from the Olive the Church, nor from any of the best of the sons of men, but
rather they are the seals and other Church ordinances visibly dispensed to
persons according as they are capable of them. These are the isntrumental
causes of the bright shining, at least in visible profession of Christ, unto
the whole Candlestick, and all the greater or lesser branches and parts of it,
Zach. 4. 2, 3. 11, 12, 14.

SECT. IIII.
TO draw to a Conclusion. 1. Then look how the Jew-branches were set into
their Olive and root mentioned, so are the Gentiles which come in their stead,
Romans 11. 17. 19. But they with all their buds and sprigs, scil. children, as
Esaias 44. 3. and 18. 5. and 61. 9. and Psalm. 128. 3. they are called, were set
thereinto, therefore in like sort are the Gentiles with their children
inserted. Amongst them were three sorts thus inserted. 1. Grown ones truly
believing, as were godly proselyted Gentiles. 2. Grown ones, which did not
prove truly believing, as many of the proselytes. 3. The children of Jews, and
of both those sorts of proselytes, some whereof afterward made holy
improvement thereof, others abused and rejected their covenant privilege: and
so is it with us now.

2. Look how they were by unbeleefe broken off, so are the Gentiles taken in
by faith; but they both parents and children were broken off through the
unbeleeving rejection of the covenant expressed by the wicked parents only,
therefore the Gentiles are inserted with their children, albeit the parents
only express a believing embrace of the covenant. Gentiles children are not
indeed expressed by name in this inserting: but yet the Gentile is collectively
spoken of as was proved, and so must needs include at least the children of
such inserted Gentiles; as in the cutting off of the Jews, and casting away of
them, their children are not mentioned, except comprehensively, here, or in
Matthew. 8. 11. and 21. 42. yet all grant that they were intended, and so in this
case.

3. Look how the Gentile in case of apostasy is cut off from his Church
estate, and union and communion in the Olive root and fatness, and look as
he is not spared in case of his unbeleefe, so was the Gentile graffed in,
verse. 20. 21, 22. But in that case of unbeleefe and apostasy, the Gentile,
both parent and child is cut off from federall grace and Church privilege;
witness the case of those which at first fell off, when first the Asian and
other Churches, as of Rome, etc. were unchurched: Therefore so was the Gentile
parent and child graffed in.

4. Look how the better part of the Jews, which did not thus actually and
obstinately reject the covenant and Gospel of grace, and Christ the foundation
thereof, did then, when the Apostle wrote this, Romans 11. 17. remain still in
their root: in such sort, are the Gentiles with them, partakers thereof: But
those Jews parents and children abode in that covenant estate: Therefore
Gentile parents and children so partake with them. Of those Jew parents none
will make question, and of their children, is no ground to doubt: which being
once in covenant in their ancestors, yea and parents right also, and not being
then of years to reject Christ, how come they at present to be cut out?
surely not for their parents unbeleefe, for they receive Christ, not for others
rejecting Christ, for what is that to them? not for their own actual rejecting
of Christ, for they were not then of years to do so.

5. Look how the Jew shall again be graffed in, in such sort were the
Gentiles at first graffed in, but they parents and children with them shall be
graffed in; therefore so were the Gentile parents and children graffed in or
inchurched. The major is evident by verse. 17. 19. 23, 24, 25, 26. compared: The
minor is as evident by the same verses compared. For as they were broken off by
unbeleefe, so are they re-inserted by faith: now the former was by the parents
unbeleefe, that young and old were cast off, as was proved; therefore by faith
in the parents, young and old are reinserted, else, as was said, parents and
children lost this which was a special and comfortable blessing by parentall
unbeleefe, which they never recover through the like parentall faith. Besides,
it has been proved, that the Apostles discourse, both of the Jews casting
off, and of their receiving in, is still of them in a collective sense, and not
barely personal, and so their children cannot be excluded, but must be
included. Little ones are not indeed named in their re-ingraffing, no more then
in their cutting off, yet as in the one, they are necessarily understood, so in
the other. Besides we have before proved that the Jews children are
interested in these promises of grace, yet to be fulfilled, Esaias 61. 9. and
65. 20. and 23. Their offspring are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, with
them, or as well as themselves: So Ezekiel. 37. 20. to the end, and Jer. 13. 19,
20. Their children shall be as aforetime: how? in a common wealth, and civil
way merely? nay rather in a Church way, as aforetime: now aforetime, who dare
deny, but their children were eyed as in covenant, Acts 2. 38, 39. And as parts
and members of the Church, Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. 36. and therefore were they sealed
with that seal of the covenant, Genesis 17. Hence some godly learned Divines in
their Commentaries upon the Canticles, expounding that Cant. 6. 11. 13. and
Chap. 7. and 8. of the Jewish Church yet to come; they expound that Cant. 7. 2.
mentioned of the Churches navell, that wants not liquor, to be understood of
Baptism, as that heap of Wheat, to be meant of the Lords Supper to be
administered amongst them. Now ^s the navell is of special need and use, to
such as cannot receive nourishment, as grown ones do, at the mouth, to convey
secretly corporal furtherance to the Babes bodily life and welfare; so this
Church navell, not wanting such an inlivening supply, it will be amongst them
accounted and improved as of need and use to be a divine means, as well as
seal, of conveying secretly gracious influences tending to the Churches Babes
spiritual welfare.

6. Look of what Olive fatness in the substantialls thereof, and in what sort
those branches did partake of the same, and in the same sort do the branches
taken out of the wild Olive partake. But those branches did partake of the
fruit causing fatness of Olive, and Church ordinances and privileges, not as
shut up, or residing in the greater boughs, parents, but through them and by
them passing to their lesser sprigs or children springing from them. Therefore
of such fatness do and must Gentiles partake. And this way was their fall an
enriching of the Gentile in-churched world, Romans 11. 12. scil. as this was to
be conveyed, as a covenant heritage, from believing parents to children. Else
were it poor and sad with believers. As with other parents in other heritages,
if what they have in such sort, they cannot leave with, or instrumentally
convey unto their children; as godly Joseph is a fruitful bough in reference
to his flourishing branches, not in a mere civil and natural, but in a
covenant and Church respect, Genesis 49. 22, 23. so is it with other such parents
as he. It Is contrary to natures Law, that any communicable sap should be
engrossed to, or shut up within the greater boughs, and not to be withal
conveyed instrumentally to those sprigs that are upon them; so is it here, in
respect of this communicable sap of federall and Church right in Church Olive
boughs; It is contrary to the Law of the tenure of the covenant of grace made
to parents with respect to their children in and with them, that this Church
fatness should not be conveyed to them. So far as the greater boughs are
ingraffed into this visible Olive Church estate, their sprigs also which are on
and in them, are set in with them, by the same Church act of ingraffing. If
Olive roots as such, should not convey instrumentally their sap and fatness to
the Olive boughs, as such, and those boughs in like sort to their sprigs,
Olive trees would fail in an ordinary way: so in an ordinary way must Churches
fail: if this ecclesiastical conveyance instrumentally of Church and covenant
sap from parent to child be denied.

SECT. V.
Object. 1. THe Jews being federally holy, as Romans 11. 16. shows, and yet
not having right to Church privileges, baptism, etc. as is evident in these
refuse Jews at this day; it shakes your foundation, that persons because
federally holy must have a right to Church privileges.

Answ. Federall holiness is ascribed to persons two ways, either as they are
collectively or distributively taken. Collectively, and so it is here ascribed
to the body of the Jews, as one whole nation, which if considered
distributively of all the parts, and of each person in that nation, so it is
not intended of them. That we may a little illustrate this, from what is here
said in this Chapter, they be said to be broken off, scil. from the rest,
verse. 20. cast away, and so unclean, profane, and not holy, verse. 15. yet are
they said to be holy by virtue of the root, in and of which they be branches:
so are they said to be cast away, and yet such as shall be received in, verse.
15. they are said to be enemies concerning the Gospel, and yet beloved of
God, verse. 28. What? are the self same persons said to be holy, and not holy?
rejected, yet to be received? enemies, and yet beloved? no verily: But when
they are said to be holy, and beloved of God, etc. it is true of the whole
body of the Jews collectively taken, in respect of the choycer part which is
federally holy, properly so called, and beloved of God, by virtue of the
covenant made with their fathers; as on the other side, when it is said of the
whole body, that they are cut off, cast away, and that they are enemies, it is
meant of the whole collectively in respect of the refuse part, for not all
wholly were cut off in the Apostles time, but some of the branches were broken
off, verse. 17. And blindness did happen to collective Israel, but not wholly,
but in part, verse. 25. In both which, that which is proper to the parts, is
applied to the whole of which they are parts, by a synecdoche. To come then to
argument, it is true, that the Jews, collectively taken for the whole nation,
containing the choicer part intended, they are federally holy, scil. in respect
of that choice part, and yet it follows not that the Jews distributively
taken, for those Jews living at this day, supposed to be a refuse part of
that whole, should be properly said to be federally holy, and so neither to
have right to Church privileges; so that the instance crosses not us, who
speak of persons federally holy, as well distributively, and not merely
collectively considered. There is therefore a fallacy, a dicto secundum quid,
ad dictum simpliciter.

Rep. Suppose we take this of the whole in respect of the choycer part of the
Jewish nation, this choice part then, at least, is federally holy, yet they
have not right to Church privileges, as being not yet ingraffed into the
olive, nor possibly, in actual being in the world.

Therefore persons may be federally holy, which yet have not right to Church
privileges.

Answ. We again distinguish, persons may be said to be federally holy,
either seminally, and preparatively, or actually: in the former sense, persons
not yet existing, may be said to be in covenant with God, or such as God
makes a covenant with, and consequently to be federally holy, Deuteronomy. 29. 14,
15. neither with you only do I make this covenant, but with him that stands
here with us before the Lord our God, and also with him that is not with us,
this day. Mark it, God says not, I [will] make this covenant in the future,
but in the present tense, I [doe] make this covenant with him that is not here
this day, that is, with persons unborne; these being expressly taken into
covenant with God, and their covenant right laid up and included therein, in
such sort, as that which in its season should actually be exerted, these
persons albeit unborne, and not actually existing, yet in this seminall and
preparatory respect of the covenant, they have thus far a covenant right, and
so far also a Church right together with it: so here in these unborne Jews
as they are federally holy in that seminall respect. Hence, the Olive or Church
here, is called their own Olive, Romans 11. 24. How is the Church now their
own, but in respect of this seminall Church right?

Federall holiness actually taken is that which is actually subjected and
exerted in a person existing, whether parent or child in which sense God made
his covenant with those Jews, and with their children that were before him
that day. Deuteronomy. 29. 14, 15. And in this sense, the Apostle speaking of the
federall holiness, especially of children actually borne of covenant
in-churched parents, says they are holy, scil. actually, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Now
therefore to apply the Argument, it is defective in the consequence of it,
thus, Persons not in being which are federally holy, only seminally and
intentionally, they have not actual Church right, nor can actually be
baptized; therefore persons existing and living which are federally holy,
actually, they may not be baptized; this follows not: one may as well reason
thus. Those with whom God made a covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. 14, 15. who were not
borne, not there that day, had not actual right to circumcision, could not be
uncircumcised: Therefore those children which were there that day with whom
also God made his covenant, Ibid. they had not actual right to circumcision,
might not, could not be circumcised: this every rational man will say is a
non sequitur.

Object. 2. This Romans 11. 16. is spoken of the natural branches, which have an
hereditary covenant right, as natural branches of that root, Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob. And therefore not pertinent to the Gentiles, and their children
which are not branches of that root.

Answ. Albeit the believing Gentiles, and their children are not of that root
by nature and propagation, yet they are in that root by grace and by
proportion. The Jew-branches were broken off that the Christian collective
Gentile might by grace be graffed in, scil. in their stead, Romans 11. 19. Look
then what covenant and Church right the Jewish parents had for their children
in an hereditary way, the same has the inchurched Gentile for his children
through grace.

Repl. This were to make way for all children of Christian Gentile nations to
have right to Church privileges.

Answ. It suffices that thus far it holds, that as all and only
Church Members children were ecclesiastically privileged among the Jews, so
all and only Church Members children are ecclesiastically privileged among
the Gentiles.

Object. 3. The Gentiles are said to be ingraffed, not by a natural way, as
being of such parents, but by a way contrary to nature, and therefore what is
this to the federall estate of Gentile Infants, as coming of believing
parents? and so in a way of nature?

Answ. It is most true, if applied to the first parties amongst any Gentile
people, which in the Apostles time or since, enter into Church estate, living
formerly in a Pagan estate, and not having any of their ancestors other then
Pagans, or such as were cut out of the wild Olive tree, scil. Ancestors pagan
or outlawry from all covenant and Church estate. Romans 11. 24. Ephesians. 2. 12. But
if it be applied to other, which come of such persons, so transplanted from
that wild Olive, to this good Olive estate, as branches or sprigs of such
Olive boughs, or gracious ancestors, then is it not fully verified, that these
are only in a way contrary to nature, partakers of the fatness of the Olive.
As they are considered together with their gracious ancestors, as all of them
of other pagan ancestors, so they are all ingraffed in a way contrary to
nature, even merely by divine Grace, but as they and their gracious fathers
are considered apart, their fathers as nextly descended of pagan ancestors,
these their children as nextly springing from fathers visibly believing, and
inchurched, so their covenant and Church estate, comes to them principally by a
way of divine grace, and isntrumental by birth descent from inchurched
ancestors: and in this latter respect therefore such children may be said, to
be inserted by a way of nature: for look as the Israelites of old, before
their cutting off were, and others of them hereafter will be, by virtue of
their holy root or covenant fathers, holy branches as natural branches: scil.
branches springing naturally from them, or borne of them, Romans 11. 16. 24.
compared: or as those Israelites, were not sinners, or outlawries from covenant
or Church, as were those of the Pagan Gentiles, but Jews, or ecclesiastically
privileged, even by nature, or natural descent of such ancestors inchurched,
Gal. 2. 15. so must the proportion hold in the children of Gentile in-churched
parents. Though even this also is of grace, that they should naturally descend
from such parents, Genesis 49. 26.

Object. 4. The Gentiles come into and abide in Church Estate by faith, Romans
11. 20. But children have not faith. Therefore this Scripture concerns not
them.

Answ. 1. The Gentiles that so stand by faith, are collectively taken as
including also their children with them so abiding, until that these their
children come to reject, as did the children of those godly Jewish ancestors,
their covenant right: And observe it by the way, how tender God was of covenant
children: They were never excluded, until they came, after many generations,
so wholly to degenerate, as Romans 11. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 25, 28. shows,
and then, but not till then, they are rejected, so is it still. God is tender
of unchurching and discovenanting any that come of godly ancestors, till they
grossly and obstinately reject their own mercy. But if they grow up to that
obstinacy, then they cut off the gracious covenant, entailed as from themselves
personally, so to their children parentally, as did those of old, Romans 11. 20.
and as those of Rome, Corinth and Ephesus, etc. have done since.

2. This faith mentioned is not a bare personal faith respecting this or that
particular Gentile, but such as is in direct opposition to that unbeleefe of
the Jews, by which they were broken off, as that opposition, Romans 11. 20.
shows; now it is evident that their unbeleefe was the obstinate rejecting of
the covenant of grace, as it was held out in Christ to them, and theirs
jointly, and not as barely made to themselves personally, Acts 3. 25, 26. and
13. 46, 47. Matthew. 21. 41. 42, 43, 44. Romans 9. 31, 32, 33. and 10. to the end:
see Romans 10. 21. with 11. 1. etc. and verse. 20. So verily is it in the faith of
the Gentile opposed thereunto. It is a faith that looks to Gods covenant, as
in reference to families and kindreds of the earth so embracing it, and so
being quickened, and comforted by it. That precious fruit of faith must hold
proportion to the nature of the seed thereof, scil. the words of promise, 1
Pet. 1. 23. now the words of promise run not barely in a personal way, but in
a parentall, oeconomicall and plural way, as well, Jer. 31. 1. Acts 3. 25,
etc. our faith is, or de jure should be enlarged according to the latitude of
covenant, as was before proved, Romans 10. 8 etc. By what has been said, their
gross mistakes appear, which say, that none are the subjects of this lump
but elect ones: That the branches were such only which were in Christ by
faith, and he in them by his spirit; for neither Jew nor Gentile branches,
many of them were such, as appears by their being broken off: nor is that
assertion sound, but absurd, and cross to the very text: that the Jews own
natural root and Olive tree whereof they were natural branches, only by
faith was union with God, etc. since that way of being branches only by faith,
is no where called natural; nay in the same verse, Romans 11. 24. speaking of
the first grown Gentiles inserting by faith* it is said to be contrary to
nature, nor is inserting which is only by faith, more natural to Jews, then
it is to Gentiles. Neither is that true and sound, that no other holiness
inrighteth any in any privileges of grace, if understood of Church privileges
now in question, then holiness of justification or sanctification: since many
of those natural branches, which as natural branches of that holy root, were
holy federally, and did partake of the root, and fatness of the olive before
their rejection, as well as some better Jews did afterward, yet they were not
justified; for which compare, Romans 11. 16. 24. 17, 18, 19. so likewise the
Gentiles, which came to partake of that Olive fatness in their stead, ibid.
yet were fatally cut off many of them, which had never bin, if they had been
justified and sanctified.

Object. 5. Does not the Apostle only speak here of the invisible Church,
under the notion of the Olive, which sometimes was amongst the Jews, and
therefore called their Olive; the Apostle reasoning about the elect remnant,
Romans 11. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. and making the tree to be the Church of
believers, still standing, and some branches broken off, and others graffed in,
and so it might seem the graffing in to be inserting into the invisible
Church, by election and faith?

Answ. I deny not but that the Apostle discourses about the elect and
invisible members of the invisible Church, verse. 1, 2, 3. etc. and therefore
proves fully enough one principal thing propounded, scil. that the invisible
elect membes of it, or the elect seed, and branches of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, did not, could not fall away finally: but it will not therefore follow,
that he speaks only of the invisible Church in the whole chapter; or that
he discourses not, as well of the visible Church, and of the Church seed of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Yea it will appear by good reason, that in that part
of the Chapter, where he discourses of the Church, as an Olive, communicating
its fatness to all the branches of it, he principally intends the visible
Church, as visible.

For 1. The objection acknowledges, that it is the Church of believers still
standing and some branches broken off, and others graffed in: now none that
were in the invisible Church, by election and faith could ever be broken off:
Yea but they might be in the Church in appearance, or visibly, as branches may
be said to be in Christ, and after broken off, John 15. 2. Not to answer this
with an exposition of that according to some to be meant of Christ considered
with his body the visible Church, as 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. here is more said of
these, scil. that others came in their room, and place, Romans 11. 17. (...) in
ramorum defractorum locum, as Beza notes on that particle, they had then a
real place there, and a real breach was made: neither did the Gentiles come
into an imaginary place in the Church but a real: and yet they came into no
other place, then into the place of the broken branches; therefore theirs was a
real, not a seeming place in the Olive: the Olive then must be the visible
Church, where hypocrites may have place, and not the invisible Church, where
they can have none. Besides, they were such branches of the Olive, as did
partake of the fatness of the Olive; not like withered branches, seemingly in
Christ, which are saplesse, nor did ever partake of the sap of Christ's saving
grace, as these did of Church sap, hence the Gentile is said to partake in
common with them, Romans 11. 17. Greek (...), etc. and thou partakest in common
with them in the fatness of the Olive: What did the collective Christian
Gentile partake in common with them, in shows and semblances? nay in
realities, in the very fatness of the Olive, of which they partooke, else it
was not a partaking in common: as both partooke also in common in the root,
Ibid. scil. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: not as natural fathers: for so Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, albeit they were natural fathers unto the Jews, yet not in
any respect natural fathers unto the Gentiles; but rather as they were Church
fathers: if they had not been Church fathers to the Jews as well as to the
Gentiles, how did Jew and Gentile partake in common in them as a root; and what
common Church fathers were Abraham, Isaac and Jacob* those fathers, verse. 28.
of the invisible Church? nay verily but of the visible, of which even the the
refuse Jews sometimes were.

Which may be a second argument that the Olive tree of which Abraham, as some
say and yield, or Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, as others: where the root is
considered here under the adjunct of the visible, and not of that of the
invisible Church, and so it is plainly ly verified that Jews and Gentiles were
(...), partakers in common in the root and fatness of the Olive, Romans 11. 17.

A third reason thereof is in that the Olive here intended is that whose
fatness it is that is communicated to the branches: yea to such branches as
were broken off, as were many refuse Jews, or might be broken off: as sundry
of the Gentiles which came in their stead might be: whence that, verse. 21. yea
ver. 22. otherwise thou shall be cut off; and so many have been witnesses
that Apostate Churches of Asia and other Churches. Now saving graces peculiar
to the elect, flow not from any company of men, no not from the invisible
Church, nor is it theirs but Christ's to convey, and communicate, they cannot
spare that oil for others, Matthew. 25. 9. but the ordinances, and they are the
Churches properly: and such as from the Church are derived, and communicated to
others whether elect, or reprobate that are members of her. Yea but what Church
is that which holds forth, and dispenses Church ordinances to others: not
the invisible Church: all the members being homogeneall, the invisible Church
properly has not officers, if you suppose officers, you must suppose some
calling, others called, and then they cease to be merely invisible, for in
this act they become visible: now a Church without officers cannot administer
all Church ordinances; not communicate that Church fatness of the seals: so
then the Olive Church communicating all Church fatness indefinitely, and so
the seals too, must be the visible, not the invisible Church. Besides since
no Olive or Church fatness is to be had, but in, and from the Church: no
Church ordinances ordinarily to be dispensed, but in, and from the Church: if
the Olive here be supposed to be the invisible, not the visible Church, no
ordinary communication of Church ordinances to any is possibly to be had since
the invisible Church, being a Church only of elect and savingly called
persons, and no hypocrites or reprobates being in, or of that Church: whither
shall any repair for Church ordinances? there being no Church in the world,
dispensing ordinances by ordinary officers, which alone can now dispense them
in a Church way; that consists only of elect ones: but there are some chafe,
and tares and trash and vessels of dishonor in it, Matthew. 3. and 13. 2 Timothy 2.
yea that Church being invisible as such is not obvious to the sense of any,
which being brought to the faith would desire to be joined to this Olive
thereby to partake of it is fatness: he cannot see where, nor what that Church
is, for it is invisible, this will drive us all to become Seekers, not till new
Apostles come, as some fondly imagine, but perpetually, yea hopelesly.

Fourthly, it is not denied by such as oppose us herein, that the Jews had this
privilege, to be reckoned in the outward administration of the covenant of
grace, as branches of the Olive by birth, by virtue of Gods appointment, which
cannot be true but in reference to the visible Church.

C.B. Object. 6. You will hereby set up a Catholic visible Church.

Answ. If that should follow hence touching a Catholic Church, as noting
Aliquid integraliter universale, as eum dicimus orbis universus; which is not
really distinct from all the particular Churches in the world considered in
one: this universal integrum, the Church albeit not visible at once to any
ones eyes, yet in its parts it is visible, both divisim in its particular
visible members, as also conjunctim in visible congregations, Ames medul.
Theolog. lib. 1. cap. 31, 32.

CHAP. III. Sect. I. Touching the Explication of Matthew. 28. 19, 20. and Mark
16. according to our opposites.
HAving laid down such conclusions as make way: let us now address our selves
to some further considerations of Pedobaptisme it self, according as other
Scripture grounds hold it forth.

And first because, Matthew. 28. is much controverted, let us try whether it make
more for us then against us therein, and withal take in the consideration of
Mark 16. 16. which our opposites pleno and uno ore cry up as quite
overthrowing our doctrine of Pedobaptisme. And herein I am content that they
should speak. First, Mr. Blackwood makes the commission to be even for the
very order of the words so exact, that Ministers, as commissioners must stick
to them: and gives reasons to prove the very order of the words to be moral
in both places: and brings Mark. 16. for his proof, that without all
distinction of Churches gathering, or gathered, thus it must be: believing in
Christ must proceed baptism; this he makes his second argument, and the same
also his fourth, only varying the words a little, but the proof is, Mark 16.
16. to which, Acts 8. 12. 37. is added for proof: from which proofs also of
Act. 8. 12, etc. he rayseth his sixth argument, so that all those three
arguments together, also with his eighth and last they all turn upon one
hinge, and have all one bottom. A. R. he also explaineth the same, in the
same way applying Mark 16. as an explication of Matthew. 28. the Scriptures,
says he, hold forth that Disciples, that is, believers only should be
baptized: so Mr. B. upon Mark 16. only believers are to be baptized, and
unbeleevers by that affirmation are forbidden.

And further to prove the same, the word (...), Matthew. 28. is urged by Hen.
Den, A. R. and Mr. B. as in reference to Disciples, not (...) in reference to
(...) the nations. Besides, in that Christ added [teaching] them; as if the
persons to be baptized are presently to be taught, and so not Infants. And
that also preaching is to go before baptism upon the same ground. And as by
that plain and well grounded treatise is added: that baptizing into the name
of the Father, etc. that is, invocating the name of the Father, Son and
Spirit, bringing Acts 22. for their proof, Paul is bid to be baptized,
calling upon the name of the Lord: now Infants cannot call upon the Lord when
to be baptized.

Now let us consider the weight of what has been said.

1. For the order of the words as moral, in Matthew, because also in Mark,
and so moral in both; for says Mr. B. it reaches to the worlds end, it was
Christ's last commission, and it were absurd to think a man baptized before
preached to, and so baptized into he knows not what. And indeed this is urged
as an argument distinctly against Pedobaptisme; because children understand not
the mysteries of Baptism: and what has God to do with such as know him not,
nor what he offers them, or does for them, etc? Whence I. S. urges it as an
absurdity that we will have children baptized which know nothing of it, and
so must build their faith upon humane testimony. We shall now answer to these
particularly.

SECT. II.
1. THen some things in this order of Christ were perpetual, as that preaching
the Gospel should go before Baptism, that baptism is to be administered by
such as preach: that discipled in-churched persons, are to be baptized: that
in founding Churches, the first members are to be visible professors of the
faith in reference to Church estate: that baptism is with water to be applied
to the persons baptized, and that into the name of the Father, Son and holy
Ghost. Yet non sequitur, that all which here Christ held forth, is so strictly
to be attended to the end of the world, as that which is to endure to the end
of the world, or that what in Matthew and Mark he propounds it is
presidentiall in all Church cases of persons to be baptized, as alike, and
that without distinction of Churches then, or now, gathering or to be
gathered. There is a commission given to Elders or Churches, as here was to
ministers, James 5. 14. that they are to pray over the sick, and to anoint
them with oil: we must now then without all distinction of times or Churches
do so too by Mr. Blackwoods argument; we must stick to Scripture commission
of the Lord; as this was by his spirit, according as the other was viva voce.

And let our opposites that urge Matthew and Mark, as presidentiall to all
Churches and times, attend what is said in Mark 16. 16, 17, 18. if Mark 16.
be the rule to us what persons should be baptized only, scil. believers, then
few are to be now baptized, but such whose believing is attended with signs,
that can cast out devils, speak with strange tongues, take up Serpents,
drink deadly poison without hurt, or if any other are yet at least some
amongst the baptized believers now as well as then, will have such miraculous
gifts. For Christ speaking of some of those baptized believers, at least,
albeit not of all, for all had not then gifts of miracles, and tongues, 1 Cor.
12. says, these signs shall follow them that believe, etc. Mark 16. 17. and
it was one continued speech, and touching some of the persons spoken of, verse.
15, 16. hence Mr. B. will never deny, unless his reason fail him, but that
such kind of persons were proper to be found in those first Churches, and
times of first foundings of Churches amongst the heathen nations, And
therefore, will he nill he, must he make a distinction of first Churches
gathered, amongst such as never heard of Christ, and other Christian Churches
in these days.

Secondly, be it that it was Christ's last commission, yet it sufficiently
appears already that what he here held forth in this gracious order about
Gentile Churches, it was not therefore moral, and applyable to all times; no
such signs now following any believing baptized members of Churches as did
then. And if that very order of Christ's last words were so moral, and strictly
to be observed: why do the Evangelists, and Paul so vary in expressions, of
those last words of Christ's order touching the Lords Supper? Matthew expresses
the Sacramental actions of Christ, about the bread and cup, to be as they
were eating, Matthew. 26. 26, 27. and so Mark, Chap. 14. 22, 23. but Luke and
Paul say he took the cup after supper, Luke 22. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 25. Matthew,
Luke and Paul make the Sacramental promise, to be uttered before the
Disciples drank, even whilst Christ gave order for their drinking: but Mark
mentions the promise, This is my blood of the Testament, etc. as spoken after
they had all drunk of the cup, Mark 14. 23, 24. Luke adds to what Matthew
and Mark say, This is my body which is given for you: Paul otherwise, which is
broken for you: Matthew, Mark and Luke say of the bread, that Christ gave it
to them; yet Paul, which affirms what he had received, and did deliver
accordingly to the Church of Corinth as from the Lord, he leaves out that act
of giving the bread; Matthew and Mark say as much expressly of the giving of
the cup to them, which Paul omitteth. Matthew and Mark express that thus:
This is my blood of the New Testament, which Luke and Paul express thus, This
is the New Testament in my blood: Matthew and Mark say, which was shed for
many, Luke which is shed for you; Paul wholly omitteth it. Luke adds in
mention of the bread, Do this in remembrance of me; but not in mention of the
cup; Matthew and Mark omit that passage in both, Paul adds it to both, and
adds that in the latter, as often as ye drink it. What variety is here,
additions, omissions, variations, etc. in the mention of Christ's last
commission about the other Sacrament? surely, Mr. B. and others will confess,
that if it had been so moral, and invariable, because Christ's last
commission, holy men inspired, would not, had not, could not have so placed
them, before, or after one another, something before, as mentioned by one,
something set after the same words, by another analogy of faith, and comparing
Scriptures with Scriptures, must regulate in such things here, and in this
Sacramental order, and so in the other.

And because so much is put in order of phrase, and words to conclude thence,
without compare thereof with other Scriptures; the order of things in acting,
because in those two places, such in order of uttering, and expressing, I would
argue hence. If because believing is set before baptizing, none is to be
baptized, but such as believe, then because being baptized is in the same
place, Mark 16. 16. set before being saved, therefore no believers are saved
but such as are baptized, and so baptism is absolutely necessary to salvation,
and a man may be a true believer, but for want of baptism, which yet was the
case of some of old which were martyrd, may be damned: yea then since Christ
when preaching, Mark 1. 15. saying, Repent, and believe the Gospel, it must
be concluded it is in the order of things acted, as uttered, that repentance
goes before faith, and that a man actually may repent, before he actually
believes the Gospel; and so Romans 10. 9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth,
is placed before the other, if thou shall believe with thine heart. Ergo, a man
may make a saving confession of Christ, before he savingly believe with the
heart: yea if the place it self in Mark, must be so closely stuck to,
without comparing it with the Scriptures of the old Testament which were then
when Mark writ, the only Scriptures, besides Matthews Gospel, existing, it
would follow in the reason of persons then living, that the Gospel must be
preached to Dogs, and Cats, Fowls and Fishes, etc. since it is expressly said,
Preach to every creature.

Thirdly, I demand of Mr. B. whether it be absurd to say the Gospel is
preached to little ones, which understand not what is said, if so, then what
thinks he of that speech of Christ in the presence of the little ones which
he uttered concerning them, Of such is the kingdom of God; and, he that
receives not the kingdom of God as a little child, etc. was this Gospel, or
not? surely yes to Mr. B. it is so which holds that Christ spoke it of their
interest in glory it self: here was then Gospel preached to little ones, to
Infants, yet not absurdly. He dares not say that was not Gospel which Moses on
Gods behalf uttered, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. as has been showed, yet spoken to little
ones then present, Deuteronomy. 27. 14. and that was such, Act. 2. 38, 39. to so many
as might be present, as well as touching so many as were absent. Zacharies
speech, spoken as to his babe Luke 1. And thou child shall be called the
Prophet of the most high, etc. it was Gospel preached to a babe.

But to come to the core of the objection, as if absurd to be baptized unto
one knows not what; or as others, when one understands not the mysteries of
such an Evangelicall act and ordinance; I answer, Isaacs circumcision was an
Evangelicall ordinance as a sign of Gods covenant of grace with him, and to
confirm the promise of God, to be a God to him, scil. to fulfill such
promises as Luke 1. 73, 74, 75. and he to walk in his father Abraham's
footsteps, etc. as some acknowledge it did signify sanctification of the
spirit, justification by Christ's blood, and faith in him as to come, etc. and
so of an Evangelicall nature, if to any, to him who was the child of promise:
yet did not he then understand these things; did God then in injoyning his
circumcision so young injoyne an absurdity? surely no. Christ's act in blessing
those Infants, Mark 10. and Luke 18. as that also of his imposing hands on
them, and embracing them, or taking them into his arms, these were no legal,
nor ceremonial, but truly gracious and Evangelicall acts of Christ, and very
mysterious, yet not absurd, because they knew not, nor understood what he did
for them, in blessing of them; Peter understood not at present that
Evangelicall act of Christ, in washing of his feet, yet must it be done, or it
had been worse for him, John 13. 7. 9. 12. will Mr. B. challenge this act also
upon the former grounds to be absurd? As for that whim of I. S. I say we lay
not foundations of building faith upon humane testimony more then they of old,
in holding out the Doctrine of circumcision, Infants circumcised knew not more
that they were circumcised in way of an ordinance, then children now do of
their baptism, when they come to be grown up, both sorts know it as it is
testified to them by others. Yea but there was a visible mark to be seen,
which is not in baptism; grant it so, yet how knew they that it was not given
them in ludibrium by enemies, or unto some false God, and worship, by some
Idolatrous Priests, amongst whom they might be as captives, and they could not
know that it was administered to them in a Church way and according to Gods
rules but by hearsay by friends, or parents? And therefore in the maine of
knowing both, as ordinances administered upon them, they are one.

Fourthly, Disciples only, that is believers, are to be baptized, according
to Mark 16. 16. the affirmative including the negative, therefore not Infants.
Let us examine this principle and principal ground work of our opposites.

1. Then it seems Scripture Disciples of Christ are only such believers, as
Mark 16. 16. speaks of, and such believers only, as that verse mentions are
to be baptized: which I deny. First, the believer mentioned, Mark 16. 16. is
one that shall surely be saved and not condemned, as the opposition shows,
but neither is every one which is called a Disciple such a one, witness that,
John 6. 66. and Act. 20. 30. no true believers can so fatally be rent away as
members cruelly torn from the body, as the Greek word (...) signifies, they
were but externally in the body of Christ, not efficaciously. Mr. B. says, a
Disciple is in English a Scholar: yea but all that are Scholars at school
come not to good: nor do they effectually learn what they are taught.

Secondly, if Mark 16. 16. be the rule of baptizing, then none are by rule to
be baptized, but such as savingly believe, for of such a one he speaks, in
opposition to such a one as is damned. And then the Apostles which baptized so
many, John 4. 1, 2. whereof sundry, Chap. 6. 66. proved apostates, and came no
more at Christ, break rule, as also did John in baptizing sundry of the
multitude amongst whom he knew, were many chaffy hypocrites, Matthew. 3. 9, 10,
11, 12. but of that more else where.

And whereas Mr. B. challenges us, to show an Example of one baptized without
faith. It Is evident many a one was baptized besides such a one, as believing,
and being baptized should be saved, as Mark has it: many a baptized person
being never saved, as sundry of them, John 4. and 6. compared; yea if he mean
it of some special personal confessing of faith in Christ, it was propounded
to them as a future thing, which afterward rather they were to attend, Act.
19. 4. John said to them that they should believe in him which was to come
after him, and of those scribes, and no mention of so much as their confessing
of sins before their baptism, John sharply reproved them, etc. and minded
them what they should do afterward, bring forth fruits of repentance, etc.
Matthew. 3. 7. 8, 9, 10. and yet he expressly says, he does baptize them, etc.
I indeed, says he, baptize you, etc. but as Mr. B. urges us in that matter of
showing any baptized without faith, the Scripture says he is silent, so say I
here, the Scripture is silent touching these Scribes confession of faith, and
in Act. 16. 15, 16. the Scripture which says Lydia's household was baptized;
says not that any more believed but Lydia; and because this example is
diversely controverted, I shall endeavor to clear it, as for, and not against
us, the story is so exactly in all the circumstances of it, set down, that as
I wonder of that evasion, that we are to seek the explication of this, by
that other distinct story, as distinctly and independently set down from this,
as this from that. The holy Ghost is exact in setting down many particular
passages in mentioning the occasion of this here expressed from Acts 16. 6. to
14. and in the particular circumstances of this passage of the first success
of Paul's ministry at Philippi. The person wrought upon is described: she was
no mere Pagan, but a worshipper of God before, albeit not one that believed in
Christ Jesus as the promised Messiah, which then was the great article of
faith, and full of difficulty to be believed, in all likelihood a Jew, or one
of the best sort of proselytes venturing hard for Religions sake, they were not
allowed the liberty of a Synagogue at Philippi: as in some other places under
the Romish jurisdiction: but they withdrew to a remote place, from ordinary
concourse and view: and though Sabbath solemnities were loathsome to the Romans
there, yet she, with some other women adventure to spend the time in Prayer.
Thither Paul repaires, and amongst them all she is wrought upon, and no other
mentioned: God opened her heart that she attended, etc. if any of her
household too, had been then, or presently after that, brought home to Christ;
the holy Ghost so exact in the circumstances of this story, as in that other
afterward of the Jaylour; it is very unlikely that he would have omitted the
same here, more then in the other place. Yea after she and her household were
baptized, the Text expressly says, If ye have judged me, not if ye have
judged them also faithful come into my house. If there be but one seeming
example for rebaptizing, and neither rule nor example to color that wrested
sense of Acts 19. 4, 5, 6. that must be current and warrant, for that
innovation, and we upbraided, if there were but one example so good for
Paedobaptisme, as that for rebaptizing they will yield the cause to us, and so
may we to them, if this be not fuller for us, then that for them. Yea but
says Mr. B. would you baptize a Turk in his Masters faith? and what of that?
therefore here were none baptized but believers unless that be granted? Non
sequitur: is it not rule for us herein to make use of a Synecdoche, as well as
you, when we urge you with families baptized, and so children in them? you
tell us it is a Synecdoche, of the whole put for the part: the whole were
baptized, that is, the grown part capable of being preached unto in the house,
Acts 16. 31, 32, 33, 34. Yea but here was none preached to of this house that
is mentioned but Lydia only, yet the household baptized, that is say we a part
thereof by a Synecdoche, even that part which might most properly be baptized in
her right more then in their own, as were her children. For so house in
Scripture is oftentimes used for children of such, or such a person only, as
Judge 9. 16. 18. dealing ill with Gideons house that day, is expounded to be
murdering of his 60. sons: so the poor widow, and her house, that she was
providing for, and which after lived of that meal and oil, was but the widow
and her son, 1 King. 17. 12, 13, 15. compared: David's house which at that
time was not so orient, 2 Samuel 23. 5. was but his children, many whereof proved
badly, and came to sad ends, witness Absaloms, Ammons act and end, etc. If
Noah only believing, and upright, yet all the rest with him are typically
baptized for that ground, Come thou, and thy house, even wife, sons, and
sons wives, and all into the Arc; For thee, not, for them have I found
righteous, Genesis 7. 1. with 1 Pet. 3. 21. if Abraham alone be a believer, yet
he and his have the same seal, of the righteousness of faith of the
covenant, Genesis 17. Romans 4. if the grown Israelites have faith, it furthers
that extraordinary baptism in the Sea. Less then this herein is not to be
denied; yea but the rule is plain otherwise, Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16.
therefore the Apostles did baptize none, but believers and Disciples: Nay
verily by their leave I conclude that that restriction of that word Disciple
only to one, that is an actual believer in Christ, was never there intended,
in Matthew. 28. nor was that in Mark. 16. ever intended to be a rule of
baptizing persons, excluding every other person, then such a one as there is
mentioned from being baptized: and I further add to that; that it points out
what a kind of person shall be saved, rather then be baptized. Wherefore it
is not said, he that shall be baptized, he must believe: but, he that does
believe and is baptized shall be saved: hence contra, he says not, he that
believes not, shall not be baptized, but rather shall be damned, or not
saved. If children be excluded from baptism, because of the former clause,
he that believes, and is baptized, they must be excluded salvation, because
of the latter clause, he that believes not shall be damned: will not our
opposites themselves say, that the latter clause is taken de adultis, and not
as any rule of exclusion of Infants from salvation; and I say as much in that
other, as no rule thereby to exclude Infants from baptism, it is the same in
Act. 2. 38, 39. if Infants because not believing, and effectually called, are
excluded the promise, then by the same reason excluded remission of sins
promised: yea salvation promised to them that call upon God, v. 21. and if not
therefore excluded these, why therefore excluded baptism, in defect of actual
faith? if the promise of justification, and salvation, be not denied, which are
the signats for want of actual faith and repentance, why is baptism the sign
denied them? is the sign more then those things signified? is not faith and
repentance more simply required to salvation, Luke 13. 5. Heb. 11. 6. then to
baptism? As for what C. B. adds that that, Gal. 3. 27. excludes Infants: I
deny it, if that be taken, as if each baptized person had really and
effectually put on Christ: then none of the Galatian members had bin such, as
Gal. 3. 3, 4, 5. and 4. 11. 19. 21, 22. and 5. 3, 4, 5. he speaks thus in a
Sacramental sense, as 1 Cor. 10. 4. 6. Heb. 10. 29. and such like, and so each
Infant too Sacramentally puts on Christ, are buried with Christ, Romans 6. 3.
that is that which is visibly signed and sealed thereby, and that is the
doctrine of the visible word of the Sacrament, holding forth what baptized
persons are called upon as they are capable to attend: hence the baptism of
John is the doctrine thereof: hence the doctrine of baptism, Heb. 6. 1, 2. but
specially holding forth what they may expect from God; so Deuteronomy. 10. 16. and
Jer. 4. circumcision, called upon them for heart circumcision, as capable of
improving it, and incourageth them what to expect, especially that way from
God, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27, 28, etc.

As for what C. B. adds touching the rule of baptizing, from Act. 2. 38, 39.
albeit the place has had its distinct consideration, yet I shall here add a
word of answer to this which is C. B. his third argument, that if this be a
rule, then none are to be baptized, but such as truly repent. For to no
seeming, and visible repentance did Peter then exhort them, but to true and
saving repentance, all will grant: and then unless we know men's hearts, and
principles, their confession of sins cannot satisfy us when we are to
baptize them, as being doubtful, and not certain, that the rule is fulfilled
in that our act, and we must either do things doubtfully, and adventure to
transgress rule, yea often break rule, as by this argument John did, Matthew. 3.
11, 12. and Philip, Acts 8. Yea but they professed it: suppose they did, that
was not that which Peter says, make confession of or profess your repentance,
and be baptized, but repent and be baptized; therefore if that be laid down
as the rule by which men must, or else must not be baptized; he that is
baptized otherwise, he was never regularly baptized, as possibly it is the case
of many in your churches. That which John Spilsbury has this way I find not in
the rest: he makes use of John 3. 5. as a repeal of the Law of circumcising
of Infants, and as the new law of admission, etc. but if that washing of water
be meant of baptism, it will then be of as absolute necessity to be
externally baptized, as to be regenerate, both, if spoken of two several
things, being made as one in point of necessity: nor let any say that
ordinarily it is so that none else are saved: For Christ's serious speaking, yea
protesting, shows he intends more, yea more then a supposed neglect, or
contempt of baptism, but simply thus, verily, verily, unless, etc. according
to verse. 3. he had to like effect spoken, and taking the kingdom here, for a
particular visible Church, not that of glory, which has no ordinances, 1 Cor.
15. 24. and 13. 8, 9, 10. how stands this with his principles, that a man first
be discipled and inchurched ere baptized, when as rather he must be from
this ground first washed with water, or baptized ere he can be in; yea so
much as see a visible Church, and so baptism is rather the form of the
Church, then the covenant of grace, as I. B. elsewhere affirms, and reason
suggesteth a Church first to be, ere Church seals to be administered to, or
by it: nor need this be urged in this sense upon Nicodemus, as the way of his
entrance into Gods kingdom, of a true visible Church. For of such a Church was
he already a member, even of the Jews Church: yea if thus meant, then not
only unregenerate persons should not be of visible Churches; but it is not
possible that they can get into them: for Christ says, verily, and unless,
etc. he cannot, no he should not, or ordinarily he does not enter into the
kingdom of God.

As for what was said of preaching the Gospel, to go before baptism, we hold
it, we preach it, the doctrine of the covenant is first opened, and then
sealed: we hold forth to parents that Gospel covenant of Abraham as to them,
and their children, and the Apostles did as much, Acts 2. 38, 39. Romans 10. 6,
7, 8. they preaching the Gospel, wherein all sorts of national creatures were
concerned, they held forth that of Gods mind of grace, to that species of
Infants of Gospelled Gentiles, and so by the Gospel they as well as the other
sort of adult Gentiles came to partake of the promise, in the initiatory seal
at least, Ephesians. 3. 6. and what Gospel they held out in the audible word
preached, that they sealed by the visible word of baptism.

Fifthly, to that strain touching the particle (...) as not in reference to
(...) because of the masculine gender, and (...) of the neuter: if C. B. A. L.
and Hen. Den had searched Scriptures, they would have found this enallage, or
change of gender, very frequent, Rev. 2. 26, 27. and 19. 15. it is (...) with
(...), see Acts 15. 17. and 26. 17. see more of the like Acts 21. 25. Ephesians. 2.
11. and 4. 17. masculines joined with (...): and I would ask A. R. and the
rest, whether when it is said in the neuter gender, before him shall be
gathered (...) all nations, with the masculine annexed, and he shall separate
them one from another (...), has not (...) reference to (...)? if not, then it
seems some nations shall be gathered at the last day, which shall not be
separated one from the other; if it have reference to it, then (...) [them] in
the masculine here in Matthew. 28. may very well have reference to the nations
albeit in the neuter gender.

Sixthly, to that argument raised hence from what is added: teaching them, that
is, presently teaching them, etc. and so not Infants, it is not cogent: As much
is said in effect of Abraham presently after he had circumcised the males in
his house, and before Isaac was borne and circumcised, that he would command
his children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the
Lord: yet none will conclude that therefore, no children of his household
servants were already circumcised, and that Isaac and others should not be
circumcised; in that Abraham will take this course with all of his family: Are
the baptized Gentiles to be taught the commands of God, that they may do
them? so are the proselyted persons circumcised, and others also circumcised to
be also taught. Yea Infants circumcised notwithstanding that part of Gods
counsel, touching such teaching; yea but Infants circumcised were not capable
of teaching: true, nor are ours which are baptized, yet both to be taught, and
so are, and were, according as capable thereof; and the Text in Matthew. 28. 19.
evinceth, that it is not a present teaching them that are there mentioned
simply, but secundum quid, scil. according as the baptized persons were capable
of being taught, otherwise it must be concluded, that they were presently to
be all and each of them taught the whole mind of Christ, and then it will
follow that that could presently be done, by the dispensers of the word, which
is impossible, and likewise that the hearers were presently capable of all
points of the doctrine of Christ, which is most unlikely; Christ himself did
not take such a course with his own Apostles, nor were they capable of it,
John 16. 12. Yea by the leave of the objectors; since they were to hold forth
by this solemn injunction of Christ, whatsoever Christ had commanded
indefinitely which were not merely personal commands; they must amongst other
such commands of his, hold forth the doctrine of his touching the interest of
the little ones, of pious minded persons pressing after, and prising of his
blessing of their children. The kingdom is of such, not merely of those very
persons, or babes, but of others, of like parents, etc. and his solemn command
upon that ground of their interest in Gods kingdom, that his Apostles should
not hinder them, but suffer the approach of such unto him in any external way,
whereof they are capable, and for which they are fit, as many of our Divines
have pleaded thence, that they are for baptism.

Seventhly, to that argument from the exposition of baptizing into the name of
the Father, etc. scil. in invocating his name, as Paul was bid to do, Act. 22.
to this I say, if Paul was bid to do so, yet does not that prove that that
injunction was ever intended to be the explication of being baptized into
Christ's name, that is, being baptized so, as then personally, and actually to
call upon his name into which the person was baptized; when Paul in 1 Cor. 1.
13. says, were ye baptized into the name of Paul, will it thus be expounded,
that is, when you were baptized, did you call upon Paul's name? if any do so,
it is new light, as they call it. For I never yet heard of that explication of
it, albeit of others; but if that be the rule that the persons baptized must
make their prayers personally and particularly to God, when they are baptized:
then did those women of Samaria, Acts 8. make their personal prayers before
the public assembly, which I suppose none will affirm, and if they will not,
then the rule of baptism was not attended by Philip, which were as absurd, or
that was no rule mentioned: nor was it possible that those 3000. baptized in
one day, should arise each of them, and call upon the name of the Lord as they
were baptized. Some would be longer in prayer, if others would be short, and
who would limit or confine them just to such an expense of time, and no more:
and if Peter would have parcelled out the time for that end amongst them, yet
he wanted much time, for all and each of them to arise, and call thus on Gods
name.

SECT. III.
THe coast being thus cleared I may I hope now pass on the more freely from
interruption to what I intend concerning Matthew. 28. And first I say in the
general, the strict of th^se words had reference to the inchurching of the
first Gentiles: and so Marks relation which our opposites make parallel
herewith evinceth: as Mark 16. 17, 18. does show, unless any will say those
signs and miracles endured ever since as of use in particular visible
Churches; and so now hold, and will hold to the worlds end. Secondly, I say,
this had reference in the general, to the Jewish nation, that when as they
only were of the visible school, and under the doctrine, and discipline of
Christ the Prophet of his Church as speaking by his spirit in their Prophets,
and Teachers, and as acting in the Church guides and officers by some influence
of his authority, etc. now not one nation and people, but all nations, the
partition wall being broken down, are to be called unto the fellowship of the
promise or covenant, and the initiatory seal of it; Acts 1. 38, 39. not as
formerly circumcision, but baptism, not males only, but without distinction
of sexes, not of such a strict day, and age, as eight days old, but
indefinitely whether elder or younger, but that our opposites make bold to go
so far as to say, not now, Infants, but only adult persons, they were best
be on better grounds then yet I see lest the rebuke of Christ light on them
also, so far forth to hinder the approach of believers Infants to him; nor will
their rule of believers, Ergo, only such, hold; as before we showed: or that
of the affirmative including the negative; no more then the affirmative, He
that calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved, or, He that labors must
not eat, includes each its negative, that he which calls not on Gods name,
as no Infant does, or he that labors not, as no Infant can, shall not be
saved or eat, and so all Infants must perish, and famish. And when I say it
has reference to the Jewish nation, I intend it only thus far; that look as
none but covenant, and inchurched parents and their children were initiatorily
sealed then by circumcision, so no others are now in ordinary Church
administration to be baptized then the inchurched parts in and of the nations.
Thirdly, I say, Christ prefacing that ground to this commission, scil. his
sovereign power over not his general kingdom of the world, but over his
special kingdom of his Church, especially that, which is or shall be in the
whole earth; he intends the execution of this commission to have reference
to all such as may at least externally be brought under that estate and
account of members in that his kingdom, according to their several capacities
of either, or both the branches of the particulars in the commission. Fourthly,
Discipling I take in a Scripture latitude: by nations discipled, I understand
not all the numericall and individual persons in every nation where the Gospel
comes, but the specificall parts of the nations, scil. all sorts of persons
in that nation, albeit not all, and every person of each sort.

SECT. IIII.
THese things premised, whereas Anabaptists do affirm, that no Infants but
adult persons only are to be baptized according to any rule of Christ; I say
that that sort of persons, scil. the Infants of inchurched believers are to be
baptized, as well as that sort of persons, scil. Adult persons making personal
and particular profession and confession of their faith, etc. and that from the
force of Matthew. 28. 19, 20. My reasons are,

First, Taken from the subject to be discipled, and baptized, by commission,
scil. all nations, and therefore at least all the specificall parts of the
nations, all sorts of persons in the nations, but not all of every sort. If it
be denied that neither all individual persons, nor yet so much as all sorts
of persons, scil. some little ones, and babes male and female, as well as some
adult persons of both sexes: I would know why the collective nations are
mentioned under that title of nations rather then under that of grown persons
of the nations: when God, Genesis 12. promises that all nations shall be blessed
in Christ, all sorts of persons, albeit not all of every kind are included,
else I cannot see how any Infants can be saved, unless either some are saved
which are not blessed in Christ, or if blessed in Christ, yet such as God never
promised should be blessed in Christ: and if so, they have a mediator of
Christ to them, but such an one as is not in respect to them, a mediator of the
new covenant, yea and so have Christ, a Savor to them, to whom he is not a
covenant, as Esaias phraseth it: Chap. 42. and 49. so every man for every sort of
men, Heb. 2. 9. and all men, for all sorts of men, Romans 5. 18. which are not
simply all but many rather, verse. 16. compared: so the world for all sorts of
persons in it, 1 John 2. 2. how usual an acceptance, and why should it here
in matters of less moment be scrupled?

Secondly, taken from the nature of the commission, scil. a charge of Church
dispensation of the Gospel, or dispensing of it with Church reference, Mark
16. 15. it is Gospel they are to preach, and this being Gospel, that children
of inchurched covenant parents, were to be with them also taken into the
fellowship of the covenant, and people of God, externally interested in it, as
was proved before: and the initiatory scale being a branch of the Gospel, as
well as the promise, as baptism is reckoned, Luke 3. 34. 5, 6. compared with
Mark 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. such Infants federall interest in the Church, and
initiatory Church seal must needs be included.

Thirdly, from the latitude of the Church reference to which this commission
relates, albeit with some different respects had to those times and ages
following, according as then the Ministers were extraordinary, and
Apostolical, and those succeeding were to be ordinary Pastors, Teachers: and
withal with various respects had to the first foundation, members strictly
considered, as such, and others: now that latitude it appears was such, as
took in all the visible Churches throughout the world, unto the worlds end:
From which if such Infants be excluded, an actual and privileged interest,
they are excluded, as was proved in ordinary course from salvation: there being
ordinarily none saved, but such as are in the visible Church, or some visible
Churches in the world. And if not excluded an actual interest in some visible
Church or other, in the earth; why are they excluded baptism which is here
given to distinguish the inchurched parts of the world, from all other, as well
as to ratify and seal up the covenant to them; there is no time set now to
limit them to such a day as of old to the eighth, that that should suspend
their jus ad rem, which they had as Abraham's seed, so soon as borne, from
being elicited till the enjoined day.

Fourthly, from that latitude of the nation disciple which takes in such
Infants as well as others, and consequently they are reached in the commission
of being baptized: For Disciples are to be baptized, as our opposites confess.
For proof of their discipleship I argue thus. All those to whom the thing
signified by a disciple as explained in any place of Scripture, is appliable,
they are Scipture Disciples: but the former is true of such Infants, ergo the
latter. The Major is evident, in that in reason significant names cannot be
denied to persons to whom the thing signified is granted. And the spirit of
wisdom would not in any place expound the name by the thing: if that thing it
self did not give ground work, to be so named. If any reply, that it
suffices not to have the thing signified by the name in one place, unless
withal, the p^ty be qualified with the signified thing in another: as for
in^ce, in many Scriptures it signifies a believer, etc. this must be (...) in
too: to this I answer.

first, I speak of significations of the name, as explained by the (...) Ghost
himself, and if any will refuse that they presume to (...) holy Ghost to
expound his own words.

^ly, if we may not rest in one, or other such a place, but (...) another way,
why not another to that, and so ano^(...) ^arroweth yet more the signification
then that did: yea why (...) ^ke in all such places where in any sense it is
mentioned? where (...) we stop? and so that exposition of a disciple, Luke 14.
26. must be taken in as requisite to, according, as Hen. Den. urges it, and
th^n Judas and Demas, and diverse others, which forsook Christ, never hating
their own lives for his sake, could not be his disciples, yet they were so:
and so does the holy Ghost call Judas, and many others, John 6. yea many that
never believed in Christ himself, but did after a sort approve his doctrine,
and followed him, albeit for base ends, etc. yet these were disciples and
baptized as such, John 4. 12. It Is spoken of disciples of Christ in the
Pharisees sense, scil. persons addicted to his doctrine, etc. as Disciples of
John, of Moses, etc. signify, and not of persons believing in him or them,
John 9. When they asked so often touching Christ as if they pretended to desire
to learn of him, etc. says the blind man to those Pharisees, Will ye also
be his Disciples or Scholars, etc. verse. 27, 28. Be thou his disciple, say
they etc. not meaning that either should believe in him; those many Disciples
never believed that heavenly doctrine of his, John 6. yet called Disciples,
verse. 66. Yea if the latitude of the signification of a Scripture disciple,
must all meet in one, to make a complete definition: then Disciples must be
Apostles, because some were so called which were such. The names of the 12.
Disciples, Matthew 10. 1. and the names of the 12. Apostles, verse. 2. are one,
see more, Matthew. 28. 16. The eleven Disciples, ( i. e.) Apostles. It is then
enough to attribute that name Disciple to any, to whom the reason and
explication of that name, any where in Scripture mentioned, is by the Spirit of
God applied: we need not fear to follow such a leader, and speak after him,
the minor then is to be proved; that such a signified thing by that name
Disciple is appliable to such little ones mentioned. For proof hereof I must
take up that wherein I perceive I am prevented by others; yet shall not desist
to speak the same thing in substance with them; one to whom drink or water is
given, in Matthew. 10. 42. in the name of a Disciple, is expounded by the Spirit,
Matthew. 9. 41. to be one, to whom it is given in the name of one belonging to
Christ. Whence I argue. All such as belong to Christ externally, they are
externally his Disciples: such Infants mentioned, belong to Christ externally:
therefore they are externally Christ's Disciples. And the same description of a
Disciple which shall be saved holds thus, such as savingly belong to Christ
are Disciples which shall be saved; but it is not needful to go so far in
this case: To the saving interest and efficacy of Baptism, it is required that
one savingly belong to Christ, and be a Disciple savingly in that sense: but
to the external and Church interest in the use of the seal, it is not of
necessity, for then none ought to be baptized, but such as are in a saving
estate, which to us is a secret, and so no ordinary proceeding in man's Court;
yea the very place speaks of the case: as one that gives drink to another,
because to him and in his judgment, he is a Disciple; for infallibly he does
not know him, but takes him rather to be such a one; and therefore refreshes
him. The major therefore of the Syllogism is in substance the very Text, the
minor is evident, such as externally belong to the Church of which Christ is
the the head, they do externally belong to Christ, etc. hence to be in his
Church by external profession and to be in him, are put for one, John 15. 2
now that such Infants belong to that Church we formerly proved, in proving
both that they belonged to Christ's visible Church and kingdom, and that he was
head thereof also. Mr. B. frames two answers to a like objection hence, his
first we have already disproved, scil. that Infants also belong to Christ in
respect of visible and Church constitution, which he denies. His second is as
impertinent, he says Christ speaks in Matthew and Mark of Adult persons:
true: I never intended to urge it otherwise; but my argument runs, that the
signification and reason of the name of Disciple there given, though to grown
persons, yet since what is there in that Scripture applied to such; is also
appliable to such Infants also, therefore they are Scripture Disciples. So Acts
11. 26. the name Disciples and Christians are made Synomyna, in way of
distinction from Pagans not of the Church; alike to what is here intended for
distinction sake from the rest of the Pagan world, amongst which since the
breaking down of the partition wall, I hope Anabaptists will advise better how
they place believing Gentiles Babes, unless they will leave a piece of the old
wall standing. Discipled persons in the Text as in reference to baptizing,
implies persons externally in the Covenant of grace, unless our opposites
think other then such should be baptized. Also persons in the visible Church
are baptized, unless they think persons out of any visible Church fellowship
may be in ordinary dispensation baptized: for which extraordinary calls and
cases our times meddle not, nor have not, as of old there were some, which yet
impeach not our rule of the Church seals given to the Church, for her use and
by her preaching Elders to be dispensed; he then is discipled for Baptism,
which is inchurched, which is in the School of Christ and in peculiar
fellowship with the other Scholars there, and in special relation to Christ
the Teacher of his Church; yea such as to whom in some sense he preaches
Gospel, as to those Babes in Luke; and howsoever he teaches the lowest
forms, as I may call them, that sort of persons in his Church, that is some
such, he so promises to teach them inwardly, that he does so appear in saved
Church children; yea so he may teach Indian Papouses now too. I answer, if we
speak of his absolute power, he can do more then he ever will, as to make
many other worlds, etc. but to speak of his ordinate and regulate power, so
he can do but what he wills to do, what his secret will is, not for us,
Deuteronomy. 29. but according to his revealed will, we may say that those children
being estranged actually from the Covenant and Church they are actually without
God and Christ, and hope, but believers Infants external estate is
ecclesiastically of another nature. So much for clearing Matthew. 28. and
confirmation of Paedobaptisme thence.

SECT. V.
A Second Argument is this. All those which are the Church seed of Abraham they
are to be baptized. Infants of inchurched believers are the Church seed of
Abraham, ergo are to be baptized. The major is not denied I think by our
opposites; but if it be Gal. 3. 16, 17. 27, 28, 29. proves that all such were
baptized in Apostolical Churches, and therefore are to be in ours. The minor
has been formerly proved in the conclusions touching federall interest, and
is evident by the Apostles argument: if Christ's, then Abraham's seed. Whence I
argue, All such as are Christ's or belong to Christ, they are Abraham's seed:
Such Infants belong to Christ, ergo, they are Abraham's seed. The Major is true
both ways, such as savingly and efficaciously belong to Christ, they are so
far also Abraham's elect seed, such as ecclesiastically are Christ's, in which
sense the Apostle here speaks of it, as has been proved, they are so far
also Abraham's Church seed. The Minor is true of the species of such Infants, if
taken in an efficacious way of saving interest: that sort of persons as well as
the other of adult persons are such; else none of them could ever be saved:
unless some are saved which neither belong to Christ nor are elect; either of
which would be absurd to affirm, but that is a secret, we are to look to
visibilitie thereof as the rule of dispensation of Church ordinances. If
therefore taken in an ecclesiastical sense as here it is, as was proved, so
all such Infants do belong to Christ as has been proved, and consequently
are ecclesiastically Abraham's Church seed.

SECT. VI.
A Third argument is taken from Acts 2. 38, 39. thus. Those to whom
appertains any principal ground upon which any of the Apostles have moved
and encouraged grown ones to be baptized, they are according to Apostolical
encouragement virtually given to be baptized. But to the Infants mentioned
does appertain the forenamed ground, therefore there is virtually an
Apostolical encouragement for them also to be baptized. The Major is
undeniable, unless any suppose that any of the Apostles as Apostles, as here
Peter is considered, should give an insufficient ground to any thing unto which
they encouraged others. For to give a chief ground of encouraging and putting
any upon this or that which will not universally hold where the same ground was
to be found, it is to give an insufficient ground. If a Pastor ministerially
urge a member thus, Brother look you, watch over your brethren, etc. for you
are a brother, if this be not cogent with any other brother as a brother unto
the like watch, it is an insufficient principle and groundworke, so here in the
case mentioned, none will doubt but it was a sufficient groundworke to enforce
the former as a duty scil. their repentance to whom he spoke; and why not of
the like force in the other? yea and so you will say it is where both are
joined. Nay verily it must be of force, if sufficient, to enforce either
apart: if both be distinct duties as reason will evince, and this be the
common enforcing reason to both, it must hold as well in either of them
considered apart, as in both of them jointly taken. And I would know if the
Apostle had from such a ground of the promise urged one already baptized to
repent only, had it not been sufficient? or suppose he had to deal with one
that in his judgment had repented already: urging him only to be baptized,
because the promise belonged to him, had not this been of sufficient force
thereunto? no rational person I think will deny it. The minor will appear by
declaring the groundwork upon which the Apostle urged them to be baptized. Now
this was the only ground upon which Peter urged them as to the former duty of
repenting, so to the later of being baptized: For the promise is, or belongs to
you, scil. the promise of grace, of remission of sins, etc. as before was
cleared. Yea but repentance is called so too from them on this ground, and that
Infants are not capable of; To this we have formerly answered, why it was
meet to require as we do, some testimony of repentance in offensive members
of a corrupt Church, albeit a true visible Church as was that of the Jews, if
they will be fixed members of purer Churches, as was that Church of
Christians, verse 41. and as members thereof partake of the seals; yet we do
not expect the same of their children too, under no such actual scandal, but
baptize them in their confessing parents right also. Besides it appears
before that it was a sufficient ground on which to urge the baptism of such or
such a person as considered in it self apart.

Now that the groundworke, scil. interest external at least, was that interest
of those persons not yet savingly wrought upon in the promise of grace that
appertains to such Infants of inchurched and externally covenant parents, it
appears in this very Scripture, the persons spoken to were members of that
true visible Church of the Jews visibly in the covenant as we proved; the
persons spoken of also were their own natural children, as was likewise
proved, and of them also Peter avoweth even after Christ's ascension, and in
reference to participation in the seal of baptism in a Church of Christians:
That the promise [is to your children] so that the conclusion follows that
the baptism of such children is virtually called upon as well as of adult
persons.

SECT. VII.
Object. YEa but the Jews children were not then baptized, Acts 2.

Answ. It Is more then such as so speak can prove from the Text.

No, will some say, but it is not. For they that gladly received the word,
says the Text, were baptized, verse. 41. And they continued in the Apostles
Doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayers, verse. 42. and 44.
All that believed had all things common, 44. and sold their possessions, etc.
verse. 45. and continued daily in the Temple, etc. verse. 46. which are not
appliable to Infants. And what then? therefore other things there mentioned
were not so too? non sequitur; what more usual in Scripture then to speak of
things in a collective way of persons which are not all and each of them
appliable to all and each particular person of that company, but by a
Synecdoche some things are spoken of the whole wholly, but others are only
appliable to some parts of that whole. It Is said in this place all that
believed were together, and had all thing common, and sold their possessions,
verse. 44, 45. will any take this of the whole company in all the parts of it?
all were not capable of such an act applied to all, as not all having
possessions to sell, for some were in need rather of supply from others, verse.
45. It is therefore a Synecdoche so in the other, so all are said to continue
in the Apostles doctrine and prayers, etc. as before this Infants were not
capable of, and therein it is as in the other Synecdochicall, for of other
things mentioned they were capable, and they were appliable to them, they had
things in common too, and had supplies of clothing or food, etc. according to
their need; unless any will say, that these persons spoken of had no children
needing such supplies as well as themselves, or else if they had, yet their
needs were not supplied, so when they all eat their meat in several houses,
etc. what were the children shut out of doors if they had any, or had none of
those families any children in them? Suppose they could not eat meat with
such singleness of heart, yet were they not of them that did eat their meat
and were refreshed with them: there were doubtless some hypocrites in heart
amongst them, and they could not eat with them with a single heart, but were
rather spots in their feasts of charity, as Judes phrase is, Jude 12. yet by a
Synecdoche, all did eat with heart singleness, in that some which were
capable of the act doing, did so among them, all added were such as should be
saved too by a Synecdoche, and in a Church sense; yea their Infants some of
them were such really, and all of them in an external and ecclesiastical
respect of covenant and Church interest: they were capable of that adjunct,
albeit not of some others, so were they capable of being added to the visible
Church of Christians, as they were of that true visible Church of the Jews
before. And as all the Infants of covenant and inchurched Parents which stand
right in the Church, are also in that right inchoatively members of that
Church, albeit not perfectly. And inchoative actual membership of a true
visible Church, does externally inright to the initiatory Church and Covenant
seal of baptism; of which two these members children were enrighted, as well
as others then present. And for further clearing of this way of application of
some common acts to an assembly where are children, which are not appliable to
the whole company, wholly, see Acts 21. 5. bringing on the Apostle and his
company is appliable to all those of Ephesus, men, women and children, but that
act of praying not so properly appliable to the little ones, but rather to the
grown persons present. Weeping and swearing is applied to the whole company
assembled, whereof many were children, Ezra 10. 1. 5. compared, yet proper to
the grown part; albeit the other of being assembled before the house of God,
etc. were common, as that sin confessed on the behalf of the whole assembly,
verse. 2. was understood of the whole figuratively. In respect of that part of
the assembly which had so sinned, which were not the children as is evident; no
nor all the grown ones, but some only amongst them, as verse. 18. 23, 24, 25.
declare, so Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12. men women, and children must be all gathered to
have the Law read in their hearing, that they may hear and learn, and fear
the Lord, and observe all the words of his Law: it is all applied to all
indefinitely, yet sense and reason tells us, that sundry of the children were
neither capable then of such observing of all Gods words, no nor so much as
hearing the words read at that time in such sort, as thereby at present to be
stirred up to fear or obey the Lord, but some things only are appliable to
the whole assembly wholly, other things now mentioned to the whole at present
only, in respect of the grown part, and to the others no other th^n as
involved in any such acts of their parents at most, so Joel ^ 14. ^. solemn
assembly of all the inhabitants of the land, is to (...) convented for fasting,
so chap. 2. 1. again repeated, and ver. 15, 16, 17. instance is given in the
sucklings, as to be a part of that assembly for that end, and the maine duty
verse. 13, 14 is laid forth as required of them all, which are called to this
solemn fast, scil. not merely to abstain from food, or to express sorrow by
rending their garments, but to rend their hearts by godly compunction and
sorrow, etc. all will yield that such things are not properly applyable to
sucklings, but to some of the assembly: nor yet will any in reason exclude
Infants from being of that Church assembly, for such Church use according as
they were capable of any thing mentioned, albeit not capable of all mentioned,
Jer. 43. 4. 6, 7, disobedience to Gods voice is applied to all the people, yet
not properly verified in all the children which were of that people and
company, Deuteronomy. 29. 1. All Israel is said to have seen those wonders in Egypt,
and yet many of them that were then grown, it being 40. years after their
coming out thence, verse. 5. never saw the same, much less did the little
ones, which were a part of that assembly, verse. 14. yet who will conclude,
because little ones were not Israel seeing the^e wonders, that therefore they
were not Israel entering into Covenant, verse. 11, 12. and mark the phrase
applied to the little ones, that they also entered into covenant with God, ibid.
as well as God is said to make his covenant with them, verse. 14, 15. this was a
covenant of grace, as has been proved, so that Hen. Dens notion holds not
concerning God being in a sense in covenant with Infants, but they may not be
said to enter into covenant with him, that by the way. To return to that in
hand; nations baptized, Matthew. 28. are to be taught to observe Christ's
commandments, but non sequitur that Infants are no part of the Churches in the
nation to be baptized; so here, Infants believe not actually, etc. non
sequitur, ergo, not to be added to the Church in a solemn way of initiation
to Church estate inchoatively by external baptism. Both may stand together
and have their truth of the whole in some things wholly, wherein they are
capable as of Church estate and baptism, in others true of the whole in
respect of some part thereof as actual believing. To like purpose C. B.
argues weakly in his sixth argument, that the whole city was baptized men
and women mentioned, not their children too, as if therefore excluded; I may as
well argue from Genesis 14. 11, 12. That those Kings took all the goods of Sodom
and Lot, ergo, they took no people besides contrary to verse. 16. or if they
did take people and women, yet not children too. And if Lot were first taken
and then redeemed by Abraham with others, yet not ergo his children or
daughters, or if then under the notion of women, yet not a word of children,
wherefore either they were left behind in the City without their Parents when
they were taken, or if taken with the Cities and persons, yet not brought back
again, which would be absurd to affirm.

Secondly, suppose the believing Jews children were not just at that time
baptized, when their Parents were thus solemnly admitted to that Church of
Christians, yet non sequitur that they were not baptized afterward. When
members are solemnly admitted to complete and fixed membership in our Churches,
we baptize not often times their little ones the first day of that their
admittance, yet do it afterward as occasion is offered, and their desire
thereof signified.

SECT. VIII.
YEa but neither then nor in any other Text in the Acts is it ever mentioned,
that any children of any believing Jews were baptized. A. Non sequitur that
therefore they were never baptized. Many things of great weight were done by
Christ, and so by his Apostles which were not recorded: yet not therefore never
acted by them, John 20. 30, 31. of which see more before touching consequences
of Scripture. But do our opposites indeed conclude, that none of the believing
Jews children were ever baptized by Apostolical approbation? Is it imaginable
that among so many thousand believing Jews, at least ecclesiastically, such
which are so moved and touched in the case of their childrens being not
circumcised and sealed that way to the covenant, that it would not much more
startle them to suppose such a tenet or practice as to deny them to be sealed
any way by initiatory sealing at all, as neither by circumcision, so not by
baptism. Are they so ready to move contentions in that point, Acts 22. 21. and
upon but a supposed denial of it, and are they no way moved so much as to put
the case, and state the question to be satisfied from the old Testament, for no
other Scripture was then extant, why their Infants which were ever used to be
reckoned in Abraham's covenants, and so sealed thereto by the seal then only in
use, but now they are either wholly excluded any Church interest and any
covenant interest actually; or if owned yet as such, yet why denied of that which
is now the initiatory seal of such interest in the covenant. Yea does Peter
expressly mind them of the interest of their children as well as themselves in
the promise, wishing them therefore to be baptized; and this occasioned no
stirring of questions and cases why on the same ground their children must not
be also baptized? other contentions about other things are mentioned, and other
differences in points controvertible in those times, as Acts 11. 2, 3. and 15.
1. 2. etc. and 21. 11. and 6. 1, 2. and 15. 38, 39. and Gal. 2. 11. Surely then
either the believing Jews which when worse men had that privilege of their
childrens covenant and Church estate and right to the initiatory seal: the
case is so soon altered with them, that they think it no matter of scruple to
call the denial and omission of it into question, or to assay to desire
satisfaction in it for matter of judgment and practice in the case, or if
starting it, why is not so great a controversy mentioned as started by some at
least, that could not so wholly forget their childrens good when solicitous
about their own, and when so gladly accepting Peter's word, especially the
gladding word of promise, which was the joyfullest word he spoke as belonging
to them, and to their children: yea when accepting so gladly that enjoined
duty upon the ground of baptism? surely controversies of far less weight
are not passed over in silence, witness that Acts. 6. 1. and 15. 38, 39. and
Gal. 2. 11. and 21, 22, etc. me thinks to common reason and rational heads
and hearts as well as gracious. It should be rather concluded as a matter out
of question, and that no such new distance and difference was put of parents in
covenant and Church estate, but not now the children as formerly; of parents to
be sealed by the initiatory Church and covenant seal unto Church and covenant
fellowship, but not now their children as formerly.

SECT. IX.
A Fourth argument follows, scil. In that the Infants of covenant inchurched
parents which were externally interested in the covenant of grace, as invested
with the covenant of a political visible Church, to whom the Seals were
appointed, they were sealed as they were in bodily respect capable to be
sealed in that initiatory way of circumcising, therefore Infants now according
to their capacity in bodily respects of the like initiatory appointed seal,
are to be sealed in the initiatory way of baptizing. For clearer proceeding in
the argument, I shall lay down a few propositions. First, that the old
testament is avowed by the holy Ghost in the new, to contain all things
necessary for faith and practice for substance; and that so fully, that a
minister of the Gospel, ordinary or extraordinary, might be furnished thence
with groundworke and general rules, upon and according to which to proceed, in
holding forth any thing necessary to be believed, or practiced. Of the
Scriptures of the old Testament is that full testimony, 2 Timothy 3. 14, 15. See
Cartwright in locum, see Luke 16. 29. 31. Secondly, that the Apostles in all
other things used to hold forth Gospel services with analogy to legal Types,
Rites, and Sacrifices, etc. testimonies are plentiful for it. Thirdly, that it
was the Apostles use to hold forth and confirm things of most weight from the
old Testament, Act. 2. from the 14. to 41. and 3. 22. to the end, and 4. 10,
11. 24. to 29. and 8. 12. 25. 35, 36. compared with Esaias 52. 15. and 53. 1,
etc. So Acts 21. 38, 39. old Testament grounds, yea from the promise are given
them for baptism it self in the new; yea for the dispensation of all the
Gospel ordinances unto the Gentiles, as thereof capable, Acts 13. 46, 47, 48,
etc. Either then they had no ground, or if any, they urged them not, which is
contrary to those places, or if any, they urged them from the old Testament
then only extant, to establish their practices. Fourthly, that Christ himself
gave them pattern in this way of proof. Fifthly, that the people with whom
they had firstly to do, were believing Jews in that way, and they were
zealous for the old Testament in the general. Sixthly, that the ancients of the
primitive Churches have rarely, if at all denied the coming of baptism in
circumcisions stead. Seventhly, that where a commandment of God does injoyne
any one thing upon such a ground, there the command does require all things which
are of the same nature, as helpefull to the same thing; as the Commandment,
Thou shall not kill, forbids anger also as tending to the same end, scil, to
murder, and as well forbidding striking, rash speaking, etc. on the same
ground, as tending to murder: yea but Christ expressly forbids it. Answer,
Christ does not put any thing thus upon the commandment which was not
virtually in it before; he urged it, but not legislatively, as then making a
law in such particulars; but, declaratively, as expounding that law and
reducing particulars to their general heads of commandment. Yea but there was
his sanction thereof in that reducing: True, but when explained, yet so as
things in the commands before, only then clearly understood to be so; so
here, look as God commanding Abraham circumcision in the flesh for that end
and on that ground, that it might be an initiatory seal or Sacramental sign
of the covenant, so also in the same does he virtually command baptism with
water, as being of the same nature, scil. such as fulfilleth that end, scil.
initiatorily to seal the covenant, therefore albeit circumcision cease, yet
the commandment thereof reaches and partly authoriseth that baptism in the
application of it to Infants for that end, as of old to those Infants for that
end. Baptism is a sign I say of the covenant, and therefore either natural,
and then any washing uninstituted had sufficed this way, but that such washing
of water should be that sign needed an institution, and being instituted, it
is now of the old use to seal initiatorily the covenant to adult or Infant
externally initiated in it. Yea but Christ's institution gave a rise both to the
sign that baptism should be that, and that such and such persons should be
signed with it, therefore not the command of circumcision gave rise so much as
to the application of that sign, to such or such persons. Answer: it follows
not, that Christ's institution gave warrant therein, therefore not the
commandment of circumcision, since both consent in the maine ground of both,
scil. that we shall apply our selves to the use of such signs as he shall
appoint, and that in both should be the same moralls or spiritualls signified,
the Lord knowing that we needed some solemn external way of signification of
his mind of grace, by some sign, as well as they did. Eighthly, as none may
add to, so neither may any detract from any words of Gods grace, wherein he
has expressed himself, unless he himself repeal the same: he once would
have his covenant of grace to be to the whole Church and Church seed, and once
would have it initiatorily sealed on them; he has repealed the way of
sealing, but the covenant he has not, the extent of it to parent and child
he has not, the ordinary dispensation of it in, and from, and by the visible
Church he has not: the sealing use of an initiatory covenant and Church seal
he has not: the things mainely to be sealed even covenant and Church right.
at least external and the like, both of inchurched covenant parents and
children, he has not, as in former conclusions has been showed.

SECT. X.
HItherto that known and much controverted place, Col. 2. has reference; the
Colossian Church and members of it, as the Apostle urges against the
circumcision teachers, are as complete in Christ without circumcision, as ever
any other Church or the members of it, yea as even the best of them were with
circumcision; that is the proposition he lays down, Col. 2. verse. 10. if
they had objected Abraham's, and Isaacs, and Jacobs, and David's compleatnesse in
covenant respects and Church respects: Gentile Churches and members are as
complete in the substantial, and most material parts or branches of it, had
the one a covenant and Church blessing and heritage as to them, so to their
children; so are these complete that way too; if the ratification thereof by a
solemn covenant and Church initiatory seal be the great thing they have to
boast of; these are complete in Christ in that respect too: Christ has not
left his Churches and the members of them without such covenant privileges,
nor without a solemn way of initiatory sealing thereto and ratifying thereof:
whether as Churches or as members of it in particular, or as such members who
have children to partake thereof with them; do the false Apostles then urge
against them their incompleatnesse without circumcision? It Is answered in the
general, v. 10. they are complete in Christ; how? as fulfilling the types
which were in any Jewish ceremonies only? no verily, not only so; albeit
firstly and principally so; for Christ nailed them on his cross, and took
them away, as such, by his death. And what need then any Church ordinances at
all? we have all in Christ might some say, as 1 Cor. 1. I am for Christ, I
care not for Paul nor Apollos, nor Cephas, nor for their dispensation of the
word or seal of the covenant, I have enough in Christ; such a spawne of our
seekers there was in those times, v. 12. Yea but the Lord Jesus in wisdom and
faithfulfulnesse will have his Church and people to be graced and perfect as
of old they were in substantialls of the same Church ordinances and the like.
The beauty of the Church was perfect through that Church comeliness, which
God did in this respect put upon them, Ezekiel. 16. 14. not a comeliness of
outward possessions, in a temporal land, in temporal jurisdictions,
kingdoms, cities: what had the Church, qua Church, and as in covenant with
God, as his covenant Spouse, to do with them? nay the heathen might vye with
them, for as good land, as large possessions, territories, riches, honors,
dominions, etc. yea but not for Church ordinances; he dealt not so with any
nation besides, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Christ had as mediator and as a Priest
completed all ceremonious types: yea, but as Prophet he will have it held
forth and cleared by that dispensation of the Gospel, and as King of the Church
he will have all also exhibited in such a way, and by such evangelicall
means, 2 Timothy 1. 10. the Word and the Seals, they are parts of the Gospel in
the dispensation of them and by them all is brought to light: yea by them as by
pipes is Christ's fullness conveyed as head of his visible body the Church
outwardly, as it is by his spirit to his elect inwardly, Zach. 4. 11, 12, 13,
14. Col. 2. 19. hence the Church has such officers given it, whose proper work
it is to exhibit and communicate such things as tend to make them every way
complete, Ephe. 4. 11, 12, 13. we are complete in Christ, as the signatum, but
yet in baptism too as the sign. Yea but regeneration and sanctification, both
in respect of mortifying and quickening grace, etc. signified by circumcision,
is conferred on us by Christ. And so it was of old in him, in whom, Ezekiel. 36.
25, 26, 27. and Deuteronomy. 30. 6. was yea, and amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. and by his Spirit
as he held all forth then in the ministry of the Prophets of old, 1 Pet. 3.
18, 19, 20. so he exhibited the same to his elect among them; yet then he had
covenant and Church Symbols to confirm the same and instrumentally to convey
the same, and so now, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. As by the word of covenant, as the
principal instrument, and the Spirit makes baptism it self to become
efficacious: so by washing too he sanctifyeth his Church both as that whereby
he ratifyeth it so to their faith that they have the more strength of hold and
influence for that end; and as that which he blesses as one ordinary mean
also, in respect of the word of promise; to which baptismall washing is annexed
as the Seal. Sanctifying and purging is the signatum and end: washing with
water through the word, is the ordinary Seal, and mean; whence here, in Col.
2. 10. when he had laid down that thesis, he declares it by two instances:
partly in that we are circumcised by the circumcision of Christ, which is the
fulfilling of the type, v. 11. partly by applying the benefits of the
circumcision of Christ, to them and theirs, by the like, or an equal ordinance
to that of circumcision which the Jews enjoyed, to wit, of baptism; else were
not the Church and Saints now as complete as those of old; which as they had
virtually all fulfilled in Christ to their faith, Act. 15. 11. and 26. 6, 7.
Heb. 13. 8. Revel. 13. 8. Heb. 12. 1, 2, 3. So had they withal sealing
ordinances, applying the spiritual circumcision of Christ to them and theirs.
And so Aretius, which makes Christ the perfect organon of our salvation,
without any other equal external cause joined with him, in that respect it
was by him alone, that all was fulfilled, Col. 1. 19, 20. and by himself he
did that work, Heb. 1. 3. yet in point of external application, he denies
not any thing we say; for in the same place in his notes upon Colos. 2. within
four or five lines, he adds it as an observeable thing from the place, that
baptism comes in the stead of circumcision, as is evident in that the Apostle
calls it the circumcision of Christ; scil. in a Sacramental way: under the
name of the sign in whose stead baptism is set, comprehending the spiritual
thing signified by a metonymy, as the covenant, scil. the Sacramental sign of
it, Genesis 17. 11. 13. Act. 7. 8. the testament, scil. the visible seal of it, 1
Cor. 11. 25. So his body and blood, ibid. the Sacramental communion of it, 1
Cor. 10. 16, 17. or communion of it in a Sacramental sense. So that the
Apostles answer is full to prove the uselesnesse of circumcision, which the
false Apostles would have intruded upon them as necessary to the Gentile
Churches, Gal. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9. and 4. 21. and 5. 11. Acts 15. 24, and 24. 25. It
was a general false doctrine troubling all the Gentile Churches, ibid. but
it is now useless in respect of the maine thing signified, Christ to come, who
has fulfilled it as ceremonious and in respect of the external sign, and
mean of application of Christ, scil. circumcision supplied by baptism: whence
Gentile Philippians as well as Paul a Jew are of the circumcision, Phil. 3. 3.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were inwardly circumcised, so are they at least
ecclesiastically judged to be, they were externally circumcised: so are they
in their baptism, ergo, now circumcision is wholly useless. Yea but what is
this to Infants? the Apostle directs his speech to grown ones: Suppose he did,
yet this speech is of, and reaches to their children as well. Else therein had
they not been so complete, as those formerly which had a covenant made with,
and externally sealed both to them and theirs: yea the sealing of the covenant,
as we have showed, by baptizing of such as have children, is not so complete
in ordinary dispensations, unless as occasion is offered the same be sealed
initiatorily on their children, according to their outward capacity of the
external sign. The whole covenant is as well sealed on Abraham's seed, as on
himself, and not wholly sealed on either, without other, as not wholly made
with the parent, but with respect to the other. It were else to cut off a great
part of Abraham's Church seed, and so make Church parents more imperfect, but
especially unto the false teachers argument, the answer was not else so full.
Be it that Christ is the Antitype of circumcision now: So he was to the faith
of them of old. Be it that Gentiles are inwardly circumcised, so were they of
old: yea be it that inchurched parents are externally circumcised in their
external baptism actually, and so circumcision is so far useless to that
sort of grown persons: yet what is this to the other sort of persons, which
used, yea they mostly, to be circumcised; and it was their parents duty to
endeavor their circumcision as well as their own. If now there be no such
persons to be externally circumcised also in baptism, and that their parents
are under no tie in that respect, then at least circumcision in respect of them
may be useful and necessary, there being no initiatory sign appointed for
them. To say they have the internal circumcision, our opposites will deny, and
if they have had sundry elect Infants of Abraham's seed of old. To say they are
antitypically circumcised in Christ, our opposites will not affirm of all the
Churches chilches children, and if only of some, as much was virtually in
Christ to come for the elect Jewish babes, yea for those parents and children
belonging to grace before ever circumcision was of use; to say they are
externally circumcised in their parents baptism, as much might have been said
that way if rightly said of the Jewish children in their parents circumcision:
yet they were actually circumsed also. The Apostle argues of a compleatnesse
in Christ with reference to baptism, which is therefore here named, as an
outward mean whereby inchurched Gentiles, especially, come ordinarily to have
communion with Christ, and to be complete in him, yea and as an outward way of
holding forth manifesting, and proving the uselesnesse of circumcision to them,
for it is an answer to circumcision teachers as Mr. Blackwood rightly has it,
unless therefore our opposites will exclude them all Church interest contrary
to what we have proved: or that they would have believers children denied of
one initiatory outward mean of communion with Christ, whence that of baptizing
into his name; (or covenant followship) unless also they would have us want
one Apostolical way of arguing to prove the uselesnesse of circumcision to all
sorts of persons, which used personally to be circumcised of old, or unless
they will deny that baptism is of the same spiritual use, as circumcision
was, scil. to be a Sacramental sign, or seal of the covenant, and the
visible interest of persons in it; which Hen. Den denies, but others do not,
and if they do we have formerly proved the contrary, I see not how the force
of Gal. 2. 10, 11, 12. will be avoided in this point of Paedobaptisme.

SECT. XI.
Whereas therefore diverse things are brought to invalidate any binding
reference to circumcision, if it be intended of any type to the substantialls
of it, and in it, or any forcible analogy in diverse material things deduced
thence, we deny the cogency of such arguments, as when Mr. B. tells us of a
many differences between baptism and circumcision, and so I. S. the like, and
Hen. Den the like, it will not thence follow, ergo, in nothing alike still,
that one as the other is a seal of the covenant, that one as the other
distinguishes the visible members of the Church from Pagans: and this
follows not, and we assay not to make the proportion run of four feet, as
the proverb is, nor to prove proportion in sundry circumstantialls, peculiar
to that ordinance. It suffices us that they agree in their common author,
Sacramental nature and end. They are both institutions of God, Sacramental
initiatory signs in their natures, to be applied to persons of all sorts, as
they are outwardly capable thereof, which are visibly interested in covenant,
etc. albeit in their particular manner of administration, and the circumstances
of time, place, sex, nation, member of the body, etc. they differ; successors
are not successors if every way the same if no way different; yet I would not
create differences as some do, which never were. As first, that the circumcised
Babes did eat the Passover: when yet the Law to all that came thither,
strangers or Israelites was one, scil. to keep it to the Lord, with spiritual
respects to Gods ends and rules, as Exodus 12. 48, 49. to be in heart prepared
as well as to be ceremonially clean, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19, 20. the children in
that family celebration of it, asked not what mean [wee] by this service, as
if they actually partooke thereof, but what mean [yee] by it, Exodus 12. 26. or
if such children capable of instruction, were admitted as some authors have
thought, yet not Babes which could not go up to the Temple, Deuteronomy. 6. 16, 17.
Nor does the mention of the house, or congregation, which some who will not
allow us that latitude of like plea urge, as keeping it, evince it; but is an
usual Synecdoche: such roast, parched meat and sour herbs, etc. Exodus 12.
were too harsh to go down with such Babes, Numb. 9. 3. they in the
Wilderness kept the passover according to all the rites of it, yet none will
say the uncircumcised males therein; for circumcision was not used in the
Wilderness, Josh. 5. did eat contrary to express rule, no uncircumcised
person shall eat. Secondly, that circumcision sealed Canaan, as if that were
all Gods covenant mentioned, Genesis 17. 7, 8. 11. 13. but of this formerly. Or
thirdly, that reprobates as well as elect were then sealed, as if none but
elect are now sealed: as for Esau and Ishmael, in what sense they by
extraordinary revelation to this or that person being discovered and yet after
sealed, how it might be and was, as was that of Judas to Christ administering
the Supper and sop, a known devil, yet admitted, etc. and no crossing of
ordinary rule; we formerly spoke to it. Fourthly, circumcision bound, say some,
to the law; What, not I hope in the rigor of it, and as the substance of the
covenant of works made with Adam? was Abraham and Isaac, etc. bound thus
thereby, and not rather to it as to an holy rule of life? and so are we, yea
by our baptism, Romans 2. 25. if any will Idolize circumcision or baptism to
make it ex opere operato availeable to salvation, they then legalize it, and if
that way they look for life, they must keep the whole Law, or else they
perish. For in this legal sense they urged circumcision, Gal. 5. 3. a^ that by
which to be justified, verse. 4. As for the essential difference supposed by
Mr. B. in the covenant, Genesis 17. 7. we have formerly disproved that: that also
is an imaginary difference of Mr. B. that circumcision gave right to the
Church, and that of I. S. It brought them into covenant; when it confirmed
rather a precedaneous right in both, and seals of God use not to be appointed
to be put to blankes but to the covenant, and that was with Church reference
as before. Whence that Genesis 17. 7. 8. 11. nor was this any mere outward
covenant sealed, but the very covenant of saving grace (as some express it)
even that, I will be a God to them, or as I. S. has it, fulfill my promise to
them, naming Luke 1. 73, 74, 75. and of the nature it was on both the seeds,
if I may use his phrases, even elect or reprobate: nor was there no faith
required in adultis as Abraham and proselytes. Yea all sorts were thereby bound
to, and called upon to endeavor after faith in Christ, a new heart, power of
godliness, etc. hence Deuteronomy. 10. 16. and Jer. 4. 4. and Romans 2. 25. 29. and 3.
30. Nor does circumcision as it was given to Abraham belong to another
covenant, but as it was given by Moses, Levit. 12. 3. between which Christ
distinguishes, John 7. 22. Nor does the father of the families hand in
circumcision, when as now it is the minister of the Gospel which baptizeth,
argue that baptism belongs to another Priesthood: as long as both of them
belonged; that to the ordinary appointed Minister for this time, and this to
the ordinary and appointed Minister now. Nor will it follow, that the
forementioned obliging reference had to circumcision will bring on us a yoke
insufferable, Acts 15. 10. unless we urged circumcision it self, in the very
symbol and manner of administering of it, in such sort, as urged by those
legalists, as necessary to salvation, and as a work by which persons are to
expect to be justified, Gal. 5. 3, 4. which none will challenge us for: nay
even circumcision it self was not that yoke, as Gods instituted seal of his
covenant; even dissenting brethren some of them (for such I should call some of
them) acknowledge as much in effect, but to urge it on the Gentiles or on their
children, as simply necessary to salvation, Acts 15. 1. and adding therewith a
necessity to keep the whole law, verse. 5. 24. this was that yoke verse. 10.
without which both the choice Jews of old, and those at that time, and
consequently others of the Gentiles might be saved, as Peter acknowledges,
verse. 11. As much may be said to the objections made against this way of
arguing from circumcision, as if there may as well follow other analogies of
Priests and their garments, etc. It follows not unless we make analogy
every way parallel, which we decry. So when it is urged that circumcision don
away in Christ is an handwriting, is enmity against us, is an unprofitable
rudiment, is a partition wall, proper to the Jews, overthrows Christian
liberty, is that without which we are in Christ complete, etc. and therefore
not binding; it is true of circumcision as urged in a legal way, hence Gal. 5,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. and in respect of it ceremoniously considered in the proper
way of administering it, but if considered in the general nature of it as an
initiatory seal of the covenant of grace, so it was not against them, nor
unprofitable, etc. and we Gentiles that are complete without circumcision in
the symboll and circumstantials, yet are not so without the substantials of it
in baptism, which is of like nature and use so far forth as before was
proved. As for the grand objection against this and against the whole doctrine
of Paedobaptisme, scil. That we have no command for baptizing Infants as they
had for circumcising of them, nor have we any example of it: we have in the
former conclusions given answer thereunto, and even in injoyning that
initiatory seal of the covenant as made with such persons, God did virtually
injoyne the application of such an initiatory seal as he should appoint to
seal his covenant to persons externally in it, which should be declared to be
of like nature and of like use in the maine, as was showed.

SECT. XII.
ANd besides former Scriptures opened, as Matthew. 28. Acts 2. Gal. 3. Act. 16.
14, 15, etc. wherein this objection is taken off, we may add other virtuall
commands and examples thereunto. When God in Acts 10. presents the present
outlawry estate of the Gentiles, from Covenant and Church, according to Ephesians. 2.
11, 12. but now to be eaten; or such as were to be taken into fellowship, not
barely civil, but sacred: as the issue of baptizing some of them showed in the
end of the chapter in reference to this Gospel and Covenant or cleansed estate;
what God has cleansed, (speaking of it as already in actual existence,
because as sure as if already, God calling things which are not, as if they
were) I say in reference to this estate of Gods external owning of them at
least, Peter is commanded not to count them unclean. Acts 10. 15. Now to count
them unclean, or profane, is to count them strangers from all
Covenant-fellowship with the people of God, etc. All sorts of beasts, little
and great, dogs and whelps, gentiles parents and child, as the Cannanitish
woman and her daughter are called, Mat. 7. and Mat. 15. Whom God shall cleanse,
are not to be counted common. If God therefore make an holy Covenant with such
as we have proved, if Christ himself affirm such like, even such babes as
are of such parents, and are devoted to Christ to be of his kingdom or
Church: if he take them within his jurisdiction as Prince of his people, as
was prophesied; he will take the outlawry Jews, etc. Ezekiel. 37. Surely he so
far forth cleanses them, and severeth them from the rest of the outlawry
Pagan world, as he does the Infants of inchurched believers, as we have
proved: verily the Apostles are charged not to carry it toward the cleansed
creatures of this sort, as if unclean, by refusing to admit them to such
religious privileged fellowship as they are outwardly capable of, and
consequently not to refuse them from baptism, the initiatory Seal of that
fellowship. So Ezekiel. 47. 22, 23. which all will confess, and Scripture
evidence will clear, has reference to these times after Christ's incarnation,
the strangers or proselyted Gentiles, with their children where ever they are
cast amongst the tribes, even the Churches of the Christian Jews in the latter
days, they all by the charge of God, must have lo^ and inheritance with them
in Canaan; What in the earthly Canaan merely? verily there is no cause of such
a limitation: even with our opposites Canaan is typical also, typed out
Gospel mercies covenant blessings, and privileges, Heb. 3. and 4. 1, 2, 3,
etc. Surely then it is the charge of God in reference to the cho^ce days of
Gospel Churches, that where godly strangers are cast, and desire to fix and to
incorporate themselves as into one people to enjoy one and the same spiritual
possessions, and mansions under one and the same spiritual government of their
Prince, that such strangers together with their children should be joint
inheritors with the Churches, in the Churches heritage of the fellowship of
such ordinances, or privileges, as they are severally capable of, as at least
they are of the initiatory seal of baptism. And if others which hold with I.
S. against us in this point, are of his mind, his p^inciples will further
administer answer to that objection; he cites Ezekiel. 16. 8. Jer. 31. 33. Heb.
8. 10 Gal. 3. 18, 19. Heb. 6. 17. Deuteronomy. 26. 15, 16, 17. Deuteronomy. 29. 12, 13. Romans
9. 8. with Gal 4. 28 by which it appears (says he) that it is the promise
or covenant of grace which produces a Christian and gives him a being in such
an estate of grace as in Church fellowship, and afterward he uses arguments
to prove the covenant of grace to be the form of the Church, etc. which how
it will stand with other things elsewhere held forth by him and some of his
mind is considerable. As first, that the command of God was the only ground
of circumcision, confessed to be the seal of the covenant; yea but the Jews
had Church fellowship in their circumcision, all will yield as being a Church
ordinance, and then the command of God gave them not alone a being in that
fellowship since, ex concessis, the covenant of grace which was ever the form
of the Church, etc. it is said it gave them such a being. Secondly, that the
covenant wherein the Jew Church was interested, was not a covenant of grace,
yet this author produces, Ezekiel. 16. 8. Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17, 18. Deuteronomy. 29. 12, 13.
to prove that this covenant of grace was the form of the Church, and that by
this argument amongst others, because it was ever so. Surely this Church of old
was a true visible Church, to which these places have reference, and yet the
whole body of the people are spoken of, as the places declare: So then the
covenant made with them, by this authors grounds was the covenant of grace.
Thirdly, that the little ones of the Jews were not in the covenant of grace;
yea but whence then had they that Church being and right to that Church
fellowship in the seal of circumcision? whence called that covenant Churches
children? Ezekiel. 16. 8. 20, 21. 23. whence else are they of that number which
were to enter into that covenant? Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12. Albeit the author
politiquely leaves out that v. 11. in citing the place, which is here produced
to prove the covenant of grace to be the form of the Church, and that which
gives one a Church being, and as he argues that to be the form of the
Church, because it was of old so: so say I of the covenant of grace as invested
with Church covenant: that which was of old the form of the Church, giving
being to Church membership and fellowship in Church ordinances, the same is now
such; but the covenant as made with respect to parents and children was of old
the form of the Church giving being to such, scil. in circumcision, as of
parents so of children, therefore the same is now in such sort the form of the
Church to give a Church being to parents and children in respect of Church
fellowship in baptism, and so I conclude against that. Fourthly, that children
of persons visibly in covenant with God and his Church have no right to
baptism; when yet as has been proved they have interest in the same covenant,
and so consequently by this very principle laid down unto this Church
initiatory seal of baptism. Yea but Infants have not the law written in their
hearts, and so it is a seal to a blank: A. No more had they of old, no not
Infant Isaac, nor those, Deuteronomy. 24. 11. with 30. 6. they are not therefore such
as have not the covenant made to them, because they have not such a power of
grace actually in their hearts; that is the execution of Gods covenant, which
often times is long after, but the very (...) Berith or covenant it self is the
promise of it, Deuteronomy. 29. 11. 14, 15. and 30. 6. compared: hence that promise
called the covenant as being the most substantial part of it, ibid. and Genesis
17. 6, 7. 11. 13. they are present actual subjects of the promise of future
grace, I will circumcise their hearts, I will be a God to them, etc. and that
initiatory seal is to this especially, Genesis 17. 7. 11. 13. Acts 13. 8. So are
not Turks and Pagans children, in foro ecclesiae; besides Judas and Ananias
his baptism was in Gods institution, and in respect of the Church court, and
their Church right no seal to a blank; albeit Gods Law was never written in
their hearts, and they shall find it to their cost, both Gospel words and
seals will work one way, if not a savor of life, then of death; the cup in
the Lords Supper is to all Sacramentally the testament or a visible seal of
the very covenant of grace in Christ's blood, 1 Cor. 11. 25. yet some drink of
that cup unworthily, and because it is Sacramentally of that nature, thence are
they guilty of Christ's blood, ver. 27. 80. circumcision on all sorts was
Sacramentally the Covenant of grace, albeit not savingly and efficaciously
such, Genesis 17. 7. 11. 13. as before was proved.

SECT. XIII.
AS for that objection of supposed absurdities, of making Christ's body to
consist of dead members; forcing Christ's spouse upon him, destroying Gods
Church, holding people in blindness, bringing reproach upon religion, filling
consciences with scruples, making men rest in their baptism, etc. I answer,
they follow not exnatura rei, from the initiatory sealing of Infants with the
Church seal; for if so, then without distinction of times or Churches, etc. it
must universally hold: and so reflects upon the wisdom and faithfulness of
God, who once at least ordered such a thing, scil. putting the appointed seal
of his covenant, circumcision, to such Infants, they were members of the
visible body of Christ, a true visible Church, etc. yet God did not thereby
destroy his Temple, force a Spouse on Christ, fill his Church with dead and
rotten members, hold people in blindness, lay a foundation of persons resting
in their circumcision, kill them with scruples by it, or destroy the marks of
a true visible Church: which are according to Mr. B's. profession, and the
initiatory seal of the covenant, (then circumcision) now baptism: and so Mr.
B. his ninth argument is answered; his second, third, fourth, sixth and eight
argument has been elsewhere answered, his seventh argument from a mistaken
exposition of Acts 19 is elsewhere answered in what is briefly spoken to that
place, his tenth argument from the taking up of Paedobaptisme from corrupt
principles, is abundantly answered in the whole discourse; wherein better
principles are held forth, and if any hold it out upon weak and unwarrantable
grounds, it weakens not a good cause in it self, that it is ill handled. His
last argument from universal practice to the contrary, is elsewhere answered,
and amongst others, the practice in baptizing Lydia's house is one exception;
nor does that which Mr. B. would pretend as an argument to the contrary, evince
what he would have, they are not said to be the brethren of the house, which
Paul there comforted, Acts 16. ult. does Mr. B. which would make all the
jaylors household to be actually believers, think, that they attended not Paul
and Silas from prison? for he was now to depart the city, and hasted out of
the jaylors house by the coming of the Magistrates thither for that end, verse.
39. so that there was no opportunity before to utter what they had to say at
parting, but another house as that of Lydia in their way out of the city, is a
fitter place for that purpose, there therefore they make a little pause for
that end; after which they departed.

SECT. XIIII.
ANd to add here to consideration of 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. which to me has been
long of validity to prove this practice of Paedobaptisme as then in use, nor
can I yet be removed from those thoughts, the Apostles scope there was to take
down their pride in privileges, and resting secure in ordinances, etc. by
showing them the hazard to which they lay open, notwithstanding, if they
provoked God, by an argument from a like example of Church members interested
not merely in ordinary, but extraordinary privileges, yet by reason of such
provocation coming to a sad end; and thus lies the Apostles argument: Where
there are like privileges of grace, there (if abused) will be like
punishments inflicted: but with you and with them of old are like privileges
of grace: ergo, if alike abused, there will follow like punishments. And
because they might glory in those peculiar Church ordinances of the seals,
which yet they were so apt to abuse, he singles out parallels to them, and
therein does not take instance from the ordinary Sacraments of the Jews, but
from two extraordinary ones: wherein, if in any thing, they might seem to be
privileged above others. Now if there were no parallel in that material
business of the childrens baptism in Corinth Church; a great part of the
Apostles scope of urging them from a ground of paritie of privileges failed;
nay this had been a good argument to have taken down their pride another way,
scil. that the members of that Church had their children with them, in a
glorious manner baptized in the cloud and sea, yet God dealt so with them in
his judgments, and you Corinthians that have nothing any way parallel to such
a baptism of your children, do you think to escape?

Object. 1. But you will say there is no proportion betwixt them, in that this
was no Sacrament at all, but an extraordinary providence.

Answ. An ordinary Sacrament it was not, but a Sacrament it was though
extraordinary.

SECT. XV.
FIrst, in that the other of the Manna and rock was not else spiritual meat
and drink, and Christ to many of them really; it was then Sacramentally so, or
no way to them. Secondly, why else does the Apostle single out but these two;
to the one giving the name of baptism, to the other of spiritual meat and
drink and Christ agreeable to that mentioned in the end of this argument?
verse. 16, 17. Thirdly, why else does he having mentioned their being under the
cloud verse. 1. come over it again, verse. 2. and add the name of baptism to
it? It were a tautology if intending it of a bare providence. Fourthly, else
the Apostle had much failed in his scope of deterring the members of this
Church, considered as such, from Church sins and wantonness under and
against Church privileges. Fifthly, else why is not the same ascribed to all
the rest, to the mixed multitude which were with them, yea to the very beasts?
for all shared in this as a providence, all passed thorough the Sea with them,
etc. yet none but the Church have this ascribed to them; All our fathers were
under the cloud and baptized, etc. the Church fathers to Paul and Gentile
Church members (as such) were those Jew Church members: whether parents or
children; the very babes, as then, yet in respect of after ages of the Church,
to whom afterward they were Instruments to convey Church truths and blessings,
they were fathers; Paul spoke this to the brethren of the Church, yet not
excluding the sisters, but including them in his admonition and argument; but
it is usual, that Church admonitions and Epistles do run in the name of the
brethren, as being principal actors in all Church matters, and hence also,
albeit the females of the Jew Church as such be by proportion included in this
matter of Church privilege, yet he names only the males; but only members
of the Church did share in it in that respect. Sixthly, hence also the phrase,
baptized into Moses, not personally but ministerially considered in his
doctrine; he gave them from God both a precept for it and a promise
encouraging to it: or into Moses typically considered, as a type of Christ,
Act. 3. 22.

Object. 2. Was not this only a type of saving preservation from sin, etc.

Answ. All the Corinthians had no antitype thereof in their baptism really, no
more then many of them, and in a Sacramental way, that baptism to them was as
that to the Corinthians, a visible seal of salvation.

Object. 3. Does he not speak of a samenesse therein betwixt the Jews
themselves, and not in reference to the members of the Church of Corinth?

Answ. The scope of the Apostle being what was mentioned, will not bear other
sense then of comparing them with the Jews in like privilege for substance,
to deter them from like sins, lest they incur like punishments.

Object. 4. By this argument we set up national Churches now.

Answ. No more follows hence, ex natura rei, but, as only Church members
according to their several capacities were so privileged and not others: so
only Church members now are to partake of Church Ordinances, we are to
consider it herein qua Church, which is continuing, and not qua national
Church, wherein was some circumstantiall peculiaritie which vanished.

Object. 5. You may then plead for Infants coming to the Lords Supper, since
all our Fathers did eat of that spiritual meat and drink of the rock, etc.

Answ. The least male child of a day old, or two or three hours old at that
instant (of which there were many scores its likely in that numerous Church)
were in respect of succeeding Churches, fathers; yet none will imagine the word
(all) to take them in, in the latter: as if they gave them water out of the
rock to drink, or Manna cakes to eat so young; but a Synecdoche must needs be
yielded therein: So I say (all) in the former is taken, for all the fathers
simply; but in the latter for all Synecdochically: or for all such which were
capable of making a spiritual use thereof.

SECT. XVI.
TO draw to a Conclusion, one argument more used by A. R. and which is Mr. B.
his first argument against Paedobaptisme, would be cleared it stands thus, the
Baptism of Christ is dipping, the Baptism of Infants is not dipping, ergo,
the Baptism of Infants is not the Baptism of Christ. Now what he means by
dipping, he shows in his answer to that of washing of cups, etc. which says
he is not by sprinkling but dipping, yea not only dipping but total dipping,
washing all over. The weakness of the Minor we shall consider in the latter
end, and beginning with his Major. The Major of this Syllogism is fallacious,
for baptism of Christ is washing, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Heb. 10. 22. 1 Pet. 3. 21.
and washing is as well by sprinkling, or pouring on of water, yea Christ's
Baptism is such a washing as is in way of pouring out or sprinkling. Hence
Tit. 3. 5. washing of regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost, which he
has powered out on us, Verse. 6. Greek, and in urging their proof from the
difference of the Greek word (...) from (...), which signifies sprinkling
properly, Heb. 9. 13. 19 21. they forget how the holy Ghost terms all those
diverse sprinklings, Verse. 10. namely diverse (...) which are after named in the
followings, Ver. scil. sprinkling the blood of Bulls, etc. Verse. 10. 13. 19.
21. compared. So then by the interpretation of the holy Ghost which is more
then a thousand Authors, baptismes are sprinklings, and sprinklings are
baptismes. Hence speaking to the inchurched Hebrews, as alluding to their
legal sprinklings, he calls baptism, baptismes ( Heb. 6.) in the plural
number; yet Ephesians. 4. there is but one baptism: and it is observable how the
Author to the Hebrews in speaking of baptism alludeth and relates to their
legal baptismes or sprinklings, and therefore calls them baptismes. Now who
knows not, that children were sprinkled with that typical blood as well as
others, to note the necessity of the sprinklings of them also with that blood?
Yea since the Hebrews in Church estate; for such they were, witness that Heb.
10. 24, 25. and 13. 17. had such baptism amongst them of persons suitable to
the legal baptismes with blood, why should not we conclude baptizing of their
children too as well as of grown persons to be in use with them according to
the type of that ceremonial sprinkling?

A. R. his reason makes rather against him too, if [(...)] joined with baptism
signify [in] and never [with] then baptizing (says he) must be dipping and
not sprinkling. To which I reply, if [(...)] joined with baptizing, signify
[with] and not [in] then by way of contrary, baptizing is sprinkling and not
dipping: now in the very places quoted by A. R. (...) put after the word (...)
signifies [with] and not [in] Matthew. 3. 11. He shall baptize you (...) with
the holy Ghost and with fire, and not in it; which is expounded by Acts 11. 16,
17. the holy Ghost fell on them, and Acts 1. 5. compared with 2. 17. it is
expounded by pouring out of the Spirit; nay Luke in mentioning the very sign,
leaves out [(...)] Luke 3. 16. and Acts 11. 16. I baptize you (...), which (if
grammatically rendered) is not [in] but [with] water. Besides, it is most
suitable to Sacramental actions: which are signs to hold proportion to the
thing signified; wherefore also it is so rendered in mentioning the signatum;
hence mention is made of sprinkling the Nations by Christ, Esaias 52. 15. and of
the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12. 24. 1 Pet. 1. 2. See more Ezekiel 35. 25, 26.
Esaias 43. 3, 4. Joel 2. with Acts 2. Sprinkling or pouring of water most fitly
expresses the maine thing properly signified and sealed visibly (...)
baptism, scil. first grace; wherein the Spirit applies, not us to the Word,
or to Christ, (as in dipping the party is applied to the water, and not the
water to him) but the Word and Christ to us, as first in order of nature, 1
Cor. 12. 13.

Object. But baptizing is burying with Christ?

Answ. It is not necessary the resemblance should hold fully unless as none is
buried before they are dead, so we should be first dead with Christ in
baptism, and then afterward buried, which if in baptism too, and so to be
twice baptized; but if the allusion be urged, it is for us rather, we use not
to bury men by throwing them down with their faces downward, as when persons
are dived with their faces under water, but by laying them in with their faces
upwards; nor do we plunge them into the dust and earth, but power and
sprinkle dust and broken earth upon them. When Christ was baptized of John in
Jordan it is said he went down, etc. but was he therefore by John dived into
the water? Yes say you, what in his clothes? then his clothes too were baptized
with him, as I may say, but how then is it said he came straightway out of the
water, Mark 1. 10. and verse. 1, 2. immediately the spirit drives him into the
Wilderness? what in that dung wet case as we say, is that probable? Luke
says, Chap. 3. 21. when all the people were baptized, he also was baptized:
women also then were baptized openly, for it was a Church action, and if they
were dived were they not stripped? how improbable is it that they were ducked in
all their clothes, and if they were stripped in whole or in part, would Christ
be present at such immodest spectacles? That women were baptized by John, see
Matthew. 21. 31. 32. compared with Luke 7. 39. and Matthew. 3. 4, 5, 6. Nicephorus
his story, lib. 13. chap. 19. of the flying of the women naked being beset with
armed men as they were to be baptized; and that sad story of a Priest defiling
of a woman when to be baptized; besides the sad plunges which they were of old
put to, when they took up this course of diving baptized persons in such sort,
witness that order of the fourth Carthage council, Can. 4. touching widows
baptizing of women and other like acts mentioned in Justinian, besides the
mischief of restrayning baptism to certain times of the year in cold
countries, and sundry other sad consequencies of such a course, might be
propounded, but thus much for the Major. The Minor of Mr. Bs. Syllogism is
weak also; since some which hold paedobaptisme, yet baptize by dipping;
therefore we shall thus retort Mr. Bs. Syllogism. Baptism by dipping is the
baptism of Christ: but with sundry Ministers, baptism of Infants is baptism
by dipping; therefore with them at least, baptism of Infants is the baptism
of Christ: so contradictory are Mr. Bs. reasonings to his own principles. And
thus much be spoken from the solid grounds of Scripture to that part of the
controverted case touching Infants Baptismall Right.

PART III.
CHAP. I. Sect. I. General consideration of the eight Propositions.
HAving seen before what defensive and offensive weapons the Armory of the
Scripture affords us, for the just vindication of the controverted Title of the
little ones of inchurched visible believers unto the Covenant and Baptism, the
initiatory seal thereof, the globe of contention is again cast by sundry, and
a challenge is made, that laying by a little those spiritual weapons of our
warfare (which indeed are mighty through God to cast down all the specious
Logismes, reasonings of the sons of men against Christ in the doctrine of his
free grace and Covenant and initiatory seal thereof) we should try it out at
other weapons, even humane testimonies and authorities. And besides other
darings of us this way; the Author or Authors of that Pamphlet entitled The
plain and well grounded treatise concerning Baptism, give out great words
this way, and even conclude the victory before the fight. For my own part I
must confess my self a very puny, and too too unskilful at such weapons; yet
I shall (God willing) adventure to accept the challenge, and make a little
trial of their skill; not doubting, but when an essay shall be made albeit by
a learner, there will be some able seconds to take up the cause when I have
laid it down.

But to leave Prefacing and fall to work.

The substance of the book is laid down in these eight Propositions.

1 That Christ commanded his Apostles and servants of the holy Ghost first of
all to preach the Gospel and make Disciples, and afterward to baptize those
that were instructed in the faith, in calling upon and confessing the name of
God. His proofs out of Scripture are, Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15, 16. Luke 24.
45. John 4. 1, 2. Acts 22. 16.

This proposition might pass for the most part as current, allowing a latitude
in the word Disciples: and understanding it of such as were baptized merely in
their own right, and taking that phrase, calling upon the name of God, as not
always the present act of the persons baptized at the instant of their
baptism, but rather of the Minister baptizing; nor does the instance of Paul,
Act. 22. 16. prove this latter. It being absurd even in adult persons to
suppose it thus in that example of the Samaritan woman that they should in the
open face of the Congregation when they were baptized make their personal and
particular prayers, Acts 8. 12. or that every one of those 3000. baptized that
day, Acts 2. 41. made their several prayers; for if it were essential to the
Ordinance to make such personal prayers; since there is no stint how long, or
how much they should utter in calling upon Gods name, the Apostles had need to
have spoken severally to them, that you must not be long, the time is short,
and if they had taken that pains, yet many days would have been needful to
such a work: It was not possible to be dispatched that very day. As for the
other Scriptures they have been elsewhere considered.

The second Proposition that the Apostles and servants of the Holy Ghost have
according to the Commandment of the Lord Jesus Christ, first of all taught,
and then afterward those that were instructed in the mysteries of the Kingdom
of God were baptized upon the confession of their faith. Proofs out of
Scripture, 1 Cor. 1. 17. How this is a Proof I see not, for if he always
preached before he baptized, it might easily have been replied, Yes Paul if
God sent you to baptize any he sent you also to preach, for you are to preach
always to all persons that you baptize, before you do baptize them: why
therefore do you say you were not sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel,
since with the one you do the other? The other proofs, 1 Cor. 3. 6. and 4. 15.
are somewhat far fetched and strained, but I will not stick there. Heb. 6. 1,
2. is as well applied by Authors, Calvin, Beza, etc. as grounds of
Paedobaptisme, those being the heads of Catechizing, containing the sum of
Christian Doctrine, scil. profession of faith and repentance, of the articles of
which Doctrine an account was demanded of adult Pagans and Jews at the time of
their baptism, and therefore called the Doctrine of Baptismes (alluding in the
plural word to the many typical washings in use of old among the Hebrews or
Jews) but from baptized Infants the same was called, for when they were
solemnly admitted to full Church Communion and declared so to be by the
Elders, commending them therein to God by prayer. And hence the same Doctrine
is called also by the name of the Doctrine of Imposition of hands. Amongst
which articles of that Doctrine two are singled out as containing the rest,
scil. the resurrection of the flesh and eternal judgment; See Calvin and
Beza, in Locum. His next proof, Heb. 10. 22. I let pass. In the next proof
Acts 2. 36, 38. 41. I observe how craftily the 39th. Verse. is left out
unmentioned, wherein the strength of argument on our part does consist, Acts 8.
36, 37, 38. and 10. 47, 48. and 16. 31. to 34. But why is that example of Lydia
here left out, and her household, but that it speaks too broadly, that albeit
the Apostles sometimes required confession of some persons which they baptized,
yet not always of all sorts of persons, as that one example witnesses? His
other Scripture is that Acts 18. 8. but of all these consideration is elsewhere
had. This Proposition with the limitations formerly mentioned may pass,
supposing it not understood exclusively, that such as they baptized were such,
therefore they baptized none other but such, which is a non sequitur.

3 Proposition: That after the Apostles time by the ancient fathers in the
primitive Church, who observed and followed the Ordinance of Christ, and the
example of the Apostle, the people were commonly first instructed in the
mysteries of faith, and after that they were taught they were baptized upon
confession of the same.

This Proposition, sano sensu, might pass also, understanding that that was
the Ordinance of Christ, and practice of the Apostles so far as concerns
grown persons baptism: but yet that was not all intended in the one, nor
practiced by the other. And the Proposition it self implies as much, saying
commonly it was so, the people being not as now many are, in a manner wholly
professing Christ, but rather wholly Pagan and Profane and Idolatrous; but
always it was not so even then; for their little ones which were not brought
to the faith were also baptized.

4 Proposition: That by the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, the
children both of the faithful and others, were commonly first instituted in
the faith, and afterward upon acknowledging and confessing of the same they
were baptized.

This Proposition is full of equivocall terms, it may not therefore pass
without some Animadversions: for it may so be interpreted as to stand with
truth, yet so also as to be utterly false. [Primitive Church] may be
understood of the Church in the same immediately following the Apostles time, or
as in some of his Authors, for the Church that succeeded more then an 100.
years, yea possibly 200. or 300. afterward. Rupertus Tiuliensis says it was
the custom of the Church of old that they administered the Sacrament of
regeneration only at Easter and Pentecost, etc. which if it begun in Victors
time, to whom that restraint of the time of baptism, unless in case of
necessity, is attributed as the Author of it about the year 290. Albeit Rivet
in his first Book Critici Sacri, cap. 8. cites the Magdeburge historians
centur. 1. cap. 8. as proving the Decretalls ascribed to Victor to be spurious;
or if not then, but some time in the third Centurie, yet it suffices to show
in what Latitude of time Rupertus his expressions run when he speaks of
what was the use in the Church of old. And in the primitive Church, in this
Latitude, it is probable there might be sundry which upon corrupt grounds might
defer both their own and their childrens baptism too, as appears by the
Orations of Gregory Nazianzen stirring up as to come more speedily themselves
to be baptized, so to offer their little ones at the most, if no danger be
toward, (in which case he advises the same sooner) when three years old, if
so long deferred, yet then to offer them to baptism, which was before they
could be able to make such an acknowledgement of the faith, or confession of
their sins. But more of him afterward. [Children of the faithfull] if he
intend such children as were knowing and able to understand truth taught them,
so as to be apprehensive of their sins, etc. It Is true, they used when any
were received into Church fellowship, which had such adult children at that
time, those to instruct in that way before those children were baptized. But if
understood of little ones not capable of such an issue and effect of such
instruction, those they used also then to baptize before such instructions. And
for this let the Authors own testimonies which he quoteth, Proposition 7. of
Origin, Austin and Gregory the fourth witness. For we now speak not to that,
whether it were only a Church custom and tradition, etc. we shall speak to
that afterward. But suppose it were only a Church custom and tradition, yet
its proof sufficient that it was so anciently in use as there is mentioned,
that even children were baptized before they were thus instructed, as the cited
places declare, of which more hereafter.

5 Proposition: That according to the institution of the Lord Christ, and the
Apostles and ancient Fathers right use, the Teachers required faith with
Baptism, and that he that was baptized must himself acknowledge and confess
the same, and call upon the name of the Lord: for which Matthew. 28. Mark 16.
Acts 8. are again urged, of which before; so Acts 19. 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 3.
21. not now to speak how pertinently this last place especially is brought or
not. The proposition if understood as adaequately expressing all that Christ
ordained, or the Apostles practiced, and the Fathers after them, which baptized
regularly, as if none else were baptized but such as came in such a way, is
denied as false.

6 Proposition: That Christ neither gave commandment for baptizing of children
nor instituted the same, and that the Apostles never baptized any Infants: this
Proposition in the terms of it is false, as before has appeared when we
proved, that a consequentiall command of Scripture is Christ's command, and that
such a command there is for the baptism of children. The other part also, that
the Apostles never baptized any Infants, is as rash and false.

7 Proposition is of the same stamp, scil. that the baptism of Infants and
sucklings is a ceremony and Ordinance* of man brought into the Church by
Teachers since the Apostles time, and instituted and commanded by Counsels,
Popes and Emperors.

8 Proposition, labors of the same Frenzy, sc. that young children or Infants
ought not to be baptized, and that none ought to be brought or driven, or
compelled thereunto. Proved by Scripture, Matthew. 28. 19. Mark. 16. 15. These
three Propositions might have been all put into one, but that the Author or
Authors would speak many things; so might the other five Propositions have
been reduced to fewer heads.

The unsoundnesse of these Proprositions in the Authors sense I hope has been
cleared to humble and pliable minds in the former discourse.

CHAP. II. SECT. I.
We shall now trace these Authors in their quoted Authorities.

Proposi. 1. Hierom upon Matthew. 28. 19. is quoted Proposition 1. and 8. The
Lord, says he, commanded his Apostles, that they should first instruct and
teach all nations, and afterward should baptize those that were instructed in
the mysteries of faith; for it cannot be that the body should receive the
Sacrament of baptism, unless the soul have received before the true faith.
This whole testimony is intended by the Author of grown ones, in what way
adult Pagans are to be baptized, and of their receiving of baptism, so as to
have the saving benefit of it. But to make it his mind to intend exclusion of
Babes is to make him work and practice things against the light of his own
judgment and conscience. The Author confessing in the eight proposition, that
his proofs are out of ancicient and later teachers, who have and do maintain
the use of baptizing children, and Hierom is one he quoteth. As for Hieroms
judgment this way, see his first Tome, his 7th. Epistle, scil. ad Laetam,
where having said before that the good and evil of little children is ascribed
to the parents, he adds, nisi forte existimes Christianorum filios, etc.
unless thou think that if the children of Christians receive not baptism,
the children only are guilty of the sin, and that the wickedness is not
also imputed to those that would not give the same to them; especially at that
time when the children which were to receive baptism, could not contradict the
same; as on the other hand the salvation of the Infants is the Ancestors gain.
He reckons that there is wickedness in it carelessly to neglect such an
ordinance, that tends to their spiritual gain in their childrens good
thereby furthered. Now if Hierom thought there were no Law for childrens
baptism, why is there any transgression, yea so deep charged upon the
neglectors of it, that it is scelus in his account? So in his second Tom. 1. 3.
Dialogorum adversus Pelagianos ad finem; he proves infants baptism to be
for remission of sins, as well as for entrance into Gods kingdom; so that
this Authors words are wrested against his own intention.

Let us see whether the next be better dealt withal, scil. Athanasius in his
third Sermon contra Arrianos: Our Savior did not slightly command to baptize,
but first of all he said, Teach, and then baptize, that true faith might come
by teaching, and baptism be perfected by Faith. If Athanasius had said thus
in the Authors sense, yet the fallacy had still been the same to conclude a
dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. But let us look upon that place and
weigh the words of Athanasius, there speaking of the unprofitablenesse and
vanity of Baptism by Arrians; he proceeds thus. For (says he) the
Arrians do not give Baptism in the Father and Son, but in the Creator and
creature, in the maker and workmanship: As therefore a creature is a diverse
thing from the Son, so is the Baptism supposed to be given by them diverse
from true Baptism. Albeit because they see the names of Father and Son in
Scriptures, they do feign to name them, for it is not he that barely names
the Lord which gives lawful Baptism, but he that expounds that name and
holds the right faith. And therefore our Savior does not command to baptize
after any fashion (the Authors render the word quovis modo by slightly) but
first he said Teach and then baptize (in the name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost) (this clause the treatise leaves out) that by teaching a right
faith might arise (the treatise says true faith might come) and with the faith
of Baptism the entire initiation might be perfected; by initiation he means
baptism as the words before these show. In these words. The Arrians hazard
the loss of the integrity of that mystery. But I speak of Baptism. For if
perfect and full initiation be given in the name of the Father and Son, and
they hold not forth the true Father, etc. how should the Baptism which they
give be true, etc. So that that speech, with the faith of Baptism the entire
initiation might be perfected, is that with the faith or doctrine of faith
rightly held out, the Ordinance of Baptism might be perfect or valid, which
he calls the right faith, as the words before mentioned show: So that he
does not here intend fidem qua credit aliquis, sed fidem quam credit, he
means it of the object, not the habit of faith; and of the qualifications of
the persons baptizing, to make their act valid, not of the parties baptized.
For none will say that an hypocrites Baptism, because he has not true faith,
is not true Baptism: The essence of the Ordinance not depending upon man's
faith but Gods word. And that he intends no other thing as it appears by the
premises, for if you take his next words following the same, it will be
evident. Truly, says he, even other heresies, and those not a few, do in
seeming words pronounce that rite of baptizing, but being not right in
judgment, nor retaining the sound faith, they possess and bestow an
unprofitable water, as destitute of the Deity of Religion, so that they which
are sprinkled by them, are rather polluted through corrupt Religion, then
redeemed. Here therefore is an ancient Authors words wrested to another sense
then the scope of his discourse tended, and some words left out which served to
declare his meaning, and other words so palpably mistranslated that the Reader
is grossly abused thereby as well as the Author.

SECT. II.
THe next testimony is of Haimo upon this Text of Matthew. In this place is set
down a rule how to baptize aright, scil. that teaching should go before
baptism; for he says, Teach all nations, and then he says, and baptize
them; for he that is baptized must be before instructed, that he first
learn to believe, that which in baptism he shall receive; for as faith
without works is dead, so works when they are not of faith they are nothing
worth. This labors of the same fallacy as that of Jeroms testimony, a dicto
secundum quid, ad simpliciter, Gerhardi loc. com. loc. de baptismo.
what the Author spoke in reference to Adulti, it is applied as his mind thereby
to make baptism of children besides or against rule; when yet the same Author
upon the 14. of Romans, speaking about the case of their dipping of children,
he mentions Cyprian as practicing dipping of children in baptism but once:
but after (says he) he being corrected of God, he abounded in more sublime
knowledge, dipping them thrice. He looks then at that way of baptizing
Infants as a lesson which Cyprian learned of God. He then surely thought
baptism it self of Infants to be taught of God, and no breach of a rule of
God: We speak not this as allowing Haimo's judgment about Immersion, and much
less that of trina Immersio, but to clear the Author from that intention
which the treatise would father upon him, or at least by producing the man's
writings in one place, would make him against h^s own light to write things
contradictory in another: Thus is this Author and the Reader with him abused
also.

SECT. III.
THe next Author cited in this Treatise is Erasmus, both upon Matthew. 28. and
Mark 16. to like purpose. When you have taught them, if they believe, etc. and
repent, etc. then let them be baptized, etc. and Proposition 3. those who in
times past were to be baptized were first of all instructed in the mysteries
of the Christian faith, and were called Catachumeni, etc. This later one would
think might have expounded the former, that he intends it of adult Pagans,
and not of others in Christian Churches, such as ours are whose foundations are
already laid and established. And Proposition 6. It Is no where expressed in the
Apostolical writings that they baptized children. He does not say, it is not
so much as probable nor is it to be gathered by consequence that they did so:
wherefore his testimony is no proof that the Apostles never did baptize
Infants, because it is never mentioned expressly. It Is never expressly said, that
I remember, that the Apostles or Evangelists when they Baptized those in Acts
2. and 8. and 16. 18. that they called upon God for a blessing upon the
Ordinance, but will it follow that they did not sanctify the Ordinance by
Prayer? Proposition 7. he is quoted as a proof of that Proposition, Lib. 4.
de ratione concion. saying that they are not to be condemned that doubt
whether childrens baptism was ordained by the Apostles, and think that the
same is to be received as the placita Scholasticorum Theologorum, which cannot
be proved by Scripture. Here the Authors use their old art of substraction and
addition. His words are thus. It is probable that to baptize Infants was
instituted by the Apostles, and yet they are not to be condemned which doubt
thereof; With the same moderation many tenants of School Divines are to be
received, which cannot (evidently) be proved from the Scriptures. The first
speech of Erasmus is wholly left out, which is cross both to that peremptory
if not impudent conclusion expressed in the 6th. Proposition, and this set
down in the 7th. if even Erasmus his judgment be adhered to, for if it be
probable that Paedobaptisme was of Apostolical institution, then it is not so
peremptorily and with such plerophory to be asserted that it was never
ordained of Christ, or practiced by the Apostles, but is an ordinance of man.
And whereas it is rendered, and think that the same is to be received inter
placita Scholasticorum, etc. there is no such connection or expression. But it
is a distinct sentence. With the same moderation, etc. many School tenants are
to be received, etc. scil. they are also not to be condemned which doubt of
some School tenants which are not so express and clear from Scripture. He
does not say that Baptism of of Infants is to be thought placitum
Scholasticorum, but speaks of other instances of things probable. Nor does he
speak of bare School Notions which have no bottom at all in Scripture, and
which cannot at all be proved from the Scripture as the Treatise says; which
cannot be proved, but which cannot evidenter probari per Scripturas. True it
is, Henry Den he says that Bellarmine taxes Erasmus with that opinion of
denying childrens Baptism; but in Erasmus his preface to his Paraphrase on
Matthew, he rather condemns the carelessness of Priests, in so much that
many Christians are in respect of knowledge rather as Pagans; and at best are
rather in titles, customs, and ceremonies Christians then indeed: And advises
that children after they have been baptized, and come to riper years, that
they be well instructed in what their sureties have promised for them, and
called to account how they profit thereby, and whether they do avouch and own
the promise made by their sureties, and if so, then at some time or other that
they in the open Congregation expressing it, be then with some solemnity
approved. And if they reject this motion, then to be debarred the Eucharist,
until they change their mind: So that he seems not to disallow
Paedobaptisme, but carelessness afterward. This I speak that none may be
rendered worse then they are, be they Papists or others. Albeit I would not
much weigh the expressions of Papists this way, to whom bare Church traditions
are equivalent to Scripture commands, express or virtuall.

SECT. IIII.
THe next Author is Bullinger in his Decads expounding Matthew. ^ 28. Docete
omnes Gentes, etc. make Disciples of all Nations, etc. What then does Bullinger
intend baptizing Infants as not here enjoined? Nay in the place quoted in his
Decades of Sermons, Tom. 5. Decad. 5. Sermon. 8. he brings this as an Argument
for Paedobaptisme, God has commanded to baptize all Nations, and therefore
Infants, for these are comprehended in the words all Nations. Bullinger is
again cited as a Testimony for the proof of the second Proposition in the
same place speaking upon the words of Paul, 1 Cor. 1. God has not sent me to
baptize but to preach the Gospel. He is quoted to say. This must not so
slightly be understood, as if he were sent not to baptize at all, but that
teaching should [goe before] baptism. For the Lord commanded his Apostles both
to preach and to administer the Sacraments. Bullingers words are, Non quod
negaret absolute (which our present translators render; this must not so
slightly be understood. Negaret is in their English not to be understood,
and absolute is in their English, slightly. If they had translated it simply it
would have hit it, but I think slightly fits them indifferent well) se ad
baptizandum non esse missum, sed quod doctrinam praeferret: utrumque enim, etc.
That clause is expounded, but that teaching should go before baptism, etc.
Here I want my construing book; but I will follow my translators; sed quod,
but that, doctrina, teaching, praeferret should go before -- Risum teneatis
amici? But if the translators had learned common rules and read the place, they
would have clearly discerned Bullingers meaning to be far wide from their
purpose, scil. To prove rather the prioritie of the Gospel to baptism in
dignity and excellency, then in order of dispensation. For besides that the
common Grammar construction of that passage, sed quod doctrinam praeferret,
will bear no sense so well as that mentioned, See Bullingers Commentary on 1
Cor. 17.
his words immediately preceding also clear the same. Evangelium majus est
baptismo, the Gospel is more excellent then Baptism, or greater then Baptism:
For Paul said, the Lord sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, not
that he denied it absolutely, etc. Sed quod doctrinam praeferret. And it is
yet more strange that this which Bullinger brings as his third Argument to
prove Paedobaptisme to be of God, the Authors of this Pamphlet bring as a
testimony to their purpose against Baptism; for Bullinger subjoynes to the
words before: That children are received in the Gospel doctrine, -- they are not
refused of God, who therefore unless he were besides himself would exclude
them from the less? In Sacraments are considered the thing signified and the
sign, the former is the more excellent. Infants are not excluded from that, (
scil. the Gospel, the promise) who will deny then the sign? for truly the
Sacraments of God are rather to be esteemed by the word ( scil. the promise)
then by the sign. As for Bullingers expressions out of Austin, contra Iulianu^
quoted in the 7th. Proposition they prove that the Carthaginian council did
indeed ratify Baptism, but not that it came in first by that council. Nay
the testimony cited of Austin against the Donatists, lib. 4. cap. 23, 24. uses
that as an argument, that it was of Divine authority, because not instituted
by any counsels. And Origens testimony there cited, Proposi. 7. proves it to
be in his time, which was 200. years before that Carthage council, in the
time of Innocent the first: Yea Origin proves it to be at least a Church
custom long before from the time of the Apostles. Bullingers testimony in his
Decads as proving the 7th. Proposition, scil. that Paedobaptisme is an humane
ordinance (when in that very Sermon of his there quoted in this Treatise, he
by many arguments from Scripture proves it to be of divine authority) is also
abused, and shamefully misconstrued and perverted, as is evident. The next is
Beza who is also quoted Proposition 7. in his annotations upon Matthew. 28. 19.
Baptize them in the name of the Father, that is, in calling upon the name of
the Father, or rather the name of the Father, etc. being called upon; for they
are Beza's words, Invocato nomine Patris, etc. And these Translators should
have done well to have rendered the Latin properly. But all is in the meaning
of the words. The authors of the Treatise urge it for a proof of the persons
bapzed calling actually upon the name of God, when they are baptized according
to Christ's institution, and bring Beza for their proof. Quaeritur therefore
whether ever Beza intended that in his words. Surely no, for it is known well
that Beza stoutly maintains Paedobaptisme as an ordinance of Christ. Now
Infants when they are baptized cannot actually call upon the name of God;
therefore if Beza say the former, that the rule of Christ requires it of all
that are to be baptized according to his mind, that they should call upon God
at the time of their Baptism; he must affirm the later against his own light
and conscience; which to do with so much deliberation as he that writes
things upon study must do, were a crime of a very high nature, and God forbid
any should charge so worthy a light in the Church with that.

SECT. V.
BEza is again cited for confirmation of the third Proposition in his
Annotations upon Matthew. 3. 6. John taught those that were to be baptized*
(this clause is not in my Beza upon the place) and admitted none to Baptism,
but those that gave testimony that they believed the forgiveness of their
sins. In my Beza's Notes it is rather thus, that John admitted not others to
his Baptism, then those which seriously professed that they did embrace the
doctrine of free remission of sins; which how different from that of these
translators let others judge. It follows in the book, Such confession was
also required of the Catechumens in the primitive Church before Baptism, for
in that the Sacraments are seals, it is requisite that doctrine or instruction
should go before the use of those things by which the doctrine it self is to
be sealed. Those words before Baptism, and that reason annexed, for in that
the Sacraments, etc. is not in my book, scil. Beza's Annotationes majores in
N. Test. Printed Anno. 1594. But to return to the testimony, Beza intended
that John baptized no other of that species of persons Adult, then such as made
that confession -- but not simply the Baptism of any other persons of another
sort, scil. babes; he that is so careful that any should take advantage to
deny that children are not rightly baptized, because not dived wholly under
water, that he the rather (as he says upon Matthew. 3. 11.) does note such
things about the particle [In] omitted Luke 3. 16. surely he intended not, by
affirming such things in reference to John's hearers thereby to exclude
childrens Baptism. Hence that added that such confession was required of the
Catechumens in the ancient Church. Now then what manner of persons they were
which he affirms made such confession of old, such like persons for age he
here intends. And no more does he intend exclusion of Infants from Baptism,
by affirming the necessity of confession in John's hearers unto Baptism, then
by affirming that the same was required of those Catechumens mentioned. Let us
then see Beza's mind further therein, which we may readily do in the third
place of Beza quoted in this Treatise Proposition 4. where Beza upon 1 Cor. 7.
14. But now your children are holy, he is thus cited as saying: Out of this
contradictors of the truth are revealed. As first, all those that make Baptism
to be the first entrance to salvation: and secondly, those that permit all
children to be baptized, which was unheard of in the primitive times, whereas
[every one] ought to be instruct^d in the faith before he were admitted to
baptism. And this testimony is brought to prove the Proposition that in the
primitive Church the children both of the faithful and else ( scil. and of
Pagans or Jews) were commonly first instructed, etc. and then baptized; so
that Beza's mind in that clause, whereas every one ought to be instructed,
etc. is made, and every child whether of the faithful or Infidel should be
first instructed before he be baptized, and in that sense, his second error
he blames of such which permit all children to be baptized, is as much as if
he should intend it as an error to permit any children at all whether of
faithful or infidel persons to be baptized before instructed: So that Beza
is by this made a direct Andipedobaptist, as they term it now for modesty
sake. But you shall not have Beza thus on your side before we hear him in his
own words, who having before spoken touching the cause, why we admit the
Saints children to baptism, scil. because they are comprehended in the
Covenant, etc. he adds, Now from hence are confuted not only Catabaptists
which do reject Infants from baptism as unclean, but those which make
baptism the first entrance to salvation, and so exclude all from salvation
which are unbaptized, and also those which admit all Infants whatsoever to
baptism, ( scil. whether of visible Saints or Infidels as appears by what he
said before, and by what follows, which thing ( scil. such promiscuous
baptizing of all sorts hand over head) was not heard of in the ancient Church.
As this at least does declare, in that all adult Infidells were first to be
Catechumens before they were baptized. Beza refuteth three things from that
clause mentioned and explained -- now your children are holy, and one of them
is this fourth Proposition of the Authors, and yet by the Authors he is brought
to refute only two things. First, he refuteth Catabaptists denying baptism
to believers children. Secondly, he from the same ground refuteth them which
maintain the baptism of all children whatsoever, scil. that are not children
of visible Saints, for if they be such children he counts it rather an
error to deny their baptism. Again in citing the last part of Beza's words,
the Authors craftily make it as an opposite sentence to that before. Thus
secondly, those that permit all children to be baptized, etc. whereas every
one, etc. as if it were a contrary speech to the former, permitting (all)
children, etc. whereas none (at all) were to be baptized of old, but such as
were Catechumens: when Beza makes this later a reason of the former, as before
we showed. Besides the Authors shamefully change and mutilate the last words:
whereas every one ought, etc. intending every particular person, Infant or
Aged, when Beza's words are expressly -- in that all adult Infidells ought first
to be Catachumens before they were to be baptized. Now who is there which
does not even feel this palpable guile and falseshood in the setters forth of
this Treatise in this particular? But not to forget what we noted touching
Beza's other testimony on Matthew. 3. this place clears Beza's intent. There
speaking of adult persons it may be affirmed such must be as the Catechumens
of old in point of confession before baptism, and yet the same Author never
intend by that assertion to exclude children of such as do make such
confession of faith and repentance from baptism. Beza which holds this forth
here, yet here also refuteth that as error in Catabaptists to deny
Paedobaptisme: So that still here is the old fallacy, a dicto secundum quid ad
simpliciter dictum.

SECT. VI.
THe next Author quoted Proposition 1. scil. Strigelius upon Acts the 8th. (as
saying that to be baptized in the name of Jesus is to be baptized in
acknowledging and confessing the name of Jesus) I have not, and therefore
cannot examine the same: Albeit this sano sensu hinders not us; in that when
parents offer their children to baptism, the name of the Lord Jesus is
confessed and acknowledged.

The next testimony is of Luther, Proposition 1. whereupon Genesis 48. he is said
to affirm -- before we receive the Sacrament of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, we must have faith; and in another place as quoting Heb. 2. 4. Romans 1.
17. Heb. 10. 38. Mark 16. 28. Act. 8. 36. and Romans 10. 10. to prove that faith
is required to baptism, and that without faith the Sacraments profit not, but
hurt rather the receivers: and Proposition 3. he is quoted again in his book
of the Civil Magistrates as speaking like words, and saying, wherefore we
hold our selves to the words of Christ, He that believes and is baptized: So
that before or else even then present when baptism is administered, there must
needs be faith, or else there is contempt of the Divine majesty, who offers
present grace, when as there is none receive it. And Proposition 5. Luther upon
giving and receiving the Sacrament, Tom. 3. is said to write, that in times
past it was thus, that the Sacrament was administered to none, except it were to
those which acknowledged and confessed their faith and knew how to receive the
same, etc. and Proposition 7. in his book of Anabaptisme, he is said to
acknowledge, that it cannot be proved by Scripture that childrens baptism was
instituted by Christ, or begun by the first Christians after the Apostles, for
a 1000. years since it came to be in use in the Church, and was established
by Pope Innocentius. This place also does A. R. quote in his second part of
childish baptism, page 8. And Proposition 8. Luther is again quoted as
speaking thus in his Postils. Young children hear not, nor understand the Word
of God, out of which faith comes, and therefore if so be that commandment of
Christ be followed, children ought not to be baptized. Now as for these
testimonies of Luther, I not having nor being able to procure near hand the
sight of all his Tomes, I shall not be so able to discover the legerdemaine
which I verily suspect in citing his testimonies as well as those of some
others. Yet Luthers meaning in the words mentioned Proposition 1. may well be
expounded by that mentioned Proposition 3. and so according to his judgment
rather establishing Paedobaptisme then weakening it; for he holds that God at
present, when they are baptized, works faith in them, and therefore the
rather such are to be baptized. Luther in his 4th. Tome expounding that Hos.
12. 3. He took his brother by the heel in the womb -- scil. by a secret
instinct and moving of the Spirit, as John also by the same moved in the womb
upon Christ's approach, of which he gives this reason, because God is not
only the God of grown ones, but even of such babes. And what wonder is it,
says he, that the Spirit is efficacious in Infants in a way we understand
not, as having also flesh and bones in the womb as we have, but yet not
nourished as we are? And therefore that tenent of Anabaptists is impious and
odious, who therefore deny baptism to Infants because they want sense and
understanding, nor do they know what is done about them. To us they understand
not, by us they are judged to want sense and understanding, but it is not so to
God whose work they are: for God as he nourishes them otherwise then he
does us, so does he otherwise move their hearts, etc. Another answer of his
see in his second Tome, lib. de captiv. Babyl. title of baptism. He says
(having spoken before of faith as requisite to the application of the promise)
opponetur forsan iis, etc. It may be to the things before spoken, the baptism
of Infants will be opposed, which receive the promise and yet cannot have the
faith of baptism, and therefore either faith is not required, or Infants
baptism is null. Here (says he) I say that which all say, that Infants are
helped by the faith of others, even of them which offer them. For as the Word
of God is forcible whilst uttered to change the heart of a wicked man, which is
not less deaf and incapable then any little one; so by the Prayer of the
Church offering and believing, even a little one having faith infused is
changed, cleansed, and renewed by him to whom all things are possible. For
conformation whereof he brings that example, Mark 2. 3, 4, 5. And in his 7th.
Tome in his Homily of baptism, he reckons that erroneous interpretation of
Mark 16. 16. is the ground of that dispute against Paedobaptisme; because if
baptized, say some, when an Infant and not believing, then not rightly
baptized, and so that baptism is nothing -- to which says Luther -- this is
nothing else then if it should be said, if thou beleevest not when thou
partakest of the Word or Sacrament it is nothing. And so they only that truly
believe are truly baptized, and others baptized which do not believe, they
are again to be baptized when they do believe, ( scil. albeit grown ones,
when baptized if then hypocrites.) As for Luthers other two speeches mentioned
Proposition 7. and 8. I somewhat wonder if he should utter them as here
expressed, that in that book styled Lutheri Antilutherana opera fratris Joan.
Apobolymaei alias Findeling Minoritae, they are not mentioned; the scope of the
book being to gather up all Luthers (seeming) contradictions. And he
instanceth in the other de captiv. Babyl. before mentioned; it is strange that
he misseth those if thus written, since it is evident both by that expression
in Luthers greater Catechism, Tom. 3. when he says, After the same manner
do we when we give baptism to little ones. We bring the child to the
Minister of the Church with this mind and hope that verily it may believe. But
we do not baptize it for those things, but rather because God has command^d
us so to do. So in that famous story of the concord between Luther and the
Divines which followed him, and the Divines of upper Germany at a meeting at
Wittinberg, Anno 1536. according to a certain form of Articles of agreement
together with the explication thereof annexed by Martin Bucer, and after the
agreement subscribed, about the presence of the body of Christ in the Lords
Supper: the next Article to be so composed and explained to all their content
was that about baptism. The Article was this: touching baptism of Infants,
all without any doubting agree, that it is necessary that Infants should be
baptized, for since the promise of salvation does also belong to Infants, and
it pertains not to those which are without the Church, it is therefore
necessary that it should be applied by the Ministry, and to conjoyne them to
the members of the Church. The explication of the Article annexed. This is to
be understood of a necessity in respect of Ministry and by command of God,
and not of necessity in respect of salvation, etc. unto which as to the rest
subscribed Martinus Lutherus, Doctor Witebergensis, Johannes Bugenhagius
Pomeranus, Doctor Philippus Melancton, Justus Menius Isenacensis, etc. And on
the other side M. Martinus Bucerus Minister Ecclesiae Argentinensis, Wolsangus
Musculus ecclesiae Augustanae Minister in verbo, and diverse others. I have set
down this story the fuller as it is mentioned amongst Bucers works in that I
shall have frequent occasion to refer to it. Bucers opera Anglicana.


But to return to Luther, he is one that holds baptism not simply
necessary to salvation, as that without which one cannot be saved, (as is
further expressed in the explication of that Article) but as necessary unto
Infants by virtue of divine precept. Surely if he had no scruple in this
point, as it is said all agreed herein without doubting, etc. he never imagined
that which the Authors of this Treatise would make him to affirm, that
baptism of Infants came in four or five hundred years after Christ's time as
an institution of Popes or counsels.

I might have mentioned that passage of Luthers (to the former two testimonies
touching faith required to baptism) which he has in his Preface to his
Commentary upon the Galatians. Anabaptists (says he) teach that baptism is
nothing except the persons believe, out of which principle it will follow that
all the works of God are nothing, if the man be nothing, for baptism is the
work of God, etc. But this is certain that Luther taking the Doctrine of
baptism of Infants as unquestionable rather argues thence to prove that
Infants have faith (which was a tenet of his own) then that faith is required
in them to their baptism. Thus Infants unless that they have faith it will
be said they are not to be baptized, but all grant that Infants are to be
baptized, therefore Infants have faith.

CHAP. III. SECT. I.
BEda is the next Author cited Proposition 2. upon Acts 19. as speaking thus:
As those that came to the Apostles to be baptized were instructed and taught
of them, and when they were instructed and taught concerning the Sacrament of
baptism, then they received the holy administration thereof. I looked on the
place, and there is no such thing there, and supposing it might be misquoted,
I looked him upon the 9. 16. 18. yea 2. and 8th. (as well as my time would
permit) and I could find no such testimony of Beda's, so that this is a forged
testimony. And as for Beda's judgment in the case; in this second Tome lib. 4.
fol. 50. expounding the place, Mark 16. qui vero non crediderit condemnabitur
-- What, says Beda, shall we say of little ones which by reason of age are
not able to believe? (for of grown ones there is no question.) In the Church
therefore little ones do believe by others: even as from others they have
derived the sins which are remitted to them in baptism.

SECT. II.
AVgustinus is the next quoted Author, and first Austin ad Salcotinanum is
cited Proposition 2. as speaking that a man must repent before baptism, etc.
As Peter says to the Jews Acts 2. etc. but as for the name of the Book or
Epist. I find not. The Authors or Printers I suppose mistake the name; I find
reference made in the Decretalls set forth by Petrus Albignanus Trecius (for as
for those set forth by Gratian, I neither have them nor can meet with them)
unto Austin ad Salectinanum, as using these expressions, Omnis qui jam suae
voluntatis, etc. Every one that is at his own free dispose when he comes
unto the Sacrament of the faithful, unless it repent him of his old life he
may not begin the new: from this penitence only little ones when they are to
be baptized, they are freed, for they cannot yet make use of a free choice of
their own, etc. If there be any other passage of that nature as is mentioned
in this book of Austins, yet by this his intention therein is cleared. Among
Austins Epistles I cannot light of any such under that name mentioned there in
his 108. Epist. Seleucianae, but that rather does strengthen then weaken the
Ordinance of Paedobaptisme.

Austine is cited again in confirmation of the 4th. Proposition in his Sermon
ad Neophytos, that is, say these Authors Juniores or young men, but they
misunderstand the word. It is neither of the single words (...) or (...), but
its compounded of (...) and (...), and as for one whom they call (...), that is
according to Suidas (...), that is, one that is newly coming from Gentilisme
(or Judaisme, says Cornelius a Lapide) and having embraced the Christian
Religion is by baptism planted into the Church of God, albeit neither yet
sufficiently established in the doctrine of the faith, nor so fully approved in
life. The like description others give of such in reference to 1 Timothy 3. 6. but
to come to the matter of the testimony which is as follows [before we ducked
or dipped their body in the sacred water, we asked, Beleev'st thou in God the
Father Almighty? and they answered, I believe, etc. and we asked them, Believe
ye in the holy Ghost? unto which every one of them answered, I believe: and
thus have we done according to the command of our Lord, Matthew. 28. 19.] and
what of all this? because persons which were converted from Paganism, or
Judaisme, were asked such questions, therefore none other were baptized but
such, and in such a way; non sequitur: or because this was commanded by Christ,
therefore this was all he commanded in Mark 28. 19. it follows not. Austin
who was of another mind never imagined such a conclusion would ever be drawn
from his words. The author not naming the Sermon nor the season when preached,
I will make bold to help out therein, that such Sermons used to be preached
at Easter, one of the solemn times then set for baptizing of persons; but that
it may appear that only such were not then in the assembly, albeit the grown
persons were those to whom especially such speeches were directed; compare this
with that of Austin in his 4. Sermon. in octav. Paschae adneophytos, where he
says, To day are celebrated the octaves of Infants, their heads are uncovered
in token of liberty, etc. Those children, Infants, little ones, sucklings,
hanging on their mothers breasts, and ignorant of what grace is bestowed, as
you may perceive, because they are called Infants, even they also also have
their octaves to day. And these old men, young men, striplings, all are also
Infants. By this testimony we may perceive a larger interpretation of the word
Neophytos, scil. any one newly planted into the Church, whether Infant, youth
or other, any one who was as newborn Sacramentally in baptism of what age
soever. And that at the solemnity of Easter Infants and sucklings were
baptized as well as elder ones even before that change of the limitatio^ of
Baptism to Easter, and --
and Pentecost: Of which Rupertus and Boemius speak, baptism of Infants was
not brought in for mortalities sake upon the change of the old use of baptism
at Easter, and Pentecost, but was in use while yet those limited times stood,
and long before, this corrupt use of limiting the time of baptism was in
force, of which more anon. Yet also this I deny not but that corrupt addition
to Paedobaptisme being in use in those times of asking questions to the child
by the sureties, etc. this answer might suffice that even Infants too were in
that number of young plants mentioned, which did answer as is there said by
their sureties.

Austin is again quoted for proof of the 7th. Proposition, de baptismo contra
Donat. lib. 4. cap. 23. and de Genesi ad literam lib. 10. cap. 23. now then let
us examine what Austine says there, and how pertinent a proof it is of the
proposition, he calls it there, says the Treatise, a Church custom -- and
thence concludes by the witness that Paededobaptisme is an ordinance of man
brought into the Church by Teachers since the Apostles time, and instituted by
counsels, etc. but let us hear Austin speak for himself at the first hand,
and not take a report of his words at second hand, lest it prove a slander:
thus he speaks in the former place, the which the whole Church holds as
delivered to it, that even little Infants are baptized, which truly yet cannot
believe with the heart unto righteousness, nor confess with the mouth unto
salvation as the Thief (he means the converted Thief) etc. and yet no
Christian has affirmed that they are baptized in vain: and immediately (Chap.
24.) adds -- And if any seek divine authority in this matter ( scil. of
Infants baptism) although that which the whole Church holds, neither was
instituted by counsels, but always retained, we assuredly believe that it
was not delivered but by Apostolical authority, yet we may truly conjecture
(opposing this to all false and uncertain conjectures) of what authority or
force the Sacrament of Infants baptism is from circumcision, etc. where first
in the very place quoted he says not, that it was a tradition of the Church
only, or from the Church, but was delivered to the Church: and least any
should imagine that this was delivered to the Church by any corrupt teachers
since the Apostles times, Austin in the next Chapter within five or six lines
of that in the 23. Chapter mentioned, gives his arguments to prove that it
could not be delivered to the Church, but by Apostolical authority; first,
in that it was never instituted by any counsels; secondly, because it was ever
held by the Churches, scil. since there was any Church planted by the Apostles:
and I think his arguments are weighty, other things which were of such note
(as this of Paedobaptisme was if innovations) either they may be proved that
they came in by such or such counsels or authors, or it may be proved, that
there was never any such thing in use before such or such a time, which in this
case will be hard for any to undertake to make the same good by convincing
testimonies or arguments.

But to return to our Authors, they bring in this testimony to prove that
baptism of Infants was instituted by counsels, The first witness says
flatly it was not instituted by Counsels.
what forgery is this? they make him their witness to prove it to be an
ordinance of man, the witness proves that it is of divine authority: What
notable juggling is this? Will they never leave this trade? Let us examine the
other place where Austin says that it is a Church custom, if our Authors
speak truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth of the place quoted,
the words there are as follows, the custom of our mother the Church in
baptizing Infants is not to be despised, nor by any means is the same to be
thought superfluous. Yery good then will they say, this place is full for us.
Nay stay Sirs, be not too hasty to interrupt the witness, whilst he is
speaking; let him speak all he has here to say, scil. nor were it at all to
be believed, unless it were an Apostolical tradition, etc. So you hear
Sirs, he tells you; it is such a Church custom, as withal, it is an
Apostolical tradition; and that in the other place quoted, is of Divine
authority he makes account, which is delivered to the Church by the Apostles.
As indeed it is, unless that any think that the Apostles in their
Apostolical ministry erred, and delivered that to the Church, as the mind,
meaning and intent of Christ, which he never meant. And Austin has the very
same words, as here in his third Epistle ad Yolusiam: Nay lest there should be
any stick in the words, traditum ab Apostolis, and Apostolical tradition, he
peremptorily affirms, (speaking of the Churches authority in this case of
Paedobaptisme) lib. 1. de peccat. merit. and remiss. cap. 16 -- proculdubio per
Dominum and Apostolos traditum, that without all question it was delivered by
the Lord and his Apostles.

But our Authors here will not leave Austin thus, but they will make him speak
for them ere they have done, therefore he is quoted again in the 28th.
Epistle to Jerome, to confirm their 7th. Proposition; Content, we will hear
any thing he can say. What says Austin there? Nay page 32. our Authors are
silent, and only quote the place, not the words, and leave us to find the
sense out, as Nebuchanezzar did his dream and them to interpret it. But let
me assure them Austin does rather confirm the contrary, in that Epistle, then
otherwise; clearing both the spiritual ends of Christian parents, in hastening
with their children to Baptism: and ratifying Cyprians judgment touching the
case of Paedobaptisme, that he therein did not frame some new decree, but held
the most firm belief of the Church that way. And possibly the Authors by
adding this testimony of Austin to that of Cyprians Epistle, and on this say,
that Cyprian ordained children should be baptized, they bring this to confirm
it, which does indeed confirm it, that Cyprian held this, and ratified this --
but not as the first Author of it, (which perhaps the Treatise would make the
world believe) but rather as that which the Christian Church had ever firmly
believed. According as Austin in his 10th. Sermon of the words of the Apostle
speaking of Paedobaptisme, says, this the Church (meaning the Christian
Church) has always had, always held, this it has received from the faith
(or doctrine) of the ancients, this does it keep most constantly unto the end.
Yea but page 33. our authors ci^e some words of his in his 28th. Epistle to
Jerome, therefore do men hasten so with their children to baptism, because
they believe they cannot otherwise be made alive in Christ, and to the like
purpose in his Enchiridion, from the young to the old none are to be denied
baptism, for salvation is not promised to the children but through baptism,
etc. and to the same purpose Austin and the Bishops of the Milevitan council,
wrote, as condemning such as think Infants can be saved, without Baptism.
All this if they intend it, of the necessity of Baptism in respect of Gods
precept, in opposition to contempt and neglect: and of salvation promised in
such sort, as with reference to this, as one ordinary help and seal thereof,
leaving extraordinary ways and secrets to the Lord; Charity would think
favorably of their words, especially since as much in effect is in this sense
held forth, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. But be it that Austin superadded his own
Stubble and Straw, yet that hinders not, but the bottom and foundation of that
Ordinance was good and sure; you will not say because Papists hold baptism to
be of necessity to salvation, that therefore baptism of grown persons is no
Ordinance. That other speech of Austins -- that as those were circumcised which
were borne of circumcised parents, even so should they be baptized which are
borne of parents that are baptized, is sound and good, and no proof of that
7th. Proposition, that Paedobaptisme is an humane Ordinance. Thus we see
Austin has sped no better then his neighbors.

SECT. III.
MElancton is the next witness, who is called in to give evidence to confirm
the 2d. 6th. and 7th. Proposition. I am sorry that these books cited are not
at hand, so that I cannot so well discover the ill dealing, which I suspect;
upon the 1 Cor. 11. 15. he is said to affirm; In time past those in the
Church which had repented them were baptized, and it was in stead of an
absolution: wherefore repentance must not be separated from baptism. For
baptism is a Sacramental sign of repentance. It Is evident that Melancton
here speaks of the baptism of grown ones; those in the Church which had
repented were baptized -- and so in like case of baptizing adult persons,
repentance should not be separated from baptism. But to Melancton himself,
it is a non sequitur, that therefore Infants ought not to be baptized, because
they cannot repent; witness the answer he makes in his Common places unto
that objection against Paedobaptisme. Loco de Baptismo Infantum. It is most
true says he, that in all adult persons (Baptism) faith and repentance are
required, but in the case of Infants this suffices, that the holy Spirit is
given them by baptism, etc. As for that definition of Baptism, that it is a
Sacramental sign of repentance it is imperfect, nor yet will it follow
thence, that none else should be baptized, but such as actually repent; no
more then in that circumcision was a sign of Heart circumcision, and therefore
of repentance, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Jer. 4. 4. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. that none but adult
persons were fit to be circumcised.

Melancton is again quoted Proposition 6. for saying there is no plain
commandment in Scripture that children should be baptized. And if he did say
thus, does this prove, that there is no command at all, because not plain or
express, scil. in so many words: you shall baptize children? there is a
command to be deduced from Scripture, by necessary consequence, in Melanctons
judgment; witness the four arguments which he draws from necessary
consequence of Scripture to prove it, Loco de Baptismo Infantum: and witness
his hand subscribed at Wittenberg, amongst others, to that Article with its
explication touching Paedobaptisme, as necessary in respect of divine command,
as before we mentioned, Proposition 7. Melancton in his answer to the
Anabaptists Articles is quoted, but no words mentioned, that he should speak,
unless the Authors cite him for mentioning the story of Cyprian and the other
Bishops determinations about Paedobaptisme, which were impertinent, in as much
as Origin is here quoted for saying, that Paedobaptisme was a tradition of the
Church. Now Origin was before Cyprian, and the Church whose tradition it is
supposed Origin says it was, was long before Origin, so that Cyprian did not
first ordain Infants Baptism, the Authors themselves being Judges. I have not
that book of Melanctons, and I cannot divine what his words were, unless they
were mentioned. And I wonder if they were for their purpose, they set them not
down. I conclude then of Melanctons testimonies, as of the rest, that they are
wrested.

CHAP. IIII. SECT. I.
IVstin Martyr (as the Authors of ignorance, or the Printer by oversight calls
Justin Martyr) in his oration ad Antoninum Pium; I will declare unto you, how
we offer up our selves to God, after we are renewed though Christ -- those
amongst us, that are instructed in the faith, and believe that which we teach
them is true, being willing to live according to the same, we do admonish to
pray for the forgiveness of their sins, and we also fast and pray with them,
and then they are brought by us to the water, and there as we were newborn,
are they also by newbirth renewed, and then in calling upon God the Father, the
Lord Jesus Christ and the holy Ghost, they are washed in water -- Mr. Blackwood
adds -- that of Justin also, That we do bring the party so washed (not the
believer, as he expresses it) and joined to the brethren, as they are called,
where they are gathered together (to common prayers and supplications, is not
expressed as Mr. Blackwood has it, but thus) that we may pray both for our
selves and for the party newly enlightened, etc. Now whereas the Treatise brings
this to prove the third Proposition, that the people were commonly first
instructed, and then baptized, etc. Mr Blackwood is more peremptory in that
matter, making this testimony contrary, and so inconsistent with any other
testimony in the questions ascribed to Justine, and concludes hence, that in
Justines time Paedobaptisme was not in the world. Let us therefore consider
whether this apology and that which is recorded in it, be so demonstrative a
proof of such a conclusion.

It Is said that whosoever were persuaded and believed, etc. they were brought
to the water and washed -- that proves that all such persons were received to
Baptism, but what? Ergo, none but such were baptized? non sequitur. It Is said,
Romans 10. 13. Whosoever shall call upon the name of Lord shall be saved,
therefore all such shall be saved: True, but not ergo none other shall be
saved. For Mr. Blackwood grants Infants may be saved. One might better have
concluded from Justins speech in that apology -- we believe that God does love
those (only) which imitate his virtues -- moderation, love, righteousness,
etc. that they believed that God loved no Infants, for they could not imitate
-- God in justice and love, etc. yet I suppose Mr. Blackwood would be loath to
think so of those believers in Justins time. And so when he there says: But
we have learned that immortality ( scil. of blessedness) is only theirs who
live honestly and holily before God; therefore they had learned, that the
kingdom of glory belonged to no Infants: For they could not live so: here Mr.
B. will not think that exclusive particle [onely] concluding against babes, to
whom he holds the kingdom of glory does belong, and why then is a particle
far less exclusive, so conclusive against Infants? When Justin in that
Apology comes to speak of the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper -- he
says, unto which none is admitted, but he that does believe our Doctrine,
having been washed in the Laver of regeneration unto the remission of sins,
etc. but he says not so in the other -- none but such as believe what we
teach to be true, etc. are washed or baptized, etc. Mr. B. might have
considered that the occasion of this Apology was to take off aspersions cast
upon grown Christians, as for their babes they were not eyed by the
adversaries, as capable subjects of such crimes charged on their Parents. Hence
that speech in this Apology -- you when you hear me expect a Kingdom, rashly
suspect it of some humane kingdom, when we speak it of the kingdom of God.
So they endeavor to make us daily infamous by objecting impious crimes against
us -- and -- heinous things are divulged of us through the peoples tales of
putting out light, and then lying promiscuously together, and of devouring man's
flesh, etc. and that at our sacred mysteries we promiscuously commit
filthiness, etc. So that it were impertinent to mention their religious way of
devoting and offering up their children to God, they were not accused, no
apology is needed for them; but it is meet to apologize only for the persons
accused, and declare what manner of persons they are, and how they devote
themselves to higher and holier uses, etc.

Let the reasons be weighed which Justin here urged, why they baptized persons
adult, and with him that urges those for reasons, it enforces more then
probable grounds to convince, that Baptism of their Infants was in use. For
having spoken of that their being newborn, as they were, (that is Baptized)
he gives these two things as reasons: Dixit enim Christus, Nisi renati
fueritis, non intrabitis in regnum caelorum; and adds -- rationem ejus rei
hanc accepimus ab Apostolis, quoniam prima nativitas, nec scientibus, nec
volentibus nobis ex complexu parentum, humoreque, genitali, etc. First, the
necessity of regeneration in and by Baptism (as the ordinary way.) [For so
he understands John 3. 5. whether rightly or no, I dispute not, but to him it
was so and that suffices.] Secondly, the native pollution and original sin
(for that he intends by nativitie] received from their parents; which are
reasons valid as well for baptism of Infants as grown ones too, and with any,
to whom they are reasons for Baptism, and are the very reasons used by Origin,
Cyprian, Ierom, Ambrose, Austin, and others, whose judgment was for baptism
of Infants, as well as adult persons.

Yea but there is no mention made here of Infants baptism, no nor was it
suitable to the occasion of the Apology, as we said before, and yet it
follows not, that it was not practiced then, because not expressed. Mr. B.
says, he sets down here the practice of the Church, both for word, prayer
and administration of the Sacraments, and that ex professo. Yet Mr. B. may
perceive that there is no mention of any doctrinall instructions held out at
the baptizing of persons, or at the administration of the Lords Supper,
occasioned by the joining of new members to them at other times. Afterward
indeed when he comes to speak of the manner of their carrying it on the
Lords day, he mentions something that way, but nothing in speaking of
occasional meetings for solemn closing with baptized persons at other times.
Yet I think Mr. B. would be loath to conclude the word was not taught, when
the Sacraments were administered to any. If he omit a thing which is professo,
he was to mention, what wonder if he pass over in silence a matter of which
he had not then occasion to speak? Tertullian de corona militis says almost
as much in substance as Justin, and it is as well urged against Paedobaptisme,
because he says, when we come together to the water, we do promise there
to renounce the Devil, etc. Yet it is evident Baptism of Infants was in use
in his time; why else does he condemn it, and would not have their Susceptors
run hazzards by becoming sureties for them? So that this is but a fallacious
way of concluding a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter. Something more
we shall add of Justin occasionally afterward.

SECT. II.
RAbanus is the next witness to Propos. 3. which says the Catechism which is
the doctrine of faith, must go before baptism, etc. he was Anno 840. when
none questions the constant use of Paedobaptisme, and so the intent is not
touching what is to go before their baptism, but what was to precede the
baptism of Pagans or Jews turned to the faith. Rabanus de institutione
Clericorum has that passage of the 4th. Carthage Council; Those which are to
be baptized are to give in their names, and are to be long under abstinence
of Wine and Flesh, etc. and yet in the same place says, Whether Infants or
young men come to the Sacrament of regeneration, they no sooner approach to the
Font of life, but the unclean spirit is driven away from them by the
exorcising of the Priests, etc. These are no contraries but may very well stand
together with Rabanus, that those that are to be baptized be so prepared
thereto, scil. if adult, and yet Infants also not capable of such preparation
may and are to be baptized, wherefore this is still but racking of Authors to
make them speak that which they never intended.

SECT. III.
BAsil is the next Author brought in, Contra Eunomium l. 3. saying, must the
faithful be sealed with Baptism? Faith must praecede and go before. Mr.
Blackwood inlargeth the testimony in words to like purpose. For Baptism is the
seal of faith, faith the confession of the Deity: For first he, ( scil. that
is made godly by grace of whom he before spoke) must first believe and after
be sealed with baptism -- and -- baptism is the forgiveness of the debt of
prisoners, the death of sin, the regeneraon of the soul, -- How can this,
says Mr. Backwood, be affirmed of Infants? And again -- I will roll in mire
-- walk deceitfully -- swear and lie, and then when I am full with evils, I
will cease and receive baptism -- which shows says Mr. B. at what time
persons were wont to be baptized, not in their Infancy, but when they were
men, if the faithful -- if one that is made godly* by grace be to be
baptized -- he must first profess his faith: ergo, none other is to be
baptized, if brought to baptism in any other way -- non sequitur; yea but that
does plainly resist the tradition of wholesome baptism -- For baptism is the
seal of faith, etc. says Basil. What does resist the wholesome tradition of
baptism? Paedobaptisme without actual faith expressed? -- Basil intended it
not, but if one that is made godly by grace (being changeable by nature)
sometimes by negligence fall from grace, etc. and so hold forth any other thing
then is consonant to the doctrine of the Trinity confessed in Baptism; This
is resisting that tradition of Baptism, he does not intend by tradition of
Baptism a rule that only actual confessors of the Trinity must be
baptized. Let him expound himself; for in his fifth book against Eunomius
page 119. speaking of that form of baptizing in the name of the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, he calls that the tradition, scil. touching baptism, if by
his description he intend the seal of faith, scil. the Covenant and doctrine
of faith, it hurts us not, if of faith whereby we believe, it is an imperfect
description of baptism. Baptism, says he, is the forgiveness of sin,
etc. if he mean it, that it is so really to all that are baptized, then Simon
Magus and Ananias had not perished in their sins, if he speak it, that it
is so Sacramentally, that may be affirmed of Infants Baptism. As for Mr. B's
exposition that Basils other speech, I will lie and swear, and when full of
evils etc. then receive Baptism, shows the time when persons were wont to
be baptized; I wonder at his collection, does he think men should sin to
the full, till they are even weary, and then come to be baptized? is that a
fit time, when they have served the Devil to the utmost, and been his old
sworn trustees, then to list themselves under Christ's command? Verily if Mr.
B. think so, Basil did not, for he rather reproves persons for deferring
their Baptism, as if a man might bemire himself in sin as much as he
would, and then at last one washing in baptism would make all clean, which he
thus sarcastically derideth.

Aretius had no such thought of Basils judgment in this case, who yet had
reason to know Basils mind, better then Mr. B. or I. And he in his Commentary
on Luke 18. brings in Basil as using this argument amongst others -- Infantes
capaces sunt (...), ergo etiam participes sunt ipsius Baptismi. -- Basil then
had other arguments for Paedobaptisme: but this was one, Infants are capable of
salvation sealed in Baptism, therefore are they also partakers of Baptism.

SECT. IIII.
EVsebius testimony lib. 6. hist. eccl. touching Origens and others being
Catechists at Alexandria, might have been spared: Mr. B. in his Preface uses
the same argument.
none denying but that Adult Pagans, or the adult children of persons baptized,
were to be so catechized (thence the name of Catechumeni in Authors usually so
taken.) But that hindered not, but that children also were baptized in Origens
time, witness Origens words in his second Tom. Hom. 14. upon Luke: little ones
(says he) are baptized unto remission of sins, etc. The Authors stories to
confirm the third, fourth, and fifth Proposition might have been also spared,
as not concluding what they intend, that in those times no Infants were, or
were to be baptized. Some were adult Pagans, which came in upon their own
right only, and were amongst the number of such Catechumeni, whose baptism
were prevented by Martyrdom, as the woman the Treatise mentions, Proposition
3. and Evirenitana the Virgin, Proposition 5. and sundry others mentioned by
Cyprian de baptismo haeret. quoted by Mr. B. in his Preface. Some adult Pagans,
which after instruction, actually came to receive baptism of which the
treatise mentions examples, as Clodoveus king of France with his 3000.
Soldiers, also those learned men, Virinus Marcellinus and Justinus in the time
of Decius Quirinus the Roman Captain under Trajan Hermingildus, Anno 700. in
the days of Tiberius the second, Torpes in the days of Nero, Nemissius in the
time of Pope Stephen "and of Valeria^ and Gallienus Emperors and Basilica in
Gallienus his time, Mauro, Honoratus, Ragatianus, Hilarious, Victorinus,
Apronianus, Tobia King of Persia, Claudius the Roman, and his wife in Pope
Gayus his time; they might have more instances too, but these are more then
enough, unless pertinent, proving what is not denied, that adult Pag^ns were
first catechized ere baptized. But what then? ergo none else but such baptized?
Non sequitur. If we were now to deal with Indians in such sort, we would take
the like course, yet maintain Pedobaptisme to be an ordinance of Christ.
Cyprian which mentions that of the Catechumeni, yet who more strong for
Paedobaptisme then he? Austin who l. 8. Confessionum writes of Victorinus his
open confession before his baptism, yet who pleads more for Paedobaptisme then
he? some were children of Christian parents, which yet were not baptized, till
grown, as Jerome, Ambrose, Austin, Gregory, Nazianzen, (added by Hen. Den)
Constantine the Emperor, Theodosius the Emperor, Lu^gerus, Pancratius,
Pontius, Nazarius, Tecla and Erasma Tusca, a certain brother mentioned in
Eusebius.

And what of all this? ergo, children of inchurched Parents ought to stay unto
adult years, before they be baptized, because these did so: Non sequitur. A
facto ad jus non valet consequentia. Nay then they should stay, till near
their death, because Constantine, Theodosius and others did so; which to our
Authors would be a non sequitur. Yea, or at least we must stay till 30.
years old, because Jerome, Austin and others did so, or what is the sequel
hereof? Is it this, ergo none other which came of Christian Parents were in
those times baptized, till grown up to full years of discretion? -- I wholly
deny it, if the Authors had brought as many more instances,, unless they could
say and prove it, and so it was with all other children of Christian Parents,
their induction is not regular. It is evident that the baptism of such persons
was deferred through corruption in the persons, whom it concerned. Some out of
groundless supposals of a necessity to conform to Christ's baptism, who was
baptized at 30. years old. Whence it is that Gregory Nazianzen refuteth that
ground of deferring baptism. Others thought it might be some defilement, yea
defacing to their childrens baptism, as well as their own, if they sinned
after baptism, and therefore thought it good to be deferred. Others had a
superstitious conceit of an excellency of being baptized in Jordans waters,
above others which occasioned Constantius deferring his Baptism, Eusebius. lib.
4. de vita Constantini, Theodoret lib. 1. Hist. Eccles. c. 35. some parents
were discouraged from bringing their children to baptism through the
covetousness of the Ministers, requiring (as then the use was) so much for an
offering from and for any persons which were baptized, which occasioned delays
in many. Whence that Canon of the Council of Ell^bertinum cited in Trecius his
Decretalls; that every Bishop should look to it, throughout the Churches, that
those which bring their Infants to Baptism, if they offer any thing freely of
their own accord it should be received of them. But if otherwise through
poverty they have nothing to offer, the Priest should not violently take any
pawnes of them, because many of the poorer sort fearing the same did withhold
their children from Baptism.

SECT. V.
BEsides many other causes mentioned by Gregory Nazianzen in his 40th. Oration
de baptismo, where he blames not only the deferring of elder persons that
are at their own dispose, but the deferring of the baptism of children by
their Parents, and because Gregory's testimony is made use of by the Treatise
in confirmation of the fourth Proposition. Its meet it should be cleared,
whether he be more ours or yours. I deny not but he gives his advise out of
case of danger of death, the childrens baptism be deferred, till they are
three years old, this was his peculiar fancy in this particular, but yet this
is not to speak for the Anabaptists tenent, which say a man must first be of
years of discretion, able to hold forth his knowledge in Articles of Religion,
besides his faith in Christ, and repentance of his sins, etc. this a child of
three years old is not able to do, we say that unripe children before
capable of professing their knowledge, faith and repentance are to be
baptized, and such a one is a child also of three years old. And I wonder our
adversaries urge not a speech of his in that oration speaking of persons that
cannot receive baptism, he reckons as some grown ones that cannot through
some sudden exigent albeit they desire it: so others which cannot by reason
of their Infancy, but he intends that of such as cannot come of themselves,
unless by others help: and especially Infants, which cannot come merely in
their own right. And he speaks of persons who if not baptized, they
themselves are exempted, from guilt of neglect or contempt, albeit not of loss
by it; as his words evidence speaking of them, (...), which being unsealed or
unbaptized are without sin, although they suffer loss or hurt, but do not
act: it unless they are not without original sin, that is not his meaning,
but they themselves sin not therein personally in neglect or contempt of Gods
Ordinance, (and therefore albeit he had inveyed so much against the sin of
those whose baptism was deferred, he hereby clears them from that blame)
but he accounts that even those babes are sufferers in this omission, and at
a loss, that in others right, and by others help they are not brought to
baptism, albeit by reason of Infancy they cannot of themselves receive
baptism* and that this is his meaning let his words declare; ibid. (...), etc.
Have thou an Infant? Let not wickedness take occasion ( scil. to cause a
deferring of it is baptism) let it be sanctified from Infancy, and consecrated
to the spirit from its tenderest age, yea but by reason of the weakednesse of
its age thou art afraid to have it sealed? how art thou a mother of a feeble
mind, and of a very little faith? where he touches upon another cause why
Christian Parents sometimes deferred their childrens baptism, scil. a
distrustful fear of hazzarding their babes health if dipped, as amongst many
the use then was in baptism; so then he charge the matter not upon the
child but upon the parent in point of guilt if not baptized: and observe he
accounts it a wickedness, not thus to devote them from their tenderest
years, their first birth ( ab ipsis unguiculis, as the word is) unto the Lord
in baptism, and that sin takes occasion to put it self forth very much in
case of Infants, whence Parents are tempted to defer their childrens
baptism, and imputes it to the weakness of their faith) which if stronger
might arm Christian parents against any seeming discouragements, he makes
the practice of Infants baptism a matter of faith in Christian parents, if
they had faith enough they would not defer the same, and ibid. answering the
query about Infants baptism, that it were better they should be sealed
without knowledge then die without baptism, he gives his reason from
circumcision, which was wont to be administered the eighth day after the child's
birth, and in the same Oration he said, that albeit other things had their
definite seasons, yet all times were fit for washing or baptism, because no
time was free from hazard of death, and that the time of our salvation was at
all times to be attended -- (...); every season is a time for thy baptism:
and speaking of pretenses to put off baptism he adds, (...); it reaches
all degrees of ages, all kinds of life, it arms one against assaults which may
be occasioned by any of them, scil. by Satan: and ibid. speaking in answer to
such as pretend Christ's age when baptized; he was pure in and of himself, and
needed not purging as thou do, there was no danger to him in the delay of
baptism, but no little hazard impendeth over thee, if but from hence, that
thou art borne only in sin, and being not immortal must die. Hence his
description of baptism under diverse notions, calling it a gift, because says
he its given to them which have contributed nothing before hand thereto:
grace, because its bestowed on such as are indebted: baptism, because sin is
buried in the water, scil. Sacramentally: and now let all judge to which side
Gregory Nazianzen most propendeth; he himself was baptized at above 30. yea
but he approves not of it as lawful in any case to defer it to above three
years, and in some cases, scil. of hazard of life, to be administered before;
surely if he had thought baptism of a very babe unlawful as Anabaptists do,
he could not be ignorant, that upon no pretense of any hazards of life any
sin was to be committed. Austin, Jerome, and Ambrose were baptized when grown
up men, yea but when they better understood the point they disallow neglect of
childrens Baptism, as the parents sin, as Jerome in his Epistle to Laeta, and
Austin frequently, and so Ambrose all one for Paedobaptisme as an ordinance of
God, and so as counting it sin to neglect it.

SECT. VI.
BUt to return to our stories, we know what Origin, and Austin have said,
what was the use of the Churches from the Apostles time as well as what was
done in their time; wherefore if we had no instances of children baptized that
would suffice; But story will furnish us with instances of children baptized
within the compass of time wherein this Treatise presents us with instances.

Polydore Virgil in his second book of the History of England speaking of King
Lucius, says, that he Anno salutis 182. regni vero 13. being moved out of a
love of Religion, dealt with Eleutherius Bishop of Rome by letters, that he
would admit him and his people by baptism unto the number of Christians. Upon
which Fugatius and Damianus (men of eminent piety) were sent into Britain,
who baptized the King with his house, and his whole people, and therefore the
British children too, unless no part of Lucius his people, which Johannes
Balaeus more fully clears, in his book of British writers, Centuria prima
cap. 27. where he recites the occasion why Lucius sent Eluinus and Meduinus
(two prime men) unto Eleutherius to be this -- Anno 170. according to Balaeus,
others say, Anno 173.
And Lucius sent thither the more speedily, because he heard that the name of
Christians begun every where to be enlarged, and that many of the Nobility,
(especially at Rome) together with their wives and children, had sworn unto
that Christian faith ( scil. were baptized;) for that was that he writ about
as before we had it, that he and his, might be reckoned amongst the number
of Christians; and baptism is a solemn obligation of the party baptized unto
the Christian faith.) Afterward when the Pagan Saxons had overrun Britain and
Religion began to be worn out again, Gregory the first sent over Austin, Anno
596. where after he had preached amongst the heathen Saxons, he baptized 1000.
men, women and children in a River. History of Britain page 214. Inas also
King of the West Saxons with his Counsel made Laws touching the orderly
living of Ministers and Infants being baptized within 30. days. Beda hist. l.
3. c. 7.
Beza's hist. Dr. Usher also in his book of the Religion of the ancient Irish,
cap. 5. says that the Irish did baptize their Infants, without any consecrated
Chrisme; and that corrupt use of Chrisme we know was very ancient indeed. And
before Clodovius King of France was converted, whilst he was yet Pagan, his
gracious wife Cleotild daughter of the Duke of Burgoine, having a son by him,
it was baptized by the same Remigius Bishop of Raines, (which afterward
baptized him being converted as the Treatise says) at which Pagan Clodovius
was at first displeased. Afterward she brought forth another son, which by
the Kings consent was in like sort baptized; after which Pagan Clodovius being
put to the worse by the Almaines, vowed, if he got the victory he would
embrace the Christian faith, to which his wife had so often persuaded him, and
proving conqueror did so, and was baptized by Remigius. Fabian, 1 par. of his
History c. 97. the Centurie writers give other Instances Cent. 6. cap. 6.
mentioning out of Gregorius Turocensis, the young son of Chilperick: also of
Theodebert borne to King Childebert as baptized, as also Theodorick another
child of his baptized, also of a young son to King Egilolph baptized; other
instances might be given out of Nauclerus, the authors of this Treatise
mention Constantines baptism, when so old; but why do they not mention also
his son Crispus too, which was baptized as well as he by Sylvester Bishop of
Rome says Nicephorus hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 23. the authors mention Clodoneus
his Baptism but not his children, and Constantius, but not his sons baptism,
do either discover their ignorance or guile.

SECT. VII.
THe next Authors testimony to the third Proposition is that of Polydor Virgil
de Inventoribus rerum, li. 4. cap. 4. It was the custom in old time to baptize
those for the most part which were come to their full growth apparelling them
after baptism in white, which was done at Easter and Pentecost, etc. yea but
before the old time of baptizing grown persons at Easter, (which was certain
hundred years after Christ ere that custom began) children were baptized (as
is confessed they were) in Origens time, and before, by a Church custom; for
then it was the custom before this custom came up here mentioned to baptize
children. And let us hear whether Pollidor Vilgil in the very quoted place
will not say as much, for he there expressing his judgment for Paedobaptisme
does quote Cyprian as speaking of it as [from the beginning] that albeit
Infants could not make confession of their faith by reason of age, yet others
confession should be instead thereof in baptism; now if that were a
principio, even from the beginning of the Christian Church; Paedobaptisme was
ancienter then this old custom, and for this also Polydore there cites
Ambrose lib. 2. de vocatione gentium.

SECT. VIII.
BEatus Rhenanus upon Tertullian is next, who is said to write that the old
custom was that those that were come to their full growth at Easter, etc. they
leave out the word [ fere] almost, or for that most part, etc. and the reasons
he gives why it was so, scil. because thousands of Pagans daily flocked then
to the Churches, then the Infants being compared to those Pagan parents, and
children which could conceive of what was taught them, yea and those adult
Pagans thus flocking in by thousands daily, no wonder that it be said that it
was then the use for the most part that those who were baptized, were at their
full growth, and adding the other causes of deferring baptism, no wonder
Shamier (who yet speaks of Paedobaptisme) speaks of so few children of old
baptized.

CHAP. V. SECT. I.
TErtullian lib. de baptismo cited also by Mr. Blackwood more amply, thus: for
every persons condition, disposition, and age, the delay of baptism is more
profitable, especially about little ones: for what need is there (if there be
need as some copies have it, which Mr. B. leaves out) that sureties should be
hazzarded, who by their mortality may fail of their promises, and be
deceived with the going forward of an evil towardliness? but herein the
treatise deals more plainly then Mr. B. who leaves out that saying cited in
Tertullian; Suffer little children to come to me; upon which he glosseth, as
follows in Mr. B. -- Let them come when they are young, when able to be
instructed, let them become Christians when they know Christ, etc. Ibid. for no
less cause are unmarried persons to be delayed in whom the tentation is
prepared, etc. the Treatise urges this testimony to prove that de facto
children before they were instructed were not baptized. Mr. B. seems to urge
that de jure they ought not: As for the first, it is rather a strong proof that
Paedobaptisme was in use in the Church; in Tertullians time: for supposing
Tertullian against Paedobaptisme, his testimony is the more valid, enemies will
not flatter us; if they were not baptized, why does he mention their
susceptors or sureties -- which ran hazzards by being their susceptors?
Tertullian was not so sottish to oppose an Imaginary abusive practice; if no
such thing were in rerum natura in his time; why does he affright persons from
being susceptors by the hazzards they run in their childrens liablenesse to
death, and to distempers, and by the latter, their outbreakings into sin to
deceive their susceptors expectations, if no such thing? it had been dangerous
to start such a novellisme: if never before practiced. And indeed Origin
contemporary with Tertullian (according to Osi inder and Funccius account) he
says in the place quoted in his 14th. Hom. on Luke that little ones were in
his time baptized.

All the question is then de Jure, how far the testimony is valid to prove
that Infants should not be baptized; some make account that Tertullian was not
simply against baptism of Infants, scil. if of believers, but of baptizing
Infidel Infants, then offered to baptism, as it might be supposed of
unmarried persons, if Infidels, to delay Baptism; others think he intends to
deny the absolute necessity of Baptism in case children are like to die, then
to baptize them out of an opinion of such necessity of it, albeit afterward
that hazard of mortality being over, they might be baptized, and it is
probable enough out of their doubling of the word necesse (si tamen necesse
fit) etc. and truly if Tertullian was against it in his judgment, it was one
of the dotages of his age, as was Montanisme, denying second marriages,
witness his book de Monogamia: and he forgot himself if that was his
intention, to deny childrens right to baptism; since that in his book de
anima cap. 21. speaking before that every soul has an evil spirit in it, he
adds, so that the nativitie of none almost is clean (at least if borne of
Pagans) for here it is that the Apostle says, that one borne of either sex
being sanctified, he is holy as well by the prerogative of the seed as by the
discipline of instruction, but (says he) else they were borne unclean: but
now notwithstanding he would have it to be understood that the children of
the faithful are devoted to holiness, and consequently to salvation, that in
respect of these pledges of hope, he might patronise marriages which he had
judged to be retained, otherwise ( scil. if that had not been his meaning) he
would have mentioned that definition of the Lord: unless any one be borne
again of water and of the Spirit he shall not enter into the kingdom of God,
that is, shall not be holy, and then adds immediately cap. 22. as his
conclusion, so that every soul is so long reckoned to be in Adam, till they
be recounted to be in Christ, and so long unclean until recounted scil. in
Christ. And in his book against Marcion lib. 4. p. 92. but behold how God
loves little children ( sc. of the Church) in that he teaches that those
which would be for ever great, must be such as they are, and brings that as
another argument of it: that God was so gracious to the Egyptian Midwives for
sparing of the Jews children, so that he speaks not this of all children but
of those of the Church, as also that which he says de anima, he speaks it
not of all sorts, but of the children of the faithful, as is evident. And
hence I will make bold after Master Blackwoods example to make some
observations. 1 That Tertullian accounted not all children alike in point of
birth -- cleanness, but some clean, others unclean. 2 That he accounted
that holiness of children mentioned 1 Cor. 7. to be no civil holiness of
legitimacy, or creature holiness of holiness to use, but a holiness of a
higher nature: such as implies right, at least external, of entering in Gods
kingdom: making this of being holy to be one with that, or to include it (
scil. according to men) and to include as much as to be accounted in Christ,
cap. 22. the beginning. 3 That children, of believers come to be holy in this
sense mentioned, not by instruction of discipline merely of which they are
capable when they come to years: but by being borne of either parents
sanctified or the faithful, or persons laying hold on Gods covenant, etc. (for
he makes being borne of either parents sanctified and children of the
faithful, etc. one) they are holy as well by prerogative of seed (says he of
which they are partakers as soon as they are borne) as by institution of
discipline. 4 That he makes this the force of the Apostles argument to
persuade to retain marriages in question in regard of such pledges of hope,
children thus holy springing from married persons whereof one at least is a
believer, etc. 5 That therefore Zwinglius was not the first author as some say
of that interpretation, that by the sanctifying of either Sex by that other
being faithful, children come to be holy with holiness of privilege, hence
that of being holy by prerogative of seed, scil. quat. covenant seed. And from
the other place it appears that Tertullian judged the children of the Jews to
be not in a bare carnal covenant, or beloved with a mere common respect of
God as others, but in the judgment of his charity he accounts them beloved,
with a special love of God: so as to become patterns to such as are always
great in Gods favor as well as otherwise. Now how these things will stand with
Tertullians denying them baptism, I leave to all judicious and sober minds to
determine: he may forsake his own principles in this as in other things, he
did; but if he hold to the same he must be ours and not yours.

But let us suppose Tertullians judgment against paedobaptisme: he is not the
first that gave erroneous counsel, and held erroneous tenants: though he be
the first that ever advised (so far as I find in authors) that infants
baptism should be delayed, and his judgment may not carry it, but the
grounds of his judgment if they are Scripture proof; and first he
acknowledges the argument, taken from Mat. 19. Suffer little children to come
unto me, to enforce baptism of these there intended: albeit he expounds that
of their coming to Christ by baptism to be understood of their coming, when
they are grown up, when they know Christ, when they ask it, when they
understand the right of Baptism, and can pray and fast. But Mr. B. (which
cleaves to Tertullian) and others of his mind, deny it to be any ground of
baptizing any. 2 He counsels (as the treatise has it) that unmarried folk
should have their baptism also deferred, whilst they yet suffer tenttaions;
the Treatise indeed says, young unmarried virgins: but Tertullians word is,
Innupti, unmarried persons, of what age soever, now how do Anabaptists like
Tertullians counsel herein? Suppose a person never marry, what, must he never
be baptized as never yet suffering this tentation? or suppose young persons of
20. or 30. years old, judged to be believers, but yet not married; they belong
to Gods kingdom, but have not yet suffered such tentation, must their baptism
now be deferred upon this ground of Tertullian, because not married, or not yet
going through such tentations? I trow not; then Tertullians counsel about
delay of baptism is not good it seems.

3 He counsels delay of baptism of any to Easter and Pentecost (albeit
therein he speaks not so peremptorily as in the other) Was this good
counsel to put baptism to such set times of the year, when yet no time is
set in the Scriptures, both John and Christ's Disciples, and the Apostles
baptized at any time of the year. I suppose this counsel will not down with
them.

4 He counsels delay of Infants baptism (for it was but his counsel at the
most as it was in the other) answering therein that argument, which even in his
time was used for paedobaptisme (not first by Zuinglius) scil. Suffer little
Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, etc. Yea (says Tertullian) let
them come indeed, but dum Adolescant, etc. when they are grown up, etc. he
yields it to be a ground of their coming to Christ, and that by baptism as
one way of their coming to him; but not of their coming so soon, but rather
when they themselves could ask it, etc. this is his gloss upon the place: but
how absurd is this gloss, as if Christ's intent in rebuking the Disciples for
hindering those babes from coming to him, were thus? Ye do very evil to
hinder those babes from coming now to me for my blessing (like them in like
case) because they (and others like them) should rather come when they are more
grown up, when they know me, when they themselves (and not as now their
parents only) can ask and desire it at my hands, etc. But why then are these
Disciples rebuked for seeking to put by their coming so young, and not
themselves desiring to come? nay then verily the Disciples rather were in the
right, which would have had them staid longer, and not Christ which urges it
as an argument for coming at that time, and accordingly at that time
fulfilleth the parents desire in blessing of the babes: but none herein surely
will own Tertullian. Another testimony of Tertullians is urged to confirm the
fifth Proposition, scil. that de corona militis. When we come together to the
water, and a little before we do promise there in the hand of the Minister,
that we will renounce the Devil and his pomp, and be ducked three times,
and say no more thereto then what the Lord commands in the Gospel; and as we
go out of the water, wherein we are baptized, we eat milk and honey together,
and refrain that whole week from washing and bathing. So far in the Treatise,
but the Authors leave out what follows, ibid. we make oblations for the
dead, for our birth-dayes yearly, and a little after, we cross our selves at
every step, and in every place, sitting down, and rising up, etc. All this
proves what the Adulti did, and what was required of them at their baptism,
but this disproveth not, but that infants baptism was in use, and that they
did promise as much by others: for why else did Tertullian give his counsel
(as is supposed) against the same? Yea, that (notwithstanding Tertullians
argument there) baptizing of infants without requiring from them personal
confession of faith, was a right use of the institution. Yea I wonder the
Treatise brings this Testimony to prove the right use of baptism according
to Christ and his Apostles: what were those oblations for the dead by the
persons baptized, and those superstitious crossings, forbearing of washings and
speech, eating milk and honey, etc. were these according to the institution of
Christ and example of the Apostles? Surely no.

SECT. II.
THe next testimony is taken from Counsels and Decretalls, either ex concilio
Gerundensi concerning the Catechumeni (or those that are instructed in the
faith (says this Treatise) It Is ordained that they should all come at Easter
and Pentecost. This is the proof of the fourth Proposition, that the children
of the faithful, etc. as if the Catechumens were only the children of the
faithful, when all adult Pagans were such: and say that Adult children too of
persons joined to the Church, but formerly Pagans were amongst the Catechumens,
yet not their babes, babes were baptized both before the superstitious
[limiting] or order of limiting the time of baptism as we proved, and whilst
it was in force too as we proved out of Austin, Sermon four in Octavo paschae
ad neophytos; yea the concilium Gerundense Can. 3. has these words, de
parvulis, etc. concerning little ones newborn, its ordained, that if they be
weak (as is usual) and that they desire not to suck; that even the same day
they are borne, they if they be brought may be baptized; so that this is the
old trick of concluding a dicto secundum quid ad simpliciter, neither is any
other conclusion to be made from the next proof ex concilio Laodicensi, The
Disciples or Scholars in the faith, who are to be baptized must before learn
the faith, and then upon the Thursday the last week in Lent must acknowledge
the same before the Priest or Bishop: which is repeated in confirmation of the
fifth Proposition, and the former answer is full to this objection, which was
even now mentioned: so ex consilio Martini, and Nicolai Popes (which is again
urged, Proposition fifth) the Catechumeni must first learn the Creed, what is
intended to adult Pagans by your counsel is prevented, to conclude against the
children, babes and all, contrary to Martins intent who was Anno 646. long
after the unquestionable use of Paedobaptisme, and Nicolaus was after him. No
more was intended by that quotation in the Decretalls ex Augustino ad
Fortunatum, when a Catechumen is baptized he makes confession, etc. as appears
by Austin in the places formerly quoted. Concilium Bracharense is quoted, but
not which, first or second, etc. nor what words; and so concilium Anterse in
like fashion, but why are not the words mentioned, if for their purposes? but
lest such blind whisperers, and items beget suspicion, it is likely the authors
if they ever saw the Canons intend it of that Canon Concilii Bracharensis
primi, that 20. days before baptism let the Catechumen all and several
learn of the Priest, Credo in Deum, etc. to which the former answer suffices.
Trecius in his Decretalls urges as much, ex secundo Concilio Bracharensi, yet
the same council also ratifieth Paedobaptism, ordering ( Canone septimo) that
each Bishop should in all the Churches take care about the baptizing of
Infants, brought to baptism, etc. The like answer suffices to that quotation
of the fourth Carthage council in confirmation of the fifth Proposition; those
that are to be baptized are to give in their names, and after long abstinence
from wine and flesh, and frequent examinations, with laying on of hands, they
are to be baptized. It is the 75th. Canon. Now that the Council never
intended, as if Infants baptism were not valid, and warrantable which could
not be thus examined, see the 48th. Canon of the third Carthage Council
(which according to Isiodore in his sum of the Decretals, was the year
before this) wherein the Council does ratify, even the Baptism of children
by Donatists (for so the Canon is expounded in Caranza his sum of the
Decretals, and in Albignanus tertius his edition of the Decretalls) this sin
being rather in the parents (not that they offered them to baptism, but) to
offer them to be baptized by such Heretics, and the fifth Carthage council
(which according to Isiodore, was two years after the 4th. council; but
according to Johannes Wolfius de rebus memorabilibus, centur. quarta, both the
fourth and fifth Carthage council was kept the same year, scil. Anno 399.)
wherein there were 74. Bishops (as in the other there were 97. Bishops)
Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, being President, in which council Canon 6. they
ratify Paedobaptisme (as this treatise also mentions Proposition 7.) It Is
not then imaginable, that the council that the other day (if our Authors
guess right) was against Paedobaptisme, and yet presently be so quite
altered, as to establish it; yea but Mr. Blackwood, in his preface [to storming
the two Garrisons of Antichrist,] would seem to make an argument against
paedobaptisme, as then in use from the 14. Can. Council. Nic. and Can. 4. and 6.
Council. Ancyran. in which Canons the Assemblies were divided into hearers,
Catechumeni, and Offerers, or persons in full communion, till cut off by death,
on censure, yet he cannot tell he says, whether this division were in use
before the first Nicene Counsel; probably its thought, since the Apostles
time; so that to conclude that according to his exposition of the Offerers,
children being not of that sort, nor of the Catechumeni, they must be of the
third sort, of the profane rabble of hearers; this is far fetched, and he
suspecteth the foundation of it, scil. that division, whether so ancient, as
from the Apostles; so that he can build nothing thereupon; nay by his leave,
he must thrust out Infants, little children not capable of being called
Auditors, in the Language of the ancient (which he cannot be ignorant,
understand it of adult persons) nor of being Catechumens, if not amongst the
third sort of Offerers, where are they then? Surely, no part of the
Congregation, when yet in Joel 2. Assemble the Congregation, gather such as
suck the breasts, etc. children then are upon Scripture grounds, as well as
common reason, parts of the Church Assemblies: nay has not Mr. B. made a rod
for his own back, since the Assembly being divided only into those three
parts, and Scripture, and reason, making little ones part of the Assembly, and
yet neither hearers, nor Catechumens (as reason will tell him) therefore they
must needs be of the third sort, scil. Offerers in those times, they were then
in full communion, witness Cyprian (as some urge it to enseeble Cyprians
testimony for Paedobaptisme) and Cyprian was above 70. years before the first
Nicene council: yea, children were Offerers too in respect of that which was
offered at their baptism, witness the Canon of the Elebertine council, as
the little ones of old were said to bring an offering in their hand, when their
parents only did it for them, Deuteronomy. 16. but Mr. Blackwood urges the seventh
Canon of the Council at Constantinople, declaring how they Catechize them they
are to baptize; he tells us not what Council it was, but says it was in
Theodosius his time, so it might be, and yet we not know by what Character,
which it was, diverse of them being then called there, Wolfius puts Theodosius
at Anno 383. and Anno 382. the third Constantinople Council Anno 383. the
fourth Anno 402. the fifth the same year that the Milevitan council was; and
Anno 403. the 6, 7, 8. now the 6th. council of Constantinople provideth that
none should have chrisme and baptism administered to them, unless it be such
as firmly hold forth the Lords Prayer, and the Creed, etc. excepting such, who
by reason of age cannot speak, and provideth, Can. 7. that such as be
witnesses to Infants in Baptism should be sound in the faith. Counsels use
not to be cross to themselves, in so little space as to order contrary
things, that only adult persons should be baptized, and no Infants, as Mr. B.
expounds them, and yet again, not only adult, but Infants shall be baptized,
that is not square dealings. And I wonder that Mr. B. foreseeing the ratifying
of the 46. Canon of that Laodicean Council before mentioned by that at Trullo
(which was the Emperors Palace, at Constantinople, where the Council used to
sit) in Justinians time, Can. 78. a Councels that was for Paedobaptisme
expressly, would enfeeble his argument from thence in that a Council of such
Fathers judge that Canons establishing both this and that, scil. catechizing
before baptism, and baptism before catechizing, are not contraries, that he
which holds the one denies the other, but subordinate, which may both stand
together, according as the persons to be baptized are either adult or Infants.
This Mr. B. foreseeing makes him (its likely) frame such a poor excuse, as
that its like, upon some abuse or neglect it was reestablished by that Council
of Trullo, but its like not, rather if it were any thing of the controversy.
Yea, but some object the Covenant of Theodor Balsamon, and Zonaras upon the
sixth Canon of that Grecian council at Neocesarea Anno. 315. concerning a
woman with child, that she ought to be illuminated (or baptized) when she
desires it, because in that matter ( scil. of baptism) she that brings forth
has nothing in common with the babe which is brought forth, which may be
showed in confession, that it is proprium uniuscujusque institutum, ac
propositum; which they are brought in as so expounding, or rather inferring
thence, that an Infant might not be baptized, because it has not power to
choose the confession of divine Baptism. Zonaras I have not, but I looked upon
that Patriarch of Antioch, Theodor Balsamon, who has these words in his
Scholia upon that Canon. Some (in the council) said that women with child
which came from the Infidels, to join with the Church ought not to be
baptized, but to stay till the babe they went with were brought forth, lest
that when she were baptized, it might seem that the child in her womb was
baptized with her, as being altogether united to her; whence it will come to
pass, that after the babe is borne, either it may be not left unenlightned
(or unbaptized) or if it be baptized, it may be thought that it is
rebaptized. This he makes the occasion of the Law of that ancient, not
Latin, but Greek council; which was a good while before the first Nicene
Council. And it is very remarkable what was the occasion, it was double, as is
evident. 1. That they might avoid the mischief of leaving babes unbaptized. 2.
That they might avoid the other of rebaptizing; two grand hinges of
Anabaptisme: these were such mischiefs (as it seems) in their eyes, that they
would not have expressions, let fall by them, that might any way occasion the
same, so that both these in those times were rather inter borrenda then
recipienda. But let us hear what Balsamon adds further there, speaking of
such Infants, that they could not make promise, etc. for how it is with the
babe in the womb none can enquire, nor be surety for them (says he) but
Infants ( scil. that are borne) do affirm by those which are their
susceptors, and are accounted to be actually enlightened (or baptized) with
divine illustration, or divine baptism, they then accounted baptism of
Infants no Antichristian baptism (as the Authors of this Treatise, and (as
John Spilsbury, Mr. Blackwood, and Henry Den do) but divine Baptism, the
Baptism of the Lord, wherefore I conclude that this testimony is grossly abused
by Hugo Grotius.

SECT. III.
Rupertus Tritiensis.
THe next Author quoted, is Rupertus Tritiensis l. 4. de divinis Officiis c.
18. both for the confirmation of the 4th. and 7th. proposition, the same is
urged by A. R. also to like purpose: but by this authors leave, that there be
no guile hid, I shall make bold to transcribe the very words of Rupertus Abbas
Tritiensis, of which the Treatise mentioned some pieces, scil. It was the
custom of old in the holy Church, not to celebrate the Sacrament of
regeneration at any other time ( scil. then Easter and Pentecost, of which he
spoke before) [unlesse in those, unto whom possibly danger might accrue by the
coming of some infirmity or danger of death upon them] [this exception which
is in his the very quaesitum; the Treatise, and A. R. leave wholly out; how
heartily they deal herein, let all judge.] All the offspring of the Church
(almost) which throughout the whole year, it could beget anew by the preaching
of the word, the solemnity of Easter approaching, gave in their names this
day, and throughout the following days, unto the very solemnity it self of
Easter: each one hearing the rule of faith, whence also such an one was called
a Catechumen, [for a Catechumen faith Rupertus is by interpretation a hearer]
both the suckling and the grown person: at length at the full time, after the
full of the moon in the solemnity at the holy Font, repeating the symboll
with full belief: It ( scil. the offspring of the Church) did die, and rise
again with Christ, but after Christianity increased, and that net of the
Gospel was filled with Fish, because that it was dangerous to delay so great a
multitude by reason of the casualtie of death, which in a multitude of men is
manifold; especially in regard of a company of Infants of Christian Parents,
much increasing, whose tender life is very often by a small occasion cut off; it
seemed good to the holy Church: leave off baptism being granted every where,
yea, offered, to prevent all dangers; and yet in a few to celebrate the
solemnity of baptism, with the resurrection of the Lord, to which it is like,
etc. by this that has been said, that which the Treatise, and A. R. intend to
disprove is rather confirmed, and the guilefull wresting of the testimony
discovered; for besides what has been before showed, that Infants baptism was
before this custom of baptism at Easter and Pentecest came up, and likewise
whilst it was held up, Infants being then, and there baptized, as well as at
other times, as by Austins testimony, Sermon. 4. ad Neoph. appeared, this
testimony also tells us, 1 That baptism of all sorts of persons, in case of
weakness and danger, at other times was in use of old. 2 That sucklings as
well as grown ones were accounted under the notion of the offspring of the
Church, begotten by the word, scil. in their parents, which being begotten
thereby, in their right also their children were in churched with them. 3
Confession of faith with full belief by others in stead of sucklings, was
counted as their confession; the lactati, as well as the grandescentes are said
to make such confession of faith, which they could not do, but by others. 4
That there were present at this solemnity a multitude of Infants, as well as
grown ones, which did Sacramentally die, and rise with Christ of old. 5 That
they baptized not of old all sorts of children at such times, but only the
Infants of Christians, and that upon the grounds of mortality and other
weakness, and hazard, was there made a change as well in respect of the
grown part of the multitude, as the Infants only. 6 That the change that was
made upon the grounds of mortality, and increase of the multitude, was not in
respect of the subjects; that afterward Infants should be baptized, whereas
only grown ones before were baptized (for both sorts were before and after
that custom came up, baptized as we proved) but it was only in respect of
the place where, and season when, that whereas of old they used to come to some
one great City, and that at these seasons of year only; now passim every
where, and at any other time they might be baptized, only some few that were
borne a little before these solemn times, (as Rupertus in his other books
mentions) were reserved to be then baptized, to grace as it were the
solemnity. And this may fully answer that testimony which this Treatise
Proposition 7. and A. R. also urge out of Joannes Beemius de moribus Gentium
speaking to like purpose. So then Rupertus Tritiensis, and his companion are
both as much abused herein, as other witnesses produced, or rather traduced.

SECT. IIII.
Cassander.
THe next witness is Cassander a stout adversary to them, yet fetched in by
the Authors of this Treatise to prove the 4th. and 7th. Proposition, Cassander
in l. de Infantium baptismo is said to say: It is certain, that some believers
in times past have with holden baptism from their children, until they were
grown, and could understand, and remember the mysteries of their faith, yea,
also counseled not to administer baptism, as by Tertullian and Gregory
Nazianzen appears. And Proposition 7. Cassander in his book de Infantium
baptismo says, that it came to be used by the Fathers that lived 300. years
after the Apostles, as much says A. R. in his Childish baptism. But say
Cassander spoke as Proposition 4. he is said to do; yet that proves not that
children of the faithful were commonly first instructed ere baptized, because
some believers deferred baptism, or Tertullian, and Gregory counseled it,
much less that this was well done according to Christ's mind, for we have
seen upon what unsound principles they did it: and as for the Council of
Tertullian and Gregory, it has been before weighed of what force herein. As
for the other speech of Cassander that Pedobaptisme came in use by the Fathers
300. years after the Apostles time, it makes me stand and wonder at the
impudent forehead of error, and yet I might wonder the less since it is but
just with God that they which hold lies should also tell lies. I read Cassander
with as much heed as I could, to find out whether there might be any color
of ground of such a speech of him, but could not find out any like it, unless
that which he says be this way wrested, scil. that the Apostles in the
beginning by the command and charge of the Lord, set up their work, and did
every where constitute Churches, gathered of the Gentiles to the Communion of
the Gospel; grown ones which consented to the Apostles doctrine after
confession of the faith, were without any distinction of times, or places knit
unto the Church of Christ by the Sacrament of Baptism administered by the
Disciples of the Apostles. [But says also in the next words] although even at
that time it is to be believed that Infants also, and especially sickly ones,
were offered to be consecrated by the baptism of Christ: but clearly to
evince the falsehood of that speech before cited to confirm Proposition 7. the
very title of this book contradicts the same. George Cassander of Infants
baptism. The testimonies of the Ancient Ecclesiastical writers, which
flourished within the 300. years from the times of the Apostles, that is, from
the departure of John the Apostles being more then the hundredth year from the
birth of Christ. And according to this his work that he propounds, he
brings in very notable testimonies of the ancients, both Latin and Greek,
that lived in that space for the proof of Paedobaptisme, that any that had not
s^ene authorities before might have been thence well furnished for this
purpose, and after the testimonies produced Cassander closes thus. These are
the testimonies of ancient Fathers which we suppose are sufficient for the
deciding of this controversy of childrens baptism, which has been raised up
by certain wretched persons; for in as much as all these whose testimonies we
have produced in a continued series from the Apostles, were Orthodox teachers,
and guiders of Churches of Christ at several times and places, there is no
question, but that this Tenent being held forth by them all severally, as with
one mouth, it was the very doctrine of the whole Church which the Church had
received from the Apostles, and transmitted the same to those in after times,
and upon the speech of Austin, l. 4. contra Donat. c. 13, 14. adds: To this
Apostolical doctrine of baptism of Infants, all the Apostolic Churches,
planted by the Apostles throughout the whole world, they do give testimony,
etc. Who sees not now the grosnesse of this falsehood in fathering that upon
Cassander, the very contrary whereunto is his business there to evince?

SECT. V.
Zwinglius.
THe next testimony is of as grand an adversary to Anabaptisme as any, and
that is Zuinglius, who is quoted to confirm the 4th. and 6th. Proposition, he
is said to affirm that there is no plain word in Scripture whereby childrens
baptism is commanded: his meaning is no more then thus; that it is not in so
many words said, you shall baptize children, as, neither the first day of the
week shall be to you the Lords day, or Christian Sabbath, etc. but the
principal place, (and for the other two quotations, they are to no purpose) is
that mentioned in his book of Articles, Act. 18. whose words, because the
treatise is so often tripping, we shall set down verbatim, who there speaking
of Confirmation says, although I am not ignorant (as it may be gathered out
of the Ancients) that of old time Infants were baptized (this is rendered
otherwise in the Treatise) and yet not so common as now it is, but the children
were always instructed openly, and when their faith had made impression upon
their hearts, and they confessed with their mouths, then they were admitted to
baptism; this custom of teaching I wish were used, and recalled now [namely
that baptism being given to Infants, they may be afterward taught when they
come to age as they are capable of instruction from the Word of God] this the
Treatise leaves out. Zwinglius his judgment was, that the maine in the child's
right to baptism was the Parents Covenant estate, whence the child being
federally holy, which else had been unclean, had its maine title to baptism,
so that in case both parents were visibly Pagans, or Idolatrous, etc. they were
not to be baptized, when yet in his time many such were baptized. And thus I
take it is that which he intends, that since in Ancient times, albeit
sometimes every little children of Infidels, (as may appear) were baptized,
yet not so commonly as now such like children are baptized promiscuously hand
over head, (for which some as it appears by Beza upon 1 Cor. 7. 14. have
pleaded, albeit he counts it their error, ibid.) and since in those times
Catechizing (as it appears) of children was too little in use; Zwinglius
makes that use of the Catechizing of children of old, both of persons joined
to the Church (which were capable of instruction when first their parents
joined in Church estate) before their baptism, which was one sort of children
so catechized, and of the exposititious children of Pagans also, those children
of their Pagan captive or slaves, which were another sort of children
catechized before baptism: Zwinglius wishes that albeit it were not in his
time used, as neither before baptism to such like children, so neither after
the baptism, neither of such children, nor of others of visible believers,
which ought in Infancy to be baptized: yet now catechizing of children might
be in more use. Assuredly Zwinglius was strong for this, that baptism of
Infants was no practice taken up after the Apostles, but by the Apostles: no
bare old custom taken upon humane grounds: but his judgment was directly
cross to the Proposition, he is brought as a witness to, that Christ did not
institute Infants baptism, etc. witness his many arguments from Scripture for
it, and his judicious answers to the evasions of the adversaries, to that
truth. And as much may be said of Oecolampadius his companion, who is cited to
confirm the 6th. Proposition; whereas in the first and second book of the
Epistles of Zwinglius and Oecolampadius they give grounds from Scripture to the
contrary. See l. 1. Epist. Zwingl. ad dilectos fratres. I will now tell you
from what grounds of Scripture I judge Infants to be baptized, etc. and l. 2.
in his Epist. Bercktold and Francis, Preachers at Berne, he says
peremptorily; contra Scripturas ergo fecissent Apostoli si Infantibus
negavissent baptismum, the Apostles therefore had done contrary to Scriptures,
if they had denied baptism to Infants. See more of Oecolampadius his mind too
herein in his Epist. to Zwinglius, and in that to the Preachers at Berne: here
therefore are two more witnesses abused in this Treatise.

CHAP. VI.
HEre the Authors forget and mistake their own witnesses names, they are in
such a hurry they bring in proofs that the Teachers according to the ancient
Fathers right did so, and so making the Fathers, and those Teachers distinct,
as persons of whom the testimony is brought, and as witnesses by whom, and yet
in the proofs, the ancient Fathers themselves are the witnesses of what was
done by those Teachers after them, as Hilary, Tertullian, Arnobius, Ambrose,
etc. these might say what was in their time, but cannot say what Teachers after
them will do or practice, unless the Authors can by a spell play the Witch of
Endors trick to fetch up old Samuel in his likeness to speak after he was
dead.

SECT. I.
BUt let us hear what any of them say, if we have not heard it before; Hilary.
As for Hilaries testimony of his own baptism, it is not material, we
mentioned him among the Authors instances of Adult persons baptized,
Proposition 3. as for his interpretation of baptizing in, or upon the name,
that is, upon confession of the beginners, it is as easily rejected, as urged,
unless his grounds were showed or were Scripture proof.

SECT. II.
Ambrose.
THe next witness is Ambrose de spiritu Sancto. l. 2. in our Sacrament there
are three questions propounded and three confessions made, without which three
questions no man can be washed, if Mr. B's answer be good to that part of
Tertullian in the beginning of his book de baptismo, mentioning, that a man
without cost, or pomp, is let down into the water: Observe says Mr. B. that
he speaks of a man, not of an Infant, so I might as well say here, he
speaks of a man's baptism, not of an Infants, which then also was in use, but
that I fear some body would sit upon my skirts presently, and ask me whether
an Infant be not sub genere isto subalterno hominis, whether an Infant be not
homo, and I ever thought before Mr. B. helped me with that distinction, that
when the Scripture says it is appointed to all men once to die, etc. Heb. 9.
that Infants also were there counted men to die as well as others, not to
mention other places of Scripture, or authors for the use of the word that way;
and I wonder Mr. B. when he supposes Romans 5. 18. makes for his fancy of
general redemption of children, whether of Pagans or Christians, then Infants
are men, on whom the free gift comes, and yet here homo demissus in aquam in
Tertullian must be only a grown man, not Infants, as if Infants now were not
homo: but this answer must be better grounded, or else I shall keep my
opinion, that as an Infant is homo; so Tertullians testimony there speaking
indefinitely of any baptized person, man or woman, Infants, youths, or riper
persons, etc. he does bear implicit testimony in that very place to
Paedobaptisme, as in his time. But to return to Ambrose, I say that in Ambrose
his time such confessions, and questions were, and Infants were baptized too,
that corruption being then in use of adding to Infants baptism interrogations
to them that brought them to baptism, which answered in their names, and made
confession in their stead. For others were baptized in Ambrose his time and
before, then such as could personally answer or make confession, yea, and that
it was Ambrose his judgment, that it was the mind of God that others should
be baptized, then could make such confessions, witness that among other
places of Ambrose, which he has in his 5th. Tom. in his Homilies upon Luke.
Jordan was turned back, signifying the future mysteries of salvation in
baptism, by which little ones in their Infancy are cleansed from the
wickedness of their natures: (namely in a Sacramental way.)

SECT. III.
BUt it will be here objected, that that custom of susceptors in Infants
baptism, and the interrogations, and questions that were put to them, or
others in their stead, does show, that of old none but grown persons were
baptized upon confession of faith, for that when Infants are baptized they must
also make confession by others. I answer, if the very use of susceptors in
baptism were an argument of force against Infants baptism of old, it might as
well be of force against the baptism of adult persons too upon the same
ground, as then in use; since they also had of old their susceptors: when
Pagans desired to be baptized, they had those which instructed them before
hand, and when they were baptized they presented them to baptism, and
undertook for them also. Stories are plentiful in instances, that after that
corrupt custom of susceptors in baptism came up, adult persons had susceptors
as well as Infants. Epidophorus at Carthage of the Church of Fausty had the
Deacon of the Church to be his susceptor. Magdeb. hist. cent. 5. c. 6.
Justinian the Emperor was surety for Gethes King of the Herulians, when
baptized, and diverse others the Centurists mention as do other Historian; nor
does it follow because such confessions, and answers were made by such as
brought Infants to be baptized, that therefore it argues only adults used to
be of old baptized, rather it argues that of old it was the doctrine of the
Church, that Infants were baptized principally in others right, which offered
them to baptism, namely, their godly parents, or such as took them as their
own adopted children, to bring them up in Gods fear. Hence even after the
corrupt and abusive practice of susceptors came up; Stories are not wanting to
tell us of Christian parents which were susceptors to their own children:
witness the Story mentioned by Fabian in his 5th. book c. 114. Andovera wife
to Chilpericus having a little daughter born in her husbands absence did by the
persuasions of the Bishop Fredegrand become witness to it her self at its
baptism. The Centurists mention the same Story out of Ganguinus. Hence also
Austin in his 14th. Sermon upon the words of the Apostle, speaking of Infants
Baptism says, if baptism profit the baptized, I demand whom it benefiteth,
the believing or the unbeleeving? but God forbid I should say that Infants are
not believing, I have but now disputed it before. He believes in another
which sins in another, scil. in the parents which alone convey sin to the
Infant: It believes then and it is baptism is valid, and it is joined to the
faithful formerly baptized. This the authority of the Church our mother
holds: This does the sure Canon (or rule) of truth obtain.

Thus far forth then it was looked at as a doctrine not only which the Church
had in it, but which the Scripture, the rule of truth contained in it: that in
the business of Baptism at least the faith of such as conveyed sin to the
child, even of the parents, was in stead of its own personal faith, so far
as to make its baptism valid and beneficial to it.

SECT. IIII.
Arnobius.
THe next witness is Arnobius upon the Psalms, which Perkins puts at the
year 290. but because Perkins in Praepar. ad Demon. Probl. and Rivet in his
Crit. sac. makes it a spacious book as mentioning on Psalm. 119. the Pelagian
heresy which came up above sixscore years after Arnobius his time, I shall
not attempt to fight against a shadow. Albeit the place being of the way of
Adults Baptism concludes nothing against what we maintain.

L^do Vives.
Ludovicus Vives is the next who in his notes upon Austin de Civitate Dei l. 1.
( cap. 26. says the Treatise, but it is rather) cap. 27 as Hen. Den. more
truly quoteth it, affirms that in times past no man was brought to be
baptized but those that were come to their full growth, who having learned what
it concerned desired the same: But whether he that lived but in Henry the
eighths days, or Austin whom he expounds which lived above twelve hundred
years ago, had better reason to know what was done of old, let any sober
mind judge.

Strabo.
To the same purpose Walefrid Strabo who lived about the year 800. seems to
speak, but Origin who was in the year 201. according to Osiander, or 230.
according to Perkins and Usher, he mentions Paedobaptisme as from the
Apostles, as well as Austin does. Melivitan.
And so does the Milevitan council in the year 402. (according to Wolfius)
say as much, that the Catholic Church has always understood Infants to be
defiled with Adams sin, and according to the rule of faith to be on that
ground (namely amongst others, for it is known sundry other gounds were of old
urged for Paedobaptisme, as that Matthew. 19. 13, 14, 15. Suffer, etc. For of
such, etc. urged in Tertullians time 200. years before, as appears by his
assaying to take off that ground in his book De Baptismo before mentioned)
baptized. See the 1. Tome of Counsels.

SECT. V.
Bucer.
THe next witness is Bucer in his Annotat. upon the 4th. of John, set out Anno
28. So much as in the Apostolical writings are written of baptism, is
apparent that baptism was administered to none by the Apostles, but to those of
whom concerning their regeneration they made no doubt, etc. I have looked that
very book (and a book distinct from his greater book on the Evangelists) and
there is no such words; It Is a mere forgery. Bucer is again cited Proposion
6th. saying that Christ has no where plainly commanded that children should
be baptized. If the speech had been just thus, yet it is evident his Intent was
not that children ought not to be baptized by virtue of Gods command, which is
the direct conclusion subscribed to in the explication of it at Wittenberg by
him and others, as before: but that the command was not in so many words
expressed, but by necessary consequence to be concluded. His book entitled
The groundworke and cause, I have not, though like testimonies have been
answered before.

SECT. VI.
Ruffinus.
THe next is Ruffinus in his exposition upon the Symbol, that those at Rome and
Aquila that were to be baptized must first acknowledge and confess the 12.
Articles of the Creed. Here Ruffinus is as one against Paedobaptisme. By others
when Origens authority is urged upon Romans 5. for Paedobaptisme, then it is
spurious and the words of Ruffinus. Now how should one behave himself amidst
this contradiction of the antipartie? Well, we shall ward off both Blows as
they come God willing. As for this testimony, as much is in the Treatise and
the same place brought out of Austin in his 8th. Book of Confessions, that
albeit the Authors conceal the name of the place where Victorinus was to have
made confession of the faith, as the custom was; namely, at Rome. Yea but how
then says Austin lib. 4 cont. Donat. cap. 13. 14. that it was ever the use of
the Churches, and that delivered from the Apostles to baptize Infants? Verily
both are subordinates and not contraries. According to the subjects mentioned,
if speaking of Adults, then the former is true; if of Infants, then the latter
is as true. Albeit it is as true after the custom then in use in Ruffinus his
time that Infants did make confession by their sureties; as according to God
they did and do now confess their faith (so far as concerns their
baptism) in their parents: even as every man ( Deuteronomy. 16. 17.) giving as he
was able, their males which personally there appeared came not before the Lord
empty, not any of them but gave, scil. in their parents offering for them.

CHAP. VII. SECT. I.
HIs proofs out of Popish writers, as Eckius mentioned in proof of that and
of the 7th. Proposition; Rossensis, Cocletus, Ennusius and Staphylus to which
some add Bellarmine, I do not much regard, because they can play
Legerdemaine, fast and loose with a trick that they have. If they dispute
against Calvinists about the sufficiency of Scripture, or validity of humane
traditions, then Paedobaptisme is a tradition of the Church: If against
Anabaptists, then Eckius in his Enchiridion here cited* has his four
Scripture arguments to prove it to be of Scripturall authority and
foundation. For Bellarmine, he has in his book of Baptism cap. 8. 3
arguments from Scripture for it. And although, says he, we do not find it
commanded expressly that we should baptize Infants. Tamen id colligitur satis
aperte ex scripturis ut supra ostendimus -- Yet it is to be gathered plainly
enough from Scriptures (says Bellarmine) as we have before showed. Wherefore
of such if I may say as he bluntly once spoke to his companion: If they can
with the same breath blow hot and cold, let them even eat porridge with the
devil if they will, I like not their falsehood.

SECT. II.
OF Lutherans, Pomeranus is quoted whose book of children unborne I cannot
meet with, and so cannot trace my Authors here: And in such a case as they say,
Travailers and Soldiers may lie by authority when none can contradict them.
But yet what says Dr. Pomeranus? that for the space of 1200. years men erred
concerning children, the which we cannot (yet willingly would) baptize; what
his intent is by these words of his cannot well be gathered. If he intend it
of all sorts of children, that it is an error to baptize all without regard to
their parents, Church or covenant estate: yet was it an old error: albeit not
so old, so far as I can find. But if it should be taken in reference to
children visibly in the covenant, I wonder if he should speak any such thing
in that sense having so solemnly subscribed to the contrary in that famous
meeting at Wittenberg formerly mentioned.

SECT. III.
CAlvin that grand opposer and stigmatizer of Anabaptists is quoted to confirm
Proposition 6. and 8th. lib. 4. Instit. cap. 16. He confesses that it is no
where expressly mentioned by the Evangelists, that any ones child was by the
Apostles hands baptized. Now Calvin having said Sect. 8. that there is none
which sees not that Paedobaptisme is not of humane devising which is
established by such Scripture approbation, brings it in by way of objection,
that it will be said, it is no where expressly mentioned where the Apostles
baptized children, which giving albeit not granting he says, Be it so, etc.
yet because neither were they excluded as often as mention is made of baptized
families, who unless he be mad will thence reason that they were not
baptized? they may as well reason on that ground that women were forbid to
receive the Supper, when notwithstanding in the Apostles time they were
thereunto admitted. Yet our Authors are so mad to bring this very place to
prove their 6th. Proposit. that the Apostles never baptized any Infants. And
upon Matthew, Calvin is said to say, Christ has no where commanded to baptize
Infants. But on what place in Matthew, Calvin says so is not said; but this I
can say that in the most likely places where that Argument of baptism is
handled, Calvin no where speaks in these words here expressed as far as I
can find.

Dathenus in his Colloquie is the next witness, confessing; It Is no where
plainly in such words written that Christian children shall in the New
Testament be baptized -- and yet we have no express commandment of it,
scil. as before in so many words; You shall baptize children: and that there is
no evident -- or express example ( scil. in so many words recorded that the
Apostles baptized (such or such) children) and what then? therefore Christ
never instituted, the Apostles never practiced Paedobaptism, according to the
6th. Proposition? Non sequitur. Here then are three more witnesses abused.

CHAP. VIII. SECT. I.
Origin calls childrens baptism a ceremony and tradition of the Church, Hom.
8. in Levit. and in Romans 6. lib. 5. What, does Origin say so in both places?
that is false. In the former he says baptism is given to Infants according
to the first observation of the Church. But if any boggle at that, in the other
place quoted he tells you the groundworke of that observation of the Church:
For this also the Church has received a tradition from the Apostles to give
baptism even to Infants. If it were an Apostolical tradition, then not a bare
Church tradition: if the Church received it from the Apostles, then was not the
Church the Author of it, but the Apostles rather. Yea but others perceiving the
force of the Testimony of so early an author in the matter of the practice of
Paedobaptisme, casheere it as a spurious testimony of some other rather then of
Origin. Some stumble at the word Tradition, when yet it is no other then what
Basil speaking (as before quoted) of the form of Baptism calls it a
tradition; and in his 73. Epistle speaking of the Spirit the comforter as
placed in equality with the Father and Son to be a thing which they had
received as delivered to them. So Justin Martyr another author formerly cited
makes the form of that manner of worship mentioned in his second Apology to
be that which they had received from the Apostles. So Gregory Nazianzen
another quoted Author here: in his first oration against Julian the Apostate,
he inveigheth against that abusive imitation of the Church traditions (the
manner of administration of the ordinances) for Pagan uses. Clemens
Alexandrinus a special Author quoted by Mr. B. yet he counts it a
metamorphosing of a Christian to kick against the tradition of the Church, and
warpe to opinions of humane heresies, lib. 7. Stromaton. He means not bare
Popish superstitious Church customs, but such as are opposite to mere humane
conceits and devices, yet calls them Church traditions. Yea but those corrupt
exploded Canons are yet called the Apostles Canons. They are so by Papists, not
so by Protestants. Such, all those orthodox Divines may explode them; yet
maintain this as an Apostolical tradition, which is genuine and divine -- Yea
but it may be said that Erasmus notes in his Praecognita unto the Book of
Leviticus that he which reads this work ( scil. the Homilies upon Levit.)
and the Enarration upon the Epistle to the Romans, he is uncertain whether
he read Origin or Ruffinus: And the peroration of the Translator annexed to
the commentary of the Romans says that he added something defective (whereof
yet he had the fundamentalls from the Author) and abbreviated other things too
largely expressed in the Commentaries upon the Romans, Leviticus, Genesis,
Exodus, Joshua and Judges. Suppose these additions of things defective by
Ruffinus; yet he says he had the foundations of what he added from Origin.
So that Origin gave such foundations of Paedobaptisme, if Ruffinus added that
as gave occasion to it; but why is not this particular mentioned as Origens
rather then Ruffinus his notion? Because Origin was somewhat Pelagianisticall,
and this place touching baptizing Infants in respect of original sin was too
cross to Pelagianisme. This is new to me that Origin held that error, albeit
he were not free of others: but I have read more said of Ruffinus that way,
scil. that he was the forerunner of Pelagius. If on that ground it was not
Origens, much less was it Ruffinus his own dictate. And Erasmus denies not
but all there mentioned must be fathered upon either Origin or Ruffinus. But
to put an end to this dispute, the Homilies on Luke are not questioned to be
Origens; neither does Erasmus nor the Translator in the peroration mentioned
acknowledge either additions or detractions in setting forth of those Homilies
on Luke. Yet there Origin affirms to the substantiall^ mentioned in that
place of the Romans; for in his 2. Tom. Hom. lib. 14. on Luke he says;
parvuli baptizantur, etc. and little children are baptized unto remission of
sins; of what sins, or when did they sin, or how can there be any occasion
of washing in little children, unless in that sense of which we spoke a
little before? None is clean from blemish, no though but a day old in the
earth, and because the defilement of our Nativitie is put away by baptism;
therefore even little children are baptized: Nor do I find in our Critics,
or the Authors quoted by them, that these Homilies of Origens on the Romans are
doubted of, to be genuine: Albeit both Perkins and Rivet do reject those on
Leviticus, as spurious, and his Commentaries on the Romans as not faithfully
translated by Ruffinus.

The next witness is called upon to come in, but miscalled and therefore may
choose whether he will answer to his name. Greg. 4th.
It is one Pope George the fourth who should call it a Tradition of the
Fathers; and to show it is no escape of the Printer he is called out in the
Roman Language, Georgius quartus Bonifacio; let children be baptized according
to the Tradition of the Fathers. Of Pope Gregory I have often heard and read, but
cannot light of one Pope George. But it is supposed the Authors meant Pope
Gregory the fourth; albeit the Translators mistook their Authors. This Pope
flourished Ann. 842. and it is not much what he had called it, in those corrupt
times. We have heard of others which gave better Language that were his
Seniors; and if you would believe but the Testimony of Gregory the first, who
had more honesty in him then all the rest of that name, but we have witnesses
enough besides, and shall forbear him.

SECT. II.
THe next Author called in is Cyprian, which is rather challenged as an Author
of Paedobaptisme, Anno 248. Epist. lib. 3. Ep. 8. for in the Margin it is said,
Cyprian ordained children should be baptized: and yet also it is said in the
Margin over against the mention of the Carthaginian Council, Baptism
Instituted; and again above: Baptism ordained by Pope Innocentius, scil. the
first, and yet over against Pope Innocent the third Baptism ordained in stead
of Circumcision, and yet over against the mention of the second Bracarensian
Council it is said Anno 610. was childrens Baptism ordained as a necessary
thing; so that I am at a stand. I thought we should have heard who instituted
or ordained baptism of Infants since it is cast as a mystery of the man of
sin in the preface, and made a humane ordinance Proposit. 7. And it has so
many first fathers, and so many are challenged for begetting this pretended
Bastard, that with all the skill I have, I know not at whose door to lay it.
If that Cyprian were the father of it, then not Innocentius the first, or the
Carthaginian or Milevitane Council gathered in his time above 150. years
after; If the fifth or sixth Carthage Council, then not the second
Bracarensian Council above 200. years after that: If either of these, then
not Innocent the third 600. years after the Bracharensian Council. The like
might be said of the Constitutions of Justinian and Leo the Emperor, which
he mentions. But if the Treatise intend that these all or any of them did
reestablish Paedobaptisme; albeit they were not the Authors of it: we are
agreed. But this proves not that what they do ratify, or because any of them
do anathematize such as deny it as the Milevitane Council did, that therefore
it is an humane ordinance. The Milevitane Council in the Anathema they
pronounce, they mention that as another ground: Of such as deny that Infants
derive any original guilt of sin which needs expiation by baptism, as
well as denying that Infants baptism is for remission of sins: Now none will
say, original guilt in Infants is a mere humane invention and device without
warrant from Scripture, because that Council anathematizeth such as deny it.
Or that because that Justinian ordaines that those that are come to their full
growth should be taught before they were baptized, as well as he does order
Paedobaptisme to be; that therefore the former is an humane ordinance. Surely
if that such a ratification be a formalis ratio to make the former an humane
ordinance, it is as well such in the latter. We speak not now in reference to
Scripture grounds of the one or of the other, but of the validity of arguing
from decrees of Counsels or Emperors or Popes. And this minds me of such
like Testimony of witnesses examined a little before. Cassander he must say,
Paedobaptisme came in 300. years after Christ. Luther, that it came in 1000.
years before him, scil. above five hundred years after Christ. Pomeranus
1200. years before him (who was contemporary with Luther) and so more then
300. years after Christ; and yet Cyprian at Ann^ 248. ordained it. Witness
Austin, Epist. 28. to Hierome. Justus Menius too I think comes in for the
same purpose, albeit he says nothing in the Book, (the same Justus Menius
which with the rest subscribed to Paedobaptisme, as commanded of God, at the
Wittenberg Concord before mentioned.) But where shall we fasten but conclude
that in as much as the witnesses disagree, their Testimonies are not valid, but
the one weakneth the other, since if one speak nothing but the truth, the
other does not? If the Authors intent be that some of these Authors or
Counsels propounded some unwarrantable motives to ratify Paedobaptisme: I go
not about to clear any of the sons of men from corruption in what they
attempt, nor in the motives which stir them up often times to things in
themselves warrantable. But this will not reach their maine aim, s^il. to
prove that because of some corruptions in the manner and way or motives of
ratifying this ordinance of God, it should be no ordinance of God. Non
sequitur. But because Cyprians Epistle to Fidus where the 66. African Bishops
did in a solemn Council agree to the ratifying of Paedobaptisme; it is many
ways undermined thereby to invalidate our proofs from antiquity for
Paedobaptisme: I shall endeavor to clear it from such aspersions. First, Mr.
B. attempts to make the judgment of the Council invalid because of the
weakness of their grounds, and the Errors annexed. Weak grounds. 1 That Luke
19. 10. as if lost if not baptized, which was also an error. 2 That God is a
like father to all -- and so all to be baptized as well as any, which was an
error too. 3 That they had only sinned in others. Errors also then held;
that the holy Ghost was received by baptism, that Infants were to have the
Lords Supper in Epist. de Lapsis, they held signing with the Cross, Unction,
that Original sin was done away by it; that only baptized persons escaped
Damnation, etc. By all which he would have it evident that no heed is to be
given to Cyprians time when there were such gross errors about baptism. To
which I Answer, if that the times were so gross and dark, then no wonder they
might hold forth such weak arguments for the truths they held. If Mr. B. had
well traced antiquity, and should in his reading still keep this principle by
him, to reject all he reads of as unsound in Authors or counsels because of
weak grounds they give; he would soon reject the most of what many approved
Authors for soundness amongst the ancients do hold forth, and what many
counsels have ratified. He that would weigh their wild expositions of
Scripture, and Allegories and Judaizing notions which often times they bring,
would as well question from thence either baptism or the Lords Supper to be
any ordinances now at all to us, as the Sectaries do. Let us bless God for
clearer times, but not despise any truth from any for the weakness of those
earthen vessels which hold it out to us. You would think him too censorious it
may be which coming to hear some Cobblers or Taylours in England to preach,
who having good Texts and being happily honest in the maine, yet make very
simple work of it both in their wild expositions of Scriptures, and weak, yea
erroneous grounds which they make use of to confirm the Text or doctrine
truly gathered from it. As for their errors it does not appear from all Mr.
B's quotations that all the 66. Bishops held them all, if Cyprian himself did.
But what if Tertullian add prayer for the dead to the baptism of adult
persons, as in the place quoted De Corona Militis before appeared, yea unction,
crossing, etc. (as Crispin in his book of the estate of the Church fathereth
these upon him) yet will it follow that ergo baptizing of adult persons upon
confession is no ordinance of God? no you will say because the Scripture
warrants it; so say we it warrants paedobaptisme. But we are now without
reference to Scripture upon a Topic place of argument drawn from humane
testimony. If the errors of the witness to the one makes his testimony
invalid, then do the errors of the other. Yea even those errors which
Cyprian held about doing away sin by baptism, unction and crossing in it,
damnation being lost without it: the receiving of the spirit by baptism, etc.
they held them in the point of baptism indefinitely, whether of grown persons
or others: so that Baptism of adult persons for those errors may be denied
as held out in Cyprians time in the maine, or any ordinance as well as
Paedobaptisme. And Cyprians testimony is vain in the one as well as the other,
as also his Mr. Tertullians was. Yet Mr. B. urges in his preface Cypr. De
Baptis. Haeret. for his purpose. If he held that all sorts should be
baptized, so have our fathers held that all sorts should come to the Lords
Supper, when yet only visible Saints should. Yet the Lords Supper is an
ordinance to adult persons visibly in Covenant with God and his people, and not
scandalous, and so is baptism of Infants of Parents in visible covenant with
God, etc. notwithstanding the error superadded, or that other of Infants
coming to the Lords Table, etc. As men may superadde to Christ the foundation,
wood, hay and stubble of their own, which will all be consumed, yet the
foundation remain precious and supporting, 1 Cor. 3. So men may and have
superadded to the ordinance of baptism both of adult and Infants, and so to
that of the Lords Supper and other ordinances much Stubble of their own vain
spirits and men's inventions, yet that hinders not but that such things were in
use in their Times, and rightly, in respect of the maine held out by them; and
as sitting in Moses chair we may and ought to hear them, notwithstanding
their own errors annexed.

But Mr. Blackwood has another evasion, as if this Epistle of Cyprianus to
Fidus be upon some grounds to be suspected to be supposititious. As 1. In
that Pamelius mentions not of what place Fidus was. Answ. No more does he
mention there of what place Victor or Therapius was; yet Therapius of the three
being a chief man and called to the Carthage Council is mentioned by his
place De Bulla. He was reckoned with men therefore in that Epistle whose place
is described, and that suffices. He was known to them, albeit not to us. 2. In
that there is such weakness in the arguments not likely to come from 66.
Bishops. Answ. What wonder if their grounds were so weak (if so they be)
since Mr. Blackwood has before told us what an evil time Cyprians was? and if
they were so full of errors as he said before about baptism, is it wonder
that they are so weak in their principles about it? I could answer this weak
reason otherwise, but since Mr. B. gives us that answer, let him take that;
and I cannot but mind him of that Council at Carthage a little after which
assembled to establish rebaptizing of persons led aside into heresies, yet
again returning to the orthodox Churches; but upon what weak gounds let even
Mr. B. consider and judge, yet none therefore questions whether ever there were
such a council. 3 Mr. B. says there is no mention made at what place this
Synod met. Ans. As if stories mentioned no Synods and those genuine, but such
as the very place where the council met is also mentioned, I shall therefore
give amongst others one instance, out of Osiander in his Exit. hist. eccles.
centur. 4. li. 3. c. 13. where he cites out of Hillary an oriental orthodox
Synod, of Bishops gathered against that Sermiensian and more then Semi-arrian
Synod, whose Canons are there recorded of which they did agree; but as for the
place or City where that Synod was held, that is not to be found. 4 Says Mr.
B. it appears that it was fained because so contrary to the mind of
Tertullian, which was in such request with Cyprian. Ans. If it were Tertullians
mind which Mr. B. supposes, yet Jerome who could speak as much as Mr.
Blackwood mentions, and does (as I remember in his book of Ecclesiastical
writers) affirm from a very aged man's mouth living in his time who had been
in his younger days Cyprians Scribe how dear Tertullians works were to him,
yet Jerome did not think that therefore this Epistle was none of Cyprians: For
he himself (who yet in that book mentioned leaves out books then accounted
spurious of several authors) quoteth this very Epistle in his 20. Tom. lib. 3.
Dialog. contra, Pelag. ad finem. And lest (says he) thou should think me
in an heretical sense to understand this (speaking before of the use of
Paedobaptisme) that blessed Martyr Cyprian whom thou boastest thy self to
imitate in expounding Scriptures, in the Epistle he wrote to the Bishop Fidus
( Jerome calls Fidus a Bishop, he treatise styles him but a Priest) concerning
baptism of Infants; he makes mention of this, etc. Paedobaptisme. 5 Says
Mr. B. it appears from Baronius that Cyprian was against Paedobaptisme, who
says if Cyprian had been so that that had been an apostolical Tradition
(speaking says Mr. B. of Infants baptism) and not contrary to holy Scriptures
by sound and sincere opinion, without doubt he had rested.

Ans. I shall let Mr. B. please himself a little in this fancy: suppose then
Cardinal Baronius says so, yet Mr. B. has amongst other exceptions here
charged against Cyprian: that in Cyprians time Infants did partake of the Lords
Supper, and will any follow that? Cyprian in his Epistle de lapsis, speaking of
the wickedness of those which sacrificed at the heathen Altars, he aggravates
their sin that their Infants they carried in their arms or led in their
hands, lost that which they had gotten in the beginning of their birth: when
the day of judgment comes they will say we have done nothing: neither did we
leaving the meat and the cup of the Lord, hasten willingly to profane
defilements, etc. Thus far Mr. B. out of Cyprian. Then it seems in Cyprians
time Infants were partakers of the Lords Supper as well as of baptism, that
birth wherein they had first got that which at the heathen Altars they lost,
scil. that good they got by it, which Sacramentally was their birth, that is,
new birth, for they rather added to what they got in their natural birth,
scil. sin, then lost at these sacrifices. If in this Epistle Infants baptism
be thus intimated, why says Mr. B. a little before (as a ground of his
challenge of his Epistle to Fidus) that he finds it mentioned but once; he
found what was in this Epistle de Lapsis too, why else mentions he the same?
and if both were the errors of Cyprian, and the rest then Cyprians judgment
was for it surely albeit it is supposed he erred in it; and why then is
Baronius brought in to prove it was not Cyprians judgment, when Mr. B. has
assayed to prove it that it was his error? was that the error of Cyprians
judgment the which he never held? but yet let us hear what Baronius can say
to it. Now I confess Baronius has this passage verbatim which Mr. B. quoteth;
only he has not Mr. B's Parenthesis (that it was spoken of Infants Baptism)
the Page is a little mistaken, it is not Page 398. but Page 415. but Mr. B. is
quite out in this application of that passage, which is mentioned in reference
only to the controversy about the baptism of heretics which he wresteth
grossly as if intended of the matter of baptism of Infants; and if Mr. B. had
but read Baronius a few lines before, he would never thus have in print
falsified an authors Testimony. Baronius discoursing about Traditions brings in
Pope Stephen using that weapon in the case of baptism of heretics against
Cyprian, who erred therein, scil. that it being by tradition received that the
Baptism of heretics might in case be valid, nothing should be acted
contrary to that tradition; as it was by Cyprian and the other Bishops with him
(nihil innovetur nisi quod traditum est) agatur, scil. (says Baronius quoting
Stephens words) and after subjoyneth. If Cyprian had been sure (that) scil.
that doctrine mentioned about the validity of Heretics baptism) had been an
Apostolical tradition (as Stephen urges it to be) and not contrary to holy
Scriptures, according to sound and sincere opinion, without doubt (says
Baronius) he had rested in it, and for this end he quoteth Cyprians 74.
Epistle ad Pompeium contra Epist. Steph. as opening the case intended, where
Cyprian himself writes that fragment of Stephens Epistle nihil innovetur,
etc. as urged against him in the business of the baptism of Heretics, and
Eusebius. lib. 7. eccles. cap. 2. and 3. speaks of the case betwixt Stephen and
Cyprian out of Letters of Dionysius Alexandrinus about it; citing it as the
great question then moved, scil. whether such as returned from any heresy
should be purged by baptism. In that the custom was to receive such only by
prayer and imposition of hands. And adds cap. 3. that Cyprian he held that
such as returned from error were no other way to be purged then by baptism:
But Stephen mentioned that nothing in this case should be innovated besides
that old tradition, scil. of receiving such again only by prayer and
imposition of hands, where Mr. B. comparing the place in Baronius with this in
Eusebius, may fully satisfy himself in his printed errors. But to come yet
closer, verily Stephen Bishop of Rome that was so enraged against Cyprian, for
that he brought in that innovation of rebaptizing persons that were baptized by
heretics: that he writ he would have no Church communion with such as did
rebaptise all sorts of heretics (as you may perceive by the Epistle of
Dionysius to Xistus Stephens successor, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 3, 4, 5.) he would
have expressed as much violence against Cyprian and his Bishops with him for
that which they determined in the case of Paedobaptisme if that had been
accounted an innovation in those times, or contrary to Apostolical tradition
as he thought the other was: or that as the treatise would assay to prove from
Ruffinus upon the Symboll, that the custom at Rome was to baptize such as made
confession of the articles of the Symbol; and so not Infants; no assuredly it
was otherwise in Rome, then they baptized Infants as well as others, else
Cyprian had heard of it to purpose from this Roman bishop, and besides the
story of Lucius and Elcutherius long before Stephens time shows, what was the
practice at Rome: surely how ever some snapper at Origens Testimony (who was
about 20. years before this) for saying Infants baptism was delivered to the
Church from the Apostles, yet if it had been thought otherwise in Cyprians
time, within a while after; other Bishops would have withdrawn the right hand
of fellowship for innovating contrary or besides Apostolical Tradition.

But to return to Mr. B. if he scruple Cyprians Epistle to Fidus, he may I
think satisfy himself if he consider Jeroms testimony, for it in the
forequoted place. Also that testimony for it from the fifth Council of
Carthage, viz. Chap. 6. cites this Epistle of Cyprian ad Fidum; so does Austin
often not only in his 28th. Epistle to Jerome, but Sermon the 14. upon the
words of the Apostle, so in his first book de pecc. merit. and remiss. and in
his third book also c. 5. he cites that Epistle against Pelagius; verily if
there had been any such question imagined in those days of the spuriousness
of that Epistle, Pelagius and his followers would soon have blunted that weapon
as often as sharpened against them. But some will say here is just the proverb
fulfilled, Ask my fellow whether I am a thief. Austin was as rotten and
corrupt in his principles about Paedobaptisme as was Cyprian. Cyprian looked at
them as incurring eternal judgment that were not baptized, so did he often
urging John 3. 5. 6. 53. he thought all were to be baptized whether of
believers or otherwise, so did Austin; he thought Infants had faith and that
because of original sin conveyed, therefore to be baptized according to
that testimony of Origens, Propter hoc, etc. For this (even because of
original sin) they must be baptized, etc.

To this I answer as before, admit Austin held out that upon Corrupt grounds,
so did he hold the administration of Baptism to adult persons upon grounds of
necessity thereof to salvation and purging away sin, yea and the Lords Supper
too as so necessary to grown persons ( John 6. 53.) also, yet none will make
these ordinances therefore nullities or no ordinances; truth is no less truth,
because a weak scholar takes unsafe mediums to confirm or prove the same.

Yet I add two things, 1. That the authors urged by Antipaedobaptists use like
language and argument. Justine calls it new birth, and says we bring them
to the water and they are Newborn as we are, that is baptized, (and per hoc
lavacrum remissionem peccatorum praeteritorum adipiscamur, fiamus filii
scientiae) and that we become the sons of knowledge and obtain remission of
sins past by baptism, etc. Clemens Alexandrinus calls it a washing whereby
we wipe away our sins, grace whereby the punishments due to our sins are
forgiven paedag. l. 1. Gregory Nazianzen calls it baptism, because sin is
buried in the water: so he calls it the key of heaven, the casting away of the
flesh, the loosing of our bonds, the taking away of slavery, etc. in his 40.
orat. de baptismo: So Basil, yea these authors use like grounds for baptism.
Justine uses that from the necessity of it from John 3. 5. and this he
speaking of baptism adds. Rationem ejus rei hanc accepimus ab Apostolis:
Quoniam prima nativitas, etc. We have received from the Apostles, this as a
reason of this thing; because that our first nativity ( scil. native
corruption) comes upon us neither knowing nor willing it, from the fellowship
of our parents and from their seed, etc. Justine and those with him lived not
in the Apostles times, yet he received this he says from them that is
delivered by them to others after them, and from those others to them. And what
reason is that delivered thus as a ground of baptism? even that native estate
of children in their parents. What is this but in effect what the author of
those homilies on the Romans urges, speaking of David's being conceived in
sin, etc. Propter hoc and ecclesia traditionem ab apostolis accepit parvulis
baptismum dare, etc. and the same is used by Origin, hom. 14. on Luke by
Cyprian Epistle ad Fidum, by Austin, Jerome, Ambrose. The same used by Gregory
orat. de baptismo, thou ( scil. art to have to baptism) as being in danger if
not more but from hence: being borne only in corruption or in sin. The same
urges the Milevitan Council. Tertullian de baptismo urges John 3. 5. for
baptism also. So as Austin and others urge it upon the ground of danger to
unbaptized persons; so does Gregory Nazianzen, orat. 40. not to stay to Christ's
years because of danger of mortality. Yea better Infants be sealed without
sense thereof, then die without the seal. And he also as well as Austin makes
the case of Infants dying without baptism to be punished with paena damni
albeit not with paena sensus, ibid. Basil in his exhortation to have to
baptism uses the same argument taken from the danger of death without
baptism; yet in them any naevi in this way are overlooked, and their
testimonies not therefore invalid. 2 I say that albeit that Austin and others
for Paedobaptisme used some unsafe grounds, yet others they used were to us
solid, as that from circumcision, l. 4. cont. Donat. c. 23, 24. and Epist. 108.
Seleucianae l. 2. de peccat. merit. and remiss. c. 25. that of their parents
faith, whence notwithstanding want of faith in themselves, it became a
beneficial ordinance, Sermon. 14. upon verb. Apostoli: that of their interest in
the Covenant which Christ came to fulfill in the flesh; hence that in the
Epistle of the Carthaginian Council (in Austins time) unto Innocent the first;
Nos quia credimus parvulos in peccato nasci, etc. praeterea quia credimus
filium dei pure ex illibata virgin natum ad implendas confirmandasque dei
(promissiones) quae Infantes non excludant a salute, sed in faedere includunt,
deo eos baptizandos esse contendimus. This that I have here recited may serve
further to evince the guile of the treatise, quoting this Epistle Proposition
7. adding the words (much rather) thus [but much rather includes Infants]
which is manifest injury; likewise it appears by Lib. de Bap. ad finem.
Tertullians answer, in way of gloss upon Matthew. 19. 13, 14. Let them come to
me, etc. that that was of old held forth as a ground of Paedobaptisme. In a
word, the command, mind, and institution of Christ and his Apostles was also
held out of old by Austin and others as the ground thereof; which they mean
when they say, the Church received it from the Apostles, Homil. in Romans 5. and
Austin contr. Donat. lib. 4. cap. 23, 24. Milevitan Council, Can. 2. and Austin
de Genesi ad literam, lib. 10. cap. 23. says, else it were not to be credited
or received if it were not an Apostolical tradition. So he says again in
his third Epistle ad Volus. Therefore then they baptized persons because to
them it was an Apostolical Tradition. That is it which was without all doubt
delivered by the Lord and by his Apostles; As Austin further opens himself,
lib de pec. merit. and remiss. cap. 26. Charity then I think should over look
other their more unsound tenants, or arguments, touching Paedobaptisme. But to
return to Cyprians Epistle and add one word more for Mr. B. and others
satisfaction. Let him look upon Erasmus his own edition of Cyprian, Anno
1541. and he shall see that Erasmus who was very Eagle eyed to espy spurious
writings, or passages of the Ancients, and there excepteth against many things
going under Cyprians name, yet no word of his against Cyprians 59. Epist. ad
Fidum: No more does Mr. Perkins in his Problemes, nor Rivet in his sacred
Critic; nor any critic which they quote, except against it. And here I might
end these Annotations upon the 7th. Proposition in this Treatise.

SECT. IIII.
BUt I meet with an old Threadbare objection to the same purpose, as if
Paedobaptisme was first ordained by Higinus Bishop of Rome who lived about the
year 1444. but all I can find in Authors is a certain decree (ascribed to him
at least) that Infants coming to Baptism need not have but one godfather or
god-mother, as they call them. And so much witnesses Fasciculus Temporum, and
Nauclerus, vol. 1. Generat. 6. besides what I find quoted out of Gratian: but
none say that he first ordained, that children should be baptized. A like
Decretall is ascribed to Urban Bishop of Rome, touching Childrens confirmation,
about the year 227. Nauclerus, but not of their Baptism, yet if they made any
such Canons it rather confirms what we say then weakneth our cause, scil.
That Infants baptism was in those times of use in Rome, and elsewhere: why
else any orders about their Susceptors or their Confirmations?

CHAP. IX.
THe Treatise has but one lie more to shake out of its Budget, and it is a
merry one (if I may so call it) if the Reader spare a little more patience he
shall hear it. It is concerning Dyonisius in his Ecclesiastica rarchia, they
would say Hierarchia, who they say confirms their 8th. Proposition thus. It
is ridiculous (or as the Author for explication sake adds to be esteemed as
a jest) that the bath of regeneration should be communicated to young
children, which neither can understand nor can hear to learn the mysteries of
God. I do not here dispute whether this were Dyonisius the Areopagite under
whose name the book goes, it is most likely it was some other Grecian
Dionysius, whether Dionysius Alexandrinus ( Origens scholar, as some probably
think) or some later Dionysius in the fourth or fifth Century, (as Dr. Usher
thinks in his catalogue of Ecclesiastic writers) yet a Greek Author he was
and ancient: As for his words recited, they are most vilely wrested. And that
which the Author of that Church Hierarchy in the 7th. Chapter ad finem brings
in as an objection of another reasoning according to corrupt nature, the
Authors of this Treatise bring in as his mind; his words are these: But that
children not yet able to understand divine Mysteries should be made pertakers
of divine generation, etc. it seems as thou say to the profane, to be
worthy of blasphemous laughter, and so on: he does not say it deserves
laughter, but seems so to do: And that not to the godly, but to the profane.
And this he said not as his own, but as another objection (as thou say.)
And if the Authors ever had seen that book and but read on; the Author of the
Book would presently have cleared himself from their error: For a little
after he adds. But yet of this matter, scil. Paedobaptisme just before
propounded, we also say that those our Divines and Holy Prefectors brought to
us from divine and ancient Tradition. For they say that which indeed is, that
Infants according to the Law or Word of God are brought to the sacred habit (
scil. to put on Christ in Baptism) to be purged from all error and unclean
life, etc. Who sees not by this and by all the former falsehoods and lies
which the Authors of this Treatise have vented, that they are some Mountebank
deceivers, and probably some Jesuited cheaters which would send this pack of
knavery abroad to deceive the simple and unlearned Reader? And it may be seek
to make the sad breach wider betwixt the professors in England by strengthening
the hand of the weaker party, the Anabaptists; so that what the authors or
translators of a book of some unknown Author or Authors say of their Preface,
scil. A mystery discovered, they mean of the man of sin; but they have made
it good rather to be a mystery of the body of sin, and a mystery of
iniquity discovered in themselves, and breaking out from them to open view,
which before lay hid. And let the Treatise hereafter Ironically only be
called, The plain and well grounded Treatise concerning Baptism.

CHAP. X. SECT. I.
I Might now have breathed a little and rested my self, but that Mr. B. boldly
challenges any man to prove Infants Baptism out of Justin Martyr, Ireneus,
Origin, Clemens, Alexandrinus, or Tertullian, and after professes he
regards no authority after the first 300. years. And others also call for
Greek authors and Testimony out of the Greek Churches for it. I am of small
reading, I confess, yet shall endeavor if it be satisfaction only that is
herein sought, to present some few things this way unto the consideration of
godly, sober and learned minds, and then draw to a conclusion of the whole
discourse; only premising that in speaking from any of these Authors; whether
touching the jus or fact of Paedobaptisme; it suffices if either expressly or
by consequence the same be held forth by them: for this in Scripture course is
allowed; when we are to prove any thing that ought to be done or was done,
either way of proof, literal or collateral and consequentiall suffices. Of
Justin.
To begin with Justin Martyr, he in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, having
spoken in way of vilifying circumcision in reference to Jewish Idolizing of
trusting in, and urging of it upon the Gentiles, he has these words, (...),
etc. and you indeed which are circumcised in the flesh, need our circumcision,
(that is baptism.) But we having this, have no need of that, namely as having
ours ( scil. Baptism) in its stead, and adds (...), etc. we in that we were
sinners (opposing the Gentiles to the Jews) have by reason of the mercy of God
been received, and so it is but equal to all, that all should equally receive
it, scil. Circumcision or Baptism spoken of, he makes our Baptism to be in
stead of their outward circumcision, and this to be received by the Gentiles,
in that sinners by reason of mercy, and this to be equal to all to be
received by them equally, meaning either all Gentiles simply: and that I think
he intends not; or at least all, scil. all sorts of Gentiles, high, low, rich,
poor, bond, free, male, female, babes, youths and elder ones.

Of Irenius.
Ireneus supposing the place quoted lib. 2. adversus haeres. Valentiniani
similium cap. 39. Magister ergo existens Magistri babebat aetatem, etc. Christ
being a Master had the age of a Master, neither rejecting nor surpassing man,
nor dissolving in himself his own law of mankind, but sanctifying every age,
by the like in himself, for he came to save all, scil. (all sorts) by
himself; all I say which are newborn unto God by him, Infants and little
ones, lads and youths, and elder ones, etc. Ireneus his judgment is, that
Christ is a Master to all sorts of men, to those of all ages, Infants, youth,
or elder persons, and by force of Relata then in his judgment, Infants as well
as adults are his Scholars or Disciples, that species of mankind, Infants as
well as grown ones, albeit not all individual Infants whatsoever, come under
relation to Christ as a Master; therefore in his judgment, that sort of
persons being actually Disciples (not merely capable of it) the privilege of
Disciples, scil. Baptism, is their due. 2. He judges that species of mankind
Infants as well as others to be actually partakers of sanctification by Christ
of the new birth, etc. the thing sealed in Baptism: therefore supposing his
judgment, thus in the one; it is regular for him to judge, that that sort of
mankind are to be visibly Baptized as well as that other sort of grown ones.

Origin is next and we have already proved supposing any ground of jealousy
against that quoted place in the Romans, yet that of Luke, is of unquestionable
credit touching both his judgment and practice of Paedobaptisme. Of Clemens
Alexandrinus.
Clemens Alexandrinus is next, where in his fourth book of his Stromat.
alluding to that of Job, return, says he, not naked of possessions, that is
common, but of sin, (...), etc. for this is it which is said, Unless being
converted, ye become as little children; clean indeed in body, but holy in
soul, by abstayning from wicked works; showing (says Clemens) that he would
have us such like, as he has begot out of the Matrix or womb of the water,
(...), etc. for generation meeting with or receiving of, or closing with
generation, scil. in baptism, will make us immortal by progress, viz. in
good, etc. I deny not but Clemens alluding to this place of little ones has
sometimes other applications of it not cross but subordinate to this, but I
see not how it can otherwise be understood, but that he makes a very child
here the pattern as clean in body and holy in soul ( scil. Sacramentally in
Baptism) according to that description in washing bodies with pure water, and
heart sprinkling from an ill conscience, scil. guilt of sin, Heb. 10. 8. A
periphrasis of Baptism, unless any say, Infants are Innocents, clean from
sin original, and expounding whom he means which here he sets as the
pattern to grown ones; he says, such like as are begotten in or by Baptism
(as Gensianus Hervetus on the place notes) comparing Baptism to the womb out
of which an Infant is borne; and so here newborn, and so the little one is
the pattern to such as will be saved: not as an Infant merely, but as such a
little one that is pure in body and soul, which here he further explicateth,
that is, such an one as is begotten again in Baptism. He speaks not this
of adult ones: they are the persons that must be such like; they cannot be
both the Patterns and the persons resembling them too, the little ones thus
holy and thus newborn are the pattern which as soon as borne in a man are
newborn Sacramentally in baptism. Their generation and that their new
ganeration do as it were join and hang and hand together.

Concerning Tertullian if his judgment be in some case for deferring
Baptism, yet his gloss upon that ground upon Matthew. 19. (which according to
him requires baptizing of the Persons so invited) is absurd, and his other
expressions de Anima mentioned seem cross thereto, but for the practice of
Paedobaptisme in his time beside^ what Origin about his time testifies to
evince it, his own words mentioned before in the beginning of his book de
Baptismo, and his arguing against the practice of hasting Infants to baptism
does prove it to be then in use.

Cyprian was within this 300. years, and therefore his testimony may not be
slightly put by as before we showed, his 59. Epistle ad Fidum so opposed in
our cause is yet authoritative with some opposites to prove the typicalnesse of
the eighth day. Amongst the Greek authors called for that which is recorded to
have been urged in the council by one of the members of that council of
Neocesarea before mentioned, touching the occasion of that Law of baptizing the
woman with child come from Paganism to the faith, is of much weight, other
Greek counsels, as the 6th. council of Constantinople, and Trullo, etc. are
of moment also.

As for Ignatius his testimony, I do not remember when I read it somewhile
since, that he speaks of baptism of adult or Infants purposely; and if he
had, so many of the Epistles fathered upon him, being spurious, and the rest
that may be his, being so mixed and corrupted, much heed would not be given
to his testimony.

Eusebius it is known omitted many things of note, as where and when Justin was
baptized: and the story of that famous writer Theognostus, of whom and his
works Athanasius makes mention de Synod. Nic. decr. contra Arrianos, quoted by
Baronius in his first Tome.

Anno 330.
Of Athanasius.
Athanasius (himself if that Question be his which some have scrupled) his
testimony quest. 125. is full for it; for in that we thrice dip the child in
water and lift it up again it signifies the death of Christ and his rising
the third day again, etc. the sentence before being the similitude stands
thus: as Christ died and rose the third day, so we in baptism die and rise
again, for in that, etc. as before.

But that is undeniably his own upon Luke 10. All things are given to me,
etc. page 197. he makes baptism to succeed circumcision, urging that proof,
Col. 2. 12. wherefore, says he, when that was come unto which the figure did
denote, that note and figure cease and rests, for circumcision was the note
(or figure) the laver of regeneration (or baptism) is the very thing which was
signified, this is no other then the Doctrine we hold forth: and whence by
Analogy we deduce the doctrine of Paedobaptism. The same also teaches
Epiphanius.

Anno 396.
Of Epiphanius.
Epiphanius contra haereses, contra Epicuraeos, there was circumcision of the
flesh which served unto the time of the great circumcision, scil. Baptism,
which circumciseth us from our sins, and seals us into the name of God: and
contra Corinth. Circumcision lasted as a servant for a time until the greater
Circumcision, namely, the laver of regeneration came in stead, and Tom. 2. l.
1. Christ came and fulfilled circumcision, having given a perfect circumcision
among his mysteries, not in one member only but of the whole body, being
sealed and circumcised from sins, and not saving one part of his people, that
is, men only, but the whole people of Christians ( scil. men, women and
children) he compleateth circumcision by all their circumcising from sin in
baptism. Yea, but why then did not Epiphanius use that argument of
Paedobaptism against the Collirydians as well as that taken from their
interests in Gods Kingdom, etc. The answer is ready; it is likely that all
those heretics might as well as some others deny Paedobaptisme in a sense, if
not wholly, and what then the argument from Paedobaptisme had been invalid;
besides it is not necessary that a man in disproving error or proving truth
should use all the arguments he has by him; or that it be concluded he has
no more arguments that way because he uses them not.

Anno 369.
What Basil said this way as I find him quoted by Aretius on Luke 18. I have
mentioned formerly, I have not time to search him and read him exactly.

Anno 380.
What Gregory Nazianzen has this way for us, yea if strictly expounded: how
he is ours we have seen before.

Anno 405.
Of Chrysostom.
John Chrysostom which Mr. Blackwood makes his own in his 21. Homil. to the
people of Antioch, (which if not spurious as sundry of them are, see Perkins
and Rivet) yet not understood exclusive. And it is much that Mr. B. that says,
page 31. he regards not any authority after the first 300. years, will yet
quote the Nicene Council 325. the Laodicean Council 308. the Constantinople
Council about 400. Basil 380. and Chrysostom 405. years after Christ, as of
much use on his part in way of authority, yet says he will not regard any
authorities (which the other party at least bring) above the limit of time. But
to return to Chrysostom, who in his 40. Homil. upon Genesis says, But our
circumcision or grace I say of Baptism has cure without grief, and brings
innumerably good things to us, etc. and it has no limited time set as there
was: but it is lawful to receive this circumcision made without hands either
in our first, or middle, or last age, and so in his homily ad Neophytos, (...),
for this cause we also baptize little ones which have no sin (meaning of
their own, have not committed actual sins) that to them righteousness,
holiness, adoption, inheritance and fraternity of Christ may be communicated,
that they may all become his members and an habitation of his Spirit.

Anno 430.
Of Theodoret.
Theodoret in his Epitome of divine decrees and Cap. of baptism. for baptism is
not like a razour, as the frantique Messalians say, taking away (only) sins
that are past: for that God gives in superabundantly; for if this only were
the effect of baptism, why do we baptize infants which have not yet relished
sin? for the Sacrament does not promise only those things but greater, for it
is the pledge of future good things, and a type of future resurrection, and it
is the communication of the Lords death and participation of his resurrection,
the garment of salvation and gladness. For as many as are baptized into Christ
have put on Christ, and as many as are baptized into Christ are baptized into
his death, that as Christ was raised from the dead, so we should walk in
newness of life, and adding, haec nos de sanctissimo baptismo sentire docuit
Apostolus, and the Apostle has taught us thus to hold concerning baptism; and
makes those speeches, Gal. 3. and Romans 6. to be verified in Infants baptizing
as well as others; and that they are baptized in respect of future good rather
then present, and that the Apostle taught them so to think hereof. Nor is that
Dionysius Graecus, who ever he were, (albeit not the Areopagite, yea albeit
having sundry mixtures in his book) to be wholly slighted or neglected.

SECT. II.
Cassander de baptis. Inf. Of the Eastern and Greek Churches.
As for the Eastern and Greek Churches, Cassanders testimony is very round
and full, (albeit their discipline may well be gathered by their teachers and
counsels doctrine) speaking of testimony of Paedobaptisme he says, but
especial and chief testimony and weight of authority to this baptism of
Infants, is further added, from the universal and constant custom, which unto
this day in the Churches which are extant in the world, and there are many such
without the limits of the Roman Church is retained, for the Churches which are
yet remaining in Greece, Asia, Syria, Egypt, and India, and the Russians and
Muscovites which follow the Greek orders; lastly, the Aethiopians under the
government of Prester John; I say all these Christians professing nations,
although differing in some opinions, and rites, yet in the custom of baptizing
Infants, they all of old agreed among themselves, some stating the 8. and the
Aethiopians the 40. day for baptizing them, unless in the case of danger or
those of the female Sex. The Russians, and Armenians baptize Infants as they
do Adults, unless that when they baptize Infants, there are witnesses; and
the Indian Christians do so likewise, for which he quotes Josephus Judas in
his Ethiopian navigations, and Franciscus Alvares, and it is not credible that
such Churches so averse from the Latins, would yet buckle to their customs of
consecrating the unleavened bread, or eating thngs strangled, or blood, that
they did borrow this of Paedobaptisme (so much abhord formerly by them) from
the Western Churches; and Paget in his Christianography cites a speech of the
Bishop of Bitonto in the Council of Trent, acknowledging of the Greek Church
thus: ea igitur Graecia matter est, that the Greek Church is that mother to
whom the Latin owneth whatever it has; see the acts of the Council of Trent,
page 18. and he mentions the form of the Russians baptism, the Priest when
he dippeth the child uses these words in the name of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, and as often as the Godfathers are asked whether they renounce the
Devil, so often they spit on the ground, Guagniny relig. Muscovit.

In the Greek Church the Priest having said certain prayers, taking the child
in his arms, puts him three times into the water saying: The servant of God
N N. is baptized in the name of the Father, the Son and Holy Ghost. Jerome the
Patriarch page 103. and the same does Thomas Aquinas observe in his third part,
Quest. 6. Artic. 8. Quest. 67. Artic. 6. and Quest. 66. A^tic. the 5th. And the
same does Dominic. a Sot. in quest. 1. Art. 8. testify, and let me add two
things more; First, that the doctrine of Paedobaptisme was never ex professo
opposed by any Orthodox Churches, or Christians in all the times of old, as
far as I can find; of Tertullians mind we have spoken before, and Gregory
Nazianzen; how far they went Auxentius the Arrian Bishop of Millain, as
Bullinger in his Decads has it, did so, and so indeed did the Samosatenian
Heretics. The Donatists they baptized Infants, witness the 48. Canon of the
third Carthaginian Council in reference to Siritius and Simplicianus. So did
other African Councels in Austins time ordain that children baptized by
Donatists should not be rebaptized; the Pelagians themselves denied it not
wholly. Austin in his 14. Sermon de verbis Apostoli. baptizand^ esse parvulos
nemo dubitet, etc. none need to doubt of baptism since even those here doubt
not, which in part do contradict ( scil. the Pelagians:) there are cases, and
times wherein some one of the servants of God saw much more then many, and most
did; as Athanasius, and some few more in the point of the Divinity of Christ
in that Arrian age, and Paphnutius the Confessor in the point of Ministers
marriage to which the Fathers of the Nicene Council had like to have gone
contrary, and yet before and after these times, whole Churches and Councels
held out as much as these Saints did.

SECT. IIII.
Object. NO such example in the opposers of Paedobaptisme; Yes, (you will say)
Berengarius about a 1050. and afterward Peter de Brucis, and the Albingenses
and so the Waldenses, (for they had such diverse names according to places and
countries in which they were scattered, etc.) they denied it, and some of them
appealed to the Scriptures, and to the Greek Church for warrant.

Answ. I deny not but that the Popish writers (as their manner is) use to brand
the servants of God with some odious tenants, for which all would hate them,
when that they never held the same; but that old accuser of the Brethren
casts on by his instruments that dirt, wash it off who can. Plateolus, Abbas
Cluviacensis and others traded this way, concerning Berengarius and his
followers. Dr. Usher de successione and statu Ecclesiarum Christianarum, Cap.
7. pa. 207. quoteth Tbuanus accusing him and them thereof, but evinceth the
contrary both in that: In all the Summons of Berengarius before the Synod we
never read he was charged with Anabaptisme, and that he rather denied
baptism to profit Infants to salvation, ex opere operato, for which he
quoteth Alanus in his first book against the Heretics of his times; as
saying: that baptism had no efficacy either in Infant or grown persons, etc.
and in p. 195. cites Serarius in Triharesio -- as saying, qui hodie sunt
Calvinisti, olim dicti fuerunt Berengariani, and qui hodie Protestants
dicuntur, Johanni Wendelstino (praefat. in Cod. Canonum,) novi sunt Waldenses.
They then acknowledge their and our doctrine to be the same, and therefore no
Antipaedobaptists, and Gretzer prolegom. in Script. edit. contra Waldenses cap.
1. cites this as one of their Articles of confession, credimus etiam qu^d non
salvatur quis nisi qui baptizatur, viz. ordinarily, and parvulos salvari per
baptismum, and we believe that little children are saved by baptism, and so
in the same cap. 8. does Dr. Usher clear Peter de Brucis, and his followers
from all such aspersions. They were accused too for rejecting the
Old Testament, and Evangelists, yet by Gretzer and others they are cleared as
those that translated; and taught the same; and Reiner the Inquisitour said,
they were so well acquainted with the old and new Testament, as that they could
say much thereof by heart: the history of the Waldenses mentions this
accusation of them, as if denying Paedobaptisme, but cites a book of the
Waldenses entitled the spiritual Almanac, fol. 45. to the contrary, ordering
that though no time or day be set, yet the charity, and edification of the
Church must serve for a rule therein, and therefore they to whom the children
were nearest allied brought their Infants to be baptized as their parents, or
any other whom God had made charitable in that kind. True it is says the
Author of that story ( scil. John Paul Peruin. of Lions, l. 1. c. 4.) they
being forced by the Popish Priest to bring their children, would delay their
baptism out of detestation of the superstitious addition: and their own
Ministers (called Barbes) being very often (and sometimes very long) upon the
Churches service, they would defer their childrens baptism to their return;
which delays of theirs being observed by the Popish Priests they thence raised
that report, and charged them with that imposture: they appealed to the Greek
Church, not as denying Paedobaptisme, for they held and practiced it as before
was showed, but as to a Church that was not so corrupt in dispensing it, as not
using Chrisme, crossing and exorcising; as the Latin Church did in baptizing
any: See Flaccus Illiricus Catalogo testium veritatis, page 434. Waldenses
semper baptizarunt Infantes, etc. the Waldenses ever used to baptize their
Infants: nor do they now hold against it; they spoke not against baptism of
Infants simply, but as not administered by those of Rome in the vulgar tongue;
nor does Aeveas Sylvius in his Bohemian Story of the Waldensian tenants,
although he be an exact sifter into the supposed errors of the Waldenses,
charge them with Antipaedobaptisme.

SECT. IIII.
BUt to return to that first consideration, let it be weighed that as Austin
long ago said of it, Nullus Christianorum, etc. No Christians (orthodox and
godly) had ever denied Paedobaptisme, l. 4. Con. Donat. c. 13. Secondly, add
also this, that if it had been any way justly suspicious, why did not the
Messalians wholly deny it, and the Pelagians also? what need had they to use
that shift of Infants to be baptized to the kingdom of God, but not to the
remission of sins? this argument Austin uses Sermon. 14. de verb. Apost. Yea
but they were afraid of the authority of the Church being great therein, that
is strange that Heretics that regarded not so directly to go against, in
their opinions, as well express letter of Scripture, as the doctrine of the
Church in fundamental matters, should yet be afraid of the Church in a
matter circa fundamentalia, and not so express in so many words as
Paedobaptisme was, who will imagine such an unlikelihood? A have done with this
dispute for present, only I could advise that Mr. Blackwood, and others would
be more sparing of such printed blaspheming of the name and tabernacle of the
Lord, as to style this (which to all the Saints (in a manner) of old, and to
the most that now live is of precious esteem and use) an Antichristian
Garrison, and the doctrine of the man of sin, or of Antichrist. Mr. Blackwood
I am sure does know what is the judgment of all Orthodox Divines touching
Antichrist, and who, or what it is that is so; and where he has his seat, and
when he had his rise. And cannot be ignorant wholly that Paedobaptisme was of
universal esteem, and use (in a manner) long before those prophesyings and
pointings out of Antichrist by many of the ancients; the Greek Church which
had not what doctrine and worship they had, and held from the Latin Church, but
the Latin Church had it rather from them (as in the Council of Trent was
before acknowledged) and which was averse from Romish customs; yet they held
Paedobaptisme, as before was proved. It is dangerous speaking a word against
the Son, (much more writing) albeit not so irrecoverably as to speak against
the Holy Ghost; he had need be on good, sure and clear grounds (if it were
supposable he could be so) that assayes to charge God foolishly with the
reasons of his covenantings, or dispensations, and so palpably as to deny that
God made a Covenant of Grace with Abraham, Genesis 17. and such like inaudita.
It Is dangerous pretending an imaginary Garrison, and in fighting against that
as a supposed Garrison of Antichrist, whereon a man hazards the name and does
the work of one which will be found a fighter against God: we know who would
not bring a railing accusation against the Devil, and how dare any so boldly
revile such a received and ratified truth, as that of Gods exhibition, and
dispensation of his grace in a preventing way to those whose seed after them in
Scripture Language are counted blessed. The Saints of old were very tender of
speaking any thing in such a sort as tended to the condemnation of the just.

CHAP. XI.
Use 1.
TO wind up all in a word of Use to all; 1. in way of instruction. 1. See the
riches of Gods grace which thus is enlarged to all the sorts of the sons of men
younger and elder; if God would amplify grace he sets it out as extended to
his people, as in the case of an helpless and despicable babe, Esaias 49. 14,
15. Hos. 10. 1. 3. especially Ezekiel. 16. 6, 7, 8. and what has Satan here to
object, Psalm. 8. 1. 2. when even that sort of persons are made presidents not
only of electing but calling (in way of Covenant and promise) grace? Romans 9.
7, 8, 9, 10. To all he is rich, and free, hence all enterers into the
kingdom, must here take pattern, Luke. 18. 17. how plentiful is that sap
that fills such twigs, that liquor that fills all sort of vessels of greater
and lesser capacity? how strong is that pin on whom all are hung?

2. See what honor God puts on his Saints thus to intaile the visible ordinary
administration of his grace on them, and theirs, 2 Samuel 23. 4, 5.

3. See how cruel unbeleevers are to themselves and theirs in excluding
themselves and theirs of the ordinary means of their welfare even covenant
grace administered.

4. See their desperate ingratitude that being children of such hopes, despise,
and sell their birthright with Esau; these do vex their father most, Deuteronomy. 32.
19, 20.

5. See the danger and detestablenesse of Anabaptisticall tenants, giving God
and Christ (in part) the lie, vayling the glory of his preventing grace of
Covenant, Numb. 11. 18. (giving such a Covenant call before we knew, or sought
it, Esaias 65. 1, 2.) framing a Covenant of God with believing parents which he
never made, scil. a Covenant not respecting their children; denying the
ordinary dispensation of the fruit of Christ's death to the Infant part of his
Church, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. making the Churches opposite to Christ in their
administrations to those of his, in their charity to that of his; as if he
were looser in his charity to own such babes as of his kingdom which his
Church will not, may not do; condemning the judgment and practice of former
Churches, Jews and Gentiles, Act. 2. 38. 39. Romans 5. 14, 15. and 11. 16, 17,
18, 19. Ephesians. 2. 11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 7. 14. and 10. 1, 2. as preached all over
Mark. 16. 15 Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. and Deuteronomy. 29. 29. with 30. 6. 10. 12, 13, 14.
compared, see Austin l. 4. contr. Don. cap. 23, 24. undermining the validity
of all which God has done by virtue of his Covenant to babes, or to any of the
Saints occasioning from the initiatory seal thereof, Ephesians. 5. 26. evacuating
all that Red-Sea-like triumphant Encouragement thence unto Gods baptized Israel
against their spiritual Egyptian enemies pursuit of them; and that Cloud-like
Influence of their baptism in scorching temptations -- and Arke-like succor
thereof in drowning times. David did not more effectually make use of his
circumcision which he long before received (even when an Infant) against that
insulting Philistim -- (whence that 1 Samuel 17. -- this uncircumcised Philistim
is come, etc.) then many of Gods faithful ones have of that preventing grace
of God sealed to them in baptism when very babes, in their spiritual
conflicts. But all such spiritual workings either in parents or in the
Churches of the Saints (where children have been offered to baptism) which
have been occasioned by the administration of Baptism to Infants, are made
here by delusions; God not using in such sort so generally, commonly and
constantly to breath in Antichristian inventions. Yea all their prayers are
thereby made so many profanations of Gods name and taking the same in vain as
often as powered out upon occasion of baptizing of Infants, whence that profane
trick of some, to turn their back upon the Churches at such time, as if all
their persons, and prayers, and fellowship were unclean, whence the stiling of
it Antichristian, etc. what is this but to blaspheme the name and tabernacle
and Saints of God, Rev. 13. And how does such doctrine undermine all the
Churches of the Saints which differ from them? witness their new foundings of
their Churches in renouncing their former baptism as antichristian and
receiving another baptism; yea how do such cast stumbling blocks unto the
coming of the Jews by undermining of Abraham's Covenant in the latitude of it
and the binding force of the old Testament, which they stick to, as if all were
invalid unless come over again in the new Testament, which they reject, and
when ever dealt withal doubtless old Testament principles will be the choice
isntrumental ways and means of getting within them.

Use 2.
Second Use of direction, 1 To Church Officers; to look after the Churches
children being children of such hopes. 2 To gracious parents; 1 Admire much at
the bounty of God who is not content to engage his grace to you, but to yours
with you; you and yours are all Traitors, yet his royal word is for your and
their acceptance. If that called for a Behold! Psalm. 128. 3, 4, 5. and if that
caused in him such holy wondering, 2 Samuel 7. 18, 19, 20. may not this also do
the like, 2 Renew your faith in Gods Covenant in the latitude of it upon
occasion of the baptism of others, or your own children in special sort. 3
Acquaint your children with, and urge Gods mind of grace upon them as they are
capable of Instruction, Psalm. 78. 4, 4, 5, 6, 7. 4 To children of pious
parents; look you do not by abuse or contempt forfeit and reject your own
mercy, as they did, Matthew. 8. 11. 12. And such as now feel and find the force
of Gods engaged grace, for ever do you adore and admire his preventing mercy
and truth.

Use 3.
Third Use of comfort to believing parents; 1 If God overflow thus in grace to
yours, will he not extend grace to your selves? Conclude it, that he will
assuredly, against all gainesayings of Satan and unbeleefe. 2 Be encouraged to
set faith on work for your children, as they did, Psalm. 102. last; yea albeit
at present vile enough; since the force of Gods covenant is such, as it can
fetch them in, even when far removed by sin from the Lord, witness that
Ezekiel. 16 60. 61, 62, etc. 3 You need not fear then touching divine protection
of, and provisions for them sutably and seasonably, Psalm. 25. 12. Prove. 20. 7.
4 When you are to die and leave them fatherless and friendlesse otherwise, yet
here is a Covenant Father and friend to whom you may comfortably leave them,
Genesis 48. 15, 16.

Tri-uni Deo sit laus in Ecclesia.
FINIS.

