A PRACTICAL DISCOURSE OF PRAYER.

Wherein is handled, The Nature, the Duty, the Qualifications of Prayer; the
several sorts of Prayer; viz. Ejaculatory, Public, Private, and Secret Prayer.

With the Necessity of, and In. gagements unto Prayer.

Together, with sundry Cases of Conscience about it.

By THOMAS COBBET, Minister of the Word at Lyn, in New England.

Psalm. 141. 2. Let my Prayer be set forth before thee as Incense, and the
lifting up of my hands as the Evening Sacrifice. Imprimatur,

EDM. CALAMY.



London, Printed by T. M. for Joseph Cranford at the Phoenix in Paul's Church
yard. 1654.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Have adventured twice already into the Press, in matters controversall, and
(through grace) what I have written has found good acceptance in the eyes of
the godly wise; and now upon the earnest persuasion of godly and worthy friends
here, unto the Lord, and unto me, I am sending forth this discourse, which
respects a matter practical. Its not a little exercise unto godly minds, and
much more grievous is it in the sight of the God of truth and peace, that there
is so great and confused a noise of axes and hammers now adays in the Lords
Temple; and ah when will that blessed time come, when unto all the Lords people
whatsoever, [there shall be but Zech, 14. 9.
one Lord, and his Name one?] Verily, its strange to see, that in these days
the Lord according to his promise, should so graciously afford to his people
the means; even turn to the people a pure lip, a pure Zeph. 3. 9.
Ministry; and yet the promised end thereof is not attained, namely, the
serving of the Lord with one shoulder, or with one consent. I know there are
many lets thereunto, but surely this is not the least, that the word held forth
by the purer Ministry thereof, has not had such effectual force upon their
hearts who enjoy the same, as to bring them to be conscionable in calling upon
the Name of the Lord, which is the more immediate end of such a Ministry. For
so says the Lord, I will turn to the people a pure lip or language, that they
may call upon the Name of the Lord; for then the next effect would follow,
which there also is promised, they would come to serve the Lord with one
consent. But the subtle enemy to all purity and power of godliness he
bestirreth himself what in him lies, to heighten and increase as many
differences in judgment in Christians as may be, and that way breed and feed
distances in affection, and so undermine any such nnanimous attending to serve
the Lord. The heads and hearts both of Preachers and Professors shall be so
busily and continually taken up with endless disputes, that they shall have
little leisure or list to attend the practicals of Religion, wherein the life
and power of pure Religion does mainly consist. Disputing times about the
Speculatives of Religion are wont to be declining times in the Practicals and
Vitals thereof. Witness former ages, wherein the Schoolmen and their notions
flourished, but purity and power of Religion withered. And ah, that this
present age, which yeildeth so many Scepticks in Religion, had not withal
increased the Spitals of decayed, unsound, spiritually sick, lame, blind, deaf,
dumb, yea, dying, and twice dead Christians. Surely, If christians had
maintaine^ ^cquaintance with God in prayer, they (...) never fallen in thus
with so many del^^^ve fancies, and so come to have fallen out with the
weightier matters of God, so as to be at such distances from them in their
Spirits. If they had faithfully repaired to the Lord for his counsel, their
ears and hearts had not been so open to Satanicall whisperings. How much was
that man of God in prayer to be kept sound in the faith? witness his frequent
requests this way mentioned, Psalm. 119. 10. O let me not wander from thy
commandments: and verse 29. remove from me the way of lying, (doctrinally, as
well as practically considered) and grant me thy law graciously. Ve. 43. Take
not away utterly the word of truth out of my mouth, so shall I keep thy law
continually. Ver. 66. Teach me good judgment and knowledge, for I have
believed thy commandments. Ver. 80. Make my heart sound in thy Statutes, that
I be not ashamed. The corrupt prophets and priests of old, who seduced the
people from the truth, were persons that made no conscience of prayer. Jer. 10.
21. The Pastors are become brutish and have not sought the Lord. Those
Apostatizing Newters in Religion of old, they were men that were careless of
seeking of God, and counselling with him in their prayers. Zeph. 1. 6. And them
that are turned back, and those that have not sought the Lord, nor inquired for
him. The like may be well feared in Christians in these Apostatizing times from
the truths and ways of God, that they do not talk much with God in prayer,
and he as little delights to speak to their hearts. They grow loose-hearted,
and strangers to God; and Satan espying this distance betwixt them and God,
falls in with them, enters other delusive discourses with them, and at
length withdraws them yet further from the Lord. But thou, Christian Reader,
plye it with the Lord in prayer, that he would draw thee after him, and he
will bring thee into his Chambers, Cantic. 1. 4. He will bring thee into the
secret of his Counsels, presence and protection, where thou shall he kept safe
in judgment, heart and life, in the worst times. Fervent and faithful prayers
would also help very much to cast out the unclean spirit out of the land, and
to dispossess the spirits of many Christians who are even possessed by an
erring spirit. If there were also but more men of God, who might, Moses like,
continue holding up their hands in prayer, no doubt but Amalakite spirited
seducers would soon be put to the worse; yea, though Philistine-like, they had
even routed the Churches of Christ, yet a few such blessed worthies of God, who
are mighty with God in prayer, would like so many Shammahs or Eleazers, soon
prevail for a blessed day over them. If Jonathan had not wrought with God (in
Prayer) 1 Samuel 14. 45. Israel had never had so glorious a day, as they had
against tbose Philistines. If men had even given themselves to the Devil, as too
many now have to spirits of Error, yet if Luther-like, we were more in prayer,
there might be help that way, and they rescued, and those Spirits discarded.
And what gracious heart can bear it, to see so many poor Christians even drawn
to death, and forbear crying to the Lord for their deliverance! Mystical
Babylon devoted to ruin, hastneth to its downfall, and shall not we be up, and
doing in prayer now to help dispatch her, as they of old did that other
Babylon? Jerem. 51. 35. The violence done to me be upon Babylon, shall the
Inhabitants say, My blood upon the Inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say;
namely, in their earnest prayers. The time approaches when the promised mercies
to the poor blinded Jews shall be accomplished; and what more seasonable work
of love can we do for the Lord or them, then to be now much in praying? Oh that
the salvation Psalm 14. 7.
of Israel were come out of Zion. In a word, Let all the enemies of England,
old or new, to Commonwealth or Church, know, that Churches of praying Believers
are terrible as so many Armies with Banners, as so many thundering Legions. Let
them tremble to think, that what ever breaches they have occasioned amongst the
Lords people, yet that there is a considerable stand of resolute ones left,
right bred Israelites, notable good wrestlers, and as special prevailers with
God. I believe that the Churches enemies, the Prelates, and others of Englands
enemies to their Civil State, have been forced to see or feel the force of
Saints Prayers. We may set God to work, (pardon the expression) in these
dangerous times to Church and Commonwealth by our Prayers; as he did of old in
like case, Psalm 119. 126. It is time for thee, Lord, to work; for they make
void thy Law.

Wherefore, Christian Reader, albeit others have written worthily about this
Subject of Prayer in their times, yet let it not seem unseasonable to thee, or
be unaccepted by thee, that I also (though the most unfit and unworthy to
attempt so great a work) do at this time likewise, bring in Evidence with other
Witnesses to the same Truth, concerning the Nature, Necessity, Excellency, and
Efficacy of holy and spiritual Prayer; and that I also, according to that
small measure of Light and Grace received of the Lord, do hereby endeavor to
stir up thy pure mind by way of Remembrance, that thou may be mindful, not
alone 2 Pet. 3.
of their Writings, but especially of the words before spoken, both by the
Prophets and Apostles concerning this Subject of Prayer; that as in Preaching
upon it here, the Lord was pleased to bless that Discourse of Prayer to sundry
Souls, so (if it may be his gracious pleasure) it may be of lively and
effectual use to thy souls welfare and peace: Which shall be his prayer, who is

Thine in the Lord Jesus. THOMAS COBBET.
Ly^ in New England, the 24. of October, 1653.
The Heads of the Chapters, the particular Contents whereof stand in the Margin
of the Book at their proper places which they refer to.
PART I.
Chapt. 1. THe several Reasons of prayer, taken from God, Christ, and the Holy
Spirit, and from Saints themselves, also from the necessities of, and
engagements unto prayer. Chap. 2 Ejaculatory prayer is described, the
excellency of it is showen, in that it is the Saints first and last holy
breathing, the Alpha and Omega of Solemn prayer. Chap. 3. The Requisites unto
public prayer are handled. Chap. 4. The duty of Family Prayer is handled.
Chap. 5. Handling the duty of Closet-praier. Chap. 6. The Rules about praying
for others is handled, and also of prayer of Imprication against others.
PART. II.
Chap. 1. Is shown wherein Importunity in prayer consists. Chap. 2. Handling
the Opportunities of prayer. Chap. 3. Shows what it is to pray indesinently:
and not to give out in prayer. Chap. 4. Touching faith in prayer, and the
necessity of it: and what faith is required in prayer. Chap. 5. Shows wherein
Humility in prayer consists. Chap. 6. Shows wherein Sincerity in prayer
consists. Chap. 7. Shows a threefold watchfulness in prayer is required,
and wherein it consists.
PART. III.
Chap. 1. Touching unregenerate persons prayer? and that they are bound to
pray. Chap. 2. Touching distraction in prayer, and the causes thereof, and what
distractions nullify prayer. Chap. 3. Showing that things materially good
suggested in prayer, may be delusions. Chap. 4. Showing what means are to be
used in prayer. Chap. 5. About the time that is to be spent in prayer, which is
to be much. Chap. 6. Showing the necessity of pleading in prayer. Chap. 7.
Showing the causes of straitnings in prayer. Chap. 8. About inlargements in
prayer, which are saving. Chap. 9. About meltings in prayer, which are from
saving principles. Chap. 10. Showing how to conceive of God in prayer. Chap.
11. In what order we are to direct our prayers to God.
GOSPEL INCENSE: OR, A DISCOURSE About PRAYER.
Delivered in sundry Lecture Sermons from 1 These. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing.
PART I:
CHAP. I. Touching Prayer in General.
NOT to spend time in analyzing the Chapter: In this Text you have two parts:
1. The Duty enjoined, Pray. 2. The modification of the Duty, Without ceasing.
In the former also you have 1. The Sovereign commanding this Duty; even God the
Father; yea, Jesus Christ his Son, who by his Spirit sent Paul his Apostle to
deliver this piece of Message, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. 2. The Subjects enjoined this
Duty, the Church of Thessalonica jointly and severally; and so in in them, all
other Churches of Christ, and Members of them, yea, all Christians whatsoever;
whence observe,

That Incessant Prayer, or Prayer without ceasing, is a duty which the Lord
requires of all and every one of his people in a special manner. Luke 21. 36.
Pray always. Luke 18. 1. He spoke a Parable to the end that men ought always
to pray. Romans 12. 12. Continuing instant in Prayer. Col. 4. 2. Continue in
Prayer. Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always, etc.

For the better and fuller handling of this weighty service of Prayer,
consider, 1. Of the Duty it self, Prayer. 2. Of the Modification of the
performance of it; scil. Without ceasing. 3. Of the conditions required to such
incessant Praying. 4. Of some cases of Conscience respecting that incessant
exercise of our selves in it.

Touching the Duty it self, Prayer; let it be considered.

1. More Generally in the nature of it; both as held forth in several names,
given to Prayer in Scripture; and in a short definition thereof.

2. More Particularly.

1 In the sorts and species of it: as 1. Sudden, or ejaculatory Prayer, 2. Set
and solemn Prayer: and that either public or Church Prayer; private or family
Prayer; secret or closet Prayer.

2. In the parts of Prayer, which albeit many, yet we shall briefly only
consider of Prayer 1. Of Intercession. 2. Of Imprecation.

Prayer is a duty very many ways enobled and honored of God and his people;
and as that which is of large use and extent, whose worth is not known nor
easily decyphered; whose nature is not readily conceived or described, and yet
that which should be most familiar to the Saints; it is set forth in Scripture
by many names: Let us then read over the Titles of this royal work.

It is called an Offering: Zeph. 3. 10. My 1 Prayer an Offering.
Suppliants shall come and bring mine Offering; or they shall in a solemn,
reverent and cheerful manner pray unto the Lord, even as the Godly use to bring
the Lords Offering to him. Isaiah 19. 21. The converted Egyptians will [do]
Sacrifice and Offering: make Prayer their spiritual work and business. And
Prayer may well be so called; for 1. As that was, so this, to be presented by
all sorts; poor or rich, none exempted from it. 2. As those Offerings were
costly to all sorts, considering their several abilities; so are these
Spiritual Sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2. 5. witness the suppliants tears, sighs,
strivings, pleadings, etc 3. As they were free services, Lev. 1. 3. So are
these: Christ's Suppliants are free Sacrificers. Psalm. 1103. Hebr. Their spirit
is forward to pray. Matthew. 26. 41. To will is present with them, Romans 7. 8. 21.
Their Prayer is their gift. Matthew. 5. 24. 4 As those were to be clean and pure,
so are the Saints Prayers. Job 16. 17. Also my Prayer is pure. Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3,
4. 5. If we should compare Prayer with their particular Offerings, it would
answer to this name. As, their Mincah, or Meat Offering. Psalm. 96. 8. All the
Subjects of Christ's Kingdom must bring an Offering (Mincah) into the Courts,
Mal. 1. 11 The converted Gentiles will bring an Offering (or Mincah) to the
Lord; meaning especially this holy Offering of Prayer, which as that of old, 1.
Is to be of fine flower, Levit. 2. 1. and well sifted, tried, and refined in
all the particulars and parts of it, and men's aims in it. We should not ask
amiss, either unlawful things; or though lawful, yet to spend upon our Lusts,
James 4. 2. It must be mingled with the oil of Grace and gracious affections.
3 Also perfumed with the sweet Frankincense of Christ's Merit and Mediation,
applied by faith. 4. All seasoned with that holy salt of gracious expressions
outwardly, Col 4. 2, 3, 6. and mortified desires and affections inwardly, Mark
9. 49. 5* Avoiding the honey of humane Eloquence or affectation of expression,
but especially of inordinate desires or lusts.

We might also compare it with other of their Offerings; but shall forbear,
remembering this only, that we speak thus in reference to these as part of their
Worship, and not as Types of Christ.

Prayer is called Incense. Psalm. 141. 2. Let 2 Prayer Incense.
my Prayer come before thee as Incense. Mal. 1 11. In every place pure Incense
shall be offered to thy name. Rev. 5. 8. Vials full of odors which are the
Prayers of the Saints. Look as that was compounded of very costly materials,
Exodus 30. 34. so is a Spiritual Prayer; as they were small beaten, so in this;
matters are not rudely and confusedly, but deliberately, advisedly, preparedly,
and very particularly presented before the Lord. The Saints in their Prayers
have also their hearts broken and bruised, and parcelled out sutably to the
very particulars mentioned in Prayer* nor is the fire of the Spirit, and of
holy Zeal wanting therein, which cau^eth them to send out holy vapors of
fragrant spiritual sighs and desires before the Lord: and whilst these
spiritual Priests are through faith exercised, offering up this their holy
Incense upon the Altar Jesus Christ, there is but a step as it were 'twixt them
and heaven, that Holy of Holies. O how near are the Saints, so exercised, to
Jesus Christ, as that covering Mercy-Seat! What precious answers of grace
receive they oftentimes from the Oracle of God! How speedily do their holy
odors pierce and pass into the Holy of Holies into Heaven!

Prayer is called a lifting up of the soul and 3 Prayer a lifting up of the
heart and soul to God.
of the heart, Psalm. 25. 1. Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul; i. e. to
thee do I pray. So Psalm. 86. 4. and 143. 8. The work of Prayer being not so
much to lift up eyes, and hands, and voice, as to lift up the heart and soul;
and as if we had not prayed, when our spirits were not elevated. Surely that
work whereby the souls of Gods Suppliants, when sinking, when cleaving to the
dust, are raised up, is a great work; yet Hannahs Prayer did it, She looked no
more sad, 1 Samuel 1. 15, 18. compared. The like lift was David's Prayer to him,
in that sad plight, from under those grievous weights upon his spirit. Psalm 6.
1, 2, 3, 4, 8. yea, hereby Gods Suppliants do get above worldly cares, fears
and distractions. Phil. 4 6, 7. Be careful for nothing (meaning inordinately)
but in every thing make your request known by Prayer, etc. And the peace of God
etc. shall keep your hearts and minds. The work of Prayer is not to move or
remove God, he is in one mind, he is still the same; but to move and remove our
hearts near to the Lord; and then have we prayed to purpose, when by Prayer our
hearts and spirits are in a more sublime and celestial frame; when we are more
above natural, carnal, and formal self; when more off and above the world, and
all the encouragements and discouragements of it; when in and by Prayer we have
recovered, yea, happily exceeded our former lively apprehensions of, and
affectious to the Lord Jesus, our former strength and bent of spirit to his
favor and ways, etc. For then our hearts are indeed lifted up: yea, prayer is
not only a lifting up of the heart effective, because when duly performed it
does thus lift it up, but it is so formaliter, because the very form, nature
and essence of a spiritual prayer lies and consists in the heavenly movings,
workings, and approvings of the mind and heart, as spiritual toward God and
Christ, in the several expressions of their desires. Gracious suppliants, as
such, they mount up with wings as Eagles, Esaias. 40. 31. They approach to the
Lord, Jer. 30. 21. Draw near to the Lord, Psalm 73. 28. They fly to heaven for
refuge, Heb. 6. 18. They fly to the Lord for refuge. David, who in Psalm. 143.
8. pleads for favor and salvation, because he lifted up his soul to the
Lord, in the 9th. verse renews his plea in this expression, because he did
fly to the Lord to hide him.

Prayer is called meditation, Ps. 5. 1. Consider 4 Prayer, 2 Meditation.
my meditation, (i. e.) my prayer. Genesis 24. 63. Isaak went out to meditate, or
to pray; so that prayer is not lip-labor, if rightly performed, but it is a
work of the mind exercised herein: It is blamed in hypocrites worship, and
prayer, which is therefore accounted null, vain, that they draw near with
their lips, but their hearts are far from God, Esa. 29. 13. Prayer in the rise
of it is a studied work: many a thought spent before hand about the sins which
the Saints confess, about the wants which they express, upon the mercies
which they do acknowledge; upon the purity, majesty, immensity,
all sufficiency, fidelity, and bounty, etc. of the Lord, to whom they pray; the
beauty and fullness, etc. of the Lord Jesus, in whose name they pray; yea
immediately before they pray they have their preparatory musing of what, of
whom, and through whom they are to ask, and as they are praying, their minds
are attent and intent upon what they pray for; yea they usher in their
expressions in prayer.

Prayer is called a talking with God. Job. 5 Prayer a talking with God*
15. 4. thou restrainest [(...)] talking before the Lord, Psalm* 55. 17. evening
and morning, and at noon, (...) will I talk, or pray, Psalm. 64. 1. hear my
voice O my God, (...) in my talk, or prayer; the Hebrew word is used to
signify some studied, excogitated thing in the mind. Amos. 4. 13. he tells
to man what is his [Secho] his thought, or some serious solicitous discourse. 1
Kings 18. 27. he talks, (...), the Saints in prayer do familiarly commune
with the Lord, as Abraham did in his petitioning of the Lord. Genesis 18. end. But
yet are they very serious* and intent in this their holy discourse with the
Lord, and though they do wrestle with the Lord in their pleas, in prayer, yet
do they not tumultuously wrangle with him, but their spirits are still and
calm, as but talking with the Lord.

Prayer is a secret, silent, submissive whispering. 6 Prayer an holy whispering,
Esaias 26. 16. they have powered out (...) a softly speaking, the word is used of
their muttering, when David's child was dead. 2 Samuel 12. 19. True suppliants
they are so sensible of their own vileness, and troubled about their own
unworthiness, that they are in a holy wise, afraid and ashamed to speak out to
the Lord, as sometime Ezra was. Chap. 9. 6. yet through faith do they eye the
Lord as one so near them, that it suffices them to whisper to him the desires
and ailes of their hearts; and as one so faithful that he will wisely
consider of what they thus impart to him. The Hebrew word is sometimes used for
charming. Jer. 8. 17. Serpents, to whom there is no charming, (...) or which
will not be charmed. But verily a godly man's prayer is often times such a
spiritual charming of serpentine divellish suggestions, yea and of these inward
vile distempers and lusts, which Satan too often makes use of to ensnare them,
that they do even bring them under command, and allay by grace, the height and
the heat of them, they even pray down blasphemous atheistical thoughts, or a
lust of the world, etc.

Prayer is called a wrestling with the Lord, 7 Prayer an holy wrestling.
in Genesis 32. 24, 25. There was a mutual wrestling of the Lord's with Jacob,
which was by divine tentations, of Jacob's with the Lord, and such as whereby
he prevailed over him, and that was his supplication or prayer, as Hosea, chap.
12. 4. expounds it, he prevailed over the Angel, he wept and made
supplication. Col. 4. 12. always wrestling for you in prayers; (...),
striving, as they did for masteries in the Olympick-games: and Romans 15. 30.
Striving together with me in prayer. Praying work is wrestling work; cross and
harsh to the flesh and blood. The Saints are put to it by their ungenerate part
to strive with that, to get into a praying frame. Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: yea with Satan too, Ephesians.
6. 12. And when got into such a frame, here is much conflicting with the
enemies of prayer, to keep in it; but as if this were a small matter, a
supplyant has God himself to wrestle with: and who is sufficient for these
things? We had need indeed, with praying Jacob, of Gods strength, that thereby
we may prevail with him. Hos. 12. 3. and by his strength (God's strength) he
had power with God; the Lord is willing to forgive, ready to help and hear, yet
he delights to try his own strength of grace in his people: the strength of
their faith in Christ, and in his covenant; the strength of their holy desires
and pleas, etc. When such holy strength is put forth in prayer, then we pray
indeed, for then we wrestle. When in prayer we close with the Lord, get fast
hold of him, of his grace, goodness, power, and truth, or the like; and keep
our hold so fast and so long, that we are got within him, (as I may say) that
we have him where we would have him: (as I may say) that we get our
spiritualized wills of him; that he expresses a holy yiedling to hear and help
us, so as that thereby our very hearts are cheared, quickened and quieted by it;
now have we prayed, for we have wrestled to purpose. And for this end, that
our praying may be such indeed, or that it may be wrestling, conscience is to
be made of preparation, as for wrestling. 1 Cor. 9. 25. to be temperate in all
things, forbearing any inordinaries of cares, fears, desires, delights,
employments, and to diet our selves, feed and delight our selves in such sort as
may fit us for prayer. To exercise our selves in holy ejaculatory prayers, and
holy meditations, and to get our souls well oyled, and suppled by the praying
graces of the spirit before hand.

Prayer is a serving of God, and a serving 8 Prayer a serving God in the spirit.
of God in the spirit. Act. 26. 7. Our Tribes instantly serving God night and
day, that is, praying. Romans 1. 9. My God whom I serve in my spirit, that is, to
whom I pray. A Suppliants prayer is to him his only work and business, such as
if he had then nothing to do beside, yea, it is his Lord and Masters
business, which he in obedience to his command is ready to attend, a business
to be done with all his might, he loves to make something of it before he
leaves it; if he seems sometimes to idle out his time in distractions and
distempers, how grievous is it to such an one to seem to have lost such a
morning or evening without doing any thing of moment for the Lord, for his own
soul or others? He loves to get him a-heat at this holy work, to pray whilst
his heart be well warmed; nor is the Lord wont to be behind-hand with any
such as so serve him; he pays them best in holy recompenses of his grace in
them which pray most to him. The people concluded that Jonathan had wrought
with God that day, (wrestled, prayed hard,) when they saw so apparently the
stamp of God imprinted upon that victory given into him and by him, 1 Samuel 14.
45. yea verily, it is no small reward to the supliants of God, that the Lord
does account, that when they are praying to him, they are serving of him; when
they are telling him of their spiritual wants and inabilities to do him
service, confessing their failings in his service, and what unprofitable
unthankful servants they have been to him; how the Lord reckons they are
doing him very acceptable service; the poor Saints are ready to complain that
they can do God no service. etc. No? Can you beg? Can you pray? This is service
of God indeed.

Prayer in the manner of carrying it on, is an holy serving of the Lord: how
awful is a suppliant! he serves the Lord with fear and trembling, whilst
praying: how humble is he he is careful to keep his distance even in talking
thus with the Lord, Genesis 18. Abraham then tells the Lord he is but dust.
Prayer also in the intents and desires of the suppliant it is serving the Lord,
all that which a true suppliant fetches of God in Prayer, if you resolve it
into its last end, it is service. He prays for outward things as Jacob, Genesis
28. For parts and gifts, as Solomon, 1 King. 3. For life and health, for
deliverance out of diverse afflictions, outward and inward, as Hezekiah, Esaias.
38. and David often; but in all, it is that he might serve the Lord, and glorfie
him the more thereby; he comes with a servantly spirit, for mercy from God,
ready pressed to do any work of his, to attend any command of his, Psalm. 123.
1, 2. A praying frame is an obediential frame, a command of God brings a true
suppliant upon his knees, and on his knees he wayteth for a command from him.

Prayer is called knocking, namely at the door of Gods grace and mercy in
Christ, 9 Prayer a spiritual knocking.
(as it is called in scripture,) Matthew. 7. Knock and it shall be opened unto
you. Prayer is a holy approaching and repayring to the door of mercy for all
manner of supplies of grace which the Saints stand in need of; the saints rest
not in this, that there is a doo^ of grace, that there is mercy for sinner^ to
be had in Christ, but they are conscionable in the use of this holy means of
opening the same; mercy is freely promised to the people of God, yet may none
rush into the door of God under pretense that it i^ open without knocking,
Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27, etc. The door of grace is set very open; I will pour
clear water upon you, etc* but verse 37. For this will I be sought by the house
of Israel. Prayer acknowledges the Lords prerogative royal. In all thy ways
acknowledge him, Prove. 3. True suppliants eye the Lord as a great God, as well
as gracious, and therefore are willing to keep their due distances: though the
Saints be the friends of Christ and of God, who may make in a holy wise bold
with him, yet it is holy manners to them not rudely to press upon his favor,
or challenge this or that benefit of it without asking leave. Indeed pinching
extremities will make them put a good face upon it, and not continue walking to
and again aloof off, within some general veiw of mercy, but to knock, and
knock again and again at mercyes door, to pray often for the opening thereof
to them. True suppliants are in haste, of earnest and weighty affairs in their
converses with the Lord, they have much to do with him, much to say to him,
much to receive from him, and therefore they must, they will knock; they are
sure that a gracious father of theirs is within, yea within hearing; and
therefore they cannot but thus knock and pray. True it is, sometimes this door
of grace seems to be shut against them in some displeasure, but yet this
makes them the more earnest, -- Has he in anger shut up his tender mercies?
Psalm. 77. 9. Luke 11 Trouble me not, for I am in bed (says the friend within;)
but yet see what prevailing importunity he uses, so that for his importunity
the friend rises, opens, and gives what is desired.

What is Prayer but as spiritual knocking, a special means of opening of the
gate and door of Grace; and so of all the lesser wickets (as it were) thereon
depending. Hence Psalm 119. 169. Let my cry come before thee (says the
Psalmist:) and ver. 170. Let my supplications come before thee; as if he would
say, Open Lord to Prayer, let it come in, let not that stand without: or as if
it were a plea, Lord, Prayer is at the door, therefore open. So Psalm. 88. 2.
Let my Prayer come before thee, or come where thou art, And Psalm. 55. 1. David
prays that the Lord would not hide himself from his supplications. Prayer it
will come in where the Lord is, will look him out (as it were) in all corners.
Psalm 66. 20. David blesses the Lord that he had not turned away his Prayer.
Prayer stands still at Gods door, it will not away without its errand and
answer.

Wisdoms out-doors, even the Ordinances. Prove. 8. 34. These are opened by
Prayer: Out-lary Gentiles fare the better this way, for that Prayer, Psalm 67.
Let thy way be known among the people, thy saving health among all Nations.
Matthew. 9. end. Pray the Lord of the Harvest that he would thrust out Laborers
into his Harvest. Prayer helps people to a fruitful Ministry. Prayer helps
to open the Ministers mouth, opens a door of utterance, Colos. 4. 3. Pray
that God would open my mouth. Prayer opens a door of faith; 1 Cor. 16. 8, 9
The mystery of Salvation may be made known by it. Ephesians. 6. 19. The Word may
come to have an open and effectual passage into peoples hearts by it. Hence
that 2 These. 3. 1 Pray that the Word may a have free course and be glorified,
etc. The door of Liberty, the Churches Liberties may be opened to the Prayer of
the Saints, as to Paul, upon his Prayer, Acts 11. Those strong and secret doors
of death may be opened by Prayer: Hence the Prophets raising of the dead child
by Prayer, 2 Kings 4. 32, 33, 34, 35. So Jonah by Prayer had the belly of Hell,
the Whales belly and jaws opened to him, to let him out, Jonah 2. 9, 10. By
Prayer the doors of the womb (as they are called Job 3. 10) are opened, as in
Hannahs case, 1 Samuel 1. 15, 16, 20. and Rebecca's; Genesis 25. 21. and Elizabeth's
case, Luke 1. 13 By prayer the doors of Heaven are opened: If I shut heaven,
and my people pray, etc. I will hear, etc. 2 Chronicles. 6 26* and 7. 13, 14. By
prayer the Prison doors are opened, as to Peter upon the Churches prayer, Acts
12. 5, 10. Secrets which otherwise are not to be opened, yet are to be unfolded
by prayer. Dan. 2. 18, 19. Then was the secret revealed, upon prayer for the
mercies of Heaven that way; yea, prayer will open even Hell gates (as I may
say;) as by Luthers Prayer one was recovered who had even given his soul to the
Devil: This kind of Devil goes not out but by prayer and fasting, Matthew. 17 by
fasting and prayer then even such a Devil is cast out, and a poor man let go
out of his possession. As in other knocking there is a hand, there are fingers
which make a noise and help open the door; so here, there is a hand of faith
which knocks, and that will open that large gate and door of mercy, and any of
the lesser wickets depending. Matthew. 15. 28. O woman, great is thy faith, be it
unto thee even as thou will; Come into all my Treasures of Grace, and take even
what thou desire. Godly desires knock and make a noise in Gods ears, and he
opens to them, He hears the desire of the humble, Psa. 10. 17. They will come
in where the Lord is, Psa. 38. 9 Lord, all my desire is before thee: The Saints
sighs make a noise at Heaven gates, and God comes forth to them, For the
sighing of the Prisoners I will arise, says the Lord. Psalm. 12. 5. and Psalm*
79. 11. Let the sighing of the prisoners come before thee; room for the sighing
of the prisoners, Lord; yea, their very tears too make a loud noise at this
door, and they have their voice also in prayer, Thou have heard the voice of my
weeping, Psalm. 68. No wonder then that effectual prayer consisting of all
these, be indeed a knocking, and means of opening of the gate and door of
Mercy in Jesus Christ. We pass by other names given to Prayer, as that of
seeking, asking, calling, opening of the mouth wide, running to the Lord for
counsel, referring ones case to him, and the like. Come we now to give a
description of Prayer.

Prayer is a spiritual and faithful opening of the heart to God in the name of
Christ A general description of Prayer
with an eye at seasonable help and relief from him. By [heart] we mean
thoughts, desires, affections; these wants, and weaknesses, and sins to which
the heart is privy, and of which it is sensible. We call it an [opening of the
heart] in opposition to hypocritical covering, and attempts to hide any thing
from the Lord, whereby their prayers become no prayers, their Worship vain,
whilst digging deep to hide the counsels of the heart from God, Isaiah 29. 13,
15. compared with Psalm. 119. 26. I have declared my ways to thee, (that is,
prayed,) and thou heardst me. Prayer is a showing of God our ways, or as the
Hebrew word bears, a telling or counting them one by one, as if we pray
indeed, when we do from our hearts deal plainly and punctually with God
therein, when we leave out nothing which we know by our selves, untold before
him, even in a particular manner, whether respecting our wants, our sins, or
the like, so Psalm. 38. 18. I have declared mine iniquity, meaning all and each
of his sins, there were some more special sins, sins which were chiefly his;
the Hebrew word signifies a telling of some new thing. David's prayer and
confession is not a highway, rode, and some one track of confession, but it is
a telling him of any new fresh acts of sin, Jer. 20. 12, To thee have I
opened my cause, or prayed to thee. Prayer is an opening of the souls causes
and cases to the Lord; the same word in another conjugation is used for
uncovering, making bare and naked, Genesis 9. 21. The Saints in prayer do, or
should nakedly present their souls causes without all cover-shames, or so much
as a ragge of self, or flesh cleaving to them.

All things are naked to him with whom we have to do, he is privy to our
secrets; how is prayer an opening of the heart to him.

Suppliants are said in prayer to open

1. In that they do not dare not, go about through temptation or desertion
want prayer vent.

2. In that it is their desire and endeavor to present all within their
hearts, which God by a general eye of wisdom, and omniscience sees, unto a
more special, energetical veiw of the eye of Gods compassion, and love, Psalm.
80. 14. Behold and visit this vine, Psalm. 119. 132. Look upon me, as thou
usest to do on those that fear thy name, Isay. 63. 15, 16. Look down from
heaven. etc. where are the sounding of thy bowels? etc.

3. In that they do thus in way of an ordinance of God, which he does eye and
own, as opening of their heart to God. Psalm. 62. 8. Pour out your heart to
him, or pray to him. And albeit their hearts are open to God before, yet not
actually opened, in this way of enjoined expressing the same, till they do thus
pray.

4. In that when prayer is duly performed, as their minds and hearts are
uttered and poured out as before the Lords face, Psalm 62. 8. or before him; so
are they in lively manner quickened to behold Gods merciful and energetical
view of the same; hence that persuasion of David, All my desires are before
thee, Psalm. 38. 9.

[It is a spiritual opening.] Spiritual, in respect of the efficient and
working cause, Gods spirit acts and works therein. It is prayer in the holy
Ghost, Romans 8. 26. The spirit makes intercession in us: the spirit of prayer
is acted in it. Zach. 12. 10. Prayer is called (...), in-wrought, our spirits
also as acted and improved thereby are at work in it. My God, whom I serve with
my spirit, Romans 1. 9. Our hearts are as water poured out to waft along each
petition, and confession, or as oil, to anoint these messengers of the soul,
that they might fly the faster to Gods throne. It is spiritual in the matter
of it, things of Gods Kingdom, Matthew. 6. 33. or if other things, yet under a
spiritual consideration; as according to Gods will, and for his glory.
Spiritual in the manner; namely in a sublime and elevated manner of
performance, Isay. 37. 4. Lift up thy prayer. Spiritual in the end; a calling
upon God whereby he is exalted, Esaias. 12. 4. Spiritual in the motive and
groundwork, a command of God requiring, a promise in encouraging; Thou said,
seek my face, my heart answered, Lord thy face will I seek. Psalm. 27. 8. for
thou revealedst to thy servant, saying, I will build thee a house, therefore
has thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer, 2 Samuel 27. 27.
[Faithfull opening] that is, unfeigned, without reservations, etc. Prayer from
unfeigned lips. Psalm. 17. 1.

[To God,] not to Saints and Angels, which neither know our hearts, nor can
help us, Isay 63. 16. Though Abraham know us not. And it is to God, not as into
the air, or as at an uncertainty, where, or to whom. [In the name of Christ,]
There is a holy renouncing of our selves and our own worth and strength, and a
resting, and trusting upon the Lord Jesus only, through whom we come to the
throne of grace, and for whose sake alone we plead for, and expect audience
and acceptance, yea and assistance.

[With an eye to seasonable help;] Our Our eyes are unto the Lord, until he
show us mercy. Psalm. 123. 1, 2.

Thus much concerning prayer in general.

We might give sundry reasons to enforce Reasons why we must pray.
this duty; Taken,

1. From God absolutely and relatively 1 From God.
considered, who is thereby improved and honored. And secondly, from Christ 2
From Christ
whose office it is to take these sufferings from his people, and present them
before his Father; and who has through many difficulties made this way for his
people, that they may freely and familiarly thus talk with God, and open their
wants to him. Thirdly, from the Spirit of God, whose office 3 From the Spirit.
among other things, it is, to help and enable the Saints to the conscionable
performance of this duty. Fourthly, from 4 From the Saints.
the Saints themselves.

1. Their necessities call for it. 1 Their necessity. 2 Their engagements.


2. Their manifold engagements to the Lord, require it.

3. They have praying graces inabling 3 The praying graces, as 1 Faith.
them to it, as, 1. Faith, prayer, is in this respect also, the prayer of
faith; Jam. 5. 15. Faith is an emptying grace, gives the most sensible and
lively veiw of the souls wants, and nothingnesse, to supply them otherwise;
presents the Lord in all his freeness, fullness and faithfulness, for the
souls suitable supply.

Secondly, Love, Psalm. 116. 1. I love the 2 Love.
Lord, therefore will I call upon him, or pray; Love of the Lord fills the
soul with desires and breathings after union, and communion with him, whom the
soul loves, Cantic. 3. 1. and 4. 16. Let my Beloved come into his garden.
Love is open hearted, would unbowell the soul to her Lover Jesus Christ, and
to the Father, by him: love is fruitful and in holy wise eloquent in its
gracious expressions to him.

Thirdly zeal: this is attended with vehement 3 Zeal.
desires; 2 Cor. 7. 11. yea what vehement desire, yea what zeal? that blessed
fire will cause such holy smoke in the weakest Christian. Isay. 42. 3. and that
will soon sparkle out in holy supplications, that will be mounting upward,
spiritualizing and lifting up the heart thus heavenward.

Fourthly, holy jealousy and fear of God, 4 Jealousy.
(we may put them together) thou castest off fear, thou restrainest prayer:
unless fear be thrust out of doors, that will put the soul upon prayer;
other jealousy fills men's heads and hearts with motions, so does holy
jealousy with praying motions and matter. The more we suspect our selves, the
more are we in these holy inquiries of God. Holy jealousy is an utter enemy
to carnal security: presumption, selffulnesse and confidence, the very bane of
prayer.

4. Their spiritual calling as Saints, calls 4 Spiritual calling.
for their drawing thus near to God, for their offering up these spiritual
sacrifices and offerings acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5. As
being spiritual Priests, yea as sons and children, they must thus own their
Father, in crying Abba, Father, Gal. 4 6. and as subjects honor their blessed
King, by becoming his humble petitioners; the believing penitent thief upon
the Cross performed this as his homage to Jesus Christ, as King of Saints, he
prays, Lord remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom. Luke 22. 43.

The fifth Reason may be taken from the enemies of prayer, the devil, flesh,
the 5 From the enemies of prayer.
world; which oppose the same upon all occasions, and seek in special sort to
hinde^ the conscionable practice of it, (as might be showed in many
patticulars,) so tha^ it the more concerns us to attend it, els^ would not
they be so busy to divert u^ from it, or distract, or discourage u^ in it.

The sixth Reason may be taken from 6 From prayer it self.
prayer it self as spiritually performed, in that it is so acceptable to the
Lord, so prevailing with him, unto admiration, for any thing which is according
to his will, (as might be abundantly showed in particular instances.) But in as
much as in handling the particular kinds of prayer, we have more occasion to
press upon the conscience, we shall here but name such things as might enforce
to the duty.

Let us only now make one use of what Us. Reproving neglect of prayer.
has been said, and that in way of reproof of Gods own professing people,
who are too ready also, to neglect and omit this duty of prayer, Isay. 43. 21,
23. But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob; that was very grievous to God*
when a people whom he has severed into Church estate, with an aim at his
praise, as verse 21. yet they should neglect to honor him in conscionable
calling upon him. Such as we are, are looked upon by others as a praying
people, but ah, that the world were not mistaken in us: what wonder is it if
many professors excel no more in the things of God, if they are not much in
prayer! One of the Ancients used to say, if I see a man not delighting in
prayer, I conclude he is one of no inward excellencies; nay; is it any wonder
to see many Congregations, rather Spitals of poor decrepit, decayed, diseased
Christians, then gardens, where are goodly fragrant thriving plants? As the
body without the soul is dead, unserviceable, yea stinketh in others nostrills,
so are we as loathsome in Gods sight, without the true exercise of prayer,
which (as some have called it) is (as it were) the soul of our souls: some of
the Ancients have called prayer the physic of the soul; and truly such it
is, it will by the blessing of God, purge, heal, recover. quicken and
strengthen a very weakly Christian, as experience witnesses. But what will
become of other distempered, relapsed professors, who use not this holy course
of physic, is it wonder that such dye, become twice dead? Some have called
prayer the sun and light of the soul, and truly in a sense it is so, but how
darkely and sadly must they needs walk, and how often will they be stumbling
and falling dangerously? How little spiritual work will they do for Christ, in
whose Horison this sun of prayer is setting, if not already set, and from whom
this lightsome and life-giving ordinance is removed? Others have called prayer
the nerves and sinews of the soul, and truly so it is; prayer holds
altogether in us, keeps all in due place and strength; and they must needs
grow loose and weak, who make not continual use thereof upon all occasions. But
that this admonition be not as an arrow shot at Rovers, let us show first some
symptoms of this spiritual evil of omission of prayer: and so who are the
persons concerned herein, and show some particular branches of the evil of it.

Touching the former, first such are surely Signs of neglect of Prayer 1
Disobedience
careless of drawing near to God, who are not pliable to the whole will of
God, Zeph. 3. 2. She obeyed not the voice, she drew not near to her God.
Conscionable praying would inure us from our hearts to say, Thy will be done,
and accordingly in heart to endeavor it.

2 Such omit prayer, who walk not humbly 2 Impatience
in afflictions; such as are full of impatience, discontent, tumultuousnesse of
spirit and the like: She received not correction, she drew not near to her God,
ibid. Eliphaz gathered that Job was neglectful of prayer, because so querulous,
and (as he thought) repining at Gods dealings with him, Job 15. 3, 4, 5. etc.
Surely thou casts off fear, and thou restrainest prayer: should a wise man
dispute with words not comely? etc.

3 Such omit prayer who are ready upon 3 Distrust.
every occasion to distrust God in his promise or providence, Zeph. 3. 2. She
trusted not in the Lord, she drew not near to her God.

4 When Professors are so very hard to 4 Hardness of heart.
be convinced of a sin, as sins of worldliness, pride, oppression, error,
impatience, and the rest, Job 15. 4. Thou casts off fear, Thou restrainest
Prayer, for thy mouth declares thine iniquity, seeing thou have chosen the
tongue of the crafty, ver 5. To evade and avoid the just imputations (as he
thought) of hypocrisy. This argues also omission of prayer.

5 So is oppression one of another, an 5 Oppression.
Argument thereof. Psalm. 53. 4. They eat up my people, they call not upon God.

6 Backsliding and Lukewarmness in 6 Backsliding.
Religion also argues the same; these two are joined Zeph 1. 6. Such as are
turned back from the Lord, and those that have not sought the Lord. So is that
of not inquiring after him; namely of his Servants. I fear these backsliding
times are not such praying times as formerly.

7. The sad temptations which are too rise 7 Sad temptations.
among Professors, argue omission and neglect of prayer. Watch and pray, that
ye enter not into temptation, Matthew. 26. 41. Yea, but it appeared, that
against that third admonition of Christ, they did neglect to do it; yea, Peter
who was personally admonished. What Peter, Could not thou watch? But ah, the
advantages which presently Satan got against the Disciples, and against Peter
above all the rest: witness his third denial of Christ. In a word. The 8
Denial of blessings.
little success we often times find in our weighty endeavors, argues that we
ask not, and therefore have not any choice blessing thereon, Jam. 4. 2. Ye war
and get nothing, because ye ask nothing.

Touching the second thing, the case of such persons is sad, both in respect,
Evils of sin in neglect of prayer


1. Of Evils of sin, accompanying the same.

1 Such are far from experimental knowledge 1 Ignorance
of God and of his ways, The Heathen that know not God, who call not upon him,
Jer. 10. 24.

2. Such are secretly Hypocrites, yea, very 2 Hypocrisy
Atheists, who make not conscience of Prayer: It is the Atheist in heart, who
in his heart says, There is no God, Psalm. 53. 1. Who calls not upon God,
ver. 4.

3. Such are under some deep measure of 3 Stupidity
hardness of heart, yea, of wilful hardening themselves: they cast out all
motions in them, arising from any fear of God who restrains Prayer,

4. Such are in a ready way to blaspheme 4 Contempt of God.
God and his ways, Job 21. 15. What is the Almighty that we should fear him,
or what profit should we have if we pray to him? They are in a ready way to
cast God quite out of their thoughts. Psalm. 10. 4. these two are joined, He
will not seek after God, God is not in all his thoughts.

But at best, 5. Such are surely weary of God. Thou have not called upon me, O
Jacob, 5 Weariness o^ God.
but thou have been weary of me, O Israel. Isai. 43. 22. And what a sin and
shame is it to be carelessly weary of God, the God of our Mercy? Micah 6. 3.

2. The case of such who omit and neglect Evils of sorrow in neglect of Prayer.
prayer, is sad, in respect of the Evil of sorrow. Such as call not upon God,
are often times in causless horrors, and have little quiet or peace in their
spirits. Psalm 53. 4, 5, They call not upon God, and then are they in fear
where no fear is: And to say no more, Such will in time come under that
dreadful imprecation Jer. 10. 25. Pour out thy wrath upon the families which
call not upon thy name, and so may come to lie open to a more full measure of
the wrath of the Almighty then other men. And so much of Prayer in general.

CHAP. II. Of the diverse kinds of Prayer. And first of Ejaculatory Prayer.
HAving spoken of Prayer in general, we come now to speak of the species and
sorts of Prayer: and therein first of sudden or Ejaculatory Prayer, In respect
of which, we may be said to pray, and must also pray without ceasing. He who
enjoyneth us indefinitely to pray without ceasing, commands us also to pray
in an ejaculatory way, Ephesians. 6. 18. Pray with all Prayer, or all manner of
Prayer, and so this also. Ejaculatory prayer is either mental only, or vocal
also.

Ejaculatory prayer Mental is a short, yet serious and sincere lifting up of
the hearts desires and ailes unto the Lord; the mind (as it were) inwardly
uttering the same to him. Thus Jehoshaphat cried to the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 18. 31.
And thus Samson called upon the Lord, and said, (in Gods hearing, not in the
lads hearing that led him) O Lord God remember me, etc. Judge. 16. 28. Thus
Nehemiah chap. 2. 4, 5. prayed unto the God of Heaven, yet the King then
present, neither hears a whisper, nor sees any motion of his lips, whilst
Nehemiah is thus speaking a word or two of moment to the King of Kings. Moses
his mental speaking to God, was a loud cry in the Lords ears; he spoke nothing
vocally, yet Exodus 14: 15. Why cryest thou, says the Lord? Believers are to
God through Christ a spiritual Temple and house, that within this house also,
in the innermost part thereof, this holy incense of Ejaculatory Prayer may be
offered to the Lord with acceptance, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5.

Ejaculatory Prayer vocal, is a holy Apostrophe, or turning ones speech to God
Ejaculatory Prayer described.
prayer-wise, in some short, yet pithy expressions from what a gracious person
is think. ing, saying, doing, or suffering. Thus Jacob breaks off his continued
speech in blessing his sons, turning himself to God, O Lord, I have waited for
thy salvation, Genesis 49. 18. So Isaiah from threatening the Assyrians, Isai. 33.
1. turns prayer-wise to God, v. 2. O Lord be merciful unto us. So Micah in
like sort, chap. 7. 13, 14. Feed thy people with thy rod. Thus Christ breaks
off his speech to his Disciples, and turns it to his Father, John 12. 26, 27,
28. Father glorify thy name, etc. Thus Luke 22. 40, 41, 42. From reproving his
fellow does the penitent Thief turn his speech to Christ, Lord remember me in
thy Kingdom. Thus Nehemiah amidst his reforming work, oftentimes turns him to
God thus, Remember me, O my God concerning this, etc Nehem. 13. 13, 14, 21, 22.

Let us now speak a little of the excellency The excellency of Ejaculatory
Prayer
and necessity of the duty of praying without ceasing in an ejaculatory way,
give Reasons for it and apply it. The excellency hereof may appear, both by the
Nature and by the rise of it. It is (as I may say) the first breath of a
Regenerate man: as soon as a It Is a Saints first breathing
man is born again, he thus at least cries, Abba Father. In that ye are the
sons of God he has sent out the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying
Abba Father, Gal. 4. 6. And when his body breathes its last, this is a gracious
persons last breathing. Hence such It is a Saints last breathing.
parting cries of Gods children at the stake, in the flames, amidst the stones,
on a Cross etc. Lord receive my spirit: into thy hands I commend my spirit. And
such were Stephens, who was stoned, calling on the Lord, and saying, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. The last words of the
Worthies of God, we account to be most memorable, and to have some spiritual
excellency instamped upon them; and these words are such like Ejaculations. If
it were possible to hear the last whispers of the Saints souls, as ready to
leave their bodies, they would be found to be such like breathings of their
desire to him to whom they are going. Ejaculatory Prayer also is the first and
last of set and solemn It is the a and o of Solemn Prayer.
Prayer, when rightly performed. God prepares the heart of the humble to pray
acceptably, even by these preparatory liftings up of the heart a prayer-wise.
Psalm. 10. 17. The heart is first thus prepared, then the hand that way
stretched out, Job 11. 13* Look upon Solomon in that presidental prayer of his
1 Kings 8. 22. his hands spread to heaven before he spoke, showed where his he
art was lifted before hand. The last also of Solemn prayer, is issued in an
Ejaculation, an Ejaculatory Amen, comprehending the closing desires, and
feeling motions of faith to all before pleaded for. All the prayers of a
gracious Suppliant are not ended with his continued speech in prayer; no, his
heart is lifting and lifting; as you see a bel-rope often hoising up after you
have done ringing the bell. Many a long look and heart wish follows such an
ones desire to heaven, and all together come before the Lord for mercy. Hence
the Lord, as he is nigh to them that call upon him, so he fulfilleth the
desires of them that fear him, Psalm. 145. 18, 19. Solomon's heart was as well
left in heaven after the end of his prayer, whereof his fixed eyes there, was a
speaking sign, (1 King. 8. 54.) as gotten thither before he began, ver. 22.
Ejaculatory prayer It is the spirits of solemn prayer.
is the very quintessence of solemn prayer; it is the very spirit into which
that is distilled and resolved. When a gracious persons heart is left in
heaven, uttering its after-requests, now prayer was well carried on. These
shorter postscripts written after the other longer letter indicted by the
spirit, and directed to the Lord, they have ever something of note and worth.
This epitom^ of prayer, how solid is it? So much for a taste of the nature of
it.

Let us withal consider of this holy duti^ It is the echo of the spirit.
of ejaculatory prayer in the spring and rise thereof: and namely, those lively
and forceable ^^bounds of the gracious spirit of a Saint of God, moved by the
hand of the spirit of God. Ejaculatory prayer is the harmonious sweet-sounding
echo of the spirit, fore-speaking to the heart. ^hen thou said, Seek my
face, there is the Lords voice: my heart answered* thy face, Lord will I seek;
there is the echo, Psalm. 27. 8. David before he is solemnly praying as
afterward he is, v. 9, 10. He turns his speech to the Lord, telling him what
his heavenly desires say: I [will seek thy face, or my hearts desires are so to
do. Ejaculations It is the venting of a heart full of the spirit.
are the spiritual ventings and breathings of a gracious heart, filled with the
wine of the spirit, (Ephesians. 5. 19.) very precious, very pleasant to the taste of
the Lord. Sometimes the Saints hearts are so filled with a spirit of holy joy,
sometimes of praise, sometimes of love to the Lord, that variety of holy
desires pressing fast on, they are forced to give them vent by short
ejaculations. Ejaculations are the holy evaporations of a heart thoroughly
warmed with some special workings of faith and love of Christ. When David's
heart is thus boiling hot, (Psalm. 45. 1.) he breaks off his discourse from
Christ, verse 2. and breaths out such holy desires unto Christ, verse 3. gird
thy sword upon thy thigh, etc. and verse 4. Ride, prosperously. And then on
again to his discourse, verse 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Ejaculations are the holy
sparks ascending up one after another, from the stirring of the fired coals of
the Spirit in the heart. From the holy admiration of God and his goodness,
power, wisdom, faithfulness, etc. proceed holy ejaculations. From that
transcendency of Gods dispensations to Asaphs reason, who had his hearts
fore-discourses about the same, proceeds, that Verily, or nevertheless God is
good to Israel. Psalm. 73. 1. From Micahs admiring at the unparalled grace of
God, Mic. 7. 18. Who is a God like unto thee? verse 19. He tells the Church
what God will do, he will turn again, and will subdue our iniquities; and
then makes his Apostrophe to the Lord, [Thou wilt] ca^t all their sins into
the depth of the sea: and verse 20. Thou will perform the truth to Jacob. God
calls for these holy Apostrophes from this ground of admiration at his
mavelous providence, Psalm. 66. 3. Say unto God, how terrible art thou in thy
works! The excellency of this fruit, must needs partake of the excellency of
such a root as is an admiring frame.

Ejaculations arise from the spiritualizing of the heart upon any occasion. As
when Its the first fruit of a spiritualized heart.
David is spiritual in contemplation of the works of God, Psalm. 8. 3, 4. When I
consider thy heavens, etc. his heart in ejaculatory wise says, Lord what is
man that thou art thus mindful of him? So when he was in a lively manner
musing upon the immensity of God, Psalm* 139. 1. to 17 He thence breaks out
thus, How precious are thy thoughts to me, oh God! From the veiw taken of Gods
justice or mercy, or from any holy discourse with others about the same, or
from singing, and sounding forth Gods praises wherein the Saints are spiritual,
arises some holy ejaculations or other. In all these, and each of these was
Deborah so spiritual, Judge. 5. from verse 1. to the last, whence that
ejaculatory prayer of hers, So let thine enemies perish oh Lord; but let those
that love thee be like the Sun in its might. If the Lord breath upon our hearts
at his table, or in his word, the spirit of God draws out our hearts to send
some ejaculatory lift of prayer, either in way of petition, or thanksgiving, or
the like, When the Lord Jesus speaks effectually to John's heart, I come
quickly, thence springs his ejaculatory Amen, even so come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. Revel. 22. 20. Christ effectually preaching that hard lesson of
brotherly forgiveness; It caused that ejaculation from them, Lord increase our
faith, Luke 17. 1, 2, 3, 4. with 5. If David hear that word twice, that all
power belongs to God, Psalm. 62. 11. his spirit is elevated to make this short
hearty speech, verse 12. Also to thee O Lord belongs mercy. From the Angels
lively discourse with Mary about Christ, who was to be incarnate, and to be
formed in her; her heart being warmed, she turns her speech to the Lord, who
sent that his angel, Be it to thy servant according to thy word, Luke 1. 38. So
then holy ejaculations are the very spirits of the spiritual workings of God,
or at the least wise from the Lords spiritualizing of his Saints, in his
providence, or ordinances, and therefore great in their excellency.

Let us add another infallible Argument of the excellency of this duty, of
ejaculatorie Its of choice respect with God.
prayer, and that is from the high esteem and real respects which God himself
has expressed thereof. Habbacucks discourse, chap. 3. though most what
doctrinal, and only something mentioned in a short way of petition, verse 2.
and of praising God. verse 18, 19. yet as from the most excellent part in Gods
account, it is all called his prayer, ver. 1. The penitent thiefs ejaculation,
Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom, is graciously owned and
answered by Jesus Christ, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.
41, 42. The Publican ejaculatorily praying, Lord be merciful to me a sinner,
goes away justified, Luk 18. 13, 14. yea that ejaculatory Apostrophe of Moses
to God, Ex. 5. end, Why have thou so evilly entreated the people? yet has its
gracious return from the Lord, chap. 6. 1. Then said the Lord, Now shall thou
see what I will do to Pharaoh. The Israelites at the red sea were so afraid
with a distrustful fear, that Moses bids them not to fear, Exodus* 14 13. yet
being thus afraid, they cried unto the Lord, verse 10. 12. and both Nehemiah,
chap. 9. 9. and Joshua. chap. 24. 7. testifies, that God heard that cry of
theirs, and put darkness betwixt them and the Egyptians, and drowned the
Egyptians in the red sea. David when in such a hurry of distrust, that he said
to God, I am cut off from thy sight, yet says, nevertheless thou heardest the
voice of my supplications, (Psalm. 31. 22.) the many short prayers which he then
made. Ejaculations are but short breathings of the Saints spirits, but being
breathed once, they scarce ever expire in respect of the efficacies and issues
of them. These short speeches are (as I may say) best remembered, their
memorials are of a very long date with the Lord. That grey-headed ejaculation
of Noah, God persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem, has had, now has,
and still will have its answer, in the Gentiles, of Japhets coming into the
fellowship with the Church. Genesis 9. 27. The day of judgment [that day]
although not a season of praying, yet of full answers of such like prayers made
with respect to the day. Paul's short prayer, 2 Timothy 1. 18. The Lord show mercy
to the house of Onesiphorus, at [that day] shall have then a full return. At
that day when the Saints treasures laid up in heaven shall be opened, these
lesser pieces shall have their weight, worth and use, when it shall be said,
these and these have been the prayers of such and such of the Saints, and these
and these are the issues and fruits of them to such and such.

Thus much touching the excellency of The necessity of ejaculatory prayer by
reason of Sudden straits.
such ejaculations: now of the necessity thereof. The Saints sudden straits
require prayer, but will not afford time for continued prayer: Room now then
for ejaculatory prayer. At this dead lift now Moses his cry will do well,
Exodus 14. 15. Then Jehoshophat must hye to heaven, when begirt with blood
thirsty men; in continued prayer he cannot, but by ejaculatory prayer he may,
2 Chronicles. 18 31. Then Jehoshaphat cried to the Lord. Scrabling is but a poor
shift for David, when known in the presence of the King of Gath, 2 Samuel 21. 10,
11, 12, 13. and when no place or space for solemn prayer, then welfare
ejaculatory prayer, Psalm. 32. title, with verse 4, 6. I sought the Lord and he
heared me; this poor man cried, and the Lord heard him and saved him. Asa,
when to join battle, thus cried unto the Lord his God, with mavelous
success, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. David in that strait prays against Achitophels
counsels, Lord turn Achitophels counsel into foolishness, 2 Samuel 15. 31. and
the issue shows it took, 2 Samuel 17. 23. Moses among a company of murmurers,
Exodus 15 24. has none fit to join in prayer in a more solemn way, yet verse
25. though he spoke nothing vocally, he cried thus effectually; he cried to
the Lord, and he showed him a tree to make the bitter waters sweet; Philistines
are upon the Israelites, then is only room for Samuels ejaculatory cry, 1 Samuel 8. 7, 8, 9. and Samue^ cried unto the Lord and he heard him. Hezekiahs
deadly sickness will only give him leave to pray thus, 2 King. 20. 1, 2, 3,
7. he^ turned his face to the wall and prayed, O^ Lord remember me, etc. Sudden
and strong tentations disable David to make such continued prayer, but he will
then make man^ Tentations.
of these ejaculatory requests, Psalm. 30. 22* Nevertheless thou heardest the
cry of ^^ [supplications] when I cried to thee. Great griefs and presages fill
the Saints hearts, and lay their speech, but then their hearts burst forth into
inutterable sighs and groans, whose meaning the Lord knows, Romans 8. 26.

Surely Saints, as men of tender consciences, ever and anon offending indeed,
but Failings.
as frequently smitten in their hearts for it, cannot but be often put upon
it, in the interims of continued prayer, to bespeak mercy and pardon whilst
their hearts are thus afflicted, 2 Samuel 24. 10. And David's heart smote him for
numbering the people, and David said unto the Lord, I have sinned, etc. I
beseech thee take away the iniquity of thy servant. And as sudden faults of
ours, so sudden strokes of God put the Saints upon this, 2 Samuel 24. When David
saw the Angel smiting the people, he said, It is I that have sinned, what have
these sheep done? Sudden injuries from men cause an injured Injuries.
Jepthah to make his short appeal to the Lord, saying, The Lord be Judge
betwixt Israel and Ammon, Judge. 11. 27, Israel injuriously begirts Judah, and
no other help for them but this. Judah cried unto the Lord, Enemies.
2 Chronicles 13. 14, 15. Pharaoh with an huge host has Israel at an advantage, and
they must needs then thus cry out unto the Lord. Enemies unexpected scorns of
the Saints, put the Saints upon these short appeals, Nehem. 4. 4, 5. Hear, Oh
our God, f^r we are despised. Their sudden affrighting of them does as much;
they all made us afraid Now therefore, O our God strengthen my hands, Neh. 6. 9
The present hearing of the Princes good will to the Commonwealth put forth
godly Subjects then present to affix their Ejaculatory Amen thereto, 1 Kings 1.
36. Amen, the Lord thy God say so too. A sudden hand of God upon others put
godly Judgments God.
Moses upon it thus to pray for Miriam. O Lord heal her, etc. Numb. 12. 13. and
godly Hezekiah to pray for his people, The good Lord pardon every one that
prepares his heart to seek the Lord, though not so prepared. And the Lord
hearkened and healed the people, 2 Chronicles 30 18, 19. Any sudden notice of some
special service of God, unto Special services
which some of the Saints are addressing themselves, must needs put others that
hear thereof by such sudden lifts of their hearts, to give them a lift therein.
Is David going to a solemn Sacrifice, godly A^aunah will thus wish him good
speed, 2 Samuel 24. 23. The Lord thy God accept thee. Eli perceiving Hannahs
Prayer-business, 1 Samuel 1. 16 cannot but add his fiat also, ver. 17. The God of
Israel grant thee thy petition. Sudden weighty changes of some of the Saints in
their Changes
outward condition, put others that hear of it upon this holy service of love
to them; as Boaz his godly neighbors, Ruth 4. 11, 12. The Lord make this woman
like Rachel and Lea^, etc. Sudden and unexpected Kindnesses others
kindnesses showed to the Saints, will put them to speed such a kind of
Messenger as this to heaven, presently to tell their Father of it. Ruth 2 19,
20. Naomi seeing Boaz his kindness to his daughter Ruth, says Blessed be he of
the Lord, that has not left off his kindness to the living and to the dead.
Besides, even one Ejaculation of the Saints, Continuation of Prayer
puts them upon making more, upon praying thus also without ceasing. One
Ejaculation begets another. Isai. 26. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in
the night, yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee early: because they
had thus prayed, they will pray yet more. Psalm* 62. 1, Hear my cry, attend to
my prayer; (yet no words there of mentioned;) and ver 2. From the end of the
earth will I cry; he had thus cried, and he will therefore cry again and
again: As billows of ten ptation ever and anon stop his mouth and ^n^errupt
him, so as he now and then does but peep above water, and get breathing space;
he will thus cry, Lead me, or guide me, or carry me to yonder rock which is
higher then I. Hence Jonah in his perishing condition mentions his Prayers
(plurally) there were many of these short Prayers like Messengers sent Post in
some great and present stress one after the other, to speed succor from heaven
J^n. 2. 1. 2, 7. My [Praiers] came in unto thee.

Yea, these holy Traders with Heaven, using to make as quick returns, as
speedy dealings thus with the Lord; as they gain upon the Lord, they are
suddenly sending for more, and bespeaking yet more blessing from him. When
Moses by his short Prayer^ has got a grant of God, My presence shall go with
thee (Exodus, 33 12, 13, 15, 16. compared) then does he in a holy wise grow upon
God. He has one short, yet no small reques^ more ver. 18. I beseech thee show
me thy glory. And chap. 34. 9. he has another reques^ yet more, Pardon our
iniquities, and take u^ for thine inheritance. So Abraham's shor^ requests as
they are granted, Genesis 18. so they multiply, If there be fifty, Lord, in Sodom,
will thou not spare it? and then if but forty five, then if forty, then if
thirty, then if twenty, then if ten.

Thus much also be spoken to show the necessity Reasons why* 1 From the honor
it puts on God.
of this Duty in sundry respects. Let us now briefly add a Reason or two yet
further to enforce this duty.

The first is taken from the nature and property of this duty, which honors
the Lord in a special manner, as a glorious In his immensity and Omniscience.
Spirit, which needs not any words of ours to express what we would to him.
He can hear the holy language and speech of our spirits; he understands the
meaning of sighs not to be expressed, Romans 8. 26. Ejaculatory Prayer
proclaims the Lord, that he is not as the Idol Gods, who needs not to be
awakened by loud outcries, as 1 Kings 18. 27, as Elijah derided Baals Priests,
wishes them to cry aloud, etc. Who needs not to be carried up and down as
dunghill Gods do, Jer. 10. 5. No, this proclaims to all the world, that the
God of the Saints is an all-seeing God, espying the least moving of their
desires to him; that he is in all, and through all, and fills every place;
yea, that he is a very present help at any dead lift; that he is a God hearing
Prayers, all sorts of Prayers, the shortest of them. If Ephraim but lisp and
wisper out, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, etc. God says, I have surely
heard him; Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20. If Israel take unto them words prayer-wise,
though but short, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, etc. God
can, and will say. I have surely heard him and observed him, Hos. 14. 1, 2, 3,
8. This glorifieth him, as one who assuredly waits to be gracious, that any
such cry and whisper as this is of the Saints, is attended by him, Isai. 30.
18. The Lord waits to be gracious; and ver. 19, is a demonstration thereof, The
Lord will be very gracious at the voice of thy cry.

The second Reason is taken from the precious fruits of the conscionable
exercise 2 From the Fruits of it. Its a means
of this duty; of such sudden and short lifts of the heart to the Lord.

1. It is a very special means to keep our 1 To keep us Spiritual.
hearts very Spiritual, and savoury, when so often in heaven, taking some short
turns with God and Jesus Christ. When so often with God, distances will not so
easily grow when conversing so with God, there is more of his brightness, more
of his Image upon such an ones face and heart. When gracious persons are ever
and anon making such holy stands and pawses of spirit (lest being let go too
long, and at too large a teather, they grow unsavory) they are kept closer
with God. Take two Professors, the one careless in this, the other conscionable
in attending to it. Alas, what sad rushes, bruises, and falls upon the very
shadow of a temptation? if he get some kind of hold of a Promise. this sword of
the Spirit hangs loose and dangling (as it were) like Amasa's sword, 2 Samuel 20.
8. yea, all the rest of his Spiritual armor, is answerable; yea, but the other
keeps himself that the evil one touches him not; enters not into temptation:
He has Gospel Promises made known, and made over to him to use at any time, he
has them by him, he keeps a holy edg upon them, by which he cutteth asunder
many temptations: He has his faith and hope in its strength; his bow abides in
his strength, and his arms are not broken, Genesis 48. If temptations to
unrighteous or guileful dealings begirt him, his heart cries out, God forbid,
O Lord, how dare I so sin against thee! If foiled at any time, he presently
cries, O Lord, ah my vile heart, Lord, Lord help: or if unexpected afflictions
be ordered to him, he hereby tyeth his shoes of Peace ever and anon closer,
Patience (Lord) do me good hereby; and so is not galled or grieved, as the
other when meeting with such stubby and hard ways. Paul was much that way with
God, learned contentment in all conditions; knew how to be full, and how to be
hungry, to abound and to want, and to glory in infirmities.

2 It is a special means to fit us for more solemn and continued Prayer. They
2 To sit us for solemn Prayer
are ever good Proficients in that holy Art of Pleading, they are ever and anon
thus plodding upon it; their minds thus exercised in it upon all occasions.
Such as will be ever and anon thus whetting their praying spirits and graces,
will make work of it when they come to it. They that are good at these running
pulls and trips, are surely good wrestlers with God. It is no new or strange
work to such to pray, that when they come to pray more solemnly they know not
how to set about it; their hearts are not so out of kilter (as we say) as it is
with idle Professors: No, these that have been so often in a day at work with God
this way, have not their Tools to seek, but at hand, and all in good plight,
fit for use. Praying thoughts and desires are in a holy readiness, they
familiarize with them.

3. It is a means to meet often with God. 3 To meet often with God.
If Abraham's servant be thus walking with God in his journey, God will be with
him, he will meet him. No sooner has he done speaking to God in his heart, but
he discerns that God is with him, and accordingly blesses him, that being in
the way he led him, etc. Genesis 24. 12, 27, 45, 47. God is often with the Minister
in his Study, who is thus praying often in his heart for good speed in his work;
often with the laboring man in the field, whilst at his work, if thus employed
spiritually.

Now let us make some brief Use hereof and close this with some Cautions.

Let it humble us, that we are so careless and barren in lifting up such
Ejaculatory Evils of the neglect hereof Strangeness to God.
What strangeness grows oftentimes betwixt God and our souls, for want of
these more transient and occasional talkings with the Lord? How many precious
things in private communion of Saints, and edifying Loss of many holy
advantages in the Ordinances.
discourses are lost for want of some forelifts, and present lifting up of our
hearts for the presence of God therein, and blessing of God thereupon? How many
precious words of grace spoken by God to us will warm and affect us at present
hearing of them, yet are lost in respect of the abiding light and life of them,
for want of serious and thankful committing of them to the Lord by such short
Ejaculatory Prayer, that he might keep them for us? Moses did otherwise when
God spoke home to him, he hastes to bow before him, and by a short prayer
improveth that particular spoken, that God was one pardoning iniquity, Exodus 34
6, 7. Let my Lord pardon our iniquity and our sin, ver. 8, 9. He presently
retaileth and puts to holy use that blessed treasury of Grace delivered of
God to him. But we oftentimes, intending happily to tell God of it more
solemnly, in the mean time lose it, for want of present improving of it this
way. Yea, many affecting providence, respecting In providence.
our selves or others, which are unexpectedly ordered, lose their kindly work
upon us for want of a present lifting up of our hearts in some suitable, though
short Ejaculations. How much of God in our particular Callings, In our
particular Callings.
how many quickening motions of the Spirit suggested to us therein, are in a
manner lost for want of maintaining hereby an holy discourse with the Lord?
yea, how many snares, in want hereof, do we meet with, and are entangled
thereby, even in our lawful labors and recreations? In the night season also,
how much precious time In the night season.
and advantage of conversing thus with God, which is even cast and forced upon
us, for want of sleep or the like, yet is all even lost? Whilst we are lifting
and revolving our selves too and again in our beds, and yet seldom or never
lifting up our hearts thus unto the Lord? And surely, all these things,
seriously considered, may justly humble us.

A second Use serves for Exhortation, Be we stirred up to it.
this Duty of Ejaculatory Prayer, those groundless pretenses against continued
and solemn Prayer: Such as expense of too much time, let of other occasions,
etc. have No loss of time hereby.
here no place. Boaz his harvest men may work hard, and yet lift up their
hearts for a blessing upon Boaz, and the like, Ruth 2 4. Nehemiah amidst his
weighty employments may be often at this holy work, Lord, remember me
concerning this, etc. chap. 13. 13, 14, 21, 22. Isaiah amidst his Ministerial
exercises, may make such holy Apostrophes, in way of appeal to the Lord, or the
like, as Isai. 53. 1. Lord, who has believed our report? So may Ezekiel, chap.
20. 49. Ah, Lord God, they say, Does he not speak Parables? Many occasions of
it. As intricate passages and occurrents.
Yea, do not they, as well as others in their way meet with such intricacies,
as by way of holy Apostrophes they must say, as Zachary to Christ, that Angel,
What mean these? Zach. 7. 4. Do not they then, with Amos in his work, hear of,
or behold more unwonted, unexpected judgments approaching, and had need make
such holy Apostrophes, Unwonted judgments.
as Amos did on like occasion? Amos 7. 1, 2, 4, 5. O Lord God Forgive, Arise we
beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise; for he is small? or as the sudden
stroke of God upon Pelatiah, whilst Ezekiel was prophesying, turns his speech
to the Lord, Ah, Lord God, will thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel!
Ezekiel. 11. 13. Yea, will not variety of afflictions, some outward Variety of
Afflictions.
some inward, which once in every four and twenty hours are wont to befall
us, put us upon it to cry as sometimes the Church did in hers, Behold O Lord,
See and consider: Lamentations 1. 9; 11, 20. As Jesus Christ did in his, when
inwardly loaded, as well as outwardly afflicted, Matthew 26. 47. My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? And whither also will our spirits wander
betwixt our solemn praying in the morning, and that at evening, if we do not
now and then, each day try whether our hearts be gone out of call after vain
objects? will they not else be too fast wedged in worldly affairs, unless now
and then hereby loosened a little? But for the fastening of this exhortation,
and the right managing of the duty exhorted unto, let us lay down, 1. Some
motives to it. 2. Some Motives.
helps and means for it. 3. Some cautions about it. Touching the Motives,
consider,

1. That this precept and duty enjoined 1. Its well for the Saints, that God
requires and owneth this duty.
of God, is a very precious privilege to the Saints; they of all others may
well be forward to this duty: in that it is well for them that ejaculatory
prayer is acceptable prayer, a choice service which the Lord himself
appoints and delights in: it is well for us, brethren and sisters, that we
may thus speak and converse with our God, when none either thinks or knows
of it; we may ever and anon talk thus with our heavenly and gracious
Sovereign, and others in our very company, neither hear, nor mark it, As
Nehemiah did in the kings presence, he prayed to the Lord of heaven, and the
king not privy to it, Nehemiah, 2. 4. As we walk in the way with others, we
may exchange a few of these holy speeches, and yet keep our way and discourse
with them; little do carnal persons think how many of these holy lifts
sometimes gracious and spiritual persons (occasionally cast into their company)
have, whilst they are with them. It is meat and drink which they know not of,
communing with one that is invisible. They may have sweet answers and returns
also thereof, which fill their hearts with heavenly joy, wherewith a stranger
does not intermeddle. Yea, in their sleep, the Saints may thus be talking with
God, 1 King. 3. 9. it was in a dream when God said unto Solomon, ask what I
shall give thce, verse 5. and he did so, verse 15. and he awakened, and behold
it was a dream; a sign then, that he was that while as in a sleep, when
praying, and yet so graciously accepted, and answered, ver. 10, 11. And alas,
what else would have become of Gods Asahs, and Jehoshaphats, David's, etc. of
whom you heard, if this were not prevailing prayer? what should desolate Jonah
in the whales belly, also do? Jonah 2. 1. He prayed but in this sort. What
shall poor Jeremiah in the dungeon do? but hereby you see he does well
enough, Lam. 3. 55, 56. I called upon the name of the Lord out of the low
dungeon, and thou heardest my voice, etc. Some friends would sometimes give a
world to exchange a word or two with a choice friend of theirs in their
extremity: If I could but send or speak with such a one will such say, I need
not, I should not lie here thus. If my Father, if my Brother did but know of
it, I am sure they would relieve me in my straits: though I am now a Turks
slave, yet I have such and such friends in such a country which would ransom
me, etc. Yea, but the Saints need not say so, the Saints are never so hard put
to it, but if they want opportunity more solemnly, yet this way they may be
telling their heavenly Father, and friend Jesus Christ how it is with them. And
is not this well for them? yea verily. Alas, what should dumb ones do, whose
tongues the enemy cut out, or if not, gag them, if yet there were no means left
of speaking with their heavenly Father? but blessed be God there is this way
left to such. It may be malicious persecutors will be throwing the saints into
a Jayle. amongst a company of rogues, which will scoff at the very mention of
prayer; now welfare this part of Gods revealed will, injoyning ejaculations for
prayers also: the poor Saints may then pour out these prayers to their God,
in which such a hellish crew cannot well interrupt them; they may hear them
sigh, it may be, or see them weep; but judge that as arising from other causes,
which indeed and in truth is some sigh of love, holy longing, admiration, or
the like; a precious melting of faith in their hearts, amidst these short heart
speeches with the Lord. Sometimes the Saints are like Hezekiah, as well
oppressed inwardly as outwardly, that they cannot in a continued way pray, but
only in an abrupt and broken way, chatter, and that within themselves, and at
length get out, Lord I am oppressed, undertake for me: and they are like babes
in Christ, and can but brokenly stammer out their minds to the Lord, or like
the Publicane, not daring in a manner to speak much; but in short, to bespeak
mercy as to chief of sinners: is it then not well for such, that O Lord be
merciful to me a sinner, is such an acceptable prayer with God? yea verily, it
is well for the Saints when to leave the world, when neither they can speak to
be understood of any friend, nor their friends to them, albeit both may desire
it with their minds and spirits, and have audience and acceptance; and indeed
if this were not so acceptable a duty, many a blessed soul sylloqui with God of
the Saints living and dying, were made null and useless. And is it not well
then for the Saints that ejaculatory prayer is acceptable prayer? yea, it is
very well in these and other respects: and truly, though it be as I may say,
ill for some notorious enemies of God, yet this is so: for the Saints can soon
do their errand, and in a very few words too. As David did Achithophels, 2 Samuel
15. 31. It is well also for many a man who is yet in his sins, or at least
under captivity to some distemper, that ejaculatory prayer of the Saints is of
such a nature; they at Taberah had been consumed else, when once the fire of
God was kindled amongst them; if Moses his ejaculatory cry had not been a
prayer of the right stamp, and full weight, to pass for current with the Lord,
Numb. 11. 12. Moses cried to the Lord, and the fire was quenched; sundry think
Paul fared the better for Stevens ejaculatory prayer at his death, Lord lay not
this sin to their charge. And assuredly many of the blinded Jews, who
ignorantly crucifled the Lord of glory, fared the better for the ejaculatory
prayer of Christ. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke
23. 34. Witness the conversion of thousands of those, who had a hand in
crucifying the Lord Jesus, Acts 2. 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41. verses compared.
Other Saints likewise fare the better for this, that the ejaculatory prayers of
others of their brethren for them, are acceptable prayers to God: Onesiphorus
will fare the better for the short prayer of Paul, at the very day of judgment,
2 Timothy 1. 18. The Lord grant that he may find mercy at that day. How well then
is it in all respects, that God will have his Saints praying continually with
ejaculatory prayer also?

2. In that it is a service which the Lord Second Motive, It is that upon which
the spirit puts us often.
by special motion of his Spirit put his saints upon often times, as well as by
general command requires the same: Let me hear thy voice, says Christ to his
people, Canti^. 2. 14. To which the Church answers in an ejaculatory prayer,
verse 17. Turn, my beloved, and be thou like a Roe: So Cantic. 8. 13. The Lord
puts them upon speaking to him, Let me hear thy voice: to which they return
an ejaculation, ver 14. Make haste my beloved: now it will not be safe to
neglect any such motions made by the Lord, and by his spirit, lest being
grieved, he withdraw from us.

3. In that the most spiritual persons Third motive; it is that which the
choysest Saints practice much
have been, and are thus exercised in those holy ejaculations, as was Christ,
as Luke 3. 21. When he was baptized, he so prayed: when those Disciples
returned with that success, he lifts up his heart, Luke 20. 21. I thank thee
O Father, Lord of heaven and earth. So John 2. 27, 28. Father, glorify thy
name. And so Luke 23. 31. Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
do. So Matthew 26. 46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? So Luke 23.
46. When to leave the world, Father, into thy hands I commit my spirit. Thus
David, and Nehemiah, and Moses, and others, who were most spiritual, how often
were they thus praying?

4. In that ejaculatory prayer has prevailed Fourth Motive, its very
prevailing with God.
with God for great things; persons have been healed of plagues. As upon such a
prayer of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19, 20. verses, God hearkened, and healed
the people. Wonders have been done by it; as when upon such a Prayer of Isaiah,
the Sun goes backward, 2 Kings 20. 11. Isaiah cried unto the Lord, and the Sun
went back ten degrees. Such wonders were done hereby at the red Sea. Nehem. 9.
9. as formerly was showed.

Now in the second place consider of some Helps to pray thus. 1 Heavenly
mindedness.
Helps to help us this way.

1 Get and maintain a spiritual frame of heart, walk much with God in
Meditation, and the like; and frequent occasion will be offered of such like
talking with him. A heavenly heart will be often lifted thus heavenward. When
Sim^on was in such a frame, then, Lord, let thou thy Servant depart in
peace, Luke 2. 29. So when John is in a like frame, then, Come Lord Jesus, Come
quickly, Revel. 22. 20. One Ejaculation or other arises out of the heart in
such a frame; and as a branch thereof, get our hearts weaned from the things of
the world; be as one leaving the world, and then an old Jacob will be mounting
thus, Genesis 49. 18* Lord, I have waited for thy Salvation. David, who was a
weaned child, was much in holy Ejaculations; so was David's Lord, who was so
much above the world; such have most to do in Heaven, and therefore so often
moving that way.

2 Get a humble soft heart, sensible of sins, and self emptiness. Broken
hearts will be often breathing out Ejaculatory sighs and requests; The humbled
Thief upon the Cross, and Publican in the Temple, had their Ejaculations.

3 Keep in life and light, as much as may 3 Sense of Gods love.
be, the sense of the love of God in Christ: when the Church is in Christ's
arms, and as in his bosom, then she has her Ejaculatory request, Set me as a
seal upon thy arm, etc. Cant. 8. 5, 6. This stirs up holy love in us to God,
and that will be making ever and anon abrupt expressions of its desire to him.

Touching the third thing, consider of these Cautions. Cautions. 1. That it be
not too seldom


1 Content not our selves, that more rarely we have some one lift this way,
but be ever and anon sending up some short requests unto the Lord: four times
in one Chapter is Nehemiah doing thus upon several occasions.

2 Look that we do it not in a Petitionary 2. That it be not only in a
Petitionary way.
way only, but praising way as well. So David, Psalm 8. 3, 4, 5. When I see thy
Heavens, etc. I said, What is man that thou art thus mindful of him! So Jesus
Christ, I thank thee Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, that thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes, Luke 10. 21. and
John 11. 41, 42. Father, I thank thee, that thou always hear me.

3 Look that be not a bare formal cry, 3. That it be not in an affected way.
for fashions sake, a customary Lord have mercy upon me, or Lord bless me, or
the like, in a morning, or at going to bed, resting therein, as if now some
goodly service were done, or that suffices: or a more forced outcry to God,
occasioned from sudden terrors or distrusts, and the like; or an hypocritical
semblance of a heart lift to heaven, by an affected lifting up the eyes when in
others company, or in a seemed squeezing out a hollow hearted sigh, in stead of
such cordial Ejaculations, to which we have been all this while exhorting.

Lastly, Look that none under this pretense, 4 That it thrust not out Solemn
prayer.
lay aside the due and constant exercise of public or private Prayer in a more
continued way. Let not one duty justle out another: Continued Prayer in solemn
manner is our duty, as well as Ejaculatory Prayer, as God willing we shall see
in the following part of this Discourse; we are the rather to make conscience
of Ejaculatory Prayer, that we may be sit for solemn Prayer: and we are so to
pray in a continued Prayer, as it may leave us sending up our after
Ejaculations unto heaven.

CHAP. III. Touching more solemn and continued Prayer; and particularly of
Public Prayer.
WE have spoken of Ejaculatory Prayer; proceed we now to consider of Solemn and
continued Prayer, which is either Public or Church Prayer, Private or Family
Prayer, Secret or Closet Prayer.

Begin we now with the consideration of Public or Church Prayer, which is also
included in this indefinite Precept, written to the Church of the
Thessalonians, collectively as well as distributively considered, 1 These 1. 1.
Whence also in this Chapter he exhorts them to due esteem of their Officers,
verse. 12. and verse. 20 of the Ordinance of the Ministerial Dispensation of the
Word. So then, Public or Church Prayer is a Duty also which we ought
conscionably to attend in the season thereof, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. Paul exhorts
that in the first place Prayers Act. 16. 13.
be made for all sorts of men; namely, Public Prayers; and makes the same
very good and acceptable in the sight of God. It is emblematically set forth
under the notion of four living Creatures, and four and twenty Elders met in
way of worship of God, Rev. 4. 8. and 5 8, 10.

For our better proceeding herein, consider 1. Of the requisites to Public
Prayer. 2. Of the Reasons of it. 3. Of some Use of it.

Touching the first: Some things are Things required of such as are to pour out
public prayer.
required to such as are to be the mouth of the Church in Prayer; some things
in such as join with them.

Of the former sort of requisites are,

1. A public Call. So it was of old, Deuteronomy. 1. A public Call.
21. 5. The Priests the sons of Levi shall come near, for them has the Lord
thy God chosen to minister to him, and to bless in the name of the Lord; which
was in Prayer-wise, as Number 6 23, 24. etc. On this wise shall ye bless the
children of Israel; saying, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make
his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious to thee, etc.

Now this Call to become the peoples mouth to God, as it respects God, so it
is (amongst other things) Gods fitting them with abilities, as for Preaching,
so for Prayer; and his sequestring them accordingly thereunto, as to their
work: whence that Acts 6. 4. We will give our selves to Prayer, and to the
Ministry of the Word: namely, as we are Ministers, and in an Authoritative way*
both alike are Ministerial acts, and gifting for the one as well as for the
other, is a choice part of a Ministerial Call. That which we render
[consecrate] Aaron and his Sons; namely for their work, Exodus 29* 9. It is
(...) So Lev. 8. v. 22. The Ram of Consecration of the Levites, is in Hebrew,
(...). The Ram of Fullness, or as it is in the Hebrew, Fulnesses.

As if such men by their Calling were very full men of all Abilities for their
Ministerial works; yea, as if it were one maine part of their Call, to be that
way as complete as may be. Hence also the Anointing of the Priests, Exodus 28*
41. In taking of the holy unction of the spirit, and the gifts thereof in them,
Joshuah the Priest must have, as the garments of Righteousness and Holiness
through Christ, with other Saints, Zach. 3. 4. so a fair Mitre upon his head,
ver. 5. as one honored above all others, in a manner, for his head Ornaments,
and Abilities in his Ministry. The Elders in the Apostles days called to that
Office, they were gifted upon any occasion to make an inwrought Prayer. James
5. 14: Let them send for the Elders, and let them pray over him, and verse. 16.
(...), the inwrought Prayer of a Righteous man avails much. Both the
Officers, yea, and Members also of pure Churches, in the days of the Gospel
(as those four living Creatures, and twenty four Elders, graver Christians) are
represented as gifted for Prayer, -- Having Vials filled with odours of
Prayers, Rev. 5. 8. And surely, such as are to be the Chosen constant Speakers
of the Assembly to the Lord, they had need have choice skill in all holy and
heavenly praying-oratory: such as are to be the chosen champions (as I may say)
of the Congregation to wrestle it out with God on their behalf, they had need
have the art of holy wrestling or prayer. Such as are the chosen Solicitours
for this or that corporation, as they had need to be acquainted with the
people well, that they may be able to make every ones prayer, and plea, and
complaint, and the like; So had they need to have the choice skill, and holy art
of pleading with the Lord, as cause shall require.

This call of such as are to be the officers, and more constant mouth of the
Congregation in prayer, consists in their free Election and full Approbation
for that and other ministerial work, some way manifested and expressed by the
people, together with their own free consent thereunto. Thus the Levite set
apart of God to the ministry of old, and amongst other things therein, to
bless in the name of the Lord; or to pray and praise God publicly, Deuteronomy. 10.
8. The Elders of the Congregation, on the congregations behalf are to impose
hands upon them, Number. 8. 9, 10. in testimony of their solemn call of them to
ministerial work. God will have no one to be the mouth of any Church, who
shall be a burden, or grievous to it; he will have none forced upon it; but
rather have such a mouth, as the body shall desire gladly thereby to breath out
its requests and desires to the Lord. Nor was the Lord more tender of old of
the orderly administration of his public worship, then he is now; then the
peoples call was Gods call, he set the Levites apart to bless in his name, in
their setting them apart for that end. And so it is now, public prayer is the
public act of the Church, there should then be a public hand in it, not
only in joint consent to the petitions, but by solemn call of him, which
prefers the same in their names to the Court of heaven. It is of great
concernement to every one in the church, as what words, and how, so by whom the
same are spoken in the Lords ears, as their words. They who draw so near to the
Lord to deal in Christ's name for so many others, had need be approved of God
for that end; and that they are not, if not approved of his people. In a word,
it is no small encouragement to such so called, against all inward and outward
discouragements, and tentations, which they meet with in their work; that as
they are in Gods way, so in the place, and about the work in special, to which
the Lord by his people did call them.

A second requisite to him who is to 2d Requ. 2 Praying in the spirit.
pray as the mouth of the assembly, is, that he pray in the spirit. Ephesians. 6. 18.
praying with all manner of prayer (and so with public prayer also,) in the
spirit; not alone with our hearts or spirits, but praying in the holy Ghost,
Jude 20. Or by a gift, and by the immediate help of the holy Ghost. Even such
as are to edify others in their most holy faith, privately, are to pray thus;
and much more such as are by office to give themselves to the ministry of the
word. There is great danger (to say no worse of it) when this tabernacle,
temple, Church-incense or prayer, is of humane composition, Exodus 30. 38. And
in offering of so public a sacrifice with fire of man's kindling, and such as
comes not down from heaven, Levit. 10. 1, 2. but much indeed needs not to
be spoken to this, now that the Lord by his grace, has so cleared up his mind
to his servants of all sorts in these days. Yet let me briefly confirm this
truth, and thereby the hearts also of the Saints in the present truth: public
prayer must be in the spirit, or by an immediate gift and help of the holy
Ghost.

1. Because public prayer being part of Reasons. It must be carried on with
most holy beauty.
public worship, it should be performed with greatest beauty, Psalm. 29. 2.
and 96. 8. It is twice repeated, Worship the Lord in the beautyes of holiness,
(for manner as well as place, the Temple of old.) Now the Church in her beauty,
Cantic. 7. 1. compared with verse 9. The roof of her mouth (both in prayer and
preaching) is like the best wine, that goes down sweetly, causing the lips of
these which are asleep to speak. And surely experience seals it, that there
is more lively efficacy to such as are present when prayers are put up to the
Lord in the assembly, from the immediate help of the spirit, then any other way.

2 Because by such manner of prayer God 2 God is most honored by it
has most glory, (which is that, which in public worship is mainely intended,
Psalm. 29. 2.) for he has most glory of the precious gifts of the spirit,
inabling Ministers to pray thus: of his glorious wisdom also, in the variety
of the measures thereof bestowed upon his servants. Those Church Officers which
have their vialls full of such odours, which as those of old, were only of
divine invention, composition and direction, they in special sort have their
harpes sounding forth the praises of God, (Revel. 5. 8.) These ministerial
stars in the firmament of the Church, (Revel. 1. 20.) do then in special wise
declare the glory of God, when they shine, as in preaching, so in prayer
publicly, not with borrowed light from others, but by an innate and natural
light, (as I may say) in them, considered as spiritual, and spiritually gifted
of the spirit.

3. Because such manner of praying in 3 It is the Churches perfection.
the spirit, consists best with the Churches perfection. The lips of such a
Spouse or Church of Christ which is most fair and complete, they drop (both in
public prayer and preaching) as the honeycomb, Cantic. 4. 10, 11. There is an
immediate inward principle, there is an holy store of sweet and savory graces
of the spirit within, such as are the Churches mouth, when without stint,
restraint or constraint, they do freely drop out wholesome expressions, sweet
to the taste of the Lord Jesus. When the Church in the 45th Psalm is (under
the notion of Solomon's Egyptian wife, a Gentile,) set forth in her glorious
ornaments, verse 14. She is said to be brought to the King (Jesus Christ) in
garments of needlework. The Churches garments, as they are the glorious robes
of the righteousness of faith, and graces of the Spirit, (which are visible to
the Lord, though more invisible to men) so are they the ordinances too,
wherewith she is (as it were) invested, when she comes near the Lord in the
Assembly: now such Church ornaments as preaching and prayer in special, they
are needlework wrought on both sides, (as I may say) the inward work of the
spirit, respecting the gifts and graces therein exercised. The outward work
thereof, the very expressions, not wrought by men to our hands, so much as by
the spirit, framing and directing the same in public as well as private
prayer, as before was hinted from the Greek phrase in James 5. 16. in singing
of Psalms; wherein not one alone as in preaching and prayer, acts in the
name of God, or others, but every one instructs each other personally. It
suffices that for the matter, it be the word of Christ the Prophet of his
Church, speaking the same, Col. 3. 16. and for the manner of expression, such
as by the help of a gift of the spirit, is expressed outwardly, in the words of
the spirit (as near as may be) and uttered from suitable workings of the spirit
in the hearts of all inwardly.

4. Because such a way of carrying on 4 Its most suitable to the Churches
liberty.
public prayer, is most suitable to the Churches liberty, and to the spiritual
liberty also of the officers of the Church, as part thereof. The Church is now
no bondwoman, but a freewoman, and so are her children sharers with her in
that freedom, (Gal. 4. 26. 31.) as from ceremonial injunctions, which sometimes
God ordained, so much more from humane inventions, which the Lord never
instituted. The Churches ministerial mouths, have most bold liberty of spirit
in such conceived prayer, to receive such drops of the spirit of prayer poured
out upon the Saints, and the renewed influences thereof. Yea to improve the
holy variety of seasonable motions, even then made by the spirit interceding in
them; wherein some particular cases of sundry poor souls present, happily
unknown to the Ministers, are to the life represented, even as if the parties
had informed them thereof. Yea they are more free to improve the various
measures of their gift of prayer received, which in diverse Ministers are very
various; yea they are freer to express the various statures (as it were) or
pitch of their respective Churches, being not all of one size, but some more
eminent for grace then others. Yea they are freer to express the various
conditions and failings of their Churches, which as the Moon, are subject to
various aspects. (Cantic. 6. 10.) The Churches, and her Ministers liberty, is
in both alike preserved entire, when they are left to the free use of all holy
liberty, to utter the mind and case of the Church to the Lord, as when left to
like liberty to speak and deliver the Lords mind to the Church.

5. Because that way of prayer is most 5 Its most acceptable to the Lord.
suitable to the nature of acceptable and prevailing prayer; as is in-wrought
prayer, as before showed from Jam. 5. 16. That prayer which is the very
suppliants own meditation by the help of the spirit, (Psalm. 5. 1.) Give ear
to [my words,] consider [my meditation;] That prayer which is the pouring out
of the very suppliants hearts or souls, 1 Samuel 1. 15. I have poured out my soul
to the Lord; that is made each ones prayer. So Psalm. 62. 8. Pour out your
hearts to him, or pray. That which is a serving of God with the suppliants
spirit. Romans 1. 9. My God whom I serve with my spirit.

6. Because such prayer is most costly 6 Its most costly.
to him who is the Churches mouth, and so a Sacrifice most suitable to a Saints
own desire, and best accepted of the Lord: such an one will say as David in
another case (2 Samuel 24) I will not offer to the Lord that which cost me
nothing; The Tabernacle and Temple-Incense (resembling also Church Prayer) as
in the matter costly, so in the manner; it cost much pounding and beating.
Exodus 30. 36. the Mincah for the Congregation, as well as that for any
particular person, was to be of fine flower, Levit. 28. Church Prayer also
resembled thereby, would cost the Officers thereof much sifting. The lips of
that Spouse, or Church of Christ, which is fo fair, Cant. 4. 7. they are (ver.
3) like a thread if Scarlet fine spun, and twice dyed, in the wool, and in the
thread: very costly, whether speaking in Prayer or Preaching.

7 Because such as are the called, officed 7 Its suitable to the gifts of called
Officers
mouths of the Church, they are (as has been showed) gifted for public
prayer in their names, as well as preaching (as Gods mouth) to them; wherefore
they ought upon all occasions to be exercising that one Talent as well as the
other. True it is, that some of these Stars differ from other in the glory of
their light and brightness; but yet every of the Stars in Christ's hand, shine
from an inward light in such public Worship of God: Each ones Vial is not of
the same capacity; yet each Church Officers Vial and Vessel has its
proportionable fullness of such holy odors of prayer, Rev. 1. 20 and 5. 8.

8. Because this way of Prayer, as it has clearest warrant from the Word, as
before 8 Its least offensive to the Saints.
proved, so is of least scandal to the choicest of the Saints, as experience of
former and later times abundantly witnesses.

A third Requisite unto such as are the 3 Requisite Holy wisdom.
mouth of the Assembly in Prayer, is holy wisdom and diligence, in observing,
as their own souls special occasions, so those of the Congregation. Those four
living Creatures resembling Church Officers, Revel. 4. 6, 8. they are full of
eyes, for that end, to look through both themselves and others, as they are
publicly to worship the Lord.

A fourth Requisite is sympathizing affection 4 Sympathy.
with the people in their cases, as if their own. So the people of old, Hebr.
5. 1 Other Requisites might be mentioned, but I forbear.

Requisites of the second sort in such as Requisites in the people. 1. Assent
of faith.
join in Public Prayer, are

1. Assent of faith, with oneness of mind and heart, suitable thoughts and
affections. All the precious strings of the gracious minds and hearts of such
as are present, should be tuneable (as it were,) and symphonize in this Lesson
of their chief Musician, Matthew. 18. 19. if they agree in one, or symphonize (as
the Greek phrase is.) Those holy Suppliants, in Acts 2. 14. They continued with
one accord in Prayer. Hence that resounding of a redoubled Amen at the public
Blessing, Nehem. 8. 6. Hence such care had, that public Prayer may be
expressed in a Language understood by all, that the people may annex their Amen
thereunto, 1 Cor 14. 16.

2. A gracious and serious attention and 2 Attention.
intention of spirit thereon. God puts such of his officed solicitours upon
the mention of the several cases of his people present, and every one had need
attend the calling out, and handling (as it were) of his case, not neglecting
others. Each ones spirit has need to write (as I may say) his name to such a
Corporation-Petition, and be ready in heart to say, Lord, this indeed is the
desire of my soul, this is my very grievance and burden, Lord, etc. If poor
souls who happily have lien spiritually wind-bound, meet with any holy gale of
the Spirit therein, they had need be ready to hoise their sail, to catch it and
improve it.

3 Amity and sweetness of spirit and of affection, both toward him which
prays 3 Amity
in their steads, and them which join with them therein in public Prayer, all
and every one must lift up pure hands without wrath and doubting, 1 Timothy 2. 8.
for then all are as one in their joint desires, and are as persons put in each
others steads and cases, expecting the love and forgiveness of God for each
other, and had need be in such a frame as to yield love and forgiveness each
to other, Matthew. 6. 12. Forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors.

4. Holiness and heavenlinesse of heart. 4 Holiness
Public Prayer must have pure hearts as well as hands, 1 Timothy 2 8. and James
4. 8. the vials from which both Officers and Members of the Congregation offer
up such odours, must be golden Vials, Revel. 5. 8.

5 Faith: 1 Timothy 2. 8. Hands lifted up (in public prayer) without doubting:
Every 5 Faith
one should put to his Amen of Faith, as well as of assent or desire.

Lastly, Reverence. Hence in that representation 6 Reverence.
of public Church Worship, all fall down and worship, Rev. 4. 9, 10 Psalm. 95.
6. O come let us worship and bow down, and let us kneel before the Lord our
Maker.

What gesture is most meet in public

Such a gesture as may best express much Touching the gesture. Kneeling or
standing, not sitting
up, not sitting. And that for these Reasons:

1 In that in public prayer, there is a more solemn presence of God and of his
holy Angels. We are in special wise before the Lord our Maker, and regard is to
be had to our carriage in Prayer, because of the Angels, 1 Cor. 11. 4. 10.
compared. The very Angels cover their faces when the Lord is in his Temple, as
on his Throne, Isai. 6. 1, 2, 3. much more cause have we, who in public prayer
do all come a begging, to come with a public Petition to our glorious King, to
offer it up to him upon our bended knees, to be very reverend in our gesture.

2 In that God gives it in most special Psalm. 95. 6. Let us bow down and kneel
before the Lord our Maker, respects not any other part of Worship so properly
as public prayer, as is evident: and that mutual charge of Gods people, each
of other, is but the echo and result of Gods charge, first given to them so to
do. If Daniel in secret prayer will be kneeling, much more should we in public
prayer. Dan. 6. 10. He kneeled upon his knees three times a day, etc

3 In that the examples of the Saints Chron. 20. 3, 6. And Jehoshaphat stood in
the Congregation, and said, O Lord, etc. or (mostly) kneeling, 1 Kings 8. 54
The King rose up from kneeling on his knees. Acts 20. 36. Paul kneeled down and
prayed; and so chap. 2. 5. He kneeled down and prayed; and in secret prayer it
was his constant gesture: Hence putting bowing of his knees for prayer, For
this cause I bow my knees unto the Father, etc. that is, I pray; and less
reverence should not be expressed in public prayer.

4 In that in public prayer we should all edify one another by our reverence
in and slightness therein. Hence Gods people are presented as calling one upon
another, to bow down and kneel before the Lord their Maker. Psalm. 95. 6.

5 In that all care should be had by the Saints, that they give no occasion of
stumbling

David sat before the Lord, 2 Samuel 18.

That was private Prayer of himself alone,

2 The Hebrew word is often used for staying Genesis 22. 5. and 24. 55. and 27, 44.
and 38. 11. and 29. 14. Exodus 24. 14. Levit. 14: 8. Numb. 20. 1. and 22. 19. 1 Samuel 20. 19. and 2 Samuel 10. 5. and 11. 12, 1 Kings 15. 16. and 2 Kings 22. 46.
and 14, 10. Judges 6. 18. Psalm 101. 7 and elsewhere.

3 It is not probable that he who professes (Psalm 109. 24.) that his knees
were weak through fasting or praying on Fast days, that he did now sit in
prayer. At the best then, this instance of David's sitting, is but a may be, and
no other instance, that I know of, of the like in Scripture: but both rules and
examples of the other gestures, are clearly set down in Scripture; therefore
these are most safe and suitable gestures, in ordinary course in public prayer;
extraordinary cases of bodily infirmities (wherein mercy pleases God rather
then the strictness of this or that gesture in sacrificing or praying) not
varying or nullifying the ordinary Rule.

Come we now to the Reasons enforcing Reasons for public prayer
this Duty of public prayer.

Public Ordinances being sanctified also, Tim. 4. 4 Public Ordinances
sanctified by it.
Call for Public Prayer. Wherefore Gods House of public Worship, is called an
House of Prayer, as if that were one most choice part thereof, Isaiah 56. 7.
Acts 2. 42. They continued as in the Apostles Doctrine (attending upon
preaching) and breaking of Bread (partaking of the Lords Supper) and in prayer,
sanctifying the rest.

Because public occasions call to it. Tim. 2. 1, 2* The cases of public
persons Public occasions call to it.
in Commonwealths, of Churches, etc. call thereto. Public wants call for
public Petitions; public sins for public confessions. The plaster must be
as large as the sore, the Land must repent. Jer. 18. 7. so every Congregation
in it must down on their knees to ask the Lord forgiveness. Members of
Congregations must sometimes give themselves to Church fasting and prayer, as
well as Family or Closet fasting and prayer, 1 Cor. 7. 5.

Because gracious persons are of a public God be merciful to us, was the
Churches Gracious persons are of public spirits.
Prayer of old, Psalm 67. 1. 2 wherein? Make thy way known to all Nations.
Cant. 8. 8. The Church moves Christ to do something for her sister Church,
being ready, for her part, for them otherwise: what shall we do for our sister?
etc. Christ teaches all to pray plurally, Give us this day, forgive us our
trespasses, and lead us not into temptation, etc. As holy Priests in Christ,
Rev. 1. 5, 6. they offer up severally and jointly Sacrifices of Prayer and
praises respecting oothers, the public good. By the blessing of the upright
(on the prayer of the upright, pleading and prevailing for a blessing that way)
the City is exalted, Prove. 11. 11. Now in public prayer there is a holy
confluence of the breathings of such public spirits, and the Lord in Wisdom,
Faithfulness and Mercy to all sorts, will have this for a stated Ordinance,
that such gracious dispositions in his own, may be exercised and exerted.

4. Because public prayer is a public 4 A public profession and confession
of God
only true God, and that one Mediator Jesus Christ; yea of the oneness of
the Saints with each other in the same Father and Savior. When the Apostle
Romans 10. 10. had spoken of confession to the Lord with the mouth. ver. 12, 13.
he instanceth, in calling upon God as one special branch of it.

Nor is it the least honor to the Lord, as a great King, to have so many
several companies of subjects waiting on him with petitions for his royal
favor: it is an holy joint homage and service, for many to join as one man in
prayer. Calling upon the name of the Lord, and serving him with one shoulder,
are joined, Zeph. 3. 9. Public prayer is a public profession and expression
of one and the same faith, of many in one and the same Father, in one and the
same Mediator of the covenant, and in one and the same covenant of grace; it
is a joint cry of one and the same spirit, in and from many childrens hearts,
calling one Abba Father; it is a common meeting of the several desires of
several good hearts in this one common center. It is a holy burning-glass,
wherein the several bright and warm rays of the faith of many suppliants
being in an holy wise contracted in one point (as it were) breaks forth into
a holy fire of love-expressions to the Lord, and their own and others souls
welfare; it is a joint outcry by reason of a serious sense of the same
grievances of many: if others sorrows, sufferings, wants, burdens, be not the
same with thine or mine; yet in praying thus, we make each ones ayls ours, as
they do make ours theirs. We come to pray in public with variety of cases,
differing from each other in sundry respects: but in public prayer each ones
soul is put (as it were) in another stead; public prayer is a public hue
and cry made out by the joint consent of this or that imbodied people, against
some common enemies of their souls, and dangerous enemies to their blessed
King, his crown, and his dignity. Public prayer, it is a public
condemnation, therefore voiced by our own mouths against any private discords,
and divisions, if any such should be amongst us.

5. Because public prayer is in a special 5 Its very delightful to the Lord.
sort delightful to the Lord, he puts his people in special wise upon it,
Psalm. 81. 10. Open thy mouth wide (in prayer) and I will fill it: he is
therefore troubled if public prayer as well as private be neglected. Esaias 43.
22. Thou have not called upon me, O Jacob. Jesus Christ is very ready to
present and perfume public, as well as more private prayers of his Saints.
Rev. 8. 3. The Lord is ready to reward it in his people. Let all the people, or
Gentiles, praise thee, was the Churches prayer, Psalm. 67. 5. and verse 6. Then
shall God, even our God, bless us: they praying for a blessing upon others,
triumph for a blessing as upon others, so upon themselves. It is good and
acceptable to him that public prayer be made for all Saints, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2,
3. Christ took it kindly, that the multitude opened their mouths to beseech
mercy for one that had an imperfection in his speech, and beseech him to lay
his hands upon him. Mark 7. 32. Upon which he cured him. verse 33, 34, 35.

6. Such manner of approaches of Assemblies 6 Its a fruit of Christ's death, and
represents his public spirit.
to the Lord, are a fruit of Christ's purchase; that way to Gods throne, i^ made
by the rending of the veil of Christ's flesh, Heb. 10. 19, 20, 22, 25.
compared: it represents the very spirit of Christ, which is all for the public
good of his people. There are in public prayer the special influences of the
spirit, which were scattered in many, compacted and gathered as it were in one;
the waters of various graces running in several gracious hearts, as in sundry
channels, do here disburthen themselves as in one pleasant and mighty stream*
One instrument alone well tuned, will make good music in Gods ears: but he
delights much in these prayers in consort; where sundry, two or three
symphonize in what they ask, it shall be done. Matthew. 18. 19. For there is
Christ in the midst of them when thu^ gathered together in his name; verse 20.

7. Because public prayer is a public Its a public engaging and uniting of
hearts
engaging and compacting of the hearts and spirits of Gods faithful ones. Acts
2. 42. They continued steadfastly in prayers, ver. 44* And all that believed
were together, and hal^ all things common. Zeph. 3. 9. That they may all call
upon him to serve him, with one consent, or one shoulder, (as it is in the
Hebrew.) As if the former were means of the latter. The joint exercises of
mutual graces in the common work breeds and feeds love and mutual respect.
As it is with any two or three Ministers or other godly persons using to pray
most together, they love and cleave most together: as Musicians that use to
play often in consort together, they use to be most friendly to each other. So
is it in an assembly of persons conscionably exercised in public prayer. Let
us now apply the consideration of this of public prayer as our duty.

First, in way of reproof of such who Evils of not; or late coming to public
prayer.
come not seasonably to public prayer; but they come dropping in when the duty
is half or almost finished. These write not after their copy set them in that
representative of pure worship in Gospel-Churches, Revel. 4. 8, 9, 10. When the
four living creatures (representing the officers) are to lead the rest, and to
begin and carry on the public worship, the rest of the Congregation
(represented by twenty four Elders for their gravity and experience in matters
of the Gospel) they are also present, ready to fall down, in testimony of
their joint accord in the worship. And observe it, none of the number are
wanting. There is not a third, or fourth part, or half, or three parts of the
company, (as too often with us, when to give glory to God in prayer and
thanksgiving) but there are the whole assembly of Gods spiritual Priests by
profession and holy calling, the whole twenty four. This also is not according
to the express pattern of the Primitive Church and the members there, they
continued steadfastly as in other parts of worship, so in prayer: and the word
[(...)] notes their ready attendance upon the same, as well as their
continuance therein. The same word is used Acts 10. 7. for the Soldiers
waiting upon Cornelius, and of Rulers attending on their work. Romans 13. 6. But
for the further whetting and sharpning this admonition, Consider

First, that it is a sin of omission, such 1. It is a sin of omission.
do not join in a duty of public worship, to which each of the assembly are
bound: being therefore public, as that which concerns all, such do not give
the Lord this holy sacrifice in the time of it* God is not now less interested
in the time of his worship, as well as in the worship it self, then of old,
Numb. 28. 2. You shall observe to offer them in due season. The very Prince,
who of all other has weighty occasions lying upon him to withdraw or delay
his coming into the assembly in the time of public worship under the Gospel,
(allusively represented under notions proper to that of the Law) yet Ezekiel. 46.
10. And the Prince in the midst of them when they go in, shall go in, and
when they go forth, shall go forth. He is to be there with the first, and
stay till the last: all the professed subjects and lovers of Jesus Christ are
to watch daily at his gates, and wait at the posts of his doors. Prove. 8. 33,
34. They are therefore to be in readiness, as those who watch and wait for any
holy opportunity of Christ's public ordinances and worship, and so of this of
prayer among the rest, or else they break rule, neglect their duty. How
unsutably do such walk to the example of other godly people abroad, mentioned
in Luk 1. 21. The people were there al waiting til Zachary had done offering
incense: and Exodus 35. mention is made of troops of women assembling at the
door of the Tabernacle. 1 Samuel 2. 22. Yet women in regard of family occasions
of children, and the like, (if any) might have been excused. Peter and John
went to the Temple at the hour of prayer. The Tabernacle and Temple then
(where they were wont to assemble) had public prayers offered up among other
services: And not less diligence in ready attending public worship and prayer,
among the rest, is prophesied of, as in these days of the Gospel; witness
that, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be willing (or free and forward
sacrificers) in the day of thy power. Esaias 60. 8. Who are these that fly like
doves to the windows? Zach. 8. 21. Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord
(say the Gentiles) and to seek the Lord: I will go also.

2. It is a scandalous evil it; offends the 2. Its matter of just offense to
others.
godly part of the assembly, which are there seasonably to join in the duty.
And the officers also, whose spirits they are not to grieve. Heb. 13. 17. For
the unseasonable coming in of some, and then of others, disturbeth Ministers
and people present, and occasionally hinders their continued fervency, and
interrupteth attention upon that worship in hand; it occasionally hardneth
lukewarm and backsliding Christians in their neutrality of respect to the
parts of public worship, and profaner persons in their grosser neglects and
contempts thereof. When they see Professors, happily of note and name, be so
slack and slighty in their attendance thereon.

3. The ordinary practice of such careless coming 3. Its a symptom of a bad
estate.
to join in public prayer before other public worship performed in the
assembly, is a speaking symptom of an evil estate in persons guilty of it.
Christ has had little power on their hearts, who are no more ready and forward
sacrifices. Psalm. 110. 3. Such upon whom he has power, being willing and
forward that way, it strongly argues that such want a public spirit, love to
the public good, through sense of public evils* and that they have little
love to public ordinances, or delight in public fellowship with the Saints,
as being so constantly careless of seasonable addressing themselves to public
prayer, wherein all those are to the life expressed.

4. Such cannot so groundedly expect a 4. Strips us of a public blessing.
blessing upon other Public ordinances then dispensed, as the word preached,
or the like; which regard not to join in Public Prayer for the same.
Wherefore let all such who profess the fear of God, be afraid any more to
grieve his spirit, or the spirits of his Saints, by any such remissness and
slacknesse in attending upon an ordinance so precious and prevailing with the
Lord; yea let them blush, that in Popish times of superstitious blindness, so
many should from blind zeal be so forward in awaiting Latin service, (to say
nothing of other service, and Common Prayer lately discarded, in attending
whereupon too many have placed their main Religion,) and Christians in these
precious times of Gospel, light and liberty, should be no more forward to
improve that liberty of pure worship of God, (as other ways) so in Public
Prayer, which both Christ has purchased so dearly, and for which the Saints
have wrestled so much with God, and conflicted with so many difficulties with
men.

The second Use therefore may serve to The second use of exhortation to attend
upon public prayer.
exhort all the people of God to seasonable, conscionable attendance upon
Public Prayer presented in an holy manner in his Churches, by such as the Lord
calls thereunto: let not God have any cause to complain, that Public calling
upon God is out of request with us. Esaias 43. 22. he accounts we are weary of
him, if neglectful of that. Thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou
have been weary of me, O Israel. Surely, the Lord has magnified his
faithfulness in bringing us strangers into his holy mountain, according to
Isaiah 56. 7. and is as ready to make us joyful in his house of Prayer, if we
are not wanting to our own souls. God honors this part of his worship before
others; and therefore by a synechdoche puts it for his whole worship; his
house of worship he calls an house of yrayer, as being a choice part of his
worship. Neglect that, neglect all; as being that which instrumentally puts
life and luster into all other parts of worship, their burnt offerings (says
God there) shall be accepted; For my house shall be called an house of Prayer:
Look then that we put special honor upon this ordinance. Yea, these
instrumentally occasion more honor to God; Prayers made in Zion have their
answers: God is a God honoring Church-Prayer also, and therefore has
Church-Prayses too, Praise waits for him in Zion. Psalm. 65. 1, 2. As gifts
are bestowed by occasion of many, so thanks come to be given by many. 2 Cor. 1.
11. And who would not then (if they love the Lord) be ready to give a lift to
such honor of his name? Yea, we shall come to have more abundant honor by it
in the eyes of others, to be styled and owned as (under God) helpers to them in
the attaining of such and such begged blessings; you also helping by your
Prayers (says Paul) to the Church of Corinth. In a word, it is the privilege
of the Saints, purchased at a dear rate by Jesus Christ, by whose cause it is
that their enmity being slain, Ephesians. 2. 16. both such as were nigh, and such as
were a far off, verse 17. through him have both an access by one spirit,
unto the Father. verse 18. and are fellow-Citizens. verse 19. And as such, they
trade with God publicly, as well as privately in prayer, for the furtherance
of the whole Cities good, and every part thereof. There is a City treasury of
Prayers, from which often times, even other decayed Citizens (instrumentally) get
relief. Many a decayed Parish (as I may call it) in the great City of God, in
the Church universal, is raised again by it, and many a backsliding Christian
raised up again by it; as others keep that blessed stock going for us, so
should we for them.

And as a means the more to farther us this way, let every gracious person make
conscience to quicken up each other to this duty. So these converts do. Zach.
8. 21. Come let us go speedily to pray before the Lord: I will go also.

CHAP. IIII. Of Private or Family Prayer.
HAving spoken of the first branch of continued Prayer, even Public Prayer; we
must now speak of Private or Family Prayer, required also implicitly in this
undefinite injunction, Pray without ceasing: respecting the families in the
Church Family prayer distinguished.
of Thessalonica, as well as the whole Church collectively considered. Family
Prayer is either extraordinary or ordinary, both are duties in their seasons,
Of extraordinary Family Prayer, such as to which fasting is joined is that 1
Cor. 7. 5. That ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer, namely,
considered as members of the family privately, as of the Church publicly,
whether upon occasion of removal, which may and must be done by one family
alone, sometimes, as well as by many families joining together at other times,
Ezra 8. 25. That we may seek a right way for us and our little ones, etc. upon
occasion also of public loss of some pious rulers, as those of the Jews, did
for Josias, 2 Chronicles. 34. 24, 25, 26. unto which allusion is made, Zach. 12. 11,
12. And many other occasions might be instance on this way. Ordinary private
Prayer in families, is either occasional or more properly oeconomical;
occasional Private Prayer is when diverse godly acquaintance of sundry families
do meet in some one family to pray and to edify one another, unto which such
places look Mal. 3. 16. Jude 20. Col. 4. 12. James 5. 13, 14, 15, 16. of which
I might declare the manifold precious uses and benefits, but I forbear: that
which we intend chiefly to speak to, as our duty implicitly here injoined, is
not that which is Prayer in the family, but that which is properly oeconomical,
or Prayer of the Christian family, Ephesians. 6. 18. Pray with all Family prayer
proved to be a duty. Romans 16. 3. 5. Col. 4. 15.
manner of Prayer, reaches also this manner of Prayer by the family. Christian
families are, or should be Churches, wherein the Master of the family should
offer up acceptable Prayers and Praises to God. Paul writing to Philemon in his
Epistle, verse 19. mentions not his Prayer alone, but others with him. I
trust through your prayers I shall be given to you, ver. 22. and ver. 2. he
mentions the Church in his house: Cornelius is commended for his prayer
always, or upon all occasions, Acts 10. 2. He prayed to God always, viz. as in
his house alone, so with his family: hence such care had that the prayers of
man and wife be not hindered. 1 Pet. 3. 7. meaning their joint prayers together
in the family as well as those severally made in their closets. Pour out thy
wrath upon the families which call not on thy Name. Jer. 10. 24. Which notion
of families comprehends households, as Joshuah 7. 14. The families shall come
by households, and a sad curse then is upon the household which are not
conscionable of this duty of household or family prayer. God would have the
houses of his people dedicated, Deuteronomy. 20. 5. namely, to holy uses, and this of
household prayer especially; and Psalm 30. Title, David therefore mentions
the dedication of his house: hence such care also in the godly Patriarchs in
the removals of themselves and household, still to be building Altars to call
upon God; so Abraham, Genesis 12. 8. and 13. 18. And thus did Isaak. Genesis 26. 25.
Thus did Jacob. Genesis 33. 20. and 35. 1. God charge Jacob to go up to Bethel
and there make an Altar to him, and verse 2. 3. Jacob applies the charge to
his household, saying. Let us arise, and go up to Bethel; and as a godly man,
Jacob must pray alone, and did, Genesis 32. 25* 26, 27, 28. with Hos. 12. 3. 4. he
made supplication: but considered as a Master of a family, it is not enough to
send away his household over Jabbock, and make supplication alone; but he must
pray, and offer up sacrifice with his family: yea, in that sense Jacob rightly
expounds the charge of God, bidding him to arise, and go up to Bethel, to
refer to his household too, -- let us go up to Bethel. Genesis 35. 1, 3. compared:
his whole household, wives, children, sojourners, servants, all must go up to
Bethel, and join in the worship, none must be absent. Reasons enforcing this
duty.

1. Because Gods promised, actual respects and Reasons why. 1. From Gods
acceptance.
acceptance of his peoples prayers indifinitely, are extendable to his peoples
prayers with the family, as well as congregation, or those in their closets:
while they speak there also he will hear. Esaias 65. 24. His ears are open to
their cries there also, Psalm. 34. 11. Cornelius his prayers then also came up
in remembrance before God. Act. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. Paul is given to the prayers of
Philemon and his houshold-Church. Philem. 1, 2, 22. compared

2. Because the Lord pours out a spirit of grace and supplication to be
exercised with the several households in their Tribes, as well as alone by the
husbands and wives apart, Zach. Reas. 2. From Gods fitting his Saints for that
service.
12. 11, 12. They shall mourn (in their prayers which with contrite hearts
they pour out,) the families apart, and their wives apart; whether in an
extraordinary way of prayer with fasting, or in an ordinary.

3. Because family occasions being also sanctified by prayer, 1 Timothy 4. call
for it: as Saul with his military family would first Reas. 3.
seek God for good success. 1 Samuel 13. 11, From family occasion.
12. So should the guides of other families before their families set about
their occasions. Yea, family sins call for this plaster to be as large as the
sore: out of fear Job would sanctify his family day by day* when to go abroad
a feasting. Job. 1. 5. He sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the
morning, and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all; for
Job said, it may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts:
Thus did Job continually.

4. Because family prayer is a special Reas. 4.
means to season the family with a religious fear and respect to God and his
ways. Act. 10 From family piety promoted,
2. Cornelius a devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, he
prayed to God always. Godly Onesiphorus house is a very seminary to the Church.
He who is so much exercised this way has a Church in his house, as before
showed. A godly praying Abraham the Master, will come to have a gracious
praying Eleazar the servant, who is the fittest for choicest service. Genesis 24.
12.

5. Family Prayer is a special means to Reas. 5.
prevent family disorders; and to keep every one therein, in their station and
duty. When the Apostle Col. 3. 18 to Chap. 4. 1. had From family disorders
prevented.
injoined husband, wife, father, child, Master and servants, the several parts
of the family their general duties, he closes all with this, as an help and
means to all the first, Colos. 4. 2. Continue in Prayer, etc. When each one in
the family hears their several sins confessed, pardon thereof begged, grace
against them pleaded for; it is a quickening admonition and help against them.
It helps to wean their hearts from inordinacies in matter of cares, fears or
desires and the like, respecting worldly matters, or occasions. Let your
moderation appear to all men. Be careful for nothing, says Paul. Phil. 4. 5,
6 But what means should we use for that end? In every thing by prayer, make
your request known to God, ver. 7. The peace of God shall guard your hearts and
minds. These are sacred fruits of prayer in the family, as well as
congregation, or closet. 6. Because servants Reas. 6.
usually want frequent opportunities of From want of opportunities to servants
secret prayer, and this way by the advantage of family prayer they are much
helped.

7. Because Christ himself is a pattern Reas. 7.
herein, of whom as we read, that he was From Christ's example.
often exercised in secret Prayer alone. So twice it is recorded of him, as thus
praying with his family privately, or with his Disciples which ordinarily abode
with him. Luke 9. 18. As he was alone in a certain place praying, when he had
done, one of his Disciples said to him, Lord, teach us to pray, etc. It is a
sign that his Disciples were with him then in private at his Prayer; and that
his praying in such sort was a lively means to do them more good, and to
quicken and enamour them with holy desires to pray in like sort. Now let us
proceed to consider of some cases and questions touching this.

Quest. Who must pray in the family?

Answ. The Master of the familo in special Who must pray in family. Its the
Masters duty.
wise. Husbands must dwell with their wives as men of knowledge, that their
prayers be not hindered. 1 Pet. 3. 2. Namely, by any defects of theirs in the
business of praying with them (as well as otherwise) for want of abilities
that way, Coloss. 4. 1. The Apostle writing to Masters of their duty, Coloss.
4. 1. adjoineth in the next place, (as nextly concerning them as heads of the
family,) Continue in prayer. Only Cornelius of all the house who feared God is
mentioned as praying always. Acts 10. 2. If the rest feared God; surely they
prayed often alone. But in the family Cornelius himself was more constantly
employed as the mouth of the rest. For indeed, every gracious Master of a
family is an holy Priest to God. Revel. 16. not as a gracious man only For he
is or should be an holy Priest.
to offer for himself, but as a gracious Master also in relation to his
family, to offer up sacrifice of prayer and praise on their behalf. And the
Priests of old, as Masters of families, had their offerings for themselves and
families, Levit. 21. 11. as well as officers to the Church, they had their
offerings for the Congregation, verse 15.

2. In that prayer being one special part 2. To undertake in matters for God
for the family.
of Gods service and worship, a godly Master undertakes for himself and
household to attend it. Josh. 24. 15. But as for me and my house, we will serve
the Lord: namely, jointly as well as severally; and so to pray together as well
as asunder. And if the Master be the chief undertaker that way, it is fit he
should be the chief actor in it.

3. In that Masters of families ought to 3. He is to be a Prophet in his family.
teach their children diligently the word and precepts of God, and speak of
them in their house when they ly down, and when they rise up, namely, the
first that they do daily at morning, and the last thing at evening. Now if to
be so in instructing their family; then to be a praying too for a blessing on
that and other exercises and endeavors, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Yea, practically they will
instruct them in obedience to the first and fifth commandments, when they give
such good examples to their families of praying to the Lord with them and for
them. Abraham had both ways instructed his family. Genesis 18. 19. And so had
Christ and John Baptist also their respective families. Luke 11. 1, 2. Teach us
to pray, as John taught his Disciples, practically as well as doctrinally.

Quest. May not, yea must not the wife in some cases pray with the family?

Answ. Yes, In case of absence or sickness In what cases the wife must pray in
the family, even in cases 1, Of husbands absence or sickness.
of her husband, for she is to be a help like him. Genesis 2. 18. Namely in all
such communicable duties and services respecting the family. So is the law of
kindness to be in the good wifes mouth, to instruct them as occasion is
offered. Prove. 31 26. In which (as in sundry other respects) her husband may
and must trust to her. verse 11. If God call him from home, he has a gracious
wife to whom he can safely leave the trust of his family for matters of
Religion, such as family worship of God is, as well as those of this life. If
that an adulterous wife can pretend this as a part of her religion, that when
the Goodman was not at home, she had paid that day her vows, Prove. 7. 14.
Godly Matrons should really make conscience of that which the other does
hypocritically pretend. The godly wife will look well to the ways of her
household. Prove. 31. 27. that they be well exercised this way as well as any
other way. The wife is compared to the Moon, the husband to the Sun, and Genesis
37. 9. So Jacob and his family are represented. Now the wife then as the Moon,
may and must chiefly give forth her spiritual light and influence in the family
in the absence of her husband, who is as the Sun thereto.

2. In case of the unregeneracy, and spiritual inabilities of the husband, she
is to supply his defects.

Quest. Whether may not a godly servant perform this duty of prayer?

Answ. Yes, first in case of the absence or sickness of both the
family*guides. A A godly servant may also do it in some cases.
godly Onesimus may this way amongst many others be profitable to his Master.
Philem. 11. Secondly, in case of special praying abilities given such an one,
and denied the guides of the family. In this respect also such a servant may be
owned and improved as a brother. Philemon 16. This way also God may, and often
does make such of his Saints a blessing to the places and houses where they
are. Ezekiel. 34. 26. Zach. 8. 13.

Quest. May not one not of the family be occasionally desired to pray in it?

Answ. Yes, every ones spiritual gift being given of God with respect to others
A godly stranger may do it in some cases.
good as well as their own, and members being to lend help to the rest, as
occasion is offered; yea, as Paul's, and Cephas and Apollos gifts are the Saints
to improve occasionally, so are other gifts likewise. Many were met together
praying, Acts 12. 12. Now one, and then another of other Families prayed by
course in Marks mothers Family. Only as the Church in that case intimates her
case to those she would have seek the Lord for her, Cant. 5. 8, 10. some hints
would be given to such, of some special things respecting the family, which
they should in prayer with them commend to the Lord.

Who must be present at family prayer

All the whole family must join with the All of the family should be present at
prayer:
Master of it, as wife, children, servants or sojourners; none should
ordinarily be absent All Jacobs household were to join with him and set
themselves to worship God with him in Bethel, Genesis 35. 1, 2, 3. only he is
principally to act therein, ver. 3. Arise, let us go up to Bethel, and there I
will build an Altar to the Lord, etc.

Reasons hereof. 1. From the care of all and each of their souls which lies
upon 1. They are all the Guides charge
the Masters of the family. It was typed of old by that Exodus 16. 16. they were
to provide Manna for all their households according to their eating. Exodus 12.
4. they were to provide a Lamb for their household according to their eating. So
Levit. 16. 11, 17. the Priests as Masters of their families, were to offer up
Sacrifice, as for themselves, so for the cleansing of their household sins.
David as a King prays with and for his people first, that the Lord would
bless them, 2 Samuel 16. 18. but as a guide of his own household, his care is to
return thither to bless them, 2 Samuel 6. 20. or pray for a blessing upon them,
verse 20. And hence by the blessing of God on such Godly care of guides of
families as well as on other means, families have become Churches, Romans 16. 4,
5.

The second Reason is taken from the proportion 2 They are in extraordinary
family prayer to be present with the guides
of ordinary private Worship, and seeking of God in an ordinary way, to that of
seeking the Lord in an extraordinary way. Many causes might exempt sundry of
the family in this case rather then in the other. Yet in such a case Hester
will have all the maids to fast and pray with her, Est. 4. 16 The whole
families apart do also in an extraordinary manner humble themselves thus before
the Lord, Zach. 12. 10, 12, 13.

The third Reason, from the proportion 3 They must all attend the Guides in
public prayer.
of our private Worship and seeking of the Lord in a private manner to that of
seeking God in public with our families. All and every one* as far any way
capable, are therein to be present; as Deuteronomy. 12. 7. and 14. 26 and 16. 11. and
other Scriptures show; and therefore also herein.

The fourth Reason, Because the whole 4. They all share alike in family
blessings.
family do or may share in the blessings upon the family; and therefore it is
meet they should join in family prayer and praises for them. Both children,
servants and so journers were thankfully to rejoice before the Lord upon this
ground, because God blessed his peoples Increase and the labors of their hand,
Deuteronomy. 16. 12. 14, 15.

The fifth Reason, Because the whole 5. They are all liable to family guilt
household is something involved in the guilt of the sin of the guides, who
thereby trouble their houses, Prove. 15. 27. as Achan did his. Meet it is
therefore, that all of them should partake in the good gifts and services of
their guides, and with them seek to divert the evils which may else bring
judgment on the family.

Quest. Supposing some of the servants be

Answ. 1. Care would be had that we look out the faithfullest to dwell with
us. Psalm. 131. 6.

2 If others be cast upon us, yet we are to Tim. 2. 1, 2, 3. James 5. 16, 17,
18, 19, 20. A sinner may come thereby to be turned from the error of his way.
Only Prayer with such would be shaped in many particulars, so as their
particular cases may be laid open before the Lord.

Quest. Suppose some one of the family be more obstinate, and either refuse to
join with

Answ. 1. That rule 1 Thessal. 5. 14. respects all in either relation, and so
Masters meekness to instruct them that oppose themselves, if peradventure God
may give them repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. So are Masters in their lesser
Assemblies; Christ the Master of his household, (as he calls himself, Matthew. 20.
25) did not refuse to pray with them, though Judas was amongst his household
Disciples, and he knew him to be a Devil. John 6. 70, 71.

2 The help of the Magistrate is seasonably to be used, if patience in the use
of fairer means avail not, for he is a terror to evil doers, Romans 13. 4.

3 If neither means work amendment, such as make deceit their work, and trade
in lying, ever and anon telling lies, notwithstanding all means used to
reclaim them, should not abide in any godly David's house, Psalm. 101. 7. The
Bond-servants child, who will be scoffing at the promised Seed, ad persecuting
him, must out with his mother and all from Abraham's family, Genesis 21. 9, 10, 12.

Quest. What is to be done in case of occasional scattering of the Family, as
when many of Jacobs family are occasioned to be in Dothan, diverse miles distant
from the rest of the household; or that Moses must be in Egypt, and his family
in Midian, Exodus 18. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

In answer hereunto, let us show some cases wherein it may be lawful for the
Guides

To the first I answer, Such absence may be lawful.

1. When it is occasioned by zealous attendance on the means of Grace which
they 1. Guides may be absent
want where they are, as when those of the Tribes are fain to travel far to the
Worship of God at Jerusalem, Psalm 84. 6, 7. and Matthew. 15. 32. Diverse there
were for diverse days absent from their families attending upon Christ's
Ministry, and not reproved for it, but encouraged to it, as appears by the
miraculous provisions made for them.

2. When its occasioned from the persecution by the enemies of Grace; as those
Priests and Levites were forced to flee from Jeroboams to Rehoboams
jurisdiction, there to provide for their families, which shortly after followed
them with other people, 1 Chronicles. 11. 16, 17.

3 When it is occasioned from personal Callings and Offices to be exercised in
places distant from part of their families, at least as those Levites and
Priests, leaving their suburbs, and part of their families, with their Flocks
in their fields, etc. Numb. 35. 2, 3, 4. Nehem. 13. 10, 11. So Moses for a time
disposed of his wife and children to be in Midian with her sons, whilst he more
fully attends his work in Egypt, Exodus 18. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. in which case
Seafaring men of Zabulon, Merchants and Mariners are encouraged by the Lord to
rejoice in their goings out, Deuteronomy. 33. 18. So military men, albeit they had
dedicated their houses to holy Services; yea, the rather because they had done
it, they must out to the Wars, Deuteronomy. 2. 1, 5.

4. When it is occasioned from necessary Travels and journeying, as in that
Parable of the Noble man journying far off and leaving Matters to his servants,
Luke 19. 12, 13 and Matthew. 24. 46, 47, 48. So Jacobs sons go into Egypt once
and again from their wives and their children to buy corn, Genesis 42 and 43. So
upon more weighty occasions of public Messages from States, 2 Samuel 20. 2 or of
changes, as Epaphroditus Teacher at Philippi, Phil. 2. 25. yet sent to Rome to
minister to Paul's necessities, Phil. 4. 18. 22. So others 2 Cor. 8. 23.

The Cautions are two: First, That all wise and lawful means be used for a
seasonable compacting of the family in such sort, that neither they nor we live
too solitary, lest that befall us which did Lot and his daughters in the
Mountain, Genesis 19 30, 31, 33.

2 Let us appoint some godly servants or sons over that part of the family
where neither of the Guides can be usually present.

When is family Prayer to be performed? Concerning the time of family prayer
morning and evening


Morning and Evening: as of old they had their daily Sacrifice respecting the
household morning and evening, Numb. 28 3, 4. the two special seasons of
household instruction, fittest to be so sanctified and honored, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. The
widows which show their piety at home in Prayers, there also (as well as
otherwise) are to do it night and day, 1 Timothy 5. 4, 5.

Quest. Whether should not family Prayer be first performed in the morning (as
much as in us lies) before any other thing be done?

Answ. Yes, when we rise up its best doing Deuteronomy. 6. 7, For first, it is meet
that God and not our selves or others should have the first of our daily time.
and the first fruits of the services of our souls and bodies daily: which are
given, and preserved, and daily laden with his blessings by him. The first day
of the week is now his day, and the first of each day should be (as much as may
be) devoted in this sense to him. And if it cannot be so soon in the family,
yet let them have it in the closet. David would not put off God till noon (as
too many of us do) and make no morning of it, for prayer in family, as well as
closet, But at morning and evening, and at noon he will be praying and praising
of God, Psalm. 55. 17.

2. That at our uprising the family is unscattered, which happily severed, is not
easily gathered in any season.

3 Then if at all, before heads and hearts are actually busied, in and on
outward occasions and employments, are minds and hearts fittest for God.

4. It is most seasonable, sanctifying and begging thereby of a blessing upon
the days occasions, before we have begun to meddle with them.

5. In the interim of some few hours space wherein morning family prayer is
deferred, some sad disasters may befall some of the family, which then must
needs be the more grievous. Job fearing this, through some miscarriages of his
children at their Festivals, sends for them each day, and (as it is) day by day
sanctified them, Job 1. 5.

Let us now wind up all in a word of Exhortation, to a conscionable performance
Motives to it.
the rather,

1 In that the Lord has honored family prayer also as well as other prayer,
with special 1. Blessings got by it
respect; as to those of Cornelius his prayers with his household, as well as to
those in his house alone, Act. 10. 2, 4. whence he and his got more clear
knowledge of Jesus Christ, as that promised Messiah, in whom they more
confusedly believed before. Besides the gift of the Holy Ghost, which they also
attained, as the sequel in the Chapter shows.

2. Even family Prayer hastens ruin upon the Churches enemies bent to destroy
them. 2. Enemies ruin hastened by it
When God will seek to destroy Nations which will come up against Jerusalem,
Zachary 12. 9. there is a mighty spirit of prayer shining in good families. He
then pours out upon Jerusalems Inhabitants such a spirit of grace and
supplication, as that they are mourning in prayer before him, both privately
and secretly; families apart, and wives, godly persons apart, Zach. 10. 11, 12.

3 Family prayer is a very good means 3. It helps to keep off any curse
to clear even the very house from any secret curse, which as a Leprosy by
reason of sin, may take hold (as it were) of the very timber and walls thereof*
as Lev. 34. 34, 35 Zach. 5. 4. Prove. 3. 33. Let us hereby dedicate the house to
God; but in the practice hereof, observe these things. Rules about it 1. Rid
the family of gross sins.


1. Look that the household be beforehand cleansed of any known and grosser
evils which may lie upon it, or any in it; as Jacobs houshold-Gods must be put
away before he go up to Bethel with them, there to worship the Lord, Genesis 3.
2, 3.

2 Let the Guides of the family, as 2. Let husband and wife carry it well to
each other
the Husband and Wife, look to it, that their mutual carriage each to other be
amiable and regular, that so the family Prayers be not hindered, 1 Peter 3. 7.

3 Let there be some little space of withdrawing 3 Take a little time to
prepare for it
from other words or works before we set about the duty: with one breath, to be
speaking, and carnally, or to be but then talking of a very Swine, and
forthwith, without any more ado, rudely and unpreparedly to begin so solemn a
speech to the great God, it is very unseemly and very irreverent.

CHAP. V. Touching Closet Prayer.
WE come now to the third branch of solemn and continued Prayer; namely
Secret and Closet Prayer: the injunction reaches, as the Church of
Thessalonica, collectively considered as a Church, and the families there as
Christian families; so each particular Christian there personally considered,
what he is to do apart, as well as what he is to do as a member of the
Congregation or Family; and by Analogy every other Christian is bound and
concerned in this precept, to pray alone also, and that without ceasing, Mat.
6. 6. But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have
shut to thy door, pray to thy Father which sees in secret, etc. he says not,
when [you] pray, but [thou] when [thou] prayest, enter into thy closet. etc. as
speaking not so much of a joint Duty of many together, as of a duty which each
person is to do alone, as in the other verse 3. When thou do thine Alms,
etc. It is an injunction not so much of what the godly are to do in some joint
way of Charity. but what each gracious person is to do apart and alone as
occasion is offered, even when or where none else happily can, or will do as they
do. So Chemnitius, Cartwright, Aretius, and Musculus upon Matthew. 6. 6. they
expound this of prayer in retired places. And albeit the intent of Christ be
not merely to prescribe closet Prayer in that Scripture as each Christians
proper duty, and much less to prescribe it as all the prayer which he calls
for from his people; yet we may safely conclude, that he therein commends
and commands closet prayer of each Christian alone by himself* as one special
way of praying to him, who sees in secret, and as that wherein they shall give
a special testimony of their sincerity, and avoid that vainglorious affection
of men's praise, which the Lord Jesus there blames in the Scribes and Pharisees.

Touching this Duty then, consider we, 1. Who must pray thus alone. 2. Why? And
3: What use we are to make thereof.

Touching the first, we say, none are excepted Each one must pray alone
who are of understanding to know what they are to do therein; whether younger
or elder, high or low, rich or poor, bond or free, Male or Female, as they are
all one in point of dignity and privilege in Christ Jesus, Colos. 3. 11. Gal.
3. 27, 28. as they have and profess each of them an interest in him, who is,
and sees in secret as their Father, Matthew. 6. 6. Pray to thy Father which
sees in secret, etc. Every one severally apart, as well as jointly together,
is to cry in secret also, Abba Father, Gal. 4. 6. the very wives apart must be
improving their spirit of Supplication in an humble and contrite manner, as
well as together with their family, yea sometimes in an extraordinary manner
must they thus mourn, even pray and fast apart; and therefore much more may
they, must they pray contritely in an ordinary way, when apart from the rest of
the Family; the wives who have so many occasions more then others, from little
ones, and other household affairs, to take up their time above others, yet are
not exempted from this holy exercise, and therefore by proportion none else are
exempted from it.

Touching the second. The Reasons enforcing Reasons why. 1 Gods promise
undertaking and encouraging it.
this duty, are

1. Taken from the Promise of God, partly undertaking that it shall be so, that
his people shall be enabled to pray apart by themselves, and shall exercise
themselves therein, as Zach. 12. 10, 11, 12, 13. he promises to pour upon them
the spirit of Supplication, and that they should mourn or pray in an humble
and contrite manner, by themselves alone: and partly from his promise to his
people, when at any time thus exercised in secret prayer when none else sees
them, when, or how, or how long they pray, he will reward them openly, partly
in this life. All shall see, and manifestly perceive by the fruit thereof, that
Isaak Hannah, and Zacharias did pray alone to their heavenly Father for the
fruit of the womb. The Holy Ghost records it in the Scriptures, and thereby
holds it forth to the view of every eye to whom the Word shall come, how
honorably God has accepted and rewarded secret prayer. All shall see that
Moses is wont to be with God alone by his manifest and notable prevailing with
God: if he but go aside and pray to the Lord, blinded Pharaoh himself shall do
it, and therefore is often entreating his prayers for him and his people, Exodus
8. and 9. and 10. so the Jews could not but perceive it, whence they recourse
often to him to pray for them, Numb. 11. 1, 2. and 21. 7, 8, 9 and the places
show a manifest reward of that his praying, granted and given out thereupon.
How openly did God reward Daniel, who was wont to pray to his God in secret,
Dan. 9. 10. with manifest deliverance from so great a death, ver. 23. and with
the notable ruin brought upon those who would have forbidden and hindered him
from that holy exercise of his but three days together, verse 5, 6, 7. and 10,
11, 12, 24. compared. The more the Saints do thus secretly also acquaint
themselves with God, the more notable good shall come to them, the very light
of God shall shine upon the ways of such; the very Island where they are shall
fare the better for them. Job 22. 21, 27, 28, 30 compared. And as in this life
so in that which is to come, will God reward them openly, when God will bring
every secret work to judgment of remuneration, Eccl; 12. 14, when the Saints
shall receive according to the good they have done in the body; 2 Cor. 5. 10.
Then shall their secret seeking of Gods face also come to light. It shall be
showed before the whole world, how many, and many a time, such and such of Gods
hidden ones have been serving him with their spirits, and that they have been,
and now fully are thus and thus graciously rewarded; not a tear of theirs shed
in their pouring out their souls thus before God, but he bottled up, Psalm 56.
8. and at that day it shall appear they were not lost: their waters at that
wedding day will be turned into wine.

The second Reason is taken from divine providence, ordering Closet occasions,
fit 2. Closet occasions
only for secret expressing and opening them before the Lord, as some secret
personal heart-plague, 1 Kings 8. 38. Some secret snares laid for this or that
Saint of God by men or devils, as by so many cursed Fowlers. But in the use of
this means of calling thus personally and particularly upon God; he delivered
both Christ the Lord, and his members in particular, Psalm. 91. 3. He shall
deliver thee from the snare of the Fowler, etc. and ver. 15. He shall call upon
me, and I will answer him, etc. The Saints by secret prayer do countermine the
secret stratagems of their subtle enemies, Psalm 9. 13, 15, 16.

The third Reason may be taken from the approved examples of the choicest of
Gods 3. Examples of the Saints so exercised
Saints this way exercised. As that of Daniel three times a day, Dan. 6. 10.
that of David as often, Psalm 55. 17. that of Isaac using daily to go out into
the fields alone, there to meditate, or pray, (as the Geneva Bible reads it,)
Genesis 24. 63. That of the Lord Jesus Mark 1. 35. Early in the morning (before he
healed the Leper) he was praying alone in a secret place. And Luke (chap. 5. 12
13, 14, 15. compared with verse 16.) instanceth in a like practice of his,
after that cure which he wrought: He withdrew himself, and went into the
wilderness and prayed, yet not much space of time betwixt the one and the
other. Luke 6. 12. He went out into a Mountain, and continued all night in
prayer: and he was then alone; for verse 13. When it was day, he called, unto
him his Disciples. Matthew. 14 22. he sends away his Disciples first by ship:
and verse 23. He goes apart into the Mountain to pray. Luke 21. 27. when he
had been employed in the day time in preaching, in the night time he went apart
into the Mount of Olives; namely, to pray and meditate. Luke 22. 41. He was
withdrawn from his Disciples about a stones cast, and prayed. and verse 44. He
prayed more earnestly, etc. and verse 45. He rose up from prayer and came to
his Disciples. And how he prevailed by these very solitary, but strong cries
and tears in these days of his flesh, or humane infirmity, is testified Heb.
5. 7. He was heard.

The fourth Reason is taken from the sutableness 4. The suitable presence of God
in secret.
of the presence and favor of God which he is wont in secret to exhibit to
them unto their aims and desires. Their desire is Psalm. 4. 7. Lord lift up
thou the light of thy countenance upon us. And when is the Lord more with his
Saints then when in secret? When Jacob is alone praying then Jehovah, the Son
of God that Angel, is in such a glorious manner with him, Genesis 32. 23, 24, 28,
30, and Hosea 12. 3, 4* compared. This being one special way of the Saints
walking with God, he cannot but be much in company with them: the nearest and
dearest acquaintance and fellowship with God is mentioned by these secret
communings with God, and holy wisperings in his ear, the secret chamber is the
most suitable and freest place for these Spouses of the Lord, to be telling
their secrets to him; and there is the place where most ordinarily and usually
he is wont to meet and greet, and secretly embrace them.

Now let us come to such Objections as Objections against it answered.
are made against this holy exercise: for we may perceive by Job 21. 15. that
man's carnal heart is ready to cavil against it, and to object, cui bono, to
what purpose it, what needs, what profit is it if we pray to him? Verily it
is an ordinance wherein the Lord is wont very graciously to communicate himself
to his Saints, and therefore so long as Satan's wily head, and man's deceitful
heart can find out cavils and quarrels against it, it shall not want for
Objections. Many a deadly wound is given to sin and Satan by these
prayer-darts, which the Saints thus secretly cast at them; besides, its a most
spiritual service requiring a special measure of sincerity and self-denial, and
no wonder that of all other Duties, man's heart be so backward to this. In
prayer with others, there is more to bribe, even the carnal heart to be
speaking; but here is little or nothing to move from man's applause, or the
like. It is a duty very costly if rightly performed; in secret are the choice
wrestlings and weepings, and the like, and man's carnal heart would take the
easiest and cheapest way rather: we are too apt to be objecting against our
maine spiritual foundations, and no wonder then if against this building work.
We are too apt to failings and falls, and no wonder if so backward to this
closer closet way of making up personal and particular accounts unto the Lord.
It were rather a wonder if there were not, then that there are so many
Objections against this.

If we must both pray with the Assembly, and with the Family, and yet also in
our We must labor six days.
closets too alone, will not this too much prejudice our ordinary callings and
occasions, and entrench upon that charge of laboring six days.

The Lord indeed will not have now any True, yet pray also
set apart only for his service, besides the Lords day; but yet as of old,
when the Jewish Sabbath was in force, the Saints made conscience of constant
seeking of God in secret, and are commended for it by the Lord, as Daniel,
chap. 6. 10. David, Psalm. 55. 17. So now the Jewish Sabbath is abolished, and
the Lords day appointed of God in its stead; yet Cornelius is commended, and
graciously rewarded for his conscionable praying to God alone day and night;
for as he was praying in his house, namely, by himself alone, a man in bright
clothing (or an Angel) appeared to him, and said, Cornelius, Thy Prayer is
heard, Acts 10. 30, 31. not that prayer alone which he made in that day of
Humiliation; but as ver. 2, 3, 4. show [his prayers] his Prayers which he made
alone, whether with his household, or by himself alone, none else were with him
praying then, as it seems, for he only saw that man in bright clothing, to
him alone the Angel addressed his present speech, saying, Cornelius, thy
Prayers are heard, ver. 4. 31. God would not have the handmaid to perk above
the Mistress, or ordinary particular callings to thrust Religion out of doors,
or so to straiten it, that scarce any leisure is afforded to worship God in
public, private, and secret. Nay, rather clean Christians, typed by those
clean Beasts, must rightly part the hoof, Lev. 11. 3. rightly divide their
time, giving a due share thereof to God in matters of his Worship, and a meet
proportion of it to God in their particular calling.

2 It is the express charge of God that we We must buy out time for prayer.
reedeem or buy out time, and that for prayer as well as other holy exercises,
Col. 4. 2, 3, 4. the Lord wishes us to continue in prayer, and ver. 5. bids
us redeem the time; which Exhortation is directed to all sorts, husbands,
wives, parents, children, servants and Masters, as the Context shows, from
chap. 3. 18. to chap. 4. 6. All and every of them, are to buy out time for
instant prayer, as al together in the family, so apart in secret, as occasions
are offered; the charge is not limited to Church or Family prayer only. Yea but
how shall we get so much time, will they say? Redeem the opportunity, ((...))
says God. If the Lord offer you any opportunity, to pray together or asunder,
be at any cost for it. Christians must be wise and frugal Market men and women
of praying opportunities. Let not the Devil or world outbid us for such seasons
which are so gainful to our souls. A wise Daniel will be willing to hazard the
loss or parting with either honor or pleasure, or profit, yea life it self,
rather then be debarred from taking his times this way, for God and for his
soul, to satisfy the wretched desires of the wicked therein, or to seem to
yield to Satan's wily suggestions and plots, in his instruments for that end,
Dan. 6. 10.

3 This is a maine part of our spiritual We must ply this as our holy Trade.
trading with God, by improvement this way of the Talent of the gift of prayer
also. Matthew. 25. 16, 17 This is as part of our (...), our City Employment.
Ephesians. 2. 19. Phil. 3. 20. Having hereby commerce and converse with God in
Christ; and it is a rich Trade. God is rich in Mercy to all that call upon him
in secret apart, as well as to others that pray together in Assemblies and
Families, Psalm. 86. 5. Gods Saints and Suppliants, which often come alone to
the door of Grace, and most frequently do thus knock by prayer, speed best.
God allows them this private key, that they may freely get in and take of all
his precious Treasures of Grace as they need the same; Knock and it shall be
opened, ask, and it shall be given, Matthew. 7. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in
my name, I will do, John 14. 13. be it publicly, privately, or secretly that
you ask the same. If others have not, it is because they ask not.

4 Prayer in secret by our selves, as well It expediteth our other affairs.
as that with others, it does expedit our weightiest temporal affairs. Jacob
did more this way to issue his great affairs, respecting his families welfare
and safety, when to meet his brother Esau; with his warlike Troops, then if he
had an equal or greater warlike power, or military skill to have managed the
same. Thou have prevailed with God, and with men thou shall prevail, Gen 32 82
etc. it is the way to have the beauty or glorious blessing, presence, and
protection of God upon us, and the prospering of our handy work, to set God
thus on work for us by prayer; whence it was, that they of old were taught to
pray for that end, as Psalm. 90. 17. Let thy beauty be upon us, prosper thou
the work of our hands. This oils the wheels for any work, quickens and
quieteth our spirits, Philip. 4. 6, 7. sanctifies our works, 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5.
If we can but pray well before hand, we may be sure we shall study well, or
preach well, or work well, as our calling requires, yea, and speed well
afterward.

Some may object, their condition as being We are servants.
and exempted from this Duty of Closet Prayer.

The charge of the Text is indefinite, not This is the work of any servant of
God as such.
than that verse 15. Render not evil for evil, but ever follow that which is
good; or that verse 16. Rejoice evermore; or that ver. 18 In every thing give
thanks, etc. in which godly servants also, as well as others, are concerned. A
godly servant considered as his Masters servant, is faithfully to attend his
Masters business, but as he is the Lords servant, so this is one part of his
servantly business. When David had said, Psalm. 116 6. I am thy servant, Lord,
thy servant, etc. verse 17. he adds, I will call upon the name of the Lord. 1
Cor. 1. 2. To them that are called to be Saints in Corinth, with all such as
call upon the Name of the Lord Jesus in every place, that is the Saints
character, be they of what calling or condition soever, or where ever, they
call upon the Lord: God is no respecter of persons, every one who calls him
Father, is to do this service and honor of a child to him. Thou (whoever thou
art, bond or free) when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, (or into some
retired place,) and pray to thy Father which sees in secret, Matthew. 6. 6.

2 Every one, whether bond or free, they have this part of the new man,
resembling Each Saint is this way gifted more or less.
Christ the Creator of it, even this holy knowledge also, Col. 3. 10, 11. to
know how to call upon God as a Father in secret, as he also did, and to cry in
solemn wise, themselves alone, Abba Father, Gal. 4. 6.

3 Godly servants also, who have the Godly servants also must be Christ's
peculiar ones.
Grace of God which brings salvation appearing to them, are as well as others
to be peculiar ones unto the Lord, zealous of all good works, and so of this
also, wherein Gods choicest servants have been wont to be conscionably
exercised, Tit. 29, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. compared. Other servants will go to
prayer with their Masters in public and private, yea, but Godly ones must do
somewhat more, they must improve their peculiar interests in the Lord in such a
way of peculiar serving of him with their spirits,

4 Bond as well as free being alike interested Their dignity is alike with
others, and so is this their duty.
in the dignity and privileges of Saints as Saints, Col. 3. 11. they are alike
concerned in such Duties as these are, which respect and lie upon the Saints,
as Saints: in which respect also, godly servants are the Lords freemen, 1 Cor.
7. 22. they must not abridge themselves, nor may be abridged by others of this
liberty, of retired repairs to the Throne of Grace as the Lord affords them
opportunity. To be mere servants of men, so to attend their Masters commands,
as to neglect this, or any other command of God, they ought not, verse 23. yea,
observe it, that the Apostle speaks of servants to infidel Masters also,
verse 21, 22. Either then they must not pray at all, which were to make them as
profane as their infidel Masters; which to them would be matter of disdain or
distaste: or they must content themselves alone with public prayer in the
Congregation of Christians, which none will affirm; or they must as holy
Priests to God, offer (as the Priests did theirs) this holy Incense to God, in
a retired place, from view of others. Yea, suppose forbidden by an Infidel
Master to pray in secret, yet they are no more to forbear, then Daniel, King
Darius his servant, did forbear it upon his Decree to inhibit the same, Dan. 6.
10.

5 Be that child bond or free who prays Bond or free so praying are rewarded.
thus in secret, and not before others to his Father, he will reward him
openly, Matthew. 6. 6.

6 Godly servants are to sanctify their work by Prayer. 1 Timothy 4. 4. Albeit
Abraham Servants must sanctify their work by prayer.
had prayed for his servants Eliczars good success in his business about
which he sent him, Genesis 24. 7, 8. yet Eliezar himself alone prays for good
success that day, ver. 12.

7. The work which godly servants do Their work then speeds best
sanctify by prayer, though more short, is wont to speed best, as did that
business of Eliezar, so sanctified, Genesis 24. 12. as the issue declared. And
surely godly Masters, which are to express special love to such servants, will
not refuse to encourage them to take some seasonable time to pray thus, knowing
how profitable such servants will be to them, Philem. 6, 11. compared.

Some will object, That they are apt to meet with temptations when alone.
Tempted if alone.


1. You may and will be annoyed with temptatious, when not conscionably
employed David. No hurt by temptations if in Gods way.
2 Samuel 11. 2. had he been praying alone, it had been well for him. And though
Joshuah praying alone was assaulted by Satan, Zach. 2. 1. yet the issue was
good, Christ the Angel took part with him, pleaded for him, ver. 2. put more
honor upon him, verse 3. 4, 5. Christ himself men with many temptations from
Satan, when alone in the wilderness, but came out as a glorious Conqueror, and
full of the Spirit: he went thither full of the Spirit, Luke 4, 1. and verse
14. he came out full, he lost nothing thereby in the close, no more do his
Members proportionably. Satan would that way debar us from (...) ^e could


2 It is Satan's slight to present such scarebags in our way of drawing near to
God in Prayer, but we must resist him in them, Jam. 4 7, 8, It is a sluggards
trick to fancy such Lions in the way to deter us from the same Prove. 26. 13.

3. Prayer of it self is rather an occasion Prayer prevents or removes
temptations.
to prevent and remove, then to raise up temptations. Matthew. 26. 41. Pray, --
least ye enter into temptation. It helps us to put on and improve our spiritual
Armor against them, Ephesians. 6. 18.

Some will object their want of ability to pray alone.

1 If children of God, you have in you a Inability to pray
child's spirit, enabling and putting you upon Gal. 4. 6. If children, then
crying to God
The particular daughters of Jerusalem, though not so fully acquainted with
Christ, yet the Church looks at them as able to pray in some measure, and
therefore commends her case to their prayers, Cant. 5. 8 If ye find my
Beloved, tell him, (namely, in your prayers) that I am sick of love.

2 In case of great inabilities and infirmities, The Spirit will help our
infirmities
yet the Spirit will help the Saints to groan out their complaints to the Lord,
in such sort as the Lord will accept, Romans 8. 26.

3 Let the weakest of the Saints, so far Exercise will increase abilities.
as their minds and hearts are apprehensive of this or that failing, lust,
defect and spiritual ayle or evil, put that into as good expression as they
can, in secret before the Lord, and though at first their tongue can but
stammer out their souls cases, yet in a short time that tongue of the
stammerer shall be able to speak plainly, Isai. 32. 4. At first you may be
timorous, but within a while you shall attain that (...), liberty of speech,
and spirit in prayer, Ephesians. 3. 12. As young Scholars at first are timorous to
speak without book, and apter to stumble and stammer in it, but in a little
time by exercising themselves to it, wax more able and bold, exact and large
therein. So it is here in the matter of praying, (as I may say) without book.
As walking with wise men increases wisdom, (Prove. 13. 20) so walking with the
wise God, in secret calling upon him, increases our holy skill, and abilities
of talking with him in prayer.

Some will object (especially in this Inconveniency of place.
a place to be retired in solitary Prayer.

1. God required the Jews of old to Deuteronomy. 22. 8. so secrecy fit for
retiredness in Prayer; whence it was that Peter in that house at Joppa,
gets him in thither to pray alone, Acts 106. 9. Such as are able, are
supposed The able must get a fit closet.
by Christ (Matthew. 6. 6.) to have a convenient closet, with a door to shut it
for secrecy in Prayer. And it would be a shame for Christians to have private
places for their very Swine to sheep, or their Cattle to feed in, free from
anoyances of wind or weather; that they should not make some shift to get some
retired place to seek the face of God therein.

2 If it were supposable (which hardly is) that Christians cannot have such a
place within doors, at home or abroad, yet Isaac can get him into the field to
pray. Genesis 24. 63. Christ can go apart into a Mountain to pray, Luke 6. 12.
any solitary place in a Wilderness, will serve Christ's turn to be alone
praying, Luke 5. 16. The Lord can, and sometimes does make any solitary place
when his Saints are praying, to be to them a very corner of Heaven, as Jesus
Christ when praying in the Mountain was transfigured, Luke 9. 28, 29, 30. Many
a precious meeting may, and does the Lord sometimes give his poor Suppliants,
when all alone praying under some solitary Rock, or by some swamyside, or
thicket, or the like.

Let us now apply what has been said touching this Duty of Secret Prayer.

1. Let this serve for Reproof to such Professors, which are shamefully to
blame in Neglect of closet prayer reproved
alone. How many are so surcharged with worldly cares and employments, that
they will scarce afford themselves time to attend upon either Church or Family
Prayer? but if they sometimes be praying there, yet seldom or never take time
solemnly to seek the Lord alone. How do many here in New England, though able
to do otherwise if but willing, build their houses so, as if they intended to
shut Closet Prayer out of doors? How do many look at Closet Prayer, to be at
the best but a Free-will-Offering, (as they term it) which they offer if they
will, but look not at it as a Duty which they must attend upon all occasions?
Surely such are little sensible of their heart-plagues, for Such as neglect it
are senseless of heart-plagues
then would they alone one by one make Prayers and Supplications, 1 Kings 8.
38, 39 How little do such love the Lord, that they are afraid to talk too much
or too secretly Have little love to God
with him? Surely such have at most but some few drops of the promised spirit
of Supplication, for if they had plenty of that Have little of the spirit of
prayer
spirit poured out upon them, they would be exercising the same apart, Zech.
12. 10, 11, 12, 13. No wonder if such are not led in a way of Supplication in
secret, as well as otherwise, that they are ever and anon stumbling in matters
of judgment or practice, Are often falling into sin
Jer. 31. 9. Nor is it wonder that we have so many lukewarm Professors amongst
us, if so few that make conscience of calling upon Are lukewarm
God, even in this sort also, Hosea 7. 7, 8, 9. Such as make not conscience of
calling upon God publicly, privately and secretly, either are, or will soon
prove as a cake half baked. Such are not led by rivers of water into a
fruitful way, who are not led in a way Are unfruitful
of weeping and supplications, Jerem. 31. 9. Such have little love to others,
who are little with God apart in prayer. If we had more Have little love to
others.
of Cornelius his spirit to be conscionably exercised in praying alone also, we
should have more love to Professors. Full of Prayers and Alms (fruits of
Charity) was his commendation, Act. 19 2, 4. And it is well if the Spiritual
Chaldees, the souls enemies, are not gotten into such men's hearts, as of old
they did into the Temple; yea, and that God himself be not Ly open to desertion
departed from such, as of old from the Temple, when this daily Sacrifice and
Offering of holy prayer unto God cease with them. Surely Daniel was not of
these men's temper, who though he had such vast Imploiments, Imitate not best
examples.
as to take the accounts of the other Princes of the several Jurisdictions, and
many other State affairs to dispatch, yet would not, no not for one day; no
nor one time in the day, omit this his constant exercising himself in secret
prayer; yea, when it comes to a matter of hazard of his life, and all his
worldly honors, yet to forbear this his course of daily seeking of God in
secret prayer: he had not such a thought; Why, I need not thus hazard my self,
I may forbear praying thus to God in my chamber for a while: It is but a matter
of my own liberty; I may pray thus, but I am not bound to pray thus by any
command of God. No verily, he saw more in Gods command then so, which was of
more Sovereignty with him then any earthly Monarchs command. He will not only
deny to pray to the King as a God, which had been a sin of commission, but he
will not forbear for the Months space, praying to the God of Heaven in his
chamber; which had been a sin of omission. Isaac, who had such weighty matters,
as the change of his condition, to have occasioned some omission of his retired
converses with God, yet then also will not leave his usual work of going out
into the field to pray, Genesis 24. Nor will Jesus Christ, whose example is a
forcible Argument to urge our imitation of his holy practice, he will not omit
this holy business of secret prayer, albeit he had many others of great moment
to attend in their seasons: he will rather borrow time from his natural rest
in the night, if so fully employed in the day, (Luke 21. 37) he will get up the
earlier in the morning before day, rather then want an opportunity for this
holy exercise, Mark 1. 35. yea, when the multitude came together to hear him,
and be healed of him, he will not omit this work, but withdraws for that end,
and they must stay the while, Luke 5. 15, 16. yea, his chiefest Followers must
be dismissed whilst be attends this holy practice, Matthew. 14. 22, 23. And to
conclude this Use, It would be a shame Are worse then Papists.
that blind Papists, and superstitious Votaries should be more zealous in their
way of secret Devotions then. we in our secret addresses in prayer to the Lord
in the name of Christ.

Let it then (in the second place) serve for Exhortation to the conscionable
practice of Let all be exhorted to this Duty.
Cornelius, who had so many Martial occasions to withdraw him, who also knew
so little of Jesus Christ as that Messiah promised, yet was so constant this
way; we that enjoy far more helps and spiritual advantages, may much rather do
it. Yea, say too many now a days should Apostatize, as did such like in David's
time (Psalm. 55. 12, 13 16.) yet let us be the more resolute this way, as he was
verse 17. Evening, and morning, and at noon will I pray: and truly, if ever it
were a time to be much with God in prayer, together and asunder, now is a time
for it. All the Saints hands in a manner are up in all places, and doing
exploits for God; and it were a shame if ours only should be down, especially
when the Saints of God in other places think that we in special ply it hard in
prayer together and asunder. Let Civil Rulers ply it thus, as that Magistrates
President Daniel did, as King David himself did (as we heard) Psalm 109. 4.
he says he is Prayer, as being more in that then in any other work; but I
prayer, or I will give my self to prayer. Constantine the Great (as Eusebius
tells us) would have this as his Portraiture, a man on his knees praying, to
show that was his usual practice and posture. How often was Moses the Magistrate
with God alone in Prayer? Let Ministers, whose special Calling lies in
Ministers.
this also, to give themselves to prayer, (Acts 6. 4.) Be much in it. How often
is Paul described as thus employed, Romans 1. 9. Ephesians. 1. 15, 16. Philip. 1. 4*
2 Timoth. 1. 3. Epaphras the Colossian Minister is commended for this also,
Colos. 4. 12. Eusebius tells us of James called Justus, that his knees were
grown hard and brawnie with being so much and often this way employed. And do
not Ministers closet sins, as vanity of mind, vain glorious reasonings of
spirit, listlesnesse sometimes to their holy work, call upon them for closet,
study-prayers? Does not their weighty closet work call for this? Is not Prayer
(as once Luther said) the best Book in our Study? Does not Satan oft-times come
into our studies to assault us in our work, as sometimes he did Joshuab the
Priest in his? and had we not then more need then others to be found often
praying there? The Lord vouchsafes ofttimes to be talking in friendly sort with
us in our Studies, and it were pity and shame if hereby we should not maintain
holy conference with him. Who are more potent with God in public prayer, then
such Ministers as wrestle it out most with God in secret prayer? The gracious
language which there they learn from the Spirit of God, and the choice, lively,
and spiritual prayer-passages and expressions, and pleas wherein the Lord
breaths upon their hearts, when alone, are those wherein he is wont to breath
upon the peoples hearts in public prayer. Who more prevalent with God then
Paul and Peter, this way exercised? we, as the friends of the Bridegroom (as
Eliezar was of old) speed the better in our work of gaining some spouse for
Christ that day, for which we have been most earnest in secret prayer before
hand. The defect hereof, too often makes our ministerial work so
unsuccessefull; as it did that of the Disciples, assaying to cast out a devil,
without praying before hand for it. Matthew. 17. 21. A Minister need not fear
but he shall preach well afterward, if the Lord help him to pray well before
hand: as Ministers have more advantage of privacy, sc their people make account
they improve it this way: witness their frequent commending their cases to
them, to spread them before the Lord in their prayers, and therefore let them
be much with God in secret.

And let all our brethren and sisters, All sorts: for Christ brings us into his
Chambers.
and every of them, make conscience also of this duty of secret prayer; the
Lord Jesus brings us (my brethren) into his chambers, where he delights
most to be, and rest, and show himself and secrets to his Saints, Cantic. 1.
4. and shall not we hereby bring him into our chambers also? the Lord hides
us in the secret place of his Hides us in his secret place
presence: the secret chambers of his providence and protection, are our
chambers for our safety and honor, (Psalm. 31. 20. Esaias. 26. 20.) and shall not
our chambers be his, for his use, that we there meet and talk with him in
secret prayer, and he with us by his gracious presence and answers?

Each particular Saint of God has his Each Saint has his chamber, or
mansion house in Glory.
chamber, (as I may say) his mansion-place of glory, in which to praise God for
ever. Joh. 14. 2, 3. Why shall not each Saint of God, of what condition soever,
have here his retired oratory and place for secret praying unto God? each of
them are by their calling, Gods hidden ones whilst here, (Psalm 83. 3.) and
let them be so in this Each Saint Gods hidden one. Set apart for Gods. Gods
friends.
respect, also, by their secret repayres to the Lord in prayer. Each godly man
in particular is set apart unto God, (Psalm 4. 3.) and why then not more apart
to pray to him; we are his friends, (James 2. 8. John 15. 15, 16. Cantic. 5.
1,) and let us then be his friends in a corner, tell him our minds, be often
doing him this service of love in secret. We are his spouses, (Hos. Spouse.
2. 19 20.) now as Canticles 7. 10, 11, 12. The Church would have Christ go
aside, as it were in private, and there she will give him her loves; so let us
in secret give him this spouse-like love, fruits of our lips in secret, and
there tell him all our hearts. The spirit which is in the Saints, is a free
spirit, (Psalm. 51. 12,) and truly there is the most free use and employment of
that spirit in prayer, when sequestered as from all occasions, so from all other
company. Friends are most free and bold, when alone; so we with the Lord when
alone. A gracious person is never more himself as gracious, then when praying,
Psalm. 109. 4. But I prayer, says he; and truly never more seen to be such an
one, then whon praper, or given to prayer in secret. Hypocrites may and will
pray, and happily in private too, but we must pray as most desiring privacy. When
the Lord would demonstrate to Ananias, that Paul was converted; he does it by
this argument for behold he prays, Acts 9. 11, it was alone, in secret that
he Wicked ones have and serve their idols in ^ecret.
did thus, he must inquire him out, for he was got into some corner of the
house. Let not wicked ones be more forward to set up an idol in secret, or to
set up a false Christ in the chambers, Ezekiel. 8. 8. Matthew. 24. 26. then we to
honor the true God and Jesus Christ thus in secret. And that we may yet a
little further press this so weighty a duty; consider that it is indeed our
privilege in many respects ordered, by the Lord in much wisdom and
faithfulness, for our good also, as well as his glory; that he will have us
thus to seek him by our selves alone in prayer. For, 1. He therein tendreth
the very credit of his people. They need not uncover their spiritual nakedness
before any man whatsoever, nor all their personal plagues need be unbared
before men; it suffices that they have this privileged precept to pray to
their Father, who sees in secret, and tell him all their hearts. In Best for
opening all their secrets.
some cases of personal sins against brethren, personal confession of such sins
is requisite; and sometimes in case of some oppressing burden upon our hearts,
we are to go to some faithful Minister, or experienced Saint of God, and
tell them our secret ails; but in ordinary course, it suffices that we tell
the Lord in secret, all our personal and particular failings and wants.

2. If solitary Prayer were not Gods Best for our necessities.
ordinance, what should Gods solitary ones do in sundry cases incident to
them? But now Jeremiah in a solitary loansome prison is encouraged, Call upon
me, and I will answer thee. Jer. 33. 13. Sometimes the Saints are like
Pelicans, and Owls in the desert. Psalm. 102. 6. Well may they make their moans
to the Lord, but are of all others respect destitute. Others would be like
other birds, fit to howt at them, and make a wonder of them; now welfare
solitary prayer. Sometimes the Lord works upon some one of the family, a
son, or daughter, or servant, or the like; the rest remain opposite to all
good, saying, What profit should we have by praying unto God? (as they say,
Job. 21. 15.) nay, now will such say of the other person, we shall have him a
precise fool, a mopish sot: father now is against child, as Luke 12. 35. Now
it is well that prayer in a corner, where none sees, or hears but the Lord,
is an acceptable service, and ordinance. The poor slave in the infidels family,
is now the Lords freeman for this business, 1 Cor. 7. 21, 22. So the poor
Christian wife with whom her infidel husband liked to dwell, though he yet like
not her religion, (1 Cor. 7. 13.) she may pray alone with acceptance. Banished
John in Patmos, may thus been in the spirit by himself alone. Revel. 1. 10.
Manasseh in his fetters, yet has liberty all alone to make his prayer to his
God. 2 Chr. 33. 11, 12, 13. If this had been no ordinance of God, to what
purpose had David's couch-prayers been? which yet prevailed, Psalm. 6. 6, 7, 8,
9. Or how else had his cave-prayers ever come to be available? as Psalm. 142.
title, with verse 1, 2.

3. If this had not been an acceptable ordinance, there had not been such
honorable records thereof kept by and with the Lord, as 2 Chronicles. 33. 18, 19.
this is singled out amongst all that Manasseh did in his loathsome state in
captivity, as most notable and honorable, and therefore is twice Best for the
Saints honor.
repeated, and his prayer, and his prayer. So Cornelius his prayers are as
memorials before the Lord, Acts 10. 2, 4.

4 It is well for the Saints, that this is an Ordinance in point of honor;
that God herein, and hereby is wont to put upon them singly and severally, as
that hereby they come to have Testimonials from the Lord himself of the good of
Grace which is in them, and of their prevailing with him for desired mercyes.
Thus when Jacob is all alone praying, he has a new name given him; he is told,
he has prevailed with God, Genesis 32 27, 28. Then is Daniel told, that he is
greatly beloved, and his prayers heard. Dan. 9. 20, 22. Again they have this
honor put upon them to have choicest secrets revealed to them, as to Gods
friends in a corner: those three Worthies severally praying, have this secret
given unto them, Daniel 2. 19, 20. and Jeremiah calling upon God all alone in
prison, has great and wonderful things showed him that he knew not of, Jer.
33. 1, 2. Peter when alone praying, has the mystery of the bringing in of the
Gentiles revealed to him, Acts 10. 9, 10, 11. yea, such in special shall have
their honor of deteining of the Lord, when he carries it ^s willing to be
gone. Let me go (says Christ to Jacob:) I will not let thee go until thou
bless me: nor did he, Genesis 32. 26, 27. 28, 29. Let me alone, says God to
Moses; but he suffers himself then, and afterward to be stayed from going on
his course of displeasure against the people, by Moses his wrestling with him
(as we say) hand to hand, Ex. 32 10, 11, 12, 13. Deuteronomy. 9. 13, 14, 18, 25, 26,
27, 28. compared. I held him* (Cantic. 3. 4.) by the exercise of faith in
prayer. The Lord knows not how to leave a praying suppliant, or to proceed in
a way of displeasure against him, and is not all this then well for the Saints,
that each Saints* prayer in secret is an ordinance of God, and a very
acceptable service unto him?

Let us wind all up with a caution or Cautions.
two annexed.

1. Look that it be not alone secret prayer, 1 In secret, affect secrecy.
in respect of the place apart from others; but in respect of our desires, and
endeavor as much as may be of privacy. That as Christ says of secret fasting
and prayer in an extraordinary way, (Matthew. 6. 15, 16, 17.) wash thy face, and
anoint thee with oil, that thou appear not to men to fast; so avoid lowdnesse
of voice when alone, or if melted in secret, let it not be perceived, if you
can, that you have been weeping; yea, if you cannot go aside unobserved of
some in the house, let us even wish that we might so pray alone, that none
might know how often, or how long we are therein; if any secret motion arise, to
think of what others will think of us, let us abhor the thought of it; else, if
in secret, our hearts desire others to take notice of us, that desire makes
it, before God, as if we prayed in the street corner. 2 Avoid customarinesse.


2. That we vanish not into customarinesse in praying in our closets, going
aside thither to pray for fashions sake, living in good families, and seeing
others go aside for that end, we do it too, or we have been trained up to
it, and so we will hold it on as a custom. Yea, lest we go about it as a more
formal task, which if we but perform, let it be well, or ill, we mind it not,
regard it not, so we do it, we are satisfied; if we do it not indeed, we are
troubled, but in all not moved from any principle of love, and longing after
communion with the Lord in it, or prevailing with God through grace by it, for
pardon of this or that sin we groan under, or supply of this or that
spiritual want, over which we mourn. Verily such customarinesse will Evils of
customariness in it. Listlesnesse to prayer.
produce other evils, as listlesnesse to pray even when got into our closets;
such will have so little of God in their customary seekings of him, that they
will have little encouragement to set about seeking of him: It will also cause
slightness in praying. The Slightness in prayer.
formalists prayer is called vanity, Job. 35. ver. 13. And if slight in
praying; usually as sleighty in praising. None says (seriously at Praises,
Exercises of repentance. Hearing of the word.
least,) where is he that gives us songs in the night? verse 10. 11, 12, 13.
compared. Such are as sleighty in setting upon the work of through repentance.
Such as slightly complain of their pining away in their sins, (Ezekiel. 33.
10.) and are therefore so roused up to turn unto the Lord, as even too well
content to dye in their sins, verse 11, 12. Turn you, turn you, why will you
dye, etc? yea, they are as sleighty in hearing the word of God, as though but
hearing only some musical song, which as we say goes in at the one ear, and
out at the other, Ezekiel. 33. 30, 31, 32. yea, commonly such are very serious in
some way of Seriousness in some sin.
sin against God. Jer. 3. 4, 5. Will thou not from this time cry, (namely in
this sleighty fashion) my Father? Behold thou have done evil as thou could.
Yea, such are wont to be serious in discontented complaints of God in his
dispensations of providence; as that his way was not equal, when it is their
own ways rather which are unequal; as those sleighty complainers of their
sins, Ezekiel. 33. 10. are bold to charge God, verse 17, 20. as if his ways
were not equal.

CHAP. VI. Of Prayer of Intercession, and Imprecation.
HAving spoken of the sorts of prayer in general: we come to speak of the
parts which are of special consideration in these sorts of prayer, especially
of solemn and continued prayer, and letting pass those which respect our
selves, we shall only single out those two respecting others, viz. Prayer of
Intercession and Imprecation.

Concerning prayer of intercession, whereby upon all occasions we are bound to
pray for others good, we shall not mention the persons especially concerned in
it; as Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, Masters, Husbands, and all other
superiors, for their inferiors, as also their inferiors respectively for
their superiors; or any other special relations, as of friends, kindred for
their friends, and the like; of which Scripture instances are plentiful; but we
shall consider it generally, as that which respects all sorts of godly
persons: nor shall we spend time in urging reasons and motives from the
honourablenesse of this holy service of love in it self; the advantageousnes of
it to the persons themselves who so plead for others welfare every way; the
sutableness of this to that matchless pattern thereof in the Lord Jesus, and
the mighty things which have been done for others thereby, and the like. But
shortly come to lay down, First, some rules to guide us in it. Secondly, some
means to help us in it. Thirdly, some marks to discover our gracious speeding
in it.

Touching the first thing propounded; observe Rules about praying for others.
we these rules in it.

1. Attend the times, and observe them, when the Lord is in any more special
manner with us by his spirit and quickening presence, and when our hearts are
got near Mind when God is near us, and we him, and then do it.
to him, by special stirrings of faith and love, such times sometimes the
Saints here met withal. They are as in Christ's lap, upon their spouses knee,
in their beloveds bosom, Cantic. 8. 5. and would yet be nearer to him. The
Church is leaning upon her beloved, yet says, set me as a seal upon thine
arm, and upon thy breast, and then makes that gracious motion to her beloved,
verse 8. We have a little sister and she has no breasts, what shall we do for
her in the day she shall be spoken for? As she is ready to do her part, so she
would have him do his part for the others good: when the daughters of
Jerusalem find Christ, when he meets them, then they must in their prayers
tell him of the Churches sad case, that she is sick of love. Cantic. 5. 8.
Moses will take the advantage of Gods being so near him, and speaking to his
heart, Exodus 33. 13, 14, 15, 16. to speak for his presence with the rest of
Gods people. If thy presence go not with [us,] carry us not hence. And Exodus
34. 8. 9. And Moses made haste, and bowed himself to the earth and worshipped,
and said, O Lord, I pray thee, if I have found favor in thy sight, that the
Lord would now go with us, and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for
thine inheritance. It were pity that the Saints would not improve their waiting
months upon the king of Saints, to move him as well for others, as for their
own good. The King at Esthers banquet expects Esthers requests for her
people: so does the Lord at such time especially look that some should make
intercession, Isai. 59. He expects that some should ask him of things to
come, concerning his Sons and his daughters. Isai. 45. and pray for the peace
^f Jerusalem. Psalm. 122. 6.

2. When others are under any special Pray for them when 2 deserted, tempted, or
afflicted.
desertions or temptations, or in any help^ess, desolate, disconsolate
conditions, as when the Lord is withdrawn from them, My ^eloved had withdrawn
himself, Cantic. 5. ^. 8. Tell him that I am sick of love. When under
reproaches and indignities offe^ed the Saints from others, which by their
^rofession and place should do better of^ices for them, as when the Church is
smit^en and wounded by the watchmen, and her ^aile taken away by the keepers of
the walls, ^hen tell My beloved, I am sick of love, (says ^he:) When others
are deeply sensible of their ^eed of Christ, and nothing else will con^ent them
but Christ, then they are sick of love, then tell Christ of it, ibid. When ^he
displeasure of God himself is breaking, or broken out against Gods own
people, ^hen if Moses have interest in God, he must down on his knees for
Israel, Exodus 34. 13, 14, 15. etc. and Exodus 34. 8, 9. then Aaron must haste
to offer incense. Numb. ^6. Then Job must offer for his friends, Job. 42. 8.
When enemies are ready to swallow up the Lords heritage, then Isaiah must lift
up his prayer for the remnant of God. Isaiah 37. 4. When persons of choicest
use are in greatest hazards through the rage of persecutors, then prayer is
made without ceasing for Peter by the Godly, Acts 12. 5. When people want a
fruitful ministry, like breasts, pray for them especially, Cant. 8. 8. Matthew.
9. 36, 38. Pray then that the Lord would thrust forth laborers into his
harvest, and in diverse other like sad cases of the saints.

3. Be we serious and not slighty in pleading for others, Lift up thy prayer
for the 3 Pray for them with fervency.
remnant that is left. Isai. 37. Wrestle together in prayer for me. Romans 15.
30. if we should seem therein to get a foil, yet get up again and try it
out a little more with God for them, especially in difficult cases. Abraham
follows Christ with prayer upon prayer, even for Sodom, Genesis 18, the end.
Isai. 62. 6, 7. Give the Lord no rest until he make Jerusalem a praise in the
earth.

4. Take we advantage of the least may-be 4 Take the advantage of a may-be of
mercy
and possibility of speeding, to set up upon this service of love for others,
in any case whatsoever, though not always desired thereto by others: but
especially when thereto moved by them. Isai. 37. 4. It may be the Lord has
heard Rabshecahs word: and in ver. 5. Wherefore lift up thy prayer for the
remnant that is left, Exodus 32. 30. Moses said unto the people, ye have
committed a grievous sin, but now I will go up to the Lord, peradventure I
may pacify him, etc. Helps to pray for others. 1 Brotherly-love.


Touching the second, even helps to further us in this duty.

1. Cherish we brotherly love, and kindness, and charity. Love the Church and
people of God, his Jerusalem, and you will pray for them. Psalm. 122. 6. Love
your enemies and you shall pray for them. Matthew. 5. 44. The Centurion will be
suing to Christ for his servant, who is very dear to him. Luke 7. 2. If we
love others, we will every way seek not our own things so much as theirs. 1
Cor. 13. Its Jonathan who loves David, will be a petitioner to his father for
him. 1 Samuel 19. 4, 6. and 20. 30. And Esther who loved her people, will not be
content to ask her own life, but theirs also of the king. Esther 4. 11, 16.
and 5. 1, 2, 3. So it is in this case in our requests to the Lord for others,
if we love them. Moses will have no greatness of his founded in his peoples
ruin; nay he refuses an offer thereof, so he may bespeak mercy for his
people. Exodus 32. 10, 11. and Numb. 14. 11, 12. True suppliants can sometimes
be earnest for others, when more sparing in suing for themselves.

2. Be as much acquainted with, and 2 Knowledge of others conditions,
especially of the good in them.
well informed in other estates as you can, especially espy, and inquire out
all the good which is in them. The knowledge of others miseries, as the eye
affects the heart, opens those sluices then, whereby it comes to be poured
out for them; this brought good Nehemiah upon his knees, when he had certain
information of Jerusalems calamities: He sat down, and wept, and fasted, and
prayed, Nehem. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. Hence the direction, confess your faults
one to another, and pray one for another. James 5. 14, 15, 16. The best of us
are much lead by sense; others cases, of which we have but some general
informations, do not so affect, as those of whose particular cases we have
better knowledge: knowledge also, or hope at least of the good of grace which
is in others, does much quicken us to pray for them. From the day that Paul
heard of the faith of the Colossians and Ephesians, how importunate is he in
prayer for them? Col. 1. 3, 4. Ephesians. 1. 15, 16. The report of Philemons faith
and love, makes Paul echo forth the sound thereof in the ears of God by praying
for him, Philem 4. 5. And it would be good to keep a fresh memorial of others
graces, as Paul did of those in the Thessalonians, whence it was that he was so
earnest for them in his prayers. 1 These. 1, 2, 3.

3. Prize we grace in others as well as 3 Prize grace in others.
in our selves. 2 Cor. 9. 14. And by their prayer for you, which long after
you, for the exceeding grace of God in you.

4 Put we our selves in others stead. So 4 Put we our selves in others stead.
Jesus Christ teaches us in the Lords prayer, to be our selves needing daily
bread, and remission of sins, and reseue from the evil of temptations, if
others be so. So Moses, Let the Lord go with [us] and [pardon us,] Exodus 34. 8,
9. So Daniel puts himself in the number and case of such and such suffering
ones, Dan 9. 4, 5. etc.

5 Look we maintain an holy life in prayers respecting our selves. When the
root Keep lively in praying for our selves.
of a spirit of Prayer is kept fresh and springing, it will be sprouting forth
into all the variety of the branches thereof, respecting others as well as our
selves. If that pipe be kept open, it will be conveying waters of Grace to
others houses and hearts, as well as our own. If the Spring Tide be up, our
neighbors creeks, as well as ours will be supplied with waters. The supplies
of the oil of Grace from the Lord of the whole earth, will be beneficial to
the whole Candlestick, the Church, and the several Bowls and Lamps of it,
Zech. 4. 2, 3, 11, 12, 13. We cannot as members of this body sensibly think or
speak for our selves, but more or less we shall be mindful of other parts and
members of the body of Christ in special sort.

6 Put we one another upon praying 6 Put we one another upon it.
one for another. Heb. 13 18. Pray for us, (says the Apostle) Lay open your
cases one to another begging each others prayers. Tell my Beloved (says the
Church) that I am sick of love, Cant. 5 8. Many hands contribute this way, even
to a poor decayed Christian* and will help him into a way of spiritual trading
with God as formerly. As many Simples put togethet will make sovereign Physic
to recover a sick man: so I may say of particular men's prayers meeting in one,
f^rther others souls welfare and health. Some Favorites Prayers may help
others who may be under some displeasure of the Lord to come into renewed terms
of favor with him, upon requests made for them. Therefore as Mordecai will set
Esther on work to intercede for him with the King and for his people; so should
we crave the prayers of such, who are upon better terms (possibly) with the
Lord then we our selves are at present. God himself sends Jobs three friends
under his present distastes (for not speaking so rightly of him as Job had
done) unto Job, who though he had miscarried, yet had made his peace again with
God, and he must pray for them, Job 42. 1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Job must break
the ice to clear their passage. Even the injurious Gibeonites must in case
bless Israel, or else they are not to look to speed so well from the Lord, 2 Samuel 21. 1. 2, 3, 4. etc. God will have all the members of Christ to see the
need and use of other members, even the meanest; as the Church of Jerusalems
daughters to tell Christ in their prayers of her condition, Cant. 5.

Touching the third thing, the Marks Marks of prayers heard for others.
of our prayers speeding for others, and that the favors showed to others are
fruits of our prayers; are

1 When God stirs up their hearts for 1. Others faith, that we shall be
heard for them.
whom we pray to be by faith persuaded that God will hear us for them. Phil. 1.
19. For I know that it shall turn to my salvation, through your prayers.
Philem. 22. For I trust that through your prayers I shall be given to you. When
God does thus send word before hand, and give notice to his Saints what he
means to do for them, at the request of such or such of their brethren, it is
a pledge that the ensuing success was that way brought about.

2 When God in the conferring of such 2 Others faith, that we were heard for
them
and such mercies upon others, does secretly and strongly persuade them, that
they are the fruit of the prayers of such and such of his servants for them, it
is verily so indeed As when Paul is persuaded that his liberty and life
restored, and the gracious fruits thereof, that they were the fruits of the
Corinthians, and others prayers; a gift bestowed by the means of many, and you
also helping by your Prayers, 2 Cor. 1. 10, 11. As when a King shall send word
to some Subjects of his, that he has done thus or thus for them, because of
the request of such or such of his Courtiers: Or as a Schoolmaster shall tell
his Scholars, who begged their play day: So here in such holy motions in others
hearts, the Lord signifies to them, that such or such a refreshment,
enlargement and succor in such or such temptations, are issues of the requests
of such or such of his servants for them.

3 When God stirs up injured persons 3. When they are the prayers of injured
persons by them they pray for.
to pray feelingly and fervently for such as have wronged them, as Job for his
friends, Job 42. 8, 9. The Prayer of Christ for many of his Persecutors, Father
forgive them, etc. Luke 23. 34. It took well; witness that blessed change
wrought in many of them so soon after, Acts 2. 36, 37, 38, 39. This fruit of
Divine love in the Saints, argues a root of it in the Lord himself toward such
persons, for whom they make such requests; and such strong living currents and
rivers of kindness and compassions, argue an Ocean of the same bowels in God
toward them; such love speeches being dictated by the special motions of Gods
Spirit, are wont to be owned by the Lord.

4 When some are stirred up to earnest Prayer for some one or more, for whom 4.
When persons prayed for, are prayed for, as well by many others, as by us.
many others of the Saints, unspoken to, happily and unthought of, do in like
sort intercede with God. When many help this way, toward the bestowing of one
and the same gift, it seldom fails: 2 Cor. 1. 11 You also helping by your
prayers; viz. together with others in like sort stirred up, in other places to
pray for the same gift: There is ever most of God in such unanimity and accord.
When the Spirit of the Lord does thus tune many hearts, as several Instruments
to answer one another, when the same Lesson of the Spirits setting and
suggesting is played by diverse Spiritual Harpers; this holy harmony of spirits,
seeking to the Lord that he would loose in heaven some poor sinning persons,
formerly bound, but now repenting, this argues the presence and acceptance of
the Lord. What ye loose on earth is loosed in Heaven; that is, If you shall
agree (or symphonize) on earth, as touching any thing you shall ask it shall be
done, etc. Matthew. 18. 18, 19, 20.

5 When God carries out some of his 5. If those prayers are importunate.
servants in Prayers for others, very earnestly, resolutely, and constantly, as
those who will have no nay. God assuredly, as a fruit of such holy importunity
in Intercessions, makes that Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isai. 62. 6, 7.
Paul who always in every Prayer of his, is stirred up to mention the
Philippians, Phil. 1. 4. is confident that God will go on with his work in
them, ver. 6. and he thinks it meet to be so confident of it, because the
Lord has put them thus often into his heart in prayer for them, ver. 7. Such
earnest incessant prayers of the Church for an imprisoned Peter are not denied,
there being most of the Spirit in such Prayers.

6 When God stirs up the faith of such 6 When such pray in faith for others.
which pray and plead for others to listen, attend, wait and expect, yea, and
to be persuaded of their answers, as the Psalmist in Psalm. 85. 8. who
expects peace as an answer of those prayers for others of the Saints, I will
hearken what God the Lord will say, for he will speak peace to his people, (and
his prayers for them are mentioned in the former verses.) When the Church in
praying for the King is persuaded that they shall have the joy thereof, Psalm.
20. 1, 2, 3, 4. and ver. 6. she concludes the same from her faith, That God
will show mercy to the King according to her desire, ver. 6. Faith ever
speeddeth in its Suits, and in this our holy trading with God; its the Lords
earnest penny, that he will give us suitable and seasonable returns.

7. When mercies begged for others, are 7 When the mercies begged for them come
in suddenly and strangely*
suddenly and strangely brought about upon our Prayers; yea, and as suddenly
brought to our knowledge. Acts 12 5, 12. etc. Peter is sent in unto them, as
set at liberty from his chains, whilst they are praying for him; wherein the
providence of God would as it were speak to them thus, There is the Mercy, here
is the man for whom you make so much a do; since you will needs have it so, and
will have no nay, and the ears of the Lord are so filled with your cries, take
it and be thankful.

8 When we are in especial wise enlarged 8. When as large in praises for
mercies to them.
and quickened in thanksgiving for Gods mer^yes upon others. The many which gave
thanks to God for his gift bestowed, were surely of the many by means of whose
helping prayings it was bestowed, 2 Cor. 1. 11. Eli prayed for Hannah; 1 Samuel
1. 17. worshippeth being answered in prayer, ver. 28. The same Spirit moving to
praise God, did assuredly stir up to prayer before. It is a sign of peculiar
interests in those mercies of others, when the Spirit of God moves us in such
thankful sort to own the same.

Let us now speak a little more largely to the other branch, being somewhat
more intricate, and not so often spoken to.

Prayer in way of Imprecation is that part of Prayer wherein the Saints do not
barely complain of the indignities done by Gods, and his peoples enemies,
against him and them, but crave Divine Justice against them.

Let us first clear this to be a Duty of the We may, and in case must pray
against Gods and his peoples enemies.
Saints, in case, to pray even against such as hate God and his people. Judge.
5. 23. Curse ye Meros, etc. Deuteronomy. 27. the Levites were to pray against diverse
kinds of sinners, and the people to join in those imprecations by saying,
Amen. The Scripture holds forth many examples of such Imprecations; as Lament.
3 64, 65, 66. Psalm 144. 5, 6, 7, 8. and many other Scriptures.

Reasons enforcing the Saints to it, are,

1 Their love to God, out of love to Reasons. 1 From our love ^o God.
whom they may and must say as he did; Do not I hate them that hate thee? etc.
Psalm ^ 39. 20, 21, 22. The converted Princes shall hate the Antichristian
Harlot, Revel. 17. 16. and if the Saints may and must hate the enemies of God,
they may pray against them.

2 Their respect to Christ and his Kingdom; 2 From our respect to Christ and
his Kingdom*
which we are taught to pray that it may come as well in the confusion of some,
as the conversion of other of his enemies, Psalm 45. 5. Let thine arrows be
sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies, whereby people fall under thee: Psalm
99. 1, 2. O thou to whom vengeance belongs shine forth, let the glorious
beams of thy Sovereignty as a King, and equity as a Judge appear, lift up thy
self, thou Judge of the earth, render a reward to the proud.

3 Their respect to the Church and people of God, and their peace and good, 3.
From our respect to the Church.
whence those Imprecations, Psalm 137. 7. Remember O Lord, the children of Edom
etc. Psalm 129. 5, 6, 7, 8 Let them all be confounded that hate Zion, etc. But
because our natures, as carnal, are principled rather with dispositions to
curse, then bless; a carnal man's mouth is full of cursing, Romans 3. 14. so that
herein we need not spurs, so much as bit and bridle to curb and guide us: And
because even the dearest of the Saints have foully miscarried this way, yea,
even when they least suspected the same, as James and John (Luke 9. 54, 55.)
would have been requiring fire to come down from heaven upon those Samaritans,
as Elias sometimes did, but were rebuked for it, though they seem to ask
Christ's counsel in it, Will thou that we command fire from heaven? to exalt
Christ's sovereign power in it, if that he willed it, they in his name might
command it, and to be zealous of his honor injured by those Samaritans, yet
checked as persons who knew not of what spirit they were of: Now considering
such like things, we had need to have aim given us, and to have the Mark
described at which we must shoot.

Consider we then 1 In what way we Cautions* Imprecations, must not be
may not imprecate and pray against others. 2. In what way we must pray
against Gods enemies. 3. Against what enemies.

1 We may not curse nor pray against the 1. Against the Righteous.
the Righteous upon any pretense whatsoever, no not of sharp, harsh, high, or
continued opposition against us. There was a sharp contention betwixt Paul and
Barnabas, but they prayed not against each other. Abraham and Lot engaged in
their Herdmens contentions. Genesis 12. 7, 8. yet Abraham prays for Lot, chap.
18. 25. and 19. 29. compared. I heartily wish that all Gods servants of either
Congregational or Presbyterial way, take heed of the breaking out of any such
fire as this is, which will be found to be wild fire one day. As for the cursed
crew of cursing Ranters, who curse those whom God has blessed; yea (it may be)
the blessed God himself also, our God will one day accomplish that dreadful
word upon them (if they repent them not thoroughly of their Blasphemies) I will
curse them that curse thee; and let none of them think that in cursing they
bless them: for they are contraries, as the Lord there shows, I will bless
them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee: He would not curse men
for blessing his people, but bless them rather: they may as well imagine that
God in cursing such, does but bless them; and if they dare adventure to
undergo Gods curse, and yet dream of his blessing, let the blind lead the blind.

2 Look that our curse against others 2 Causeless.
be not causeless. Prove. 26. 2. The curse that is causeless shall never come; as
when Jeremy in a distemper cursed him that told his father first that a man
child was born unto him, Jer. 20. 15, 16. It is extreme injustice and taking
the name of God in vain (nor will he hold such as do thus guiltless,) to call
for vengeance against the guiltless, and to assay to make divine Justice,
subservient to the unjust desires of the flesh. If a reviling Racha be under
the head of murder of another, Matthew. 5. 21, 22. What is this? It is foulest
impiety under a covert of piety, of prayer, to seek to devour others.

3 Look we, that though there be some 3. Rash.
seeming cause, yet that we be not rash in imprecating, but very deliberate,
consider thoroughly of our own spirits therein, the want whereof was rebuked in
James and John, though seeming to consult with Christ about it, Will thou that
we command fire from Luke 9. 14.
heaven, etc. but Jesus rebuked them saying, You know not, etc. of what spirits
ye are. We are easily mistaken in our spirits at such a time, in such a work.
In other cases not so intricate, we understand not too often what is that which
chiefly acts and moves us therein; much more in this, we may soon miscarry
here both in the persons against whom, and the things which, and the end for
which we imprecate. If in other cases we should not be hasty with our mouths,
or rash to utter a thing before God, Eccles. 5. 1, 2. much less should we be
rash in our Imprecations.

4 Look that we imprecate not in our own 4. Not in personal cases merely.
persons barely. Eccles. 7. 22. As when servants provoked will be cursing their
Masters, our hearts and consciences will smite us for it, if thine heart knows
that thou thy self have cursed others, ibid. this were to imitate Heathens in
a way of revenge.

5 Look that we do not therein cut 5. Nor with ^reach of bonds, of relations.
in sunder the bonds of special relations which the Lord has laid upon us, as
for children under any pretense whatsoever to curse their parents, Prove. 20.
20. Whosoever curses his father or his mother, his lamp shall be put out in
obscure darkness. Such wild and strange fire never came down from heaven, such
a cursing tongue is set on fire of Hell.

6 Look that we do not secretly imprecate 6 Nor when pretending to bless.
against such as we pretend to bless. Some there are who bless with their
mouth, but curse with their inward parts, Psalm. 62. 4. but such persons are
rotten hearted, and near ruin, like a tottering wall, ver. 3. It is as
monstrous that out of the same mouth should proceed blessing and cursing, as
for a fountain to send forth bitter and yet sweet, or salt and yet fresh
waters. James 3. 10, 11, 12. It is gross hypocrisy, and that wisdom which
contriveth it, is carnal, sensual and divellish, ver. 15. The Devil himself
will sometimes carry toward men, as if he wished them well, and in heart curse
them.

7 Look that we do not abound in imprecations, 7 Nor abounding.
as that cursed cursing generation of Ranters (sprung up of late:) little else
to be heard but, Lord confound such and such, Lord cut them all off, God damn
them body and soul, etc, Prayers so continually besprinkled with gall, argue a
root bearing gall and wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29. Their grapes are grapes of gall,
their clusters are bitter, and so their vine is a vine of Sodom, Deuteronomy. 31. 32.
guile is under their tongue, which is full of cursing. Psalm. 10. 7. They are
Jews, professou rs of religion in show, but really carnal Gentiles, not
sincerely righteous, whose mouths are full of cursing constantly, and only
cursing. Romans 3. 9, 10, 14. verses compared, such do not experimentally know
the grace of Christ, and the blessing of grace. verses 11, 14. Nor are sincere
seekers of the Lord. ibid. But rather wander as persons dangerously deluded and
misled, in by-ways leading to destruon. verse 12, 13, 14, And are at best
unprofitable, and such as do nothing formally good, ibid.

Lastly, look that we do not delight and 8 Nor delightful.
glory in imprecations. The Prophet in Psalm. 109. 17. speaks of one delighting
in cursing, and by verse 8. compared with Acts 3. 20. Judas is pointed at
therein: who it may seem thereby, was a man much given to cursing, and
delighting much in imprecations, and himself in the mean space a cursed
hypocrite, and traitor to Jesus Christ.

Caution 2. Now consider we affirmatively We may pray against others so. 1
Being more ready to bless then curse.
in what way we may pray against others?

Answ. 1. We must be more ready to bless, and pray for others, then to curse,
or pray against others. Bless or pray for them that persecute you, Romans 12.
14. and Matthew. 5. 44. compared: yea, bless, says the Lord, and curse not,
ibid. The charge of blessing or praying for others, is reiterated, and a
prohibition given to the other, showing how ready and forward we should be to
bless others, but be very rare and cautelous in imprecating, and praying
against them: for the prohibition there is not taken absolutely and indefinitly
in no case, and at no time, the Saints may or ought to curse, or pray against
others: the Scripture elsewhere (as we have seen) allowing of it, in case, and
enjoying of it.

2. We must bless long, before we may 2 Blessing long before we curse.
dare to imprecate; in case they be professed friends to the Lord. As Jeremiah
did, who prayed long for those revolters of his time, until forbidden of God to
pray any more for them, Jer. 14. 7. 11. Pray not for this people; yet verse 19,
20, 21, 22. he is at it again, beseeching of God, for his Names sake not to
abhor them. Chap. 11. 1. God tells him, there is no good that way to be
done for them, though as mighty men in prayer, as Moses, and Samuel stood
before him; afterward indeed, Jeremy once or twice prays against them, in
Jer 55. 10, 15. and 18. 21, 22 Remember that I stood before thee for them, to
turn away this wrath from them, yet Lord thou know all their counsel
against me, to slay me, forgive not their iniquity, etc. God is long before he
inflicts his curse: My spirit shall not always strive with man -- yet his
days shall be an hundred and twenty years. Genesis 6. 3. We may then be long
before we wish the curse of God upon the ungodly. Jesus Christ was by, and
heard his persecutors imprecating so against themselves, and children, saying,
his blood be upon us and our children, Matthew. 27. 25. and one would think he
might well say Amen thereto; nay, but he would not, he did not, for as in that,
Luke 22. 34. he prays rather that God would take off that curse; Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do. Imprecations had certainly
miscarryed, if they had been made, by any of the Saints against Manasseh or
Paul, who yet went very far in rebellion and enmity against God.

3. Look that we imprecate and pray 3 We imprecate rather with respect to
blessing.
that such or such calamities may light upon others, so as in reference to
blessing of them: if the Lord please, Psalm. 83. 15, 16. So persecute them with
thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm; fill their faces with shame,
that they may seek thy Name, O Lord. The Church she anathematizeth a wicked
person, but it is not for their destruction, but of their flesh in them, and
that their souls might (if possible) be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 1
Cor. 5. 4. So here.

4. Look that we imprecate and pray 4 We pray rather against their sins then
persons.
rather against their sin and wickedness, then their persons against whom we
pray, 2 Samuel 15. 3. Turn this counsel of Achitophel into foolishness. Acts 4.
29. Lord, behold their threatenings. Psalm. 7. 9. Let the wickedness of the
wicked come to an end. It is the wickedness and the enmity of Gods wicked
enemies, which most properly strikes at God, which is most mischeivous to the
Church, and most hurtful to themselves and others, wherefore spare no arrows
against that; and as far as worldly greatness is an occasion and instrument of
their wickedness, we may pray against that. Psalm. 58. 6. Break the great teeth
of the young Lions.

5. Pray against the enemies of God 5 We imprecate conditionally.
suppositively and conditionally; namely, if they persist in their emnity
against God, that they be implacable; that they be reprobates, persons devoted
to ruin, and ripe for it. David prays against the enraged enemy, that God
would judge them. Psalm. 7. 6. but verse 12 If he turn not, God will whet his
sword, and the Lord himself declaratively curses the wicked by his Ministers
but yet with a tacit condition, if they repent not, and the like. Jer. 18. 7,
8. and 36. 2, 3. and so are the Saints to wish that curse 6 Imprecate
indefinitely.
of God against them with the like tacit condition, if they repent not, and the
llke.

6. Pray against the enemies of God indefinitely, and abstractively, not so
much eying this or that person in particular. Deuteronomy. 33. 11. Smite through the
loins of those that rise up against him, that they rise not again. Moses did
not eye one enemy of Levi, more then another. So Numb. 10. 35. Let them that
hate thee, fly before thee; the like, Psalm. 68. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 16. 22. Let them
that love not the Lord Jesus be Anathema, Maranatha. There is ever most of God,
and least of self in such indefinite imprecations. And the Saints may in that
way of imprecating be both more free, and have more help to their faith in
Gods promises, wherein he ingageth himself in an indefinite way, to plague
such and such a sort of desperate and ripened enemies, and the like, without
particular reference to this or that person in particular.

7. Look that as we propound for our 7 We imprecate with faith, and that with
respect to Gods glory and the churches good.
end in such imprecations, the glory of God and the Churches good, (and as
Paul's respect to the glory of God in his word, makes him, wish them accursed
that preach another Gospel. Gal. 1. 8. And his respect to the Churches good and
peace, makes him wish them cut off who trouble them. Gal. 5.) So for the
manner of imprecating, we do it in faith. Psalm. 36. 11, 12. Let not the foot
of pride come against me. There are they fallen, and he by faith sees them
fallen against whom he prayed. Psalm. 10. 15. Break thou the arm of the
wicked. verse 15. The heathen are perished out of his land. Yea, that it be
with holy grief of heart, that we have any cause to imprecate against any
enemies of God. As Matthew. 18. 31. When the fellow servants saw what was done,
(by that cruel and merciless wretch against one of their fellows,) they were
sorry, and came and told the Lord. As Christ the Judge pronounces that
sentence against those his enemies, with expressions of much bowels -- he
beheld Jerusalem, and wept over it -- and said -- they shall not leave thee one
stone upon another, because thou knew not the day of thy visitation, Luke
19. 41, 42, 43, 44. So should the Saints, which as witnesses, or assessors,
either give in evidences or verdicts upon the testimonies of their acts of
enmity against God, and his Church; they should do it with grief.

Touching the third thing propounded; We must pray against treacherous enemies.
we say, we may and must pray against treacherous enemies, which should have
been friends: as those of Meros, which should have helped the Lord against the
mighty, were cursed* Judge 5. 23. Psalm. 69. 20. I looked for some to take pity,
but there was none, etc. verse 22. Let their table become a snare.

2. Against sligh undermining enemies, such as pretending to pity and help,
will 2 Sly enemies.
hurt the people of God. Psalm. 55. 15. Let death seize upon them: his words
were softer then oil, yet were they drawn swords. Such as can use all
fraudulent expressions to insinuate to murder souls, Psalm 10. 7. and verse
8. They lurk and lie in wait to take all advantages to murder the innocent,
yea their very souls (if it were possible) as well as their bodies, by wily
tricks to draw them to sin against their consciences, verse 9. They would be
drawing them into their net. Yea, verse 10. He crowcheth and humbles himself
that the poor may fall. And verse 12. Arise, O Lord, O God, lift up thy hand,
and verse 15. Break thou the arm of the wicked. Such enemies who professing
the true religion, yet against their own light will be plotting all the ways
they can aginst the Saints, and to reproach, and to disgrace the ways of God.
Jer. 18. 18, 19, 21. these are very like the Devil, transforming himself into
an angel of light, but against his light, using all his wiles to ensnare souls,
and bring them to like perdition with himself. These do the more mischeife to
the Church and people of God, and possibly cause many truly godly ones, through
their wiles, to go halting and bleeding to their graves.

3. Against mocking, scoffing and insulting enemies; who like Tobiah and
Sanballat, 3 Mocking, insulting enemies.
do deride and jear at the gracious practices of the Saints, as they did at
that good work of theirs, in building Jerusalems walls, Nehem. 4. 2, 3. But
verse 4, 5. Hear O God, for we are despised, and turn their reproach upon
their own heads. Psalm. 69* 10. When I wept and fasted, that was to me a
reproach: or ver. 11. I became a proverb to them, And verse 26. They talk to
the grief of them whom thou have wounded. verse 27. Add iniquity to their
iniquity, etc. Such as are ready to gnash their very teeth at the righteous,
and to make themselves merry at any evil befalling them. Psalm. 35. 16.
Hypocritical mockers in feasts, who gnash their teeth upon me, they open their
mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, aha, our eye has seen it. verse 26. Let
them be ashamed and brought to confusion together, that rejoice at my hurt.
Such are old standers in the ways of sin, and have long walked in the
counsels of the ungodly, and now taking up their rest (as it were) in the way
of scorning at God and good. Psalm. 1. 1. These have most venom in them that
can laughingly smile on the Saints, when yet they had rather be gnashing their
teeth at them, and so are riper for Gods curse, as even ready to glory in any
wicked pranks which are played against the Saints.

4. Against apostatized enemies; As 4 Apostatized enemies.
an Achitophel, a Judas. Psalm. 55. 12, 13. 14, 15. An Alexander. 2 Timothy 4. 4.
Alexander has done me much hurt, the Lord reward him according to his deeds.
Such do much hurt indeed: they know the ways of the Saints: they are most
imbittered against them. Like Christians turning Turks, proselited pharisaical
persons; more hellish in their malice and fury against the godly, then Turks,
or Pharisees themselves. Math. 23. 15. the sweetest wine turning the sharpest
vinegarlike spirits against the Saints.

5. Against such as apparently oppose rather 5 Enemies against God in Saints
persons.
God in their persons, then the persons themselves; opposing persons every way
amiable in their eyes, for parts, parentage, good behavior and repute, and
only because godly, and so hating them without any (personal) cause. Psalm. 69.
4. only for Gods sake they reproach them. verse 7. Because they pray and fast,
that is to their reproach. verse 10. Let the table of such become a snare, etc.
verse 22. Psalm. 35. 7. Without cause (on my part) they have hid for me their
net, etc. Therefore let their way be death. And verse 20. They devise
deceitful matters against them that are quiet in the land. Persons that meddle
not with others, or other matters, but have their conversations in heaven, they
themselves cannot charge them to be turbulent, but they are pious, they are
conscientious, that is enough against them in such men's eyes, and yea
wherever, or in whomsoever such persons see the image of God, they do like
their father the Devil, malign it. Yea, though they gain neither credit nor
profit by maligning such persons, as the Devil himself does not, but are
rather losers by it, yet they are well appayed if they can but wreak their
despite upon the Saints: let the ways of such be slippery, and the angel of
the Lord persecute them Ps. 35. 6, 7. etc.

6. Against such enemies, who are so 6 Enemies past the reach of man's justice.
great, that they are even past the reach (in a manner) of humane justice; none
other left (in a manner) to break their teeth, but God only. Such as say, we
will speak, and do thus and thus with them, and let us see the proudest He of
them all, which dare contradict or oppose us. Our tongues are our own, who is
Lord over us? As for the Saints, they make a puff at them, (such poor snakes
as they are:) and some vilest persons (happily) being exalted (to the highest
place of rule) such wicked enemies walk on every side, without (curb or
control:) Now it is high time for the poor and needy to cry against them,
and God will arise at their cry. Psalm. 2. 3. 12. 4, 8. with 1. 5. verses
compared. In this case Christ makes it the Saints duty to cry night and day
for vengeance against such enemies. And God at length will hear them. Lu. 18.
1, 2, 3, 7, 8. Bloody minded Joab being too mighty to be reached by King David's
justice, is prayed against, 2 Samuel 3. 29. Let this blood rest on the head of
Joab, and verse 39. I am this day weak though anointed King, and these men the
sons of Zerviah be to hard for me, The Lord shall reward the doer of evil
according to his wickedness. 7 Enemies with whom divine justice has begun.


7. Against the enemies of God, which divine justice has already found out,
and begun to seize upon. If the fire of God has begun to kindle on them, and
in them, we may blow it up by this holy breath, Psalm. 21. 9. etc. and verse 13.
compared. If God shows that its his will to cut down such ripened stalks, we
may help onward to their cutting down; if he has begun to wound such mad
dogs, such wolves, such serpents, we may help to kill them outright. If he has
routed such Midianites, our prayers must help for the chase of them. When
persecuting Babylon is once begun to be battered at, and closely besieged
through Gods sin revenging hand, Then the inhabitants of Zion shall say, the
violence done to me, and to my flesh, be upon Babylon; and my blood upon the
inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say. Jer. 51, 31, 32, 33, with 34, 35.

Lastly against general enemies, such as 8 General enemies.
Antichrist; the Saints may and must all and every one of them, muster up al
their spiritual forces against such an enemy. To conclude

Quest. It may be demanded, When the

Answ. I answer. 1. When God brings Such prayers answered, when strange
judgments come upon them.
against. As Hezekiah, no extraordinary inspired prayer he prays against
blaspheming Senacharib. 2 Kings 19. 5, 16, etc. and verse 20. God heard his
prayer, which appeared, ver. 35 by the strange hand of God against him, and his
Army, of 185000. who are cut off by an unusual stroke or plague of the angel,
and he himself (in an unheard of manner) is killed by his own sons, whilst he
is worshipping in the house of his God. verse 37.

2. When God brings upon such enemies, speedy and untimely deaths, and 2
Speedy and sudden judgments come on them.
not long after imprecations of the Saints made against them; as that night
after Hezekiah had so prayed, the angel wrought that unheard of slaughter of
the Assyrians, and soon after that parricide is committed upon Senacharib
himself. Doubtless the Saints which made such earnest request for Peter, did
not forget Herod that bloodyman, to entreat God to convert him, or else to cut
him off, if ripe for it; and Acts 12. 5. 23. you see it is not long after that
in that unwonted way, he comes to his end by the stroke of an angel; when the
very next day Arius dies by voiding his bowels as he went to ease himself, it
is a sure token, that the prayer of that godly Bishop of Alexandria which he
made against him the night before, did speed him. Theodoret. Eccles. hist. lib.
1. cap. 4. When within five or six days after that fasting and prayer of the
Jews, wicked Haman is unexpectedly brought to his end, surely God has respect
to his peoples requests in their mournings and this their enemy came to fall
before them, Hester 4. and 7. compared, according as the very night after
Hesters feast, that unexpected way was made by God in the kings heart for
Hamans fall. Chap. 6. When Achitophel within a day or two after David had
prayed, -- Lord turn the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness, 2 Samuel 15.
31. compared with chap. 17. 1. 23, comes to his end, it evidenceth the same to
be an issue of David's imprecation; its a sign that God heard that cry of Moses
against the Egyptians, when that very day the Lord in a wonderful manner
overthrows them. Exodus 14. 13, 15. 33. compared. So when Jehoshaphat and his
people solemnly and humbly request the Lord to judge those inhumane,
ungrateful enemies of theirs, 2 Chronicles. 20. 2, 3 4, 5, 10, 12, 13. and the very
morrow after, Grd does in an unwonted manner bring ruin upon those enemies,
verse 16, 17, 22, 23, 24, 25. compared, all may safely conclude, that those
prayers speed them.

3. When the manner of the ends which God brings upon such enemies against 3
Reproachful ends befall them.
which his pray, is reproachful and shameful; as when a wicked Haman, which a
little before was the greatest in the kingdom, comes to be hanged upon a
gallows. Esther. 7. 9, 10. When the great Oracle of the people, and Counselor
of state, Achitophel, comes to so shameful an end, as to dye by an halter, yea
to hang himself. When that deputy King or Governor Herod, he comes to so
base an end, as to be eaten of basest vermin, of lice; so when wretched Arius
comes to so base an end, it argues that some godly Alexander has told his
errand to the Lord.

4. When the judgments God brings 4 When the very same judgments prayed
for, follow.
upon his enemies, are the very same which his people desired against them in
their prayers. God does not indeed always hear his people in the very
particular, but in something equivolent; yet sometimes he does, and when he
does so, it the rather argues the same to be an answer of prayer. As when not
alone a Prophet extraordinarily inspired, prays against Judas, in another
enemy like him; and the things desired are inflicted, as Psalm. 109. and Acts
12. 18, 19, 20, compared. But Jotham an ordinary man, he prays that five may
come from Abimelech, and devour the men of Sechem; and again, that fire may
come from the men of Sechem, and devour Abimelech, and the issue presently
afterward answers the same, for both were instruments of each others ruin;
it is a sign that Jothams prayer sped them both. Judges 9. verse 56, 57
compared.

5. If when persons prayed against are 5 They perish without being desired.
swept away, without any desiring even of their associates to the contrary,
even they pity them not, there is none, no not of their companions in evil, to
show them mercy; all blessing from any hand (almost) is far from them. Psalm.
109. 12. 17. The very wicked which drew them, which counseled them to such
treacherous enemy-acts against God and Christ cast them off without pity; as
the Priests and Scribes did cursed Judas, in his saddest outcries and troubles
-- What is that to us? (they will not own him, nor his acknowledgement) look
thou to it. Matthew. 27. 4. Nay, such enemies prayed against, if the prayers be
effectual, will (like those Ammonites) help forwards one another ruins. 2 Chronicles. 20. 10, 11, 12. with verse 22. etc. Such bloody Shechemites, so prayed
against, will help forward murtherous Abimelechs death and misery, as he did
theirs. Judges 9. 56, 57.

PART II.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray without Ceasing.
CHAP. I. Touching the modification of the exercise of Prayer: and therein of
Importunity in Prayer.
HAving dispatched the Discourse about the nature, sorts and parts of Prayer,
We come to consider of the modification of the exercise of Prayer, injoined and
employed in the word, (...), which implies praying importunely, opportunely,
and indesinently Some Interpreters make account, that Paul has reference
herein unto that speech of Christ, Luke 18. 1 that men ought to pray always,
and not to faint; namely, through spiritlesness sluggishness, or slightness,
so here, pray, (...), without giving out, giving over, leaving off, or
intermitting any space of time, which must needs imply importunate praying; as
that of the widows plying that unjust Judge with earnest Suites for Justice,
notwithstanding any seeming discouragements or denyals. And indeed such as pray
importunately, earnestly, and servently, when they do pray, they in Gods intent
and account, do pray continually, or without ceasing.

Now for our better handling this Duty of praying importunately, consider we,
1. Wherein importunity of Prayer consists? 2. The Qualifications of it. 3.
The Reasons enforcing it. 4 Some Helps furthering it. 5 Some Marks discovering
that importunity of Prayer which the Lord means.

Touching the first Quere, Wherein importunity Importunity of prayer consists
1. In the utmost improvement of mind and heart, and the gifts and graces of the
Spirit therein, in Prayer.
of Prayer consists? I answer, It consists

1. In the extensiveness and intensiveness of the mind and heart, and of each
praying Grace of a godly Suppliant in his prayer. Our new Translation renders
that in Acts 12. 5. by a like phrase as this in the Text, Prayer was made
[without ceasing.] but the word there in the Greek is (...), then was Prayer
made which was stretched out upon the Tenters; not so much, namely, in the
length and largeness of the intercessions of such as put up the same, as in
respect of the thoughts, holy affections, and exercise of the graces of the
spirits of those godly Suppliants in their prayer. So in Acts 26. 7. prayer was
one special piece of that service intended in that there mentioned, Our twelve
Tribes instantly serving God day and night. The words are (...), in a stretched
out manner serving God. Psalm. 119. 145. I cried with my whole heart. David's
whole heart acted in that prayer with all earnestness; his prayer was the
common cry of all that was within him; his desire, love, hope, and all the
graces of his spirit in his heart put forth themselves in his prayer. So Romans
12. 12. Continuing instant in Prayer; (...), continuing with all your might in
prayer. The acceptable prayer is (...), an inwrought prayer. A prayer wherein
all the active hands within the suppliant are set on work, according as there
it is said of him, Coloss. 4 12. Always laboring fervently in prayer for you,
(...), wrestling for you in Prayers. A fervent Suppliant does Wrestler-like,
bend and writhe, and strain every joint of the new man in their souls; yea, of
their whole mind and heart, so far as sanctified, that they may take all helps
and advantages of the Lord to prevail with him in prayer. All our lines must
meet in this center of Prayer; our whole man must wait upon this as the
creature of the holy Ghost: as it will share in this blessing, so it must act
in begging it; and then it will put on the garment of praises also for it. Like
as before, the whole man went as it were in mourning weeds in the want of that
blessing: so the mercy will be sweetest to the whole man when it is thus holily
employed in the begging of it; or if the mercy be delayed, yet it can the more
quietly sit down in the want of it, when it has used Gods means for it. A
gracious Christian that prays much, can want much, he has that inward peace
that guards his heart and mind from discontent. Phil. 4. 6, 7. Make your
request known to God, and the peace of God shall keep your hearts.

2. Importunity in prayer, consists in 2 In frequent renewing of our suits.
a frequent renewing of our suits when we are at this holy work, early and
late; the Psalmist was at it early, when he said, Psalm. 88. 13 My prayer shall
prevent thee. and 119. 147. I prevented the dawning of the morning* and cried,
etc. He was a good husband* and earnest in this holy work, who was at it so
early; a lively Christian will be up in his spirit, and hard at this work, when
other lazy and drowzy professors are not stirring this way. And verily he had
need be up betimes, who preventeth the Lord with his prayer, whose use it is
before we call, to answer us, Isai. 65. 24. Psalm. 21. 3. The importunate
suppliant also will be late at it, come for bread at midnight, when he might
have it inwardly suggested to him, that he comes unseasonably, as that parable
holds fotth, Luke 11. 5. 8. He will pray with the first and with the last
too, he will pray again and again. For this I besought the Lord thrice, 2
Cor. 12. 7, 8. His fresh suits freshen up the suppliants praying graces; put a
new gloss upon his faith, love, fear, zeal, holy desires, and the like.
Sometimes the heart is more praying ripe then at other times; importunity
tries conclusions, sees how our hearts prayer-pulses beat at all times; the
heart is sometimes more full of holy motions and workings, much more resolute,
more fixed upon God and good, much more tender and sensible. Importunity takes
all advantages of the heart of a Christian; an importunate suppliant is wont to
be always taking the skales and balances into his hand, and in his thoughts
puts in the mercies he needs and longs for, in the one skale; and all
his prayers, pleas, and tears for the same in the other. And perceiving the
mercies to weight down all his prayers, he then lays in more prayers and
sighs, and yet alas, they are not weight, which makes him still to be laying
weight after weight, prayer upon prayer al his days. Prayer is the souls
messenger, which it speedeth to heaven, there to relate in the ears of its God
and King, the various cases which do concern it; and as good speeding
messengers, are the most serious, and the most serious messengers speed best,
so it is in the case of prayer; yea, as messengers are sent again and again
till their errand be fully told, and their business dispatched, or sufficient
order raken for it, so it is here: Prayer after prayer is sent up to heaven,
until either the Lord do what is desired, or that which is equivalent to it;
as in Paul's case; 2 Cor. 12. 7. he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for
thee; my strength is made known in weakness. An importunate suppliant has
the art of praying, and so has his diverse spiritual topic places, (as I may
call them,) whence he frames variety of holy arguments and pleas in prayer,
which is an holy reasoning with God (as it is called) he has a great deal of
spiritual eloquence, and holy rhetoric, so that he is seldom nonplust in
prayer, but with sweet and apt variety of supplications, is again and again
pressing upon the Lord for mercy: and when ordinary prayer seems not to
prevail, importunity in prayer will be expressing it self in an extraordinary
way, fasting shall be joined to crying mightily, as Jonas 3. 6. and if our
prayers alone prevail not, it will make us go another way to work with God,
even to set others on work to seek God with us and for us. Cant. 5. 6, I sought
him, but found him not, verse 8. If you find my beloved, tell him I am sick of
love.

3. It consists in a holy impatience 3 An holy impatience of delay or denial
of an answer.
of delay, or of denial of our holy requests; it makes a gracious suppliant to
stand (as we say) upon thorns: the captive exile hastes to be delivered,
Isaiah 51. 14. The Church is even sick of love for want of the desired presence
of Jesus Christ. Cant. 5. 8. Hear me speedily (says David) my spirits fail,
least I be like to one of those that go down to the pit. Psalm. 147. 7. it is
even death to such to be delayed, much more to be denied, hence those frequent
ingeminations, How long Lord, how long? Ps. 13. every day, week, or month, is
as seven to importunity: love in the soul to the Lord, his favors and
fellowship, keeps due and true account how long he has held us off, and
therefore calls upon the soul, Go again to him, renew thy suits, speak, why
do not thou speak for a speedy answer? and faith whispers the soul in the
ear, be not put off, the Lord has that by him for which thou come, it is
not for his honor to bid thee go and come again to morrow, when he has that
pardon, and peace, and grace by him for which thou come: yea, Satan and
unbelief will be charging such present pay of spiritual debts, or else to
prison; and therefore fears and jealousies are raised by them both in the
Saints, and many times will post and haste the soul upon desires of speedy
resolutions and answers from the Lord, what he means to do for them at these
dead lifts.

4. It consists in a strong resisting of 4 In a resolute breaking through
discouragements in prayer.
discouraging suggestions whencesoever arising, tending to beat the soul off
from prayer, If the answer from within be, trouble me not, I am in bed, Luke
11. 7, 8. yet the suit is continued, and for importunities sake the friend
arises, and supplieth with bread: If the angel say to importunate wrestling
Jacob, Let me go: nay, I will not let thee go, till thou bless me, (says
he) Genesis 32. 26, 27, 28. he will hold his hold whosoever says no. Exodus 32,
11, 12, 13. Let me alone says he to Moses, (or leave off thy prayer, as the
Chaldee paraphrase reads it,) but the event showed he would not, he did not
let him alone. Psalm. 80. 4. Though God carry it toward his people, sometimes
as angry, yet they pray; why art thou angry at the prayer of thy people?
Lamentations 3. when his prayer is shut out, yet he knocks, Psalm. 61. 1, 2.
From the ends of the earth will I cry to thee, when my heart is overwhelmed,
lead me to the rock that is higher then I: let his distances be never so
great, he is resolved to cry after the Lord, and if he get but his head never
so little above water, the Lord shall hear of him. Psalm. 69. 1, 3. One would
think his discouragements such, as he were past crying any more, the waters
entered into his soul, in deep waters the streams running over him: he
sticks fast in the mire where is no standing, (he is at the very bottom, and
there fast in the mire,) he is weary of crying, yet verse 6, 13. But Lord, I
make my prayer to thee: and as he recovers breath, so breathes out fresh
supplications to the Lord; if men or devils would be forbidding to pray, as the
multitude sometimes did the poor blind man, to cry after Jesus; yet as he, so
an importunate suppliant will cry so much the more, Jesus thou Son of David,
have mercy on me. Mark 10. 47, 48. When distrust and distempers would be
pulling such a suppliant by the sleeves as he is going to the throne of grace,
and say, what, thou go thither? alas poor tattered creature, will thou go
thus in thy rags? Has the Lord nothing else to do but to wait upon such as
thou art? Do thou poor prodigal think that he will be spoken with by such
an one as thou art? Go pay thy debts first to divine justice, thou know what
an one thou art, and have been. It is for such as are so fruitful, so
faithful, so zealous, so mortified, so selfe-denying, so sincere, so
serviceable to God and others, such as have kept so close to God, that have not
run into such and such sins against light, such as can confidently stay
upon God; and not for thee who have failed in all these, to draw near to him:
yea, but strength and importunity in prayer will gather strength by these
pressings and oppositions, these gusts will but kindle the fire of holy desires,
and make them flame out the more in prayer; and conclude, that it concerns
the soul the more to beg and seek for mercy. Sometimes the guilt of some
special sin would stop the souls mouth this way; but that also makes it to
roar out its complaints the more, and press the harder for pardon. Sometimes
the world in the occasions of it would withdraw the soul to speak a few words
to it of concernment; but importunity packeth that away with indignation.
Importunate David will chide out all manner of disquieting suggestions; Why art
thou disquieted within me, O my soul? Psalm. 42. 5. and break through an army of
discouragements to speak to the Lord: if he must swim for it through a
tempestuous sea of difficulties, he is at a point for that, he will make his
prayer to the God of his life. verse 7, 8. In this holy buildingwork,
opposition makes not serious builders lay by their trewell, but take their
sword rather in the other hand ready to resist such as oppose it: such holy
beggars have no other trade to live upon, but such begging, it is even death to
them to leave it.

5. It consists in a patient* bearing and 5 In submissive bearing cross
occurrences in prayer
overlooking adverse occurrences in our seeking of the Lord. Genesis 32* 25. The
Angel touched the hollow of Jacobs thigh, and it was out of joint as he
wrestled with him, but yet he muttered not; he minds his work: and verse 26.
I will not let thee go except thou bless me: let him criple him and bruise
him if he please, but bless him he must ere they part. The importunate
Canaanitish woman does not regard, or any ways stomach the taunt of Christ,
(if it may be so called) in his calling her dog; It is not meet to take
childrens bread, and cast it to dogs, but she owneth the worst name he can give
her as her due, Truth Lord, says she, etc. Matthew. 15. 26, 27. These people of
Christ will be seeking of him, Cant, 5. 6. I sought him, but could not find
him, I called upon him, but he gave me no answer; yea, they bear it quietly:
yea, but the watchmen and those upon the walls abuse his people. verse 7. They
put up that also, but follow their suit for the recovering of Christ's favor
toward them. ver. 8. If you find my beloved, tell him (in your prayers) that I
am sick of love. Such beggars winch not much for the barking, yea or for some
snaps of dog-like enemies to prayer, nor care such beggars what they are
secretly termed, the worst name is welcome, so that they may have but the alms
of mercy for which they come. They meet with many a wrinch, and many a crush,
in pressing through crowds of discontentments, with their petitions to their
Kings gracious throne; but earnestness of their desires, makes them quietly to
bear all. In those soul wooings of Christ, such like discouragements are all
nothing, if at last they may but win Christ, and gain true spiritual
conjugall fellowship with him: if they find such a pearl, they weigh not any
cost they are at in seeking it. If they may but gain the passages of the
straight gate to life, they can very well bear the dry blows they meet with, in
fighting to enter in, as the force of that Phrase, (Luke 13. 22.) (...),
holds forth fighting; as those of old in the Grecian exercises, some whereof
were with fists, and batts. Brave spirits are up in the soul, when a spirit of
importunity in prayer is stirring, and they will make suppliants bear any
thing: so much also the force of the word (...), (used both, Col. 4. 21. and
Romans 12. 12. For continuing instant in prayer,) holds forth; continuing
therein with much patient bearing of encumbrances or molestations.

6. It consists lastly, in being in a holy In holy insatiablenesse with
mercies received.
wife, unsatisfied with smaller measures of prayer-blessings, pressing still on
for more, Importunate Abraham has his additionall requests to the former, when
they are granted, Genesis 18. 17, 20, 30. So Moses, when heard for Isreal's pardon,
so far forth: Exodus 32. 10, 11, 12, 13. yet he wants, and must have the Lords
gracious presence along with him: and then Exodus 33. 12, 13, 17. when that is
granted, yet he wants a further light of Gods glory, v. 18. And when he has
got that, yet chap. 34. 8, 9. he has a further request for Israel again,
verse 8, 9. Gideon has scarce ever done asking one sign and token of Gods
gracious presence with him, after another granted him, Judge. 6. 17, 18, 37, 38,
39. compared. Those earnests make them press harder for the receipt of farther
and larger sums of grace; those gracious recoveries makes them to renew their
suits and pleas; those tastes do but whet their appetites after more of such
spiritual cheer; such first fruits make them long the more, for gathering in
more of that blessed harvest; now and then a view and kiss of their beloved at
their request, makes them more enamoured with love-desires after more.

Now of the second thing propounded. Importunity in prayer must not be 1
Unseasonable.
What manner of importunity is required? To which I answer, 1. Negatively. 2.
Affirmatively. Negatively also two ways. 1. Look that it be not unseasonable
importunity, but a seeking of Christ early, in the day time of grace, not in
the evening, the close and ending of that day. Prove. 1. 28. Thou shall seek me
early, and not find me, when the door of grace is shut, to cry, Lord, Lord,
open to us, it is in vain, Luke 13. 25. when men have wearied out the Lord
with knocking at their hearts, and with calls, and they answer not him, they
shall (cry) says the Lord, but I will not hear.

2. Look that it be not an inordinate 2 Inordinate, or for a lust.
importunity, an importunity of some lusts, like Rachels wrestling (in prayer
also) with great wrestling for a son.

Quest. How may Inordinacy of affection

1. Answ. When importunity in prayer Marks of earnest prayer when from our
lust. 1 Undervaluing of mercies received.
undervaluing of the blessings we already have, or with coffeehouse at
them. Numb. 11. 4. You fell a lusting, and wept, saying, who will give us
flesh? and verse 6 We can see nothing but this Man. Like children, that whilst
crying for an apple from their fathers hand, will fling away the cake that is
in their own, and so get a whipping rather then a pippin (as we say;) so such
get a lashing, rather then their longing, which argues an inordinacy in such
children.

2. When such importunity in seeking such 2 Valuing of things desired even with
a bad estate.
or such things from God, is accompanied with a prising of a very bad estate,
in the enjoyment of the things we ask: as we remember, say they, the flesh we
did eat in Egypt, Numb. 11. 4, 5. they are so eager for flesh, that Egypt it
self, where they had such flesh, has now an honorable memorial with them,
and they could even be glad of Egypt again upon condition they had but flesh
enough as formerly: A place of bondage, a place where sacrificing to the Lord
was an abomination to the Egyptians, would be a welcome place, with that
desired flesh they crave. Luke 15. 12. The younger said, father give me the
portion of goods which falls to me: he will have it though he want his
fathers presence, and the communion of his family, and be left to himself to
shift for a living. The Israelites will have a King, though they are told from
God, that they will be in a far worse condition under their tyrannous usages,
then ever they were under the government he appointed over them, even under
their Judges; 1 Samuel 11. 11. to the 18. And verse. 18. And you shall cry out in
that day, because of your King which you shall have chosen you, and the Lord
will not hear you in that day, verse 19. Nevertheless the people refused to
obey the voice of Samuel, and they said, nay, but we will have a King over us.
Like some young men, that against all their fathers wholesome admonitions will
needs have such an one for their wife, and night and day solicit their father
to let them have her; though told that they will but undo themselves by it. 3
Asking things unsuitable to our condition.


3. When we ask things of God, that are unsuitable for our condition: as for
the younger son to ask his father to have all at his own dispose, when no way
fit to manage it: Luke 15. 12, 13. So for Israel in a wilderness to desire
quails, a meat altogether unsuitable for their place, and estate; So for James
and John, to desire that one might sit at his right hand, and the other at his
left hand in the Kingdom of heaven, Mark. 10. 35. 37. before they are fitted
to suffer with Christ, or for him; to be riding on horseback ere they are able
to go on foot. 4 Rashness in asking.


4. When we are rashly importunate, as James and John were Mark 10. 36. You
ask you know not what: they considered not, understood not what they asked: or
as in that request for fire to come down from heaven, to consume those
Samaritanes, Luke 9. 54. Christ told them, you know not what spirits you are
of: they considered not from what spirit they were moved in that request. When
we wait not for Gods counsel, advise not with the Lord about what we are to
ask; or not seasonably, before our hearts are grown inordinate with their
desires, Psalm. 106. 13, 14. They waited not for his counsel; they lusted in
the wilderness: when desires prevent, or outrun deliberate judgment, they are
not right; or when judgment the mistress, must wait upon these her maids,
there is disorder: When your princely mind must go on foot, whilst servantly
affections ride on horseback, there is confusion; when understanding must only
dance after affections pipes, there must needs be great miscarrying.

5. When we are not willing to wait 5 Hastiness for getting things desired.
the Lords leisure for the affecting of what we ask of him: but will be asking
of him in ways full of hazard, or with means of our own devising to attain
our desires: As Rachel, who wrestled in prayer for a child, Genesis 30, 8. but
whilst delayed, gave her maid to Jacob to attain her desire of a child: or
like David, desiring the waters of Bethlehem, which could not be had, without
the lifeblood of such as fetched it: 2 Samuel 23. 15, 16, 17. Like feverish
persons, flying out of their beds for the drink they ask: the Israelites desire
to go up to Canaan then when God said nay, was a lust: Numb. 14. 40, 41. 44.
There were lusts in that Kings extraordinary seeking of God for supplies of
bread, by fasting and prayer: 2 Kings 6. 30. That in delays of supply, lets
drive at the Lord himself, verse 33. Behold, this evil is of the Lord, what
should I wait on the Lord any longer. Isa. 58. 3. Wherefore have we afflicted
our soul, and thou take no knowledge: those breathings that are so short
winded, they are not divine inspirings.

6. When we keep not due proportions in our desires, being more importunate 6
Inequality in desires.
in corporal matters, and those of less consequence, then in those soul
matters of greatest concernment: like those in Hosea 7. 14. Who can howl upon
their beds for corn and wine, and yet without heart to seek reconciliation
with God: verse 10, 11. Lukewarm at the best in spiritual matters; a cake
half baked, verse 8. Like foolish children, hardly ever speaking of choice
matters, and yet ever and anon filling the house with cries for rattles and
baubles.

7. When we fly in the face of this or that Creature, lay causeless blame
upon 7 Quarrelling with instruments.
such or such persons, or things, if not answered of God, in things that we
crave of him: thus Rachel wrastled with God for a child, but whilst delayed,
quarrels with Jacob, Give me children, or else I dye: Genesis 30. 1, 2. 8.
compared. Like distempered patients, angry with their attendants, because they
may not have such, or such things, albeit forbidden by their Physician: or like
children falling out with the executors of their fathers will, because they do
not at their times, in their ways and proportions, pay them in what they
desire.

8. When our desires in prayer tend to a lust, and the service of it, they
spring 8 Asking for a lust.
from a lust; and if lust be last in execution of our desire, it is the end of
them, and so the first in Intention. Our prayers are in their Genesis, as they
are in their Analysis: when their resolution and dissolution is into
Inordinacies, their beginnings were asuredly some inordinacy. Such prayers and
desires as have earth and flesh for their Center, were assuredly earthly and
carnal in their principles: Such as their Omega is, such was their Alpha. The
Prodigal who spent what he asked of his father upon harlots, surely had some
inordinate lust, which set him on work to ask the same of his father. Luke
15. 12, 13. For this it is that the Apostle James condemns these professors:
Ye ask amiss, that you may James 3. 3.
consume it upon your lusts.

9. When the fruition of the things so earnestly desired, proves afterward
some 9 A blast upon the thing desired.
way burdensome to us: Genesis 19. 20. How earnest is Lot for Zoar, Is it not a
little one? and my soul shall live: but verse the 36. He is weary of Zoar: Lot
went up from Zoar: thus the Israelites quails over earnestly asked become
loathsome to them. Numb. 11. 18, 20. So did they at length cry out as much upon
a King, as ever they did cry out for one: 1 Samuel 1. 8, 18. This passing from
one extreme to another, argues Inordinacy in the heart. Now we come more
briefly to answer affirmatively.

1. Then look that your importunity Importunity in prayer must be
in prayer be caused and guided by faith: so it was with the importunate
Petitioner, 1. From faith,
Matthew. 15. 25. 28. compared. He says not, oh woman, great is thy importunity,
and yet it was such; but, great is thy faith; faith does ballast the heart
aright in prayer, and keeps the swift sailing desires thereof, in their due
course.

2. Look that it be with filial meekness, 2 With meekness and submission.
submission: Christ offered up prayers with strong cries, and tears. Heb. 5.
7. but annexeth, not my will, but thine be done; Matthew. 26. 39, 42. and Luke 22
42, 44. compared.

3. Look it be done with suitable earnestness 3 With like earnestness in use
of means.
and seriousness in holy endeavors, in the use of lawful means to attain
our spiritual desires, Canticles 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Touching the third thing, the Reasons calling for importunity in prayer:
though we might name many; as the Lords importunity in calling upon us; the
fiery fervent nature of the spirit of God in us; the importunity of the wicked
in their desires; the prevailing force of such holy importunity with the Lord.
Yet we shall insist upon this one Reason, taken from the evil of carelessness,
remissness, or slightinesse in prayer which is cross to importunity in the
same, which may suffice to awaken us all to the contrary duty of importunity in
prayer. Let us only hint some particulars of the evils Evils of sin in
slightinesse in prayer.
both of sin and sorrow which attend such slightinesse and remissness in
prayer. Consider we first of the evils of sin in such slightinesse in prayer.

1. A slighty prayer is a blind sacrifice: the 1 Inconsiderateness in prayer.
mind of such a one that so prays, is not wont to consider, or observe what
he does therein. He that is careless of the manner of his approach to God,
looks not to his feet, considers not that he does evil. Eccles. 5. 1.

2. It is a lame sacrifice; it is not a complete prayer. Like the sacrifices of
those careless 2 Incompl^^^nesse in prayer.
slighty Jewish Priests of old, Mal. 1. 8. such a ones affections to God and
good, are corrupted. Such an ones expressions in prayer, are very unfit and
unsuitable oftentimes unto what he is speaking of. Prayer in such an ones mouth,
is as a parable in a fools mouth, which in expression is very unequal. Prove.
26. 7. The Prayer-expressions of a drowsy, slighty spirited professor, are
like the speeches of one half asleep, half awake, full of impertinences. The
mind also of such one is cripled halteth: witness the many distractions
constantly accompany such an ones prayer. The mind of such being not serious in
prayer, and taken up in talking with God, will easily admit speech with other
objects, which will be calling the mind forth to mental discourses about them
whilst praying. As it is in seeking of something which we have lost, if we
mind it not seriously, we shall have trifles enough in veiw to draw our eyes to
them: so is it in slighty seeking to God in prayer.

3. Carelessness and slightinesse in 3 Instability in prayer.
prayer, breeds and feeds inconstancy, and instability in prayer. Any, yea
sometimes no occasion shall cause a sleighty Professor to neglect his praying.
Any pretense that will but seemingly serve to stop conscience its mouth, or any
discouragement will put him by praying; it is verified in such an one, Job. 27.
10. Will he always call upon God? (that is) he will not do it on
constantly. Their goodness in seeking God in prayer also, is but as the early
dew which goes away, Hosea 5. last, and 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. compared. Nor will it
be only an occasional omission sometimes of Prayer, but an habituated
instablenesse in Prayer, now off, now on; now having a mind, and now no mind to
pray; until at length such an one waxes weary of prayer, which did not call
upon God, to wit seriously, Isaiah. 43. 22. Thou have not called upon me,
(namely importunately) but thou have been weary of me, O Israel. As it is with
the sluggard, Prove. 6. 10. yet a little slumber, and yet a little sleep, and as
one sleep and slumber steals upon another, so one sleighty prayer begets
another, at least a disposition thereunto: and one ommission of Prayer
occasioneth another, though it may be, an awakened conscience would feign have
it otherwise; or as it is with a sleighty workman, if he do but now and then
forbear working, labor grows tedious to him, or at least he cannot hold out
to any constancy in working. The like befalls him that is sleighty in
Praying, he cannot be constant in Praying. Such an one will rather run any
hazards, to shark and shift for comfort otherwise, then be constant in
laboring in Prayer for it.

4. Slightinesse in prayer, it rather strengthens then weakens the sins we
pray against. When Professors grow remiss in prayer, then corruptions
presently gather head, and get the better; if Moses his hands grow heavy and
remiss in prayer, flying, yea and wounded Amalakites will rally, and give a
fiercer and more victorious charge. Exodus 17. 11. Whilst a Christian Soldier
handles this weapon of prayer carelessly, he leaves an open mark for an enemy
and lust to foil and wound him, if not mortally and irrecoverably. Should a
Christian traveller, though like another traveller, with his pistols in his
holsters, and his sword by his side, be well weaponed, yet if careless, and as
good as asleep by the way side, he is a fit prey to any lust to spoil and rob
him of his treasure; or if suddenly awakened in conscience, to see his danger,
yet he is but as one suddenly awakened in a kind of amazement, and hardly in
case to resist and fight against any such robber. Yea sleightnesse in prayer
lays a Christian open to all manner of temptations. It even tempts that
arch-robber and murderer of souls, the Devil, to be making a booty of such
sleighty professors. Mark 14. 37, 38. Watch and pray lest you enter into
temptation. The disciples carelessness of prayer made the more ready way to
Satan to tempt them to forsake their master. And it was an ominous presage to
Peter in special, of his sad fall soon after. Simon, sleep thou? watch and
pray lest ye enter into temptation.

Supiness and sleightness in prayer is an 5 It is an inlet to delusions
inlet to delusive fancies and conceits. The sleightest Christians in holy
performances are most haunted with groundless and vanishing toys and hopes; as
is evident in hypocrites, who are habituated in such a sleighty way of prayer,
and other religious exercises. Joh. 8. 11, 12. 13. As it is with other persons
who are betwixt sleeping and waking, they are subject to dreams, so is it with
such like Christians.

6. Such Sleightness in prayer, is an 6 It brings in Apostasy.
inlet and sad forerunner of Apostasy, if not seasonably redressed. The
professors in Josiahs time that so soon turned back from God, were such as did
not seek God, namely to any purpose, but at most, formally and carelessly. Zeph.
1. The foolish virgins who for fashion and form sake, go out to meet Christ
in his ordinances, making it their great care to get so much oil of grace, as
would make them shine in religious exercises, their oil at length failed them,
and their profession and religious performances ended in a snuff and in smoke.
Matthew. 25. 8.

Christians come not from one extreme of rash and hypocritical zeal and
fervency, to the other of utter contempt and neglect of God and good, but by
this midling temper of sleightness; from hot they come to be quite cold by
this lukewarmeness; when Christians are once beginning to take from the height
and steep of fervency, they then haste downward apace, and if the Lord prevent
not, they stay not till they fatally fall into the bottomeless pit. When
Christians grow indifferent in their desires of grace, they grow as indifferent
in their endeavors after it; and when once indifferent whether they do work
for God or no, they are fittest to be hired to do some worse work. When
Christians through carelessness in driving this holy trade of prayer, do not
thrive, but go down the wind amain, it is twenty to one but they will be
taking up some other trade: it may be of covetous persons, it may be of
time-servers, it may be of drunkards, it may be of adulterers, it may be of
heretics, or opinionists, or the like.

Consider we now of some evils of punishments Evils of sorrow accompanying
slightness in Prayer.
and sorrow attending this; for this being in Gods account the guise of
deceivers, That when we have a male in our own flock, as sometimes the Lord
spoke, Mal. 1. 8. 14. -- we have serious spirits in other matters of the world,
or the like; Yet offer such an accursed thing, as careless and slighty
prayers; a curse of God is wont to A blast upon the gifts.
attend it, God is wont to blast such in their spirits and gifts; so that their
very gift of prayer is by degrees taken away from them: there is a secret moth
that eats out the strength and beauty of it, and it is too often found, that
whilst such are slightly hapething and trifling about the greater matters of
their souls, the Lord leaves offering his rich mercies to them, and whilst
they are making some complemental suits to Divine forsakings.
Christ, he at length will be woed no more by them, and that sad curse of God
threatened against them in Jer. 44. 26 And the Lord will be no more named by any
mouth of the men of Judah, comes to be fulfilled in such loose-hearted
professors. Prayer is cast out of their families and closets, as some refuse
service, as is to be seen in these later days in too too many: or if by some
awakening afflictions sent upon them, they come to be roused; yet it is too
often their just doom to be earnest indeed, but without any regard thereunto
by the Lord. They shall cry, but I will not hear. Zeph. 7. 11. Isai. 65. 13, 14
But at best any degree of such a slighty spirit in prayer, will become very
grievous to us, if truly gracious: whence that way of complaint, Isai. 64. 7.
There is none that calls upon God, no not one that stirs up himself to
take hold of Saddest heartgreifs.
God. It is as grievous to such souls to have their spiritual joints either
bound or benumbed, as it is in a like case to men when their body has its numb
palsy; when in prayer a gracious heart is ever reaching out to take an
approaching mercy, and then through a little incogitancy and remisness the
mercy is let slip, and the advantage at that time lost, it must needs be
grievous to the godly.

To the fourth Query.

Quest. What means we should use to be

I answer, get thee more abundant Helps to importunity in prayer. 1 Distinct
knowledge of the Lord.
especially acquaint our selves with Gods friendly and merciful disposition
toward us. Luke 11. 7, 8, 5. verses compared, He who was importunate for
bread knew he was at a friends door: like the Syrians, hearing that the Kings
of Israel were merciful Kings, this quickened them up to that earnestness in
seeking their favor, 1 Kings 20. 31. It will make a beggar earnest for an
alms when he knows where a bountiful person lives, who is not wont to send
any beggar away empty.

2. Cherish we, hope of the Lords 2 Lively hope of mercy.
mercy to us. Jonah 3. Let them cry mightily to the Lord: verse 9. Who can tell
if God will turn and repent? the possibility that the Lord was within hearing,
and might open to the Ninivites, made them knock so hard at his door of grace.

3. See we be sensible of our utter destitutenesse 3 Sense of our own
helplesnesse.
of what we are to ask of God, and our shiftlesnesse to get it any other where
or way. Luke 11 3 6. Lend me three leaves, for a friend of mine is come and I
have n^thg to set before him. Luke 15. 17, 18, 19. I perish for hunger, I will
arise, and go to my father, and say, make me as one of thy hiredservants.
Psalm. 143. 4. My heart is desolate within me. ver. 6. My soul thirsts after
thee. When all other means and doors fail such spiritual beggars, and that one
only door of grace is left for their relief, or else they must famish, how
earnestly will it cause them to knock there? Jer. 3. 21. A voice of weeping and
supplication was heard. verse 23. Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from
the hills. Truly in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel.

4. Look that we account highly of the 4 High esteem of what is desired in
prayer.
mercies we ask in prayer. Prove. 2. 3. If thou cryest after knowledge, and
liftest up thy voice after understanding. verse 4. If thou searchest for her as
silver, and searchest for her as for hidden treasure. The Church was sick of
love, Cant. 5. 8. and uses all means to find him; and no wonder, her beloved
was the chiefest of ten thousand to her, ver. 10.

5. Take we holy advantages of the gales 5 Opportunity of prayer.
and movings of the spirit in prayer, and of Christ's approaches to us:
opportunity helps importunity in prayer. Mat. 20. 30. And behold two blind men
sitting by the way side, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out,
saying, have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David. And verse 32. And Jesus
stood still and called them, and said, what will you that I do unto you? verse
33. they say to him, Lord that our eyes may be opened. When Christ by his
spirit calls us to him, puteth us upon asking, and when he stands still
waiting to be gracious to us, now let him not go till he bless us. When
beggars come whilst a bountiful person is giving out his dole to the poor, or
in dinner time, when victual is stirring, they will not away without
something; so if we perceive the Lord to be on the giving hand, put in hard
for a blessing.

6. Improve we former advantages gotten 6. Improve experiences.
of God in and by prayer. I will cry to God most high, unto God who performs
all things for me: when we see crying will do, it will put us on not to spare
for crying. Now in this holy search after experimental knowledge of Gods grace,
we now and then light upon a smaller vain of such treasure, we will not spare
any pains in digging; when in our daily woing of Christ in prayer, we meet now
and then with a smile, and kiss, and love-token, it will make us follow our
suit close.

7. Go we about prayer as our only 7. Make prayer our only business.
business, which then we have to do, engaging our selves to attend it.
Saints are spiritual solicitours by their calling as Saints. That which made
Abraham so urgent in his request, Genesis 18. 27. is this, Behold now I have taken
upon me to speak to the Lord.

8. Chide we our selves sadly, and be we seriously abased for any
sleightinesse, 8 Chide our selves out of sleightinesse in prayer.
at any time in prayer, as the Prophet complaining thereof: Isa. 64. We have
now called upon thy name, nor stirred up our selves to take hold of thee: and
Isa. 63. 17. Why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear? As Elisha was
wroth with Joash for smiting but thrice, and then staying: 2 Kings 13 18, 19.
Saying, thou should now have smitten five or six times: or as they did chide
sleeping Jonah, when he should have been praying, Jonah chap. 1. 6. Awake thou
sleeper, and call upon thy God. So chide we our sleighty spirits to awaken unto
prayer.

9. Set we the examples of the most 9 Set before us the best examples of
importunity in prayer.
importunate suppliants of God before our eyes, James 5. 17. Elias prayed
earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not; a very dullard will pluck
up his feet when he sees how nimble his leaders are.

Lastly, take heed of all such things as are enemies and impediments to
Importunity Lets to importunity in prayer. 1 Inordinate desires after other
things.
in prayer. Such as are inordinate desires after other things: we cannot to any
purpose follow several suits at once, in several Courts: we cannot ply the
worlds court and Gods too. The messengers are sent out another way which should
importune heaven, and they cannot be here and there too: whilst our winged
desires are hasting after other things and booties, we are slowest in moving
heavenward with wings as Angels.

2. Immoderate intentness even upon our lawful occasions: when our spirits are
2. Too much eagerness upon lawful things or occasions.
even rivited to our occasions, they will not be easily got free for prayer,
they must be even filed off again, no ordinary pulling at them will do: when
we are too too busy all the day long in speech with such occasions, they will
be calling even in prayer for a word with us.

3. Inconsiderate rovings of mind 3 A wandering mind before.
in the interims between our praying seasons; when we let our fleet thoughts
fly hither and thither without restraint, they will not be so easily lured by
us and come at our call, to become fixed in prayer.

4. Admission of wandering thoughts in prayer, and too easy yieldings to
sleightinesse 4 Distraction in prayer.
therein; they grow unmannerly bold, when in the least entertained.

5. Resting in graces and comforts 5 Resting in grace received.
received, in, and by prayer: we are sure to become remiss in praying the next
time, if we seed our thoughts too much upon what we got the last time we
prayed, or if sleighty once in prayer; because secretly thinking to make amends
the next time, we shall be then also the more sleighty.

6. Misgiving Apprehensions touching Diffidence.
God and his grace; That thought (Job 21. 15.) What profit should we have, if
we pray to him? makes them careless of coming near the Lord. A petitioner
must needs be heartlesse in his suit, if he think that the King is wroth with
him. And a beggar has no mind to stand begging at a known churles door.

Quest. To the last querie: touching

Answ. I answer, we may discern Marks of acceptable importunity. 1 Self
abasement in prayer.
when our importunnity is the importunity of a suppliant, of a beggar in
spirit: when it is attended with much self abasement, as the importunate
Canaanite, who looked upon her self as a dog. Matthew. 15. 26, 27. Truth Lord,
yet the dogs take of the crummes under the table. Importunate Abraham looks
at himself as dust and ashes. Genesis 18. 27, 29.

2. Answ. When our hearts in prayer are 2 Holy warm^h in prayer.
fervent prayer is attained; when our hearts wax warm by it, and the means is
acceptably used, then Gods ends in the use thereof are attained.

3. When we are in special wise attent, as to the work we are in hand with, 3
Holy waiting for an answer.
so to the success thereof: as that woman that besought Christ in an
acceptable way of importunity: you may see, she lay at catch, for she picketh
out something for her holy advantage, out of even that word which Christ let
fall in way of Answer: Matthew. 15. It is not meet to take childrens bread, and
give it to dogs: truth Lord, yet the dogs take of the crumbs falling from their
masters tables: that prayer was full of holy pleas, and so are importunate
prayers. Psalm 58. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And the Prophet believes it was
acceptable: verse 8. He will speak peace unto his people: but withal, he was
in a lifting posture after his answer, I will hear what God the Lord will speak.

4. When we are as earnest and serious 4 Hearty praises afterward.
in returning praises for mercies received and begged, as we were in begging
for them. Luke 17. 12, 13. The Samaritan among the other leapers, he also
lifted up his voice with them, saying, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us: and
verse 15, 16. he is as earnest and loud in his praises: and one of them, when
he saw he was healed, turned back, and with a loud voice glorified God, and
fell down at Jesus feet, giving him thanks, and he was a Samaritane: and verse
19. Christ himself justifies his importunity as a fruit of his faith, Go thy
way, thy faith has made thee whole.

CHAP. II. Touching Opportunity of Prayer.
WE come now to the second thing included in the Modification of this duty of
prayer; that it be without ceasing. Namely, that we pray opportunely. When
Paul says, that without ceasing, ((...)) he had remembrance of Timothy in his
prayers night and day, 2 Timothy 1. 3. He means that upon all occasions, and as
he had any opportunity, he did remember him in his prayers. He takes all
opportunities offered by the Lord to pray, and omitteth them not; he prays
without ceasing. It is then the duty of all the Lords people to pray
opportunely, or to take all holy opportunities to pray unto the Lord. For the
better handling of this duty, consider these particulars,

First, that it is seldom that any time is unseasonable for prayer.

Secondly, that yet there is a time when the Lord will not listen to prayer,
no, not of his own people.

Thirdly, that in mercy the Lord uses to offer unto his people opportunities
and seasons of prayer.

Fourthly, that the Lords people are bound to take or improve all such
opportunities of prayer.

Touching the first very briefly, that it is Prayer is rarely unseasonable at
any time.
very rare that any time is unseasonable for prayer, it appears in this that
the Saints are enjoined to pray always; Luke 21. 36: Ephesians. 6. 18. And this,
that the title of God, is to be a God hearing prayers. Psalm. 65. 1, 2. O thou
that art hearing ((...)) prayers. He is always hearing the prayers of some of
his people, and ready to hear the rest.

Touching the second a little more largely, Sometimes prayer is not so
seasonable.
that there is a time when the Lord will not listen to prayer, no, not of his
people; so that praying at such times, they pray out of due season. It is not
then so fit a time for them to pray. As

1. When they are under offenses unrepented 1 When the persons praying are
under just offenses.
of, Matthew. 5. 24. First be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer
thy gift. It is not seasonable for Jobs friends to come to offer to God, until
reconciled to injured Job. Job. 42, 78. If we are out with the favorites of
the King of Saints, it is not seasonable to come to the King with petitions. It
is not a season to seek peace with Christ the head, when peace with his members
is not sought. If our heavenly Father should not hold off his respects to
childrens requests, who offend their brethren, they would never seek to be
reconciled.

2. When any of them do too willingly 2 When under some guilt of sin not
actually repented of.
and contentedly remain under the guilt of some known sin against the Lord.
Isai. 1. 15. When you make many prayers I will not hear, your hands are full
of blood. ver. 16. wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings,
etc. ver. 18. Come now, and let us reason together, etc. And then only it is
seasonable to pray, when we lift up our hands and hearts. Psalm. 66. 18. If I
regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayers. Josh. 7. 10,
11. Wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned. Job 11. 13,
14. If thou preparest thy heart, and stretchest out thy hand toward heaven, if
iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, else all that is to no purpose. God
hears not sinners, (h. e.) imponitent ones. John 9. 31. It is no fit season
for us to go a wooing to Christ, if not clear of privy leagues with any of our
lusts; not is it seasonable to trade with the Lord in prayer, if we have any
kind of traffic with his proclaimed enemies.

3. When we are under any special 3 When under special hurries of lusts.
power of passions and distempers, and (as then not seeing the sin of them)
to lift up wrathful hands is unacceptable, and so unseasonable. 1 Timothy 2. 3.
Lift up pure hands without wrath. It is not seasonable to offer up our
sacrifice with such common, yea, wildfire. Such leaven of wrath and malice is
apt to sour our very Mincah; and makes it come as out of due season. Such was
the petition of James and John to Christ, Lu. 9. 54, 55. Will thou that we
command fire to come down from heaven to consume them? Such were Jobs
petitions, Job 3. from verse 3. to verse 11. Such was that of Jonah, chap. 4.
3. Take away my life from me. Look as it is in a strong blustering time, knocks
at the door are scarce heard* if at all; so is it here; the noise of our
distempers outsoundeth the voice of our knockings in such like prayers. It were
better to pause a while till the blustering noise be abated. And as Revel. 9.
1, 3. Silence was made a while before that the holy incense was offered; so
should it be here.

4. When our heads and hearts are overfull, 4 When under hurries of occasions.
and even sore charged with carnal occasions and inordinate thoughts about
them, it is not so seasonable to go abruptly from such a crowd and throng into
the holy presence of the Lord without some pause. It is most unseasonable to
enter upon so holy a discourse with God, with so many batlers attending us,
when there should be but one speaker. Eccles. 5, 1, 2, 3. Such rashness is
irregular, and therefore unseasonable, such a foolish seekers prayer will be no
better then a dream arising from multitude of business stuffed with
multiplicity of unseasonable impertinent, and independent expressions.

5. When we come to pray in remediless 5 When praying in remediless cases.
cases, or for persons past recovery. Jer. 11. 14 Pray not for this people, for
I will not hear them when they cry unto me for their trouble. 1 Samuel 16. 1. How
long will thou cry for Saul, seeing I have rejected him.

6. When we will be praying at such 6 When praying whilst other ordinances call
for our attendance.
times wherein other ordinances do call for our attendance. As when we will be
praying at home, when we should rather be in the public assembly, or praying
in our closets, when religious family-exercise requires our presence.

Now let us consider of prayer-seasons Most seasonable to pray.
offered by the Lord, which he requires us to take. These opportunities are
either general or special. The general opportunity 1 When God is near us: more
generally by his word.
of prayer, is that general Season of grace held forth in the offers of the
dispensations of the Gospel. Isa. 1. 5, 6. Seek him whilst he may be found.
Whilst God may be found, it is a season to seek him. Isai. 21 12. If you will
inquire, return, come. Whilst the Prophets encourage to come, it is a season to
inquire. Our calling and cry is but the echo of the Lords call. Psalm. 27. 8.
When thou said, seek my face; my heart answered, thy face Lord will I seek
Its the season of the echo to wait upon the voice; a demand of grace upon a
former offer of it, its very seasonable. This blessed day work is most suitable
to the day time of the Gospel and grace of God. But besides this general
opportunity, there are some more special praying seasons, Ps. 31. 8. For this
shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a finding time (as it is in the
Hebrew). As bountiful Princes have their, so the Lord has his special seasons
for petitioners to come in with their suits, and have each their days of
audience.

Our blessed Father has his set days of paying to each child his portion of
mercy and blessing upon demand and suit for it. Now these special seasons of
prayer are of three sorts.

1. When God in special sort is near to us. Or secondly, we in special sort
near to him. Or thirdly, in case of emergencies or special necessities calling
for speedy help.

First when God in special is near to 1 When more specially God is near us, ^A
us, then call upon him while he is near. Is. 55. 6. The Lord as our gracious
king goes his holy progress, and now he is nearer this people, and such and
such subjects; and now again he is nearer to others: Let each accordingly take
and observe their particular seasons of holy approaches to him with their
suits. If the loadstone be near, the very iron moves; the approaches of the
Lord to us, have, or should have this holy magnetical attractive virtue to draw
us near to him in Prayer.

1. Now the Lord is thus in special 2 By some special act of mercy.
sort near to us, by some special mercy vouchsafed to us, as when answering to
former prayer or the like. Psalm. 34. 18. The Lord is nigh to them that are of a
broken heart. Yea, but wherein, or whereby does he show that he is nigh to
them? It follows, He saves such as be of a contrite spirit. Gods ordering
some special favor to his people by his providence is called his visiting of
his people. The Saints repairing to the Lord with earnest fervent Prayer, is
called their visiting of the Lord. Isai. 26. 16. Lord in trouble have they
visited thee; how? tbey have powered out a prayer to thee, etc. When God first
begins to give us a gracious visit, it is seasonable and suitable for us to
give him prayer-visits. Exodus 33. 17. And the Lord said unto Moses, I will do
this thing also which thou have spoken, verse 18. And Moses said, I beseech
thee show me thy glory. Moses made Gods time of giving to be his opportunity
of begging mercy. If ever the Saints hearts are filled with love, it is when
they partake of manifest tokens of the Lords love to them; and if ever it be a
season of this friendly talking with God, or praying, it is then, when in such a
friendly frame. Psalm. 116. 1. I love the Lord because he has heard my voice.
And verse 2. therefore will I call upon him, or speak lovingly to him. Words
spoken to God in love, or from love to him, come the most seasonably, for they
are ever well taken, they are taken in love by the Lord. When the Lord in his
providence bestows upon his people something whereon the image of his special
favor is instamped, it is a time in special to acknowledge the Lord by prayer,
as praying is called, Prove. 3. 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, even by
prayer of faith.

Secondly, the Lord is thus near to us by 2 By special motions of his spirit.
any special motions of the spirit, especially such as put us upon prayer; when
the Lord does inwardly speak, even to our hearts such like words, as Isai. 43.
11. Ask of me touching my sons and daughters, and concerning the work of my
hands command ye me, or when Christ by his spirit says to our hearts, as
sometimes he did to them by word of mouth. Joh. 16. 23, 24. Hitherto ye have
asked nothing: Ask that your joy may be full. Or as he said to his people,
Cant. 2. 14. Let me hear thy voice, for it is sweet; it is now a time to speak
to the Lord, that we seem not to slight him. When thou said, (namely, by the
spirit inwardly as well as by the word outwardly) seek my Psalm. 27. 8.
face; my heart answered, thy face Lord will I seek. If that holy motion to
Solomon, 1 Kings 3. 5, 9. Ask what I shall give to thee, etc. made even a
sleeping-time, a supplicating-time; much more may holy motions of God this way,
make our waking-times, our wrestling seasons. Such drops of a spirit of prayer
are handsells and pledges of large pouring out of that spirit upon us, if
thankfully received and improved. Zach. 12. Such soliciting directions given
us from the Lord, argue that assuredly it is both a praying and speeding time.
If the Lord prepare the heart, if he fit it, and put it upon prayer, teach it
how to pray, He surely boweth the ear to hear. Psalm. 10. 17. It is Esthers
time to ask, when King Ahasuerus himself puts her upon it; What is thy
petition? and it shall be granted thee; and thy request? it shall be performed.
Esther 7. 2. So is it here. And let none abuse this to strengthen any fond
Grindletonian conceit, that we must never pray till we find the spirit first
moving us to it. It is our opportunity indeed of prayer when the spirit moves
thereto, but not the only season of prayer, as we have in part showed, and
must further mention other seasons thereof as well as that. We must sometimes
pray, that we may pray, and when as we are apt to judge our selves, that we
are most unfit to pray, then to pray that we may become fit to pray. As by
speaking men are fitted to speak, by running to run, by wrestling to wrestle,
by laboring to labor.

Thirdly, he is thus near us by some special 2 By some special promises made
ours.
word of his mouth, especially by some gracious promise spoken and manifested
to us; and that also is a special season for prayer. 2 Samuel 7. 27. For thou O
Lord God have revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee an house,
therefore has thy servant found in his heart to pray unto thee. Its a season
of this holy talking with God, when he first enters speech with us by some such
words of his grace. Its seasonable to open our mouths wide, and receive grace
and peace when the Lord sets open any such golden pipe of both as is the
Promise: the Gospel is in every part of it, the ministration of the spirit, 2
Cor. 13. 8. and of life, verse 6. and of faith. Romans 10 8. and of peace. Esai.
57. 19. The words of Gods grace pacify and still the tumults in the soul, and
enlarge and quicken the heart. Now if ever it be a season to speak to the Lord
in prayer, it is when unmannerly distempers, (which too often silence us at
best) retreat, and are put to silence, and when our hearts are set at an holy
liberty to power out themselves before the Lord.

Fourthly, the Lord is near his people 4 By some fatherly correction.
when he visits or afflicts them. What shall I answer him when he visits (or
afflicts?) Job 31. 14. and Job 7. 18. What is man that thou should visit
him? The Lord is then near to us to try us, to take an account of our ways, to
correct our mis-doings to observe how we carry it under affliction, to comfort
and support us in affliction, to sanctify affliction to us, and to save and
deliver us out of the same, and therefore in special sort it is seasonable to
cry unto him, and to ask a correcting father forgiveness. Jam. 5. 15. If any
be afflicted, let him pray. Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble,
and I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me. God does then speak to us by
his rods, Micah 69. It is therefore seasonable then to answer him in our
prayers, If ever a gracious heart be humble, sensible, serious and lively, it
is then when in affliction, when in the fire. Such a time of pangs is a time of
crying out to the Lord; when God visits Saints by affliction, it is
seasonable for them to visit him with prayers: Isai. 26. 16. Lord in trouble
have they visited thee, they powered out a prayer to thee when thy chastning was
upon them.

5. The Lord is near to us by some special deliverance out of affliction: this
is 5 By some special deliverance.
likewise the Lords visiting time when he comes to see us, Zeph. 2. 7. For
the Lord their God shall visit them, and save them from their captivity. If God
will thus visit his vine, the people of God look at themselves as engaged to
call upon him, Psalm. 80. 14. 18. compared. Behold, visit this thy vine, quicken
us, so will we call upon thee. When the winter of the Churches afflictions and
captivity is over, Christ expects to hear his Churches voice in prayer.
Cant. 2. 10, 14. Zach. 13. 9. I will bring that third part through fire, and
they shall call upon me. A person newly delivered out of this pit, Job 33. 24,
36. He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him. Little do
Christians, sharing in a time of the Lords clemency and pity, in their
deliverance from sickbed, and other notable hazards of life and livelyhoods,
know, what a fair opportunity they have now in their hands to speak for further
mercy, so as to speed; and how much they lose if they grow slighty or negligent
in improving such an importunity of prayer, when if ever, praying dispositions
stir afresh in them.

6. God is thus near us when his time 6 By accomplishing his promises actually.
of special promises draws near. Then Gods Faithfulness, Immutability,
Almightinesse begin to come into our very views. And it is a season then for us
in our prayers to go out and meet the Lord. Jer. 29. 12. Then shall ye call on
me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you then* When?
verse 10. When the seventy years shall be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit
you, and perform my good pleasure toward you, and then shall you call upon
me. Dan. 9. 2, 3. I Daniel understood by Books the number of the years whereof
the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the Prophet, that he would accomplish
seventy years in this desolation of Jerusalem; and I set my face unto the Lord
to seek by prayer and supplication. Such a time is a speeding-time, for so
verse 23. At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment came forth:
and therefore the fittest season for prayer. A fair day may well be expected to
ensue, when the Saints are, so early at this work of prayer, even as soon as
any morning beam of divine righteousness begins to break forth. And surely,
such a time is this very present time, when if ever, now it is a season of
frequent and servent praying. When the Lord is coming out in view to accomplish
his great designs of grace to his churches, and vengeance to Antichrist and his
abettors. When his wondrous works in our native land, and the
neighbour-nations do declare that his name is near.

A second special season of prayer is, Secondly, when we are near to God. As.
when we are near to the Lord (There being times when we are far off from
God.) True it is, that all the Saints are always near unto the Lord, in
respect of their reconciliation wrought by Christ, and their Union with Christ,
God-man, and the like. Yet are there differences of their 1 By some special
engagement.
actual neernesse to the Lord in many other respects, as might be showed in
sundry particulars. Let us instance only in two or three branches of this holy
neernesse of ours to God. Which are several opportunities of prayer.

We are near to God by some solemn engagement, whether more publicly or
secretly plighted before the Lord. Thus Israel Psalm. 148. 14. was a people
near to the Lord. And what Nation is there so great (said Moses Deuteronomy. 4. 7.)
unto whom God is so near, as the Lord our God is near to us in all that we
call unto him for? Jer. 30. 21. I will cause him to draw near, and he shall
approach to me: for who is this that engagaged his heart to approach unto me
says the Lord?

Secondly, we are near to God, 2 By some choice reforming work.
when upon any work of Reformation of special enormities in our selves or
others, which alienates them or us from the Lord. Zealous-reforming-rulers,
whose hearts stand bent, as much as in them lies, to reduce the Church to its
Primitive purity and perfection, they are said in that respect also, as well as
others, to engage themselves to approach to the Lord. Jer. 30. 20, 21.
compared. So zealous reforming Asa, and others joining with him in that work,
are said to be with God. 2 Chronicles. 14. 2, 3, 4, 5. and 15. 2, 7, 8. compared. So
those zealous friends of Christ that set themselves against the Babylonish
whore, and her abominations, are said to be with Christ. Revel. 17. 14. And
surely as they are with him, so he is that while with them, as he said. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. The Lord is with you whilst you are with him. And there being
such neernesse 'twixt them and God, then surely is it a choice season of
speaking with God in prayer. For indeed it is a choice speeding time, as the
Prophet there adds. And if you seek him, he will be found of you. Isa. 1. 16,
17, 18. Wash you, make you clean, etc. Come now and let us reason together: it
is the fittest time to offer up this holy incense of prayer in these
fiery-zealous-times; and to plead with the Lord when makebate and alienating
sins are removed. Thus godly Nehemiah takes such an opportunity for prayer,
Nehem. 13. 14. 22. 29. 31. Remember me o my God for good. When the graces of
the spirit have been stirring in one good work, they are the fittest to be
employed in another. And when we have been doing for God, if we take the
advantage of time and of our hearts to speak to him, he will be doing for us;
if we give any thing to him, he will assuredly give us something that is
better if we ask it.

3. A third special season of prayer is, 3 When in extremities* As in case of
when any special extremities and urgencies are upon us. Prayer being one of
our last means to be used for attaining succor from God; and our very
extremities having their cry in the ears of the Lord, it will be most
seasonable that we join our lips with theirs, that they make together the
louder and more prevailing outcry. Its meetest for us then to go a begging to
the door of Grace, when in such extreme necessities. God accounts the time of
our extremities in asking, to be his opportunities of hearing and helping. Let
us instance in these four cases.

First, in case of intricacies of providence 1 Intrecacies of providence.
which merely concerns our selves or others. Now in such cases of riddles of
providence, Prayer is most seasonable, being (...) the usual Hebrew word for
Prayer, a repair to the Lord for inquiry, or for his sentence in a case of
controversy. Rebekah found by experience that her going thus to God to inquire
in that difficulty was very opportune. Genesis 25. 22, 23. The Lord interprets to
her the meaning of that unwonted struggling of twins in her womb. David when
to remove his habitation, and yet not knowing whither, finds this inquiry
seasonable, by his answer; Go unto Hebron. 2 Samuel 2. 1. when that sad
affliction was on David and his people, and the particular cause unknown, this
inquiry came in season, and made discovery wherefore the famine had been so
long upon them, 2 Samuel 23. 1. Asaph does but go into the Sanctuary, and then
all his hard questions about the reasons of the wickeds prosperity are
answered, and all that cloud on his mind scattered. Ps. 73. 17. Until I went
into the Sanctuary, and then I understood their end, etc.

Secondly, in case of some masterly distempers gaining upon us, and we know not
2 By masterly distempers.
how to redress the same, though we sadly mourn under it. Such a time of need
is a time of speeding in seeking for answerable help at the throne of grace.
Heb. 4. 15, 16. compared. When any lust begins to grow more seditious against
the Lord Jesus. When it becomes more headstrong against his sacred Majesty,
and will not be curbed by all our expressions of shame and sorrow, and
detestation, and defiance of it; it is high time to draw a solemn petition to
our gracious King, to take some effectual order to suppress it.

3. In case of some weighty service of God, 3 Difficult service.
which we look at as above our strength. Now must young Solomon, that thinks
himself but a child for such employment, ask of God. 1 Kings 3. 5, 6, 7, etc.

4. In case of greatest danger impendings 4 Danger impending.
as when, Yet forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed. Jonah 3. 4. Now (if
ever) poor Ninivites must call mightily to the Lord: and verse 10. God saw
their works, and repented him of the evil. Exodus 32. 10. Gods hand is up
against Israel with his slaughtering weapon; Now pray Moses, or never; and he
did so, v. 11, 14. God repented of that evil also. Touching the last
particular, that we are bound to take these opportunities of prayer, it is
undeniable, we are bound to pray without ceasing, and therefore to be taking
all opportunities to pray. And wherefore else does the Lord put such a talent
of opportunity of Motives.
prayer into our hands, but that he expects the faithful, and fruitful
improvement thereof to be made by us? or else he will assuredly take his time
to express his displeasure against us, for so gross a neglect of his grace,
and of our own souls advantage. But that we may be quickened up to pray
opportunely, or to take all opportunities of prayer. Consider,

1. That opportunity is the very cream and This Opportunity is the best, and
all of Time.
flower, and spirits, yea, the very All of time. Hence this, Pray continually,
(i. e.) opportunely: he that prays as often as he has opportunity, prays
always.

2. That opportunity of asking offered 2 It Is an engagement to the Lord to hear.
by the Lord, does (as I may say) engage the Lord to answer. Why should the
Lord set out such almes-dayes, and audiencedayes, and some way signify it to
his people, if he meant not to hear and help them? Friends in such a case
stand upon their credit, if they appoint times to meet, and to entertain a
friendly discourse with their friends, they are not wont to fail them; so here
opportunity of asking given us by the Lord, it imboldneth us to ask, and to
expect a seasonable answer.

3. That opportunity of Prayer, it 3 It is the grace and beauty of prayer.
does grace and beautify our Prayers. As every thing else is beautiful in its
season. Eccles. 3. 11. So is Prayer in its season; opportunity is a wheel to
the chariot of prayer, which safely, strongly, and swiftly carries it in
before the Lord. A word spoken in season to men, is (in the Hebrew phrase) a
word spoken upon the wheels. Prove. 25. 11. So is it in these words spoken to
the Lord in their season: yea, opportunity helps to carry our prayer also in
an holy state before the Lord, as upon a royal Chariot-wheele. Opportunity of
Prayer greatly furthers their acceptance in Christ. These fruits of our lips
also are then best, and most welcome to the Lord, when brought forth in their
season. 4 It uses to succeed well.


4. That seasonable prayer is ever speeding prayer. Psalm. 5. 13. My voice shall
thou hear in the morning: namely, praying in the season of prayer.

5. That opportunity of seeking, and 5 It is begged for us by Christ.
getting grace by prayer, and other means, is begged for us by Christ. In an
acceptable time have I heard thee, as says the blessed Father to the
Mediator, Isai. 49. 8. And thence it is that the members of this head of the
Church have any such time of acceptance. 2 Cor. 6. 2. For he says, in an
acceptable time have I heard thee. Now is the acceptable time.

6. That great will be our disadvantage, by letting such holy opportunities of
Prayer slip; for besides the loss of such jewels, and of what we might have
gained by trading with the same, our spirits will come to be very much
straightened, and hardened, as sad experience in the Saints themselves witnesses.

CHAP. III. Of Constancy in Prayer.
WE come now to the third and last thing held forth in the modification of the
practice of this duty of prayer, that it be without ceasing, (i. e.)
Indesinently, or constantly. It is then our duty to pray indesinently, or
constantly. Now for this, Consider,

1. What it is to pray indesinently, or T^ pray constantly is, 1. Not to give
out from prayer.
constantly, or what is employed in it? and why we must so pray? and then make
we one brief Use of it.

Touching the first: To pray indesinently or constantly is, Not to give out
from praying: not to let God alone until he do bless us, To pray and not to
faint, Luke 18. 1. Not to give God rest, Esa. 62. 61. To look to him in prayer,
until he show us mercy, Psalm. 123. 1, 2.

Quest. May any true child of God give off prayer for a season?

Answ. Yea verily: Gods own dear Saints may be weary in praying, though Psalm.
6. 6. I am weary with my groaning, and 69. 3. Godly ones may give out from
prayer for a little season.
I am weary of my crying, yet he gave not off wholly, or not long, verse 13.
But as for me, my prayer is unto thee. If they give out for a spurt from solemn
Prayer, they cease not to be darting up ejaculatory prayers. Jonah 2. 4. I said
I am cast out of thy sight, yet will I look unto thy holy Temple. When God in
deserted times seems to turn his back upon his Saints, or they through
distrust, and distempers are as if turning their back upon him, yet they give
many of these love-casts of the eyes of their souls toward God; desires will
be ever and anon stepping out of such a gracious heart to look after the Lord.
That holy fire within the heart albeit it blazeth not out, yet will be ever and
anon sending out these sparks. There are times wherein the Saints are so
spiritually sick of sin and of temptations, that their very speech fails
them; even they have their spiritual swounds and may lie a while speechless,
yet either they are making these holy signs in their fainting fits, or some of
this holy breath is stirring. If Hezekiah cannot speak out in solemn prayer,
yet can he chatter, and make these shorter holy mutterings of his heart, and
these dove like moanes of his spirit. Isai. 38. 14. I am oppressed, O Lord
undertake for me.

Quest. How comes it to pass that any solemn Prayer, does at any time, or for
any shorter space befall Gods own people?

Answ. Sometimes through some dangerous fall into some heinous sin: as other
speech is sometimes lost by bodily falls, so is this by such spiritual falls.
So David after his 2 By reason of sad falls.
great fall into the sins of murder and adultery, lay speechless in this
respect for a while, Psalm. 32. 3. When I kept silence my bones waxed old; so do
dangerous declinings and backslidings in religion occasion some Backsliding.
temporary cessation of solemn prayer: hence Isai 43. 22. Thou have not called
upon me O Jacob, but have been weary of me O Israel. So Isai. 64. 7. There is
none that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold of
thee. Great guilt breeds great horror and great despondency of mind and
heart, which with unbelief blending it self, causes poor Christians even to
give off prayer in their desperate fits. Look as Heathen Tully said to his
brother, I would pray to the Gods for those things, but that they have given
over to hear my prayers: or as desperate Saul, perceiving Strength of unbelief.
God answers him no more, will go to him no more to inquire, 1 Samuel 28. So
it is thus far forth with the Saints; so far as desperate dispondencies grow
upon them, and represent the Lord to their souls as all justice, they dare not
come to him in these fits. Sometimes they pore too much upon discouragements,
which they meet with in Discouragements.
prayer, within themselves also: as that they pray with so many distempers and
distractions intermixed, and with so little life, or liberty of spirit, or
comfort, or quiet, or faith, or good success, and the like, that as good never
a whit, as never the better, and they are even loath sometimes to go apart to
pray. And sometimes Christians fall into some such errors touching prayer,
Errors.
as for a time do take them off from it, imagining that God being a spirit
must be worshipped only in spirit and truth, and so not by any bodily worship.
That bodily exercise even in prayer profits not; that all outward forms of
worship are abolished. The Christians must have some immediate light of the
spirit, and unwonted suggestions putting them upon prayer, if at any time they
do set upon prayer, if at any time they do set upon prayer. These and sundry
like delusive principles, too rife in these latter days, make too great and
too long interruptions with too many hopeful professors in this holy exercise
of solemn prayer.

2. To pray indesinently, is to maintain 2 To maintain a praying spirit.
praying dispositions: that albeit we actually pray not without intermission,
or do nothing else but pray, (as those fanatical Euthites of old) yet in the
inward frame and bent of our heart, we cease not prayer. There is still a
spirit in us, crying, Abba Father, Gal. 4. 6. a disposing us upon all occasions
to go to God as a Father in prayer. Christians of all sorts, both Ministers
and others, must have their vials full of prayers ready still to power them
out, albeit they actually do not power them out without intermission. They are
to be ready evermore to offer up those holy odours, and that holy incense,
though not always actually offering the same. Revel. 5. 8. The church in its
members, must have honycomb-lips ready to drop this sweet, wholesome honey of
prayer, albeit they be not dropping the same every moment. Cantic. 4. 11. Thy
lips drop as the honeycomb. And good reason is it why each gracious person
should maintain always a praying frame in their hearts; for a praying frame is
a most A praying frame, a most filial frame.
son-like, child-like frame. If ever the love of sons and daughters of God be
stirring in them, it is then: if ever their hearts are filled with holy awe of
God, and faith in him, it is then: if ever they are ready to do any thing for
God, it is then. The same spirit which is to them a spirit of sons, a spirit
of adoption, acts in them as a spirit of Prayer, and where there is a spirit
moving to Prayer, or cry, Abba Father, there is a spirit of adoption: Romans 8.
15. Again a frame of Prayer is the most A most sweet and comfortable frame.
sweet, calm and comfortable, and thence in Romans 8. 15. opposed to the spirit
of bondage, working fear, amazing, discouraging, sinking fear. But this
breeding and feeding filial boldness, and freeness with God, as a child with
his Father.

Again, it is a most free, and best privileged frame of spirit: and hence
also A privileged frame.
opposed to that servile frame, and imbondaging fear. ibid. Is any free to
pray, and free in praying? surely those imbondaging cords of slavish distempers
are broken in sunder.

A praying frame is likewise a most evangelical An evangelical frame.
frame: being redeemed from the laws rigor and confinement, we are most at
liberty to address our selves thus, as children to our heavenly Father. Gal.
4. 5, 6. To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the
Adoption of sons: and because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit
of his Son in your hearts, crying, Abba Father.

A praying frame is also a most heavenly A heavenly and gracious frame.
and gracious frame. A spirit of grace, and a spirit of supplication, or a
spirit disposing, or carrying out to power out holy Supplications, are
inseparable companions. Zech. 12. 10. I will power out upon them a spirit of
grace and of supplication. No grace is wanting where a spirit of prayer is not
wanting. All and every grace is stirring where that spirit of prayer is working

A praying frame is an humble frame of heart, the Saints never mourn more
savingly over their sins, even as crucifying the Lord Jesus, then when in
such a frame. ibid.

A praying frame is a believing frame, An humble and believing frame.
and a believing frame is a praying frame; then have they the most clear and
effectual views of him whom they have pierced. ibid. To conclude this, a
praying frame both furthers our delight in prayer, and makes it every way more
easy and pleasant to us: that we are not so apt to give out through emergent
difficulties or discouragements therein; yea, and it furthereth the good
success of our prayer with the Lord himself.

Quest. How may a believer maintain in

Answ. 1. Let such as would hold up Helps to maintain a praying frame.
sucking from the flowers of Gods providence and promises, some spiritual
sweetness, and then our spiritual combs will be dropping ripe. Droan-like
Professors whilst they neglect this, and live upon an old stock of grace or
comfort received, they grow altogether listlesse to prayer, they have enough
already, what need they ask more? But this Bee-like diligence in the Saints
will make their lips like the dropping honycomb, whence that by way of
allusion, Cantic. 4. 11. And this is done mostly by Meditation upon Gods word
and works.
daily meditation, whereby we do in a holy wise sit, and dwell upon, and draw
out the sweet and sap which is in Gods words and works. Psalm. 5. 1. Consider my
meditation, he means his prayer. What David sucked and brought into the
retired corners of his soul by holy contemplation, he dropped it out in prayer.
Meditation fills the vessel of a gracious heart, and prayer broacheth it,
opens the heart, lets, and pours out the precious things therein: By
meditation we beat the spices, and cut the offering to pieces, and lay them in
order, fit to be offered, and then we are the fitter to offer the same up in
prayer. Meditation diggeth and searches, and finds out the precious metals
and materials, which being ready at hand, are the sooner and the better minted
in prayer.

2. Let such be improving all praying 2 Improvement of motions to prayer.
motions, and stirrings. We shall never hold on in prayer without ceasing, 1
These. 5. 17. and in continual praising, ver. 18. unless we attend that
counsel, verse 19. Quench not the spirit, even in any strong, warm, and
lively motions also, which he may make that way in our hearts. David, who
says, Psalm. 109. 4. That he gave himself to prayer: or as it is in the
Hebrew, I prayer, As if made up of prayer, and doing little else but praying:
he says also, Psalm. 27. 8. When thou saydst, seek my face; my heart answered,
thy face Lord will I seek: he did not slight or put off, or put by any strong
motions of the spirit in his heart to seek the Lord, but made faithful and
fruitful improvement thereof. Christ putting the Church upon it, to let him
hear her voice, Cantic. 2. 14. she verse 17. has a request ready for him. And
so, Chap. 8. 13 Cause me to hear thy voice, says Christ to the Church. verse
14. She speaks prayer-wise, Make haste my beloved. etc.

3. Let such be often and much in ejaculatory 3 Frequency in ejaculations.
prayer: we may be sure to find our hearts in elevated frames, when we have
been often heaving and lifting at them. When we have been dealing with God just
before, and have made so many short essays, we are the fitter to deal with
him more solemnly. Moses was (as I may say) tampering and catching at the Lord
thus, before he spoke out so solemnly, as Exodus 32, 11, 12, 13. Lord why does
thy wrath wax hot against thy people? etc. For God (verse 10.) says to Moses,
let me alone. When we have so often whispered thus with God beforehand, we are
the fitter to, talk and speak out before him. Psalm. 61. 1. Hear my cry, attend
to my prayer; yet nothing expressed what he said* he was at it in ejaculatory
crying, and praying, and thence is so bent for more solemn prayer, expressed
in the verses following. From the end of the earth will I cry to thee, etc.
These running grasps and trips do much help our holy wrestling, praying-art and
skill, and courage: when we do in ejaculatory prayers often sally out upon our
spiritual enemies, sin, Satan, and the world, we are the fitter to maintain
a solemn fight against them in our more solemn prayers.

4. Let such maintain in their souls 4 Poverty of spirit.
that precious frame, poverty of Spirit. That will teach us praying eloquence,
help us much with praying Arguments, and quicken up in us all praying desires,
as we see persons pinched with extreme wants and penury: of all others, the
poor oppressed ones (as the Hebrew is) Psalm. 10. 17. have their hearts set,
and fitted by God for prayer: Lord, thou have heard the desire of the poor,
thou will prepare (or fix) their heart (namely to pray) thou will cause thine
ear to hear: namely their prayer.

3. To pray indesinently, is to be very 3 To pray very often.
frequent in prayer; so we use to say, you are always doing thus or thus: we
mean, you are very often doing so, Joh. 16. 23, 24. Ye have asked nothing (i.
e.) but very seldom; Ask; that is, more frequently; frequent prayer keeps
every grace active; frequent uttering our wants, and Ails, keeps us humble;
the often opening of our spiritual wounds keeps us tender; the more we
trade with God about heavens Commodities, the more it keeps up the price of
them in our hearts; we then vend, and utter them readily, in other parts of
our holy conversation; and making quicker sale that way, we make the quicker
return again to God for more.

Quest. How often must we pray?

Answ. As often as opportunity is offered How often we must pray.
Hen^^ that morning and evening sacrifice of old, unto which the Prophet
alludeth, and calls it a seeking of God evermore; as held out in his
Tabernacle, Psalm. 105. 4. The very Birds, morning and evening (and some also
(as the Nightingale) in the night also) are in their manner lifting up their
notes unto their maker, and maintainer. Give us this day our daily bread, must
needs imply a daily prayer for it: and as twice a day (at least) our bodies
need supply of bread, so is it sit, that both body and soul be employed twice
a day in solemn seeking of the Lord about that, and all other things which we
need, or the blessings of the Lord thereupon.

Quest. Suppose a Christian take the

Answ. Yea, we should as much as doubled. The carnal heart of man will more
cavil, and startle at secret prayer by our selves alone, then at that with
others: our natures will less easily be strangers to services, to which others
are privy (as we see in Hypocrites, and Familists.) than to such as the Lord
only beholds: but no wiles or slights of our hearts or Satan, should draw us
from a commanded duty in Scripture. And indeed, we under the Gospel should not
be less in holy serving of God with our spirits, than those under the Law, but
rather more. Hence it is, that the wooden or Incense Altars for the incense of
prayer, is in Ezekiel Typically represented to be much larger under the times
of the Gospel, than ever under the Law. That under the Law was a Cubit in
length, a Cubit in breadth, and two Cubits in height. Exodus 30. 1, 2, 3. That
which Ezekiel sees in vision is three Cubits high, and two Cubits long, the
breadth is indefinite, and unlimited. Ezekiel. 44. 22. Showing, that the Saints
under the Gospel would make much more improvement of the Lord Jesus (their holy
Altar) in prayer, and make use of his mediation, and Intercession by Faith, in
their heavenly sublimated supplications, for height more sublime, for
continuance more stable, and lasting etc. than the Saints of old were
ordinarily wont to do. Hence a Spirit of supplication promised in those days,
not to be barely dropped, but abundantly to be poured out upon the Saints.
Zech. 12. 10.

4. To be indesinent in prayer, is to be 4 To be constant in a course of prayer.
constant in a course of prayer daily, employed also in daily prayer to be made
for daily bread: Hence Paul injoyning praying always, joyneth persevering or
holding on our course in prayer. Ephesians. 6. 18. so Col. 4. 2. Continue instant in
prayer.

As for Reasons why we ought to pray Reasons why we must pray constantly.
thus indesinently, they are briefly these.

1. In that the Lord is very constant 1 God is constant in calling upon us.
in calling upon us. Esa. 65. 12. He daily spreads out his hands to us: we may
well be daily lifting up our hearts and hands to him.

2. In that Jesus Christ intercedeth for 2 Christ is constant in pleading for
us.
us without ceasing, he ever lives to make intercession for us, coming unto
God by him. It is all his work in a manner, Heb. 7. 15. and 9. 14. Therefore
we may well be so much taken up with this business of prayer.

3. In that the maine matters of our 3 Choice things begged are perpetual.
prayers are everlasting matters; and everlasting mercies call for incessant
prayers; yea the praises one day to be returned for answers of prayers, will
be everlasting, and there would be some proportion of perpetuity in our holy
prayers.

4. In that the Lord cease not blessing of us, till we cease begging: but if
we 4 God continues to bless whilst we continue to ask.
give out from praying, he will forbear his wonted giving: so long as Abraham
held on asking, the Lord held on answering. Genesis 18. When Abraham left off
Communing with the Lord, he goes up from Abraham. If Joash be scanty in
smiting with his darts, his victories over the Syrians are the less. 2 Kings
13. 18, 19. Fewer spiritual wrestlings will issue in fewer spiritual
Conquests. The oil of grace still runs, as long as there are empty vessels
to receive the same. As sometime Sir Walter-Raleigh answered Queen Elizabeth's
demand: when he would leave begging of her: not till your Majesty (said he)
cease giving: so should we, perceiving that whilst we seek the Lord, he is
found of us. As 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. We should resolve, to hold on seeking, pray as
long as we prosper in it.

5. In that, holy constancy in prayer, 5 Constancy in prayer argues integrity
in it.
will be an argument of most integrity in it. The Hypocrite will not pray
always. Job. 27. 8, 10. They are elect ones which are so incessant in prayer.
Cry night and day, Luke 18, 7. They are natural fruits to trees, which they
bring forth constantly. So constancy in holy prayer, argues prayer to be in a
holy wise natural to us as Saints, and that there is in us some praying
nature: It is a beam of Divine Immutability, amidst variety of Changes in
other things, yet to be inchangeable in our way and course of holiness, and so
of prayer. The Saints as Saints, whatever their changes otherwise may be, yet
are suppliants. Zeph. 3. 10. From beyond the river of Aethyopia shall my
suppliants come. That is, my Saints, my effectual called ones, which will be
continually, even naturally making holy supplications to me. If abroad, they
are conscionable of prayer, and so likewise if at home. If free, then free to
pray; if bond, yet the Lords free men to pray. In privileged and peaceable
times, they continue praying, and so they do in boisterous and troublesome
times; whilst the light of God shines in their tabernacles, and on their
spirits, they labor in prayer; and so in darkness of temptations,
afflictions, etc. and yet they hold on praying.

6. In that special and desirable benefits, 6 Special blessings attained by
constancy in prayer.
come by constancy in prayer: for which only consider that place, Luke 21. 34,
35, 36. Its a special help against all worldly temptations. If we would not be
far charged with cares of this life, pray always. Men much in prayer with God
are ever the most weaned from the world. They have so many sweet discourses
with God, that other talks with the world are more harsh and burdensome to
them; they are so often in speech with the Spouse of their souls, that they
cannot affect to speak familiarly with that Strumpet. They are so much in
heaven, that their spirits cannot be much in earth. Psalm. 3. 19, 20. They
drive so rich and gainful a trade in that celestial City, that they have little
list or delight to be pedling elsewhere about trifles. They fare so well at
their fathers house, that they care not for the devils husks, or the worlds
scraps. It is likewise a means to escape the displeasure of God, which
lights upon others; to escape that which comes as a snare, which takes and
hold fast, and bruiseth, crusheth, and kills others. ibid. Besides, it is
a means to fit us for Christ's second coming. Pray always, that ye may be
accounted worthy to escape all these things, and to stand before the Son of
man. Persons much in prayer do so often set up Tribunals in their own hearts, so
frequently do they make up just accounts with God in Christ, and so many times
in their prayers are they making references of matters unto that day, that they
familiarize with their Judge, and do in a manner facilitate the business of
that day, so far as it concerns them.

But here we might justly reprove such Job 27. 10. Will he always call upon
God?

Quest. Whence comes it to pass that any Causes of ceasing in prayer.
faint, or grow weary, or cease from praying?

Answ. Many bring with them to prayer 1 Encumbrances in prayer.
them; they cannot travel on, to hold out in a course of prayer, when they use
themselves to carry so much luggage with them.

2. Many do but slightly waste their time in 2 Slightness in prayer.
prayer, to no purpose, and so getting nothing by this their trade, they grow
weary of it, and men shut up shop (as I may say.) It is bootlesse they
perceive, and in vain for them to pray any longer. Mal. 3. 14.

3. Many have some secret wounds or 3 Secret wounds and distempers.
diseases, yet unhealed, they are annoyed with some malignant distempers of
heart, with some predominant lusts, and so come to faint and give out. They
began this holy course, and set out with others in this spiritual way, but
cannot hold out with them, their hearts not being sound and right within them,
they draw back, and that to perdition: their heart is lifted up, and not
upright within them, and so cannot make any spiritual living of it. In this way
of exercise of faith, Hab. 2. 4. whereas the just hold on living by faith,
these draw back, Heb. 10. 38. Their hearts being not sound in Gods statutes,
they sustain the shame of Apostasy. Psalm. 119. 80.

4. Many do not conscionably receive 4 Letting slip the words of God.
and retain the holy food of their souls, the word of God, which should and
would keep us, and preserve the spirits of their souls in running this path of
a Christians course, and race, and way. Careless and unprofitable hearers will
not, cannot hold on long, or with any life, a course of prayer. Whilst
Christians are lively and fruitful in hearing the word, they are lively,
fruitful, and constant in prayer; but they that give, the bare hearing to the
Prophets words, minding other matters whilst they are hearing, Ezekiel. 33 31, 32.
They are heartless, and listless altogether in seeking unto God that they might
live. v. 10, If our iniquities be upon us, and we pine away in our sins,
how should we then live? They think it loathsome to look, or speak to God
about it.

CHAP. IV. Touching the Conditions required to such manner of praying without
ceasing: and first of Faith in Prayer.
HAving spoken of the nature of the duty of prayer here enjoined, and of that
which is employed in the notion of praying without ceasing, We come now to the
third thing at first propounded to consideration: namely, the conditions which
are required in such praying importunely, opportunely, or constantly. Now these
conditions of incessant prayer are four. 1. Faith. 2. Humility. 3. Sincerity.
4. Watchfulness.

First then concerning Faith in prayer: this is a principle requisite to
prayer, it is even all in all in it; without this prayer is in effect no prayer
unto the Lord, hence acceptable prayer is called the prayer of faith, Jam. 5.
15. The prayer of faith shall save the sick. Its not so much a Christians
prayer, as his faith in prayer which prevails with God for a gracious answer.
Whatsoever ye ask believing, ye shall receive. Matthew. 21. 23. It is faith
which makes a man's person first acceptable, and no wonder then if such an ones
prayer prevail. Cain and Abel both sacrifice, hypocrites as well as upright
ones pray. God had respect unto Abel, and unto his offering, yet not to Caine.
Genesis 4 4.

But it was by faith that Abel offered a more excellent sacrifice then Cain.
Faith is The necessity of faith in prayer.
the instrument whereby the spots and stains which else might blast us and our
prayers are removed, both from our persons and prayers. God purifies our hearts
by faith, Act. 15. 9: We are sanctified by faith. Act. 26. 19. Faith is a
means to make the holiness of Christ's person and prayers ours, and that must
needs be acceptable to the Lord. My beloved is mine, all his holiness and
righteousness is mine, says the believing Church. Cant. 2. 16. Faith
interested the saints in all the succouring attributes and titles of God, or
offices and titles of Christ in the covenant of grace, and all the particular
promises which we need to improve in prayer: and what then more needful or
useful in prayer then faith? Faith shows a godly soul, where all its
succor lies, and where all its strength and life is to be had, and after that
makes the utmost improvement of all in prayer. Its faith which makes the
Saints keep their due distances in prayer. Gives God and Christ their due,
grace and mercy its due; our selves, and our spiritual enemies, which we
complain of, their due: It sets, and (as I may say) places God and Christ
in his proper place, seat, and throne, puts us into an holy Athletique
plight, orders the bounds, proportions, and motions of prayer, and then
takes its best season, and holy advantages, both of God and of our selves, to
effect and bring about the desires which spring from our faith. Faith is a
lively spark indeed, and puts life, both into the suppliants, and into their
supplications. Be we never so dead, dumb, saplesse, and listlesse in
spirituals; if faith begin once to be stirring, it puts life into the
business. Now for the better handling of this principal requisite to
incessant prayer, Consider,

1. What faith in prayer is required, and why so?

2. What is the work of faith in prayer?

3. What helpful means and encouragements are useful to further faith in
prayer?

4. What are the marks of faith in prayer?

Touching the first, we say that faith as There is requied in prayer Faith.
requisite and acting in prayer, either respects God more generally, both in
his absolute and relative nature, or Jesus Christ more specially, or the
promises, or providence of God more particularly.

1. Faith in Gods nature, and in God absolutely considered, is required, as in
all other approaches to God, so in this of prayer. He that comes to God must
believe Heb. 11. 6-
that he is, and so must believe in God absolutely considered, and that he is a
rewarder of those that diligently seek him; and so believe in him, relatively
considered.

But let us instance in some particulars herein.

1. Faith in the immensity and omnipresence 1 In Gods immensitie.
of God is required in prayer. True it is, faith in prayer does and must look
at God as in heaven, in respect of his more glorious manifestation and
communication of himself. Hence that, Our father which art Matthew. 6.
in heaven, etc. 2 Chronicles. 20. 6. Art not thou God in heaven? And 2 Chronicles. 6.
21. Hear in heaven thy dwelling place. It is a great help to an heavenly spirit
in prayer, and to high and holy aims. It is a notable curb to restrain
carnal desires and thoughts in prayer, to eye God as in heaven. But yet
albeit, faith with its eager eye pierce the clouds, and behold the Lord as
above all, yet also, as in all, and through all. He conceives of God as
comprehending heaven it self, and not comprehended either of heaven or earth.
So did Solomon by faith in that prayer, 1 King. 8. 27. eye God as one whom the
heaven of heaven could not contain. Wheresoever the Saints are praying, they
are praying as before God. Dan. 6. 10. Daniel prays and gives thanks before
God. So did Nehemiah, chap. 1. 4: Neither is any frame more suitable to prayer
then that lawful working of heart which proceeds from faith in Gods
immensity. And nothing more quickening to serious attention, and intention to
the duty, and to comforble expectation of the issue, then a lively
apprehension, that we speak not to an absent, but to a present deity, not to a
friend out of hearing, but to one that is with us, and by us, when we are
praying.

2. Faith in Gods omniscience is also 2 In Gods omniscience.
required in prayer. Thus David in his, and Jeremiah in his, and Solomon in his
prayer, look at God as one that tries the heart and the reins: 1 Chronicles. 29.
17. Jer. 32. 16. 19. 1 King. 8. And faith in prayer comes not to bring light
to God, but rather to borrow light from him in all the business of prayer. It
knows his all-seeing eye, as well as his all-hearing ear. Faith makes a
sincere heart the more free and bold with God, because it eyeth him as one who
is privy to all it has to think or speak in prayer. Nothing more terrible to
sinners thoughts in their ways, then that God sees them. But nothing more
comfortable to godly ones then this persuasion, that now they are before an
all-seeing one; they are glad that they serve such a Master, and speak to such
a father, who does thoroughly know them, and watchfully eyeth them. The
suppliants of God have secret things, in secret corners to commit to the ears
of God, and oh, how well is it for them in their esteem that they may pray to
God which sees in secret! Matthew. 6. 6. Pray to thy Father which is in secret,
(says Christ.) Suppliants are to seek Gods face about matters carried on by
Gods and their own enemies, secretly and slyly, and had need eye the Lord as
one who sees what is contrived and done in the dark: yea, sometimes they are
so sorely assailed, and charged by the wily enemies of their souls, that they
have no way left them, but to appeal in prayer to the Lords all-seeing eye, to
judge of the false charges of men, and devils; and sometimes of their corrupted
tempted consciences, accusing them when they should excuse, disquieted when
they should rest in God; Hence, why art thou so sad O my soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? trust still in God. Psalm. 42. 5. and verse 7. Deep
calls to deep. and verse 8. My prayer shall be to the God of my life. That
Tepilla, or appeal prayerwise unto the Lord as one that hears, where the
right lies, helped much. Sometimes we know not what to ask as we ought, but
the spirit it self makes intercession for us with sighs and groans that cannot
be uttered, Ro^. 8. 26, 27. and he that searches the heart, knows what is
the mind of the spirit. So said Paul's faith, so says the faith of each
gracious suppliant.

3. Faith in Gods all sufficiency is requisite, 3 In Gods allsufficiency.
wherefore Christ teaching us to pray, teaches us to look at God, as one whose
is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, Mat. 6. 9, 13. compared. Hence,
the lowest room, and one days residence in Gods house of prayer, is desirable
to David. Ps. 84. 10. He believed that God is a sun and a shield, and would
withhold no good thing from them that walk uprightly. verse 11. Moses prays
to the Lord for mercy, as one whose mercy would fill all the desires and
corners of their souls. Psalm. 90. 14. O satisfy me early with thy mercy. None
are more selfe-empty and needy then true suppliants, and therefore faith in
Gods all sufficiency is most needful to them. None are more sensible of their
utter inabilitie to withstand the force and guile of their souls enemies, and
so need such a faith the more: yea, the truth is, true suppliants use not to
seek of God this or that so much, as God and Christ in that which they seek of
him; God in a spouse, in a friend, in liberty, in health, in ordinances, in
comforts, and the like; and therefore they must needs eye the Lord as all in
all, and all without him to be nothing; yea, in a barren land where no
desirable comforts are; and can then in seeking him by faith be satisfied with
him, as with marrow and fatness, Psalm. 63. 1, 2, 3, 5. etc.

4. Faith in Gods Almightinesse is requisite in prayer. Paul, who bowed his
knees 4 In Gods Almightiness.
(or prayed) unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3. 14. he
looks on him, as one who was able to do exceeding abundantly above all that
we can ask or think, according to the power that works in us, ver. 20. So
Jehoshaphat in his prayer, argues by faith with God thus, (2 Chronicles. 20. 6.)
And in thy hand is not there power and might? that is, there is. So Jeremy in
his prayer, Chap. 32. 16, 17. I prayed unto the Lord, saying, Ah Lord, behold
thou have made the heaven and the earth by thy great power and outstretched
arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee. Sometimes Gods suppliants are put
hard to it in the course of their prayers; the last grain of their faith and
patience seems to be put into the scale: their pressures are such, that they
even squeeze them to the last drop of their faith and patience; there appears
but some small spark thereof under the ashes: they seem to cease in some
fainting fits, to be even departing, only some gasping, panting symptoms left
of life therein; namely, some workings of faith in Gods Almightinesse, that he
is yet able to help and succor them. A may be, a possibility in respect of
Gods Almightinesse, is eyed by faith, and that carries them out in prayer.
Sometimes the very faith of Gods suppliants is at a stand, at a non plus, in
regard of Gods will, it is an [if] to them whether he will help; yet they
believe he can help, and therefore pray; as he did, Matthew. 8. 2. Lord [if]
thou will, thou can make me clean: and such a faith in the Lords
Almightinesse does great things by prayer: For hence that, I will, be thou
clean, says Christ, and immediately his leprosy was cleansed. v. 3. He who
prays in faith of Gods power, shall have beyond his faith the benefit of his
gracious and energetical will. So the Centurion in his prayer to Christ
believes that if he but will his servants cure, he can work it, he can even
command it by his sovereign word. Matthew. 8. 8. Speak the word only, and my
servant shall be whole. He is not sure that he will give out that energaticall
word, but if he would but speak the word, he concludes that he has power
over all desirable blessings, as servants at his command even as his soldiers
were at his beck, v. 9, 10. And Christ approves of this his faith in his
sovereign power, saying, Verily, I have not found so great faith, no, not in
Israel. So the man mentioned, Mark 9. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. he makes a request
to Christ for his child, but at first questioned Christ's power, saying, If thou
can do any thing, help us; and so long his request took not; but being
quickened up by Christ's word to faith in his power, that he could do any thing
for them, and to expect any thing from him in such a way of believing, if thou
can believe, (namely, that I can do any thing for you) all things are
possible to him that so believes; then the man cries out with tears, Lord I
believe, (namely, that thou can do any thing for us) and so gets the
blessing he prayed for: where prayers are put up in faith, believing all things
are possible to the Lord believed in, and attainable upon believing in him;
there all things are possible and attainable to such a faiths-request.
Sometimes the suppliants of God deal with God in prayer about intricacies,
where the determinations of the will of God seem or are hid, and obscure, yea
for such good things as come within the reach of his power; and herein it were
sad with them, if faith in Gods power might not, or did not relieve them. Yea,
sometimes they deal with God about cases wherein the Lord comes to express his
will and mind to the contrary, and yet faith in Gods Almightinesse puts
words into their mouths, and bids, and incourageth them to speak, and to
pray to him, and to try it out with him, even in such cases. When God tells
Moses that he will smite the people, and disinherit them. Number. 14. 11, 12. Yet
because Moses believed the greatness of Gods power, which might else be
dishonored, he pleads that the nations will say, that because the Lord was
not able to bring them into the promised land, therefore he slew them, and then
betaketh him to this hold; Let the power of my Lord be great, according as thou
have spoken: the Lord is long suffering and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity,
etc. He looked at him as now able to fulfill the other part of his revealed
will, even to be a God pardoning his peoples sins. This set the Ninivites a
praying, when yet God had said, yet forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed.
Jonah 3. 3, 4, 5. Yet for ought any knew to the contrary, God might show them
mercy, verse 8, 9. who can tell if God may not turn and repent of his fierce
anger, that we perish not, and their prayers took effect, verse 10 God
repented of the evil that he had said. Besides, true seekers of God are
continually sensible of mighty, adverse powers of darkness against them, so
that if they had not faith in Gods almightiness overmatching those powers, they
would not pray without ceasing.

5 Faith in the gracious nature, and disposition of God, as in his love, mercy,
bounty, compassion, long-suffering, goodness, is required. Nothing more usual
with the Saints in their prayers mentioned throughout the scripture, then to
set their faith on work in prayer upon the gracious nature of God. I need not
mention the scriptures. In this ocean faith can freely swim, and bear up all
the suppliants burdens, and packets. In this holy chancery court, and court of
grace, it can have right in any cases, which concern the soul. Nothing more
suitable to the hungring and thirsting desires of suppliants, and nothing more
sweet, and satisfying, then the marrow and fatness of Gods loving kindness,
Psalm. 63. 1. to 5. The upright remember the love of the Lord more then wine,
Cant. 14. A poor suppliant seeeth here by an eye of faith the true riches
which his soul needs, and that it is here ready for him, that God is rich in
mercy to all that call upon him. So did David, Psalm. 86. 41. This is a
spiritual all-heale to the poor diseased, wounded soul, crying to God for
cure: therein it sees, and eyeth the particular salves, that are most suitable
to the several sores of which it complains: when the people of God are
tossed with tempests of troubles, and temptations, as they were Isai. 44. 11.
yet they eye this as a sweet and safe harbor; if they can but put in here,
they are sheltred in all weathers; if they can but cast the anchor of faith and
hope here, they can ride it out securely, and without hurt or losses from any
winds which blow:

6. Faith in Gods simplicity is required. 6 In Gods simplicity.
Solomon in his prayer looks at God as always acting, and all act, one whose
eyes were open night and day. 1 King. 8. 29 so the Psalmist, Psalm. 65* 2. and
thou that art hearing (ever hearing) prayers, to thee shall all flesh come. The
like faith in the eternity, and immutability of God, and in his faithfulness
in what he is to his poor redeemed ones, and in what he says to them, and
does for them in a way of grace and favor, is needful. Habbakuk in his prayer
makes use of the eternity of God, Hab. 1. 12. Art not thou from everlasting,
oh Lord my God, my holy one? we shall not dye. Nehemiah in his prayer
improveth Gods faithfulness, chap. 1. 4. O God, that keep Covenant and
mercy for them that love him. Those afflicted souls mentioned Psalm. 102. do
in their prayer improve by faith Gods unchangeablenesse. Thou art the same, and
thy years have no end, verse 24, 25, 26, 27. The suppliants themselves, and
their cases vary much, and suffer many changes, but faith in these incourageth
them to hold on in incessant prayer to the Lord. We might have instanced in the
particulars of faiths improvements of the relative nature of God, in prayer: as
that of a Father, of a Savior, Redeemer, and the like, as is often mentioned
in Scripture, as Jer. 14. 8. Esa. 63. 15, 16, 17. and 64. 8. etc. but I shall
forbear: proceed we therefore 7. In the Lord Jesus.
to the second branch of faith required in prayer, namely Faith in the Lord
Jesus, Heb. 7. 23. Christ is able to save such to the uttermost which come unto
God by him. Out of Christ God is a consuming fire, and if we eye him as such a
one only, we are driven from him rather than drawn to him. Daniel craveth all
things for the Lords sake, Dan. 9. 17. David requesteth mercies of the Lord for
his words sake, or as in 1 Chronicles. 11. 9. for his servants sake; the saints of
old looked in their prayers toward the temple. 1 King. 8. 29, 30. 35, 38. So
Jonah chap. 2. 4. Now the temple was a type of Christ, Christ spoke of the
temple of his body, Joh. 2. It was not enough for the Israelites to cry out of
wounds, nor for Moses to pray with them, or for them, but they must look to the
brazen Serpent, Numb. 21. 7, 8, 9. which in Joh. 3. 13, 14, 15. is made a type
of Christ: Christ is the altar whereon we offer all our spiritual sacrifices,
if acceptable, Heb. 11. 12. And if we do in offering them but touch this
blessed altar by faith, that sanctifies them. Exodus 29. 37. The best incense
of our prayers needs sprinkling with Chists blood. As was typed in that Exodus
30. 10. No intercourse twixt God and us but by the means of this blessed
ladder whose foot is on earth, and top reaches unto heaven, Genesis 28. 12. with
Joh. 1. end.

A third branch of faith required in 8 In Gods promises.
prayer, is faith in Gods promises; especially in such promises as do respect
our personal and particular cases and complaints. Jehosaphat in his prayer
makes use of a suitable promise, respecting the present case about which he
then besought the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20. 6, 7, 8, 9. saying, if when evil comes
upon us, as the sword, etc. we stand before this house, and in thy presence,
and cry in our afflictions unto the^, then thou will hear and help. When David
also is to seek the Lord for mercy upon his house, he improveth a promise of
God made to that end, 2 Samuel 7 27. For thou O God have revealed it unto thy
servants, saying, I will build thee an house: therefore has thy servant found
in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee. The Lord is so abundant as in
goodness, so in truth, Exodus 34. 6, 7. that at every paths end, in the way of
grace, and race of godliness he has placed some well of salvation, some
spring of consolation, quickening and encouragement in Christ to go therein
without fainting. All his Ordinances, and precepts, have their promises annexed
to the faithful observance thereof, and no one ordinance has more gracious
promises made to the conscionable attendance thereupon then this of prayer.

This of prayer; as it is that which in special puts much honor upon God,
so the Lord has honored it with many goodly, glorious, encouraging promises;
now faith makes use of this blessed treasury, bequeathed in the Lords
Testament to prayer, or to his suppliants prayings: Faith wisely lays out and
bestows this holy stock, here and there, in this and that case, as need
requires: hardly any prayer case to be supposed, but there are promises here
and there scattered in the word of God, which speak to that very case, if not
directly yet by necessary consequences: Now by that grace of Faith, the godly
make suitable improvement thereof, and where the case requires, drawing such
spiritual conclusions from them, as put them upon the pleading such holy
maxims before the Lord, the Lord sees it meet to bound the peoples desires
within these holy limits of his promises, and it is faith that helps us to
keep within compass in our prayers. And surely there is no language more sweet
and acceptable to God then to speak to him in our prayers, in this holy
language of his spirit and word, in his own language: if we speak in our
prayers no otherwise then the Lord himself speaks in his promises, there
shall be a sweet consort of voice begun by the spirit in the promises,
seconded by the spirit of faith in the Saints prayers, and answered by God in
his providence.

4. The last branch of faith required in prayer, 9. In Gods providence.
was faith in God his providence; the Saints in their prayers mentioned in
scripture have used thus by faith to improve the providence of God, as Psalm.
22. 4, 5. Our fathers called upon thee, and were delivered. Isai. 64. The real
respects which the Lord bears to his peoples prayers, are practically
demonstrated in the providence of God, providence of mercy respecting prayer
cases, are but the promises of God made thereto, acted and executed: Every such
providence is an Oracle of God instructing or encouraging us. Faith is a
spiritual recorder in the soul and conscience sanctified, it registreth,
writes and notes down by the finger of the spirit on the table of the heart,
such observable and useful passages; and faith calls for conscience to read
them over, as need requires. There are no cases now, but what in substance
have been heretofore, there is nothing new under the Sun. And the Lord in like
cases cannot vary, but ever carries it like himself, so that faith makes
great advantage hereof in prayer; the spirit of God he leads suppliants in
the same track of holy requests for the substance of them, and what wonder if
the same answers, and issues are, may be, must be by faith expected: presidents
in prayer cases, as they are rules to us, so are they arguments with God in our
holy pleadings with him in our prayers for his mercy. It is so with men in
their Courts and pleas, Presidents in such and such a Kings reign, in such a
suite, thus and thus issued, according to such or such a Statute, not repealed,
are casting matters in law suits; and so it is verily in our suites in heavens
Court, for this or that relief which we crave: presidents of providence
improved by faith are a current Gospel plea.

The second thing propounded comes The work of faith in prayer.
now to be handled, namely what is the work and business of faith in prayer?
Prayer is called the prayer of faith, James 5. 15. as if faith were and indeed
is the chief instrument of the holy Ghost in the souls of the suppliants to
do all in prayer. Let us instance in some particular good offices which faith
does do in and for the souls of Gods poor suppliants in this work and business
of Prayer.

1. Faith is a monitor, to instruct and 1. It instructs*
inform the soul truly and thoroughly of such things as are most suitable and
helpful to this holy work: Hence we read of the Psalmist, in his secret
lifting up of his heart to the Lord in the night season, he says, His reins
instructed him, Psalm. 16. 7. This knowing grace of faith in his heart, was the
Spirits instrument to teach him. Faith is called the wisdom of the just, Luke
1. 17. the wisdom of justified persons by Christ, to which they were to be
converted, there spoken of: and as other wisdom, so this in special is
profitable to direct our minds and mouths: It is faith which gives the soul
the truest survey which it has faithfully made of its emptiness and
needinesse. It is faith which most fully and convincingly informs the soul of
the fullness and freeness of the riches of Grace in God and Christ, and of his
sutableness to us, considering our cases and conditions: It is faith that
tells the soul of its interest and encouragements in the mercies of God, and
merits of Christ, and in the Covenant of grace, and any particular branch
thereof, so far as the same does concern its perfect cases about which the
soul comes to God in Prayer.

Faith in Prayer acts as a Queen, and 2. It injoineth.
(as I may say) a mother grace, to order, and enjoin, and excite each praying
grace unto its proper work therein. When Faith is stirring, it does in a manner
speak, and charge Desire to do its office; reach out thy hand, open thy mouth
wide, enlarge thy self (O Desire) to crave these and these mercies which the
soul needs, which the Lord is ready to give. And Love, do thou the like,
never a more lovely object presented to thee from one who so dearly loves the
soul wherein thou art. Zeal, be thou fervent, put an edge upon Desire and Love;
the case so requires, the mercies are near, its pity they should be lost for
want of putting to a little more strength to wrestle for them. Humility, stoop
thou the heart, fall down, be low and vile before one that is so glorious.
Fear, awe thou the heart, let it tremble in the presence of the holy One of
Israel. Joy, do thou enlarge the heart in the sense of mercies already gotten
by prayer, and more mercies are at hand. Hope, stand thou on tiptoe, and look
up, and look out; for verily mercy is not far off: the Lord is near such secret
motives and whispers of faith that are in the souls of Gods suppliants; their
spirits are encouraged and moved variously to act in prayer from that faith
which they have in the Lord when it is exercised. Look as David's faith in the
love of God toward him, occasioned and made that speech in his soul, when to
praise God; so that David from the strength of his faith therein speaks to
his soul, And all that is within him to praise his Name, Psalm 103. 1. The like
speech does faith occasion in a gracious heart, when to pray, requiring all
within the same to be employed in furthring the work. So when David is to make
his prayer to the God of his life, in faith that God will command loving
kindness to him, Psalm 42. 8. here is a charge given in his heart to attend it
patiently and hopefully, and distempers are commanded to stand by the while, v.
11.

3 Faith in Prayer is a moderation to regulate 3. It does regulate.
and rectify the souls pleas; yea, to dictate Arguments to back those holy
pleas. Prayers of Faith use to be pleading prayers, filled and carried on in
lively reasonings with the Lord. And because oft-times the spirit of a
Suppliant may be even non-plust almost, and not know how to carry it on, by
reason of secret cavils raised in the heart, whether from Satan, or distrust,
or otherwise; Faith then stepping forth, and whispering some spiritual and
suitable answers, clears up the mist upon the Spirit, and the mistake and
sophisme, and so the soul is a fresh carried on in his pleading with God. Psalm
77. 7. Will the Lord cast off? etc. this was secretly whispered by distrust, as
if God would cast him off: but will he do it for ever? and so ver. 8, 9. David
his spirit was pinched in these reasonings and cavils; at present he could not
positively answer that God would not do so: the cavil of distrust became a real
question to his tempted, deserted spirit, by reasoning so much with that whilst
he was crying to the Lord, ver. 1 but faith gave light to the case, and upon
discovery he perceived that these were but cavils of an infirm spirit of his
own. ver. 10. The case is resolved and determined through the help and light of
Faith exercised, and acted and standing up, which before sat silent; and he
concluded this was his infirmity. Faith is a Second to the soul in its holy
wrestlings and pleadings with God to succor it in its suits, both in point of
assistance persuading with the heart, that the Lord will prepare the heart to
seek him, and so the rather to prevail, Psalm. 10. 17. And in point of
Assurance, 1 John 5. 15. it is the speech of faith, We have what we ask of God.
It is as sure as if it were already granted. And so in point of Acceptance,
ver. 14. We know he hears. ver. 7. Now when at any time the spirit of a
Suppliant begins to give out, when any fainting fit is upon it, then faith
renews the charge upon the Lord, takes up the holy weapons which the spirit
of the Saints began to lay by, the Arguments which it was ready to forgo, and
now the soul gathers up it self afresh, and plyeth the Lord with renewed
strength of holy requests: at this pass was Jonah chap. 2. 4, 7. he said, he
was cast out, yet would look again to the Lord; and ver. 7. when fainting, and
when faith minding him afresh of something in the Lord, he is revived, and
sends up many Supplications to him. What, give out? will Faith say, nay fie for
shame. It claps the soul on the back, (as I may say) and bids it cheer up,
wrestle one bout more, pursue once again; it may be, nay, it is likely thou will prevail, nay, thou shall indeed prevail.

4. Faith in prayer is an Agent for the 4. It pleads
soul to improve and plead all the foregoing principles, and spiritual Topic
places mentioned. That of Gods gracious disposition it is a large field and
very fruitful in prevailing Arguments, when improved by faith: so is that of
God his All Sufficiency, Allmightiness, Eternity, Immutability: and so is that
of Christ considered in his Offices, Merit, Mediation, and Intercession: the
Promises of God likewise are several heads of holy pleas: Faith improveth them
wisely, and seasonably, and sutably, as the cases of the same require. It would
be improving them all, in and through the Lord Jesus, for the souls succor
and support in this Ordinance of Prayer, verifying that Isai. 12. 3. Drawing
water out of the wells of Salvation.

5 Finally, Faith in prayer becomes (as it were) the common pledge between the
5. It undertaketh.
Lord and the Suppliant; that each shall do right in all that has been
pleaded. Faith undertakes to become bound, and to be a pawn to the soul, that
the Lord for his part will do what is meet, and what becomes him for the soul.
And again it ingageth it self to the Lord, that by his help the soul shall
attend to its duty, which concerns it. See Psalm 55. 3. David's faith you see
there, pawneth its credit that the Lord will not, shall not say him nay; My
voice shall thou hear, O Lord: and then faithfully promises on David's behalf,
that he will and shall rightly order his prayer, and so wait and leave it with
the Lord, and unto thee will I direct my prayer, and look up.

3. In the third place we come to consider of some useful Helps unto sincere
Suppliants Helps to says in prayer.
Faith in prayer. The Helps and Encouragements to faith in Prayer may be such
as these.

1 Let us take and make all holy advantage of the least may be of Mercy, where
on 1. Improve every may be of mercy.
we may ground an expectation of a gracious success and answer of our prayers.
We may, yea must do thus. Meek ones must seek the Lord, hoping for his mercy
when there is but a may be of being hid from the Lords anger, Zeph. 2. 3. Thus
did the Ninivites: no body could tell they should be delivered, nor assure
them of mercy if they did sue for it; but yet none could tell the contrary,
none could say peremptorily they should perish without remedy. If it be but a
Who can tell, it is a ground of mighty prayers, and may cherish a spark of hope
therein of success, Jonah 3. Isaiah must lift up his prayer, albeit it be but
a may be, that God would hear the blasphemous speeches of Rabshekah, against
which he was to bend his prayers on Isreal's behalf, 2 Kings 19. 4. A very
peradventure of prevailing in prayer will set Moses a praying, Exodus 32. 30. No
Scripture tells thee that thou art a castaway, many Scriptures give thee
grounds of a may be at least of salvation. Let that therefore raise thee,
though troubled sore, to look and wait for a gracious answer of thy prayer.

2. Labor to be stored with suitable Promises to your prayer cases: it will be
our 2. Store up suitable promises to prayer cases
wisdom to lay up such knowledge of such words of Grace, Prove. 10. 14.
Jehosaphat was not to seek of a Promise suitable to that he was to pray for, 2
Chr. 20. Nehemiah had a like promise ready written on the table of his heart,
Nehem. 1. 8, 9, 10. And be we well acquainted with the Attributes of God, which
are vertually Promises and props to our faith in Prayer. Moses in his prayer
makes use of them for that end, Number. 14. 17, 19. And the Saints often elsewhere
in the Scripture.

3. Improve we former experiences, both of our own and others of the gracious
3 Improve former experiences.
dealings of God with us in way of prayer, for merely (as well as otherwise)
they work hope. Psalm. 6. 9. The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping, he
will hear my prayer. David's experience of Gods merciful and faithful
performance of all the desires of his soul for him, will make him cry to him
with much confidence, Psalm. 57. 1, 2. We may not rest in mercies and blessings
received, but we may and must be encouraged from them to reach after and wait
for more, if we never had tasted of his goodness to us, when we sought him, yet
were we to expect and wait for his gracious answer: but tasting and seeing how
good the Lord is by experience, it is then a blessed thing to trust in him. Ps.
34. 4. 8. We may well trust him and rest on him as a God hearing prayers, when
we have tried him to be such a one; or else it will be a shame, if speaking it
in his word that he is such a one, and then speaking it over sensibly in his
works that he is such a one, yet he cannot be believed. If any, surely such
as by experience know the name of God (have proof of that or any other title
or Attribute or word of his wherein he makes himself known to us) they will
trust in him. Psalm. 9. 10. Gracious answers of prayer given to the Saints, are
precious pledges of our interest in the covenant of grace, and in God as our
God, and so we are to look at them, and be encouraged by them, Zach. 13. 9. We
are also to quicken up our confident expectations of a gracious issue of our
prayers from other experiences therein: so the Saints used to do in their
prayers mentioned in Scripture, Psalm. 74. 1. 13, 14. and often elsewhere; for
indeed the Lord in giving answers of Grace to any of his children, has regard
to the good and encouragement of them all: that which the Lord did for, and
spoke to supplicating, wrestling Jacob, (Genesis 32.) he eyed others that were to
come after him therein. Hosea 12. 4. He had power over the Angel, etc. and
there he (that Angel the Lord himself) spoke with [us,] not with him alone. The
regard which the Lord has to the prayers of destitute ones, is written and
recorded for the generation to come, to make a comfortable use thereof, Psalm
102. 17, 18. if one of Gods chosen ones fare well in their holy approaches to
God, the Prophet will put it plurally in the conclusion; he draws from
thence, Psalm. 65. 4. (the former part of the verse compared with the latter
part) we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house.

4 Improve we conscionably the Intercession 4. Improve Christ's Intercession.
of the Lord Jesus for us. When he was on earth he prayed for us, as you may
see in John 17. To be sanctified by his Truth, to be kept from the evil of
sin, Apostasy: we pray for union and communion with the Lord Jesus, such as is
very strong, comfortable, and constant whilst we are here, and the eternal
enjoyment of the Lord Jesus in another world, but fear lest our sins might
intercept and frustrate our prayers; but Christ tells us (and for our
comfort, that our joy may be full,) Joh. 17. 13. what is the sum of what he
intercedeth with the Father for on the behalf as of his Apostles, so of all
Believers, verse. 20, etc.

We will and must needs confess, that Christ's prayers were without exception,
and that the Father always heard him, John 11. How well is it then for us that
the Lord Jesus has with acceptance prevented us, and these mercies are already
begged by Christ, and granted of God to our hands? Surely, the Lord has heard
Christ in the desires which he as Mediator expressed to the Lord, that we and
our services, and so our prayers might be accepted; of which that in Isaiah 49.
8. is prophetically spoken, compared with 2 Cor. 6. 2. we may well expect that
in our holy approaches and makings out to God for mercy, we come in a time of
acceptance, since the Lord has heard Christ bespeaking of it: if the Lord the
rather honor the Lord Jesus, because in the days of his flesh he made
intercession for Transgressors, Isaiah 13. 12. (therefore shall he divide the
spoil, etc. because he did so) surely we may well expect the success thereof,
and to share in those spoils, if we are strong and earnest wrestlers with God
in his name for the same. Solomon's request for the grant of their prayers, in
their several cases, which are mentioned 1 Kings 8. and which are granted,
chap. 9. 3. were shadowing Types of what the Lord will condescend to in all his
suppliants cases, at the request of this our blessed Solomon, Psalm 72. but
especially improve his present Intercession and appearing before God for us now
in Heaven, Heb. 7. 25. Look as whilst the people were praying without, the
Priest was offering Incense within the Temple, Luke 1. 9. 10. So is Christ in
that glorious Temple above appearing before God for us, whilst we are a
praying. That was a shadow of this, Heb. 8. 5. the Saints Prayers are committed
to him there, as his charge, according to his Office to which the Lord has
appointed him, to offer them up with the Incense of his own meritorious
sufferings, Rev 8. 1, 3. they cannot then but succeed well. At that time when
the Lord should be corporally absent from his Disciples, he made account that
was a special speeding time in their Prayers, John 16. 26, 27.

5 Contemplate and let your spirits dwell 5. Contemplation upon the eight
following particulars 5. Consider that God is a God hearing prayers.
much upon these considerations.

1 What a suitable name the Lord assumeth, and by his own dictate, writing and
seal allows to be challenged; namely, A God hearing Prayers, Psalm 65. 2.
Hearing prayer, showing it is his usual work, his constant exercise, his
inseparable property; nor says he whose prayers, as excluding thine or the
prayers of any other poor soul which in truth desire to seek him. It is
recorded of Augustus, That he never sent away any Petitioner sad from him; and
do thou think, that the Lord of bowels, that is rich in mercy to all that
call upon him, Psalm. 86. 5 can or will?

2 To whose requests the Lord has given 2. Whose cries and prayers he does hear
(at least) some audience? even to the rude moans of beasts and other dumb
creatures, Psalm 145 15, 16. Job 38. 41. And as Christ reasons thence, Luke
12. 14. God feeds the Ravens, and are not you much better then they? So may I
say here, God hears the Ravens cries, will he not hear the Righteous cries?
It is but Righteous, as well as an act of grace in him so to do. Psalm. 145. 15,
16 He fills the desire of every living thing; and ver. 17. Is righteous in
all his ways. No wonder then if as ver. 18, 19 he be nigh unto all such as
call upon him to fulfill their desires. The cries of mere natural men, as they
are his creatures, and in helpless conditions, look out to him for succor, as
many rude Mariners are so heard, Psalm 107. 23, 28 he will give some audience
even to hypocrites prayers, Psalm 78. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. and surely he that
out of his overflowing bounty will hear (as far as he may) such persons
prayers, they shall have that benefit of his common audience and providence,
albeit not of his peculiar and saving respects of grace. He is not unwilling to
hear his peoples requests, when not so rightly principled, as that noble Jew,
who would scarce believe without signs showed, yet was so heard in his
requests for his son, Joh. 4. 48, to 53. or if rightly, yet not so thoroughly
principled as Cornelius, who yet was not so cleared in that great Article of
faith then in question, that that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah: hence that
Acts 11. 13, 14. with Acts 10. 2, 3, 4, 5. or if so principled, yet at present
under much distemper of corruption; and yet when praying, even then God has
overlooked all that, and judged of them by their better part, and taken their
prayers then made kindly. Such was David's secret prayer at that instant, when
changing his behavior, or favor, as if he had not been the man he was, yet
accepted, Psalm 34. title, with ver. 4. Those that in their affliction are so
distempered with infirmities of distrust or discontent, it may be that they
cannot speak freely to God in prayer, but sigh; yet heard, Romans 8. 18, 26, 27.
Moses when in such a pet, yet the Lord picketh out what he would have craved,
and grants it, Exodus 5. 22, 23. compared with chap. 6. 1. and Numb. 11. 11,
12, 13, 14, 15. with ver. 16, 17. their cry was with much distemper, as appears
by their words to Moses, Exodus 14. 10, 11. yet heard and granted; and God the
rather showed all those after signs and wonders on the Egyptians, in answer
even to that distempered cry to him by the Israelites, many whereof were truly
godly: see Nehemiah. 9. 9, 10. halting Jacob, yet wrestling in prayer, though
lamely, is heard: yea when too curious in his inquiry, Genesis 32. 28, 29. yet is
blessed in regard of his prayer before. Sparks of grace amongst an heap of
ashes are acceptable.

3. Consider what kind of prayers have 3. What kind of prayers he hears.
found special acceptance with God: such as have been rather sighs and groans,
then express prayers; he hears the prisoners groans, Psalm. 102. 20. the
needies sighs, Psalm. 12. 5. Such as have been but Ejaculatory liftings up of
the soul unto God in mental desires, Psalm 145. 18, 19. Jonah 2. 1. Such as
have been but a poor chattering and muttering of something in the ears of God,
Isaiah 38. 5, 14. Such which have been but an abrupt and broken expression or
two from a truly broken spirit, as the contrite Publicans, Be propitious to me
a sinner, Luke 18. 13, 14. The converted Thief's, Lord remember me in thy
kingdom, Luke 23. 42, 43. but a long look of the body and soul toward God;
They looked to thee and were not ashamed, Psa. 34. 4, 5 And Jonahs look toward
God in Christ, typed by the Temple, Jonah 24. 7. that took well with God; yea
Prayers of the Saints in a dream, as was that of Solomon's, have found good
acceptance, 1 Kings 3. 5, 9, 10, 11, 12. after that Solomon awoke, ver. 15. Not
that any should think it enough to sigh or groan and not utter their souls in
words to the Lord; but if, like the Shunamite the soul of any be troubled
within them, that they cannot utter their hearts, 2 Kings 4. 27. or like David,
so troubled in spirit that they cannot speak, Psalm. 77. then it is comfortable
to consider, that yet in such cases sighs are successful. Neither may any abuse
what we said of the Publican and the converted thief, and to content themselves
to speak some few words constantly, and there rest as if all were well: no, but
if we are younglings in Christianity, babes in Christ, know that our heavenly
Father also, (as other fathers do in theirs) he delights as much and
sometimes more, in the broken language and lispings of his little ones, and of
his sick ones, though elder in prayers, craving this or that in their broken
fashion, and rather making signs for what they would have, then able fully and
plainly to express their mind to him; then he does in the more fluent
expressions of sundry others: not but that he uses in his own season to
enable such stammerers also to speak more plainly, Isai. 32. 4.

4 Consider what account God does 4. Consider what esteem God has of prayer.
make of his people: they are his choice allowed Suppliants, Zeph. 3. 10 his
royal Priests, 1 Pet. 2. 9. persons sequestrated for such holy ends. Psalm 4.
3. Zach. 13, 9. his beloved ones. Hence that strong expression of Christ,
encouraging to expect hearing of our prayers, I say not that I will pray to the
Father for you, (namely, as now whilst on earth) for the Father himself loves
you, John 10, 26, 27. as if that were that strong motive, which will farther
his gracious audience of his servants prayers. What will not love grant?

5 Consider what account the Lord makes 5 What esteem he has of his Saints
prayers.
of his peoples prayers. They are his delight, Prove. 15. 8. as sweet music in
his ears, Revel. 5. 1. They are memorials before him, ever in his eye, minding
him of what is meet to be done for his people, Acts 10. 4. They are as a
Recompense to him, he likes to be paid in his dues in prayers also. Psalm. 116.
12, 13. he thinks we never pray enough, John 16 13, 14. Hitherto you have
asked nothing, (namely, in comparison,) open thy mouth wide. Psalm. 81. Mercy
accompanies prayer; if the Lord would turn away the one, yet not the others
pleas, Psalm 66. 20.

6 Consider what measures the Lord 6. What measures he keeps in his respects
to prayer
keeps in his respects to prayer: He hears sometimes before we call;
preventeth his people with goodness, Isaiah 65. 24. Sometimes even whilst
praying they have answers of grace, ibid. Sometimes when his people seek him
for pardoning grace, and the manifestation thereof, he shows mercy even above
their thoughts, Isaiah 55. 6, 7, 8, 9. gives them, as above what they ask, so
beyond their thoughts and expectations, Ephesians. 3. 20. Wherefore raise up our
expectations in this way of seeking the face of God, touching his gracious
disposition to hear and help us, and when we have got up our thoughts therein
to the highest, yet believe it, he has mercy and answers of grace for us above
our thoughts.

7 Consider what method God continually and infallibly uses in his respects to
7. What method he observes in his respects to prayer
prayer: namely, first to incline hearts to be cordial and serious in prayer,
and then to give his promised mercies, Psalm 10. 17. Jerem. 29. 11. 12. The
nearer and surer mercies are, the more praying motions and workings there are
then in our hearts. Both are to the same mercy, as one works to help to pray,
and to hear prayer. Mercy would not be at work with us in the one, if the other
part of God's mercies work were not to be effected.

Lastly, That we may clear up our fainting 8. Consider the Parable Luk, 18 1.
to 9.
spirits and drooping hearts, in expectation of faith, that our prayers shall
not fail of good success from God, consider of that Parable of our Lord Jesus,
which he for this purpose propounds, Luke 18. 1. ad 9. A Judge, a man, comes
off to hear a poor suppliants request; and will not God, a Father, do much more
for his? An unjust Judge hears, and will not a just and righteous God hear the
cries of his poor ones? One that was a hater and disregarder of men, and of his
own name, yet hears; and will not God and Christ hear, whose delight is to be
with men? Prove, 8. One that was utterly averse from hearing, [He would not
hear:] one to whom asking was a trouble, [This widow troubles me] yet at
length grants the request of her which sought to him. How much more will the
Lord, to whom prayer is a delight, and whose property it is to be hearing,
(even ready to hear) prayers? surely he will hearken to his suppliants requests
much more. One that while he denied and delayed his Petitioner, considered it
not till afterward, [Then he considered with himself,] and he comes off: How
much rather will the Lord, who wisely weighs all circumstances and
inconveniences in case of too long delay to hear? Isai. 57. 17. He will surely
fulfill his peoples desires. One that in granting his Petitioners desire, merely
to avoid disquiet, (Lest she should weary him out with her outcries) he
hearkens; and will not God, who delights in mercy, do much more for his
precious ones? One that is solicited by (a certain widow) one no way allied to
him, (coming to him without any other Intercessour to plead her cause) yet he
cannot deny her Petition: and can or will the Lord deny his own dear children,
which come to him in the name of him in whom he is well pleased; yea, and have
the Lord himself to intercede for him?

Touching the last thing propounded, very briefly. The Marks of one praying in
faith Marks of praiing in faith.
are these.

1 When a soul is borne up, and carried 1. Praying amidst discouragements.
on in praying, amidst discouragements to pray. If he pray without ceasing when
yet there are so many things sometimes which may seem to occasion ceasing to
pray, save that he prays in faith. When we are hindered and opposed in it by
Satan and others, yet a Joshuah stands before the Angel notwithstanding Satan's
resistance, Zach. 3. 1. or like him in Mark 10. 47, 48, 51, 52. we continue
crying, Jesus have mercy on us, even when others would forbid us: when we are
delayed and held off from our desired answers, and left in some deeps of
affliction in the interim. and yet trusting in the Lord in Prayer, We will
wait, Psalm 136. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. When the Lord is long silent, yet we will not
be silent, but plead, How long Lord? Psalm. 13. 1, 2. When denied of God as the
woman of Canaan, as if we had no part in the mercy we ask, it were not for us,
yet we continue asking, Matthew. 25. 25. 26, 27. Surely there is faith emboldning
thereunto, verse 28. When we seem to be curbed and silently rebuked, as the
friend wished not to trouble his friend, yet will not give over his suite, Luke
11. Surely he thinks he speaks to a friend within, or else he could not, would
not then continue asking.

2 When we pray with some more then 2 Praying with boldness
usual boldness and liberty of speech* as sometimes in an awful and spiritual
manner, we are wondrous free to plead with God, more then at other times, now
is faith stirring in such a Prayer, 1 John 3. 21, 22. Ephesians. 3. 12.

3 When we pray with a kind of delightful 3 Praying with heart calmness
calmness and stillness of spirit, not tossed like waves in prayer, through the
power of unbelief, Jam. 1. 6.

4 When in setting our selves sometimes to pray to the Lord, and petition him,
4. Prayers turned into praises
we are even ready to make a holy digression and diversion, and turning our
intended Petition into melting, admiring praises of God; as often times spiritual
Christians have experiences thereof, surely then faith is stirring. So Christ
turning himself to approach to God, John 11. 41, 42. says, I thank thee
Father, -- that thou always hear me.

CHAP. V. Of Humility required in Prayer.
WE have entered upon the discourse of things propounded touching the conditions
required for the incessant performance of the duty of prayer, and have
dispatched the first, namely, Faith. And now we are to speak of the second
condition thereto required, and that is Humility. It is the desire of the
humble which the Lord hears, Psalm. 10. 17. and his people that pray are to
humble themselves, and then the Lord promises them hearing. 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.
But Humility in prayer consists.
for our better proceeding in handling this condition of prayer, Let us
consider,

1. Wherein that Humility which is required in prayer does consist? 2. When
Humility expressed in prayer may be discerned to be saving? 3. Why this
Humility is required to prayer? 4. What are useful helps and means furthering
such humility in prayer?
To the first, we say, Humility required in prayer consists in these six or
seven things.

1. In low thoughts of our selves to attempt 1 In low thoughts of our selves as
unmeet to pray.
or set about such a duty. When we are going about it, we judge our selves
most unmeet and unworthy in our selves to speak to the Lord; as we are employed
in praying, still the serious and sensible thoughts of our own worthlesnesse
dwells with us, and works on us. That justified suppliant mentioned, Luke 13.
13, 14. stands a far off and would scarce lift up his eyes to heaven, he
thinks he is not worthy to come nearer: let others go as high as they please;
as for himself, he will take the lowest room in Gods house. It is more then
he is worthy of to be admitted to come there at all, and heaven is too glorious
a place in a manner for him, a wretch as he has been to be so bold; he has
sinned against heaven, it is better for him to look on the dust, yea, to kiss
and lick the dust. In the words which the wiseman speaks prayer-wise unto
Christ) that Itheil, he that was his God, and that Vcall, that mighty one,)
Prove. 30. 1, 7, 8, 9. You see how humbly he prefaceth in his speech (so far as
directed to him in way of prayer) as verse 2, 3. he professes he is more
brutish then any man; and has not the understanding of a man, so unfit and
unworthy does he see himself, to speak either of Christ in an instructive way,
as verse 4, 5, 6. or to Christ in a supplicating way, ver. 7, 8, 9. The
Disciples having been at prayer with Christ, they see so much weight in the
duty, and so much excellency in the due exercise of the gift and grace of
Christ in prayer, that they look at themselves as most unfit to pray as they
ought, and therefore entreat his help and direction, Lord teach us to pray.
Luke 11. 1. The Psalmist begins his prayer in a kind of expostulation with
God, Psalm. 22. 1, 2. and pressing of God with examples of his mercy to others
in like cases, verse 4, 5. But if thou think he is too bold with God, and
keeps not his due distance, he will profess that for his own part, he is a
worm and no man, verse 6, 7. he judged himself, as infinitely unworthy to
stand upon terms with God, so even unfit to make comparison with others, verse
5, 6. But I am a worm, and no man: what ever our fathers were, yet I look at my
self, as fitter to creep on the earth, and feed only upon the dust, in
respect of the guilt of sin laid upon me, (for if you apply it to Christ the
antitype, God laid upon him the iniquity of us all, Isai. 53. 6. but we intend
it of the Psalmist rather himself:) then as a man to lift up my self to
heaven; and therefore am justly made the reproach of men, ibid. No sooner do
the Saints essay to draw near unto God, but the beams of the glory of God
reflect upon the faces of their souls, which do thus awe and abase them; they
see in the glass of that excellency their own vileness.

2. In abased thoughts of our selves 2 In low thoughts of our selves when heard.
when we do get any thing of the Lord by prayer. True it is, humble ones do
speed best of all others in prayer: but yet, as mercyes of prayer found them,
so they leave them humble. When Abraham has gained upon the Lord by prayer,
Genesis 18. 26. yet then, nay then especially is Abraham lowest and vilest in his
own esteem, then verse 27. he says, and sees he is dust and ashes. He then
considers what he is in himself, whence he came, and whither he must,
notwithstanding the favor which he finds with the Lord; he knows no cause
which should move the Lord to give any answer of mercy to so mean an one as
himself, but his rich grace, (What is in dust to move respects in God to it?)
and secretly presents it as a plea to continue such undeserved mercy to such
an one, from that which moved the Lord to begin to respect his prayer. Thus
David Psalm. 34. 4 when he had gained by his prayer, and God was found of him,
yet verse 6. he puts an humble Emphasis upon the matter, this poor man
cried. That they, verse 5. (even better men then he, such as had walked worthy
of God, and of his grace,) looked unto the Lord in prayer, and were encouraged
by answers of favor, was no wonder; but that this poor man, that he poor
wretch, as he esteems himself, one that (as in the title of the Psalm)
says, he changed his favor and was not like himself, in that case at Gath, 1 Samuel 21. 13, yet he to cry unto the Lord, and be heard, this is a wonder of
grace to him. After Ephraim has prayed for turning grace from God, Jer. 31.
18. and is answered, v. 19. then is he abased, yea more abased in his own sight
then before. When the Church upon her request is drawn unto her beloved, Cant.
1. 4. then she cries out of her blackness. verse 5. Humblest Christians are
the soundest and healthiest in spirit, and as showers and blasts of affliction
and temptation do not much annoy them, so neither do warming gleames and
shines of mercy distemper them, still they are humble; they are square men,
nothing comes amiss to them, they will fall right which way ever they are
cast, if lowly. Look as vessels whose sayls are filled, if well ballasted,
they run a more steady course; so is it here with the Saints, when they pray
with full sailed joy of faith, yet when this holy ballast of humility is in the
hold of the heart, and not merely aloft in show above decks, appearing to men:
they are not soon lifted up with every good success they meet with, but keep
low, and deep, and carry it evenly with the Lord, as humbly, if not more humbly
then before. The Saints know well they are but beggars, and stand in need of
much; they praise not their good prayers, but their good Master for the alms
of grace which they get: Not unto us, and because once was too little to set
forth their own unworthiness of any mercy, they repeat it again, not unto
us, but to thy Name give glory, etc. Psalm. 115. 1. Liitle cause to be proud of
a trade or art of such holy begging, albeit through the bounty of God it proves
gainful.

3. In affectionate amplifications of 3 In affectionate amplifications of our
vileness, and of Gods grace.
our own vileness, and Gods mercy and excellency. As beggars which use to
make very lamentable relations of their own miseries, but yet giving their
benefactors all their titles to the full. So those in Psalm. 115. 1. ingeminate
the expression of their own utter unworthiness. Not unto us, not unto us. And
the Publican in his prayer speaks of himself, as a sinner, none else such a
one as he, Luke 18. 13, 14. So the Prodigal in his request to his father,
acknowledges his extreme and unparallelled sin, and unworthiness. Luke 15.
18, 19. So those converts, Jer. 31. 18, 19. Do the like: such like
amplifications being as so many forcible arguments in their prayer, with
themselves, to further compunction, and contrition in them; and with God, to
further their participation of the benefit of his compassions. Out of the
abundant heart-abasement the mouth speaks. As pride is large in speaking for
self, so is humility in declaring against self.

4. In framing all our pleas in our petions forma pauperum, in the manner of
poor 4 In framing all our petitions forma pauperum.
undone persons; and pleading for mercy in regard of our extreme misery. That
we are under woeful captivity and oppression, not of Turks, and such like, but
even of spiritual enemies of our souls, corruptions of nature, temptations of
Satan, etc. which are far more grievous. That we have sustained losses in
soul that are almost inreparable, lost the goodly patrimony in our first
parents of Gods favor and image, which never can be sufficiently bewailed; yea
happily have lost that little light, and life, and comfort of grace through some
ill course we took since the Lord set us up again, and trusted us with a new
stock of grace; yea, are strangely run behind hand with God; yea, we are
extremely in debt by our sin to divine justice; yea, we are afflicted with
many spiritual diseases and distempers, and sorely wounded in our spirits,
through some sad foils of the enemies of our souls, and in all we are utterly
insufficient to recover our selves, yea, and helpless, and shiftlesse, in the
very use of such means as might tend thereunto. We see indeed, that if we
could believe, that would succor us, but yet are not able; if we could so
earnestly wrestle for, and breath after help of God in Christ, we might have
relief; but see also that of our selves we cannot do so much, but as we are
able through the might of God. We tell him of our grievances, and plead our
miseries, and spread them before him, and his people, if they may move to
mercy, and so wait his gracious leisure for the same. Jeremiah pleads for mercy
to him and his people, because their backslidings were many. Jer. 14. 7. David
pleads for pardon because his sin is great, Psalm 25. 11. and craveth mercy
because a poor shiftlesse stranger, and sadly gone to decay, Psalm. 39. 12, 13.
So Psalm. 38. 1, 2. entreats the Lord to forbear to go on to afflict him,
because his arrows stick fast in him; he is sorely wounded already, ver. 2. he
is sick in body and spirit. ver. 3. he is already fallen under a burden that is
too heavy for him, ver. 4. and ver. 6. his back is already ready to crack under
his pressures, and so on with such like sad pleas taken from his forlorn
condition, he presses God for mercy in that Psalm.

5 In much inward brokenness and relentings 5. In heart brokenness therein
of spirit. Hence that smiting upon the breast in the Publicans prayer, Luke 18.
13, 14. There, there lay his sin and misery, there was his wound and burden;
little did men think what he felt and saw. Ah that breast of his, how had it
harbored rebellion formerly against God! his heart within was smitten for it,
whereof his breast smiting was but a shadow. Psalm. 51. 17. A broken and contrite
spirit is the all of his Sacrifice and prayer. Surely that heart is low in
prayer, and brought down to the dust, which is broken as it were to dust. What
ever speech humble ones have in prayer, it is sure they have sighs attending.
If the Dove-like Spirit of Christ breaths in them, they will be breathing out
Dove-like moanes and groans in the ears of God. The Psalmist speaks not so
much of Gods hearing of the words of the humble, as the desires; he hears the
desire of the humble: If they do fall short at any time through some occasional
impediments of expressions, yet broken hearted desires, expressed in groans are
present and stirring, and they are to God as prayers, Psalm. 10. 17. The
groanings of the prisoners are the prayers of the afflicted and destitute,
Psalm. 102. 17, 20. in Gods account.

6 In a meek and quiet submission, and 6. In a quiet submitting to the Lord
amidst discouragements.
bearing all discouragements without quarrelling against God, nay, awfully
clearing the Lord therein. If rated like beggars, if rebuked, if upbraided, if
delayed, if denied, yet putting up all contentedly. The reproachful name of a
dog moves not the humble suppliant; she takes it very well, and makes good
use of it, and does not mutiny against the Lord Jesus for it. Mat. 15. 27. They
in Judges 10. hear and bear, and take all that well, which the Lord in a holy
upbraiding way speaks. Judges 10. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. They yield to all, as
so, and just, if worse with them from the hands of God then it is: but yet with
the leave of his mercy, they crave his favorable acceptance of their request,
ibid. If humble ones come to Christ in prayer or otherwise, surely they come
with holy dispositions to stoop to any yoke and burden of Christ, which he will
lay upon them, as well as desire to have their own burdens taken off by him,
Matthew. 11. 28, 29. They may indeed plead with God, why he carries it so
toward them: as Psalm. 22. 1, 2. but they are clear in it, that he cannot but
carry it well, albeit the particular cause they know not: So Psalm 22. 3. But
thou art holy: and however it comes about, that such divine forsakings are
occasioned, yet still thou art holy and spotless, and pure in all thy
dispensations.

7 In a real preferring others prayers before 7. In a real preferring others
prayers before ones own
our own. Thus the humble Centurion in his request he had to make to the Lord
Jesus, he thought better of the Jews prayers then of his own, as being in his
own sight a most unworthy Gentile, Luke 7. 3, 7. Not that under this pretense
men should in a way of voluntary humility repair to deceased Saints, that is
idolatrous humility; yea, even the madness of persons then living. So Hezekiah
prefers Isaiahs prayer before his own, and therefore sends solemnly to him
to lift up his prayer in the case of Judah, Isaiah 37. 1, 2, 3, 4. So the
Church prefers the prayers even of her young daughters (not so well
instructed as her self) before her own, in that Cant. 5. 8. And the Psalmist
reckons the prayers of his fathers as far more excellent then his, Psalm 22.
2, 5, 6. And the like did David in comparing his own prayers with others,
Psalm. 34. 5, 6. True it is, Pride and Hypocrisy will counterfeit this, as they
that preferred Jeremiahs prayer before their own, and therefore so earnestly
do seem to desire it, Jerem. 42. 2. and the proud false hearted Simon Magus
does the like in regard of Peter's prayers, Acts 8. 24. But this was but an
extorted act, wrested from horror of heart: and others in a complemental way,
and for fashions sake, or that they might seem to be humble persons may carry
it thus too; but it is not inwrought in their spirits.

Touching the second, When humility Marks of humility in prayer as saving
in prayer may be called saving?

I answer, first Negatively, and then Affirmatively.

1. Negatively. 1 That expression of 1. Not to desire others prayers.
Humility is not always saving, when a person questioning the worth and
validity of his own prayers, does desire the benefit of others prayers; for
then that act of Pharaoh in desiring Moses prayers, and Jeroboam the Prophets
prayers (1 King. 13. 6) had been saving.

Nor 2. Is that always saving when 2 Not in words to ascribe all our good to
the Lord.
one carries it so in prayer, as ascribing all to the Lord in what good he
partaketh of. The unjustified Pharisee will in words attribute all to God, that
he is not as other men are, Extortioner, etc. Luke 18. 10. 14. yet with a proud
spirit disdaining others, which in his esteem are not so good as himself. 3.
Not to be afraid to come before the Lord.


Nor 3. Is that always saving, when one is fearful to come to God in prayer,
out of sense of great distance betwixt God and him; as the slothful servant
which durst not trade thus with God in prayer, (as well as otherwise) Luke 19.
21. Or like him whom the fear of the Majesty, Word, Presence and Justice of
God, as a King, strikes him speechless, Matthew. 22. 11. he cannot, dare not
open his mouth to plead for his mercy.

Nor 4 Is that always saving, when any 4. Not merely to make large confession
of sin, or mournful complaints, to fast, to be of dejected countenance, to weep
in prayer.
prayer does express several semblances of Humility: as when any is large in
confession of their sin: as many of those that are brought in as confessing
their sin in such a sort; as Isaiah 59. 12, 13. yet few or none of them
savingly interceding and pleading with God in prayer; hence that wonder, that
he found no Intercessour. v. 16. or when any utter before the Lord many sad
complaints of themselves, and their misery, and that in a mournful manner: in
their prayers in appearance they will roar like Bears, and mourn sore as
Doves, as sundry of those did mentioned, Isai. 59. 11, 16. and such like were
many of them that did not savingly complain or bewail their sins, albeit they
did as Ezekiel. 7. 16. compared with the 17, 18, 19. and chap. 8. 18. Nor when
persons set apart solemn days, and that frequently, for a more seemingly
humble seeking of God in prayer; as that proud Pharisee and unjustified person
did fast twice a week, Luke 18. 12. Nor when sad countenances and dejected
looks are adjoined in such solemn times of prayer. There is an hypocritical
affected sadness of countenance charged upon those false hearted professors in
their days of fasting and prayer, forbidden to sincere ones, Matthew. 6. 16. No
nor when tears and weepings are joined to such prayers, are they always
expressions of saving humility therein required: albeit some of those were
sincere, yet surely some of that people which wept so sore, upon that
confession of sins made, Ezra 10. 1. and in that solemn time wherein all Israel
were gathered to Mispeh to pray, 1 Samuel 7. 5, and there even poured out waters,
so abundantly did they weep on that fast day, ver. 6. were not sincere therein,
but many of them did it from common principles, and not saving.

2. I answer, Affirmatively. Humility expressed in prayer is then saving.

1. When a gracious Christian abaseth But 1. Self abasement in prayer.
himself in prayer; and is not merely abased: when he is a stirring agent, by
the lively power of the graces of God in him to abase himself; he uses means,
lays many Arguments together for that purpose, and is not barely a Patient
therein. Thus did the Publican in his prayer, he smote on his breast, and that
not to seem to be humbled; but as one outward help to himself to be abased,
Luke 18. 13. Hence the conclusion of Christ in ference to the humble manner of
seeking of Gods face, He that humbles himself shall be exalted. The Pharisee
he lays all such materials together in his prayer. ver. 11, 12. as did rather
tend to lift up his spirit, which was high enough in it self, and needed not
such stirrups. When humility is wrought in prayer, as out of the fire, yea,
gained out of much contrary opposition, a Christian finding his heart
senseless, unaffected, and unbroken, he takes such pains with his heart in
prayer, and wrestles so with God and his own spirit, that it relenteth, and
melts, and falls before God. Thus did those of Ephraim, they cease not
bemoaning themselves, and charging their stiffneckednesse, and unbrokennesse so
deeply upon themselves, and pressing the Lord for a more serious and through
bringing of their hearts to a relenting, repenting frame, Jerem. 31. 18. whilst
that they prevail with God, and their own souls, and are more thoroughly
abased, ashamed, and confounded in their own sight before the Lord, v. 19.

2 When a Christian is in a holy wise ashamed 2. Inward holy shame even to look
God in the face.
before God in prayer, even so much as to look him in the face. That humble
Publican that was so ashamed in his prayer, in the sense of his extreme
vileness, and unworthiness in himself, he is justified, Luke 18. 13, 14. he
thought earth and hell below were more suitable to his case and deserts, and the
judgment of God there (and thence looks down thitherwards) then heavens
glory and grace. Thus that precious Suppliant Ezra in his prayer professes, he
was ashamed, and blusheth to lift up his face to heaven, Ezra 9. 6. Thus the
Publican, and converted Prodigal, he is even ashamed to own the name of a
son; to be called, or be as an hired servant is too good for him, he
thinks, and speaks so in his prayer. Luke 15. 19. The woman that came to
Christ, she is even ashamed to come before him, to behold his blessed
countenance, but stands behind him. Luke 7. 38. And she sped well in the
desire of her soul, for the comfortable manifestation of her pardon, she
secretly sought for. Says Christ, verse 48, 50. Thy faith has made thee whole.

3. When a man in or upon his prayer 3 A holy awe in and after prayer.
is affected and awed with much holy trembling: thus that humble Suppliant in
Luke 18. 13. He is even afraid to lift up his eyes to heaven, durst not do it,
such awful rays in the glorious purity, majesty and excellency of the Lord
did he behold by an eye of faith, and he is justified therein, verse 14. That
godly Prophet in his Prayer, Hab. 3. 1, 2. and in the mention of diverse things
touching God his providence and proceedings, his belly (he says) trembled, and
rottenness entered into his bones, verse 17. Thence that believing Centurion,
after he had sent to Christ to entreat his gracious presence, and coming for
the help of his servant, as in a holy wise jealous of himself, and what he had
done, whether he, so unworthy an one, had not made too bold with the Lord
Jesus, to desire him to come under his roof; he sends a second message,
therein professing his unworthiness that Christ should condescend so far to
the desire of so unworthy an one as he judged himself to be, Luke 7. 3.
compared with verse 6, 7.

4. When a man in prayer is much in begging pardon of sin, and the
reconciliation 4 Greatest earnestness in begging pardon of sin, the benefit of
Christ's righteousness, etc.
of his soul to God in Jesus Christ. Thus the Publican, justified in that way
of prayer mentioned, Luke 18. the maine and in a manner only matter of his
desires was, that God would be propitious to him a sinner; for so the Greek
word signifies, or be reconciled to him, and have mercy on him, in covering all
his sins in Christ, the favor and mercy of God in Christ Jesus, as a
propitiation for sins, is all in all with him. When a child of God is in
great afflictions of outward as well as inward man, yet the favorable
remembrances, and merciful respects of Christ to a poor converted sinner,
even in tortures, it is all in all. The converted thief desires not to be
saved or exempted from any justly deserved censures of God or man, but only
favor with Jesus Christ. Luke 23. 39, 41, 42. The other wretch was all for his
own ease, and for to continue in the world; he cares not for the favor of
Christ, as sometimes the Psalmist did, Psalm. 63. 1, 3. The loving kindness of
God in any condition is better then life; to live in the love and favor of
Christ, is more then ten thousand lives to him: yea, so the Lord will be
merciful to him in the maine of his soul, he cares not what becomes of his
bodily life, when called to sacrifice the same. An humble child that cries out
when he is whipped, yet cares more for his fathers favor, then is troubled
about his whipping.

5. When a Suppliant of God does not propound to him in his prayer matters too
5 Praising of the least degrees or portion of mercy.
high for him, things that are above his reach, or his measure, or his
condition, or his calling, or the present necessity whereof he is sensible; but
he will be glad of smallest mercy, childrens crummes, yea, such as are to
others refuse, despicable blessings, are in high esteem with him in his
desires: crummes that fall from the childrens table she craveth in Matthew. 15.
26. and is accepted and approved in the manner of her praying. verse 28. Some
children it may be will scorn to have only bread for their food in the
fathers house; but the humble Prodigal in his penitent motion which he means
to make to his father, will be glad of that, yea of the coursest of the
household bread, and fare in the house, hirelings bread yea he would be glad
to have of the refuse, and leavings, and spare even of hirelings bread. Luke
15. 17. Make me as one of thy hired servants, namely, in their allowances, as
well as services; as one of them, albeit as the meanest kitchin-boy, (as it
were) the poorest, most despised cutter of wood, and drawer of water, etc.
Beggars ask but a piece of dry-bread, a cup of small beer, or water; any old
cast clothes, and the like mercies and blessings in God his house, which others
it may be account too slightly of, these humble suppliants will highly prize,
and earnestly crave of the Lord: and whatsoever they press after in spiritual
blessings in Christ, yet in temporals they use to be very modest; neither
poverty, nor riches, but Lechem Chukki, the bread of his portion, and
dimension, that is the matter of humble Agars prayer. Prove. 30. 7, 8. So Jacob,
if God, or (prayer-wise,) O that God would give me bread to eat, and raiment
to put on. Gen, 28. 20. In spirituals indeed they are still more needy, and
craving, hunger and thirst after righteousness, that is their most ordinary,
usual and continual daily desire, like hunger and thirst, the ordinary and
daily affections in the body. Matthew. 5. 6.

6. When a Christian amidst all vilifiings of himself in prayer, is ready to
exalt 6 An acknowledgement of greatest love in smallest mercies.
the Lord, and to acknowledge much love and mercy of God, even in the smallest
fruits and benefits thereof: whatsoever stout vagrants and bedlams do, which
will disdainfully cast scraps at their feet, yet poor hunger-bitten beggars
will not do so, but be very thankful for smallest courtesies. So it is here,
the guiding of a faithful Eleazar in his way, will make him bow his head in
way of thankfulness to the Lord, that so graciously answered his prayer
therein. Genesis 24. 48. O how will Gods humble Suppliants exalt and magnify the
Lord for blessings of a meaner nature, even temporal as well as spiritual
blessings! as David for promised blessings to his house, cries out, who am I,
and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? 2 Samuel 7. 18, etc.
and 1 Chronicles. 24. 11, 12, 13, 15, 16. He exceedingly amplifieth the kindness
of God to him and his people, even in regard of temporal blessings he wonders
at the greatness of God his mercy to him and them, even therein ibidem verse.
14, 15. And when such of God his Suppliants do not fare so well at the door
of mercy, as they could desire, and as sometimes they have done, yet they will
not go away muttering, but even then will speak well of God, and grace, and
mercy, and the covenant and way of God, etc. The Psalmist, in Ps. 89. 49.
cries out, Lord where are thy former loving kindnesses? yet concludes, (verse
52.) thankfully, notwithstanding all the sad passages of providence before
mentioned. Blessed be the Lord for evermore, Amen, and Amen.

7, When a Suppliant having prayed pathetically, 7 Looking through all our
meltings unto mere Grace for the success.
with much fervency and brokennesse of heart, yet as one which sees the
emptiness of his prayer, even at the best, he goes out of that, rests not
therein; but as if he had not prayed in such sort, he runs to the Name of
the Lord, he looks for nothing, but from the rich and free grace of God in
the Lord Jesus, as Daniel Chapter 9. 3. 4. He is at it with God in such like humble
prostrating his souls desires to him, but in the close professes the
supplicaons which were presented, (though with much brokennesse of heart
doubtless) yet were not for any righteousness of their own, (whether of
person, or performances, or prayers,) but for his mercies sake. v. 18. And v.
17. desires audience for the Lord sake, for Christ's sake. And ver. 19. for his
name sake; so Ezra, albeit he had been weeping and casting himself down before
God in prayer, Chapter 10. 1. yet chapter 9. last, he concludes, that he and the
people in respect of themselves, are before God in their trespasses, and cannot
stand before him, by reason of the breach of covenant with God, which he had
then bewailed. verse 14.

Now touching the third thing propounded, Humility required in prayer, Because
1 Humble prayers speed best.
why this humility in prayer is required? I answer briefly;

1. Because prayers put up in and with such humility, they do ever speed best.
Mark 7. 29. For this saying, go thy ways, the devil is gone out of thy
daughter, for what saying? namely, that verse 26. wherein she takes the name
of a dog so quietly, and meekly and craveth the very portion of dogs in a
manner, the mercies slighted by the children: The Lord will not look at what
the proud bring to him, but has respect to the lowly, to strengthen them with
grace and peace in their souls. Psalm. 138. 3. 6. to perfect all that concerns
them; verse 8. The lowly strangers see how the Lord welcomes them in prayer,
Isai. 56. ver. 6, 7. The penitent Prodigal that speaks in such a vilifying way
of himself to God his father, Luke 15. 18, 19. sees how royally and richly he
is entertained by the Lord, like as by that father, verse 22, 23. the costliest
robes of grace, and delicatest of mercy in Christ, are readily brought forth to
such; greatest mercies are granted to such, as pardon of sin, and the like.
Luke 18. 13, 14. Yea, in such a lively and convincing manner exhibited, as that
they shall carry it home with them, the sight and light thereof shall stick by
them; he went home justified: they shall in a holy triumphant wise carry home
the garland of grace and peace, for which they wrestled with God in prayer:
whereas in defect of Humility no prayers, nor tears of a proud Esau shall avail.
Heb. 12. 17. The Pharisees repair so diligently to pray to the temple is to
little purpose, whilst he does not humble, but rather exalt himself therein.
Luke 18. 10, 14. God will not approve of any such men's persons, or prayers; and
such a non-justified estate is a sad abasing of such, ibid. as the gracious
acceptance of the persons and prayers of humble ones in Christ Jesus, is an
high degree of honor and exalting to them.

2. Because the servants of God are 2 Then are humble ones themselves.
never more themselves, as such, then when humble in a way of seeking the face
of God. When the converted Prodigal, and Publican comes to rights, to
himself, then in that frame, he betaketh himself to this work. Luke 15. 17,
18, 19. Assuredly penitent dispositions work then strongly, zeal and holy
indignation against sin, and our selves for it, are then stirring, then is
faith, and love doubtless active, and putting forth themselves in our souls.

3. Because an humble frame of heart 3 It puts most honor upon God and
Christ.
in prayer puts most honor upon God, and Christ, and mercy, and grace, as
all in all. Aga^ in that frame thinks that it will put the largest heads, and
ripest wits in the world to it, to conceive or express the glory of God in
Christ. Proverb. 30. 2, 3. compared with the 4^h. And he will magnify the
purity, perfection, and stability of his word. verse 5. see verse 1, 7, 8, 9.
Asaph when in that frame of heart, Psalm. 73. 22. then who but the Lord of
heaven and earth with him, and in his desire! verse 25. and if such a poor
soul get any mercy by prayer, of all others he will use it best, and give God
the most glory of it, and for it, as might be showed in diverse instances.

4 Because such a kind of spirit in 1. It fitteth us most for mercy.
prayer, it does fit us most for the mercies of prayer. Hence it is compared to
hunger, which as it is good sauce to the body, and prepares it well for its
meat, so does it fit the soul for its desired food of grace and mercy. Hence is
that opposition Luke 1. 53. betwixt the hungry and the rich, and yet rich is
rather opposed to poor, because indeed the poorest in spirit, the beggars in
spirit are the most hungry. Look as the emptying of a vessel fitteth it for
being filled with precious liquor; so humility by emptying the heart of all
self-strength, self-confidence, self-sufficiency, self-righteousnesse,
self-willednesse, and self-conceit, it fitteth the soul in prayer for what it
does pray for. The heart of the humble is a prepared heart; as to pray to God,
so likewise to receive and improve the mercies which it seeks in prayer; such
an one is most flexible and ready both to use the best means to obtain the
mercies desired, and to walk worthy of them when obtained. So Job 7. 20. I have
sinned, what shall I do to thee, O thou Preserver of men?

As touching the last thing propounded; Helps to humility in prayer.
namely, What Helps and Means we should use to further such Humility required
in prayer? I answer,

1. Set faith on work, as we showed at 1. Faith in the Lord.
large the last Lecture. Faith in Gods Promise and Providence made David pray
so humbly, as one not worthy to speak more to God, or receive more from him, 2 Samuel 7. 18, 19, 27. That made the Prodigal to throw down himself in such sort,
and humbly to seek his fathers favor, considering in him a fathers bowels, yea
which possibly might move toward him; he is apprehensive likewise that he has
all he needs, and that moves and furthereth him therein, Luke 15. 17, 18,
19. So it is here, the Publicans faith in that propitiatory merit and mercy
causes him so to speak, as Luke 18. 13. It was faith that set the woman a
begging, in that humble and lowly, as well as earnest manner, Matthew. 15. 26,
27, 28, The faith of that woman was the instrumental means of her salvation,
Luke 7. 50. that was the means of that her silent, humble approach to the Lord,
ver. 38. It is faith which takes a true measure, both of God and of our
selves, and thereby furthereth such humility.

2 Get our hearts filled with love to the Lord. Love is a stooping grace, it
will 2. Love to the Lord.
make a Christian think meanly of all he says or does in behalf of Christ whom
he loves, that he never speaks nor does enough for him. Love will make a man
amplify his worth and excellency, and glory, and even be speaking well, even
the best of him; and that will surely make him carry it submissively to him, as
very loath to displease or dishonor him; and when at any time a Christian
wrongeth or offends the Lord, Oh how will love occasion self-loathing and
displeasure, and distaste, and trouble for it! The Lord Jesus in giving that
answer in that poor woman's hearing, Luke 7. 47. Her sins which are many, are
forgiven her, for she loved much; shows, that love also set her on work in
such humble and melting sort to express the secret desires of her soul unto
him, touching the conserving and clearing of her Justification, ver. 38.

3 Be we sincere in heart in our prayers 3. Sincerity.
which we make. The sincere hearted Publican will humble himself in seeking of
Gods favor by prayer, when the leaven of hypocrisy, will heave and puff up
that Pharisee whilst he is praying, Luke 18. Sincerity will make us in prayer
speak all freely and ingenuously on the part of God, and Christ, in way of
good; and on our own part in way of our evil and emptiness; it will make men of
yiedling and flexible tempers, and cause persons to be open and plain hearted
with the Lord; and that they shall not refuse or be unwilling to take any shame
before God.

4 Improve we the thoughts and serious 4. Thoughts of our need, and Gods
greatness
considerations of our needy conditions, as likewise of the greatness of God.
The Saints are styled such as are beggars in spirit. Matthew. 5, 3. hungry, ver.
6. Luke 1. 53 Destitute ones, Psalm. 102. 17. such as whose best habilements are
rags, Isaiah 64. 6. Clay vessels, the Lord our potter, ver. 8. Dust, Genesis 18.
27. and such like: the consideration whereof kept those Saints of God, as
Abraham and the rest, humble in their prayers. When we look at this ragged
condition of ours, it will make us remember our selves, and keep us humble in
our Supplications.

5 Spread we much our own and Ancestors 5. Thoughts of our Ancestors sins.
sins before the Lord when we are to pray. And thus did Daniel, chap. 9. thus
did Ezra, chap. 9. The very serious mention and meditation of an offense of a
child of God against his Father, will make a Regenerate nature begin to work,
and then will issue such holy blushes in the face of an ingenious Christian. If
through the wily slights of Satan, and our deceitful hearts, we should begin to
gaze on our goodly feathers, and have some risings of spirit in way of pride,
yet at the sight of this black foot of ours we should then assuredly fall in
our spirits.

6 Take we all holy advantages of such 6. Taking advantage of melting workings
in our selves.
melting, weeping plights, in which we are sometimes above others. David's heart
being in that humble plight upon occasion of a good word of the Prophet, sent
to him from God, then David goes in and prays, and then he carries it so
humbly, 2 Samuel 7. 18, 19, etc. When Ezra upon the hearing of the evils among
them, was put into that abased frame, Ezra 9. 3. then he falls into that
humble sort to pray before the Lord, ver. 5, 6. etc. So whilst Nehemiahs heart
was even broken at the present hearing of the sad news, he forthwith sets
himself in solemn wise to pray and weep before the Lord, Nehem. 1. 2, 3.
compared with verse 4, 5. etc. Albeit such melting desires and inclinations
should happily be raised from other causes, or spiritual miseries, yet being
stirring already they may the better be spiritualized. There are times when we
are so strangely stupefied, that scarce any thing will affect us, but when
affected seriously with any thing, it is an advantrge (if improved wisely) to
turn such waters, (the sluices being now opened) into the right channel.

7 In our secret approaches to the Lord, 7. Premeditation.
spend some time in serious premeditations, it will help to put us into a more
serious frame of spirit, and that is the next neighbor to an humble and
sensible plight. It will add plummets to fleety, lofty spirits; especially if
we seriously consider of his Majesty and Sovereignty before whom we come;
surely that will help to bring us on our knees: The sight of the Kings Colors
will doubtless make all, but some presumptuous, careless, stout spirits to
lower their sails, even when they are going on full sailed in prayer.

CHAP. VI. Of Sincerity required in Prayer.
HAving spoken in part of the third general thing propounded, touching the
conditions required to the incessant practice of this Duty of Prayer; and
therein handled two of those conditions required, namely, Faith, and Humility:
we come now to a third; namely, Sincerity, or Purity, or Integrity. The
approved Suppliants are such as call upon God out of a pure heart, 2 Timothy 2.
22. such as call upon him in Truth, Psalm. 145. 18. The prayer of the upright is
a delight to the Lord, Prove. 15. 8. Prayer that is pure, Job 16. 17.

For our better handling of this Requisite to prayer, consider we

1 Wherein this Purity, Integrity, and Sincerity required in prayer does
consist? 2 Why the Lord requires it? 3 What are the Marks of it? 4 What Means
and Helps there are to it? 5 And lastly; what Motives may stir us up to
endeavor it?
To the first we answer, That such Sincerity consists in these six or seven
Sincerity consists
things.

1 In carrying on the whole business of 1. In praying as to God.
prayer as to God. Whether we confess our sins and miseries, or crave redress
of them; whether we ask such or such blessings or favors for our selves or
others: or whether we bless the Lord for Grace already vouchsafed us, for what
else we do in Prayer, we are to carry it with such awe and reverence as those
which are speaking to God; and with such intention, and attention, and
observance as those that are now to deal with God; and to keep our true
distance, neither heartlesly distrustful and dismayed, and yet not heedlesly,
and presumptuously, or malepertly bold with God; Afraid of him, yet not
terrified by him; sollaced in him therein, yet trembling before him; satisfied
in him, yet unsatisfied in continued desires of mercy from him; resting on him,
yet restless: and albeit restless, as pressing upon him for mercies we need,
yet resting on him quietly for the same. Having such apprehensions of God in
the duty as befitteth him, and as are suitable to us, to the Duty, to the
present work and workings therein. If we confess our sins, we are sensibly
apprehensive of his Purity and Majesty offended thereby; of his Goodness and
Patience abused thereby; of his privity to them all, in their circumstances; of
his sin-revenging Justice due thereto, of his sole prerogative to pardon the
same, of his readiness in Christ to do it. We are seriously apprehensive of
the vileness of such sins, of our own loathsome nature, whence they did arise,
and our hearts rise up in holy indignation and detestation of them, and our
selves for them: whilst we mention the same, we bleed over them in our spirits,
could even tread upon our selves, and take a holy revenge on our selves for the
same: and all the meltings and breathings of our spirits in the mention of our
sins they are still as to God: When we mention such and such wants of such and
such mercies we crave, all is carried as to God. We have suitable workings in
our minds; we eye him as full of all grace and mercy, as treasuring up all that
fullness in the Lord Jesus, as willing and free to communicate the same, as real
in his Promises of the same; and the like might be said in the rest. Psalm 5.
3. David says, he will direct (or orderly settle, prepare, and adress) his
prayer to the Lord. And Christ would have such as pray, to pray to their Father
which sees in secret, Matthew. 6. 6. Job would order his cause before the Lord,
Job 23. 4.

2 In carrying on the whole business of 2. In doing it as from God.
prayer as from God: as praying in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying in, or by
the dictate and direction of the holy Ghost, Jud. 20. Christians are to drive
this holy trade with God, but yet as with his own talents and commodities.
Luke 19. 16. Lord, thy pound has gained ten pounds (says the good servant.)
We should wrestle in and by prayer with God, but as in and by his strength.
Hosea 12. 3. By the Lord will his people make mention of his name in prayer, or
any other ordinance of his. Isai. 26, 13.

3. In carrying on the whole work of 3 In doing it as for God.
prayer, as for God alone. The Suppliants of God bring their prayer, not as
their offering, so much as Gods offering; Zeph. 3. 10. they do indeed lift up
their prayer, as did the Prophet, Isai. 37. 4. and their heart in prayer, yet
so, as withal exalting God in both. He is extolled with their tongue, in their
crying to God with their voice. Psalm. 66. 17. The Saints confess their sins,
that God may be cleared in his proceedings. Psalm 51. 4. Express his mercies
in prayer, not to set forth their own praise and commendation as did the
Pharisee, Luke 18. 10, 11, 12. But that the Lord rather may be glorified, and
that the heart in the mention thereof may be awakened to give him glory, and
therefore they use in the mention thereof sensibly to immix the mention of
their own vileness and wretchedness. If they request of God such and such
mercies, yet it is that the Lord may occasionally be the more honored in
granting the same to them, whether the mercies be of a spiritual or temporal
nature. Albeit the mercies they crave, and immunitie from the miseries which
they complain of to the Lord be the matter of their prayers, yet not the sole
motive. Self is not the great wheel which sets all the wheels of their
hearts going, nor is self the center in which those many lines of their spirits
and prayers do end and meet, but rather the respect to the Lord, and his name,
favor and presence, these are all in all. They are a generation not of
falseseekers in their prayers, but of seekers of the face of the God of Jacob.
Psalm. 24. 6. and having pure hearts therein, they do not lift up their souls
to vanity. ver. 4. The maine of their desires, is that the Lord Jesus, the man
of Gods right hand may be glorified, and that the mighty hand of God may be
with him in his government; and if he be exalted, that shall and will engage
them the rather to be thankful to God for it, Psalm. 80. 17, 18. The making of
the refused stone, the headstone of the corner, is that wonder of grace in
which they thankfully rejoice. Psalm. 118. 22, 23, 24. David wishes that guilt
removed, not merely because it lay as so sore and heavy a burden upon his
conscience, or that he would have ease of the terrors thereof, but that in
being eased and freed thereof, he might be the freer to sound forth the
praises of God. Psalm. 51. 14. He would have his former joy again, not because
he made any idol of his comforts, and was all for comfort in his spirit, for he
is as earnest for a clear and sound heart, verse 10. But that he may be more
active for God in giving some honor to him in other sinners conversion whom he
had happily hardened by his sin, etc. verse 12, 13. He would have his mouth
opened, verse 15. Not to be more free and cheerful of speech, but that his
lips might set forth Gods praise. The sons and daughters of God pray for
preservation from, or deliverance out of temptations, and afflictions inward
and outward, (as in the petition of the Lords Prayer) but with a first and
maine respect and desire that the name of God may be hallowed, sanctified,
honored therein; they pray for the remission of their sins, and the
comfortable manifestation thereof, not merely because they are damning, but
because detestable to them; not because terrors to them simply, but that God
in his gracious and free pardon of them may have his name hallowed; and for
that cause do they pray for all temporal blessings for them in their callings
and conditions, under the notion of daily bread. The Godly power out prayers,
not so much as expressions of their desires of observance thereof from God, as
of obedience therein unto God. Nor merely as helping means of future, but also
as an homage of love for past mercy. David will call upon God, because he
loves not himself, but him. Psalm. 116. 1, 2.

4 In being as ready pressed to a serious 4 In like conscience of use of means.
use of all other means to obtain mercies prayed for, and avoid miseries
bewailed; as to pray for the one, and against the other. Abel brings himself
with his offering, both are equally at the beck and service of God, so did not
Cain. Genesis 4. 4. They offer themselves in with their prayers, and such like
service, as the maine sacrifice, willing to prove what is the holy, and
acceptable and perfect will of God. Romans 12. 1, 2. And therefore no wonder they
are pressed to use any holy means to further what they ask of God. Their heart
and hand is (as I may say) combined to, and joined with their tongues. If they
cry for wisdom, they bring their instruments to dig and search for the
precious mines thereof. Prove. 2. 3, 4. Their prayers are called seeking, Isai.
55. 6. because they are ever attended with searching in all corners, in every
means if they may find out, and light of the mercies they pray for. And they
are comprehended under the notion of that hungring, Matthew. 5. 6. that will
break through even stone walls, any difficult lets, but it will come by the food
it craveth. Many instances hereof might be given; but more hereof when we come
to speak of that case about use of means.

5. In not hiding any thing from God, as unwilling or not desiring his privity
5 In hiding nothing from God.
thereto, but at least endeavoring to open all to him, declaring our ways to
him. Psalm. 119. 26. Pouring out our hearts to him. Psalm. 62. 8. And where we
fall short, craving a further discovery of our selves by and to the Lord. Psalm
139. 23, 24. When Job would clear his integrity, and prove his sincerity, he
does it, professing that he covered not his transgressions as Adam, Job 31.
etc. Sincere ones are (...), such as would be, and have all in them seen of
God: as persons held to the sun-light, perspicuous, transparent, yea in all
their spots; Suppliants being much in commerce with God, they have experience
of his allsearching and all seeing eye, and cannot but will and desire his
search. Psalm. 139. 1, 2. 23. verses compared. They are acquainted with his
admirable faithfulness and cordialnesse to them, and therefore are not loath to
have it thus, but glad of that opportunity. They find they pay dearly for any
contrary acts of guile, and beholding withal the happiness of plain dealing
with God in their words and walks, they cannot but desire and endeavor the
same. Psalm. 32. 2, 3, 5, 6.

6. In harboring nothing willingly 6 In harboring no sin, hindering answer of
prayer.
and knowingly in themselves tending to hinder audience and acceptance of their
persons and prayers by the Lord, or free access to the Lord and to his
gracious throne. The Psalmist declares that the unfainednesse of his prayer,
in that he dare make that appeal to the Lord, and is purposed not to offend so
much as in a word. Psalm. 17. 1, 3. And Psalm. 66. 15. The sincerity of his heart
in prayer appeared, in that he, albeit he had evil in his heart dwelling there,
yet was not the same had in respect by him. Hence that putting away of iniquity
required in persons which are intended to pray. Job 11. 13, 14, 15. hence the
holy clearing of the Saints, (as it is called 2 Cor. 7. 11.) when entering upon
prayer, by premising and prefacing their selfe-condemning confessions, as in
Ezra, Daniel, and others: Hence that casting up accounts when persons are then
to offer up their gifts; then is the remembering time of what was not taken such
notice of before; When thou offerest thy gift at the Altar, and there
remembrest, etc. Matthew. 5. 23. When to lift up our hands and our hearts unto
God in the heavens, then if ever there is, or ought to be searching and trying
of our ways, Lam. 3. 40, 41. we are to draw near with our hearts sprinkled
from an evil conscience, and privity to any known sin approved in us or by us.
Heb. 10. 22. Sincerity in prayer loathes to mean rebellion, when it speaks
repentance, to cry my Father, and yet do evil to the utmost. Jerem. 3. 4, 5.
Sincerity will heartily complain of any lets to the free passage of prayer,
and account the same its great burden and misery, as Lam. 3. 8, 44. but it will
never connive or wink at them, or give free way to them. Sincerity is very
real, not intending speech with God. so much as success from God, and
therefore will not, dare not, cannot own any spiritual make-bates.

7. In avoiding all affection of any expression in prayer. In hypocrisy there
7 In avoiding all affected expressions in prayer.
is affectation; hypocrites are stage players, which albeit they are illiterate
dunces many of them, yet will be highflown sometimes in their expressions,
their mouth speaks great swelling words when they speak to men or God, or
else they fail of their use and aim. Jude 16. And in all affectation there is
some hypocrisy, be the persons who they will be that are therein exercised.
Sincerity will account those Gentile-like esteemed flourishes of rhetorical
ingeminations, but vain repetitions. Matthew. 6. 6, 7. not expecting that the
Lord should be moved by any such like vanity. ibid. Sincerity loathes and fears
to complement with the all-seeing and faithful God. The lips of the Saints in
their prayer, are as as a thread of scarlet, not stuffed out with the gowty
rhetoric of man (for it is in comparison sthe high and holy language of the
spirit, no better) but with the pure spun spiritual eloquence of God, Cant. 4
3. Thy lips are a thread of Scarlet.

Now to answer more briefly to the second thing propounded: The Reasons Reasons
of sincerity in prayer
why God requires Sincerity in our prayer, may be such as these.

1 Because Purity and simplicity is most 1. Sincerity is most suitable to Gods
nature to whom we pray.
suitable to his nature with whom we have to do in prayer: as a simple pure
Spirit, he will be worshipped in spirit and in truth, John 4. 23, 24. He
seeks most that part of his Image of Truth and Purity, in any person or
performance. Such does the Father seek to worship hiw, ibid. Truth in the
inward parts is that which he eyeth and desires Psalm 51. 6. The more of that
therein, the more approved, the more delightful to him: The words of the pure
are (to God also) pleasant words, Prove. 15. 26. His Image in his children is
lovely. The child that is likest his Father, is most made of. The purity and
sincerity of the people of God is reckoned their perfection, albeit they have
many imperfections attending their persons and performances. Thence are the
godly called the perfect, 1 Cor. 2. 6. Besides, Purity and Sincerity is most
suitable to Christ our High Priest, who was holy and undefiled, Hebr. 7. 26. And
God would have his Priests, his Saints, an holy Priesthood, and so conformable
to him, 1 Pet. 2 3. Besides, there is Truth, Reality, Seriousness, and
Solidity in all we eye and improve in prayer; and therefore no wonder if God
will have us carried with an answerable frame of spirit therein; the Priest of
our Profession is what he is really, Truth it self, John 14. 6. The meritorious
Sacrifice was real and true; it was the Sacrifice of himself, Hebr. 9. 26. The
Covenant of Christ's blood, a real, ratified, forcible Testament, Hebr. 8. 6.
and chap. 9. 17. etc. The way made for us a true and living way, and therefore
we may well draw near to God with true hearts, Heb. 10. 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22
verses compared.

2 Because Sincerity ever uses to put 2. Sincerity strengthens our prayers.
to all its strength in prayer; and that is it which the Lord likes best.
Hypocrisy divides; James 1. 6, 8. and that doudling and dividing makes weak
work. It is not potsheard strength, which is but brittle, and will not abide
any knocks, Prove. 26. 23. Burning lips in zealous expressions, joined with a
wretched false heart, are but like a pot sheard covered with silver dross; but
Sincerity is single and unanimous in all its actions, and so its united force
must needs be more available.

3 Because Sincerity puts a holy grace 3. Sincerity most graceth our prayers.
upon, and force into our words in Prayer. Hence that strength ordained in the
mouths of babes, entire and sincere ones, Psalm. 8. 2. Grace of the lips is
joined with pureness of heart, Prove. 22. 11. And as earthly Kings befriend
that in their Petitioners, so does the Lord in his. Hence is it that David
pleads his unfeigned speaking to God in prayer as an Argument with God to hear
him, Psalm. 17. 1.

4 Because prayers of sincere ones are 4. Sincerity gets most in prayer.
ever of most public use and good, and that is a thing the Lord greatly
likes. A pure handed and hearted Job praying to the Lord, shall deliver the
Island where he is thereby, Job 22. 27, 30. by the blessing of the upright the
City where they are is exalted, Prove. 11. 11.

Touching the third thing propounded: the Marks and Characters of Sincerity in
Marks of sincerity in prayer
prayer are such as these.

1 When the main and choice matterials 1. When the materials in prayer are the
best things
of our prayers are right and holy things. Psalm 17. 1, 2. When our hungring
desires expressed in prayer, are after Righteousness, they are surely such as
are accounted of God sincere, Matthew. 5. 6. when in prayer also we first and
chiefly seek the kingdom of God, Matthew 6. 33. the light of Gods countenance,
Psalm. 4. 6. not as the most do, some worldly good, ibid. When we mind not
baser, common metal, brass or tin, etc. but Gold and Silver, precious
Materials, requests of weight and worth with God; it argues we have some
spiritual measure of Sincerity and Purity within, when we trade with God, not
about trifles but pearls of great price; it argues we are not Pedlars,
Mountebank hypocrites, but solid and substantial Merchants and Citizens of
Heaven.

2 When our whole man does act in prayer; 2. When the whole man acts in
prayer*
understanding, and judgment, and conscience, and will, and affections, they
do their parts in it, and are joint Petitioners and Suppliants, Psalm 109. 4.
But I prayer, says David, he was all prayer, or all of David, or in David, was
herein employed. Psalm 119. 58. With my whole heart (says he) have I entreated
thy favor; the soul and spirit, all the inwards, and the sublimest parts of
the Church are employed therein, Isaiah 26. 9. If this little world in man,
this little Commonwealth in a Christian become a joint Solicitour unto our
heavenly Sovereign, surely this King of Saints will account of the requests
serious, and the Solicitour entire therein; as earthly Kings do the joint
Petitions of whole Bodies, and Counties and Countries. When every string in the
Instrument sounds its part and keeps due proportion, both the Instrument is
right tuned, and the Music and Lesson played is fullest of true harmony. So it
is here, the Saints when entirely and wholly exercised in the prayers they
make, surely they are sincerely employed therein. When all within the soul, as
bound by Oath, and Vow and Covenant unto the Lord; to deal truly in matters
touching him and us, do agree in what they present and utter before him, surely
then it will pass for a true verdict, as in other cases it does with men.

3 When in praying still we endeavor to 3 When we still strive to pray to
purpose.
do it to purpose, or else we are to our selves as if we had not prayed.
Righteous ones will pray effectually, James 5. 15, 16. if they pray, they lift
up a prayer unto the Lord, 2 Kings 19. 4. When a Factour or servant will not
leave trading or working until he make something of it, you will say then he is
honest, and just in his calling or dealing; like Abraham's servant, he prefers
his Masters occasions which he was to dispatch, before his very food, Genesis 24.
33. and verse 49. as he was serious in speaking his errand, so in pressing for
his answer; and when he has done, hastes to make return thereof to his
Master, ver. 56. so it is here in serving God with our spirits in prayer, Romans
1. 9. They are true and trusty Soldiers to their Commander and Country, which
will not out of the field without some Trophies of Victory; like those which
when thereto enjoined and adjured (1 Samuel 14. 24, 26.) though the honey would
even drop into their mouths, as they were in the pursuit of the enemy, yet they
mind the completeing of the Victory, albeit with some denyals of themselves in
their present refreshments. So it is here, when we are sincerely set to seek
and wrestle for mercy, we will not away without a blessing in and by it. Or as
a Pleader is honest in soliciting a Clients case, when he will not cease
pleading until he have brought the same to some comfortable issue; so is it
with the spirit of a Christian, which is mainely employed by us in this holy
pleading work; the more serious, resolute and unmovable it is therein or
therefrom, without some good success, the more sincere.

4 When we strain not much to speak 4. When we strive to speak as it is with
us
more then is, or otherwise then it is, either in the general bent of our
souls, or then is in the present desires of our spirits, or then is in the
sense or feelings, or fears, or griefs, or workings of our hearts; but speak as
things are to us and with us. It is not so much the strength of brains and
judgment, or memory, that prompteth the mouth to speak, to fill up time with
aerie expressions, as the strength of heart workings, of holy desires and
griefs, etc. which put the people of God upon uttering what they do in prayer;
they had rather cease, after some serious strivings to the contrary, against
distempered, senseless spending of time in mere words without spiritual life,
then go on in such sort, albeit they may seem to themselves or others but in an
ill pass at present by reason thereof. I opened my mouth and panted (says he,
Psalm. 119. 131) for I longed for thy Commandments. Strength of holy desires
after Grace, to understand, believe, and practice the Word of God more, made
him be so large and zealous in his prayers, out of the abundance, not of his
head, but of his heart, his mouth thus speaks. Hence the Saints prayers are
called their desires, Psalm. 145. 18 and 10. 17.

5 When we are most frequent and fervent 5. When most frequent and fervent in
secret prayer.
in secret prayers of all other prayers. As it is said of grief, so is it true
of prayer, He prays most truly and sincerely, that prays most secretly.
Hence our Savior does oppose secret prayer to hypocritical praying, Matthew. 6
5, 6. Slye false dealers will be careful and very exact in what they speak when
witnesses are by; but honest men will be as exact in what they speak to another
all alone. So is it here; many, it may be, which carry it with much Zeal and
circumspection before others, yet in their Closets if they do pray at all, it
is so flatly, so drouzily, so curtly, so carelessely, that it is as good as no
prayer at all. Let such look to their spirits whether all be right within.
Whatsoever false hearted spouses may seem to speak so and so lovingly and
loyally to their Spouses before others, that such as are by would take them to
be very chaste and faithful, and kind; yet if in secret, they carry it
otherwise, their honesty may well be suspected. So is it here, if Christians
should carry it in expressions in prayer with others as if very loyal to the
Lord Jesus, but in secret it is quite otherwise, their hearts are not so entire
and honest as becomes their profession. Verily, sincerity is plain and open
hearted, and surely never more then when alone with God its friend. Sincerity
in prayer, is simplicity and singleness in prayer; and therefore will be the
same every where. If praying with others, striving still to speak with such
life and power, and holiness as is meet: and if alone praying, it will put us
upon the like seriousness of attentiveness, and intentiveness in, and on the
duty in hand.

6 When we can in prayer be as earnest 6 When as earnest in prayer for others,
(...) for enemies, as for our (...)
for others, as for our selves; yea, we can be very serious in wrestling with
God for such as have injured us; and that not so much that we may be less
molested by them as that the Lord Jesus may be magnified in them. The very
thoughts what a mighty conquest the Lord would work in their conversion, what a
glorious name he might get thereby, what a foil it would be to the Devils
kingdom, power and policy, etc. this puts spirits into their prayers for
them. David, albeit he had many things lay heavy upon himself, as appears in
the whole 51. Psalm, yet verse. 18. he prays for, and is mindful of Zion and of
the Churches good. Self has less ground work and foot hold in prayers for
others, then those which are for our selves. The Lord Jesus makes account that
they had need be perfect as their heavenly Father is (in their measure and
proportion of perfection) that love and wish so well to their very enemies, Mat.
5. 44, 48.

Lastly, When we are as ready to praise 7. When as ready to praise God, as to
pray to him.
God for mercies received, as to pray to him for what we want. Godly Esther and
Mordecai are as solicitous and careful that they and others with them may have
their solemn Thanksgiving days, for the gracious deliverance for which they
had prayed and fasted, as ever they were of the days of Prayer and Fasting,
Esther 9. 22, 29, 31. verses compared. Self will be sometimes prayer full, and
so will hypocrise, because its good and suitable to both; satisfying the desires
of both, and furthering the ends and aims of both may come in thereby: But
sincerity is that which is and will be praiseful and thankful. An honest and
poor man will scarce ever forget a special kindness showed to him by another
at his request in a time of his necessity; when ever he meets his friend, he
will be thanking him a long time after; and when he is with others, he will be
thankfully acknowledging the same to the great commendation of that his friend.
But a Counterfeit, a Vagabond, a Rogue, for whom you do any office of love, you
shall hardly ever see, or hear of him more, when he has gotten his
penny-worths of you he is gone, unless he need you again; he returns not to
acknowledge it, albeit at the present he give you good language, So is it here,
a Christians grace and sincerity thereof is more tried when he gets prayer
blessings, then when he wants the same. Self being empty prays, but self
when full looks but to his own satiety: but self-denial the daughter and
handmaid of Sincerity, will not be so circled within the compass of self in
his prayers. Look as it is in a Prospective glass, if you turn the wrong end
foremost, great things will seem very small, and things that are nearest will
appear, as a far off, and small things will hardly be discerned. So is it here;
when self and hypocrisy are to look upon mercies of prayer; great ones are but
little and small mercies, none at all, etc. but sincerity takes the truest
survey of them all in their dimensions, and colors, and therefore no wonder if
it be thankful; sincerity will bear such true and full witness to our extreme
misery in our selves, that the light and white of mercy, compared with this
darkness and black, will prove very amiable and praiseworthy* Sincerity will
truly and faithfully compare our worthiness and utter unworthiness at our best,
with Christ's glorious merit and worthiness, that the eye of the soul that
looks on, cannot but discern praise worthy glory therein. Greatness and
absolute Sovereignty, and independency in the Lord, and unutterable nearness
and dependency in us shall truly be presented and compared in a sincere hearted
Suppliant, and can he be other then very thankful? Self, (which prompteth a
false hearted Christian to speak for blessings) will be Judge too of the same.
And there is little likelihood of right judgment to proceed from so bloody and
ungrateful an Umpire; and if not rightly judged of, what thanks to be expected?
But sincerity judges of divine blessings by the Rules of the Spirit and Word
of God. The spring of Sincerity in Prayer rises from God; and therefore it
will assuredly return to God in praises which are suitable. Luke 17. 13, 15, 19.
The sincere Samaritan Supplicant is as loud in his praises of God, as ever he
was in his prayers, but so were not the other.

Let us now briefly speak to the two last things propounded, first of the Means
and Helps to further Sincerity in prayer, and then of the Motives to stir us up
to the same.

Helps to Sincerity and Purity in prayer H^lps to since^^^ in prayer.
may be such as these.

1 Labor to be sincere in other passages 1 Be sincere in (...) other acts of
our lives.
and practices of our life to Godward, and to manward. When Sincerity is
interwoven in this whole piece of our lives and conversations, it will show it
self in this part of it. Sincerity and right things should be our constant and
daily study. The thoughts of the Righteous are right, Prove. 12. 5. and
therefore no wonder that the words of the pure are pleasant words, Prove. 11.
26. When men love pureness of heart in all their courses, there will be a
grace and savor thereof in all their discourses with God or men, as Prove. 22.
11. when persons double in some things with God and their own souls, they
will do so in other things likewise. James 1. 8. A double minded man is
unstable in all his ways: Hypocrisy is leaven. Luke 12. 1. if you lay it, and
hide it, and suffer it to lie in one part of the lump of your conversation, it
will spread, and sour all the rest soon, James 4. 2, 3. compared, prescribing
the remedy of that guileful asking to spend the blessings of God upon their
lusts. verse 23. He instanceth the double minds that such have, and they must
purge themselves of their double mind in all other things if ever they would
approach and draw nigh to God in prayer rightly, and not ask amiss; and for
this purpose get we our hearts and hands rid of what ever sinful defilements
which do foment that doubling with God, and hinders this integrity in prayer.
If men in any kind retain the same, they will ask amiss, ask things with a
false adulterous heart; ibid. verses 23, 4. compared. We shall never make
straight steps in this part of our christian race, if that which is lame be not
healed. Heb. 12. 13. If the feet of our affections be diseased, we can never
wrestle with God so stably, but shall halt therein, as well as in other of the
ways of God.

2. When at any time we espy any flaws or doublings with God in prayer, (as the
2 Be truly abased for any guile therein.
best sometimes may espy some guileful slightings and overlinesse therein) be
we greatly abased for the same, as James wishes such as ask amiss, and such
false spirits therein, James 4. 2, 3, 4. or such as would be rid of such
doubling guileful distempers, verse 8. to be afflicted and mourn: namely, for
that doubling with God and their own souls, when Christians pay dear for
such slynesse and slightness, they will surely take heed thereof; the more
bitter it becomes, and grievous to their palate, the more will they leave it
and loath it. It is to be feared that many Christians which see such slyness
and guiliness in prayer, they are content sometimes that they have prayed,
albeit the same were a shell and shadow of the duty, and the pith and substance
thereof were wanting; or if they be troubled lightly and slightly with it, all
is not well with them, that they deal not so faithfully with God and their own
souls, yet they are not thoroughly stirred up with serious grief and holy
indignation by reason thereof, and therefore go on often times in such a way. If
guile of spirit were so exactly and thoroughly examined and sentenced, and holy
revenge taken upon it, such a cheater would not so much haunt the hearts of
christians in this and other of the ordinances of God as it does. And to this
let me add, that we carefully and resolutely resist Satan when at any time,
then, or afterward, he does tempt us to this guiliness and falseheartedness in
our talking with God in prayer: give not the least way to it, but when at first
you perceive the tempter busy that way, to put us upon sinister ends in our
requests, or any sly dealing with God and our souls in prayer, away with it,
strongly and seasonably bend we all our strength against it, discover to God by
humble and solemn confession that treacherous motion, cry out upon it, pursue
it, and never leave till we have sent it packing with shame and loathing of
heart. Hence is it that James wishes such as were so guily in their prayers
they made, James 4. 2, 3, 4. to make use of that remedy, Resist the devil,
namely, in his temptation thereunto, and he will fly from you, verse 7. and
espying such like wiliness of spirit in our prayers, let us be willing to be
crossed in any such requests as we make with such a spirit, for verily God will
not grant such desires to us if he love us, Jam. ^. 3 and if we do or should do
it, it would be worse for us. Many of the Saints see cause to bless God
afterward, that the Lord did not grant such or such requests of theirs,
perceiving that indeed their heads were not right therein; and it is well for
them that God will cross them in any sinful desires of theirs, yea, it would
be better for us that God should fall upon us with some good downeright blows,
whilst we carry it thus wilily with him in any of our prayers, (as usually he
does deal with his servants, under such distempers. Wars came upon them, many
contentions amongst them, they that doubled and divided so with God, they were
divided amongst themselves, and not so true to each other, James 4. 1, 2, 3, 4.
but as a remedy of that inward cause of these outward disorders and mischiefs.
This Apostle wishes such, (and let us follow his counsel) Submit we our
selves to God, verse 7. and humble our selves under any such divine providence,
verse 10. see that it is good, say it is good, and then we shall he better.

3. Labor to be of an humble and lowly heart 3 Be of an humble spirit in
prayer.
in our prayers, and we shall pray the more honestly and entirely. They are ever
proud spirits that have such selfe-aims and sly respects to their own names or
such good blessings as the main in their prayers, which may make them seem
some body amongst men, what ever approbation therein they get with God. James
tells those he mentioned, that they were of adulterous spirits, James 4. 4.
that they asked and had not, as asking amiss, out of base respects: and verse
2, 3. and verse 6. he tells them more plainly that they would be above
others in gifts and repute, and estate, etc. Envy sets them on work, verse
5. they are proud, and therefore God resists them in that way of asking; but
humble ones get the grace of him which their hearts seek. Humble ones have no
such wily fetches and reaches, but are plain hearted: they are such which are
lifted up, whose hearts are not upright within them, in any things what they
say or do, Heb. 2. 4. 4 Be we of believing spirits therein.


4. Get and exercise more faith in the Lord. So much unbelief in our asking,
so much doubling with God, James 1. 6, 8. Unbelief is never cordial, but
slavish and selfish. Faith will cause a through opening of the heart to God.
Psalm. 62. 1, 8. We shall then draw near to God with the truest hearts, when
with most assurance. Heb. 10. 22. There is secret Atheism of heart or
infidelity, and much unbelief, in that any at any time dare to double with God
in speaking to him, making God like to man, which might be mocked and deluded
with goodly words and pretenses, and not to be a searcher of their heart and
reins; else men durst not make so bold with him, to baffle with him to his
face. David, one that had made too bold to affirm that of his integrity, of
his hatred of Gods enemies, Psalm. 139, 22, 23. qualifieth it with a plain
hearted motion to him, whom he knew was privy to his spirit, to search it, and
see whether there were any way of wickedness in him, and to steer his course
for him in the right way. Where faith is, love will attend and show it self;
love uses still to be candid and cordial, and entire in all its speeches to
him whom the soul loves, the more that abounds, the more sincere. When the
Apostle prays that the Philppians may be sincere (in all their words, and
walks, respecting God, themselves, or others,) he prays that their love may
abound; then will they approve the most excellent things. The best way of
praying to God, serving of God, and walking with God. Philip. 1. 9. 10.

Motives to sincerity in prayer, may be Motives to sincerity. It will argue
Gods effectual speaking to us, and ours to him.
such as these.

In that it will be an argument of a saving and sound fruit of Gods speaking
unto us, and of our effectual speaking to him. The former is evident; when our
prayer language is sincere, surely God has turned unto us some pure lip, some
soul-saving ministry. Zeph 3. 9, 10. Such of the Cities of Egypt as should be
converted savingly, the Prophet says, they should (as a fruit thereof) speak
the language of Canaan. Isai. 19. 18. Especially in worshipping God in prayer,
there they should not speak half the language of Ashdod, (as it were) and
half the Jews language, like those Nehem. 13. 24. half carnal language,
natures, sins, the worlds language; but at least in the desire and endeavor of
their souls they speak the language of the holy Ghost, pray in the holy Ghost.
And the latter is as evident; truth in our seeking of God, and mercy in Gods
answers, will surely meet together as in other cases they do Psalm. 85. 10. The
Lord himself makes it an argument of his respect to his peoples desires, in
that they are children that will not lie, Isai. 63. 8. and gives it as a pledge
when they may expect infallibly that he will answer their prayers, namely, when
they are cordial and entire in seeking of him, when they seek him with all
their heart. Jer. 29. 11, 12, 13. And the Psalmist makes his cordial and
entire seeking of God, to which his very conscience was privy, and the Lord
much rather, as an argument with God, to pray for respect to his desires. Psalm.
119. 10, 94. Sincerity and integrity in our speeches is amiable to men, to all
sorts of men. Proverb. 16. 13, and 24. 26. and the God of truth is not less,
but more delighted in the words of truth. Hence it is that upright hearted
Supplicants, they are (and well they may be) freest and boldest of all others
with the Lord. Such as come with true hearts, come with much confidence, Heb.
10. 21. they can and dare walk at liberty when conscious to their integrity,
that they seek the statutes of God. Psalm. 119. 45. Consciousnesse of secret
guile, it will appall a man, when to deal with an all-seeing God. Hypocrites
are afraid, Isai. 33. 14. but are persuaded, that such as speak uprightly may
come near to God boldly, and converse with him safely, albeit in respect of his
justice a consuming fire, verse 15. But amongst them, who may or dare come near
him with such stubble? verse 14. and if they durst be foolhardy as senseless
ones are, yet it would be to no purpose, salvation which they might desire,
would be far from such persons, as seeking not God but themselves. Ps. 119. 155.

2 In that God will cover a great deal 2 Where this irs God will cove. many
failings
of weakness in their persons and in their Prayers, where yet there is
sincerity in the bent of their desires. True it is, that their sincerity in
their prayers is a special preservation against any ruling evils in them. They
that seek God with their whole heart, they do no iniquity, Psalm 119. 2, 3 God
is engaged to protect and preserve them from such swervings. Hence that plea,
Psalm 119. 10. 94. When Christians do not deal cordially and plainly with God
and their own souls in the request they put up against their sins* and for Gods
grace, they do but strengthen then the part of sin; pretending to speak against
it, and not doing it cordially, it provokes God to leave them to such lusts,
and to receive a due recompense of such spiritual Treachery, from such secret
Traitors: but as for the Saints that are cordial with God in Prayer, albeit
they escape that mischief of ruling evils, yet are they perplexed and molested
with indwelling distempers, which haunt them and pursue them hard at heels,
even to the very door of Grace, to which they repair in prayer; and herein is
the kindness and compassion of God to them, that he overlooketh these their
distempers in prayer, and owneth the meaning of his Spirit in theirs therein,
Romans 8. 26. and Psalm. 34. Title, with verse 45. God looks at the bent of such
a heart, and by that measures out to them mercy. 1 Kings 8. 39. Do according
to his ways whose heart thou know. God searches the heart both of sincere
and false Christians, in all their doings to give to every one according to his
ways, Jerem. 17. 10. to the false heart, indignation and wrath, but to them
that are sincere, eye and aim at, and seek for glory; to them he gives honor
and immortality, Romans 2. 7. For of all others, upright ones have the successful
influences of all others prayers with them, and with their prayers; each
sincere one prays that God would do good to them, Psalm 125. 4. As for
others, they are left to be discovered, and left to such courses at the length,
as shall declare them* to be evil doers, verse 5. The Many are the evils of
hypocrisy in prayer.
continuance of Gods faithfulness to sincere ones, is the joint request of all
that are godly, and the several Petitions of each of them, Psalm. 36. 10.

3 Consider of the evils of hypocrisy in prayer. God esteems basely of such
prayers, as but dross of some Silver, Prove. 26. 23. It is but as a stinking
savor, and steam rising from a dead rotten person, Matthew. 23. 27. He eyeth us
then as speaking lies rather then uttering prayers, because we pretend to pray,
and worship, and serve God, but do indeed therein but serve our own base lusts,
become Petitioners for them, Hos. 7. 13, 14. and James 4 2, 3. and that we
speak against God rather then for God. They lied against me, says God, Hos. 7.
13. yet in pretense cried to him; but in truth they did not cry to him, when
they howled on their beds: their ends were carnal, ibid. and they make God a
God that were as carnal as they; a God that would further the desires of lusts;
else why do they petition him thereto? and this is to belly the Lord, and the
Lord uses to answer such according to their heart desires, according to their
heart Idols, and not their lip hypocrisies, Ezekiel. 14. he gives them up to
their lusts: they secretly choose Delusions, notwithstanding other pretenses of
sacrificing, Isaiah 66. 3. and the Lord chooses to let them have their choice,
verse 14. and at length takes away that good that they seem to have, and to
prayer they become as speechless, outed of all their ability to pray Math. 22.
11.

CHAP. VII. Of Watchfulness required to Prayer.
HAving handled three of the Conditions required to the incessant practice of
this Duty of Prayer, we come now to speak of the fourth and last Requisite
thereto, namely, Watchfulness; which is threefold: 1. Watching unto prayer,
Ephesians. Prayer watching threefold.
6. 18. 2. Watching in prayer, Coloss. 4. 2. 3. Watching after prayer, Psalm
130. 1, 2, 5.

In which let us consider severally three things.

1 The Nature of the Duty in the three forementioned branches thereof. 2 The
Reasons and Motives urging to the practice thereof. 3 Some Helps furthering the
performance of the same.
Watchfulness unto prayer consists Watching unto prayer consists 1. In
readiness to take all prayer seasons.
in these four particulars.

1 Being of a wakeful spirit, ready and fit to take the due seasons of prayer,
as the Lord requires, Isaiah 55. 6. Call upon him while he is near, as the
Saints usual practice is: and that is a part of their special privilege for to
do. They call upon God in a time wherein he may be found, Psalm 32. 6. There is
a morning of opportunity which David will take for prayer, Psalm 5. 3. True it
is, that God is up before us, he is stirring early for his peoples help, as
soon as the face of the morning, or season of showing mercy to them appears,
he helps them, Psalm 46. 5. but yet we may not be up in our spirits; we had
need rowze up our hearts, as being too often drowsy at such times, and not
watching for the first daybreak of a season of mercy. So that look as David
did when to praise God, that are we to do when to pray to him, Awake early,
Psalm, 57. 7, 8. There is much spiritual sluggishnesse cleaves to the spirits
of the best in spiritual services: as sometimes the eyes of their bodies were
covered with sleep when they should have prayed, Mat. 26. 4. so is it too often
with our spirits when they are not in wakeful plight. That Godly Matron when to
utter a Song of Praise to God, see how she doubleth, and redoubleth the word
Awake; Awake, awake Deborah, Awake, awake, utter a Song. Judge. 5. 12. It is not
a little calling that will awake our slumbring, heavy eyed spirits. Sometimes
they call up a sleeping Jonah to arise and call upon his God, Jonah 1. 6.
Zachary must be rowsed out of his sleepiness to observe the Vision, by the
Angel, Zach. 4. 1. When the Lord Jesus would hear his Doves voice in prayer,
Cant. 2. 14. see how often he calls to her to arise and come away, verse 10,
13. Sometimes the Spirit of God in their consciences and spirits themselves
calls them up to attend this holy employment, if any morning light of
approaching grace peepeth forth, or season of doing the Lord service in prayer
is observed, as in Deborah, and David, and others of the Saints. If ever our
spirits had need be up and ready, they had need be so when we are to pray. A
sleepy spirit will scarce speak sense (as I may say) to God in prayer. It is
burdensome to a friend to stand listening to a sleepy broken discourse,
consisting of half words and sentences indistinctly placed and uttered in his
ears, albeit it be by his friend. So is it in a like spiritual, disorderly
drowsy praying and speaking to the Lord: as men in a sleepy fit, rather lose
something they got in their hand, then get more unto the same by craving it in
such a drowsy sort: So is it here, we are losers and not gainers by prayers
whereunto our spirits are not wakened to be fit to speak to the Lord as
becomes him and us.

2 In heeding to make use of all holy and 2 In taking all prayer advantages.
special advantages unto prayer that Divine Providence offers. When
Christians wait for such items of Providence, such speaking invitations to
Prayer, then they watch unto prayer indeed. As at other posts of the doors of
Christ, so at this are the Saints to watch and wait, Prove. 8. 33. 34. Albeit
the Lord, in respect of his own disposition to mercy, be always ready to hear
and help his people, yet he is not always to be spoken withal for that end;
neither are we so fit to speak to him. At sometimes again it is in our hearts
to pray to the Lord, as David said, he found in his heart to pray that prayer
to God, 2 Samuel 7. 27. At other times that advantage was to seek. It requires
much holy skill and care, to epsy and discern advantages to prayer. A
wandering, watchlesse, spiritlesse, sluggish eye observes them not, espieth
them not, discerns not the same.

3 In observing narrowly and distinctly what In minding all prayer occasions.
necessary and weighty occasions of prayer we have, searching our ways for
that purpose, and then lifting up heart and hand in prayer, Lam. 3. 40, 41.
Like Pleaders, Saints ought to be good Students, that they may be the fitter
to plead: we are to study our hearts and lives, and the cases of both, before
we plead them. Or look as Trades men do look over and set their marks upon
their parcels ere they do retail them: so in this case ought the Saints to look
over the particulars of their hearts, and lives, before they do trade with God*
in prayer about the same.

4 In observing wisely the frame of spirit In minding the plight of our spirits
when to pray.
in which we are, when we are to address our selves to prayer; how fit we
are, or unfit for prayer; how far lively, or listlesse or dead hearted; how far
tender, or otherwise senseless; how far serious, or slighty; what faith is
stirring, or what distrusts, doubts or temptations: and like other Musicians,
which when they are to play, as they are about to tune their Instruments, they
make use of their musical ear, attending how far each string is in tune or no,
too high or too low, too sharp or too flat; So is it here in the Suppliants of
God, which are Harpers, as we have showed, it is their peculiar property and
gift above other men; they have (as I may say) a musical ear, an attentive
discerning spirit, and can tell when their spirits are prepared or unprepared,
and how far forth prepared or not prepared to seek the Lord. David had not only
a forelook to that, that his heart might be prepared to praise God; but he
had a reflect look upon the same, and gives his censure upon it, that as far
as he could judge, his heart was in indifferent good tune to praise God, Psalm
57. 7. And the like observation did the Church make of her heart when to seek
the Lord; strong and lively desires of God and his favor were stirring in her,
and she is resolved to improve them that way to the utmost. How many people,
which pretend to be seekers of God, are utterly careless in making these
observations, and being thus heart awaked for this duty? which I leave to their
own consciences seriously to consider. But the people of God ought thus to
watch unto prayer; it appears: We ought to watch unto prayer, because 1 Its a
special help to Pray.


1. In that it will be a special help to pray pertinently, awfully, seriously,
and sensibly. If we would pray in the spirit, with the help, life, and power
of the holy Ghost in a spiritual and heavenly manner; we had need watch unto
prayer, Ephesians. 6. 18. praying in the spirit, watching thereunto, etc.

2. In that it will much help spiritual 2 It helps inlargements in prayer.
inlargements, and continuance in the act of prayer; and prevent straitnings
and inconstancy, praying always with all manner of prayer, and watching
thereunto, are joined; yea it will help our skill in prayer, we shall pray in
the spirit in that sense, even in and with the skill thereof. The best students
are, or may, or will be the best pleaders in this way of prayer.

3. In that it will be a special means to 3 It helps success in prayer.
make our prayers more availing, and successeful, both in the exercise of our
faith, and hope, and patience: such watching unto prayer. Ephesians. 6. 18. Helps
to farther that mentioned, ver. 15, 16, 17. as might be evinced in many
particulars, if need were.

4. Watching in prayer consists in 4 Watching in Prayer consists in a
wakeful spirit throughout the duty.
the general, in a wakeful spirit throughout the duty. When the eyes of those
which see are not dim in this ordinance, as not in others, but are increased in
a right carrying on of the duty, and making holy observations thereupon. Isai.
32. 3. So far as any sluggishnesse steals upon us we are ready to shake it
off, and to rowse and raise up our spirits in this holy work. Look as the good
Prophet, even whilst the Angel talked with him, was as one in a sleep, and
stood in need to be waked to attention, Zech. 4 1, 2. So may it be with our
spirits, whilst we talk with the Lord in prayer: we should indeed be of
wakefull spirits therein, but often times we are watchlesse, and spiritually
sluggish.

1. In a careful heeding and ordering Particularly, 1 In heedfull ordering
prayer expressions:
our expressions in prayer. As not in vowing, so neither in praying, we are not
to be rash with our mouth, careless what expressions we use unto the Lord.
Eccles. 5. 2. As men that speak to Kings and Princes, weigh all their words
heedfully, lest while they seeking to request his favor, provoke him to
displeasure by any unseemly and disorderly expressions; so ought men to heed
what they speak to the great God of heaven. It is an argument of a stupid, and
in a manner athiestical spirit, not to heed what we utter before God in Prayer,
so we fill up time with words. It is a high provocation and contempt of the
holy One, when men will make so bold with his pure ear and eye, as to use such
expressions in speaking unto God, which they would be loath, yea would blush to
speak in the hearing of mortal men. If of every idle, or frothy, impertinent,
unprofitable, unnecessary word spoken at other times, and that unto men, we
must give account at the day of judgment, Matthew. 12. 36. And that we must be
justified or condemned according to the savourinesse, solidnesse, and
spiritualness, or the contrary unsavouriness, and unsutablenesse of our words,
verse 37. What may we think will be the censure of idle, unsavory, impertinent
expressions used in prayers, if not soundly repented of, if we judge not our
selves for them. if we reform not the same by a more watchful regard, what
and how we speak unto the Lord? When David is to pray, Ps. 141. 2. He desires
the Lord himself to set a watch before his mouth, and to keep the door of his
lips. The Saints are very tender, and awful, and sollicitous of what they speak
in prayer to the Lord; they are sensible of such weight in this duty of
watching in prayer, that they think it is a work which requires the skill and
wisdom of God to help therein. David is very sensible that he runs many
hazzards, if rash and heedless therein, and yet sees that he has no
sufficiency to set or keep this holy watch at the door of his lips, to take
due care what expressions came out of that door, and how many or how few; to
restrain and keep in a doors any unseasonable and unsuitable words, which with
the first would be coming forth even then, when he should be most savoury and
spiritual. The Saints in prayer they are shooting and darting upwards, and had
need to keep their eye on the work as well as on the mark; they had need
observe what darts they direct thither, and how they levy them.

2 In attending carefully to the manner of the working of our hearts and
spirits 2 In observing the workings of our spirits in Prayer.
in prayer. David observed his whole heart to be stirring in his prayer, Psalm.
119. 58. 145. and what strength of desires he had therein, verse 131. Psalm. 17.
1. He observed how entire and sincere his heart was in his prayer: a watchful
Christian will observe whose hands are to the souls petition, whether the
several affections, the mind, etc. do join therein. And as Musicians improve
their musical ear in tuning to play; so whilst playing, they listen what
strings sound harmoniously, and which are not touched, and sound not at all; so
it is here in praying.

3. In observing carefully and seasonably what want there is of meet stirring
of 3 In minding what is wanting or amiss in prayer.
heart in prayer, and what impediments, and unmeet thoughts, and suggestions,
or affections, are stirring therein: the Church and people of God observed,
that their spirits were hardened, straightened, and wandering, and complain
thereof: Why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear? Hezekiah observed,
what distrustful thoughts were working with him in his sickness, albeit he
prayed then for recovery. Isai. 38. 2, 3. compared with ver. 9, 10, 11. etc.
Asaph observed carefully all the passages of his distempered spirits workings,
and the distempered reasonings which he had whilst he sought the Lord, as
Psalm. 77. from the 1. to the 11th verse. and Psalm 116. 4. 11. Albeit he prayed
for deliverance, yet then he perceived the distempered speeches of his
distrustful heart* and the like. Psalm. 31. 22. A watchful Christian observes
what jarrings are in the harp-strings, the heartstrings (as I may call them)
whilst he is harping, whilst he is praying, or praising God. He observes who
would be fingering the instrument of his spirit, or the pins or strings of it,
whilst he is playing, or rather praying; he marketh who comes in to interrupt
his spirit whilst it is speaking to God in prayer. Some intruder will assuredly
be crowding in upon the people of God, in their retired discourses with the
Lord, but a wakeful spirit espieth and rebukes them.

4. In a heedfull and wistly observing, 4. In observing the hints of grace
given in Prayer.
and viewing, and prying into such spiritual hints, Items and motions of God,
which he gives and makes unto us in prayer, or any divine beams of grace, or
glimpses, or smiles of favor, which even in a transient way, we meet withal
therein. Albeit the the Lord, the Savior of his people be but as a wayfaring
man, who makes very short stages with them, yet a watchful Jeremiah observes
and improveth such journeying, traveling calls and stages of the Lord. Jer.
14. 8. Sometimes whilst the people of God are asking, the Lord speaks to them
to ask on; and a watchful David will hear that, Psalm. 27. 7. he was crying,
ver. 8. the Lord bids him seek his face; he hears and does it. verse 9. etc.
If but a harbinger, or any Post of heaven do but call upon such watchful
Christians, they espy them, and inquire more of them. Whilst that Generation
are seeking the face of the God of Jacob, Psalm. 24. 6. a motion is made for
preparation to entertain the King of glory in his ordinance. Lift up your
heads ye gates, and the King of glory shall enter in. verse 7. They hear what
was spoken, and inquire farther about the same, verse 8. Who is the King of
glory? Now how many drowsy formalists neglect this holy watch in prayer, in
all the several particulars, we may easily guess: but I shall leave them to he
awakened by the Lord.

Reasons moving the people of God Reasons of watching in Prayer. 1. Because God
has fitted his Saints for it.
to watching in prayer, may be these:

1. In that the Lord has gifted his Saints and people with eyes within,
fitting them to observe themselves, as in all other actions, so most of all in
the acts of his worship; hence those living creatures in the Church are
represented with eyes within, when about the worship of God, Revel. 4. 8. etc.
They are fools, which when religiously exercised, consider not what evil they
do therein, how vain, or slight, or stupid their spirits are therein, Eccles.
5. 1. But the Saints are the wise ones, which have their eyes in their heads,
fit to improve them in discerning of what passes, Eccles. 2. 13. The watchman
in the soul of a natural man and hypocrite is blind, or at best sleeping, and
therefore observes not who passes to and again through the soul; but the
conscience of a Regenerate man sits upon the Watchtower, the candle of the
Spirit is lighted up, his eye is single, he has a seeing eye from the Lord.

2 In that the Lord is a glorious, heavenly, 2. The Lord is an All seeing God.
and All-seeing God, and well may we then mind what we speak and think in
prayer before him. If that we our selves do not observe our hearts, how, or
whither, or to what they are carried out in prayer, yet he does, and he will
discover us to our shame, how our spirits were excercised in our prayers, Psalm
78. 34, 35 36, 37. and James 4, 2 3.

3 In that God breaths, or answers, 3, The Lord is free in his workings and
answers.
or smileth when he pleases. Sometimes when we are addressing our selves to
pray, he will hear before we call, Isaiah 65. 24. He will meet him that gladly
works righteousness; even in the half way will he meet such a one. A
Suppliant had need then be a man which minds and remembers the Lord in his
ways, Isai. 64. 5. The Prodigal himself when about to solicit and sue for his
Fathers favor, shall perceive his Father coming to meet him, Luke 15. 18, 19,
20. Sometimes whilst we are speaking in prayer, the Lord gives gracious
answers in the items, and motions, and persuasions of his spirit in ours, Isai.
65. 24. We had need then in this part of our course, observe the gale of the
Spirit of God, and how it wheeleth about this way or the other, how it turns
or returns in the breathing of it; that we may be ready to catch this
prosperous wind in the sails of our spirits, and keep still our sails full.

4. In that the enemies of our souls and 4. Our souls enemies then watch us an
ill turn.
supplications, do then watch their opportunities to annoy and disturb us in
prayer, and to tempt, and to distract us with troublous perplexing thoughts, or
to delude us with groundless comforts. The Fowls will be lighting on Abraham's
Sacrifice, but a watchful Abraham soon espyeth them, and drives them away,
Genesis 15. 10, 11.

5 In that our hearts are naturally 5. Our hearts are then very apt to start
aside.
slight and slippery, and false in the performance of this, as in the practice
of other holy duties; they are apt to step aside from the track of such a
strait path in the way of Grace. David was privy to it, and therefore desires
the Lord to order his steps in the word, Psalm 119. 133. Sometimes the heart
seems to be brought to some good bent to God and good, and yet then is apt to
crack and start aside; as was said, Psalm. 78. 57. David says, he found in his
heart that he might pray to God. 2 Samuel 7. 27. He light of such a heart by
hap, (as we say) or upon serious and long seeking of such a heart, for the
Hebrew word will bear both. It is one of the holy chances (if I may so call it)
that any of us overtake a heart filled with holy praying dispositions. It is so
slippery this way, that if we look not strictly to it, when we think we have
got hold and made stay of our wandering spirits (such they are as far as carnal)
yet they will then steal away from us, and leave us; and when they are but a
little while gone aside, it is very difficult to recover sight or hold of them
again for such holy employment: albeit we should seem to lay a lock and chain
upon them, by our holy resolutions and vows; yet verily our hearts have their
pick-locks, and the devil for a shift will lend them a file: there is no
keeping of them from their natural wanderings, without a very strict hand and
vigilant eye kept over them. That slippery flitting disposition of heart, which
rules in hypocrites, does at least dwell in the dear children of God, so that
it is partly in them, which is abundantly fulfilled in hypocrites: their
goodness, good thoughts and workings in the ways and Ordinances of God, are
sometimes too like unto morning clouds, which mount heavenward in appearance,
but forthwith vanish out of sight, Hos. 6. 4.

6 In that God and Christ watch then 6. The Lord then does watch to help and
hear us, and Angels to observe and help us.
to give us a lift in prayer, that our spirits may be more and more elevated,
and to be then whispiring items of Grace to us, to rescue us from oppositions
of the wily enemies of our souls and the like: he waits to be gracious to us
then, in hearing and helping us at the voice of our cries, Isaiah 30. 18, 19.
He observes carefully the resistances made by Satan against his Joshuahs,
Zach. 3. 1, 2. As he says of vowing, we may say of praying, Say not before the
Angel, it was an error. a careless rash expression of our minds. We should
so carry it before Christ the Angel of the Covenant, in such Religious acts, as
those that have been conscienciously heedful, the rather therein; yea in that
when we are Religiously exercised in prayer, and such like worship of God, some
of the blessed Angels are then and there waiting and observing of us, what we
do, and how we carry it; and they are waiting on the Lord there, ready to be
employed in any service for our good. As when Joshuah is so employed, as Christ
was there ready for his succor; so were there some which stood before him,
some blessed Spirits ready to be commanded in any service for Joshuah, Zach. 3.
1, 2; 4. verses compared. There is an Angel of God ready at hand whilst Daniel
is praying to minister encouragement to him. Dan. 9. 20, 21. May not we then
well watch in prayer, when the Lord himself thus waits upon us, and the
blessed Angels are watching the grant of a Commission from God for our good?

7 In that watchings in prayer much helps 7. It much helps our comfort and
confidence in and after prayer.
both our comfort and confidence, in and after prayer, when hereby we become
more assured of our conscionablenesse in our praying unto God. Paul had
observed how he was carried in prayer, and that his spirit was duly employed in
that service, and therefore dares to appeal boldly unto the Lord, and call him
to witness, in what sort he had mentioned the Romans in his prayer, Romans 1. 9.
Our waitings in this way of crying and calling upon God, is a pledge and fruit
of Gods waitings to be gracious unto us. Isaiah 30. 18, 19. verses compared. We
may best know the state of our souls, by observing what we are usually in our
prayers. David gathers by this, he was one of those godly ones set apart for
God, Psalm. 4. 3. Look as skilful persons may gather the state of the body by
the beatings of the pulses, so may a wise, and judicious, and vigilant
Christian, by observing how his spirit usually works in prayer.

Watchfulness after prayer does likewise consist in these four particulars. 3.
Watching after prayer consists


1. In diligent attention to keep up such 1 In due care to keep up praying
dispositions after prayer.
praying dispositions fresh and lively, which were operative in us, in our
prayers. It is a great part of a Christians wisdom, when he has gotten an
advantage against a slight or formal spirit, or any enemies to prayer, now to
stand his ground, and manage this holy victory; and when his heart is got upon
the wings, so to keep it; but neither will be effected without a watchful heed
thereto. When David was in that praying and praising frame, as one suspecting
the fidelity of his own spirit, and his own sufficiency to maintain the
same, he entreats the Lord to keep the same in his servants heart for ever. 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. A praying frame is so sweet, that gracious hearts would ever be
in such a plight, if it might be, and they take all the care they can that they
may be so; they therefore crave and improve the faithfulness and wisdom of
God for that end. Great is the insufficiency and inability of the best to keep
up their own spirits therein. Even praying Moses, albeit he held up long, and
strongly in prayer, yet his hands wax heavy; such is the infirmity of the
best, that they are not able to hold it out long with strength of elevation of
spirit in any holy exercises. Care must be taken both to keep and hold such a
sublimity of spirit. Exodus 17. 12. A stone is brought to bear up Moses hands,
the strength and stability of that tried stone, 1 Peter 2 4, 5, 6, 9. Is to be
improved by such, which as a holy Priesthood, would hold on offering acceptable
sacrifice of prayer or praise. And as this care is to be took, that whilst we
are actually praying it may be thus; so even afterward, we are to look well
to it, that our praying spirit be not weakened, and grow weary, that it flag
not, flack not, fail not; (as the force of the Greek word bears, Luke 18.)
When a motion is made by the Lord to David, to hold on yet seeking of God as he
had already done, he was awake to hear, and improve, and followed the motion.
For such is that which is employed in that mentioned passage, Psalm. 21. 8, 9.
compared.

2. In looking heedfully and hopefully 2 In listening after the returns of our
prayers.
after our prayers, and listening still when God will answer us by his word and
spirit, and accordingly observing how far forth he does not answer us, David he
is careful to order his prayer rightly, so when he has done, to look up, to
wait and see what becomes thereof. Psalm 5. 3. and Psalm 85. 8. The Psalmist
will hearken (after he had prayed, as verse 7. etc.) what God the Lord will
speak. Watching after our prayers and the success thereof, is as the watching
of the night-watchman watching for morning. Psalm. 130. 1, 2, 5. O how eagerly
do such of the Saints desire the dayspring of the least shows and out-breaking
of the light of the Lord Jesus! how earnestly do they attend the scattering of
the night mists and clouds of their troubled, tempted spirits? How often do they
look out to espy the least peep of the dawning and the least out-lookings of
the daybreak and morning light? When they have knocked at the door of grace,
they listen after the least moving of the door of grace, the least noise, or
news, or sign, or pledge of the gracious approaches of the Lord to them. Hence
is it that on the one hand, when the Lord is silent, or when the prayers of the
Saints take not according to the desires of the Saints, they observe it, and
acknowledge it; as the Prophet Lament. 3. 8. perceives that the Lord gives
not such gracious entrance and entertainment to his and the Churches prayers.
And Psalm. 80. 4 they observe the frowns of the Lord, notwithstanding their
prayers. And Isai. 26. 16, 18, they observe that no such desired deliverances
were wrought by their prayers. On the other hand Paul he observes how long the
Lord was silent; he kept true account how often he sought God without answer
given, and then he minds the answer which at length was given. 2 Cor. 12. 8,
10. They that love the Lord Jesus their Spouse will look after their
love letters which they have sent, and carefully attend and await the answer
returned. If our heavenly Father should by his spirit put the question in our
hearts, what we have done with our petitions, where we have left them? we may
upon observation and knowledge answer, that we have left them in the hand of
the Lord Jesus our elder Brother. And if we be questioned how we have disposed
of our sacrifices, we may confidently answer, we have delivered them, and left
them in the hand of our blessed High Priest, and do await the success. 3 In a
judicious eying, examining and owning after gracious Items


3. In a judicious eying, examining and owning of after Items, or occurrents,
wherein an answer of our prayers is involved, as in secret pacifying of the
heart amidst his sad stormy grief of spirit. He thence gathered that the Lord
had heard the voice of his weeping. Psalm. 6 8, 9. He observed that after he
had prayed against his enemies plots and whispers, they did not triumph in the
attaining of their intended mischievous desires, and gathers that the Lord did
therefore hear his prayer. Psalm. 41. 5, 7, 10, 11. compared. David observes the
sweet quiet of spirit which he had after his prayer against the rage of his
enemies, and gathers thereby that the Lord has heard him Psalm. 3. 1, 4, 5, 6.
Paul sees and feels strength in and from the Lord against his temptations,
and gathers therefore that God had heard his prayer against the same, albeit
the temptations were not removed 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. David being in a pit of
fear, and rescued and freed of his horrors, and his spirit more established in
the ways of God, he sees that he waited not for his answer of prayer in
vain, but that he got it at last, Psalm 40. 1, 2. he observes how he is
quickened and strengthened with the might of God in his spirit, and by that
perceives God had heard his cry, Psalm. 138. 3 When before prayer he was, as in
outward distress, so in inward stresse and perplexity, and after he had
prayed, he perceives how he is every way outwardly and inwardly enlarged, he
concludes, that the Lord has heard him, Psalm. 118. 5. and sundry other like
instances might be given hereof. As Lovers will be opening the boxes wherein
are their Letters, and reading, as the superscription and direction on the
outside, so that which is written within: so will the Saints be looking into
the providence of God, and see and hearken what they speak, and what of Gods
mind and grace in answer to their prayers they may perceive. Or as Petitioners
to earthly Lords, will be enquiring of every one of his Attendants and Servants
which comes from his presence after their Petitions have been carried unto
them, what the Lord says touching their requests, whether he has read it, how
he accepts it, whether they bring not the answer thereof from him, and the
like? So is it here, Heavens Petitioners will be examining and enquiring into,
and of all, after providence occurrent without them, and motions made within,
What news from heaven?

4 In a vigilant care to keep with us what 4. In a due care to keep the
experimental successes of our prayers by us, for our holy use.
answers and Trophies of prayer we have gained, in safe custody, and lively and
fresh vigor, sweetness, and efficacy. The Lovers of the Lord Jesus, they will
keep such Love Letters and Answers by them, and will ever and anon be reading
them over with as much delight and content as at the first, and happily at a
second perusal and review, they take notice of some precious, pithy passages,
that at the first more cursory looking over, they observed not; and it may be
at a third time still they perceive, it breaths more love* and more in this
or that pathetical expression, then at a first, yea, or second view they were
aware of. Answers of prayer are like to friendly tokens of the Lords special
love to them, and how every vigilant friendly seeker of Jesus Christ, he owning
and looking over and over these bowed pieces of his coin, which at this or that
time he has sent them by such or such a good hand, in such or such an
Ordinance, or Providence, or work of his Grace. How will they make conscience
of keeping the love of the Lord Jesus engraven upon their hearts, if he was
lately with them, and spoke kindly to them in prayer? Oh how they will
familiarize with him by reviewing and reviving, and speaking over in their
hearts his last expressions which he used; a word spoken to them in mercy is
carefully kept by them, Luke 8. 15. incorporated into their very hearts, James
1. 21 Hence also the Church who had so wished for Christ's company, Cant. 8. 1.
O that thou were as my brother, etc. verse 4. professes her care to keep
Christ with her, and that nothing provoke him to be gone from her, verse 4. I
charge you O daughters of Jerusalem, that you stir not up nor awake my Love til
he please. Paul, long after that answer mentioned before, 2 Cor. 12. 9. he kept
the joy of it, witness that joy of his in his trials, verse 10. Therefore I
take pleasure in reproaches, etc.

Reasons to move the godly thus to watch Reasons of watching after prayer. 1.
We are the Lords children, subjects, servants.
after prayer, may be these.

1. In that our condition is the condition of children, subjects, servants,
beggars, and therefore we may well attend the good pleasure of our heavenly
Father, Lord and Master, to give answer to our requests: the poor are
Expectants, Psalm. 9. 18 David praying to the Lord as his King, Psalm 5. 3.
says, ver. 3. He will look up. Psalm. 123. 2. As the eyes of servants look unto
their masters hand, so our eyes wait upon the Lord, etc.

2. In that it is certain God will give an 2. Its certain God will seasonably
hear.
answer of grace to his Saints prayers, albeit it may be long first; yea, in
that the Lord oft-times deferreth his answers, it the rather calls for our
waiting. Habakkuk having prayed against the Churches enemies, chap. 1. 12, 13.
etc. Wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously? etc. chap. 2. 12
says, I will stand upon my Watchtower, and will watch to see what he will say
unto me: He will use all pains, patience, and vigilance to observe the issue of
his requests; and verse 2 he has some answers, The Lord said unto me, Write
the Vision, etc. verse 3 The vision is yet for an appointed time, though it
tarry, wait for it; and verily, sooner or later faithful prayers do speed.
Isai. 45. 19. I said not to the seed of Jacob, Seek my face in vain. Psalm 85.
8. I will hearken what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace to his
Saints. Micah 7. 7. I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God will bear
me. God has wisely appointed hearing times, when answers are most suitable and
grateful to his Saints, and honorable to him and to his Grace, therefore we
may well attend the same. Psalm 5. 3. My voice shall thou hear in the morning
(that is seasonably) and in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and
will ^ook up. None are Iosers by being the Lords waiting men or women. The
expectation of the poor shall not perish (or fail) for ever, Psalm. 9. 18.

3 In that such watching, and waiting 3. Its a sign of mercy toward us, and of
grace in us.
after our prayers, it is a comfortable pledge of Mercy to us, and Grace in us.
Answers of prayer are assuredly near us when we have hearts to wait for them
earnestly, and attentively. Habakkuk stands, and sits not long upon his
Watchtower, is not long in that waiting posture, without his answer, as before
showed from Hab. 2. 12, 13. The speaking Vision will come, if we wait for it,
and they only whose faith tells them that God will hear, and will speak peace
to his Saints, they hearken, they wait for him, Micah 7. 7. Psalm 85. 8. It is
a sign that we do truly and fensibly feel the pinching wants of mercy, and that
the desires of grace have some strength as well as truth in them, when we are
so industriously heedful and attentive in listening for answers of prayer; they
come not idling to mercies doors, or as men who have no weighty soul businesses
to dispatch: for them well they might stay there, as men do in a formal course
of prayer, but they would not wait. Waiting Christians make not light of their
prayers, but look at them as precious, in that they in such sort look after
their returns, and the answers of such Messengers.

4. In their answers of prayer, which by this holy watch are met withal, and
4. Its many ways helpful to us in our praises, faith, and courage.
observed: They are of all others most precious and useful to us; they greatly
enlarge to praise God, and walk worthy of him. Continue in prayer, watching
therein with thanksgiving, Col. 4. 2. Who more thankful then such watching
Suppliants, who observe how and wherein God has heard them? Psalm 22. 24. When
the afflicted cried to him, he heard, verse 25. My praise shall be of thee; and
Psalm 116. 1. I love the Lord because he has heard my voice, etc. Answers of
prayer heeded and observed. greatly strengthen and arm a gracious person
against Satan's wily cavils and rebukes, Hab. 2. 1. I will watch to see what he
will say to me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved. Its pity to see how
many precious souls, which out of ignorance or mindlesnesse of this duty of
Watching, or out of improvidence and negligence in often reading over these lines
of Gods love, written and sent in, are foiled in temptations. Answers of prayer
attentively observed, they strengthen our faith for the future, and much
encourage us to pray in greatest straits, and saddest hours. Psalm 6. 9. The
Lord has heard my Supplication, the Lord will hear my prayer. Psalm 118. 56. I
called upon the Lord in distress, and he answered me; the Lord is on my side,
I will not fear what man can do unto me. When we look not after our prayers,
both we and others also lose much of the benefit thereof. Answers of Prayer are
in Gods intent of public use. God spoke with us, (say they) when yet he spoke
with wrestling Jacob, Hos. 12. 4. Gods hearing of the prayer of the destitute,
concerns all others in like case, Psalm 102. 17, 18. He will regard the
prayer of the destitute, ver. 18 This shall be written for the generation to
come. Much sadder would the case of many an afflicted soul have been, if godly
David and others had not been watchful had not observed, and by the Spirits
guidance had not recorded the varieties of their prayer cases, carriages,
conflicts, comforts, answers and issues?

5 In that its the part of the more wise 5. Its our wisdom* and means of
increase of experimental knowledge
and judicious of the Saints so to do, and that by doing whereof they grow most
in experimental knowledge of the Lords giving. As the wisest men with men, are
those that take most heedful observations of the carriages and issues of humane
Transactions, so are they the wisest and experimental knowing Christians, who
most attentively mind these holy Transactions betwixt them and God, and God and
them. Hence the Psalmist among other passages, speaking of manifold answers of
prayer in Psalm. 107. 6. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he
delivers them; so ver. 13, 19, 28. he closes the Psalm with this, Who so is
wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord. To conclude, we would have God to mind our prayers, and
desires of answers, wherefore look that we heed our answer of prayers, if worth
the waiting for, Prove. 13. 12. When the desire comes it is a tree of life.
Harvest answers of seed prayers will fully recompense our pains and patience,
and therefore as other seeds-men we may well wait for the precious fruit
thereof.

Now for the third thing propounded. Helps to such holy watching.
The Helps of such holy Watching, are:

1. Sobriety, which is joined to prayer* 1. Sobriety.
watchfulness. 1 Pet. 4. 7. Be sober and watch unto prayer. Spiritual
drunkards, distempered persons with Lusts, they regard not what they say, even
to God himself. Such as are most moderate and mortified in their thoughts about
common matters here below, have little else to mind then their souls, how they
prosper in their holy converse and commerce with the Lord.

2. Bodily watchfulness: both are aimed 2. Bodily watchfulness.
at under that Mat. 26. 40, 41. Watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation.
The eyes of the mind are hardly watching, when the eyes of the body are scarce
waking. Now for this end use seasonable hours for prayer, neither too early nor
too late.

3. An heavenly frame of spirit. Angels are 3. An heavenvenly frame.
very vigilant, Mat. 18. 10. Their Angels are always beholding the face of my
heavenly Father. A godly man's Watchtower is a sublimer station and condition
then is usual; earthly, sensual, worldly spirits are not fit to keep this holy
watch.

4. A wise and awful frame of heart, apprehensive 4. Holy prudence.
of the weight and worth of prayer, of the glory and greatness of God; an holy
ability and skill to espy, discern, and judge of things that differ, whether
workings, or motions: the wiser Christians (as I said) are most observing of
such things, Psalm. 107. 4.

5. Composedness of mind and thought, together with earnestness of desires and
deep 5. Composedness of mind.
sensibleness of our present pinching, and pressing necessities. David praying
in deeps, brings in a night Watchers case, often exposed to extremities; is in
a night watchers posture, watches for morning break of gracious answers and
items from God, Psalm. 130. 15.

6 An holy keeping our selves in a constant 6. Keep up this holy watch in other
things
and general watch of spirit in other things and passages of our Christian work
and way. Watch unto, in and after hearing the Word and reading of it,
conference about it, meditation upon it, and practicing of it, etc. Deuteronomy. 6.
25. We must observe all the Commandments of the Lord.

PART. III.
1 These. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing.
Cases of Conscience respecting PRAYER.
CHAP. I. Touching unregenerate Persons Prayers.
HAving handled the two former parts respecting the duty it self of prayer,
and the modification and qualifications thereof, we now come to the last part
of this discourse about prayer, namely, to speak to some cases of Conscience,
considerable in the incessant practice of this duty of prayer.

The first case respects the persons, Pray without ceasing: or if such
persons should endeavor the practice of this duty, how far forth they may come
up to it, and be carried out in the obedience thereof; and likewise what
success may come thereof, whether their prayers may not be heard and answered
of God, or how far forth (at least) God may hear, and answer, even their
prayers?

The case it self doubtless may lie sad upon some spirits, which either
suspecting, or concluding, out of some dismal horrors of heart, their estate
to be but of the estate of mere natural persons, they question whether the
injunction do lay a bond upon them to obey it, albeit, it may be, they would
desire to come up to the obedience of it; especially, considering that the
Scripture requires that such as pray, should pray in faith, and believe that
they shall receive what they ask. Mark 11. 24. Whatsoever ye ask, believe that
ye receive them, and ye shall have them. And this they cannot do, finding no
assurance of any interest in God, nor being able to persuade themselves that
Christ died for them in particular, and through this mistaken fancy, that there
can be no true faith without such a firm persuasion and assurance that Christ
is theirs, (which is rather a reflect then direct act of faith, and which
rather follows after some time and strength of faith, acting upon Christ in a
holy casting the soul upon Christ alone for mercy, and leaving upon him all
the help and salvation which they desire) thus are they kept off, and scarce
dare to pray, conceiting that they are not qualified and fitted yet for it:
they cannot lift up pure hands without doubting. Besides, God says, that the
prayer of a wicked man is an abomination to the Lord. Proverb. 15. 8. And they
think that they are such wicked ones in themselves, and can or will God take a
prayer in good part from such wicked ones as they are? Surely no. Neither will
Satan the enemy of prayer neglect the opportunity to present to them the
strictest of the qualifications required of such as seek God by prayer, and
that unless they could come up to that strictness of the rule, (which is laid
strait that the people of God may by little and little come as near to it as
they can) and that forthwith, at first setting about the work, etc. it is not
for such as they are to attempt the same; and better were it for them to sit
still and be silent; and so would (if possible) take them off from using means
to be better, and make them resolve never to seek after a better estate then
what they are in already; the devil knowing right well, that God who orders
such or such an end of good to his people, orders such and such good means to
be used, for attaining of that end.

But such suspicions of tender hearts, being most what groundless surmises,
need not, must not discourage any from prayer, in whom the Lord has wrought a
pliablenesse of heart to the mind of God therein, and a desire to obey his
injunction thereof, this is to them as an inward call and invitation of God to
call upon him. The more tremblingly they set about this duty with sense both of
their own unworthiness and unfitness to perform it, the fitter they are for
it. And suppose the worst, that their surmises are grounded, yet verily, the
more sad they see or suspect their estate to be, the more need have they to
seek God by prayer. When wicked Simon Magus did discover the naughtiness and
falsenesse of his heart, Simon Peter does not now forbid him to pray, but he
injoyneth him to pray God, if perhaps the thought of his heart may be forgiven
him. If there be any possibility of a man's salvation, if there be but a
perhaps left of pardon, and that of one at present in the gall of bitterness,
and bond of iniquity; as such a one is bound to repent, so also to pray. Acts
8. 21, 22, 23. Some will be ready to put off these injunctions of prayer, as
such as concern Puritans; but as for such as they are, what boot is it for them
to pray? It was reckoned among the profane speeches of them of old, Job 21.
14, 15. What profit should we have if we pray to him? Yea, but some now adays
hold it as their judgment, that it is to no purpose for unregenerate persons
to pray; because indeed they are got bound to pray. They were as good join in
the rest of the speeches there condemned and branded for profaneness, and
stand up against the holy Ghost, charging the profane speeches of those
unregenerate ones: and maintain them in it, that they ought not to desire the
knowledge of Gods ways, they ought not to serve him, they ought not to pray to
him and therefore may say to God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge
of thy ways: and what is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what
profit is it if we pray to him? An unregenerate heart who of it self is averse
from any way of God, and would not be subject to the law of God, would gladly
have such a Tenent to hold up against God and his servants, to excuse them from
seeking unto God by prayer, as not bound to do it.

Let us therefore give answer to the several branches of the case propounded,
and show, 1. That an unregenerate person Unregenerate Persons are bound to
pray. because,
is bound to pray. 2. That such a one may be strangely carried out in prayer,
3. That God may hear and answer his prayer.

1. Then, that an unregenerate man is bound to pray, is evident from this
indefinite injunction, Pray without ceasing; whether regenerate or
unregenerate. The wicked man, who Isai. 55. 7. is charged to forsake his evil
ways and thoughts, is first charged, verse 6. to seek the Lord whilst he may
be found, to call upon him whilst he is near. Psalm. 65. 2. All flesh shall come
to thee, whether they are good or bad persons.

For First it is a duty which lies upon 1 Prayer is natural worship required
of all sorts in the first commandment.
all men, as created and made by God. It is a natural worship. It is that
which the law of nature, as well as that of the word of God does put men upon.
Hence even the most Pagan people all do call upon some God. Jonah 1. 5. The
mariners cried every man to his God. Isai. 45. 20. They pray to a God that
cannot save. Among other things contained in the Law, they do this also by
nature. Rom 2 14. If they omit calling upon God, their natural conscience will
accuse them for it; or if they do call upon God, it will so far excuse them and
encourage them in it, v. 15. other natural men which live under the light of
the word, if they neglect it, they sin both against the light of nature, and
the light of the word of God. Heathens and other naurallmen will be damned for
this sin of not calling upon God. Hence are they twice imprecated against, as
under that consideration of not ho nouring of God, so of not calling upon him;
as highly sinning in the one as well as in the other. Psalm. 79. 6. and Jer. 10.
25. Power out thy wrath upon the Heathen that know thee not, and the Families
that call not on thy Name. Unregenerate persons, as well as others, are bound
by the first commandment, to have no other Gods but God, and therefore bound
to worship the Lord only, and no other God but him alone; and therefore to
love him and no other God, to fear him and no other God, to trust in him and no
other God, to pray to him and no other God beside him, etc. as they are bound
to make no graven images of God, to worship the true God only with his own
instituted worship, and not any other of men's inventing; and as they are
likewise bound not to take Gods name in vain, etc.

2. Prayer is a means ordered by the Lord, even for the obtaining of
regenerating 2 It is an instituted means of Grace and Blessing to them.
grace. Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart will I give you, etc. compare this with verse
27. Thus says the Lord, I will yet for this be sought (or inquired of) by the
house of Israel to do it for them. God will give even first grace, in the use
of his own appointed means, and that is in a way of seeking for it. Hence also
God owneth this as his own appointed means for obtaining other blessings of
his, as deliverance from dangers, supplies of wants, and the like, albeit the
persons which pray are unregenerate. So when Seamen of all sorts, whether
ungodly or godly, are in storms and dangers, they cry unto the Lord in their
trouble, and he brings them out of their distress, Psalm 107. 23. 28. If it
were simply sinful in them, being unregenerate, to cry and pray to God, he
would never thus encourage them or others in their case to cry then unto him. 2 Chronicles. 26, 5. Vzziah sought God in the days of Zechariah, and when he sought
the Lord, God made him for to prosper; if he had been downright godly, he had
sought God all his days: yet though an hypocrite (so unregenerate) as long as
he does that which is for the matter of it right in Gods sight, ver. 4. (which
is expounded ver. 5. He sought God) God prospers him. Vzziah did what was
right in Gods sight, as Amaziah his father did, which was not with a perfect
heart for the manner of doing it, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2. yet seeking of God even by
such a one, whose heart is not perfect with God, is in it self considered, that
which is right in Gods sight, and a due and direct means to prosper, in what
such a one takes in hand. Exodus 22. 27. When he So Exodus 21. 22. 23. Deuteronomy. 15.
9 and 24. 15
cries unto me (namely, as one oppressed, as one in necessity, be he who he
will be, Regenerate or Unregenerate) I will hear him, for I am merciful. That
scoffing lad Ishmael was an Unregenerate person, yet when in distress and
crying, to God Genesis 21. 17. Fear not (says the Angel to Hagar his mother) for
God has heard the voice of the lad where he is; if it had been simply sinful
and that which Ishmael ought not to have done, the Angel would never have
encouraged Hagar from such an Argument, as Gods hearing Ishmaels cry

3 God may and does bestow praying abilities 3. God may and does give them
praying abilities to be improved.
upon Unregenerate persons. He gives to some the gift of prayer, to whom he
never vouchsafes the spirit of prayer. The gift of prayer is as common to
hypocrites, as the gift of Prophecy. Not every one that says to me, Lord,
Lord, (is large and earnest in prayer to me) shall enter into heaven, Matthew. 7.
Unregenerate Ministers, Magistrates, Parents, Masters, Tutors, may have such a
gift of Prayer, by the use whereof others may be instructed, helped and
encouraged in a way of Prayer, yea in a right way of prayer; and if he give
such a gift, surely he requires the use of it. That slothful servant, albeit a
Reprobate, yet having such a like gift and Talent, he is damned for not
improving it, Matthew. 25. 30.

4 That practice or religious performance 4. The omission and neglect thereof
is charged on them as their sin.
must needs be a Duty, even of unregenerate persons, the omission or neglect
whereof is charged by the Lord upon them for their sin, (for if it were not an
Anomy or Transgression of some rule of God, it could not be sin:) but the
omission or neglect of prayer, or calling upon God, even by Unregenerate
persons, is charged upon them by God as their sin; therefore the performance of
that service of calling upon God was their Duty. The Assumption is evident,
when the Apostle would prove the unregenerate Jew and Gentile to be under sin,
Romans 3 9. he proves it ver. 11. by this, out of Psalm 14. 2. There is none
that understands, there is none that seeks after God. And Psalm. 14. 4. The
workers of iniquity have it charged upon their very consciences, as that which
they cannot but know to be their sin, that they call not upon God: Do not the
workers of iniquity know, that they eat up my people as bread? They call not
upon God; and Psalm. 10. 4. Its charged as the pride of the wicked, The wicked
is so proud, that he seeks not God: The like charge see Jer. 10. 21. Hos. 7.
7. Zeph. 1. 6. and Job 27. 10. The hypocrite that is blamed for ceasing to call
upon God (Will he always call upon God?) should rather have been blamed for
calling upon God at all, if it had not been any duty of his to pray. To like
purpose we might argue, That the neglect of it by the Unregenerate, as well as
Regenerate Jews* is bewailed by Daniel, as their sin: ergo, the contrary was
their Duty, Dan. 9. 13. All this is come upon us, yet made we not our prayer to
God. Besides also, if it had not been in it self good, and a duty, even for an
Unregenerate person to pray, but had been in it self sinful; the Psalmist
never need to have made that Imprecation against him in Psalm. 109. 7. Let his
prayer be turned into sin. Besides, the Psalmist would never have urged God so
to affright and persecute his enemies by his judgments, that they might at
length be forced to seek his name, if it had been in it self sinful, Psalm. 83.
15, 16.

Obj. Prove. 15. 8. The prayer of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord.

Answ. So is the Plowing of the wicked sin, Prove. 21. 4. Not simply in
themselves, for then an unregenerate man should not plow, nor labor in his
Calling; yea, he should not eat his meat, nor sleep; etc. For to the impure and
unbelieving is nothing pure, Titus 1. 15, 16. But it is so in respect of the
defects of other qualifications, required to the holy use and exercise of such
things; namely, want of faith, love to God, repentance for sin, etc. Their
Sacrifices were an abomination to the Lord, Isaiah 1. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. yet
in themselves commanded duties, and enjoined to every Jew, whether he were
Unregenerate or Regenerate. God once enabled Adam, and in him all his
posterity, to call upon him; and though he and we in him are become Bankrupts,
and disabled to do that service and homage, yet our Lord and Master may, and
does require it of us, and accounts it our sin to neglect it. It is every
ones duty to understand, and so to believee in God, as well as to seek him; but
the omission of that Duty of understanding and believing God, hinders not,
but that the omission of that other duty of seeking God becomes a sin to every
one. Romans 3. 9. 11.

2. An Unregenerate man may be strongly and largely carried out in prayer, as
its Unregenerate persons may be large in prayers.
said of them, Psalm. 78. 36, 37. who did but flatter God with their mouth, for
their heart was not right with him; They sought God early, ver. 34. namely,
when he slew them, when they were in fear of their lives: So may profane
Mariners be very earnest in prayer then, Psalm. 107. 28. Cry unto the Lord. So
Prove. 1. 27, 28. When your fear comes, etc. then shall you seek me early, but
shall not find me. Those in Isai. 58. 2, 3. they joined long and large prayers
with their Fasts. An hypocritical Pharisee could not spend his time in his
Fasting days, unless enlarged in prayer, Matthew. 6. 16. Those hypocrites that
devoured widows houses, they had such a gift in prayer, that they could be
very large and long in prayers, Matthew. 23. 14. And for a pretense make long
prayers.

3 Unregenerate persons may be full of praising and thankful expressions in
their They may be large in praising God.
prayers. The unjustified Pharisees prayer was rather a Thanksgiving, Luke 18.
10, 11 He prayed thus, God, I thank thee, I am not as other men, etc. Those
unregenerate ones among the Jews also, which cried so earnestly, Exodus 14. 10.
they did sing as loud as Moses and Aaron. Psalm. 106. 12, 13. Then believed they
his words, and sang praises to him; but not rightly, for verse 13, but
incontinently they forgot his works, and waited not for his counsel; verse 15.
They lusted in the wilderness, and tempted God in the Desert; of whom the
Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 10. 9. Only lest what is now said, may raise some
doubt in the hearts of any truly Regenerate, the example of the Differences
betwixt the thanksgivings of the Unregenerate, and those of the Regenerate.
Pharisees thankful Prayer, will yield matter of distinction and differencing
of the Unregenerate person in his praises from the Regenerate.

1 The Unregenerate person in his thanksgiving before God, pretending to lift
up God in his praises, does intend to lift up or exalt himself. Hence Christ
who knew the spirit of this Pharisee in his praises of God, renders him thus,
Luke 18. 14. Whosoever exalts himself.

2 The main in their eyes, and so in their thanks, is some inherent excellency,
not those imputed mercies, not Christ and his Righteousness, and propitiation,
and the pardon of sin, Gods favor, acceptance, etc. No word of these in the
Pharisees thanks, but that I am not as others, unjust, I fast, I pay Tithes,
etc. They are the Saints, whose hearts being most affected with those mercies,
do break out into cordial prayers for them.

3 Such men use to rest in some common eminencies and excellencies above
others. The Pharisee passes others, he is not as other men, and that suffices
him: no word of a serious petition for the supply of such or such wants, of
this or that grace, or for the increase thereof, or for the subduing of such or
such corruptions. He grounds his rejoicing upon another falling short of him,
upon others falls into such sins from which he is restrained; as Gal. 6. 4. He
shall have rejoicing in himself, and not in another.

4 Such men respect more the gift, then the Giver, and trust more in that, then
in him. They trust in themselves that they are righteous, when they say, God,
we thank thee, Luke 18. 9, 11. compared. They make the gifts their God, and
they adore and admire the Giver only for the gifts sake, and do not admire the
gifts for the Givers sake, as true Converts, and Spouse like spirits use to do,
but harlot like they do otherwise.

5 Such men are very ambitious in their thankful acknowledgments. They make
Gods praises but as a stirrup to get up into men's esteems, and as a bridge by
which to convey to themselves humane praises; Hence this Temple
acknowledgement, and in the most conspicuous place of it.

6. Such men will in the midst of their thanksgivings, be with heart and mouth
too (sometimes) censuring, and putting contempt upon others, falling short (as
they conceive) of their excellencies; yea, albeit those others be better men
then themselves, as this gracious Publicane was, then the Pharisee: so says
this seemingly thankful Pharisee, God I thank thee, I am not as this Publicane,
not such a varlet, not such a wretch, etc.

3. Unregenerate men may be carried out with some faith, as well as fervency in
their prayers. As Luke 17. 12, 13, 14, 3 They may pray with some kind of faith.
15, 17. The nine, as well as the tenth, who was truly gracious, cry as loud as
he, and believe as strongly upon the word of Christ as he, that the Lord Jesus
had granted their request of healing, and go a great way to Jerusalem as men
already cured, to show themselves to the Priest (as the manner then was) when
yet they were not then actually cured; they set forward in the journey upon
that errand, upon confidence of Christ's word, as if they had been cured at the
very instant wherein he spoke, and yet not at that very instant, but afterward,
even as they journeied toward Jerusalem from that part of Samaria, were they
actually cured. As an unregenerate man, one who has not love, may have the
gift of the faith of miracles, so as to remove mountains. 1 Cor. 13. 2. So may
they exercise that faith in such a way expecting answers of prayer in cases of
wonder. They that cast out devils did it by invocation upon the name of the
Lord, accompanied with such ^ faith for hearing them, and helping them. Mat. 7.
22. And in thy name cast out devils. And as an unregenerate man may have that
common temporary faith, believe for a time. Luke 8. 13. So may he for such a
time act such a faith in prayer, or the like, albeit it be in matters only of
a common nature, and not such as are properly saving; as for clearing up pardon
of sins, subduing secret corruptions, sanctifying of afflictions, an holy
rescue or issue from temptations, or the like.

Touching the third thing propounded, God may be said in some sense to hear
their prayers, praying with others.
I say, God may in some sort, and in some cases hear unregenerate men's
prayers; both such prayers as they put up to the Lord with others, or by
themselves alone. Prayers put up by them with others, may be heard in a saving
way and manner by the Lord; albeit not in a saving manner to themselves, yet in
a saving way to the Saints which join with them in the prayers which they put
up. Matthew (chap. 3. 5, 6) says, the Centurion came unto Christ beseeching
him to heal his servant, but Luke 7. 3, 4, 5. expounds it, that he sent to
the Elders of the Jews to beseech Christ to do it. He joined with them in the
request, it was his, but it was presented by those proud hypocritical and
unregenerate Elders, who breathed none of the Centurions faith, or humility, as
appears by their plea with Christ from the Centurions worthiness, saying, that
he wa^ worthy that he should do this for him, yet the Lord Jesus heard, and
graciously answered the good Centurions hearty desire, and consente^ to the
substance of the prayer. They that presented the poor palsy man to Christ
with a tacit desire of cure, he had (some o^ them at least) a faith of miracles
for his cure; but the man himself no doubt had a further desire, even of his
souls cure, with the pardon of his sins, and when Jesus saw their faith, Mark
2. 5. he says to the sick of the palsy, (as Matthew has it, chap. 9.) Son,
be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven; the man's grievous disease might
trouble his friends; but this was his greatest trouble, in the want of pardon
of sins, and his desire and faith was accordingly carried out, and this soul
mercy of his pardon and peace is given in as an answer in common to them all.
When he saw their faith he says to the palsy man, Son, thy sins be forgiven
thee. Abiathar, who proved a treacherous and bad man, (1 Kings 2. 26.) yet if
he made inquiry of God for his counsel about distressed David, (1 Samuel 30. 7,
8.) or about David in a strait, (2 Samuel 2. 1.) God gives a gracious answer for
David, who by him seeks unto the Lord for his counsel; and surely the
desires of says are acceptable to God, and successful, whether expressed in
others prayers, wherein believers join, or in their own alone. Psalm 145 19.
He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: The fruit of no one
ordinance of God does depend merely and only upon the worthiness and
goodness of such as chiefly act in it. Christ authourised the twelve
Disciples, and Judas among the rest, to preach the Gospel. Matthew. 10 4. 7. And
so, as that if they came to worthy ones, humble souls, ready to receive their
doctrine, their peace was to come upon them, verse 13. If the house be worthy,
let your ptace come upon it, even all kind of bliss to their souls also, which
you petition for in your prayers, and hold forth in your preaching, that shall
come upon it. Let the Preacher be unworthy himself, yet if the hearers be
worthy, their peace comes on them. The Gospel, and Gospel Ordinances are the
power of God to salvation to the believing hearer and partaker, be the Minister
regenerate or unregenerate. The cup in the Lords Supper, is the Communion of
the blood of Christ to the worthy receiver, be the Minister, whom the people
called to dispense the same to them, regenerate or unregenerate. 1 Cor. 10. 16.
and so in prayer: Gods compassions are to his peoples miseries, for redress
whereof the prayer is made, be the man that is the mouth of the people therein,
Godly or ungodly. Notable is that example of wicked Jehonhaz, 2 Kings 13. 4.
Jehoahaz besought the Lord, and the Lord heard him: for he saw the trouble of
Israel, wherewith the King of Aram troubled them. Nor would God ever show such
respect to prayers put up by unregenerate persons in behalf of his people or
any of them, if it were (as some say) a sin to join with an unregenerate
Minister, Parent, Master, Husband, etc. in their prayer. And since every
Hypocrite, how godly soever he is taken to be by the most judicious Christians,
yet he is an unregenerate person, if an hypocrite; and since he that we judge
to be truly godly, yet its very possible he may be an hypocrite, we cannot be
infallibly sure in any ordinary way of another saving estate, but only in the
judgment of charity we may esteem such or such a one truly godly: so that if
we sin if we join in prayer with an unregenerate person, we cannot assure
our selves but that we sin in joining with any other at all, because we cannot
ordinarily be so assured, that another with whom we would pray, is regenerrte;
and so a man must now turn an absolute separatist indeed.

As for other prayers, which do more personally Praying by themselves also.
respect themselves, and are uttered by themselves, albeit the parties be
unregenerate, yet the Lord may hear the same; the Lord as a Master, grants the
request of that hypocritical servant, though not as a Father. Matthew. 18. 26,
17. and verse 32. O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee the debt, because thou
prayedst me, etc. So those rude They are then heard.
mariners, crying in distress, are heard of the Lord. Psalm. 107. 28. So was
mocking Ishmael heard in his cry. Genesis 21. 17. God may, and does put forth
wonderful works for persons which cry to him as they are the children of men,
albeit not as the children of God, many of them. Psalm. 107. 15, 21, 31. O that
men would praise him for his wonderful works which he does for the children of
men! Though those that sought him, when he slew them, had not hearts right
with God, Psalm. 78. 34, 36, 37. compared, yet he being full of compassion
forgave their iniquity, (i. e. as to the punishment deserved by it, even utter
ruin, he passed over that,) he destroyed them not utterly, verse 38. God
likes also to own the righteous causes even of unrighteous persons, and to
set himself against their affliction. Job 34. 27, 28. They have caused the cry
of the poor to come to him, and he has heard their cry. So Exodus 22. 22, 23.
Though many of the children of Abraham, of Isaak and Jacob in Egypts bondage,
were themselves unregenerate, yet they crying also, were heard, out of respect
to their godly Ancestors, and the covenant of God made with them, Exodus 6. 5. I
have heard the groanings of the children of Israel, and have remembered my
covenant. Sometimes God hears such persons prayers the rather, that they may
afterward be instruments of his peoples good; and sometimes that he might the
rather encourage all sorts to pray to him. Psalm. 65. 2. O thou that hear
prayers, to thee shall all flesh come. Sometimes the persons at present
unregenerate, yet are elect, and God in hearing them, will look to his own
thoughts of prayer which he has toward them, and so will be found of those
which sought him not aright.

But in case the parties be reprobates, what hearing God does afford to any
prayers of theirs.

It is first in common things, and such, which (at least) are not properly In
common, not in things properly saving.
saving mercies unto them, for so God hears not sinners: if any object, that
evil servants pardon, granted upon his request. Matthew. 18. 32. I answer, the
Master forgave him the debt, not simply, but in respect of the consequent
vassalage and imprisonment presently deserved by it. Matthew. 18. 25. or as some
interpret the place, to be spoken in reference only to the maine intent of
Christ, that if a man forgive not his neighbor offending, and begging his
mercy, God will never communicate to him any saving benefit of his mercy in
Christ. An implacable spirited Christian is at present in a state of damnation.

2. The hearing which the Lord does By God as a Master, not as a Father.
lend to such, is from his general providence and pity, and rather as a
Sovereign and Master, then from any particular grace, and as a Father; for so
he hears not sinners, yea he hears them, rather to leave them without
excuse, and to take a fuller blow at them afterward, as in the case of that
evil servant, Matthew 18. the end.

3. The Lord uses not to give any suitable They receive not Grace answerable.
grace as the success of their prayers; so he hears only Saints, and not
sinners, especially reprobates; he changed not the servants heart with his
condition, Mat. 18. nor theirs, Psalm. 78. 37, 38, 39.

4. God sometimes hears them in They are heard in wrath.
displeasure and anger. Hosea 13. 10, 11. I gave them a king in mine anger.
Psalm. 106. 15. He gave them their desire, but sent leanness into their soul;
their soul is blasted, they were hardened in pride and security thereby, and
the thing it self given is blasted to them in the use of it, becoming a snare,
and vanity, and in the deprivall of it vexation of spirit.

CHAP. II. Touching Distractions in Prayer.
WE are now to proceed to other cases of Conscience, arising in the incessant
carrying on of the weighty duty of prayer. The second case now to be handled
is, touching Distractions, or Impertinent thoughts, and workings of spirit,
which disturb and molest us in prayer: wherein, demand will be made of three
things.

Touching, 1 The Causes 2 The Cure

Touching the first we say, the causes General causes of distractions in prayer.
of such distractions are either such as are more general or more particular.
The more general causes are two.

1. Satan that enemy to prayer, the Author of all confusion, and so of this
confusion Satan.
of the spirit in prayer; that foul who steals away what is spoken to the
heart by God in the word, he is as busy to steal away the good motions of the
spirit, stirring us up to speak to God in prayer. Satan is at hand to tempt
when we are in hand with prayer. If we will draw near to God in prayer* we may
expect the tempter to approach some way or other to disturb us* by some
sinister subtle suggestions or other. We must resist the devil in such like
distracting motions when we are drawing nigh to God. Jam. 4. 7. Resist the
devil, and he will flee from you. And verse 8. Draw near to God, etc. If we
will pray with all manner of prayer, we had need be armed against such like
wily assaults of Satan, which tend to annoy us therein. Ephesians. 6. 11, 18.
compared. Look as Act. 16. 16, 17, 18. still when the Apostle and his company
were to go to prayer, the devil in his instrument, the maid possessed, makes a
disturbance with her impertinent speeches; so is it here, if the devil can help
it, some thing or other shall be set on work to breed distraction, or occasion
disturbance to us in prayer, or he himself will be suggesting something to
molest us.

2. The unregenerate part of man. When 2 The unregenerate part in man.
at any time we should do any good, whether it be to pray, or the like, evil
will be present with us, as he complained. Romans 7. 21. When I would do good,
evil is present with me: that sink of natural corruption will then especially
cast out its unsavory smells, when so raked into by holy humble acknowledgments
and deprecations, this dunghill will then be sending out his vapors, even when
the heart is heated and warmed in prayer by the spirit; when a commanding power
of grace is stirring in the heart, the unregenerate part will be raising these
munities. Romans 7. 23. I see another law in my members, rebelling against the
law of my mind: Paul found it so, and who does not find it so in continual
experience? If the spirit do break any long silence in the heart, and will be
speaking, corruption will talk as loud as the spirit, and if it can, drown the
noise and voice of the spirit, that the heart may not distinctly hear what the
spirit does teach the heart to speak to the Lord. The flesh will be lusting
against the spirit, so that we cannot speak to God, or do any service for
him, in so free and spiritual manner as we (as regenerate) do desire. Gal. 5.
17. All evil thoughts which boil out of the spirit, rise out of that inward
spring, and so these evil thoughts which disturb us in prayer, they spring from
the same fountain, Mark. 7. 21. out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, etc.
The unregenerate part in the best, savoureth not such a spiritual way of God,
as is the conscionable exercise of our selves in prayer, that begets that
natural slipperinesse in spiritual things, whence it is that good motions are
not so rooted, and dwell not so long with us. This is that which would be
breeding and feeding a disposition in the best, to be soon satisfied with
spiritual things, and so to abate of the earnest, and intent pursuit after the
same. The strength of this natural By as will too often show it self in the
Saints, that whilst their spirits are carried out with some might of the hand
of the spirit of God toward the mark in prayer, this draws the mind away,
and the deceitful heart of many will be slyly flinging something or other in
the way to cause a rub, and to slack or divert the strait course of a
regenerate man in prayer.

More particular causes of such distractions Particular causes thereof.
in prayer, are these:

1 Natural hypocrisy, and falsenesse of heart; want of soundness in the feet
of 1 Natural hypocrisy.
our affections, will make us go crippling and blundring, and stumbling, even
in this plain even way of prayer, and a small push will turn us aside, and
cause the mind and heart to divert from the holy way, in which they were going.
Heb. 12. 13. lest that which is lame, be turned out of the way. And as Prove.
28. 7. As the legs of the lame, so is a parable in a fools mouth; a fools mouth
cannot, will not utter spiritual things so closely and concisely, but will be
intermingling impertinences; so is it here, so far as this sinful guile,
(which indeed is but folly) does take place. As where ruling hypocrisy does
possess a man, that man is very fickle and unstable, he is in and out, off and
on, in every thing he says or does: now he will be as one speaking or doing
well, and now again the contrary. James 1. 8. That double minded man is
unstable in all his ways: so is it in part, where tyranizing hypocrisy
domineereth over any poor soul, it will cause many diversions and much
unsteadinesse in the mind in the best services. Where the spirit is
hypocritical, there will the heart and mind be constantly gadding, and far
off, when the lips are near God in seeking of him. Jer. 12. 3. Thou art near in
their mouth, and far from their reins. And Matthew. 15. They draw near me with
their lips, but their hearts are removed far from me. When the heart is
divided, as Hosea speaks, chap. 10. 2. surely the mind will be so too. That
part of man which is not for God will never be long with him, but ever starting
from him in any Ordinance, and so in this. Though the heart, as sincere in
part, put the mind upon thinking of suitable things to the prayer in hand, yet
the heart, as wily and guileful also in part, will be employing the mind in
other thoughts also: and so far as there is division of mind, there is a
distracted mind, or a mind drawn diverse ways.

2 Distrustful care for outward things. 2. Distrustful care:
Thence is the mind as a meteor (as is the Greek phrase, Luke 12. 28, 29)
pendulous and wavering, now up, now down, now turning this way, now that,
keeping no certain course in this, or in any other way of God. Look as that
care of his about his Inheritance, distracted his mind in hearing God speak to
him, Luke 11, 13, 14. (whence that interruption of Christ in his preaching,)
Master, (says one then) bid my brother divide the inheritance; so does the
like cause work a like effect in our speaking to God in prayer. It is a sad and
dangerous character of a thorny Professor, when constantly as any seed of the
Word is shooting up in any Ordinance, such thorny distempers and distractions
spring up with it, Luke 8. 7. Yea, when they commonly overtop the same, and
good things in prayer, hearing, meditation, etc. come thereby to be choked and
stifled in our minds or hearts. When the mind is in a manner drunk with cares
of this life, it will go on reeling and staggering in the choicest paths of
God: or if from such a worldly spirit, we make rash and sudden irruptions unto
Prayer from heat of worldly businesses, when the mind but then was reaking hot,
and sweating in them, the steem and savor thereof will surely annoy us in
prayer so soon after: our businesses, which we talked with so earnestly but
then, they will be calling after us again, as having somewhat more to say to
us. The Vessels of our minds will taste too much of that strong liquor, which
can hardly be emptied out so soon. Look as it is with a man, who is not
thoroughly waked from sleep, his head is most apt to be filled with fumes, and
his tongue to speak impertinently: so is it here, when we are not thoroughly
rowzed from carnal occasions and thoughts about them; our minds will be full of
impertinent thoughts. And as other dreams come from multitudes of business,
and busyings of the mind, Eccl. 5. 2, 3. so here, from such like busyings of
the mind but then, we shall pray but dreamingly and distemperedly. When we have
been so intently studying but then, such a point respecting the world, we
shall not so soon be drawn to think so intently and fixedly of better subjects.

3 Discontent with our present condition. As discontented Jonah, how is his 3.
Discontent.
prayer stuffed with distempered expressions springing from distempered
thoughts, Jon. 4. 1, 2. Grace and discontent pulled Rachels spirit diverse
ways; now tumultuous thoughts against her husband, now envious thoughts
against her sister, and now better motions of the Spirit to counterwork the
same: So that she in that case might be said to be in great wrestlings in
prayer also, Genesis 30. 8. Discontent is a mutinous distemper, and will be
casting tumults, even in our best times of praying, etc. All the days of such
aflicted ones are evil, Prove. 15. 15 Discontent, as a mighty vapor in the
heart that is pent in, and there has lain long, will at length be breaking
out, and will cause Earthquakes in the heart of long continuance, which will
strangely vary the motions of the heart this way and that way, and oft-times
rend it. It will make a man mentally, ever wandering, and so liable to all sorts
of temptations, at all times, and in the best Ordinances, Prove. 27. 8. As a
bird wandering from her nest, so is a man wandering from his place. Discontent
taking off the mind from its basis and center of quiet submission to Gods mind
and will, the mind knows not where to fix. A discontented Christian is
neither pleased with himself, nor any thing he has or does, no not with his
very praying; and no wonder then if so distempered in it. The ground of
discontent is distrust: and what is of a more wavering nature then that? It
makes a man like the troubled sea when it cannot rest so long as such blasts
are upon his mind. It makes the workings of his mind like the waves of the
sea, very independent, and sometimes thwarting each other. Jam. 1. 6 Nothing
wavering; that is, nothing doubting or distrusting, which is indeed the
wavering of a troubled Sea wave.

4 Inordinacy of affection, whether of 4. Inordinacy of affection.
desire, or fear, or love, or joy, or grief, or anger, etc. The Lord Christ
when to raise Tabithae, he will put out the Minstrels and the Mourners, which
made a confused noise; no good to be done unless these be stilled. No raising
up of a dead spirit in prayer unless all such inordinacies be secluded. Such
inordinacies in the heart will hurry the mind with them, and make that
inordinate too. If they give respit to the mind to be busied a little in any
Ordinance, yet they cannot spare or forbear its service long. They carve and
cut out so much work for the mind, that it can scarce have leisure for more
spiritual Employment. Yea, the very mouth and tongue, which should be in any
Ordinance as the pen of a ready writer, shall be ever and anon jogged by them;
yea, they will be inditing, suggesting and inserting ever and anon their
matters, whilst the spirit of a sanctified Christian is inditing the more
weighty messages of the soul to be dispatched to heaven by this sure and speedy
Messenger Prayer; and its well, if through the tumultuous noise of these
distempers, the mind be not so disturbed, that men sometimes in prayer speak
nonsense. And as in Feverish distempers, the Patients thoughts are slippery,
slighty, and independent, and their discourses accordingly as full of
impertinencies. So is it here, amidst those feverish distempers of the soul.
Inordinacies of Affection they are the souls Diseases, and a Christian sick of
such Diseases will be followed ever and anon with impertinencies of thoughts in
best services.

5 Any spirit of Lust. This makes Christians of good hopes, as clouds which
are 5. Lust.
driven hither and thither of contrary winds: Jude calls those lascivious
professors, Clouds carried about of winds, Jude 12. also wandering Stars; their
minds cannot be fixed and intent in any Duty of piety. They do not, cannot keep
in the right Eclyptick Line, but wander from that constant course which Jesus
Christ the Sun of Righteousness constantly kept. That wildfire will be burning,
whilst the Incense of prayer is offering and burning. Look as it is with the
boiling pot, the scum of it will be rising up, together with the meat therein:
So is it here, even when a Christians heart is or should be boiling up good
matter in prayer, such a filthy scum as this is will be rising up in the spirit
together with it. Or as its said of the Harlot, She watches her times to call
and entice passengers to her, which were going right on, Prove. 9. 15. So is it
here, these Bawds and Panders in the soul, they will be inveagling and enticing
the mind and heart to withdraw the same from their intent going on in prayers;
or any other good way of God to the end that they may be naught with them. As
its said of that old Beldam and grand Strumpet Concupiscence; A man is tempted
when he is drawn away of his own Lust and enticed. So is it here, in this
daughter of that mother of Fornications; it will be enticing the soul, and
drawing it away from any way of God, and then tempt it.

6 A spirit of Error, This makes Christians 6. Error.
also like clouds, as Jude speaks of erring persons, Jude 8, 12, 13. Unclean
Opinionists, they are or will be Dreamers, as Judes phrase is, These are filthy
Dreamers, dreaming continually in every thing they say or do. Their thoughts
will be incongruous in their best employments. As it is with persons benighted,
they are aptest to wander from any right path wherein they were going: so is it
with a mind benighted and bemisted with darkness of error; that mind will
hardly keep on its way in prayer, or any other Ordinance long, but will have his
sinful vagaries. Or as a man whose head is filled with wine or strong drink,
his head being giddy he goes reeling along. So is it with Christians besotted
with error, their giddy brains will not suffer them to be solid, distinct,
exact, and intent in their thoughts in the good ways of God; they will be
stumbling with their feet, and stammering with their tongue, making at best but
rude and broken work of it in their prayers and performances. Such persons are
ever unstable souls; They beguile unstable souls, 2 Pet. 3. Their very minds
are unstable in any thing that is good. They are vain in their imaginations,
Romans 1. Belial, the spirit of confusion of mind, heart, and way, is where a
spirit of Error dwells.

7 Family contention. It is a continual 7. Family contention.
dropping, Prove. 19. 13. It will make breaches into the very spirit also of the
other yoke fellow; yea, divide and distract it in prayer, as well as other
services. 1 Pet. 3. 7. to orderly dwelling together of Christian yoke fellows
this is adjoined, That your prayers be not hindered; neither by distempering
your spirits who are to join in prayer, nor by distasting the Lord, so as he
will not give a ready answer thereto. Its hard for him who is in the Family to
mind the cases of each one therein, but in minding the contentions therein,
some distemperrd thoughts will be arising in him. If the very repetition of an
offensive matter passing 'twixt two friends, is so apt to breed a fresh
distance, by renewing the former apprehensions of the offensiveness thereof;
whence that Prove. 17. He that repeateth a matter separateth chief friends; then
in the best men and in the best duties, it is a wonder if reminding and
rementioning family contentions, there be not found some tang and touch of
distempered movings and musings.

8 Spiritual drowsinesse, sluggishnesse, 8. Sluggishness
and slightiness of heart. When heart and mind is of a drowzie temper, it is of
a dreaming temper, full of impertinent fancies even when to be employed in
prayer, or the like; yea, if both body and soul be not in a waking and watching
plight, the soul will be apt to be hurried with impertinencies, temptations.
Matthew. 26. 41. Watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation.

Now touching the second thing propounded, Remedies against distractions in
prayer,
even the Remedies of such distractions in prayer. Let but diligent heed be
taken, and conscionable endeavor used against each of the former occasions and
causes thereof, and it will help to redress the same. Espy out and bewail the
secret guile and wiliness of heart, get your heart rid of those distrustful
cares, of that Disconcontent and inordinacy of affection; banish that spirit of
Lust and of Error from your souls, beware of that family contention, and that
spiritual or corporal supineness, and you will in a good measure get rid of such
distractions in prayer. But yet for our better help herein.

1 Make conscience of holy and due Holy ^^^paration unto prayer.
preparation of our selves unto prayer. Exodus 34. 3. Moses must come alone to
God, and leave the flocks. Jacob ferrieth over all belonging to him on the
other side of the river, before wrestleth with the Angel. Genesis 32. Abraham
leaves the servants, and the Asses at the foot of the hill, when to go to
sacrifice to the Lord. Genesis 22. David had got his heart into a very serious and
fixed frame, for that praising part of his prayer, and yet as thinking that all
too little, says, he will yet rouse himself up to that work. Psalm. 57. 7. O
God my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise: and
verse 8. I my self will arise right early. So good Deborah rowseth up herself
amain to power out praises to the Lord, Jud. 5. 12. Awake, awake Deborah, awake
utter a song. A gracious heart should think it self never enough awaked to such
holy work, experience of Saints will prove it: and when they can by grace get
their minds and hearts a little sequestered to consider seriously of the work
they are going about, and of God and Christ before whom they come, and of
themselves who are to come before the Lord, and the like, before they actually
address themselves to solemn prayer; how intently, and spiritually, and
strongly they are wont then to be carried through the duty: and all other
times, when they more suddenly and inconsiderately set upon prayer, how
unprofitably they are wont to spend such a time; and how many hurries of
spirit, this way and that way, they are cumbred with, and much ado to make any
thing of it at such times.

2. Spiritual wisdom is another help; 2 Godly wisdom.
Godly wisdom will choose places for prayer, which are freest from any
distracting occasion: Hence Christ so often repaires to the mountain to pray.
Wisdom will seasonably discern a deluding, cheating thought, yea, though it
come with its vizard, or with its painted face, wearing in view the very livery
of our heavenly Father; and much readier will it espy other thoughts, which
would slyly withdraw our minds by little and little from the present business
of our souls. Wisdom is before him that has understanding, Prove. 17. 24.
whilst the fools eyes are wandering in the corners of the world, The wise
Christian keeps his eye from gadding after vain objects, and keeps it rather
intent upon wisdoms works and ways. The heart of the wise is at his right
hand, the instrument of action. Eccles. 10. 2. He has his heart and spirit at
an holy beek, to be employed as wisdom shall direct, as there is need of the
exercise of thoughts, or desires, or grief, or joy, or fear, or anger, in an
holy way or work, a truly wise Christian has them at hand to do their several
homage to the Lord, being thereto commanded by his spirit. The wise man's eyes
are in his head. Eccles. 2. 14. The truly wise Christian has the ready and
seasonable use of the eyes of his mind and understanding, holy thoughts and
apprehensions are not to seek when the Lord calls for the use thereof, as in
prayer or the like; but they are then active, and so ready to keep out worse or
unjust thoughts. A wise Christian being also privy to his own inability to
keep his heart close to God; he betaketh himself to the Lord, as he did, Psalm.
86. 11. Unite my heart to fear thy name. He would have the Lord to keep his
heart close to any part of his fear or worship, that it scatter not, wander not
therefrom. Intruders cannot get in unseene, and untaken notice of whilst this
lightsome, watchful grace is employed, as they will in darker places. This
skillful Pilot at the helm, by keeping its eye upon Gods compass, avoids many
yawes, and much lee-way in a gracious Christians course, in prayer, or
otherwise, which other unwise Christians make.

3. Wathfulnesse, which is the seasonable 3 Watchfulness.
and practical use of that holy wisdom upon every occasion. This will be
examining such as knock at the door of the heart, whilst the spirit is talking
with God in prayer. Those godly Church Officers described, Revel. 4. 6, 8. with
their eyes before and behind, and within also, to observe all without, and as
well also within themselves, they go on uninterrupted in the worship of God,
as though their cry was but one and the same continued cry night and day: They
rest not night nor day, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which is,
and was, and is to come. This pondering the path of our feet is a help to going
right on in this or any other way of God without diversions from it, or
stumbling in it. Prove. 4. 26, 27. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy
ways be established. Turn not to the right hand nor to the left; the former is
the means to the latter. A good watch at the City gates, the out-lets and
inlets of suggestions to the mind, or motions from it, will keep us from
trouble-Cities, such trouble-souls, as are these distractions, and help rid
them of such Vagrants as they are. Such holy, careful oversights of the banks,
will prevent the dividing of the streams and issues of our minds (even our
thoughts) that they run in no other channel and way then is meet for them. When
we go to prayer, we are assaying by the ladder Jesus Christ to climb up to
heaven, and this holy care of our feet keeps them from slipping, and us from
falls. Look to thy foot when thou go into the house of God, namely, to
worship God in prayer or otherwise, Eccles. 5. 1. When we go to pray, we go
spiritually to plow, and this holy minding of our work, and our hand, helps
to keep us in our right furrow.

4 Holiness and heavenlinesse of heart. 4. Heavenlines of heart.
The nature of prayer is a lifting up of the heart; the more elevated that is
therefore, the more fitted to pray aright. Who more free from any distractions
in prayer, then Christ the holy one of God? Who go on more straight in their
holy course without any digressions, then those heavenly spirits described,
Ezekiel. 1. 9. A heavenly heart is so much in heaven at other times, and on other
occasions, that it will be very loathsome to it to be then in earth, when to be
so solemnly exercised in so heavenly a discourse with God: Holy things and
thoughts are made so natural to such a soul, and so familiar to it, that they
will more easily be spoken with, and more readily be speaking with us in
prayer. God has such a ones heart, and therefore his eyes will be fixed and
intent upon this or any other way of his. Prove. 23. 26. My son, give me thy
heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways. Such a heart is filled with
spiritual materials, and when well warmed in this, or other like holy
exercises, it will boil up little else but good matter, as he said, Psalm 45
1. My heart boileth up (so it is in the Hebrew) good matter; and such a ones
tongue will be also as the pen of a ready Writer, not often making so much as a
wry dash, in presenting the souls occasions before the Lord, ibid. As a well
builded ship deeply and richly laden, heeleth not so much, nor makes not so
many yawes, and is not put to it to make so many boards and tacks to recover
and keep its course, but will lie nearer the wind, even when its scant, and
keep a straiter course then other vessels. So is it here with a well composed,
well principled heart, it will steer a straiter course, and freer from
digressions and distractions in prayer. Or as a person that has his pocket
filled with pieces of Silver, and here and there a brass farthing possibly
amongst it; if he be to trade for wares, will mostly pluck out silver; whereas
another that has most brass money in his purse, and very little silver, will
hardly pull out any other then brass. So is it here, when spiritual and
heavenly minded Christians are to trade with God in prayer, they present little
else to the Lord then what is spiritual and suitable to their work in hand. Out
of the good Treasure of their hearts, they bring forth good things, Matthew. 12.
35. yea, good thoughts too, as well as words; whereas a more worldly minded
Christian, when to pray, presents little else but what savours of the world,
especially in his thoughts: as Psalm 37. 31, its said of the spiritual person,
The Law of God is in his heart, none of his steps shall slide: no not so often or
much slip, when to go on in this or any other path of God. God himself is more
engaged to keep such a heart from wandering from any of his Commandments which
is devoted to him. Hence that plea of his, Psalm 119. 10. With my whole heart
have I sought thee, O let me not wander from thy Commandments.

5 Holy Zeal. When there is an holy ardency 5. Holy Zeal.
of indignation against the least evil and impenitency arising in prayer, its a
means to redress the same. When Christians do not barely fall out with any such
evil, but abhor it, hate evil as hell, (as the Greek word in Romans 12. 9.
signifies) then will they more immoveably cleave to this or any other good,
for they are joined there; Abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is
good, or be glued to that which is good, so as not to be stirred from it. A
zealous Suppliant espying any such impertinency in prayer, presently falls
fowl of it, cries out upon it, pursues it with exclamations, censureth it in
all its aggravations, and so gains more intentness of spirit, and
seriousness of lively affections in the duty then before. Zeal is bold and
courageous, and will not basely yield to any such intruder, but thrust them out
of doors, looking at them as attended with a whole crowd of other like
disturbers, ready to press in at their heels, if once permitted entrance into
the soul of a Christian exercised in prayer. Look as the cutting or cropping
off unprofitable sprouts, putting forth here or there, upon their first
appearance, causes the tree to grow the straiter, and to bring forth more
seasonable fruit. So is it here, when by Zeal we cut off impertinencies at
their first appearing, we bring forth more seasonably the fruits of every
praying grace and disposition. And look as 2 Kings 6. 32, 33. when they were
serious in that weighty discourse, there was charge given to handle that
turbulent messenger roughly at the door, to prevent his Mstaers coming in at
his heels. So is it here, when at this pious conference with God, any such
unseasonable motions are zealously repulsed, it preventeth more sad disturbance
in the duty. Albeit Abraham's zeal could not hinder the fowls from lighting upon
his Sacrifice, yet will it not suffer them to rest there, but drives them
away, Genesis 15. 10, 11. Zeal also will make a godly Christian remove all causes
and occasions of disturbance: As Paul, out of his zeal uses means to cast the
devil out of the possessed maid, which occasioned that disturbance daily to
them when they went to prayer, Act. 16 16, 17 18. As we went to prayer a
certain damsel possessed, etc. cried, etc. and Paul being grieved in spirit,
said to the spirit, Come out of her.

6 Peace of conscience and calmnesse 6. Peace of conscience.
of spirit. If noise without disturb and distract us in prayer, much more
clamorous noise within. The heart in hurries of conscience unpacified in the
blood of Christ, in a pit of noise (as the Psalmists phrase is in the Hebrew,
Psalm 40. 2.) has not its goings established: He brought me out of the
horrible pit, and established my goings. When God brought David out of the pit
of noise, then, and not till then, were his goings established; then did his
mind and heart take more fixed and straits steps in the ways of God. If the
blood of Christ does not speak such good things which further in us prayer, the
blood of Abel, or the guilt of sin, will speak that which will startle us and
stumble us whilst at prayer: and the poor soul will be more taken up with
listening to these cries, and with perplexed thoughts what answer to make to
such pinching Objections thence, then be able to hold out its attentions to
what he was to speak further unto the Lord. When Asaph was so beset with fears
about his maine estate, (as Psalm 77. 1. to 10) his prayers were rather
reasonings to and again, with inward cavils raised from his own infirmity of
unbelief, then distinct requests. When the heart is shackled with such bindding
griefs and fears, it cannot go, much less run so sturdily in this, or any
other way of God, but will be blundring and staggering in mind and heart:
whereas peace and joy in God, they fit and free us for a steady and speedy
motion in this or any other way of God, Psalm. 119. 32. I will run the way of
thy Commandments, when thou have enlarged my heart.

7 Faith is a help against distractions in 7. Faith.
prayer. That preserves from wavering in mind or heart in prayer. James 1. 6,
8. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering, etc. especially if a Christian
stir up himself to act and exercise his faith in such promises wherein the Lord
undertaketh for his poor servants to help them against such distractions.
Jerem. 31. 9. With suplications will I lead them in a straight way wherein they
shall not stumble. Isaiah 30. 21. Thou shall hear a word behind thee saying,
This is the way, walk in it, when thou turnest to the right hand or to the
left; and so be speedily set to rights in mind or heart in Gods ways when at
any time starting aside, Isaiah 40. 31. They shall mount up with wings as
Eagles; soar aloft with winged thoughts and affections in Gods holy ways.
Ezekiel. 36. 27. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes and to keep my Judgments and do them; his Spirit shall keep his
peoples minds and hearts, intent and attent in his ways.

8 The fear and awe of God. Which as 8. Fear of God
it helps to make through work in the things of God; whence that Phil 2. 12.
Workout your salvation with fear and trembling: So in this, it makes us full
of holy jealousy, lest we should any way come short of what God requires of
us in it; or in stead of pleasing him therein, carry it so as to displease him.
And as other fears call in, and confine all the thoughts to be exercised about
the objects which are in their view, as matters of dread: so in this holy fear,
lest we should sin against the Lord in our approaches to him, it fastneth the
mind to attend to that end. This is a jealous Grace, and therefore will be
suspecting every impertinent thought, and examine it, and awaken the soul to
take notice of it, and to take speedy order with it. Hence is it that by the
fear of the Lord men come to depart from all manner of evil of sin.

9. Lastly, Love of God, of Christ, and of the duty it self. Love it self is
glue, and 9. Holy love.
bond, and all; a very strong engaging, and indearing tie: it is an overcoming
delightful affection, so that the mind will not so soon wander from its
pleasing objects and actings, Love of God and good is so unsatisfied an
affection, that the exercise of all the thoughts in their utmost intentness, at
such praying times, seems unto love too slender, short and narrow for its
Employments. Hence that speech of Love, Psalm 63. 7. Thou have been my help,
and in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice; and yet ver. 8. as not having
enough, says, My soul follows hard (or cleavingly) after thee. Psalm 116. 1.
David professes, I love the Lord; and ver. 16. Truly Lord, I am thy servant,
thy servant; and ver. 17. I will call upon the name of the Lord. Love makes him
wholly for God, and that in a way of prayer also; so in love to the Duty of
Prayer it self; if that David can say, (Psa. 119. 30) I have chosen the way of
Truth, he can also say, ver. 31. I have stuck to thy testimonies, If the soul
make choice of Prayer for a lovely Ordinance, it will not be loose in it or
from it, but cleave close to that holy exercise when called to it. As love of
Christ will constrain Paul to attend to speaking of Christ, so as others may
have soul benefit, 2 Cor. 5. 14. The love of Christ (says he) constrains me;
so will this work the like holy attention to the work of this holy speaking to
God in the name of Christ. As it is with the burning glass, by it the scattered
beams of the Sun being more united, come to kindle upon combustible matter; so
is it here, it comes to pass, through this grace of love, that the scattered
dartings, motions, and thoughts, like beams of the mind, are so gathered and
kept in one, and so set and fixed upon the hearts desires expressed in prayer,
that our hearts come to be even fired and inflamed spiritually: or as other
heat, it does congregare homogenea, and disgregare Heterogenea: So is it with
this heat of holy love in prayer. It is an active instrument and means to
compose and compact the good thoughts and stirrings of the mind and heart,
which are suitable to the expressions in prayer, but to scatter and remove
impertinent and unsuitable motions and workings of our spirits therein.

Touching the third thing propounded; The success of prayers pestered with
distractions. Distractions nullifying the force of prayers
namely, the success of such prayers, which are pestered with distractions. I
answer,

1. That some kind of distractions in prayer; are such as do sorely undermine,
if not wholly overturne the saving issue of any such prayers which they do
accompany: and these are of four sorts.

1. Such as are constant and commanding 1. When constant, commanding* and
general.
distempers, usually and in a manner constantly carrying all gainsaying motions
before them, yea, such distractions as are universally overspreading; as the
duty of prayer, so all other Duties. These argue ruling hypocrisy, and an
Unregenerate estate. When the eyes of the mind of any person, which is to have
to do with any of the ways of wisdom, are so constantly and prevailingly
wandering in the corners of the earth, that person is a fool, a natural man,
Prove. 17. 24. The eyes of the fool are in the corners of the earth; namely,
when he should have to do with wisdom, as the opposition shows; but wisdom is
before him that has understanding. Jerem. 12. 2. They are sheep for the
slaughter of judgment, whose trade and way that is, there mentioned, Thou art
near in their mouth, but far from their reins: When their mouth makes the
godliest mentions of God in prayer, (or the like) of Gods nearness to them,
yet even then he is far from their hearts and thoughts.

2 Such distractions as are despised in the 2. When despised and constantly
neglected.
persons eyes in whom they abound, he is careless of them: This verifieth that
Prove. 19. 16. He that despises his ways shall dye; be they the ways of his
mind, or heart, or lip, or life, if he never regard whether they be regular or
irregular, he is a child of death. When such words get up, grow fast, yea, and
overgrow his better things, and he regards it not, surely, such a professors
end will be miserable. Prove. 24. 31, 33. The sluggards vineyard is covered over
with nettles, and yet a little sleep etc.

3 Such as notwithstanding which, yet the heart is quiet. Prove. 24. 31, 33. it
breaks 3. When leaving the heart quiet.
not his sleep, it molesteth not his ease, nor is he so much as willing that
such spiritual mischiefs and evils should disquiet him; he is all for ease, and
will not have that disturbed; ver. 33. Yet a little sleep, etc. such a ones
case is sad. God regards not him nor any thing he says, but eyeth him as a
loathsome sluggard fit for ruin.

4 Such as overcome the soul, and by degrees 4 When overrunning the heart.
eat out the very motions and dispositions to prayer, or any other good work;
ibid. compared with Prove. 21. 25. such a sluggard had his desires, but even his
desires too are overcome with such distempers, The desire of the sluggard
kills him, for his hands refuse to labor.

2 There are some other distractions in prayer, which may stand with hopeful
Others not bindring answers of prayer
successes of the prayers annoyed by them. As

1. Such distractions in prayer which are 1. If resisted.
strongly resisted, prayed against, and bewailed. Albeit sometimes by their
violence they captivate us, so that as he said, The good we would do we cannot,
because of that present evil; Romans 7. 21. And this part of the law of our
members rebelleth against the law of our minds; is quite cross to the bent of
our spirits, as spiritual. ver. 23. whence with Paul, as verse 24. we are ready
to cry out, Wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from the body of
this death.

2 Such as are frequently overcome, so 2. If frequently overcome.
that notwithstanding that opposition of the Spirit in us by the flesh, yet the
flesh has not its will of us, Galat. 5. 19. The Spirit lusts against the
flesh; namely, so as to put it to the worst.

3 Such which at the first arising of them do amaze and appall the heart, and
3. If amazing the heart.
so Satanical, and not ours.

4 Such as are mainly occasioned from bodily distempers, melancholy, unwonted 4
If occasioned from bodily a^ls.
drowsinesse, sickness, pains, etc. in which case he pitieth us as a father
his children, remembering our frame that we are but dust. Psalm. 102. 13, 14. as
in sick Hezekiahs chatterings, etc. Isai. 33. 8.

5. Such which are occasioned by some 5 If occasioned by outward occurrents.
outward occurrents, as the disturbance occasioned at that prayer and fasting.
1 Samuel 7. 5, 6, 9, 10, 7, 8. compared, so by sudden outcries, accidents, etc.

CHAP. III. Touching good things suggested in prayer, and how discerned to be,
or not to be delusions.
A Third case of conscience about prayer,

Before we lay down the marks of differencing Things materially good may be
moved in prayer, and not from a good principle and cause.
these motions materially good, from those which are so formally; we must
premise that such good things for the matter of the motions may be suggested
and raised up in the spirit of a Christian, when praying to God, and yet not
spring from the spirit of God. Even such like motions may be raised from our
own natural spirits, as far as they are carnal, and likewise they may be
cunningly propounded by Satan. And because this to some may seem strange, that
good motions should be suggested to Gods people, or to others, whilst exercised
in so good a work, and yet the same not to come from a good spirit, let us
evince it a little from Scripture examples and grounds.

That such motions may come from our They may arise from man's deceitful heart.
own hearts, as they are carnal, will appear by the charactar of man's heart in
its self considered, and as far as natural, Jer. 17. 9. The heart is
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. Surely, if the heart could
not play such a cheat as this, that speech would be too hyperbolical. When
David sought God in and about his souls cases, he had experience of such
seemingly friendly counsels to do this or that, to take this course for his
succor, and that whereby the Lords displeasure might be removed, but by his
complaint of them, it appears he found them deceitful counsels; he is weary
of such heart-counsels, saying, Psalm 13. 1, 2. How long shall I take counsel
in my self? When David was in so sad a case as he mentions, Psalm 42. 1, 2,
3, 4. one might think sad musings and thoughts being so suitable to his case
need not be suspected to be sinful, yet David perceived that those he had were
tainted, and therefore chideth his soul for them, verse 5. Why art thou so sad,
O my soul? when Asaph was crying to God in prayer in that sad condition, Psalm.
77. 1, 2, etc he had motions in his mind then, propounding grounds of comfort
whilst he sought God; for he says, I sought God, my soul refused to be
comforted, verse 2. Again at the same time, he had other motions crossing the
former, and persuading that it was not for such a wretch as he, who had lost
Gods favor, to take hold of comfort, and these motions prevailed against the
other; for he says, I sought the Lord, my sore ran, and my soul refused to be
comforted: both motions had their probable grounds of equity and truth, but
could not be both from a good principle. He had also in his prayer many
thoughts of Gods past mercies to him, yet other motions and inquisitions are
made in and by his spirit, which make him but the more troubled and overwhelmed
amidst his complaints, verse 3. I remembered God and was troubled, I complained
and my spirit was overwhelmed. True it is, that the thoughts of Gods mercies,
together with the serious musings of our vileness and unworthy walkings, they
work kindly, when they humble us, and break our hearts, but it is never of God
that they should overwhelme us, as these did this good man. The like might be
said of such motions, demanding, will the Lord cast off for ever, is his mercy
clean gone for ever? Albeit he does cast off, and his mercy be gone, to sense
at present, yet is it so for ever? was there any hurt in these? yea verily,
Asaphs own conscience being Judge afterward, verse 10. And I said, this is
mine infirmity. Psalm. 39. 3, 4, 5, 6. David has motions in his heart which put
him upon that, Lord make me to know mine end, and it was materially a good
thought which he expresses, man at his best estate is vanity: yea, but David's
heart was too hot within him, it was distempered heat against the prosperity of
the wicked at which he was troubled, and these are but the sparklings of that
wildfire, he does as good as pray to hasten his own end; but he corrects
himself presently. But now O Lord, what wait I for? etc. he thinks it more
needful to exercise faith and patience, then to be so hasty and discontented.
Job uttered many things (out of the abundance of his troubled heart,) before
the Lord which were materially good. Job 13. 20, 21, 22. and 14. 1, 2, 3, 14,
15. compared with chap. 15. 12. but his heart did but carry him away in sundry
of them. A heart transported by a distemper may make religious motions, and put
upon religious expressions. The spirit of good Moses that man of God suggested
things considerable, and put him upon uttering the same before the Lord in
prayer. Numb. 11. 12, 13, 14. Have I conceived this people? etc whence should I
have flesh to give them, etc? I am not able to bear this people alone; yet
verily, by that which the 15. verse mentions, it appears that his spirit
was not regular and spiritual therein, but carnal; If thou deal thus with me,
kill me I pray thee. The Spirit of the Disciples moved them to pray as is
mentioned, Luke 9. 52. 54. Lord will thou that we command fire to come down
from heaven upon them, as Elijah did. The ground and warrant seemed weighty and
rational, verse 33, The Samaritans did not receive him, yet they were deluded
and mistaken, in listening to these motions of their own distempered spirit, as
verse 55. Jesus rebuked them, saying, ye know not what spirit ye are of.
Whilst Jacob was praying so well, Genesis 32. 28. As a Prince says the Angel, have
thou prevailed with God. Yet an unseasonable and unsuitable, and unwarrntable
motion, materially good, arises in a his heart, whence that further request
uttered by his lips, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. ver. 29. A desire to know
more of so glorious and gracious a one, as the Lord was, who would suspect
that, or any thing which it moves, yet verily curiosity blended and mingled it
self therewith; hence so checked: Wherefore ask thou after my name? verse
29. Jeremy whilst he is praying humbly, Jer. 15. 15. Remember and visit me,
take me not away in thy long suffering; yet behold a tincture of a distemper
though fair faced arises therewith, and moves him to speak thus, verse 18.
Will thou be altogether to me as a liar, and as waters that fail. The
disciples Acts 1. 6. seem to themselves to have good ground for that desire and
motion. Lord, will thou at this time restore the Kingdom of Israel? but were
transported with curiosity, and thence that secret check of Christ, verse 7. It
is not for you to know the times, etc.

And as man's heart can thus sophisticate, so Satan he can inject and suggest
things They may come from Satan.
materially good to our minds. Thus when Christ had been fasting (and praying
too) in the wilderness, he suggesteth a piece of Scripture to his mind. Matthew.
4. 1, 2, 4, 5. It is written, he shall give his Angels charge over thee, etc.
Thus whilst Joshuah is before God, Satan can present to him his sins, and
charge his heart and thoughts with them, and that groundedly, for Joshua was
clothed with filthy garments, Zech. 3. 1, 2, 3. 4. and the Lord also adds, I
have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee. And what humble soul but would
be ready to judge it meet to think of its sins? When to come before the Lord
with that holy zeal of the Church of Corinth, against the incestuous
Corinthians sin, 2 Cor. 7. 11. Satan by his wiles would be transporting the
same beyond bounds of compassion and charity, 2 Cor. 2. 6. Sufficient is such a
ones punishment inflicted of many, ver. 7. So that contrariwise ye ought
rather to forgive him, and comfort him, lest he be swallowed up with overmuch
heaviness. And ver. 11. Lest Satan should get an advantage, for we are not
ignorant of his divices. The poor penitent Corinthians sin was very great, and
his sorrow needed to be exceeding great, and he was moved to sorrow
exceedingly, and is there any evil in this? yes, a device of Satan to carry him
out in his very sorrow for his sins beyond all bounds. The man Gabriel, an
angel of light, brings a gracious message to Daniel in prayer. Dan. 9. 20, 21,
22, 23. Satan can imitate the like message at the like time, for he can
transform himself into an angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14. as his Ministers
can, like those of Jesus Christ, speak things materially good to the outward
ear, which are formally Satanicall, ibid. The like legerdemain can that old
deceiver play, in reference to our inward senses, verifying that, Proverbs 17.
He that speaks truth shows forth righteousness, but a false witness
deceit; namely, when in pretense he holds forth righteous things. The Saints
are most endangered by such a white devil, being more aware of him when he
speaks like himself. It was the devil in the poor possessed man, who made
that motion in him, to do homage to Christ, Mark 5. 5. When he saw Jesus a far
off, he ran and worshipped him. He also moved another such a like person to go
to the Synagogue as outwardly to obscure the Sabbath exercises. Mar. 1. 21.
Christ entered into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and taught: and ver. 23.
There was there in the Synagogue a man of an unclean spirit. The devil also
could strongly move such a one to make for substance a goodly confession: for
the man cried out, saying, I know thee who thou art, the holy One of God. But
this was whilst the Auditors should have been harkening to Christ's doctrine,
and joining in his prayers sanctifying the action. Whilst the Apostle and his
company were at prayer Satan moved the possessed Damosel present to expressions
in substance good, saying, these men bring unto us the message of salvation,
and are the servants of the most high God. Act. 16. 16, 17. when praying
dispositions in those there present had been more suitable. So that it
concerns us the more to endeavor to a clear discerning of any such delusive
motions, materially good, from such as are truly good and heavenly. A mistaken
devil entertained for an angel of light is most mischeivous, and not easily
excluded, when once admittted. Such comfort or counsel slyly suggested, will
not so soon be rejected, but being admitted for good, is apt to be maintained.
The good witches (as they call them) which will tell men news of lost things,
and how to right injuries done, are most mischeivous, as bewitching, and
besotting the spirits of such as listen to their counsel, they are poysoners.
Revel. 21. 8. Greek. Hence the devils instruments, Heretics and Schismatics,
which propound Scripture grounds for what they hold forth, these beguile and
hurt more souls then other wretches; they bewitch people: Galat. 3. 1. Who
has bewitched you? These flatterers spread a net for men's feet, Prove. 29. 5.
Seven abominations are in the heart of Satan and his subtle Instruments, when
they make their voice gracious; as the Hebrew has it, Prove. 26. 15. If Satan
could not, or did not set a good face upon his Treacheries to men's souls, and
cover all with the mantle of good and pious motions, he would not so properly
be said to deceive the whole world, Rev. 12 9.

But to come to the Marks of distinction Marks of such like motions when
delusive.
and of discerning of this highest strain of the sophistication of our
spiritual enemies, through suggestions materially good.

1 Such motions, materially good, which 1. When they do but steal away the
heart from prayer.
steal away the heart from the duty of prayer in hand, though possibly the Duty
be carried on but in an overly manner by reason of those motions; such are
Satanical: on the contrary, motions which tend to farther intentnesse, and
attentnesse thereon, they are of God. The Spirit of God is a faithful and wise
guide, and uses not to lead the Saints about, or in by ways, but in strait
paths, right on by all his motions. The Spirit of God leads the sons of God
in a direct way of crying, Abba, Father. For as many as are led by the Spirit
of God, they are the sons of God* And ye have received the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba Father, Romans 8. 14, 15. Isaiah 30 21. Thou shall hear a
voice behind thee saying, This is the way, walk in it, when thou turnest to the
right hand or to the left. The Spirit moves nothing to draw us out of the way
of God, but to put us into it, and being in it, to move us to keep on. When a
man in prayer has his imagination working and exercised about good notions for
godly discourse, for expatiating on some good subject of meditation or
preaching; and that in such sort, as he cannot, and does not mind scarcely what
he is saying or doing before God in prayer, these thoughts and motions are
delusive.

2 Such motions as come into the heart 2. When they are too violent
with such violence, that they occasion inward hurries of spirit by them, and
thereby breaking off the very duty sometimes; these though materially good, yet
are delusive and satanical. As when in prayer strong motions are suggested,
pretending to put us upon being affected with sorrow for some past evil, or
fear about some evil imminent, yet so, as the same are pressed and followed
with such violence that they bend and tend to amazement and swallowing up of
spirits, these are delusive. Such were those motions in Asaphs heart, whilst
seeking God, which so troubled him, that he was overwhelmed, Ps. 77. 2 In the
day of my trouble I sought God; and verse 3. I complained and my spirit was
overwhelmed. Such were the motions to the humbled Corinthian, when so violent,
that he was like to be swallowed of overmuch heaviness about his sinful and
sad estate, 2 Cor. 2. 7. Satan's divices were in it for his own advantage, ver.
11. Lest Satan get advantage, for we are not ignorant of his devices, The Lord
never uses to maintain contention to cause the spirits of his people to fail,
Isaiah 57. 16. I will not contend for ever, lest the spirit should fail before
me: nay, rather the Spirit of God uses, when such troublous motions grow
strong and very heavy, to put under his hand to revive the Saints spirits when
ready to give out through such hurries of sad pressures of heart. Isai. 57. 15,
16. To revive the spirit of the humble, for I will not contend for ever, lest
the spirit should fail before me. Hence that Psalm 94. 18, 19. In the multitude
((...),) of my wretched thoughts, thy comforts delight my soul. The Spirit of
the Lord will indeed suggest motions of fear, but not such as tend to make us
break off through their violence, but sweetly rather to draw us to hold on in
the way of God. Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me; he gently leads his flock as a shepherd, Isaiah 40.
11. Yea, if the motions were to confidence in God, or joy in God, but with such
violence, as to drive men into strange ecstasies, they are to be suspected. So
in motions putting upon just anger for the ground of it; but with so much
violence as not to be kept within bounds of godly moderation, and temperature
of compassion: so in motions putting upon desires of something in its time,
way, and proportion very desirable; but so all upon the spur, and with so much
imperiousness upon the spirit, as though all present service of God, and all
other thoughts, must forthwith give room and place to this motion, which is
enough to prove the same to be delusive; the Spirit of God using to work
regularly and calmly, even when he works most strongly. Sure it is, that it
is not one and the same Spirit, that speaks to a man's spirit, which whilst it
was but then called upon to speak to the Lord about such a business of weight,
it is now in such haste and hurry called off to run a long tract of mental
discourse, so hotly and so closely, with some other matter: but Cheater like
rather, coming galloping to overtake the honest Traveller, and falling in with
him, he must all on a sudden, be over entreated to step aside to take his
kindness, and then he shall be told he shall on again, and dispatch his
business in time good enough; when it proves rather to the poor Travelers
loss in the close on every hand.

3 Such motions, which are empty notions, carrying a show of Scripture
language, 3. When they are but empty notions.
but are not Scripture; happily some piece of Scripture joined with something
else, whereof the main is left out: So the Devil at first sight seemed to
suggest that Scripture, Psalm 91. 11, 12, He shall give his Angels charge over
thee, etc. Matthew. 4. 6. but look it over again, and you shall see the main
limitation of the Promise, To keep thee in all thy ways, is left out; as
something is added of the Devils own in bringing this to back the temptation
of Christ, Cast thy self down, for it is written, He shall give his Angels
charge over thee, etc. Thus here is chaff mingled with Gods Wheat. Yea here is
a pretense of a Scripture, when in the terms of it there was no such Scripture.
Scripture in the devil, or in his Instruments mouth, is as the Parable in the
fools mouth, Prove. 26. 7. Like to the legs of the lame, which are not equal,
but halting. It is pretended, Thus says the Lord, by the false Prophets, Jer.
23. 17. They say, The Lord has said, etc. but ver. 28. God counts it all but
chaff, a mere empty husk, What is the chaff to the wheat? The like may be said
of Jerem. 28. 13. and 1 Kings 22. 11. they did but pretend the word and counsel
of God, Thus says the Lord, it was not really so. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. God sends
(in a judicial way) strong delusions, that they should believe a lie. It were
not a delusion if better things were not held forth; yea, but indeed and in
truth its nothing else but a very lie, though backed possibly with the
Scripture of truth, wrested and abused. The devils Imps, to seduce the better,
pretend the liberty of Jesus Christ, but indeed and in truth, its servitude to
the flesh, 2 Pet. 2. 18, 19. So Satan himself would be beguiling of Christians
with his delusive shadows of Gods grace, counsels, comforts; but they who
hearken to such lying vanities forsake their own mercy, Jonah 2. 8. But such
things which the Holy Ghost suggesteth, they are realities, regularities,
solidities. The Spirits suggestions carry a real port of divine Majesty and
Sovereignty, and many times in the very mentioning of them does he effect what
he represented to the mind. Psalm. 42. 8 The Lord will command his loving
kindness in the day time, (and not barely hint it;) yea so effectually, that a
Song of praise for it follows, And my Song shall be with me, etc.

4 Such motions, in show possibly Scripture, 4. When any way cross Scripture.
yet really suggested to cross other Scripture counsels, reproofs, comforts,
commands or threats; or coming cross to principles of Faith, or light, or
peace, and experience received from God, such motions are delusive and
Satanical. Such were those suggested to Christ, whilst spiritually exercised in
the wilderness, Matthew 4. 6 crossing that Scripture verse. 7. Thou shall not
tempt the Lord thy God. Its a deluding spirit, it sets the blessed
harmonious Scripture against it self. When Scriptures are set on the devils
rack, by himself immediately, or by his Instruments mediately, its still
divellish, 2 Pet. 3. 16. 17. (...), They put them on the Rack as they do other
Scriptures, albeit to the perdition of such hucksters. Thus the Devil by the
false Prophet pretends divine Authority and Warrant, for that which was
directly contrary to Divine Authority. Jerem. 28. 11, 14. Hannaniah says,
Babels yoke shall be broken in two years, and that the Lord says it; but God
by Jeremiah says, No: and as Satan does thus mediately by his Instruments, so
he uses to do more immediately by himself: But as for the Spirit of God, he
being a Spirit of Truth, can suggest nothing but what is consonant unto truth;
What he hears (says Christ) that he shall speak, Joh. 16. 13. And being a
Spirit of Wisdom, he cannot speak contradictions to what himself indicted and
inspired, as he did the Scriptures, 2 Pet 1. 21. he is a witness, 1 John 5. A
faithful witness speaking the truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the
Truth, and the same constantly: As its said of the true witness, Prove. 21. 28.
He that hears speaks constantly. I deny not, but that in some extraordinary
cases God may say to Abraham, That in Isaak shall thy seed be called, etc. Genesis
21. and yet chap. 22. bids Abraham, kill that his Isaak, before Isaak had any
child, and so seemingly crossing his Promise, yea, and his Precept too, Thou
shall not kill: but this was for trial sake. Heb. 11. 17. By faith Abraham when
he was tried, offered up Isaak Nor do such extraordinary cases cross the
tenure of ordinary rules, which we are to attend, and by which we are to judge
of the regularity or irregularity of suggestions or actions.

5 Such motions which leave no impression 5. When leaving no holy impression
upon the soul.
upon the mind, but are forthwith forgotten, they are delusive. Satan is
sometimes compared to lightning, Luke 10. what lightsome motions he makes,
they are but flashes soon gone; the Spirits motions are abiding reflections of
Sun-like beams. Satan as a foul will be present at Religious exercises, Matthew.
13 4, 19. compared, (the fowls attending the Sower, are interpreted the wicked
one attending the Ministers in their preaching, and hearers in their hearing
the Word.) But whatsoever flatterings he makes in men's minds, they are but
vagrant and transcient movings; but its otherwise with suggestions truly
divine. When such a motion and word is spoken from heaven to Christ, Thou art
my Son, etc. Luke 3. 21, 22. and the Spirit abides upon him too, that argued
that it was indeed a divine attestation, John 1. 32. When in keeping the
Commandments of Christ from love to him (as that command of Christ for prayer,
John 16 23, 24. or the like) the Lord so shows himself and his gracious
counsels to us, that he abides with us, the suggestions of such comfortable
things to our hearts in prayer, are of God indeed. Joh. 14. 21. 23. I will
manifest my self to him, we will come and make our abode with him. When a
word is so spoken once to us inwardly or outwardly, that it is heard twice by
us, verily God spoke that word to us indeed. Psalm. 62. 11. God has spoken
once, twice have I heard it, that power belongs to God. When Solomon is
praying in his dream, and the while precious and sweet motions are suggested
to him to ask what God shall give him, and when he asks wisdom, its said to
him that he has that granted, and more, 1 Kings 3. 5, 9, 10, 11, 12. with
ver. 15. and this does nor vanish as a dream, but leaves such an impression
upon him, that when he awoke, the light, heat, and life thereof abides; so
that he must to Jerusalem and offer sacrifice there, in regard thereof; this
was indeed of God. So in that Item of God to Paul whilst he was praying, 1 Cor.
12. 8, 9. He said to me, my grace is sufficient for thee, my strength is made
perfect in weakness: this so stuck with Paul, and so warmed him, that he
breaks out thus; most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities,
etc. he rightly therefore concluded that the Lord said thus unto him. Whilst
Jacob is wrestling with the Lord, that is told him, that he should prevail with
men. Gen, 32. 28. and the motion clave to him, and in confidence of the truth
of it, he now dares to meet his brother Esau, verse 32. of whom before he was
so afraid.

6. Such motions which leave the 6 When leaving the heart barren.
heart barren, when yet they swim aloft in the brain plentifully, are
delusive: as those lying Items suggested to the ear from Satan's instruments,
they please, but profit not. Jer. 23. 32. Therefore they shall not profit this
people at all; So these of Satan leave the heart fruitless. Satan's sweet bits,
they nourish no more the soul, then those of that dissembling Churl do the
bodies of his guests. Prove. 27. 8. Like his sorcery of bringing a fair woman to
another bed, which in the morning proved a carcass. Satan's flattering motions
when ever suggested, are but as other flatteries, a pleasing song, and chearing
blaze, but ending soon after in sadness and smoke. Eccles. 7. 5, 6. The song
of fools is like the crackling of thorns under a pot. Like those that in
seeking God, Hosea 5. last, (in their affliction they will seek me early) they
had such motions of returning to God, Hosea 6. 1. Come let us return to God;
and of following on to know him, verse 3. Then shall we know if we follow on to
know the Lord; but verse 4. their goodness was like the early d^w, and clouds
vanishing away. So Psalm 78. 34. in seeking God when he slew them, they had
motions materially good stirring, as verse 35. For they considered that God was
their rock, and the high God their redeemer. But their heart was not right with
God, neither were they steadfast in his covenant. It was then without force upon
their hearts, which indeed were never sincere and serious, but deceitful. But
when the spirit moves upon the face of our souls in any ordinance, whether it
be in and by motions of conviction, or consolation, it makes the spices flow
out, it causes the various graces of God in the soul to give their fragrant
smell. Cant. 4. 16. Awake O North wind, and blow O South upon my garden, that
the spices may flow out. When Christ comes to us in prayer, or in any other of
his holy ordinances by the motions of his spirit, he comes as showers that
water the earth, Psalm. 72. 6. the force thereof mollifieth our souls and makes
them fruitful. Isai. 44. 3, 4.

7. Such motions which are various, confused 7 When confused.
and independent one upon the other, or upon the present business which then
we are in hand with in our prayers. Such, albeit they may be for the matter of
them good, yet being not distinct, methodicall, or seasonable, they are not
from Gods spirit, but from some other delusive spirit. Such Items are not words
upon the wheels, in due order, according to our particular suits, etc. which
are then in motion and agitation. Christ's lips when he speaks to us more
immediately by his spirit, or otherwise, they are as lilies, dropping sweet
smelling myrrh. Cant. 5. 13. His words and motions come not in heaps, but
orderly, drop after drop, and pertinently; as of the same myrh-like nature all
of them, as he guides his truly wise servants, so that their tongue uses
knowledge aright, Prove. 1^. 2. so the fruit of his lips by his spirit flows
forth aptly, dependingly, in a right order, season and manner: but those of a
delusive spirit, they are like sea*waves, tumultuous, independing, in no
certain course or channel.

8. Such motions materially good, which 8 When puffing up the heart.
put us upon high thoughts of our selves, and of our good estates, which heave
up our spirits, they are delusive; like those in Zedekiah who was confident
that the Lord moved him to speak, 1 Kings 22. 11. Thus says the Lord, says
he, and that his spirit had been with him, verse 21. yet see how proud he was,
and how he despised Micaiah, who indeed was moved by Gods spirit to speak, he
smote him on the check, saying, which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me,
to speak unto thee? The spirits motions in prayer tend to humble rather. As in
Abraham's praying, and saying, which am but dust. Genesis 18. 26, 27. Those lilly
like drops from Christ's lips, of which we spoke from Cant. 4. 13. they are as
myrrh; of a holy funeral, abasing, and mourning use, as myrrh used about dead
bodies to keep them from putrefaction.

9. Such motions materially good, suggested in prayer, which put us upon any
breach 9 When putting upon breach of relations.
of special relations, or duties of our callings, are delusive. As when Jonah
thinks how merciful a one God is, and thence is put upon it to turn aside
from his calling to pray at Niniveh, Jonah 4. 2. O Lord, was not this my
saying, when I was yet in my country, therefore I fled before unto Tarshish,
for I knew that thou are a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil. Or if a private man should be
followed in prayer with Scriptures, urging him (as he thinks) to cast off
civil subjection to higher powers, such as 1 Cor. 7. 23. Be not the servants of
men. Or Mat. 17. 16. Then are the children free; or if some private man should
be moved in prayer very strongly, to kill such or such a wicked Ruler, from
Ehuds example. Jud. 3. 15. Such like motions would be found to be delusive. The
Apostle to prevent such abuses, says, 1 Pet. 2, 16, 17. As free, but not using
your liberty as a cloak of maliciousness.

10. Such things materially good as are 10 When tending to justify any
unwarrantable practice.
moved in prayer, either to justify some former evil thing in us, as Jonah in
his prayer now mentioned, Jonah 4. 2. he reviveth in his mind those former
thoughs of Gods gracious nature, as a plea whereby to have justified him in
that refusal to obey his call to Niniveh: O Lord, was not this my saying? etc.
Or when they are moved to ground some present distemperd request in prayer, as
that pretended humble motion of Jobs in prayer. Job 7. 11, 17, 18. What is man
that thou visitest him? brought in (as it may seem) to back his distempered
desire not to live any longer in such misery, expressed, verse 15, 16. I loath
to live, my days are vanity: and verse 17. what is man? etc. So 1 Kings 19. 4.
distempered Elias says, he is no better then his fathers; good: yea, but its
brought in to plead that God would dispatch his life; O Lord take away my life,
for I am no better then my fathers; and this was delusive.

Lastly, when God in judgment orders 11 When tending to harden a person in
some unsafe way.
it to some false and perverse seekers of him, that some things which they
conclude to be good shall be suggested to them, whilst seeking of him; but in
judgment for some inordinacy, or hypocrisy in their requests, and so in wrath
not in mercy. God had once told Balaam inquiring of him that he should not go
with Balaks messengers, Number. 22. 12. Thou shall not go with them: and yet out
of his covetous mind and desire of the wages of unrighteousness, he will go
again to move him for his counsel about going, verse 19. Tarry ye here,
(says he, to Balaks second messengers) this night, that I may know what the
Lord will say more to me. and ver. 20. God came to Balaam at night, and said to
him, if the men come to call thee, rise up and go with them. Balaam was
inordinately set to go, and God when he again inquireth about going, does in
judgment bid him go. For ver. 32. The angel tells him, behold, I went to
withstand thee, because thy way is perverse before me. Ezekiel. 14 47. Every one
that puts the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face, and comes to
the Prophet to inquire of him concerning me, I the Lord will answer him that
comes by my self, according to the multitude if his idols. And as God deals
judicially with such rotten hearted ones, inquiring after his counsel in the
word, he in like sort deals with like persons inquiring after his counsel in
prayer.

CHAP. IV. Touching use of means with prayer.
WE are now to proceed to some other cases of conscience about prayer.

A fourth case is, how far forth means are to be used together with our prayers?

In Answer whereunto, let us show, 1 That

That means are to be used with our Means to be used with prayer.
prayers; It is clear in all instances of the Suppliants of God in their
prayers, and in Christ's example also, using the means with his prayers.
Nehemiah, as he prayed that he might be improved as an instrument of good to
his distressed contrymen; so also did he use his interest in his Lord and
Master the King, to further him therein. Nehem. 1. and 2. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. show:
and when he was in hazard by reason of his enemies powers and policies, as he
prays with the people, so he sets a watch. Neh. 4. 9. Nevertheless we made
our prayer unto our God, and set a watch against them night and day, because of
them. Ezra and the rest had confessed the sins of the people, but must use the
means to reform the same. Ezra 10. 1. Now when Ezra had prayed, etc.
Shechaniah answered, now therefore let us make a covenant with our God to put
away the strange wives: and from v. 3. Arise, for this matter belongs to
thee, etc. Abraham's servant with his prayers for success in the business of
procuring a wife for Isaak. Genesis 24. 12, 13, 14. He uses the means to speed
therein, he bestows bracelets upon her, when he began to perceive her to be
the woman. v. 21, 22, 23. etc. Paul with his prayers that the Philippians love
may abound. Phil. 1. 9. 10, will use exhortations too for that end, Phil. 2. 1.
Christ when to raise Lazarus, as he will pray, so commanded that the stone be
removed from the grave. Joh. 11. 38, 41. And with his prayers for the not
failing of Peter's faith, etc. Luke 22. 31, 32. He uses that means of
recovering words also.

Let us add three or four Reasons hereof, Reasons; because, 1 God ordinarily
effects our desires by means.
why means must be used with prayer.

1 Because ordinarily God gives us in the blessings which we seek of him in
the use of means If David pray for a victory over the Philstins, God will give
it him, but he must listen to the noise in the tops of the mulbery-trees to
know when he must fall on, as he must first fetch a compass, the better to lie
in ambush. 2 Sa. 5. 23, 24. 25. So he shall recover all upon his prayer and
inquiry that the Amalekites took from Ziklag. 1 Samuel 8. But he will use means
to come upon them where they are securely, by making use of the information of
that Egyptian soldier of theirs whom they left behind. ver. 11, 15. Jacob shall
prevail over Esau, having prevailed over God. Genesis 32. 32. But will use the
means by a large gift to pacify his brothers wrath. Paul has a promise of the
lives of all in the ship, Acts 27. 24, 25. Yet some means, as that of that boat
must not be used; ver. 31, 34. and other means more unlikely must be used for
the safety of all, ver. 44. they that can swim must do it, and the rest get
upon boards, and pieces of the wrack to the shore. Not a bone of Christ shall
be broken, yet God ordained it that he should be dead, before they came to
hasten his death by breaking his bones, as they did the others. Jon. 19 33, 35.
compared. Of those that the Father gave me, have I l^st none; according as it
is written, Joh. 18. 9. Yet will he use the means, that his weakly disciples
may at that present escape that temptation of suffering. ver. 8. God delights
to bless the use of means as his own ordinance, he will be seen to be all
in means and over means, and will have his people discern the sweet accord
betwixt the first and the second causes.

2 Because the more costly and difficult 2 Use of means makes mercies more
valued.
mercies are to us, the more they are prized by us, and they stay and stick the
longer with us. Hezekiah has means prescribed for his recovery, which God
could have wrought without them, but his recovery is thereby the more
memorable. Abraham's servant with prayer using sundry means, had made many more
affecting observations, of speaking providence for accomplishing his business,
and did the more thankfully admire God therein, and repeat the same the more
feelingly for others benefit. See Genesis 24. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. 50, 52.
There are more conspicuous varieties of Gods wisdom, grace, power and truth in
such a way. Both the means and the mercies which we obtain in and by prayer,
with use of means, are more suitable to our humane condition here; when means
are used by us, we are often minded of the mercies received thereby, by like
cases and means occurring, and are fitter to mind others thereof occasionally.

3 Because the Saints using means with 3 The Saints are the more quieted in the
successes.
their prayers, are quietest and most at peace in the issues thereof,
whatsoever they prove, and are strongly armed against objections impugning
their fidelity to God, themselves, or others; being thereby also senced against
temptations to discontent, etc. Hannah having prayed by her self, and having
set good Eli also on work with God for her also, she is quiet, 1 Samuel 1. 13,
16, 17, 18 David after he had with his prayers to defeat Ahithophels counsel,
(2 Samuel 15. 31. Lord turn Ahithophels counsel into foolishness) used means to
escape Absoloms bloody Army, martialling his own Army for that end, 2 Samuel 18.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. how quiet he is, Psa. 3. title, compared with v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6. shows. A Psalm of David when he fled from his son Absalom, v. 5. I laid me
down and slept, etc. he can then sleep as sweetly in his Tent, as in his Palace.

4 Because the Saints using means with their 4. The Saints then come to have
the things themselves, or as good.
prayers, are sure either of the good things they seek, or as good, and the
Lords blessing upon them. Abraham's servant, Nehemiah and others had the very
mercies they sought. Paul and Moses had the good of that which they sought, 2
Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10. Deuteronomy. 34. God gave not Paul the desired deliverance from the
evil he complained of, but yet gives him grace sufficient to guard and support
him against his temptations. Moses shall have all in a view at a distance,
which they had who went into Canaan, Deuteronomy. 3. 23, 28 David earnestly desired to
have built God a Temple, It was in his heart so to do, and accordingly he made
ready, 1 Chronicles. 28 2. yet ver. 3. he must not build it; but 1 Kings 8. 17, 18.
God honored him in selecting his son Solomon to do it; ver. 19. and he farther
honored David with a glorious testimony of his gracious acceptance of such
desires and endeavors of his to have done it, even as if he had actually done
it, v. 18, yea he honored him with that divine discovery of all the platform
of that goodly fabric that albeit Solomon shall erect it, yet David shall have
the honor above him in all matters concerning the framing of it, 1 Chr. 28.
19. Abraham is denied his desire in Ishmael, Genesis 17. 18. but its fully made up
in the blessing upon Isaak, and Ishmael some way also fared the better for it,
v. 6.

As touching the other particular, namely, Rules about the use of means.
What Rules are to be attended unto, in our using of the means with our
prayers. I answer:

1 Sanctfie even the very means which 1. Sanctify even them by prayer.
you use, with prayer for a Blessing upon them. So did Nehemiah, his petition
to the King was sanctified by his petition to the King of heaven, Nehem. 2. 4,
5. So I prayed unto the God of heaven, and then I said unto the King, etc. and
Ezra 8. 21. those godly Jews sought God by fasting and prayer, for a right way
of proceeding in their return into Judea. Asa will set the battle in array, as
the means, but yet sanctify it by prayer, and yet then also profess, it is
all nothing without the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 14. 10. 11 We have no power, help us O
Lord our God. And indeed when Christians sanctify the means by prayer, they
acknowledge God as All in All, even in the means as well as the end; this will
prevent using of unlawful means. If Abraham, Isaak, Rebecca, and Jacob had done
so, they had not used those poor shifts mentioned, Genesis 12. and 20. and 26. and
27. no better then lying. Besides, it will prevent a blast upon that which
means may bring about without such prayer to sanctify the same: when we use
means with success in our desires, without prayer, we either want the comfort
of the thing attained, or it is unexpectedly snatched from us; or it is some
way perverted to some unwarrantable use or rather abuse thereof.

2 Be we choice, prudent, and pious in making use of the means, we pitch upon,
and 2. Use the best means.
as pious and prudent in the manner of using the same. Neither choose nor use
any unlawful means, as Rachel and Sarai did, to give their maids to their
husbands, to attain their desire of children by them. Or as David in danger at
Gath, supplicating for deliverance, but scrabling too as the means. Nor are we
to use any unsuitable or unseasonable means, or lawful pertinent means
unlawfully or unseasonably, but use lawfullest and likeliest means. As Mordecai
with prayer used Queen Esthers interest with her husband King Ahashuerus; and
Jacob with his prayer sends Esau a Present, a gift using to prosper
whithersoever it goes.

3 Look we that there lie no fault or sin upon us, in such sort as might blast
both our 3. Remove what might blast the means
praying and means using also. As in Joshuahs crying whilst Achans sin lay upon
the Congregation, Josh. 7. 10, 11, 12, 13. Why cryest thou? -- Israet has
sinned, etc. So the Israelites for avenging that horrid crime of Bejamin, Judge.
19. gather an Army, and pray too; but for sins among them, and too much
trusting to their numbers, etc. twice blasted, Judge. 20. Hence when godly Ezra
would use means for their safe return to Judea, he puts his company upon
solemn humiliaation of themselves before God, Ezra 8. lest their sins might
way-lay them.

4 Use the means in faith. Set faith on 4. Use means in faith.
work, as well in the use of means as of prayer. Nehemiah prays, sets a
strict watch, encourages all sorts to fight, but all in faith, Our God shall
fight for us. Neh. 4. 9, 13, 14. compared. Moses cries, Ex. 14. 15. so did the
people, Neh. 9. 9. and withal Moses uses means prescribed of God for to pass
through the red sea, Exodus 14. 26. he stretches out his hand over the red sea
to divide it; but all this was in faith, looking through all their prayers, and
all secondary means, unto the Lord as All in All: By faith they passed through
the red sea, Heb. 11. 29. Asa sets the battle in array, and prays, but
rests neither on his warlike power nor on his prayers, but on the Lord
alone, We rest on thee, 2 Chro. 14. 10. 11. And indeed we have need to use
means in faith, looking through means and resting on the God of them, and on
his promise for succeeding the same. Jacob prays as well after he had pitched
upon the means of pacifying Esau as before, and yet rests on the charge of
God that he should return; and his promise That he will be with him and do him
good, Genesis 32. 10. and on that ver. 28. With men thou shall prevail, compared
with verse 30. Use the means also in faith, respecting the warrantableness
thereof, lest in that respect what is not of faith become sin to us. And let
all be done in faith also, eying and owning God in all successes of prayers and
means, as the chief, as all. So Exodus 15. 1. etc. He has triumphed gloriously,
the horse and rider has he thrown into the sea.

5. Be diligent and patient in using means, 5. Be diligent and patient therein.
waiting upon God for the success, as they do that dig for Mines, Prove. 2. 3,
4. Our eyes wait on thee, as the eyes of the handmaid upon her Mistress, etc.
Psalm. 123.

6 In using means be we submissive. Bind 6. Be submissive to God therein.
not God to our praying, or means using, much less to this or that means, or
manner, or season, either of the use, or of the success of the same; but leave
all with the Lord, to do, delay, or deny as he pleases. Even Joab spoke nobly
herein to his brother, 2 Samuel 10. 12. Be of good courage, and let us play the
men for our people, and for our God, and the Lord do that which seems him
good. This he spoke after he had used all warlike means for a good success,
mentioned v. 10, 11. David, though he so earnestly desired, and industriously
endeavored to build a Temple, and was denied the success as to himself, yet
rests quiet and satisfied in Gods mind touching his son, and his acceptance
of him for other service, although not for that. So Paul denied of that he so
earnestly begged and endeavored, yet rests quiet in Gods answer. My grace is
sufficient for thee; saying, 2 Cor. 12. 9. 10. Most gladly therefore will I
rejoice in my infirmities.

7 When means have been thus used with 7. If means prosper not, search out the
cause.
prayer, and yet do not succeed, search out the Cause, be humbled for it, and
redress it; find out the Achan that troubles Israel, and execute holy
vengeance upon him, Josh. 7, and be not discouraged then to go on using means,
as Joshuah uses stratagems to take Ai and the men thereof, who had the better
but then of Israel, Josh. 7. and 8. compared. So did Israel after their twofold
defeat by Bejamin, humble themselves greatly before God, enquire his counsel,
and use stratagems against Bejamin, and prospered, Judge. 10. So Paul hiadred
often from going to the Romans to do good among them; albeit he prayed and
endeavored it yet was ready to it still, Romans 1. 10, 11, 13, 15.

CHAP. V About time time spent in Prayer.
HAving briefly dispatched this Case, about the use of means with prayer, we
shall go on to speak to a fifth Case, namely, concerning the time to be spent in
prayer, How long, or how short we may be in prayer? About time in prayer. Much
time to be spent in prayer. For


To which I answer, more generally, That the space of time is not fixed, or
limited but the Text plainly shows, that much time is to be spent in prayer:
Pray without ceasing, implies, be much in prayer; spend much time about it.
For 1. The heart is not so suddenly or easily gotten upon the wing; yet 1. The
heart is not soon elevated.
in that does the nature and life of prayer consist. It is a lifting up the
heart, I lift up my heart to thee; that is, I pray, Psa. 25. 1. We pray indeed
when our hearts are elevated in prayer. Many weights are oft-times upon our
spirits to press them down, which are not so easily removed; many bonds, yea
knots in these cords, straitning our spirit, which are not not easily unlosed,
we need enlargment of our hearts to run any such way of Gods Commandments. We
would, as men sometimes in their sleep, feign cry, but there is such a weight
upon our breasts that we cannot; deadness seizes upon us, and much rubbing is
needful ere life is recovered: dullness annoieth us, and much whetting is
requisite ere our hearts get a spiritual edg upon them: we may say with the
Church, Quicken us, so will we call upon thee, Psa. 81. 18. and as Eccl. 10. 7
If the iron be blunt, the more pains is taken to sharpen it, so it is here with
our blunt spirits in prayer.

2. The necessities of the souls of the best, 2. The souls weighty necessities
call to it.
are so many and weighty, that a little time will not suffice to express them;
yea it being the trade of a gracious soul to be thus merchandising, his work
and business being to be thus pleading, his calling as a Saint being to call
upon God; surely a little time should not be taken up in this his proper
employment.

3. As the time in prayer is managed and improved, all the rest of our time is
either 3. As time is husbanded in prayer, other times are better spent.
blessed or blasted to us. That morning that the soul speeds well, that day all
goes the better; and on the contrary, if Jacob see Gods face in prayer the
night before, he is confident to speed well the next morrow, Genesis 32 30. If the
Instrument of a Christians spirit be not well tuned in prayer, truly he will make
but bad music of it all the day after in his calling and employments. If we
speed not well at heavens Court, we shall not do so well in earths Country: If at
this holy Mart and Port we get not well stored, and full lading, we shall make
but poor Markets elsewhere.

But to answer more particularly. Sometimes We are to be long in prayer in case
in special sort we are to be long in prayer; other times there are, when its
meet to be but short. We are to be long in prayer.

1. When some extraordinary occasion of 1. Of more then ordinary occasions.
the Church or Commonwealth, or of our own or other Christians call for it.
Prayer of eight hours long was made on that Fast day Neh 9. 3. Nehemiah himself
spends whole days in prayer and fasting, Neh. 1. 4. Prayers stretched out upon
the Tenters (as the Gr. word is Act. 12. 5.) was made by the Church for Peter's
enlargement. Upon the calling of Christ's twelve Disciples, he spent a whole
night in prayer, Luke 5. 12, 13. and so in Families, Christians for a time are
to be as only sequestered to prayer and fasting, sometimes 1 Cor. 7. 5. Abstain
with consent for a time that you may give your selves to prayer. Ezra 8. 21.

2. When strong and long temptations 2. Of special temptations.
are upon us, Luke 22. 44. Jesus Christ in that strong and bloody conflict in
his soul, being in an Agony he prayed, (...); in a more extended manner: Then
the Psalmist cries himself hoarse with long crying, when in these quagmires,
that deep pit, those deep waters, Psalm. 69. 1. 2, 3. I sink in the mire, I am
weary with crying, my throat is dry? Lord in trouble they have poured out a
prayer to thee, Esa. 26. 16. They do not only barely drop, but plentifully
pour out prayers. Then Psalm. 102. Title A prayer of the afflicted, when in
distress he pours out his complaint, etc. and that prayer following is longer
then others. When Satan, (...) the Law Adversary does extend his Pleas against
us, its meet that we should enlarge our Counter Pleas for our own souls; as
the powers of darkness do lengthen and multiply their wrestlings, so must we
our counter wrestlings of Prayer. Ephesians. 6. 12. 18. We wrestle with
principalities, and powers, and rulers of the darkness of this world. Praying
with all manner of prayers. etc.

3. When some sad trials and sufferings 3. Of Eminent trials.
are Eminent and approaching, then will Jesus Christ spend night after night in
prayer, not long before his bitter sufferings. Compare Luke 21. 37. with chap.
22, 23. For my love they are my Adversaries. (says he Psa. 109. 4.) but I
pray, or I give my self to prayer, whilst they are treacherously plotting my
ruin. We must lay in a stock, a store, a magazine of prayers, against such a
spiritual seige, and sorest sufferings; wherein, if not then so fit to pray, we
may have the benefit of former prayers.

4. When we are in any special spiritual 4. Of spiritual Frames.
Frames, then spread out your sails and hoise them up to receive and improve
the wind, as long as any spiritual gales last. When liberty of speech is
granted and given us, then speak on. When the Cloud fills the Temple, now is
a time if ever, for Solomon to make his long prayer there, 1 Kings 8. 10, 11,
12. 22. when we are filled with the spirit, we may well continue pouring out
prayer.

5. When we are not like to live long: Christ knowing he had but few days to
5. Of death not far off.
live, spent the more time in prayer. Luke 21. and 22. compared with 1 Pet. 4.
7. now the end of all things is at hand (at least to us in particlar) therefore
be sober, and watch unto prayer. If Heavens pleaders have but a little while
allotted them, they had not need loose any of that little time to plead in.
When such spiritual Merchants are shortly to go out of this country of trading
so by prayer, they had need bestow themselves to purpose. When these
travailours are so shortly to take their long journey home, they had need
improve every sand of Times hourglass, for the dispatch of the remaining part
of their prayer-businesse here. Sickness allows but little respit and free
space for prayer. Other work of the poor soul is so various then, and
perplexing, that it takes up the whole man to dispatch that. And indeed when
sincere ones have not long to live, they are the fitter for prayer. When the
Saints are near the Ocean of Eternity, then the Rivulets of Grace in their
souls wax stronger. Weakly persons which are Godly, are so often minded of
Eternity, and Perpetuity, as times successors, that they bare an Image of
Perpetuity; it is deeply Instamped upon them in their Spirituals.

Obj. But some will say, shall not Suppliants then wander and vanish into
forbidden Repetitions, if they are long in prayer?

Answ. 1. The Saints are and may be Repetitions in prayer lawful.
helped with such holy variety, that unlawful Repetitions may be avoided, as
might be evinced by many Reasons, if need were.

2. We distinguish of Repetitions in prayer: some are lawful, some are
unlawful: The Scripture frequently gives us instances of lawful Repetitions,
as Amos 7. 2. 5. It is twice repeated, by whom shall Jacob arise, for he is
small. And in Solomon's prayer, 1 Kings he often repeateth this clause: then hear
thou in Heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, etc. verse. 30. 39. etc. of this
sort of lawful Repetitions in prayer, are these.

First, such which are wrung from the strength of pinching necessities, or
temptations: as when Christ was so hard bestead First which are wrought from
extremities.
in the Garden, he often, even a third time spoke the same words, Entreating his
Father, that if it were his will, that the Cup might pass, Mat. 26. 39. 42. 44.
and chap. 27. 46. Eli, Eli, Lamasabachthani, My God, My God, why have thou
forsaken me. So Paul in a like sort besought God thrice in the same manner, 2
Cor. 12. 7, 8. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice that it might depart
from me: like children in great pain, when they are to tell where it is, they
iterate and reiterate this cry, O here, here, here, O here: or like men in a
ditch, or among thieves iterating this out cry, help, help, help; or as
prisoners in straits, crying, bread, bread, for the Lords sake bread, a little
bread for Christ's sake; or as it is with men, when their house is on fire in
the night, they cry fire, fire, fire.

Secondly, such Repetitions wherein the heart is carried out with equal
Secondly, wherein the heart is lively.
strength, of feeling and holy affections. at a third, as at a first time; so
was Christ in his Iterated cries. He made supplication with strong crying and
tears. So Dan. 9. 17, 18, 19. often Iterateth, O Lord hear: when there is in a
gracious supplicant so much strength of love, desire, and esteem, and suitable
wreachings after mercies begged, that the soul is not content to speak once,
but it must speak it over and over again. As friends when commending some
business of greatest weight to their friends care, they will be often
repeating, be sure you forget me not in such or such a thing. So is it here in
making known our requests to God. Or as it is with a cry uttered with greatest
strength, it causes the Iteration of a like Echo: so is it here when
repetitions in prayer, are the Echoes of strong cries of spirit; as it is when
a Ball is banded with great strength, it makes many rebounds: so is it when
the heart is carried out with great strength of holy affections, it is apt to
make these holy rebounds of such repetitions; or as a Bell which having been
but then ringing, doubles and redoubles its knoles, from the strength put forth
in its ringing; So will the gracious heart be giving many reiterated lifts, and
those sounding out in like expressions of the lips in prayer. Hence that
reiterated desire of the Saints, Psalm. 72. 19.
Amen and Amen.

3. Such Repetitions in prayer are lawful, 3. Which spring from says exercised
which spring from some strong workings of says, in the expectation of
mercies: such was that Iterated cry and prayer, Amen, even so (which is the
sense o^ the same) Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, as believing Christ's word
then mentioned, Lo I come quickly, Revel. 22. 20. So Psalm. 89. 50, 51. the
Psalmist concluding that God had heard his prayer, says, Blessed be the Lord,
Amen, and Amen. such was that frequent repetition of David's in his prayer to
God to bless his house, as building upon the truth of his promise for that
end: of which see 2 Samuel 7. 25, 26, 27, 29: thus is faith letting down the same
bucket into the well, which is presented to it when the believing soul hears
assuredly that its friend, the Lord is within hearing, It knocks thus again
and again, in the same sort as before.

4. Such repetitions in prayer which 4 Which spring from love.
spring from love, or are accompanied with special delight and spiritual
stirring of heart in the very mention thereof: such was their reiterated cry in
solemn worship of God, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty; Revel. 4. 8. such
strains of love and holy delight may often be reiterated in holy musical
divisions (as I may call them) albeit there be little variation. Look as where
a speech is pleasing, a motion is wont to be made to hear that over again; so
here, the spirit of Christ liking to hear us speak so very favourly and
sincerely in this or that passage in prayer, may bid us speak that again. In
sundry passages of the Saints prayers, the holy Ghost in special manner spoke
in them and with them, and such like double speeches of Gods Saints and Spirit
speaking together, may well be repeated.

But yet there are Repetitions in prayer Repetitions in prayer unlawful. 1
When affected.
which are unlawful, as,

1. Such which are affected: as, streines of eloquence, uttered in a
Rhetorical way. Such were those of the Gentiles, Matthew. 6. 7, 8. Use not
repetitions as the Heathens. These may please men's ears; but in prayer,
whereas suppliants should be most humble and self-denying, they are loathsome
to the Lord.

2. Such Repetitions which are vain, 2 When vain.
Matthew. 6. 7. Use not vain repetitions: vain, that is, empty, frothy,
impertinent, unprofitable repetitions, wherein is no spiritual life, heat,
vigor, nor yet solidity nor integrity.

3. Such repetitions which are Idolized, 3 When Idolized.
Matthew. 6. they think they shall be heard for their much babbling: to conceit
that God would not, or could not take notice of our wants, unless we should
word it in that sort with him, is a great dishonor to his free and rich grace,
and to his faithful and watchful care and respect to his suppliants: or to
rest and trust in our Repetitions, that God will the rather regard us, is to
make God like a mortal man.

4. Such Repetitions which spring from 4 When from hypocrisy.
hypocrisy, namely from secret desire to seem to be fervent in prayer, or to
be thought of others to spend much time in prayer, or to stop the mouth of an
accusing conscience, which would else be quarrelling at persons if too brief
in prayer: and therefore to fill up times, men will be making such repetitions
of the same things and phrases, in their prayers; such like repetitions as
these are sinful and heathenish: men thereby take Gods name in vain, abuse
his holy ear, willing to draw him to listen to bablings, they derogate from
the glory of Gods wisdom, would make God to be one that is dull of hearing or
conceiving, as childish as the sons of men; like an Idol Baal, 1 King. 18.
needing long and loud crying to awaken him by a vain reiteration, O Baal hear
us. Such cast disparagement and dishonor upon the renowned Ordinance of
Prayer, making it to be but as empty expense of time in aerie, vain, and
vanishing expressions. So much for the answer to the former part respecting
length of prayer: Now consider in what cases, and with what Cautions we may be
short in prayer. We may be short in prayer in case of bodily Ayls.


We may be short in prayer, 1. in case of bodily sickness, pain, Faintness,
and death* approaching, Dan. 10. 16. 17. How can thy servant talk with this my
Lord, there remaining no strength in me. Sick Hezekiah and Jacob were short in
prayer, Esaias 38. 1, 2. Heb. 11. 21. Jacob worshippeth God leaning on his staff.

2. In case of pressing occasions, unavoydable 2 Of pressing occasions.
by ordinary prudence or providence: when the Philistims came suddenly upon
Samuel and upon Saul in prayer they soon dispatch, 1 Samuel 7. 14.

3. In case of prevailing indisposednesse 3 Of prevailing indisposedness.
of heart to pray; after much strivings to pray, yet distempers and hurries of
spirit abate not: better then be short, then multiply words in any senseless
and tumultuous manner, and take Gods Name in vain.

4. In case a Christian be personally persecuted, 4 Of personal persecution.
and may not stay long in one place.

5. In case the prayer to be made be 5 Of Occasional prayer.
only occasional, above that of our ordinary course. In such a case Hezekiah
is short, 2 Kings 19. 14. to 20. and 2 Chro. 30. 20, 21. Only in spending so
little time in prayer, take we these Cautions. Cautions touching short prayer.
1 That it be not usual.


1. That it be not ordinary and usual with us so to do, but rather
occasional: to be ordinarily so brief in prayer, would argue strangeness and
unacquaintednesse with the Lord, men not using to hold any long discourse with
strangers. It would manifest suspicion and distrust, and sleighting of God; as
men that use to speak either seldom, or but little at once, with persons they
suspect, or dare not trust, or who are not regarded. Besides, it would evidence
a self-full spirit; they have little business with the Lord, and therefore
will not exchange many words before him: however, it will be an argument at
best, of slender abilities and weakness of mind, that they cannot hold any
long discourse with God.

2. That it be not out of a worldly 2 That it be not so from a worldly spirit.
spirit, so earnest and intent upon the world, as affording scarce time for God
or good; family and closet services of God, must therefore be dispatched
usually in haste and a hurry: there are so many that call upon such persons
without, that they have not leisure or list to be with God in prayer, within:
they are so familiarly and fully employed with these new friends, that they
speak but by snatches with God. They are so much abroad, that they can be but
little at home: when these choking weeds of the world spread so fast, and so
far, that they crowd and thrust the good grain, herbs and fruits into a very
narrow room and compass.

3. That it be not from negligence 3 It be not from sleightnesse.
or sleightnesse, yea or from profaneness of spirit, supposing that such a
short good morrow, or good-even will serve the Lords turn well enough.

4. That it be not out of improvidence, 4 That it be not from improvidence.
when by the use of godly foresight, wisdom, and prudence, such streights of
time for prayer might have been prevented: for that will sadly afflict and
abase a Christian, if he be indeed gracious and tenderhearted.

CHAP. VI. About pleading in Prayer.
WE have already spoken to some About pleading in prayer.
in the incessant practice of this duty of prayer. A sixth Case comes now to
be spoken to: namely, touching holy pleading with God in our prayers. Wherein
let us consider and clear, 1. That we must use holy pleas in prayer. 2. What
pleas we may use therein. 3. What Rules we are to attend unto in our pleading
with God in prayer.

Now first, that we may and must plead That we must plead in prayer.
with God in prayer, Esaias 1. 18. God says to penitent ones, Come let us reason
together. God reasons with us by his word and providence, outwardly; and by
the motions of his spirit, inwardly: but we reason with him, by framing
(through the help of his Spirit) certain holy arguments, grounded upon allowed
principles, drawn from his nature, name, word, or works: And it is condemned as
a very sinful defect in professors, that they did not plead the Churches case
with God, Jer. 30. 13. There is none to plead thy cause, that thou may be
bound up. If you pursue the examples of the most famous and prevailing
suppliants of God, recorded in Scripture roules, you shall find them using
holy pleas in their prayers for themselves or others. Thus did Abraham, Genesis
18. 25. Shall not the judge of the whole earth do right? So Jacob, Genesis 32. 9,
12, 13. Which saidest, return to thy Fathers house. And saidest, surely I will
do thee good. Which is, as if he had said, Lord, I undertook not the journey
upon my own head, but thou badest me go, and I have thy word for a good
success: and therefore I look thou should bear me harmless, and bless me
in this undertaking. So Moses, David, Daniel, and others, their prayers are
full of holy pleas. And that we may strengthen this by two or three reasons,
consider: Reasons. 1 Its an argument of familiarity with God.
acquaintance, and friendship thus to plead with God in prayer: and therefore
most suitable to this holy talking with God. As men use to plead with such as
they are most intimate withal, so is it here: Hence the Saints, which have
been men inward with the Lord, to whom he has made himself most known, and
opened his mind and bosom to them, and they theirs to him; they ever use the
most pleas with God in their prayers. What mere men more intimate with God,
then Abraham, Moses, and David? and who pleaded it more stoutly and freely with
him, then they did. This is a branch of that (...), which we have through
Christ, and it being so dear a bought privilege, we may well improve it to the
utmost, Ephesians. 3. 12. By whom we have free access with confidence. Heb. 10.
19. By the blood of Jesus we have access with boldness unto the holy place.

2. It will be an argument of fervency 2 Of Fervency
and holy seriousness in our spirits in prayer, to back the same with
prevailing pleas. As it is in all petitioners amongst men, suing for things
they most strongly desire.

3. It will be an argument of our careful and serious minding, and recording of
3. Of holy minding of Gods word and works.
what the Lord holds forth in his word, or works, for our encouragement in
our prayers. Hence when the Ministers of the Church, are wished to be Pleaders
in the Churches Case; they are called Remembrancers, Recorders, and therefore
men fittest to plead, yea persons called to plead with the Lord for his people.
Esa. 62. 6, 7. Ye that make mention of the Lord keep not silence, Give him no
rest, etc. and the Hebrew Affix, does show their eminency in it: the Word
[Mazkir] there mentioned, is for such a one, who by his office did note down all the memorable matters of the King, and used to suggest to the King seasonable
Items of things to be done accordingly, Esa. 36. 3. 2. Sam. 8, 16.

But three or four things may be objected against the necessity of such
pleading. Objections against pleading in prayer.


Obj. 1. Jesus Christ is the common pleader and Advocate for his people, 1 John
2. 1. If we sin we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous. What need they then do any more, then barely present their requests
unto God in his name.

Answ. True, Christ's office is to present our requests to God, which we bring
before him, but withal also to perfume those holy pleaes with the odor of his
merit and mediation: The Lord Christ meant to pray the Father for them, but yet
will have the Disciples in his name to ask more to purpose then ever they had
done, Ioh. 16, 23. 24. Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name; ask (that is
more freely and fully, and strongly) that your joy may be full: yea, he is an
Advocate to solicit and plead on our behalf, as well our pleaes for what we
sue for, as the suits themselves.

Obj. 2. God is not as man, hard, but rather easy to be entreated, as being
much more merciful, and wise, then any of the sons of men: whose wisdom
from above, is to be easy to be entreated. Besides, as men, the more entire
and sincere they are, the more candid they are, in ready answers to others
desires, which they may grant. They will not assent to carry it otherwise then
they intend: no more will the Lord, but as he is, so will Mich. 7: 18: Esa. 65.
14:
he show himself to be, ready to show mercy, and ready to forgive, and
therefore what need such a urging on pleading.

Answ. True, the Lord is thus ready to help and hear; yet who more full of
pleaes for his mercy then David, the Penman of the Holy Ghost, in ascribing
this to God, that he is ready to forgive, and plenteous in his mercy to all
that call upon him. Psalm. 86. 5. in that very place he pleads: incline thine
ear and hear, why so? for I am poor and needy. verse. 1. and preserve thou my
soul; why so? for I am thy servant and trust in thee. verse. 2. etc. Be
merciful to me O Lord, why so? for I cry to thee continually. verse. 3. And
rejoice the soul of thy servant, why so? for unto thee O Lord, do I lift up my
soul. Verse 4: which is backed with another argument from this very gracious
disposition of God. verse. 5. For thou Lord art good and ready to show mercy,
and rich in goodness to all that call upon thee. This readiness then to mercy
must not hinder, but further the Saints pleading in prayer, and help to find
the more Argument, whereby to plead with God therein. Jesus Christ knew that
his Father always heard him. Ioh. 11. 42. yet in that his solemn prayer
recorded, Ioh. 17. how many Arguments does he use, to strengthen his Petitions,
as to glorify him, verse 4. 5. Father glorify thy Son: why so? The Hour (or
the Time) is come, Ibid. And verse 4. 5. I have glorified thee on Earth: And I
have finished the work thou have given me: And now (or therefore) glorify me,
etc. and V. 21. Let them be one in us: why so? That the world may know thou
have sent me. V. 24. Let them be with me to behold my glory: why so? For thou
lovedst me before the world was. Surely God himself must needs be ready to do
what himself wills, yet as one stirring up himself to act, he argues with
himself, Esaias. 51. 9. Awake, Awake, O Arm of the Lord; why so? Art not thou
it that have wounded the Dragon? and verse 10. Art not thou it that have dried
up the Sea. So Esaias 63. 8. For he said, Surely they are my people, children
that will not lie, So he was their Savior, and Psalm. 12. 5. For the sighing of
the poor, and cry of the needy, I will arise, says the Lord, and set him at
liberty from him that pusseth at him. God glorifieth his readiness to mercy;
in that we no sooner plead for it, in our prayers, but he shows mercy. Esaias
65. 14. Whilst they yet speak; I will hear. Psalm. 65. 2. O thou that art
hearing prayers. It is the Lord who prepares our hearts in prayer, and
furnishes them with holy pleas; and it is the rather a pledge that he is ready
to hear the pleas of his own spirit. The Lord may, and sometimes does prevent
his people with mercy. Esaias 61. 24. Before they call, I will hear. Yet
ordinarily he will have us to pray and plead first, ere he will answer us.
Christ prevented Zacheus, and bad himself to his house, Luke 19. 5. Zacheus,
come down quickly, for I must abide at thine house to day: yet usually he went
to no house, but he was first invited; which makes way to answer another
objection.

Obj. 3. God may and does bestow upon his people many desirable blessings,
without so much a do, in pleading for them: The penitent thief did but say,
Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom, and Christ presently
answered him, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Luke 23. 42, 43. and
the Publican did but cry, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, and he went away
justified, Luke 18. 13, 14. And David did but in a short ejaculatory Psalm. 3
way seek the Lord, and he delivered him from all his fears.

Answ. 1. Some extraordinary examples do not take away from the force and
course of an ordinary rule, in this business of prayer, nor any other.

2. The cases of the Saints may be such, and so circumstantiated, that a few
broken expressions may be as much, yea more in them, and from them, then many
pleas in themselves or others, in other cases, and at other times. As in the
poor thief, encompassed with so much sense of guilt of his former lewd
courses, with bodily tortures, fear of death, etc. So in David, in that
instant when he changed his behavior before Abimelech, Psalm. 34. title. So in
cases of poor tempted Saints, under bonds, bolts, and keepers, (as it were)
and with heavy weights upon their spirits, They make short cries in depths,
Psalm. 130. 1.

3. God will sometimes order passages for peculiar examples of his royal
bounty, that none may glory in man, nor in prayers, nor in pleas, although
acted therein by the spirit of grace: and that none may be dismayed, albeit
they cannot sometimes plead the cases of their souls.

4. The Scripture in recording the Saints prayers, does not always express
all, but rather sets down the sum and substance of what was uttered by
them.

5. In short prayers there may be couched many pleas, as in that of the
Publicans prayer, wherein almost every word includes a secret plea. As that
term of [Lord] is a plea of respect to an humble servants request: so that [be
propitious] includes pleas from Gods own mercy, and Christ's merits. So that
[to me a sinner] that is, chiefest of sinners, it was a very plea for grace to
him that was such a one in his own sight and sense. To be sure he had a
pleading spirit in him.

Obj. 4. God is not as man to be moved by our pleas, but abides unchangeable
in his purposes of what he will do: so that as he said to Samuel touching Saul,
1 Samuel 16. 1. Why mournest thou for Saul, seeing I have rejected him? God is
not as man to repent, what pleas soever are made to the contrary, 1 Samuel 28.
15. God answers me not (says Saul) neither by Vrim, nor by Prophets. Lord,
Lord, (plead they in Luke 13. 25, 26.) have we not eaten and drunken in thy
presence? And Matthew. 7. 21, 22, 23. Have we not prophesied in thy name, and in
thy name cast out devils? but both in vain: I know you not (says the Lord)
depart from me, etc.

Ans. 1. Its true, Amidst Gods diverse expressings of himself to us, sometimes
as frowning, sometimes as smiling, there is no change with God; God is the same
when he carries it to us as willing, or when as unwilling to hearken to us:
because by an immutable act of his counsel he ordered it to carry it so
diversely toward us in his dispensations.

2. Its true also that there is nothing done in time, but the Lord decreed it
immutably before all time; as that he would confer upon his people such and
such a mercy, but in such a way of moving them to pray and plead for it.

3. Its true also that there is a time when pleas avail not: as,

1. For a time: and so the Lord may express distaste, and carry it as one that
is angry with his own, yea when pleading in prayer. The Church pleads, Psalm.
80. 1. Hear: why so? O thou shepherd of Israel etc. yet verse. 4.
expostulateth, Why art thou so long angry with the prayers of thy people? yet
were their pleas, and prayers, and tears treasured up for a fit season of help.

2. For ever: namely in case of expiration and ending of the date of the day
and season of grace with any, Prove. 1. 28. They shall seek me early, and not
find me.

4. Albeit the Lord be not moved by our pleas; yet are our pleas his ordinance,
and therefore we are to attend thereto: and they are an ordinary way and
means, in the use whereof God will give promised mercies; yea, they are a
means which the Spirit of God makes use of to move and quicken up our sense
and feeling of such and such wants, our desire of such and such mercies, and
our faith in such and such promises or attributes of God, (or the like) to put
us upon the serious urging of such and such holy pleas in our prayers.

Now we come to the second thing propounded, namely, what pleas we are to use
in our prayers to the Lord. There are in arguing the cases and intricacies of
our souls, spiritual Topic places (as I may call them) certain radical
notions in God and Christ, and the Word, which yield fruitful and forcible
arguments, in this our holy discourse and reasoning with God: true it is, that
it is not every puny in Christianity that can raise so aply, seasonably,
strongly, plentifully, and graciously, such prevailing pleas: some are but
Juniors and Freshmen in the school of Christ; others are Senior Students in
this holy Logic: there is much skill required to become one of Heavens
Barristers.

But for the better help and direction in Pleas with God respecting himself,
as from his own name.
this Art, and fruitful practice thereof, let us reduce these pleas to three
heads. Some respect God, some our selves, some others. Briefly then of some
pleas respecting God, and there we find the Scripture recording some approved,
and (as I may say) unanswerable pleas. As first, the engagement of his own name
in the cases before him. When a petitioner has such skill in pleading his
suit, that he can prudently involve the petitioned party in his case, and so
make it as well the case of the petitioned, as of the petitioner: this with men
is undeniable pleading; So is it here with God, thus Exodus 32. 11, 12. Why does
thy wrath wax hot, etc. Wherefore should the Egyptians speak and say, for
mischief did the Lord bring them out to slay them in the mountain, etc. As if
he had said, Lord, I say not how the name of thy grace, wisdom, faithfulness
and long-suffering, may suffer in the eyes and hearts of thy professed people,
if thou should deny my request; but consider what a disparagement it will be
to thy glory, in the eyes of thy enemies, to deal so strictly with thy people;
men are forbidden to lay a stumbling block before the blind; and will God lay
such an occasion of offense and falling in the way of blind Egyptians. The
like plea is used in Psalm. 79. 9, 10, 11. Help us for the glory of thy name,
purge away our sins for thy names sake: wherefore should the Heathen say, where
is there God? Render to them the reproach wherewith they have reproached thee,
O Lord. So Psalm. 74. 18. 19, 22. and in many other places to like purpose. The
cases wherein Gods name and glory is in any special sort engaged, are of
greatest weight and concernment, and therefore none necd be afraid or ashamed
to plead them in such sort before the Lord: in such pleas truly, if the Lord
should deny his Saints, he should deny himself. And the self-denial of the
Suppliant shines forth the more in such pleas, when he pleads the case, not so
much in reference to himself, as to the Lord himself, and to his name.

Secondly, the suitableness of the relation His relation to us and fitness to
help us.
betwixt God and us, as Psalm. 79. 9. Help us, O God of our salvation. Deliver
us for thy name sake. As if they would say, thou stilest thy self the God of
our salvation: we by thy grace do eye and own thee as such a one; wherefore
show that thou art such a one by saving of us: let it appear that it is no
empty title. And what is more suitable to a God of salvation, then to save his
people? or wherein shall that Name of thine be more magnified, then in thy
delivering thy people? So Esaias 63. 16. Doubtless thou art our father, our
Redeemer, etc. As if they had said, O Lord, we have no other but thee; of whom
should children seek for relief, or from whom should they expect succor but
from their father? Now, we are resolved to own no other for our father but
thee, and can a father be cursed to his poor desolate, disconsolate, sick, or
sad children, when it is in his power to relieve them? To this we may add the
suitableness of the mercies we ask of God, unto him, and unto us. So Numb. 11.
17, 18, 19. Let the power of my Lord be great, as thou have said, the Lord is
longsuffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity, etc. pardon, I beseech
thee, the iniquity of thy people. As it is suitable to a sinning people to get
a pardon, so it is most suitable to a sin-pardoning God, to give forth a pardon
to them. So Psalm. 130. 4. But there are forgivenesses with thee, that thou
may be feared. I need not speak more in this case, or so much as scruple it,
that thou should be strict upon a poor desolate tempted creature, to mark
what is done amiss, and so to proceed to condemn or confound such a one as I
am; for there are Forgivenesses with thee: the manifold pardons that I need for
my manifold and multiplied sins, are in readiness in abundance with thee: thou
can not deny the benefit thereof to me in my case; I will and do conclude it
as a granted case, there are forgivenesses with thee: What then? that thou
may be feared. Thus the Faith of Heavens suppliants will be coming within God,
and will be framing good conceits of God, and telling him how well they are
persuaded of him, and of his generous nature, that if he deny them he should
disparage himself in their eyes, who had better thoughts of him. As Paul,
desiring Agrippa's becoming a Christian, he windeth him in by his holy
Rhetoric, thus, Believe thou the Prophets? yea, I know thou believe: so
that if Agrippa deny this, he must in a manner weaken his own esteem: so when
the Saints in their prayers and pleas hold forth their faith in God, as such or
such an one, in his gracious nature, the Lord uses not to exercise himself
short of their apprehensions; but it is for his honor to make good the utmost
of his peoples desires and expectations of Faith.

Thirdly, the little gain that the Lord The little gain the Lord will have by
our ruins.
would have by denying his people, in the mercies they request. David beggeth
his own life of God, using this plea, What profit is there in my blood? Psalm.
30. 9. So did the captive Church plead, Psalm. 44. 12. Thou sellest thy people
for naught, and do not increase thy wealth thereby. So then, poor Saints of
God, when they come and tell the Lord in their prayers, that indeed he may
condemn, or confound, or cut or cast them off, he may continue to frown upon
them, and to withdraw his spirit from them; he may deny such and such requests
of theirs, for such and such just causes, in them; but what will he gain
thereby? he may gain many praises etc. by hearing them, and helping them; but
what good will it do him to see them oppressed by the enemies of their souls?
or what delight would it be to him to see them sighing, and sinking, and
fainting under sad pressures etc. this is an allowed, and a very succesfull
kind of pleading. We might instance in many other pleas respecting God, as that
Esaias 63. 15. Where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels,
and of thy mercies toward me? are they restrained? These are prevailing pleas,
since the Lord can as soon cease to be, as cease to be zealous of his own
glory, in his peoples welfare; since he neither wants power nor will to help
them in any needful case which concerns them: for he has strength, and
therefore is able, and bowels of compassion and tender mercies, and therefore
is willing to answer and succor his people. Yea, every Attribute and Title of
God, and every promise is a several plea, which God cannot deny.

The second sort of pleas respect the Saints themselves which plead, and they
Pleas respecting us:
are of two sorts:

First, some respect the dependency and needinesse of our condition. As our
needinesse, as we are creatures.


Secondly, others the good of grace shining forth in us.

Of the former sort let us instance in these:

1. It may be, and has been pleaded, that we are Gods creatures; both
considered as men, and as Saints by calling: we are the workmanship of his
hands, and as such plead for his gracious respects. Job 10. 9. Thou have made
me as the clay, and will thou bring me to dust again? As if he should say, thou
have been at such cost and pains to make me, and now will thou altogether
mar me by afflictions and temptations? so the Church pleads Esaias 64. 8, 9.
But now thou art our Father: we are the clay, thou art the potter: be not wroth
very sore. Which is as much as to say, Fathers do not use to be irrevocably
displeased with their children, nor will they correct them without measure, or
whip them to death. Potters do not use to conceive so deep a distaste against
a poor vessel of clay, as to rage against the same, without all respect to
their own credit, or to their own workmanship: and therefore surely thou our
heavenly Father and Potter can not, wilt not do thus. Thus David pleads his
Fashioning by God, Psalm. 119. 73. Thy hands have made and fashioned me, give me
understanding, that I may learn thy Commandments. God himself makes it an
argument to himself, why he will bear his people, Esaias 46. 3, 4. I have made,
and I will bear: even I will carry, and will deliver you. And it is a
prevailing reason with God, not to contend for ever, lest the soul should
fail before me (says he) and the spirit which I have made, Esaias 57. 16. so
would God have this an argument to help the weakest faith, to expect its
desires above all its fears. Esaias 43. 1, 2. But now thus says the Lord, that
created thee, O Jacob, and he that frmed thee, O Israel, Fear not. And so V.
7. For I have created him for my glory, I have formed him, yea I have made him.
And therefore surely the Saints may well urge this, in any like case, in prayer.

2. We may plead the imbecility and We are frail creatures.
frailty of our natures. So Job pleads for the speeding of Gods manifesting
of his pardoning and reconciling grace to him. Job 7. 21. Why do thou not
pardon my transgression, and take away mine iniquity? for now shall I sleep in
the dust, etc. As if he had said, Lord if ever thou intendest (as I am
persuaded thou do) to renew the former beams of thy favor, and pardoning
mercy, thou had not need to defer too long, lest it come somewhat too late;
for ere long I shall return to my dust. This is David's plea in the like case,
Psalm. 39. 12, 13. Keep not silence at my tears, for I am a stranger with thee.
Spare me a little, that I may recover my strength, before I go hence, and be
no more. So Job pleads this, Job 13. 25. Will thou break a leaf driven to
and fro? and will thou pursue dry stubble? What credit it is to so great a
Majesty as thou art, to show thy power against a poor leaf? or to run after
a poor leaf, which every puff of wind whisketh hither and thither? or is it
any honor so much as to a man, to be cutting and hewing a poor leaf, which
can make no resistance? Thus Abraham pleads for Audience and patience in
hearing him: because he is but dust and ashes, of little substance, and short
continuance before the Lord, if the Lord please now to hear him whilst he is
before him, he is not like to trouble him long; it is but a very little and he
is gone: he is but weak, and it is not much discouragement in denial of
requests, which he is able to bear. Genesis 18. 27. And the Lord has sanctified
this plea, as an argument to himself to show his servants mercy. Psalm. 103.
13, 14. He pittieth those that fear him; for he knows our frame, he
remembers that we are but dust. So Esaias 57. 16. I will not contend for ever,
for the spirit should fail before me. This prevails with the Lord, not to
charge too hard upon his poor people.

3. Plead we the extremities of our miseries, We are in extremities.
inward or outward: our extremities being Gods opportunities of hearing and
helping us, Psalm. 27. 16. Have mercy upon me, O Lord; why so? for I am
desolate. And Psalm. 143. 7. Hear me speedily, O Lord, why so? my spirit
fails. I have but a little spirit left, O Lord, to breath after thee, and
speak to thee, let me not spend that in waste: Lord, my soul is dying away,
speak Lord, answer Lord, before I faint quite away. A gracious answer, Lord,
would even fetch life in me again: and nothing else but that will recover me:
and therefore hear me speedily, a poor dying, sinking, fainting spirit, O Lord
I entreat thee. So Psalm. 69. 12. Save me, O God, for the waters are come even
to my soul: I sink in the deep mire, where is no standing. This plea in
effect is thus, Lord I am ready to drown; if ever thou would save a poor
perishing servant of thine, save me: my troubles and temptations are too deep
for me, I am ready to sink over head and ears in them, and therefore Lord
reach hither thy gracious hand, and bear up my head above water, least
otherwise I miscarry: but especially, if such extremities continue, the
continuance of them may be pleaded. Such is Hemans plea, Psa. 88. 14, 15. Lord,
why hidest thou thy face from me? I am afflicted and ready to die, from my
youth up, whilst I suffer thy terrors I am distracted: and God makes this an
allowed plea to himself, of showing his people mercy in such a case. Esaias 42.
19, 20. I have a long time holden my peace. Now will I destroy and devour at
once. And I will bring the blind by a way they know not, etc. Christ the Angel
uses this plea Zech. 1. 12. O Lord of Hosts, how long will thou not have mercy
on Jerusalem, against which thou have had indignation these threescore and ten
years?

4. Plead we our helplesnesse in our We are helples otherwise.
selves, and in any other besides himself. So Psalm. 22. 11. Be not far from
me, for trouble is near: for there is none to help. So Ier. 14. 22. Are there
any among the vanities of the Gentiles, that can cause rain? or can the
heavens give showers? Art not thou he, O Lord our God? therefore we will wait
upon thee: for thou have made all these things. So 2 Chro. 20. 12. We have no
might, we know not what to do, but our eyes are unto thee. Either then thou
must help, O Lord, at this dead lift, or else thine enemies will prevail. So
Psalm. 60. 11. Give us help against trouble, for vain is the help of man. When
people are in a perishing condition, it must not keep them from making out to
God, but they must take this to bottom their requests upon for mercy; their
spiritual oppressors and oppressions must make them repair to the Lord, and
that will prevail for succor, from that great one the Lord Jesus. They shall
cry unto the Lord, (Esaias 19. 20.) because of the oppressors, and he shall send
them a Savior, and a great one, and he shall deliver them. Psalm. 72. 12. It is
engaged concerning Christ the true Solomon, He shall deliver the needy when he
cries, the poor also and him that has no helper. He cannot forget the cry of
his sucking shiftlesse babes, that hang upon the breast, and can no more shift
for a living then a poor infant. God himself urges his people to come to
him, with this plea in their mouths, Hos. 14. 2, 3. Take unto you words and
say, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously. For in thee the
fatherless find mercy: The like is done Jer. 3. 23. Truly in vain is
salvation hoped for from the hills: truly in the Lord our God is salvation. So
is the Lord himself moved hence to help his people. Esaias 63, 5. And I looked
and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold,
therefore mine own arm brought salvation to me. And Deuteronomy. 32. 36. The Lord shall
repent for his servants, when he sees their power is gone.

5. Plead the greatness of our sins, not to keep us from mercy, but to
prevail Our sins have been many and great.
for it. Psalm. 25. 11. Pardon my sin, why so? for it is great. Psalm. 41. 4.
Heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee. Jer. 14. 7. Do thou it for thy
names sake: for our backeslidings are many, we have sinned against thee. This
is a strong plea, when sincerely urged, by an humble and contrite spirit. It
glorifieth God as one that is abundant in goodness, rich in mercy, and one
with whom are forgivenesses and plenteous redemption; and it honors Christ
as infinite in mercy. Hence also the Lord himself when he would stir up
himself to choice acts of mercy to his poor people, he first aggravateth
their sin against him to the highest, and then expresses his royal act of
grace to them. So Esaias 43. 22, 23, 24, 25. Thou have not called upon me, O
Jacob, but have been weary of me, O Israel, thou have not honored me with thy
Sacrifices; but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, and wearied me with
thine iniquities: I, even I am he, that blotteth out thy transgressions for my
names sake.

The latter sort of pleas, respecting our The good of Gods grace, as Gods
stirring us up to plead with him.
selves, or the good of grace in us, are

1. Gods own stirring us up to pray for such mercies. When a petitioner can
plead with God, Lord, I come not to thy blessed Court without thy sending for.
It was thou which appointedst me to come to thy door of grace; else I had not
come; thy Spirit moved me, thy promise encouraged me so to do: and therefore,
O Lord, I expect the fruit of my coming and request. So David pleads 2 Samuel
7. 27, 28. Lord, thou saidest this and that touching my house, and therefore
has thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer. And so Psalm 27. 7, 8.
He pleads, Thou saidest, seek my face; and my heart answered, Thy face Lord
will I seek. And well may this be pleaded, in that God uses not so to stir
up, and strengthen us to seek him, but when he intends to be found of us.
Psalm 10. 17. Thou will prepare the heart, thou will bow thine ear to hear.
Jerem. 29. 11, 13. Then shall ye seek me, and find me, when ye shall search
for me with all your heart. And God makes it an argument to himself, that if
he say to any inwardly as well as outwardly, seek my face, he that speaks
righteousness cannot speak thus to them and frustrate their prayers, and so
bid them seek his face in vain, Esaias 45. 19. I said not to any of the seed of
Jacob, seek my face in vain; I the Lord speak right things. If Ahashuerus bid
his Spouse to ask, surely he will not fail to grant her petition, Esther 7. 1.
so here. And as when Christ called the blind man to come to him to tell him his
grievance, it was truly said to him by them, Be of good comfort, rise, for he
calls thee, Mark 10, 49. so it is in this case.

Secondly, our waitings, and the expectations Our waiting upon him.
of Faith which the Lord wrought in us, may be pleaded. That a King should
occasion a petitioners expectation of bounty, and fail him, were not seemly;
it were strange. Hence Asahs plea, in his prayer for help, Help Lord; why so?
for we rest on thee, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. So Psalm 119. 66. Teach me good judgment
and knowledge, for I have believed thy Commandments. And Psalm 25. 2, 3. My
God I trust in thee, let me not be confounded. And Verse. 5. Lead me forth in
thy truth, For on thee do I wait all the day. And Verse. 20. Let me not be
confounded, for I trust in thee. And Verse. 21. Let uprightness preserve me,
for my hope is in thee. And Psalm 143. 8. Let me hear thy loving kindness in
the morning, for in thee is my trust. And it is an argument with men; such a
one does depend upon me, and I have passed my word to do such or such a thing
for him, and he comes to meet me, according to my own appointment, at such a
time, in expectation of what I promised; and therefore I cannot, may not, must
not fail him. So it is with God, Esaias 26. 3. Thou will keep him in perfect
peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusted in thee. And Psalm. 10.
14. The poor commits himself to thee. Thou art the helper of the
fatherless.

Thirdly, we may (in all humility) The breaking of our hearts before him.
plead our heart-breakings and weepings in sense of want of mercies which we
crave, and our pantings and faintings after the same. As Psalm 39. 12. Hold not
thy peace at my tears. And Psalm 51. David, who groundeth all his pleas only
upon the free grace of the Lord, Verse. 1. Have mercy upon me, according to thy
loving kindness, etc. yet Verse. 17. he pleads the brokennesse of his heart,
The Sacrifices of God are a broken heart; a broken and a contrite spirit, O
Lord, thou will not despise. It is a moving argument with a compassionate
father, when his child craveth this or that with tears, from him, not then to
deny him. In such a case, a father will be ready to say, alas my dear child,
thou shall not blubber thy cheeks any longer; come, do not thus mar thy face
with weeping, thou shall have what thou cravest: so doubtless is it with the
Lord toward his children. When Ephraim smites upon his thigh, is ashamed, and
even confounded, because he bare the iniquity of his youth, Jer. 31. 19. how
this took with God we may perceive by what himself replieth, Verse. 20. Is
Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him,
I earnestly remembered him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I
will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. So Esaias 38. 5. Isaiah is bid
to go to weeping Hezekiah, and tell him from God, I have heard thy prayer, I
have seen thy tears. As if he had said to Isaiah, Go run to yonder child
of mine, bid him not weep so sore; tell him, he shall have his request. So
Psalm 6. 8. The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping. And V. 9. The Lord
has heard my petition. His prayer and petition it self spoke, and his tears
also spoke aloud in Gods ears, and prevailed for audience.

Fourthly, the integrity of our hearts The integrity of our hearts and ways.
and ways, in former workings after God and service for God, may by faith in
Christ, as all in our justification, be also pleaded. Esaias 38. 3. Remember that
I have walked before thee in sincerity, etc. Psalm. 71. 17, 18. O Lord, thou
have taught me from my youth, and hitherto I have declared thy wondrous works:
Now also, when I am old and gray headed: O God, forsake me not. Psalm 119. 10.
With my whole heart have I sought thee, O let me not wander from thy
Commandments. The Lord himself makes it to himself a motive, to show mercy
to his people. Esaias 63. 8. They are children that will not lie: so be became
their deliverer, Jer. 2. 2. I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, etc.
only we must use this plea more rarely and sparingly, in a self-denying way,
in faith in Christ's righteousness, as made ours. The like also may be said of
our integrity with men, which in some cases, as of reproach, slander, or
injurious dealing from men, may be by way of appeal, pleaded before the Lord.
Jer. 15. 15. Know, O Lord, that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke. Psalm 26.
1. Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine integrity.

Fifthly, we may plead our sufferings, Our sufferings.
especially those that are most directly and properly for God and his cause.
Other sufferings also may be pleaded, as Nehem. 9. 32, 33. Let not all the
trouble seem little to thee, which has come upon us. Howbeit thou art just in
them. Psalm 90. 15. Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have
afflicted us. But especially plead those which are undergone for the Lords
sake. Psalm 44. 22, 23. For thy sake are we killed all the day long. Awake, why
sleep thou?

Sixthly, our former experiences of mercy Our former experiences.
in like cases may be pleaded, as Esaias 63. 15. Where is the sounding of thy
bowels and of thy mercies toward me? are they restrained? Which is as much as
to say, Lord, thou had wont to be a compassionate God, I have had experience
in various conditions and cases of thy bowels; how comes it to pass that
they are so shut up now? So Psalm. 71. 17, 18. Thou have taught me from my youth
up, forsake me not now when I am old. Psalm 61. 23. Lead me to the rock that is
higher then I: For thou have been a shelter to me.

Lastly, the great good which we might both get and do, may be also pleaded:
The good that we might get and do.
God put that plea in their mouths, Hos. 14. 2. Take away iniquity, and
receive us graciously: why so? so will we render the calves of our lips. And
Verse. 3. We will no more say to the works of our hands, ye are our Gods. Psalm
119. 33. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy Statutes, and I will keep it to the
end. V. 34. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law. Psalm. 51. 12, 13.
Restore to me the joy of thy salvation: Then will I teach sinners thy way. And
as the Saints may plead the good which they may do, if answered: so that good
of inward quickening, encouragement, and enlargement which they may thereby
receive, Psalm. 90. 14. O satisfy us early with thy mercy: why so? so shall we
rejoice and be glad before thee all our days.

A third sort of pleas are those respecting Pleas respecting others. As their
experience of a like help.
others: which are these.

1. Others experiences of the like mercy in like cases: as Psalm. 119. 132. Be
merciful to me, as thou usest to do to those that love thy name. Lord, do
not change thy wont, do to me as thou have ever done to others in my case. Let
not me be the first Anomalon.

2. Others discouragements, or encouragements Their discouragements or
encouragements in ours.
in ours. Psalm. 69. 6. Let not them that wait on thee be ashamed for my sake.
29. Let thy salvation (O God) set me up on high: why so? verse. 32. The humble
shall see this and be glad. If thou hear me, others will be encouraged; or if
not, they will be ashamed.

3. The subtle and malicious desires of Enemies plots and desires.
ours and Gods enemies: Ah Lord, our miseries snares, fears, straits,
temptations, and falls, they are that for which they plot and wait, and are
ready to reproach us with; and therefore the rather tender our case. Thus may
we plead, as others have done, Psalm. 27. 11. Make my way plain, because of my
enemies, Ps. 38. 16. I said hear me lest otherwise they rejoice over me, Psalm.
39. 8. Deliver me from all my transgressions, make me not a reproach to the
foolish.

Now touching the last thing propounded, namely, the rules which we are to
attend to in pleading in prayer, they are these:

1. Look that we plead in faith; yea, with some strength of faith, acted
suitably Believingly.
to our pleas. Esaias 53. 15, 16, 17. Where are thy bowels toward me? Doubtless
thou are our Father: Why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear?

2. Look that we do it with holy skill, Improving those promises or Attributes
Skilfully.
of God, which are most suitable to our present cases, which are most strongly
speaking, most apt to move, at least our selves to believe, and such as used to
prevail that way formerly. So did the Church, Esaias 63. 15, 16, 17.

3. Look we be submissive in our pleas, and not inordinate, impatient, or
distempered. Submissively.
Moses was somewhat distempered in those pleas, Exodus 5. 22, 23. Wherefore have
thou evil-entreated this people? why have thou sent me? and Numb. 11. 12, 13,
15. Whence should I have flesh for so many? I am not able to bear the burden
alone. If thou deal thus with me, kill me.

4. Look that we be humble and self-denying Humbly.
therein, and come not to God to stand upon terms with him, or to chop Logic
(as we say) with the holy one. Job was too blame herein, Job 23. 4, 5. and so
were they Esaias 58. 3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou regardest it not? So
Matthew. 7. 21. Have not we prophesied in thy name, and in thy name done
wonderful works?

5. Look that we be sincere in our pleas, Sincerely.
that there be nothing lurking with us, and too well approved by us, which may
be counterpleaded against us, and that justly by our own consciences. As Esaias
58. 3, 4. Behold ye fast for strife. So Matthew. 7. 22, 23. Depart from me ye
workers of iniquity.

CHAP. VII. About straitnings in Prayer, and their Causes, Cures, and
Differences.
HAving spoken of sundry cases of Conscience touching the incessant practice of
this duty of prayer: we come now to speak of the seventh Case considerable
therein, namely, concerning straightnings incident to the Saints in prayer: and
therein we shall enquire of About the Saints straitnings in prayer.
the Causes, and then of the cures, and then of the differences of these
straitnings, incident to the Saints from that Judicial speechlesnesse of
hypocrites and reprobates.

But first we shall premise and prove that the Saints may be straightened, and
have their mouths in a manner shut up in prayer. This is too evident in
ordinary experience; and it were most sad, if such as were sometimes shut up
that they cannot pray, yea and that some continuance of time, should be
concluded to be therefore none of Gods called and chosen ones. David's mouth was
in this respect shut, and therefore he entreats the Lord to open it for him.
Psalm. 51. 15. And hence also Asaph complains of his being spiritually shut
up, Psalm. 77. 4. I am so troubled that I cannot speak. Hence even the Saints
are described under the notion of prisoners, Isai. 61. 1. and whose experience
does not at some time or other seal to this? But come we to consider things in
the order as they were propounded: and first of the causes of such straitnings,
and they are three; Causes of straitnings in prayer. 1. Gods withdrawing and
shutting up.
God, Satan, and our selves.

1. God is a cause: he withdraws his Spirit, the Author and efficient of all
all our liberty of speech, or steps which respect the welfare of our souls, 2
Cor. ^. 17. Hence called the free spirit, from the effect, because it freeth us
to speak or do any thing to or for God, which he calls us unto, Psalm. 51.
12. David wanted, and in his own sense had lost this spirit, in such like
efficacies of it, and in the supporting influence thereof: yea the Lord
sometimes lays some spiritual bonds upon some of his professed people. Hence
that complaint of the Church, Why have thou hardened our hearts, from thy fear?
Isai. 63. 17. She found her self clung up in the ways of God. The Lord which
sometimes opens the hearts and spirits of men, can and does other times shut
them up, so as none but himself can again open them. Revel. 37. He shuts,
and nono can open. Sometimes some of Gods own professed people, which are not
bound by any Church for sins deserving the same in the nature of them, but
being hid from the eyes of men, they cannot sentence the persons guilty
thereof: yea, but the Lord orders the matter so, that they go
conscience-bound, and excommunicated by God for the same. So was David after
his fall, and before his confession of the same, which (as it is probable) was
not til a good space after, even after the birth of the child which he had
adulterously begotten, 2 Samuel 12. 13, 14, 15. O how a Christians spirit is
hampered at such a time in and by the cords of his own sin! how is he bound up
in petition and confession, having no list to pray; and when he is at prayer,
no life or delight in it! If he come to pray, he has little or nothing to say,
his words stick in his teeth (as it were) his thoughts are not at liberty to
attend his words, his affections are not stirring, he cannot get his heart to
be affected. If he do strive, it is but as against the stream; he would fain
weep sometimes over his condition in his prayer, but cannot: he is often
pressed in spirit, to make his moan thus and thus to God; but when he comes
to it, his spirit is shackled, and he can but shake his chains before the
Lord: his faith was in a dead sleep in his prayers, he cannot tell how to
apprehend any thing of God or Christ, (in a manner) therein, but is in his own
sight like an Atheist: the promises which sometimes have been a great support
unto him, now he is not able to see any thing in them, or to make any thing of
them: his mind is full of hurries, but at no liberty to fix upon God or his
Covenant, yea he is not free to desire grace and redress, as formerly: his
conscience passes by him whilst he is upon his knees, and often upbraideth him
with his sin or sins, but will scarce afford him any friendly word of direction
what course he should now take to mend himself. God sees his servants
sometimes play the spend thrifts, and running into arrerages with him, and then
he will lay them under restraint for a time, till they do humble themselves in
serious manner to him; or he takes notice that they wax wanton, and begin to
abuse their inward freedom, or are not so thankful for it; and in such a case
he will cut them shorter, and abridge their former liberty: or else he
observes much pronesse in them to turn such grace of his into wantonness, to
grow secure and slighty, if not proud and self-conceited, by occasion of that
liberty of spirit which sometimes they have in prayer: for the redress and
prevention whereof, he shuts them up, and keeps them short, that if they
have any liberty that way, it shall be only as they stand in great need of it:
It is probable it might be Hemans ease, who being a man of rarest abilities,
(as appears by 1 Kings 4. 31.) he might happily have run more riot, if not
restrained and kept short, and under. Psalm. 88. 8. God will by such restraints
warn them from their own gift of prayer, that they may not rest in it, or trust
to it, and he will make them know whence is all their freedom in prayer, and
prise it more, when they shall again be enlarged, and cause them the rather to
see how God owneth them thereby, and so put them upon a freer owning of him, by
occasion of his loosing even these spirit bonds. Truly Lord I am thy servant,
thou have loosed my bonds. Psalm. 116. 16. In a word, the Lord will by such
straitnings have them know their dependency, as upon him, so in part likewise
upon their fellow brethren and sisters, and to see a need of the help of their
praying abilities, as Cant. 5. 8. Now if there be ever brother or sister (as
there are ever some) at liberty, when some others of their brethren are
confined, and under some restraint, their liberty yet is welcome news, and
puts some life into these poor prisoners at the grates, and now must they
be speedily called and spoken with to remember their poor brethren, and to take
the next opportunity to bespeak their liberty, and to get a grant from God for
their speedy release; Like Absolon, when not suffered to come at Court,
earnestly sending to Joab, a Courtier, and one that had the liberty of the
presence chamber, to speak to the King for him, that he may have free access
to him as formerly, 2 Samuel 14. end.

2. Satan, he sometimes surprizeth the 2 Satan:
Saints, they are in his hands, he has them, Luke 22. 31. and then you see in
the instance of those Disciples, that they are so heart-bound this way, that
they could not watch or pray, no not for the least space of time; no, nor when
in the most danger, Matthew. 26. 40, 41. Yea albeit there were some stirrings in
their spiritual part to the contrary, fain they would have prayed, but could
not, their spirit was willing: the Lord gave leave to Satan to hamper them a
little, and to correct their former prefidence, pride, and carnalnesse, Luke
22. 24. Matthew. 26. 8, 9, 10, 35. Sometimes the Saints are Just Captives under
the hands of their spiritual enemy, Esaias 49. 24. Sometimes the devil lays a
snare for them, and so they are entangled, and straightened thereby, namely by
raising carnal fears, or cares in them, or by increasing or strengthening them
being raised, 1 Timothy 6. 9. Prove. 29. 25. or, he does peradventure hurry them
into some slowes of temptation, in which they sink and stick fast, and cannot
scarce speak or stir. Psalm. 69. 2, 3. The Psalmist was so hampered and bemudded
through temptation, that he had no list to cry or pray, I sink in the mire, I
am weary of my crying.

3. Our selves: and so our straitning in 3 Our selves,
prayer is caused

1. From some lust or sin, unto which by some lust.
our hearts are let out; some deceit of sin causes such benumming and
stupifying of the sinews and spirits of the soul of a Christian, that he
cannot bestir himself in any such holy service as prayer is. Heb. 3. 13. Lest
any be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. And look as it is said of the
wicked, that he is bound by the cords of his own sin, Prove. 5. 21. so is it
true in part in the Saints themselves: and as it was with Simon Magus, he being
under the bond of iniquity, under the binding power of covetousness, and
pride, he could not pray (for his heart) himself, but beggeth Peter's prayers,
Acts 8. 23, 24. So is the same in part verified, in respect of some degree of
straitnings, occasioned from like sins in them, albeit not in like power: such
sins will bind, both by their hardening power, as before was said, and by
their terrifying perplexities, which they may occasion in the soul; for as
legal terrors in the strength of them, are imbondaging and binding to the
spirits of men under the power of them: hence that of the spirit of bondage to
fear, Romans 8. 25. So any other fears occasioned by sin, which are not so
properly legal, yet they are in this sense binding to the Saints ofttimes.
Hence Asaph is so troubled with perplexing fears, in the sight and sense of
his sin, that he cannot speak to God, namely with that freedom and liberty
of spirit and speech which formerly he did, Psalm. 77. 4.

2. From some carnal distempered griefs which do contract our spirits (as
spiritual) as griefs do the natural spirits, as we are naturally such; in
sufferings, we cannot utter our minds, Romans 8. 18, 26. When a discouraging
sinking fainting frame of spirit seizes on us, it is with us as it was with
Daniel, we are not able to speak to the Lord, Dan. 10. 16, 17, 19. the
Disciples under that frame could not pray, although enjoined by Christ, Luke
22. 40, 45. Aaron could neither speak, nor do ought before God that day, when
too much oppressed with grief about his sons death, Levit. 20. 19.

3 From our straitning of God, and of his Saints or servants. When we straiten
3 Straitning of God, or of his Saints and servants.
the spirits motion in meditation, or otherwise, then cannot we hold on either
in praying to God, or praising of him; they cannot pray indefinitely, or in
every thing give thanks, which quench the spirit. Hence when the Apostle
exhorts to these, he dehorteth from this, (1 These. 5. 17, 18.) as a bar
thereto; when the spirit is pent up in us, then does he leave us. He is a free
spirit and will be at liberty where he dwells and abides; and when we allow
not room to him, he will be gone, and then our spiritual liberty goes away
with him: or if we are straightened toward Gods poor afflicted Saints, truly God
will leave us to straitnings in prayer. Hence if those the Prophet spoke to,
will enlarge their bowels to the poor* draw out their souls to the needy, he
promises in the name of the Lord, that their spirits shall be free, and ready
to pray, and that the Lord will be as free, and as ready to answer, Isai. 58.
9, 10. else if otherwise with them, no wonder that they set times apart to
fast, but are not enabled to pray sutably. ver. 3. They were like tonguelesse
bulrushes in comparison of true Suppliants, they could bow down the head, but
not sincerely open the mouth in prayer to the Lord, verse 5.

4 From distrust and strength of unbelief, 4 Distrust.
an unbelieving Zachariah shall be dumb. Luke 1. 22, 20. Men under the power
of unbelief are wholly shut up, Romans 11. 32. he has shut them up in
unbelief; so is it partly manifest in this business of prayer. None are so
free to power out their hearts upon all occasions in prayer, as they that trust
in God. Psalm. 62. 8. Trust in the Lord at all times, and power your hearts to
him; when faith is not stirring in the soul to take hold of God, a praying
spirit is not stirring to call upon God. Isai. 64. 7. When a professed people
of God through distrust secretly think that Gods hand is shortened, it is no
wonder then, that even God by his spirits motions does call on them, and invite
them to prayer, or the like, that they have no list to that, nor are they free
to make a suitable answer therein unto the spirit in their prayers: whence that
complaint and expostulation of God, Isai 50. 2. Wherefore when I called, was
there none that answered? Distrust does limit, confine, and straiten the power,
mercy and truth of God, the merit and mediaion of Christ, the latitude and
virtue of the covenant of grace, which should be the foundation of the souls
enlargement in prayer. Psalm. 78. 41. they limited the holy one of Israel. It is
by faith only that we comprehend those dimensions in the Lords love, etc. Ephesians.
13. 18, 19. without which the soul cannot see or conceive any such height, or
length, or breadth, or depth, and know the love of Christ, as passing
knowledge. That he may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye may comprehend
with all Saints what is the height, and length, and breadth, and depth, and
know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.

5 From an unsettled and unstable frame 5 An unsettled and unsuitable spirit.
of spirit, whether in respect of the practice of the duty, or in respect of
the place of our abode. Proverb. 17. 24. When a man is (as it were) upon
journeying still, his prayers are suitable to those travelers, whose spirits
use not to be enlarged in prayer, through the many occasional hurries of their
spirits.

6 From resting in former inlargements, 6 Resting in former inlargements.
or present preparations to prayer, this stops the flowing and spreading of
holy desires to grace, yea, it banketh out the continued course of the spirits
influences.

7 From carelessness and improvidence, 7 Carelessness and improvidence.
either in putting our selves upon straits of time, and so the duty is
performed in a hurry; and no wonder the spirit in such a case, as pent up; from
so specious a pretense at first, There is not now time, therefore what need
inlargements? Brevity is more seasonable; and so by frequent inuring our selves
to be thus straightened outwardly for a time, our spirits by little and little are
conformable thereunto: or in heedlesse admiring other vain and impertinent
thoughts which take up room in the soul, that they crowd better thoughts into
corners.

8 From curious puzling our selves about 8 Curiosity.
comprehending and conceiving of God, without reference to the present matter
in mention in prayer. In this work, after the soul has in vain toyled it
self, and made nothing of it, it gathers to it self discouragement, and has
no list to speak any more in so Athiestical a sort as at such a time it will be
apt to conclude: whereby it comes to pass that the wheels of the soul wanting
the oil of joy and delight, they stick and cannot be readily turned about.
Such straining of our strings too high, does but occasion some cracking in
them, and thereby our music is marred for that time; when our spirits are once
nonplust, (as they will soon be in such transcendent mental discourses of a
subject past their comprehension or inquisition) they then blush, and the shame
thereof puts them to silence, like some petitioner to a King, so taken up in
speaking to him with many circumlocutions touching his excellency, majesty,
greatness and glory etc. that he has forgot what he came about, and is not
able to recover expressions of his request: so is it here.

The second thing propounded now comes Helps against straitnings in prayer.
to consideration, namely, the means of cure of such straitnings in prayer, and
they are these:

1 Be we sensibly apprehensive of the sad and evil plight of a spirit
straightened in prayer. Such prisoners which mourn in the 1 Sensible apprehensions
of the evils of such straitnings.
sense of their thraldom, and of their pent and confined condition, are in the
ready way to liberty in all the ways of God, and so in this of prayer. Is. 61.
1. A broken heart will break this deep silence: and to help our apprehensions
herein, consider but how sad it is to be tongue-tyed otherwise, Mark 7, 32, 34.
The Lord Christ sighs over it, and you see with what difficulty it is cured,
ibid. Such are usually as deafish in hearing the word as they are spiritually
tongu-tyed, they are straightened in hearing as well as praying dispositions: the
Saints are never more enlarged in praying, then when their spirits are much
straightened, quickened, and enlarged Evils of such straitnings.
in hearing; and so on the contrary, men that have ears but hear not, have not
spiritual use of their ears: they have mouths and speak not, they have not the
fruitful use of their mouths in prayer; yea, such a dumb distemper in prayer,
is attended with spiritual lamenesse, and halting in the ways of God; in
walking wherein they make little progress. Hence is it that the Prophet
prophesies of spiritual dumbness and lamenesse to be cured at once, Isai. 35.

6. How miserable and uncomfortable is the case of a man otherwise dumb, every
one will easily conceive; and truly this spiritual tongue-tyed condition far
exceeds the misery of that, as might be easily demonstrated. When a man which
has spoken, is taken speechless, how sad is it accounted in all that behold
it, or hear of it? Alas says one* heard you not of such a sad thing befallen
such a one? he has lost his speech: if he could but express his mind, it
would never grieve his friends so much; but alas, he is suddenly taken
speechless; so might much more be said of such a Christian. Hence a
speechless condition is inflicted upon the unprepared guest, as a sad Omen and
forerunner of his after doom. Matthew. 22. 12. It was the next and first effect
of divine wrath upon such professors, and it is well if it be not the case of
many that hear me this day. Ah, how sad is it to hear ones tongue cut out? (as
I may say:) nay, suppose it be but gagged by the enemies of our souls, like
notorious thieves; first, robbing us of the treasure of our peace, and leaving
us Conscience wounded, and then gagging of us, lest by our outcries unto
heaven they should soon be pursued and attached, and executed. O the weight
such poor souls feel! but know not how to remove the same! they would feign
cry, as men oppressed in their sleep, and tell how sad it is with them, but
they cannot. What, to be thrown into a dungeon and to be in a manner forbidden
all means to send to, or speak with, either our heavenly father, or our elder
brother, and chief tried friend Jesus Christ! How sad is this? What, not to be
so much as at prison liberty, even to beg out of the very grate? This is most
sad: sure we are in for some great matter of fact, else we should not be
left under such straits. Begging is but a poor trade, you will say; yea, but
whilst we are at liberty to beg for our souls livelihood, it is comfortable,
it is hopeful; but when even that poor trade fails us, verily all will yield
that this case is much to be lamented. O how must such needs wast and pine
away, like that dumb person mentioned in the Gospel? Mark 9. 17, 18. How will
such run upon desperate adventures, like him that sometimes casts himself
into the water, sometimes into the fire, and what more contrary one unto the
other? Yet verily, if not upheld, thus will these do in that want of this free
spirit: a free spirit it is an upholding spirit from all such distempers. How
unthankfully do such walk, if their mouths be not opened? God has little
praise from them. Open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
Psalm. 51. 15. Sad are their cases all the while, all these sweets are in their
sense, at least in their experience restrained from them, whilst their hearts
are hardened, congealed, (as it were) shut up, fast closed. Isa. 63. 15, 17. The
Church which complains of her heart as hardened, complains likewise of Gods
mercies as restrained from her: this black of a straightened spirit will appear
the more, by comparing of it with the white of a free spirit, which is free in
prayer, and other holy Duties. What David said of his case is true in this,
that it argues that the Lord delights in us when he delivers us ever and
anon from this straightened condition, and sets us at a holy liberty in our
spirits, the Lord delights in such of his people, whom he admits and
inableth to be so free in opening their minds and heart unto him; and as David
says, Psalm 18. 32, 33. God girdeth me with strength, and makes my way
perfect, makes my feet like Hinds feet; so may we apply the same to this case,
that verily the Lord makes our way perfect when there are no more such
blunders therein, and he communicates special strength to us, when we can more
freely without such stops, lets and abruptions, and restings, keep on in this
part of our Christian course and race; yea, and it is an Argument, that we
shall by him be enabled to do great things when he thus enlarges our steps;
ibid. v 35, 36, 37. He sets me on High places, and thou have enlarged my
steps, etc. And that the Lord has known our souls in adversity, he has owned
us, and so also will when in this wise also he sets our feet in a large room
Psalm 3 1. 7 8. Thou have known my soul in adversity; thou have set my feet in
a large room. I have urged this the more to be so apprehensive of the evil of
this imprisoning of our spirits in prayer, if ever we mean to get at liberty,
because there are a sort of Spiritual Prisoners, whose hearts and spirits are
shut up in prayer, and other holy Ordinances, and yet they lay it not to heart;
or when they perceive and feel themselves to begin a little to be restrained,
they are but slightly affected with it; they think all is not well with them
indeed, or so well as formerly, and wonder what is the matter that they are not
so free and so much carried out in prayer as heretofore, but it may be this is
but nine days wonder to them, and so by degrees their spirits are still more
and more straightened, and then they begin to have more serious troubles and fears
about the same, what the issue thereof may prove; and sometimes their fears are
more desperate, lest the Lord has thus laid them up, as intending ere long to
proceed against them in a way of wrath and justice, and then they begin to
bestir themselves and make out for help. But if this straitning continue long
with them, then happily, as it is with prisoners, which although at their first
coming into prison, it seemed somewhat strange and sad to them, which but then
walked at liberty, to be thus cooped up, and they many times sadly bemoan their
case; yet having been long in prison, then they begin to grow more resolute and
desperate, and are less solicitous of using means to get out. So is it here
with many Christians; at first they are much troubled at their straitnings in
Prayer, but when they have been a long time shut up in their spirits, truly
then they are apt to grow more desperate, and secretly to think and conjecture,
that there is little hope now, that they should recover their former freedom of
spirit: they have used such and such means, but all in vain, they seem but to
strive against the stream in wrestling in their poor measure with God and
themselves for their liberty, and therefore they were as good even to be
content and quiet, and so suffer their sins like Dallilahs to lull them asleep,
and to bind them in such sort, that their strength departs from them, and
they are made a miserable prey and reproach unto the enemies of their peace. So
much of this first Means of cure.

2 Plead it with God, that his Promise 2. Plead Gods Promise to enlarge us.
and Covenant is to enlarge us. Jer. 31. 9. If he will lead us with
Supplications, then with multiplied enlarged expressions of our hearts in
Prayer; if with weepings too, then with enlarged affection also. For what God
promised to them of old, he is the same to make it good to us, as need
requires: I will (says God) lead them with weeping and supplications in a
strait way wherein they shall not stumble. Yea, set we our faith on work;
enforce such suitable Promises made to persons even in their sad plight, upon
our own hearts: let them shamefully give God the lie, If they do, if they
dare to deny to expect freedom by virtue of the same. Since the Lord Jesus is
anointed, appointed, and fitted of God for this very purpose, to speak, and
that effectuallly, liberty to the Captives indefinitely; surely then to such
poor souls as are spirit and heart-bound, groaning under, and mourning over the
same as their extreme misery, Isai. 61. 1. God is verily faithful in his
promise, to make the dumb to sing and speak forth his praise for Gods opening
their mouths, loosening their tongues in his Service, Isai. 35. 6.

Yea, but will some poor soul say; I have given just cause of this my
Imprisonment, I am in for debt and delinquencies, I am justly inhibited and
restrained my former freedom of spirit, and therefore what have I to plead?

Answ. We will grant all this, and if thou have nothing to plead, then cry,
Guilty, and confess all is just, and put thy self upon the King and Judges
mercy; yet withal plead the benefit of the Kings pardon, and of his Royal
Clemency, engaged in the word of a King for the deliverance of just Captives,
Isai. 49. 24, 25. This Promise being as well verified in the delivery of
imprisoned and captivated spirits, as in that of Babels Captives of old, which
were justly delivered for their sins. Imitate David herein, whose case was a
like case; after his grievous fall he felt himself in the net, his spirit
strangely hampered, entangled, and bound up; yet he purposes that he would
constantly wait and expect, and look for his liberty again, Psalm. 25. 11. My
eyes are even unto the Lord, he shall pluck my feet out of the net. So do you;
and albeit while you plead and urge your case before the Lord, and press the
same upon your own spirit, yet you seem to your self but hard and slight; as
the Church whilst and when pleading strongly, yet cries out of her hardness
of heart, Isai. 63. 15, 16, 17. Why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear?
etc. yet cease not to do it still; and when at any time you do get hold of any
word of Grace, and grant of your liberty from the Lord, hold it fast, and be
not beaten out of the same by any cavils of the enemies of your peace. If when
we go on in this, or any other way of God, we would not have our steps any more
straightened, take fast hold of any item of Gods mind, of Grace; and if we once
get such a gracious Instruction and Information of Gods love in his Promise,
set home by his spirit, then keep it, for the very life and livelihood of our
souls depends thereon. Prove. 4. 12, 13. When thou go, thy steps shall not be
straightened: Take hold of instruction, let her not go, keep her as thy life.

3 Improve we the Offices of Christ 3. Improve the Offices of Christ for this
end.
for this end; for (as was but now hinted) the Lord Christ was anointed and
designed to this work of procuring prisoners liberties: he is given of the
Father for that end, Isai. 42. 6, 7. And if to free Spiritual prisoners at
their first conversion; when they are under such strong iron bolts and gyves,
and yet he does it; What can he, what will he not do for such as he can once so
set at liberty? but since that time they are happily held under some smaller
cords for a time; and be it that we are justly under such a spiritual restraint
for our Covenant breaches, etc. (as was before mentioned from Isai. 49. 24,
25.) yet inasmuch as the Lord Jesus is given to be a Deliverer of all spiritual
prisoners, by being given to become their Covenant: Isai. 42. 6, 7. and 49 8,
9. Therefore the Lord supposes, that such a let shall not hinder the free
passage of his promised grace to such, I will give thee for a Covenant to bring
the Prisoners from the Prison. The Lord Jesus he even begged this Office, that
he might have the honor of this gracious work of delivering the poor darkened,
straightened spirits. Hence Isai. 49 8. The blessed Father is brought in as
speaking to the blessed Son, saying, I have heard thee, etc. and I will give
thee for a Covenant, etc. (ver. 9.) that thou may say to the Prisoners, Go
forth; and to them that are in darkness, Show your selves; and when he mentions
his saying so, he means his operative word of command of their liberty, who
are ashamed to show their heads in respect of the sense of their own misdoings.

Improve the Priestly Office of Christ. Improve his Priestly Office
and the Priestly Merit and Mediation, and Intercession of the Lord Jesus for
this end; for so in a special manner is he given as a Covenant for this
purpose, Isai. 42 6, 7. He is our Surety, and such a Bail as the blessed
Father will not refuse. His suffering, as one dumb before the Shearer, Isai.
53. 7. and as one from whom God withdrew for a time, Matthew. 27. 46. has
merited and purchased our liberty to approach, and freely to pour out our souls
before the Throne of Grace, Heb. 10. 19, 20. Ephesians. 3. 11. He was forsaken for
a time, that we might not for ever be forsaken. By the Blood of his Covenant it
comes to pass that the Lord delivers his Prisoners, not only from a
Babylonish, but from all other imprisoned conditions of soul or body, Zech. 9.
11. therefore let all the poor Prisoners of God, which are Prisoners of Hope,
turn hither as to their strong Hold, v. 12. So did Hezekiah when not able to
speak out, or pour out his heart distinctly and freely before the Lord, but in
an abrupt manner; and when held under the pressures of his heart, he cries out
for the benefit of this his Surety, I am oppressed, O Lord, undertake for me,
Isa. 38. 14. Improve we the Intercession of Christ for this likewise; whereby
the Lord Christ is fully able to deliver and rescue us from this or any other
bondage: He is able to save them to the utmost that come unto God by him,
forasmuch as he ever lives to make Intercession for them, Heb. 7. 25.

Improve his Prophetical Office also for this purpose, Inasmuch as the blessed
Father Hie Prophetical, and
that he might bring about liberty for all spiritual prisoners, he has given
him to be a light to them, Isai. 42 6, 7. and experience proves it, that no
sooner does the Lord become light to poor deserted, tempted ones, but they
regain liberty of spirit likewise; it is the Son that makes any free indeed,
but it is by discovering some special part of that mind, and Covenant, and
Promise of God; they come to know more of his Truth, and that truth so made
known to their souls, that does set them free in this kind as well as
otherwise, Ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free, Joh. 8.
32. They are the Scruples, and Objections, and mists which are in the mind,
which keep the spirit so strait laced; and so long as that darkness remains,
that prison state of soul remains too. Isai. 42. 7. and them that sit in
darkness out of the prison, when they are cleared up, then those binding fears
and griefs of distrust vanish, and the Spirit is sweetly at liberty again, to
pray more freely, or to do any other spiritual service.

In a word, Improve we the Kingly Office His Kingly Office.
of the Lord Christ for the same purpose. The Lord Christ is a true Solomon,
which opens his mouth for the dumb, Prove. 31. 8. That spiritual bondage of
the poor soul, it has been occasioned either through some violence of
temptation and corruption, or through some wily deceit of their own hearts,
drawing them to give at first but a little way to slightness and remisness in
prayer, or to some other distemper; and then to suffer our selves to go on a
little in some such unsafe way, until we have been so entangled in the snare of
slightness, that we know not how to get into a serious and fervent frame; yea,
but the Lord Christ as the Antitype of Solomon, he is promised, that he shall
redeem his from deceit and violence, Psa. 72. 14. And as the Antitype of
Hezekiah under his Government, the tongue of his stammering subjects, such as
are spiritually tongue tied, etc. yet their tongue shall be free and ready to
speak plainly of God or to him, Isai. 32. 4. The tongue of the stammerers
shall be able to speak plainly.

4. Improve others liberties of the Throne 4. Improve others liberty of Gods
Throne.
of Grace. The Lord ever uses to keep some in his Churches at liberty for this
very end; sometimes it is the turn of such his subjects and favorites, and
household servants to have the liberty of the Kings Court and Presence Chamber;
sometimes again some others are thereto admitted; now seek we them out,
inquire out such Princely spirits, who may open their mouths for you which are
dumb persons, Prove. 31. 8. Look as imprisoned Joseph made use of the Butlers
liberty to be a mean of his, Genesis 40. So do we in this case: he that had such
an impediment in his speech, he had got others to speak for him, Mark 7. 32,
33. And those dumb ones which had friends to bring them before Christ, and to
cast them down before him, they got cure, and were enabled by Christ thereupon
to speak, Matthew. 15. 30, 31 So will it be here in like case.

5. Be we sincere and cordial with God in 5. Be we sincere in prayer.
our approaches to him: consciousness thereunto, and conscience thereof greatly
furthereth our liberty of spirit. David who made conscience to seek Gods
Statutes, and was conscious to himself that he did what he did from obedience
and respect unto the words and commands of God, he says, that therefore he
will walk at liberty, Psa. 119. 45. When a Christian is conscious to himself
of any witting carelessness in the service of God, or any secret Treachery and
falseness of heart in his grounds or aims therein, this appaleth him; and so
straitneth him.

6. Improve we heedfully the Word 6. Improve the Word preached or read.
preached and read. When we continue in Christ's word, attending to it, and on
it, then we come to know the Truth, and to be set free, Joh. 8. 31, 32. We gain
often times many precious loosenings of our spirits in the attentive use of the
Word preached, Mat. 16 19. Our spirits and consciences so freed on earth are
the freer in heaven too, in respect of their free approaches thither, and
suitable entertainments thence.

7. Lastly, Repair and cherish we our Joy 7. Cherish holy joy.
in God, and Christ, and his Covenant; and our hearts being thereby enlarged,
will be freer to run in this, or any other way of Gods Commandments, Psalm 119.
32. I will run the ways of thy Commandments when thou have enlarged my heart.

The third thing propounded comes Differences betwixt others straitnings and
that of the Saints; which
now to be answered; namely, How this straitning in prayer, incident to the
Saints, may be discerned from that judiciary speechlesness mentioned, Mat. 22.
12. He became speechless. And from that sad doom of hypocrites, whose gifts of
prayer, and the like, come to be so miserably diminished, and so far to decay,
that they cannot pray in any sort as formerly, their gift is in a manner taken
from them, Mat. 13. 12. From him shall be taken away even that which he has.
To which I answer.

1. That the straitness incident to the Saints it is not perpetual; albeit they
are kept a 1. Is not perpetual.
while under some restraint, yet they are many times set at liberty again,
Isai. 61. 1. As David and others have been, and are. True it is, that some of
the people of God may lie longer by it then others, and God may keep their feet
in the stocks (as Jobs phrase is, Job 13.) longer then others, for wise and
holy ends; some again are shut up less while, yet both the one and the other
are enlarged at length. They for a time be bound asn iearth, so in heaven, like
Excommunicants; but yet as that bound incestuous Corinthian, was again loosed,
2 Cor. 2 so is it with these. But it is otherwise with Reprobates and
Hypocrites when Judiciary straitning seiseth upon them. These chains of theirs
are chains of darkness, and in them are kept too, without bail or mainprise;
Their straitning grows fast upon them, until that after a while both their
words, and will, and spirit, and all fail them in prayer.

2. That is not total and universal as is 2 It is not total
the other. That speechlesness in hypocrites is accompanied with binding hand
and foot, Matthew. 22. 12, 13. In all Ordinances as well as prayer, their spirits
are shut up, and to no service of God are they free; but the Saints when
straightened in prayer, yet oftentimes meet with some enlargement of heart in
meditation, as the Church which found not God in public or private Ordinances.
Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. yet in reflecting Meditation upon what the Watchmen the
Ministers spoke, therein she found Christ. Sometimes in conference with other
Christians whilst sadly complaining of their deserted estate, even therein they
meet with Christ.

3 The occasion of that in the Saints, 3. Has not the like occasions; as,
Reigning unbelief.
may be some particular defeat in them, or some particular distemper on their
part. But the cause of this in the other is a total want of true Faith and
Repentance; they have not that wedding garment, Matthew. 22. 11, 12. and hence
become speechless, when called to an account for it. Or Unprofitableness.
some universal barrenness and unprofitablenesse, as in the slothful servant
that does not at all, or to any purpose improve his Talent, and therefore it is
taken from him, Matthew. 25. 18, 28. and chap. 13. 12. But from him that has not
shall be taken away that which he has. Or it is occasioned by some
Implacableness
high-handed contempt of reconciliation to some of Gods people whom they have
injured, who thereupon commit their cause to God as the Judge of all; and God
thereupon as a Judge, delivers them over to perpetual imprisonment, as Matthew.
5. 24, 25, 26. Or else it is occasioned from some gross, contemptuous,
undervaluing, and unworthy Hard thoughts of God.
apprehensions of God; as when the Hypocrite conceives God to be a most hard
and unmerciful Master. Matthew. 25. 24, 25, 28. Or else a man is happily of an
unmerciful and implacable spirit toward others, and therefore God justly
delivers him to a perpetual imprisoned condition, even in this life in respect
of his Spirit, like to that Matthew. 18. 30, 34. Or it may be such a one Resting
in gifts received.
does wilfully rest in some sprinklings of gifts of grace received, without due
care of continual supply for the future as well as for the present. They care
not for a heart as well as a brain Treasury, and so like foolish virgins come
at length to be fatally scanted of oil. Matthew. 25. 3, 4, 8. When there is no
care of multiplying, and adding to grace received, they come at length to lose
their light, and vigor of gifts, as 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. 8. but he that lacks
these things (or holy additionals mentioned) is blind, or cannot see a far
off, etc.

4. The ministry of Gods servants uses 4 Is not usually by the ministry of the
word.
not to bind, but rather to loose those; ever and anon they meet with some word
of Grace that inlargeth their heart to Godward, and in his ways. Christ by his
ministers says to such sometimes, as Isai. 49. 8, 9. Go forth, be not ashamed
to show your faces before the Lord. The Gospel preached by the spirit of Christ
effectually proclaims their liberty. Isai. 61. 1. Joh. 8. 31. But these are
bound by the servants of God which were sent out to loose others, Matthew. 22.
10, 13. some Prophet is made an instrument as to shut their eyes, and ears, so
their hearts and mouths: Isai. 6. 10. Some Peter, some minister in his
preaching binds them, Matthew. 16. 19.

5. The former in their straitnings are very sensible of the burden and evil
thereof, 5 Is not accompanied with senslesnesse. of it.
although not able to get at liberty. Such prisoners are broken hearted and do
mourn, Isai. 61. 1, 2. when they cannot utter their minds in prayer, they can
sigh, Romans 8. ^6. when their mouths are not open to those free will offering^
of prayer and praise mentioned Psalm. 119. 108. Yet they offer that sacrifice of
a broken heart, Psalm. 51 15. compared with verse 11. yea, it makes them meek
or submissive to any course that God would take with them. Isai. 6. 1, 2. And
they make it the maine of their begging then (then in a manner) that they might
be enlarged, and free to speak to God, especially to his prais in their
freedom. Open thou my mouth, etc. Psalm. 51. 15. and 142. 7 But the other are in
a manner wholly sottish and senseless, and speechless, Mat. 22. 12. and
therefore doomed to a place and state of weeping afterward. verse 13.

6. Those are prisoners of hope, and 6 Is not final.
now and then suffered to walk abroad, yea, to come into their Lords gracious
presence. Zech. 9. 12. But these are for ever thence. forward excluded Gods
gracious presence. They are taken away, cast out. Mat. 22. 13. Heb. 10. 26 27.
Those have sometimes some crevices and glimpses of light, yea, of the light of
Gods countenance, as through the grates at least. Cant. 2. 9* But these are
cast into utter darkness, therein to reside and abide. Matthew 22. 13.

CHAP. VIII. About inlargements in prayer, when saving.
WE are (God willing) to dispatch the handling of some other cases, in carrying
on this weighty duty of prayer.

The eighth case now to be considered of, is touching inlargements in prayer,
how Case. 8. About inlargements in prayer, which are saving: when they are for
the manner,
they are discerned to be from saving and peculiar principles of grace, and
differenced from those which are but from natural, carnal or common causes.

In answer whereunto, we must premise, that persons may be strangely enlarged
in prayer, sometimes from principles that are not saving. The Pharisees made
long prayers. Mat. 13. 14. But from a principle of hypocrisy, ibid. From
carnal and sinful aims. ibid. And for a pretense make long prayers. From
pride, as in those rhetorical ingeminations, Matthew. 6. 7. from error, as
trusting to such inlargements, thinking to be heard for their much speaking.
ib. id And for those in Is. 1 15. they made many prayers, or multiplied
petitions, as the Hebrew phrase imports: some from carnal emulation of some
famous men in the Church will strain this way; some from delusive raptures,
may be wonderfully enlarged in their expressions in prayer, yet none of these
in the right.

Now saving inlargements in prayer may be discerned from those that are common,

1. They are free, not forced or strained, 1 Free.
Cant. 4. 11. As the droppings of the honeycomb, not needing squeezing, or as
the pouring out of water, or oil, which runs down naturally and freely.
Isai. 26. 16. They powered out a prayer to thee. So Psalm. 102. the Title. Not
but that such inlargements do ofttimes issue from foregoing struglings and
conflictings with much opposition, and many intervening lets, yea, and are not
also without sundry present difficulties; yet the spirit is free at such times,
and as far as it is spiritual it is delightfully drawn forth therein.

2. They are sweet, solid, sappy, lively, 2 Lively.
strengthening inlargements, as honey or milk, Cant. 4. 11. and that not only to
us, but to others that join with us. The Churches lips when exercised in
prayer, as well as preaching* run down like the best wine, causing the lips of
those that are asleep to speak.

3. They are seasonable inlargements. 2 Seasonable.
As when God in his providence calls to them in special sort, whether in way
of confession of sins, or of Gods mercy; or in a way of petition for mercies,
for our selves or others. Thus Solomon, Ezra, Daniel and Christ were then in
special wise enlarged. These fruits of the lips of the Saints are brought forth
in season. Psalm. 1. 3.

4. They are most what secret closet-inlargements. 4 Secret.
There David prays and cries aloud; there do they power out largely their
secret whispers. Isai. 26. 16. in the Hebrew, the same word with 2 Samuel 12. 19.
as has been formerly showed. Zech. 12. 10, 12, 13.

5. They are contrite melting inlargements. Zech. 12. 10. Not some few drops 5
Contrite.
of either, but abundance of such a spirits influences, it is powered out; they
are led as with supplications, so with weepings adjoined to their enlarged
prayers; such were those of Christ, his strong cries were with tears likewise.
Heb. 5. 7. His lips in prayer dropped sweet smelling myrrh, betokening some
holy bitterness or brokennesse.

6. They are obediential inlargements. 6 Obediential.
David as he offers a multiplied free will offering, Accept the free will
offering of my mouth, so he desired to be taught his further duty, and teach me
thy judgments Psalm. 119. 108. As he opens his mouth to express his enlarged
desires largely, so is it out of obediential longings to do the will of God,
ver. 131. I opened my mouth and panted, for I longed for thy commandments.

Lastly, they are thankful inlargements. 7 Thankful.
Psalm. 51. 15. Open thou my lips that my mouth may show forth thy praise: if
his mouth be opened, it will appear in his praises: and Psalm. 71. 8. the
Psalmist's mouth is filled with praise, his praise is a fruit and concomitant
of the delivery of his imprisoned spirit. Psalm. 142. 7.

2. By the matter of them. 1. The most 2 By the matter. 1 Respecting our sins.
acceptable inlargements being mostly and best seen in sensible aggravations of
our own wretchedness, as in Ezra and Daniels examples, Ezra 9. Daniel 9. Jer.
3. 21. the choice matter of their supplications and enlarged prayer, is,
touching the perverting of their way, and their forgetting of the Lord, Oh how
long will a contrite Suppliant be here in making sad commentaries upon his own
wretched heart? what large declamations will he make against his own sins?

2. In sensible amplifications of Gods 2 Gods grace.
grace and mercy to us, as in David, of which his Psalms are a plentiful
proof. The love of God makes him eloquent in setting out the beauty and
excellency thereof to the life.

3. In spiritual pleas, especially for spi-spritual 3 Spiritual mercies.
mercies, of which the prayers of David and of other Gods servants are full.

4 In the cases of afflicted, tempted ones, especially of afflicted Churches.
Oh! 4 The afflicted or tempted ones cases.
how large and unwearied is a gracious Nehemiah in such a case! he will spend
days in dilating upon so sad a theme in the ears of the Lord. Nehem. 1. 3, 4.
The substance of the largest prayer that is recorded to be made by Solomon,
concerns most what the cases of afflicted ones in some kind or other. 1 Kings
from the 31. verse to 54.

3. By the occasional rise of them. 3 For the occasion of them.
The enlargement of the Saints in prayer being occasioned.

1 By afflictions. Afflicted Hannah 1 Afflictions,
was large and long in prayer, insomuch that Eli observing her moving her lips
so long, says, how long will thou be drunken? 1 Sa. 1. 14, 15. When David's
spirit is so hard bestead, then does he power out a complaint. Psalm. 142. 2, 3.
And when so persecuted and reproached, then is employed in little else but
praying. Ps. 119. 4. And this argues that some spiritual principles are
within, that such griefs and ayls enlarge their hearts; which naturally rather
contract the spirits of men, and silence them, as in hypocrites which are then
straightened. Bonds of afflictions are bonds to their spirits, they cry not when
God binds them. Job 36. 13. But afflictions sanctified to the saints, make
them more in prayer. 2 Conquest of temptations.


2. By the conquest of some foregoing sad temptation, or upon the remove of
some sad desertion, and after some foregoing straitnings, and silencings of
them. Then it is not a supplication, but they are supplications. Hence David is
large in supplicating. Psalm. 130. 1, 2, 3, 4. And is bent to spend in a manner
his whole time in prayer, after he had got the start of such trials. Psalm. 116.
1, 2, 3. 10, 11, 12, 13.

3. By the bringing home of some 3 Some promise set home.
word of promise to the heart. When David does pray for a free spirit, and to
have his mouth opened, he prays that he might hear of gladness, have some
quickening, healing promise spoken and manifested to him as the means thereof.
Psalm 51. 8, 12, 15. verses compared.

4 By some special sense of love to the 4 Love to the Lord.
Lord. Hence when the Lord sets forth the lips of his Spouse, so freely
dropping sweet and savoury expressions before him. Cantic. 4. 1. He magnifieth
her love therein, how fair is thy love? love is unsatisfied; it thinks it
has never spoken enough of its mind to the Lord, that it has never talk
enough with him, that it is never near enough to him, that it has never hold
enough of him, that it has never love tokens enough from him, that it has
never sufficiently declaimed against all distancing treacherous distempers and
sins, and that it has never spoken sufficiently in his praises; so that when
it is stirring in the Saints, no wonder if then they are so large, and enlarged
in their prayers.

A fourth way of discovery of such inlargments 4 For the issue of them;
effectual.
to be right, is by the issue of them, being in the Saints a successful
prevailing for conquering graces over their distempers, over their corruptions,
over their temptations of fear, care, grief, distrust, and the like; besides,
the obtaining of quickening, comforting grace, for doing or suffering the will
of God, and depending upon the promises and faithfulness of God in Christ. The
fruit of the Saints opening their mouths in enlarged prayers, is Gods gracious
filling of them with such like grace Psalm. 81. 10. Open thy mouth wide, and I
will fill it. The fruit of Jacobs long continued Supplications, that night the
Angel wrestled with him, you see what it was; his distrust and carnal fears of
Esau were removed, his Faith and Joy are revived, and the like, Genesis 32. 24,
26, 28, 30.

CHAP. IX. About Meltings in Prayer.
A Ninth Case is about Meltings in prayer, How they may be discerned to be
from saving principles, and not from the moving nature of some pathetical
expressions in prayer, or from some common natural passion, or melting
disposition, and aptness of nature to tears.

This case is of weight, and its dangerous being deceived herein, in the
semblance of that which ordinarily fails not of acceptance with God: yea
never, when such meltings in prayer are in truth. God eyed with a gracious
aspect Hezekiahs tears he shed in his prayers, 2 Kings 20. 5. and heard the
voice of David weeping in his prayer. Psalm. 6. 8.

Before we come to give a particular answer to this case, we must premise,

1 That God makes use sometimes of pathetical expressions to break his peoples
hearts, when they are more hard, and stupid, and sleighty. And therefore often
in the Prophets there is much use made thereof for the like purpose. Jeremiahs
lamentations abound therewith: yea, the Lord makes use of natural temper and
disposition this way, sanctifying a natural, soft, tender, melting disposition,
as well as any other. 2 Corinthians 5. 17. All things become new.

2 That yet it is very possible, that men may be melted in prayer from such
common cause; some from mere natural tempers, some from carnal grief, as those
grieved women whose husbands abusing of them by marrying others in their life
time, they made them cover the Altar of God with tears. Mal. 2. 13. Some from
the affecting and moving nature of the notions in prayer, (especially praying
with others) as notions pleasing a curious fancy, or illuminating their minds
in material passages, or setting forth to the life some sad afflicting matter,
etc. Many of those which with the rest of the Congregation at Mizpeh wept
abundantly at the religious exercises there, they even drew water, the text
says, 1 Samuel 7. 5, 6. Verily, in many, this was from such like common
principles, albeit in others it were from holy and spiritual causes; yea, some
may from some sudden extatical joys conceived, upon some mistaken
apprehensions and feelings in prayer, as Benjamin wept for joy. Genesis 45. 14.
(which yet had a real ground in him,) so these from mistaken grounds of joy.

But that we may come to some answer When meltings ^^ prayer are not merely
from force of natural temper, or from pa^h^ticalnesse of expressions. 1 When
more melted, yet fewer of pathetical expressions used.
to he case.

1 When more expressions, and more pathetical are used by our selves or others
in prayer, yet not like melting attending; and when at other times there are
fewer such like expressions, yet there are more meltings accompanying the same:
yea, when expressions which are more obvious, and not so pathetical, yet melt us:
then surely does it evidence that your meltings are not wrung from us by any
force of expression, but from some inward better principle. The Father of the
possessed child in his request unto Christ for its cure, had many more moving
expressions Mark 9. 21. Ofttimes he has cast him into the fire, etc. If thou
can do any thing, have compassion on us. (Besides those, Verse 17 18.) then
he used, verse 24. yet in mentioning of those wherein a Fathers bowels might
have flowed forth into tears, he is not melted. But the in gracious
expressions he used in his prayer to Christ, verse 24. Lord I believe, help
mine unbelief. Therein he breaks forth into tears.

2. When meltings whilst we pray are in 2. When meltings prevent prayer and
expressions.
a manner without expressions; or do at least prevent our expressions in
prayer; such meltings are from more inward principles then moving expressions.
As in the woman which silently begged the clearing of her justification to
them, as appears by our Saviors answer to her silent and secret desires,
Woman, thy sins are forgiven thee. Luke 7. 48, 50. yet v. 38. she is there
weeping behind him, without expressing in words her hearts desire.

David's tears (its likely) first spoke, ere he uttered his heart; and his
tears called out expressions, his expressions did not provoke and urge his
tears. Psalm. 6. 8, 9. Jacob wept and prayed, Hos. 12. 4. he was weeping ripe,
even as he went about to pray; his heart was so full, that it issued out at his
eyes, before his mouth could utter forth his desires and ails.

3. When they are most spiritual things, 3. When the most spiritual
expressions melt us most.
or strains in prayer, which most affect and melt us therein. Here nature is
purblind and deaf, and senseless, as above its element. Or when such passages
be in prayer, wherein nature and self is most vilified, and the Lord and his
grace is most exalted, then we are usually most melted; then fear not any
force of expressions, or strength of a natural melting temper to be chief in
such meltings. Such was Ezra's weeping in his prayer, Ezra 10. 1. And how much
he exalted God, and his rich grace, and abased man and self in his
expressions, the ninth Chapter verse. 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15. will make it appear.

4. When they are no sudden starts of 4. When more tears then words.
meltings, here or there, as some affecting or nature-moving matter is
mentioned: nor are they some light, flitting, vanishing dew, but they are more
continued and abundant; their prayers which melt kindly (albeit they are not
always so spiritual, yet) sometimes are sealed with tears: so that their
prayers at some such times are rather weeping then words. Psalm. 6. 8. Hezekiah
said little, but wept sore, or much, 2 Kings 20. 2, 3 5. Ezra began and ended
meltingly, Ezra 10. 1. and 9. 5. compared.

5. When such meltings are not land-floods, 5. When meltings are more usual,
rare, unusual things (as are all forced things, which are not natural to
regenerate spirits, considered as regenerate) but they are more frequent and
constant, and therefore they are joined in Jer. 3. 21. and 31. 9. weeping and
supplications; as if inseparable in a manner, and led with weeping and
supplications, as in the usual way which the Lord guides them: yea, when such
meltings are opportune and seasonable, holding some gracious proportion to the
occasions which are offered, and which fall into tears and meltings, as in
Ezras more then ordinary weeping, when a more then ordinary cause thereof was
given, Ezra 10. 1. So in Nehemiahs weeping with his prayers sundry days which
he set apart for fasting and prayer for the calamities of the people of God in
his native Country. It is the trade of the Saints, a part of their spiritual
calling and husbandry, to be ever and anon sowing such seed tears. Psalm. 126.
5, 6. They are mourning beggars, Matthew. 5. 3, 4. Blessed are the poor in
spirit: blessed are the mourning.

6. When such meltings are not merely 6. When heart droppings.
rain-dews and distillations, (as I may call them) when they are not mere
notionall fleeting things, but they are heart-drops; the heart is poured forth
in and with them; they proceed from, and are joined with a melting, tender,
contrite heart, as in Josiahs request, which he made and God heard, 2 Kings 22.
19. I have heard thee, says God; yea, but his prayer is not there recorded;
true, but a prayer its likely he made when his heart melted so before God; else
what was it which God heard? or wherein is it said that God heard him? when all
suitable workings in spirit do accompany such meltings in prayer, when there
is strength and savor of spirit suitable to meltings in prayer, then are they
right, as in Christ. Heb. 5. 7. He made supplications, with strong crying and
tears.

7. When they are not unprofitable meltings, 7. when like seed-teares,
fructifying.
but seed-teares, there comes much good fruit after them, as fruitful,
upright, even walkings with God and men: Conscientiousnesse and tenderness of
the least blunders in or at the ways of God, or any path thereof: these are
fruits of Gods covenant of grace; he uses to lead his own in such sort, with
such weepings in their supplications, as that they keep the closer to, and the
more directly and inoffensively in the way that he has appointed. Ierem. 31. I
will lead them with weeping and supplications in a strait way.

Lastly, when they are meltings of faith 8. When meltings of faith and love.
and love: when the Lord Christ would show the rise and root of the woman's
weeping, in presenting her secret desires of his mercy, he instanceth in her
love: She loved much, Luke 7. 48. in her faith, v. 50. Thy faith has saved
thee. Compare that with v. 38. She stood behind him weepping, and washed his
feet with her tears. Thus that poor man, when in a believing frame in his
prayer to Christ, then he cried out with tears, Mark 9. 24. When in prayer the
Saints are apprehensive by faith, that notwithstanding their unworthiness and
rebellions and backslidings, yct the Lord is willing to hear them and accept
of them, or return to them, and the like; then are their hearts full, then what
with grief and shame, in sense of their own vileness, and joy in the
intimations of the favor of God in Christ toward them, they are dissolved
into tears.

CHAP. X. In what way we are to conceive of God in prayer.
A Tenth Case is about the thoughts which we are to have of God, when About
conceiving of God in prayer.
we do pray: it being requisite that such as worship God in prayer, should in
some measure be apprehensive, and able to conceive of God whom they worship,
John 4. 22. We know what we worship.

Now for answer hereunto observe these Rules.

1. Look we do not conceive of God under any shape or resemblance: as God 1.
Think not of him under any likeness or shape.
gave rules of worship to his people of old by voice; but in giving the same he
represented no similitude of himself unto them: so are his people in like
manner to perform obedience to those Commandments of his without framing to
themselves either inwardly or outwardly any similitude of God, Deuteronomy. 4. 12. and
15. v. compared. In seeking the Lord we ought not so much as to think that the
Godhead can be resembled any way to any other thing, Acts 17. 27. 29. verses
compared. This was one main rise of Idolatry in practice, to make a mental
Idol of God; when men would not glorify God, in worshipping of him as such a
one as he made himself known in his very works, even as an Almighty one, but
would strain to fancy things of him beyond his revealed will, to seem to be men
of a deep search and reach, and of profound and exquisite understandings and
capacity: then did they vanish in such imaginations touching the nature of God,
and were more and more dazeled and darkened, and (in the just judgment of God)
given up to mis-shaped apprehensions and idolatrous practices, Romans 11. 21, 22.
All things without God are finite, and too short a portraiture of an infinite
Majesty. In all comparisons there must be some proportion and equality: Now,
unless we could equal God to any thing, how can he be likened to it? Esaias 40.
18, 25.

2. Look that we do not go about to 2. Pry not too far into his Deity.
comprehend in our minds his glorious Essence, prying too far into his Majesty,
and the like: his Godhead is one of the invisible things of God, and must no
further be reached after by our shallow and dark minds, then as shining forth
in the works and word of God, Romans 1. 20. If we go any further, we shall
become vain in our imaginations, verse. 21. Who can by search find out the
Almighty to perfecton? Job 11. 7, 8, 12. we should show our selves in affecting
such wisdom to be but vain men. Ibid. Jacob when he was at prayer, was a
little too busy herein, and too inquisitive after the name or nature of the
Son, or Angel of God; and therefore is rebuked for asking his name: yet his
weakness is passed over, and the Lord blessed him notwithstanding, Genesis 32.
29, 30. But rather in our approaches unto God, conceive we of him in his back
parts, in his glorious Attributes: Conceive of him as one not to be fully
conceived by us, and so pray to him with such apprehensions of him. Moses did
desire in prayer to have God to show him his glory: his invisible being and
Majesty was too much for him to ask, or to have answered: God tells him, he
could not see his glory and live; man's finite underdanding and spirit would be
swallowed up, and confounded therein, Exodus 33. 18, 20. but his goodness, and
name of grace, his back parts are fitter objects for Moses to contemplate upon,
and to behold, verse. 19. 25, compared with Chap. 34. 5, 6: When God came down
to his people that they might worship him, Exodus 11. he came down in a Cloud,
that their prying eyes or spirits might be bounded: the Altar of Incense, where
the Incense of prayer was to be offered, was before the Veil that was by the
Arc of the testimony, before the Mercy seat, Exodus 20. 6. God would have his
servants to behold and mind him in their prayers; but yet his Mercy seat was
covered with Cherubs wings, they might not pry too far: and indeed it is but
an endless work; we may weary our selves in this maze of the divine nature,
but make nothing of our work when we have done. It is a fruitless bootlesse
work, no good comes of it, but amazement and discouragement: we shall but
reflect upon our selves as if we were very Atheists: conceiving and believing
nothing at all of God, when we go about to conceive more of him then is meet.
When at any time the Saints of God, out of a witty kind of reasoning of their
deceitful hearts, persuading that it is meet that we should conceive of God,
to whom we pray, and the like, (which is in a sense true) do lance out in
their slender skiffs or Canows into this vast Ocean, without the Cord and
Compass of the Scriptures: now if any gust of temptation arise (as twenty to
one but it does) how are they amazed and affrighted, and know not where they
are, nor how to get safe ashore again, having forgotten the work they intended
at the first? and commonly the work and business of prayer is for that time
disappointed, and left undone, or as good, being never at such a time performed
to any purpose. Besides, the advantage we give to the enemy of peace and truth
hereby, which is great; and if no worse thing follow, yet we get a check from
God for our labor, as Jacob, Genesis 32. 29. and Manoah, are reproved for asking
after the name of that Angel the Son of God, which was secret, Judge. 13. 17,
18. Why ask thou after my name, since it is secret?

3. Conceive not God absolutely, as out 3. Think of him relatively as such or
such a one to thee in Christ.
of Christ, but as in Christ, and so merciful, gracious, and abundant in
goodness and truth. We must look, as they of old, to the glory of God, in
offering up our spiritual Incense; but as in Christ, considered as Mediator,
who is that Mercy seat; for so the Hebrew Capporeth, translated usually by the
Septuagint, by the word Hilasterion, and approved by the Holy ghost, Heb. 9. 5.
which in Romans 3. 25. is applied to Christ, whom God has set forth to be
Hilasterion, the mercy seat, or merciful Covering, or propitiation for our
sins; or that Capporeth, to which Gods Priests must look when offering their
Incense of prayer, Exodus 30. 6. and 25. 20, 21, 22. compared. We are not taught
in the Lords prayer to look at, or think of God absolutely, but relatively, as
a father; namely, in Christ. Our thoughts of God must be suitable to our
worship of him in prayer; which is a coming to God not immediately, nor
absolutely considered, but in and by Christ. Heb. 7. 25. Which eome to God by
him.

4. Let us not too much beat our thoughts about particular and personal
apprehensions of God, or conclude that we are 4. Go not too far in personal
thoughts of God.
Atheists in defect thereof: but be satisfied in conceiving and believing that
of him, that he is, and that he is a rewarder of such as seek him, Heb. 11. 6.
with such other general apprehensions, which serve to keep the heart humble,
awful and attentive: namely, that he to whom we pray, is such a God, which
sees and knows all our secrets, our thoughts, wants, and sins, and the like:
that he is such an one that is with us wherever we are; and that we are in
him, and live by him; that he observes what, and in what manner we do any
service before him, that he is a very holy God; that he is such a one which
comprehends us, albeit we cannot so fully comprehend him; and that therein
lies our bliss, Psalm. 139. 6. and so throughout the Psalm: and 2 Samuel 7. 20.
and Acts 17. 27, 28, 29. Fix we our minds sometimes upon God under one, and
sometimes under another of such like notions touching him; and let the aw and
impression of God, either as one that is most holy, or that is most wise, or
that is most mighty, carry us as far along as the Lord helps, and then
consider of him under some one or other like notion; and in our prayers carry
that along in our minds as far as we can; and if our spirits wax flat, or
slight notwithstanding, try them with thoughts of God under some other notion,
as before mentioned.

5. Look that we limit not God to our 5. Limit not God to our conceivings.
shallow comprehensions of him; but in all our thoughts of him, conceive of God
as infinitely above all our conceivings: as Agur did, Prove. 30. 1, 2, 3, 4. yet
conceive of him to be one that is ready, yea who is engaged to teach us to
conceive and know him; Heb. 8. 10, 11. and to do for us above what we are able
to ask or think of him, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19, 20.

6. Let us with wisdom proportion out 6. Think of him suitably to our needs of
him.
our conceivings of God, under such a notion of his name and nature revealed in
his word, as is most suitable to that which we are about in prayer. When God
had proclaimed diverse Attributes and Branches of his Name, Moses does not go
about to fill his mouth or his mind with them all at once, but selecteth out of
them all, such a one as is most suitable to the request he has hereupon to
make for himself, and for Israel; which was, that God would pardon their
iniquity, Exodus 24. 8, 9. which was suitable to one of the last mentioned
Branches of the name of his grace, namely, that be was one forgiving iniquity,
transgression, and sin, Verse. 7. and the like course does hetake in that prayer
of his mentioned Numb. 14. 17, 18, 19, 20. We are to glorify God in prayer
thus, according to what we know of him. Romans 1. 21. especially to improve that
of Gods nature, by which he has practically discovered himself to us;
conceive of him as we have found of him by experience, and as we are convinced
he has carried himself toward us: have we found the experience of his
wisdom? pray to him as one infinitely wise: have we tasted of the fruits of
his faithfulness? pray to him as such a one, and that part of his Name wherein
he has last held himself forth unto our hearts and spirits, in a convincing
manner; and with which we are last affected most of all; worship him, and pray
to him under that notion, but especially consider and conceive of him in the
glorious and precious demensions of his love, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. that we may
comprehend with all Saints what is the height, and length, and breadth, and
depth, and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge.

7. Let holy admiration ever and anon 7. Let our thoughts of him issue in holy
admiration.
upshot our conceivings of God, as it did in David, Psalm 139. 1, 2. compared
with v. 7. 17. whether shall I go from thy spirit? or glorious Deity; he
looks at it as wonderfully, and unexpressibly filling all places; and verse
17. he cannot express the thoughts of God toward him. And likewise let
humility and reverence attend the same. Ibid. SO it was in Habbakkuks prayer,
wherein he is carried out to a glorious conceiving of God: Hab. 3. 1, 2, 3. his
heart the while trembling, verse 16. The Incomprehensiblenesse of God, and his
unsearchable excellency, must make men therefore fear him. Job 37. 23, 24. Let
our shallowness in conceiving of God drive us more out of our selves, and
abase us much that we know so little of him, and inflame us with desire after
that time when we shall in a glorious manner conceive of him: we understand but
as Children, but in part, in comparison of that time when we shall know the
Lord as we are known by him, according to the measure of our capacity, 1 Cor.
13. 12.

CHAP. XI. How and in what order we are to direct our prayers to the Persons of
the blessed Trinity.
THe last Case briefly to be spoken unto, is, how, and in what order we are to
divide our prayers to the persons of the blessed Trinity? and whether we may
not single out any one of the persons, to whom we may direct more immediately
such or such a prayer.

This Case has some more difficulty in it then the former, yet I will endeavor
to lay down the Answer thereunto, as briefly as I can in these following
conclusions.

1. That in all parts of Divine worship, and so in this of prayer, the Trinity
in Unity, 1 So think of God in prayer as one in Essence, yet three in Persons:
and so as three in persons, that he is but one in Essence.
and Unity in Trinity is to be worshipped and respected; and therefore we are
not so to fix our thoughts on God as one; but rather to have this meditation
and thought attending, that this one God in Essence is in personal proprieties
three subsistences, really distinct nor yet are we so to let our thoughts
expatiate and feed themselves in musings upon the blessed persons as distinct
in personal proprieties, but still with an attending apprehension of them as
one in Essence, one Jehovah, one God and no more. He to whom the Scripture
applies the property of begetting, he is Jehovah, God the Father, and not the
Son, or the Holy Ghost, to whom that property in reference to the eternal
begotten of God is never ascribed: he to whom the Scripture gives the property
of being the only begotten son of God; he is Jehovah, God the Son, and no
other person: the Scripture ascribing that propriety of Communication of the
divine being, in a way of begetting to none other: and so he to whom the
Scripture applies that propriety of proceeding, he and only he is God the
Holy Ghost: the Scripture applying to none other of the persons that propriety
of Communication of the Divine being in a way of proceeding, or being as it
were breathed forth from the father; and therefore is called his spirit, Nom.
8. 11. and from the Son; therefore is called the Sons Spirit, Gal. 4. 6. yet
the same holy Scripture never mentions but one Jehovah, or any more then one
God, even when it mentions him in personal distinctions three, yet Essentially
but one, 1 John 5, 7. and no otherwise surely are we to worship him, or to
conceive of him in our worship. Let the beams of the glorious Unity of the
Deity lead us in worshipping of, or praying unto God, to the consideration of
the blessed Trinity; and let the mention or Meditation of the Trinity of the
persons in our prayers lead us forthwith to this glorious Unity in the Deity.

2. In our prayers fix not our eyes or 2 So think in prayer of some one Person
in the Trinity as thereby to be led to the other two.
minds so upon one of the glorious Persons, as not thereby to be led to the
contemplation and consideration of the other; or direct any prayer so to one
person in the blessed Trinity, as not to exclude the other: The Father being in
the Son, and the Son in the Father, and the Holy Ghost in them both: John 14.
10. we cannot look at one, and behold one by a spiritual eye, but we must eye
the other and be led to the other, as our Savior reasons, to prove that if
they had seen him, they must see his Father also, verse 9, 10. compared: They
which look at Christ as their Mediator, must see and eye the Father, as giving
of him so to be; yea and at the Holy Ghost as one who with the blessed Father
sent and consented to his designment to that office, as the Lord Christ says,
Esa. 48. 16. and now the Lord God and his spirit has sent me: yea they must
eye the Holy Ghost as that blessed spirit and more immediate efficient, by
whose power and grace they thus come to the Lord, and are enabled to pray to
him, or look to him; we cannot look aright to the blessed Father, but we must
look to him as it were through the blessed Son; neither can we look upon the
Son but by the Spirit. As he said in that case 1 Cor. 12. 3. so may l in this:
If we worship God as our Father, with whom we have Union and Communion, we
believe him to be so to us in his Son, and that this Union and Communion is
effected by the Holy Ghost: so that if we worship God aright, we worship each
person in the Trinity in any one person, as Con-causes of our Sonship, and
union with God the Father as first in order regenerating and adopting of us,
the Son as one in and by whom we are redeemed and reconciled, and for whose
sake we are accepted with God, and expect to be heard; the holy Ghost as the
immediate efficient of and with the blessed Father and Son of our calling and
adoption, etc. and therefore is he called the spirit of Sonship, as the Greek
word signifies, Romans 8. 15. see Tit. 3. 5, 6. and he by whom more immediately we
are enabled to pray to the Father in the name of his blessed Son, Romans 8. 26.
true it is that a Christian may not in every particular petition or confession,
particularly and distinctly consider of the other two persons in that one
person, to whom more properly he directs his prayer, but yet he must in the
general bent of his mind and spirit do it and intend it.

3. That in order we are first to direct 3. Direct we our prayers to the Father
as first in order of the persons.
our prayers to the blessed Father; yet not as first or chief in honor and
dignity above the other two (for even the Son who albeit as man and as
Mediator he be inferior to the Father, John 14. 28. yet as God and as the Son
of God he is equal with him: John 5. 18. Phil. 2. 6. and the Son is to be
honored, as equal with the same honor as the Father, John 15. 23.) but as
first in order of subsisting; according as the Scripture in two places, where
the order of the blessed persons is set down, the Father is first set down in
order of witnessing, 1 John 5. 7. and in invocation and worship. Mat. 28. 19.
as first in order to be mentioned and invocated: and as he is the first in
order, who was displeased, and to whom we are first in order reconciled in
Christ; and who is first in order pleased on him, Col. 1. 19, 20. yea who first
in order among the persons laid the foundation of our Redemption: ibid: and
therefore to him is ascribed the work of giving his Son, John 3. 16. and of
sanctifying or annoynting and appointing the Lord Christ to his Office of
Mediator, (albeit, as was said, the holy Ghost be not excluded, but included,
as acting in the blessed work, Esaias 48. 16) so are we in that order to worship
him and to breath after nearest fellowship with him, through Christ by the help
of his blessed spirit.

4. In singling out any one person in 4. In singling out some person in the
blessed Trinity, let it be the Father most usually.
the blessed Trinity, we are to pitch most usually upon the Father as he to
whom we direct our prayers through the mediation of Christ, and by the help of
the holy Ghost: that is the rule and method prescribed by Christ to ask the
Father in his name, John 16. 23. and suitable is and has been the usual
practice of the Saints: and yet in such directings of prayers most what as to
the Father, in the general intention of their spirits, do the Saints mind and
eye the other two persons, and include them as jointly worshipped; and
therefore in their Prefaces of prayer ofttimes mention expressly, that blessed
God one in Essence, yet three in persons, as he to whom they speak, and in the
close they subscribe glory to the blessed Father, Son, and Spirit, three
persons yet one God, etc.

5. We may single out the Son of God the Lord Christ, as he to whom we
occasionally 5: We may pray unto Jesus Christ.
present some special request, either by way of Apostrophe, whilst we are
directing our prayers to the Father, or in way of ejaculation: as did Stephen,
Acts 7. 59. Lord Jesus receive my spirit: and so in the instance of that short
prayer of the converted thief, Luke 23. 42, 43. Lord remember me when thou
come into thy Kingdom; and so in that short prayer of Jacobs, the Angel
which has delivered me from all evil bless thee, Genesis 48. 16. this Angel was
Christ: the Father never being called an Angel in Scripture (that I read of)
or being said to be sent of any other of the persons; nor do I find where the
holy Ghost is called an Angel, and a created Angel surely it was not: It being
unlawful to Jacob as well as to any others to worship Angels; Col. 2. 18. and
in more continued and solemn wise did Abraham pray to that Angel, which in the
same chapter is called the Lord; which indeed was Christ by the reasons
foregoing: Genesis 18. end, to him did Jacob pray and make supplication, by the
space almost of the whole night, Genesis 32, from verse 24 to the end, compared
with Hosea 12. 3, 4. yea, he had power over the Angel, to him is the prayer of
the afflicted made, Psalm. 102. which was to Jehovah verse 1. which was God the
Son, verse 24. 25, 26, 27. compared with Heb. 1. 10, 11, 12. read, and peruse,
and consider the places at your leisure, and the primitive Saints they are said
to call, not simply and only upon the name of the Father, but of the Lord
Jesus Christ: for it was the Lord Jesus whom Saul persecuted that appeared to
Saul: Acts 9. 5, 6. and after wards to Ananias verse 11. it was the Lord whose
Saints Saul so much injured verse 10, and upon whose name such as called, Saul
had commission to bind, verse 14. see verse 15. 17. so 1 Cor. 1. 2. and the
reasons hereof are evident. Because 1. Prayer is due to God.


1. Because prayer is a divine worship of God as God; and therefore due to the
Son, and so to the holy Ghost as well as to the Father, Romans 10. 13, 14.

2. We are baptized into the Name of the Son, and the Holy Ghost, as well as
2. We are baptized into the Sons name.
into the name of the Father: and therefore both the Son and the Holy Ghost
likewise may be particularly and personally invocated, and worshipped as well
as the Father.

3. We are to believe in the Son, and 3. We are to believe in Christ
particularly.
so in the Holy Ghost as well as in the Father, and that personally and
particularly: and therefore so are to pray to either, John 14. 1. That which
the Apostle expounds of the Gentiles trusting in Christ, Romans 15. 12. the
Prophet expressed of their seeking to him, Esaias 11. 10. so that they are
inseparably due to one and the same Christ, upon one and the same ground. See
Romans 10. 13, 14. beforementioned. It is supposed, that he on whom men call, he
must be believed on, or else he cannot be called upon by any; and when the
Apostle in the verse. 13. mentions the Name of the Lord, as that which is called
upon, he in verse. 14. expounds it to be meant of the Lord himself: to call
upon the Lords Name, is to call upon himself.

4. The Lord Christ promises that he himself will do what we ask, John 12.
4. Christ promises to hear our prayers.
13, 14. and therefore he may be sought to do the same; and indeed he thereby
proves himself in that Chapter to be equal with the Father, by this argument,
because petitions shall not only be granted in his name, but by him: neither
does he make account that this is any disparagement to the Father, but a
glorifying of him: Ibid. I will do it that my Father may be glorified: What we
have said, to prove, that in our prayers we may single out the Son of God,
may serve to prove the same may be done to the Holy Ghost: and more arguments
might have been added if need were.

Against this which we have spoken, it John 16. 2.

To which I answer: 1. The Lord Christ 1. Christ is prayed to in the prayers
made to God.
that is put up to the Father in his Name, John 16. 23. Christ speaking of the
time after his Resurrection and Ascension, says, In that day ye shall ask me
nothing: or (which he makes all one) Verily ye shall ask the Father nothing in
my name, but he will give it you. He is glorified as God, in that all is done
with God in his Name, and for his Father. For albeit it be sometimes said for
Abraham and David's sake God will do this or that; yet this is meant in
reference to Gods covenant of grace with them, and so to Christ properly, in
whom that Covenant is ratified, Gal. 3. 17. They called on the Name of the Lord
Jesus in all places. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Yet surely they brake not that rule. John 16.
23. they called on the Father in Christ's Name also, yet are said to call on
Christ's Name, even in their calling upon God in his Name: and Christ as God is
also called upon, in that his Father as God is also called upon.

2. In all external worship of God, one 2. The Trinity undivided in worship.
person of the Trinity being named, the other are understood, and are not to be
excluded.

3. If Christ be considered as the Son 3. Christ is prayed to as God, not as
man.
of God in Essence the same with the Father, He is he to whom we come, etc.
coming in prayer to the Father: if considered as Mediator, God incarnate, God
and man, He is he by whom we come to the Father, Heb. 7. 25. and 1 Timothy 2. 5.
and look as it is another part of his divine glory ascribed to him, Phil. 3.
21. which is true of him as the Son of God, he by his divine power does
subject all to himself: and yet in another consideration and respect, namely,
as Mediator, he has all things subjected to him of the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 28.
so it is here in this part of his glory, as the Son of God he may be, he must
be prayed to, which is God and man in one person; but is not prayed to as man,
but as God. So much be spoken to this weighty duty of prayer, and to the
incessant practice thereof.

FINIS.

