AN ANSWER TO A BOOK Set forth By Sir EDWARD PEYTON, KNIGHT and BARONET,
Carrying this Title, A Discourse concerning the fitness of the Posture,
necessary to be used, in taking the Bread and Wine at the SACRAMENT.

BY ROGER COCKS, Preacher of Gods Word.

Quam diu per hanc lineam serram reciprocabimus, habentes observationem
inveteratam, quae praeveniendo statum fecit? Hanc si nulla Scriptura
determinavit, certe consuetudo corroboravit.

Tertul. de Coron. Militis, Cap. 3. Ad quam forte Ecclesiam veneris, eius morem
serva, si cuiquam non vis esse scandalo, nec quenquam tibi.

Sententia Ambros. in Aug. ut ipse refert, Epist. 118. Cap. 2. LONDON, Printed
for Nath. Butter. 1642.

Scribimus indocti, doctique.
PAmphlets, like wild geese, fly up and down in flocks about the Country.
Never was more writing, or less matter. That of the Preacher, if ever it did
reflect on any, may fitly suit with our times. There is no end of making many
books. Eccles. 12. 12
For in many, in most, there is no end indeed; Nay, there is neither beginning
nor ending; that is, neither head nor foot, as it is in the Proverb. I will not
absolutely rank yours in the number of these, yet I conceive (and many, I
presume, will be of my opinion) you should have shown more wisdom, if you had
taken less pains, and spared your Discourse. For though I commend your
moderation, in not being affected with the Epidemicall disease of the times,
Railing, yet I cannot approve your discretion, in acting that upon the public
stage of Printing, which might have passed better by private intercourse of
writing. I was once about to have answered your Discourse with nothing but
silence, (if so be that might have been reputed an Answer) and to this the
persuasion of some friends had almost induced me, as well because the
sleighting of some wrong, is the best way to overcome them, as because it is
not an easy matrer for a Practical Divine on the sudden to turn Polemicall.
But I was diverted from these (to my thinking) by stronger considerations: As
first, the giving of occasion unto the adverse side, to insult and triumph; and
next to ours, the scandal of deserting my self; and which is more, the
public cause of the Church, at which (it is plain) you strike, though through
the sides of me, an unworthy member of it. Over-swaid by these, I thought it
better to show my self (is the times now are) a fool in print among the rest,
then that the Truth should suffer by my default, or that your pretending to
invincible, unanswerable arguments, should conduce to the offending of others.

Before I enter upon your Book, I cannot pass by the Title; as a man that is
to survey some new building, ere he enter the house, will cast his eye upon the
Portall. Now this (me thinks) is not given with that advisednesse of judgment
that should have been, for you call it A Discourse concerning the fitness of
the posture, necessary to be used, in taking the Bread and Wine at the
Sacrament. Had you left out [necessary,] it would have been a great deal
better; for you change a matter of indifferency, into a matter of necessity.
You cannot (or at least, writing of that subject, ought not to) be ignorant,
that Ceremonies, in their own nature are but (...), indifferent things; your
postures therefore being not yet enjoined by authority, cannot be necessary.
But a rough outside may have a smooth inside, and a jewel is not always
known by the case or casket that does enclose it; I will therefore come to the
discourse it self.

And this is composed in the form of a Letter, I must therefore shape my
Answer accordingly; only I will add a Superscription, lest I should not seem
to deal with a man of your fashion as I ought to do.

To Sir EDWARD PEYTON, Knight and Baronet.
But I pray give me leave to close it up with that wish of Philip, a King of
Macedon, to Menecrates, an overweening Physician, Health of mind.
THe reason that induces me to this, is, because the elapsed time you speak
of, has brought forth the foul issue of a collapsed disposition, which (as
you would seem to pretend) my rudeness has made abortive, and caused it to
come into the world before the time: But the truth is, (for so much I have
heard you affirm your self) it was conceived many years before, though
perhaps not altogether in the same shape it is produced. Who advisedly
considering this will not argue you of much weakness, for being grounded in
your opinion? why did you so often before take the Sacrament kneeling without
question or scruple, if it were a matter against conscience so to do? If it
were not, why do you now refuse it? I refer my self to the indifferent
Reader, if in this you do not render your self suspected to side more with
the times then with the truth.

But to proceed. In the first place (though an easy apprehension may conceive
it an impertinent introduction) you tax my defect of manners: Indeed I was
never bred in the school of complements, and may therefore happily commit a
solecisme against ceremonious form, but here (I presume) I may justly acquit
my self. The irreverence was on your part, the affront on mine, I did but my
duty, which you answered with indignity, and for my beseeching, returned a
threatening. As for the satisfaction which you would seem to have desired, you
know well that I was not chief in the place, but (as you acknowledge me your
self) subordinate, Curate. Therefore you should rather have sought it at his
hands who was chief, especially being there resident, then at mine, and I make
no doubt, he would upon the least intimation of this desire from you (so well I
know his willingness and sufficiency) have given you (if any thing could have
done it) satisfaction.

Howbeit, had you requested as much of me (for it has never been my custom to
obtrude my labors upon another, especially where I had just cause to suspect
the party possessed with a prejudicate opinion, and so the matter in all
likelihood, to meet with derision instead of acceptance) I should as far as
my mean ability, and my many occasions and interruptions would have given me
leave, have done what I could. Let the discreet Reader now judge, whether there
were more want of manners in me for not writing, or of civility in you, for
taxing me in this kind.

Next, you affirm, that being to receive the Sacrament, you did stand, with
just ground, and therefore I should not have denied it unto you in that
posture. I answer, you are no Pythagoras, or if you were, I am none of your
Disciples, to be satisfied with an Ipse dixit. Who of sound judgment will not
think that I was tied in duty to comply rather with public authority, then
with your private, singular, irregular opinion: And whereas you say, I ought
not to urge an imposed kneeling, though backed by the authority of the Ordinary,
the Bishop, the Canon, because it is not confirmed by Act of Parliament; I
answer, first, that your inference is not good: Are all things unlawful, that
are not confirmed by Act of Parliament? Surely then many indifferent actions
must needs be unlawfully performed; Has the King, has the Church no authority
in these things? what then shall become of government, if there be no
Parliament? But it may be you desire such a time as the Israelites had when
there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own
eyes. Judge. 17. 6.


Secondly, I answer, that your assertion is not true, there is an Act of
Parliament for that and other Ceremonies, entitled, An Act for the uniformity
of Common Prayer, and prefixed as an Introduction to the Service Book; but I
believe you have taken little notice of it, because you are not much affected
to the Book it self. Again, whereas you say, Kneeling is not commanded in
the Rubrique: surely you do but take the matter upon trust, and that has
deceived you; for the words are plain, that the Receiver must take the
Sacrament kneeling. I will repeat them, that the truth may the better appear:
Then shall the Minister first receive in both kinds himself, and next deliver
it to other Ministers, if any be present, and after to the people in their
hands, kneeling. What can be more plain? Certainly, if you did not take the
matter upon trust (as I said before) it must needs be, that either you did not
look so far, or overlooke it.

Your disallowing of the Canon cannot make it of no validity; for it is
confirmed by the King, whom we acknowledge Supreme, in causes as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil; yea the power thereof is further ratified by a
clause mentioned in the latter part of the Act made for the uniformity of
Common Prayer; This threefold cord then cannot be broken by you, strain a hard
as you can. And yet let me advise you as a friend, not to strain too far, lest
by this means you do not only forfeit your judgment, but your estate; for the
Act being still in force, may lay hold upon you.

But to follow you, (as you proceed) you urge us next (as if we did we know not
what) with many demands, concerning the object you should kneel unto, and some
of them very poor and ridiculous; you cannot (without much prejudice to your
own judgment) conceive us to be so simple as to require you to kneel to the
creature, whether it be the Minister or the Sacrament; but what that should be
which may hinder you from kneeling unto God, I am not (I confess) quick
sighted enough to perceive; yes, say you, for if that be required, why did not
the Disciples kneel? I answer, first, it is not of absolute necessity that we
should in all things imitate the Disciples; next I affirm, that with all the
skill you have, you cannot clearly and fully determine whether they did kneel
or no.

Touching the form of administration, what if we shall affirm (for all your
negative) that part of it is a prayer? I doubt not we shall make it good well
enough, do you your self examine it a little better, and you cannot (if you
will confess a truth) but conclude it to be so; I will repeat the former part
(for that only is material to the purpurpose) The Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy body and soul into everlasting
life. The later part is by you vainly added, for who did ever conceive that to
be a Prayer? But if it be a Prayer, say you, the words should run thus, I pray
God to preserve thy body and soul to eternal life. Why so? I see no such
necessity. Is not that of the Apostle Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. 7.
The Lord give thee understanding in all things, a prayer for Timothy? because
he does not say, I pray the Lord to give thee understanding in all things.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give you a better understanding.

Nor is it convenient (for all your cavil) that the Minister should kneel at
the time of Administration, though the Receiver do, seeing the former
subordinately under Christ our Savior, imparts the blessing; the latter takes
it ministerially from him. Suppose the King (nay, let it be some Vicegerent,
or General under him) be to bestow the Order of Knighthood, because he must
kneel that takes the honor, must he do so that gives it? Or, to come nearer
to the present question, consider this in matter of Ordination, for though it
be no Sacrament, it is a holy action: because he must kneel who receives
Orders, must he do so that does ordain him? who sees not the manifest
absurdity of this consequence? It is sufficient that the Minister himself
receiving first, according to appointment, do take the Sacrament upon his
knees. And why (I pray you) may you not kneel to Christ, when you receive?
what necessity is there that your kneeling to him should make him to be
corporally present in the Sacrament, when you take the holy Communion, more
then he is at other times, when you pray unto him?

My Lord of York (and it is much that you should vouchsafe to give him that
title) confesses no such thing as you quote him for; Yea, in the Page
following, he is directly against you: For he affirms out of approved Authors,
that it is a matter of conveniencie for every Country to use such Ceremonies
as they shall think fit. Page 133.


Your Proposition that we ought to follow Christ in all things, is too
general; S. Augustine will tell you otherwise, and so will all other Orthodoxe
Divines; They will affirm we ought not to imitate him in his Miracles, but in
his Morals; For though the one may entitle us to obedience, the other cannot
acquit us from presumption.

In the next place you come upon me like a fencer: But (Venia tua) give me
leave to tell you in a friendly manner, your Venies are but triflings in a
cause so serious; I fear your sharp as little as your foils, for unless your
weapons be (and I hope they are not) tincta Lycambaeo sanguine, I see no great
danger in them, an indifferent judgment may easily blunt their point, and turn
their edge. Howbeit, I thank you for your friendly advertisement, for
praemonitus praemunitus, forewarned forearm'd; and however you may seem to
your self an iuvincible Goliath, yet I a little David dare enter the lists with
you.

First, you make a flourish, not with a two-handed, but with a two-edged sword;
nay with that which is sharper then any two-edged sword, Heb. 4. 12.
The Word of God: Such a weapon, I grant, as being well handled, is not to be
resisted; but you do only flourish it, and make a show of striking that which
you do not come near.

Your Argument runs thus, That gesture is best which was used by the Apostles;
but the Apostles used this gesture, therefore it is the best gesture. And here
you fall into an error, for you do not stand to your tackling, but go from
Standing to Sitting; Nay, you use the demonstrative this, before you mention
Sitting at all. For the confirmation of that which you would prove, you cite
many Texts of Scripture; among which, some are merely impertinent, as belonging
nothing to the Discourse in hand, because they imply an imitation, not in
Ceremonial, but Moral duties: Such are Ephesians. 5. 1. 1 Cor. 11. 1. 1 Timothy 16.
you mean (I conceive) 1 Timothy 1. 16. 2 These. 3. 7. The other conduce not
rightly to your purpose, though they seem to come nearer. For however you make
much ado with the Greek Text, and Latin Translation, where (by the way) you
have occubuit, for accubuit, which I am willing to pass by, because but a
literal error, and conclude that the posture used was Sitting, (howbeit no
direct sitting neither, but such an one as did incline to leaning) yet I may
say all this will not help you a jot: For we have two Bucklers to oppose
against this sharp of yours, (as you call it;) the one, that all this proves
nothing, but that our Savior Christ and his Apostles sat at the celebration
of the Passover, not at the institution of the Sacrament; Nor can you by
direct and evident Text of Scripture urge it further, as some of the learned
have judiciously observed, however others for want of a due consideration, have
given too much way to your assertion.

And surely if I among these should do so too, yet it would fare with you, but
as with him, qui suo se jugulat gladio, who striking fiercely at his adversary,
wounds, yea kills his own cause. Your pretense is to plead for Standing at the
Communion; nay your offense was, (howbeit Scandalum acceptum non datum) because
you might not receive it in that posture; and now you plead for sitting, nay
affirm it is unlawful to use other; concluding it to be, not indifferent, but
necessary. Risum teneatis amici. Surely when you wrote this Discourse, you were
either forgetful of your former Position, or irresolute in your present
opinion; So that if one Proverb will not hit you, You are a man sitting duabus
sellis, yet another may fit you, Aliud stans, aliud sedens judicas, and thus
you quite overthrow, what you seek to establish; for if sitting only be
necessary, I do not see how you can stand more for standing, then we for
kneeling.

Your bringing in of Calvin, makes nothing to the purpose; he writes against
adoring the Host in the Sacrament; and what is that to our kneeling at the
Communion? You might as well say, The Papists kneel to Images, and worship
them, therefore we may not kneel to worship God. You press further the
sayings of Bullinger and Keckerman, who (if you cite them rightly) take that
for granted, which remains to be proved, namely, that Sitting was the posture
used at the Sacramental Supper. Indeed I should side with Chemnitius in his
opinion, that the reverence of the Sacrament is to be taken from the Word of
God, if there were any prescript form, or certain direction to be found in
it. As for that which you quote out of the Centuries, namely, that Kneeling was
never used in three hundred years after Christ; were it true, (which I shall
hardly be induced to believe, without more pregnant testimony) yet it is not of
sufficient force to infringe the lawful use of this Ceremony, no not though
you could directly prove the Apostles did receive sitting.

For against this we lift up our second buckler of defense, which (I conceive)
will be able to ward off the blow that you would give us, and that is this: In
circumstantiall things which are indifferent, there is no absolute tie of
necessity that we should follow our Savior Christ and his Apostles, much less
the practice of the Primitive Church; if there were any such necessity, why do
you not plead as well against the change of time and place, as that of gesture?
Seeing you cannot be ignorant, that what the Apostles took in the evening, we
take in the morning; what they received in a chamber, we receive in a Church;
If the Church had power to alter these, why should it not have as much to do
the other? The instances which you produce for standing, (were they to the
purpose, as they are not) would confirm as much. For if the Church in those
times had power to vary from the order of sitting, and make use of standing in
the place of it, why had not the Church afterward as much power to change that
standing into kneeling?

But the truth is, the words of Tertullian, as S. Jerome In Epist ad Ephesians.
notes, have no reference to the Sacrament, but to the Resurrection: We stand
then, says the Father, (and it is not at the Lords Supper, but every Lords
day) because it is Tempus laetitiae, quo nec genua flectuntur, nec curvamur,
sed cum Domino ad coelorum alta sustollimur: A time of joy, in which we neither
bow nor bend our knees, but are with the Lord lifted up (as it were) to the
highest heavens. So S. Augustine, Propter hoc jejunia relaxantur, and orantes
stamus, quod est signum resurrectionis: Epist. 119. Cap. 15.
For this we give over fasting, and pray standing, which is a sign of the
Resurrection. The Canon of the Nicene Council is grounded merely on the same
reason, and so is also that which you cite out of S. Basil.

Howbeit did all these make to your purpose, they would yet but make good what
I said before, that the change of things indifferent is in the power of the
Church; and if so, why should not that power be obeyed now as well as in former
Ages? S. Augustine is firm for it; That is (says he) to be accounted
indifferent, and to be observed, in respect of the society of those among whom
we live, Quod neque contra fidem, neque contra bonos mores injungitur 118.
Epist. Cap. 2.
: which being enjoined, makes neither against faith, nor good manners. This
truth the Reformed Churches in the Low Countries do acknowledge, These. Belg.
3. art. 6.
and Beza likewise in his 24. Epist. Indeed if men should be suffered to do
what they list in this case, what would become of that which the Apostle
requires, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
Decency and Order? Surely it would breed in the Church horribilem (...),
says Paraeus In Romans 14. 5
, a horrible confusion; And from this confusion would arise no small seeds of
contention, says Calvin in his Institut. Li. 4. cap. 10 sect. 32.
I have cited these, because I conceive this testimony to be of more validity
with you, then that of the Fathers.

But you go about to make kneeling no matter of indifferency, because it
tends (as you say) to Idolatry. What conformation has kneeling, (say you)
unless to conform us to Transubstantiation? Since you do not know, I will
tell you; It serves to conform you to Reverence, to Obedience, to Order; and I
hope these are not Transubstantiation. Indeed could you prove what you pretend,
that kneeling at the Sacrament is Idolatry, (though that would not necessarily
bring in standing) you should do something; but the instances you produce for
that purpose, are slight and trivial. That which you allege concerning a
reason before the Rubrique in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth is nothing
probable; we have but your bare word for it: I may therefore say as S. Jerome
does in another case, Pari facilitate rejicitur qua recipitur Cent. Helvid.
: I may as easily reject it, as you obtrude it. The rest I omit, as not worth
the answeriug; and the rather, because you knit up afterward the full strength
of all in an Argument. Only I cannot pass by that speech of yours, It is an
absurdity to kneel to Christ's humanity. It should seem you do not either
remember or regard what the Apostle says, In him dwells all the fullness of
the God head bodily, Colos. 2. 9.
and shall we not worship that wherein dwells the fullness of the Godhead?
Doubtless we are to worship the Humane nature with the Divine, for our blessed
Savior is not divided, 1 Cor. 1. 13.
and we are to adore whole Christ.

I come now to your Argument, which you frame in this manner:

To bend the knee to a creature in divine worship, is Idolatry; but to bend the
knee at the Sacrament, is to bend the knee to a creature:

Ergo, To bend the knee at the Sacrament is Idolatry.

In seeking to prove the major or Proposition, you spend more time, more pain
then needs. For as when one would have made, or did make a long Oration in the
praise of Hercules, another did put him off with this short answer, What needs
all this? Who ever went about to dispraise him? So I may say to you, Who among
us did ever bend the knee in divine adoration to a mere creature? Therefore
you might have omitted this as granted, and have prosecuted the proof of your
minor or assumption, which how weakly and poorly you do, when you come at it,
will easily appear upon a due examination of it. In the mean time, you urge
some things by the way, at which we may take just exception; as the definition
of will worship, (...), which you would fasten upon Perkins, but unjustly; for
who of sound judgment would say, that Will Worship is a worshipping of God,
with the intention of the heart, and goes no farther; how does this distinguish
it from true worship? No, he affirms it to be when God is worshipped with a
naked and bare good intention, not warranted by the Word of God. Again, you
seek an utter extirpation of all tradition that is humane, wherein you deal
with too much inhumanity against it: For it may no doubt in some kind be
lawful, useful, so long as it does not oppose Gods Word: Nor do any of the
learned (as far as I could ever read) deny it in this respect: Even Perkins
himself does in the place where you cite him, affirm as much: Nor is it any
pollution of Gods worship, no addition or diminution of Scripture, (as you
pretend) to make use of an indifferent Ceremony. Lastly, your implicit
conclusion from the perfect example of our Savior Christ, (as you say) does
make explicitly against your self; for standing has as little relation to
sitting, as kneeling has.

You proceed now to the Assumption, and seek to make good the proof of it,
because (as you affirm, but you do not, indeed you cannot confirm, it) we
reverence the actions, and the things in the Sacrament more then we ought. In
this you are quite mistaken, and cannot be thought to write well, (though you
applaud your self never so much in this work) because you distinguish no
better: qui been distinguit, been direct.
for you confound using reverence in the actions, and of the actions, bowing
the knee at the Sacrament, and to the Sacrament. Your Argument then is of no
force, unless you can prove we worship the actions, or the Bread and Wine,
which I am sure you will never be able to do.

But lest all this should not avail to take away Kneeling, you urge an
Argument of Bellarmines to do that for you, which you cannot do for your
self: It should seem the sword of the Scriture failing you, you are glad to
borrow a weapon from your adversary, and it is brandisht by you in this
manner: If kneeling at the Sacrament may be as the Calvinists say, without sin,
then it is not Idolatry to kneel before Images. To this I answer, first, that
the case is not alike; for the Sacrament, though it be a representation, is not
properly an Image. Besides, we may be without Images, we must not be without
the Sacrament; The one is peremtorily commanded, the other only in some sense
permitted. Again, I answer, that to kneel before Images is not simply in it
self unlawful, that is, as the act has no relation to the image, no more
then it is to kneel before a pewe, or a pillar; for the command is not, that
we should not bow before them, but bow to them. Exodus 20. 5.


As little availeable is your following reason, that we ought not to kneel,
because the Sacrament is (...), a giving of thanks, and kneeling no fit gesture
for thanksgiving. Certainly you have little ground for this opinion; for if
thanksvc:\balbir\cptx\print\print\ing be a part of Prayer, (as who almost save
your self will deny?) what fitter posture can there be for it then kneeling?
Your instance of Solomon makes little to the purpose; for first, it is said, He
made an end of praying; secondly, that he stood to bless the congregation: 1
Kings 8. 55.
So that it was not only a thanksgiving unto God. And how unseemly it were in
our public prayers, when we are upon our knees, as soon as we come to a
passage of thanksgiving, to start up suddenly upon our feet, let the Reader
judge. Howbeit, if examples in this point may be availeable, it will be a
matter of no great difficulty to produce some, who have kneeled in their giving
of thanks. The Apostle tells the Philippians, that he thanks God upon every
remembrance of them always, in every prayer that he makes for them. Philip. 3.
4.
Now it is not to be doubted, but in some of those prayers he was upon his
knees. The Samaritane Leper when he was cured did express greater reverence;
He fell down on his face at the feet of Christ, and gave him thanks. Luke 17.
16.
But what should I speak of these? Do not the Angels and the Saints in heaven
express their giving of thanks with all submission and reverence? we know they
do, for so we read, Revel. 7. 11. and 11. 16.
And if kneeling be fit to be used in Prayer, it is so also in Thanksgiving,
for that is to be joined with Prayer. Colos. 4. 2.
Continue in Prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving, says the Apostle.

Besides, who will not confess the gesture of kneeling in this action to be
most becoming? For if the Israelites receiving only a message of their
corporal deliverance, by the ministry of Moses, bowed their head and
worshipped, Exodus 4. 31.
surely we have greater reason when we receive an undoubted pledge of our
spiritual deliverance by the death and passion of our blessed Savior, to
humble our selves to Almighty God, and upon our knees to offer up the sacrifice
of praise and thanksgiving. We know that men do many times upon their knees
receive temporal favors from the hands of mortal Princes: Without doubt then
it will become us to receive with all submission and reverence, this spiritual
favor from the hands of immortal God, the great King of Kings.

That Epistle of S. Aug. by you cited for the abolition of indifferent
Ceremonies, helps you little, unless you will say he does (which he does not)
contradict what he had delivered in the Epistle immediately going before: For
there he gives this rule to Ianuarius, Nulla disciplina est in his melior gravi
prudentique Christiano, quam ut eo modo agat, quo agere viderit Ecclesiam, ad
quamcunque forte devenerit. Epist. 118. Cap. 2.
In these things no discipline can be better for a grave and wise Christian,
then to demean himself in that manner the Church does, to which it is his hap
to come: And he confesses he took this rule from S. Ambrose, Tanquam a
coelesti oraculo, as from some heavenly Oracle. Therefore if you would be
indeed, as you desire to be accounted, a grave and wise Christian, you must
observe that discipline which is enjoined by the Church wherein you live. And
indeed in that Epistle you cite, he is so far from disallowing the rule before
mentioned, that he does highly commend it, affirming of it, that it is una and
saluberrima regula retinenda, Aug. Epist. 119. Cap. 18.
the only wholesome rule to be observed.

Your last Argument to take away Kneeling at the Sacrament, is drawn from the
avoiding of an inconvenience: It is (say you) an occasion of scandal and
offense. I answer, The best actions may be so; but then the offense is in those
that take it, not in those that give it. But I would fain know of you, if
sitting or standing should be substituted in the place of kneeling, (for you
seem to be indifferent for either of these, and I think would not care what
the posture were, so it were any other) how these could be used without
scandal. For I persuade my self, that as they would give more occasion of
offense, so they would give occasion of offense to more then kneeling does. In
this the greater number sure will side with us. To say nothing, that whereas
you can pretend only the bond of charity, we have besides this the bond of
duty, even the command of Authority, which (as Beza observes) does impose a
kind of necessity. Epist. 24.
Calvin also affirms, that where the doctrine is sound and pure, and the
Ceremonies tend to a civil decency and honesty, it is fit rather to submit
unto them, then to dissent about them, Epist. 254.
especially if the greater number carry it. Now suppose all the congregations
in the Kingdom were united into one, and the matter were to go by votes, I
presume I may safely affirm, that where you have ten for sitting or standing
severally, nay for both jointly, we for kneeling shall have an hundred. This
reason therefore of yours is of no validity, seeing scandal would not be
lessened, but increased by this means.

You draw now to a conclusion; and so would I too, for I am even wearied with
following you in such a confused course, but that I meet with one thing which
will detain me a while. Indeed a good Christian, nay a good Subject, though a
Heathen, could not pass by it without offense: Are the names of Kings (think
you) fit things to be played upon, or to be stigmatized by the pens of private
persons? if not, what means your new coind word Carolicall? Minutius records
of Mercurius Tresmegistus, that even the Heathen, because he was a great
Philosopher, would not use his name without great reverence: Is there not as
much respect due to Kings, as to Philosophers? Suetonius reports of Augustus
Caesar, he wrote to the Senate of Rome, to take order that his name might not
absole fieri, be worn thread bare among the common people, by their frequent
and trivial using of it; And can our King then take it well at your hands you
should abuse his name, and that in so serious and weighty a matter as Religion?
Surely when I consider this, I cannot a little wonder at your inconsiderate
boldness, nay, irreligious impiety. For if a Subject may not revile his
Prince, no not in his thoughts, Eccles. 10. 20.
much less is he to do it in his words, especially in such as proceed not
from sudden passion, but from mature deliberation, and being committed to the
press, are exposed to a public view. I could never hear that his Majesty is
any way tainted in Religion, you may justly be suspected, therefore I shall
rether follow that Church, which is (if I may lawfully repeat the term you
use) Carolical, then that which is Peytonicall, that is, rather the Doctrine,
and the Discipline of the Church of England, then the fancies and factions of
some few Sectaries, and Schismatics.

And now I will shut up all with an inversion of your conclusion. Seeing
kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament, is in it self a Ceremony that is
indifferent; seeing it is as judicious Hooker terms it, the gesture of piety;
Ecclesiast. polit. lib. 5.
nay, as Beza himself acknowledges, does carry a show of pious reverence;
Epist. 12.
seeing it is enjoined by authority, and that of the King, of the Church, of
the State; seeing it is practiced by the generality; seeing it is refused only
by some few out of singnlarity, Qui nisi quod ipsi faciunt nihil rectum
existimant, as Saint Aug. speaks, Epist. 118. Cap. 2.
who think nothing to be right but what they do themselves, you ought not to
require at my hands an administration of the Sacramen unto you standing, or to
be offended with me or any other, who (rebus sic stantibus) shall refuse to
satisfy your desire, that he may comply with the authority of the Church.

Mart. 15. 1642. Imprimatur, Tho: Wykes.

FINIS.

