To the READER.
IN Astrology there be comm^nly two Queries; one of the lawfulness of it; the
other of the truth of it: to both which, as touching this present subject of
the Planetary Influence for the Weather and Meteors. The lawfulness of this,
although that of some other parts of Astrology be much disputed, is and must be
acknowledged by every one, Genesis 1. 14. and Job 38. 31, 32, 33. But as for the
truth and certainty of predictions, though it be the most infallible piece of
all Starry knowledge; yet the ignorance of pretenders to it, has rendered it so
ridiculous, that our Almanacks, or rather Almanack-makers, through their many
absurd mistakes of the weather,(...) ased to th^mselves the sorry name (...)
Jack the Liar. And were it not the learned experience, and solid judgments of
some few that do maintain the dignity of it by their more certain Prognostics,
this knowledge had been degraded from the honor of Learning long ag.

As for this Discourse, were it not a matter of conscience with me to hide my
talent in the ground, it had never seen the light; and now when it is come
abroad, let me tell thee, what is here contained, is not to be found in all the
Books this world does contain. This discovery by the goodness of God, was
gained by the Observations of many years; and the Rules of it I have a thousand
times put to the touchstone of trial, and a thousand times I have found them to
be true: therefore give Glory to God, the supreme Author, and own me his
instrument, for

Thy Christian Friend, William Cock. Pertho
Edinburgensis.
To his Ingenious Friend Mr. WILLIAM COCK, Upon His Excellent Tract of
Meteorology, or Judgment of the WEATHER.
AStrology is an Art (though much abused)
Whereinlies hid great Mysteries unknown
To many Mortals; yet some are infused
With those great gifts of knowledge; this all own.
All are not born to know this secret skill;
And those that search the depth of Natures mine,
Are often condemned, although they act none ill,
By such as, value Pearls, like hungry Swine.
In this small Tract, a Secret is disclosed,
By which the World shall clearly see and find
Much truth in Starry: knowledge, though opposed
Only by such, whose words pass like the wind.
Here Is a Discovery made, till now unknown,
Which may convince those, which so much deny
The change of air by man may before shown,
To the great Credit of Astrology.
Let all men therefore much respect my Friend,
And for his pains, let no man him despise,
But rather give him thanks unto the end,
Who now at length has made us Weather-wise.
Sic dixit Henry Coley, Philomat.

To my Ingenious Friend Mr. WILL. COCK, Upon His ASTROLOGICAL Judgment of the
WEATHER.
SIR, to your praise, our profit, have you wrought,
What Haly, Guido, and the rest nere taught.
Your surer Observations have made known
What most pretenders never could have done.
When Bookers worth to Lilly did appear
Surpassing others in this work. Oh where
Were thou (my Friend) to inform us all
A Scheme for Booker was not radical.
Yet to his praise, we ever shall attest
With famous Lilly, he was one o'th'best.
For others skill, they who have eyes may see,
Our errors are with them, the truth with thee.
W. Harrison, R. S. I. D. P. Philomat.

THE INTRODUCTION.
FOr their sakes that (as yet) understand nothing of this kind of Learning, I
thought good to premise this by way of Introduction to the right understanding
and application of the following Work.

1. They ought to acquaint themselves with the right use of an Ephemeris (which
they may have annually for a small price.) To which purpose, after they
understand the Characters of the seven Planets, the twelve Signs, and those of
the Aspects (which are the only furniture of an Ephemeris) they should also
learn to know the distance of each Aspect in the Ecliptic, or Zodiac, which
is briefly showed in the following Work.

2. To be exceeding ready, by the help of their Ephemeris, to discover what
Planets are in Configuration the one with the other; as also how the Moon
beholds them, as she passes through the Zodiac.

3. Learn to be well acquainted with the Nature of the Signs; as which are
Fiery, which Earthy, which Aerie, and which Watery.

4. Be careful to observe the several Separations and Applications of the
Planets; as also their Natures, and ^he Nature of the fixed Stars, by whose
bodies they frequently pass, in their Diurnal and Annual Motions. I say, these
(and such like things as these) are necessary to be known by all such as desire
to be acquainted with this kind of sublime ^nowledg, which leads to ^he
contemplation and admi^ation of the great and wonderful Works of our Creator.

Now those that are as yet Strangers to this kind of Study, may (if they
please) acquaint themselves with the Fundamentals of Astrology, by the help of
a small Treatise lately published, entitled Clavis Astrologiae, to be sold at
the Raven in Duck-lane; wherein they shall receive full satisfaction in what is
convenient to be known by way of introduction to this Art; as also the
Genethliacal part of Astrology, viz. the exact handling and calculating
Nativities, and other things of good use to all such whose Genius leads them to
this kind of Speculation. Lastly, Note that it is the opinion of some good
Artists, and curious Observators, that not only the Geocentrick Aspects ought
to be considered, but also the Heliocentrick Aspects of the Planets, which are
found to cause much variation in the Weather, when there has been nothing to
signify the same otherwise, Vale.

THE True way of Foreseeing THE WEATHER.
CHAPTER I.
AS in Architecture we do take inspection if the ground upon which we are to
build be firm enough to bear up the weight of the house, before we do provide
materials, and go to work with the building: even so in this Discourse, we will
first take a view of the Fundamentals, and therein discover the sandy
Foundations upon which the vulgar frame of an Almanac is totteringly erected.
Secondly, we will make choice of better Principles for a surer groundwork of
weather-knowledg. And Thirdly, proceed to the rearing up a more trusty fabric
of Starry learning, to foreknow the Seasons and their Meteors, by the signs
which God has set in the firmament for that purpose.

For the first of these, viz. the mistakes of our common Astrologer, whereof
the principal reasons be,

First, Because of many things which our paper- Astrologers are ignorant of,
which must of necessity be known, before the knowledge of Influences can be
attained. A great sort of usurpers of this profession; ignorant of Philosophy
and Nature, and void of well-grounded experience, and if they have made
observations upon the influences, they are not able to try their experience by
the touchstone of true natural knowledge, in which they are mere strangers, and
so no wonder they go wrong. This defect I shall endeavor in the second Chapter
of this Treatise to supply.

Secondly, There be other things which they do meet with in the books of the
Ancients, which be pure Riddles, as dark as night, which our Astrologasters
look upon as literal truths of clear light, and set them down for fundamentals
of their skill; as for Example, The erecting of a Figure of the twelve Houses
to the obtaining of the fore-knowledg of the Weather.

And here, Reader, I will reveal one secret unto thee, which in the books of
Astrologers thou shall rarely find, That the erecting of a Figure, is a mistie
cloud overcasting the light of starry Literature, and a black masque over
Vrania's bright face, debarring thy eyes from seeing her true beauties, and from
reading the proper meaning of the Stars not only in this, but also in all other
parts of genuine Astrology. It is true, that learned Astrologers can play the
hocus in blinding your eyes with their judgment upon the Figure, whereas they
do secretly ponder the essential dignities of the Planets, but to others they
speak by a figure, as Rhetoricians do, wresting the meaning of the Houses,
which are only accidental, according to their secret knowledge of the essential
figure, which is known but to a few. And when at any time an accidental figure
speaks truth, it is because sometimes the rules of it are coincident (as a
blindman sometimes, though seldom, hits the mark) with the rules of pure
Astrology. But in particular for judgment upon the weather, the absurdity of a
figure may clearly be evinced by these arguments. 1. A figure is either for the
birth of a body at a certain time entering this worlds theater, as infants newly
coming from the womb, whom the constellations which at that time do arise, make
an impression upon, and in some manner do stamp with their essential figure and
seal; but the birth of a year, or a quarter of a year, for which they do set up
a Figure in Mar^h, or June, etc. is the birth of neither body, spirit, nor
substance.

Or a Figure respects some actions of mortal and transitory bodies here
below, which do sympathize with the motions of their proper and significant
Planets above: and do admit of a direction to the time when these things shall
come to pass, it may be, many years after the figure is calculated, as the
Doctrine of Nativities can tell. But there is no such thing in prognosticating
the season: for suppose in the Spring quarter, at the ingress of the Sun into
the sign of Aries the Lord of the figure be an hot fiery Planet (as Mars or the
Sun) and so do portend a warm Spring; yet if the Quadrats, or Oppositions of
the two cold Planets Saturn and Venus do afterterwards occur in that Spring, it
will prove quite contrary to the Figure, that is, it will be a most cold and
sharp season.

2. The Houses of a Figure, are for Parents, Brethren, Marriages, Children,
Friends, Enemies, Servants, Trades, Professions, Wealth, Journeys, etc. I hope
you will grant me, that the knowledge of the weather calls for no such matters.

3. Let there be a Figure calculated for Paris of France, which may fore-token
great rains and storms: at the same time let another Figure be fitted for the
north part of Scotland, which sometimes does appear, which may signify great
droughts; yet aged experience, and clear reason will contradict those Figures:
for the Scotch season will prove rainy; but the French air will be much more
dry: and if the year be dry in Scotland, it will not be wet in France.

The third ground of mistakes is, that the yearly Prognosticators do
misapprehend the very first Principles of the Art: as instance, they hold that
Jupiter raises North-winds; when observation guarded with reason does tell us,
he is altogether for South-winds. And they do charg Saturn and Mars in their
Conjunctions or Opposition with tempestuous storms; whereas I have seen a most
clear and calm air occasioned by their aspect: and they do give out Mercury for
a stirrer up of mighty winds. It is not my purpose to fill the paper with their
erroneous tenets; I am for truths, which, God willing, shall adorn these sheets.

CHAP. II.
Of the true grounds of predicting the Weather.
FOr the due consideration of Meteor-Astrology (which is the skill of
foretelling by the Stars, hot and cold, clear and dark, calm and stormy, dry
and moist, thundering, snowy, rainy times of the year, etc.) we must take notice
of these twelve Hypotheses, upon which as so many magnificent pillars, we do
set this stately Edifice of Starry knowledge. Namely, 1. the Natures of the
Planets. 2. Of the Signs. 3. The dignities of the Planets. 4. The observation
of the Aspects. 5. The mixtures of the Planets. 6. The renewing of the Aspects.
7. The transits of the Planets. 8. The Sign which sympathizeth with the
Country. 9 General causes and influences. 10. The Nature of eminent fixed
Stars. 11. The Season of the year. 12. The Latitude and Situation of the
Country.

Now to these in order:

And first for

The Natures of the Planets;
Which are in number seven; viz. Saturn Jupiter Mars

Sol Venus Mercury Luna


As for Saturn, his influence properly stirs up colds and droughts, except
in the first fifteen degrees of Capricorn, his own sign and house, which is
opposite to the watery sign Cancer (but accidentally many other ways) he
excites abundance of moisture.

Jupiter is moderately humid and warm, and is a very windy Planet, chiefly in
aerie Signs. He shows himself most waterish in the Signs of Pisces and Cancer,
and chiefly in his Conjunctions with Saturn, not only in them two waterish
Signs, but also in the fiery Sign of Sagittary.

Mars is accounted hot and dry. Hot he is certainly, and may be dry in dry
Signs; yet he many times in watery Signs, and in aspects of moist Planets; and
when he thunders sometimes also with dry Planets, he can drop and weep as
readily as any other Planet: when he raises up thunders, he is many times
attended with impetuous and violent showers. As also in the aspects of Venus in
summer he rains, and in winter he snows.

The Sun is hot, as every one knows, and temperately dry.

Venus is cold and moist, and gives both hail and snow in Winter, and sometimes
in other quarters of the year. And in Summer can rain apace.

Mercury is a little windy, and strengthens every other Planet in their proper
significations.

The Moon is a little moist; but mostly renews the influences of the aspects,
by her manifold applications to the other Planets; for she gives all and every
one of them several visits every month.

The main business of the weather lies most upon the Influences of Saturn and
Jupiter; they are not only great Planets, but when the one looks upon the
other, they make a forcible alteration in the air: and although they do seldom
meet one with another, nevertheless other Planets passing between them, do
translate and carry the nature of the one to the other, which is succedaneous,
and almost equivalent to the great and proper aspectings of those two mighty
Planets.

Be careful to observe this one thing: that Mercury, Mars and the Sun do in
some manner enforce the other Planets to give an account of their natures and
influences; Mercury after a moderate way, but Mars more strongly; and the Sun
is the most active of all the three. As for example, when the moist planet
Venus is in Conjunction with Mercury, suppose in the beginning of the sign
Gemini (Mercury making Venus appear in her own nature) we have showers and
sunshine interchangeably: But when Mars is united to Venus, we have more
continued snows or rains; but most of all it powers down rivers, when the Sun
and Venus do meet together. These three Planets, not unlike unto Chemists, do
distill and extract the natures of the other Planets.

Now to draw to a close of this point, you must understand, that the seven
Planets which are visible in the Skies, have their secret correspondents
throughout the whole body of the Universe; that is, there be seven Planets
occultly in the air, and there be also hidden Stars and Planets in the bowels
of the earth. There is a visible Saturn, and a visible Jupiter in the
Firmament; there is an hidden Sarurn, and an hidden Jupiter, and hidden Stars
also within the obscurities of the earth. The matter is thus then; the Planets
above do move their brother-Planets below of this inferior globe of earth and
water, to move and keep harmony with them; so Saturn below sympathiseth with
Saturn above, in sending forth cold exhalatious: for it is the earthly Saturn
moved by the celestial Saturn, that brings forth the colds out of the bowels
of the earth.

The Second Principle is, The Nature of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac:
Which are Aries, or the sign of the Ram; Taurus, or the sign of the Bull;
Gemini, or the sign of the Twins; Cancer, or the sign of the Crab; Leo, or the
sign of the Lion; Virgo, or the sign of the Virgin; Libra, or the sign of the
Balance; Scorpio, or the sign of the Scorpion; Sagittarius, or the sign of the
Archer; Capricornus, or the sign of the Goat; Aquarius, or the Sign of the
Skinker; Pisces, or the sign of the Fishes. Their Characters be these,


These twelve Constellations are set about the Firmament like a girdle; through
which the Sun makes his way every year; and since the Creation of the world it
is the only road in the starry frame which all the Planets do move in.

The Sun enters the Ram in March, and makes his progress through the Bull in
April; and he perambulates the Twins in May, and so in order bestows a whole
months time upon every Sign; journeying from one to another, he goes round
through all the Signs, until he come to the Ram again, and thence begin his
travels for the next year. If you would know the Sign where a Planet has taken
up his quarters any time, you must procure the book of the motions of the
Planets for that year, commonly called Ephemerides.

The twelve Signs are divided into four sorts; for some be earthy, others
watery, a third sort aerie, and the fourth sort is fiery.

There be three of each sort: the earthy, which are so named, because like the
earth they are cold and dry; namely, the Bull, the Virgin, the Goat: the watery
are apt for rainy aspects, being cold and moist; and they are the Crab, the
Scorpion and the Fishes. If any great Eclipse of the Sun or great Conjunction
or Aspect of and do happen in them, we have store of rains. The three aerie are
the Twins, the Balance, and the Skinker, which are temperately warm and moist,
and hugely windy, and chiefly for Westerly winds.

Jupiter in the Skinker opposed by Saturn in the Lion, did raise mighty
South-west winds. So Jupiter lately in the Twins, being in a trine-Aspect of
Saturn in the Skinker, did bring us mighty winds from the South-West. The three
fiery signs, which be most apt to thunder, are the Ram, the Lion, the Archer,
moderately dry, but sensibly hot; they stir up heats, and so make the Planets
very active, while they reside in them. When Saturn without mixture of other
Planets is in them, we have excessive droughts. So then, to judge upon the
Signs: Observe when a Planet is in an earthy Sign, he was lately dried up by
perambulating a fiery Sign, and after that immediately having made his progress
in an earthy Sign, he is quite bound up from moisture. So the Sun in the Bull
is dry, and Jupiter having but a temperate moisture of himself, becomes
sapless in an earthy Sign; and Saturn in them is dry and cold, except in the
first 15 degrees of Capricorn he is moist. Then if there be an Aspect with
Jupiter in an earthy Sign, the season is at least dry. In like manner, when a
Planet has been somewhat moistened in an airy Sign, and after that having made
a pretty progress in a watery Sign, he is pretty well sap'd. So Jupiter in the
watery Signs or Triplicity occasioneth a wet time.

When a Planet is in the beginning of one Sign, and in the end of another, he
is indifferent to either of them two Signs: but when he is in the middle of any
Sign, he is then well acquainted with the nature of that Sign. Mars in the
middle of Leo, is hot; but in the middle of Cancer he is moist, and a little
abated of his heat; but in the end of Leo, and the beginning of Virgo he is
neither much heightened, nor much abated in his heat; yet he is purely dry: for
both the Lion and the Virgin are dry Signs. So Venus in the beginning of the
Ram, differs not much from Venus in the end of the Fishes; and Venus in the
end of the Ram is almost of the same temper with Venus in the beginning of the
Bull.

Thirdly, Consider in what Sign the Planet is strongest.
Other parts of Astrology do admit of 5 dignities of the Planets, viz. House,
Exaltation, Triplicity, Term, and Face: the Planets are strongest in their
Houses, next to that in their Exaltations, where there be some fixed Stars
directly of the Planets nature; next to them they are strongest in their
Triplicities; they have some strength also in their Terms, but least of all in
their Faces. But Astrology, as it respects the weather, has only reference
to three of them; namely, House, Exaltation, and Triplicity. The Houses of
Saturn are the Goat, and the Skinker; his Exaltation is in the Balance; his
Triplicity, according to some, is the three airy Signs; these indeed have
relation to Saturn of the Skinker, and in them Saturn is windy: but the earthy
Saturn of the Goat, has his Triplicity in the earthy signs, in all which he is
cold; and in the Bull and the Virgin (if by mixtures of other Planets he be not
accidentally changed) he is dry.

The Houses of Jupiter are the Archer, and the Fishes; his Exaltation the Crab;
and his Triplicity the three fiery Signs: and I say for wind, in the three aerie
Signs.

The Houses of Mars are the Ram and the Scorpion; his Exaltation they say is in
the Goat. But the Triplicity of Mars in the Scorpion is the three watery Signs;
and the Triplicity of Mars in the Ram, is the three fiery signs.

The House of the Sun, is the Lion, his Exaltation is in the Ram; his
Triplicity in the three fiery signs.

The Houses of Venus are the Bull and the Balance, her Exaltation is in the
Fishes: they say her Triplicity is in the three earthy signs; but I think her
as powerful in the watery signs.

The Houses of Mercury are the Twins and the Virgin; his Exaltation in the
Virgin; his Triplicity, because he is a little windy, in the airy signs.

The House of the Moon is the Crab, her exaltation the Bull, her triplicity the
three earthy.

Now for judging according to the dignities. Though the Goal be a dry sign, yet
when Saturn is there, it raineth much in the first fifteen degrees of it. The
Bull is a dry sign, yet Venus joined with the Sun, is not a little rainy; she
is there in her own house. The Archer is a dry sign, and the house of Jupiter;
yet when Jupiter entertaineth Saturn there, he is pretty moist.

Jupiter in the Fishes his own House, and in the Grab his Exaltation, plays
Rex for rains. In aerie signs he is windy, in fiery signs he is hot, in earthy
signs he is very dry. Mars in the Ram his own house, in a Trigon, or Trine of
the Sun in the Lion, is very hot, and so in the fiery triplicity, though in the
watery triplicity he is for rains.

The Fourth Fundamental is, The Observation of the Aspects.
As when one Planet does behold another Planet at a certain distance, which
according to the rules of the worlds harmony, do affect the spirit of the
world, and particularly of the earth, water and air; as music has an
influence upon the minds of men.

The principal and most powerful Aspects are a Conjunction, Opposition,
Quadrat, Trine, Sextile. The Circle of the Zodiac, in which the Planets move
round the Firmament, being divided into 360 degrees; when two or three Planets
are in one and the same degree of the Zodiac, they are said to be in a
Conjunction; as Jupiter and Saturn in the 25 degree of Pisces, both at once in
the year 1644, were there in a Conjunction. When one Planet is directly distant
from another the half of the Firmament, that is, the half of the Circle, viz.
180 degrees, they be them in an Opposition, as Saturn in the sixth degree of
the Lion. When Jupiter is in the sixth degree of the Skinker (remember that
every sign contains just 30 degrees) at the distance of 180 degrees from the
sixth degree of the Lion, Saturn and Jupiter are then opposite. When one Planet
is distant from another 90 degrees, as Mars in the first degree of the Ram,
when Jupiter is in the first degree of the Crab, they are said then to be in a
Square, or Quadrat aspect. So when one Planet is distant from another the space
of 120 degrees, as Saturn in the fifth degree of the Crab, when Jupiter is in
the fifth degree of the Scorpion; they be then in a Trigon or a Trine Aspect.
And when one Planet is removed from another the distance of 60. degrees; as
when the Sun is in the twentieth degree of the Balance, and Jupiter in the
twentieth of the Archer, they be then in a Sextile. So an Opposition takes up
the half, a Trine the third part, a Square the fourth part, a Sextile the sixth
part of the whole Circle: the which Aspects are profoundly demonstrated by the
famous Kepler in his Harmonice Mundi, to the which he adds some new Aspects
upon the same grounds, as a Semisextile of 30 degrees. a Quintile of 72 degrees. a
Decile of 36, a Semiquadrat of 45. degrees. The Characters of the Aspects are,
Conjunction Semisextil Ss. Opposition Quintil Q. Trine Decil Dec. Square
Semiquad. S. Sextil


Quincunx is of 150 d. distance Vc.

To pass your judgment upon the weather, have a regard to the strength of the
Aspects: for one Aspect is more powerful than another, and one and the same
Aspect is more potent at one time than another. Fir^ therefore a Conjunction is
the most powerful of all others, nex^ to it is the Opposition, then the
Quadrat, then the Trine, then the Sextile, then the Quincunx, then the
Semisextile.

The Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, if the mixture of other planets hinder
nor, is clear and frosty, so is the Conjunction o^ the Sun and Saturn; but of
Mercury and Saturn a little cold, louring and misty; that of Saturn and Vinus
snow and hail in winter.

The Conjunction of Jupiter and the Sun, if the Sun come from the Aspect of
Saturn, and if Mercury has seen Jupiter a little before is warm and windy; but
if they be tinged and mixed with Mars, chiefly in fiery signs is thund^^^ing.
The Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, is warm and thundering, if they be not
hindered with cold mixtures, for then they be a little showry, without the
noise of Thunder; yet these showers are like unto thunderdashes. The
Conjunction of Jupiter and Venus, if they be not impedited with strong mixtures
of other Planets, is clear and pleasant. Otherways if Jupiter be strongly mixed
with Mars or the Sun, some rains do follow; but if Jupiter be strongly mixed
with Saturn, it is cold and a little moist. Conjunction of Jupiter and Mercury
is misty. Conjunction of Mars and the Sun, if they be not dulled with cold
mixtures, or in earthy, signs, is thundering, In dry signs, there may be
lightning without thunder. Mars and Venus is showry or snowy, according to the
season. Mars and Mercury warm and misty, if there be any wet mixtures. The Sun
and Venus is showry, or snowy. The Sun and Mercury clear and fair, if strong
watery mixtures do not intervene. What is here said of Conjunctions, the same,
though not in so high a degree, may be said of the other Aspects. Venus and
Mercury, is sometimes shining, sometimes showring.

Secondly, The Aspects which do more seldom come to pass, do make a deeper
impression upon the earths interior Lamp, than those which are obvious every
month, quarter, or year. So the Conjunction of Mars and the Sun, which falls
out but once every two years, is much more valid than that of the Sun and
Mercury, which comes to pass several times in one year: or of the Sun and the
Moon once in a month. Thus an Eclipse of the Sun is of more force than an
Eclipse of the Moon; and either of the Eclipses, is more effectual than other
Conjunctions or Oppositions of the Sun and Moon be. The Conjunction or
Opposition of Jupiter and Saturn, is more than the Conjunction of the Sun and
Saturn; because it (...) does occur; although the Sun be a great Planet, yet
beca^se, once every year he accosteth Saturn, whereas Jupiter comes to him but
once in fifteen years or more, and therefore the Conjunction of Jupiter and
Saturn is called the great Conjunction, which is ever cold; and chiefly; if, it
be mixed with Venus, is snowy or rainy.

Thirdly, The Aspects of the greater Planets be of greater efficacy than those
of the lesser Planets; so the Conjunction of the Sun and Saturn, and of the Sun
and Jupiter, is more effectual than the Conjunction of the Sun and Mercury, or
the Sun and Venus, or the Sun and the Moon.

Fourthly, A potent mixture gives potent Aspects, as the Conjunction of the Sun
and Mercury is warm; but if both of them have lately been in a forcible Aspect
of Mars, and so are mixed with his nature, they do thunder.

Fifthly, The Aspects in lofty or fiery signs, are strong Aspects. So a Sextile
of the Sun in Sagittary or the Archer, and Saturn in the Balance, or the
Skinker, is stronger than a Trine of Saturn and the Sun in the Bull and the
Virgin, two earthy Signs, although a Trine in it self be a greater Aspect than
a Sextile.

Sixthly, The Aspects of the Planets in their Houses, are mighty, yea and in
their exaltations also: as a Trine of Mars in the Ram, and of the Sun in the
Lion, is hot and thundering.

Lastly, When there is no Aspect, or when the Aspects be weak, the season is
quiet. If forcible Aspects in dry Signs rain not, yet the air may be lowering
and cloudy.

Fifthly, or the fifth Rule is, Carefully to observe the mixtures of Planets.
That is to say, a Planet not only acts according to his own nature, when he
is in an Aspect; but also carries along with him the nature of the Planet which
did behold ^im in the Aspect: which adventitious nature got by the Aspect, is
called a mixture: as for Example, the Sun a hot Planet, in the Sign of the Ram,
his exaltation, a fiery hot sign, lately being in Conjunction of Jupiter, a
warm Planet, in the sign of the Fishes, becomes very hot and active coming to
a Quadrat, (which is a strong Aspect of Saturn, a cold and dry Planet) yet
being moist in the first fifteen degrees of the Goat, as also lately joined
with Venus, a cold and moist Planet, the Sun potently stirs up the nature of
Saturn, which is tinged or mixed with the moisture of Vinus, and occasioneth a
cold and moist season: nevertheless after the cold is over-past, Saturn
retains a little warm tincture of the Sun.

By these mixtures or tinctures also, I have observed Jupiter lightly tinged
with Saturn, but lately united to the Sun, in the sign of the Lion: so Jupiter
becoming active through the mixture of the Sun, coming to the Conjunction of
Venus, who was lately aspected of Saturn, did procure abundance of ruins;
whereas our common Prognosticators would have predicted a fair season, because
of the Conjunction of Jupiter and Venus, which does many times make a clear
sky, if mixtures do not contradict it.

Though Mercury, Mars, and the Sun do stir up cold Planets to shed forth their
natures, and Jupiter, fortified by hot mixtures does the same; yet if any of
them be overheated, they do then burn away the influences of the cold Planets,
and do only exercise the hot influence. So Jupiter in the cold winter, being
twice immediately warmed with the Sun, and once by Mars, free from the
intervening of all cold aspects, is hotter than either the Sun or Mars are in
themselves: for at that time, Jupiter being opposed to Venus, who was lately in
Quadrat or Square with Saturn, after a little cold beginning, because of the
nature of Venus, and mixture of Saturn, did at length thaw the ice, and banish
the cold.

After the like manner there is a cold mixture of an high degree: for I have
observed Mars damped with some cold Aspects, without intermission, when he came
to the Aspect of Jove, a warm Planet, (the vulgar Astrologer would then have
fore told a hot and thundering time) did then emit a cold influence.

Mars also in the cold winter, in an aspect of cold Saturn, yet Mars being
heated by the Sun, who was lately warmed with Jupiter, and Saturn also
separating from a good Aspect of the Sun, lately fortified by the fire of Mars;
this Aspect, even in the winter-season, did redouble the great Ordnance of
thunder and lightning.

When a Planet is but lightly, or singly tinged, and immediately applies to
another Planet, he first manifests the adventitious mixture; and when that is
past, he acts according to his own nature: as the Sun coming from the Trine
of Saturn, and so a little colded, and going to the Trine of Jupiter,
separating from the Trine of Venus; at first meeting, chiefly in the watery or
aerie Triplicity, they are a little cold, moist and windy; but after that is
gone, they are warm.

If a Planet be tempered with two contrary mixtures, the last is first
manifested, then the first mixture does appear.

The Sixth Rule is, Diligently to take notice of the renewing, or anticipating
the Aspects by the Moon.
Though the Moon it self be but weak; yet when it passes between two other
Planets, that are coming to a strong Aspect, it makes their influence operate
before their proper time of aspecting, which may be called the anticipation of
the Aspect. Or when two Planets do break up their Aspect, and so separate the
one from the other, the Moon coming between them, does renew the bargain of the
Aspect, and works the influence over again, which may be called the
Renovation of the Aspect. And I advise thee to peruse all the Moons Aspects
every day to this purpose.

An example of anticipation is, when the Sun strongly applies himself to Mars,
for the letting off the great guns of the clouds according to the course of
nature. The Moon then coming from the Conjunction or strong Aspect of the Sun,
she ushers the way to the Sun, and gives Mars the first salutation; and anon it
thundereth, before the Sun come to act his part: or if the Moon apply from the
Opposition of Mars, to the immediate Opposition of the Sun, the same effect
does follow.

An Example of Renovation: At the time when Jupiter and Venus in the Lion did
give a dropping season, the Moon was then in Cancer, in her own house, in a
watery sign, and shortly after presented her self to Jupiter, Venus, the Sun
and Saturn, one after another, renewing the business by her progress among the
Planets; and all that while for the most part, it rained apace: which work of
the Moon is not vulgarly taken notice of; the neglect of which, I doubt, has
brought forth one, if not more false principles in Astrology. Yea, and as
Physicians do observe her influence upon the sick of the fever, when she comes
to the Quadrat of her own place, she works then also: even so it is in the
weather, if she be not impedited.

The seventh Rule is, Of the Transits of the Planets, which by no means must be
neglected.
That is, when either of the two Planets, that did aspect one another, comes
first to that point of the Zodiac where the other Planet was, whom he did
aspect in Sextile, or Trine, or Quadrat; or when he passes along the point
himself was in. But in Conjunctions or Oppositions, when he also comes to the
Square of that degree wherein the Conjunction or Opposition was.

It may be admitted for a transit also, when an aspect falls upon the place
of another Planet which he had in the time of a great Conjunction, or at the
first appearance of a Comet, or in the time of a great Eclipse: or when an
aspect falls upon the same degree, where other Planets did not long ago
aspect each other.

For an example of the first sort of Transits, Saturn in the Lion did oppose
Jupiter in the Skinker, and did first raise up a South-west wind, and then a
mighty cold air: afterward in the year 1669, Saturn transiting the place of
Jupiter in the Skinker, in that threefold Opposition, did raise up the same
sort of winds, which did continue all that year for the most part; yea and did
stir up the same sort of diseases that he had formerly occasioned at the
threefold Opposition.

It is therefore fitting to review the Aspects of preceding years, if we would
truly know the state of succeeding times; and to this purpose an old
Ephemerides is useful for some years after they be expired.

Jupiter in the Twins aspected by Mars in the Ram, not only in the time of the
aspect did they show their natures, but also when Mars came to the place which
Jupiter had in the aspect, it thundered. The like in the Trine of Mars in the
Ram, and the Sun in the Lion; it thundereth (if not damped by cold mixtures)
when Mars first comes to that degree where the Sun was in the Lion: the thunder
is re-excited, though more faintly; and the same effect follows, when the Sun
first comeeth to the degree Mars was posited in at that Trigon; the which is
little minded by our raw Astrologers.

An Example of the Second sort: The Sun and Mars united in the same degree of
the Crab, which was Saturns place, at the eclipsing of the Sun in the Ram, in
the year 1652. which did occasion a thundering, and showery season.

The Eighth Rule is, To consider the Sign which sympathizeth with the Country
in particular.
Which of necessity must be looked into: For an Aspect will operate in the
Country which is subject to the Sign wherein it is celebrated, many times more
powerfully, than in Countries agreeable to other Signs. Some Countries are
subject to the fiery Triplicity: England to the Ram, Italy to the Lion, Spain to
the Archer. Some to the watery Triplicity; as Scotland and Holland to the Crab,
Norway to the Scorpion. Some to the Airy; as Austria to the Balance, Tartary to
the Skinker. Some to the earthy, as Ireland to the Bull. Thus the Conjunction
of Saturn and Jupiter, or of the Sun and Venus in the Crab, gives abundance of
rain in Scotland, whereas in the South of England they are but few, if some
Aspect in the fiery Triplicity do not increase them. The Aspects may shed forth
their influence in all Countries after some measure, but they work most
potently in Countries subject to the signs wherein the Aspect is made. And to
go no further for the proof of this than the year 1669, when the Conjunctions
of Mars and Venus and of the Sun and Venus came to pass in the Crab, the which
did abundantly moisten North-Britain; though they were not so operative in
Englands South parts: and when Jupiter the same year came to the Crab, these
Aspects were again irritated by Sextiles with Jupiter, and the effects did
follow in the North, though the South was wonderfully dry. After the like
manner drought proceeding from an Eclipse of the Sun in the Ram, is much more
felt in Countries subject to the fiery Triplicity, than in Countries related to
the Crab, or the watery Triplicity.

The Ninth Rule. General causes are to be looked upon; as Comets, great
Eclipses, chiefly of the Sun, the great Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter.
Comets cause dry times for the most part, and more particularly in dry Signs,
and their Countries, as our days can witness by experience of the Comets in the
year 1664. There was a great Eclipse of the Sun in the Ram, and about that time
a Comet; to which also may be added Saturn in the Lion, the which did occasion
a dry Spring and Summer in England. It has been wondered at by many, at the
dry Summer and Harvest of the year 1669. But if they do consider the Eclipse of
the Sun in the dry and earthy Sign of the Bull, and although it was not visible
in our Horizon, yet in matters of the weather, it works all over; for the
fabric of this world is like a Musical instrument well tuned, of the which if
a string be touched at one end, it will quiver all along to the farther end:
And in the Bull and the Twins, the Comet of the year 1664 did move, and Saturn
in the Skinker looking on the Bull with a Square, and on the Twins with a Trine
Aspect, and in Opposition to the Lion, where he was in the time of drought, in
the years 1652 and 1653. And likewise the Sign wherein Mars was in the time of
the great Conjunction, in the year 1663. he may then wonder the less. However
it is most true, that God sends extraordinary droughts, to punish sinners, as
in the days of Elijah, for the space of three years and an half it did not rain
upon the land of Israel. And God causes it to rain upon one City, and not upon
another.

The Tenth Rule. Observe the Nature of the most eminent fixed Stars, in or near
the Zodiac, when the Planets are in Conjunction with them.
As when the Sun is joined to Sirius or the Dog Star, of a fiery nature, the
air is hotter than at other seasons of the year, if doubled or redoubled
mixtures of other Planets do not contradict.

So the Pleiades, or the cluster of Seven-stars, are accounted moist, if Venus
be aspected when she comes to them: so Hyades, and so of others.

The Eleventh Rule. The Season of the year must be looked upon.
For the influence of a cold rain in Summer, is snow in Winter, and snow or
sleet in the Spring. Warm Configurations, if they be moist, are for rain, both
Summer and Winter. Anniversary winds or rains which do come once a year, as in
the month of March it raineth about Rome: the winds, called the Etesii, do
usually blow.

Moreover, take especial notice of this, that prediction for every days weather
in an Almanac, is absurd: for an Aspect of rain, except it be very potent, is
not at one and the same time generally all the Country over. For suppose it
may rain at London to day, tomorrow it may rain at Bristol, and be fair and day
at London; it may rain at Norwich the third day, and that day the other two
places may be without rain; and so it may move from place to place, while that
rainy influence lasts. The common people do call this a falling out by Planets.

The Twelfth Rule. Forget not the Latitude, and Situation of the Country.
The Latitude is, how far North or South it lies.

The Situation is, whether it be an Island, or Firm-land; whether it be hilly,
or a plain champaign ground, a low vale. Now an Island is more windy than the
Continent or Firm land; because the Sea is seldom without winds: and it is more
warm in winter (except it be seituate in the Frozen-zone, as Island) than the
main-land: therefore Britain has milder Winters, than France.

In the low Vales and level grounds, which are not exalted with hills, the
rainy clouds make but a short abode, but swiftly move away through those aires,
without stop; whereas among high tops of mountains, the clouds are hampered and
arrested, and have not so free passage; but crouding together, at length do
discharge themselves by millions of drops into the lower bottoms.

The Situation also does tell us, what Winds are most frequent and familiar in
any Country, if we do look how the Sea bears to the Land: The Western Ocean
looks broad upon Britain; from whence Westerly-winds do often blow upon this
Island: The Mediterranean-Sea upon the East of Portugal gives that Country
moist Easterly-winds. These same great waters flowing from the South Regions
upon the shoars of Italy, do furnish that Country with moist South-winds: but
the land of Canaan, lying at the bottom of the Streights, to the East of the
Mediterranean, does meet with Westerly wet winds; but the winds that blow upon
it from the South, coming from Sunburned Egypt, are hot. Thus our Savior
reasons with the Jews, Luke 12. 54, 55. We do use to say in Britain, that
when it clears up in the West in time of raines, that it will be fair anon;
because no more Clouds at that time do come from the Western Ocean. Under the
Equinectial, in the middle of the World, there is a Trade-wind (so called, by
reason of the great trading of Merchants in those Seas) one half of the year
blowing from the East, and the other half year from the West, according as the
Sun is on this or that side the Equinoctial. And in the East Indies, when the
Sun, in or near the Aequinoctial, is Vertical, or direct over their heads, it
raineth almost constantly; because of the great Indian Ocean, from whence the
Sun with his mighty heat draws great store of moisture.

The winds upon mighty high mountains, which are not adjacent to the Sea, do
vary according to the point of the Compass the Sun is in, any hour of the day.

The Sun in the Meridian, and upon the direct South of the airy Alps, the wind
at that hour upon Mount Viso, one of the highest among the Alps, is quite
contrary to the Sun, blowing directly from the North.

As for the Latitude of the Country; the farther North, as being more remote
from the Sun, the colder it is; but the farther South, the warmer: it may snow
in the High-lands of Scotland, when it but raineth at London: it may rain in a
North mountainons Country, when it is dry weather in great Champains and
Southern plains.

The Northern Countries of Denmark, Norway, Swedeland, Russia, and the North of
Germany, are for the most part frozen all Winter, and then the exhalations and
mists are close imprisoned, therefore the air is calm and clear, and the
starry lights glistering most beautifully. They can walk upon the narrow Sound,
between Sweden and Danemark, as upon dry land, it is so strongly bridged with
Ice. In the Springtime, when the ice is chawed, and Winter must go lodge among
the Antipodes, and the pleasant Spring and flowery Summer do enter the stage,
then the imprisoned exhalations do break out, and fill the air with warm fogs,
bringing a warmer Summer than islands have, which lie farther South. In the
South-parts Egypt is dried up, and has little or no rain. Judea seldom is
rained upon in June and July: the East Indies has great rains, when the Sun is
vertical, through the Suns vehement heat upon the Indian Ocea.

CHAP. III.
What may be prognosticated, and how.
THere may be foreseen 1. The temper of the Air, cold or hot, infallibly. 2.
Calm and dry seasons. 3. Wet weather, as rains, sleets, mists, snow, hail. 4.
Thunders and Lightning. 5. Winds. 6. Cloudy dark aires. 7. Comets and other
fiery Meteors.

For the First, of Heat and Colds. The Conjunctions and Oppositions, and other
powerful Aspects of Saturn, if he be not overheated by mixture, are cold. The
Conjunction and Opposition of Jupiter and Saturn are vehemently cold, yet not
always frosty. Saturn and Venus bring Colds, Snows, Rains, Hails, consideratis
considerandis. The Sun and Saturn, Mars and Saturn are clear and frosty; and
Mercury and Saturn are not warm: remembering always, according to the
foregoing Rules, to consider the Latitude, Situation and Sign and Planet
sympathizing with the Country. The strength of the Aspect, the Sign, the
Dignities of the Planets aspecting, their Mixtures, Transits, the Seasons, and
general Causes. A Planet proceeding from the Aspect of Jupiter to the Aspect of
Saturn, or Venus Saturnized, is cold.

For Heats; the applications of fiery or warm Planets, if they be not double
damped with cold mixtures. Thus the Conjunctions of Mercury with the Sun, Mars
or Jupiter, are hot. So the powerful Aspects of Mars and Jupiter, or Mars and
the Sun. So the Aspects of the Sun and Jupiter. Or when cold Planets are deeply
dyed with hot and fiery mixtures. Or the applications of Planets separating from
Saturn, or Venus mixed with Saturn or Jupiter. Hence you may know whether
proves mild or rigid. If the Planets go from Saturn immediately to Jupiter, the
Winter is mild; if they go from Jupiter immediately to Saturn, it proves a cold
Winter.

In this particular of Heat and Cold, the new Aspects of Kepler do take place,
and do bring a sensible alteration of the air.

For the Second, calm and temperate weather. When there is no Aspect, or no
powerful Transit for some season: or when the Aspect is weak and mean; or when
the Aspect is in Earthy Signs, chiefly the Aspects of Jupiter and Venus: or
when the Planets are well mixed with a dry Jupiter. Look also is Saturn be in
an earthy or fiery Sign (except the Goat.) Cold and dry Aspects in Summer do
give frosty nights; but clear and pleasant days. Total Eclipses of the Sun in
the Ram, Lion, or Earthy Signs, and also Comets, do prenote a dry season.

For the Third thing, namely wet weather, may be foreseen, by strong Aspects
of the Planets with Venus, or with any Planet well tinged with Venus. Saturn
and Venus Snows, Rain, Hail: the Sun and Venus, Rains or Snow, considering the
mixtures and the Seasons: Mercury and Venus many showers, intermixed with
Sun-shines. Mercury and Saturn, or Mars, a little tinged with Venus, do give us
fogs; Mars or the Sun looking upon Saturu, well tinged with Venus, are moist.
Jupiter also well heated with mixtures, strongly aspecting Venus, does give us
rains in Summer, and Snows in Winter. Jupiter also in a watery Sign aspected of
Saturn, or coming to the Transit of Saturn, in a watery Sign, is moist. So Mars
in the Crab, aspecting Venus in the Ram. Likewise fiery Planets, when they
thunder, do give us rains; but if they have a dry tincture, we have thunder
without rains, or lightning without thunder. If they have a tincture of Saturn
and Venus, and do thunder, they do also hail: which also is the Fourth thing
here considerable.

For the Fifth thing, namely Winds, it is a little difficult, but much more
difficult to foretell from whence they shall blow. Yet observe the Airy
Triplicity to be windy and Westerly. So Saturn in the Skinker, an airy Sign,
transiting the place of Jupiter, when Saturn in the Lion did oppose him; as
also in a Trine of Jupiter in the Twins, another aerie Sign, as in the year
1660. can testify, in which the wind did blow almost constantly from the West.
The winds are commonly laid upon Mercury; it is true, Mercury coming from
Jupiter to Saturn, or a Planet well tinged with Saturn, makes way for winds.
Jupiter and Saturn are two great Planets, of contrary natures, and so do many
times meet with a tumult. Saturn, in the Lion, opposing Jupiter in the Skinker,
do at first stir up South-West winds, and afterward a cold quiet air. But
immediately after that Opposition, the Sun also came to be opposed by Saturn,
and presently after united to Jupiter, yet did raise no winds; because there
was small contrariety at that meeting, two warm Planets both being alike
Saturnized.

For the place from whence the winds do blow; Aerie Signs are Westerly, as is
said already. They say commonly, that Jupiter is for North winds, which is
false, except it be upon cold mixtures: for North winds are cold: Jupiter is
warm in this Island of Britain: though Westerly winds do not always, and in a
dry year do scarce rain at all; yet they have a moisture in them, because they
come from the Western Ocean. Easterly winds, of their own nature, are more dry;
because they come from the dry land, whose great Continent lies to the East of
Britain. South winds, for the most part, are warm; because they blow from the
warm parts of the World. North-winds are cold, blowing from the perpetual Snows
of Greenland and Moscovia. Hence Jupiter, being hot and moist, is for
South-west winds, according to reason and experience too. Venus is cold and
moist, therefore of her own nature she is for North-west: great mixtures may
alter their natures. The Sun is hot and dry, therefore South. East, so is Mars.
Saturn is cold and dry, therefore North- In Fiery Signs he is Easterly. Mercury
and the Moon are for all quarters. Remember the winds proper to the Country,
and Anniversary winds.

For the Sixth, viz. cloudy and dark airs; Every day when there is a great
Aspect formed, is commonly cloudy; and the rather, if it do incline to rain.
When there be many great Aspects, one immediately after another; though they be
dry, yet is it a cloudy time.

For the Seventh: Oftentimes about the great Conjunctions or Oppositions, there
is some such thing as Comets; as the years 1652, 1664, 1665, can witness: after
the great Conjunction in the Archer, we had three Comets. And when Saturn
transits the place of Jupiter, which he had in the great Opposition, if the
Opposition be lofty. When Saturn came to Jupiters place in the Skinker, then
did appear a Comet in Virginia, in the Fishes, in the which Sign the next great
Opposition is to be celebrated.

SOLI DEO VNITRINO GLORIA.
A New Table, showing exactly the Prime, Epact, Dominical Letter, and
Leap-year, etc. for 20 years.
years Prime. Epact. Domin. Let. Cyc. Shrove Sund. Easter Sund Whit Sunday.
1671 19 29 A 28 Feb. 5 Ap 23 Ju. 11 1672 1 11 G F 1 Mar 18 Ap. 7 Ma. 26 1673 2
22 E 2 Feb 9. M. 30 Ma. 18 1674 3 3 D 3 Mar. 1 Ap 9 Jun. 7. 1675 4 14 C 4 Feb.
14 Ap 4 Ma. 23 1676 5 25 B A 5 Feb. 6 M. 26 May 4 1677 6 6 G 6 Feb. 25 A. 15
J^n. 3 1678 7 17 F 7 Feb. 10 M. 31 M. 19. 1679 8 28 E 8 Mar. 2. A. 20 Jun 8.
1680 9 9 D C 9 Feb 22 A. 11 M 30. 1681 10 20 B 10 Feb. 13 Ap. 3 M 22 1682 11 1
A 11 Feb 26 A. 16 Jun. 4 1683 12 12 G 12 Feb 18 Ap 8 M 21. 1684 13 23 F E 13
Feb. 10 M. 30 M 18. 1685 14 4 D 14 Mar 1 A 19 Jun. 7 1686 15 15 C 15 Feb. 14
Ap. 4 M 23. 1687 16 26 B 16 Feb. 6. M. 27 M 15. 1688 17 7 A G 17 Feb. 26 A. 15
Jun 13 1689 18 18 F 18 Feb. 10 M 31 Ma 19 1690 19 29 E 19 Mar. 2. A. 20 Jun. 8.
Day Janu. Febr. Mar. Apr. May Jun. 1 a d d g b e 2 b e e a c f 3 c f f b d g 4
d g g c e a 5 e a a d f b 6 f b b e g c 7 g c c f a d 8 a d d g b e 9 b e e a c
f 10 c f f b d g 11 d g g c e a 12 e a a d f b 13 f b b e g c 14 g c c f a d 15
a d d g b e 16 b e e a c f 17 c f f b d g 18 d g g c e a 19 e a a d f b 20 f b
b e g c 21 g c c f a d 22 a d d g b e 23 b e e a c f 24 c f f b d g 25 d g g c
e a 26 e a a d f b 27 f b b e g c 28 g c c f a d 29 a d g b e 30 b e a c f 31 c
f d Day July. Aug Sep. Octo. Nov. Dec. 1 g c f a d f 2 a d g b e g 3 b e a c f
a 4 c f b d g b 5 d g c e a c 6 e a d f b d 7 f b e g c e 8 g c f a d f 9 a d g
b e g 10 b e a c f a 11 c f b d g b 12 d g c e a c 13 e a d f b d 14 f b e g c
e 15 g c f a d f 16 a d g b e g 17 b e a c f a 18 c f b d g b 19 d g c e a c 20
e a d f b d 21 f b e g c e 22 g c f a d f 23 a d g b e g 24 b e a c f a 25 c f
b d g d 26 d g c e a c 27 e a d f b d 28 f b e g c e 29 g c f a d f 30 a d g b
e g 31 b e c a

The Immovable Feasts are celebrabrated with us upon the days of the Month
following.
The Feast of the Circumcision of Christ January 1. The Epiphany, or
Twelfth-day, Jan. 6. The Conversion of St. Paul, Janu 25 The Purification of
the Virgin Mary, Feb 2 St. George his day, April 23. St. Matthias the apostle,
Feb 25. The Annuciation of the Virgin Mary, Mar. 25. Phillip and Jacob
Apostles, May 1. St. John Baptist, June 24. St. Peter and St. Paul Apostles,
June 29. St. James Apostle, July 25. St. Bartholomew Apostle. August 24. St.
Matthew Apostle, Sept. 21. Michael Archangel, Sept. 29. St. Luke Evangelist,
October. 18. Simon and Jude apostles, October. 28. St. Andrew apostle, Nov. 29. St.
Thomas apostle, Dec. 21. Nativity of Christ, December. 25. St. Steven Martyr. Dec.
26 St. John Evangelist, Dec. 27. Innocents, Dec. 28.
How to find the Moons Age.
ADd to the day of the Month the Epact, and so many days more, as are Months
from March, to the Month you are in, including both Months; and if they
amount not to thirty, that Sum shall be the Age of the Moon; but if your number
exceed thirty, deduct thirty, and what remains is the Moons Age.

This is to be understood; when the Month has one and thirty days; but if the
Month has but thirty days, you must substract but twenty nine, and the rest
is the Age a foresaid.

For in those Months that have thirty-one days, the New Moon, or Conjunction,
is the thirtieth day of her Age: and those Months that have but thirty days,
the New- Moon falls on the twenty ninth day of her Age.

Take an Example to make this plain.

Suppose I would know the Age of the Moon, January the First, 1675. current.

Now considering that the Epact changes not till March, I add the Epact of the
foregoing year, which is three, and the day of the month one, their sum is
four; and January being the eleventh Month, accounted from March, being also
added, amounts to fifteen; which is the true Age of the Moon, the said First
day of January 1675. Et sic in aliis.

THe Number of the days in each Month are briefly summed up in these following
Verses.

Thirty Days has September,
April. June, and November,
February has twenty-eight alone,
And all the rest have thirty one.
Note, That in Leap-year, which happens once in four years, February has
twenty nine days.

By this preceding Almanac, you may find the day of the Month, as also the
moveable and immovable Feasts, for twenty years to come. Its use is plain and
obvious to a mean capacity, and the day of the Month found by it, as in other
Almanacks, knowing but the Dominical Letter.

Vulgar Notes and Observations to know when the Moon rises, or sets, etc.
1. AT the New Mood, she rises and sets with the Sun.

2. At the Full-Moon, she rises when the Sun sets, and sets when the Sun rises.

3. At the beginning of the Increase, she rises after Sun rising, and sets
after Sun set.

4. At the beginning of the Decrease, she rises a little after Sunset, and
sets a little before his rising.

5. In the first Quadrat of her Increase, she rises about Noon, or Midday, and
sets about Midnight.

6. In the Second Quadrat of her Decrease, she rises at Midnight, and sets
about Noon or Midday.

And hence may be computed (near enough for common use) the intermediate times
of the Moons rising every day slower by one hour and about a fifth part, viz.
twelve minutes.

The Four Terms are as follows;
HIllary Term begins January the twenty third, and ends February the twelfth.

Easter Term begins Seventeen days after Easter Day, and ends the Monday before
Whit-sunday.

Trinity Term begins next Friday after Trinity Sunday, which is always the next
after Whit- sunday) and ends on Wednesday. nineteen days after.

Michaelmas Term begins on twenty third of October, and end November the twenty
eighth following.

FINIS.

