BERSABA: OR, THE Love of David.

A POEM.

Written by Samuel Cobb, Student of Trinity College, Cambridge.

Improbe Amor! quid non mortalia pectora cogis?
Virg. Aen. l. 4. LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by J. Whitlock near
Stationers' Hall, 1695.

THE PREFACE.
IT may look like Presumption, perhaps, to appear again in public, after such
ill success, such a fearful Engagement, and such dangerous Enemies, who resolve
to draw upon an Author, whatever he be, and fly at him open-mouthed, like a
Pack of Irish Wolves barking at the Moon; who think that Man happiest that
strikes deepest; who, because they have no Wit themselves, will not allow any
in others. This, one would think, were enough to deterr a young Scribler, from
ever after engaging himself in a Poetical Quarrel. But our Authors for the most
the part, have(...) Hydra's Heads, cut one off, another presently rises in the
roo(...) of it; these, like Benito in the Play, though kicked and cuff'd, ar(...)
resolved to scrape on, and suffer heroically. They are not now-^days awed
formidine fustis; when they are once in the humor writing, their Natures are
invincible, and can no more be expel than the English can leave Fighting after
the first Engagement, than an unlucky Gamester can forbear Playing, when he has
lost round sum of Money. Since then this wicked Custom has gain (...) so much
strength upon the World; since Fools and Blockheads, like, Logs, will Swim
uppermost; since every paltry Apprentice that has read a few Plays, sets up for
an Author; since these, I say, take the Privilege of writing, I am resolved
not to stand out, but make one for Company's sake; if I am laughed at, it will
be a comfort to have Companions; for though some good natured Persons (I cannot
tell what to call them) have snapp'd at me once already, yet I cannot give over
for my Life, I must on: Ecce iterum Crispinus, I am come once more to furnish
matter for their senseless Lampoons: make bold to use the Impudence of a
Player, who will appear up(...) the Stage, though hist first off an hundred
times. But I must (...)eg the Favor of them not to debarr me the liberty of
Prefacing, (...)r that is the Colors which our Company is known by; and it is
as great a rarity nowadays to see a Poet without a Preface, as a Spaniard
without his Cloak and Sword: With this he covers his Faults, and defends them
at the same time.

Here I must digress a little from my purpose (for it is grown a modern Vice to
amuse the Reader with Chriticisms upon the Ancients, and tell him strange
things, nothing to the Subject that lies before him: And when one has made a
few Poems, to write in the Preface how far we have out-gone the French and
Italian in advan(...)ing Tragedies and Comedies:) I must hamour the Age, and
(...)se these digressions for Custom's sake; but more particularly by
(...)eason of a late Ode of mine upon the Queen's death, which came (...)ut
under the name of J. D. Gent. which made such a Noise (...)road, and which an
ingenious Gentleman bestowed a few Reflecti(...)s upon: I am not in the least
ashamed of what he says, but slight (...)im more than the Mastiff did a little
barking Cur, when he (...)ew'd him his Teeth, and pist upon him. However I
think my (...)f obliged in a manner by the Laws of Nature to say something
(...) it; for there is no Man so inhumane who will not speak in de(...)ce of
his own Offspring, when he finds it abused.

Had I been the first that tried the severity of ignorant and en(...)us Men, I
might with all justice imaginable have murmured (...)t my misfortune; but since
others, and those of extraordinary (...)ote, have run through the same hazards,
the same critical per(...)ecutions, I willingly submit my self, like a poetical
Martyr, to (...)heir tyrannick Fury, but with the constancy of an unjust
Sufferer an laugh at their vain, insignificant, and harmless Blows, There are
three things, I confess, which are to be utterly banished ^ur Commonwealth (for
I will pretend to be a small Member of it) Blasphemy, Profaneness, and
Obscenity. Wherever any of these meet in a Poem, we may call the sense
Diseased, it can in no manner be Wit, however cleanly it be covered. For
Obscenity Ovid was banished Rome, as appears by his own account in his second
Book de Tristibus: His Elegies are somewhat Lascivious; ^or is his Imperial
Poem free from those extravagant stories of Pasiphae and Myrrha; where the
Subjects are so unaptly chosen, that they would not allow him to write chastely.
Horace, whom we have ^n so great esteem, is licentious in this kind to an
extremity, ^hiefly in his Satyrs, which he wrote not with an intention to ^ash
Vice (as Juvenal did) but purposely to please himself. Homer we find leading
his Women to Bed, but he says no more of them. Virgil, the best of all the
others, wrote Love-passions with admirable Softness and Purity; considering
that Poets are commonly too Luxuriant on those occasions. I need not name
Cornelius Gallus, and many others: I will only descend to our Times: Mr. Cowley
has some small taste of it in his Mistress, which he seems to be sensible of in
his Preface. Much excess is to be allowed in Love, and even more in Poetry, so
we avoid those two unpardonable Vices, Profaneness and Obscenity, which (says
he) if I am Guilty of, they have ill represented my thoughts and intentions.
Profaneness and Blasphemy commonly go together, and the Author of the Satyrs
against the Jesuits seems to me, to be Guilty of all those three Vices. I don't
mean to detract from the honor of the dead; but, as the most vulgar Persons
are allowed to give their Vote, so I only speak my opinion, which, I am
persuaded in this case no body will go about to contradict. As for Blasphemy,
of which I was accused, I cannot but allow with Mr. Dryden, that the using of
it is a kind of applying Pigeons to the Soles of the Feet, it proclaims their
Fancy as well as Judgment to be in a desperate condition. This I say, because I
have found the same immoderate liberty of Verse in others, as well as my self;
and if the Supercilious Readers had examined them with the like strictness and
impartiality, I am sure very few of them would have escaped the fire. I do not
mean to tread in their steps; for the Ode was snatched from me so abruptly and
unfortunately, that I could not gather time enough to consider what I had
wrote. I found J. D. Gent. joined to it, of which I was wholly ignorant; for I
scorn to do that injustice to another, in cloaking my Faults under his name;
and on the other side I am so vain, that I would not let any one claim my
Excellencies, (if I had any) but my self.

Nevertheless those Men (who pretend to understand much) would certainly have
been more mild and favorable, had they but considered the Licentiousness of
Pindarique Poetry, which is a more exalted sort of Lyrick, to which we are to
allow more Digressions, more bold Metaphors and Allegories, than to any other
Verse besides; which as few can understand, so few can write it well: Hear what
Pindar speaks himself concerning it (for (as the Plain Dealer says) Authors
love to show in the Preface that they understand Greek and Latin, for fear the
Reader should not find it out by the Poem.)

(...): He writes to the Learned and Wise, and not to the Vulgar, who commonly
correct what they cannot comprehend, therefore he compares them to Crows,
(shadowing by that name, Bacchilides, (Schmidius says,) who was one of the same
Wit and Learning as our pretended Critics are) (...). But lest I should be
guilty of Pindarical Digression, I will return to the Argument that lies before
me, though, I hope, I may stand excusable for what I Have said, it being the Zeal
of a Parent to it is Children.

Dorotheus, Bishop of Tyrus, (who lived in the Year 401,) and Epiphanius,
relate the Story of David and Bathsheba after this manner; They tell us that
Nathan (who lived in Gabaon a City near Rama) foresaw that David would Sin with
Beersabea, (for so they call her,) and as he was coming to sorewarn David,
Belial laid a dead Corpse in the way: Now it was counted a great part of Charity
amongst the Jews to bury the Dead, as appears by the Book of Tobit: Nathan
therefore fearing lest the Body should be unreverently torn by wild Beasts,
buried it; in the mean time David lay with Bathsheba; Nathan two or three days
after was sent to warn him of it. Whether it be true, or no, I will not dispute
now, but it seems impoetical: Therefore Th^^dorus Beza has rejected it; and
though I took the hint of (...) Fancy from him, yet, I think, I may with as
great Justice claim the whole Poem to be my own, as a Poet does a Play when he
has taken the Plot from a Novel, or with more dexterity changes the Scene, by
turning the French and Italian Comedies into English, and throws them upon the
Stage for his own peculiar Wit and Invention. I have not followed my Author
word for word, neither have I Paraphrased him in his Sense, but have taken out
what was too grave for Poetry, and have added some Fancies of my own; as at the
latter end, where the Angel appears to Nathan in the shape of Samuel; and where
Nathan tells the King a short story of Solomon and Christ. This way of Writing
we took from Virgil; but, if I am not mistaken, we have improved the Thought.
For some Learned Men think that Virgil is in a Fault, when he brings in
Anchises relating to Aeneas the Chronicle of those that were yet unborn, who
should proceed from his Son. They wonder how he should come to the knowledge of
Futurity. They must either allow that he was a Prophet, when he was alive, and
thou it will be probable; for the Ancients thought that Men do the same thing
below, as they did above. See Horace, who makes mention (...) Sappho and
Alcaeus, as if they were the same Poets in Hell, a^ they were on Earth.

Aeoliis sidibus querentem
Sappho Puellis de popularibus, etc. Od. 13. l. 2.
If this cannot be proved of Anchises, we must run to Pythagoras his
Transmigration, and Plato' s Phaedo, who thought that the Souls of Men informed
several Bodies, and went out of one into another: Then it will be no wonder if
Anchisos tells his Son what Persons shall come after, since their Souls were
predestinate^ for them below. But we never follow this. Mr. Dryden ^s more
exact in the Conquest of Granada, where, in the Second Part, he brings in the
Ghost of Almansor' s Mother, warning him of his future Love; yet she knew not
this as her being a Ghoct, but an Angel bids her go and forewarn her Son, who
wandered about ignorant, of his Parentage.

Then from the Battlements of Heavens high Tower
A Watchman Angel bid me wait this Hour;
And told me that I had a Task assigned,
To warn the little Pledge I left behind.
Spenser, who first led us the way in English, supposes Merlin to tell
Britomart, his Virgin-Hero, the Progeny of the Kings and Princes which should
spring from her and Arthegal. Milton follows his footsteps; but he could not
bring in a Prophet since there were but two Persons upon Earth; therefore an
Angel appears to Adam, and comforts him with the Promised Seed. Cowley makes
David dream of his Race, and an Angel confirm the truth of it, when he awakes.
Though Dreams were held of old a kind of Prophesy, though God was sometimes
pleased to reveal his. Will in that manner, and foreshew the Fates of Kingdoms,
the various Changes of Empires, and things to come, as is manifested from
Pharaoh, Joseph, and Daniel; yet it would not have been according to the Rules
of Poetry, to have made David dream of all his Successors, and his Race for a
thousand Years together, had not some Diviner Being ordered the Vision wisely,
and appeared afterward to persuade him in the certainty of it; for in those
days the Jews began to disbelieve the Sacredness of Dreams, thinking them to
proceed from the multitude of Business: David himself thought so at first,

That only 'twas wild Phancy's play,
The loose and scattered relics of the Day.
But the Poet showed his Skill by making Gabriel satisfy him. The Reason why
we commonly bring in Angels or Prophets, when Futurity is to be mentioned, is
this; we are to make improbabilities seem probable; for should we tell such
strange things in our own Persons, without bringing a Muse, or the like to help
us off, no body would believe us, notwithstanding our boasted Inspiration: For,
says Homer, on such an occasion,

(...)
(...),
(...). Iliad. ss.
Which Virgil (Aen. 7.) follows, by invoking the Muses to tell him,

Qui bello exciti reges, etc.
Vos meministis enim, divae, and memorare potestis,
Ad nos vix tenuis famae perlabitur aura.
This Rule is constantly to be observed in an Epick Poem, whenever we have need
for it. And we must likewise take notice, that if we have occasion for Angels,
Devils, Furies, to forewarn, persuade, or counsel any one what to do, they must
not appear in their proper shape, but in form of them, who are either loved,
honored or reverenced by those to whom they appear. Homer' s (...) appears to
Agamemnon in his sleep, dressed in the likeness of Nestor, the chief and wisest
of his Counselors. But in his Third Iliad he seems to be inexcusable, where he
brings in Venus like an old Spinning Woman of Lacedaemon, whom Helen loved: No
sooner had this old Dame spoke, but Helen knew her to be Venus by her Eyes, her
Neck, her Breast and every thing, which, in my Opinion, is a very odd kind of
Change: We must nevertheless Reverence him as our Father, and give him leave
aliquando dormitare, to sleep a little now and then. There are some such
Changes in Virgil and Statius, which, seeing Mr. Cowley has taken notice of
before, I will not meddle with.

As for the Poem that lies before us, I suppose the Reader will find as smooth
a run of Verse, as the Subject would allow, and very few Synalaepha' s, which I
endeavored to avoid; for what grates the Ear more than the Sounding of one
Vowel upon another? There might be more said concerning this, but we will rest
a little, since the Author of the Dedicatory Preface to Examen Poeticum has
discoursed enough of it. Now if after all, I find but a few Friends, I shall,
like the Spartan, scorn an innumerable Army of Enemies; who if they are
offended at my wretched Stuff now, I can tell no way to be revenged of them,
than (as Sir John Denham has said before) by writing worse and worse the next
time, which, I hope, will prove such a Punishment to them, that they will not
dare to take up Arms against an Author, for fear of being knocked on the head
with Nonsense and inhumane Dullness.

Trinity College, Cambridge, August 3. 1695: S. Cobb.

THE Love of David, etc Imitated from Theod. Beza.
OF Deities, that Stock bright Heaven above,
Or reign below, there is none so great as Love.
Love through the gilded Firmament does fly,
Commands the Gods, and Lords it in the Sky
Love does on Earth his beaut'ous Empires keep,
And makes his Voyage through the boundless Deep.
With sweet Contagion he corrupts the Mind,
Harmfully fair, and dangerously kind.
As through the Nations of the World he flew,
And smiling Ills in every Kingdom blew:
At last to Judah's Sacred Towers he came,
Judah! Immortal as its glorious Name.
There great Jessides he with Envy viewed,
Whom nor his Darts had pierced, nor Charms subdued.
And well he knew, that from his Loins should flow
A sure Destruction to the Powers below,
In whom Hell suffered harder than before,
And doubled Pains the Infernal Tyrants bore,
Greater than those, when impiously bold
They fell from the resisted Sky of old.
^emembring this, Am I, (said he,) whom none
(Though thousands) could subdue, subdued by One?
The growing World I, like a Conqu'rour, swayed,
Me Adam, Father of Mankind, obeyed.
These Darts (my only praise) did once engage,
Fierce Men, with these I tamed a barbarous Age.
(...)drew the Deluge from the wondering Sea,
The Watery Battle was engaged by Me.
The well built, lofty Babylonian Tower,
And Murdered Ninus testify my Power.
By Me, in flames Incestuous Sodom fried,
When Burnings hotter than her own she tried.
By Me, to Troy the Grecian Navy sailed,
And Perjured Priam's Sacred Palace scaled.
Hector untimely to the Shades did go,
^^glorious Armies followed him below.
With Heathen Beauty I fond Sampson slew,
(For Me, what will not beaut'ous Woman do?)
Isr'el's vast Champion a full Harvest reaped,
And Piles on Piles, Trophies on Trophies heaped.
^or many Miles torn Heroes choked the Way,
^ike Hills on Hills dismembered Gathites lay.
Him I subdued; nor stopped I there, till He
Bent at my Virtue, and was blind like Me.
Nor shall you escape, Jessides; though you shine
^n Judah's Palace, all the World is mine.
Arrows and Darts instead of Stones I Will throw,
Command thy Sling, and I Will command my Bow.
Thus spoke the God. At this enraged he grew,
And from the Top of Judah's Temple slew.
A Golden Bow he on his Shoulders wore,
A Quiver full of pointed Deaths he bore.
Then spreading round his Eye, unseen, at last
He viewed the fair Bersaba, as he past.
Though Sacred Judah's Beauties were Divine,
The fair Bersaba, like the Moon, did shine
Among the inferior Stars: So beauteous she;
But, ripe for Man, now might a Mother be.
Even Love himself admired her won'drous shape,
And she might well fear an Immortal Rape.
With Gods and Goddesses she might compare,
For Gods and Goddesses were not so sair,
No spot, no blemish in her Face was seen,
Clear as the Morn, and as the Sky, Serene.
So bright, so goodly her Complexion shone,
As if some Angel drew it by his own.
And in her Eyes did thousand Graces play,
Like sparkling Stars that gild the Milky Way.
Here pointed Flames with cheerful Light did strive,
Able to Murder Mortals and revive.
But ah! What Pencil can describe, or show
The radiant Honors of her spacious Brow?
Here on her Neck in Curls soft Tresses rol'd,
Her Neck, like Ivory, and her Hair, like Gold.
Smooth, but more warm than Ice, her Breasts did show,
Whiter than Marble, but more soft than Snow.
The God admired the Virtues of her Face,
Beauty contending with Majestic Grace.
I Will cast, said he, my useless Bow away,
There will I sit, there I delight to play.
My Arms no more shall wound unguarded Hearts,
Far hence my Quiver and my idle Darts.
Under the shadow of her bending Brow
I Will place my self, and use it for my Bow,
Whilst every glance proceeding from her Eye,
My want of pointed Arrows shall supply.
Thence will I shoot, some Martial Hero tame,
I Will use my Skill, and they shall use their Flame.
He spoke; and clothed himself with subtle Air,
No Bow, no Darts, no Quiver did he bear.
To bright Bersaba bodied thus he slies,
And shoots himself by stealth into her Eyes.
The bright Bersaba felt him as he came,
Her rolling Eyes dart forth an amorous flame.
Her Heart straight blushes with a secret Fire,
Her wanton Breast glows with a new Desire.
She tries all Arts that Woman's Wit can find,
And only Love fills now her laboring mind.
Sometimes her Curls on her soft Forehead play,
And here and there in various rollings stray.
Sometimes she seems her rising Breasts to chide,
And all the Riches of her Bosom hide.
Sometimes her Neck she openly displays.
And a fair Goddess by her Form betrays.
But in her Garden when to bath she goes,
And all around her naked Beauty shows,
Undrest so lovely, and so beauteous she,
Looks like a Venus rising from the Sea.
There stood a Tower, where Kings did often repair,
To slacken and unbend Imperial Care.
From whence Jessides saw Bersaba's Charms,
Jessides, famed for Valor and for Arms.
Often, like some God-like Hero, would he fight,
And his own Conquests in high Verses write.
Scarce could one know in which he did excel,
So bravely would he Fight, and Sing so well.
But Love impartial and as bold as Fate,
Love always dangerous to the Good and Great.
With subtle strength Heroic Souls does pierce,
No Brazen Castles can resist his force.
Jessides saw, (caught in an amorous Chain,)
The naked Beauty: (could the Gods refrain?)
Through every part his rolling Eye Balls rove,
And pry into the Labyrinths of Love.
His Looks the Passion of his Heart betray,
The Royal Lover melts insensibly away:
At last overwhelmed with a vast tide of flame,
Which from her Eyes, like darted Lightning, came.
So when we gaze on the Sun's glorious Light,
Our Eyes straight faint and sicken at the sight.
Now David yields, he lays his Scepter down,
Forgets himself, and does his God disown.
His Songs now heathen and rebellious prove,
No more he vies with Seraphims above;
No more of Wonders and of Heaven he sings,
Love tunes his Heart, to Love he tunes his Strings:
He Courts with Passion; (what can Woman do
When Kings turn Lovers, and when Monarchs sue?)
Within his Breast he feeds immodest fires,
Till the kind She consents to his desires;
She thinks it brave to enjoy an amorous King,
And the Great Author licenses the Sin.
But now her teeming Womb to swell began,
And God's bright Image lengthens into Man.
When Judah's Monarch fears impartial Fame,
For though he loves the Crime, he hates the Name.
Remarked Adult'ry seems an odious thing,
And Whoredom's more apparent in a King.
Now Israel's Sons, whom Ammon had opposed*
Laid Siege on Rabbah, and her Walls enclosed;
Where Just Urias, for his Valor known,
Fought for his Country's Honor, and his own;
Defended Judah's Right, and Judah's Lord,
And wrote his Monarch's Title with his Sword;
Abroad he roam'd; him Camps and Arms did please,
Whilst David wantoned in domstick ease.
But now he is sent for, and must haste away,
Leave all his Armies, and his Warlike play:
He comes; and David with a feigned embrace,
A seeming Kindness, and dissembled Face,
Salutes the General, and to know desires
Much of his Troops, of Joab much inquires.
The unhappy innocent Man begins to show
The Events of War, the Advantage of the Foe.
Tells what their Forces, what their Numbers were,
The Deaths of all; nor thought his own so near.
At the King's Table royally he Dines,
And drinks of Noble Arnon's costly Wines:
But David, fearing that all Israel knew
Those Crimes, which he alone was privy to,
Resolves the Good, the Right'ous, and the Just,
Shall fall a Victim to his royal Lust;
No fear of Judgment can his Mind reclaim,
He dreams of Thunder as an idle Name.
'Twas now the time when Night's prevailing shade,
And grateful Darkness did the World invade;
All Nature sleeps; Birds to their Nests repair,
Nor longer Murmur through the dusky Air.
Beasts lie extended on their hollow Beds,
And drowsy Cedars nod their leafy Heads.
Even Storms are silent, and loud Tempests sleep,
Whales slumber in the Chambers of the Deep.
Yet wakeful David can enjoy no rest,
Whilst various Thoughts disturb his anxious Breast.
All Night his Mind's employed the Just to kill,
Who feared no danger, for he knew no ill.
At last the Inhumane bloody King designs
His Fall, and writes his Death in fatal Lines.
Soon as the Morning did her Beams display,
And blushing, gave the Signals of the Day:
With joyful haste the brave Urias went,
Bearing his Sentence to great Joab's Tent;
He goes, but straight lies mingled with the slain
Of val'ant Thousands stretched upon the Plain;
The cloud of Death o'ercasts his glimmering Eyes,
His bleeding Ghost sinks downward to the Skies.
This did the Father of the Gods behold,
And (far as an Immortal Being could)
Did blush. Red Thunder in his Hand he bore,
The Thunder too looked redder than before;
Whilst David scorned his mighty Friend above,
And bartered Judah for unkingly Love,
Chaffer'd his Empire for a soft Embrace,
Yielding his Glories to a Female Face.
Whilst in the Front too Just Urias stood,
And died Philistian Arrows with his Blood,
God laid aside his pity and his love:
Almighty Grief with doubtful Anger strove.
The wide Fxpansion trembled all around,
And distant Stars did horribly resound.
The dreadful Echo through Heaven's Court did sly,
And frightened the winged People of the Sky.
Here trembling Angels gathered to inquire
The grounds and causes of this sudden fire;
From whence the stir and heavenly Tumult rose,
Or whom the Father for his Rage had chose;
Whether some haughty, headstrong Seraphs dare
To storm the Sky, and cope the Thunderer:
Whether on Earth his Lightning will be hurled,
And ravel the fine Clock-work of the World.
Or if the Immortal Citizens of Heaven
Should from their ancient, native Seats be driven;
For they remembered well, what God of old,
When first he built the mighty Globe, foretold
How Earth to Nothing should at last retire,
And Heaven's high Fabric in the Flames expire.
Above the Clouds, where the Sun's golden face
N'ere looks, nor Cynthia casts imperfect Rays,
There is a Place of purest hallowed Light,
Painted with Stars, marked with Eternal White,
(Whether it comes from Souls, who knew no sin,
Or be the Shadow of the Light within)
Which leads the way to God's aetherial Throne,
By all Heaven's Peers and common People known.
Here reigns the Almighty, and from hence surveys
The subject Earth, wide Lands, and swelling Seas;
Him, King of Men, and Father of the Gods,
Stars, Earth obey, and tremble when he Nods.
Here from each part and corner of the Sky,
With nimble Wings affrighted Cherubs fly.
When the grand Silence thus the Almighty broke,
And, shaking his Immortal Head, he spoke;
Are we despised? is all our Thunder vain?
And is it nothing in the Skies to reign?
Nothing to be a God? --
I with my Power command the World below,
I teach the Waves to rore, and Winds to blow.
Me, when I Thunder, all the Globe shall hear,
And Man's rebellious Offspring learn to fear;
Over Birds, over Beasts he rules, over all the fry
Of Fishes Sailing through the Liquid Sky.
Him the large Monsters of the Deep obey,
But He more Monst'rous, more unkind than they:
I gave him Freedom, and a Soul Divine,
In every Limb a stroke of Heaven does shine;
These Public Gifts I equally did share,
Wide as the World, nor was I partial there;
I Abr'ham's Seed distinguished from the rest,
Abr'ham! the care and darling of my Breast.
I, pitying, set his Murmuring Children free
From Egypt, and ignoble Slavery.
I Pharaoh, (for ye all remember) slew,
Him my strong Arm did through the Floods pursue;
The gazing Waters wondered as he rode,
Whilst Israel safely the sure bottom trod:
The unjointed Sea forgot his wonted force,
And loos'ned Nature did withdraw her Course;
You know how often I Have left the Aetherial Tower,
(So much my Love prevailed upon my Power)
Divided Jordan's silver Streams can show,
I spoke, divided Jordan ceased to flow:
Witness the Ruler of the Day, the Sun,
Who stopped his Race; witness the Seed of Nun,
Ordained by us for thousand Years before,
To lengthen Israel, and enlarge it is shore;
Witness those Kings thrust from their native Ground,
And Cities conquered with a Trumpet's sound.
Even David, that ungracious King, can show,
To whom I gave all that a God could do;
All that a greedy Monarch can require,
All that Ambition or his Lust desire;
Him from his Father's woolly Charge I took,
And gave him a bright Scepter for a Crook.
You all beheld, on Helah's bloody Plain,
By his young Hands the monst'rous Gathite slain.
I did the Hate of envious Saul repel,
And all the Malice of pursuing Hell.
By me his Power does far and wide extend,
A boundless Empire, and without an end.
But now our Laws are scorned, unmindful He
Of Justice, Goodness, of himself and Me.
In'ocent Urias by his crime did fall,
Whose bleeding Ghost does still for Venge'nce call.
A thousand plagues the stubborn King shall bear,
And all Jerus'lem in my Judgments share.
Renowned examples to the future age,
And lasting Mon'ments of eternal rage.
He said, The Spirits stood silent as he spoke,
Whilst the whole Firmament around did shake.
Heaven's immeasur'd space made loud reply,
Like Thunder ecch'oing from the distant Sky.
The mighty Shilo felt his Father's care,
(For Son and Father of like passions are.)
Their heavenly minds in equal order run,
And what does move the Father, moves the Son.
The Son was Mercy, Love he only knew,
Wrath from his breast, as from an En'my, flew.
The melting God with pit'ing look surveys,
The world below, and man's unhaypy Race.
He rose, and nodding his illustrious head,
These words to his Almighty Father said:
Immortal Parent of the world and Me,
Author of all that is, or is to be;
Hear me implore: Thee let no Passions move,
Nor heavy Justice so outweigh thy love.
Let no ungodlike Rage begin to rise,
Unworthy the Commander of the Skies.
If we should shoot as often as Man shall sin,
How soon (alas!) our Quivers would be thin!
Soon would our Lightning and our Shafts be spent,
No Thunder rolling in the Firmament.
Unbottom'd Hell; though large and unconfined,
Would scarce contain a part of Humankind.
Myriads and Myriads would unburied go,
And crowded Ghosts lament for room below.
Diminished Nature would begin to dye,
And Earth, unpeopled like a Desert lie.
Are then thy Prophets false? thy Promise vain?
Did thou for this the Race of man ordain?
Have we not fixed a stated time, when All
Shall in one universal Ruin fall?
When the disordered Elements shall burn,
Wither in flames, and to their Nothing turn.
Till then, Great Father, let thy Thunder sleep,
Till then the Terror of thy Lightning keep
He ended here. Cherubs and Seraphs sung,
Whilst with applause the starry Palace rung.
They tuned their golden Harps: Heaven's Monarch smiled,
And straight became more merciful and mild.
His Rage departs: He feels his thoughtful Mind
Melt into Softness, and to Love inclined.
Then calls forth Gabri'l, Minister of Heaven,
And General of the fair selected Sev'n,
Who walk the Circuit of the World, to know
(Laborious Angels!) what we do below:
No Sign of Anger now his looks betrayed,
But, smilingly, these pleasing words he said.
I Will try once More my stretching Grace, and know
How far the Mercy of a God will go.
Thrice among Monsters Jesse's Offspring fell,
Thrice we the salvage Monsters did repel:
Himself a Monster now! but we forgive,
His bloody Crimes, and suffer him to live.
Have then to Naioth's Town, our Prophets seat,
Who there enjoy Ease, and a learned retreat,
Bid Nathan go to David, and relate
Bersaba's wrongs, and just Uriah's fate,
Whose injured Ghost does still for Blood complain,
Unless his Sorrow washes out the stain.
Scarce had he spoke, when Gabr'iel left the Sky;
From Heavens high Top did the Winged Envoy fly.
An azure Mantle does around him play,
And softened Clouds fringed with the Sun's pure Ray
Serve him for wings; whose flying Sails do bear,
The nimble Angel through the liquid Air.
Over Ramah's Hills he takes his Winding Flight,
And does at last, unseen, in Naioth light.
Here the good Prophet eased his careful breast,
And weary Nature borrowed gentle Rest.
When Gabr'iel Sam'el's reverend likeness took,
And in these words his sacred Message spoke;
Nathan, well-read in sure Futurity,
Awake and hear what Heaven commands by me.
With speed to Judah's Monarch have, relate
Bersaba's wrongs, and just Uriah's Fate.
Whose injured Ghost does still for blood complain,
Unless his Sorrow washes out the stain.
The Prophet, wakened with the Voice he heard,
Arose, but straight the Vision disappeared,
Inspired by God and by wise Sam'el sent,
Undoubtingly to Judah's Court he went.
On David's lofty Palace top there stood
A pleasant Garden and delightful Wood.
Here nodding Trees their fruitful Branches shook
And bending Boughs with lovely Apples broke.
Here various Fruits in artful order grew,
That Babylonian Lux'ry ever knew.
Here in a Grove retiring David walked;
Here with the Monarch the rough Prophet talked.
I from the Almighty come, who from above,
Beheld thy Murder, and thy hated Love;
From hence thou viewd'st the treacherous charming She
Witness this consc'ious Grove: Witness each blushing Tre^
And then in words he paints his bloody Crimes.
Jessides heard, and wept. --
On Earth he threw the Scepter which he bore,
And felt a passion greater than before.
No more Bersaba can his mind delight,
No more her charming Graces can invite.
A Kingly Grief his mournful Breast reclaims,
And streaming Tears quench the forbidden flames.
This pious sorrow Nathan did behold,
And straight the Prophet things to come foretold.
No more indulge thy Grief, but hear, said he,
What gracious Heaven has pre-ordain'd for Thee.
A royal Race shall from thy Loins descend,
And flying Conquests through the world extend.
Tigris shall wildly swell with hostile Gore,
Whilst Syrian Blood stains swift Euphrates shore.
Judean Arms through all shall cut their way,
Africa and Egypt shall become their prey.
But of thy numerous Progeny, shall none
Be wiser, or more fair than Solomon.
Heaven shall to him unbounded Knowledge give,
All that a Mortal nature can receive.
Sabaean Kings shall leave the parched Line,
And bring, like Vot'ries, Offerings to his Shrine.
The Southern Queen her Kingdom shall forsake,
And learned rules from his example take.
Then bount'ous Heaven shall all it is riches throw,
That fruitful Sun's can breed, or Showers bestow.
Then precious Ophir's wealth shall bless the Land,
And silver Jordan flow with golden Sand.
Continual Corn shall the low Valleys fill,
And verdant Oks sweet yellow Dew distill.
Far from the painted East shall Monarchs stray,
And uncompell'd their glorious Tributes pay.
From every part great Emperors shall come,
Some shall bring Pearls, Arabian Spices some,
Sacred to God shall a bright Temple rise;
The wondrous work shall make the vaulted Skies.
His boundless sway shall stretch over Babel's Tower,
And sandy Libya shall obey his power.
Him the vast Earth undoubted Lord shall style,
From wide Euphrates to the secret Nile.
A Row of glorious Worthies then shall reign,
Defend Judea, and her Right maintain.
Though wicked Kings shall harm thy race and Thee,
Thy Seed shall rise, like Rocks a bove the Sea.
^o root thee out, though a whole World combine,
^o human Forces can resist Divine.
Commanding Judah shall her Scepter bear,
And rule till Promised Shilo, shall appear.
The Promised Shilo, the Mysterious King
Tho gave thee Birth, from thy bright Loins shall spring*
The bending Clouds he shall unseen divide,
And, without grief, leave his great Father's side.
Whilst Angels gaze, whilst all the Spirits above,
And God himself shall wonder at his Love.
No Heavenly Sings the Deity proclaims,
No Arms, no Lightning, no avenging Flames.
No good he comes, so humble and so mild,
Not like a Thunderer, but like a Child.
Then Eden's Garden shall again Display
It Is Beaut'ous Beams, and make Eternal day.
Then happy Man immortal Fruit shall see,
And, without danger, taste the Second Tree.
He spoke, Vast Joy did David's heart invade;
He took his Lyre, and Wondrously he played
If wondrous Mercy: No unchaste Desire
Did the great Poet's Heavenly Thoughts inspire.
He Sung; nor could Bersaba now Beguile,
His Lute or Hearts-Strings; with an Amorous smile.
To God his Lute resourds, to God alike
His Lute and Heart in equal Numbers strike.
FINIS,
ERRATA.
IN the Preface p. 1. l. 9. at the latter end, dele the, p. 4. l. 11. d. (^. p.
ib. l. 20. r. (...) p. 6. l. 2. r. Ghost p. 7. l. 15. r. or Furies. In the
Verses, fol, 6. l. 6. r. Domestic.


