

Come Reader draw thy purse and be a guest
To our Pa^assus; It Is the Muses feast
The entertainment needs must be divine;
Appollo's th'Host' where Cockains Heads (...)
THE TRAGEDY OF OVID.

Written by Sir ASTON COKAIN Baronet.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Kirkman, and are to be sold at his Shop under S.
Ethelborough's Church in Bishops-gate-street. 1669.

TO MY Most highly honored Cousin, CHARLES COTTON Esquire.
Noble Cousin,
AS soon as I had finished this Play of mine, (called The Tragedy of Ovid) I
sent it to wait upon you, at your house in Berisford; where it found so
courteous and generous an Entertainment, that I should accuse my self of much
ingratitude, did I not Dedicate it to you, and entreat your Favor that it
might visit the world under the secure Patronage of your authentic Name. I
beseech you therefore to afford it so much grace, and to give it leave to lie
in your Parlour-window, since you have been pleased to signalize it with two
excellent Epigrams. This is but a small Testimony of my Thankfulness to you,
for an abundancie of high and obliging Favors that I have (upon several
occasions) received from you: To which you will infinitely add, by continuing
in your good opinion,

Sir, Your very affectionate Kinsman, and most humble Servant, ASTON COKAIN.

To the Author, ON Captain HANNIBAL.
An Epigram.
YOur Captain Hannibal does snore and puff,
Armed in his hrazen face, and greasy Buff
Amongst Punks and Pandars, and can rant and rore,
With Cacala the Turd, and his poor Whore.
But I would wish his Valor not mistake us;
All Captains are not like his brother Dacus.
Advise him then be quiet, or I shall
Bring Captain Hough, to bait your Hannibal.
Charles Co^.
Drammatis Personae.
PYrontus, A young Lord. Philocles, His Friend. Bassanes, A young Lord.
Marullus, His Friend. Phoebianus, Pyrontus his younger Brother; called also
Caralinda. Hannibal, A banished Italian Captain. Cacala, A young fellow, his
man. Publius Ovidius Naso. Dacus, A Getick Captain. Clorina, Bassanes his
Bride. Armelina, Her Sister. Cypassis, A Bawd. Spinella, Her Daughter, a
Courtezan of Tomos. Floretta, A Roman Courtezan. Maskers. A Spectre. Servants.
The Scene Tomos, a City in Pontus. PUBLIVS OVIDIVS NASO EQVES
ROMANUS-POETARUM INGENIOSISSIMUS


The sweet-tongd Ovid's Counterfeit behold;
Which Noblest Romans wore in rings of gold
Or would you yt, which his own pensil drew
The Poet, in his d^thless Poems, view.
The Tragedy OF OVID
Actns primi,
Sena prima.
Enter Pyrontus, furiously intending to fall upon his sword, and Phylocles
after him, who with his foot strikes it away.
Pyrontus UNcivil man begone, before my rage
Increases above my troubled patience;
And (...) for this un^mely Courtesy.
Make thee to harbinger my Soul, in death,

Phylocles. Alas! My Lord why will you take away
The noblest Life that ever honored Pontus?
I pray you think upon it.

Pyron. I am resolved.
Nor (...) I live to see Clorina made
A wife to any man besides my self.

Phylo. Ah! who would not run mad, and tear his hair.
And weep until his eye-ball^ did dissolve,
To see the bravest man of all this Land
So passionate? And for a scornful Lady?

Pyron. Kill me Phylocles: Thou will do a deed
The gods will love thee for; for I am One
Full of those things that virtuous Souls abhor,
Else sure Clorina would not use me thus.

Philo. To my own death to do you real Service
You may command me readily (my Lord):
But to entice me to advance my hand
Against your Life; Great love: and all the gods
(Whom we do reverence and fear) forbid.

Pyron. Phylocles, do thou love me?

Phylo. You know (my Lord) I do above my Life.
In our late wars when we did aid our Friends
The fortunate Roman, I attended you
And when your Horse's Fall left you a Prey
Unto the barbarous Cruelty of the (...)
I, careless of my life, ran to your Aid
And brought you ^ff through many of their death^.
Command me any thing, so you except
Your noble Life, and I will do it freely.

Pyron. As well except you will not stir a foot
To do your friend the greatest favor for him;
Which with an ease, so easy as is walking,
You may perform.

Phylo. What would you have me do?

Pyron. Begone my Phylocles. Is this a day
For me to honor with my Life, wherein
Clorina sl^ghting all my years of service
(Which I have paid to her with as great f^vour
As any of our Priests adore the gods)
Will give away her self unto Bassanes?
Away my Friend, and let me dye.

Phylo. My Lord I will obey you on condition
That I may find you as I leave you, safe,
And (till I see you next) untouched, and living.
I have some hope I may bring comfort with me,
Calm all these passions, and create a Joy
That may occasion triumphs in your heart

Pyron. Go then, my friend, and prosper, but be sure
Thou do not trisse with me. Thou well know^*
The nature of Pyrontus is a verse
To suffering of abuses.

Phylo. I am gone
With hope to bring you comfort speedily.
Exit.
Pyron. False Tyrant Love! I would I had thee here,
With thy own bow I Would shoot such passions in thee
As should be over strong for thee to bear.
Fond Boy! I Would make thee dote on chaste Diana
And pluck thy Golden Feathers from thy Wing^
To write with them Repentance to the world.
Which of the Fatal Sisters did provoke
Thee ca^eless of man's happiness, to do
Those bloody deeds which thou art famous for?
O that I knew her I And when I am dead
I Would pass the dreadful Waves of Phlegeton
But I would find her, and destroy her too.
Upon Ix^on', wheel I Would torture her
Till with her balefull Cries she did awake
The Porter Corberus from his drowsy den,
Then would I g^ve her body unto him
And he should eat it* and she be forgot.
But, cruel Love, had thou bin ^ind to me
And equal sire (...) in Clorina's breast,
No^ only in (...), but throughout a (...) Pontus,
I would have raised Altars to thy praise:
Where night and day (whilst (...) makes Night, and day)
I would have had such Anthems carrol'd to thee
^y happy Lovers; that, eternal Jove
Should have wished himself to have been the god of love.
Enter Ovid, Phylocles, and Armelina.
Phylo. My Lord, the beauteous Lady (...)
Attended by the Poets ^ilory Ovid
By the ^treaty of the excellent Bride,
(...) come to wo^e you to your (...),

Pyron. It Is a miraculous kindness, that the fair
Clorina on this solemn ^ay affords me,
Had she but pleas^d to have been so merciful
In former times. I had not drooped thus
Now all the City Tomos lays aside
Neglected ^are, and puts on Jollity.
Madam! what is the pleasure of my Deity?
And ^hou sull Soul of poetry (sweet Ovid)
What unimmagin'd harmony of Comfort
Bring you unto me?

Armel. My Lord! if that my sister
Still does retain the east of power over you
By me she does entreat you to continue
Among the living. ^y all the Love you have
Profes'd unto her, she conjures you t'bear
The Chances of this Day worthy your birth,
And all the noble Act^ons of your Life.

Ovid. It is an unbeseeming weakness in you
(...) from the former fullness
O^ all your Honors all your immense knowledge
Of sage Philosophy, and of your self
(...) to captive your Reason, and becom^
S^ve to the passions of an heart let loose
To the pursuit of ba^ barous (...).

Pyron. Sweet (...)! you whose every word
Strikes Music through my ears unto my Soul;
You in your ^olt language have (...)
The Commands of my Goddess, must have po^e.
To make me die continually by living

Ovid. Assume a better Courage, and contemn
These trifles, which you rashly deem Misfortunes.
My Lord, you are the Glory of this Country*
The Basis upon which not only Tomos,
But the Nobility of Pontus, build
Their Glories on instructed hitherto
By imitating You their great Example,
A little time may alter your Opinion
Of Beauty; you may chance to see ere long
Another Lady that may please you better:
And then this day you do account so miserable
You in your Calendar will mark a Festival.

Pyron. Peace gentle Ovid, thi^ is bl^sphemy
Against the Divinity of her fair soul,
And that rich Heaven of happiness, her body*
Jove has no Beauty, like her, on Olympus;
She Is nature's Master-peice, and glorisies
This Angle of the world so, that I prize it
Above triumphant Rome, and all the Splendours
The Court of great Tiberius is renowned for:

Ovid. You shall or^come Me, so you will Your self:
Say any thing (my Lord) and I will hear you;
Do any thing, and I will honor it;
So you forbear to trespass against your life.

Armel. My Sister does expect (if you have ev^
Born real affection to her) that you should
Return her word by me, that you will loose
This resolution of Self-murder, she will
Love you as far as Honor will give leave,
Entertain welcomly your Company,
And conversation, whilst you prove your self
Delighted with her virtue And she knows
The Lord Bassanes will must joyfully
Continue you within the Catalogue
Of his Friends most beloved, while you exceed not
The Limits of a canded Amity,
No^ attempt treason to her Nuptials.

Phylo. I see a Calmness in your looks (my Friend!)
Thanks (gracious Madam) for your pains; And may
Thy Roman Gods reward this kindness (Ovid).
Yet he were savage that had ears so deaf,
And dull an Intellect, as not yield
To your great Reason, and most eloquent Tongue,

Ovid. Your partial Love does too much overvalue
My poor Endeavors. Hark!
Music (...)
Armel. The Music does
Invite as in; Pray, Glorify this Ceremony
With your fair presence

(...). (...) wills (my Lord)
Owe (...) for it.

Ovid. Light a more
Auspicious Torch, and (for a Co^rtesy
So timely given crown your more happy head
With (...) b^ss above your Hopes.

Pyron. ^ead in.
Exeunt, Ovid, I (...) but collect my self* and follow you.

Armel. You will oblidge us all.
Armelina.
Pyron. My ^iend Philocles!

(...). I am here my Lord. (he^e!

Pyron. Oh! how a thousand passions combat
But which of them shall prove predominant
Commands (received from my fair, cruel Mistress)
(...) have determind. What strange Miracles,
(...) Deity of Love, are in thy power!
(...) prompts me to advance my hand;
And turn the Genial Bed into an Urne.
By setting this Bassanes Soul at Liberty.
But I must needs recall this infant-thought*
Or an inglorious stain may six upon
My Reputation. He was ever noble
In all his actions to me, and we
Have long ago contracted such a frienship,
That it has been looked on, as an Example
Worthy an Imitation. Besides, he
Was never made acquainted with my Love.
He then is innocent as any Injury
Committed against me? and does no more
Then I. The bright (...) he ^ffects
An^ so do I, and so must all the world
That are not blind, or sensess when they see
His Stars befriend him: all those Eyes of Heaven
Did look a-squint at my Nativity:
And he has ^ar more merit to deserve her.
Come Phylocles: she is my only Goddess
And I must quit me of profaness too
What she commands, strike no forbidden Blow.
Exeunt.
Sena secunda.
Enter Dacus, Cypassis, and Spinella.
Spi. Mother! Captain Dacus promised me a new Gown against the Masque: and has
not kept his word with me. I desire therefore I may be quit of his Company?


Dac, Pretty grumbling Heart! My Tenants are slow in paying their Rents, I else
had not faild thee: But you are very fine as you are, Venus be thanked.


Spi. That (...) cost of yours. I am the more beholding to another friend.


Dac. To whom? The Brides groom I warrant you Spinella,


Spi. It Is he indeed.


Cypass. The Lord Bassanes was ever her noble Patron.


Dac. But I hope she will loose his bounty hereafter, Cypassis.


Spi. Your Jealousy prompts you to talk thus.


Cypas. After honey-moon (...) past, he may return to her again.


Spi. You shall become more liberaly, or I will shortly (...) you from my
Acquaintance. What do you think, we venture reputation for nothing but oaths,
flattering words, and a little foolish pleasure.


Cypass. Indeed Son* a young Gentlewoman must be maintained with other
Materials. If she goes not sine, and cleanly, she is not fit for good Company.
And if she keeps never so (...) a while (...), and it comes to be known, she
may bid farewell for ever to all her holidaies; The Honorable, and Worship^ul
will not care for her Embraces.


Dac. Are you against me too, mother? (...) thought Madam Cypassis had had a
greater kindness for me then so.


Cypas. Captain Dacus! You know I have much respected you from our first
Acquaintance. But you must think of performing better with Spinella for the
future. My poor Girl else, will not be able to live decently, in the fashion
unless she should live more common then I could wish.


Spinel. Mother, you shall not need to fear that: for I can be married when I
will. And this Wedding of my dear old friend invites me much to ta^e that
Course. Juno direct me to the best: for Venus (whom I have hither* to served
^is but an ill Tutress.


Dac. Prithee, sweet Spinella, leave thi^ melancholy Discourse. It sounds too
unkindly, especially on a marriage day. We should now talk of Love, Maiden
heads, Music, Banquets, Maskques, and so ^orth.


Spinel. Captain Dacus I must confess, my Genius is toward mirth indeed: But
you must not then give me cause of sorrow.


Cypas. The (...), Captain, you must not be so close handed for the future. The
Lord Bassanes being married, peradventure may turn foolishly uxorious: and then
you must either get you better Tenants.


Spinel. Or a new Mistress.


Dacus. Still in this Key*


Cypas. What has been done yet, has been kept private. And so it concerned
all our Reputations. But (now I think better on it) it is your best way
(Spinella) to take an Husband, if he be worth having.


Spinel. He can scarce be worse then this servants.


Dacus. Pretty one, afford me better words: For I dearly love thee. And (though
I never made use of my Credit yet in that kind) I will take up a new Gown for
thee to morrow; on that condition I may take it up as often as I will.


Spinel. Then you shall have leave to do your best, or worst.


Cypass. Agreed, agreed.
T^s well ye are come.
Enter Marullus.
Spinel. He thought Bassanes had forgotten us: but we meant (you see) to come
unsent for.


Mar. You might have been welcome if you had: I should have got you good
place^. But Bassanes is a Gentleman for his word, and has sent me to conduct
you accordingly.


Spinel. I thank his Bridegroom-ship.


Mar. You are angry (I warrant you, that he is married.


Spinel. Not I, Venus bear me record: Much good do him with his fresh meat. He
will be weary of it no doubt ere long, as he has been with Others: so you may
tell him, (...).


Mar. And then you op^ for him again?


Cypas. Juno, and Diana defend. I dare swear she has no such thoughts.


Dacus. So durst not I.


Mar. Nor I,


Spinel. I care not what you say, you are both minded to jest with me. But is
not the young Phoebianus returned from Rome against these sol^mnites?


Mar. Pyrontus writ for him.


Cypas. It Is (...) Bassanes would not stay for his Arrival


Spinel. No wonder at all: All men so mad of a new face when they can get i^.


Cypas. Though often they leave a better for it.


Dacus, Well said, Mother: thou speak Oracles, old Cypassis!


Mar. With some regret. This marriage is not yet digested by them in earnest, I
must entreat you to beware of your behaviors. You are desired to pretend no
Acquaintance to the Bridegroom These slips of youth are sit to be concealed


Spinel. Or Clorina may grow jealous.


Mar. It Is good preventing the worst: it is time we walk.

Exeunt Omnes.
Scena Tertia.
Loud Music: Then Enter, Pyrontus Bassanes, Phylocles, ^vid, Clorina,
Armelina.
Bassanes. Welcome for ever to my hand, Clorina,
Who long have been the Regent of ^y heart,
This day has made me Owner of such Riches,
(The Mine of Joys in my delicious Pride)
That I our mightiest (...) do not envy
Why does my dearest blush ^Because thy modesty
Does s^e so many beauties here Inferior
To thy supremest one ^ut blush on fairest,
Like to a setting Sun, at the approach
Of this so (...) for Night, that's to determine
Your Virgin Honor.

Clor. Now you make me blush
Indeed my Lord.

Pyron. I wish you (Madam) a Life so circled in
With joy, that you may never breath a sigh:
And (when you shall grow weary of the Earth)
Become Jove's Dotage and be Queen of Heaven.

Clor. My Lord Pyrontus. I return you thanks:
And hope the immortal gods will recompense
This kindness, with an happiness transcending
What ever yet (...) could desire.

Ovid. May Heaven
Propitiously smile on you with all those
Bright eyes that do enlighten Night and Day.

Arm. I did not think this City could have shown.
A Multitude so gallant of both Sexes.

Bassa. They come (I thank them) to grace our Nuptials.

Phyloc. They come no doubt to see and to be seen.
Enter Marulllus, Dacus, Cypassis, Spinella.
Mar. Hymen be praised, we are come in time

Cypass. Venus bless mine eyes! what a sine show is heree?

Spin. Indeed (Captain Dacus) you have endeared me much
We are beholding to your lusty Shoulders,
That made a Pretty Lane through all the Crowd,

Dacus My best of strength shall evermore attend.
To do you se^vice

Mar. Here let us keep together
This is the best Room that is le^t. Pray tell me
How do ye like the (...)
Da^t subtle rays, such as may (...)
Within the breasts of all mankind*

Spin. I do not know how some may love heart, burning,

Cypass. It is a Pretty Lady, but I have seen
Some faces that have seemd as w^ll.

Mar. O Envy! Madam Cypassis, where beseech you?

Dacus. I hope Spinella would be loath enough
To change with her.

Spinel. I am not yet aweary
Of mine own.

(...). It does grow late, and time they did begin

Ovid. They only waited your Commands.

Mar. That^s Publius Ovidius Naso, the Chief Poet
Not only of Rome, but all the mighty Empire.

Cypas. I know him well enough, and was acquainted
Many years with him, ere I saw this Country.

Ovid. May music b^g
Some Deities from Olympus* top, to grace
This Nig^it s solemn^ties. The mask.
The Maskers a^l attired according to the Fancies of the Ancient Poets. After a
slourish of loud Music Enter Hymen, Cupid, and Venus singing.
Ven. I ^nil'd with eyes, that darted rays
Of sweet desire on either's face.

Cupid. And I such shafts did put in ure
As only they themselves could cure.

Him, And I Loves best Physician quickly found;
Each others hand might heal each others wound.

Ven. May they dissolve in love, yet prove
No Diminution by their love,

Cup. May they their fears and pains requite,
And spend (in such revenge) this night.

Him, What ere they do, they may with ardent zeal.
For they have License under my great Seal.
Enter Mercury.
Mere. Jove has commanded me to let you know.
You shall not want a grace that Heaven can show.
By virtue therefore of my sacred Wand
Juno, and pallas, hither I command;
That they (with Venus) may again contest,
To whom belongs the Golden Apple best.
And Paris (by my Caduceus Power),
I charge to come from thy Elysium Bower.
Now let thy doom meet the just will of Jove
And thou shall feast with Deities above,
Forgo thy Solitary shades* and sit
A judge upon Olympus for thy wi^.
Enter Juno, and Pallas.
Pallas. Wherefore are we thus summond to appeir
To hu^in view? and to these Mortals here?

Juno. I hope Jove now will not disturb our Reign,
And fall in love with women kind again.

Pallas. Surely long since (Queen of the Deities)
He did abandon terrene vanities.

Juno. Daughter, he swore (by Dis) to me himself, he would for ever leave all
amorous stealth: Yet Juno cannat but suspect the worse; He once so long
continued such a Course.


Pallas. Pallas has often blushed to hear Mars tell*
Following his Fathers steps he did but well.
My brother was too blame.

Juno. Alas! my son
Gloried to imitate what Jove h^d don.
Your sister Venus was an hansome Child.

Pallas. And Mars (when he was young) was very wild.

Merc. Saturnia, needless, I do know your fear;
Had (...) meant so* heed not have met you here.
Paris is slow in his Approach. Sure some
Fine Dreams have fixed him in Elysium
Again I must command him to appear.
Enter Paris
Paris. You need not (Maia's sons) for I am here.
I had not made such stay, but was in talk,
With my fair Queen in a delicious Walk,
Where Agamemnon, and the Spartan King,
And all those many Princes, they did bring
To fight for the Revenge of that famed Rape,
Did laugh at our Discourse, not envy at.
Thrice happy are those Shades, where none do bear.
Those Passions that so tyrannize it here.
The Grecian Chie^ains have a thousand times,
^urs'd their own rage, that cros'd us in our Crimes:
For when their wiser souls were loosned from
Their Bodies (Porc'd unto Elysium
By voilent deaths) and clearly understood,
Those follies they had sealed with their blood.
Amazement ceased upon them all Our (...),
(Which that so fatal Quarrel did dostroy^)
Had slourish'd still in pomp; All they and we
Had lived in peace and in Felicity.
And died in our own beds, had they been blessed
To Have had those thoughts wherewith ^'are now possessed.
We are not jealous in those plains of Bliss:
They so^ fruition care not there, that kiss
Hellen of Greece, and I (with out dispight
To (...) self) take what Delight,
Pleases (...) there the most. Every one there;
Sleights those things most they doted upon here.
Our Bodies being composed of Elements
Incline Mankind to seek to please the sense.
But there our Spirits (being confined)
Strive at the satisfaction of the mind.
Though Souls embrace, They Organs want, and Places.
To raise a jealousy at their embraces:
We at our old Amors do often laugh.

Merc. Then you was in discourse, which I broke off?

Paris. No matter (Mercury) it is sit I pay
My duty unto Jove, and him obey:
What therefore is his will? that I may soon
Submit to his Inevitable Doom.

Merc. You must again an Umpire be, and tell
(In beauty) which of these does most excel.

Paris. My Judgment I have given, once and why
Should that again to my discussion lie?

Merc. It Is* Jove's Decree, And he (if you refrain)
Will make you Subject unto Pluto's Reign,
From the Elysium Plains, remove you quite,
And cast you into an eternal night,
(Instead of Helen's voice) where evermore
You shall hear C^rberus bark, Cocytus rore,
And dreadful Phlegeton (with horrid Noise)
Torment your ears, as darkness shall your eyes*

Paris. I must submit.

Merc. Here take this golden Ball*
And give't her that is hansom'^ of them all.

Paris. I shall (in my Opinion) doom aright:
But wish that Jove had chose: some other wight.
But the last time these goddesses employed
Me in this kind, it was on Sacred I Would.
Why therefore here, in so remote a Town?
And countries, so far distant from mine own*

Merc Cast but your eyes about this Crowded place,
And you may judge, it is to do a Grace
To some in this fair company.

Hymen. To day,
That generous youthful Pair became my Prey.

Cupid. But they had never been your Captives* bound,
If I had not compe'd them by a wound.

Merc. Jupiter (to do honor to this Night)
Has summond these to appear to humain sight:
And has commanded you (before this Throng)
To give that Apple where't does most belongs:
Be well advised (after exact Survey)
How you dispose the golden Fruit away.

Paris. Prime goddesses of the Olympic Court,
That Paris grace again with your Resor.
I on my knees beg leave, that what I does
For One, may not offend the other Two:
Because our Poets have profes'd that we
Have been afflicted for my first decree;
For thence two of you did our foes become,
And hastned-on the Sack of Ilium.
I must obey Imperious Jove's Command,

Venus, And we to thy Arbitriment will stand.

Juno* I do protest (by all my Rule above)
I Will not be angry how soever It prove.
Pallas And, Priams son I will be nothing stird
Or discontent, if others be preferred.

Paris. Having implored your Mercies, Now I fall
To look to whom belongs the Golden Ball.
Juno has sweet black eyes, Pallus sine hair,
Venus is just proportioned wondrous fair.
As I have done before, again I must,

Venus, The Ball's thine; And my judgment just.
Gives it to her.
Juno. To tax thy Doom, were but a needless shift,

Pallus. Nor do we envy her the petty gift.

Venus. To show there is no falling out Lets all
Fall in, and dance (before this Pair) a Ball.

Juno. You and I (Trojan Prince) will lead this sport

Juno. You have been famous for, in Priam's Court.

Paris. Supremest goddess, you a Grace confer
Too high, upon your humble Honorer.

Juno. Hymen, Cupid, and Maia's son, advance;
Let Us show these Mortals an Olympic Dance.
All the Maskers dance, After a Flourish of Solemn loud Music, Enter Jupiter.
Merc. The King of gods and men! Hail, thundering Jove!

Pallas Why has my Father left his Throne above?

Jupiter. Perceiving Venus, and her wanton Son,
(To do some service) were by Hymen won
From my star-paved Court, and looking down
Upon the world and (in it) on this Town,
I soon espide the business: Therefore straight
Summond you both to meet (this Nuptial night)
My daughter Venus here, that we might do,
A Grace divine unto these happy two.
How Paris has bestowed the Ball, I Have seen:
But give it me again (you amorous Queen
Of Cyprus) It hereafter must not be
A Trophy to the Paph^an Diety.

Ven. Great Jupiter, I yield to thy Command

Jupi. And I thus give it to a more beauti o^s hand.
Gives it Clorina* Here may you flourish long in bl^ss, and when
You weary grew of the abodes of men,
I Will fix you both (t'amaze all humane eyes,)
A glorious Constellation in the skies.
Pallas and Venus do not take offense,
For she is a superior Excellence,
And frown not Juno; I no more will make
Co^verse with Mortals, for thy Quiet'^ sake.
Had thou thus given the Golden Ball, had
Speaks ^o Paris. Made thee Companion unto Ganimed.
Take hands, and dance, whilst our attentive ears
Do guide our feet, to music of the spears*
They dance the second Dance, A Song.
Hymen. Blessed, and best Pair make hasto to bed,
The Bride still owes her Maidenhead.

Cupid. There you can only find a Balm,
The festring of my Darts to calm.

Venus. And Youth, and Beauty may delight,
In all Joys of a Nuptial night.

Chorus. There when you shall be left alone, and Kiss,
You need not envy to the gods, their Bliss.

Jupiter. It Is time we leave these to a new Delight,
And therefore Jove himself does bid good night.
Exeunt, Maskers
Bassanes. Let us to bed, my Dear: I long to lose,
My self in thy Embraces. Gentle Ovid
The bright Clorina, and my self shall owe,
All power we have to serve you to the utmost:
And may propitious Heaven incline great Caesar,
To look with gracious eyes, on your Misfortunes.

Ovid. You both vouchsafe too much of honor to me,
If you forgive the rudeness of my Muse.

Pyron. I find my self extremely ill o'th ^oddain
And must not be so barbarous t'interrupt
(With any sign of sickness) the Felicities
Of this Bles'd Company: Good night to all.
Farewell my Lord, The happiest of mankind:
Clorina too goodnight, -- you most unkind.
Exeunt Bassanes, Ovid, Clorina, Armelina.
Marull. Captain I do commit to your Conduct
Madam Cypassis, and her pretty daughter.
I must go help the Groom to bed, and see
The Bride to taste her last Virginity posset.
Exit Marullus.
Dacus. I shall becarefull of my charge. Spinello,
I had rather have spent my time in bed with thee,
Then have been at this Maskque.

Spin. So had not I with you.

Dacus. I know you jest my little Rogue.

Cypas. Juno was of a demure look, and had a grave behavior.

Dacus. Pallas had a smart cast with her eyes.
I warrant you she beat
Her husband, if she were ever Married,
Spin, Venus indeed was the hansomest of them all.

Dacus. But you are hansomer then she my pretty One.
Exeunt. Dac. Cyp. Spin.
Phyloc. It Is very late and time to hasten home.
How is it with Noble Lord Pyrontus.

Pyr. I am undone (my Philocles) for ever.
And have too tamely yielded to this Match.
I should have challenged my friend Bassanes,
If he would not have given up his interest:
And (by his fall) raised up my self some hope;
Or lost her bravely with my life together.

Phyl. My Lord for Heavens sake, cast aside such Thoughts,
And (to your Aid) call generous Patience.

Pyron. The Cowards virtue! O the Multitude
Of those grand joys Bassanes (...) possessed of
By this Conjugall knot! And oh the Myriads
Of Miseries, my poor life is to wade through
By her severe Command! were I the mighty
Tiberius, and (over the conquered world)
Bore Sovereignty, the Empire I should slight,
And give't Bassanes for his Room to night.
Exeunt Ambo.
Actus secundi,
Scena Prima.
Enter Captain Hannibal, Cacala, and Caralinda, Floretta.
Hani. FRom Ostia, we have had a voyage hither,
So fraught with Storms, and Tempests that I wonder
The Sea gods

Cacala. The Sea Monsters call them rather.

Han. Were not all tired with using so much Rage
On us: And yet you (Beauteous Caralinda)
Seemed fearless of the Furies of the Ocean.
Dreadless of thunder and lightning? whilst my man
This Rascal Cacala did nothing but shit,
And spew, and pray; when there was such a Noise,
(Betwixt the Mariners voices, and the Elements,)
That Neptune could not hear the timorous villain.

Caca. Sir, I did love you well: you have been bountiful
On a (...) Occasions to me, I else should never
Have left my Native Country pleasant Italy;
TO have undergone a voluntary Exile.
But had I ever dreamt on such a Passage,
Such Thunders, Whirlewinds, and such horrible Tempests,
I would have taken leave to stay in Rome.

Han. Although Floretta sometimes wept for fear.
She did not baui, and whine like thee.

Cac. No Matter.
She does not know how precious a Thing life is,

Flor. Surely I do; but well enough imagined,
That such ungoverned Outcries might disturb
The Company, yet not incline the gods
The sooner to deliver us from drowning.

Caral. Intruth, Cacala, your fear was often times
So full of noise, the Mariners could not hear,
Their own voice to attend their necessaries:
But, you perhaps are valianter at Land.

Han. He Is every where a Coward Caralinda

Cac. I would confute you (Sir,) with all my heart,
If you, and Mistress Floretta would consent. to it:
Were I in bed with her, I Would prove my self,
As valiant as the proudest Captain living.

Han. How now you, saucy Rogue

Flor. He talks most wickedly.

Cac. I had rather do.

Flor. You must go look a Mate then.

Caral. Where do you mean to lie in Tomos, Captain?
Good Lodgings, here, I think are somewhat rare.

Han. As soon as we came to Town I dispatched Cacala.
TO enquire out one Madam Cypassis, A Gentlewoman,
Of my Acquaintance in my very youth, she was
A servant once unto the Princess Julia.

Caral. You rather should say, TO Ovid's famed Corinna.

Han. By your fair leave, I know I speak a Truth,
And were not Ovid timorous he would confess,
He Julia veild under Corinna's Name.
Cacala has taken me Lodgings at Cypassis;
Where you may hear of your humble servant Hannibal.

Caral. And does Floretta lie there also?

Han. Yes marry,
Venus defend else.

Caral. Then you do resolve.
(It see us) to make a wedding on it

Han. By no means; Madam, Neither pretty Floretta.
Nor I, are yet such fools, to flight our Liberties,
Whilst we like one another we will keep together,
And when we grow a weary we may part.
The world has other men and women enough
And we are both of us yet ignorant,
How soon we may affect variety.

Caca. But, fear you not the gods? Are they well pleased,
Think you with such a life?

Cacala. My Captain never*
Feared any thing And for Mistress Floretta
What Man could do to her, she never dreaded:
But how her Courage stands toward the gods,
I cannot say.

Flor. You say too much, Cacala: And must learn manners.
Or I must pray the Captain to bestow
A Cudgel on you.

Cacala. Sure his valor scorns
Such mean employment; He disdains to touch
A weapon that is beneath a sword, or poniard.
My noble Captain ever was accustomed,
To give me leave to jest.

Han. But you must know,
Your distance to Floretta,

Caca. I know it but too well;
And always am more distant then I would be.

Caral, But, Captain i would advise you both to marry,
It is a life thar is more honorable.

Cacala, You are deceived (Madam Garalinda)
Our R^man Captains think there is more honor
In keeping wenches* then in Marriage.

Han. Out upon Wedlock: I had rather ^ear
Alarums at Midnight then the Multitude
To baul Thalassio, ^t a Nuptials.

Caral. Y' are a mad Captain, Hannibal.

Han. I acknowledge it.
And never had else been banished into Pontus.
But where abouts in this town (Caralinda)
Do you intend to make abode

Caral. At Publius Ovidius Naso's:
I write to him from Rome, to entreat that Courtesy.
And he returned me thither word (by Letter)
I should be welcome* I have sent my servants
Thither to prepare for me, and to beg
His company here, that he may be my guide.
Unto his house,

Han: Were Ovid in his Youth
He would be glad of such a Purchase (Lady*
Y' are of a tempting beauty. He had famed you
Equal unto his so renowned Corinna,
Had he been then acquainted with your Excellencies.

Caral. You shame me Captain Hannibal: I am
So conscious of my own deformities,
That I shall (all I may) shun public view
Besides I know the Noble Poet has
Subdued his Passions, and is now become,
As rigid in his behavior, as the gravest
Of all the ancient Philosophers.

Cacala. These women such Discourse affect as if
They were pure Vesta-Nuns* But they that do
Give credit to them, are of a Belief
That is not in my Creed,

Caral. You must have leave,
To talk: know likewise Captain!
Enjoyed the generous Ovid his prime youth,
And Flourished again in his own house,
(Adjoining unto our triumphant Capitol)
I should choose to live with him, I do prize him
As the supreme wit of the Empire.
Whose Conversation ever was admired.
Besides, I dare presume on my'own Temper*
I fear not the Temptations of all mankind*
And such Averseness have to all that Sex;
That here (in presence of the Immortal gods)
I vow (in that kind) never man shall touch me.

Cacala. For all your Confidence in your own Chastity,
(I speak it with a reverence to your merit*)
Beware of the old Game, and of the Consequence;
Known commonly by the name, of Great -- Belly.

Caral. My Life (through all my Actions) shall vindicate
My Reputation spot less.

Han. Your Beauties, and unequa'd Qualities are
Too potent charms for frail mankind to know,
And not be conquered, by so many wonders.

Caca. Besides her Clothes would set ones teeth on edge.

Flor. On Shipbord she went in an homelier habit.

Caral. The meanest Clothes will serve at Sea for women:
Captains in Tyrain died Habiliments.
And with their diverse colored Plumes should flourish,
At all times in all Places to beget
Awe, and Respect, from those they do converse with.

Han. Fair Caralinda, You speak Oracles:
The Hearts of all the Getes here, must do Ho. mage
To your unparalled perfections;
They will not only own you for most beautiful,
But the chief femal Gallant of the Province.
Enter Ovid,
Caral. Your Praises so transcend, they make me blush.

Ovid. Welcome my sweetest Cosen Caralinda.
May all the gods of Seas and winds be praised,
For your Arrival in this Country safely.

Caral. Thanks, generous Ovid, I rejoice to see
The wonder of the Roman Empire living.

Ovid. Oh spare to overvalue so your servant,
A serious Adorer of your virtues:
Admire only you have found me breathing,
After so many years here in Exilement.

Han. Madam, because we see you in that Company
We know you have an honor for, and who will
Conduct you to your Lodgings, we will press
No further on your Privacies; But take
Our leave for this Time. May both gods, and men
Bear Hatred to Tiberius, un till he
Repeal the gentle Ovid. When we next
Do meet, we will converse at large. May Jove
Juno, Pall^s, and the whole Court of Deities,
Be evermore auspicious to you both.

Caral. Also to me. Master; and to Floretta:
What ere we do, I Would have the gods be merciful.
Exeunt, Han. Flor. Cac.
Caral. I need not hope I shall be safe, but be secure I shall be so, while I
comtinue in

Your house.

Ovid. You (Madam) to your self shall promise
All privacy you can desire: you are
As secret as you were not in the world,
Although your Native City you inhabit,
Your name shall not escape my lips. But why
(if with an offense I may demand it)
Affect you such concealment, now especially
When all your friends would be so proud to see you,
And in this time of public joy?

Caral. Hereafter,
At better leisure i will acquaint you with
My very soul, in all Particulars.

Ovid, I will await your time. But when you left.
The world's great Head, happy and flourishing Rome,
How was Tiberius moved by the Intre aties
Of my dear wife, and some few real friends,
That my Repeal solicited?

Caral. Your virtuous wife and many constant friends,
Have not evaded any opportunity
In your behalf. And (though they have not yet,
Effected their desires in that Concern)
They do not despair of prosperous success

Ovid. I have two powerful enemies I believe,
And such who block up (with their imputations)
All ways of mercy. And yet they are men,
I cannot accuse my self for ever injuring.

Caral. You always was too noble to do wrongs,

Ovid. Even he that has that cruelty of heart,
To tempt the wife of a poor banisht-Man,
(Amidst her sighs and tears for my misfortunes)
Makes use of all the mighty Imterest
He has with Casar, still to fix me here.
Pardon my passion, ye Just gods, if I
Do wish one day you will requite the Mischiefs
Of Cornificius.

Caral. Your wife could make good Mirth with his Affection,
Were not her heart so sad for your long Banishment.

Ovid Some of my Griefs I have flung on him under
The counterfeit Name of Ibis.

Caral. Those Curses he richly deserves, Our sacred
Empress the sweet conditioned Julia,
Has from the Island Trimerus, (where she
Has lived confined about these twenty years)
Writ to him often in your Behalf. But she
(Although she brought to him the world in Dowry)
Could not prevail.

Ovid. She graced too much an Exile.

Caral. But had much reason to solicit thoroughly,
She being believed to be the fair Corinna,
Whom in your Poems you have celebrated.

Ovid. I pray you think not so: you wrong her virtues,
Of which I only was a true Adorer.

Cara. Though you deny it never so much, a Many,
And of the nobler fort, believe it otherwise
Droop rot best Poet; but Courage.

Ovid. Alas.
My hopes sunk with Augustus to the Grave
And here my aged bones must find an Urne,
Will you not see the Bridal house, although
In this disguise, and sure to be unknown?

Caral. I all those Inclinations must suppress:
It is the will of Heaven, and not mine own,
It Is time we walk.

Ovid. I Am ready to attend you.
Exeunt.
Scena secunda.
Enter Pyrontus solus,
Pyron. This sweet and solitary Grove (adjoining
To your citie's walls) I have made Choice to vent
My sorrows in: This Place that many times
Clorina's smiling eyes have graced more,
Then Phoebus with his beams could ever do.
Happy you Trees, whose roots received vigor
From the life-giving virtue of her looks:
And you sweet Birds that choose this shady place,
To warb^e forth your various notes were blessed,
To learn new Aires from bright Clorina's voice:
And all those Beasts are fortunate, that here
Enjoy the cooll shades, and the Crystal springs,
The waters and the grass receiving virtue
(From her rich presence) toward their ease, and nourishment
Even all The Inhabitants of Tomos choose
This place to recreate their minds withal:
Pan' Faunus, Satyrs, and the Dryades
Have not afforded me so good success
Wherefore alas! thus do I vainly tax
The rural gods? Clorina is my foe,
Else I had been as happy as Bassanes,
Who is the most blessed man of all the Empire,
And that unparalled Beauty does enjoy,
Whose Loss must perpetually lament;
Whose Loss must sit so near unto my Soul,
The world will want a Cure to make me whole.
Enter Cypassis,
Cypas. Thanks to These Trees auspicious shades* whereby
I, undiscovered, have been made partaker
Of Lord Pyrontus Love unto the Bride*
I will observe (with all the curious search
I may) what progress he intends to make,
And hope I shall raise motives to withdraw
Bassanes from the dotage on his wife,
And six his heart again upon Spinella.
Enter Pyrontus, and Philocles.
Philo. I have been searching for you long

Cypas. It Is best I do retire, where unperceived
I their discourse may over hear.

Philo. You should not.
Give such a Liberty to your Melancholy,
Nor take delight in solitary walks.
My Lord Pyrontus in your early youth.
You was instructed (by the ablest Mastero
That famous Athens or triumphant Rome
Could glory in) in all the Principles
Of grave Philosophy; reflect upon them
And raise your self thence strengh to conquer these
Unruly passions.

Pyron. My dear Philocles,
It Is very easy for a man to give
That counsel to his friend, he could not follow
Himself, were he in his condition;
I want a Power to preform't The world
Cannot afford me means: I must enjoy
Clorina, or I utterly am lost.
And therefore (though Bassanes is my Friend,)
My Amity cannot enjoin me silence
I must pursue my suit, and will.

Philo. ^ake heed:
You then will run a course against all Virtue,
Offend the sacred Deities, whom we
Are bound by strictest Obligations,
To observe in all they have commanded us.

Pyron. But they are merciful, and will forgive

Philoc But it is inglorious to commit a Crime
Out of presumption of a pardon; and
Your breach of friend-ship, all mankind will censure
An Act degenerating from true Nobility

Pyron. These Moralls (Philocles) are cast away
On me, who am so overwhelmed in love,
I have not Reason left to practice them.

Philo. But you will have sufficient if you would
Take up a Resolution to withstand
This dangerous passion.

Pyron. It Is in vain to preach
These things to me: I must enjoy Clorina,
Or leave you friend for ever, I shall dye.

Philoc. How this untoward Love destroys your sensel

Pyron There is not Oratory enough on earth,
To win me from the Pursuit of my love,
One way or other I must get Clorina:
And to invent a Means to compass her,
Shall be my only study; and if I prove
So fortunate as to accomplish that,
I shall account my self a Favorite*
The most esteemed of by the Gods.

Philo Fiends rather.

Pyron. Then I shall find there is a Fate attends
On Lovers; Harsh Beginnings, happy Ends.
Exit Pyrontus
Philo. I will not give him over thus, but follow him
And though I have small Hopes I shall prevail
Yet I (in Friendship) am obliged to do
My best to stop him in this vicious Course.
O brave Pyrontus! How has impious Love
Abused thy Reason with this mighty Dotage!
He that has been the Glory of this Province,
Will make himself, this way, the shame and scandal,
Exit Philocles Cypassis discloseth her self.
Cypassis. is he so hotly set that none beside,
The Bride can satisfy his luxury!
This shall Bassanes know. Now will I work
With all the treacherous Art I Am Mistress of,
To raise a Discord in their Marriage, she
Is made of Flesh and blood and may prove false,

Pyrontus. is resolved to Court her strongly;
A Gillant Gentleman, hansome as any,
Perfect in amorous Complements no doubt.
I wonder how he mist her, if he ever
Made it his business to obtain her favor.
I wish him good Success May this Clorina
Fall into his Embraces: Then my Girl
Spinella it is likely may arise
Into her former Favor with Bassanes.
He Is rich, and bountiful; And such are welcome
Unto young Women? who will loose no time,
And love to live in Flourish of the Fashion,
Enter Bassanes.
Bassanes. I like this marriage well, For now I led
My Life in favor of our best of gods.
I have lived loosely long enough, and paid
My services to Venus, and wild Priapus.
Juno will now befriend me, sure, and Hym^n
Rain blessings on my head, and Family.

Cypassis. Good day, my Lord Bassanes! what alone?
Can you so soon deprive your self of the
Fair Sunshine of your bright Clorina's eyes?
Find in your heart to be out of her Company?

Bassanes. I must not be a shadow to my wife,
Nor she to me: we must not evermore
Follow each other; so our Loves might prove
Troublesome to our selves. But say, Cypassis;
What business brought you hither? Is It for health's sake
That you are come to walk, and take the Air:
Or out of hope to meet me here, to tell me?
Fictitious stories of Spinella's Love
To me?

Cypassis* I had not any such intention:
Affection to the Groves, and a desire
To exercise my self a while in walking*
Did bring me hither. But I Have lost my labor,
And (^as you came) was a returning home.

Bassanes. This is a Riddle, Who could hinder
You from walking?

Cypassis. My own Curiosity,
I have been listening to the saddest speech,
That ever yet did pass a Lover's lips.

Bassanes, Prithee Cypassis, Who had the ill Fortune,
To vent his Sorrows in thy hearing?

Cypassis. A friend
Of yours: But it is no matter who, you are
In a condition of such Happiness
That it would be an incivility in me,
To cause the least sad thoughts in you. Continue.
In mirth, and Jollity* And so, Farewell.

Bassanes. I pray thee stay a while. I must confess
I have a curiosity to know,
Who this is that you call a friend of mine
Who can be sad now I am grown so happy.

Cypassis. My Lord Bassanes! I must crave your pardon,
Secrets of Love you know should be concealed.

Bassanes. I am no Common Brother.

Cypassis. For old Acquaintance sake I cannot choose,
But tell you any thing you shall request.

Bassanes. I thank you. How does fair Spinella? I
Should have enquired sooner of her health,
But your discourse drew me aside from it.

Cypassis, Oh! how you flatter me. I easily can
Believe you have forgotten her for ever.

Bassanes. You wrong our Friendship: Happiness I wish her,
As much as you and she can both desire.

Cypassis. I Will tell her so, and so again Farewell.

Bassanes. Nay tell me (e're you go) what Friend of mine
Is grown so Amorous, and so passionate.

Cypassis. Since you will have me, think.

Bassanes* I cannot guess,

Cypassis. It is Pyrontus.

Bass. It may be so, yet he
Never revealed to me he was in love.

Cypassis At that I make no wonder.

Bass. Whom should he
Be so enamored of?

Cypassis. Clorina's eyes
Have Beams enough a Province to inflame.

Bass. My wife!

Cypassis. The very same.

Bass. He surely then will stisle
His passion generously, and not attempt
The wife of his approved Friend.

Cypassis. You guess amiss, He is resolved to try
Her to the utmost. He Is a proper Gentleman,
And (I believe) has a prevailing language:
You may be civil to him, and be wary.

Bassanes. It is too likely. On our Marriage-night
He so abruptly did depart, he gave us
Not leisure enough to take our leaves; A sign
He wanted patience to look on my Joys.

Cypassis I thought he somewhat suddenly was gone
But Love's a passion not to be commanded.

Bassanes What was it he in your hearing said?

Cyp^sses. Alas!
Enough: Too much. He does deserve our pity,

Philocles. did surprise him, and did use
His best persuasions to divert him from
So vain, and dangerous an Affection.

Bassanes. Come to particulars, my good Cypassis,
Conceal not from me any thing. The gods
Did guide you hither to over-here him, Why
Stand you in such suspense?

Cypassis. Take heed, my Lord Bassanes! Oh, beware
Of Jealousy, It Is an accursed Fiend,
That otherwise your Quiet will molest,
Involve you in a Perpetuity
Of hideous Chimera's. Fair Clorina
Is innocent, and of a spotless virtue,
She is not accessory to his fault;
If to be beautiful be not a Crime.

Bassanes. I am not jealous; neither will be ever.

Cypassis. A Resolution worthy your great mind,
And worthy the Respects you ought to owe,
And pay, unto the virtues of your Lady.

Bassanes. I know her excellent body is enricht,
With so sublime a spirit, and so pure,
That Vice dares not approach her, thoughts, Be free
Therefore, and tell me all thou know.

Cypassis. You may command me; And I will conceal
Nothing from you

Bassanes. Good old Cypassis! thanks.
Exeunt Ambo,
Scena Tertia.
Enter Pyrontus, and Clorina.
Clorina. For shame (Pyrontus) cease to prosecute
A suit so much beneath your Honor, and
So prejudicial to my Reputation:
I must not hear you.

Pyron. What a misery,
To be condemned to an eternal penury,
And be forbidden to complain! Fair, cruel

Clorina, do not so insult. Although
I am most wretched, it is in your power to make me
Happy, when you shall please to be but kind.

Clorina, I am not of a salvage nature, neither
Ever rejoiced at my body's Grief,
I wish you all content, and ever did
A wife superior unto me in all things.
Sink not beneath this passion of your Love,
You under-valued evermore your merits,
To think of me in that way

Pyron. You abuse
The truest affection amorous heart did ever
Pay to his Mistress, if you think I can
Efface your image in my soul. The center
Of this vast Globe we breath on, is not faster
Fixed then your Beauties here: Here in my Bosom
They sit tryumphant. Aetna in its torrey-Entrals
Does nourish lesser. Flames* then burn me daily.
And yet you have no pity for my sufferings.

Clorina. Alas! what would you have the make my self
A Beast, of such an horrid name I tremble
But to think of it? all tho Gods forbid,
Would you have her, whom you have cast away
Some kindness on, become an Whore? My heart
Trembles to think upon it. And the swift Lightning
Of Blushes flies into my Cheeks* Me thinks*
My tongue does burn like fire within my Mouth
Since it did mention so abhord a name

Pyron, Will you then never think me worth your mercy
Shall the vain terrors of an empty name,
Condemn me to a languishing life for ever.

Clorina. You gods are Witnesses, that know my thoughts,
I would not by the wrack of Chastity,
And proving to my marriage false, redeem
My self from the most cruel death that Tyrant
Did ever invent for his most hated enemy.

Pyron. More merciless than worst of all those Tyrants!
Can you refuse a Courtesy to me,
Which my assidnous services may plead for?
And such an one, as can be never known,
Neither impoverish you in the least degree?
Reflect upon my misery, sweet Clorina,
And imitate the gods in Mercy.

Clorina. Rather the Fiends, if I should be so wicked.
The Lord Pyrontus (whom I heretofore
Did look upon as a most noble Person,
Accomplished with the virtues) has declared
Or Counterfeited himself an Atheist, to
Allure Clorina from her Purity.
The gods see every thing. Nature, nor Art,
Can any thing conceal from them. Thoughts which
Did never take the air in words, to them
Discovered lie: And is it not far worse,
To have the gods to see our Crimes then men?
Could I prove guilty of so foul a fault,
I should impoverish my self to nothing;
A Bankrupt be in honor; which who wants
Is a companion fit for such wild people,
As never heard the name of virtue. Riches
Are Fortune's Trifles, neither altogether
To be despised, or doted on, but well used.
Poor Virtue is most rich. Virtue it self
Was (by the Ancients) held the greatest wealth.

Pyron. In your Discourse you are too much a Stoic:
Young Ladies hearts should not so utterly
Be void of all Compassion.

Clorina. I must leave you,

Pyron. Not without hope of Comfort, I beseech you,
Let me but taste of those sweet Delicacies
You cloy Bassanes with, if it be possible
He can be satiated with such delights.

Clorina. I trespass on my modesty to hear you.
Exit.
Pyron. In a condition she so sad has left me,
Joy is become an Exile from my heart.
To love and not be loved, is such a Curse
Jove (on his Foes) cannot inflict a worse.
Exit.
Actus Tertii,
Scena Prima.
Enter Ovid, and Caralinda.
Ovid. Trasullus is a great Astrologer,
In the Mathematics skilful to perfection:
For his profounder knowledge, the Chaldeans
Submit all to him.

Caral. Therefore I have reason,
More strictly to observe the advice he gave me;
And wait for the Accomplishment of the Fortune,
Which he foretold me.

Ovid. But fair Caralinda!
I would not have you either be too scrupulous,
Or negligent. The skill which they pretend to
Has but foundation upon Probabilities:
The glorious Planets may incline, but force not.
We have a Liberty within our selves:
Our wills are free, not slaves unto the Stars.

Caral. Though I believe you; I am so superstitious
I shall expect the Accomplishment of his Prophesy.
Further Discourse of it I shall forbear now,
And choose a worthier subject for our talk,
Tell me (dear OVID) therefore how the Fair
Bride's Fairer sister does enjoy her health?
I left her (when I went to Travail) like
Illustrious Phoebus rising in the Spring,
Without a Cloud about his Temples, promising
A bright day to the world. I left her in
Her early youth, but with so growing a Beauty,
That surely now it is able to work wonders.

Ovid. Indeed she is a Miracle of Perfection;
Nature has prodigally bestowed upon her
All her rich gifts: she is so fine a Virgin,
That I should wrong her to describe her Farther.
Health dares not be so rude as to forsake her,
Nor sickness so uncivil to approach her.

Caral. You have delivered her to my Amazement:
But I did always look that she would prove,
The Glory of this Province for her Beauty.

Ovid. But Armelina has besides a Soul,
Replenished so with goodness, and all virtue,
That were it lodged in any other body,
It would be locked up in a Cabinet,
Too mean for such a precious Jewel.

Caral. Ovid!
She is obliged to you for the rich Character
You have bestowed upon her.

Ovid. You mistake me,
I cannot speak her to her merit. You
Will think (when you shall see her) I have Injured her:
Her merits do so much exceed all Language.

Caral. We two have from our Childhood had a Friendship,
And she will grace me to continue it;
If she be such an one, as you have spoke her.

Ovid. Ah!. Caralinda I am grown too old,
To be a Flatterer.
Enter Armelina. Here she comes; and I
Appeal to your own eyes, to be my witness.
You grace me (Armelina) by this visit.
You seem a Deity; And bring a Comfort
To any Place you honor with your Presence.

Armelina. Duty obliges me to wait upon
A Person so Renowned as is Ovid,
One banished from his Friends, and Native Country
And (in his Age) confined to our poor City.

Ovid. You have a Charity equal to your Beauty.
This Lady is my Cozen, born at Sulmo;
The Place of my Nativity, you will honor me
To favor her with your Acquaintance, and
(As you hereafter shall approve of her)
With your fair Friendship too.

Armelina. The generous Ovid,
New Obligations lays upon me daily.

Ovid. My Kinswoman is your servant. Caralinda!
This Lady is the excellent Armelina
We were discoursing of, and I commending
(For who does otherwise that speaks of her,
Does sin against the greatest Truth on earth)
As she came in.

Armelina. Madam! I kiss your hand; And am ambitious
Of your acquaintance, and Affection.
So excellent a Kinswoman of Ovids
Must find my best Respects, and truest Love.

Caralina. Admirable Armelina! you are of
A Goodness so immense, that you may cast
Away of it on others an abundance,
And not impoverish your self at all.

Armelina. I wish
Pontus had any Person in it worthy
To be a Suitor to you for your love;
That here you might be married, and fix.
We would not lose such Graces you are Mistress of
Now we have seen you once. Ovid me thinks
Should joy to have so great a Comfort near him,
And settled past tho fear of Removal.

Caralina. Madam! my stay may prove much longer then
You do imagine. But let my occasions
Prove how they can (you with your Courtesy,
Have won so on me) that without your leave
I Will not return.

Armelina. You are too gracious, and have so ^gag'd me,
I know not what to speak or think.

Ovid. You saw,
I will believe (in Rome) one Phoebianus,
A Gentleman of this Country, and this City.

Caralina. I saw him often, and know him very well,
For he was pleased to afford his friendship to me.

Ovid. When thinks he of returning? he stays long,

Armelina. I can imagine he is so discreet,
That he had rather live in the Metropolis
Of all the world, than in a solitude,
Retired (in a manner) from the world,
Upon the Confines of the Empire here:
And to that purpose he has mighty reason
To choose himself (among the Roman Ladies)
A Wife whose matchless Beauty shall have power,
To fix him there for ever.

Caral. By your fair leave,
Dear Armelina, I with confidence
Dare say he shortly will be here.

Armel. Why pray you?
Can he escape the Roman killing Beauties,
And slight so much his own full happiness,
As to return a Batcheler to Tomos,
And here take up with an inferior woman
To be his wife. He has too much discretion,
To be found guilty of so great a weakness.

Caral. You are a stranger it seems to his affection:
For he has lest his heart here. Diverse times
he has told me, he has such a Mistress here,
That Rome, and all the World, does want her equal:
That there is neither Caesar, King, or Tetrarch,
But would elect her rather for his wife,
Then be an Emperor of the Universe,
And have all Mankind Loyal Subjects to him:

Ovid. Who should that Beauty be?

Armel. This Province, sure,
Has none of so supreme an Excellency,
As he to you has intimated. Poets
Report that Love is blind: And if he choose
A wife in Pontus (after he has seen
Those glorious Ladies in Tiberius Court)
He will too late (by his Experience) find
(...) his own choice was also blind.

Ovid. Do you not know her name he so affects?

Armel. He is an hansome Gantleman, and if
He comes not back debauched with the Luxuries
Of that proud City, nor infected with
The vices of it, He is a Personage
Of eminent virtues. Such he went from us;
And I shall hope he will come back untainted,
And be an honor to his Native Country.

Ovid. But still my curiosity is unsatisfi'd,
What might her name be, he does celebrate
With such Encomiums?

Caral. Perhaps it might offend him if I should
Reveal that secret.

Ovid. Do not think it, I
Believe (if he were here and I required it)
He it from me would not conceal: And I
Dare pass my word the Lady Armelina
Will be as private in it as you can wish.

Caral. Madam! I easily will believe, that you
Care not at all to hear it.

Armel. I dare not (in modesty) be so inquisitive,
Ladies would have their Loves concealed.

Ovid. Sweet Cozen!
Dear Caralinda, tell us who it is.

Caral. Sweet Armelina! I must needs obey,
It Is you that he affects.

Armelina. You jest with me, and he abuses me,
To make me the subject of his mirth.

Caralina. I Am sure
You are mistaken much: He has expressed
Too great a Love for you, to be in jest.

Armelina. There may be other women of my Name,
For ought I know in Tomos or in Pontus.

Caralina. If you Clorina's Sister are, it is you.

Armelina. You made me blush, A better choice I wish him.

Caralina. Were all the Beautiful Ladies in the world
Together, and among them, he might select
Freely which he should please, I know the vehemence
Of his Passion such, he would take you:
And you are of an Excellency so unparalled
That he would wrong his Judgment, if he should
Err into any other Choice.

Armelina. You complement too much: you Flatter me.

Ovid. You do an injury to your mighty merits
Deserve the Praise of all the world.

Armelina. Pray let us
Discourse of something else.

Ovid. Since you will have it so,
Let us withdraw; And taste a Glass
Of Cretane wine.

Caral. Dedicate one health
To Phoebianus, and his speedy Return.
Exeunt Omnes.
Actus Tertii, Scena secunda.
Enter Dacus, Cypassis, and Spinella.
Dacus. Now we are Friends again.

Cypassis. All very good Friends.

Dacus. Spinella too will smile upon me.

Spinella. Laugh at you also, when you deserve it.

Dacus. My wonderful old Mother! Dear Cypassis.
You are grown merrier of late, and it
Becomes you well; makes you grow fat, and hold
The Relicts of your Beauty up together:
If there be any woman in the world
That does remember the building of the Capitol,
I dare pronounce it is you. I wish I had
But as much money as you have spent in Almanacks,
(Reckoning but one for a year) since you could make use of them; And I
Should be as rich as a Governor of a Province; And have Gold
Enough to make daily high Entertainments
Of the best Sweetmeats, and rich Grecian wines
For you, and my Spinella, and maintain her
In clothes beseeming one of Caesar's Family.

Cypassis. Well, well Captain

Dacus: For all you make a jest at my Age, you would
Be very glad to live so long your self.

Spinel. I think there is small reason to imagine
He will arrive to such an Antiquity;
His Debaucheries will shorten his days. Besides
He is so quarrelsom, that it is a wonder
That he has lived till now.

Dac. Pretty Spinella, you steer another Course;
Are tame enough, as Gentle as a Cad;
And he that gives you money cannot Injure you.
Enter Hannibal, Cacala, and Floretta.
Spinella. You prate, you prate.

Hannibal. Is the meat ready yet?

Cacala. Whether it be or no, my stomach's ready for it.

Cypassis. It is; but we must stay for Lord Bassanes.

Han. Will he be here, Cypassis?

Cypas. Yes, and his friend Marullus.

Han. The more the merrier, my reverent Mo.

Cacala. But the fewer the better Cheer, I say.

Dacus. Jove save you, Captain Hannibal. And Venus,
Delicate Floretta, smile upon you always.

Han. Mars (Captain Dacus) be thy Friend, and Victory
Sit on thy swords point, when thou go to battle.

Caca. If Victory be of any weight, he had better
Carry her behind him on horseback through the Field.

Floret. You look, Spinella, very well to day, are neatly attired;
You meet with wealthy Servants, else you could
Not go so richly clad.

Spinel. You wear as good Clothes as I; which makes me conclude that
Captain Hannibal is of a wealthy Fortune.

Floret. His sword has been his money; It Is it that has
Purchased him an Estate sufficient,
To live in nobler splendour then he does.
But he is content without the Noise of Clyents,
And a Retinue of many Servants. Cacala
Serves him for man; And me for Maid.

Dacus. I wish Bassanes would appear. It Is pity
Good meat (out of a Complement) should be spoiled.

Spinella. He is a Person of his word.

Cypassis. And will
Be suddenly here I dare assure it.

Cacala. But how if he comes not this hour yet?

Cypassis. We must stay for him.

Cacala. I would then I were a Lord, and the better of the two; That we might
go to our meat presently, and he come at his own leisure, and sit down
accordingly.

Enter Bassanes, and Marullus.
Dacus Long looked for comes at last!

Cypassis. My Lord Bassanes welcome! Friend Marullus!
You Are welcome too.

Bassanes. You see I trouble you Cypassis. Why
Seems my Spinella discontent?

Spinella. Because
She is not yours. You have forsaken me
I have not seen you many a day.

Bassanes. I shall
Not hereafter be such a stranger to you.

Marullus. These wenches strange Temptations are. Yet sure.
Clorina's Beauties, and the sacred knot
Of Hymen will continue him in virtue.

Bassanes. Your daughter looks exceeding well, Cypassis,
She Is Mistress of a Beauty so supreme,
It is above the rage of time, of sickiless.

Cypassis. Venus be praised, she needs no Art, and never
Read Ovids Poem of the skill of Painting,
She knows not what belongs unto a (...)
Her Face does ever wear its native Colors.

Spinel. Mother! the very thought of the Ingredients
Of Paint, would powerfully deter me from it;
I should be sick to daub my Face with Ointments
Made of the spawn of Snakes, Spittle of Jews,
And Mird of Infants.

Flor. Many a Gentlewoman
Of good Repute, and excellent Features also
Have not so nice a stomach.

Cypas. I credit it:
And have known many (who use Art themselves)
Rail at it with so fine an Impudency,
As if they did intend to win belief,
To paint they such Aversion had, as they
Scorned (with it) to adulterate their Faces.

Mar. You women no Dissemblers are! (...) that
Can live without you is an happy man.

Caca. In my opinion, you Floretta had
Better become my wife, then thus continue
A Concubine to Captain Hanniball.

Floret. I shall inform him of your sauciness
If you desist not from your suit. Know Cacala
I scorn to be a wife to thee.

Caca. No more:
You have more Cause to scorn to be a Whore.
Aside.
Flor. What mutter you?

Caca. No matter of Importance. I conceit
Your conversation with the Captain has
Inspired you with valor.

Flor. Prithee wherefore?

Caca. Because you lead such an Incontinent Life;
I think you do not fear the Gods.

Flor. Adon;
Or I will make you fear my Hannibal's Anger.

Cypas. Our meat stays on us.

Bassanes. Mother lead the way.
Give me your hand Spinella,

Spin. And my heart.

Dacus. I fear Bassanes will renew his Love.
Exeunt. Could I win her affection. I would marry her
And take her to Rome out of his reach, she is
Cypassis only Child; And they are rich.
She may turn honest after she is a wife:
However Money makes an happy Life.
Exit.
Actus Tertii, Scena Tertia
Enter Armelina Sola.
Armelina, Ovids fair Cosen Caralinda has
Inspired a spirit of Joy into me. Those
Sweet words she told me of my Phoebianus,
Sunk pleasantly into my heart, and thence
Disperse a Comfort unto all my Senses.
Before he travailed he would often whisper
Kind Accents in my ears of his Affection.
But (though I wished him well) I durst not give
Too easy credit to his amorous tongue.
Yet from my Childhood I have had a kindness
For him, as he professed he had for me.
His Constancy my only Comfort is;
And I will pay with my Affection his.

Scena Quarta,
Enter Bassanes, and Dacus.
Bassanes. You should not be so angry. He intended
You no affront. He had been drinking ere
We came. You (...) much as he
Could bear: Come therefore in again, shake hands
And still continue Friends.

Dacus. It must not be
Refuse my Mistress health! It is a Crime,
Which nothing but his death shall expiate.
His body goes to Atoms for it aud's Soul
Whither it pleases surly Caron to Waft it.
Have I been ever his continual Friend,
Waited on all his worst Extravagancies
With my unwearied valor, and my sword?
And am I slighted thus! I will rouse up
The dreadful Furies from infernal shades,
To stigmatize him full of my revenge.
The lasting Stars of his Ingratitude.
Enter Marullus, Cypassis, Hannibal, Cacala, Floretta, Spinella.
Cypassis. I Will ^ave no quarrelling in my house, you shall be Friends. He shall
drink Spinella's health, and have no more.


Caca. And you can hinder Quarrels in a Baudy-house, you have more power than a
Constable. But if you force him to drink her health; Let him have something
more, have her too, though it be but to night.


Spin. Leave ^imping Cacala, I have no need
Of your assistance in this kind. Bassanes
Let me en^ that you would reconcile them

Bassa. Marullus! I conjure you by our Friendship:
And Captain Dacus! He shall have the Boul.
pointing to Marullus.
Mar. You shall command me.

Spin. If you expect favor you must leave
These ^u ^ours. Are you Friends?

Dacus. I must obey you.

Flor. Shake hands, and let us in again.

Cypas. I need not of Clorina's Health enquire
She cannot but be well whom you affect.

Bassa. Cypassis! this is pretty Complement,
She Is free from sickness, and I will be careful
To keep her clear from any vicious Act.

Cypas. Doubtless she is virtuous: Trouble not your head
With Jealousy.

Bassa. I will be wise, old Mother!

Han. Come Captain.
We men of War are for the Field, and there
Will be victorious; Let the woman here.
Exeunt.
Scena Quinta.
Enter Clorina above, as in her Chamber.
Clorina. I am locked in, and at it am amazed
But will conceal it from my servants while
I any Excuse can find. It needs must be
My Husband; For he last was with me here.
I did not hear him do it; but (in all likelihood
'Twas he, when is mind did run on something else
I am so innocent I should fear nothing,
And yet so timorous that I am in dread.
Enter Pyrontus, and Philocles below. Pyrontus and his Friend are come into
The Garden: Gracious Heaven divert him from
The Prosecution of his suit to me.
My troublesome thoughts have brought a Drousiness
Upon me. Sleep shall entertain my time
Until Bassanes comes, and ope's the door.
I will not force the lock, because I am
A stranger to the reason I Am made Prisoner.
Perhaps my Husband knows some Mortal danger
Designed against me, and has thus secured me
Till his return.
Withdraws.
Pyron. My Philocles, by all
The Circumstances of our mighty Friendship
I pray thee vex me with no more Disswasions.
I cannot look upon my Passion to
The fair Clorina as a Crime. If it is
Offense on her to be enamored, sure
All mankind that beholds her, must be guilty.

Philoc. You are so obstinate, my heart foretells me
You will draw Mischiefs on your head. For Heavens sake
Consider on your Friendship to Bassanes,
Reflect upon the Contumely, you
Will bring upon you from the Mouths of all,
For your unbridled Appetite to the Wife
Of your approved Friend; and for the Breach
Of Sacred Amity by such a Crime.

Pyron. Your words you scatter in the wind to give
Counsel to me. My Friendship must submit
To my more powerful Love.

Philos. Noble Pyrontus,
It Is not too late yet to consult with Reason.
Pray give me leave to wait upon you home.
Rouse your depressed Virtue up, and let
Time, your own Courage, and the gods Assistance
Clear your brave mind, from all these vicious Flames.

Pyron. I will not leave the House till I have seen
And spoken with Clorina.

Philoc. You have heard
She is retired into her Chamber, there
Has locked her self up; And you may believe
It Is done to shun your Courtship. Will you go?

Pyron. I will not stir from hence, till I have blessed
My eyes with the most glorious Beams of hers.

Philoc. I then must take my leave. If I can do
No good with my Entreaties to my Friend.
The world shall not inflict their Curses on me,
As if that I connived at his Impieties.
I pray you come away.

Pyron. All-powerfull Love,
(...) charmed me from obeying your Commands.

Philoc. Farewell then; but be wise and follow me.
Exit Philocles.
Pyron. So let him go. I undisturbed may now
Enjoy my thoughts; and follow my own Genius.
She is not sick, and yet she keeps her Chamber;
And locks her self in, to my greater Prejudice.
That is the window to it. Oh! For the power
Of Jove, t'fall on her in a golden shower.
Mercury! thanks. The Gardener has left
A Ladder here. I Will rear it up and venture
Thereby to get a sight of her; And (if
I else where must not) there declare my grief.
Rears and climbs up the Ladder. The window open! every thing foretells
Happy success! -- she lies upon her Bed!
Looks like Diana toyld with rural sports.
Fortune has thus far favored me, and I
Will by her Foretop hold, and venture in.
Degenerate Minds are known by Fear: And ^ate
Makes the audacious persons fortunate.
She sleeps! Morpheus his heavy hand has laid,
On the fair Lids of her bright eyes. I Will kiss
Them open, till those Suns appear
And shall disperse those Clouds.

Clorina. My Lord! Bassanes!
You to Clorina are most welcome ever.
Alas! I am deceived: What Spectre's this
That haunts me in Pyrontus shape?

Pyrontus. It is
No aerie Apparition, but the wretched
Pyrontus self, who has presumed to steal
Upon your Privacies.

Clorina. For Heavens sake go, and never see me more.
Your self you too much trouble, and expose
Me (whether I will or no) to so much Ignominy
By this Intrusion, that should it be known
My Reputation would be overthrown.
For Heavens sake, hence immediately retire
Without a word.

Pyron. Have you no pity yet?

Clorina. Have you no Goodness?
No care, and no Respect for a poor woman?
A Married one, and your Friend's Wife? You gods
Deliver me (in safety) from this Monster.
Men have exiled all Piety from their hearts,
I must not hope for any succor from them.
Fie, sie Pyrontus! if you have not made
A league with hell and mischief, vanish straight,
And purge your foul Soul by sincere Repentance.

Pyron. Are you of so supreme a Beauty, that
It were profaness to compare you to
The fairest of women kind (I think I may
Say, Venus self does want of your Perfections?)
And can you harbor so severe a mind,
Within so rich a body? Give a Period
To your long Cruelty, and mercy show.

Clorina. You blast me with your words, study my Ruin.

Pyron. Dearest Clorina! Have a Milder thought
Of my immense affection. In a body
(by Nature's liberal hand framed to a wonder)
Lodge not a soul for ever void of pity;
Slight not my knees thus bowed to move a tenderness,
In your so long inexorable heart;
Neither despise my tears, which thus I pour
A sacrifice to you disdain: No longer
Attire your heart in Robes of Salvageness,
Armor impenetrably cold. Oh! Molli^ it
With the Remembrance of the assiduous service
That I have paid you, upon all Occasions.
Enter Bassanes, and Marullus below.
Bassa. Marullus! I have passed my word to make
This Afternoon a Visit to Spinella.

Mar. You will not so discourteous be I know:
Your friend Pyrontus (as I heard within)
Is come to see you, and is in the Garden.
It seems he is retired into some of
The solitary walks; being out of sight.

Bassa. Faithful Marullus! I will not conceal
A thought from you that does disturb my Breast.
He Is to our Friendship false, loves my Clorina,
And (if he has not yet) intends to tempt her
By his lewd Courtship to incontinent Life.
Because to day I meant to go unto
Cypassi's house, I Have locked her in her Chamber,
To prevent him of his wild Aims.

Marullus. I think
I hear his voice in the next Ally to us

Bassa. My Wife is with him: Her tongue I Am well acquainted with.

Mar. It seems they are together.

Bassa. Here stands a Ladder at her Chamber window,
How came it hither! Hark -- O monstrous villainy,
He by it is got up into her Chamber:
I am betrayed; Marullus basely injured.
Forsake me not (my Friend) in my adversity,
Remove the Ladder safely without noise.
Watch here Marullus, that he slides not down,
And so escape; And this great Treachery,
(By both of them) be impudently denied.
So, so, it is done without discovery.
Lay it down there, or any where, I now
Will go and make a Third in her lewd Lodging.

Mar. But my best Friend! noble Bassanes! let not
A rash impatience move you to say,
Or to act any thing unworthy you.

Bassa. You need not fear me.
Exit.
Mar. This is an Accident so strange, I cannot
Consider it without astonishment.
If these the Fruits of Marriage be: high Heaven
Be praised that I have lived a Batcheler.
Boast not henceforth you Women, of your wealths
Or Beauties: for if you make no better Proof,
You bring an Hell, in Dowry to your Husbands.
Bassanes unlocks the door above and enters there.
Clorina. My Husband's come. Oh you have ruined me,
Worked such a Mischief that the gods will blush at it.

Bassa. Thou beast! unworthy of the name of man,
Much more unworthy of the name of Friend!
Thy Crime so great is, that I need not lose
A Minute in hearing Lies for thy Excuse.
Kills him. Dye; and go rince in vain thy so polluted
Soul, in the flaming streams of Phlegeton.

Pyron. Let my last words (for they are perfect truth)
Find Credit with you. Your Clorina's chaste,
I here surpised her when she was asleep.

Bassa. He Is sunk to Hell. Now my lewd Huswife come,
I Will find another Room for your disports,
Thy unclean Body shall no more infect
My Nuptial Bed.

Clorina. Protect, Oh Gracious gods! my Innocence.

Bassanes. Walk in Marullus. I have suffered wrong:
And this Adulteress, Justice shall ere long.
Exeunt Omnes.
Actus Quarti,
Scena Prima.
Enter Dacus, and Spinella.
Dacus. I tell thee (sweet Spinella) I adore thee;
Have for thee a more generous affection,
Than the greatest Lord in all this Province has.

Spin. You mean Bassanes. But, my doughty Captain!
He does express his love in Golden Terms;
Which I more value than a Soldier's Oaths.

Dacus. He loves you for himself, and not for you;
Mine is a virtuous Flame.

Spin. Your Dotage is,
Forgetful grown of what is past.

Dacus. I fain
Would marry you.

Spin. Dacus! I am too young.

Dacus. Why jests my pretty wanton so?

Spin. Old women that love melancholy Lives,
Are the fit'st Creatures to make slavish Wives.

Dacus. Have you so small Esteem for holy Marriage?
And can you think it such a Bondage?

Spin. Yes,
Are not such yoked together? And oftentimes
Draw they not Contrary ways; like Dogs in Couples?
The tugging at an Oar in any Gally
Is as much Liberty as your Matrimony.

Dac. Fie pretty Atheist. Such profaneness quit
And take an Husband, take thy Captain Dacus:
A man whose sword shall reap the Parthian Fields,
And bring thee in (by frequent victories)
A large Revenue, equal to thy wishes.

Spinel. My glorious talking Captain, I shall not
Be won with empty words.

Dacus. Have you no care
Of future Bliss, or Bare?

Spinel. Plato, and Virgil he has read, I smell him,
And Courts me with their trim Philosophy.

Dacus. As you resolve to live, you do not mean
To serve the Gods.

Spinel. There you come something near me;
But Venus is a Goddess, and I shall.
Serve her. But Dacus! To be plain with you,
I love a Gaudy Chariot, and fine Horses,
Servants of all sorts, in rich Liveries,
Delicious Meats, and Wines, costly Apparel,
And Jewels of the highest value. I must
Out-glitter all the Femals of the Province,
Or I shall want my will.

Dacus. And all this Bravery
Bassanes wealth shall furnish you withal
You hope, as I suppose. But (dear Spinella)
Think of his Marriage. He has now a wife
Of great Descent, who brought a Fortune to him
So vast, I want Arethmetick to name it:
And she may look to be maintained at th'height
Of all his Means; And then your hopes will prove
Fleeting as shadows, vanish in the Air.

Spinel. 'Twit me not with his wedlock: For our Crime
Will now be greater, And he shall be brought
To buy his Pleasure at an higher value.
Enter Hannibal, Cacala, and Floretta. The Roman Captain his Mistress, and his
servant.
Dacus. How (...) it with my mighty man of War.
Lets us shake our victorious Hands in Peace,
And pray to Mars to set the world in uproar.

Hannibal. That Timorous Princes may grow Bountiful;
Court us to take Employment on us, while
Their Luxuries they may securely follow.

Dacus. Brave Captain Hannibal, such Iron-Times
Would be a Golden Age to us; shall we
Together walk and drink an health or two,
To all the Sons of Battle?

Hannibal. I am for you.

Spinel. Then I Will retire and keep my Mother Company.
Exeunt Han. Dac. Spin.
Caca. Gentle Floretta stay. Let me not lose
This opportunity to woo thy love.

Floretta. Where learnt your folly those fine words?

Caca. Your eyes have taught me to express my heart:
They have infused a Spirit of speech into me.

Flor. You have been certainly with some Pedagogue,
And hired him to pen this Courtship for you.

Caca. I love thee better then I love my Captain.

Flor. And I your Captain much above you aff^ct.

Caca. What delicate eyes you have! I Will kiss them out,
And wear them in my ears.

Flor. You shall be hanged first;
I Would rather scratch thy heart out with my nails.
And stuff a Cushion with it

Caca. To sit, and fart upon it, and keep it warm.
Thou art a precious Rogue, and I had rather
Have thee to be my wife, than any Damsel
That lives in the Saburra. Give me a wench
In all the Gamesome frailty of ^er youth;
Especially, would she turn honest afterward.

Flor. Thou talk at such a Random Cacala,
That thou art a Pastime to me. But why rather
Would thou elect a Beauty broken up
Than one that is sound?

Caca. To tell you the plain Truth,
An honest woman is a Bugbear to me:
I never took Delight in their Acquaintance.

Flor. Run after your Master, tell him, I would speak with him.

Caca. I Will pimp no more: But will henceforth grow honest.

Flor. I doubt me (Cacala) thou have of late
Been troubled with some terrible Dreams. Have seen
Pluto, and his dark Region in thy sleep?
What else should make thee talk of Virtue?

Caca. The goodwill (Floretta) that I bear to you
Engages me to this discourse. I pray thee
Take me unto thy Husband: And we then
Will run away together, leave Captain Hannibal.
To his new Fortune; And resolve both of us
To lead our lives Honestly for the future.

Flor. Out thou Villain! Turn Traitor to a^ Master
So liberal to thee as my Captain is?
But that I know he would frown thee to death,
I would acquaint him with this Parley. Amend
Or neither he, nor I, will be thy Friend.
Exit. Flor.
Caca. I know not what to make of this wench; and yet I would fain
Make her my Wife: But I think I am a Fool for my Labor.
She Will hold her Peace I hope, That Is all my Care,
And then to get her, I will not despair.
Exit.
Scena Secunda.
Enter Bassanes, Marullus, and Clorina, with Servants.
Bassanes. So, place her in that Chair, and to the sides
Tie fast her Arms, keep her hands open thus!
Here the servants tie her fast, and fasten Pyrontus heart in her hands. Thus!
That she may not close them, or remove them:
And put her Paramour's Heart into them: So,
Now Foul Adulteress! Thou may contemplate
Of the Affection it did bear thee once.
Reflect upon the Mountain of thy Sins,
Which has overwhelmed the false Pyrontus. Look
Thou most libidinous woman, what a Ruin
Thy Lust has brought upon him, and thy self.

Clor. I have at large (calling the gods to witness
That what I told swerved not a jot from truth)
Related to you all the Particulars
Of his unruly Love; that he surpised me,
Came in at my window whilst I was asleep;
With what an horror I was stricken at it,
When I perceived 'twas he; how I railed at him,
Called him by the worst names that I could think on;
Bad him be gone for ever from my sight,
That I looked on him as a Basilisk,
The Ruin of his honor, and mine own,
That I would tell you of him, my Bassanes,
Inform you what a Devil's Company
You kept in the likeness of a Friend. Just gods!
Protect my Innocence, and by some means
Divine, inspire these Truths into his heart.

Bassa. That wife who dares polluth the Nuptial Bed,
Is prodigal enough of Vows and Tears,
To win belief from credulous Persons; she
Has done no wrong, when she has done all the wrong.

Clori. Thrice happy are those souls that from the Cares,
And slanders of this wicked Age are free,
Walk up and down Elysium in their thin
And airy substances. And have them so
Transparent that their thoughts may all be seen.
Wood mine were such. Oh that the Deities
Would lend their eyes a while to you, that you
Might search (Bassanes) every Cranny of,
My heart. I do not know a thought I have,
I would conceal from you.

Bassa. Thou have a Soul,
So ulcerous, Clorina, that the Prayers,
And vows of all the world can never cleanse it.

Clor. Oh! the hard heart of unbelieving Man!
Happy you Virgins that do stop your ears
Against the Charms of their bewitching tongues
And evermore continue in your Chastity.
I would to Heaven I never had beheld
Hymen to light his Pine. Have I bestowed
My self on you to find such miseries,
Under your Roof? I wish my Parents had
As soon as I was born exposed me to
The open Fields, unto the Cruelty
Of the most salvage Beasts; or in a small
Unguided Bear, left me unto the fury
O^ an enraged Sea. Would any Mischief
Had fallen upon (...), but this fatal Marriage.

Bassa. Hearken Marullus! are you not amazed
To hear her speak against our Nuptials thus?
It is apparent that she does repent her
Of taking u^, And wished she had Pyrontus.

Mar. I pray you (...) her out.

Clorin How you mistake
My meaning, my beloved, and cruel Husband!
I would it had been pleasing to the gods,
I never had been made a wise to any.
How fortunate a choice might you elsewhere
Have found; these dire Mischances mist; and I
(With my ill Fate) have no man else infected.

Mar. My heart is bigg with sorrow at her words,
And vents it self in this sad dew.

Bassa. What are these Tears for, you do dry away?

Mar. I cannot choose but Melt.

Bassa. You are too Tender.
Come: we will leave her to contemplate here
The horrid wickednesses, she has acted.
If that all sense of honor has not left thee.
Clorina, dye: It will be endless shame
For thee to live, after thou thus have brought
Perpetual Ignominy on my poor Family.

Mar. I pity her, Bassanes, much commiserate
Her so disastrons Fate: She may be Innocent:
I pray you think her so; I hope she is.

Bassa. Her Reputation's gone, for ever lost:
A Sea of Tears cannot wash off her Guilt,
It Is so infectious, I am tainted with it.
False woman, dye: Lost honor never more
(By any Means) admits of any Cure.
Exeunt.
Scena Tertia.
Enter Ovid, solus.
Sure I was born when all the glorious Stars
Were met in Council to contrive a Mischief.
Under pretense of my Loose useful studies,
For the composing of my Art of Love.
In my declining years (when I expected
Ease, and a quiet Life) I was exiled
From Rome, and here confin^d to end my days
Among a people rude, and almost barbarous,
Except a few of the Gentry and Nobility,
In a Cold Country, where sierce Jether pays
(Through diverse channels) a Continual Tribute
Of his vast streams into the Euxine Sea,
A many have imagined Julia
Daughter of great Augustus was too gracious
And liberal of her Amorous Favors to me;
Which caused him to inslict this Punishment.
But ere that Emperor left the world, he was
Informed (for that Particular) of my Innocence:
And was acquainted that, if I were saulty,
It was an Error in me, not a Crime;
For if I ere enjoyed her, it was through
Her craft; I taking her to be another.
But he was too severe; That excellent Princess
He showed as little Mercy to, as me.
Now about Twenty years, in the small Island
Of Trimerus (near the Apulian Shores)
Confined by him sh' has led a tedious Life.
I must confess she had a Generous kindness
For me, and took delight to read my Poems.
But by her Letters, and Authentic witness
Cleared me sufficiently from that Reproach:
And won thereby so much upon her Father,
That I had been repealed if he had lived.
Since his Decease by diverse Messengers
(Persons of Noble Rank and Quality)
And by her eloquent Epistles she has
(For my return to Rome) importuned much
The great Tiberius, her too Cruel Husband,
But he that to a Wife (who brought him all
The Universe in Portion) shows no mercy;
Will not redress my wrongs. Here I must mourn
Out all my Life, and sind my Funeral Urn.
Exit.
Scena Quarta.
Enter Hannibal, and Cacala.
Han. T^ Captain Dacus is a jovial Blade,
(...) a very valiant Gentleman,
And of an heart as liberal as the Air.

Cacala! How like thou him

Caca. But so, so; yet?
I was well pleased to see him pay the Reckning.
You are far from home, and Mistress Floretta is
As chargeable as a stable of running Horses.

Han. It is grown something late; And Time to think
Of our Return unto our Lodgings. Look!
What Is that?
Espies a man hanging on a Gibbet.
(...). Sir, (...) thing.

(...). (...)
(...) what is it hangs there?
(...)
It Is (...) poor (...) that was executed
Two, or three days ago.

Han. He had (...) fortune.
Had he (...) b^ter have followed Mars, and fal^
In glorious Battle, and his soul exspir'd
Through (...) wounds, then Ignominiously,
Thus (...) to death in Noose of paltry halter?

Caca. My Captain Hannibal talks evermore
Of mighty Battails, or his little Whore.

Han. What mutter you, Sirrah?

Caca. I (by your valor's Leave.) was saying Captain,
Y'on man hangs in a pitiful cold corner.
The North wind shakes his Legs as he were dancing.
Of Wine, and Women, and of all good Meats,
He has for ever took his Leave.

Han. I'^ sorry for's hard Fate. Some lying People
Report some of the dead have walked. If thou
Can such a piece of fine Activity show,
Come sup with (...) to night. Thou ^alt be welcome.
Speaks to the Hang'd-man.
Caca. He bows his head.

Han. (...) '(...)

Caca. He (...), not put himself to such unnecessary trouble:
He that small savor has received already,
From some of's smaller Friends.

Han. If thou art a good dead Fellow, Come (I say)
And sup with me to night.

Spectre. I Will come.

Caca. I think I heard him answer; he would come.

Han. Thou art so timorous; The Echo of
My voice deludes thee.

Han. Follow me thou fearful Puppy.

Caca. A dog,
His Captain-ship makes of me; Sir, I shall
Even tread upon your Heels; I dare not stay
Behind an inch.

Han. Come then, for I fear nothing.

Caca. By your Leave.
I dread the Gallows mightily: And a Thief
That can talk after he is dead is a terrible Bugbear.
Exeunt.
Scena Quinta.
Enter Armelina, Bassanes, and Marullus.
Arm. I Am come to wait upon you Brother, and
To see how my dear Sister; your Clorina
Enjoys her health. I found among your servants,
A general sorrow as I passed along.
And you (me thinks) reflect distractod looks:
What is the reason of this Alteration
Throughout your Family?

Bassa. I am something troubled,
And now not in condition for discourse.

Arm. What is the matter, good Marullus! Though
I may suppose some business, that has fallen
Athwart his Expectation, has distempered
His thoughts at present; yet I guess he is not
Sick. Therefore my afflicted mind misgives me,
That my poor Sister is not well: Resolve me,
Alas! I see some malady has taken her:
And he like a Good Husband suffers with her,
Grieves fot her want of health: Is it not so?

Bassa. Sweet Armelina! At this present leave me:
I at another time should fitter be,
To give you th'Entertainment you deserve;
According to the utmost of my power.

Arm. The gods be with you: My poor Company
Shall be no longer to you troublesome.
I hope to find my Sister in her Chamber;
And will go sit with her.

Bassa. She is not there.

Arm. Where is she then? For I resolve (...) see her.

Bassa. She Is not in case to give you Entertainment,
Or to receive a visit.

Arm. Alas! You strike me
Almost as dead, as I suspect she is.
For Heavens sake teach me where to find her.

Bassa. She is alive,
I pray you let that satisfy, and leave us.

Arm. Not for the World. I will not leave the house
Till I have seen, and spoken with Clorina.

Bassa. My dear Marullus! Since this Lady is
So very importunate, She Will not be diverted,
Guide her I pray you to her Sister.

Mar. I must obey you; And fair Armelina
Shall wait upon you.
Exeunt Mar. and Arm.
Arm. Lead, and I follow you.

Bassa. Now she will curse me, and traduce my name,
Though (the Gods know) her Sister's in the blame.
He that refrains for fear of women's Tongs
To right himself, basely submits to wrongs.
Exit.
Scena Sexta.
After a small Supper set forth, Enter Hannibal, and Cacala.
Han. What! Is this all we are like to have?

Caca. So please your Souldier-ship, renowned Captain,
This is even all; And it may serve the turn.
Although I have an Appetite as sharp
As your victorious Sword, great Captain Hannibal.

Han. Where is Floretta (Cacala?) Go call her,
She will rail at this meat, and call me covetous.

Caca. I needs must say, her stomach never failed her;
Though she is but little, she is a tall woman at a Trencher.

Han. Run, and call her,
Tell her the meat will be cold; And then it is spoiled.

Caca. I may save that Labor. Mistress Spinella has invited her to Supper.
They and Cypassis eat to night together.

Han. Will Captain Dacus be there.

Caca. I think not Sir.
I never knew Cypassis but an hungry:
She Is not so bountiful, as to invite
Others to eat her meat up.

Han. How comes it then Floretta is their guest?
Sit down, and be not troublesome: You know
I Would have it so.

Caca. I thank your valor. I have some small suspicion
Bassanes has a Liking took to your
Dear Damigella, and Cypassis must
Court her, and tempt her to his various Lust.

Han. May be so Cacala! Let him take his Chance:
If he so lead, i will follow him the Dance;
Then I will woe Spinella; And he shall
Father the spurious issue i will get on her.
Hark! Somebody knocks: Rise, and inform me who
Is at the door -- How now, What art thou deaf,
And hear'st me knock; or dumb because thou speak not?
An Apoplexy sure has ceaz'd upon thee.
Sit down again, and drink a Glass of Wine
It will recover thee. Well done, now eat thy meat.
Again there knocks somebody at the door.
Rise once more Sirrah, and conduct them in.
Be gone, or I shall kick you to your duty.
He opens the door, turns back and falls down, as in a Swound. This idle Rascal
sure the falling Sickness
Has got of late. I must be at the charge,
I fear to send for a Physician to him.
I wonder who it is: For somebody knocks
Again. It needs must be a stranger, else
He suc^ long Complement would not have showed.
Still he knocks on. I will go bring him in.
Enter Spectre. Your name Sir, and your pleasure.

Spectre. My name, Helvidius is.

Han. You are a stranger
Unknown to me; I pray, what is your business.

Spectre. I come to sup with you.

Han. Though clad so meanly,
You shall be welcome.

Spectre. I am not so rude,
To press upon you, uninvited, Captain.

Han. Who should invite you?

Spec. Sir! Your self.

Han. It Is strange.
I should forget it then.

Spec. I come unlooked for Noble Hannibal,
But you did bid me to supper to night.

Han. My Memory has failed me. Where Helvidius?

Spec. At the Gibbet, by the City walls;
Where I did hang in Chains.

Han. This is a Courtesy deserves a welcome;
You are most welcome Sir, and so believe it.

Spec. You are my generous Patron, and I'thank you.

Han. Sit down, I pray sit down. So: it is well done,

Cacala! Where Is Cacala. Give me a Glass of Wine,
What on the floor still! rise man.

Caca. I dare not stir, nor breathe Sir.

Han. He will not hurt you.

Spec. I shall not be so rude, where I find welcome
To do a Mischief.

Han. Fill Wine. Sir much good do you, And here is to you,
To your fair Mistresses health; whether alive,
Or your Companion in the Elizian Groves.

Spec. You much endear me.

Han. Could I have thought you would have supped with me,
You should have been much better treated.
Sit down and eat, Thou silly Cacala!

Caca. I am very timorous.

Han. His Promise and my Valor do protect thee.

Caca. This Napkin thus dispos d under my Hat,
Shall keep my eyes off him. I Will cat like a Lion,
Because I fit in fear, and after will
Chew the Cud as some Beasts do, to disjest it.

Spec. Good Fellow, I salute thee with this Bonl,
To thy brave Hannibals Mistresses health.

Caca. I have no mind to drink yet. My Master
Is the better Pledger of such Fancies.

Han. You shall not refuse him. Off with is Cacala:
I Will conclude it.

Spec. It has gone round.
Captain, your kindness has so far obliged me,
That I presume to beg a favor of you.

Han. You shall command.

Spec. I pray you dine with me to morrow.

Han. You jest.

Spec. I am in earnest: You shall be most welcome.

Han. Where?

Spec. At the Gibbit.

Han. I Will come.

Caca. Now my bellie's full, I cannot forbear.
To cast a sheeps eye at him.
Oh! oh. Cries out aloud, falls backward, and (with his Legs under the Table)
overthrows it, and all the meat.
Spect. I thank you, generous Captain; And good night.

Han. Farewell Sir; And expect me as I promised.
Rise thou unmannerly Beast, and let us to bed.

Caca. Good Master, and thrice-valiant Captain Hannibal,
See me in bed first, and asleep, I beseech you,
And let me have Mistress Floretta; For I dare not lie alone.

Han. Follow me and undress me.

Caca. Sir, I beseech you have a little patience:
Say that I shall not lie alone to night,
And you will comfort me. I otherwise
Shall be so weak with fear, I shall not be
Able to pluck your stockins off.

Han. Get whom
Thou will to be thy bedfellow, but Floretta:
For, her I cannot spare.

Caca. Then I entreat you,
Let me lie in the same bed with you both.

Han. You must some other Lodging find.

Caca. Is It so?
Then I must old Cypassis try: Perhaps
A bottle of strong water will prevail
So far with her,
That she may give me leave
To lie with her.
And yet I had much rather
Lie with my old Grandmother, or Grandfather.

Han. It Is said she was a Beauty in her Youth.

Caca. Sure no man can report it that has seen it:
For I believe her birth was in the days
Of Lucius Brutus, who was Rome's first Consul.
Exeunt.
Scena Septima.
Enter Marullus, and Armelina, to Clorina fastened in a Chair, with the heart of
Pyrontus in her hand.
Arm. You Have made me such a terrible Relation
Of his strange Jealousy, and his foul Murder,
And's barbarous usage of your dear sweet self;
That (my Clorina) I Am deficient
Of Language to express my admiration.
But (my dull eyes) ^an you so long refrain
From dissolution into showers of tears?
My heart is sure of stone, or it would break
At these effects of's impious proceedings.

Clor. Have patience, my best Sister. It Is enough
For me to be so miserable: I would not
My sufferings should beget a grief in you.

Arm. Then I more stupid were then Salvages,
Then any beast in any Wilderness,
Or any Fury in black Hell it self.

Clor. Oh! Armelina, how am I beholding
Unto you, for your pity of my wrongs!
And yet I needs must grieve to see you thus
Afflict your self at the sad sense of them.
But I beseech you to assume a courage
Worthy our Noble Family to overcome it.
I shall but a few minutes longer trouble you
With my unfortunate company: I find
My heart too weak to make resistance longer
Against the impetuous storm of my vast injuries:
I find Death stealing sensibly upon me.

Arm. The Heavens forbid.

Clor. Prayers come too late now to divert my Fate.
I pray you therefore, good Marullus, have
To my dear Husband, and your faithful Friend;
Tell him, I beg but so much favor from him,
As I may breathe my soul out in his presence,
And see him once again; and I shall die
Contentedly, and pardon him my wrongs.

Mar. Madam! I do beseech you to have patience,
I will go for him; and have hope he will
Be very shortly reconciled unto you:
For from my soul I pity your misfortunes.
Exit Marullus.
Clor. Shed no more tears. You have, my Armelina,
Spent too much of that precious dew already
On poor unworthy me.

Arm. You are Clorina! my Elder, and
My only Sister: And can I perceive
Your innocence persecuted thus,
And seem an unconcerned Spectator of it?
It is impossible. Give me leave therefore,
TO express all sorrow I am capable of,
As tribute of my cordial affection
To your so lovely, sweet, and injured person.
Enter Bassanes, and Marullus.
Clor. Welcome my too unkind, though my dear Husband,
To your Clorina, welcome my Bassanes.
My eyes grow dim, and I my heart strings feel
To crack. Your harsh suspicion of my Loyalty,
And so severe an usage of me, have
Cut off my life in prime of all my youth.
Here, with my parting breath (in presence of
The Gods, within the hearing of your friend Marullus,
And of my Sister) I declare I dye
Free from all guilt, and never injured you.
And so farewell for ever. Gods! I come;
Afford my Innocence in Heaven a room.
She dies.
Mar. She has took leave of life.

Arm. I did not think
Her death had been so near.
Farewell for ever all content and pleasure
Since she is gone. No thought of joy shall ever
Possess my heart hereafter. She that was
My only happiness is vanished from me.
Look Monster of Mankind! This is a sight
Only befits the eyes of such a Villain.
Here thou have murdered the most virtuous wife
That ever Hymen knew; And one that was
In her affection over-fond of thee.

Bassa. Your passion makes you speak you know not what.
Your Sister injured me in such high nature,
That she has justly brought upon her self
The end that is come upon her.

Arm. The Anthropophagians that devour man's flesh.
By thee may be instructed in worse Cruelties.
What hellish wretch, but thy more hellish self
Would thus have used a Lady of her beauty?
To fasten with strong wires (in a Case of Male)
A man's heart in his wife's own hand, and lock her
With Chains into a Chair, fast; is a mischief
None out Bassanes durst have done. What Tyrant:
In History did ever act so ill?
Perill^s was an Innocent to thee.
The vengeance of high Jove hangs over thy head,
To strike thee with his forked-Thunder dead.

Bassa. No Husband but a Wittal, would have suffered
The Prostitution of his Wife.

Arm. You slander her, basely belie her virtues.
She to us all has cleared her self. Marullus
And I heard her relate the story. It was
The suddest that did ever fall from tongue;
Which she before had told thee all at large.
She doated on thee to her death, and with
Her last expiring breath protested freely
Her Innocence from thy imputed Crime.

Bassa. I care not what you say: She was as foul
In her base actions, as her face was fair.

Arm. Thou do traduce in humanely her virtue;
And I believe forbad'st she should have meat.

Bassa. I did not think of it; And therefore gave
Forth no such Order.

Arm. If the least Humanity
Remains yet in thee, let her be released
From these so barbarous bonds; this heart removed
O^t of her hands; it with Pyrontus body
Delivered to his Friends for Sepulcher:
And I will take care for the funeral-Rites
Of sweet Clorina my poor murdered Sister.

Bassa. 'Twill ease me of some trouble, and a Charge;
Therefore I will consent to that demand:
And the Gods keep me from a second Marriage.

Arm. Thou needst not fear that: thou can not find a woman
So lost to Virtue, and to Honor, that
Dare be a Wife to such a bloody Butcher.
Sure there is no woman in the world so senseless,
And wicked, as to give her self to thee.
I Will tell thy story unto all I meet;
And thy reproach shall ring through every street.

Bassa. Your Larum may run on, whilst I Will declare
To all the world how false you women are.
Exeunt Omnes.
Actus Quinti,
Scena Prima.
Enter Ovid, Philocles, and Caralinda.
Ovid. I am amazed much, and afflicted more,
With the sad news you have imparted to us.

Philo. All my entreaties could not win him thence:
And therefore missing him too long from home,
And knowing upon what design he staid,
I did enquire of Armelina; who
Made me the sad Relation you have heard.
Oh brave Pyrontus! I lament thy Fate;
That have in love proved so unfortunate.

Gara. It is so sad a story you have made us,
That it draws tears from my eyes. Though I was
A stranger to their persons, my weak Sex
Allows me liberty to weep. A man
Would not be taxed of softness, to relent
At so deplorable an History.

Philo. Madam! I am so far from blaming you,
For gracing with your tears their cruel Fates,
That my heart chides mine own eyes for not melting.
Hell never plotted a worse Tragedy.
Nor ever did so great a Lover find,
So merciless a death as Lord Pyrontus:
Neither did ever Virtue and Beauty meet
So hideous a Treatment as Clorina.

Ovid. Have you their bodies seen, since they were dead?
Oh Philocles! If you those woeful objects
Have looked upon, you have beheld a sight
More sad than ever Tomos was ac^us'd for.

Philo. Alas! I brought the Heart, and mangled body
Of my dear Friend Pyrontus, to his house:
And did attend the Corse of fair Clorina
To Armelina's Palace: where alas
No April-shower ever fell so sweetly,
As she (...) weep over her Sister.

Cara. A word with you dear Cozen Ovid. My eyes
Are big with tears, and my poor heart is laden
With grief. A thousand showers cannot drain them.
And Time wants years enough to wear away
The Sense and Memory of this woeful day.

Ovid. I must beseech you to have patience.

Cara. I have too much, dear Ovid! Much too much:
But I will all the Fortitude collect
That my poor heart is capable of, and shall
Suppress all signs exterior of a grief.
You know the Fortune which Trasullus told me:
I find it now points at me; And will therefore
Go walk abroad. You are acquainted well
With Philocles. I Will leave you with him.

Ovid. I will attend upon you.

Cara. By no means,
You are old and sickly; And I will not be
So troublesome.

Ovid. You shall not go alone.
Good Philocles, My Cousin Caralinda
Is something undispos'd, and has a mind
To take the Air abroad; You will oblige me
To bear her company. She is a stranger,
Which is the cause I crave the trouble from you.

Philo. The Noble Ovid may command me any thing.
But you confer much Grace on me, to give
Me leave to wait upon a gallant Lady
Of so su^ passing Excellencies.

Cara. You complement (Sir) with me.

Ovid. Hereafter you may like better of her Company,
When you are more acquainted with her.
Beware I pray you what you do; Take heed
Speaks to Caralinda aside. You give not too much Credit to Predictions.
Take heed your vengeance be not rash; Beware
You bring not ruin on your flourishing youth.

Cara. I will not play the Amazon, believe it:
And so (best Poet) for a while farewell.

Philo. Your servant, generous Ovid!

Ovid. Sir, I Am yours.
Exeunt Caralinda, and Philocles. O Love, and Jealousy! What mighty power
You, mighty passions, have over humane hearts?
How you too often join within one breast,
And joys that would aspire keep low suppressed!
To be enamored on a beautiful object;
As natural to us is, as to eat and drink:
But to suspect whom we affect, is a Crime
Declares a guiltiness within one's self;
A want of Merit. Then a wise man should
Make himself worthy of his Mistress Love,
Or never prosecute his amorous suit.
A discreet Lover in a beauteous outside,
Expects a mind adorned with all the virtues;
And holds it an impiety to think,
So rich a soul can ever stoop to vice.
Therefore the Lover that is rightly bred,
Admits no jealous thoughts into his head.
I wish Bassanes had proved such, then he
Might have enjoyed an happy life on earth:
Too passionate Pyrontus then had lived,
And (in some time) might have overcome himself:
The admirable and innocent Clorina
Had been alive; this Tragedy had never
Been acted here, which will be famous ever.
Exit.
Scena Secunda.
Enter Bassanes, and Marullus.
Mar. If you would give me leave (as your known Friend)
Whom you have long graced with your Amity,
To tell you freely my Opinion,
And no offense, take it. I should tell you
(My Lord Bassanes) I conceive you have
Been much too rash in your proceedings.

Bassa. How?
If such a thought you harbor of my actions,
I needs must tell Marullus, that he thinks me
Guilty of my Wife's blood: Do not imagine
Your friend aspersed with such a Crime. She was
A gallant Palace (to do her beauty right)
Where all the Devils of Lust inhabited.

Mar. I cannot tell, but if one might give credit
To her so often serious Protestations,
And to her vows uttered with her last breath,
She was an Innocent.

Bassa. They that dare play
So foul a Game, value not what they say.
Enter Caralinda, and Philocles. What Lady's that?

Mar. I never saw her before.

Bassa. She is a Miracle of such handsomness,
She can no other be but Venus self.

Philo. Yonder Is the Murderer of my Lord Pyrontus,
And the base user of the best of women.
My blood is all on sire at this Encounter,
My Hilt seems Loadstone, and my hand of Iron;
I cannot keep it longer from my Sword.
(A sudden vengeance he deserves,) which shall
Fall on him. At this present I Will revenge
The slaughter of my friend, and the sad death
Of his so barbarously abused Clorina.

Cara. Dear Philocles forbear. I do conjure you,
By all the love you bore unto Pyrontus,
Suppress your anger for a while; yet know
I wish him but a short Reprieve, and hate him
As much as you. He at a fitter time
May sind his Destiny. Let it not be said
He died in the presence of a tender mind.

Philo. I must obey you, Madam!

Bassa. She is an object so extremely ravishing,
I must speak to her.

Mar. I had thought you had
Done with that Sex for ever.

Bassa. I resolved so:
But beauty such a potent Charm is known,
Strong'st Resolutions it has overthrown.
Hail Female Goddess, or if (of womankind)
Hail! rich Epitome of all the beauty
That ever yet in several women Nature
Revealed to humane eyes!

Cara. Good Philocles!
Draw back a little. I would find to what
His fine words aim; and he will be more sparing,
(If y' are too near us) to express himself.

Philo. I will retire a little. But beware
His flatteries win not on your heart.

Cara. I warrant you.

Bassa. My friend Marullus, I beseech you walk aside.

Mar. I shall, my Lord, obey you.
Good day to Philocles! Pray shun me not:
For I am much afflicted at the Tragedies
Bassanes Rage and jealousy have acted;
I had no hand in them, and could I have
Prevented them, they had not been performed,

Cara. You both provoke my wonder, and my blushes:
Become enamored on a stranger! One
You never saw before!

Philo. Marullus he has done such horrid acts,
The Gods can never punish him enough.

Bassa. It does become your beauty, to work such wonders.
Madam! I am one of the chiefest persons
Of all this Province, and have an heart to love you,
Above the expressions of a thousand tongues.

Cara. Your name (Sir) I beseeeh you.

Bassa. It Is Bassanes.

Cara. What he that (through his jealousy and fury)
Murdered Pyrontus, and his innocent Wife?

Bassa. You have been mis-inform'd: He did deserve
The Fate he found: And her shame broke her heart.
I am the same Bassanes, but not guilty
Of any Crime. They in their deaths found Justice.

Cara. I Have heard too much of them already, But how
Can you so fresh a widdower, so soon
Give entertainment to a second flame?

Bassa. Your beauty that can work such Miracles
Is a sufficient reason.

Cara. I may prove
The like sad destiny Clorina did,
Should I become your Wife.

Bassa. It is impossible;
You are an heaven where all the virtues meet;
And therefore cannot be inconstant to
Your Wedlock-vows.

Cara. I merit not (Bassanes)
This favor at your hands. If I ere wed,
It shall be unto one of my own Country.

Bassa. Within a Body form^d to all perfection,
That ever liberal Nature, and the Gods
Could, can, or ever shall make up (fair stranger.)
Give not an Entertainment to Contempt
Of your enslaved Bassanes, neither in it
Lodge thoughts disdainful, nor an heart of Flint.

Cara. It Is an astonishment in me to hear you
To make so passionate discourse to (...),
Even one whose name you neither know, nor Fortune:
I may be poor, and vicious.

Bassa. Nothing but Virtue
Can in a body so beautiful in habit.
Vice dares not so presumptions be, as to enter
Under so fair a Roof: And y' are so rich
In Beauty, that I with more joy should marry you,
Then to be saluted Emperor of the world.

Cara. You court me now indeed. I have some business
Of such concern, that at this time no longer
I can stay with you.

Bassa. But must you needs be gone?

Cara. I must, in truth.

Bassa. When shall I then receive
So great a blessing as to enjoy a second time
Your covered company?

Cara. Within this half hour
I Will meet you here again.

Bassa. You Have raised me to
A joy as great, as Jove himself can know.

Cara. Come generous Philocles, I will impart
Our Parley freely to you, and acquaint you
With the whole Cause^, why I entreated you
To stisle your Revenge, and to retard
His death. You shall know al my secret thoughts.

Philo. Sweet Caralinda, you oblige me much.
I shall attend you any where.
Exeunt Caralinda, and Philocles.
Bassa. Marullus!
Cupid has pointed all his shafts with the
Fair beams of this bright Ladies eyes. I am
Become enamored on her to that height
That I must marry her, or I shall die.

Mar. The Heavens forbid.

Bassa. Nay rather, friend, may all the gods vouchsafe it.

Mar. You know not what she is, she may be much
Unworthy of such Nuptials:
Resist bet^mes; Physic too late is took
When sickness (through delay) is six'd at the root.

Mar. Surely she can
No other be, but Ovids Kinswoman,
Who (we have heard) so lately came to Tomos;
I will presume her, then, of Noble Birth.
That excellent Poet is my worthy friend;
And I may hope will easily be won
TO assist me to attain her to my wife.
Methinks he should be glad to have his Cousin
Well matched here; To be six'd a constant comfort
Both to his Age, and grief for his Exilement.

Mar. May the just Powers Divine, turn all to the best.

Bassa. If (...) obtain her to become my Wife,
An Heaven on Earth, I shall enjoy this life.

Scaena Tertia.
Enter Hannibal, and Cacala.
Caca. Sir, I entreat you (my too valiant Captainl)
To give me leave to return home. I have
No mind to such a formidable Dinner.

Han. What should thou fear? My keen victorious Sword
Carries spells strong enough to conjure down
All the unruly Fiends of Pluto's Court.
Therefore for shame take courage: Thou had wont
To have a good stomach to thy meat: And sure
This gallant Ghost will treat us very Nobly.

Caca. I have an horror to such company;
And had a thousand times much rather be
With Mistress Floretta, and converse with her.

Han. Thou talk so often of her, that I think
Thou art in love with her.

Caca. I must confess
I have some smackering that way: But the Awe
I stand in of your Indignation,
Deters me from professing my Respects.
I wish your Captainship would cast her off,
And give me leave to make her my honest Wife.

Han. Thou talk impossibilities, Fool Cacala!
To thin^ make an Whore an honest woman.
Such an one would indeed prove a strange wonder:
And he that should to such an one be wed,
Might raise a mighty portion to himself,
By taking money for the sight of her.

Caca. His tongue's no slander.
Aside.
Han. Walk on: we are almost there.

Caca. I Am monstrously afraid.

Han. Fear nothing in my company, but the marrying
Of an Whore.

Caca. I ever dreaded stories of Hobgoblins,
But evermore abhorred the sight of them:
Beseech you therefore Captain Hannibal,
Give me leave to go back.

Han. Thou shall not leave me, I will make thee valiant,
And neither to fear Men, nor Devils.

Caca. Heaven bless me!

Han. We shall have a brave dinner without doubt.

Caca. Instead of a Calfes head, and glorious Bacon,
A skull half rotten of some Malefactor,
Stolen from a Neighbour-Gallows to his own:
And (in the place of a brave side of Venison)
The sal^ Hanch of some executed (...):
And in the room of Grecian Wines, the moisture
That does distill from their hanged putrisi'd bodies.
Sir, I will take my leave.

Han. Thou shall go with me,
And (when employment calls me forth again)
I Will make thee my Lieutenant: w' are almost there.
Look you! He is come down from off his Gibbet.
It Is the most courteous fellow that ere di'd
By skurvy Halter. Would his Judges were
Trussed up in's place, and all the villainous Jury
That did condemn so brave a Spark.
Enter Spectre.
Spectre. Welcome thou Noblest Son of Mars! Give me
Thy hand, thou servant to great Hannibal.

Cacala. I wish you would excuse me the Complement.

Spectre. You need not fear me.

Han. Cacala be courageous, and dread nothing,
My friend Helvidius will no hurt do to thee:
Should Corberus bark but at thee, with my Sword
I (at one blow) would cut off all his heads.
A Table set forth, covered with a black Linen Cloth, all the Napkins of the
same color; the meat, and dishes, Bottles, Wine, and all things else.
Spectre. You see your Entertainment, and are both
Most heartily welcome. Let us sit, and eat.
They all sit down and eat.
Caca. I do not like the color of this Linen.
The Meat, and Wine, and every thing is black.

Spectre. It Is the sole color used in Pluto's Court.

Caca. The meat tastes well though. Though I had rather be
At a piece of Bread and Cheese at Madam Cypassis's.
I cannot choose but eat. I think my fear
Has added to my hunger.

Spectre. Gallant Hannibal,
I dedicate this Boul to thy Floretta.

Han. Off with it then, thou only Worthy of
The other world. Here Cacala, thou shall pledge me.

Caca. I Will do my weak endeavor.

Han. I thank you Sir, and in requital drink
To him or her you most affect.

Spectre. Y' are Noble.
Friend Cacala, here is to you, and you conclude it.

Caca. I dare not do otherwise.

Han. Would you excuse my curiosity Sir,
I would enquire why you were executed.

Spectre. I Will satisfy you: The Lords and Gentry of
This City Tomos gave order to a Statuary
To make the Image of the Poet Ovid,
In beaten massy Gold, for the Honor he
Had done them, by writing an excellent Poem
I'th'Getick Language in Tiberius praise.
When it was ready to have been presented,
I got into the house, and stole it thence;
Melted it privately, and put it off
By little parcels, spent it on wanton wenches,
And among boon companions. In my Cups
Bragged on it to two false Brothers, who betrayed me.

Han. I would they had been born both drunk, and Fools.

Spectre. I pray you give me leave to be as free
With you. Why were you banished and confined?

Han. A poor old woman, and a Witch, a Friend
Of mine, pretended an occasion to make use
Of a live Infant, ripped out of the Belly
Of's Mother: And the Enchantment she was hammering
Was for my service. I stole into a Cottage
That stood alone, where such a woman lived then,
Found her alone, and had so laid my plot,
That I might undisturbed proceed; cut up
Her belly, took her Infant thence, and sowed
A Cat up in the place; so she enjoined me.
This simple Sorceress being for other
Matters accused, and like to dye, confessed
This Prank.

Spectre. How chanced it, you escaped with life?

Caca. My Captain is the greatest villain that
I ever heard of; I will leave his service,
Although I have often been told of this before;

Han. The Favorite, all-powerful Sejanus,
Did bring me off with life. I helped him to
Floretta's Maidenhead; for which good turn
I also had some bags crammed with Sesterces.

Spect. You had good fortune to escape so well.

Han. Some business calls me home. I give you thanks
For this brave Entertainment: So farewell.

Spectre. I pray you stay a while, you shall look on
A little Masque I have provided for you.

Han. You much oblige me, and are over-liberal
Of your high favors to me.
Enter (after very solemn loud Music) Aeacus, Rhadamanthus, and Minos, the
Judges of Hell; Alecto, Tysyphone, and Megaera, the Furies; and dance all
together to loud Music.
Spectre. Aeacus, Minos, and Rhadamantbus, the three
Judges in Hell; Tysyphone, Megaera, and Alecto.
The Furies there (of equal number to them)
Lead in a Dance.

Cacala. Can Devils be so merry!
But I had ever thought there had been rather
Three thousand Judges there, then three; I wonder
Their number is so few: so of the Furies;
For often, on earth, one woman has more in her.

The Dance ended, this Song follows. I.
Most happy is the Libertine,
And of mankind the most in genious;
Who from grave Precepts does decline,
And does indulge his jovial Genius.
Oh! the joys, the joys,
They have that follow Vice,
Without any fear of the gods:
Who freely wast their Treasures,
To purchase them their pleasures,
And are with the virtuous at odds.
II.
The Atheist is the greatest fool,
Who only aims to please his Senses;
Thinking in Heaven no Gods bear rule,
And tipples, murders, swears, and wench es.
Oh! the woes, the woes,
That follow all those
Who wear out their lives in vice,
That swear, whore, kill, and drink,
And never them bethink,
Till they fall into Hell in a trice.
After the Song is ended, they all seize on him, and carry him away. Han. Must
I be then bet raid thus! false Helvidius!
Exeunt with him And foolish Hannibal to trust to Specter!

Spec. Away with him. Down to the Infernal shades
Of grisly Pluto's Kingdom let him sink:
A fouler soul was never seen in Hell,
Where Is witchcrafts, rapes, murders, and vicious life
Will find a suitable endless punishment.
The Spectre vanishes.
Caca. This was a terrible sight indeed. Heaven keep me
But in my wits till I can see Floretta,
And I shall tell her such a tale, as will
Make her return virtuous, if she has not lost
All love to the Powers Divine, and fears no vengeance.
Exit.
Scaena Quarta.
Enter Bassanes solus.
Bassa. I find my self half raised to happiness
Already, after my so late affliction.
The stranger Ladies Beauties triumph here
Within my heart; My hopes are fair enough
That I shall win her to become my wife:
Then all my future days I shall esteem
To be a lasting Festival, and more
To be prized by me then are all the Fasts
Observed the year through in our Calendar.
Enter Phoebianus, and Philocles.
Phoebia. I now have made you well acquainted with
My Person, and my History, and have to you
Revealed the reason why I did entreat
You to forbear Bassanes, when your rage
Would fain have flung you on him. Now you know
The cause why I will meet him. Give me therefore
Leave (Noble Philocles) to go alone.
I fear him not at all, and shall not have
Any need of your assistance. It Is
The will, sure, of the gods, that I should singly
Encounter him. Therefore retire (my Friend,)
Near hereabouts you may conceal your self:
You within call may stay, I shall have quickly
Dispatched with him, and shall not fail then to
Hollow you back. See, there he is a walking,
And waiting my approach.

Philo. You must command me,
The Gods be with you.
Philocles withdraws.
Phoebia. Well met Bassanes. Ovids Kinswoman,
The stranger Caralinda, has imploid me
To you, to make Apology for her
Not meeting you according to her promise.
Why do you look so wishly on me? Do you
Know me?

Bassa. I certainly have seen your face
Before. Some alteration that I find
Some years of absence might have made. Resolve me,
I pray you Sir, Are you not Phoebianus,
Pyrontus younger Brother, that have spent
Three or four years abroad? If y' are not he,
I never saw two Faces so alike.

Phoebia. I Phoebianus am, and Caralinda
Whom you so lately troubled with your courtship.
Through the Providence of the Almighty Gods,
I met with thee in that disguize: And parted
From thee but to divest me of those Clothes,
And bring my Sword to our next parley. It Is needless
To tell thee more; And I have too much time
Tristed away in this discourse. Pray draw
Your Sword; For one of us must dye.
Thou traitorously, and unawares did murder
My brave, and hopeful Brother. Though he loved
Clorina, he deserved her better far
Then thou; never attempted violence unto her,
And (in a little time) might have subdued
His too unruly passion. Thou have broke
Thy Innocent Ladies heart with usages
More horrid then a Scythian ever practiced:
Therefore unless you will die basely, draw.

Bassa. You are a glorious Talker, sine young man;
But I shall presently allay your pride,
And the fond confidence you seem to have
In your own valor.

Phoebia. Let us try your skill.

Bassa. You Have sought your ruin by provoking me.

Phoebia. So: Have you yet enough?

Bassa. Oh! you have slain me.
I have received so home a thrust, I dye,
Without another word.
Bassanes dies. Enter Marullus.
Phoebia. Marullus, in an equal Duel I
Have killed your friend. The Gods did guide my Sword;
Justice was on my side: He slew my Brother:
And I in Roman honor could do no less,
And to preserve my Reputation clear,
Among the Getes my Countrymen, then to
Fight fairly with him.

Mar. My mind mis-gave me some disastrous Fate
Would overtake him for so foul a murder.
Though I am grieved at his sad death, I Am glad
You are, my Lord, returned so safely home.

Phoebia. You Will see his body conveyed unto hi house.

Mar. I shall not fail.

Phoebia. The Gods preserve you.

Mar. Farewell, brave Phoebianus.

Phoebia. Friend Philocles!
Calls aloud.
Phil. I Am (at your service) here.

Phoebia. Stay, and I Will come to you.
Exit.
Mar. Draw near you that his servants are, and bear
Enter Servants. This sad Lord to his Palace.
Exeunt.
Scaena Quinta.
Enter Captain Dacus, Cacala, Cypassis, Floretta, and Spinella.
Cypas. It was a lamentable Spectacle
We met withal as we came hither.

Dacus. An usual one, a dead man:
We Soldiers smile upon a thousand such.

Cypas. Bassanes was an extraordinary person.

Dacus. Caesar's, and Lords, must die.

Caca. You talk of trifles. The story I related you
Of my Master Captain Hannibal's being took away with Devils,
Deserves to be called terrible indeed.
Hell broke loose on him, Devils, and Devils-Dams
Seized both upon him. He would fain have hung
An arse, but no resistance could prevail:
Away they hurried him, and left me in
So great a fear, I know not how I came home.

Flor. Thou have told us too much of this already,
And too often.

Caca. 'Twill never out of my Memory.

Flor. Nor from thy tongue I fear.

Caca. Oh fear the Gods, Mistress Floretta, fear them;
Take heed the Devils show you not such a Trick:
Turn virtuous, pretty One, and marry me;
For I do love thee above womankind:
Show thy self therefore to me a kind woman.

Flor. Though I am sorry my Hannibal is perished so;
I cannot call him back; And must some care
Take of my self. And therefore Cacala
I Will be thy wife. All his remaining Goods
Are ours.

Caca. And I have something too to trust to
In my own Country.

Cypas. Here Is a Match soon made up.

Flor. We will return to Rome.

Caca. With all my heart.

Dacus. And will my fair Spinella prove as kind

Spinel. Now Lord Bassanes is dead, I am content
To receive Captain Dacus for my Husband:
Mother! I hope of your allowance to it.

Cypas. And you shall have it. The gods grant you joy.

Dacus. My Mother Cypassis now indeed!

Cypas. You knew her Father. He was your Countryman
And a fine Gentleman, when he in Rome
Did marry me; I else should never have been
Content to have lived in so remote a Province.
Though his good nature, and many losses at Sea
Melted a way most of his Land; we have
Silver and Gold enough to make you live
In plenty.

Dacus. Mother, I kiss your reverent hand
In gratitude. What my own means may prove
Deficient in, my valor shall supply.

Spin. We Will have no fighting nor any quarrelling:
I am for Peace. Love hates the noise of War.

Dacus. You are too timorous; grow as affectionate;
For thus I print my Soul upon thy lips.

Caca. Let us go home, send for a Priest of Hymen's,
And presently each Couple on's be married.

Omnes. Agreed, agreed.

Caca. I dare not lie alone to night for fear
My Captain, or his Friends, should give me a visit.

Spinel. Was Hannibal a Gentleman by birth?

Dacus. My pretty One --
Brave Hannibal the famous Carthaginian,
Who marched like Mars, even to the walls of Rome,
And fought against that Senate for the worlds Empire,
In one of's Winter Quarters at Salapia,
Obtained the affection of a Beautiful Lady,
Called Issidora: And from them he was
Descended lineally; as he lately told me.

Spinel. And is now
Descended to the Devil; we have heard how.
Exeunt omnes.
Scaena Sexta.
Enter Ovid, Phoebianus, Philocles, Armelina, and Servants.
Phoebia. My Father (on his deathbed) did enjoin me
(For Educations sake) to stay so long.
You grace me (excellent Armelina) much
After so long a Trial to receive me.

Arm. I nothing have worthy your acceptance,
But my reciprocal return of Love.

Phoebia. I kiss your hand for so immense a bounty.
But why (my fairest) would you never honor
My many Letters with one single answer?

Arm. I durst not; fearing (among the Roman Ladies)
You might have made a second choice, and then
Have left me blasted in my Reputation.

Phoebia. I was too true, and you was too severe.

Arm. But wherefore came you so disguised? and why?
From me would you conceal your self?

Phoebia. It Is reasonable that I should satissie you.
Just upon my departure out of Italy,
My Curiosity led me to Trasullus,
One of the chief Astrologers of these times,
And happy in foretelling future fortunes:
I made Friends to him, and received these verses.
Return disguised in Woman's Clothes, and you
The Murderer of your Friend shall pay his due;
Obtain your Mistress to become your Bride,
And with her gain a world of wealth beside.

Ovid. Bassanes his death, and fair Clorinas's wealth,
(You being her Heir) added to your great Portion,
Confirm for truth the Soothsayers Prediction.

Arm. And I again must thank you for so bravely
Revenging on Bassanes his soul Cruelties.
But why (my Phoebianus) would you not
Disclose your self to me?

Phoebia. You are my Country-woman; And I feared
So doing, I should have broken my Injunctions:
But now (divinest Lady) when shall I
Be made so happy by your gracious self,
As to receive you for my Bride?

Arm. As soon
As I can give some stint unto my tears;
After my Sisters Obsequies are past.

Philo. Pray listen! What noise is that without?
I think
I hear an horn, and it is some Post.
Enter a Post.
Phoebia. From whence, my friend, come you?

Post. From Rome.

Phylo. What news?

Post. I Have Letters for the famous Poet Ovid.

Ovid. Deliver them. I Am that unfortunate man.
Ovid breaks open his Letters and reads. I am undone for ever. No more hope
For my return must ever flatter me.
My Wife writes to me, she has used the utmost
Of her endeavor (assisted by the chiefest
Of both our Friends, and of most power with Casar.)
For my Repeal, or but (at least) Removal
To a more temperate Clime; and that the are both
Refused her, and she enjoined perpetual silence
In my behalf. Besides, my Friend Graecinus
(A Roman of high note) has writ me word,
The gracious Princess Julia, our great Empress
And my best friend, is in Trimerus dead.
One of these News were much too much to strike
My poor and crazy body into my grave.
But joining both their poisonous stings together,
I needs must to the world this truth impart,
That Ovid dies here of a broken heart.
Dies.
Phil. It was too sad a truth his last breath did
Express; for he, alas! is dead indeed.

Arm. Death is too prodigal of his Tragedies
In this small City. I must spare from my
Clorina's Fate one shower of tears to shed
Upon his Grave.

Phil. Not only we, but all the Getick Nation
Were worse then barbarous, paid we not that duty
To Excellent Ovid's infelicious end.

Arm. He was a most accomplished Gentleman,
A person asfable, and sweet-condition'd;
And of the Roman Poets the most ingenious.

Phil. He was in Italy at Sulmo born,
A pleasant City within the Territory
Of the Peligni, and descended of
The Ancient Family of the Nasones;
Who had preserved the Dignity of Roman
Knights, from the first Original of that Order.
In The Astatick wars, he under Varro
Had eminent Command, and well discharged it:
Who now alas (after seven years Exilement)
Hopeless of a Repeal, has breathed his last.

Arm. Take up his Noble Body, and bear it gently
To his own house; we all will wait on it thither.

Phoebia. I Will have a stately Monument erected,
(Without our City-walls, near the chief Gate)
To his fair Memory, to declare the gratitude
Of Tomos to him, for the Honor it
Received by his so long abode among us;
Enclosed in which (within a Marble-urn)
Curiously wrought, his ashes shall for ever
Remain in peace; An endless grace to Pontus.

Phil. No Poet ever did more glory contribute
Unto the Latin Language, then his Pen.
The Soul of Poetry feels a Convulsion
By his Decrease. He no superior knew
In that sweet Art; and was great Virgils Equal.
His works have an Eternity stamped on them,
Do far exceed the Consul Cicero's verses,
And all the lines sacred Augustus ever
Writ in a numerous strain; All the fine Poems,
The Darling of the People, the Facetious
And valiant Prince Caesar Germanicus
Has published with applause; and all such things,
Though writ by hands that were the spoils of Kings.
Ovids Body being removed, Exeunt omnes.
THE EPILOGUE.
NOble, and generous Spectators, stay!
A word at Parting, and then go your way.
Our Author is stolen hence in mighty have,
Because he thought the House was overcast
With Clouds on every Brow; and was in dread,
A storm would else have fallen upon his head.
I am his friend left purposely behind,
TO inform him how his Fate proves; harsh, or kind.
Beseech you Ladies smile: Their general Frown,
Portends the Men will hiss our Tragedy down.
Command them clap their hands; for it is strange,
If men forbear, when women bid them clap.
I thank you Ladies! thank you Gentlemen!
To morrow, you may be welcome here again.
FINIS.

