A SERMON Preached before the Queen Dowager, In her Majesty's Chapel AT
SOMERSET HOUSE ON Quinquagesima Sunday February the 6 th. 1686/7.

Being also the Anniversary-day of His late Majesty King CHARLES the II, of
Blessed Memory.

By Thomas Codrington Preacher in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Published by her Majesty's Command.



LONDON, Printed for William Grantham in Cock-pit-Alley in Wilde-street,
MDCLXXXVII.

A SERMON Preached before the Queen Dowager ON Quinquagesima Sunday February 6.
1686.
Being also the ANNIVERSARY Of His Late MAJESTY.
Caecus quidam sedebat secus viam, mendicans; -- Et clamavit, dicens; Jesu Fili
David miserere mei!

A certain Blind man sat by the way side begging; -- And he called out saying,
Jesus Son of David, have Mercy on Me!

Words taken out of the 18 th. Chap. of S. Luke 35, and 38, verse and Read in
the Gospel of this present Sunday in Quinquagesima.
THis Mornings Gospel (Sacred Majesty) were I Master of my own choice, would
lead me readily to a Subject, not unwelcome to Your Royal Ears: Offered to Me
upon the occasion of the Anniversary Remembrance of a Doleful, and yet Happy
day; Doleful for the Departure of Our late Sovereign from this Life: Yet Happy
for the manner of his Preparation for it. If we look upon his Life, then turn
our Thoughts upon the manner of his Death: We shall easily discover, both from
the one and the other, how particularly my present Text belonged to Him: A
certain Blind man begged, and he called on Jesus to have Mercy on him. We may
fitly parallel the Blindness of our Beggar in the Gospel, with the Darkness
which obscured for a time His Royal Sight; and the Cries of that same Beggar,
with the Penitential Tears which Bathed his Deathbed; and those Ferverous
Ejaculations, which Reached so effectually the Ears of Christ: That now with
Joy before his Altars, we Celebrate the Anniversary Remembrance of that
Miraculous Effect of his Infinite Mercy and Goodness. How gladly should I
enlarge my self upon this Theme, and loose my self in the Ocean of a long
Discourse; were I not checked in my forewardness by a Compliance I owe to the
Ceremonies of the Church, which admits not of Funeral Rights and Solemnities on
days (like this) particularly Devoted to Her Service. I must therefore forcibly
let this Subject fall, and take up another (though none so proper) to Entertain
Your Royal Presence with. And thus I begin,

THe connection of those Sacred and Divinely inspired Writings the Holy Gospels,
(although peradventure it appears not so clearly in the Letter) yet may easily
be traced by the diligent Observer in the Mystery. This may particularly be
remarked in our present Gospel; the former part whereof (though with little
appearance of connection in the Letter) leads us Mysteriously to a knowledge of
those Truths, which may be gathered from the Moral of the Latter; that part, I
mean, which I Have assumed for my Text. At the opening of this Gospel, our
Savior is said to have call d aside his twelve Disciples, and to have made to
them, a part from the rest, a Pathetick Discourse upon his approaching Passion;
but the Evangelist who mentions this, says also of those same Disciples,
That they understood him not; Et ipsi nihil horum intellexerunt: And they
understood not a word of all this.

Our Holy Mother the Catholic Church, following the Conduct of Her Great
Master, Reads to us Christians her Disciples the same Discourse: To Prepare us
against this Holy Time of Lent for a Fruitful Communication of his Sufferings.
But truly this dismal Lecture of the Passion of Christ is Read to us at a
Season, in which the Hearts of some loose Livers are so little prepared to
receive the intended Advantages thereby: (This being the Merry time of
Shrovetide, a Season Dedicated to Sports and Riots; so to forestall the rugged
time of Penance with Excesses too too Criminal, and Pastimes at the best but
dangerous enough:) Their Hearts, I say; at this loose Season are generally so
little prepared for a Lesson of Suffering and Mortification; (as that is of the
Passion of Jesus Christ;) that of too too many bearing the Name of Christians,
with much more reason may be verified, what was also said of his Disciples:
Ipsi nihil horum intellexerunt: They did not understand a word of all this;
that is, of all those weighty Maxims of our Religion, which this Mornings
Gospel did open to them.

This argues a strange Blindness in the Hearts of Sinners: For the Cure of
which, as this mentioned Passage has led me to the choice of my present Text:
So I shall endeavor to draw from it those Instructions which the Moral of it
may supply me with, both for a right knowledge of this Spiritual Malady, and of
the proper Means to Cure it by. Following therefore the method of my Text, I
shall consider in my First Part, The Blindness of Sinners, as figured to us in
the Blindness of that poor Beggar. Caecus quidam sedebat secus viam mendicans.
In my Second. The means which sinners are to use, like that same Beggar, for
the Recovery of their Sight. Et clamavit dicens, Jesu Fili David Miserere mei!


These are the Considerations I shall insist upon; having first implored the
Divine assistance to favor us with a Ray of Heavenly Light, to dispose our
Understandings for the Reception of these Truths; by the Intercession of the
Blessed Mother of God in the Angelical Salutation, Ave Maria, etc.

First Part.
CAEcus quidam sedebat secus viam mendicans; A certain Blind man sat by the way
side begging. The Blindness, Christians, of this poor Beggar, represents to us
(according to the common gloss of Holy Fathers) the Spiritual Blindness
occasioned in the Soul by Mortal Sin. Ambulabunt ut caeci, quia Domino
peccaverunt; says the Prophet Sophonias, They shall walk like Blind men,
because they have sinned to the Lord: 1. 17.
And the Book of Wisdom, Excaecavit illos Malitia eorum; The Malice of Sinners
has made them Blind. 2. 21.
This Spiritual Blindness then is the effect of sin, as it is properly its
Punishment too; it being the want of a right Understanding on the part of a
sinner, to consider thoroughly the deplorable Condition he is in. Eccl. 4. 5.
Peccavi (says the sinner) and quid mihi accidit triste? I have sinned, and
what has happened to me amiss? I Eat, I Drink, I Sleep as I did before; my
Meats are as Relishing to my Palate; and my Slumbers on my Downy-Pillow as
Undisturbed. I enjoy a perfect Health, and Solace my self with the
satisfactions of a Voluptuous Life. Quid mihi accidit triste? What has
happened to me amiss? What has happened to Thee amiss? Poor Wretch! Did thou
but rightly understand the Damages (perhaps irreparable,) which thou suffer'st
by Mortal Sin, thou soon would change thy Note; and Bath thy self in Tears,
at the sight of thy Unhappiness, who now art Drowned in Jollities, because thou
see it not!

This Blindness therefore being the effect of Sin: the chief causes of it are
as many, as there are in number Capital Vices; which, like Fruitful Mothers,
give a Birth and Beginning to all the rest. Let us then run over in our
Thoughts the different Natures and Properties of those Radical Sins; we shall
easily discover, in Discoursing on their Effects, how every single Species of
that number brings with it its respective Blindness to the Soul. First, Then of
Pride this Truth is manifest; that Sin consisting properly in an Inordinate
Desire of some Excellency deserving the Honor and Esteem of others: Appetitus
inordinatus excellentiae, cui debetur Honor and reverentia, says S. Thomas.
Hence it is that the Proud and Haughty Man either arrogates to Himself what he
deserves not; or bears Himself Confidently above others, as justly deserving
that Tribute of Honor, which he Ambitiously covets to be paid to Himself
alone. And these are equally the Effects of Blindness; for were not the Eye of
his Understanding extremely defective, he would both discover his own
unworthiness, and at the same time the real Merits also of his Neighbor.

Covetousness also Blinds the Possessors of Wealth; according to that of
Moses in Deuteronomy, Munera excaecant Oculos Judicum; Bribes do hoodwink the
Eyes of Judges. 16. 19.
Gluttony and Luxuty have their parts also in the Spiritual Darkness of the
Soul. Drunkenness (says St. Basil) Is the very Origin of all Impiety; the
occasion of for saking God; it being an obscuring of the Intellective Faculty,
by the means of which we arrive to the knowledge of him. Isa. c. 5. v. 22.
Blindness also was the punishment of the Luxurious Sodomites; a Figure of that
Interior Blindness which struck their Souls, Percusserunt eos caecitate. Genesis
19. 11.
And it is observable in the Parable of the Beggar and Dives: An example both of
Gluttony and Lust, That, Elevans Oculos suos in tormentis vidit Lazarum;
Lifting up his Eyes, whilst he was in Torments, he saw poor Lazarus: And then
indeed he knew him, whom whilst he lived in Pleasures, he saw not; such is the
Darkness the Souls of Voluptuous Livers are buried in, In Tormentis vidit
Lazarum. Anger obscures the Eye of the Intellect, falling down upon it like a
Fiery Cloud, and interposing it self between the Sun of Truth and it; Super
cecidit Ignis, and non viderunt solemn. And how many in their Passion, have
fallen foully upon their Dearest Friends; who, when their Eyes are opened to
the Rays of Reason, are ready to Expiate so horrid an Ingratitude, with the
very Sacrifice of their own Blood! Envy also Blinds our Sight, that we cannot
distinguish rightly the True Object of our Sadness, whilst we are dejected at
another's Good, Invidia (says the mentioned S. Thomas) est tristitia de
alterius bono. But Sloth above all the rest of her Vicious Company, declares
her self the most Malicious in inflicting this Wretched Punishment on the Souls
of sinners. For whence proceeds this Coldness in the Spirit of Christianity?
Whence this Drowsiness in the Service of God Almighty? This neglect in
complying with the Obligations of our Religion? But from a Slothful Ignorance,
and unacquaintance with them. We understand not the Ties of our Christian Duty;
but the fault is fixed at our doors, that we put not our selves in the
occasions of being acquainted with them. We are destitute of those comfortable
Lights that quicken Devotion, because we are easily tyr d with the practice of
it; we receive not the Promised Helps of Grace in our Temptations, because we
endure not long and perseverant Prayer: That properly may be verified the
saying of S. Peter, in regard of such; Gaecisunt, and manu tentantes: They are
Blind indeed, like those who search about them with their Hands; 2 Pet. 1. 9.
As Conscious to themselves, sufficiently of their own Unhappiness, though
ignorant of the true occasion why they suffer it.

These are the different Causes of the Blindness of a Soul in sin. Now if we
will consider this Intellectual Defect in its own Nature, we shall find it
distinguished into two kinds; into the Blindness of such as see not with their
Eyes shut (and that is no wonder,) and the Blindness of such, as see not with
their Eyes open (which certainly is the strangest Blindness of all.) Apertis
Oculis nihil videbat, says the Scripture of the Persecutor Saul, when he was
struck from Heaven with a sudden privation of Sight; and in this he was the
Figure of those poor Wretches, who have indeed their Eyes Open, but see
nothing; Apertis oculis nihil vident. Act. 9. 8.
Now if you ask me, who those Blind Men are with their Eyes Open; with Sorrow I
must answer you, They are Christians; The Gentile, Jew, or what other
Misbeliever there is, are all Blind, Having (says the Apostle) their Intellect
Obscured and Sealed up in Darkness of Infidelity. They are Blind indeed, and
Blindly follow the Passions of this World; because the Eye of their
Understanding is not opened by the Light of Faith to behold the Advantages
Promised to us Christians in the World to come. This is the Misery of poor
Infidels and Mis-believers, whom the Gospel has not illuminated with the Rays
of Truth. And these are properly those blind Men, who see not indeed, because
their Eyes are Shut. But we Christians, who have the Eye of our Understanding
clear and open by the Light of Faith; we, who are assured that there is a God,
a Heaven, a Hell, Eternity, a Punishment for Sin in the next Life, and a Reward
for Virtue: We, I say, whose Eyesight Faith has cleared to behold all this;
and yet to live, as if we saw it not! As if these Truths were so many Raveries
of a man in a Dream! What a dismal Blindness is this with the Eyes Open! To
believe like Christian, and yet to live like Pagans! Christian credere,
Gentiliter viventes! Says Petrus Damianus upon the like occasion.

That the Pagan gives up the Bridle to Concupiscence, his excuse is tolerable;
because he knows no better: But intolerable in a Christian, who has Learned
the Lesson of the Apostle: That Livers according to the Flesh shall die: Si
secundum carnem vixeritis, moriemini. Romans 8. 13.
That the Jew has Crucified his own Redeemer, this he has to say, that he
knew him not; But what can the sinful Christian reply, who firmly believing in
him as truly such, yet Crucify him again by every Mortal sin: Rursum
Crucifigentes sibimet ipsis Filium Dei, and ostentui habentes, says St. Paul
of sinners: Crucifying again to themselves the Son of God, and exposing him to
shame and scorn! Heb. 6. 6.
That the Misbeliever neglects the means our Savior has left us in his Church
for our Salvation, it is, because he understands not the value of them; but how
unpardonable is it in the Christian and Catholic; who believing the
Sacraments, to derive their Virtue from the Merits and Sufferings of a dying
God, yet profanes them so easily by so many imperfect Confessions and unworthy
Communions! Oh sinful Christians! Your Eyes then are opened, but to render you
more Admired, and less Compassionated for your Blindness. Your Eyes are opened
by Faith to behold the horror of a gaping Hell for sinners: And yet you behold
not the eminent danger you your selves are in, in following them. Your Eyes are
opened to discover the dreadful Consequences of Mortal Sin: And yet you
discover not the desperate risk you every moment expose your selves unto,
continuing in it. Your Eyes are opened to consider Speculatively, that the Life
of a Christian is a Life of Penance: And yet practically you consider not how
little your easy and voluptuous way of living accords with it. Are not We
then, properly, We, (Sinful Christians) those Unhappy ones, in whom is
discovered that extravagant sort of Blindness: That their Eyes indeed are open,
but they see nothing; Apertis oculis nihil vident?

But as those Wretches are miserable indeed, whose Eyes are either quite Sealed
up, through the want of Faith: (such are Infidels and Misbelievers;) or opened
by Faith, but to see nothing: (such are Believing Christians, yet insensible of
their Misery;) so again thrice Happy and Fortunate are those sinners, whose
Eyes indeed are opened, to see: (Such are Mercifully Illuminated with the Rays
of Divine Grace, to look in time with an Eye of True Repentance into the
sorrowful condition of their sinful Lives.) The passage in Genesis of Adam's
prevarication (take it according to the Mystery) seems to acquaint us with this
Truth. For properly may be said of every Repenting Sinner, what Moses said of
our first Parents upon their Fall: Aperti sunt Oculi amborum; The Eyes of both
were opened, and something then they saw. Genesis 3 7
(Oh how better was their condition than of those Blind Wretches who see
nothing.) But let us enquire into the same Text, what it was poor Eve and Adam
then discovered, when their Eyes were opened; They discovered that they were
Naked, Cognoverunt se esse nudos.

This Nakedness of our first Parents, represents to us the Nakedness of a Soul
despoiled of Grace. And such is the Misfortune of every Sinner, who traveling,
like the Pilgrim from Jerusalem to Jericho, through the troubled and dangerous
ways of Sin, falls into the Hands of Thevees, the Devils, who rifle him of this
Sacred Ornament of his Soul.

This dangerous way was that poor David walked in, when he fell into his sin;
and the Barbarous usage of the Thieves Infesting it, (I mean the Devils,) is
passionately expressed by him, who had experienced the sad effects of their
fury and rage. Ad nihilum redactus sum (cried poor David, when he was robbed of
Grace) Ad nihilum redactus sum; O my God! I am brought to nothing! I am
Plundered! I am Bankrupt, I am Robbed of Grace, the precious covering of my
Soul, and nothing now remains to me but my own Nakedness: Where is now the
sweet Harmony of my Soul: The ready Obedience of my Inferior Powers to their
Superior; Of my Passions to the Rule of Reason? Now nothing but Disorder and
Rebellion reigns within me. Where Is the Collection of all my good Works, my
Meritorious Actions? All become the spoils of sin! All lost! In the state I am
at present, lost! Oh my Treasure of Grace! Oh my Inheritance to Glory! Ad
nihilum redactus sum: I am rifl'd, I am ruined, I am reduced to nothing. Et
nescivi; and that which proved the most fatal loss of all, I lost the very
Sense of my Misfortunes; Ad nihilum redactus sum, and nescivi. Thus complained
David then a sinner, when his Eyes were opened to behold his Misery.

This same road also did Adam take before him, and lighted into the Hands of
the same Robbers upon the way, the Devils, as he Descended from Jerusalem to
Jericho; from the state of Innocence to the state of Sin. And after him all we
sinners march on blindly in the same track, and light into the same Disasters
upon the way. For (as S. Austin makes the Reflection) Omnes nos Adam sumus; We
are all Figured in this Adam; We are all Adams too. Aug. in Ps. 125.
We ought then to turn our Thoughts upon our selves, and consider that it is
not only his Misfortune which deserves our Tears, but much more our own; so
that our First Adam may properly speak to us in the Phrase of our Second, Jesus
Christ: Nolite flere super me, sed super vosmet ipsos flete; Shed not, my
Children, your Tears on me, but on your selves. Luk 23. 28.
And certainly, Christians, there is just reason so to do, if we consider
seriously how Adam's Misery accords with ours; not only in what we suffer by
Original sin: But also in what we suffer by our Actual, those sins which after
Baptism we our selves commit; for in these as well as that, Omnes nos Adam
sumus; We are all Adams too; That is, we all like Adam, are rifl'd of our Robe
of Grace and Justice; although we are not all, like Adam, Fortunate in
Discovering our own Nakedness; Cognoverunt se esse nudos.

This Happy Discovery of our own Nakedness being the first Disposition to a
True Conversion: We ought (as we are sinners) to make it our first request to
God Almighty in the words of our Beggar in the Gospel, Domine, ut videam; Lord
that I may see. Our Savior asked him what he desired of him; He humbly
answered, it was, To see, Domine, ut videam. Let us then, Dear Sinners, with
this good Beggar, demand of God the recovery of our Sight; that so we may
arrive to a right understanding of our Nakedness and Misery; Domine, ut videam!
Lord, that I may see, how poor and naked a Wretch I am without thy Grace, and
what a Treasure I have lost, in loosing Thee! Cure then my Heart of its
Insensibility, and suffer me no longer to remain Cold and Indifferent, sinning
on unconcernedly without the least remorse of Conscience, or without the least
reflexive Thought of what I have done: Quid feci? Domine, ut videam! Lord, that
I may see; How Bountiful thou have been to me in the Offers of thy Grace: And
how ungrateful I have been in neglecting or abusing them! How often thou have
called upon me, and I have answered not! How easily I follow the Maxims of the
World, rather than those of thy School: The base Sentiments of Flesh and Blood,
rather than the Lessons of thy Gospel! Domine, ut videam! Lord, that I may see
the manifold malice of my SIN! How much I have despised Thee in quality of my
Lawgiver, prevaricating against Thy Divine Commands! How much I have despised
Thee in quality of my Lord, refusing Obedience to Thy Sovereign Will! How much
I have despised Thee in quality of my Last End, neglecting the Beatitude thou
have Courteously Promised me! How much I have despised Thee in quality of my
Creator, abusing the Bountiful Effects of Thy Creation to Affront the Bestower
of them: My Memory, my Understanding, and my Free Will! How much I have
despised Thee in quality of my Redeemer, setting no value upon the inestimable
worth of Thy Dearest Blood, and bitter Death thou have endured for me! How much
I have despised Thee in quality of my Judge, expressing my self so little
concerned at the future Terrors of thy Tribunal! At the Severity of thy final
Sentence, and the Dreadful Effects thereof! How much I have despised thee in
quality of my Friend, setting little by thy Grace, by which I correspond with
that Title! And finally how much I have despised thee in quality of my Father,
forfeiting my Inheritance to thy Kingdom, and the unparalleled Dignity of
being called thy Son. All this I did, when I offended Thee; and yet without the
least concern for what I had done: Quid feci? But now unseal the Eyes of my
senseless Heart, and I will publish the wonders of thy Mercy! Revela oculos
meos, and enarrabo mirabilia!

This Lesson Christians, may thoroughly acquaint us, of what Instruction the
Passage of our Beggar in the Gospel is to us; what a Truth is cleared to us by
his Blindness* and how his Wants may teach us how to Pray. What ought to be the
subject of a Sinners Supplications, he has already showed us in what he asked
for, Lord that I may see! Now, as he has taught us, what we are to Pray for;
So he also teaches us how we are to Pray. This shall be cleared to you in my
Second Part; favor me accordingly with your Attention.

Second Part.
ET clamavit, dicens; Jesu Fili Dei miserere mei! And he called out, saying,
Jesus Son of David, have mercy on me! I have represented to you a Blind Man
Begging for the Recovery of his Sight; now I shall acquaint you with the
Efficacious Means, of which he served himself in his Address, that so his
humble Suit might reach our Savior's Ear, and be Considered by him as he
passed by. Clamavit, faith the Gospel, He cried out; He called on our Savior
with a loud Voice. Now what is the Christian meaning of Calling on God Almighty
with a loud Voice? It is to Accompany our Prayer with our Works; that so our
Actions, as well as Words, may speak the real Sentiments of our Hearts: And our
Lives remain not Mute and Dumb, whilst our Tongues do cry for Mercy. Ne forte
simus strepentes vocibus and muti moribus; faith S. Austin, Sermon 18. de
verbis Domini. Who is then this Beggar (continues the Holy Doctor in the same
place; whose Thoughts I shall follow in the sequel of this Discourse, Who is
then this Beggar, that calls on Christ with a loud voice, to be Cured of his
Interior Blindness? Quis est, qui clamat ad Christum, ut pellatur interior
caecitas, transeunte Christo, He answers himself, Clamat ad Christum, qui
spernit saeculi voluptates; Clamat ad Christum, qui dispergit, and dat
pauperibus; Clamat ad Christum, qui dicit non lingua sed vita mihi mundus
Crucifixus est, and ego mundo. That Sinner truly calls aloud on Christ, who
retains no longer an Affection for the World; that Sinner truly calls aloud
on Christ, who Distributeth his Charities to the Poor and Necessitous; that
Sinner finally calls aloud on Christ, who Witnesses not by his bare
Discourses only, but by the manner of his Life, That the World is truly
Crucified to Him, and He to the World.

These difficult ways of Calling on God Almighty, although so earnestly
recommended to us by that great Teacher of his Church, yet are but rarely
practiced by Sinners, because they are as rarely understood. Let us therefore
examine, how such acceptable Works of Penance do speak aloud for the doers of
them, and make themselves be understood as far as Heaven. Our first Call then
on God Almighty for the recovery of our Sight, is (with S. Austin) a rejecting
of the sinful satisfactions of this Life. Clamat ad Christum qui spernit
saeculi voluptates. This Heroic Action, (and Heroic it is indeed, to gain a
victory over Flesh and Blood) this Heroic Action of true Christian Courage
speaks strongly in the Favor of a Sinner to Jesus Christ; it pleads his Cause
at the seat of, Mercy. It is an assurance on the part of the Sinner of the
sincerity of his Conversion: How sensible he is of the condition of his Soul:
How unfeignedly desirous to be Heald of his Infirmity: And how vigorously on
his part he contributes to the Cure, by removing those Obstacles that may
prevent or hinder it: Those Obstacles are our Passions for the World. How
strong a Call then, and how forcible in the Ears of Jesus Christ is a Christian
like renouncing of those Worldly Enjoyments, our Passions for which has proved
the occasion of our Blindness! Clamat ad Christum qui spernit saeculi
voluptates.

We call (with S. Austin) in another Voice that reaches also the Ears of Jesus
Christ, as often as our Charitable Assistances do reach the Necessities of the
Poor; Clamat ad Christum, qui dispergit and dat pauperibus. In the Book of
Proverbs we read a Threatening Sentence, able to Chill the Hearts of
Uncharitable Men; Qui obturat aurem suam ad clamorem pauperis, and ipse 21. 13.
clamabit, and non exaudietur; Who stops his Ears to the cry of the Poor, he
also shall cry, and shall not be heard. From whence we may draw this Rational
Conclusion, that the opening of our Ears to the Cries of the Poor, is the
opening of the Ears of Christ to us. And such a Call undoubtedly is both loud
and piercing; since we employ as many Tongues, as there are Mouths we fill, to
speak for us. Clamat ad Christum, qui dispergit, and dat pauperibus* A third
call also (with S. Austin) is of a Sinner whose Life is truly Crucified to the
World, and the World to it. And can there be a Voice more Charming, more
Inviting the Mercies of Jesus Christ, than to behold a Sinner suing to him in
that same Posture, as He himself did sue for the Worlds Redemption to his
Father upon a Gross.

But perhaps (Devout Christians) you are desirous of a clearer Notion of so
Celebrated an Expression, and yet peradventure so little understood: (I mean, A
Crucifixion of a Christian to the World, and of the World to him:) Ise
therefore give it to you in an easy and familiar Thought. To be Crucified to
the World, and the World to us; is to have our Judgments and Practices
directly contrary, the ones to the others. In the Judgment and Practice of the
World it is a Cross, to live in the World without Enjoying it; but in the
Judgment and practice of a Christian, those very Enjoyments are a Cross,
because they hinder us in the way of Virtue. The World sets a value upon his
Gifts, his Wealth, his Honors, his Delights; S. Paul on the contrary esteems
them as dirt, as they are put in Balance with Jesus Christ: Haec omnia
arbitror ut stercora, ut Christum lucri faciam. Phil. 3. 8.
Oh how truly was the Apostle Crucified to the World, and the World to him!
When two are fastened upon the same Cross, they necessarily must turn their
backs, the one to the other* This ought to be the practice of a Christian, in
his Reciprocal Crucifixion with the World. The World turns his back on you,
turn yours also upon the World. The World Laughs at you, because you live up
to a practice different from his* Laugh at him also, or rather Pity him,
because (through Blindness) he understands no better. The World loves you not,
because you are no longer in the number of his Followers: Then love not you the
World, and so will little love be lost between you. Whose Life corresponds
with this Lesson of indifferency, may confidently call on Jesus Christ, with a
Mundus mihi crucifixus est, and ego mundo.

Such Christian-like performances are, according to the reflection of the Great
S. Austin, so many loud and sounding Voices, with which our Lives do call on
God, and not barely our Mouths only. But as the Virtuous Actions of the Devout
Christian sound harsh and gratingly in the Ears of Worldings: So he is
frequently checked by them, and desired to hold his Peace. The same also
happened to our Beggar in the Gospel, who was rebuked for his clamor by those
who in the company of our Savior went before him, and by them commanded to be
silent. Et qui praeibant, increpabant eum ut taceret: And those who went
before, rebuked him, that he should hold his Peace. This very particular of our
Gospel, is also a figure of what too frequently passes in the Church. Those
Rebukers of the Clamorous Beggar, are Lazy and Scandalous Christians, who make
it their endeavor to impede the Virtuous purposes of the good: Bonos
Christianos mali and tepidi prohibent.

No sooner does the Sinner begin to enter Seriously upon a change of Life, to
deny himself those Hurtful Liberties which before he took, to withdraw himself
carefully from the occasions of sin: In a word, to live up to the Obligations
of his Baptism and Religion; No sooner can a sinner resolve on this, but
presently he is opposed in his Virtuous Designs: Qui diligunt saeculum,
contradicunt; The Lovers of the World rebuke him for it. They interpret his
Conversion an excess of Folly, his new course of Life some Fit of Melancholy
or Indigested Zeal, and a singularity tacitly condemning the Lives of so many
others, who bear in the World the Name of Christians as well as he. Et nunquid
alii non sunt Christiani? And are not others Christians too? Such and such
persons are not so scrupulous; they think it time enough to take up yet. This
Gallant for example continues still his customary Disorders, his Riots, his
Debauches, his Excesses in Drinking, Swearing, Gaming, and the like; Yet ask
him, what he is, he answers you a Christian, and (though we hardly gather it
from his Life) perhaps a Catholic too. That Lady still exposes her self to
dangerous Liberties, to Scandalous Privacies, which are encouragements to sin;
still she sleeps away unconcernedly the better part of her precious hours
(every moment of which might gain her an Eternity;) or she Dreams them away
waking upon new Garbs and Fashions: As if for that concern alone she thought
her self placed in this World; she is still most lavishly Expensive in her
Dress, which makes her as narrow Hearted to the Poor; and yet she is a
Christian, and a Catholic too. In fine, they still conform to the Maxims of
the World: They little concern themselves in the Great Affair of their
Salvation, and yet they all pretend to a place in Paradise as well as we. But
tell us not, (continues the Holy Doctor,) tell us not, how such and such do
Live, but how the Gospel teaches them to Live, Let them not invite us by their
ill example, but rather by the Rule of their Religion, the Doctrine and Life of
Jesus Christ. Non dicant quomodo isti vivunt tam multi, sic vivamus. Quare non
potius, quomodo dicit Evangelium?

But as the maliciously subtle World, resolved to nipp our Religious
Commencements in the very Bud; proposes on the one side the Scandalous Examples
of Vicious Livers to invite us: So on the other side, it objects the apparent
Difficulties which occur to us in the Exercise of Virtue, to deter and fright
us, It makes a change of Life appear a thing impracticable by Flesh and Blood:
The Conquering of our Passions, a Combat to be undertaken by more than Man:
Mortification the Burying of ones self Alive; In fine, it represents to us
Penance with such a ghastly and frightful Visage, that many Sinners have
scarcely Courage to look upon it: But this is a Cheat the World puts upon us.
The face indeed of Penance is a little rough, but her Conversation is Sweet and
Delightful. We may properly apply to this Subject the Words of the Learned
Moralist Seneca, which he himself made use of writing to his Friend, To Arm him
with Courage against the Fears of Death Toll (said he, Addressing himself to
Death without the show of Fear) Toll istam pompam, sub qua lates and stultos
Epist. 24
territas, mors es; quam nuper servus meus, quam ancilla contempsit! Take, take
away that frightful show, with which thou appearest to scar Fools; Remove those
Sables, cover that Earthly Paleness, dry up those Tears of Relations and
Friends! Take, take away the appearances of Horror that disguise thee! Mors
es, Thou art no more than Death, that Bugbear nothing, which lately my very
Bond-slave Encountered with Scorn; Mors es; quam nuper servus meus, quam
ancilla contempsit. The same proportionably may we also say of a Life of
Penance; Toll istam pompam sub qua lates: Take, take away that mask of Terror
which disguises thee, to frighten Cowards in Religion! Silence those hard and
terrifying Names, of Mortification, Self-denial, Struggling and Combating with
Flesh and Blood! Show thy self to us in thy proper Colors! Penitentia es; Thou
art but Penance: A Life, this ignorant Plough-man, that tender Girl have passed
through with Courage, Aug. lib. Conf.
and are Crowned for it, Et tu non poteris quod isti and istae? And cannot you
do like these and these? Know you no better things than that vile Peasant? Own
you your self to have a lesser Heart than that poor Girl? And shall these
snatch* from you the Kingdom of Heaven? Take, (Convert!) take this Thought to
heart! You Will find a Life of Penance no such Monster, when such and such have
Courage enough to tame it! And their Examples as sharp a Spur to Egg you on in
the way of Virtue, as those can be of Vicious Livers to draw you back!

Then let us not be daunted at the Frighful Arguments of the World; but rather
set before us the example of the Beggar in the Gospel, and take* his method for
our Rule. The multitude indeed rebuked him for his Clamor; but he increased
it, instead of being Silent at their check: Increpabant eum ut taceret; ipse
vero multo magis clamabat. This remarkable circumstance recommends to us most
particularly the virtue of Constancy and Perseverance in the practice of good
Works, as the surest means of surmounting those Difficulties, which are often
objected to us by Flesh and Blood, to deter us from the Accomplishment and
Perfection of them: Perfectio boni operis perseverantia est. Had the Beggar
been daunted at the rebuke of the Multitude, his Prayer had not arrived to the
Ears of Christ. And if every opposition can make us turn our backs, we may
often enter the Lists to Fight, but our Cowardice will not suffer us to be
Crowned.

We must do in our Conversions to God Almighty, as Abraham did in his
Sacrifice, when the Birds descended to disturb him in it, Abraham (as we read
in the Book of Genesis,) 15. 11.
had prepared the Flesh of certain Victims clean and neat, to offer them in
Holocaust to God Almighty: But whilst he was occupy'd in this Religious Care,
Descenderunt Volucres super cadavera: Certain unclean and hungry Birds of Prey,
(drawn thither peradventure by the scent of the Bodies,) came fluttering about
him, attempting with their durty Beaks and Tallons upon those Sacred Limbs
designed by him for the Holocaust. What did that Holy Patriarch in this
Distraction? In this disturbance of his Devotions? Abigebat eas; He drove them
unconcernedly away. And as they returned, he drove them away again; pursuing
still with greater Fervor that Holy Work, the greater was the Molestation he
suffered in it: 'Till at last they left him, and undisturbedly he finished his
Sacrifice. So it is with those Sinners who prepare themselves by a change of
Life, to offer up to God Almighty a Grateful Sacrifice of a Contrite Heart.
They meet indeed with Unclean Birds, that flutter about them to disturb them
too; These are the Temptations of their past Life, which often return in their
Devotions, attempting to Pollute the Purity of this new Victim with unclean
Thoughts; Luxury slings dirt upon our good Resolutions of living Chaste;
Gluttony upon our purposes of quitting our Riotous and Debauched Lives; Sloth
upon our Vigilance in the Service of God, and the great concern for the
Salvation of our Souls; and so for the rest: But drive those Birds away.
(Parley not with your Temptations) and as they turn upon you, drive them away
again. Doubt not, at last they will leave you, that you may undisturbedly complete
your Sacrifice; that is, may perfect the Work of your Conversion, and the
Church with Joy may see the Fruits thereof.

These, Christians, are the weighty Reflections that offer themselves to our
most Serious Thoughts upon the Moral Examination of this Text. The Corporal
Blindness of that Poor Beggar represents to us the Spiritual Blindness of a
Soul in Sin. Which Blindness, (if we form a right Conceit of it) is so
deplorable in regard of sinful Christians, who have their understanding opened
by the Light of Faith, and yet remain insensible of their Misery; that properly
with their Eyes open, they see nothing; Apertis oculis nihil vident. Those
indeed amongst us who are desirous to have their Eyesight cleared, to discover
their own Nakedness, (such a Discovery being a principal Disposition to a true
Conversion;) have also a method given them by our Blind Beggar, how to Address
themselves to Jesus Christ for the recovery of their Sight: Domine, ut videam!
Lord, that I may see! He called on Christ with a loud voice, Clamavit; and so
must we; but (in a ready compliance with S. Austin's Sage Advice,) let not
barely our Tongues call on him, but our Lives also. The Beggar heard himself
Rebuked by the Multitude, and commanded to hold his Peace, Increpabant eum ut
taceret. The same rough usage must we expect from the Temptations of the World
and VVorldly Livers, whose malicious endeavors are to retard our Progress in
the way of Virtue. Let us then no more regard them than the Blind man did the
Peoples check, that so Our Voice may reach the Ears of Christ. Vouchsafe us
then, dear Son of David, as thou did the Blind man in the Gospel, a Gracious
Respice, Look up, and see! Clear our Understandings of those Clouds, which
Passion and Ignorance have drawn before them! Grant us the Exercise of a lively
Faith, to discover those Sacred Truths, which are concealed from the Eye of the
World! Purify our Souls from Sin, and render them capable of beholding that
Invisible Being, which is only the Object of a clean Heart. That arriving to
the right knowledge of Thee in quality of our last End, and chiefest Good, we
may Love Thee, Praise Thee, and Enjoy Thee for Ever. Amen.

FINIS.

