The Magistrates Support and Burden: In a SERMON Preached at the LATE ELECTION
OF THE LORD MAJOR For the Famous City of London, Sept. 28. 1650

By JOHN CARDELL.

Exodus 18.17.18.21. And Moses Father in law said unto him, The thing that thou
do is not good.

Thou will surely wear away, both thou and this People that is with thee: for
this thing is too heavy for thee: Thou art not able to perform it thy self
alone.

Moreover thou shall provide out of all the People, able men, such as fear God,
men of truth, hating Covetousness, and place such over them, to be Rulers of
Thousands, and Rulers of Hundreds, Rulers of Fifties, and Rulers of Tens.

Magistratus itaque inductus est, ut leges quam diligentissime conserventur,
sontes puniantur, and boni juventur ac foveantur: Et sane lex est mutus
Magistratus, and vicissim Magistratus est lex animata and loquens. Pet. Martyr.
in cap. 19. lib. Jud. London, Printed by Peter Cole, 1650.

To the Right Honorable Thomas Foot, Lord Major of the City of LONDON; Thomas
Andrews, Lord Major Elect: AND To the Right Worshipful, The Aldermen, and
Sheriffs of the same City.
My Lords,
THE following Discourse presents you, with the Original Copy, of a complete
and well Accomplished Magistracy, drawn first by Moses, somewhat more
imperfectly, and afterward corrected by Jethro, unto that Exactness, wherein
it now lies before us, in those most Ancient and Authentic Records, The Holy
Scriptures of God: A Subject which had it been set out, according to merit of
it, would have fallen before you, and entitled it self to you deservedly, who
have both had the Honor to sit at the Stern, in the Government of this great
City, and that have both (...)

It is not surely, without a special hand both of Power and Providence, that
your feet (my Lords) are still standing upon those slippery places, where so
many have caught falls: However, That Is excellent Counsel which the Apostle
gives (and I mention it, not by way of Charge, or Accusation, but merely by way
of humble Admonition) To. 11.20.
Be not high-minded, but fear; for, Blessed is the man that fears always: But
he that hardens his heart, shall fall into mischief, Prove. 28.14. The Fear of
God lies in the middle of Jethroes qualifications, as the Diamond in the Ring,
or the Heart in a man's Body, or as a dram of Musk, to perfume the whole Box of
Ointment. And indeed, who among all the People, have more cause to fear God
then Magistrates? since if they fear not him, they have Nothing else to fear,
or so much as to restrain them from any thing that is evil: The Psalmist having
let fall that high expression, concerning Rulers, (I said ye are Gods) he
presently adds by way of corrective, for fear of the worst, Ps. 82.6, 7. Vita
in summo, mors in imo. Lactant.
But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes: And if there were
no other motive but this (my Lords) The consideration of your own Mortality,
that should strongly induce and persuade you to fear the Lord your God. The
Fear of God being the only Antidote against the Fear of death: He needs fear no
danger, no difficulty, no enemy, no death, that does but truly fear God.

But besides this, Consider I beseech you, Opus Dei, in die suo.
what God is now about to do: and for that, consult but your own Experiences:
Seems he not to be in a way of Isa. 23.9.
staining the Pride of all outward glory? Has he not lately answered us by
64.3.
terrible things in Righteousness, and such as we looked not for? Job 12.21.
Pouring contempt upon Princes, and upon great ones, Psalm. 2.5.
Speaking to them in his wrath, and vexing them in his sore displeasure; And
the Isa. 2.17.
loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men made low, That
the Lord alone may be exalted in this day; And therefore, now says the
Psalmist, You that are Ps. 2.10, 11 12.
Rulers, and Judges of the Earth, Be wise, Be instructed, Serve the Lord with
Fear, Rejoice with Trembling, Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, etc.

Doubtless Christ is now upon his March, toward the taking in of all Rev. 11.15
Nations, or at least, some of all Nations, and All that he meets with in his
way, They must (who ever they be) either bow before him, or else be Broken, and
Psalm. 2.9.
dashed in pieces by him, like a Potters vessel: And at Esth. 4.14
such a time as this, That God would give out abundance of Wisdom and Courage,
Abundance of the Fear of his Name, Abundance of Love to Truth and Peace,
Abundance of Hatred and Indignation against Covetousness, ( 1 Timothy 6.10
the root of all our evil) to all in Authority) That the Jam. 2.1.
Lord of Glory would in a special manner thus cloth the Governors of this great
City, with his own Spirit, unto a full compliance with Christ, in all the great
things that he is now about to bring forth and Accomplish; This is the Prayer,
my Lords, of

Your Lordships most humble and obliged Servant, John Cardel.

THE MAGISTRATES Support and Burden.
Numb. 11.16, 17. And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me Seventy men of
the Elders of Israel, whom thou know to be of the Elders of the People, and
Officers over them: and bring them to the Tabernacle of the Congregation, that
they may stand there with thee:

And I will come down, and talk with thee there, and I will take of the Spirit
which is upon thee, and will put it upon them, and they shall bear the Burden
of the People with thee, that thou bear it not thy self alone.


IN the former part of this Chapter, Introducti^^
you may see the Spirit of Moses (an holy and gracious Governor) extremely
burdened with the sinful Provocations of a discontented People; The sins o^ the
People Burden to godly Gov^nors
Although the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the
face of the earth, Numb. 12.3. yet the Peoples frowardness was too hard for his
meekness; neither was he able, any longer to bear, the weight of that Burden,
which their iniquities did inevitably cast upon him.

And among the rest of the sins of this People, that lay so hard upon the
spirit of Moses, There are Two great enormities, Peccata primae magnitudinis,
or the sins that ^ay so hard upon the Spirit of Moses, mentioned.
or heinous offenses of the first magnitude, expressly mentioned here in this
Chapter: The First was, Their complaining of an hard journey in the Wilderness,
without a sufficient Cause; Complaints are never just, but when the Cause is
just; and that the Cause was not just here, the effect shows: For in the first
Verse it is said, when the people complained, it displeased the Lord, and the
Lord heard it, and the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed them:
where ye have both the Sin, and the Punishment. The Sin was unjust complaining,
or discontented murmuring, because of their long travel in the wilderness: And
the Punishment was consumption by fire. The Anger of that God brake out upon
them, who is Heb. 12.29.
A consuming fire: and He was at that time, A consuming fire unto them.

And (lo) that fire was no sooner quenched, by the Prayer and Intercession of
Moses, but presently there was kindled another fire. The fire of the Lord was
no sooner quenched without, but the fire of Lust within, that begins to kindle
the second time, and speedily breaks out into a greater flame of discontent and
murmuring. And from Verse. 4. etc.
At the 4th Verse, etc. The mixed multitude which was among them fell alusting,
and the Children of Israel also wept again, and said, Who shall give us flesh
to eat? we remember the Fish which we did eat in Egypt freely, the Cucumbers,
and the Melons, and the Leeks, and the Onions, and the Garlic, But now our
soul is dried away, there is nothing at all besides this Manna before our eyes:
That Manna which they speak so slightly of, and that they undervalued so much,
in saying, Queruntur nihil praeter Man oculis su^ occurrere ac si^ in unius
opti^^ cibi copia fast^^ dium penuria esset. Calv. i^ Loc.
We have Nothing but this Manna: it was as excellent food as ever men were fed
with: The Psalmist calls it Angels food, man did eat Angels food, Ps. 78.25. If
Angels would have been fed, they could not have had daintier food then that
same Manna was, and yet they wept throughout their families, every man in the
door of his Tent, and spoke as if it had been nothing for God to rain down
Manna from Heaven, in a miraculous manner upon them. Which Repetition of their
former transgression, did exceeding highly provoke God, and kindle his anger
greatly, The Anger of the Lord was kindled Before, at the first onset of their
complaining and of their murmuring. But now at the 10th Verse of the Chapter,
The Anger of the Lord was kindled greatly, says the text, Moses also was
displeased.

And upon this occasion of their adding sin to sin, and wrath to wrath, does
Moses begin to plead with God about the Burden that was upon him. From the 11th
Verse, etc. Moses said unto the Lord, The pleadi^^ of Moses w^ God about^ the
Burden^ that was upon him; from^ Verse. 11. and^
Whersore have thou afflicted thy servant? and wherefore have I not found
favor in thy sight, that thou layest the Burden of all this people upon me?
Have I conceived all this people? Have I begotten them, that thou should say
unto me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father bears the sucking
Child? I am not able (says he) to bear all this people alone, because it is too
heavy for me: And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee out of hand,
if I have found favor in thy sight, and let me not see my wretchedness. Which
Pleadings of Moses, though they did arise from a troubled Spirit, or from a
Spirit overwhelmed with grief and sorrow, for the sins of the people, and were
Not without some mixtures of humane frailty, Quod Mosi displicuit ^anta
perversitas sancti zeli, et ^aude digni fu^t, sed excessus pitio non caruit.
^dem.
not without some mixtures of human frailty: yet God He Hearkens and Hears; and
overlooking the faylings that were in it, He presently signs the Petition of
his servant, and grants him what he requested: the thing that Moses desired
was, That he might have some Ease in point of Government, and that the whole
Burden of it, might not for the future lie upon himself alone: That was the
substance of his Request. And this ye see is both fully and fairly granted unto
him, in the words now read unto you: And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto
me Seventy men, etc.

The Text contains a new Election of Magistrates fo the Commonwealth of
Israel, wherein ye have these particulars notable: 1 The Persons to be Elected,
Text divided unto 3 Parts:
or Chosen. 2 The Manner, or Order of the Election. 3 The main End, or Purpose
of God in it.


The Persons to be Elected or Chosen, described Two ways: The Persons ^o be
Elected, ^wo ways de^cribed, By their Number and Qualifica^^ons.
1 By their Number, Seventy men: 2ly By their Qualifications, Elders of the
people, and Officers over them, in the former part; and such as as also had,
The Spirit of God upon them, in the latter part of the text.

Then the Manner, The manner of ^^e Election.
or Order, or whole Proceed of the Election, that follows in the close of the
16th and at the beginning of the 17th Verse, Gather unto me (says God to
Moses) such a Number of men, whom thou know to be men of Gravity, and men of
Experience; Elders of the people, and Officers over them, and bring them to the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, and let them stand there with thee, and I will
come down, and talk with thee there; that is, I my self will be present at the
Election, says God, and see to the managing of it in all things; according to
the due Order.

And then in the 3d place, The End of God in it.
God declares his full End and Purpose, or he opens his whole heart unto Moses
in the Business, which comes fully up to the satisfaction of Him in that which
he requested. For says he, I will come down and talk with thee there, where
thou art appointed to stand with the Elders of the People, and the Officers over
them; and I will take of the Spirit which is upon thee, and put it upon them,
and they shall bear the Burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not
thy self alone.

I shall but cursorily run over the former parts of the Text, as having mine
Eye chiefly upon that which lies at the bottom of it: The Lord said unto Moses,
Gather unto me Seventy men of the Elders of Israel] Passing by the Number
Seventy, as that which was not intended surely, to be always binding, The
Number Seventy not Binding.
or perpetually presidential unto Posterity; that there should be continually
such a number as seventy sitting upon the Bench, leaving that unto the good
will and pleasure of God, in disposing it so at that time, and as not so
properly belonging unto our present purpose: I shall first take notice of
something by way of Observation, The Rise of the first Dectrine, from the former
part of the 16 Verse.
from the two former Qualifications that lie plainly before us, in the 16th
Verse; Gather unto me (says God to Moses) such a Number of men as are upon thy
certain knowledge, grave men, and experienced men, Elders of the People, and
Officers over them, and says he, Let them appear with thy self at such a
place, and there receive each of them a Commission, for Places of Authority;
From whence I shall commend this lesson in the first place to you.

That it is both an ancient and a laudable Custom,

Ye see that God Himself does clearly give the Precedence unto such, Unto the
Elders of the People, and the Officers over them, Reasons for Gravity in Places
of Authority.
in this Election or choice of his own making: And great Reason there is for
it, That men of Gravity and Experience should be respected and looked after,
and that they should be preferred (Caeteris paribus especially) rather then
others, unto Places of Authority.

First because of that Honor which is due unto the Aged, or unto the Elders of
the People, even as they are such, and that according to all Principles,
whether Divine or Moral, Not only Apud Lacedaemonios ij qui amplissimum
Magistratum gerunt ut sunt, sic etiam apellantur senes. Cicer. de Sen.
Heathens, and such as were merely guided, by the Twylight of Nature, have
always held it their duty to give respect unto such; But even God Himself has
clearly taught us this lesson, Not only from his own Example, Being called in
Scripture Non quod Deus more hominum consenescat, sed quod non aliter, magis ad
mores hominum accomodate ejus aeternitas declararipossit. Mald. in loc.
The ancient of Days, Dan. 7.9. But by a positive express Law of his, among
his own People the Jews. The Equity, Morality, and Ground whereof is still in
full force, among us Christians, Lev. 19.32. Thou shall rise up Before the
hoary head, Si quaeratur quamobrem su^piciendi and reverendi sint senes? Resp.
(...) ipsam canitiem and numeros^ annos, quod annositate Propr^us ad Dei
Imaginem accedu^ qui antiquus dierum appell^tur. Cartwr. in Prove. 16.3^
and honor the face of the Old man, and fear thy God, says Moses there: As if
he should have said, This is no way disonant from, but very consonant or
agreeable unto the Principles of Religion, the Piety of those that do truly
fear God, to rise up before the hoary head, and to Honor the face of the old
man.

Secondly, God he threatens it at one time, Reason.
as a sore judgment upon Eli, That there should not be 1 Samuel 2.3^
an old man in his house for ever; And at another time He promises it as a
great Blessing unto his People, That there should not be Is. 65.20.
an Infant of days among them, nor an old man that had not filled his days.

Thirdly, That which makes a man to be a man, Reason, that comes not unto it is
(...), Vid. Aristor Eth. lib. 8. C.
or unto it is full Perfection. It loses not it is verdure, or it is greenness:
Neither is the rawness of it boiled off, but by Age, and by Experience.

Also in the 4th place, makes a man to be more then a man, a Christian, a true
Believer, Religion and Age, Gravity and Sincerity; They do mutually Help to
Grace and Adorn, and Beautify one another: The hoary head is a Crown of Glory,
Cum inv^^tur in via j^stitiae, tum ^^plicatur hon^^ canitiei debi^ Cartw. in
(...)
if it be found in the way of righteousness, Prove. 16.31. As the way of
Righteousness, is an Honor unto Age, so Age is no dishonor unto the way of
Righteousness, but a good set-off thereto; There is hardly a more graceful
sight in all the world, then to see an old man walking in his Integrity, Act.
21.1^
Mnason an old Disciple: It Is like the going of the Prove. 30.^
Heegoate before the rest of the flock; that Solomon says is comely.

Fifthly, Gravity and Sincerity, so Gravity and Authority do likewise mutually
grace, or well become one another. How apt are men to slight Authority, when it
falls upon those, whose years are every way incompetent or unsuitable
thereunto? 1 Timothy 4.12
Let no man despise thy youth, says Paul to Timothy, which implies that men
would be ready to do so, to withhold that respect which is due from the very
Calling of the Ministry; yea, and upon the same Account, from the very Calling
of Magistracy also, in case it should always descend upon the younger sort.

Sixthly, and Lastly; God Himself threatens it, not only as an heavy Curse upon
a Private Family; but he mentions it as a sore Judgment upon a People in his
own Book; when He says, That He would take away from them, the Is. 3.2.4, 5.
Prudent, and the Ancient. Maximas Respub. per adolescentes labefactas a
senibus sustentatas and restitutas reperietis. Cicer. ubi Supra.
And (says he) I will give Children to be their Princes, and Babes shall rule
over them: And the People shall be oppressed every one by another, and every
one by his Neighbor; The Child shall behave himself Proudly against the
Ancient, and the Base against the Honorable.

Then for matter of Experience to give a little touch upon that also, Men in
Authority should be Experienced men, as well as Grave men.
The Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me Seventy men, whom thou know to be,
The Elders of the People, and Officers over them; that is, Men of Experience,
as well as men of Gravity, such as have in some measure felt the weight of
Authority already, Experience very Helpful to those that are in Authority.
and that do not come rawly to it, without any former insight into the thing it
self: Doubtless Experience is always a very great Help, in things that are,
Either Divine or Humane. There is a Threefold Advantage, that Experienced men
have over others that are of no Experience.

First, By Experience, The Benefits of Experience
a man comes to weigh his wings as it were, or to feel his own strength, and to
Qui accipit gratiam, per quandam Experientiam dull cedinis novit se illam
habere, quam non experitur ille qui no^ accipit. Aquin 1.2. Qu. 112 Act. 5.
know or understand thereby, Quid valiant humeri, Quid far recusant; what his
shoulders are able, or not Able to Bear.

Secondly, A man has hereby an Opportunity administered of discovering his
Gifts, and his Parts, His Strength and his Faithfulness unto others, that they
may accordingly take notice of him, for one Place or another.

And then Thirdly, Experience will also show a man his failings, and how to
rectify himself, how to strayten that, which perhaps he himself, and others
too, have a long time endeavored to make exceeding crooked.

This is always the fruit of sanctified Experience: A special Excellency in
sanctified Experience.
It shows a man his own weakness: It lets others as well as himself see, what
strength he has received from God; And it may at least help, to put a man upon
the Amendment, of all his former failings: All and each of which advantages,
are utterly wanting, to him that wants Experience.

But before I leave these things, that I have thus briefly hinted, about Age,
and about Experience; Cautions about Gravity and Experienc^
I shall here put you in some certain Cautions concerning both, which may, and
shall serve, as so many Uses of the Point.

First we must take heed, of confining God, Caution God not to (...) confined
un^^ days and year^
unto Days and Years, any otherwise, then as he has confined Himself. Elihu
in Job's Case does modestly show us the vanity of such confinements, The vanity
of such confinements from Job 32.7.9. v.
Job, 32.7.9. His words are, I said, Days should speak, and multitude of Years
teach wisdom: But says he, I do now in Experience find, That it sometimes
falls out otherwise, Since great men are not always wise, neither do the Aged
always understand Vera Dei and nostri cognitio, non est commune aetatis bonum,
sed singular Dei beneficium per co^municationem Spiritus, five in juvenibus,
sive in senibus. Jun. ^t Trem. in loc Deus mentes magis comprobat quam aetatem.
^vid. Collect. Aug. Marl. in 1 Timothy 4.12.
Judgment. Not always, though many times they do.

Very certain it is, That God is, Agens liberrimum, The freest Agent of all
other, and as he can, so he does fometimes power out the Gifts and Graces of
his Spirit more plentifully upon some in their Youth, then upon others of riper
years, or of longer standing in the world. 2 Chronicles. 34.1, 2.
Josiah was but 8 years old, when he began to reign, and yet he did that which
was Right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways of David his
Father, and declined neither to the right hand, nor to the left. And among all
the Kings of Israel and Judah, none lived so desired, or died so lamented as
that man did. The greatest Zach. 12.10
mourning that we read of in Scripture was that of Hadadrimmon in the valley
of Megiddor, Iosiab but 8 years old when ^he began to Reign.
for the death of good Josiah. I might also mention our own Edward the 6 of
famous memory, but 9 years old when he began to Reign. See Act. and Mon. de
vit. Edw. 6.
Edward the Sixth, and some others that carried themselves very Nobly and
Honorably, in the Places of Supreme Magistracy, even in their tender years: But
yet, Though the wise and the holy God be at liberty, and may sometimes vary
from the Rule of outward Gravity, which he is no way tied to: yet we see that
for the most part he has respect unto the elder sort, and that he does put
this high Honor mostly upon them, to be his own Vicegerents, in Places of
Authority.

But then it must be with this other Caution or limitation, Caution Seniores
must be Saniores, Grave ones Good ones, or else not fit to be Great ones.
That Seniores be Saniores, men of known Integrity in their ways and walkings;
and every way like, to be true and faithful, to the Trust reposed in them, or
else their Places do not grave them so much as they disgrace their Places:
Grave men must be Good men, Sin the greatest Blemish unto Age.
or else they are not fit to be Great men, since Nothing casts such a blemish
upon Age, or makes it so unfit for Government as Sin does; Prove. 16.13 Quam
multi sunt qui multo. annos expetun cum pace conjunctos? Sed quam pauci sunt,
qui hos quaerunt in vi^ justitiae. Quae runt illos convictu, in Medicina in
opibus, sed ubi se obviumillis praebent in via justitiae non quaerunt. Cartw.
in loc.
The hoary head is a Crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
Righteousness, but if it be found in the way of Unrighteousness, then it loses
i'ts crown of glory: As the Beauty of Age is Holiness, so the shame of Age is
wickedness: And therefore in that very place, where God makes so gracious and
so precious a Promise unto his People, about filling up their days, He still
leaves the Curse upon the Head and Heart of the wicked, Is. 65.19.20. I will
(says he) rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my People, and the voice of weeping
shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. There shall be no more
thence an Infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days, for
the Child shall die an hundred years old: But the Sinner being an hundred years
old shall be accursed: that is, Though he live never so long, yet the Curse
that never departs from him, but continues and grows upon him still more and
more: And is it possible think ye, That he should be a Blessing to a City, or a
Blessing to a Commonwealth, that is really Accursed, in all that he puts his
hand unto? The undoubted Portion of every wicked man: Deuteronomy. 28.20. Experience
how far to be respected.


Then for matter of Experience: Though it be good to have a Christian, and a
due respect unto that also; both unto Age, and unto Experience: yet I pray take
heed of Idolizing either. Such and such have bin in Office a long time it may
be, but Quam been se gesserint, How have they carried themselves in their
Places, or in their Offices? When do ye mean to make that Enquiry, and to Act
accordingly? True it is that the Apostle tells us, and it either does (or
should at least) hold true in Temporals, as well as in Spirituals: They that
have used the Office of a Diaconos ad fidelitatem in Ministerio suo cohortatur
ab utili effectu quod eo modo bonum sibi gradum acquirant et multam libertatem,
nempe apud Deum. Piscat. in loc.
Deacon well (which was but a lower Office in the Church) They (says he)
Purchase to themselves a good degree, and great Boldness in the Faith, which is
in Christ Jesus: 1 Timothy 3.13. It is the Rule that Christ himself goes by, and
that He himself puts down for us to go by: Luke 16.10. Hortatur suos Discipulos
Christus, ut fideliter agentes in rebus parvis, se ad fidem in maximis rebus
colendam assue faciant. Calv. in loc.
He that is faithful in that which is least (says he) is faithful also in much
And he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. And according to
this Rule of Proportion, does the King of Saints and Nations, either lift men
up, or cast them down: As in the Parable of the Talents; Mat. 25.21. Adesdum ut
fructum percipias benignitatu meae, et reipsa sentias quam gratum sit mihi
Officium tuum. Bez. in loc. Old Experienced Officers how to be dealt with.
Well done good and faithful servant, Thou have been faithful in a few things,
be thou Ruler over many things. So he said to the two first, that had improved
their Talents, and that in experience had been found faithful; but the other
that upon trial, had been unfaithful, and that had Napkined up his Talent, and
made no good improvement at all of it. He was not to be Credited, or trusted
any longer with it. And thus should you deal with your old experienced
Officers, ye should either Advance or Cashier, continue, or cast them out,
according to the verdict of Experience; according to that faithfulness or
unfaithfulness that ye do experimentally find to be in them: If experience tell
you, That they have been faithful in a lower Office, ye may the better trust
them in an higher. But in case they have been unfaithful in a lower, do not ye
lay a temptation before them in an higher, least ye both deceive your selves,
and destroy them thereby.

But I proceed: The Second part of the text containing Gods coming down to
confer with Moses about the choice of new Magistrates.
It follows in the words -- And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me
Seventy men, etc. And bring them to the Tabernacle of the Congregation; and let
them stand there with thee, and I will come down and talk with thee there. This
I call Gods own disposing or managing of the Election in order to his own
Glory, and the satisfaction of his servant Moses; And from thence ye may
observe further.

That in all Affairs of concernment especially,

Wait for me, says God to Moses, at the Tabernacle of the Congregation, with
the Elders of the People, and the Officers over them, and I will come down and
talk with thee there, and tell thee what thou shall do; Note.
where I pray Observe the great and the mighty condescension here spoken of;
for indeed there is much, yea, very much in it, much more then can be
mentioned, That the great God of Heaven and Earth should Malumus Deum ad nos
huc in terram descendere, quam ad illum in caelum assurgere. Camer. conc. 2. in
cap. 6. Joan.
stoop so low, or condescend so far, to any of his poor Creatures, as to say,
Wait for me at such a Place, and I will come down and talk with thee there.

But ye will peradventure say, That this was indeed a privilege that Moses
enjoyed; Numb. 12.8
with him the Lord spoke mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark
speeches, and the similitude of the Lord did he behold, But is there any such
privilege as this extant among Believers now?

To that I Answer; doubtless God has his times of coming down, and his ways
of talking with his own People still, The privileges of the Believer are no
way straytened or diminished, but rather increased exceedingly since the coming
of Christ, and there is a Tabernacle still, as well as in the days of Moses;
Rev. 21.3. Indicat manifestationem divinae gloriae non plenam adhuc futuram,
quali fruentur sancti post ultimum judicium, aptum est Tabernaculum
perigrinan^i Ecclesiae, non illi quae consequuta est fixam sedem in sua patria.
Brightm. in loc.
Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and
they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.
And whersoever this Tabernacle is seated and placed; that is, Wheresoever there
are Churches Constituted, and Ordinances Dispensed, according to the mind of
Christ, do but wait for the appearances of God in such places, and then
undoubtedly, he will at one time or other come down and talk with you there.
But I said, It Is good (in all Affairs of Concernment especially) to be there
waiting upon our God, where he does vouchsafe to come down and talk with us:
And surely so it is. In 3 respects it is good to wait where God vouchsafes to
come down and talk with us.
It Is good to be there in 3 Respects: 1 In regard of God. 2 In regard of your
selves. 3 In regard of others.


First, God himself, it is good to be there waiting where he does vouchsafe to
come down and talk with us; In regard of God, who does thereby discover
This arguing, both greatness of Wisdom, and greatness of Power, and greatness
of Love on Gods part.

1 It Argues greatness of wisdom, to come down and talk with us: Greatness o^
Wisdom.
God never speaks to the hearts of his People, or he never brings any savory
message home to their Spirits, but he does always manage it, in the exactest
way of wisdom: Men are apt to speak Psalm. 41.6.
vainly, and Prove. 15.2
foolishly, and Eccles. 5.^
rashly, and Psalm. 106.
unadvisedly with their lips, if not worse then so; there is frequently very
little, or none of the Col. 4.6.
salt of discretion mingled, with any of their words, or with any of their
speeches. But whenever the wife God comes down to talk with us, there is
always a fullness of wisdom in that which he delivers; and there is not so much
as any shadow of Vanity, or any appearance of Iniquity, in any thing that he
says.

2ly. It Argues Greatness of Power also, Greatness o^ Power.
as well as Creatness of Wisdom, That God is pleased at any time to come down
and talk with us: God never speaks to the hearts of his People, one way or
another, but when his words are managed with a great deal of Authority and
Power. Mat. 7.29
He taught them as one having Authority, says the Text of Christ, and not as
the Scribes: Men speak weakly, and faintly, and coldly to one another; there is
little or no strength in that which they themselves deliver: Their words are
but wind, as we say; but when God comes to speak in them, or to speak by them,
when he comes Psalm. 18.1
to ride upon the wings of that wind; and to make out spiritual 1 Cor. 2.
demonstrations of his own Almighty Power in the way of an Ordinance: Then
there is such a fullness of strength discovered, that there can be no resisting
of it; Then it is the 1 Pet. 1.2 Constat imn^^tale esse quod Dei est, hom quod
caduct^ Ambros. d^ Fill. Divin (...)
immortal seed of the word, and that which never fades away: Then vain
Imaginations, and unclean Affections, and proud Lusts, and corupt Reasonings
must al come down, and every 2 Cor. 10.5.
thought be captivated to the obedience of Jesus Christ.

3ly. Greatness of Love.
This Argues Greatness of Love also, that God is pleased at any time to come
down and talk with us. God never speaks, Ad ventum di^i, forsan autem ^ic non
tam ve^emens ventus uit Eliae visia^e, sed lenior et ^acidior quaeam aura ne
ve^ementior alioui ventus cos ^tis conscientia ^ccati consteratos vehemen^us
terreret. Mercer. in loc
but very lovingly, to the hearts of his People, and not so hastily as men use
to do in their angry fits and moods: He appeared unto Adam not in the heat, but
in the Genesis 3.8.
cool of the day: He was not in the wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the
fire, but in the small still voice, in the Vision of Elijah: He Isa. 40 11.
Mansue tudinem and misericordiam Christi describit. Vatab. hic.
shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, says the Prophet, He shall gather the
Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and gently lead those that are
with young: A Mat. 12.20.
bruised Reed shall he not break, nor quench the smoking flax, until he send
forth Judgment unto victory. Thus in regard of God it is good.

Secondly, (...) regard of ^ur selves. (...) Job, 31.28. ^uid mirum si
^ferioribus and ^eterioribus ^ntentus nonsit, ^ui citra sum^um and opti^um
quiescere ^n potest? ^ern. Tract.
In regard of your selves it is also good, to be there waiting upon your God,
where he does vouchsafe to come down and talk with you: For otherwise, when ye
are in some great distress at any time, and when all the creatures are mute and
silent about you, and have not a word to say, either for the supporting, or for
the directing, or for the comforting of you: What would ye do at such a time,
if Dilig. Deo ^ag. 950.
the God that is above should not come down and talk with you? Alas, the
necessities, the inward necessities of the Soul and Spirit are variously such,
and very frequently such, that if there should be Rev. 8.1.
silence in heaven but one half hour beyond the appointed time, unbelief would
utterly be too hard for faith, and despair too hard for hope: And how
uncomfortable a condition that poor creature is left in, that is both faithless
and hopeless, that no man can tell you: for it is the very Abstract of all the
Creatures misery, to have no Faith, nor no Hope in God: Despair is Hell it self.

3ly. In regard of others, In regard of others.
It Is good to be there waiting where our God vouchsafes to come down and talk
with us: That when at any time, any of you have been spoken to, and received
Consolation, ye may go and bear forth this precious seed, and be a means to
encourage others to wait upon God, as you have done, that they may also in due
time partake of the same refreshments with you: God many times makes the hearts
of his People to be not only Cisterns, but Conduits of Consolation: Blessed be
God, says the Apostle, who Apostolica^ dignitatem d^ clarat, ostende^ quod
solatio (...) fectus, ac res^ ratione refoc^ latus, non se^ pinat otioque dat,
quemadn^ dum nos, se^ huc petius intendit studiu^ ut alios unga^ corroboret,
at^ erigat. Chry^ in loc.
comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them
which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted
of God: 2 Cor. 1.3, 4. Thus ye see how good it is every way, Both in regard of
Himself, Our selves, and Others, to be there waiting upon our God, where he
does vouch safe to come down and talk with us. The Uses of this follow; and

First, Since it is thus Profitable or Advantageous for us to do so; let us
therefore observe, special notice of, the Times, and the Places: The times
when, and the places where, our God is pleased to come down and talk with us:
And surely look wheresoever the Tabernacle of God is fixed among men, that is,
Look where he does dispense his Ordinances unto his People, in a pure
Gospel-way, there he has Promised, and there he does vouchsafe to come down
and talk with them. There Is the 1 Timothy 3.15
Ground and Pillar of Truth; and there is the 1 Cor. 2.13.16.
lunguage of the Holy Ghost; and there is the Officium est Ecclesiae sustentare
atque suffulcire veritatem su^ ministerio, et corespectu columna veritatis
appellatur. Davenant. Disp. de Jud. et Nor. Fid. Cap. 18. vid. Whitaker de
Author. S. Script. Tom-2. Oper. lib. 1. Cap. 3. Page 46. Col. 1.
mind of Christ.

Secondly, humble request unto God, That He would Exodus 40.34
fill the Tabernacle with his own presence continually; That he would not leave
you without his Company, at any of your Is. 1.13.
solemn meetings; for otherwise, though never so many meet, yet if He be not
there, the benefit of the Meeting's lost: Better be Mat. 18.20.
with two or three, where He is present, then in never so great a crowd, where
He is absent: Therefore, I say, beg his Presence, Psalm. 105.4.
seek his face continually, Romans 15.30
strive with him in Prayer, That he would not leave you to the bare 2 Cor. 3.6.
letter of the Word, or to the outward presence of an Ordinance, but that he
would thereby, and therein, upon all occasions come down and talk with your
souls, and tell you Act. 9.6.
what ye should do.

Thirdly, God does talk with you, or when he does at any time speak to you, be
sure to mind what He says; do not neglect, or slight this great Condescension:
There is (as you have heard) much of the Wisdom of God, and much of the Power
of God, and much of the Love of God to be seen in all that he says to you, and
therefore do not undervalue it, or play with it, or look upon it as a vain
thing, for it is Deuteronomy. 32^
your life as Moses tells you; and Christ He seconds Moses in that, The words
that I speak unto you, They are Spirit, and They are Life, says he, Joh. 6.63.

Fourthly, Make it appear by this, Teachings, and all the Talkings of God with
you, are not in vain to you, by your walking suitably and answerably thereunto:
Take heed of drowning all the great Gifts that are now vouchsafed unto you in
the Homo qui naturae done munus animae, rationis bene^ um, excellentiamsensus,
(...) cium mentis, artu industr^ culturae bonum, persterile^ que inopes actus
revertit, o^ pat, mergit, auctori fruc^ cultori gratiam negat, sicu^ bor e
terra, sic iste e vit^^ (...) tur excidi. P. Chrysostom. Ser.
dead sea of unfruitfulness: There are hardly any People under Heaven, that
trade more in Ordinances, then you do; ye are very frequently at those
Performances, wherein God does appear, and show Himself; your feet stand often,
in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and ye do pretend, at least, unto a
desire, That God would come down, and talk with you there: And therefore when
he does so, when he does come down and talk with you, be sure to Romans 6.17.
(...). That form of Do^ whereinto ye were deliv^ vid. Bez. hic.
deliver up yourselves, unto that which he delivers, as a People that are
willing to be taught of God, and let both Heart and Life savor, of that which
He says to you: Jam, 1.22. Vult Apostolus ut non ta^ simus auditores Sermonis
(...) etiam effectores, hoc est ta^ quibus sermo qui inserit^ dices agat, quod
fit dum^ ex verbo concipitur, et (...) entia nostra testatur fiden^ Heming. in
loc.
Be doers of the Word (as James says) and not Hearers only, deceiving your own
selves.

Especially when ye are met (as now) about any Business of Concernment, and the
Lord shall then please to come down and talk with you, and cast in A word in
^eason not to ^e neglected, (...) being like ^pples of gold ^n pictures in
^lver, grateful and delightful Prove. 25.11.
a word in season; when ye come and sit before your God, for a word of Counsel,
and He is pleased to come in with a word of Counsel, according to your desires,
and according to your expectations: Now take heed of resisting or rejecting,
and be sure to close in with that word, that so what ye do may appear to have
been done in sincerity, Verbum secun^um suos modos ^u commode ^ictum nihil a^ud
est, quam ^ntentia in se bona observatis locorum, temporum, and personorum
circumstantiis, prolata. Cartwr. hic.
and not in hypocrisy; and so I shall now fall upon that in the rear of the
words which does principally concern the purpose of our present meeting.

-- I will come down, The third ^art of the Text opened.
and talk with thee there, says God to Moses, and I will take of the Spirit
which is upon thee, and will put it upon them, etc. By the Spirit here, Seponam
de ^piritu qui est ^per te, Spiritu ^uta gratiae: non ^t ideo minus aberet
Moses, ^d ut illi tan^um haberent de ^piritu Dei, ^uantum ad^ensurus ipsis ^at
Deus voca^or is auctor, ut ^osi adju^ento essent.
we must understand the Spirit of Government; And says God to Moses, I will
take of that Spirit, or I will divide that Spirit, or I will increase and
multiply that Spirit, that is now upon thee, upon these seventy men: The very
same Spirit of Government that is now upon thee, says God, it shall rest upon
them, even as 2 Kin. 2.15
the Spirit of Elijah rested upon Elisha; ^un. et Trem. (...) loc. ^ee Ainsw.
^nnot. upon ^e place.
Not that Moses himself was to be unspirited, or dispirited, or uncloathed, or
unpossessed of the Spirit, that is not the meaning of it neither, But says God,
the same Spirit that has 1 Cor. 12.4
diversities of gifts in it, It shall be diversely shared amongst you al, that
are to be the Governors of my People, According to the several Exigencies, or
Necessities of your Places: And says he, Having thus sitted and prepared these
men, By putting my Spirit of Government upon them, They shall then bear the
Burden of the People with thee, that thou bear it not thy self alone. Two oth^^
Doctrine from thi^ ter part o^ Text.
From whence I shall further commend these two other Notes, or Observations to
you, which I shall entreat you to take special Notice of. The First this,

That the Burden of the People lies upon the Magistrates. They shall bear the
Burden of the People with thee.

The Second this,

That no man is any way fit or able to bear this Burden, but he that has a
Spirit of Government graciously conferred upon him.

To begin first, with the former of these, Namely this,

That the Burden of the People lies upon the Magistrates. 1 Do^^


For the opening of this, you may please to observe, That the Burden of the
People is in 4. The Bur^ of the P^^ in 4 resp^^ upon the gistrates.
Respects incumbent, or lying upon the Magistrates.

1 The Burden of the Peoples Sins. 2 The Burden of the Peoples Sorrows, or
Sufferings. 3 The Burden of the Peoples Rights, or Privileges. And, 4 The
Burden of the Peoples Discontents. The Bu^^ of the pe^^ sins.

First, The Burden of the Peoples Sins, that is incumbent, or lying upon the
Magistrate more ways then one; For sometimes Magistrates are the Causes, of
the Sins of the People, being like unto 1 Kin. 1^
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. Rulers (...) of the sin^
the Peop^^ veral wa^


There are several ways whereby Rulers may be guilty of the Sins of the Sins
of the People, Either By 1 Samuel 22.18
commanding, or, By 2 Chr. 19.2
countenancing, or, By 1 King. 1.6
co^niving, or, By 1 Samuel 3.13.
not restraining the sins of the People: And in such Cases as these, If
Magistrates will make Rods for their own Backs, or lay Snares for their own
Feet to be taken in, Then nothing in the world more righteous, or -- Non est
^ex aequior ulla Quam necu Ar^ifices Art pe^ire sua.
equal, then that they themselves should bear the greatest weight, of their own
procured Burdens.

Or, suppose on the other side, That the Magistrate be like 2 Chapter 34.37
Josiah, of a tender heart, or of a melting disposition, and no way so much as
accessory to the sins of the People, but one that would fain have all things
rightly and duly administered, yet this will trouble Him never the less, but
burden him so much the more, to see how hard a matter it is, to reduce a
rebellious, De exilii sui in^ommoditate, et nolestia queri^ur David, ^uam ex
com^oratione tali^m barbarorum and malitiosorum ^ominum quo^idie experieba^ur.
Muscul. ^ loc.
or to bring a gainsaying People into any good order; as ye know what a burden
it was unto 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
Lot, and how his righteous soul was vexed, and grieved from day to day, to see
and observe the unclean conversation, of those lewd and wicked Sodomites, among
whom he lived. And Psalm. 120.5
woe is me says David, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of
Kedar, intimating that the lewdness of those places, was a very great burden
unto his spirit also.

Secondly, The Burden ^f the peoples ^orrows or ^ufferings.
The Burden of the Peoples Sorrows, or Sufferings, that also lies upon the
Magistrate: Magistrates ye know are called Patres Patriae, Senatus no^en dedit
aetas ^am ijdem Pa^essunt. Quin. ^^st. orat. lib. ^. Cap. 6.
Fathers of their Country; And can a tenderhearted Father see any of his
Children lie groaning under heavy Burdens, and not do whatever in him lies to
ease their shoulders of those Burdens? How sad was the fruit of Rehoboams
refusing to hearken unto the People, Magistratus moribus debe^ se gerere ut f^
trem reliquo. rum, in offici^ ut Patrem. Ames. de c^^ lib. 5. cap. 2^
when they came in a fair Petitioning way unto him, to ease them of their
Burdens? The peop^ Petition to Rehoboam. 1 King. 12.
Thy Father made our yoke grievous, say they; now therefore make thou the
grievous service of thy Father, and his heavy yoke, which he put upon us,
lighter, and we will serve thee. No says he, His Answ^^ verse. 10.11. compared
with 2 Chr^^ 10.14.
My little finger shall be thicker than my Fathers loins; my Father made your
yoke heavy, but I will add thereto: my Father chastised you with whips, but I
will chastise you with Scorpions. Hereupon the People depart in a mighty
discontent, and resolve to have no more to do with Rehoboam, nor with his
Government neither; Their Resolution. v. 1 of both Cha^ters.
What Portion have we in David? say they, neither have we inheritance in the
son of Jesse, every man to your tents o Israel, and let David see to his own
house: And not only there, or at that time, but at other times, and in other
places also, Most of t^^^ Civil Wars^ that ever we^ in the world^ have had the^
Rise from hence.
Oh! the woeful Contentions, and bloody Breaches, that have heretofore fallen
out between Governors and Governed, when heavy burdens have been either
imposed, or continued, without a sufficient cause! Gods goo^ ness and sev^rity
toward England.
How many Iron yokes of Oppression has God already freed the People of this
Nation from, through a vast expense of Blood and Treasure? And as for those
other Burdens and Impositions that some amongst us do so much complain of, Truly
for what I know, They might All have been removed by this time, Had we not
either drawn, or continued them upon our selves, by our own What hinders our
present prosperit^ Love would soon heal all our Breache^ and ease us (...) all
our Taxe^
unthankefulness, and Disobedience, and unworthy walkings one toward another.
The Burden of the people Rights, or (...)


Thirdly, The Burden of the Peoples Rights or Privileges, that also lies upon
the Magistrate: I do not say, That the Rights and Privileges of the People,
are a Burden in themselves, or A Burden unto them; But this I may, and do say,
That the care of upholding and main^aining, The care of vindicating and
increasing, all the several Rights and Privileges of the People; That must
needs be a Burden to any man, or men, that shall conscientiously undertake the
work, and go through with it accordingly: Especially in -- Sero medicina
paratur Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
corrupt times, when things are mightily out of frame and order, They that
shall industriously set upon, and accordingly prosecute this service, The
upholding of that which is present, the vindication of that which is stolen,
or taken away, The increasing, or adding of that which is wanting in point of
Right or Privilege, They shall find it to be one of the hardest pieces of work
that ever men enterprized, and that which will prove a Burden too heavy for
them, If the Lord Himself do not mightily assist, or wonderfully come in to
help: And yet this Magistrates should, and are bound to do, Virtute Officij, by
virtue of their Office; For as 2 Cor. 11.28
Paul had upon him, the care of all the Churches: so have Magistrates upon them
the care of all the People, to see that In istos fines incumbit Magistratui
singularis cura legum and judiciorum, ut comomni justitia et aequitate, tam
constituantur, quam exequutioni mandentur. Ames. ubi supra.
Justice be done impartially for them, and without respect of persons, and that
Nothing be withheld from any one that of right belongs unto him, either for
fear, or favor, or upon any other terms whatsoever.

Fourthly, The Burden of the peoples Discontents.
The Burden of the Peoples Discontents, that also lies upon the Magistrate: If
ye road over several Chapters in the Books of Exodus, and Numbers, and there
view the Passage of the Children of Israel, from Egypt into Canaan, you shall
find that nothing all along, was such a Burden to Moses and Aaron, or such an
affliction to them, as the Discontents of the People: True it is, that the
wants of the People were exceeding great and many, (and yet no other then such,
as the wise God thought fit to exercise them by) sometimes they wanted Bread,
and sometimes they wanted Water, and sometimes they wanted Want of Faith the
greatest w^^ See for th^^ Job. 13.15.^ 27.13. L^ 22.32. Jo^ 36. other (...)
wants nev^^ pinch us t^^ our Faith (...)ns, Fides (...) mem non ti^^. Hier. If
(...) take away (...) mear, God (...) take away (...) hunger, sa^^^ the Marty
(...)
Faith, and that was the worst want of all: And in the midst of all the straits
that they were under hereby, instead of complaining of themselves, and of their
own unworthiness, and unbelief, and undue provocations, They would still be
murmuring, and complaining against Moses, and against Aaron, as if they had
been the Causes, of all their present sufferings. Instances (...) the People^
Burdenm^ Moses and (...) with their (...) murmuri^ in the 11.^ and 16. Cha^ of
this Bo^ of Number^
A remarkable instance of this their unjust and injurious dealing, ye have not
only here in the 11th Chapter, and again in the 16th Chapter of this Book of
Numbers, in the matter of Korah, and his Company, But more especially in the
14th Chapter of the same Book, where when the false Spies had brought them news
of Giants, and sons of Anak, in the land of Canaan, that would in all
likelihood be too hard for them, and that might peradventure come upon them,
and kill them, Numb. 14.2. It is there said, A special (...) stance of (...)
doing so, (...) Numb. 14 (...) verse. 2. etc (...)
That all the Children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron: and the
whole Congregation said unto them, Would God we had died in the Land of Egypt,
or would God we had died in this Wilderness: And wherefore has the Lord
brought us into this Land to fall by the Sword, that our Wives and our Children
should be a prey? Were it not better for us, to return into Egypt? And they
said one to another, Let us make a Captain, and let us return into Egypt: And
albeit Verse. 5.
Moses and Aaron fell upon their faces before them, and entreated them to be
quiet, and not thus male-centent or unruly; And withal, though verse. 6, 7, 8, 9
Caleb and Joshua (the two good Spies) came in to their assistance, and did all
that ever they could, Non persuadebus etiam si persuasevus, Verse 10.
to persuade them, yet all would not do, but says the Text, All the
Congregation bade stone them with stones, at the 10th Verse of that Chapter.
Thus ye see, in what Respects, the Burden of the People, lies upon the
Magistrates,

In the next place I am to show you,

That no man is any way fit, or able to bear this Burden, but he that has a
Spirit of Government graciously conferred upon him.

For the Opening of this, Opened in the Resol. of two Queries.
Two things to be inquired; 1. Wherein the Spirit of Government lies? 2ly. Why
no man is any way fit or able, to bear the Burdens of the People, in all the
particulars mentioned, but he that has such a Spirit graciously conferred upon
him, or vouchsafed unto him?

To the former Question, Spirit of Government lies? A Spirit of Government
includes
I Answer thus, Such a Spirit includes these ensuing Qualifications:

First, A Spirit of wisdom and understanding: of all other men, A Spirit of
wisdom and understanding
Magistrates had need to be wise men, yea Col. 1.9.
filled with the Spirit of wisdom and understanding; wise as 2 Samuel 14.17
Angels of light, to discern between good and evil, between Party and Party,
between Cause and Cause, between that which is Righteous, and Just, and Good,
and that which only appears to be so.

Their Wisdom lies more especially in 3. Things; 1 In the knowledge of the
Rule, The Mag^ strats wise in 3. Thi^^
of all Equity and Justice. 2 In Applying Things, to that Rule. 3 In making
out, a Right Sentence or Judgment from that Application: In each of which
particulars, the Magistrate is to be marveilous exact, and careful.


First, In the knowledge of his Rule, In the kn^^ledge oph^^ Rule.
which is the Law of Deuteronomy. 1^
God and men, that he must be well versed in, and know the whole compass of it,
that so he may not stagger, or be to seek, but understand fully and clearly,
what he may do, or what he may not do in any Case that is brought before him.

2ly. In Applying things to the Rule, In applyi^^ things to (...) Rule.
He should always express both a great deal of Tenderness, and a great deal of
Faithfulness.

First, A great deal of Tenderness, with T^ derness. (...) Summum (...) Summa
in^^^
not putting the worst, but rather the best interpretation upon things,
Especially where there is but any hope of reclaiming the Offender, in a fair,
and gentle, and mild way of Proceeding.

But withal, with F^^fulness.
as a great deal of Tenderness is to be used, so as much Faithfulness, that
neither the Majesty of the Rule, nor yet the Authority of him that Judges by
it, may be any way wronged, or prejudiced thereby.

And then in making out a right Sentence or Judgment, from such an Application,
In making a right Sentence or J^^ment fro^^ that App^tion.
There must be always great store of wariness and circumspection used: The
hand must be steady of it self, and there must be Nothing to jogge it: All
things are to be so carried with so much clearness, in the making up of any
Business, that there may be no just complaining afterward, that every thing was
not exactly scanned, or not duly enough considered of, before the Sentence
passed: These things are so Essential to a Magistrate, in matters of the
greatest moment, that the Omission of any one of them cannot but produce, a
world of inconveniences, reflecting very much dishonor, even upon the Office it
self: So that, Support, under all the former Burdens, A Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding.

Secondly, Spirit of Courage, and of Might, that is also very requisite in a
Magistrate, A Spirit of Courage and of might.
That He should not be of a soft effeminate disposition, but of an undaunted
Spirit, full of Courage, and Resolution, Ephesians 6.10. Ille enim fortis est qui
non in se, sed in Deo fortis est. Aug. Enar. in Ps. 33
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: otherwise how shall he be
Able to hold up his head against both Wind and Water, against all the whole
torrent of Vice, and current of Prophanness, that he shall be sure to meet
with, and that he must oppose and cross, in case he would be Faithful: How
much Fortitudo togata, est qua non tantum in aegritudine etmorbis, in
tempestate maris, in Sylvis and incursu la^ronum, sed etiam in ferendis injuijs
quibu^nos adversarij afficere conantur, aut afficiunt, illisque non privata
vindicta, sed auxilio legum depellendis, animi firmitatem deliberatam
retinemus. Polan. Syntag. Theol. lib. 10. cap. 19.
fortitude, and valor, and magnanimity ought He to be Possessed of, that shall
turn the Prove. 20.26.
wheel over the wicked impartially, and Pluck the Prey out of the Lions mouth,
and rescue the Isa. 1.17.
Oppressed, from the man that is too mighty for him? That shall neglect the
f^^wns, and the fawns, Job. 29.17.
reject the letters and the suits, of this man Rich, and that man Great, and
the other man his Friend, that He may do Justice in his place? He that is sure to
go into the Field, and to enter the Lists, with the strongest, and the
stoutest, and the subtlest Adversaries, that ever flesh and blood brought
forth, shall he be a Coward? He that shall 1 Cor. 16.^^.
quit himself like a man, in such a service, Had he not need to be an able man?
which was the first, and prime Qualification in Jethroes Advice to Moses, Exodus
18.21. The Burden of the work is to heavy for thee, says he to Moses, and Exo.
18.^^.
thou art not able to perform it thy self alone. Thou shall therefore provide
for thine Assistance out of all the People, Able men, (...) viros virtutis,
Vid. Monta^^ verse. hic.
as Montanus turns it, men of a David-like, or of a Sampson-like Spirit, in the
Cause of God, 2 Suppo^^
and of all his Faithful people, That Is a 2d Support, under all the former
Burdens, A Spirit of Courage, and of Might.

Thirdly, A Spirit of the fear of the Lord, requisite in a Magistrate; A Spirit
o^ the Fear o^ Lord.
He that Rules over men must be just, Ruling in the fear of God, says David,
2 Samuel 23.3. Moreover thou shall provide out of all the People, Able men, and
such as Fear God, says Jethro to Moses, Exodus 18.21. Such as fear God, not
with a slavish, but with a filial, not with a vicious, but with a gracious
fear: In short take it thus; Quid est qu^^ Sapientia C^stiani? Q^^nisi Timor,
(...) Amer Christ Salvian. ad Eccles. Cathol. Lib. 4. Fides facit formidinem,
formido facit solic^ nem, solicitudo facit perseverantiam. Tertul. contr.
Marcion.
The Consideration of his Presence, who is 1 Timothy 6.15.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the great and the only Potentate, All Eye to
see, and All Ear to hear, and All Hand to punish every disobedience; This
should awe the Magistrate continually, and make him afraid, to Exodus 23.3.
patronize the Nocent, to Deuteronomy. 24.17
pervert the Cause of the Innocent, to Prove. 17.15.
justify the Wicked, to condemn the Righteous, 1 Samuel 8.3
to take Bribes, to Prove. 28.21
accept Persons, to Mat. 18.6.
offend any of the little ones of God: He that truly fears God, dares not do
any of these things, and why? But Because he knows all such Practices as these
are, to be an Abomination to that God, who is a Heb. 12.29
consuming fire, and that has provided Isa. 30.33.
Tophet for Princes, and great ones, as well as for those of a meaner rank and
Quality: This therefore may well go for a 3d Support under all the former
Burdens.

Fourthly, Spirit of Truth and Faithfulness, that is also very requisite in a
Magistrate, A Spirit of Truth and Faithfulness.
without which, all the other Qualifications that I have mentioned already, are
but shadows of Honor, and of no worth at all: Behold thou desire truth in the
inward parts. Ps. 51.6.
for though a man be reputed never so wise, a man, never so courageous, and
stout, and Able a man, yea, never so Pious and Religious a man; Veritatem quam
scripfit in cord hominis quia non legebatur in cord, iteravit Deus in
Tabulis, ut voce fornisecus admota rediret ad cor, and ibi inveniret, quod
extra legeret. Lombard, Sentent. lib. 3. Distinct. 37.
Though his Name be up, and his Credit never so great, for all these things,
for Wisdom, for Courage, for Pretty, yet if these things be not in him of a
Truth, If there be Nothing to Confide in, or Nothing looked after, but an
Appearance, or an outward show of these things: Such a one is but the Picture
of a Magistrate. He is no more a Magistrate in Reality, or in propriety of
speech, then a painted man's a man: But He that is a Magistrate indeed, Gods
Vicegerent indeed, He is a Exo. 18.2
man of Truth, one that knows the truth, and that loves the truth Non solum
verum opponi^ tur falso, et v^ ritas mendac^^ verum etiam (...) significat
sin^^ rum et simpl^ cem, et oppor^tur fucato et (...) mulato. Zan^ de Not. D^^
lib. 3. cap. 3 (...)
Both ways, both in opposition to falsehood, and likewise in opposition to
hypocrisy; one that hates with a perfect hatred, All those Hiding places of
Iniquity, All those dens, and thickets, and coverts of deceitful dealing, that
others have to lie down in; And in all particular Cases, Suits, and
Controversies whatsoever, He counts it his greatest honor to sift out the
truth, to maintain the truth, and to cleave unto it inseparably; still saying,
Amicus Pla^ Amicus Soc^ tes, sed mag^ Amica veri^
as He did of old most worthily, Such a one is my Friend, and such a one my
Friend, Socrates my Friend, and Plato my Friend, But Truth's my best, and my
dearest Friend, and with that in my Bosom, I intend to live and die: This I
mention, 4 Supp^^^
as a 4th Support, under all the former Burdens: A Spirit of Truth, and
Faithfulness.

Fifthly, A Spirit of Heavenly-mindedness, A Spirit o^ Heavenly-mindedne^^
that is also very requisite in a Magistrate, which is the concluding Passage in
Jethroes Advice to Moses, Moreover, thou shall Provide out of all the people,
Able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating Covetousness, I pray mark; He
does not only say, Let Rulers or Magistrates abstain from Covetousness, or fly
from Covetousness, that is not his language; But let them says he, be such as
Exo. 18.^^ Quoniam (...) pturimum ^ duntur ins^ judicibus, ob quaestu, no^ it is
munitie^ contra hoc g g^^corruptelae ^^avaritiam ^^professo det^^rentur. Ca^^
in loc. Reasons (...) Magistrat^^ should H^^^ Covetous^^^
hate Covetousness: Now Hatred that reaches as far as it can, after the
Non-being of the thing Hated: As Love desires the life, and the preservation,
so Hatred the death, and destruction, of that which is the Object of it: And
indeed, Great Reason there is for it, why Magistrates above all other men,
should be Haters of Covetousness, why they should Hate that evil more then any
other evil.

First, Sin that God hates, Therefore should they Hate it: It is a Vice that
God Abhorres, Therefore should they Abhor it: Psalm. 10.3. The wicked boasts
of his hearts desire, and blesses the Covetous whom the Lord Abhors: Does
the Ezr. 5.11.
God of Heaven abhor the Covetous, and shall not the Psalm. 82.6.
gods upon earth abhor to be Covetous?

Secondly, Hate the evil, and to love the good, or else He cannot Establish
Judgment in the Gate, as ye may see from Am. 5.15. Though He is not to hate the
Person of the evil, any where, yet he is to hate the evil of the Person every
where: But he is so far from hating every evil, that he does not so much as
hate any evil, that does not hate Covetousness, for that is so deep, and so
dangerous, and so comprehensive an evil, that it has all evil at the bottom of
it; It is says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.10 Radix excisos semper densius reparat
ramos. Evellenda est ergo radix ne rami superflue excidantur. Hier. in loc.
The root of all Evil. And therefore to be Rev. 14.3.
redeemed from the Earth, and from a 1 Pet. 1.18.
vain Conversation, here below, and to have a Spirit set upon Col. 3.2.
Heavenly things, more then upon Earthly: Support, under all the former
Burdens. And thus ye see, what kind of Spirit that is, which God bestows upon
those whom he does prepare for Government, A Spirit of Wisdom, and of Courage,
and of the Fear of the Lord, and of Truth, and of Heavenly-mindedness:
Magistrates must be men of Understanding, and men of Valor, and men of Truth,
and men that Fear God, and men that Hate Covetousness.

Now for that other Question already propounded, Why No man is any way fit or
able to bear the Burdens that have been mentioned, but He that has such a
Spirit as this, graciously conferred upon him? Reasons of it are Two:

First, Because of the great weakness, Two Reas^ of the Doctrine.
of the Creatures own Spirit: And 2ly. Because of the great and mighty strength
of a Spirit thus underpropped, or sustained, and upheld, by the Spirit of the
living God.

The Creatures own Spirit is so weak, and so feeble, full of sores naturally,
The extre weakness o the Creatu own Spirit
so full of Ignorance and Folly, and Cowardice, and Athiesme, and Hypocrisy,
and Earthly-mindedness, that it is able to bear Nothing, just Nothing at all,
every small and light Burden is too heavy for it.

But the Spirit of God, The invin^ strength o^ Gods Spir^ Placitum D^
necessitas se^ tur volum^^ comitatur ^f^^ ctus. Tho^. B^^dward^^ de^^lau^^ lib.
^. cap.^
has invincible strength in it, and such as cannot possibly be, either ^^a.
31.3^.
resisted, or repelled, or outvyed by all the Power of the creatures, ^^a.
31.3^.
The Horses of Egypt are flesh, and not Spirit, says the Prophet, that was an
Argument of their great weakness, That they were flesh, and not Spirit. And on
the other side, Zach. 4.^.
Who art thou o great Mountain says God? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a
plain, and He shall bring f^rth the head stone of the Building with shootings,
and they shall cry, Grace, Grace unto it: yea, But how shall this be done? Not
by Might, nor by Power, but by my Spirit says the Lord of Hosts; intimating,
That what Created Might and Strength could not do, The Spirit of the Lord alone
was able to effect. Thus then ye see, the Burdens that are upon Magistrates,
the Supports that they have, under those Burdens, and the Necessity of those
Supports.

The Use of this is Threefold: It serves, 1 By way of Information. 2 By way of
Admonition. 3 By way of Direction.


By way of Instruction, Information, This follows from hence, By way of
Information shows us three things.
in the first place, That there is No calling whatsoever, though never so high,
and honorable, but it has it is Burdens; Ever since Romans 5.12.
Sin entered into the world, That no outward calling is unburdensome.
and God said unto man, Genesis 3.19.
In the sweat of thy face, Thou shall eat thy Bread, Eccles. 1.8.
All things are full of labor, from the Sheephook to the Scepter, No calling
unburdensome, The Crowns of Princes are glistering things, but they are many
times lined with Cares, In omni honor est onus, every Dignity has a
Burdensome duty waiting upon it: yea, and the higher, or the more noble, and
excellent any outward Employment is, the greater are it is Burdens, which has
always made, men of Note and Worth, to shun and decline those Places, all that
ever they could, and very unwilling to come at them, as being sensible of their
own great weakness, and insufficiency to bear the Burden of them: Perhaps an
Judge. 9.2.
Abimelech, or an Absalom, or some such worthless fellows as those were, may
covet such Places, and earnestly sue for them, saying as one of them did, 1 Samuel 15.4. Annon eligendi de toto orb orbem judicaturi? Sane huic negotio non
se ingerat rogans. Alius pro alio, alius force et pro se rogat: Pro quo
rogaris, sit suspectus, Qui ipse rogat pro se, jam judicatus est. Nec interest
per se, an per alium quis roget. Bern de. consid. lib. 4. cap. 4.
o that I were made Judge in the Land, that every one that has any Cause or
Suit might come to me: whereas others that know the weight of Magistracy, and
that do withal consider the Burdens that are upon it. They can by no means be
persuaded to buckle with it, until they see A clear call from God and men
inviting them thereunto, and then they dare not but appear, when the great
voice from Heaven says, Rev.
Come up hither, it is an evil modesty to draw back, or to 1 Samuel 1^
hide behind the stuff.

2ly. Let us from hence take notice, The g^ of Go^ that he to any Implo
of the loving kindness and tender mercy of our God, in affording such sweet
Supports, and comfortable Supplies, unto all that are to bear the weight, of
any great Employment, God never lays heavy Burdens upon any, but where he
gives shoulders exactly suitable, or fully proportionable to those Burdens: He
says to all his, that are under any strait or exigence whatsoever, Deu^
The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are mine everlasting Arms: The
God of Wisdom has provided wisdom, and provided courage, and provided the fear
of his Name, and Truth of heart, and Hatred of Covetousness, for every
Magistrate that is of his own choosing, and that has but a mind, to these
heavenly Qualifications, He has laid up all these Joh. 1^
Graces, in his Son, the Mat.
Son of his love, and from thence they are to be issued forth by his Spirit
unto all that stand in need of them, and that do withal unfainedly desire, to be
made partakers of them.

3ly. Ye may from hence learn, How ^ nor the of Lon^ whole mon-W^ of Engl
how to Honor the City of LONDON, and consequently how to Honor the whole
Commonwealth of England, The way lies plainly before you, and it is this, If
there were but a strict Course taken to Seclude the Ignorant, and the Timorous,
and the Profane and the Falsehearted, and the Covetous, from Bearing any
Office: N^
If every Justice of Peace in City and Country had but Jethroes Qualifications,
were they All such as they should be, Able men, and men that fear God, and men
of truth, and men that hate Covetousness, what a blessed Return of things,
should we then see immediately? then indeed, our Isa. 60.17.
Officers would be Peace, and our Exactors Righteousness: upon this Account we
should certainly be the most famous renowned People, that ever the Sun shined
upon.

But ye will say to me perhaps, telling us of such an Vtopian Commonwealth as
this? Alas! where should we have men thus well disposed, or thus highly and
nobly Qualified, either in City or Country, though we should search, and
inquire, never so diligently after them?

To that I Answer Two things, indeed be acknowledged, Men rightly qualified
hard ^o come by.
That men thus qualified, were always very hard to come by; hertofore they were
very choice Commodities, very rare Creatures, and truly so they are still: ^
Ier. time,
In Jeremies time they were so, Jer. 5.1. Run ye too and fro through the
streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places
thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that executes Judgment, And
(...) Ezekiel. time,
that seeks the truth, and I will Pardon it, says the Lord: 'Twas so in
Ezekiels time also, Ez. 22.29, 30. The People of the land have used Oppression,
says God, and exercised Robbery, and have vexed the poor and needy, yea they
have Oppressed the stranger wrongfully, And I sought for a man among them, that
should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the Land, And ^t
all other ^imes.
that I should not destroy it, but I found none: And so at other times, and in
other places: It Is a known story concerning the Cynick that came into the
Market place, Diog. Laert.
at noontide, with a Candle and a Lantern in his hand, And when they asked him
what he made there in that posture? I seek for a man says he: A man! They told
him, there were men enough to be had, for he was in the midst of a crowd of
People; Yea says he, that is true, Homines video, sed virum desidero, Here are
men enough, but here is never A such a man as I would have: very certain it is,
that men of wisdom, and men of courage, and men that fear God, and men of
truth, and men that hate covetousness, as they are the choicest, so they are
the rarest Creatures, in all the whole world.

But 2ly. Though men rightly Qualified were heretofore, and are still,
exceeding hard to come by, yet be not wholly discouraged from entering upon the
work of Reforming those who should be A means, to help Reform others,
Difficultie^ must not di^ hearten fr^ known and necessary ^^ties, rather
quicken t^^ unto.
Do but come as near this Pattern as you can, for the present, and so come up
to it by degrees, by little and little, For in corrupt declining times, it
cannot be expected, That the Isa. 66.8.
Earth should bring forth such a Blessing as this, in one day, or that a Nation
thus blessed, should be born at once: as the Prophet in another case, Do you in
the City here, but begin to the several Counties, in the way of this Mercy,
Longa per p^ cepta via, exempla br^
and see whether they would not follow you, who can tell what a powerful
effect, such a good example from hence might have, upon all the Nations besides.

In the next place, That which has been said, Use f^^ Admoniti^^ to Magistr^^
themselves
may serve by way of Admonition, to Magistrates themselves: Remember I Beseech
you (Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful) the Burdens that are upon you, and
upon others in the same condition with (...) better then themselves, By all
means take heed of impowering such, unless ye mean to ruin all, For (Alas) how
unfit are they to Rule a City, or to Rule in a City, that have no manner of
Power, over their own unruly Spirits, I conclude my Advice to you, as Exo. 18.23
Jethro did his to Moses, If ye shall do all these things, that I have now made
known to you from the Word of Truth, God Commanding you so, Then shall ye be
Able to endure, and All this People shall go to their place in peace.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 9. after the Note out of Aquin. for Act. 5. read Art. 5. Page 10. line
21. for Megiddor, read Megiddo. Page 31. in the Note out of Calvin. for ee.
read ex.


