THE COMPLETE COPYHOLDER.

Wherein is contained a Learned Discourse of the Antiquity and Nature of Manors
and Copy-Holds.

With all things thereto incident,

As.
Surrenders. Presentiments. Admittances. Forfeitures. Customs, etc.
Necessary, both for the Lord and Tenant.

Together, with the form of keeping a Copyhold Court, and Court Baron.

By Sir EDWARD COKE, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes, for W. Cook, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
Furnivalls-Inne Gate in Holborne. 1641.

TO THE READER.
THis Copy coming to my hands, perused, and reverenced by men learned in the
Laws. J thought most worthy of Publication. The very name of the Composer, who
has been an Ornament to our Kingdom, is enough to give it sufficient
authority, and indeere it to every wise opinion. But the profit which does
attend, is most considerable, it being a subject so material, declaring the
Antiquity of Manors and Copyholds; and written for the good of Lords and
Tenants; and by consequence of all men: it cannot but receive a becoming
entertainment. In the confidence of this truth, J refer it to all judicious
perusal, not a little congratulating my own happiness, to have been an
instrument of bringing so excellent a Piece from obscurity, for the benefit of
the Commonwealth.

W. C.

MANORS AND COPY-HOLDS.
SECTION I.
THough a Manor and Copyhold have such mutual respect, and reciprocal
reference one to the other, as that they are almost in nature of Relatives, yet
the knowledge of the one cannot be attained unto, unless the sense of the
other be truly apprehended: for a Manor is as the body, and Copyholds
certain members of this body. In this Treatise I will discourse of them
severally apart, and begin with the Manor it self especially, when common
reason teaches us, that totum magis illustrat parts, quam parts aliquae
illustrant totum.

SEC. II.
THe Saxons (who held England in subjection immediately before the coming of
the Normans) were unacquainted with these Manors, yet in effect they had Manors
in those days in circumstance peradventure something varying in substance,
surely nothing differing from our Manors at this day; they wanted neither
demesnes nor services, the two material causes of a Manor, as Fulbecke terms
them, Fulbecke in his fourth Dicalogue.
their demesnes they termed Inlands, because the Lords kept them in their own
hands, and enjoyed them in their own possession, their Services they termed
Vtlands, because those lands were in the manurance and occupation of certain
Tenants, who in consideration of the profits arising out of these lands, were
bound to perform unto their Lords, certain duties and services: their
Demesnes were of two sorts; and their services likewise were of two sorts.

SEC. III.
ONe sort of their Demesnes was termed Bockland, because they passed by book,
and they in effect differed nothing from our Freehold lands at this day.

SEC. IV.
The Other sort of their Demesnes was termed Folklands, because they passed by
Polls, and were claymed and challenged by the Tenants; not by any assurance in
Writings, but only by the mouth of the people; Per vocem populi, and they in
effect differed in nothing from Copyhold Lands at this day.

SEC. V.
TOuching their Services, one sort of their Services were Servicia libera,
which consisted most commonly in Render, as to pay yearly such a Rent, or in
Vser, as where the Lord reserved Common for his Cattle, or in Prender, as
where the Lord reserved three shillings, and four loads of Estovers for fuel
to be taken yearly in his Tenants grounds.

SEC. VI.
The Other sort of Services, were Servitia villana, which consisted altogether
in Fesance, as to scour the Lords ditches, to tyle his houses, to thatch his
barnes, or such like.

SEC. VII.
ANd in the reservation of these Services, the Lords had a special respect
unto the quality of the Land, did they transfer their Bockelands, hoc est,
Freehold Lands, they would never reserve Villeine Services; did they
transfer their Folk-lands, hoc est, Coppy-hold Lands, they would never
reserve free Services, but still they suited their Services according to the
nature of the Land: the reason I gather was this, in those days none but men
of good account and reckoning enjoyed the said Bock lands, whereas Holblands
were in the hands of men of meaner sort and condition, and therefore had not
the Lords care been extraordinary in reserving apt Service they should have
much wronged their Tenants; Lamb. in his explication of the Saxon word, Terra
ex-scripta.
and thus much Lambert verifieth, saying, Terra ex scripto fuit haereditaria,
libera, at que immunis: terra vero sine scripto officioru^ quadam servitute
f^it obligata: priorem plerum que nobiles atque ingenui, posteriorem vero
rustici feri and pagani possidebant. Lambert terms these Bocklands, Terras
liberas atque immunes, non quod ab omnibus servitiis fuerunt liberae aut
immunes, sed quod tenentes ipsi fuerunt liberi and servitiis tantum liberis
onerati. But I much wonder, why this Bockland does to this day retain the name
of Freehold Land, sithence time has bred such an alteration, that in the
point of Service, a man can scarce discern any difference between Freehold
Lands, and Copyhold Lands. The favorable hand of time has so infranchised
these Copyholders, that whereas in the Saxons time, their Services did consist
wholly in Feasance; now they consist in Render, in Vser, and in Prender: as
Freeholders Services did in those days: And on the other side, time has
dealt so unfavourably with Freeholders, and has so abridged them of their
former freedom; that if you compare the Service of the Freeholders, with the
Service of the Copyholders, Senties hunc potius quam illum fore liberum, How
many Freeholders are there at this day, charged with base Services, as many (I
doubt not) as there are Copyholders? No marvel then that many able men turn
Copyholders, and many Pezants turn Freeholders; no marvel, I say, that men
of all sorts and conditions, promiscuously, both Freeholders and Copyholders,
sithence there is such small respect had unto the quality of the Land in the
reservation of our Services. Yet observe, I pray, though time has so
infranchised these Copyholders, that they have in a manner shaken off all
villain Service; yet they retain a badge of their former bondage, for they
remain still subject to their Lords will; therefore at this day they are
termed Tenants at will: but with Freeholders otherwise it is, for they are not
in that subjection to their Lords; peradventure in this respect only Bocklands
may be termed Freehold Lands, and Folk-land Villain Lands; and yet time has
dealt very favorably with Copyholders in this point of will, as well as in
the point of Service.

SEC. VIII.
Bract lib. 4. Tr. 3. cap 9. numb. 5. Fleta lib. 5. cap 51.
FOr, as I conjecture, in the Saxons time; sure I am, in the Normans time, those
Copyholders were so far subject to the Lords will, that eorum tenentes
tempestive and intempestive pro voluntate Domini possent resumi and revocari,
as Bracton, and Fleta both speak; the Lords upon the least occasion, sometimes
without any color of reason, only upon coffeehouse and malice; sometimes
again upon some sudden fantastic humor, only to make evident to the world,
the height of their power and authority, would expel out of house and home
their poor Copyholders, leaving them helpless and remediless by any course
of Law, and driving them to sue by way of Petition.

SEC. IX.
But now Copyholders stand upon a sure ground, now they weigh not their Lords
displeasure; they shake not at every sudden blast of wind, they eat, drink,
and sleep securely, only having a special care of the mainechance (viz.) to
perform carefully what duties and services soever their Tenure does exact, and
Custom does require; then let Lord frown, the Copyholder cares not, knowing
himself safe, and not within any danger, for if the Lords anger grow to
expulsion, the Law has provided several weapons of remedy; for it is at his
election, either to sue a Subpena or an Action of Trespass against the Lord.
Time has dealt very favorably with Copyholders in diverse respects.

SEC. X.
But I perceive my self rashly running into an inextricable Labyrinth, I will
therefore sail no longer in these unknown coasts, but will hasten homewards,
I will content my selse with this. I know amongst the Saxons th'essentiall
parts of a Manor were known; but whether there then were the same form of
Manors which is at this day, that I dare not examine, for fear of being
accounted more curious than judicious, and therefore leaving the Saxons, I draw
somewhat nearer home, and come to the Normans, from whom we had the very form
of Manors, which is observed amongst us at this present hour.

SEC. XI.
I Confess indeed, that sithence the Original creation of Manors, Time has
brought in some innovations and alterations, as in giving a large freedom unto
Copyholders, both in the nature of their Service, and in the manner of their
Tenure. Yet I may boldly say, that the selfsame form of Manors remain
unaltered in substance, though something altered in circumstance, Demesne
termed in Latin Demanium, Domanium or Dominicum, is taken in a double sense,
proprie, and improprie; proprie, for that Land which is in the Kings own
hands; Chopimus de demonio froute lib. 2.
and the Chopimus says, that Domanium est illud quod consecratum unitum, and
incorporatum est regiae Coronae, take Domanium in this sense, and then you
exclude all common persons from being seized in Dominico: for admit the King
pass over the Demesne Lands, as soon as they come into a common persons
hands, desinunt esse terrae Dominicales; for though the Kings Pattentee, has
the land granted to him, and to his Heirs, yet coming from the King must
necessarily be holden of the King, it is contrary to the nature of Demesne
Lands to be holden of any; therefore though those Lands which commonly are
termed ancient Demesne, viz. such Lands as were quondam in the hands of Edw.
the Confessor, may properly be termed generally ancient Demesne, because they
were in ancient time in the Kings own possession, yet to term them at this
day the Lords Demesnes, or the Tenants Demesnes being severed from the Crown
is improper ca. qua super.

SEC. XII.
THen by this it appears that those lands are termed improprie Demesne, which
are in the hands of an inferior Lord or Tenants, nor can such a one in
propriety of speech be said to stand seized of any Land whatsoever in Dominico
suo, but if you observe narrowly the manner of pleadings, the words are used in
a proper sense, for you shall never find that an inferior Lord or Tenant,
will plead that he is simply seized in Dominico, but still with this addition,
in Dominico suo ut de feodo, and that very aptly, for this word Fee implies
thus much, that his estate is not absolute, but depending upon some superior
Lord: therefore I conclude with the Feudists, that a common person may aptly be
said to stand seized in Feodo, or in Dominico suo ut de seod. but improperly in
Dominico simply; the King e converso may properly be said to stand seized
Dominico simply, but in Feodo improperly, or in Dominico suo ut de feodo.
Bracton divides these Demesne Lands into two branches; under the first are
comprehended those Lands which the Lord injoyeth in his own possession; under
the second, those Lands which are in the hands of the inferior Copyholders:
His words are these, Dominicum dicitur quod quis habet ad mensam suam and
idcirco Anglice vocat. Bordland; Bract. lib. 4. tract. 3. cap. 9. numb. 5.
dicitur etiam Dominicum villinagium quod traditur villanis, quod quis
tempest^ve and intempestive resumere possit, pro voluntate sua and revocare.

SEC. XIII.
Fleta agrees with Bracton in this division, Fleta lib. 5. cap. 5.
and unto these two he adds more sorts of Demesne Lands: His words are these;
Dominicum est multiplex; est autem Dominicum proprie terra ad mensam assignata
and villinagium, quod traditur villanis ad excolendum, quae tempestive, and
intempestive pro voluntate Domimi and poterit revocari sicut est de terra
commissa tenend qua^diu co^missori placuerit: poterit and dici dominicu^ de quo
quis habet liberum tenementum alius usum fruct. and etiam ubi quis habet
liberum tenementum aliter curam de custode dicipoterit and curatore quoru^ unus
dicitur ab homine, alius in jure, Dominicum etiam dicitur ad differentiam ejus
quod tenetur in servitio. Dominicum denique est omne illud tenementum de quo
antecessor obiit sesitus, nec refert, cum usu fructu vel sine, and de quo si
ejectus esset recuperare possit per assisam nove deseisme licet alius haberet
usum fructu^ sicut dici poterit de illis qui tenent in villenagio qui utuntur
and fruuntur non nemine proprio sed nomine domini sui.

SEC. XIV.
THis opinion of Bract. and Fleta, bo h consenting in one, that Copyhold Land
is parcel of the Lords demesnes, wants not modern authority to second it,
for 15. Eliz. in the Excheq. I find it adjudged in the case of a common
person, howsoever it is otherwise in the Kings Case; That if the Lord of a
Manor grants a way, Omnes terras suas dominicales; the Copy holds parcel of
the Manors pass by these general words; neither does this want Reason to
confirm it; for in the time of Henry the 3. and E. 2. when Bract. and Fleta
lived, Copyholders were accounted mere Tenants at will, and therefore after a
sort their Lands reputed to continue still in the Lords hands, and now, though
custom has afforded them a surer foundation to build upon, yet the Francke
Tenement at the common Law, resting in the Lord, it can be no strange thing to
place their lands under the rank of the Lords demesnes. But to deliver my
mind more freely in this point, I think that howsoever, according to the
strict rules of Law, these Copy-holds are parcel of Lands demesnes, yet in
propriety of speech (if propriety can be in impropriety) they are the more
aptly called the Copyholders demesnes; for though the Frank tenement be in
the Lord by the Common Law, yet by the custom, the inheritance abides in the
Copyholders; and it is not denied, if a Copyholder be impleaded in making
title to his Copyhold, he may justly plead, quod est seisitus in Dominico suo,
with this addition, secundum consuetud. Manerii. Therefore I conclude, that
howsoever the Common Law valueth the title of the Copyholder, yet he has such
an interest confirmed unto him by Custom, that the Lord having no power to
resume his Lands at your own pleasure they are (though improperly) called (yet
peradventure truly accounted) the Lords demesnes, and that in the eye of the
world, howsoever it be in the eye of the Law, that these Lands alone can
properly challenge the name of the Lords demesnes (if any Lands in the
possession of inferior Lords, may properly challenge that name) which the Lord
reserveth in his own hands, for the maintenance of his own Board or Table, be
it his waste ground, his arable ground, his pasture ground, or his meadow; be it
his Copyhold which he has by escheate, by forfiture, or by purchase, or be it
any part of his Freehold Land, of which I must speak a word by the way, not to
prove that it is demesne, for manifesta probatione non indigentes, but to show
you in what sense it is taken, and how far it extends.

SEC. XV.
A Freehold is taken in a double sense; either it is named a Freehold in respect
of the state of the Land, or in respect of the state of the Law.

SEC. XVI.
IN respect of the state of the Land, so Copyholders may be Freeholders; for
any that has any estate for his life, or any greater estate in any Land
whatsoever, may in this sense be termed a Freeholder.

SEC. XVII.
IN respect of the state of the Law, and so it is opposed to Copy holders, that
what Land soever is not Copyhold is Freehold, and in this sense I take
throughout this Discourse.

SEC. XVIII.
THe name of Freeholders extends not only unto Lands held per servitium
militare, as it did by the ancient Laws of Scots; Skens. de verb. sign. tit.
milit.
and amongst whom Freeholders were known by the name of milites, but it
reaches likewise to lands holden per servitiu^ Socae, whether in libero
Socagio, or in villano Socagio: Liberum Socagium is, where any Tenant holds of
any Lord by paying yearly a certain sum of money in lieu of tillage, and
such like services, and not by escuage; and this is termed sometimes common
Socage.

Socagium villanum is where the ancient services of carrying the Lords dung
into the fields, Stat. 37 H. 8. Cap. 20. It is so called.
of plowing his ground at certain days, of plashing his hedges, and such are
not turned into money; but remain still unaltered; and if you doubt that such
Land as is held per villanum Socagium cannot come within the compass of
Freehold Land: for your satisfaction, read Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 8. number. 8.
Hactenus de primo defunctionis membro ad secundum properemus and pauca de
servitiis Domino debitis periractemus.

Services in individuo are manifold, in specie threefold. 1. Corporal
services. 2. Annual services. 3. Accidental services.

Corporal services are of two sorts; Services of Submission, services of
Profit.

SEC. XIX.
SErvices of Submission, are homage and fealty, which are certain Ceremonies
used among tenants, whereby they submit themselves unto their Lords, and bind
themselves by solemn oath, or by faithful promise, from that day forward to
become the Lords men for life, for member, for terrene honor, or adminimum, to
owe unto him faith, for the Lands which they hold of him. Both these Ceremonies
are used at the first entrance or admittance of any Tenant, and both tend to
one end, viz. to enforce every Tenant to acknowledge and confess himself
Tenant unto his immediate Lord, yet they differ in many material points.

SEC. XX.
IN regard of their several manner of performance: for in doing fealty, the
Tenant takes a solemn oath, in doing homage only gives his faithful
promise; and thence it is that fealty is accounted the more sacred service,
though homage be the more humble service, and performed with far greater
reverence than fealty in many respects, for in doing homage, the Tenant
kneeleth, in doing fealty he stands; in doing homage, the Tenant must remain
uncovered; in doing fealty, he may remain covered; in doing homage, the Lord
kisseth his Tenant, in doing fealty he kisseth him not. Lastly, in doing
homage, the Tenant promises to become the Lords man for life, for member, and
terrene honor. In doing fealty he only swears to become the Lords faithful
Tenant: the reason of this difference I learn to be this, Skens. de verb.
signum Homage.
because homage especially concerns service in war, and properly
appertains unto Knights service; but fealty chiefly concerns service at
home, and properly appertains to Socage tenure; and though now it is held,
that a Tenant by Socage may do homage, and that homage ex se makes Socage
tenure, and not Knights service; yet originally homage was invented for Tenants
by Knights service, and such as were bound by their tenure to attend their
Lords in the wars; but fealty was primarily devised for Tenants in Socage,
and such as were bound by their tenure to manure the Lords ground, and
carefully to discharge all rural affairs; and this agrees with the ancient
Laws in Scotland, for amongst them none were accounted Freeholders, but only
Tenants by Knights service, and consequently none but they could do homage;
and therefore marvel not why in doing homage, the Tenant promises to become
the Lords man for life, for member, for terrene honor, in doing fealty he
only swears to become the Lords faithful Tenant.

2. They differ in regard of the persons to whom they are performed, and that
two ways. In respect none is capable of receiving homage, but the Lord in
person, but the Lords Steward, or his Bailiffe is capable to receive fealty in
the Lords behalf. 2. In respect that a Lord who has but an estate for his
life in his Seigniory cannot receive homage, but such a Lord may receive fealty.

3. They differ in regard of the persons to whom they are performed, and that
two ways. 1. In respect th t no Copyholder is capable of doing homage, but he
is of doing fealty, witness common experience. 2. In respect that a Tenant for
life or years, is unable to do homage, for it is a ground in Law, that none can
do homage but tenant in fee-simple, or ad minimum, tenant in tail.

SEC. XXI.
But a Tenant for life or years, Brudnal and Yoxley 5. H. 7. The Justices of
the Common Place, 10. H 6. held, that Lessee for years cannot do fealty.
are both able to do fealty, according to Littletons rule, that fealties are
incident to every tenure, except tenures in Franck-almoigne, and tenants at
will, contrary to some erronius opinions, they differ in regard that homage can
be but once done unto one Lord by the same Tenant; and therefore it is agreed,
that if Lands descend unto me, which is holden of I. S. by homage, and I do
unto him homage, and after other Lands descends unto me by another Ancestor,
which is holden of the same Lord by homage, I shall not do homage again, but
fealty only, because I cannot twice become the Lords man; but the selfsame
Tenant may several times do fealty unto the selfsame Lord; and therefore if
a Copyholder surrendreth Whiteacre unto me, for his Whiteacre I should do
fealty unto the Lord. If after another surrendreth unto me Blackeacre, I shall
do fealty likewise unto the same Lord. And thus much for services of
Submission,

SEC. XXII.
SErvices of Profits are of two sorts tending to the public profit of the
Commonweal, as when the Lord injoyneth his Tenant to amend high ways, to
repair decayed bridges, or similia. 2. Tending to the private profit of the
Lord, as where the Tenant is enjoined to be the Lords Carver, Butler, or
Brewer, or is tied to payle the Lords Parkes, to tyle the Lords Houses, to
thatch the Lords Barnes, and similia. And thus much for corporal services.

Annual services are in number infinite, in nature all one, for they all tend
to the increase of the Lords Coffers, and are reserved in their duties, as well
for Copyhold. Land, as Freehold-Land; though in the Saxons time, and long after
the Conquest, they were never, or seldom reserved for Copyhold-Land, but only
for Freehold-Land. I will not enumerate many particulars of annual services,
for that were as endless, as numbering the sands of the Sea; only this I say,
that those annual services which here come within the compass of my meaning,
consist all in Render, none in Feasance, for those annual services, as well as
accidental services, which consist in Feasance, I comprehend under corporal
services; thus leaving both corporal services and annual, I bend my course
toward accidental services, which before I begin to particularize, observe
these two things by the way:

1. That accidental services differ from corporal and annual services in
this, that most accidental services are incident to the Fee, and are due
without special reservation of the Lord; but most corporal services, and all
annual services are due upon special reservation, and are not incident unto
the Fee.

2. That service is taken in a double sense, in strictiori sensu, and in
latiori sensu; In strictiori sensu, and in that sense the Feudists define,
servitium fore munus obsequii clientelario, etc. that duty which the Tenant
owes unto his Lord, either in performing some corporal function, or in
discharging some annual payment. In latiori sensu, and so it signifies any
duty whatsoever accruing unto the Lord, by reason of his Seigniorie; and in
this sense, these accidental services following (which prima facie, may seem
better to rank under the title of jurisdictions, or rather under the name of
the fruits of a Manor) may very fitly be reduced to this kind of services.

The services I aim at, and which I mean to treat of particularly in this
place are these following, 1. Wardships. 2. Herriots. 3. Reliefes. 4.
Amerciaments. 5. Forfeitures. 6. Escheates.


Now touching every one of these apart, and first with Wardships.

SEC. XXII.
VVArshipp. est custodia heredis infra aetatem existentis, Polidore Virgil
says, that this was novi vectigalis genus excogitatum, to help, Hen. 3. being
oppressed with much poverty, by reason he received the Kingdom greatly wasted
by wars of his Ancestors, and therefore needing extraordinary help to uphold
his estate, the use of Wardships was set abroach. But the 33. Chapter of the
grand Customary makes mention of this to have been used among the Normans,
immediately after the erection of Manors, and that the use of Wardships was a
foot before H. the thirds time, as appears manifestly by Glanvil, who
writes very largely in many places in his Book, Fleta. lib. 5. cap. 5.
and lived in H. the seconds time; Guardians are either termed Custodes, or
Curatores, Custodes a lege, curatores ab homine, as Fleta speaks. The
Civilians make three sorts of Guardians, Tutor testamentarius. 2. Tutor
a-Praetore datus. 3. Tutor legittimus: This in every point agrees with our
Common Law, so we have Tutorem testamentarium, viz. where a man possessed of
certain goods and chattells demiseth these unto his child, and withal,
commits the care of his child's body, and disposition of his substance unto
some friend, this committee is Tutor testamentarius, unto whom belongs the
care and custody of the child's body, and the disposition of his substance,
until he accomplish the full age of fourteen years, and then immediately
he shall be out of Ward for his body, but his goods may be kept longer, for as
for them they shall remain in the trustees hands, so many years as the
Testator appointed by his last Will and Testament: for though it be not in the
Fathers power to restrain the liberty of his child's bodylonger then to the
age of 14. yet the disposing of his goods he may commit to any, for as long
time as himself shall think expedient: So by the Stat. 32. and 34. H. 8. If a
man be seized of Socage Lands, not holden of the King in Capite, he may by his
last Will and Testament commit the ordering of Theoglands, to what friend
soever, for as many years as shall seem most convenient, and that friend is
Tutor testamentarius, otherwise it is of Lands holden by Knights service; for
it is not in any man's power by his last Will and Testament, to deprive the Lord
of that duty which, de jure, belongs to him, and therefore if a Copyholder
dies, his heir under the age of fourteen. In regard that this privilege of
appointing the heirs a Guardian for their Copyhold Land, until he accomplish
the age of fourteen, de jure, appertains unto the Lord. It seems that the
father cannot prejudice the Lord in this kind, by appointing him another
Guardian by his last Will and Testament; haec de Tutore testamentario. 2. We
have Tutorem a Praetore datum, viz. where a man devises goods unto his child,
and appoints him not Guardian, then it is in the Ordinaries hand to commit
the ordering of the Infants goods unto some trusty friend, unto the age of
fourteen; at what time the Infant himself may choose a Guardian: for it is a
rule in the Civil Law, Invito curator non datur, and this Committee est Tutor
a Praetore datus. These Guardians termed amongst the Civilians, Tutores a
Praetore dati, are commonly called Guardians, pur nurture; and thus in words we
somewhat differ, in matter nothing. 3. We have Tutorem ligi^t^mum, viz. where
the interest does de jure belong unto any, without the nomination of a private
person, or the appointment of any public Officer: and this Guardian is
twofold, either ligitimus jure naturae, or ligi^imus jure Comuni; ligitimus
jure naturae, as where the Father or the Mother has the Wardship of their
heirs apparent, be it heir male or female: Ligitimus jure comuni; and that
Guardian is twofold, either Guardian in Chivalrie, or Guardian in Soccage;
Guardian in Chivalry is, where any Tenant seized of Land, holden by Knights
service dies, his heir male under the age of fourteen, and unmarried; then
shall the Lord have the Ward, both of the Lands, and body of this heir male,
unto the age of 21. because the Law intends, that before that age, the heir
is unable to perform Knights service, according to the tenure; but the heir
female shall be in Ward, no longer than to the age of sixteen, because the
heir female, though she her self be unable to perform Knights service, yet
at sixteen, she is able to take a husband, who in her behalf may do Knights
service; and therefore at those years she shall be out of Ward; nay,
sometimes she shall be out of Ward before sixteen; and that is either, where
she is married at the death of her Ancestor, or where she is any whit above
fourteen: when her Ancestor dies in neither of these Cases shall she be in
Ward at all; for though the Stat. of W. 1. cap. 11. gives unto the Lord two
years next ensuing the fourteenth, yet that is to be understood, where she is
under the age of fourteen, and unmarried at her Ancestors death, and not
otherwise. This for Guardian in Chivalry. Guardian in Socage, is, where any one
seized of Socage Lands dies, his heir under the age of fourteen, then the
next friend unto the heir, to whom the inheritance cannot descend, shall have
the Ward of the heirs body, and of his Land, until the age of fourteen, as
if the Land descends unto the heir by the fathers side; then the mother, or
next cousin of the mothers side shall have the Ward; and if the Land descends
to the heir by the mothers side, then the father, or next cousin on the fathers
side shall have the Ward. To conclude, observe this difference between
Guardian in Chivalry, and Guardian in Socage, that the^ one receives the
commodities of the Land to his own use, without giving any account; the other
only to the use of the heir, to whom he shall be accountable whenever it
shall please the heir to call him to account after the age of fourteen. Thus
much concerning Wardships; a word concerning Herriots.

SEC. XXIV.
HErriot, or Harriot comes of the Latin word herus, Dominus, because it is a
duty appropriated to the Lord; or it is derived from the Saxon word here
exercitus, because in the Saxons time, when the name of Herriot was first
known, Herrior signified nothing else but a tribute given to the Lord for his
better preparation toward war, as a horse trapped, or a spear, or armor,
or a sword, or some suchlike Military weapon; and therefore in this sense
importing a thing appertaining to the war, and being due unto the Lord, by
reason of this service which Tenants owe unto their Lords, many warlike
employments, Vide Lamb. in h^s explication of Saxons words, tit. Herriot.
it may very fitly be derived from hence: This their Herriot among the Saxons
little differed from our Relief at this day, howsoever now they differ ex
diame^ro: But let us examine the nature of our Her^iots at this day, and not
search into the nature of their Herriots in those days; for that were to
examine the nature of Reliefes not Herriots. Britton thus speaks; A Herriot
is a Render, Britton. cap. 69.
made at the death of a Tenant to his Lord, of the best beast found in the
possession of the Tenant deceased, or of some other, according to the ordinance
and assignment of the party deceased to the use of the Lord, which touches not
the Land at all, nor the heir, nor his inheritance, neither has any
comparison to a Relief, for it proceeds rather of grace and good will, than
of right, and rather from villains, than freemen: to this effect speaks
Fleta, Fleta lib. 4. cap. 28.
Herriottum est quaedam praestatio ubi tenens, liber vel servus in morte sua
dominum suum respicit de meliori averio suo vel de seeundo meliori, quae quidem
praestatio magis, fuit de gratia quam de jure and nullam habet comparationem ad
relevium eo quod heredi non continget quia factum antecessoris.

This our Herriot is twofold; Herriot Service, Herriot Custom; Herriot
Service, is that Herriot which is never due, without special reservation, and
is seldom reserved upon any less estate, than an estate of inheritance.
Herriot Custom, is that Herriot which is never due upon special reservation,
but is challenged upon some particular Custom, and is usually paid upon an
estate for life, and for years, as well as upon an estate of inheritance.
Touching the original of these Herriots, doubtless they are not of that
antiquity which the name does promise, for though among the Saxons, the name of
Herriot was known, yet the nature of both these, Herriot Services, and Herriot
Custom, was utterly unknown, until the coming of the Normans; who
immediately upon the Conquest changed the name of the Saxons Herriot, and
termed it by the name a of Relief, leaving notwithstanding some d^fference
betwixt them, for where the Saxons Herriot, consisted usually in the payment of
some military weapon; our Relief in those days consisted wholly in the
payment of a certain sum of money, and presently after the Normans had thus
wholly altered the name, and somewhat altered the nature of the Saxons Herriot,
then upon the parcelling of their lands unto inferior Tenants, they invented
this new kind of service unknown amongst the Saxons, and termed it by the
name of the Herriot Service, afterward, upon the infranchisement and
manumission of certain villains; these Herriot Customs, were given to the
Lords as a continual, future gratulation: so that originally, as Britton, and
Fleta well note, they were granted merely, ex gratia, but now time has
effected it, that they are challenged, ex debito. Thus much of Herriots; a word
of Relief.

SEC. XXV.
Relief is a certain sum of money which every Freeholder pays unto his
Lord, Gl^^v. lib. 7. cap 9.
being at full age at the death of his Ancestor, which in effect foundeth all
one, with these words of Glanvil, Haeredes majores statim post decessum
antecessorum suorum possunt se tenere in haereditate sua licet Domini possint
feodum suum cum herede in manus suas capere: ita tamen moderate id fleri debet,
ne aliquam disseisinam haeredibus faciant, possunt enim, haeredes si opus
fuerit, violentiae Dominorum resistere, dum tamen parati sunt Relivium
altaretro servitia eis inde facere; with this agrees the definition of
Hotoman, Hotoman Comment. de verbo seod and verbo Relivium.
Relivium est honorarium quod novus vassallus introitus causa patrono largitur
quasi morte usuali altius vel al^o quo casu feodu^ ceciderit quod jam a novo
sublevatur. This relief by the ancient Civil Law was termed Introitus; and
Vincentius terms it Praestantionem seu saluationem factam pro confirmatione
seu renovatione possessionis, and that very aptly: for indeed Relief is the
key, which opens the gate to give the heir free passage to the possession of
his inheritance. Bracton gives this reason why it is called a Relief, Bracton
lib. 2. cap. 86.
Quia haereditas quae jacens fuit per antecessoris decessum Releviatur in manus
haeredis and propter factam relevationem faciend. erit ab haerede quaedam
praestatio quae dicitur Relevium. Skene de verbo signum tit. Relief.
Skene fondly imagines that it takes his name, a relevando, in another sense;
for says he, Relief is given by the Tenant or Vassal, being of perfect age,
after the expiring of the Wardship, to the Lord, of whom he held his Land by
Knights service, it is by Ward and Relief, and by payment thereof he relieves,
and as it were, raises up again his lands after they were fallen down into
his superiors hands; by reason of Wardship. Glanvil lib 9. cap. 9.
But these words of Glanvil will serve to convince him of error; Ta^dam vero
eode^ad aetate^ pervenie^te, and facta e^ haereditutis restitutione quietas
erit a Relivio ratione custodiae: this Relief is twofold. 1. Relief Service.
2. Relief Custom: Relief Service, is that which is paid upon the death of
any Freeholder. Relief Custom, is that which is paid upon the death, change,
or alienation of any Freehold, according to the Custom of the place, in many
places half a years profit, in many places a whole years profit, and
therefore where Bracton says; Quod dat Domino Relevium qui succedit jure
haereditatis, non autem is qui acquirit; that is to be taken with this caution;
nisi illud etiam consuetudine, praestare debet qui acquirit. These Reliefes are
paid, as well for lands-holden in Soccage, as Lands holden by Knights service:
for lands holden in Soccage in this manner. If a Tenant in Soccage die, his
heir above the age of fourteen, then shall the heir double the Rent that his
Ancestors was wo^^ to pay to the Lord, as if the Tenant holds of his Lord by
fealty and five shillings; then shall the heir double the Rent, and shall pay
ten shillings, viz. five shilling^ in the name of a Relief, over and above the
five shillings, which he pays for his Rent. For Lands holden by Knights
service in this manner; if a Tenant by Knights service dies, his heir of full
21. if he holds by an entire Knights Fee, he pays five pound, if by half
a Knights Fee, then he pays fifty shillings, if by a quarter of a Knights
Fee, he pays 25. shillings, and so proportionably, who so holds more,
pays more, and who holds less, pays less; yet for the fuller
apprehension of the quantity of a Relief: let us examine what a Knights Fee
signifies. A knights Fee, is so much land as in ancient time was accounted a
sufficient living for a Knight, but whether this was rated according to the
quantity, or according to the value, Causidici certant, and adhuc sub j^di ce
lis est. Some hold according to the quantity, and that according to the
several computations used in several places. A Knights Fee was either more or
less; as in the Duchy of Lancaster: a Knights Fee contained four hydes of
land, every hyde four carnes of land, every carne four yard lands, every yard
thirty acres; and every Knights Fee 1920. acres. According to other
computations, a Knights Fee contained, 680; but according to most computations,
a Knights Fee contained five hides of land, evey hide four yard lands, every
yard land 24. acres, according to which computation; a Knights Fee contained
480. acres: so that according to several computations, a Knights Fee was more
or less. Others hold, that a Knights Fee was measured according to the
quality, not according to the quantity; according to the value, not according
to the content: and amongst these, some hold that land to the value of fifteen
pound par annum made a Knights Fee; and therefore, Camden in sua Br^tan. page
Camden says, that, Sub Henrich tertio quodammodo coacti fueru^t equites fieri
quot quot libras quindece^ exannuis terrarum redditibus colligarunt; and out of
Matthew Paris, he writes, that anno, 1256. Exit edictum regium preceptumque
est and acclamatum per totum regnum ut qui haberet 16. libratas terrae and
supradict. armis redimitus tirocinio donaretur, ut Anglia, sicut Italia militia
roboraretur, and qui nollent, vel qui non possunt honorem status militaris
sustinere pecunia se redimerent. Others hold, that census ^questris, was fort^e
pound revenue in Freehold land: and of this opinion is Sir Thomas Smith: Smith.
de rep page 31, 32, 33.
others held, that census equestris, was twenty pound revenue; and this
opinion is confirmed by many authorities, and reasons cited in Anth. Lowes
Case, by an ancient Treatise, de modo tenendi Parliamentum tempore Regis
Edwardi filii Etheldred, where it appears, quod comitatus constabat ex
viginti feodis unius militis quolibet feodo computato ad viginti libratas.
Baronia constabat, ex 13. in feodis ac tertia part unius feodi militis
secundum computationem predicta unum feodum militis constabat ex terris ad
valentiam 20. li. and therefore where the Statute of Ed. 2. d^militibus,
provideth that a Knights Living shall be measured by the value of twenty pound
per annum; this is but an affirmance of the Common Law- 2. This is strengthened
by the words of the Statute of W. 1. cap. 36. and by Fitch. Fitch. not.
B^ev^um. fo 62.
this seems something pregnant, for in both these places, Soccage land to the
value of twenty pound par annum, are put in equipage with a Knights Fee. 3. In
a Writ of mesne, brought per Ranulphum de Normanvile petentem versus Luciam de
Kyme tenentem P. 3. E. 1. appears, that twelve carnes of Land made a Knights
Fee, every carne being in ancient time of the value of five nobles per annum;
according to which account, a Knights Fee amounted to twenty pound per annum.
These are the several opinions, touching the quantity of a Knights Fee,
embrace of these, which shall seem most consonant to reason. For my own part,
I think that in the ancient time, a Knights Fee, was measured according to the
number of the acres; but in those days, according to the value of the land:
the reason of this alteration is; that though in ancient time, as well as in
these days, some lands were far more fruitful than others; yet the value of
every quantity of land was certainly rated, according to the Custom of the
places, and never upon any occasion was the land increased or decreased; and
therefore were they to examine whether any man had a sufficient living for a
Knight, they would look no further than to the quantity of his land, for by
the quantity, they could presently judge the value; but now the value is not
certainly rated in any place, but increases and decreaseth upon every
occasion; and therefore reason requires, that in these days a Knights Fee,
should be measured, according to the value, not according to the quantity of
the Land, for by reason of the different value of the land, one man may be
better able to maintain the dignity of a Knight, with two hundred acres in
some place, and of some land, than another with four hundred acres of other
land. But howsoever it is, whether a Knights Fee be rated according to the
value, or according to the quantity let it here rest.

Now give me leave to examine at what time, and by what Law it was first
provided, that for every Knights Fee, the fourth part of a Knights Revenue
should be paid in the name of a Relief, viz. 5. li. for every Barons Fee, the
fourth part of a Barons Revenue, viz. one hundred marks; for every Earls Fee,
the fourth part of an Earls Revenue, viz. one hundred pound; surely Reliefes
were paid in this manner, before the Statute of Magna Charta, Glan vil. lib 9.
cap 9.
and that is somewhat pregnant by this, that by the very words of that Statute.
This Relief is termed Antiquum Relevium; and by Glanvil, who writ before the
making of this Statute, this is some what manifest; for he speaks to this
effect, Dicitur rationabile relevium alicujus juxta consuetudinem regni de
feodo unius militis centum solidos? de Soccagio vero quantum valet, census
illius Soccagii per annum de Boronia vero nihil certum statutum est quia juxta
voluntatem and misricordiam Domini Regis solent Baroniae capital. de relevis
suis Domino Regi satisfacere: from whence I gather, that Statute of Magna
Charta was in part an affirmance of the Common Law, in part an institution of a
new Law.

Touching Relief paid by Knights, it was but an affirmance of the Common Law,
because they were certain before the Statute. Touching Reliefes paid by
Barons, it was an institution of a new Law, because they were before
uncertain; and the reasons why Dukes and Vicounts, are not mentioned in this
Statute, as well as Earls, Barons, and Knights is this, because when that
Statute was made, there was neither Duke, Marquess or Vicount in England. The
first Duke that ever was in England sithence the Conquest, was the Black
Prince, eldest son to Ed. the 3. The first Marquess that ever was in
England, was Robert Earl of Oxford, created by R. 2. and the first Vicount
that ever was in England Dominus de Bello monte, created by H. 6.

But though at the making of this Statute, these dignities were unknown, yet
they are comprehended under the equity of the Statute, and according to their
several dignities shall pay Relief unto the King, a Duke two hundred li. a
Marquess two hundred marks, and so ratably and proportionably. But to
conclude, let us compare Herriots and Reliefes together, and observe in what
they differ.

1. They differ in this, that a Herriot lies in Prender, and a Relief in
Render. 2. In this, that a Herriot is paid in the name of a Tenant deceased;
but a Relief in the name of an heir, who is become Tenant. 3. In this, that
Heriots are paid by Copyholders, as well as Freeholders; but Relief by
Freeholders only. 4. In this, that Herriots are ever due upon a special
reservation, or upon some particular Custom; but Reliefes are incident to the
Fee, and are due without reservation or Custom, contrary to the opinion of
Vincentinus, who holds a Relief extrinsecam fore praestationem and non in
esse feodo. Thus much touching Reliefes, a word touching Amerciaments.

SEC. XXVI.
AMerciament is a Pecuniarie punishment for any offense committed against the
Lord of any Manor, or (as some more at large define it) it is a certain sum
of money imposed upon the Tenant by the Steward by oath, and presentment of the
homage; for the breach of any by Law made, either for the profit of the whole
Kingdom, or for the benefit of the little Commonwealth among themselves, or
for default of doing suit, or for other misdemeanors, punishable by the same
Court, infinite in number and quality; and this word Amerciament takes his
name from being in the Lords mercy, to be punished more or less at his will
and pleasure, and it differs from a Fine in diverse respects.

In that whosoever is fined may lawfully be imprisoned, but whosoever is a
mercied cannot. 2. In this, that Amerciaments are incident unto Court Barons,
as well as unto Court Leets, and Fines are never incident to any Court Barons,
but to Court Leets only, or other Cou ts of Record. 3. That Amerciaments are
incident unto every Manor whatsoever; but Fynes are incident unto some few
Manors only: the reason of this difference is partly grounded upon the former
difference; for sithence Amerciaments are incident unto every Court Baron, and
Court Barons are incident unto every Manor: Sequitur ex consequente, that unto
every Manor amerciaments are incident, but ex adverso, Fines being incident
unto Court Leets only, and those Court Leets being in some few Manors only,
not in every Manor expressly sequitur, that Fines are not incident unto every
Manor, but unto some few Manors only. 4. In this, that Amerciaments are
afferable Per pares, per sacramentum prob^rum and legalium hominu^ de viceneto
qui secundu^ modu^ delicti majori vel minori amerciame^to delinquent. mulctare
possunt: but Fines are never afferable in this kind; for look what Fine
soever the Court imposes upon the delinquent, that binds sufficiently,
without further afferance. Give me but leave to ask two questions, when had
this afferance his first conception or creation? 2. How may Amerciaments in
Court Leets be discerned and distinguished from Fines imposed in the same
Court, since they are both pecuniary punishments for offenses committed?
Touching the first question, I think this Law of afferance was before the
Statute of Magna Charta; Glanv. lib. 1. cap. 11.
for Glanvile thus speaks of it, Est autem misericordia Domini Regis, quo
quis per juramentum legalium hominum de viceneto eatenus amerciandus est ne
aliquid de suo honorabili contenen. amittat; and therefore by this appears,
that this Stat. of Magna Charta, was but an affirmance of the Common Law in
this point of afferance. Touching the second question, know that it is not in
the power of the Court to impose a Fine, or an Amerciament at their election
for any offense committed, but still the quality of the punishment must
necessarily suit with the quality of the offense, from the several natures of
offenses committed, arise the several names of punishments inflicted. The
offenses in respect of the place are twofold, and in respect of the persons
twofold. In respect of the place, offenses committed, extra curiam, of which
the Steward by no common possibility can have cognizance without the
presentment of the homage, and therefore the power of presenting them, and
imposing punishments for them, belongs unto the Jurors of the Leet, and not
unto the Steward; and these punishments thus imposed are termed Amerciaments.
2. Offenses committed in Curia, of which the Steward can take sufficient
notice, without the helping hand of the homage, and therefore the punishments
of these offenses belong unto the Steward, not unto the Jurors, and these
punishments thus imposed are termed Fines. Thus in respect of the place,
offenses are twofold. In respect of the person, they are likewise twofold:
Offenses committed by private persons. 2. Offenses committed by public
Officers, and Ministers of the Court, in the administration of their office,
punishments imposed for offenses of the former rank are termed Amerciaments,
of the latter rank Fines, the one afferable per pares, the other not; and the
reason why the Statute of Magna Charta in this point of afferance, extends
not unto any offenses committed in Court by private Persons, Co. 8. Greislegt.
Cafe.
or public Officers: neither unto any offenses committed extra curiam, by
public Officers in administration of their Office, is this, because though
the words of the Statute are generally extending unto all offenses whatsoever;
yet the intent of the Statute makers was not to make the Jurors Afferors in
omnibus delictis mulctandis, sed in iis tantummodo puniendis quorum certam
possint habere notitiam, Fleta lib. 1. cap. 98.
and intelligentiam, as Fle^a speaks, and therefore sithence the Steward has
more certain notice of offenses committed in curia by what persons soever then
the Jurors have, and can better judge and discern of the natures and qualities
of offenses committed, Extra curiam by public Officers than Jurors can;
therefore surely the intent of this Statute, was to leave the punishment of
these offenses, to the discretion of the Steward, and not the afferance of the
homage. Thus much concerning Amerciaments: a word concerning Forfeitures.

SEC. XXVII.
FOrfeiture comes of the French word Forfaict, scelus, quia scelerum and
delictorum perpetratio est forisfacturarum causa and origo. In our Language it
signifies the effect of transgressing, rather than the transgression it self,
I mean, it signifies the penalty for the offense committed, rather than the
act it self, whereby the offense it self is perpetrated, and it extends
both unto Lands and unto Goods; unto Lands, both Copyhold and Freehold.

Touching the causes from whence springs the forfeiture of Copyhold Lands. I
shall have occasion to speak more liberally in another place, and therefore I
will silently pass them over, speaking some few words touching the causes from
whence Forfeitures of Freehold Land arise.

The causes are many, amongst the which I have observed. 1. That if any
Freeholder alieneth his Land in Mortmaine, he forfeiteth his Freehold. 2. If a
Freeholder cease for the space of two whole years, to perform such
Services, or to pay such Rents, as he is tied unto by his Tenure, and has not
upon his Land sufficient goods or chattels to be distrained, he forfeiteth his
Freehold. 3. If any Freeholder infringeth any condition whereunto he is tied,
he forfeiteth his Freehold.

Touching the causes from whence grow the forfeitures of goods, they are
likewise in number many, and from the several causes of forfeiting, goods
arise several names of goods forfeited. 1. If a Felon steals goods, and upon
pursuit made, waiveth these goods, and leaves them in any part of the Manor,
and be not attached upon the fresh suite of the owner; then are these goods
forfeited to the Lord, and are termed waives. 2. If any beasts are, found
wandering in any place, and be proclaimed in three market Towns adjoining, and
are not claimed by the owner in a year and a day; then are the beasts
forfeited to the Lord, who has such a liberty, and are termed Estrayes. 3. If
any suffer Shipwreck upon the Seas, and through the violence of the Waves,
goods are cast upon the Shore; and being seized by the Bayliffe, are not
claymed within a year and a day after the seizure; then are these goods
forfeited to the Lord, who has that Franchize, and are termed Wrecks. 4. If
one come to a violent end, without the fault of any reasonable creature, then
immediatley that thing which is the cause of that untimely death, becomes
forfeited unto the Lord; and it is termed a Deodand; as this old Verse
testifies; Omnia quae movent ad mortem sunt Deodanda: as if a Horse strikes
his Keeper, and kills him: or if a man drives his Cart, and seeking to
redress it, falls, and the Cart wheel running over him, presses him to
death; or if one felling a tree, gives warning to comers by to look to
themselves, and notwithstanding warning given, some body is slain by the fall
of the tree, the Horse in the first Case; the Cart and the Horses in the second
Case, and the Tree in the third Case, are forfeited to the Lord as Deodands:
many other sorts of forfeited goods I might add unto this, but I will forbear
to enumerate any more in this kind; and to speak more largely of these which I
have already enumerated, for three special reasons;

1. Because they are duties accruing unto the Lord, not merely from the
Tenants, nor solely by the Act of the Tenants, but most commonly from
strangers, and by the sole act of strangers, and therefore I confess are not
aptly ranked under the name of Services. 2. Because a perfect Manor may well
subsist, without their assistance, since they add nothing to the perfection of
the essence of a Manor. 3. because they are not incident unto every Manor, but
into such Manors only as can challenge them, either by special prescription,
or by Patent from the King; for primarily and originally these forfeitures of
goods, belonged to the King for these reasons, especially, because what goods
soever have no certain owner known to challenge interest in them, as waives,
estrayes, and wreckes, the property of such goods belong unto the King,
virtute praerogativae; and thus much Bracton intimates, when he says, Sunt
alia quaedam quae in nullius bonis esse dicuntur sicut wreccum maris, etc. and
aliae res, quae Dominum non habent sicut animalia vagantia, and quae sunt
Domini Regis propter privilegium marium: the reasons why Deodands are forfeited
to the King, is this;

Deodands were originally invented for the pacifying of Gods wrath, and the
appeasing of Gods anger, and these things thus forfeited, were according to the
true intendment of the Law to be sold, and money distributed among the poor;
and therefore upon whom could the Law have better conferred this benefit, or
rather imposed this charge then upon the King, who represents Gods person
upon the earth, and whom the Law presumes will deal more justly, and truly,
nay, more liberally and bountifully with the poor in this kind, than any
inferior Lord, who peradventure out of his uncharitableness, peradventure out
of want, will be so far from adding any thing to that which is due, that he
will rather unjustly substract part, or unconscionably detain the whole.

Since therefore, these Forfeitures of goods neither add to the perfection of
a Manor, neither are incident unto every Manor, to spend any further time about
a subject so superfluous would ill beseem this small Treatise, wherein the
scope and end I aim at, is this, only to present to your view what things
soever are necessarily requisite to the essence of every Manor, and what
Services soever are incident unto every Manor: and thus much concerning
Forfeitures; a word concerning Escheats.

SEC. XXVIII.
EScheates comes of the French word Echear excidere, and are termed
excadentiae, which imports Lands fallen into the Lords hand for want of heir,
general or special to inherit them, but before the Lord enter into an
Escheate in this kind, the homage ought to present it, and being presented
proclamation ought to be made to give notice to the world, that if any man come
in, and justly claim, he shall be received; the homage then finding it clear
entitle the Lord, as to Lands Escheated.

Besides this ordinary sort of Escheate, there is another sort of Escheate, and
that is, where any Freeholder commits Felony, and is attainted, the King
shall have animum diem and vastum; and then it comes unto the Lord as an
Escheate; thus much concerning the nature of Services in general, and there
are so many particular Services in individuo, that I might insist in millions
more, but fear of incurring the censure of being over tedious, restrains the
forwardness of my hand: yet sithence occasion is so favorable to me, I will
presume so much upon your patience, as to lay open the several remedies which
the Law has provided for the obtaining of those several Services before
mentioned, if perchance they be wrongfully deceived by the Tenants; and for
method sake, I will begin with corporal Services.

SEC. XXIX.
IF any Freeholder refuses to do homage, or fealty, which are corporal
Services of submission; or to mend high ways, repair decayed Bridges; or
similia, which are corporal Services, tending to the public profit of the
Commonweal, or to discharge the office of a Carver, a Butler, a Brewer, or
such like; or to payle the Lords Park, to tyle the Lords Houses, or to thatch
his Barnes, or similia; which are corporal Services tending to the private
profit of the Lord; If, I say, any Freeholder refuses to do any of these
Services, being bound unto them by his Tenure; then may the Lord lawfully
distreine his cattle or his goods, and detain them until satisfaction be
given, by performing such Services as the Law does require, and the same remedy
which the Law has provided for Corporal Services, is likewise provided for
Annual Services.

SEC. XXX.
FOr if any Freeholder refuses to pay any annual Rent, or to discharge any
annual payment, according to his Tenure; then may the Lord lawfully distreine
and in a Replevin brought by the Tenant, may avow the distress, and justify
the taking. But no action of debt will lie for these annual Services, no more
than for Corporal Services; for it is a ground in Law, that as long as the
Rent continues of any estate or Frank tenement, no action of debt lies for
the arrearages of the Rent, nor for any other Service whatsoever; and therefore
if a Lease for life be made reserving rent, the Lessor cannot maintain an
action of debt for the arrearages of this Rent, as long as the estate
continues, but presently upon the determination of the estate an action of
debt lies for the arrearages of the Rent incurred before the time of the
determination: but what has the Law provided no other remedy for those annual
Services, then a distress? Surely no, before seisein, none, but after seisein
once gained, it is at his election, either to distreine, or to bring an Assize:
and thus much touching remedies for corporal and annual Services.

SEC. XXXI.
Accidental Services are gotten by many differing means; By seizure only, as
the Wardship of the heirs body together with the Waives, Estraies, Wreckes,
Deodands, and such like forfeitures of goods. 2. By th'entry only, as the
Wardship of the heirs Land, together with Lands forfeited to the Lord, either
upon the breach of some condition, or upon an alienation in Mortmaine. 3. By
Seizure or Distress, as Herriot Services, contrary to the opinion of some who
held them gaineable by Distress only, and not by Seizure, or action, as
Herriot Customs; for upon the eloignement of the best beast, the Lord may
maintain an action of detinue against the heir. 5. By entry, or action as
Lands forfeited to the Lord, by the cessing of his Tenant, or Escheat, accruing
unto the Lord, either upon the attaindeur or death of his Tenant without heir;
in the first, the Lord may enter or maint^ine a Writ of Cessavit; in the
secord, the Lord may enter or maintain a Writ of Escheate. 6. By Distress or
Action, as Reliefes and Amerciaments. For Reliefes the Lord may distreine, or
bring an action of debt; neither does this any whit impugn the former ground,
that as long as the rent does continue, etc. because indeed Relief is the
fruit and approvement of Services rather than any service, and for Amerciaments
the Lord may either distreine or bring an account of debt, other remedy the Law
has provided against strangers, for detaining of these duties from the Lord,
as to insist in one: if a stranger will deraine the Wards body or the Wards
land from the right Lord, a writ de recto de custodia terrae and heraedis lies
against the stranger, but to meddle with strangers were to wander out of the
little Common weal, and therefore to keep my self within my bounds and
limits, I will here conclude, touching the two material causes of a Manor,
viz. Demesnes and Services: a word touching the efficient cause of a Manor, and
then I will end the definition of a Manor.

The efficient cause of a Manor is expressed in these words, of long
continuance, for indeed time is the mother, or rather the nurse of Manors;
time is the soul that gives life unto every Manor, without which a Manor
decays and dies, for it is not the two material causes of a Manor, but the
efficient cause (knitting and uniting together those two materialll causes)
that makes a Manor. Hence it is that the King himself cannot create a perfect
Manor at this day, for such things as receive their perfection by the
continuance of time, come not within the compass of a Kings Prerogative, and
therefore the King cannot grant Freehold to hold by Copy, neither can the King
create any new custom, nor do any thing that amounts to the creation of a
new custom, and therefore a composition made between the King and his Tenant,
where he has Herriot custom to pay 10. li. in Levy thereof every time it
falls, is no binding composition: for this amounts to the creation of a new
custom. Et haec omnia and similia sunt temporum non regum seu principum opera,
which fully verifieth the old saying, Plus valet vulgaris consuetudo quam
regalis concessio, this is the sole cause why the King cannot create a perfect
Manor at this day, and this is the chief cause why a common person cannot
create a perfect Manor, but not the sole cause; for there is this cause
farther, a perfect Manor cannot subsist without a perfect tenure, between very
Lord and very Tenant: but a Common person cannot create a perfect tenure, and
consequently cannot create a perfect Manor, before the Stat. of Quia emptores
terrarum, if any Tenant seized of Land in Fee simple had infeoffed a stranger,
he might have reserved what services he thought fit, or had he reserved no
services, yet the Law would have employed a perfect tenure, between the
Feoffor and the Feoffee, for the Feoffee was to hold off the Feoffor by the
same services, that the Feoffor held over on his Lord Paramount, but since this
Statute, If a Tenant seized of Land in Fee, infeoffeth a stranger neither by
the express reservation of the Feoffor, nor by the employed reservation of the
Law, can there be a perfect tenure created at this day between the Feoffor
and the Feoffee; for the Feoffee shall hold immediately of the Lord Paramount
not of the Feoffor, and further, as the King can do nothing which amounts to
the creation of a new custom: so a common person can do nothing which
amounts to the creation of a new tenure, and therefore if there be Lord and
Tenant by 10. s. rent, and the Lord will confirm the estate of a Tenant
Tenend. by a Hawke, a pair of gilt spurs, a Rose or similia, this is a void
confirmation; otherwise had it been if the Lord had confirmed the estate of
the Tenant Tenendum per 5. s. that had been a good confirmation, because it
tends only to the abridgement of an old tenure, and not to the creation of a
new, and as it is with a confirmation, so it is with a composition upon the
reason of this ground, it is, that if the Lord of a Manor purchase foreign
land lying without the Precincts and bounds of the Manor he cannot annex this
unto the Manor though the Tenants be willing to do their Services, for this
amounts to the creation of a new tenure, which cannot be effected at this
day; And therefore if a man having two Manors, and the Lord would willingly
have the Tenants of both these Manors to do their suit and service to one
Court, this is but lost labor in the Lord to practice any such union; for
notwithstanding this union they will be still two in Nature, howsoever the Lord
covet to make them one in Name, and the one Manor has no warrant to call the
Tenants to the other Manor, but every act done in the one to punish the
offenders in the other is traversable; yet if the Tenants will voluntary submit
themselves to such an innovation, and the same be continued without
contradiction, time may make this union perfect, and of two distinct Manors in
nature, make one in name and use: and such Manors peradventure there are thus
united by the consent of the Tenants and continuance of time, but the Lords
power of it self is not sufficient to make any such union, causa qua supra,
But if one Manor holds of another, by way of Escheate these two Manors may be
united together, fortior enim est dispos^tio legis quam hominis. But in this,
that I exclude common persons from being able to create a tenure, I may seem
to impugn many authorities which hold at this day, that a tenure may be
created by a common person, for to clear this color of contradiction, know
that tenures are two fold. First imperfect, as where a man makes a Lease for
years or for life, or a gift in tail, here is an imperfect tenure between
the Lesson and the Lessee, the Donor and the Donee; and this imperfect tenure I
confess may be created by a common person at this day. Secondly, perfect
between very Lord and very tenant in Fee, and such a tenure a common person
could never create since the Stat. of Quia Emptores terrarum, and consequently
a common person cannot create a perfect Manor sithence, for without a perfect
tenure a perfect Manor cannot subsist. Thus much touching the definition of a
Manor, thus much I say touching the two material causes, together with the
efficient cause. A word of another cause of a Manor which appears not in the
defini^ion so manifestly as the other causes do, this is a cause which among
the Logicians is termed, Causa sine qua non, and that is a Court Baron; for
indeed that is the chief prop and Pillar of a Manor, which no sooner fails
but the Manor falls to ground: if we labor to search out the antiquity of
these Court Barons, we shall find them as ancient as Manors themselves. For
when the ancient Kings of this Realm, who had all the lands of England in
Demesne did confer great quantities of land upon some great personages, Vide
Lamb in his explication of Saxon words verbo Thanus. Bacon in his elements of
the Law. fol. 41. 42. 43.
with liberty to parcel the land out to other inferior Tenants, reserving
such duties and Services as they thought convenient, and to keep Courts where
they might redress misdemeanors within their Precincts; punish offenses
committed by their Tenants, and deside and debate controversies arising within
their jurisdiction; and their Courts were termed Court Barons, because in
ancient time such personages were called Barons, and came to the Parliament,
and sat in the upper house; but when time had wrought such an alteration, that
Manors fell into the hands of mean men, and such as were far unworthy of so
high a calling: then it grew to a custom that none but such as the King would
should come to the Parliament, such as the King for their extraordinary
wisdom or quality thought good to call by writ, which writ, ran hac vice
tan^um, yet though Lords of Manors lost their names of Barons, and were
deprived of that dignity which was inherent to their names, yet their Courts
retain still the name of Court Barons, because they were originally erected,
for such personages as were Barons; neither has time been so injurious as to
eradicate the whole memory of their ancient dignity, in their name there is
stamps left of their nobility, for they are still entitled by the name of
Lords. These Courts differ from Court Leets in diverse respects: In this, that
Court Barons by the Law may be kept once every three weeks, or (as some
think) as often as it shall please the Lord, though for the better ease both
of Lords and Tenants, they are kept but very seldom; but a Court Leete by the
Statute of magna Charta is to be kept but twice every year; one time within
the month after Easter, Magna Charta C. 35. 31. E. 3. Ca. 15.
and another time within a month after Michal. 2. In this, that Court Barons
may be kept in any place within the Manor, (contrary to the opinion of Brian.)
But a Court Leete by the Statute of Magna Charta, is to be kept in certo loco
ac determinato, within the Precinct. 3. In this, that originally Court Barons
belonged unto inferior Lords of Manors, but Court Leets originally belonged
unto the King. 4. In this, that Court Barons are incident unto e^^^y Manor, so
that every Lord of a Manor may keep a Court Baron, but few have Leets; for
inferior Lords of Manors cannot keep Court Leetes without special
prescription, or some special Patent from the King. 5. In this, that in Court
Barons the suitors are Judges, but in Court Leets the Steward is Judge. 6. In
this, that in Court Barons the Iewrie consists oftentimes of less than
twelve, in Court Leets never; the reason of that is, because none are
impanelled upon the Iewrie but Freeholders, in Court Barons of the same Manor,
but in Court Leets strangers are oftentimes impanelled. 7. In this, that Court
Barons cannot subsist without two suitors adminimum but Court Leets can well
subsist without any suitors. 8. In this, that Court Barons enquire of no
offenses committed against the King, but Court Leetes inquire of all offenses,
under High Treason committed against the Crown and dignity of the King. In
many other respects they differ, as that a writ of error, lies upon a
judgment given in a Court Leete, but not in a Court Baron. So in a Court Leete
a Capias lies, but in a Court Baron in stead of a Capias is used an
Attachment by goods; So in a Court Baron; an action of debt lies for the Lord
himself, because the suitors are Judges, but in a Court Leete the Lord cannot
maintain any action for himself, because the Steward is Judge; but omitting
these with many more, I come to the Etymology of a Manor. Some derive the word
Manor a manendo, and then it takes his name either from the Manor-house which
the Lord makes his dwelling place, or else a manendo quia Dominus ac tenentes
in Manerii sui circuit cohabitant ac manent. Some think it is termed Manor from
manuring the ground, and then it takes its name either from the Lords
Demesnes, which the Tenants are bound to Manure, or else from the Land
remaining in the Tenants hands, which are likewise tilled and manured; others
are of opinion that it is derived of the French word mesner, which signifies
to govern or guide, because the Lord of a Manor has the guiding and directing
of all his Tenants within the limits of his jurisdiction, and this I hold the
most probable Etymology and most agreeing with the nature of a Manor: for a
Manor in these days signifies the jurisdiction and royalty incorporate,
rather than the Land or Site; Thus much touching the Etymology. A word
touching the division of a Manor; A Manor is twofold, re and nomine: 2. Nomine
tantum, re and nomine, as where the two material causes of a Manor, the
efficient cause, and causa sine qua non, do meet and join together, nomine
tantum, as where any of these causes is wanting, as to insist in the two
material causes, if the Lord will transfer over to some stranger the
services of all his Tenants, and reserve unto himself the Demesnes; or if he
will pass away the Demesnes, and reserve the services: in both causes the Lord
peradventure has a Manor, nomine but not otherwise, because in the one cause
he wants Demesnes, in the other services. So if a Manor discendeth to
Co-parteners and they make partition, and the entire Demesnes are allotted to
the one and the entire services to the other, the Manor is now in suspense, for
neither of them has any Manor but in name only: but if part of the Demesnes
and part of the Services be allotted to each one, then have they each of them a
Manor, not nomine tantum, but re and nomine. To insist in the efficient causes,
If the King at this day will grant a great quantity of land to any Subject,
injoyning him certain duties and services, and withal wills that this
should bear the name of a Manor, howsoever this may chance to gain the name
of a Manor, yet it will not be a Manor in the estimation of the law; to insist
in this cause, sine qua non, If the King grant away a Manor to I. S. excepting
the Courts and perquisites, the Grantee has a Manor in name only: So if all
the Freeholders dye but one, if the Lord purchase all the Freeholders land, or
pass away the Services of the Freeholders, or release unto his Freeholders all
their services, notwithstanding the Demesnes and the Services of the
Copiholders, yet the Lord has but a Manor in name, because the Freeholders are
wanting which are the maintainers and upholders of the Court Baron, and
consequently necessary help to the perfection of a Manor. So if the Lord
grants away the inheritance of all his Copyholders, or demiseth all his lands
granted by Copy to another for 2000. years, the Grantee in the one case and
the lessee in the other, have a kind of Seigniority in gross, and may keep a
Customary Court, where the Steward shall be Judge, and shall take surrenders,
and make admittances; and this in the eye of the world is a Manor, though in
the judgment of the law it comes far short of one. Thus much touching the
division of a Manor. I might here handle many collateral jurisdictions,
appropriated to Lords of Manors, as that our erecting Dove-houses, of proving
the Wills of their Tenants deceased within their Precincts in many places; of
enclosing Common, leaving sufficient besides for the other Commoners, with many
of the like; Sed haec lubens libensque omitio. And thus closing up this part of
my Treatise touching Manors. I come to the other part touching Copyhold.

SEC. XXXII.
INeede not stand to discourse at large th'antiquitie of the Copyholders; for
if you cast your eye back to that is past, you shall easily perceive that
Copyholders, though very meanly descended, yet they come of an ancient house;
and therefore if in this point you desire satisfaction, call to mind what I
have already spoken; and (if I mistake not) it will sufficiently answer your
desire. Give me leave to go a step further, and to examine the several
names which Copyholders have had from time to time allotted unto them,
together, with their proper Etymologies immediately upon the Conquest: they were
known by the name of Villains or Tenants in Villanage; so termed by the
Normans, either in respect of Imbecility and incertainty of their estates,
which were grounded upon a very weak foundation, wholly depending upon the
will of the Lord, and Oustable at his pleasure; or in respect of their
Services, which savoured of nothing but slavery, whether they were, certa ac
determinata, or incerta ac indeterminata, ubi sciri non poterit vespere, quale
servitium facere deberent in Crastino, as Bracton speaks; contrary to the
opinion of some, who hold, that the Service of Copiholders were never subject
to such incertainties: or lastly, in respect of the persons, who for the most
part were Villains; howsoever some free men did sometimes hold Land by the
same Tenure: the least of these three reasons is sufficient to make them
deserve that name, but join them together, and then he that judges most
favorably of them, will think this the truest title that could be bestowed
upon them, yet some there are, who in behalf of these Tenants, stick not to
maintain (howsoever in respect of their estates, they may not unfitly be
termed Tenants in Villanage, being in such strange subjection to their Lords)
that neither in respect of their Services, nor their Persons they could merit
that name; especially if we take the word in that reproachful sense that it is
usually taken in at this hour. But if we account those villain Services
which any way touch Husbandry, as Plowing, Sowing, Reaping, and such like; and
these men villains, who exercise themselves in any point of Husbandry, then
they agrue, that their Tenure could in no wise have an apter term than this;
for they confess, that these Copyholders were for the most part, Rustici and
Pagani, and their Services whol^y, ad Rusticitatem tendentia: Howsoever, I dare
not wholly disallow of this opinion, though I cannot altogether approve of it,
for I admit, and in a manner consent, that amongst the Normans, these Services,
which we call Rural Services, were called villain Services; and those men
whom we term Husbandmen were termed Villains; and do hold that the Copyhold
Services in those days were more slavish, than Rural; and they themselves
rather Bondmen, than Husbandmen; otherwise we should make their Tenure differ
in nothing from ancient Soccage Tenure, which I assure my self is otherwise:
for though Soccagres were Rustiques, and in that sense Villains; yet their
Tenure was never noted by the name of a Tenure in Villenage, till in many
places their Corporal Services begun to be turned into money: then for
distinction sake, the one began to be called Liberum Soccagium; the other,
Villanium Soccagium. But long before these Coppiholders, were termed Villeynes,
and therefore without all doubt their Tenure was in baseness and slavery, a
degree above the ancient Soccage Tenure; till at length the Lords of Manors
being framed to more civility, began then to think it a most uncharitable part
to keep their poor Tenants in that bondage; therefore out of the remorse of
their own consciences, and the compassion of their Tenants miseries, by little
and little, they infranchised them, and released them of their heavier
burdens, reserving Services of another nature in liew of them. Thus having
shaken off the fetters of their bondage, they were presently freed of their
opprobrious name, and had other new gentle styles, and titles conferred upon
them; they were every where then called Tenants by Copy of Court Roll, or
Tenan^s at will, according to the Custom of the Manor: which styles import
unto us three things. 1. Nomen. 2. Originem. 3. Titulum. His name is Tenant by
Copy of Court Ro^e; for he is not called Tenant by Court-Role, but by Copy of
Court-Roll; and this is the sole Tenant in Law, who holds by Copy of any
Record, Charter, Deed, or any other thing. 2. His commencement is at the will
of the Lord. For these Tenants in their birth, as well as the Customary Tenants
upon the borders of Scotland, who have the name of Tenant; were mere Tenants
at will: and though they keep the Customs inviolated, yet the Lord might,
sans control, eject them: neither was their estate hereditarie, in the
beginning; as appears by Britton: Britton Ca. 66.
for if they died, their estate was presently determined, as in case of a
Tenant at will at common Law; and in some points, to this present hour, the
Law regards them no more, than a mere Tenant at will; for the Freehold at
the Common Law, rests not in them, but in their Lords; unless it be in
Copyholds of Frank Tenure, which are most usual in ancient Demesne; though
sometimes out of ancient Demesne, we shall meet with the like sort of
Copyholds, as in Northamton-Shire, there are Tenants which hold by Copy of
Court-Roll, and have no other evidence, and yet hold not at the will of the
Lord. These kind of Copyholders have the Frank Tenure in them, and it is not
in their Lords, as in case of Copyholds in base Tenure. Besides, Copyholders
shall not attourne upon the granting away of the Manor, no more than Tenants at
will at the Common Law; and their estate can be no infranchisement to a
villain, no more then a mere estate at will. And further, their Lands are
parcel of the Lords Demesnes, as well as Lands granted away at Will, according
to the course of the Common Law; and for his Title and Assurance, that is
according to the Custom of the Manor: For the Custom of the Manor has so
established, and so fixed them in their Land, that if they do their Services
and Duties, and perform the Customs of the Manor, they are as well
inheritable, according to the Custom, as he that has a Franck Tenement at the
Common Law: and sithence Custom is the life and soul of Copyhold Estates, and
whatsoever shall, or can be spoken touching Copyholds, arises from this Head,
and from this Fountain; Give me leave in the second place to speak something
concerning them.

SEC. XXXIII.
Customs are defined to be a Law, or Right not written, which being
established by long use, and the consent of our Ancestors, has been, and is
daily practiced.

Custom, Prescription, and Usage; howsoever there be correspondencie amongst
them, and dependancie one on the other, Custom, Prescription, and Usage, how
they differ.
and in common speech, one of them is taken for another, yet they are three
distinct things; Custom and Prescription differ in this. 1. Custom cannot
have any commencement since the memory of man, but a Prescription may, both by
the Comon-Law, and the Civil: and therefore where the Statute. 1. H. 8. says,
that all actions popular, must be brought within three years after the offense
commi ted; whosoever offends against this Statute, and does escape uncalled
for three years, he may be justly said to prescribe an immunity against any
such action. 2. A Custom touches many men in general; Prescription, this, or
that man in particular: and that is the reason why Prescription is personal,
and is always made in the name of some person certain, and his Ancestors, or
those whose estate he has; but a Custom having no person certain in whose
name to prescribe, is therefore called and alleged after this manner. In such
a Borough, in such a Manor, there is this or that Custom. And for Usage, that
is the efficient cause, or rather, the life of both; for Custom and
Prescription lose their being if Usage fail. Should I go about to make a
Catalogue of several Customs, I should with Sisiphus saxum volvere, undertake
an endless piece of work, therefore I will forbear, since the relation would
be an argument of great curiosity, and a task of great difficulty: I will
only set down a brief distinction of Customs, and leave the particulars to
your own observation. Customs are either general or particular; general,
which are part of the Common law, being current through the whole
Commonwealth, and used in every County, every City, every Town, and every
Manor. Particular, which are confined to shorter bounds and limits, and have
not such choice of fields to walk in, as general Customs have. These
particular Customs are of two sorts, either disallowing what general Customs
do allow, or allowing what general Customs do disallow, as for example
sake. By the general Customs of Manors it is in the Copiholders power to sell
to whom he pleases, but by a particular Custom used in some places, the
Copyholder before he can enforce his Lord to admit any one to his Copihold, is
to make a proffer to the next of the blood, or to the next of his Neighbors ab
orient solis, who giving as much as the party to whom the Surrender was made,
should have it: so on the other side by the general Customs of Manors, the
passing away of Copyhold land by deed for more than for one year without
license is not warranted; yet some particular customs in some Manors do it:
so by the general Customs of Manors Presentiments, or any other act done in
the Leete, after the month expired, contrary to the Statute of magna Charta,
and 31. E 3. are void, yet by some particular Customs such acts are good, and
so in millions of the like, as in the sequel of this discourse shall be made
manifest. And therefore, not to insist any longer in dilucidating this point,
let us in few words learn the way how to examine the validity of a Custom:
For our direction in this business, we shall do well to observe these six
Rules, which will serve us for exact trial. 1. Customs and Prescriptions
ought to be reasonable, and therefore a Custom that no Tenant of the Manor
shall put in his Chattell to use his common in Campis seminatis: after the
Corn severed, until the Lord have put in his Chattell, is a void Custom,
because unreasonable, for peradventure the Lord will never put in his Chattell,
and then the Tenants shall lose their profits: so if the Lord will prescribe
that he has such a Custom within his Manor, that if any man's beasts be taken
by him upon his Demesnes damage Fesant, that he may detain them until the
owners of the beasts give him such recompense for his harms as he himself
shall request; this is an unreasonable Custom, for no man ought to be his own
Judge. 2. Customs and Prescriptions ought to be according to common right, and
therefore if the Lord will prescribe to have of every Copyholder belonging to
his Manor, for every Court he keeps, a certain sum of money, this is a
void prescription, because it is not according to common Right, for he ought
for Justice sake to do it Gratis; but if the Lord prescribe to have a certain
Fee of his Tenants, for keeping an extraordinary Court, which is purchased
only for the benefit of some particular Tenants, to take up their Copyholds
and such like; this is a good prescription, and according to common right. 3.
They ought to be upon good consideration, and therefore if the Lord will
prescribe that whosoever passes through the Kings High way which lies through
his Manor, should pay him a penny for passing, this prescription is void,
because it is not upon a good consideration; but if he will prescribe to have
a penny of every one that passes over such a bridge within his Manor, which
bridge the Lord does use to repair, this is a good prescription and upon a
good consideration. So if the Lord will prescribe to have a fine at the
marriage of his Copyholder, in which Manor the custom does admit the husband
to be Tenant by the courtesy, or the feme Tenant in Dower of a Copyhold, this
prescription is good and upon a good consideration; but in such Manors where
these estates are not allowed, the Law is otherwise. 4. They ought to be
compulsary, and therefore if the Lord will prescribe that every Copyholder
ought to give him so much every month to bear his charges in time of war,
this prescription is void; but to prescribe they ought to pay so much money for
that purpose is a good prescription, for a payment is compulsary, but a gift is
Arbitrary at the voluntary liberty of the giver. 5. They ought to be certain;
and therefore if the Lord will prescribe that whenever any of his Copyholders
dye without heir, that then another of the Copyholders shall hold the same
lands for the year following, this prescription is void., for the incertainty;
but if the Lord will prescribe to have of his Copyholders, 2. d. an Acre Rent,
in time of war four pence an Acre, this prescription is certain enough. 6.
They ought to be beneficial to them that allege the prescription; and
therefore if the Lord prescribes that the custom has always been within
the Manor, that what distress soever is taken within his Manor for any common
persons cause, is to be impounded for a certain time within his pound; this is
no good prescription, for the Lord is hereby to receive a charge and no
commodity: but if the prescription goes further, that the Lord should have
for every beast so impounded a certain sum of money, this is a good
prescription. If we desire to be more fully satisfied in the general knowledge
of prescriptions and Customs, we shall find many Maxims which make very
material for this purpose, amongst which I have made choice of these three, as
most worthy of your observation. 1. Things gained by matter of Record only,
cannot be challenged by prescription, and therefore no Lord of a Manor can
prescribe to have fellons goods, fugitives goods, D^odands and such like;
because they cannot be forfeited until it appear of Record: but waves,
estraies, wreckes and such like may be challenged by prescription, because they
are gained by usage without matter of Record. 2. A custom never extends to a
thing newly created, and therefore if a Rent be granted out of Gavelkind-land,
or Land in Borough-English, the rent shall descend, acorcording to the course
of the Common Law, not according to the Custom. If before the Statute 32. H.
8. Lands were deviseable in any Borough, or City by special Custom; A Rent
granted out of these Lands was not deviseable by the same Custom; for what
things soever have their beginning, since the memory of man, Custom maintains
not. If there be a Custom within a Manor, that for every house or cottage two
shillings fine shall be paid, if any Tenant within these liberties makes two
houses of one, or builds a new house, he shall not pay a fine for any of
these new houses; for the Custom only extends to the old. So if I have
Estovers appendant to my house, and I build a new house, I shall not have
Estovers for this new built house upon this ground. It has been doubted, if a
man by Prescription has course of water to his Fulling-mill, he converting
these into Corne-mills, whether by this conversion the Prescription is not
destroyed, in regard that these Come-mills are things newly created; but
because the quality of the thing, and not the substance is altered; therefore
this alteration is held insufficient to overthrow the Prescription; for if a
man by Prescription has Estovers to his house, although they alter the Rooms
and Chambers in the house, as by making a Parlor where there was a Hall, vele
converso, yet the Prescription stands still in force: and so if by Prescription
I have an ancient Window to my Hall, and I convert this into a Parlor, yet my
neighbors upon this change cannot stop my Window; Causa qua supra. 3.
Customs are likewise taken strictly, though not always literally. There is a
Custom in London, that Citizens and Freemen may devise in Mortmayne. A Citizen
that is a Forreiner, cannot devise by this Custom. An Infant by the Custom of
Gavelkind, at the age of fifteen, may make a Feoffment; yet he cannot by the
Custom make a Will at that age to pass away his Land; to make a Lease, and a
Release, which amounts to a Feoffment. If there be any Custom that
Copyhold-Lands may be leased by the Lord, vel per Supervisor. vel deputatum
supervisoris: This Custom gives not power to the Lord, to authorize any by
his last Will and Testament, to keep a Court in their own name, and to make
Leases, Secundum consuetudinem Manerii: but these Customs have this strict
construction, because they tend to the derogation of the Common Law; yet they
are not to be confined to literal interpretation; for if there be a Custom
within any Manor, that Copyhold Lands may be granted in Feodo simplici, by the
same Custom they are grantable to one, and the heirs of his body, for life,
for years, or any other estate whatsoever; because, Cui licet quod majus, non
debet quod minus est non licere; so if there be a Custom that Copyhold Lands,
may be granted for life; by the same Custom they may be granted, Durante
viduitate, but not e converso, because an estate during Widdowhood, is less
than an estate for life. Before the Statute of 32. H. 8. Lands in certain
Boroughs were devisable by Custom. By the same Custom was implicit
warranted, authorizing Executors to sell Lands devisable. Now with your
patience, I will only point at the manner of pleading of Customs, I find a
fourfold kind of Prescribing.

1. To prescribe in his Predecessors, as in himself, and all those whose
estate he has.

2. To prescribe generally, not tying his Prescription to place, or person, as
where a Chief Justice prescribes, that it has been used, that every Chief
Justice may grant Offices; or where a Sergeant prescribes, Quod talis habetur
consuetudo, that Sergeants ought to be impleaded by original Writ, and not by
Bill.

3. To Prescribe in a place certain.

4. To Prescribe in the place of another.

The first sort of these Prescriptions, a Copyholder cannot use, in regard of
the imbecility of his estate; for no man can Prescribe in that manner, but
only Tenants in Fee simple at the Common Law.

The second sort of these may be used sometimes by Copyholders in the pleading
of a general Custom, but in alleging of a particular Custom, a Copyholder
is driven to one of the last, and as occasion serves, he uses sometimes the
one, sometimes the other. If he be to claim Common, or other profit in the
soil of the Lord, then he cannot prescribe in the name of the Lord, for the
Lord cannot prescribe to have Common or other profit in his own soil; but
then the Copyholder must of necessity prescribe in a place certain, and
allege, that within such a Manor, there is such a Custom, that all the
Tenants within that Manor, have used to have Common in such a place, parcel of
the Manor: but if he be to claim Common, or other profit in the soil of a
stranger, then he ought to prescribe in the name of his Lord, saying, that the
Lord of the Manor, and all his Ancestors, and all those whose estate he has,
were wont to have a Common in such a place for himself, and his Tenants at
will, etc.

SEC. XXXIV.
THus much of Customs. I come now home to Copyholders: and in the third place
I hold it the best course to dilate upon the manner and means of granting
Copyholds; wherein I will only rely upon these five parts.

1. Upon the person of the Grantor. 2. Upon the person of the Grantee. 3. Upon
the Grant it self. 4. Upon the thing Granted. 5. Upon the Instruments, through
whose hands, as through Conduit-pipes, the Lands are Gradatim, conveyed to the
Purchasor.
And first, of the person of the Grantor. Sometimes the Lord himself is
Grantor; sometimes a Copyholder. In voluntary Grants made by the Lord himself,
the Law neither respects the quality of his Person, nor the quantity of his
Estate; for be he an Infant, and so through the tenderness of his age,
insufficient to dispose of any Land at the Common Law, or non compos mentis, an
Idiot, or a Lunatique; and so for want of common reason, unable to traffic in
the world; or an Outlaw in any personal action, and so excluded from the
protection of the Law; or an Excommunicate, etc. and so restrained, ab omnium
fidelium communione, or at least, a Sacramentorum partitipatione:
notwithstanding these infirmities and disabilities, yet he is capable enough to
make a voluntary grant by Copy, for if a feme seignioresse take Baron, and they
two join in a voluntary Grant by Copy, this shall ever bind the Feme and her
heirs, and yet she is not sui juris, but sub potestate viri, because the
Custom of the Manor is the chief basis, upon which stands the whole fabric
of the Copyhold estate, and therefore what Custom does confirm to a
Copyholder, the Law will ever allow, and never seek to avoid it, in respect of
any such imperfection in the Grantors persons, and the quantity of the Lords
estate is no more respected than the quality of his person: for if his
interest be lawful, be his estate never so great, or never so little it is not
material; for be it in Fee, or be it in tail or dower, or as Tenant by
courtesy, for life or for years, as Guardian, or as Tenant by Statute, or as
Tenant by Elegit, or at will; the least of these estates, is a sufficient
warrant to the Lord, to Grant any Copyhold esheated unto him: for as long time
as the Custom does allow; the ancient Rents and Services, being truly
reserved, and these Grants shall ever bind them that have the Inheritance, or
Franck-Tenement of the Manor, as well as offices granted for life, by the
chief Justice of the Common Pleas, whose office is but at will, shall ever
conclude the succeeding Justice. The reason of the Law is this. A Copyholder
upon voluntary Grants made by Copy, does not derive his estate out of the Lords
estate only, for then the Copyholders estate should cease, when the Lords
interest determines, Nam cessante: primitivo cessat derivativus, but the life
of the Copyholders estate is the Custom of the Manor; and therefore whatsoever
befalls the Lords interest in his Manor, be it determined by the course of
time, by death, by forfeiture, or other means; yet if the Lord were Legitimus
Dominus pro tempore; how small so ever his estate was, that is enough, for the
same Custom that fixes a Copyholder instantly in his land upon his
admittance, will likewise preserve, and protect his interest, to the end, in
such manner, that though the Lords interest fails, yet his shall never fall
to ground, being upheld by such a proppe, such a pillar, unless perchance the
Copyholder offer violence to his Founder in breaking the Custom. If the Lord
grants a Copyhold, and after does sever this Copyholder from the Manor, by
granting the inheritance to a stranger, though now one of the chief pillars of
a Copyhold estate is wanting, viz. to be parcel of the Manor; yet because the
Land, at the time of the Copyholders admittance, had this necessary incident,
this severance, being a matter ex post facto, cannot amount to the destruction
of the Copyhold, espicially being the sole act of the Lord himself. If a Manor
be granted upon Condition, and before the Condition is broken, the Land is
granted by Copy, then the Manor become forfeited, and the Feoffer enters; yet
the Copyhold estate remains untouched, because lawfully established by
Custom, and yet all mean estates and charges whatsover, granted by the
Feoffee at the Common Law were voidable upon the entry of the Feoffer; for we
have a ground in Law, that when an entry is made for breach of a Condition, the
party to all intents and purposes, is in the same plight that he was in at the
time of the making of the estate. If a man seized of a Manor in Fee, dies
seized, having issue, a daughter; and his wife being privement inse^nt with a
son, and the daughter grants Lands by Copy, this Grant shall stand good
against the son, for the daughter was Legitim^ Domina pro tempore. So if the
Feoffee of a Manor, upon Condition to infeoffe a stranger, the next day makes
a voluntary Grant by Copy, this shall bind, and yet his interest was to have
but small continuance. If a Manor be Granted with a feme in Francke marriage,
and there is a divorce had, causa paercontractus; so that now the interest of
the Manor is now granted to the feme only, and by relation, the marriage is
void, ab initio: yet because the Baron was Legitimus Dominus pro tempore, any
Copyholders estates granted, before the divorce, remain good. So if a man
espouseth a feme seignioresse, under the age of consent; and after she does
disagree, though the marriage by relation was void, ab initio, yet Copyholds
granted before disagreement, shall never be avoided, causa qua supra.

If the Lord of a Manor commits felony or murder, and process of Outlawry,
be awarded against him, after the Exigent, he grants Copyhold estates,
according to the Custom, and then is attainted, these Grants are authentical,
though by relation, the Manor was forfeited, from the time of the Exigent
awarded. So if the Lord had been attainted by Verdict, or Confession, any
Grant by Copy, after the Felony, or murder committed, shall stand good,
notwithstanding the relation. If the Lord of a Manor acknowledge a Statute, and
then grants Lands by Copy; and after the Manor is delivered to the Cognisee
in extent; the Grant cannot by this be impeached. And if the Lord of a Manor
takes a wife, and after makes Copyhold estates, according to the Custom, and
dies, though the feme has this Manor assigned unto her for her Dower, yet
cannot she avoid these Copyhold estates, because the Copyholders are in by a
title Paramount, the title of the feme, viz. by Custom. But paradventure, if
the heir after the death of his Ancestor, before the Assignment made unto the
feme for her Dower, had granted Lands by Copy, the feme might avoid these
Grants, because instantly upon the death of the Baron, her title received his
perfection, and nothing more was wanting to the confirmation of her interest:
but though the quantity of the Lords estate in the Manor be not respected, yet
the quantity of his estate in the Copyhold is regarded. For if a Copyholder in
Fee surrender to the use of the Lord for life, the Remainder over to a
stranger, or reserveth the Reversion to himself, if the Lord will Grant this
by Copy in Fee, whatsoever estate the Lord has in his Manor; yet having but an
estate for life in the Copyhold; no larger estate shall pass, then he
himself has, Quia nemo potest plus juris in alium transfer quam ipse habet:
and further observe, that sometimes the Law respects the quantity of the
Lords estate in the Manor; for what Acts so ever are not confirmed by Custom,
but only strengthened by the power, authority, and interest of the Lord, have
no longer continuance than the Lords estate continues, and therefore it is
held, that if a Tenant for life of a Manor, grants a license to a Copyholder
to alien, and dies, the License is destroyed, and the power of alienation
cease. As for the quality of the Lords estate in the Manor, that is much more
now respected, than either the quality of his estate, or the quality of his
person: for if the Lord, or he whosoever it be that makes a voluntary Grant
by Copy, has no lawful interest in the Manor, but only an usurped title, his
Grant shall never so bind the right owner; but that upon his entry he may
avoid them, otherwise we should make Custom an agent in a wrong, which the
Law will never suffer; and yet if the Lord of a Manor by his Will in writing
devises, that his Executor shall Grant Copy hold estates, Secundum
consuetudinem Manerii, for the payment of his debts, etc. and they make
voluntary Grants accordingly: these Grants are good, notwithstanding the
Executor has no interest in the Manor, nor is Dominus pro tempore.

If a Disseinor of a Manor dies seized, notwithstanding his heir come in by
ordinary course of descent, yet because the Tort commenced by his Ancestor, is
still inherent to his estate, if any Copihold estate be granted by the heir,
it may be avoided by the Disseinor, immediately upon his recovery, or upon his
entry; and so if the Disseinor infeoffe a stranger of the Manor;
notwithstanding the Feoffee come in by title, yet no grant made by him of
Copyhold-Land, shall ever bind the Disseined, no more than a Grant made by the
Disseinor himself.

If Tenant in Tail of a Manor discontinueth and dies; and after the
discontinuance Grants Copyhold, estates, the heir recovering in a Formidon
in the Discender, may avoid these Grants; for though the Discontinue come in
under a just title, yet his interest being determined by the death of the
Tenant in Tail, the continuance of the possession is a Tort to the heir, and
Acts done by Tort-scisors tending to the dis-inheritance of the right owners
Custom, will never so strengthen, but they may be adnihilated. So if a man
seized of a Manor in right of his wife, Alieneth this Manor and dies, any
Grant made of Copyhold estates, after his death may be avoided by the feme,
upon her entry, or upon her recovery, in a Gui in vita.

If a Manor be Granted, pr. aut. vie, and Cestay que vie dies, and the Grantee
continues still in the Manor, and makes Grants by Copy, these shall not bind
the Grantor of the Manor; for immediately upon the death of Cestay que vie, the
Grantee was but a Tenant at sufferance, and had no Manor of Lawful interest,
for a Writ of Entry, ad terminum qui preter sit, lies against him, as against
Deforceor.

And so if a Tenant for life of a Manor makes a Lease for years of the same
Manor and dies, Copyhold estates granted by the Lessee, after the death of the
Tenant for life, are voideable by the first Lessor.

If a Lessee for years of a Manor grants a Copyhold in Reversion, and before
the Reversion eschew, the term is expired, the Grant is void; and so I take
the Law to be, if the Lessee surrendreth his term, and then before his Lease
should have ended in point of limitation, the Reversion falls, yet the
Grantee shall not have it.

If a Lease be made for years of a Manor, the Lease to be void upon the
breach of a certain Condition, if the Condition be broken, and afterward the
Lessee before the entry of the Lessor, grants estates by Copy, these Grants
shall never exclude the Lessor: for presently upon the breach of the Condition;
the Lease is void, but had the Manor been granted for life, in Tail or in
Fee, I think Law would have fallen out otherwise, for before entry, the
Franck-Tenement had not been avoided, and wheresoever a man may enter and
avoid any estate of Franck-Tenement, upon the breach of a Condition, the Law
adjudgeth nothing to be in him before entry, and he may waive the advantage
which he might take by the breach of the Condition if he will, and therefore
notwithstanding the accruer of the title of the Grantor; yet before this title
be executed by entry, the Grantee has such a lawful interest, that what
estate soever he grants by Copy, in the interim shall stand good against the
Grantor. And so if an Infant infeoffe me of a Manor, though he may enter upon
me at his pleasure; yet Grants made by me by Copy before his entry, shall never
be defeated by any subsequent entry.

And the same Law is of Grants made by a Villayne purchaser of a Manor, before
the entry of the Lord, or of Grants made after an alienation in Mortmayne,
before the Lord Paramount has entered for a forfeiture.

If a Parson after Institution, and before Induction, a Manor being parcel of
his Gleab Lands, Grants Lands by Copy, and after is inducted: this admitting of
the Copyholders is no binding act, for though, as to the spiritualties, he be a
complete Parson, presently upon the institution, yet as to the temporalities,
he is not complete before Induction. So if a Parson be admitted instituted and
inducted, but does not subscribe to the Articles, according to the Statute of
13. Eliz. and grants Lands by Copy, as before. This Grant shall not conclude
the succeeding Incumbent because his Admission, Institution, and Induction were
wholly void in themselves, but had the Parson been deprived for crime or
heresy, or for being mere Laicus, although he be declared by sentence, to be
incapable of a Benefice; and so his presentment, void (ab initio) yet because
the Church was once full, until the sentence declaratory came; for though the
deprivation shall relate to some purposes, yet because the Presentment, is not
in it self void, surely a relation shall never be so much favored, as to
avoid a Copyhold estate in this kind.

So much of Grants made by the Lords themselves. In Grants made by Copyholders,
as the Law respects the quality of the Copyholders estate, so does it respect
both the quality of his person, and quantity of his estate.

The quality of person, for whosoever is incapable of disposing of Land at the
Common Law, cannot without special Custom pass away any Copyhold. The
quantity of his estate, for no Copyholder can possibly pass away more than is
in him; and therefore, if there be joint Tenants of a Copyhold, one cannot
aliene the whole. But if there be two joint Tenants of a Manor, and a
Copyholder escheateth, one of them may grant this Copyhold, and his Companion
shall never avoid any part of it.

If a Copyholder for life, the remainder over in Fee to a stranger surrendreth
in Fee, and the Lord admits accordingly, yet an estate for life only passes.

So if the Lord of a Manor grants a Copyhold for life, where an estate in
Fee, is warrantable, and the same Grantee surrenders in Fee, to the use of a
stranger; and the Lord admits him, secundum officium sursumredditionis; I
think no Fee passes: for though the Lords admittance may, prima facie, seem
to amount to a confirmation of the estate surrendered; the Reversion resting in
him to dispose of, according to the Custom; as where a Lessee for years at
the Common Law makes a Feoffment in Fee, and makes a Letter of Attorney to
his Lessor, to deliver Livery and seisin, who executes it accordingly, though
the Lessor be used as an instrument to perform the will of the Lessee; yet
this being his voluntary act, the Law takes it as a consent for the passing
away of the whole inheritance; but if you look narrowly into both Cases you
shall find the difference in the Latter Case, by the Feoffment, the Fee is
divested out of the Lessor; and therefore a consent will serve to transfer
the Reversion; but in the former Case, the Reversion is not plucked out of the
Lord, by the Surrender, and therefore an implied consent is too weak to remove
it. I will only add one observation more, and so I will end with the Grantor.

The Law is not so strict to a Copyholder, as that he must come personally into
Court upon the making of every Surrender, but they may Surrender by Attorney,
as well as Livery and Seisin may be made by Attorney at the Common Law; and
should the Law be otherwise, great inconveniencie would ensue; for how should
Copyholders that are in prison, or languishing upon bed, or beyond the Seas,
surrender but by Attorney?

But note this difference, if a man has a bare Authority joined with a
Confidence without interest, this Authority cannot be executed by Attorney; and
therefore if I devise, that my Executor shall sell my Land, they cannot sell by
Attorney, for that were to make an Attorney upon Attorney, which the Law will
in no wise permit; and though a man have an Authority joined with an interest,
yet if the Authority be warranted by special Custom only, it cannot be
executed by an Attorney: and therefore if there be a special Custom, that a
Copyholder for life may make estate, for 20. years to continue after his
death, these estates cannot be made by Attorney. So if there be a special
Custom, that an Infant at the age of discretion may surrender a Copyhold; this
surrender being confirmed by special Custom only, cannot be made by
Attorney. And so if there be a Custom, that a Copyholder out of the Court may
surrender into the hands of the Lord, by the hands of two Customary Tenants,
such Surrenders must be done in person.

But wheresoever there is a general Authority, accompanied with an interest,
that Authority may be executed by Attorney, as Cestuy que use, after the
Statute of 1. R. 3. and before the Statute 27. H. 8. might have aliened by
Attorney; for at that time he had an absolute authority to dispose of the Land
at his pleasure, without any confidence reposed in him. And thus much of the
Grantor; A word of the Grantee.

SEC. XXXV.
THe same persons that are capable of a Grant by the Common Law, are capable of
a Grant by Copy, according to the Custom of the Manor.

An Infant, a man of non sanae memoriae; an Idiot, a Lunatique, an Outlaw, or
an excommunicate, may be Grantees of a Copyhold estate.

The Lord himself may take a Copyhold to his own use, one joint Tenant may
receive a Copyhold from the hands of his joint companion, because it passes by
Surrender, not by Livery.

A feme covert may be a purchaser of Copyhold, and this purchase shall stand in
force, until her husband disagreeth. Nay, further, a feme covert may receive a
Copyhold estate by surrender from her husband, because she comes not in
immediately by him, but by mediate means, viz. by the admittance of the Lord
according to the surrender.

As the seem is capable of receiving a Copyhold from the hands of the Baron; so
by special Custom, the Baron may take a Copyhold from the hands of his seem,
for in some Manors, Custome^ does enable the feme to devise a Copyhold to the
Baron, but this Custom has been much impugned, therefore I dare not justify
the validity of it.

What persons soever are capable of a Grant by Copy, may well take by Attorney,
not that the Lord shall be enforced to admit any one by Attorney, because upon
every admittance, there is fealty due by the party admitted, which is a duty so
inseparably annexed to the persons, that it cannot be discharged by deputy, and
therefore no reason the Lord should be enforced to admit by Attorney, but if
he will admit him, it stands good.

It is not necessary that upon Surrenders of Copiholds, the name of the party
to whose use the Surrender is made, be precisely set down; but if by any
manner of circumstance, the Grantee may be certainly known, it is sufficient.
And therefore a Surrender made to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, or the
Lord Major of London, or the high Sheriff of Norfolk, without mentioning,
either their Christian-name, or Surname, are good enough, and certain enough,
because they are certainly known by this name, without further addition. So
if I Surrender to the use of the next of my blood, to the use of my wife, to
the use of my brother or sister, having but one brother, or one sister, these
Surrenders are good without any additions, because the Grantee may certainly be
known by these words.

If I Surrender generally into the hands of the Lord, not expressing to whose
use the Surrender shall be, this Surrender is a good Surrender, and shall enure
to the benefit of the Lord.

If I surrender to the use of my son W. having more sons than one of that
name, yet by an averment, this incertainty may be helped.

But if I Surrender to the use of my cousin, or my friend, this is so general
and so incertaine, that no subsequent manifestation of my intention can any way
strengthen it.

So if three Surrender, to the use of three or four of S. Dunstons Parish, not
naming the Parishiones by their names, this Surrender is utterly void.

And so if I Surrender in the disjunction to the use of I. L. or I. N. this is
insufficient for the incertainty.

And in customary Grants upon Surrenders the Law is not so strict, as in Grants
at the common Law, for in Grants at the common Law, if the Grantee be not in
rerum natura and able to take by virtue of the Grant, presently upon the Grant
made, it is merely void. But in customarie Grants upon Surrenders the Law is
otherwise: for though at the time of the Surrender, the Grantee is not in esse,
or not capable of a Surrender, yet if he be in esse and capable at the time of
the Admittance that is sufficient; and therefore if I Surrender to the use of
him that shall be heir to I. S. or to the use of I. S. next child, or to the
use of I. S. next wife; though at the time of the Surrender I. S. had no heir,
child, or wife: yet if afterward he has a child, or takes a wife, his
heir, his child, or his wife may come into the Court and compel the Lord to
admit according to the Surrender. So if I Surrender to the use of him that
shall come next into Paul's after such an hour, whose fortune soever it is to
come first, the Lord must admit, and I shall never avoid it.

The same Law is if I surrender to the use of him that I. S. shall nominate, or
that I my self shall nominate to the Lord at the next meeting; the reason of
the Law is this, a Surrender is a thing executory which is executed by the
subsequent Admittance, and nothing at all is invested in the Grantee, before
the Lord has admitted him according to the Surrender, and therefore if at the
time of the Admittance the Grantee be in rerum natura and able to take, that
will serve.

Besides in Customarie Grants the intent of the Grantor is more respected than
it should be by the strict rules of the Law, which appears by this, that if a
Surrender be made of a Copiehold to the use of a last Will, and the Surrender
devises it unto two, the one is admitted according to the purport of the Will,
this shall inure to both, but though the Surrender be a thing executory and
the intent of the Grantor so much favored: yet if a Copyholder will Surrender
to the use of the right heirs of I. S. he being alive, this is void because
it cannot take effect according to the intent of the Grantor; for he would have
the grant to be executed presently, which cannot be in regard that I. S. can
have no heir till after his death: So much of the Grantee, and I come now to
the Grant it self.

SEC. XXXV.
A Copyhold interest connot be transferred by any other, assurance then by Copy
of Court Roll, according to the Custom.

If I will exchange a Copyhold with another, I cannot do it by an ordinary
exchange at the Common Law, but we must surrender to each others use, and the
Lord admit us accordingly.

If I will devise a Copyhold I cannot do it by will at the Common Law, but I
must surrender to the use of my last Will and Testament, and in my Will I must
declare my intent.

If I am ousted by a Copyholder, a release made to him is void, because it
would be a prejudice to the Lord, and besides there is no Customary right, upon
which the release may inure, but a release inuring by the way of extinguishing
where no prejudice accrueth to the Lord, will serve to drown a Copyhold right,
and therefore if I surrender out of Court upon condition, Co. 4 fo. 25.
to the use of I. S. and the presentment is made absolute in Court, and the
admittance framed accordingly, this admittance and presentment differing from
the effect of the Surrender are both void. Yet because upon the admittance the
Lord is satisfied of his fine and so nothing at all prejudiced, and besides
here is a customary right, upon which the release may be grounded, I may by a
release at the Common Law, sufficiently confirm this void esta^e. And so upon
the same reason if I am ousted of a Copyhold, and the Lord admit him according
to the Custom, a release made by me at the Common Law, will extinguish my
right, but if I make a Lease for years of a Copyhold, I cannot by my release
pass my Reversion, because this release injureth by way of enlargement to
transfer an interest, and not by way of extinguishment, to drown a right,
but my way is to surrender my Reversion into the hands of the Lord, and he to
Grant it over to the Lessee.

SEC. XXXVII.
IF Copyhold Land come into that plight that it cannot pass by Copy, it is
become not alienable; and therefore if the Lord of a Manor will grant to me a
Copihold in Fee, and after will grant the inheritance of this Copihold to a
stranger in regard that now my Copihold is become no parcel of the Manor, and
so I cannot surrender into the hands of the Lord and the Grantee of the
inheritance, though I am to him a Tenant, and am tied to do unto him all
manner of services which are due without keeping of Court, as to pay Rent, to
discharge Herriots and all other Duties, of the same nature: yet because the
Grantee cannot keep a Court, and so is incapable of taking a Surrender, or
making an admittance, therefore I cannot by any means alien for no conveiance
at the Common Law will serve, because it remains still Copihold
notwithstanding, and what Customs soever were incident to the Land before
severance, do remain still undestroyed, as if the land were Burrow English,
or Gavelkind before, it so continues, Co. 4. fo. 24.
and a decree in Chancery will not serve no more than an ordinary assurance at
the Common Law; for that binds my person only, not my interest: sithence
therefore Copihold estates cannot be conveyed away otherwise than by Copy of
Court Roll, according to the custom, let us examine the nature of these
customarie grants, wherein three branches are to be considered.

1. The Surrender. 2. Presentment. 3. Admittance.
In some Grants a Surrender is sufficient without Presentment or Admittance.

In some an Admittance without a Surrender or Presentment.

In some a Surrender and Admittance and both necessary; and in some, a
Surrender, Presentment, and Admittance are all requisite.

SEC. XXXVIII.
IF a Copiholder will Surrender to the use of the Lord the interest of the
Copihold is sufficiently vested in the Lord immediately upon the Surrender
without any Admittance of the Lord, because the Lord cannot admit himself.

If the Lord will make a voluntary grant of a Copiehold, no Surrender is
requisite, for by the Admittance of the Lord according to the custom, the
Copieholder is sufficiently settled in his Land without any other ceremony.

If a Copyholder will Surrender in Court to the use of a stranger, besides the
Surrender the Admittance is requisite, and if the Surrender he made out of
Court into the hands of the Lord himself, which the general custom will
warrant, or into the hands of the Bailiffe or of two Tenants of the Manor,
which by special custom only is warrantable, besides a Surrender, two other
ceremonies are requisite, the one a true presentment of the Surrender in Court
by the same persons into whose hands the Surrender was made, the other is an
Admittance of the Lord according to the effect and tenor both of the Surrender
and presentment.

But now more particularly of every one of them apart, and first of a Surrender.

SEC. XXXIX.
THis word Surrender, is vocabulum artis, and therefore where a Surrender is
needful, if this one word be wanting, all other words, used in ordinary
conveiances, are uneffectuall and insufficient to convey any Copyhold estate,
for if a Copyholder come into Court, and offer to pass his Copyhold by word of
grant, of gift, of bargain, or sale, or such like, I doubt he will fail of
his purpose, for as he is tied to a singular form of assurance, so is he
restrained to peculiar words in his assurance.

Surrenders are made in several sorts according to the several customs of
Manors.

In some Manors where a Copyholder surrendreth his Copyhold, he uses to hold a
little rod in his hand, which he delivers to the Steward or Bayliffe,
according to the Custom of the Manor, to deliver it over to the party to whose
use the Surrender was made in the name of Seisin, and from thence they are
called Tenants by the Verge.

In some Manors in stead of a wand a straw is used, and in other Manors a glove
is used, Et consuetudo loci semper est observanda.

A Surrender (where by a subsequent Admittance the grant is to receive his
perfection and confirmation) is rather a manifesting of the Grantors intention
than of passing away any interest in the possession, for till Admittance, the
Lord takes notice of the Grantor as Tenant, and he shall receive the profits
of the Land to his own use, and shall discharge all Services due to the Lord,
but yet the interest is in him, but secundum quid, and not absolutely; for he
cannot pass away the Land to any other, or make it subject to any other
encumbrance than it was subject to, at the time of the surrender, neither in
the Grantee is any manner of interest invested before admittance; for if he
enter he is a trespasser, and punishable in trespass; and if he surrender to
the use of another, this surrender is merely void, and by no matter, ex post
facto can be confirmed; for though the first surrender be executed before the
second; so that at the time of the admittance of him, to whose use the second
surrender was made, his surrenderer has a sufficient interest as absolute
owner; yet because at the time of the surrender, he had but a possibility of an
interrest; therefore the subsequent admittance, cannot make this act good which
was void, ab initio: but though the Grantee has but a possibility upon the
surrender, yet this is such a possibility as is accompanied with a certainty,
for the Grantee cannot possibly be deluded, or defrauded of the effect of his
surrender, and the fruits of his Grantee: for if the Lord refuse to admit him,
he is compelable to do it by a Sub paena in the Chancery, and the Grantors
hands are ever bound from the disposing of the Land, any other way, and his
mouth ever stopped from revoaking, or countermanding his surrender. But
peradventure, if a Copyholder languishing in extremity surrendreth out of
Court, to the use of his Cousin, in consideration of consanguinitie, or to the
use of his son, in consideration of natural love and affection, and after,
recovereth his health before presentment, this surrender is revocable, or
countermandable: but if it be granted upon valuable consideration; as for the
discharge of debts, or for a sum of money paid, though it be made out of
Court, yet it is as binding as any surrender whatsoever made in Court. And thus
much for a Surrender; a word of a Presentment.

SEC. XL.
THe Presentment by the general Customs of Manors, is to be made, at the next
Court day, immediately after the surrender, but by special Custom; in some
places, it will serve at the second or third Court. And it is to be made by the
same persons, that took the surrender, and in all points material, according
to the true tenure, of the surrender. And therefore if the surrender be
conditional, and the Presentment be absolute, both the Surrender, Presentment
and Admittance thereupon are wholly void.

But if the Conditional surrender be presented, and the Steward in entering of
it, omitteth the Condition; yet upon sufficient proof made in Court, the
surrender shall not be avoided, but the Roll amended, and this shall be no
conclusion to the party, to plead or give in evidence the truth of the matter.

If I surrender out of Court, and die before Presentment; if Presentment be
made after my death, according to the Custom, Co. 4. fo. 39. b.
this is sufficient; so if he, to whose use the surrender is made dies before
Presentment, yet upon Presentment made after his death, according to the
Custom, his heir shall be admitted: and so, if I surrender out of Court, to
the use of one for life, the Rendrour, and the Lessee for life dies before
Presentment, yet upon Presentment made, he in the remainder shall be admitted.
And so, if I surrender to two jointly, and one dies before Presentment, the
other shall be admitted to the whole. The same Law is, if those into whose
hands the surrender is made, dye before Presentment, upon sufficient proof in
Court, that such a surrender was made, the Lord shall be compelled to admit
accordingly; and if the Steward, the Bailiffe, or the Tenants, into whose hands
the surrender is made, refuse to present, upon a Petition or a Bill exhibited
in the Lords Court; the party grieved shall find remedy. But if the Lord will
not do him right, he may both sue the Lord, and them that took the surrender
in the Chancery, and shall there find relief. Thus much of Presentiments. A
word of Admittance.

SEC. XLI.
ADmittances are threefold;
1. An Admittance upon a voluntary Grant. 2. An Admittance upon Surrender. 3.
An Admittance upon a Descent.


Involuntary Admittances the Lord is an instrument; for though it is in his
power to keep the Land in his own hands; or to dispose of it at his pleasure,
and to that intent may be reputed as absolute owner, yet because in disposing
of it, he is bound to observe the Custom precisely in every point, and can
neither in Estate nor Tenure bring in any alteration, in this respect the Law
accounts him Customs instrument. If the Custom does warrant an estate only,
Durante viduitate, and the Lord admits for Life; this shall not bind his heir
or successor, because Custom has not sufficiently confirmed it. So if the
Lord fail in reserving verum and antiquum redditum; as if he reserveth ten
shillings, where the usual rent Customably reserved, is twenty shillings: this
may be a means to avoid the admittance, and the Law is very strict in this
point of reservation: for though the ancient accustomable rent be reserved
according to the quantity; yet if the quality of the rent be altered, the heir
may avoid this Grant: for if the ancient rent from time to time has been
twenty shillings in Gold, and the Lord reserveth it in Silver, this variance of
the quality of the rent is in force to destroy the Grant: so if the ancient
rent has been accustomably paid at four Feasts in the year, and the Lord
reserveth it at two Feasts. So, if two Copyholds Escheate to the Lord, the one
of which has been usually demised for twenty shillings rent, the other for
ten shillings rent, and he grants them both by one Copy, for one rent of
thirty shillings, this is not good; and so if a Copyhold of three acres
Escheates, which has been ever granted for three shillings rent, and the Lord
grants one Acre, and reserveth pro rata, one shilling rent, verus and
antiquus reddit, is not reserved: but if a Copyhold of six Acres, which has
ever been demised for six shillings rent, Escheateth to two Coparteners, and
one grants three Acres, reserving three shillings pro rata, this is a perfect
reserving. In Admittances upon surrender, the Lord to no intent is reputed as
owner, but wholly as an instrument, and the party admitted, shall be subject to
no other charges or incombrances of the Lord, for he claims his estate under
the party that made the surrender: and in the plaint, in the nature of a Writ
of entry in the per, it shall be supposed in the per by him, not by the Lord;
and as in admittances upon surrenders; so in admittances upon descents, the
Lord is used as a mere instrument, Co. 4. fo. 27. b.
and no manner of interest passes out of him, and therefore, neither in the
one nor in the other, is any respect had unto the quality of his estate in the
Manor; for whether he has it by right, or by wrong it is not material, these
admittances shall never be called in question for the Lords Title, Co. 1 fo.
140. b.
because they are judicial acts, which every Lord is enjoined to execute.

Besides in admittances upon Surrenders, the Lord being accounted nothing but a
necessary instrument, it follows that he has a bare Customary power to
admit, secundum formam and effectum sursum reddendi: therefore if there be any
variance between the admittance and the surr. either in the person, in the
estate, or in the tenure, or in any other collateral points, the Lord does
only transfer an estate according to the surr. and his authority if it can
take such effect. As if I Surrender to the use of I.S. and the Lord admits I.N.
this admittance is wholly void; and notwithstanding this admittance the Lord
may afterward admit I. S. according to the effect of his authority: but had
he admitted I. S. and I.N. jointly, then the admittance had been void for the
one, and good for the other, like the Case of a Devise: where a Devise of a
term is made to I. S. and the Executors agree, that I. S. and I.N. shall have
this term; Co. 4 fo. 28
this consent is void to I.N. for after the consent of the Executors, I. N. is
in by the Devise. Yet some are of opinion, that if I surr. to the use of I. S.
in Fee, and the Lord admits I. S. together with his eldest son and heir
apparent, that this is an estate by Estoppell to I.S. and that he shall only
claim jointly with his son, because he might have refused an admittance in
this manner; but I can hardly be brought, to think that this admittance,
giving a present interest in theson, who by surrender was to have no interest
till the death of his father, should be any such estopell.

If I surr. to the use of I.S. for life, and the Lord admits him in Fee, an
estate for life only passes. Co. 4. fo. 29.
So if I surr. without mentioning any certain estate, because by implication
of the Law, estate for life only passes, though the Lord admit in Fee, no
more does pass, than the implication of Law will warrant. If I surr. with the
reservation of a rent, and the Lord admits not, reserving any rent, or
reserving a less rent than I reserved upon the Surrender, this admittance is
wholly void: but if the Lord reserveth a greater rent, then is the reservation
void, only for the surplusage, and the admittance, so far current as it agrees
with my surrender. If I surrender upon Condition, and the Lord omits the
Condition, the admittance is wholly void; but if my surrender be absolute, Co.
4. fo. 25.
and the Lords admittance be conditional, the Condition is void, but the
admittance in all points else is good.

The reasons of these diversities are these, where an Authority is given to any
one to execute any act, and he executes it contrary to the effect of his
authority, this is utterly void, but if he executes his authority and withal
goes beyond the limits of his warrant, this is void for that part only,
wherein he exceeds his authority. These admittances upon Surrender, differ
from admittances upon Discents in this, that in admittances upon surrender,
nothing is vested in the Grantee before admittance, no more then in the
Voluntary admittances; but in admittances upon Discents, the heir is Tenant by
Copy immediately upon the death of his Ancestor, not to all intents and
purposes; for peradventure he cannot be sworn of the homage before, neither
can he maintain a plaint in the nature of an Assize in the Lords Court
before, because till then he is not complete Tenant to the Lord, no further
forth then the Lord pleases to allow him for his Tenant. And therefore, if
there be Grandfather, Father, and Son; and the Grandfather is admitted, and
dies, and the Father enters, and dies before admittance, the Son shall
have a plaint in the nature of a writ of Ayell, and not an Assize of Mort
d'auncestor, so that to all intents and purposes, the Heir, till admittance is
not complete Tenant, yet to most intents, especially as to strangers, the Law
takes notice of him, Co. 4. fo. 23.
as of a perfect Tenant of the Land, instantly upon the death of his Auncestor,
for he may enter into the Land; before admittance, take the profits, punish any
trespass done upon the ground, Surrender into the hands of the Lord, to whose
use he pleases, satisfying the Lord his fine, due upon the Descent, and by
estoppell, he may prejudice himself of his inheritance, for if an Estrange
come and surrender to the use of him and his Wife, before admittance, he shall
ever claim jointly with his Wife, and never be taken as sole Tenant, and the
Lord may avow upon him before admittance, for any arrearages of Rent, or other
Services, and last of all, Co. 4. fo. 22. b.
upon an actual possession, there shall be possessio fratris, before
admittance, for if a Copyholder in Fee, have issue a Son, and a Daughter by
one Venture, and a Son by another venture, and dies seized, and his Son by
the first Venture, enters into the Land, and dies before admittance, the
Daughter shall inherit, as Heir to her brother; and not the Son by the
second Venture, as Heir to his Father: and many times the possession of a
Guardian, or a Tearmer, without an actual entry, or any claim made by the
Heir, will make a possessio fratris. As if a Copyholder in Fee, having issue a
Son or a Daughter, by one venture, and a Son by another Venture; by License
of the Lord, makes a Lease for years, and dies, and the Son of the first
Venture dies, before the expiration of the Term, being neither admitted, nor
having made any actual entry, or any claim. Yet this possession of the Lessee
is sufficient, and the Reversion shall descend to the daughter of the first
Venture, and not to the son of the second Venture. But if the Lease had been
determined living, the Son by the first Venture, and afterward he had dyed
before any actual entry made, the Law would have fallen out otherwise, because
there was a time, when he might have lawfully entered; therefore, where some
have imagined that nothing should be invested in the Heir before admittance;
because every admittance of an Heir, upon a Descent, amounts to a Grant, and
so may be pleaded, they are in an error, for though it be true, that after
admittance, the Heir may in pleading, allege this as a Grant, and that has
been allowed, to avoid the inconveniences that otherwise should ensue; For if
the Copyholder should be driven in pleading, to show the first Grant, Co. 4.
fo. 22. b.
either that being made before the memory of man, is not pleadable, or since
the memory of man, and then Custom fails, for this reason the Law has
allowed a Copyholder, in pleading to allege any admittance as well upon a
Descent, as upon a Surrender, as a Grant: and yet he may if he will, allege
the admittance of his Ancestors as a Grant, and show the Descent to him, and
that he entered; and well without any admittance; but the Heir cannot plead
that his Ancestor was seized in Fee, at the will of the Lord, by Copy of Court
Roll, of such a Manor, according to the Custom of the Manor, and that he dyed
seized, and that the Copyhold descended upon him, because in truth such an
interest is but a particular interest at will, in judgment of Law, although it
be discendable by Custom.

So that I conclude, that an admittance is principally for the benefit of the
Lord, to entitle him to his Fine, and not much necessary for strengthening of
the Heirs title.

Then will some say, if the benefit which the Heir shall receive by the
admittance, will not countervaile the charges of the Fine, he will never come
in, and take up his Copyhold in Court, and so defeat the Lord of his Fine: I
assure my self, if it were in the election of the Heir to be admitted, or not
to be admitted, he would be best contented without admittance, but the Custom
in every Manor is compulsary in this point, for either upon pain of forfeiture
of their Copihold or of incurring some great penalty, the Heirs of Copyholders
are enforced in every Manor to come into Court, and be admitted according to
the Custom within a short time after notice given of their Ancestors decease.
And thus much of the Grant it self. A word of the things granted.

SEC. XLII.
THings that lie not in Tenure, are not Grantable by Copy. As Rents,
Bailiwickes, Stewardships, Common in gross, Advowsions in gross, and such
like. All which are incorporate Hereditaments, and therefore no Rent can issue
out of them; neither can they be held by any manner of Service, but an
Advowsion appendant, a Common appendant, or a Fair appendant may pass by
Copy, by reason of the principal thing, to which they are appendant, and
generally what things soever are parcel of the Manor, and are of perpetuity,
may be granted by Copy, according to the Custom, as Underwoods growing upon
the Manor, being things of continuance, (for after they are cut they will grow
again, Co. 4 fo. 31.
ex stipitibus) may well be granted by Copy; and so of herbage or any other
profit of the Manor; and sometime of the grant of a Copyhold, things shall
pass that are severed from the Manor. As if the Lord of a Manor grant his
Manor for years, except. bosc. and sabosc. growing in certain Copyhold
ground, and the Lessee by his Steward grants a Copyhold within which Manor
there is a Custom that every Copyholder may take within his Copyhold Woods,
and Underwoods, growing upon the ground for his necessary fuel, notwithstanding
this exception in the Lease of the Manor, the Copyholder may cut down Woods or
Underwoods according to the Custom, though by exception severed from the
Manor, for though the Lessee of the Manor, in respect of the exception, could
not meddle with the Woods or Underwoods, and so it might seem, p^ima facie,
very probable that the Copyholder, coming in by the voluntary admittance of
the Lessee, should have no more Authority nor interest then the Lessee himself
had; yet because the Copyholder being once in by Custom, and so his title
being grounded upon Custom is paramount the exception; Therefore, the
exception in the Lease of the Manor, though preceding the Grant of the
Copyhold, cannot any way touch or prejudice the Copyholder. And so, if there be
a Custom, within a Manor that Copyholders have used to have Common in the
Wastes of the Lord, and the Lord grants away his Wastes, and after grants a
Copyhold, the Copyholder shall have Common, but in alleging the Custom, he
shall not say, Quod infra Manner. praed. talis habetur consuetudo. but that till
such a time, viz. before the severance, talis habebatur and toto tempore, etc.
consuetudo, and then show the severance. If there be an incertainty in the
things granted, the Grant is not therefore insufficient; for by the election of
him that is the first Agent, it may be made certain.

As if I grant by Copy, twenty loads of Hasell, or twenty loads of Maple in the
disjunctive to be cut down, Co. 4. fo. 31. a Co. 2 fo. 37. a
and taken by the Grantee in my Manor of Dale, there the Grantee has election
to make choice of which he pleases, because he is to perform the first Act of
cutting down, and taking them, but if I am to cut them down, and deliver them
to the Grantee, then have I the election, and observe this difference touching
this point of election.

If a Grant be made in the dis-junctive of two annual things, and things of
continuance; if the election belong to the Grantor, and he fails at the day
to make election, yet his election is not determined, but continues the same
after the day, that it was before the day, but otherwise it is, where things
are not annual, but are to be performed unica vice tantum.

Therefore if the Lord of a Manor grants by Copy, twenty trees growing upon
Blackacre, or Whiteacre, to be cut down yea^^ly by himself, and to be
delivered to the Grantee at such a day, though the Grantor fail at his day to
make his election, yet his election is not gone, because the things granted are
annual, but had these trees been to be delivered to the Grantee once only,
and not yearly, then by the failor of the Grantor at the day, the election is
devolved to the Grantee.

SEC. XLIII.
ANd thus much of the thing granted, a word of the Instruments, through whose
hands, as through Conduit-pipes, the Lands are gradatim, conveyed to the
purchasor; I will not speak of those men, that are used as Instruments by
special Custom to present in Court surrenders taken out of Court. These I
have sufficiently spoken of already. I will here point only at these persons;
that by the general Custom of every Manor, are employed as necessary
Instruments in Customary admittances, and will cursarily examine the extents of
their authorities, and the quality of their offices.

The persons I aim at are these;
1. The Lord. 2. The Steward. 3. The Vnder-Steward.


SEC. XLIV.
THe Lords Authority consists chiefly in these four things.

1. In punishing offenses, and misdemeanors committed within his precincts, as
not performance of Customs, breach of By-lawes, not discharging of du^ies, and
such like.

2. In deciding controversies arising about the Title of Copyhold-Land, lying
within his bounds; and when he sits as Judge in Court, to end debates of
this nature, he is not tied to the strict form of the Common Law, for he is a
Chancellor in his Court, and may redress matters in Conscience upon Bill
exhibited, where the Common Law will afford no remedy in the same kind, as to
insist in one familiar example.

If I surrender a Copyhold to the use of a stranger, upon confidence, that such
debts being by me discharged, he shall surrender back this Copyhold; I upon
discharge of the debts demand a surrender, and he refuses, at the Common Law I
were left remediless, this being a bare confidence, and no Condition, but upon
Bill exhibited in the Lords Court I shall be relieved, for the Lord upon proof
of the matter may seize the Copyhold, and readmit me, according to the effect
of the Confidence.

3 In admitting Copyhold. And in this Customary power of admittance, the Lord
does somewhat outstrippe the Steward, for the Lord may make either admittances
upon voluntary Grants, Co. 4 fo. 27.
admittances upon surrrenders, admittances upon discents, in any place where he
pleases out of the Manor, but so cannot the Steward: and in giving License to
Copyholders to aliene by deed, and in this point of License, the Lords
authority does exceed the Stewards authority; for though some are of opinion,
that it is both usual and warrantable, for the Steward of a Manor in absence
of his Lord, to License a Copyholder in full Court to aliene by Deed, for as
many years as he shall think good, because he is Judge in the Court, and
besides the entry of it in the Court Roll is in this manner. Ad hanc curiam.
P.S. petit Licentiam Domini dimittendi, etc. Cui Dominus licentiam dat, etc.
and therefore this License being granted in the Lords name in full Court, the
Lord shall never enter for a forfeiture, but shall ever be estopped, to say the
contrary, but that he did give license, yet (under reformation be it spoken) I
must mistrust the truth of this opinion; for this power of Licensing Copiholds
to alien by Deed, is not Customary, for then it were as proper to the Steward,
as to the Lord; but it is a power of interest annexed to the person of the
Lord, in respect of his estate in the Manor, and not in any other Collateral
respect; and therefore if the Steward having a bare authority to execute what
the Custom of the Manor does warrant, sans doubt, he cannot, virtute officii,
grant any unwarrantable License to aliene by deed, no more than to commit
waste: for the one act, as well as the other, tends to the breach of Custom,
and both of them without a sufficient allowance, amounts to the forfeiture of a
Copyhold, but by express words in the Stewards Patent, or by special
authority given him by the Lord, or by some particular Custom warranting the
same, the Steward may in Court lawfully License Copyholders, to aliene as well
as the Lord may. And thus much of the Lord.

SEC. XLV.
STeward, is derived from those two words, Stead, and Ward; and so any that
does supply another place, or that is in any employment deputy to another, may
according to the true sense of the word be termed a Steward; as the high
Steward of England, because the King appoints him in diverse matters to
exercise his place: and so the under Sheriff may be termed by the name of the
Sheriffs Steward, being his Deputy, and how properly the Lords Steward is so
named, any man may judge by this, that the whole authority of the Steward is
derived from the Lord, as from the Head; and not only so, but withal he
represents the Lords person in many employments; for in the Lords absence, he
sits as judge in Court to punish offenses, determine controversies, redress
injuries, and the like; and further, some things he performs in the Lords
name, and not in his own name, for if the Steward admits any Copyholder, or
by special Authority, or particular Custom, licenceth a Copyholder to aliene,
this admittance and license shall be made in the Lords name, and the entry in
the Court Roll, shall be, Quod Dominus per Senescallu^ admisit, and
licentiav^t, and not that the Steward did admit, or license; therefore fithence
the Steward has this measure of authority and confidence committed unto him,
the Lord shall do very well to be very careful in making choice of his
Steward; for if he be defective in any one of these three qualities, Knowledge,
Trust, or Diligence, the Lord may be much prejudiced and damnified; therefore
Fleta wisely gives the Lord this counsel.

Fleta l. 2. c. 6.
Provideat sibi Dominus de Senescallo circumspecto and fideli and pacifico and
modesto, qui in legibus consuetudinibusque provinciae Domini sui in omnibus
tueri affectet, quisque Ballivos Domini in sui^ erroribus and ambiguis sciat
instruere and docere, quique egenis parcere, and nec prece vel pretio velit a
tramite justitiae deviare and pervense judicare.

These Stewards for the most part, have Patents for their Offices, yet they may
be retained by paroll, and this reteiner by paroll, is as effectual in all
points before discharge, as the most effectual institution by Patent: for a
Steward thus retained, may take surrender out of Court, or make voluntary
admittances, or any other Act incident to the office of a Steward, Co. 4. fo.
30. b.
as well as a Steward instituted by Patent. But in the Kings Manors, a Steward
cannot be retained by paroll by the mouth of the Auditor or Receiver; but to
make the Stewards authority current, Co. 4. fo. 30. a.
especially to make voluntary admittances; it is necessary he have a Patent,
and then, by virtue of his Patent, without any special Authority, or
particular Custom, he may justify the making of any voluntary admittance,
upon Escheates or forfeitures, or the doing of any Act belonging to his Office;
but though he may Ex officio, do those things without special warrant, yet
duty binds him before he make any voluntary admittance to inform the Lord
Treasurer of England, the Chancellor, and Barons of the Exchequer, or any of
them for his better direction, and the Kings better benefit, the Law is not
very curious in examining the imperfections of the Stewards person; nor the
unlawfulness of his authority, for be he an Infant, or non comps mentis, an
Idiot, or Lunatique, an Outlaw, or an Excommunicate; yet what things soever
he performs, as incident to his place, can never be avoided for any such
disabilitie, because he performs them as a Judge, or at least as Customs
Instrument: and for his authority, though it prove but counterfeit, if it come
to exact trial; yet if in appearance or outward show, it seems current, that
is, sufficient. As if I grant the Stewardship of my Manor of Dale by Patent,
and in the Patentees absence, a stranger by my appointment keeps Court, this
is authentical. If a Grant of a Stewardship be made to one, and for some fault
or defect in the Grant, it is avoidable, yet Courts kept by him before the
avoidance, shall stand in force: and whatsoever he did as Steward, are ever
unavoidable. As if a Corporation, retains a Steward by paroll, and he keeps
a Court, punishes offenses, decideth controversies, takes surrenders, makes
admittances, either upon surrenders or discents: these Acts being judicial
shall ever stand for current, though his authority be grounded upon a wrong
foundation, for a Corporation cannot institute any such officer without
writing. And so if the Kings Auditor or Receiver, retain a Steward by paroll,
he may lawfully execute any judicial Act, but things which he performs, as
Customs instrument, not as Judge, such as are voluntary admittances, neither
in the retainer by the Corporation, or in this retainer by the Kings Officers,
shall any whit bind, but if a stanger without the appointment of the Lord, or
consent of the right Steward, or without any color of authority, will of his
own head, come into a Manor, and keep a Court; it seems that the
performance of any judicial duty, or the executing of any act whatsoever will
not be warranted, especially if the Court be kept without warning given to the
Bayliffe by precept, according to the Custom.

The Office of a Steward may be forfeite three manner of ways.
1. By Abuser. 2. By non user. 3. By Refuser.
By abuser, As if the Steward burn the Court Rolls, or if he takes a bribe
to wink at any offense, or use partiality, in any cause depending before him,
these and the like abuses will make him subject to a forfeiture.

By non user, as if the Steward by his Patent being tied to keep Court at
certain times of the year, without request to be made by the Lord if he
fails, and by his failer the Lord receive any prejudice, this is a
forfeiture. But if the Lord be not damnified, then this non user is no
forfeiture. As if a Parker attends not for the space of three or four days,
and no prejudice or damage happens in the interim, this is no forfeiture: and
in Offices, which concern the administration of Justice, or the Commonwealth
the Law is more strict then in these Offices which concern private men: for
where an officer ex officio, or of necessity ought to attend for the
administration of Justice, or for the good of the Commonwealth, there non user,
or non attender in Court is a forfeiture, though this be prejudicial to no
man, as the office of the Chamberlain in the Exchequer, a Protonotary Clarke
of the Warrants Exigentur Filizar, or the like in the Common Pleas, because the
attendance of these and the like officers, is of necessity for the
administration of Justice, so the attendance of the Clarke of the Market, is of
necessity for the good of the Commonwealth, and so is holding of the Sheriffs
turn, etc.

By refuser the office of a Steward may be thus forfeited, if the Steward be
tied by his Patent to keep Court upon a demand or request, to be made by the
Lord, if the Lord demands or requesteth him to keep a Court, and he fails;
this is a forfeiture, though the Lord be thereby nothing damnifyed, and thus
much of the Steward.

SEC. XLVI.
THe under steward is the Stewards deputy, and sometimes appointed by writing,
sometimes by paroll, and the extent of his Authority, is as great as the
Stewards own Authority, and his office consists in performance of the self
same duties, that the high Steward himself is to perform, only in this point
the power of the Steward goes beyond the power of the understeward, that the
Steward can make an admittance out of Court, and it shall stand good if entry
be made in the Court Roll, that he that is admitted, has paid his fine and
has done fealty, but the understeward though he may take a surrender out of
the Court, yet he cannot make any admittance out of Court, without especial
Authority or particular Custom.

Some have thought, that an understeward may be made without special words in
the Stewards Patent, authorizing him to make a Deputy, but surely since it is
an office of knowledge, trust, and discretion it cannot, unless it be in cases
of necessity. As if an office of Stewardship descend unto an Infant, he may
make a Deputy, because the Law presumes he is himself incapable to execute
it, so if it be granted to an Earl in respect of th'exility of the Office in a
base Court, and of the dignity of the person, who is Praepositus Comitatus, and
had in ancient time the charge and custody of the whole shire, whose attendance
the Law intends to be most necessary, upon the King and the Commonwealth,
therefore it is employed in Law for the convenience, that he may make a Deputy,
for whom he ought to answer. This is one observation touching understewards, in
admittances made by understewards, as well as in admittances made by the
Stewards themselves it is good order to express in the Copy, and in the Court
Roll, the name of the understeward, or of the Steward, because in pleading any
admittance a man must say that he was admitted by such a one understeward or
Steward, naming his name. And this shall suffice touching the manner and means
of granting Copiholds: Suffer me now in the fourth place to point at the
several estates of Copiholders, together with their several qualities
incident to their several estates.

SEC. XLVII.
ALl estates whatsoever may be reduced to one of these three heads.
1. Inheritance. 2. Francktenant. 3. Chattells.
All Inheritances are of two sorts, either Fee simples, or Fee tails.

Of Fee simples, some are determinable, some are undeterminable.

Determinable, as where Land is given to a man and his heirs, for so long time
as Paul's steeple shall stand.

Vndeterminable, as where Land is given to a man and his heirs, without
further limitation.

Of Fee tails, some are general, some are special.

General, as where Land is given to a man and the heirs of his body, or
heirs males, or females of his body.

Special, as where Land is given to a man, and the heirs, males or females,
which he shall beget of such a woman.

All Francketenants are of two sorts, either created by the act of the party,
or by the Act of the Law.

Of Francketenants created by the act of the party, some are determinable by
death, some by collateral means.

By death, as estates granted during the life of the Grantor, of the Grantee,
or of a Stranger.

By collateral means, as estates granted quia diu fuerit innupta, to a Widow
quia diu remanserit vidua, or to a Minister, quamdiu Sacerdotium exercuerit.

Of Francke tenants created by the act of the Law, some are Francketenants
simpliciter, some secundum quid simpliciter, as the estates of a tenant in
Dower, of a tenant by the courtesy of an occupant, a tenant in tail, after
possibility of issue extinct, secundum quid, as the estates of a tenant by
Statute, Merchant, Stat. Staple and Elegit. who though they are to have the
Land, but for so many years as will give a plenary satisfaction to their
debts, yet by the Stat. of Westmin. 2. they may mainetaine an Assize, which no
other tenant having but a Chattell can have.

All Chattells are either certain, or incertaine, of Chattells certain, some
are in themselves certain, some are made certain by relation to a certainty.
Certain in themselves, as where Lands are granted for 20. 30. or 40. years.
Certain by relation to a certainety, as where Land is granted for so many
years as I. S. has acres of Land.

Of incertaine Chattells, some are incertaine in their commencement, some
incertaine in their determination.

In their commencement, as where a Guardian has an estate during the minority
of the heir, all these estates either by the general or by the particular
Customs of Manors, are of Copyholds as well as of Freeholds, in what manner
soever an estate in Fee simple is warranted by the Custom, Co. 4. fo. 23.
most inferior estates are by implication likewise warranted. All Francke
tenants created by the act of the party, the estate of an occupant, and all
Chattells whatsoever, without any other particular Custom, are hereby
warranted.

But the Law is otherwise, Co. 4. fo. 22. a.
of estates in Dower by the courtesy, by Statute Merchant, Statute Staple, or
Elegit, for as long as such a Copyhold, by the Custom of the Manor grantable
in Fee simple, continues in the Copyholders hands, it is not liable to any of
these estates, but if once it comes to the Lord by Escheate forfeiture, or by
other means, so long as it remains reunited to the Manor, it is in the
nature of a Freehold, and shall be subject to the charges and encumbrances, as
Land at the Common Law, and howsoever by implication these estates are not
allowed in Copyholds, continuing in the Copyhold possession, yet by particular
Custom the Wife may be Tenant in Dower, the Husband Tenant by the Courtesy, a
stranger Tenant by Stat. Merchant, Stat. Staple, or Elegit, of a Copyhold,
resting in the Copyhold, as well as if it rested in the Lord, whether an estate
tail, or an estate Tail, after possibility of issue extinct, which has a
necessary depending upon an estate Tail may by any particular Custom be
allowed, that I may dispute, but cannot determine; for it is vexata quaestio,
much controverted; but nothing concluded, I will briefly touch the reasons
alleged on both sides. They which are against the validity of Intailes by
special Custom, do chiefly urge these two reasons, that no estates tails
were before the Stat. de donis conditionalibus, but all Inheritances were Fees
conditional, and the Statute being made 13. E. 1. which is within the memory
of man, it cannot be that any special Customs have any Commencement, since
the Statute, for then a Custom might begin within time of memory, which is
altogether repugnant to the rules of Custom.

Two great inconveniences would ensue, if a Copyholder might be Intailed by
special Custom, because neither fine nor Common recovery can bar it; so
that he has such an estate, that he cannot of himself, without the assent of
the Lord, dispose of it, either for the payment of his debts, for the^
advancement of his wife, or preferment of his younger sons.

SEC. XLVIII.
THe maine reasons insisted upon in defense of intailing Copyholds are these.

1. In diverse Manors they have been from time to time, not only reputed as
Tenants in tail, but in every man's mouth termed by that name.

2. A Formed on in the Descender lies of a Copyholder, which Writ none can
bring but Tenant in tail.

3. A remainder limited upon such an estate in such Manors has been allowed,
and therefore is no Fee conditional; for upon a Fee, whether absolute or
conditional, a Render can by no means depend.

4. It is a common usage there by a Recovery to docke intayles of Copyhold* or
to defeat these estates by presentment, that the Copyholder has committed a
forfeiture, and so the Lord to seize, and then to surrender it to the
purchaser; and therefore there is not that inconvenience which is supposed in
the Copyhold, scilicet, want of power to dispose of such an estate without the
Lords consent.

5. Much inconvenience would depend upon this if Copyholds might not be
intailed, for it would tend to the subversion and destruction of many men's
estates, which from time to time they have enjoyed without contradiction, and
therefore for the quiet of the Commonwealth how necessary it is, that
Copyholds should be intayled, let any man judge.

Thus much of the several estates of the Copyhold. A word of their several
qualities incident to several estates.

SEC. XLIX.
WHat qualities soever are necessarily incident to estates at the Common Law,
are incident to estates by Custom. In illustrating this I will confine my
self to the discussing of these two points.

1. What words will create Copyholds of inheritance, and what Copyholds of
Franck-Tenant.

2. How Copyholds of inheritance shall descend.

Touching their creation, Copyholds of inheritance, Co. 4. fo. 2^.
and Copyholds of Franck-Tenement, are created by the same words that
Inheritance and Franck-Tenement at the Common Law are created by.

If a Copyhold be granted to a man, and to his heirs males, or heirs females.

If to a man and sanguini suo hereditabili.

If to a Deane and Chapter, or to a Major and Commonalty, without any express
estate, or without a limitation of some inferior estate. In all these Grants, a
perfect estate in Fee passes.

And so peradventure if I surrender a Copyhold to a man and his heirs, and he
reciting this estate, re-surrendreth in the same manner to me, that I
surrendered to him, not making any mention of my heir, yet this recital
seems sufficient to pass a good Fee-simple.

So, if I surrender unto you as large an estate, as I. S. has in his Manor of
D. and he has a Fee-simple in his Manor, it is somewhat probable, that an
estate in Fee simple should pass, by reason of his relation without the word
heirs.

If a Copyhold be surrendered to a man, and semini suo haereditabili de corpore,
or to a man, and haeredibus ex ipso precreatis, or to a man in Franck-marriage
with his wife, in these Grants an estate tail passes in the first, without
the word heirs, in the second, without the word body; in the third without
either.

If the King by his Steward grants a Copyhold to a man, and to his heirs
males, or heirs females, no Fee-simple passes, because the Lord never
intended to pass such an estate.

If a Copyhold be Granted to an Abbot, and to his heirs, an estate for life
only passes.

So if I Grant a Copyhold to a man in Fee-simple, ac sanguini suo imperpetum,
or sibi and assign. suis impe^pectum; yet the word heirs wanting no greater
estate than for life passes.

The same Law is, if a Copyhold be granted to a man, and to his heirs, as long
as I. S. shall live, this is only an estate, per anter vie, and a rend.
limited upon this estate, is good.

But if a Copyhold be granted to a man, and to his heirs, as long as such a
tree shall grow in such a ground, this is a good Fee, and a render limited
upon it is void.

If a Copyhold be granted to I. S. and I. N. and haeredibus, they are joint
Tenants for life; and no inheritance passes unto either, because of the
uncertainty for want of this word (suis) but if a Copyhold be granted to I. S.
only and haerend. a good Fee-simple passes without the word suis.

If a Copyhold be granted to a man, and haered bus, an estate tail does not
pass, for want of the words de corpore. And if a Copyhold be granted to a man,
and liberis aut puer. suis de corpore; an estate tail does not pass for want
of this word (heirs) for what estates soever are intayles since the Statute De
donis Conditionalibus were Fee-simples Conditional; but this could be no
Fee-simple conditional before the Statute without the word (heirs) and
therefore no intayle since the Statute. And for the same reason, if a Copyhold
be granted to a man, and to the issues males of his body an estate for life
only passes.

If a Copyhold be granted to a man, without expressing any certain estate by
implication of Law, an estate for life only passes; and if I grant a Copyhold
to three habendum successive, they are joint Tenants, unless by special
Custom the word successive make their estates several. Thus much touching the
creation of Copyhold estates.

SEC. L.
THe discents of Copyhold of inheritance are guided and directed by the rules
of the Common Law, as well as the creation of Copyhold estates.

If a Copyholder in Fee-simple having issue, a son and a daugher by one
venture, and a son by an other venture, dies, and the son by the first
venture enters and dies; the Land shall descend to the daughter,
Quia-possessio fratris de feodo simplici facit sororem esse haeredem.

But if a Copyholder in tail, have issue, a son and a daughter by one venture,
and a son by another, venture dies, and the son by the first venture enters
and dies, the son of the second venture shall inherit.

If a man having issue, a son and a daughter by one venture, and a son by
another venture, the eldest son purchases a Copyhold in Fee, and dies
without issue, the daughter shall have the Land, not the younger son, because
he is but of the half blood to the other.

If a man has a Copyhold, by descent from his mothers side, if he die without
issue, the Land shall go to the heirs of the mothers side, and shall rather
escheate, than go to the heirs of the fathers side; but if I purchase a
Copyhold, and die without issue, the Land shall go to the heirs of my Fathers
side: but if I have no heirs of my fathers side, it shall go to the heirs of
my mothers side rather than escheate.

If there be Father, Uncle and Son, and the son purchases a Copyhold in
Fee, and dies without issue, the Uncle shall inherit and not the Father,
because an inheritance may lineally descend, but not ascend.

If there be three brothers, and the middle brother purchases a Copyhold in
Fee, and dies without issue, the eldest shall inherit, because the worthiest
of blood.

If there be two Coparteners, or two Tenants in Common of a Copyhold, and one
dies having issue, the issue shall inherit, and not the other by the
survivership; but otherwise it is of two joint Tenants. Should I give way to my
Pen, and write of this Theme till I wanted matter to write on, I should make
a large Volume in dilating this one point; therefore I will contract my self,
entreating you to supply by your private cogitations, what I have either
willingly or unwittingly passed over in silence, only take this caveat by the
way.

Though all qualities necessarily incident to estates at the Common Law, are
likewise incident to Copyhold estates; yet the Law is not so of collateral
qualities without special Custom; Co. 4. fo. 22. a.
and therefore a Copyhold shall be no assets to the heir.

A descent of a Copyhold, shall not toll an entry. A surrender made by Tenant
in tail (admit a Copyhold may be intayled) or by a Baron of a Copyhold, which
he has in right of his wife shall make no discontinuance, because these are
collateral qualities, and not necessarily incident.

Thus much of the several estates of Copyholds together with their several
qualities incident to their several estates. I come now in the first place to
examine how Copyholders are to impleade, and be impleaded.

SEC. LI.
A Copyholder cannot in any Action real, or that savoureth of the realty, or
has a dependence upon the realty implead or be impleaded in any other Court,
but in the Lords Court, for or concerning his Copyhold, but in actions that are
merely personal, he may sue or be sued at the Common Law.

If a Copyholder be ousted of his Copyhold by a stranger, he cannot implead him
by the Kings Writ, but by Plaint in the Lords Court, and shall make
protestation to prosecute the suit in the nature of an Assize of novell
disseisin, of an Assize of Mort D'ancestor of a Formedon in the Discender,
Reverser, or Remainder, or in the nature of any other Writ, as his cause shall
require, and shall put in pleg. de prosequend.

If a Copyholder be ousted by the Lord he cannot maintain an Assize at the
Common Law, because he wants as Franck-Tenant, but he may have an action of
trespass against him at the Common Law; for it is against reason, that the
Lord should be Judge where he himself is a party.

If in a plaint in the Lords Court touching the title of a Copyholder, the Lord
gives false judgment, he cannot maintain a Writ of false judgment, for then
he should be restored to a Francke-Tenant where he lost none.

No Copyholder of base Tenure in ancient Demesne can maintain a Writ of droit
close, or a Writ of Monstraverunt, but Tenants of Francke-tenure in ancient
demesne can.

A Copyholder that may cut down Timber trees by Custom, by license of the
Lord, makes a Lease for years, the Lessee cutteth down trees, the Copyholder
shall not have a Writ of waste, but shall sue at the Lords Court to punish this
waste.

If a feme Dowable, by Custom of a Copyhold; by plaint in the Lords Court,
recovereth Dower and damages, no action of debt lies at the Common Law for
these damages, because the action, though it be in it self personal, yet it
depends upon the realitiy.

If a Copyholder makes a Lease by Copy for Years, or by Deed with License,
an action of debt lies for the Rent, reserved upon either Lease at the Common
Law; but I much doubt whether he can avow for the Rent, either in the one or in
the other, no more than Cestuy que use, before the Statute 27. H. 8. cap. 10.
could avow for the Rent reserved by him upon a Lease for years, and yet he
could maintain an action of debt for such a Rent, because an action of debt is
grounded upon the contract.

If a stranger cut down trees growing in the Copyhold ground, an action of
trespass lies at the Common Law against him; so does it against the Lord,
where he cutteth them down, when by Custom they belong to the Tenant,
because this is a mere personal action, and damages only are to be recovered.

And if a copyholder without License, makes a Lease for one year, or with
License makes a Lease for many years, and the Lessee be ejected, he shall not
sue in the Lords Court by plaint, but shall have an ejection firm at the
Common Law, because he has not a Customary estate by Copy, but a warrantable
estate by the rules of the Common Law. Thus much of the manner how Copyholders
are to impleade, and be impleaded.

SEC. LII.
I Come now in the sixth place, to show under what Statutes Copyholders are
Comprehended. Copyholders are comprehended under Statute, either by express
limitation in precise words, or by a secret implication upon general words: by
express limitation in precise words;

As by the Statute of the first of R. 3. cap. 4. it is expressly provided,
that a Copyholder having Copyhold Land, to the yearly value of twenty six
shillings and six pence; above all charges may be impanelled upon a Jury, as
well as he that has twenty shillings, per annum of Freehold-Land.

So by the Statute of 1. E. 6. cap. 14. it is expressly provided, that upon the
dissolution of Abbyes, and Monasteries, Copyholds should continue as they did
before the Statute, and should fall into the Kings hands.

So by the Statute of 2. E. 6. cap. 8. it is expressly provided, that the
interest of a Copyhold, should be preserved, notwithstanding it be not found by
Office, after the decease of the Kings Tenant.

So by the Statute of 1. Mar. cap. 12. it is expressly provided, that if any
Copyholder being Yeoman, Artificer, Husbandman, or Labourer; and being of the
age of eighteen or more, under the age of sixty; not sick, impotent, lame,
maimed, nor having any other just or reasonable cause of excuse upon request
made by any man in authourity, refuses to aid Justices in suppressing of
riotous persons, that then immediately he shall forfeit his Copyhold to the
Lord, of whom it is held during the Copyholders natural life.

So by the Statute of 5. Eliz. cap. 14. it is expressly provided, that the
forging of a Court Roll, to the intent to defraud a Copyholder, shall be as
well punishable, as the forging any other Charter, Deed, or Writing sealed,
whereby to defeat a Copyholder or Freeholder.

So by the Statute of 13. Eliz. cap. 7. It is expressly provided, that the
Copyhold Land, as well as the Freehold Land of a Bankerupt, shall be sold for
the satisfying of the Creditor.

So by the Statute of 14. Eliz. cap. 6. It is expressly provided, that if any of
the Queens subjects goes beyond the Seaes without License, that then the
Queen shall not only take the ordinary profits of the fugitives Copyhold
Land, as they arise, but shall let, set, and make Grants by Copy, and usual
Wood-sales, and other things, to all intents and purposes, as a Tenant pro
term durante vie, may do.

So by the Statute of the 35. Eliz. cap. 2. It is expressly provided, that if
any person or persons being convicted of recusancie, repair not home to their
usual place of abode, not removing from thence above five miles distant, that
then any person; or persons thus offending, shall not only forfeit their
Freehold Land to the Queen; but withal their Copyhold Land to the Lord, or
Lords of whom it is holden.

Thus have I showed in brief under what Statute Copyholders are comprehended
by express limitation in precise words. Now I will show you as briefly as I
can, under what Statute they are comprehended by secret implication upon
general words.

SEC. LIII.
SOme hold that all Statutes that speak generally of Tenants, extend to
Tenants by Copy: but it is much to be feared that we shall wander from the
Truth, if we give credit to this conceit: for if we peruse the Statute, we
shall meet with an infinite number of them, that speak generally of Tenants,
and yet touch not Tenants by Copy; wherefore not giving way to this opinion, as
being erroneous, I will set you down an infallible rule, which will truly
direct you in the exposition of the general words in Statutes; and that is
thus.

When an Act in Parliament alters the service tenure interest of the Land,
Co. 3. fo. 8.
or other thing in prejudice of the Lord, or of the Custom of the Manor, or in
prejudice of the Tenant, there the general words of such an Act in Parliament
extend not to the Copyhold; but when an Act is generally made for the good of
the Commonwealth, and no prejudice may accrue, by reason of the alteration of
any interest, Service, Tenure or Custom of the Manor there usually Copyholds
are within the general purveiw of such Acts.

The Statute of West. 2. ca. 1. of intailes, extends not to Copyholds,
because it would be prejudicial to the Lord; for by this means the Tenure is
altered: for the Donee intayle, without any special reservation ought to hold
of the Doner by the same Service that the Doner holds over; besides the words
of the Statute are, Quod voluntas Donator in charta Domini sui manifesta
expressa decetero observit, which proves, that the intent of the Statute was,
that no hereditament should be intailed within this Statute, but such an one as
either was given, or at least may be given by Charter, or Deed; but Copyholds
are no such hereditaments, and therefore not within the body of the Act; yet it
is holden, that Custom with the cooperation of the Statute will make an estate
tail.

The Statute of W. 2. ca. 20. which gives the Elegit, extends not to
Copyhold, because it would be prejudicial to the Lord, and a breach of the
Custom, that any stranger should have interest in the Lands holden by Copy
without the admittance, and ordinary allowance of the Lord.

The Statute of 16. R. 2. cap. 5. which makes it a forfeiture of Lands,
Tenaments, and Hereditaments, to the purchasor of Excommunications, Bulls, etc.
in the Court of Rome, against the King, etc. extends not to Copyhold, because
it would be prejudicial to the Lord to have the King so far intereressed in
his Copyhold without his consent.

The Stature of 2. H. 5. ca. 7. of Heretics extends not to Copyholds; for
though the Lord of a Manor is yearly to receive a benefit, in having the
Lands after the year and the day forfeited unto him; yet because the King is a
sharer in this for feiture; therefore Lands by Copy are not comprehended under
the general words; besides the Statute speaks of the Kings having annuum
diem, and vastum of these Lands forfeited for heresy, as in Lands forfeited
for felony; whereby it appears, that the meaning of the Statute is, that such
Lands only should be forfeited; in which the King by the ordinary course of
the Law should have An nuum diem and vastum: if the Tenant of them had
committed felony, but such lands are not Lands by Copy; for if a Copyholder
commits felony, his Copyhold is presently forfeited to the Lord; therefore
Copyholds are out of the general purview of this Statute.

SEC. LIVE.
THe Statute of 27. H. 8. ca. 10. of Uses, touches not Copyholds, because the
transmutation of possession, by the sole operation of the Statute without
allowance of the Lord, or the Agreement of the Tenant, would tend to the
prejudice, both of the Lord, and of the Tenant, and the branch of the same
Statute which speaks of Joyntures touches not Copyholds, because Dowers of
Copyholds are warranted by special Custom only, and not by the Common Law,
or by the general Custom.

The Statute of 31. of H. 8. ca. 1. and 32. H. 8. cap. 32. by which
joynt-Tenements and Tenants in Common are compellable to make partition by a
Writ de partitione faciend. As Coparteners at the Common Law, touch not
Copyholds, because this alteration of the Tenure without the Lords consent may
sound to the prejudice of the Lord.

The Statute of 32. H. 8. ca. 28. which confirms Leases for 21. years, or
three Lives made by Tenants in tail, or by the husband and wife, of the Lands
of the wife, touch not Copyhold: for the Statute speaks of Leases made by
Deed only; so that the intent of the Statute is to warrant the Leasing of
such Lands only as are Grantable by Deed, but such are not Copyhold-lands: for
though they may by License of the Lord be demised by Indenture, yet in their
own name they are demiseable only by Copy; and therefore out of the general
purview of the Statute, for the same reason, the same Statute cap. 34. which
gives an entry to the Grantee, of a Reversion, upon the breach of a Condition
by the particular Tenant touches not Copyholds.

SEC. LV.
THe Stat. of 17. E. 2. cap. 10. which gives the Wardships of Idiots Land unto
the King, touches not the Idiots Copyhold; for thereby great prejudice would
accrue to the Lord.

But the Statute of Marton, cap. 1. which gives damages to a feme, upon a
Recovery in a Writ of Dower, Co. 4. fo. 30. b.
where the Baron dies seized, extends to Copyhold.

So that the Statute of Westminster, 2. cap. 3 and the three several branches of the
same Statute.

1. The one which gives the Cui in vita, upon a discontinuance made by the
Baron.

2. The second which gives the receipt unto the feme upon the Barons refusal
to defend the wives title.

3. And the third, which gives a quod ei deforceat to particular Tenants
extends to Copyhold.

So that the Statute of 31. H. 8. ca. 13. of Monaster. which provideth for the
avoidance of doubling of estates,

And the Statute 32. H. 8. cap. 9. against Champertie, and buying of Litigious
Titles, and chap. 28. which gives an entry in Liew of a Cui in vita, Co 4. fo.
26.
extends all to Copyholds, because these Statutes are beneficial to the
Commonwealth, and not at all prejudicial to the Lord in the alteration of
Tenure estate Service, etc.

So the Statute of 4. H. 7. cap. 24. of Fines extends to Copyholds; for if a
Copyholder be disseised, and the Desseisor levieth a Fine with proclamations,
and five years passed without any claim made; this is a bar both to the
Lord, and to the Copyholder.

So if a Copyholder make a Feoffment in Fee, and the Feoffee levieth a Fine
with proclamation, and five years pass, the Lord is barred; but if a
Copyholder levy a Fine, and five years pass, the Lord is not barred, for the
Fine levied the Copyhold, having no Franck-Tenant, is utterly void. And
whereas it has been doubted, that this Statute should not extend to Copyhold;
but the Lord should hereby receive grand prejudice; Co. 9. fo. 105. a.
for he should not only lose the Fines, upon alienations or descents, and the
benefit of forfeiture, but should withal be in hazard to be barred of his
Franck-tenant and inheritance.

To that I answer, if the Lord receive any such prejudice, it is through his
own default, for not making claim, for in regard of the privitie in estate,
that is between him and the Copyholder he may make claim, as well as the
Copyholder himself; Et vigilantibus non dormientibus jura subveniunt.

Thus have I showed under what Statutes Copyholds are comprehended. I come now
in the seventh place, to speak of Fines.

SEC. LVI.
A Fine is a sum of money paid to the Lord of the Manor for an Income into
any Lands or Tenements. In some Manors Fines are certain, in some incertaine.

Fines of Copyholds.
By special Custom Copyholders are to pay Fines upon Licenses granted unto
them to demise by Indenture, but by general Custom they are to pay Fines
only upon admittances.

If the Lord having a Copyhold by Escheate forfeiture, or other means, makes
a voluntary admittance, a Fine is due unto the Lord.

If a Copyholder surrendreth to the use of a stranger, and the Lord admits,
a Fine is due to the Lord.

So if a Copyhold descends, and the Lord admits the heir, where by the
Custom of the Manor, the wife is to have Dower, and the husband is to be
Tenant by the courtesy of a Copyhold, either of them shall be admitted, and
shall pay a Fine to the Lord.

If a Copyhold be granted du rante vie, and the Grantee dies, living Cestuy
que vie, and a stranger enters as a general occupant he shall be admitted,
and shall pay a Fine.

And so if a Copyhold be granted to one and his heirs, durante vie; and the
Grantee dies, and his heir enters as a special occupant, where by the
Custom of the Manor, a Copyhold may be extended, upon the extent the party
shall be admitted, and shall pay a Fine.

Where by the Custom of the Manor, the Bailiffe of the Manor, is to have the
Wardship of the Copyhold heir; being under the age of fourteen, such a
Guardian shall neither be admitted, nor pay a Fine, because he is but a partnor
of the profits, and that not in his own right, but in the right of him to whom
he is Guardian.

If the Copyhold Lands of a Bankerupt be sold according to the Statute of the
13. Eliz. cap. 7. the Vendee shall be admitted and pay a Fine.

If a Villain purchases a Copyhold, the Lord of the Villain may enter and
seize it, and the Lord of the Manor shall admit him and have a Fine.

If a Copyhold be granted upon Condition, and the Condition be broken, and the
Granter enters, he shall not be admitted, neither pay a Fine, because upon
the breach of the Condition, and the entry, he is to all intents, in Statu quo
prius, as if no grant at all had been made.

If a Copyholder in Fee surrendreth for life, reserving the Reversion, and the
Lessee for life dies, the Copyholder shall not be admitted to his Reversion,
neither shall he pay a fine, because the Reversion was never out of him.

If a Copyholder be disseised, and then enters upon the Desseisor, or
recovereth by plaint, in the nature of an Assize, he shall not be admitted,
neither shall he pay a Fine, for he continues still Tenant by Copy,
notwithstanding the disseisin, but where by a plaint a Copyhold is recovered
upon the accruer of a new Title, where he that recovereth was never admitted
nor paid Fine; there upon his recovery, an admittance is requisite, and a Fine
is due: as if a Copyholder dies seized, a stranger abateth, and the heir
recovereth by plaint in the nature of an Assize of Mort d'auncester upon this
recovery he shall be admitted and pay a Fine.

If I take a wife, Copyhold in Fee, though by this inter-marriage, there
accrueth a present interest to me; yet because I am seized, non jure proprio,
but jure alieno, therefore I shall not be admitted, neither shall I pay a Fine.

The same Law is, Vid. Plowden com. 4 18. b.
if she be a Termor of a Copyhold; for though the term by the inter-marriage
be so vested in me, that I may dispose of it without control; yet because
before disposer I am possessed of it, but in the right of my wife; therefore I
shall neither be admitted, nor pay a Fine.

If a Copyhold be surrendered for life, the remainder to a stranger, though the
admittance of Tenant for life be sufficient to invest the estate in him in the
Remainder, yet upon the death of Tenant for life, he in the Remainder shall be
admitted and pay a Fine.

So if a Copyhold be granted to three habend. success. vie whereby Custom
successive is in force; if any one dies, he that next succeeds shall be
admitted and pay a Fine.

If two Coparteners, or Tenants in Common of a Copyhold be, and the one dies,
and the other has all by descent, he shall be admitted, and shall pay a Fine.
But if two joynt-Tenants be of a Copyhold, one dies, the other shall have all
by the survivorship without admittance, or paying Fine, because joynt-tenants
to all intents and purposes, are seized per my, and per tout.

If two several Copyholders join in a Grant of their Copyhold by one Copy; or
if one Copyholder having several Copyholds, grants them by one Copy; yet the
Grantee shall pay several Fines, for they shall inure as several Grants.

Co. 4 fo. 27. b.
But if two joynt-Tenants, two Tenants in Common, or Tenant for life, and he in
the Remainder join in the Grant of a Copyhold, one Fine only is due, and it
shall inure, as one Grant only: so if a surrender be made, and after a common
Recovery is had by plaint in the nature of a Writ of entry, in Le post, for the
better assurance, one Fine only shall be paid.

And thus much of Fines. I come now in the next place to Forfeitures; wherein I
will chiefly rely upon these four points.

1. What Acts amount to a Forfeiture. 2. What persons are able to forfeit. 3.
What persons are able to take benefit of a Forfeiture. 4. What Acts amount to a
confirmation of an estate forfeit.
SEC. LVII.
OF Acts which amount to Forfeiture, some are Forfeits, eo instante,, that they
are committed: some are not Forfeits till presentment. Offenses which are
apparent and notorious, by which the Lord by common presumption, cannot choose
but have notice are Forfeitures, eo instante, that they are committed, as if by
special Custom, upon the descent of any Copyhold of Inheritance, the heir is
tied upon three solemn Proclamations made at three several Courts, to come in
and be admitted to his Copyhold, if he fails to come; in this failer is a
forfeiture Ipso facto.

So if a Copyholder be sufficiently warned to appear, and he fails, this is
a forfeiture Ipso facto.

But if he be hindered by sickness, or by over flowing of waters, or if he be
much in debt, and fear to be arrested, or if he be a Bankerupt, and keeps
his house, then his default is no forfeiture.

If a Copyholder in the Court be called, and summoned to be sworn of the
homage, and refuses; this is a forfeiture Ipso facto.

So if a Copyholder be sworn of the homage, and then refuses to present the
Articles according to his Oath; this is a forfeiture Ipso facto.

So if a Copyholder will swear in Court, that he is none of the Lords
Copyholder, this is a forfeiture Ipso facto.

But if a Copyholder in presence of the Court speaks unreverent words of the
Lord, as that the Lord exacteth and extorteth unreasonable Fines, and
undue-Services, this is fineable only, but no forfeiture; and if he says in
Court, that he will devise a means no longer to be the Lords Copyholder, this
is neither cause of fine not forfeiture; for peradventure the means that he
intended was lawful, viz. by passing away his Copyhold; Et ubi sensus verborum
est multiplex, verba semper sunt accipienda in meliori sensu.

If the Steward shows a Court roll to a Copyholder, to prove, that his Land
is holden by Copy, and that the Copyholder says he is a Freeholder, and
shows a Deed, pretending thereby to procure his Land to be Freehold, and
teareth in pieces the Court-Roll, this is a forfeiture Ipso facto.

So if the Lord, Co. 4. fo. 27. b.
upon the admittance of a Copyholder; the Fine, by the Custom of the Manor
being certain, demands his Fine, and the Copyholder denies to pay it upon
demand, this is a forfeiture ipso facto.

So if a Copyholder will sue a Replevin against the Lord, upon the Lords
lawful distress for his Rent or Services, this is a forfeiture Ipso facto.

But if the Copyholdder be in doubt whether it be due or not, and therefore
entreats the Lord, that the homage may inquire the truth, this is no
forfeiture.

If the Fine by the Custom of the Manor, be incertaine, though a reasonable
Fine be assessed, yet because no man can provide for an incertainty, the
Copyholder is not bound to pay it presently upon demand, but shall have
convenient time to discharge it, if the Lord limit no certain day for payment
thereof, and if within convenient time it be not discharged, this is a
forfeiture without presentment.

But if the Fine be unreasonable, though it be never paid, it is no forfeiture,
and it shall be determined by the opinion of the Justices before whom the
matter depends, either upon a demurre, or in Evidence to the Jury, upon the
confession or proof of the yearly value of the Land, whether the Fine be
reasonable or not; for if the Lords might Assesse unreasonable Fines at their
pleasures, then most estates by Copy, which are a great part of the Kingdom,
and which have continued time out of mind, might now at the will of the Lords
be defeated, and destroyed, which would be very inconvenient.

If the Lord demands his Rent, and the Copyholder denies to pay it, this is
a forfeiture Ipso facto.

So if the Copyholder says, that he wants money to discharge the Rent, and
therefore entreats the Lord to forbear, until he be better provided,
unless the Lord gives his consent; this non payment is a forfeiture, Ipso
facto.

For a Copyholder knowing his day of payment is to provide against the day; but
if the Lord comes upon the Copyholders ground, and demands his Rent, and
neither the Copyholder himself, nor any other by his appointment, is there
present to answer their demand, though this be a denial in Law of the Rent,
yet this is no forfeiture.

But if the Lord continues in making demand upon the ground, and the
Copyholder is still absent, this continual denial in Law, amounts to a
denial in fact, and makes the Copyholders estate subject to a forfeiture
without presentment.

If a Copyholder for life suffers a Recovery by plaint in the Lords Court, as
Copyhold of the inheritance, this is a forfeiture Ipso facto.

But if he surrender in Fee, this is no forfeiture, because it did not pass by
Livery.

If a Copyholder commits waste voluntarily or permissive, this is a
forfeiture Ipso facto.

Voluntary, as if he plucketh down any ancient built house, or if he builds
any new house, and then pulls it down again; or if he ploweth meadow, so
that thereby the ground is made worse; or loppeth the trees, or sells the
lopping; or if he cutteth down any fruit trees for fuel, having other wood
sufficient, this and the like voluntary waste are forfeitures Ipso facto.

Permissive, as if he suffers his house to decay, or fall to ground for want
of necessary reparations; or if he suffers his meadows for want of mending
his banckes to be surrounded, so that it becomes Rushy, or worth nothing; or
his arrable ground, so to be surrounded, that it is become unprofitable. These
and the like permissive wastes are forfeitures Ipso facto.

And thus much of Acts which are forfeitures, eo instante, that they are
committed. A word of those Acts which are said not forfeitures till presentment.

SEC. LVIII.
ANd such are those offenses, which by common presumption, the Lord cannot of
himself, have notice of without notice given, as if a Copyholder commits
felony or treason.

So, if a Copyholder be Outlawed, or excommunicate, that the Lord may have the
profits of his Copyhold Land, a presentment is necessary.

So, if a Copyholder goes about in any other Court to intytle any other Lord
unto his Copyhold, or if he alieneth by Deed; these and the like ought to be
presented.

If a Copyholder makes a bargain and sale of his Copyhold, and it is not
in-rolled according to the Statute; this is no forfeiture; no more than a
Feoffment without Livery, because nothing passes.

So if a Copyholder makes a Feoffment of all his Lands in Dale, and makes
Livery in his Charter Lands, no part of his Copyhold-Land is thereby forfeited;
but if Livery be made in any part of the Copyhold Lands; all his Copyhold Lands
are forfeited.

If a Copyholder by Deed of bargain and sale enrolled according to the
Statute, does bargain and sell all his Lands in Dale, having both Copyhold and
Freehold; his Copyhold is not thereby forfeited; for the Law will construe this
to extend to his Freehold only, rather than by any over large construction^
make a forfeiture in this kind.

And if a Copyholder by Deed enrolled, bargaineth or sells all his Copyhold
Lands in Dale, or all his Lands in Dale generally, having no Freehold Lands,
this is a forfeiture.

Thus I have showed you what Acts amount to a forfeiture. Now I will show you
what persons are able to forfeit.

SEC. LIX.
A Man of non sanae memoriae, an Idiot, or a Lunatique, though they be able to
take a Copyhold, yet they are unable to forfeit a Copyhold, because they want
common reason, nay common sense.

So an Infant that is under the age of fourteen is unable to forfeit his
Copyhold, because he wants discretion, and till then he is to be in Ward to
the next of his kindred, to whom the inheritance cannot descend, or to the Lord,
or the Bayliffe of the Manor, as the Custom shall warrant.

So a feme covert by any Act she can do of her self, cannot possibly forfeit
her Copyhold, because she is not sui juris sed sub potestate viri: but if she
do any act which amounts to a forfeiture by the consent of her husband, this
is in her a forfeiture.

An Infant at the age of discretion may forfeit his Copyhold, not by offenses
which proceed from negligence or ignorance, but by such as proceed from
contempt.

If an Infant come not in to be admitted, according to the Custom at three
solemn proclamations made at three several Courts; or if he will suffer his
houses to go to ruin, or his ground to be surrounded; these Acts savouring of
negligence only are no forfeitures.

So if an Infant Copyholder sueth a Replevin against the Lord, upon a distress
lawfully taken; or if he alieneth by Deed, or the like; these Acts relishing
of ignorance only are no forfeitures.

But if he denies from time to time to pay the Lord the Rent, or commits
voluntary waste, notwithstanding often warning given him by the Lord; these
Acts proceeding from malice and contempt are forfeitures; and so if he
comitteth felony or treason.

If a Guardian of a Copyholder commits waste, he shall forfeit the
Wardsh^ppe only, not the inheritance of the Copyhold.

If Cestuy que use, of a Copyhold commits waste, he shall not forfeit the
Copyhold.

If the husband commits waste in Copyhold Lands, which he has in the right
of his wife; Co. 4. fo. 27. a.
this is a forfeiture of the wives Copyhold.

But if a stranger commits waste without the consent of the husband, this is
no forfeiture though the wife consents.

If a Diffeisor of a Copyhold commits waste; this is no forfeiture.

So, if a Copyhold be surrendered to the use of I. S. and before admittance, I.
S. commits waste; this is no forfeiture, for by the same reason that he
cannot grant before admittance, he cannot forfeit before admittance.

If two joint Tenants be of a Copyhold, and one commits waste, he forfeiteth
his part only, for no man can forfeit more than he has granted.

And therefore if there be Tenant for life with a remainder over of a Copyhold,
and the Copyholder for life purchases the Manor, commits waste, or does any
Act, which amounts to the extinguishment, or the forfeiture of a Copyhold,
yet the remainder is not hereby touched.

And so if a Copyholder be granted to three habend. successivie, whereby the
Custom of the Manor, this word Successivie takes place, the first Copyholder
cannot prejudice the other two by any Act: he can do no more, than if a
Copyholder in Fee by License, makes a Lease for years by Deed, or without
License by Copy, and either of these Lessees commits waste, the reversion is
not hereby forfeited.

If I have two several Copyholds, by two several Copies, and I commit waste
in one, this is a forfeiture of this one only, and not of the other.

And so if I grant these several Copyholds by one Copy, yet they continue
several as they did before, and the forfeiture of the one is not the
forfeiture of the other.

The same Law is, if two several Copyholds Escheated to the Lord, and he
regranteth them again by one Copy.

And thus have I showed what persons are able to forfeit. I will now in a word
show what persons are able to take benefit of a forfeiture.

SEC. LX.
REgularly it is true, that none can take benefit of a forfeiture; but he that
is Lord of the Manor at the time of the forfeiture.

And therefore if a Copyholder makes a Feoffment, and then the Lord alieneth,
neither the Granter, nor the Grantee can take benefit of this forfeiture, for
neither a right of entry, nor a right of action can ever be transferred from
one to another. And therefore if a Freeholder alieneth in Mortmaine, and then
the Lord grants away his Seigniory, neither the one nor the other can ever
take benefit of this forfeiture.

So if a Lessee for life commits waste, and then the Lessor grants away
the reversion, this waste is made dispunishable.

But if Tenant for life be of a Manor, with remainder over in Fee to a stranger,

If a Copyholder commits waste, and then Tenant for life of the Manor dies
before entry; yet he in Remainder may enter, for he had an interest in the
Manor at the time of the forfeiture committed, though he could not enter, by
reason of the State in Tenant for life, which being determined, his entry is
now accrued unto him for the forfeiture committed in the life of Tenant for
life.

And sometimes, he that is neither Lord of the Manor, at the time of the
forfeiture committed, nor ever after shall take benefit of a forfeiture.

As if a Lord of a Manor grants a Copyhold in Fee, and then grants the
Franck-Tenement, or the inheritance of this Copyhold to a stranger; the
Grantee, though no Lord of the Manor, nor able to keep any Court, Co. 4. fo.
24.
shall take benefit of forfeitures made by the Copyholder, as if the
Copyholder do make a Feoffment, Lease, waste, deny the Rent, etc.

Thus have I showed what persons are able to take benefit of a forfeiture. I
will now in one word show what Acts amount to a confirmation of an estate
forfeited.

SEC. LXI.
IF the Lord does any thing whereby he does acknowledge him his Tenant after
forfeiture; this acknowledgement amounts to a Confirmation; as if he
distreyneth upon the ground for Rent due after forfeiture; or if he admits
after the forfeiture, or the like: these are estoppells to the Lord, so that he
can never enter, so the Lord have notice of such forfeitures before any such
act, which may amount to a confirmation be done, yet some make this difference,
that these forfeitures only which destroy not the Copyhold are only
conformable by subsequent acknowledgement, and not those forfeitures which tend
to the destructions of a Copyhold, as if the Copyholder makes a Feoffment; by
this the Copyholder is destroyed, and therefore no subsequent acknowledgement
of the Lord will ever salve this sore.

And this shall suffice for forfeitures. I come now in the last place, to show
what Acts amount to the extinguishment of a Copyhold.

SEC. LXII.
Wheresoever a Copyhold is become not demisable by Copy, either by the Act of
the Lord, by the Act of the Law, or by the Act of the Copyholder himself, it
is extinguished for ever.

By the Act of the Lord, as if a Copyholder Escheateth, and the Lord grants
away any estate by Deed, this is an extinguishment. Co. 4. fo. 31.
So if he makes a Feoffment upon Condition, and then enters for breach of
the Condition: yet the Copyhold is extinguished, because once not demisable.

But if the Lord keeps the Copyhold-Lands, for never so many years, or
grants at will, this destroys not the Copyhold, because it continues ever
demisable by Copy.

By the Act of the Law, as if the Copyhold escheated be extended upon a Statute
or Recognizance acknowledged by the Lord, or if the feme of the Lord has this
Land assigned unto her for her Dower, although these impediments be by the Act
of the Law: yet because they are lawful, the Land can never after be granted
by Copy.

By the Act of the Copyholder himself, as if he accepts a Lease for years
at the Common Law, either mediate or immediate from the Lord; of the Copyhold,
this is an absolute extinguishment.

But if he accepts a Lease for years of the Manor, the Copyholder by this
has not continuance, but this is no extinguishment, because the Land
continues still grantable by Copy.

If a Copyholder with License make a Lease for years to a stranger; or without
License, makes a Lease for years to the Lord, the Copyhold is not hereby
extinguished, and yet it is not demisable by Copy.

So if a Copyholder intermarrieth with a feme Seignioresse; this is a
suspension only of the Copyhold, no extinguishment.

So if the interruption be torcious, as the Lord be disseised, and this
disseisor dies seized, or if the Land be recovered by false verdict, or
erroneous judgment; and after the Land is recontinued, it is not extinguished,
but may be granted arere by Copy; for Non valet impedimentum quod de jure non
sortitur effectum, and quod contra legem fit pro infecto habetur.

And so I conclude with Copyholders, wishing that these may ever be a perfect
union betwixt them and their Lords, that they may have a feeling of each others
wrongs and injuries; that their so little Commonwealth, having all his members
knit together, in complete order, may flourish to the end.

FINIS.

