THE NECESSITY OF Divine Instructions In point of REFORMATION; Discovered in A
Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable, The LORD MAYOR, The Right
Worshipful, The Sheriffs and Aldermen, with other worthy Citizens of the City
of London, at a Solemn Anniversary Meeting, April 4. 1648. By John Cardell.

ISA. 54.11, 12, 13. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted,
behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with
Saphires.

And I will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all
thy borders of pleasant stones.

And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace
of thy children.

April 13. 1648.
Imprimatur

Joseph Caryl.



London, Printed by John Field for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his
shop at the entering into Popes-head-Alley, out of Lumbardstreet. 1648.

To the Right Honorable, the LORD MAYOR AND Court of Aldermen OF ENGLANDS
METROPOLIS THE Famous City of London.
THe Service that I was lately called to, by your Honorable Appointment, was a
Spiritual Service, and the Theme or Argument that my Meditations were engaged
and carried out upon, was of a Spiritual nature, far above the reach of those
that live merely by Sense and Carnal Reason, (...) Hom^ animalis, cui anima
prosale. non alia quam naturali animi luce pr^^itus, Bez Non Regnitue per spiri
tum sanctum. Pisc^^.
and that savor not the things of God: The natural man, says the Apostle,
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor.
2.14.

My desire was, to suggest something from the Word of Truth, in so great a
Presence, that might advance the Work of Reformation, which is so much spoken
and talked of amongst us, and whereunto we are, above all other People in the
World, so many ways engaged.

But surely our misery even in this respect (as well as in some other) is many
times great upon us, Viv^^^ (...).
That whilst we only pretend to a right end, we woefully miscarry about the
means, that should bring us to that end: My endeavor therefore was, To rectify
this great Error, and to lay something at the bottom, which might sustain the
Building of a Scripture-Reformation, viZ. Jesus Christ by his Word and Spirit:
This is doubtless so ^^re a Foundation, that a better cannot, and another ought
not to be laid or thought upon; Other foundation can no man lay, then that is
laid, which i^ Jesus Christ, says the Apostle: The Prophet calls him, (...).
^nn.
A precious cornerstone, A sure foundation, Isa. 28.16. And whilst men go
about to erect Buildings of Reformation, or Buildings of Salvation, or of any
thing that tends thereto, upon other Foundations, they do but as the Disciples,
when they fished all night, and caught nothing, they do but busy, (...)
and weary themselves to no purpose, and in conclusion utterly lose their
labor; yea, they many times both sow the wind, (...).
and reap the whirlwind, as the Prophet speaks.

Now to establish us upon this sure Foundation, in point of Reformation, was
the scope and drift of the ensuing Sermon, That we might not merely hearken
unto, or carnally rest upon that, which men hold forth unto us, about that
great Work, but consult the mind of Christ therein, from his Word faithfully
interpreted and opened unto us by that Spirit, which at the first gave us the
Word, (...), 2 Timothy 3.16. Scripture cum sint a Spiritu Dei, non possunt
intelligi sine Spiritu Dei. Zanch. de sacr. Script.
and that must still give us the true sense and meaning of it.

Not that I would altogether exclude men neither, from having any hand in this
business, any farther then God himself excludes them: I knew that in all Times
and Ages, God has been pleased to select and choose out men (Magistrates and
others) and to qualify them accordingly, for the helping on of this great
Work; not that he stands in any absolute need of Men, or Means, or Instruments,
only to testify his love and honorable respects unto some, he has been
always pleased to take them in, and to put that glorious Title upon them, (...)
2 Cor. 6.1.
of being co-workers with him in this weighty business, though they can do no
more then what in his strength, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10.
they are continually enabled to perform.

And among other Engines or Instruments of great worth, The Preaching of the
Gospel ( by men rightly qualified for, and duly called unto, that great Work)
must and will certainly have a very great stroke in this business, which,
accompanied with the Spirit, is The Rod of Christ's strength, Psalm. 110.2.
or The Scepter of his Kingdom; that whereby he teaches, and governs his
People, Casting down imaginations, and pulling down strong holds, 2 Cor. 104, 5.
and captivating every thought to the Obedience of himself, by these weapons
that are not carnal. And therefore certainly the Civil Magistrate cannot honor
Christ more, or do Him better service, who is King of kings, 1 Timothy 6.15.
and Lord of lords, then by supporting such a Ministry, which is
Experimentally found, and known to be vehiculum Spiritus, the Chariot, as it
were, of that Spirit, which has always made a world of Believers to come
flocking to Christ, and flying apace unto him, (...).
like so many Doves to their windows.

Now as to this, the Honorable Houses of Parliament have lately Declared
themselves very fully, to the Satisfaction, I am persuaded, of all unbyassed
and well-affected People throughout the Kingdom; and that in these words, among
the rest to that purpose, Men's consciences (say they) must be mollified and
prepared by the powerful Preaching of the Word, ^e^^a^ation of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, concerning the ^apers of the Scor^
Commistioners, (...)
before they will be capable Subjects of Ecclesiastical Discipline; and till
then, there is no other means to restrain them from vice and impiety, but by
the Power of the Magistrate armed with wholesome Laws to that purpose, and by
the powerful Preaching of the Word, which is our hearty desire and endeavor to
advance throughout the Kingdom.

Which Noble Resolution of theirs, seconded and pursued by the Power and
Authority of this great City, what a world of good might it do in a short time?
How mightily, in all likelihood, would the Sun of Righteousness cast forth his
beams even all the Kingdom over, if LONDON were but quietly and thankfully
possessed of this most savory mercy? And truly I^^ ^oyce very much, That in
taking upon me the boldness to be herein your humble and faithful Movitor, Qui
monei utfacias, quod jam facis, ipse monendo laudat, and hortatu fortius ire
juvat.
that I do but only entreat the pursuance of that which ye are already doing:
For where has the powerful Preaching of the Gospel always hitherto had more
encouragement, then from this Famous City?

I will not here be too busy, or too bold, in prescribing or giving
Information to you about that Ministry which ye ought to favor, support and
countenance by your Civil Power; As that D. Stoughton B. Light. page 23.
rare man said in a Sermon of his to Ministers, I am not of metal good enough
for that, The snuffers of the Temple should be of pure Gold.

Only thus much give me leave to say in the general, That certainly such as
deal with the Understandings of men, had need to be men of Understanding; They
that take upon them to teach and inform others, had need to be well taught and
informed themselves; They that make it their work, and their employment to
season others, had need to be well seasoned themselves: otherwise, If the salt
have lost his savor, Matthew. 5.13. compared with Luke 14.34.
wherewith shall it be seasoned? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be
cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men.

But I must remember to whom I speak, Verbum sapicutibus. 1 Cor. 10.15. Ioh.
10.3, 4, 5.
even to wise men, that are able to judge of what I say, and to discern the
voice of Christ, from the voice of a Stranger: And blessed be God for it, that
of late you have known no man, laboring amongst us in the Word and Doctrine, By
this Name, or By that Name, but on both sides, such as by long experience you
have found Able, and Orthodox, and Pious, and Peaceable, they have been equally
employed and encouraged by you; which has somewhat revived our languishing
hopes, that there may yet be a sodering and a combining amongst those that are
really well affected ( and not in appearance only) through your exemplary Care
and Wisdom herein; And that in due time Breaches shall be so far healed, (...).
2.4.
that Swords may be beat into Plow-shares, and Spears into Pruning Hooks; and
that we shall have no occasion to learn War any more, if God has not a purpose
( for the Iniquities thereof) utterly to ruin the Nation; (...) militem (...)
terribilis ^ro^ucit ad bel^^m, ^. oves ad pa^^^ ^ulccdo (...) i^^^^^ Bellanai
(...). ^remi^um, (...) ^^hrvsol. in (...), Sermon.
That as the terrible Trumpet of War has lately called forth the Soldier into
the Field, so that now at the length ( after a few other Storms blown over) the
sweet Jubile-Trumpet of the Gospel shall gather the Sheep of Christ together,
and make them lie down in green pastures, and lead them forth beside the still
waters.

That God would herein bless your Endeavors, (Right Honorable and Right
Worshipful) and bring the Blessing of Peacemakers upon you, and make you famous
all the Kingdom over, and singularly instrumental in this great Work, is the
hearty Desire, and earnest Prayer of

Your Servant in the Lords Work, John Cardell.

The Necessity of Divine Instructions In Point of REFORMATION.
JOB 34.31, 32. 31. Surely, it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
chastisement, I will not offend any more.

32. That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no
more.


THese words are a part of Elihu's Speech to Job, The words a part of Elihu's
Speech to Job.
after his other three Friends, that were elder then he, had ended their
Discourses with him: Because he was young, he was therefore willing to tarry
till graver men had spoken, and then to show his opinion also; (...) is (...),
in (...).
which by the way may teach us, That Piety is no enemy to Ingenuity, or
sweetness of Disposition.

In the 32. (...) from (...) 6. c. 1.
Chapter of this Book, from the 6. ver. and so on, Elihu the son of Barachel
the Buzite answered and said, I am young, and ye are very old, wherefore I was
afraid, and durst not show mine opinion: I said days should speak, and
multitude of years should teach wisdom.

But yet to show that God is not tied to days and years, (...) not tied (...)
days and (...).
says he at the 8. v. There is a spirit in man; and the inspiration of the
Almighty gives them understanding: Great men are not always wise; neither do
the aged understand judgment: (...) And what it was that even (...).
Therefore I said, Hearken to me; I also will show mine opinion. For says he at
the 18. v. I am full of matter, the spirit within me constrains me: Behold,
my belly is as wine, which has no vent, it is ready to burst like new bottles:
I will speak, that I may be refreshed; I will open my lips and answer. This is
the Preface that he makes unto what he had to say.

To carry you through all the several particulars of Elihues dealing with JOB,
(though but with a brief Paraphrase) would tender my Porch too big, my Preface
too tedious.

I shall therefore confine my self to this Chapter, whereof the Text is part;
and that I may be brief in surveying the whole Chapter, and come quickly to the
words, you may please to observe, The main p^^t of Elihu in (...) 34 Chapter,
to justify God in all his dealings with men
That the main plot of Elihu, or the thing that he chiefly ayms at here in this
Chapter, it is to justify God in all his proceedings with men.

At the 10. and 11. verses, says he there, Generally propounded ver. 10.11.
Hearken to me, ye men of understanding: far be it from God, that he should do
wickedness, and from the Almighty, that he should commit iniquity: For the work
of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man to find according to
his works.

This he lays down in the general, Illustrated by several passages in the
following parts of the Chapter.
and this he does illustrate or make good by several passages in the following
parts of the Chapter.

And here about the Text he gives instance in several changes that God makes
upon mighty men, and upon Nations; Changes upon mighty men, ver. 24.
He shall break in pieces mighty men without number, and set others in their
stead, at the 24. v. The Reason why, ver 28.
And in the following verses he tells you why, especially at the 28. v. in that
they cause the cry of the poor to come unto him, and he hears the cry of the
afflicted: Pray mark that Expression, He hears the cry of the afflicted, says
Elihu.

There be three Cries that God is said in a special manner to hear: (...) Cries
(...) God hears


The cry of Prayer.

The cry of Blood. And

The cry of the Oppressed.

First, The cry of Prayer: Shall not God avenge his own Elect, The Cry o^ Prayer
which cry day and night unto him? I tell you, says our Savior, he will avenge
them speedily, when once they begin to cry unto him, Luke 18.7, 8. That Is one
cry that God hears, The ^ry of Prayer.

Secondly, the cry of Blood likewise: The Cry of ^^ood
The cry of his Sons Blood, and the cry of his Saints Blood; The voice of thy
brothers blood cries unto me from the ground, says God to Cain: (...) 4.10
And this is such a loud cry (the Blood of one Righteous Abel, but especially
the Blood of many Righteous Abels) as cannot possibly be decryed any other way,
but only by that other Blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things then
that of Abel, Heb. 12.24.

Thirdly, The Cry of the Oppressed.
God he hears the cry of the Oppressed likewise: When the children of Israel
began to sigh, and groan, and cry unto God, by reason of their Taskmasters, and
those cruel Oppressions that were upon them, then God said, I have seen, I have
seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt, and I have heard their
groaning, and am come down to deliver them, Act. 7.34. And for the Oppression
of the poor, and sighing of the needy, Psalm. 12.^.
Now will I arise (says the Lord) and set him in safety from him that puffs
at him: And here in the Chapter Elihu tells us, That the cry of the poor comes
unto God; and says he, He hears the cry of the afflicted.

But then farther, v. of trouble and quietness, Trouble and quietness sometimes
upon a man, and sometimes upon a Nation.
sometimes upon a man, and sometimes upon a Nation, Quum ipse tranquillat, quis
inquietabit? When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he
hides his face, who then can behold him? whether it be done against a Nation,
or against a man only; that is, God is sometimes pleased to trouble Nations,
and particular persons, and sometimes to bestow peace and quietdess upon them;
Gods end in both, ver. 30. N^ regnet homo hypocrita, Ne sint sendiculae (...).
and his end in both is this, at the 30. v. That the Hypocrite reign not, lest
the people be ensnared. God is more solicitous and careful to prevent the
insnaring of the people, then he is about the Hypocrites reigning: And he many
times suffers a great deal of sorrow, and trouble, and unquietness to come upon
a Nation, to come upon a particular Person, on purpose to prevent the
Hypocrites reigning over a poor ensnared people, or that the Hypocrite reign
not any longer, lest the People be yet farther deluded, and ensnared thereby.

But to leave that also, (...)
and to come unto the words of the Text, which contain the blessed fruits of
sanctified Affliction, when trouble or unquietness has been upon a Person, or
been upon a Nation, what then? Surely, then says he, it is meet to be said unto
God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more: (...) Speech (...)
That which I see not, teach thou me, etc.

In which words the holy Ghost by Elihu frames a speech for the sorrowful, or
tells afflicted ones what to say, when the Chastisements of God have been upon
them.

And in this Speech you have three things especially considerable: Three thin^
in it.


First, Person to be spoken to in this Speech, and that is God; Surely, says
he, it is meet to be said unto God.

Secondly, Here is the time, the season of uttering that which is here
composed, and that is, when the Chastenings of God have been upon us, or when
we have born chastisement; Surely, says he, it is meet to be said unto God, I
have born chastisement.

And then thirdly, matter of the Speech, or the substance of that which is to
be delivered, and that contains two things: A Prayer for Instruction; and A
Promise of Reformation.


A Prayer for Instruction, in those words, That which I see not, teach thou me;
and then says he, when once thou have effectually taught and instructed me,
then if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

The main Observation that I shall pitch upon and propound, as containing the
whole sum and substance of the TEXT, it will be this:

Elihu here speaks of a particular man ye see, Verse 39.
and he speaks likewise of a whole Nation; From whence observe,

That it is the Duty of a Person, or a People that have born chastisement, (...)
and that are newly come out of troubles, to beg Instruction from God, as well
as to promise Reformation. This is plain from the Scripture, which makes
Instruction from God to be the end of chastising, as well as Reformation,
(...), Nocumenta, documenta, Scholacrucis schola Lucis; (...) the (...).
they are old sayings, and very true ones, the Scripture in many places does
both expound and ratify them: Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord,
and teach out of thy Law, (...).
says the Psalmist.

And besides the TEXT here, says Elihu moreover, (...)
Job 36.8, 9, 10. If (says he there) they be bound in fetters, and holden in
cords of affliction; then he shows them their work, and their transgressions
that they have exceeded: He opens also their ear unto discipline, and
commands that they return from iniquity: And a little after in the same
Chapter, at the 15. (...)
ver. of it, He delivers the poor in his affliction, and he opens their
ears in oppression: I pray observe, it is GOD that does all this, and not
Affliction it self; it is he that commands to return from iniquity, and it is
he that opens the ear in oppression, to attend unto that which formerly was
not heeded.

And so again, Isa. 26.9. Isa. 26.
When thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness: But how? how shall they learn it, if God do not teach it? How
shall the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness, if God do not teach
them Righteousness?

It is said of Noah, Noah.
that he was a Preacher of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. But what were the men of
the old world the better for it? not one jot the better: Though men Preach
righteousness in their way, yet if God do not Preach righteousness in his way
also; though men Preach it to the ear, yet if God do not Preach it the heart,
there will be no reforming, nor no redressing of any thing that is amiss.

But for the handling of the Point; Two things inquired, for the explication of
the Doctrine.
in the farther prosecution of it, we will inquire two things:

1. What kind of teaching that is, which the Scripture calls the Teaching of
GOD.

2. Of what necessity that teaching is in the great Work, or business of
Reformation?

For the former; (...)
What kind of instruction, or what kind of teaching that is, which the
Scripture calls the Teaching of God?

To that I shall Answer by these particulars following: (...)


First, (...)
The teaching of God it is an inward Spiritual kind of teaching; it is that
which teaches the soul and conscience of a man, (...)
yea, that pierces, to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the most secret thoughts, intents and
purposes of man's heart, Heb. 4.12.

And this is one main difference between man's teaching, and Gods teaching; Man
speaks to the outward ear, but it is God that must persuade the heart; The
heart of Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem.

There is a twofold knowledge of heavenly things* There is a notional knowledge
of them, and there is an experimental knowledge of them.

There is a Carnal knowledge of Spiritual things, (...)
and there is a Spiritual knowledge of Carnal things; There is an earthly
knowledge of Heavenly things, and there is an Heavenly knowledge of earthly
things; There is an Humane knowledge of Divine things, (...).
and there is a Divine knowledge of Humane things: Now the knowledge that comes
in by the teaching of God, it is not a Notional, a Carnal, an Earthly, an
Humane kind of knowledge, but it is Experimental, and it is Spiritual, and it
is every way both truly Divine and Heavenly: The wisdom that comes from above,
says the Apostle, Iam. 3.15.
it is not an earthly, it is not a sensual, it is not a devilish kind of
knowledge, but pure, and peaceable, and gentle, and easy to be entreated, full
of mercy, and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

Secondly, The teaching of God, secret mysterious kind of teaching, like a
voice behind a man secretly whispered into his ear, Isa. 30.21.
and saying to him, This is the way, walk in it: thence is the effect of it
called in Scripture, The hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4.
and the hidden Mannah, and A new Name in the white stone, Rev. 2.17.
which no man knows, but he that has received it: We speak the wisdom of God
in a mystery, says the Apostle, even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained
before the world to our glory, which none of the Princes of this world knew;
for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory, (...)
4.16.
1 Cor. 2.7, 8. And in another place, Great is the mystery of godliness: and,
Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
13.^^. Psalm. (...)
and not unto others, says our Savior: and, The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, and he will show them his covenant.

The truth is, (...) haber se^^^am (...) tra Pla^^^ tri^ium (...) re^^ fa^lt
hyp^^^^^^ ^^^retum. (...) sol. Ser. 9.
this teaching of God it is so great a secret, and so high a mystery, that very
few understand the meaning of it: The wind blows where it lists, says our
Savior, and thou only hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it
comes, and whither it goes; and so is every one that is born of the Spirit,
(...) ^.8.
Joh. 3 8. As a man sees not how the grass springs up in the meadow, or how the
corn comes up in the field, or how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is
with child, (...)
or how the shadow creeps along upon the Dyal of Ahaz, even so in like manner
grace comes in upon the soul, by this teaching of God, in such secret
insensible paces, that a man knows not how to reveal, or discover the exact way
of it unto you, in every step or degreee thereof. Mark 4.26, 27. Mark 4.26, 2^.
So is the Kingdom of God, says Christ, as if a man should cast seed into the
ground, and should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring
and grow up, he knows not how, nor which way; Acts 22.9. Comi^c. Pau^ vocem
(...) quia (...) loqui, (...) Pa^^^. (...) quiduam, (...) Christus; F^^g^rem
(...) Calv^^ (...).
As it was with those that journeyed with Paul to Damascus, They that were with
me saw indeed the light, says he, and were afraid, but they heard not the voice
of him that spoke to me; there was something secretly whispered into Paul's ear,
that they understood not who were of his company, and that stood hard by him;
and even so it is with this teaching of GOD, it secretly puts a distinction
many times, between those that have the same parts, and means, and time, and
helps, even after a wonderful, and after an unspeakable manner.

Thirdly, The teaching of GOD, it is a meek, Fluct ut re^ eloquium m^^^ etc. in
ani^^^ seill^^t audientiam (...) grati^^^ (...) Vat. in loc.
a smooth, a gentle kind of teaching, like that of Moses, the man of GOD, My
Doctrine shall drop as the rain, says he, and my speech distill as the dew; as
the small rain upon the tender herb, and (...) upon the grass, Deuteronomy. 32.2.

(...) the rain comes down from Hea^^ and the snow, and returns not thither,
but waters the Earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed
to the sower, and bread to the eater, so shall my word be, (...)
says God, it shall not return unto me void, but accomplish that which I
please, and prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.

When God teaches the heart, (...)
he then appears to it, as unto Adam after he had sinned, not in the heat, but
in the cool of the day; or as unto Elijah in his Vision, (...)
First, there passed by a great and a strong wind, that rent the Mountains, and
brake in pieces the Rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the (...):
and after the wind there came an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the
^^^^^quake: and after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire:
and after the fire, a small still voice; and then God spoke, and said, What
do thou here Eli^^^ Thus is the coming of Christ, the great Prophet of his
Church, (...)
punctually de^r^^d to be, He shall not strive, nor cry, says the TEXT, Summa
(...) nuper (...) osse ^umal^^^ sum Christ adventum q^ia (...) ^^para^^ (...)
mox (...) jici^a^. (...) ^^ninum (...) tem fore: ut amabilis (...) MA^^ (...)
TUDO qu^ past^^ (...)
neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets; a bruised reed shall he
not break, nor quench smoking flax, until he send forth judgment unto victory,
Mat. 12.19, 20.

And although he had zeal and courage enough against both sin and sinners, a
sufficiency, an all sufficiency, a redundancy of zeal and courage, yet when he
was to deal with any poor creature about Spiritual affairs, about Soul-matters,
his manner was to deal very gently, and very mildely with them; as with the
woman of Samaria at the Well, and diverse others: And he does upon this ground
invite us to come and learn of him, to come and be taught by him, Learn of me;
says he, for I am meek, and lowly in heart, and then ye shall find rest unto
your souls thereby, Matthew 11.29.

Fourthly, The teaching of GOD, plain familiar kind of teaching: Psalm. 27.11.
Teach me thy way, O Lord, says David there, Psalm. 27.1.
and lead me in a plain path, because of mine enemies: Sinful ways are crooked
ways, full of Distraction, and full of Distortion; As for such as turn aside to
their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of
iniquity; but peace shall be upon Israel, Psalm. 125.5.

On the other side, The ways of the Lord are right, says the Prophet, and the
just shall walk in them, though the transgressors fall therein, Hosea 14.9. The
crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain, and then the glory
of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together, Isa. 40.4,
5. Yea, so plain and so clear shall the truths and ways of God be made, (...)
that even he that runs may read them; and the wayfaring man (though a fool)
yet shall he not err therein. (...)


It is said of Jacob, that he was a plain man, dwelling in Tents; and yet what
man ever had more acquaintance, or communion, (...) 4.
or power with God, then he?

But here ye must understand, That the Scripture in these things speaks no
contradiction to you, (...) Mari^ (...)
in telling you before, that the Teaching of GOD is mysterious, and here that
it is plain; for the very same way of teaching, or the very same thing, in one
kind and other, may be very mysterious unto one, and yet plain enough to
another: Proverbs 8.9. says Wisdom there, My words are all plain to him that
understands, and right to them that find knowledge: And so in other cases;
when a man comes into an Artificers shop, or a Tradesman's shop, Simile.
it is many times a mystery unto him to conceive how things should be so and so
framed, so curiously carved, etc. But now the Artificer himself, or the
Tradesman himself, he apprehends no mystery in this or that, as to himself, he
knows well enough how to do it, the things are all plain enough to him: And so
is it with this teaching of God, though it be very dark and mysterious unto
some, yet it is plain enough to others, who are of discerning spirits, and of a
right understanding in all things.

And although the Natural man be apt to complain, Incredibilem tibi narro r^^
sed veram, nes^^ se esse caecam. subinde Paedagogum suum rogat ut migret, ait
domum toncbrosam esse. Sen. Ep. 50. Pugnant inter se sapientia Dei. and
sapientia hamana, seu prud^ntia carnis quae est inimi^^
as the blind woman did that Seneca speaks of, that she was not blind, but
that the house wherein she dwelt was dark: I say, though Natural men are apt to
do so, to complain of darkness without, when as all the darkness is merely
within: Yet the truth is, the teaching of God in it self is plain enough, and
easy enough, to those that are able to understand it; and the reason why the
Natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, (...) quo quis (...)
^am carnem ^^^inus perci^^re possit sapi^^iam (...), quae (...) est (...) and
causa ^^s^u^^a^^^ non est in ^^ripturis, s^l in hom^^ibu^. Zanch. de sacr.
^^ript inter ^p mi^^llan.
it is not because of that abstruseness or darkness that is in the things
themselves, but because they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know
them, merely upon this account, because they are to be spiritually discerned, 1
Cor. 2.14. which spiritual discerning he wants, or else the things themselves
of the spirit of God would be plain enough unto him. And therefore in this case
let us be sure to set the saddle upon the right horse, as we say; and if the
light shine in darkness, and the darkness comprehend it not, let us not lay the
fault upon the light for not shining, but rather upon the darkness, for not
being able to comprehend it.

Fifthly and lastly, teaching of God, it is a Powerful efficacious kind of
teaching, Ita docet ut quod quisque di^^^erit, non tan^am cognoscondo ^ideat
sod ctiam ^olendo Appo^ai, Agendoque ^erficiat, idque and colinabiliter atque
insuperabiiater. Aug. de Great. Chr. c. 14. de corrept. and Great. c. 12. and
Al^^ Passim.
and such as no man is able finally to resist, where Conversion is intended;
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, says the Apostle, but mighty, How
mighty? mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds; casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of
God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10, 4, 5. True it is, Divina vol ^^tas est uni^ ^^sal^ter e^^cax,
i^superabilu, and necessarta in causando, non impedibilis, nec frusirabilis
ullo modo. Th. Bradwardm de causa Deilib. 1. cap. 10. Praeparatio hominis ad
grav^am est a Deo sicut a move^te, a libero arbitrio ficut a moto, and tunc
habet necessitatem ad i^ ad quod ordinatur a Deo, n^^ quidem coactionis, sed
infallibilitatis, quia intentio Dei deficere non pote^t, unde si ex intention
Dei moventis est, quod homo cujus cor movet, gratiam consequatur,
infallibiliter gratiam consequitur. Aquin. 1.2. Quest. 112. Art. 3.

Efficacia auxilii Praeoperantis gratiae, qua ratione praevenis ordine
causalicatis ^^operationem nostri arbitrii, non est solum efficacia moralis,
sed etiam physica, quae ad moduncausae physicae liberum arbitrium praemovet
efficaciter ad consentiendum, vel pie operandum, aut etiam ad perseverandum
usque in finem. Didac. Alvar. lib. 9. de Aux. div. Grac. Disp. 83. number. 15.

Gratia Dei Agit in Hominem ad conversionem ejus, homo fibimet in praesonti
statu piacens repugnat, and in contrarium tendit ex propensione carnis: si jam
repugnantia haec aequalium prorsus virium sit, cum exerta gratia virtute, tum
nec efficitur conversio, n^^ ut officiatur expectari potest: Effectio enim
semper est ab inaequali superante. Si vero gratiae virtus excedat, tum quamvis
incompleta resistentia fiat a carne, vincitur tamen a gratia quia fortius Agit.
Ames. cor. ad coll. Hag. Art. 4. de convers.

Illud proprie dicitur irrefistibile, cui resistere nemo potest quamvis vellet,
quod in actu volendi locum prorsus non habet: ex bujusmodi autem operatione
Divina existit necessit as effectus, sed non libertati voluntatis Humanae
repugnans, sed cum ipsa liberate voluntatis optime consentiens quod etiam suo
loco demonstrabimus. Twiss. Praefat. ad Vindit. Great. page 31.


that so long as man has to deal with man, in an Ordinance or the like, there
may be a resisting, and a gainsaying, and a turning of the deaf ear, etc. But
when once God comes to reveal his own arm in the Ministry of his Word, and to
make it the day of his Power, and to deal effectually with the heart, then he
presently acts over all those old miracles upon the souls of people, that
Christ was wont to work upon the bodies of people, making the blind to see,
and the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, and the lame to walk, and the
leper to be clean, and the dead to arise out of their graves of sin, and live;
and now the work goes on both very sweetly, and very prosperously, and God he
now convinces, and converts, and sanctifies, and saves; he now begins, and
carries on, and perfects the work of Grace, without any considerable opposition
or gainsaying from the Creature.

And thus you see what kind of teaching that is, which the Scripture calls The
teaching of God.

Now in the next place, enquire and see, of what necessity these Divine
Teachings or Instructions are, in point of Reformation.

I shall endeavor to demonstrate the necessity of Divine Instructions in point
of Reformation, ^^e necessity (...) ^^^ine In^^^tions in point of Reformation
evinced by five A^guments
by these five ensuing Arguments:

The First shall be drawn from our own ignorance, from our own ignorance about
the work of Reformation.
in and about the great work of Reformation; we our selves are mightily to seek
in all affairs of this nature, and such as know not how to reform, A^tus Deus
so^^n ^ese it ignorantiam and to^^s ^ides, and to tam quia minime fallitur,
^ui^ minime
unless God himself teach us to reform: when we go about such a business, such
a great work as this, if God should wholly desert, and leave us unto our
selves, clauditur, quia extra s^ lumen non qu^rit ut vid^^^ ipse onim est and
qui videt, and unde vide^. Bern.
we should rather deform then reform, cry up this, and pull down that which
will either comply, or not comply with our own ends, and interests, and ayms,
without any respect at all unto God, and unto his word and glory.

In this respect therefore, Nihil est al^ s^^cutia nostra quam culpa, qu^ ad
ho^ cantum. modo l^gem ^^vi^ (...) de no (...) ction^ (...) Salvian. ^ Guborn.
D^^ lib. 4.
even because of our own ignorance and blindeness (which are either wholly, or
in a great measure still upon us) whenever we go about to reform, we should
be sure to take GOD along with us, and make him of our counsel, (...) be often
lifting our hearts unto him, and saying, Lord, I am a poor blind ^^eaure, The
greatest part of what I know, is but the least part of that which I still
remain exceeding ignorant of, and therefore go along with me in this great
business, and That which I see not, teach thou me; Let me not call evil good,
or good evil; let me not put darkness for light, or light for darkness; let me
not go about to set up that which ought to be pulled down, or to pull down that
which ought to be set up; to establish that which ought to be demolished, or to
demolish that which ought to be established (as men in their blind zeal are
mavelous apt to do) but let me manage the business, so far as it concerns me,
according to thine own mind, and according to thine own appointment in every
thing.

Secondly, Argument to prove the necessity of Divine Instructions in point of
Reformation, (...) the dan^er of erring ^ervan, through hypocrisy and
^ss^mulation.
may be drawn from the danger of erring therein, through hypocrisy or
dissimulation. There may be a great deal of hypocrisy and deceitfulness;
^^^pocritarum ^aculam non (...) Pau^orum aut nui^^rum. Aug
There may be, did I say? Yea, there must and will be a world of hypocrisy,
false-heartedness, and dissimulation in all those Reformations that are not
bottomed upon Divine Instructions.

For although it be very ordinary and usual with men, like a boy under the rod,
to promise great matters, and to say that they will do this or that, (...) en^m
simulationum in^lurris tegitur ^^^quasi velis ^^^bu^dam ob^^nditur unius^p^^s^^
natura, (...), vul^^ persaep^ men^^untur, oration (...) saepissime. (...) quend.
(...).
when the hand of GOD lies heavy upon them (as who so graceless almost, that
will not have some relentings upon his spirit at such a time, and promise to do
any thing, in case that he may but have ease and freedom, and relaxation from
the burden that is upon him?) Yea, but then let me tell you, That if men be
not taught of GOD, and instructed by him with a strong hand, as the Prophet
speaks, Isa. 8.11. The Lord, says he, spoke thus to me, and instructed me with
a strong hand, that I should not walk in the way of this people; I say, That
unless there be such a teaching, and such an instructing as this Antecedent, or
going before; All the Vows, and Promises, and Covenants that men make about
Reformation, They Will all prove but like those green withs that Sampson was
bound with, which he presently brake asunder, as soon as ever it was said unto
him. Judges 16.^^.
The Philistines are upon thee, Sampson.

And therefore in this respect also, There is great reason, whenever we go
about to reform, that we should lie at the feet of God, Simulata sanctitas est
dup^^ iniquitas.
and humbly desire his advice and counsel, that so we may not play fast and
loose with him, that we may not deal falsely, deceitfully, hypocritically with
him in the transaction of this great and most important business.

Thirdly, From the danger of erring through corrupt and bad Examples.
Another Argument may be drawn from the danger of erring through corrupt and
bad Examples: Men are not only mavellous ignorant and hypocritical in point of
Reformation, when God himself does not teach them aforehand, and instruct them
with a strong hand about it; But they are also mavelous prone and apt (when
left unto themselves) to go by evil Examples, (...).
and false Paterns, and not to reform, according to the Pattern from the Mount,
or according to the mind of God, but rather according to that which Men hold
forth unto them, be it either right or wrong.

As now in that great Alteration of go^vernment, which fell out in the days of
Samuel, (...).
it is worth the noting, what the ground of that Alteration was, 1 Samuel 8. from
the 4. v. etc. it is there said, That All the Elders of Israel, they solemnly
gathered themselves together, and came to Samuel at Ramah, and they said unto
him, Behold thou art old, (...).
and thy sons walk not in thy ways, they are men that turn aside after lucre,
and take bribes, and pervert judgment: Now therefore, say they, make us a King
to judge us like all the Nations: When Samuel heard them say so, he was
mightily troubled and displeased at it, and not knovving well what Answer to
give, he goes and carries the business unto God by Prayer; Samuel prayed unto
the Lord, and the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken to the voice of the People, in
all that they say unto thee; for, says he, they have not rejected thee, but
they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.

This was very sad now, Nulla re^ no^ majoribus ma^^^ implica^, quam quod ad
rumorem componimur, optimara ti^ea, quae magn^ assensu recepta sunt, quorun^
exempla multa sunt: nec ad rationem, sed ad si militudanem ^^vimus: Inde ist^
tanta coaccr^atio Aliorum supra alios rucutium: and ^u^ unusquisque mavult
credere quam (...) nunquam de vi^judicatur, s^mper creditur versatque nos and
praecipitat traditus per manus error alicnisque perim^^ exemplis, sanabimur fi
sep^remur a cat^. Senec. ub^ supra.
that a People should upon any pretense whatsoever reject God himself from
reigning over them any longer.

But now that which did thus dangerously mislead them, and that carried them
quite out of their way, it was a corrupt Example that they took from other
Nations, and from other People, Make us a King to judge us, say they, like all
the Nations; and hereupon God himself was ye see rejected by them.

And so in like manner, when a People have a long time been in a wrong way, and
do now see it to be so, and have some serious thoughts of reforming, and
getting into a better way, if God himself go not before them, and teach them
what they see not, in such a case they many times fasten upon some corrupt
Example or other, which utterly misleads them, and carries them quite out of
their way, and after a little compassing about, either puts them into their old
way again, or into one as bad, or it may be into a worse then that, which
formerly they walked in.

And therefore in this respect also, whenever a person or a people change
their way, or alter their course, it is of necessity that they should take God
along with them, and say, Lord, at this time especially leave us not unto our
selves, neither leave us to corrupt Examples; Let us not now look our faces in
false glasses, that will mis^^pr^^ent things to us; but That which we see not,
teach thou us, and then, If we have done (...), we shall be sure to do it again
no (...).

Fourthly, Another Argument may be drawn from the danger of erring through
corrupt Principles: (...).
Men of themselves are not only mavelous ignorant and hypo^r^tical, and very
apt to be seduced and mis^ed by corrupt and bad Examples, without ^^^truction
from God; but they are also very prone and ready to be seduced and misled by
corrupt Principles, Every (...) tempte^, (...) he is (...) side of (...) lust,
and ent^ced. Iam. ^^. 4. Causas (...) (...) illcebri^ (...) in cordibus (...)
mus, and ^iti^^t^s nostra men. n^stra est. Salvi^n. de Gubern (...) lib. 6.
Quid nos (...) pimus? (...) extrans^^ (...) lum nostr^^n, intra no^ (...),
(...) and (...) difficulter (...) nimus, qui (...). (...) sup. (...).
either hatched or harbored in their own breasts, and in their own bosoms, and
mightily fomented there by the malice and subtilty of Satan, that old Impostor.

As now when men have engaged themselves for a Reformation, and peradventure
Covenanted for it, you shall have many that did not this sincerely, or out of
Conscience, or as taking God along with them, but merely out of Carnal and
worldly respects, you shall have them to stand listening and hearkening, to
know and understand, out of what corner that will issue, which may best comply
with their own Ends, and Purposes and Projects; and look what way soever it be,
that has either most Profit in it, or most ease in it, or most Preferment in
it, There ye shall have the Covetous, and there ye shall have the Voluptuous,
and there ye shall have the Ambitious, and there ye shall have the Drunkard in
one corner, and there ye shall have the Thief in another corner, and each other
vile person, that has but wit enough to cover over his wickedness with an
outward form of godliness; (...). 5.
and this way of his now, ye shall have him to cry it up, as the only way of
God (even as the Bishops did the Service Book) when as perhaps its nothing in
the earth, but that which the Devil has merely driven him into, for the
Advancement of his own Ends, and for the Promoting of his own secular
Advantages.

And therefore in this respect also, what cause has every poor Creature to be
earnest with GOD, and to say, Let the wicked fall into their own nets, and
tendicles, and pits, (...)
and snares, whilst that I withal escape them: Blessed Lord, do not thou leave
me at any time to be seduced by corrupt Examples, to be misled by any false
Principles of mine own, but That which I see not, teach thou me; and then, If I
have done iniquity, I shall do it again no more.

Fifthly and lastly, Argument to prove the necessity of Divine Instructions in
point of Reformation, may be drawn from the Difficulty of returning from a bad
way of reforming, (...) the difficulty of re^^^ing from a (...) way of ^e^^^^g,
when (...) upon
when once we are engaged upon it: Men are not only mavelous ignorant, and
hypocritical, and apt to be misled by corrupt Examples, and to be seduced by
naughty Principles, without instruction from God; but when once they are deeply
engaged (with all their own interests) upon a way that is never so bad, Simil^.
Its good to be cautelous therefore (and not too hasty) in all affairs of this
nature. Diu deliberandum quod scmel stat^endum. Sen. And in this respect great
reason had the Honorable Houses of Parliament to declare, as they have done
lately to the whole Kingdom most nobly and worthily, in haec verba, When we
consider what some Ministers of the Presbyterian judgment, in their Book
subscribed Smectymnuus, dedicated to the Parliament 1641, say of the Lyturgy
then established by Law, that it was never established to be so punctually
observed, so ^igorously pressed, to the casting out of all that scruple it, or
any thing in it; WE HAVE REASON WELL TO CONSIDER WHAT WE PUT THE STAMP OF
PUBLIC AUTHORITY UPON: For if this Uniformity in the Directory,
Church Government, Confession of Faith, and Catechize, should produce such a
rigid Conformity unto them, it is not easy to foresee all the mischiefs and
inconveniences that it would beget; although we may easily guess they would not
be small, by what we have felt in the like kind. Declar, of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, concerning the Papers of the Scots
Commissioners, page 59.
its an exceeding hard matter to get them out of that way: As when a loaded
Cart is sunk, with all its weight into an hole, in a rotten boggy place, its no
easy matter to draw it out again; twice that strength that let it fall in,
will hardly fetch it out: And so here, when once men are settled upon that,
wherein most of their Religion lies (as they themselves are wont to speak) then
what ado to maintain and uphold that way? what siding? what complying? what
daubing with untempered mortar? Ezekiel.. 13.10.
what contending to keep up that way, which has the Honor of men engaged upon
it? though perhaps the Honor and glory of God be quite and clean expulsed, and
never so much as mentioned or thought upon in the business.

And therefore in this respect also, what cause have we to be earnest with God,
to teach us what we see not, that so we may not ignorantly, or hypocritically,
or unadvisedly, above all, that we may not stubbornly, or frowardly be engaged
upon any way, besides that, or against that which may chiefly advance Gods
glory, together with the present and everlasting welfare of our own immortal
souls.

And thus much shall suffice for the Explication, and clearing up of the Truth
propounded: Application to (...) this Na(...)
The Application follows.

And certainly this that has been said, is very appliable unto the present
condition of us in this Nation.

For First, (...).
We are a People that have born chastisement, that is plain, and evident enough
to every eye that looks upon us, to our selves and others, that we have born
chastisement; Judge. 15.8, 16. Acervum f^^^ unum and alterum sensus est Sams.
dicere se tantam hostium stragem fecisse ut magnos eorum cumulos congesserit.
P. Mart. in loc.
God has smitten us hip and thigh, as Sampson said, he has laid Heaps upon
heaps in diverse places, by the Sword, and by the Pestilence; He has drawn a
cloud as it were over all our Pleasant things; He has smitten every part of
this Body Politic of ours, from top to toe, from head to heel; The whole head
is sick, Isa. 1.5, 6.
and the whole heart is faint, from the sole of the foot, even unto the head,
nothing but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores; not a part free, where
there has not been some stroke or other of Divine displeasure.

I do verily believe, That in the days of our Forefathers, The great day of
England^ trouble, (...) which the Saints of England have (...) and shall be
saved, one w^^ or another Jer. 30.7
or since England was a Nation, the Nobility, the Gentry, the Magistracy, the
Ministry, the whole Commonalty of this Kingdom, never saw such another Day,
such another black gloomy Day, as this that has lately been upon us; And
therefore it may well be said of us, That we have born chastisement.

And yet I do not mention these things neither, to cast any the least aspersion
upon the Proceedings of the Almighty; (...) Quis (...) ^mur mino^^ Patimur
(...) meremur Quid qucrimur quod dure ag^^ nobiscum Deus (...) no^ cum D^o
durius agimus Exacer^amus quippe ^cum impurita^^bus nostris, and (...)
puniendos (...) trabimus in^^um. Salvian. de ^^bern Dei, lib. 4.

(...). Chrysostom. Homil. 7. ad Pop. ^ Ar^i^^h.

Si mi^i trascatur Deus, number i^^i ego similiter redirascar? Non utique s^d
pavebo, (...), s^^, eniam deprecabor: Ita si me Arguat, non redargu^tur a me,
sed (...) sustifi^abitur: Nec si me judicabit, judicabo ego cum, sed adorabo.
Bernard. (...).

(...). Clem. Alex.


Let my right hand forget her cunning, and my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth, before ever I open my lips to any such purpose; for our God is Just, and
our God is Righteous, and Holy and good, in all that he has hitherto brought
upon us, and he has punished far less then our iniquities have deserved.

We may all say as the Psalmist does, Psalm. 118.18. The Lord has chastened us
very sore; and it is of his mercy, that he has not quite given us over unto
death; it is of the Lords mercies, that we are not utterly consumed, every one
of us, and because his compassions fail not, Lam. 3.22. He has not dealt with
us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities, Psalm. 120.10.

Only this I say, That whether ye look upon the universality of the
visitation, Apparent from the universality and impartiality of the late
Visitation, that we have born chastisement.
all sorts and degrees of Persons having tasted of the Cup; or whether ye look
upon the impartiality of it, God having carried it so, that he has seemed to
put no difference at all in his outward Administrations between one and
another, but good and bad, mean and mighty, noble and ignoble, high and low,
rich and poor, young and old, have all felt the smart of this heavy Blow more or
less, even all the Land over: So that I say, which way soever we look, under
what notion or apprehension soever we consider our selves, we cannot choose but
say and acknowledge, That we are a People who have born chastisement.

And not only so, but moreover and besides this, besides our bearing
chastisement on this manner, And promised Reformation.
we have likewise Promised Reformation; we have said, That we will not offend
any more; we have engaged our selves, To go one before another in the example,
not of a verbal, but of a real Reformation.

Yea, but as to this now, it deserves to be seriously considered even by us
all, whether in this we have not been a little too hasty, many of us, a little
too preposterous; whether we had not need to step back a little, and apply this
part of the Text unto our selves, (...) ^orrec^io (...) quae tollit id, quod
dictum est, (...) pro to, quod (...) Idoneum (...), Repo^^ Voss. Par^^^^ator,
lib. (...). 2^.
with a kind of Epanorthosis or correction, saying unto God (as it is meet we
should) Lord, we are a People that have born chastisement, and we have said
with our lips, diverse of us, That we will not offend any more: Now therefore,
That which we see not, teach thou us; and then indeed, If we have done
iniquity, we shall do it again no more.

I pray, Let me not be mistaken in this that I now say, as though I went about
to enervate or destroy your Covenant by it; (...) neces^^ry Cautions (...)
Considerations about the (...) C^^e^^^t.
for certainly this is not to weaken or make void your Covenant, but to
strengthen and make good your Covenant; this is not after Vows to make enquiry,
any farther then to make enquiry how to Pay your Vows: And let me tell you
farther, That if in taking that Covenant, you did not merely pretend, but
intend Reformation, these Divine Instructions that now I am speaking of, are so
necessary to the reaching of that end, that there is no possibility of reaching
that end, without these Divine Instructions.

It is very certain, and a most sure rule, That those Reformations will prove
decaying buildings, that are not bottomed upon Divine Instructions: When men
are slight, and formal, and surperficial, and overly in their Promises, they
are commonly so in their performances too, both unto God and men.

And doubtless one main cause of all our present Fears, and of all our present
Disturbances is this, That abundance of People have been more forward to
promise Reformation to God, then to beg Instruction from God, how to make good
that Promise, and to do it in such a way, that the remedy may not prove far
worse then ever the disease it self was.

Let me say thus much farther, and humbly offer it to you, as that which I
conceive to be very considerable by you: God himself has promised (as I shall
show you by and by) that All his people shall be taught of him; And if he shall
please to honor this Nation so far, as to bring in, and set up that Teaching of
his amongst us, that Spiritual, that Secret, that Meek, that Plain, that
efficacious Powerful kind of Teaching, that has been this day spoken of: if
so, then ye may comfortably expect to see the work of Reformation prosper;
otherwise, ignorance, hypocrisy, corrupt Examples, carnal Principles, private
Engagements, like the wind will carry you away, and without this teaching of
God, ye will be no more able to discern the way of GOD in point of Reformation,
then a blind man is able to judge of colors.

It is a notable passage, (...) de^^^^ar ab ^mit ^rdi^ mor^^^, ^^nando (...)
siliorum ^^^us s^^uli, scu ^^minum mun^^norum: and ^on^ra hort^^ur (...) s^riam
studi^m pla^^ndi (...) ^ii ^ausam pro^^^^em expo^^^, vid^^^^ (...)
eransform^^^^em sea R^^^^^^ionem, (...) Auther (...) effecter est (...)
sanctus. P^^^^. in loc.
to this purpose, even that of the Apostles, Romans 12.2. says he there, Be not
conformed unto this world, but be ye transformed, by the renewing of your
mind, that ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable, and perfect will
of God; intimating thereby thus much unto us, That until men are wholly taken
off from the vain Customs and Traditions of the world, in matters of Religion,
and until they are withal effectually transformed, by the renewing of their
minds, they are no way able to make proof of that good, and perfect, and
acceptable will of God, whereunto they ought in all things to conform
themselves.

And therefore in the next place, my Exhortation to you is this, As ever ye do
expect, believe, or hope to see the work of Reformation prosper, so mind this
Teaching of God, An Exhortation to mind these Divine Instruction.
mind these Divine Instructions; and not only so, but be sure to have some
measure of experimental acquaintance with them.

To this purpose, Motives thereunto
and by way of Motive hereunto, let me here propound these two things unto you:

First of all, Let this be considered, Teaching of men can do you no good, Men's
teaching unprositable without the teaching of God.
give you no relief, afford you no true contentment, yield you no inward
Spiritual nourishment or refreshment at all, without the Teaching of God. There
is an extreme emptiness, and a mere vanity upon all ma^er of outward Ordinances
and Administrations whatsoever, unless God himself be pleased to come in upon
the heart thereby.

And certainly this has been one great iniquity, Neglect of Gods teaching, the
great sin of many i^ these times.
whereby we have much offended in these latter times, that whilst the gifts of
men, and the parts of men, and the teachings of men thereby, have been
extremely cried up, and idolized; in the mean time the teaching of God, the
Spiritual, the Secret, the Meek, the Plain, the Powerful teaching of God, that
has been too much neglected and disregarded by us.

And although it be a sad thing to speak it, yet is it very certain, That even
to this very day, we are generally either extremely ignorant of it, or utter
enemies to it, or both.

Secondly, Promise of God the Father's in Christ unto his people, which I
pointed at before; namely, That All his people shall be taught of him, Promises
to be ^aught of God.
Joh. 6.45. It is written in the Prophets (says our Savior there) and they
shall be All taught of God: Mark, not a few of them only, but All taught of
GOD; you may see the places in the Margin of your greater Bibles, whereunto our
Savior alludes in that speech of his, especially that Isa. 54.13. where among
other promises to the Church, this is one, And, says he, All thy children shall
be taught of the Lord; and thereupon, Great shall be the peace of thy children:
And in that other place, (...).
I will put my Law in their inward parts, says God, and write it in their
hearts; and they shall no more teach every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall All know me, Nunc autem in
Evangelio post crucem, resurrectionem, and ascensionem, dare se pactum, non in
tabulis lapideis, sed in tabulis cordis carnalibus pollicetur* cumque scriptum
fuerit Domini testamcutum in mente credentium, ipsum esse eis in Deum, and
illos esse in Populum: ut nequaquam Judaicos quaerant magistros, and
traditiones, and mandata hominum, sed doceantur a spiritu sancto. Hieron. in
loc.
from the least unto the greatest of them, says the Lord: Having such Promises
as these are, we may go and plead them by Faith, and so draw out the
pleasantness, and the joy, and the sweetness that is contained in such breasts
of consolation.

But here ye will demand, and say, perhaps, issue forth this Teaching of his?
How does he draw forth and manifest these Divine Instructions unto Believers?

I Answer, ways whereby he does it: By his Word: and By his Spirit. (...)



First, By his Word; By his Word.
that is a principal means or instrument whereby be teaches and instructs his
people; To the law, Isa. 8.20.
and to the testimony, says the Prophet, if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them: And, Thy word is a light unto my
paths, says David, Psalm. 119.
and a lanthorn unto my feet: And, We have, says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.19.
a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed, as unto a
light that shines in a dark place.

But here ye must observe, The Word a light, but not the Fountain of light.
Christ the true ^ight. John 1.9 Mal. 4.2. ^ohn 9.5. ^^d 12.46. (...). 22.16.
That although the Word be frequently called A light in Scripture, yet is it
not the Fountain of light; Christ is the true light, which lights every man
that comes into the world; and the Word is but a means or instrument in his
hand, to convey light unto us: It is not the word it self, in the ordinary
dispensations of it, but Christ by the word, that illuminates dark
understandings, and opens blind eyes, and turns people from darkness unto
light, and from the power of Satan unto GOD.

Men may enjoy the outward sound of the Gospel, and yet never feel the inward
power of it upon their hearts: (...)
Lord, says the Prophet, who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm
of the LORD revealed? that is, though there be a report made, a sound of words
in the ears of many, yet unless the arm of the LORD be revealed in the
Ministry of his Word, there will be no believing, nor no repenting, nor no
converting or turning in to God thereby.

But Secondly, Instrument that God makes use of, By his Spirit.
for the teaching and instructing of his people, is his Spirit; without which
the very Word it self is but as a sealed Book, Isa. 29.11.
or a dead letter unto them; 2 Cor. 3.6.
and by the means whereof, he is pleased to reveal and manifest, not only mean
and ordinary things, but the secrets of the Gospel, the mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven; (...).
the deep things of God are hereby manifested and made known to the Saints: 1
Cor. 2.9, 10. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the
heart of man, the things that God has prepared for them that love him: But,
says he, God has revealed them unto us by his spirit; for the spirit Scrutatur
(...) id est, nihil in Deo tam profunde ac penitus abditum quo non penctret
spiritus nemp^ quoniam perillum docemur etiam abditissima. Bez. in loc. Quia de
Deo est hic spiritus omnia novit Dei: Hic spiritus Dei docuit nos quos scit
naturaliter non doctos, and docuit nos de mysterio Christi, qui non solum
spiritus Dei est, sed and Christi. Am^ros. Com in loc.
searches all things, yea the deep things of God: And in the same Chapter and
following verse, he tells us yet farther, That as no man knows the things of a
man, save the spirit of a man which is in him; even so the things of God knows
no man, but the spirit of God: Though ye should have Ten thousand instructers
besides, as the Apostle speaks in another case, yet all would do you little or
no good, without this instructor.

And therefore though the Ephesians had as excellent Preaching as any that the
world afforded, Quia animalis homo non percipit ca quae sunt Spiritue,
stultisia enim sunt ci: Spiritualis vero disudicat omnia: opu^ est ergo
Spiritus san^ti illuminatione, ad inveniendum and dijudicandum verum scripturae
sensum: Ita Paulus optat ^cclesiis Spiritum illuminationis, and Pater coelestis
dabit Spiritum pe^entibus. Chemnit. Examen. Decret. Council. Trident. de
Interpret. sacr. Script.

Ezangelium per humanam sapientiam capi non potest, sed requirit operationem
Spiritue sancti per quam cordibus nostris insinuetur. Muscul. loc. com.

Ambiguitas igitur vel obscuritas scripturarum, quam causantur pontificii, non
in^ringit carundem authoritatem, sed ostendit necessitatem Spiritus
illuminantis, and ministerii ^^centis, atque exponentis scripturas. Davenant.
de Iud. ac norm. fid. cap. 13.

Palam est, verbum Dei, Spiritus virtute armatum, corda Piorum trahere ad
consentiendum sibi, and decretis suis. Id. ibid.

Spiritus sapientiae and revelationis ab officio dicitur, quod vera Agnitione
Dei ecclesiam ornat. Centuriat. Magdeburg, lib. 2. centur. 1. cap. 4.

Paulus quaedam citavit ex Arato and Epimenide, sed affirmo Apostolos non
propterea ejusmodi testimoniis usos fuisse, ut inde caput aliquod fidei
confirmarent, nam ad eam rem semper Adhibucrunt expressos locos petitos ex
scriptis Propheticis, cosque Afflatu Spiritus sancti expossuerunt. Sadeel. de
verb. Dei script. advers. Hum. trad.

Nos nihil hic somniamus extra ordinem: sed id ipsum Agnoscimus, quod in
reliquis Articulis fidei omnibus, nimirum omnino opus esse interna Spiritus
sancti persuasione, ut libris sarris plena fide assentiamur. Chamier. Panstrat.
Cathol. tom. 1. lib. 6. cap. 1. D. White, in his way to the true Church, sect.
8. number. 1, 11. Reinold. Confer, with Heart. Chap. 2. Divis. 2. Jewel. Repl. to
Harding, 15. Art. 11. Divis.


in Paul's own Ministry, yet you may see how earnestly he prays for them,
Ephesians. 1. That the GOD of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Father of glory, would
give unto them the spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of him:
The eyes of their understandings being enlightened thereby, to know what was
the hope of their calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance
in the Saints, and what the exceeding greatness of his power toward them that
belieeve, etc.

And that it may appear to you, How necessary the presence and help of the
Spirit is, to bring in these Divine Instructions.
how necessary the presence and assistance of the Spirit is, to bring in these
Divine Instructions, be pleased to observe thus much, That the most plain
Fundamental Truths that are, cannot be rightly understood, without the help and
assistance of GOD's Holy Spirit.

To give instance but in one main Fundamental Truth, and that which is indeed
the very basis or foundation of all Christian Religion, The Divinity of Jesus
Christ; The Divinity of Jesus Christ instanced in.
who is there almost that looks not upon it, as a most dangerous, yea damnable,
Heresy, 2 Pet. 2.1.
for any body to deny the Deity of the Son of God, The Godhead of Jesus Christ?
who is not ready to say, Out upon him, its not fit he should live, that holds
forth such an horrid Blasphemous Opinion as this?

But now I beseech you take heed, Caution.
That whilst ye condemn this Opinion in others, and cry out upon it others,
that in the mean time ye be not deeply guilty of it your selves.

And that this may appear to be no needless Caution, pray give me leave to tell
you, That no man living is able to assert the Divinity of Jesus Christ in heart
and life, No (...) able to (...) the Divinity of Christ in hear and life, but
by the help of the Spirit. (...). Ambros.
but by the special aid and assistance of Gods Holy Spirit: Natural light will
never reveal thus much unto a man, it must be the Spirit of GOD that must teach
him this lesson, or else he will never be able to hold forth the power of this
Truth, That Jesus Christ is every way the eternal Son of GOD.

For the clearing of this to you, Cleared by ^^ve places of Scripture.
I shall only entreat you to cast your eyes upon two places of Scripture, that
may, I suppose, abundantly satisfy you concerning this particular.

The first place is that Matthew. 16. from the 13. (...) place Mat. 16. from
(...) etc. (...)
verse, etc. It is there said, That when Jesus came into the coasts of Cesarea
Philippi, he asked his Disciples this question, Whom do men say that I the Son
of man am? And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist, some Elias,
and others Jeremias, or one of the Prophets: Verse 14.
Well, says Christ, this is the Opinion that the world has of me; Verse 15.
But, says he, whom do you say that I am? you that are my disciples and
followers? Simon Peter answered and said, (...) Confes^^^ ver 16
Thou art Christ the son of the living GOD: Mark, here was Peter's confession of
Christ.

But then I pray observe withal, Our Savior. Reply, v. 1.17.
our Saviors reply to that answer of Peter's, at the 17. v. of that Chapter,
Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona; for flesh
and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven.

But why does our blessed Lord say so? Peter, that flesh and blood had not
revealed it unto him? why may not flesh and blood reveal thus much unto any man
almost? As now suppose that one should come to any man in this Congregation, or
to any man of understanding within the compass of this great City, and put this
question to him, Do not you believe that Jesus Christ is the son of the living
God? There is no man almost but would answer and say, Yea, I do believe, that
Jesus Christ is the son of the living God.

But let me here tell you, Quad earo and sanguis revelare non potuis Spiritus
sancti gratia re^clatum est. Hieron. com. in Mar.

Non sit ergo mirum, quod intelligere divina non valent qui Spiritum Dei non
habent. Fulgent cones, Sermon. ^ustid. Ar. cap 18.


That if nothing else but flesh and blood has revealed this truth unto you; if
ye have only learned it by rote out of a Book; or if ye have taken it upon
trust, as it fell from the Ministers lips; or if ye have merely held it forth,
in conformity to the customs of the times; if ye are only upon such carnal
Principles and Foundations as these are; if the Spirit of God did never deal
with you about it, nor never instruct you with a strong hand about it, nor
never beam in light, clearly and distinctly, into your souls about it, and
thereby convince you of it, ye are not yet in any measure sufficiently
persuaded of this truth, neither do ye rightly understand the meaning of it:
Flesh and blood, says Christ, has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father,
etc.

Add to this another like place, 1 Cor. 12.3. says the Apostle there, The
second place 1 Cor. 12.^ explained.
Thus much I give you to understand, that no man can say that Jesus Christ is
the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

No man can say it: why? every man says it almost with his lips, and with his
tongue; what more ordinary, then for men to profess, That Jesus is the Lord,
and a desire to come under his Discipline and Government.

But yet though men may make an outward profession of these things with their
lips, Memo porest ut Dominum and Deum serio agnoscere, nisi per Spiritum
sanctum. Bez hic

Dictum enim ipsum quo significatur Deminus Jesus, non adulatione hominum,
sicut and idola dii vocantur, sed spiritus sancti veritate profusum est,
Quicquid enim verum, a quocunque dicitur, a spiritu sancto dicitur. Ambr. com.
1. Ep. ad Cor. Lombard. lib. 1. sentent. did. 46.


yet their hearts, and consciences, and spirits, and lives, can never stoop to
the obedience of Christ in all things, without the mighty overruling power and
direction of the holy Ghost.

So that if ever ye would know things to purpose; if ever ye would know Christ
and his Truths, not after the flesh, or after a carnal manner, but so as ye
ought to know them, and so, as that ye may be the better for the knowledge of
them, then do not merely rest upon men's teaching, but be sure of this, That the
Spirit of God teach you how to compare spiritual things with spiritual, 1 Cor.
2.13. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
how to try all things, and thereupon to retain a savor of that which is truly
good.

Not that I would by this lead you besides the Scriptures neither, or any other
Ordinance, No denial of the Scriptures here, or of any other Ordinance.
I have no such thought, nor no such intention: But still I say, Attend the
motions, and the breathings, and the teachings of the Spirit in the use of
Ordinances, and from the holy Scriptures, without which they will all prove but
dead letters, and dry things unto you, and ye will never understand the
spiritual sense of any thing; but still be carnal in every thing, without the
spirits aid and assistance to you, and continual vouchsafement of its presence
and cooperation with you.

The truth is, There is nothing spiritual, but that which comes from the
spirit, Nothing Spiritual, but that which comes from the Spirit, as a fruit of
^^s teaching.
as a fruit of its teaching, and of its divine, and heavenly informations: That
which is born of the flesh, is flesh, says our Savior, and That which is born
of the spirit, John 3 6.
is spirit: As the Philosophers say of those things that they call Homogeneous,
Homogeneum est quod constat ^x partibus idem nomen cum toto habentibus.
Keekerm. System. log. lib. 1. cap. 22.
that each small portion thereof retains the name of the whole; Quaelibet pars
Aquae est Aqua, every drop of water, is water, and every spark of fire, is
fire; and so, all that comes from the flesh, is flesh, and all that comes from
the spirit, is spirit; All that comes from thence, is spirit, and All that is
spirit, comes from thence.

True it is, that in all the truths of GOD, and in all the ways of GOD, there
is something merely external, that belongs not to the substance of the
business, and that men may teach you; How far man's teaching reaches.
and truly that is all they can teach you: Learned men, large parted men, brave
gifted men, they may teach you to be Protestants, or teach you to be
Presbyterians, or teach you to be Independents; they may engage you upon this
outward Profession, or upon that outward Form; but they cannot teach you to be
righteous, or teach you to be humble, or teach you to be uprighthearted, or
teach you to be holy, or teach you to be faithful with those that are most
holy: Hos. 11.^^.
Nothing in the world can teach you thus much, but only that Anointing that
John speaks of, 1 John 2.20 Haec unctio (^^quit) ^ac^^ ut tatelligatis omnia,
scilicet, p^^ manire possunt adversus Antichristorum Imposturas. Heming in loc.
which is the Spirit of truth and holiness, purposely appointed to lead us into
all truth, and to make us Quoad parts de praesenti, licet non quoad Gradus: By
Paul's Rule, he is no Saint (...) is not wholly Sanctified; he has Sanctity in
no part, that is not Sanctified in (...) part. Dr. Slater Somerset. on 1 Thessalonians.
5.23.
completely holy.

And therefore in a word, that so I may conclude, Take heed o^ dealing
unkindely with the Spirit. Res delicata est Spiritus Domini.
if ever ye would know any thing concerning the mind of God in point of
Reformation, Take heed of dealing unkindely with the Spirit, which is of a very
tender and delicate disposition: Take heed of Acts 7.51. Ephesians. 4.30. Isa.
63.10. 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Heb 10.29.
Resisting the Spirit, of Grieving the Spirit, of Vexing the Spirit, of
Quenching the Spirit, of Despighting the Spirit, of the living God:
Which last (whereunto all the rest tend) is conceived to be a branch of that
unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost.

Let the Word of Christ, and the Spirit of Christ dwell in you richly; Col. 3
16. Tit. 3.6.
the wholesome instructions of the one, and the sweet suggestions of the other;
the grave counsels of the one, and the gentle persuasions of the other; let
them be dearer to you then thousands of gold and silver, Mal. 119.72.
yea then All the world besides.

To this purpose, be pleased to consider but this one thing more, and I have
done: It is certainly very observable by us, That albeit amongst men, Several
Parties, several Spirits, several Mysteries among men.

But the Scripture, that takes notice of (...) more but Two Parties, two
Spirits, (...) myst^^ies. Mat. 12 30. Rom, 8 9. 1 John 4.3. ^ Thessalonians. 2.^. ^
Tim. 3 16.


and among your selves here, you have I know not how many several Parties, and
Spirits, and Mysteries, moving, and working, and stirring up and down
perpetually; yet the Book of GOD, and especially the New Testament, that takes
notice but of two Parties, and two Spirits, and two Mysteries; He that is not
with me, is against me, says our Savior, and he that gathers not with me,
scatters abroad: So that in all the world, there is but a Christian, and an
Antichristian Party; the Spirit of Christ, and the Spirit of Antichrist; the
Mystery of iniquity, and the Mystery of godliness: no more.

And let me tell you further, That each of these Parties, and Spirits, and
Mysteries, they do now work at this very day, both very secretly, and very
strongly; very curiously on the one side, and very craftily on the other side:
In which respect, it is very easy to be deceived in these times, and somewhat
a difficult business not to be deceived: Hag. 1.7. Prove. 4.26. 2 John 8.
And therefore consider your ways, and ponder the paths of your feet, and look
to your selves, Remember the watchword, and him that gave it, Rev. 16.15. Bono
animo jubet esse Christu^ promittco^sc venturum tanquam furcm ex improviso, a^
ulturum Hosts, and vindicaturum ceclesiam prater omnem expectationem.
Brightman in loc.
[Behold, I come as a thief; blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.] There is a great deal of
unsavory salt upon the dunghill already, and in all likelihood there will be
more, ere long.

If ye would have God to teach you better, and to reveal the truth to you,
Ephesians. 5.21.
as it is in Jesus, by his Word and Spirit, then take heed of Pride, and take
heed of Passion; James 4.6.
for God resists the proud, and gives grace to none but to the humble; and,
The meek he will guide in judgment, Psalm. 25.9, 14.
and the meek he will teach his way: The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him, and he will show them his Covenant: Lie at his feet therefore meekly
and humbly, and be often saying to him, That which I see not, teach thou me,
that having done iniquity, I may do it again no more.

FINIS.

