AN EXACT ABRIDGMENT IN ENGLISH, Of the eleven Books of Reports of the Learned
Sir Edward Coke, Knight, late Lord Chief Justice of ENGLAND, and of the
Council of Estate to His Majesty, King JAMES.

Composed by the Judiciou^, Sir Thomas Ireland, Knight, late of Grayes Inn,
and an Ancient Reader of that Honorable SOCIETY.

Wherein is briefly contained the very substance and marrow of all those
Reports, together with the Resolutions on every CASE.

Also a perfect Table for the finding of the Names of all those Cases, and the
principal matters therein contained. Very useful for all men, especially the
Students and Practisers of that Honorable Profession.

Brevitas Memoriae Amica.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, for Matthew Walbancke, at Grayes Inn Gate, and
H. Twyford in Vine-court in the Middle Temple, 1650.

To the Reader.
Gentle Reader.
THE Abridger of these Reports was not only a Learned Lawyer, but also was
very conversant with the Author of them: For my part, I was only entreated by
many Friends to view and correct the Copy from the Press: If any faults be,
you may blame the Printer. If I should commend the Original work, I should
disparage the Author, who all learned Lawyers know, that never any man wrote
like him: and for the excellency of this Abridgement, it has in it the very
pith and substance of the Reports at large, and so I rest.

It is an abuse that the laws and usages of the Realm with their Causes, are
not written, whereby they may be known, so that they may be understood of all.
Mirror Justice, fol. 225.

An exact Table of all the Cases in each several Book.
The First Book of the Lord Coke.
LOrd Buckhursts Case Pelhams Case
fol. 1 Porters Case. fol. 2 Altonwoods Case, Capels Case, Archers Case,
fol. 3 Bredons Case, fol. 4 Corbets Case, fol. 5 Shelleyes Case, fol. 6
Albaines Case, fol. 7 Chudleighs Case, fol. 8 Anne Mayowes Case, fol. 11 The
Rector of Chedingtons Case, fol. 12 Digges Case, fol. 14 Mildmayes Case, fol.
16
The second Book of the Lord Coke.
MAnsers Case, fol. 19 Goddards Case Thoroughgoods Case
fol. 20 Wisemans Case fol. 21 Lanes Case fol. 22 Baldwins Case fol. 23 Case of
Bankrupts fol. 24 Bettisworths Case fol. 24 Doddingtons Case fol. 25 Sir
Rowland Heywards Case fol. 26 Bishop of Winchesters Case fol. 29 Archbishop of
Canterburies Case fol. 31 Sir Hugh Cholmleyes Case fol. 33 Buckleyes Case fol.
34 Beckwiths Case fol. 36 Winningtons Case fol. 37 Westcots Case fol. 38
Tookers Case fol. 39 Lord Cromwels Case fol. 40 Binghams Case fol. 45
The Third Book of the Lord Coke.
THe Marquess of Winchesters Case fol. 49 Copledikes Case fol. 53 Heydons Case
fol. 54 Borastons Case fol. 56 Left out, Dowties Cass, and Sir Willam Harberts
Case. Walkers Case fol. 58 Butler and Bakers Case fol. 61 Ratclifts Case fol.
68 Bontons Case fol. 71 Sir George Browns Case fol. 72 Rigewaies Case fol. 73
Lincoln College Case fol. 74 Pennants Case fol. 77 Westbies Case fol. 80 Deane
and Chapter of Norwich's Case, fol. 81 Fermors Case fol. 83 Twines Case fol. 86
The Case of Fines. fol. 89
The Fourth Book of the Lord Coke.
VErnons Case fol. 95 Bevils Case fol. 98 Actions of Slander, the Lord Cromwels
Case. fol. 101 Cutler and Dixons Case fol. 102 Sir Richard Buckley, and Woods
Case fol. 103 Stanhop, and Blyths Case fol. 104 Hext, Justice of Peace against
Yeomans, fol. 104 Birchleyes Case fol. 105 Weaver, and Caridens Case. fol. 105
Stukley, and Bulheads Case. fol. 106 Snagg, and Gees Case. fol. 106 Baton, and
Allens Case. fol. 106 Anne Davies Case, fol. 106 Jeames Case, fol. 107 Oxford
and his wife against Cross. fol. 108 Sir G. Gerrard, Master of the Rolls
against Mary Dickinson. fol. 108 Barhams Case, fol. 109 Britteridges Case, fol.
110 Palmer, and Thorps Case, fol. 111 Coppi-hold Cases, fol. 111 Brownes Case,
fol. 111 Rivets Case, fol. 113 Deal and Rigdens Case, fol. 113 Bullock, and
Dibleyes Case, fol. 113 Gravenor, and Teds Case. fol. 114 Fitch, and Huckleyes
Case, fol. 114 Clark, and Pennifathers Case, fol. 114 P. 26. of the Queen.
fol. 115 Rous and Arters Case, fol. 116 Murrell, and Smyths Case, fol. 116 Kite
and Queintons Case, fol. 117 Melwich and Luters Case, fol. 118 Neales Case,
fol. 120 Clifton and Molineux Case, fol. 120 Taverner, and Cromwels Case, fol.
120 Hubbard and Hamonds Case, fol. 121 Westwick, and Wyars Case, fol. 122
Bunting, and Lepingwels Case, fol. 123 Downs, and Hollakins Case, fol. 124
Harm, and Says Case, fol. 125 Shaw and Tompsons Case, fol. 126 Hoe, and
Tailors Case, fol. 126 Frenches Case, fol. 127 Foyston, and Crachrodes Case,
fol. 128 Myttons Case fol. 129 Bozouns Case fol. 130 Terringhams Case fol. 132
Cases of Appeals and Indictments. Brooks Case,
fol. 135 Wetherell and Darly's Case fol. 135 Youngs Case Walkers Case Heydons
Case
fol. 136 Hume against Ogle. Hudson and Lees Case Syers Case
fol. 138 Bibiths Case Vauexs Case
fol. 139 Wrote and Wigges Case fol. 140 Waits Case fol. 142 Hill 30. of the
Queen Ognels Case
fol. 143 Rawlins Case fol. 145 Wardens and Commonalty of Sadlers Case fol. 148
Forse and Hemblings Case fol. 149 Harlakendens Case fol. 150 Fulwoods Case fol.
152 Hindes Case fol. 154 Boroughes Case Palmers Case Hollands Case
fol. 156 Case of Corporations. fol. 157 Digbies case, fol. 158 Nokes case, Sir
Andrew Corbets case,
fol. 159 Southcots case, fol. 160 Luttreles case, fol. 161 Druries case, fol.
162 Slades case, fol. 163 Adams, and Lamberts case, fol. 164 Actons case, fol.
166 Dumpors case, fol. 167 Bustards case, fol. 168 Beverleys case, fol. 169
The Fifth Book.
CLaytons case, Elmers case,
fol. 171 Jewels case, Lord Mountioyes case,
fol. 172 Justice Windhams case, Brudenels case,
fol. 173 Hensteads case, Ives case,
fol. 174 Saunders case, Rosses case,
fol. 175 Countess of Salops case, fol. 176 Case of Ecclesiastical persons,
Covenants, etc. concerning Leasees, Assurances, etc. fol. 177 Slingsbyes case,
Rosewels case,
fol. 180 Higginbottoms case, Styles case, Sir Anthony Mayns case,
fol. 181 Laughters case, Hallings case, Matthewsons case,
fol. 182 Lambs case, Broughtons case,
fol. 183 Deane and Chapter of Windsors case, Sir Thomas Palmers case,
fol. 184 Earl of Rutlands case, fol. 185 Cases of Executors Russels case,
Middletons case, Harrisons case,
fol. 188 Piggots case, Princes case,
fol. 189 Caulters case, Hargraves case, Pettifers case,
fol. 190 Robinsons case, Reads case,
fol. 191 Ployters case, fol. 192 Walcots case, Baynhams case, Gardiners case,
Bishops case,
fol. 193 Teys case, fol. 194 Dormers case, Rowlands case,
fol. 195 Countess of Rutlands case, Godwels Case, Nichols case, Bohuns case,
fol. 196 Freemans case, Gages case, Cooks case,
fol. 197 Franklins case. Gilbert Littletons case, Drywoods case,
fol. 198 Vaughans case, Wyrrels case, Biggens case,
fol. 199 Halls case, Pages case,
fol. 200 Knights case, fol. 201 Specots case, fol. 202 Fosters case, fol. 203
Gooches case, fol. 204 Sparries case, Case of By-Lawes, Chamberlain of Londons
case,
fol. 205 Clerks case, Jeffrayes case,
fol. 206 Lord Cheneys case, Cases of Usury.
fol. 208 Buttons case, Claytons case,
fol. 208 Hoes case, St. John's case,
fol. 209 Williams case, Case of Orphans of London. Wymarks case,
fol. 210 Cliftons case, fol. 211 Pilkintons case, Earl of Pembrooks case,
Pagets case,
fol. 212 Boothes case, fol. 213 Samons case, Grayes case, Fitz Herberts case,
fol. 214 Fords case, Case of of customs, Snellings case,
fol. 215 Case of Market Overt, Perimans case, Sir Henery Knevits case
fol. 216 Pennrins case, Cases of Executions. Blumfields case,
fol. 217 Garnons case, fol. 218 Frosts case, fol. 219 Hoes case, fol. 220
Semaynes case, fol. 221 Barwicks case, fol. 223 Goodalls case, Countess of
Northumberl. case, Buries case,
fol. 224 Flowers case, Rookes case,
fol. 225 Penruddocks case, fol. 226 Windsors case, Hungats case,
fol. 227 Bakers case, Boulstons case,
fol. 228 Aldens case, Sir Henry Constables case,
fol. 229 Foxleyes case, fol. 230 Malaries case, Wades case,
fol. 232 Foliambs case, Olands case, Pynners case,
fol. 233 Edriches case, fol. 234 Whelpdales case Longs case,
fol. 235 Saffins case, De libellis, Famosis,
fol. 236 Palmers case, Caudreys case,
fol. 237
The Sixth Book.
BReuertons case, fol. 239 Markals case, fol. 240 Sir John Molins case, fol.
241 Wheelers case, Ferrers case,
fol. 242 Spencers case, fol. 243 Gentleman's case, Morrices case, Cases of
Pardon,
fol. 244 Arundels case, fol. 245 Treports case, Edens case, Colyers case,
fol. 246 Wilds case, Sir Edward Cleers case,
fol. 247 Packmans case, fol. 248 Gregory's case, Michelborns case,
fol. 249 Butler and Goodalls case, Ambrosia Gorges case,
fol. 250 Marquess of Winchester his case, Reads case, Helyars case,
fol. 251 Ruddocks case, Sharps case,
fol. 252 The case of Soldiers, Vicont Mountagues case,
fol. 353 Greenes case, fol. 254 Boothies case, Fitz Willams case,
fol. 255 Bishop of Baths case, fol. 256 Dean and Chapter of Worcesters case,
fol. 257 Bellamyes case, Henery Finches case,
fol. 257 Sir Anthony Mildmay, Blakes case,
fol. 258 Higgins case, Dowdales case,
fol. 259 Boswels case, fol. 260 Countess of Rutlands case, fol. 261 Lord
Chandows case, Bredimans case,
fol. 262 Gatewards case, fol. 263 Catesbies case, fol. 264 Sir Moyle Finches
case, fol. 265 Lord Darcies case, fol. 266 Burrels case, Sir Drue Druries case,
fol. 267 Sir Gorge Cursons case, fol. 268 Bullens case, Lord Abergavennies
case, Sir Edward Phittons case,
fol. 269
The Seventh Book.
Calvin's case, fol. 271 Bulwers case, fol. 273 Sir Miles Corbets case, fol. 274
Gendils case, fol. 275 Milbornes case, Earl of Bedfords case, Oghtreds case,
fol. 276 Englefields case, fol. 277 Case of Swannes. fol. 279 Sir Thomas
Cecills case, Lord Andersons case,
fol. 280 Butts case, fol. 281 Cases of Quare Impedit. Halls case,
fol. 282 Sir Hugh Portmans case Baskervills case,
fol. 283 Mauds case, Discontinuance of process by the death of the Queen.
fol. 284 Case of a Fine levied by the King. fol. 285 Nevils case, Penal
Statutes,
fol. 286 Lillingtons case, Bedels case,
fol. 287 Beresfoeds case, Kenns case,
fol. 288
The Eighth Book.
THe Princes case, fol. 291 Calyes case, Pains case,
fol. 293 Barretry, Greysleyes case,
fol. 294 Whittinghams case, fol. 295 Jehu Webbs case, fol. 296 Sims case, fol.
297 Roger, Earl of Rutlands case, fol. 298 Beechers case, fol. 299 Swains
case, Sir William Fosters case,
fol. 300 Lovedayes case, Crogates case,
fol. 301 Trollops case, fol. 302 Whitlocks case, Greenlyes case,
fol. 303 Lord Staffords case, fol. 305 Wiat Weilds case, fol. 306 Vinyors
case, Sir Richard Pexals case,
fol. 307 Buckmers case, fol. 308 Frauncis case, fol. 309 Foxes case, fol. 310
Mannings case, fol. 311 Baspoles case, Sir Richard Lechfords case,
fol. 312 Talbots case, fol. 313 Doctor Bonhams case, fol. 314 Case of the City
of London, Case of Thetford School,
fol. 316 Turnors case, fol. 317 Shiplyes case, Sir John Nedhams case,
fol. 318 Sir Francis Barringtons case, fol. 319 Doctor Druries case, fol. 320
Davenports case, The Six Carpenters case,
fol. 321 Edwards Althams case, fol. 323 Arthur Blackamores case, fol. 324
Cases in the court of wards, Myghts case,
fol. 326 Digbies case, Earl of Cumberlands case, Paris Stoughters case,
fol. 327 Toursons case, Sir Gerard Fleetwods case,
fol. 328 Hales case, Sir Henry Constables case,
fol. 329 Virgill Parkers case, fol. 336
The Ninth Book.
DOwmans case, fol. 331 Anna Beddingfields case, fol. 332 Case of Avowry, fol.
333 The Abbot of Strata Marcella his case, fol. 334 Bucknals case, Henslowes
case,
fol. 336 Earl of Shrewsburies case, fol. 339 Hickmots case, fol. 340 Batens
case, fol. 341 The Poulters case, Aldreds case,
fol. 342 Lambs case, fol. 343 Bradshawes case, Mackallies case,
fol. 344 Peacocks case, fol. 346 Doctor Husse case, fol. 347 Combs case, fol.
348 Petoes case, fol. 349 Agnes Gores case, Coneys case,
fol. 351 Pinchons case, fol. 352 Banes case, fol. 354 Sir George Reynels case,
fol. 355 Podgers case, fol. 356 Treshams case, fol. 357 Marys case, fol. 358
Lord Sanchars case, fol. 359 Cases in the Court of wards, Laws case,
fol. 360 Floyers case, fol. 362 Sondayes case, Quicks case,
fol. 363 Bewleys case, Holts case,
fol. 364 Menes case, fol. 365 Ascoughs case, fol. 366 Thorogoods case, fol.
367 Beaumonts case, fol. 368
The Tenth Book.
THe case of Suttons Hospital. fol. 371 Portingtons case, fol. 374 Lampets
case, fol. 375 Case of the Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of the University
of Oxford. fol. 378 Bishop of Salisburies case, fol. 379 Whistlers Case
Churchwardens Case of St. Saviors in Southwark.
fol. 381 The Case of the Marshalsea in false imprisonment, fol. 382 Loveis
Case, in Ejectione ferme, fol. 384 Doctar Leyfields Case. fol. 387 Seymors
Case, fol. 389 Bewfages Case fol. 391 Denbawds Case in Error, fol. 396 Lofields
case in debt upon bond, fol. 397 Legates Case fol. 398 Pilfolds Case fol. 399
Cheyneyes Case. fol. 400 Case of the Major and Burgess of Lin, fol. 401 Cluns
Case, fol. 402 Osborns Case, fol. 403 Read and Redmans case, fol. 404 Richard
Smiths Case, fol. 405 Cases upon the Commissions of Sewers. Case of Chester
Mill, Keighleys case,
fol. 406 The Case of the Isle of Elie, fol. 407 Scroops Case, fol. 409
The Eleventh Book.
THe Lord Delawares case, fol. 411 Auditor Curles case fol. 412 Sir John
Heydons case, fol. 413 Priddle and Nappers case, fol. 414 Doctor Grants Case
fol. 416 Sir Henry Nevils case, fol. 417 Doctor Ayrays Case fol. 417 Henry
Harpurs case, fol. 418 Henry Pigots case, fol. 420 Alexand. Poulters case, fol.
420 Metcalfes case. fol. 423 Richard Godfreyes case fol. 425 Richard Lifords
case fol. 426 The Tailors of Ipswich case, fol. 428 Edward Savels case fol. 429
Benthams case fol. 429 Doctor Fosters case fol. 429 Magdalen College case.
fol. 432 Lewis Bowls case fol. 34 The Case of Monopolies fol. 436 The Earl of
Devonsh. case fol. 437 James Bags case fol. 438
THE FIRST BOOK.
The Lord Buckhursts Case, 40. El. fo. 1.
IF a man for him and his heirs, do warrant Land to one and his heirs; this
is a general warrantie, because there is not a restraint against any
particular person in certain.

Upon a Feoffement without warranty, the Feoffee shall have all the Charters,
which comprize warranty, and others, though they be not given to him, because
he is to defend the Title at his peril. Upon a Feoffement with warranty,
without express grant, the Feoffee shall not have any Charters, which serve
for to deraigne the warranty paramount. Also the Feoffer shall have all
Charters, which serve for maintenance of the Title, but the Feoffee shall have
all which maintain the possession, as Court Rolls, and which are concomitant
and incident to the possession.

If A. be seized of a Segniorie, rent, advowson, or other thing that lies in
grant, and grant the same over unto B. with warranty, and B. grant that to C.
with warranty; In this case C. shall have the first deed although B. be bound
to warrantie, for without that he cannot make any Defense against A. or any
claiming by him.

Pelhams Case, 32. El. fo. 14.
A Tenant for life, the remainder in Tail the remainder in fee, bargains and
sells the Land to one, who before the Statute of 14. El. ca. 8. suffers a
recoverie, in which A. is vouched, and voucheth over, and he in remainder
enters, and the entry is adjudged lawful; for the Recovery is a Forfeiture,
and the remainder may enter, for it is the common Assurance; As if Tenant for
life had levied a Fine, etc. and suing of execution, does not toll the entry of
the remainder, and a Writ of error was sued, and the plaintiff release the
errors.

Porters Case, 35. El. fo. 22.
32. H. 8. P. devised a house to his wife and her heirs, upon condition, that
she by advise, etc. with all convenient speed, after his death should assure
it, etc. for maintenance of a Free School, etc. for ever, and dies, 32. H. 8.
the wife enters, and 3. E. 6. leases to A. for years, the heir of P. enters,
and his entry adjudged lawful; because 23. H. 8. extends not to good uses, nor
does it make the conveyance void, or give entry, but makes the use void; and
admit the use void, yet the condition is not, for Counsel may devise, etc. as
to have a Corporation by Pattent, and license to assure, and therefore the wife
ought to have performed it.

Any man at this day may give Lands, Tenements, or hereditaments to any person
or persons, for the finding of a Preacher, maintenance of a School, maimed
Soulders, poor people, reparation of Churches, Highways, Bridges, marriage
of poor maids, or any other charitable uses. But it is good policy in every
such Feoffment or estate, to reserve to the Feoffor and his heirs any small
rent, or to express some small sum of money for the consideration of the
cause before recited.

Altonwoods Case, 42. Eliz. fo. 41.
H. 8. seized of an estate Tail to him, and the heirs males of his body, and
of a Fee expectant, grants in Tail, and dies without issue male; adjuded that
the grant is void; for the King had an estate Tail in possession, by which he
might grant a lawful estate for his own life; and a Fee, by which he might
grant an estate Tail by special recital. And these words (ex speciali
gratia, etc.) shall not produce a strainable construction against the rules of
Law, or in deceptionem regis.

Capells Case, 23. Eliz. fo. 62.
A Tenant in Tail, the remainder to B. in Tail. B. grants a rent charge, A.
suffers a common recovery, and dies without issue, the grantee distraines, the
Alienee of A. brings a Replevin; adjudged for the alienee by all the Justices
of England that a common recoverie against a Tenant in Tail, shall bind not
only the remainder, and all Leases, charges, etc. granted or made by him in
remainder, but also the Reversion, and all Leases, charges, etc. granted by him
in reversion.

Archers Case, 39. 40. Eliz. fo. 66.
LAnd was devised to the Father for life, the remainder to the next heir male
of the Father, and to the heirs males of his body; the devisor dies, the
Father infeoffes J. S. with warranty. First it was resolved by Anderson and
Walmeslowe et tot. Cur. that the Father had but only an estate for life, for
that he had an express estate for life demised unto him, and the remainder is
limited to his next heir male in the singular number, and his right heir
male may not enter for the forfeiture in his life, for he cannot be heir so
long as he lives. Secondly, It was resolved that the remainder to his right
heir is a good remainder, although he cannot have a right heir during his
life, but it suffices that it vesteth eo instanti, that the particular estate
determines, Dyer. 14. Eliz. fo. 309. Thirdly, it was resolved which was the
principal point in this case, per tot. Curiam, that by the Feoffment of the
Tenant for life, the remainder was destroyed, for every contingent remainder
ought to vest, either during the particular estate, or at the least eo instanti
that the particular estate determines; for if the particular estate be ended
or determined in Deed or in Law before the contingency fall, the remainder is
void. And in this case, by the Feoffment of the Father, his estate for life was
determined by condition in Law, which cannot be revived by any possibility;
for this cause the contingent remainder is void, for by the Feoffment no right
of the particular estate remains; and the better opinion was, that the
warranty binds the remainder, though in Abeyance.

Bredons Case, 39, 40. Eliz: Fol. 76.
TEnant for life, and the remainder in Tail, join in a fine Come ceo, etc. to
A. who renders a Rent charge of 40. l. a year, to Tenant for life, the
remainder dies without issue, the second remainder in tail enters. Tenant for
life, distraines for the Rent; adjudged he may, and that the rent remains,
after the death of Tenant in tail without issue, during the life of Tenant for
life; the fine was no discontinuance, for every one gave that which he might
lawfully give, and it is no forfeiture by Tenant for life, for the Law construes
this. First, to be a grant of him in remainder; and after, the grant of Tenant
for life, Vt res magis valeat, etc. If Tenant for life, and the first remainder
in Tail, make a feoffement, it is no discontinuance, though the first remainder
in tail dies without issue, nor is it a forfeiture, but the feoffee shall hold
it during the life of Tenant for life; but if it be without deed, then it is a
surrender of Tenant for life, and the feoffement of the remainder, Vt res magis
valeat, etc.

Corbets Case, 42. Eliz: Fol. 84. of Perpetuities.
C. Covenants to stand seized to the use of himself for life, and after to the
use of A. his Eldest Son, and the Heirs Males of his body, the remainder to
the use of B. his second Son, and the Heirs Males of his Body, etc. And if A.
or his issue, etc. shall attempt, etc. to alien, etc. by which any estate shall
be barred, etc. that after such attempt, and before any act executed, the use
and Estate of him so attempting, etc. shall cease only as to him so
attempting, in the same degree as if he were naturally dead, and not otherwise,
and that then it shall be immediately to such persons, to whom it should come
by the intent of the Indenture, etc. C. dies, A. suffers a recovery, B. enters,
etc. adjudged he could not, for this proviso is repugnant, impossible, and
against Law; for the death of Tenant in tail, is not a cesser of the Estate
tail, but death without issue Males; and by this reason the issue should have
it in the life of the Father, etc. And for every descent etc. Death, natural
or civil, is requisite, and it is not material, though Tenant in tail had no
issue at the time of the breach, for it was repugnant at the beginning; and the
estate tail does not commence, by the having of issue, and a gift in tail
upon condition, that if the Donee dies, his estate shall cease, is a void
condition. Also the proviso is void for the incertainty, as a gift to two, Et
haeredibus, is void though a Warranty be made to them and their Heirs, and in
Jermine and Arscotts Case, the like proviso was adjudg'd void: for be the
proviso a condition or a limitation, the entire estate ought to be defeated by
it, and an Estate in Land cannot cease for part, and continue for the residue,
nor cease for one person, and continue for another, nor cease for a time and
revive after. The like judgment was betwixt Chomly and Humble, but the
Parliament, or Law, may make an estate void, as to one, and good to another,
as Tenant in special tail, levies a fine, the issue is barred not the wife,
so a release by the demandant, to the vouchee is good, not by a stranger, so,
if an Executor surrender a term, to one respect it is extinct, to another it is
assetts, etc. And uses are within the Statute De donis, though it speaks only
of Lands and Tenements, and there shall be a Possessio fratris, etc. of them,
for they are guided by the Rules of the common Law. Richill in the time of R.
2. and Thirning in the time of H. 4. Justices, intended for to make a
perpetuity, but could not.

Shelleyes Case, 23. Eliz: Fol. 94.
EDward Shelley leased for years, and after Covenanted to suffer a recovery,
which should be to the use of himself, and after to the use of A. for 24.
years, and after to the Heirs Males of the body of the said E S. and the
Heirs Males of the said Heirs Males, etc. E. S. dies 9 of October. the first
day of the Term, in the morning, betwixt five and six a clock, the recovery
passes the same day, and an Habere facias seisinam awarded, the recovery was
executed the 19 of October. 4 December. the Wife of the Eldest Son (before dead) of
E. S. was delivered of a Son, named Henry, Richard, the second Son of E. S.
entered, and made a Lease, etc. Henry entered upon the Lessee, who brought an
Eject firmae, and Judgment was given for the Defendant, and it was resolved,
that if Tenant in tail suffer a common recovery, and dye before execution,
that execution may be sued against the issue, for the intended recompense, in
favor of the common assurance, resolved that the revertion in judgment of Law
is not in the recoveror before execution sued, for the judgment is, Quod
recuperet seisinam, which cannot be executed till entry, or claim, as it is of
a Common, etc. granted upon condition; for when a man may enter, or claim, the
Law will not put things in him, till entry or claim. The third and great point
resolved, was that the Uncle is in, as by descent, though he shall not have his
age, nor be in ward. 1. Because the recovery being the Original act, had its
Essence in the life of E. S. to which the execution has retrospect. 2. Because
the use might have vested in E. S. if he were in life. 3. Neither the
recoverors by their entry, nor the Sheriff by making execution may make an
Inheritance to whom they please. 4. Because the Uncle claimed the use by the
recovery and Indenture, and by words of limitation, not purchase.

Albanies Case, 28. Eliz: Fo. 111.
A By Indenture infeoffed B. of two Acres, to the use of A. for life, the
remainder in tail to C. the remainder in fee to D. with a proviso, if E. dye
without issue, that A. at any time by indenture sealed, etc. in the presence of
four, etc. may alter, etc. any use, etc. A. of the one acre, infeoffes F. and
for the other Acre, A. by Indenture renounces, surrenders, releases, etc. to B.
C. and D. the said power, condition, authority, etc. E. dies without issue, A.
by Indenture in presence of four, revokes the first uses, and limits new,
resolved that by the feoffement, the power to revoke, as to limit new uses, was
extinct, and by Wray chief Justice, the future power may be released, as a
condition subsequent, though the performance or breach cannot be done without
an act precedent, but as to this point, the Court did not give their
resolution: but the whole Court agreed, that if the power had been present,
(as it is usual) this might be extinct to any one, who has a free hold in
possession, reversion or remainder. 'Twas moved (if the future power could not
be released) whether it might be defeated by the words of defeasance, both
being executory; and 'twas said that in all cases, when any thing executory is
created by a deed, that the same thing, by consent of all parties to the
creation, by their deed may be nullified, as a warranty, recognizance, rents,
charge annuities, covenant, etc. And of the same opinion was Wray chief
Justice, and the whole Court, and judgment given according.

Chudleighs Case, Or the Case of perpetuities, Fo. 120.
SIr Richard Chudleigh was seized in fee of the Manor of D. and had issue
four Sons, A. B. C. D. and 26o April, the third and fourth of Phillip and
Mary, infeoffed E. F, etc. in fee, to the use of himself and his Heirs of the
body of G. then Wife of H. and after to the use of the performance of his Will,
for ten years immediately after his death, and after to the use of the
feoffes, and their Heirs, during the life of A. the Eldest Son, the
remainder to the use of the first issue Male of the body of A. and the Heirs
of the body of the first issue Male, and so to the second issue Male, the
remainder to the use of B. the second Son, and the Heirs of his body, the
remainder to C. etc. the remainder to D. etc the remainder to the right Heirs
of himself Sir Richard Chudley, died without issue of the body of G. 1o of the
Queen the feoffees (C. living) by deed infeoffed, A. in fee, without
consideration, he having notice of the first uses. A. has issue a Son, named
S. and after I. and after infeoffes Sir I. C. with warranty, S. died without
issue, etc. I. enters, etc. agreed, by all the Justices and Barons but two,
that the feoffement made by the feoffees (which had an Estate for life) devests
all the estates, and the future contingent uses also; and though A. had notice
of the first use, it is not material, because the ancient uses were divested,
and this new estate cannot be Subject to the ancient uses, which rose out of
the ancient estate, agreed that 27 H. 8. does not extend to destroy uses,
otherwise then by execution, and transferring the possession to them, agreed by
the most that 27. H. 8. does not transfer the possession to any use, but
only to uses In esse, which does appear by the Statute, for there ought to be
a person In esse, seized, and also a use In esse, for if there be only a
possibility of a use, there cannot be an execution of the possession to the
use: the Statute says, That the estate shall be out of the feoffees, and that
the estate shall be in such person which has the use. So that no Estate of the
feoffees shall be transferred in abeyance; and upon this it was concluded, that
contingent uses, or in possibility, may be destroyed or discontinued, before
that they come In esse, as they might at common Law; so the remainders limited
in use here, shall follow the rule and reason of Estates executed in possession
by the common law, and if the estate for life here had been determined by
death, before the birth of the Son, the remainder in future should be void,
though the Son were borne after, for a remainder ought to vest during the
particular estate, or Eo instanti, when it ends. And it was holden by all, that
if the contingent use here, had come In esse, without alteration of the estate
of the Land, it should be executed by the Statute of 27. H. 8. Also it was
holden by most, that 27. H. 8. against the express Letter of it, shall not be
taken by equity, because, by preservation of contingent uses mischeives
intended to be prevented, shall be preserved and greater introduced. Popham
chief Justice said, that by 27. H. 8. some uses in esse are executed
presently, uses in futuro agreeable to Law, are executed if they come In esse,
in due time, but uses not agreeable to Law are extirpated, for the intention of
the Statute, was, to restore the ancient common Law. Five other points
adjudged, besides the principal matter. 1. When Tenant for life (the remainder
being in tail to A.) infeoffes the reversioner, it is a forfeiture, for it
devests the estate in remainder; so if there be Tenant in tail, the remainder
in tail, ctc. and the diversity is, when the privity and estate, is sole and
immediate, when not. 2. If A. has issue B. and C. infants, and a lease is made
to A. for life, the remainder to B. in tail, the remainder to C. in tail. A
is diseised, and releases to the disseisor with warranty, and dies, this
discends upon B. within age, B. dies, the warranty discends upon C. within age,
C. comes to full age, and three years after enters, his entry is lawful, for
he might enter in the life of his Ancestor, and if he does not enter, yet the
warranty shall not bind him, otherwise it is, when he is put to action, and
Caveat, that after his full age, he does not suffer a descent before entry. 3.
If a disseisor, etc. who has a defeasible title in a Manor, grant a voluntary
estate by Copy (being forfeited, or escheated to him) this grant shall not
bind him that has right, after a recontinuance of the Manor, but
admittances, which a disseisor, etc. makes to Copy holds, are good, for they
are in a manner judicial acts, and shall bind the disseisee. 4. That an
estate made to one and his Heirs, during the life of B. is but an Estate for
life, upon which a remainder may depend. 5. That an Estate made to A. and his
Heirs of the body of Jane S. is an Estate tail against the opinion of Ascugh
20. H. 6. 36.

Anne Maiowes Case, 35. Eliz. fo. 146.
FEeoffor and Feoffee upon condition, by Deed join in a grant of a rent charge
to C. the condition is broken, the Feeoffor reenters, the grantee distraines,
the Feoffor brings a Replevin. Resolved, that the rent remains; to the
objection, that it is the grant of the Feoffee, and the confirmation only of
the Feoffor, and a confirmation cannot make a conditional estate absolute, nor
alter the quality of it, except it enlarge it: as if a Feoffor confirm the
estate of the Feoffee upon condition, before the condition broken, it does not
make it absolute. Answered, and agreed by the Court, that there is a diversity,
when the estate of him, to whom the confirmation is made, is upon an express
condition; there the confirmation does not toll the condition; but if such
feoffee infeoffe another without condition, there a confirmation to the second
feoffee extincts the condition. Feoffee upon condition grants a rent in fee;
the feoffor confirms it to him and his heirs, and after enters for condition
broken, yet the rent remains, and by Littleton every fee simple land may be
charged one way or other, Concurrentibus his, etc. and the case 11. H. 7. is
all one with our case, and here it is the stronger, because the grant and
confirmation were by the same Deed, so that the rent was never subject to any
condition.

The Rector of Chedingtons case, 40. Eliz. fo. 153.
2. E. 6. the Rector of Ched. demised the Rectory to El Elderker for fourscore
years, if she should live so long; and if she dyed, within the said term, or
aliened, that then her estate should cease, and then by the same Indenture
demises the premises to R. E. for so many years, as shall remain unexpired
after the death, or alienation of El. for the residue of the term of
fourscore years, if he shall live so long, without alienation, etc. And if he
dye, or alien within the said term, then his estate shall cease; and then by
the same Indenture he grants the premises to W. for so many years of the said
term of fourscore years, as remain, if he lives without alienation, and if
W. dies, or aliens within the said term, that his estate shall cease, and then
he grants, etc. during so many of the fourscore years, which shall be
unexpired to T. his executors and assigns, which Indenture, and estate, was
confirmed by the Patron and Ordinary; the Rector dies, T. dies, W. dies, and
17. Eliz. Ellerker dies, after R. enters, and dies, 18. Eliz. the executor of
T. enters, and assigns to J. S. the Successor of the Rector enters, and Leases
to B. who upon ouster, brought an Ej. Firmae. Resolved for the Plaintiff, and
that the Lease to T. is void. Argued for T. that his demise was good, and a
difference taken betwixt terminum annorum, and tempus annorum, as in this case
of the demise to T. during so many years of the fourscore years, etc. not of
the term of fourscore years, if a Lease be made for 21. years, and after
another Lease, to commence from the end and expiration of the said term of
years, and after the first Lease is surrendered, the second term shall
commence presently, not so, if it were from the end of the said 21. years.
Resolved that the demises to R. and W. are void, because the term that El.
had, was sub modo, if she should so long live, which is determined by her
death, ergo, no residue can remain to R. and W. and so 'twas adjudged between
Green and Edwards, and the Court agreed the diversity betwixt the demises to
R. and W. and the demise to T. 'twas argued that the demise to T. was void. 1.
Because that the Lessor had not power for to contract for the land during the
fourscore years, for he had but a possibility to have the land again during
the fourscore years, viz. if El. dyed, which possibility cannot be demised,
but the Court delivered no opinion to this point. 2. That the Lease to T. was
void, for the incertainty, how many years should be behind, at the death of
El. a termor grants to B. so many years as shall be behind tempore mortis
suae, it is void. Locrofts case adjudged, a man possessed of a term of 90.
years, upon marriage of his Son, demised the land to his Son for 70.
years, to commence after his death, the Lessor dies, the lease was adjudged
good, because here he demised the land for 70. years, which is certain, in
which, this differs from 7. E. 6. which diversity was agreed by the whole
Court. 3. That 'twas void, because, he dyed in the life of El. so that the
incertainty, cannot be reduced to a certainty in his life time, and so cannot
rest in the executors, a lease to one for so many years as his Executors shall
name, is void. Note, a diversity betwixt a covenant and agreement, which is
perfect, and certain, though it takes effect in possession, upon a future
matter precedent; and a covenant and agreement incertaine, which is to be
reduced to a certainty by matter ex post facto, for in the first case, the
estate is bound presently, in the other not, which was agreed by the Court. 4.
It was moved, if T. had been in life, the demise could not rest in him; T. dyed
before R. or W. and R. survived El. and by the express condition precedent, R.
could not take, except El. dyed within the term, and W. could not take, except
R. dyed within the term, and this is as much as to say, that if R. dies before
El. and T. cannot take, except W. dye in the life of El. and R. survived El. So
that both precedent contingencies fail, viz. the death of R. and W. in the
life of El. and though the demise to R. and W. are void, yet the limitation
precedent ( viz. the death of R. and W. in the life of El.) to the demise to T.
is not void, for his interest may depend upon both the contingencies, for so
was the intention of the parties, and this was affirmed by the whole Court, by
Popham Chief Justice. The Lease to T. was void for another cause, for it
cannot commence upon a contingent, which depends upon another contingent, as
here the demise to T. depends upon the contingent annexed to the demise, made
to W. and the demise to W. depends upon a contingency annexed to the demise to
R.

Digges Case, 42. Eliz. fo. 173.
C. Digges was seized of the land in question, and other lands in fee, and by
Indenture 6. Maij. 10. of the Queen covenanted (in consideration of marriage
betwixt him and his wife, and for the advancement of T. their Son, and for
two hundred pounds paid to him before marriage) that he and his heirs would
stand seized to the use of himself for life, and after to T. in tail, and
after to the use of himself in tail; with a proviso (for the considerations
aforesaid, etc.) that it should be lawful for him, at any time during his
life, with consent of certain persons, by Indenture to be Enrolled in any of
the Kings Courts, to revoke any of the uses, or estates, and for to limit new
uses. 6. Maij. 12. of the Queen C. by consent, etc. by Indenture enrolled in
the Chancery, revoked the uses and estates aforesaid, in part of the land, and
limited the use of it to him and his heirs; after, 20. Sept. 13. of the
Queen, by Indenture with consent, etc. enrolled in Banck. M. 13. and 14. of
the Queen, declared that for the payment of his debts, that from the time of
the inrollment of this Deed in Chancery, all the uses in the first Indenture
should be void, and that the land should be to the use of himself in fee:
after, C. 26. October. 14. of the Queen by Indenture covenanted for to levy a
Fine of all his land, part of which should be to the use of himself and his
wife, and his heirs; which Fine was levied the same term, after the Indenture
dated 20. Sept. was enrolled in Chancery, after C. enters, and makes his
claim: and whether C. dyed seized in fee of the land mentioned in the Deed of
Revocation of 20. Sept. was the question. Adjudged, 1. that C. D. might revoke
part at one time, part at another, till he has revoked all; but he can revoke
the same part but once, except that he has a new power, etc. to uses newly
limited; for these words ( at any time) amount to ( from time to time, etc.)
2, That where the revocation is to be by Deed Indented to be enrolled, this is
as much as to say, as by Deed Indented and enrolled, and till inrollment no
revocation shall be, for otherwise perchance none shall be enrolled. 3. That
'twas no perfect revocation by the Indenture of 20. Sept. till the Deed were
enrolled in the Chancery; for though that the proviso of revocation in the
first Indenture shall be satisfied with an inrollment, in any of the Kings
Courts, yet for that the Indenture of revocation it self, limits the
revocation to take effect, after the inrollment in Chancery, it ought to be so.
4. That the Fine levied before the inrollment in Chancery (which was before the
revocation) has extinct the power; see Albaines case before adjudged, and
Popham Chief Justice said, that without question such a power might be
released, for it is not merely collateral, but savours and tastes of the
estate of the land, which all the Court agreed. 5. If the Fine had not been,
the ancient uses were determined, without entry or claim, because he himself
was tenant for life of the land, and the act of revocation is as strong as
claim; and this point was agreed in the Earl of Salops case. 6. By the same
conveyance that the ancient uses are revoked, others may be raised, without
claim, or other act, and the Law adjudges a priority of operation, Whites case
adjudged according.

Maildmayes Case, 24. Eliz. fo. 175.
A Use cannot be raised by any covenant, proviso, or bargain, etc. upon a
general consideration, and therefore if a man by Deed indented and enrolled,
etc. for diverse good causes and considerations; bargain and sell his Land to
another, and his heirs nihil operatur inde, for no use shall be raised upon
such general considerations, for it does not appear to the Court, that the
bargain or had quid pro quo. But the bargainee may aver, that money or other
valuable consideration was paid or given, if in truth it was so, and the
bargain and sale is good.

It was resolved that when uses are raised by covenant in the consideration of
advancement of any of his blood, and after in the same Indenture a Proviso that
the Covenantor may make Leases for years, etc. that the Covenantor in this
case may not make Leases for years to his son, daughter, or any of his
blood, much less to any other person, because that the power to make Leases
for years was void, when the Indenture was sealed and delivered. For the
covenant upon this general consideration will not raise any use, and no
particular averment in this case may be taken; but if the uses be limited upon
a recoverie, fine, or feoffment, there needs not any consideration to raise
any of the uses. Resolved, that the words (other consideration) cannot comprise
any consideration expressed in the Indenture before the proviso, for (other)
ought to be in quality, nature, and person, different, and advancement of his
daughter is a consideration mentioned before.

Anthony Mildmay brought an action of the case against Roger Standish, for
saying that Lands were lawfully assured to John Talbott for 1600. years, and
that he was lawfully possessed of the same term; whereas in truth the said
Lands were not lawfully assured for the said term, nor the said John Talbott
was lawfully possessed of the interest thereof And so for slaundering of the
title by speaking of the words, Mildmay brought an action. Standish justified
the words, and showed the title of Talbott, and it was adjudged that the action
was maintaineable and good, although that Talbott had a limitation of the Land
by will, which was the reason that Standish (being a man not learned in the
Laws) affirmed the words, yet because he took upon him the notice of the Law,
and meddled in a matter that did not concern him, Judgment was given for
Mildmay; Et ignorantia juris non excusat.

THE SECOND BOOK.
Of Sir Edward Cook, Lord, etc. Mansers Case, 26. Eliz. fo. 3.
IF a man be unlearned and cannot read, and be bound to do an act of sealing
assurances, writings, etc. upon tender, etc. he is not bound to seal and
deliver any such writing, if there be not some ready which may read the Deed if
the party so require it, and in the same language and tongue that he
understands. Ignorantia duplex est facti and juris, and ignorance in reading,
or of the language. Quae sunt ignorantia facti, may excuse, but ignorantia
juris non excusat, and if it be read unto him, he may not have a reasonable
time to show it to his Council learned, to see whether it agree with his bond
or covenant; for he must seal it at his peril, or if the same be truly
expounded to him, it is good enough. But if it be read amiss, or declared
contrary to what it is, and thereby the illiterated man is deceived, he may
very well plead non est factum; For the Law says, it is not his Deed; and so
it was adjudged in Throughgoods case, being the third case in this second
Book. Resolved, that if a man be bound that a stranger shall do an act, in
such case he takes upon him, that he shall do it at his peril; for he which
is bound, takes more upon him for a stranger, then for himself, in many cases.
If a man plead, that he has kept a man indemnified, etc. he ought to show how,
otherwise, where he pleads in the negative, Non fuit damnificatus.

Goddards Case, 26. El. fo. 4.
AN obligation dated the fourth of April Anno 24. El. and delivered as the
Deed of the party 30. July An. 23. El. adjudged the Deed of the party; for
though the plaintiff in pleading, cannot allege the delivery before the Date,
because he is estopped, yet a Jury which are sworn to speak the truth, shall
not be estopped. The Date of a Deed is not the substance of the Deed. For if it
want date, or have an impossible Date, as the 30. February, the Deed is good.
For there are three things of the essence or substance of a Deed (viz.) writing
in paper or parchment, sealing, and delivery. And if it have these three,
although it want, In Cujus rei testimonium Sigillum suum apposuit, etc. yet the
Deed is good; and when a Deed is delivered, it takes effect by the delivery,
not by the date.

Throughgoods Case. 26. Eliz. fo. 9.
REsolved, that it is not material, whether the party to whom the Deed is made,
or another, by his procurement; or a Stranger of his own head, reads the
writing in other words, then the writing is, so that he that seals it, be a
lay man, and (without covin in him) deceived, and the pleading of it is always
general, without showing by whom 'twas read; and A. shall void an obligation
to B. by pleading that he did it ^y menace of C. Resolved, that such a layman
is not bound to deliver a Deed, if no body be present that can read it, in
such language as he can understand, and if it be read in other words, it shall
not bind him, and it is at the peril of him to whom it is made, that the very
effect and purport of it be declared, if it be required, but if he do not
request it, he shall be bound by it, though it be made contrary to his meaning.
Resolved, that it shall not bind, if the effect be declared in other words,
then it is, as if the Deed had been read in other words. Two Justices, a
Feoffement of two acres, is read as of one, it shall not bind; see Mansers
case before.

Wisemans Case, 27. Eliz. fo. 15.
TEnant in tail of certain Lands, the remainder to another in Fee, he in
remainder by Deed indented and enrolled in consideration of blood, etc. as for
other good considerations, does covenant to stand seized of the said Lands to
the use of himself, and of the heirs males of his body. And for default
thereof, to the use of the Queen, her heirs and successors. After the Tenant
in tail in possession suffers a common recoverie with voucher. And whether
it was a bar to the issue in tail was the question; And it was adjudged that
the issue in tail was barred, for good considerations are too general to raise
any use, without special averment, that valuable or other good consideration
was given. Resolved, that the Land should continue in his name and blood, is
not a consideration to raise a use to the Queen, though the limitation to her,
were, for the preservation of the tail against discontinuances and bars, for
there wants quid pro quo. Resolved, if he had said in consideration, that the
Queen is the head of the weal public, and has the care and charge, as well
to preserve peace, as for to repel hostility, yet it is no good consideration,
for Kings ex officio ought to govern their Subjects in tranquillity, which is
employed in the word (King.) And admit the consideration had been sufficient to
raise a use to the Queen, yet that would not preserve the estate tail by
force of the Act 34. H. 8. for no estate tail is preserved by the said Act,
except the same estate tail be of the creation or provision of the King, and
not where the estate tail is given or created of a common person without
provision of the King, as may appear by the preamble of the Act. Resolved,
that before the Statute of 34. H. 8. a common recovery barred a tail created
by the King.

Lanes Case, 29. Eliz. fo. 16.
THe Queen seized of a Manor in right of her Crown, by her Steward granted
coppie-hold Lands, parcel thereof, to one by coppie, according to the custom
in Fee. And after the Queen under the Exchequer Seal made a Lease of the same
Lands to another for 21. years, who granted the same Term to the
coppie-holder, and after the Queen reciting the Lease for years, granted the
reversion thereof in Fee, the Term of 21. years expired. The Patentee of the
reversion enters upon the coppie-holder, and the entry was adjudged good.
Resolved, that the Lease under the Exchequer Seal was good, by the usage
there, for the course of every Court, is as a law, of which the common law
takes notice, without alleging of it in pleading; and every Court at
Westminster is bound to take notice of the Customs of other Courts, otherwise
of Courts in the Country: and the order of Exchequer is to make Leases by (
Committimus such land.) Resolved, that the estate of the Coppie-holder was
determined by the acceptance of the Lease for years; And so it was adjudged
against the Coppie-holder, for notwithstanding that the Coppie-holders estate
is taken to be but an estate at will, yet the custom has so established the
estate of the Coppieholder, that he is not removeable at the will of the Lord,
so long as he performs his customs and services: and by the same reason the
Lord cannot determine his interest, by any act that he can do. And so it has
been adjudged many times. And the aceptance of this Lease was the proper act of
the Coppie-holder. Resolved, that by the severance of the freehold from the
Manor, the Coppiehold estate is not extinguished.

Baldwyns Case, 31. Eliz. fo. 23.
THings which lie in grant, and take their essence and effect by delivery of a
Deed, without other ceremony, as rent or common out of Lands, etc. by the
premises of the Deed to one and his heirs, habendum to the grantee for years
or life, this habendum is repugnant to the premises, for the Fee passes by
the premises by the delivery of the Deed, and therefore the habendum is void.
And when a man gives Lands by Deed in Fee by the premises, habendum to the
Lessee for life, there the habendum is void, and when livery is made, the
effect of the Deed shall be taken the most strongly against the Feoffor, and
the best for the Feoffee.

When a ceremony is requisite to the perfection of an estate in the premises
limited, and to the estate limited in the habendum, no ceremony is requisite
but only the delivery of the Deed, although the habendum be of meaner estate
then the premises, the habendum shall stand good and qualify the generality
of the premises, as a Fee granted in the premises, habendum for years, it is
for years, and no inheritance. Note; There is a diversity betwixt the estate
implied in the premises, and expressed; as if A. grant a rent to B. this is an
estate for life, but if the habendum be for years, this is good, and qualifies
the implication of the premises.

Case of Bankrupts, 31. Eliz fo. 25.
REsolved, that a grant or assignement of goods, by a Bankrupt, after the
Commission awarded, which is matter of Record, of which every one ought to take
notice, and though to a Creditor, in satisfaction of his debt, is void, and
that a sale of such goods, by the Commissioners, is good. Which sale, by the
Statute of 13. of the Queen, ought to be equal, to every one rate, and rate
like, according to the quantity, etc. And the Court resolved, that the proviso
in the said Statute, concerning gifts bona fide, does not make any gift good,
but excludes them out of the penalty, etc. Commissioners may sell, by Deed,
without Inrollment, and though they have not seen the goods; agreed, that the
distribution ought to be several, not joint, for the one debt, may be greater
then the other, and in this case the Jury found, that the Commissioners sold
the goods to three Creditors jointly, but further; that the Bankrupt was
indebted to them in 273. pounds, which shall be intended a joint debt, and so
good. Resolved, that the act gives benefit to such as will come, and not to
them that refuse; and vigilantibus, and non dormientibus, jura subveniunt; and
every Creditor may take notice of the Commission, being matter of Record.

Bettisworths Case, 33. Eliz. in communi Banco. fo. 31.
A Lease for years was made of one Message, one Close called Raynolds, and of
diverse other Lands in Dale, and afterward (the Lessee being in the house) the
Lessor entered into the same Close, and makes a Feoffment of the Message, and
of the Lands therewith demised, and makes livery in the same Close, and
afterward the Lessee reentreth into the said Close. And if this was a good
Feoffment, and livery of seison of the said Close, (the Lessee nor any for him
being in the said Close) was the question. And it was adjudged that the livery
and seison was void, as well for the Close as for the Message; and the other
Land therewith demised; For the Possession of the Message, which is his
Castle, is a good possession of the Lands therewith demised, and it matters
not, whether livery be made on the Land within view of the house, or not. When
a man makes a feoffment of a Message cum pertinentii, he departs with
nothing thereby, but that which is parcel of the house, as buildings,
curtelage, and gardens.

If a Lessee for years makes a Lease for a certain Term of any parcel, and
so divides the possession thereof from the residue (if of this parcel so
severed) Liverie be made, the possession in the residue by the first lessee, is
not any impediment to the liverie of this parcel, otherwise if a Lessee make a
Lease, at will of any parcel, there his possession of the residue shall hinder
the liverie made in this parcel, and with this judgment agreed all the other
Justices, and Sergeants of Sergeants Inn in Fleete-streete.

Doddingtons Case, 27. Eliz. fo. 32.
KIng H. 8. Ex certa scientia, etc. granted to A. for 300 l. Omnia illa
Messuagia in tenura Johannis Brown, Situate in Well, nuper prioratini de W.
Spectant'. And in truth the Lands lie in D. in this Case 'twas resolved that
the grant was void by the Common Law, as well in case of a common person, as
the King, because the grant is general, and is restrained to one certain
Village, and the grantee shall not have any Lands out of that Village, to which
the generallity of the grant is referred, for this Pronoune Illa, has his
necessary reference as well to the Town, as well as to the Tenure of I. B. for
if either the one or the other fail, the grant is void. And so it was
adjudged, Per tot. cur. de Banco Regis. Resolved also, that this grant was not
helped by the Statute of 34. H. 8. For no grants are helped by this Statute,
nor by any act of confirmation, but such as comprehend convenient certainty. 1.
Quia generale nihil certum implicat. And here no Tenements are mentioned, to be
granted, because the general grant being entire, was referred to a falsity,
and therefore it cannot be said that the Town was misnamed, and great
inconvenience would follow, if, etc. for the King should be deceived, but the
Statute helps when there is a convenient certainty, as a Manor, Farm, Land,
known by a certain name, or containing so many Acres, etc. So that it may
appear what things the King intended to pass. Note, it is the most sure way,
for the Pattentee to express as much as he can in certainty, before the
general words.

SIR Rowland Heywards Case, In cur Wardor 37. Eliz. fo. 35.
SIr Rowland Heyward seized of a Manor in Demeans, and rents, in consideration
of money, does demise, grant, Bargain, and sell to A. the said Mannours,
Lands, Tenements, and the reversions and remainders with all Rents reserved
upon any demise, to have and to hold to A. and his asignes after the death of
the Lessor for seaventeene years, rendering a rose, the Indenture was enrolled,
and after the Lessor by Indenture does Covenant with B. to stand seized of the
premises, to the use of himself and the Heirs of his body, and no attornment
was made to A. The Question was, What passed to A? and it was resolved by
Popham and Anderson chief Justices, and the Court, that A. may have his
election, either to take the same by demise, at the common Law, or by bargain
and Sale, Per Statutum 27. H. 8. without attornment, for it was one entire
demise, and bargain of one Manor without any fraction or division thereof,
and this election remains to A. and his Executors and assigns, for here is
not Election, to claim one of two several things by one Title, but to claim
one thing by one of the two several Titles, for where the things are several,
nothing passes before Election, and the Election must precede; but when one
thing passes, the Election of the Title may be subsequent. For if I. have 3
Horses, and do give to you one of them, the property comenceth by Election,
and must be made in the life of the Parties.

The By: of Sarum had a great wood of 1000 Acres, called Brerewood, and
infeoffed another of one House, and seaventeene Acres, parcel of the Wood, and
made Liverie in the Wood House; nothing passes of the Wood before Election and
the Heir of the feoffee may not make Election. Bullocks Case, 10. Eliz. Dyer.

In case where election is given of two several things, he which is the primer
Agent, and that ought to do the first act, shall have always the Election. As
if a man grant a Rent of twenty Shillings or a Robe, the Grantor shall have the
Election for he is the primer Agent, either by paying the one or delivering the
other. If a man make a Lease rendering twenty shillings or a Robe, the Lessee
shall have the Election, Causa qua supra, but if I give unto you one of my
Horses in my Stable, there you shall have the Election, for you are the Primer
Agent, by taking or seizing one of them, and so of twenty trees in my Wood.
Note for Elections these diversities. 1. When nothing passes to the grantee,
etc. before Election, there it ought to be made, in the life of the Parties;
but when the Estate passes presently, etc. the Grantee, etc his Heir or
Executor may elect. 2. When the same thing passes and the Donee, etc. has
Election, in what manner, etc. he will take it, the Donee, Heir, or Executor
may elect. 3. When Election is given to several persons, the first shall
stand. 4. When Election is given of two several things, he which ought to do
the first Act, shall have Election. 5. When the thing granted is annual, and
to have continuance, there the Election remains to the Grantor (in case, where
the Law gives him Election) as well after the day as before, otherwise it is when
the thing is to be performed, Vnica vice. 6. The feoffee, etc. by his act may
forfeit his Election; as if A. infeoffe B. of two Acres, Habendum, the one for
life, the other in Tail, and he before Election makes a feoffement of both;
here the feoffor shall enter in which he pleases, for the wrong of the feoffee.
7. Though the Lessees here enter generally, yet they may Elect after; so, if
one be Executor, and Devisee of a term, and enters generally, etc. and after
the Lessees, in the principal case, made Election, for to take by bargain and
Sale, and had the Rents.

The Bishop of Winchesters Case, 38. El. fo. 43. In a prohibition.
REsolved, that at common Law, none had capacity to take Tithes but spiritual
persons, or Persona mixta, as the King, and regularly no mere Lay man was
capable of them (except in special Cases) for he could not sue for them in
Court Christian and regularly, a lay man had no remedy for them, till 32 H. 8.
A Layman may be discharged of Tithes, at the common Law, by grant or by
composition, but not by prescription, for it is commonly said in our Law Books,
that a lay man may prescribe, In modo decimandi, but not In non decimando. And
the reason is, because he is not (except in special Cases) capable of Tithes
at the common Law, before the Statute of 32. H. 8. Cap. 7. And therefore
without special matter showing, it shall not be intended that he has any
Lawful discharge, and in favor of the Holy Church (although it may have a
lawful comencement) the Law will not suffer this prescription In non
decimando, to put it to the Trial of lay men, which sooner will strain their
conscience for their private benefit, then render to the Church the duty which
belongs to it.

A spiritual person that was capable of Tithes at the common Law in pernancy
may prescribe to be discharged of Tithes generally, or to have a portion of
Tithes in the Land of another.

Before the Counsel of Lateran, every man might give his tithes to any
spiritual person that he would; and if the Lands of the Bishop were discharged
in his hands absolutely by prescription, the demising it to a lay man cannot
make it chargeable, and the Bishop might reserve the greater Rent.

And in discharge of Tithes, the Judges of our Law do know, that the
Ecclesiastical Judges will not allow any such allegation, and therefore a
Traverse, Absque hoc quod judices placitum, etc. recusarunt, is insufficient
for the refusal is not material, for the party might have a prohibition,
before any plea pleaded by him, but in some Cases, the refusal is traversable,
as it was adjudgd in Morris and Eatons Case, where it was pleaded that the
plaintiff did not read the Articles, etc. and that the Ecclesiastical Judge
refused this Plea; But the truth is, a man may prescribe that he and all
others whose estate he has in the manor of D. time out of remembrance, have
paid to the parson of C. for the time being, one certain pension yearly, for
the maintenance of Divine service there, in contentation of all Tithes,
renewing, or happening within the same Manor, and prescribe in respect of the
pension paid, etc. to have all the Tithes within, etc. and this was adjudgd
good in Banco Regis, Mich. 39. Et. 40. El. Rotulo 199. And that a lay-person
may sue for the Tithes, etc. For at the beginning it shall be intended, that
the Lord was seized of the whole Manor, before any tenancy was derived out of
the same, and then by composition or other lawful means, the Lord had all the
Tithes within the Manor, for the said Pension paying to the parson, and the
Law intends it was for Divine service, Et pro bono Ecclesiae, the reason of
whch intendment is the continual usage, time out of remembrance. And upon such
special matter, a man might have Tithes as appurtenant to a Manor, for he
prescribes in a Que estate in the Manor, and therefore cannot have them in
gross, but it was adjudged Winscombs Case in a prohibition, that a man cannot
prescribe generally in him, and all those, etc. to have Tithes appurtenant to a
Manor, without special matter shown, because Tithes are due Jure divino.

The Archbishop of Canterburies Case, 38. Of the Queen, fo. 46.
A Religious house in M. was given to E. 6. by the Statute of 1. E. 6. a
Rectory which was impropriated to it, was granted to the Archbishop of
Canturbury, who leased to the Defendant, and Land within M. parcel of the said
College, came to the Lord Cobham, and from him to the Plaintiff, who shows,
that the Master of the College was seized of the said Land, and Rectorie,
Simul and semel, as well at the making of 31. H 8. as of 1. E. 6. Resolved,
that this College came to the King by 1. E. 6. only, for when 31. H. 8.
speaks of dissolution, renouncing, relinquishing, forfeiture, giving up (which
are inferior means by which, etc.) or by any other means, cannot be intended
of an act of Parliament, which is the highest manner of conveyance that can be,
and the makers would have placed this in the beginning if they had intended it.
Bishops are not included within 13 of the Queen, which begins with Colleges,
Deanes, and Chapters, etc. Also 1. E. 6. Enacts, that all Colleges by this
Parliament shall be in actual possession of the King, which last act being of
as high nature, as the first, it cannot come to the King by 31. H. 8. and it
was never pleaded, that of Colleges which came by 1. E. 6. the King was seized
Vigore of the Statute of 31. H. 8. Resolved, that neither the Act, nor the
meaning of 31. H. 8. extends to other Colleges then to those, which came to
the King by 31. H. 8. for it should be absurd, that a Branch of the act of 31.
H. 8. should extend to a future Act of which the makers of 31. without a spirit
of prophecy could not have foreknowledge: and the Act of 31. concludes, in as
large manner as the late Abbots, etc. which late, as it has been agreed,
extends only to those to be dissolved by 31. Resolved, (admitting that the
College had come to the King by 31. H. 8.) that such a general allegation of
unity of possession, of the Rectory, and the Land with it, was not sufficient,
for no unity shall be sufficient, but lawful and perpetual unity of
possession, time out of mind, as 'twas adjudged in Knightly and Spencers case;
and that the general allegation of the plaintiff, that the Master of the
College at the making of 1. E. 6. held the Land discharged, is not good,
without showing how, either by prescription, composition, or other lawful
means, as it is adjudged in the Bishop of Winchesters case; otherwise, if the
Land had come by 31. then by force of the said branch of discharge, such
general allegation had been good. Resolved, that no Ecclesiastical house,
except religious, was within the Statute of 31. H. 8. Resolved, that though 1.
E. 6. says, that the King shall have the lands of Colleges in as ample and
large manner as the said Priests, etc. enjoyed the same: yet these general
words do not discharge the land of any tithes for they do not issue out of
the land; for a Prior had tithes against his own Feoffment of the Manor, and
it is no good cause of prohibition, to allege unity of possession in a
College, which came to the King by 1. E. 6. as it is upon 31. H. 8. in Abbyes,
etc. For the Statute of 1. E. 6. has no such clause of discharge of payment of
tithes as 31. has, and therefore such perpetual unity will not serve upon 1.
E. 6. So 'twas likewise resolved betwixt Green and Buffkin.

Sir Hugh Cholmleys case, 39. of the Queen. fo. 50.
TEnant in Tail, the remainder in tail, the remainder bargains and sells the
Land and all his estate to J. S. to have for the life of Tenant in tail, the
remainder to the Queen, etc. upon condition that the estate shall be void upon
tender of 10. l. Tenant in tail suffers a Recovery, to the use of himself and
his heirs, after the remainder tenders the ten pounds, etc. Resolved, the
remainder to the Queen was void. 1. Because the grantee, for life of tenant in
tail, took nothing, for it is a void grant, for the grantee shall never have
any benefit by it, but such a grant of a reversion were good, for he shall have
the services; but a lease for life of J. S. the remainder to J. H. for life of
J. S. is good, for this may take effect, by forfeiture of tenant for life; and
remainder dicitur, quasi terra remanens, which cannot be here, and the
remainder must take effect when the particular estate ends, and vana est illa
potentia, quae nunquam venit in actum. And the possibility for tenant in tail
to enter in Religion, shall not make the remainder good, because it is remote,
and it ought to be a common, and propinqua possibilitas, which shall make the
remainder good, as death, coverture, dying without issue; remainder to a
Corporation, which is not in esse, is void, though such be erected during the
particular estate. 2. Because the Law will never adjudge a grant good, by
reason of such a foreign possibility, for, it is potentia remotissima and vana,
and by intendment, nunquam venit in actum. 3. Because the remainder being
tenant in tail, granted all his estate for the life of tenant in tail, so
that there is no remainder left in the grantor, but in such case, the estate
tail is in abeyance. Blithmans case. 35. of the Queen agreed, tenant in tail
covenants to stand seized to the use of himself for life, and after to his
eldest Son in tail, the remainder to the Son is void; for when he had
limited the use to himself for his own life, 'twas as much as he could limit
by Law. Resolved, (admitting the remainder good to the Queen) that the common
Recoverie, has barred the estate of the first grantee, and so the condition
during his life; for it is out of the Statute of 34. H. 8. being not of the gift
of the Queen, etc. as Wisemans case is before adjudged. A revertioner upon an
estate tail, grants upon condition, a Recovery bars the reversion, and
condition, and as Capels case is before adjudged, if the reversionor, or he in
remainder grant a Lease, etc. and tenant in tail suffers a recovery, the
possession shall never be subject to such charges. Resolved, that the payment
to the first grantee, cannot divest the remainder out of the Queen. 1. Because
the condition during the life of the first grantee, was discharged. 2. Because,
he that takes benefit of a condition, ought to have the entire estate, with
which he departed, which cannot be here, for the estate of the first grantee,
was barred by the recovery. 3. The tender to the first grantee, was to the
intent, for to revest his estate; which cannot be, because, 'twas barred, and
therefore the payment cannot divest the remainder out of the Queen.

Buckleys Case, 40. Eliz. in Communi Banc. fo. 55.
TEnant for life, the remainder in Fee, tenant for life makes a Lease for
four years in March 20. El. the Lessee enters tenant for life, grants the
tenements aforesaid to C. to hold from the feast of Saint John Baptist next
ensuing for life, after the said Feast, the tenant for years attornes, the
years expire, C. enters, and makes a Lease at will to D. to whom the tenant
for life levieth a Fine, he in remainder in Fee enters and makes a Lease to
Buckler the tenant at will, enters upon him, and Buckler the plaintiff
brings an ejectione firmae, and judgment was given for the plaintiff. In
this case diverse things were resolved First, that the grant to C. was void, for
the Law makes construction upon the whole grant, and an estate of Freehold
may not commence in futuro. The office of the premises of a Writing (viz.)
Feoffment, Lease, etc. is to express the grantor the grantee, and the thing
granted. And the office of the habendum is to limit the estate; so that the
general implication of the estate, which should pass by the premises, is
always controlled and qualified by the habendum; as a Lease to two, habendum
to the one for life, the remainder to the other for life, here the general
implication of joyntenancy is altered, and the habendum is not contrary to the
premises, for in the premises no certain estate is passed, and the grant
being void at the beginning, the attornement after Midsommer, shall not make
the reversion to pass. For quod ab initio non valet, tractu temporis non
convalescet.

Resolved, that when the grantee entered, by color of this void grant, he was
a disseisor; but when the grant is good at commencement, but is to have its
perfection, by an act subsequent, as livery, or attornement, and the grantee
enters before the perfection, etc. he is not a disseisor, but a tenant at will.
And if the Fine had been levied, to the disseisor, come ceo, etc. He which had
the right of the remainder, might enter for a forfeiture, for a right of a
particular estate may be forfeited, and entry given to him, who has but a
right. Resolved, the Fine being levied to tenant at will, it is a forfeiture,
and he which has the right of the remainder, may enter, and the tenant for
life, and at will, shall be estopped to say, quod parts Finis nihil habuerunt,
and of such estoppells, which are by matter of Record, and trench to the
dis-inheritance of those in reversion, etc. they shall take advantage, though
strangers to the Record (for they are privies in estate.) A disseisee levieth a
Fine to a stranger, the disseisor shall hold the Land in this case for ever,
for the disseisee against his own Fine may not claim the Lands, and the
counsee may not enter, for the right which the conusor had, may not be
transferred to him, but by the Fine the right is extinct, whereof the disseisor
may take advantage.

Beckwithes Case, 27. Eliz. fo. 56.
IF the husband and the wife levy a fine of Lands, whereof they are seized in
right of the wife, and the husband solely declare the use of the fine, this
declaration shall bind the wife, if her disascent do not appear, although
her assent to the limitation of the uses do not appear, for it shall be
intended (if the contrary do not appear) that she joined with him, also in
the declaration of the uses of the fine. But if the husband declare one use,
and the wife another use, they are both void; the declaration of the use,
insues the ownership of the land; for the one (viz.) the wife is not sui juris
sed sub potestate viri, and has the estate of the Land, and the husband is sui
juris, and has not the estate; and if a fine be reversed by nonage of the
wife, all the estate shall be restored to the wife presently; for all the
estate passed from her by the fine, and so it was adjudged Banco regis, in
Worseleys case.

Resolved, that though the variance of the limitation, be only in one estate,
and they agree in all the other, yet all is void. But if two joint tenants, or
two having several estates, vary, it is good, for every of their parts, and
shall be directed by their interests; but if the variance had been in
limitation of part of the land, and they had agreed in the use, it should be
void for that part, and good for the residue.

Note, That though the husband might dispose of the land during coverture, yet,
for the cause aforesaid, his declaration was void.

If A. tenant for life, and B. in reversion or remainder, both levy a fine
together, generally the use shall be to A. for life, the reversion or remainder
to B. in fee, for either of them grants that which lawfully he may grant, and
either of them shall have the use, which the Law vesteth in them, according to
the estate, which they would convey over.

Winningtons case, 40. of the Queen. fo. 59.
W. Infeoffed B. upon condition, to regive to the Feoffor for life, the
remainder to J. Son and heir of the Feoffor, the Feoffor enters, and takes
the profits, without agreement, or contradiction of the Feoffee, and leases to
D for 21. years, and yet continues possession, the Feoffee acknowledges a
Statute to J. the Feoffor makes a feoffement, to the use of himself for life,
the remainder to his second Son in tail, etc. and dies, the Feoffee enters,
and infeoffes the Son and heir, upon which the second Son enters, etc.
Resolved, that though the intention was, that the Feoffee should make an estate
to him for his life, when he has entered without agreement of the Feoffee,
it is a disseisin, and the rather, because, as owner of the land, he took upon
him to make a Lease for years. Resolved, that by the Lease by Indenture, he
has dispensed with the condition, during the term. Resolved, that when the
Feoffor disseises the Feoffee upon condition, and the Feoffee acknowledges a
Statute, etc. This is no disability, to cause the Feoffor to enter, for the
right of the Feoffee, is not subject to the Statute, but when the Feoffee in
possession takes a wife, grants a rent, or acknowledges a Statute, the land is
presently subject, etc. And though upon entry he may be disabled, yet, till
then he is not, because the wife may dye, or the Statute be released, and then
he may enter, and perform the condition; and the Feoffor by his feoffement
has extinct the condition, so that the Feoffee may enter, and when he has
infeoffed the eldest Son, he has done well.

Westcots Case in Communi Banco. 41. El. fo. 60.
IF a man make an estate to three, and to the heirs of one of them; one of
them in this case has Fee simple, and yet the joint estate continues, for it
is all one estate, created at one time, and therefore the Fee simple cannot
drown the jointure, which takes effect with creation of the remainder in fee;
but when three joyntenants are for life, and after one of them purchase the
Fee, or else the Fee discends to him, there the Fee simple does drown the
estate for life, for the estate for life was in esse before.

Note, by this resolution, if tenant for life grant his estate to him in the
reversion, and a stranger, it is a surrender for the moity, and the benefit of
survivor not regarded; so the doubt in 7. H. 6. well resolved. Resolved, upon
view of three presidents, that judgment should be given for the plaintiff,
upon a demise made by husband and wife, without alleging it to be by Deed.

Tookers Case, 43. Eliz. fo. 66.
John Arundell seized of Lands in Fee, makes a Lease thereof to A. and B. for
their lives, and after grants the reversion to C. for his life, to which grant
A. does atturne being joint tenant with B. and after A. by his Deed does
surrender to C. all his estate, title, and interest, etc. and then dies; C.
enters claiming to hold in common with B. and whether his entree was lawful,
or no, was the question, and judgment was given, that it was lawful, for the
attornement of the one tenant for life, shall vest the entire reversion in the
grantee, because the estate of the joint Lessees is entire, and every joint
tenant is seized per my, and pro tout', and by consequence the reversion, which
is dependent and expectant upon this estate is entire also, and the atturnement
of the one joyntenant is the atturnement of both. Attournement is a lawful
act: if one joyntenant assign Dower, it is good. Also, the attornement passes
no interest from him that attournes, but perfects the grant of another. And if
one joyntenant give seizure of rent that shall bind the other, but in a quid
juris clamat, or quem redditum reddit, or per quae servitia, one joyntenant
shall not be permitted to attourne without his companion, for doing of
prejudice to his companion. By Popham one joynt-tenant, may prejudice another
in the personalty, but not in the realty; if one take all the profits, or
release a personal action, the other has no remedy, because of the privity
and trust between them, and the folly imputed to him, to join with such a
companion.

Note, if a tenant have notice of the grant by a stranger, and do give his
assent thereunto, it is a good atturnement, although it be in the absence of
the grantee, but disagreement, ought to be to the party himself, or do
atturne for any part, it is good for the whole, for the intent of an
atturnement is but only an assent to perfect the grant of another, and he
which atturnes cannot apportion, divide, or alter the grant.

Lord Cromwells case. 40. of the Queen. fo. 70.
BLunt bargained, etc. the Manor of Alexton, to which the Advowson of A. was
appendant, by Indenture, to have, as after in the same Indenture is mentioned,
and B. covenanted to suffer a common Recovery, to the use of Andrews and his
heirs, rendering 42. pounds per annum to B. and his heirs, with a nomine
poenae. And further, 'twas covenanted, and agreed, as well, for the assurance
of the Manor to A. as of the rent to B. that B. should levy a Fine, etc. to
A. and his heirs, and A. by the same Fine, should render a rent of 42. pounds
per annum, etc Provided always, that A. by Deed, should give the Advowson,
etc. to B. during his life, and if it did not become void, during his life, one
turn to his executors, etc. And further, 'twas covenanted, and agreed, that
all assurances afterward to be made, should be to the use of this Indenture,
etc. after a recovery was had, and after B. and A. levy a Fine to Perkins, and
he renders a rent of 42. pounds to B. and the Manor with the Advowson to A. A.
dies, without granting the Advowson, and B. did not request it, B. enters for
condition broken, and by Indenture enrolled, bargained, etc. to the Lord
Cromwell, by which he entered, and upon the reentry of the Son and heir of
A. brought an Assise.

In this Case is showed when this word (proviso) or (provided) makes a
condition, and when not, which upon long debate was judged by all the Justices
of England.

It was adjudged that the Law has not appointed any place in a deed or
instrument, proper or particular to a condition, but in what place it pleases
the parties, and this word (proviso or provided) is as apt a word to make an
estate conditional, as Sub condition, or any other word of condition, but
notwithstanding when this word proviso makes an Estate or interest
conditional, three things are to be observed. First that the proviso do not
depend upon another sentence nor participate thereof, but stand originally of
it self.

Secondly, that the proviso be the word of the bargainor, Feoffor, Donor,
Lessor, etc.

Thirdly, that it be compulsory to enforce the barganee, Feoffee, Donee,
Lessee, etc. to do an act, and where these concur, it was resolved, that it
was a condition, in what place soever it be placed, for Cujus est dare ejus est
disponere. And although words of Covenant be contained in the same clause of
the proviso it self, yet (the proviso being in judgment of Law a word of
condition) it shall not loose his force, and so it has been judged, In Symson
et Titterell, 26. El. Sergeant Bendlowes demysed to Titterell certain Lands in
Essex, for forty years, provided always, and it is Covenanted and agreed
between the said Parties, That the Lessee, etc. should not alien, and this was
adjudged a condition, by force of the proviso, and a Covenant also, by force of
the other words. Also it was adjudged in Banco Regis 36. El. between the Earl
of Pembrooke, Plaintiff, and Sir Henry Barkely Defendant. The Earl granted
the Office of the Lievtenant-ship of the West part of the Forest of
Fronslewood, in Com. Somerset, to Sir Mawrice Barkely, Father of the said Sir
Henry in Tail; provided always and the said Sir Mawrice Barkeley for him,
etc. does Covenant to, and with the said Earl, that neither he the said Earl
nor any of his Heirs Males, etc. shall cut down any Wood growing upon any
part of the premises. And it was resolved by all the Justices of England, upon
argument before them at Serjants Inn, that although the proviso was coupled
with the express Covenant of the Grantee, and every condition ought to be
created by the words of the Grantor, Donor, Feoffor, etc. yet in judgment of
Law, this word (provided) was a condition created by the Grantor, although all
the residue of the sentence be the words of the Grantee, for (proviso) being an
apt word of a condition, the same sentence contains the words of the Grantor,
purporting a condition, and the words of the Grantee comprehending a Covenant.

This word (proviso) when it depends upon another sentence, or has reference
to another part of the deed, does not make a condition, but a qualification or
limitation of the sentence or part of the deed, to which it is referred. As in
a Lease without impeachment of wast, provided that he shall not do voluntary
wast, grant of a Rent charge, provided that the Grantee shall not charge the
Grantor, etc. Resolved, that B. shall have the Rent, notwithstanding that
before the Reddendum, the use in Fee was vested by the recovery in A. and
notwithstanding 'twas objected, that the Rent ought to be limited out of the
Estate of the Recoverors, for 27 H. 8. has an express clause, Where diverse
be seized, to the intent, that one shall have an annual Rent, the same person
be adjudged in possession, and seisin of the same rent, as if a sufficient
grant had been made, and so here the intent, being that B. should have the
Rent, construction shall be made, Vt res magis valeat quam pereat. Resolved,
that the fine leavyed by B. and A. to P. has not extinct the condition (and
this was the great doubt of the Case) 1. Because by the general Covenant it is
declared, that all assurances afterward to be made, should be to the uses and
intents in the same Indenture, and to no other; and the Indenture intends that
the condition should be saved as the Lord releases all his right in the Land,
saving his Rent. Putnams Case, 4. 5. P. and M. Dyer: Feoffement of a Manor
rendering Rent, and a reentry, and a Covenant by any Indenture to Leavy a fine,
which should be to the uses and intents of the first Indenture, and to no other
use, which was leavyed according, with the usual words of release of all his
right, yet, resolved that neither the Rent, nor the condition was destroyed,
and 23. of the Queen, Tussers Case, a rent reserved by a fine before, was not
destroyed by a common recovery, and general entry into warranty, and 34. of
the Queen in Clever and Child's Case, adjudged according to Putnams Case: for
the same reason it was adjudged in this Case, 14. of the Queen, for the Advouson
of Alexton, for, Modus et conventio vincunt legem, and Covenant and agreement
of the parties has power. First, to raise a use. Secondly, to declare uses
upon fines, recoveries, etc. Thirdly, for to preserve Rents and conditions, and
for to direct recoveries, fines, etc. and the saving may be contained in
another deed, delivered at the same time. And these common assurances, as
fines, and recoveries, are to be construed, according to the intent and common
usage, without prying into them with Eagles eyes. Also, here the Bargain, etc.
recovery, etc, fine. etc. though made at several times, yet, all by mutual
agreement, are but one assurance, and tend for to perfect a bargain, etc. and
therefore the one shall not destroy the other, resolved, that except in
special cases a fine, Sur grant and render, cannot be averred by word to
another use, then is in the fine, feoffement, etc. yet in some cases, it may be
ruled in part by averrement, by word, when the original contract is by deed;
but a man may by word aver another consideration, which stands with the
consideration expressed, but not against it: Read the Book at large for this
purpose.

Resolved, that by the death of A. the condition was broken, for when the
Feoffee or Grantee is to do an act to the Feoffor, etc. upon condition, and no
time is limited, regularly, the Feoffee may do it at any time during his
life. If the Feoffor or Grantor do not hasten the same by request, and upon
request and day or time limited, the Feoffee or Grantee ought to do it
accordingly: and if no request be made, and the Feoffee or Grantee that ought
to perform the condition dye, the condition is broken. Yet, this general rule
admits an exception, for, here in case of an advowson, he has not time during
his life, though no request be made, but upon contingency, to wit, if no
avoydance fallin the mean time, for if the Grantee stay till the avoydance
fall Ipso facto, the condition is broken, for B. cannot have all the
presentations during his life, which was the effect of the grant, and the
Advowson is come into another plight then it was. But where the day is certain
for the performance, and the party dye before, the condition is discharged,
because the performance is become impossible by the Act of God, and therefore
when a day certain is appointed, it is good that the Heir of the feoffee be
named in the condition. Another diversity was also agreed, when it is to be
performed to a stranger, he ought to request the stranger in convenient time
for to limit a time when it shall be done, but if it be to the Feoffor
himself, he ought not to perform it, before request. Another diversity was
taken by some, when the feoffee dies, and when the feoffor dies, for in the one
case the condition is broken, in the other not.

Binghams Case, 43. of the Queen, fo. 91.
R. Bingham the Grandfather held the Manor of B. M. of Sir Jo: Horseley, as of
his Manor of H. and levied a fine to the use of him, and his Wife for life,
and after of R. the Father, his Son and Heir, in tail, and after to the
right Heirs of the Grand father, R. the Father dyed, the remainder in tail
descended to R. his Son within age. Sir I. H. suffered a recovery of the
Manor of H. to the use of himself and his Wife, in tail, and after to Sir R.
H. his Son and Heir in tail, after to the Heirs of Sir I. Sir I. and his
Wife dyed without issue, Sir R. enters, R. B. the Grandfather, dies, by which
the reversion in Fee descended to R. B. the Wife of Robert dies, R. within age
enters and Leases, etc. Resolved, that the use limited to the right Heirs of
the Grandfather, upon the fine, is a reversion in the Grandfather, expectant
upon the tail, not a Remainder, so it was resolved in Fenwick and Mitfords Case,
and so it was resolved in the Earl of Bedfords Case. Resolved, that Sir R. H.
shall not have the ward of the Land, for the reversion in Fee is holden of him,
and not the Tail; though both descend from the same Ancestor, for the tail
cannot be drowned, and if Tenant in tail grant over the reversion, he shall
hold the Tail of his Grantee, and though the Seigniory of the tail be
suspended, yet the Donee has two distinct estates, and the reversion is as a
Mesne, betwixt the Donee and the Lord, and the Lord is not defeated; for the
Law gives no wardship in such cases, and if it were admitted, that by the unity
of Tenure, betwixt the Donee and reversion, it was determined, yet nothing shall
be holden of the Lord, but the reversion, and in some cases, the Donee in tail
shall hold of no body, as a gift in tail, the remainder to the King. Resolved,
if the Grandfather were Tenant for life, the remainder to the Father in tail,
the remainder to the Father in fee, the Father dies, his Heir within age, and
Sir I. H. grants the Seigniory to Sir R. H. and the Grandfather dies, that Sir
R. H. shall not have the ward of the Heir because R. the Father did not hold
of him nor any of his Ancestors, the day of his death, nor the Tail was not
within the sea and Seignory of Sir Ra. or any of his Ancestors, at the death of
R. the Father; and the Writ says, Praecipe, etc. Eo quod terram illam de eo
tenuit, die quo obijt. And though that during the life of Tenant for life, the
Heir of the remainder shall not be in ward, because Tenant for life, is Tenant
to the Lord, yet the death of Tenant for life is not the cause of ward, but the
removing of an impediment, as in Paget and Caries Case, Tenant for life commits
wast, and after Tenant for life in remainder dies, he in remainder in fee shall
have wast. It Was said, when two accidents are required to the consummation of a
thing, and the one happens in the time of one, and the other in the time of
another, neither the one nor the other shall have benefit by it; as the Tenant
ceases for a year, the Lord grants his seigniory, and then the Tenant ceases
for another year, neither shall have a Cessavit, which was agreed. So Lacies
Case. Trin. 25. of the Queen, who gave a mortal wound upon the sea, of which
the party dyed upon the Land, yet he was discharged, because the stroke was
upon the Sea, the death upon the Land, so that neither the Admiral nor a Jury,
can inquire of it: and it was said, when diverse accidents are required to the
consummation of a thing, the Law more respects the Original cause, then any
other. A man presents to a Church in time of War, notwithstanding the party
be instituted and inducted, Tempore pacis, all is void. So the Law more
respects the death of him in the remainder, the Original cause of wardship,
then the death of Tenant for life, which is but Causa sine qua non, and rather
a removing of an impediment, then a cause, so it was resolved that neither the
one, nor the other shall have the ward. Resolved, that Sir Ra. should not have
the third part of the Land, by 32. and 34. H. 8. for though R. the Grandfather
had limited the use to the Father, which is within the Statute, yet when R.
the Father dies, in the life of the Grandfather, the Statute extends no
further, for the Heir of the Father, who is in by descent, shall be in ward by
the common Law, not by the Statute, and if the Statute should extend to the Son
and Heir of him in remainder, by the same reason it should extend to all the
Heirs of him in remainder, In infinitum.

THE THIRD BOOK.
The Marquis of Winchesters Case. 25. of the Queen. fo. 1.
LIonell Norris and Anne Mills were seized of the Manor of M. and to the
heirs of the body of L. a common Recovery is had against L. (without naming
Anne) H. Norris being in remainder in tail, is executed for Treason, and it is
enacted that he shall forfeit Manors, etc. uses, possessions, offices, rights,
conditions, and all other hereditaments, L. dyed without issue, Anne dyed, the
Queen brought error against the Marquis of Winchester, heir of the survivor
of the recoverors, the error was, that the original Writ of entry wants, the
defendant pleaded, that 14. of the Queen, she gave and restored to the Lord
Norris, Son and heir of H. Norris, the Manor ex speciali gratia, etc. and
all her right, estate, title, claim, etc. Resolved, that the Record was well
removed by the Writ of Error, which was for to remove the recovery of the
Manor of M. in M. cum pertinentiis, and the Recovery was of the Manor of M.
cum pertinentiis. Resolved, that this Writ of Error, was not given to the King
by any of the words of the Statute of 28. H. 8. because the terrtenant is in by
title, and the entry of the person attainted taken away; and such a right, for
which the party has no remedy, but by action, is a thing consists in privity,
which cannot Escheate, nor be forfeited by the common law; and this word (
right) in the Act, shall be satisfied with a right of entry, and 'twas observed
by the Court, that by no Act of attainder, a right of action was ever given.
Note, a diversity betwixt inheritances, and chattells; for Obligations,
Statutes, Recognisances, etc. are forfeited by attainder or Outlawry. By the
Court, if L. had made a Feoffement without warranty, this had been a
discontinuance of the moity, for the jointure was severed. Resolved, that H. N.
had no right to a moity of the Manor, for though the recovery were erroneous
(for 'twas agreed, 'twas not void) yet the recovery being in force, the
remainder has no right, for the intended recompense, if tenant in tail
suffers an erroneous recovery, and disseise the recoveror, and dye, his issue
shall not be remitted, for the tail is barred, as long as the recovery stands
in force; and the Court agreed, that neither an action without a right, with a
descent, shall make a Remitter, as in the principal case, nor a right without
an action, for a man shall never be remitted, but when an action lies, if the
right and possession were in several persons. Resolved, for the one moity, the
Recovery shall be a bar to the tail, and remainder, for, though that as well
L. as the vouchee might have abated the Writ, because, Anne was jointly
seized, not named, yet, when the vouchee, without demanding any Line, enters
generally into warranty, and admits the Writ good, and L. recovers in value,
which shall inure according to his estate, with the remainder over, it is
barred, for by the recovery against L. the jointure was severed, but, for the
other moity, the recovery was not a bar to the tail, or remainder, because,
for that L. was not tenant to the Praecipe; but the recovery is by Estoppell
only. Agreed, that H. N. at the time of the attainder, was not entitled to
have error, yet, 'twas agreed, that the remainder upon a tail shall have
error, upon a judgment given against tenant in tail, for when W. 2. inables
the donor for to limit a remainder over upon the tail, all actions which the
common Law gave to privies in estate are by the same Act, as incident, given
also; as a reversion, or a remainder, shall have Error upon a judgment given
against tenant for life, though not privy by aid voucher, or receiver. But
agreed, that by the common Law, Error does not lie by, etc during the life of
tenant for life, except he were privy to the first Record by aid, voucher, or
receiver, for remedy whereof 9. R. 2. ca'. 3. was made, which gives an attaint
or error, during life, upon which Statute the Court resolved, 1. that though
the Statute speaks only of reversions, yet remainders are within the purview,
2. That a reversion expectant upon a tail, is out, for the Statute enumerates
these four estates; Life, Dowor, Courtesy, and Tenant in tail after
possibility, which declares their intentions to exclude reversions upon tails,
and this upon great reason, for the tail by possibility, may continue for
ever, and here L. survived H. N. and so his possibility of error destroyed, and
no word of the Act, extends to give a possibility. Resolved, admitting the Writ
of Error had been given to the Queen, that by this general grant of the
Queen, it did not pass; for a common person cannot grant it, and therefore it
ought to pass by Prerogative, and ought to have precise words: adjudged in
Cromers case. 8. of the Queen; the Queen having a right of a disseisee
attainted, grants de speciali gratia, etc. all lands, etc. The right does not
pass, without special recital, and words. Owen and Morgans case, Trin. 27.
of the Queen; Baron and Feme are seized, and to the heirs of the body of the
husband, a recovery is had against the Baron sole, without naming of the wife,
and after the wife dyed.

Resolved, that though the wife were not party to the Writ, nor the Conisance
(for the estate of the husband and wife, was by render upon a Fine levied by
the husband) and though it does appear within the same Record, that she was a
stranger, yet the render to her is voidable only. Resolved, that this recovery
against the husband only, shall not bind the remainder, for betwixt husband
and wife, there are no moities, and the husband has no power to sever the
jointure, or dispose any part, and he, during the life of the wife, is not
seized by force of the tail: and he can, by no Act, execute any part; so the
Praecipe being brought against him only, the recompense cannot enure to the
tail, or remainder, for, to all, it cannot, for the wife has a joint estate
in possession, and for a moity it cannot, for there are no moities, and the
remainder depends upon the entire estate, and recompense recovered by the
husband only, cannot inure to him, who has a remainder depending upon the
undevided estate of the husband and wife, and the joyn-tenancy cannot be
severed by the judgment against the husband only, and though the husband has
all the inheritance, yet, because, by no possibility, it can be executed, it is
all one, as if the husband had a remainder depending upon an estate for life,
and then a common recovery shall not bind, because, not tenant to the
Praecipe, nor seized by force of the tail, but took effect by Estoppell
only. The issue may say, his auncestor was not tenant tempore brevis, and
though here the husband survived the wife, this is not material, for the Law
adjudges as 'twas then.

Copledikes Case, 44. of the Queen. fo. 5.
C. And his wife were seized, and to the heirs males of the body of the
husband, the husband levies a Fine to A. B. recovers in a Writ of entry against
A. who vouches the husband only (the wife living) who vouches the common
vouchee. Resolved, that this recovery shall bind the remainder, for here was a
lawful tenant to the Praecipe, and though the husband were only vouched, and
not his wife, who had a joint estate with him, yet the husband coming in as
vouchee, he came in, in privity of the estate tail, and not of another estate,
and the recovery in value gives recompense to the tail, which the husband had,
and to the remainder. A. tenant in tail, the remainder to B. the remainder to
C. the remainder to D. A. makes a Feoffement, the feoffee suffers a recovery,
B. is vouched, and he vouches the common vouchee; A. is not bound, but B. and
all the remainders are, for though the remainders are discontinued, and cannot
be remitted, till the tail be recontinued, yet in a common recovery, which is
the common assurance, he which comes in as vouchee, shall be in judgment of
Law, in privity of the estate, which he ever had, though the precedent estate,
upon which the estate of the vouchee depends, be discontinued, so, here the
husband shall be said in of the tail, and it is the stronger, because the
estate of the wife was put to a right, so, that the husband came in as sole
tenant in tail, and not jointly with his wife, because, she is not vouchee,
and he cannot be in of another estate, because, once he had a tail, but had
they had a joint estate to them, and the heirs of their two bodies, he being
only vouched, it might be doubted, whether the tail should be barred, because
the wife had a joint inheritance with him. 8. of the Queen. Dyer, Knivetons
case. A Praecipe is brought against tenant for life, and the remainder in
tail, they vouch over, it shall not bind the tail, for the remainder is not
tenant to the Praecipe, and the land is recovered against the tenant for life
only, and recompense shall not go to the remainder, and the remainder was
never seized by force of the tail, and so 'twas adjudged in Leach and Coals
case. 41. of the Queen.

Heydons case. 26. of the Queen. fo. 7.
THe Gardians and Cannons Regular of the late College of O. seized of the
Manor of O. granted a Coppihold to Father and Son for their lives, etc. and
after they leased it to H. for fourscore years, rendering the ancient Rent,
and after surrendered their College. Resolved, that the lease to H. was void
(the Coppi-hold for life continuing) by the Statute of 31. H. 8. For Coppihold
is an estate for life, and the Statute says (of which any estate or interest
for life, etc.) at the making of such grant had continuance: read the Book at
large, where you have admirable rules, for true interpretation of all Statutes.
Resolved, when a Parliament alters the service, tenure, interest of the land,
etc. in prejudice of the Lord, custom, or tenant, the general words shall not
extend to Coppi-holds; as the Statute of W. 2. de donis conditionalibus, does
not extend to them, for if the Statute should alter the estate, this should
also alter the tenure, for the donee ought to hold of the donor, and to do
such services (without special reservation) as his donor did to the Lord, and
the intent of the act was not to extend to such base estates, which were taken
then but tenants at will, and the Statute says, Voluntas donatoris observetur
in carta, etc. So that which shall be intailed, ought to be such an
hereditament, which may be given by Charter, and great part of the land within
the Realm being granted by Copy, it would be inconvenient, that Coppi-holds
should be intailed, yet, neither Fine, nor Recovery should bar them, so that
the owner cannot (without making a forfeiture, by assent of the Lord, and a new
grant) dispose of it for payment of debts, advancement of his wife, or younger
issues, wherefore the Statute does not extend to them by Manwood, Ch'. Baron,
which the Court agreed. But 'twas objected; that the Custom and the Statute
cooperating, might make a tail, as if by a custom, a remainder had been
limited over, and enjoyed, and plaints in nature of a Formedon in discender
brought, and the land recovered by it; so neither the custom without the
Statute, nor the Statute without the custom, can make a tail. And Littleton
says, that if a custom has been, that lands, etc. have been granted, etc. or
in tail, etc. and paulo post, that a Formedon in discender lies of all
tenements, which Writ was not at common law. Manwood answered, if the Statute
does not extend to them, without question, the custom cannot, for before the
Statute, all estates of inheritance were fee simple, and no custom can
commence after the Statute, for this being made 13. E. 1. is made within time
of memory; and Littleton is to be intended of a fee simple conditional, for he
knew well that no custom could commence after the Statute of W. 2. as appears
in his book 2. ca. 10. and 34. H. 6. and a Formedon in discender, in special
cases, lay at the common Law. And by the Court, another Act made at the same
time, which gives an Elegit, extends not to Coppiholds, for the reason
aforesaid; but other Statutes made at the same time extend to them, as ca'. 3.
which gives a Cui in vita and receite, and ca'. 4. which gives to the
particular tenant, a Quod ei deforceat. Resolved, that though 'twas not found,
that the said rents were the usual rents accustomed to be reserved within 20.
years before, yet, because 'twas found, that the accustomed rent was reserved,
and a custom goes to all times before, it shall be so intended, without
showing the contrary, and judgment was enterd for the Queen.

The common Law is founded upon the perfection of reason, and not according to
any private and sudden conceit or opinion.

Borastons Case. 29. of the Queen. fo. 19.
B. Devised land for eight years, and after to his executors, to perform his
will, till H. his youngest Son come to the age of 21. years, and when H.
comes to 21. years, then, that he shall have to him and his heirs, H. dyed at
the age of 9. years. Objected, that till H. attaines to 21. years, the land
descends to the heir, and, for that he never attained to 21. years, this
remains in the heir, and the intent appears by the words, that he should not
have, till he come to 21. years, and this ought to precede the commencement of
the remainder, and if land were leased till H. comes to 21. years (H. then
being of 9. years) it is no absolute lease for 12. years, for if H dye before
21. the lease shall be determined, which the Court agreed. 'Twas also said,
that when the particular estate, which should support the remainder, may
determine before the remainder can commence, there the remainder does not vest
presently, but depends in contingency.

If one make a Lease to A. for life, and after the death of B. the remainder to
another in Fee, this remainder depends upon contingency, for if A. dye before
B. the remainder is void. A Lease is made to A. for life, the remainder to B.
for life, and if B. dye before A. the remainder to C. for life; this is a good
remainder upon contingency. If A. survive B. which case is all one with the
common Case, which is many times agreed on in our Books, a lease is made to one
for life, the remainder to the right Heirs of I. S. this remainder is good
upon contingency, (viz.) If the Lessee for life survive I. S. otherwise not,
and by the same reason, if a man have issue a Son of 9 years of age, makes a
Lease until the Son shall accomplish his full age, the remainder to another
in Fee, as in this case, nothing vesteth in him in remainder presently, Quod
fuit concessum per tot. Cur. vide. Chudleyes Case, Libr. 10.

Answered, that in Wills the intent of the devisor is to be considered; for,
when the devisor in his life by apt words, by good advise, might have made his
Will sufficient in Law, there, though he makes it in disordered manner, and in
barbarous and unapt words, the Law will order those words, which want order,
according to his intent, as in Wellock and Hamonds Case, Coppy-holder in
Borough, English devises, to his Eldest Son, paying 40. shillings within, etc.
to every of his other Sons, etc. surrenders according, and dies, the Eldest
Son did not pay within, etc. the youngest enters, and adjudged lawful; and
resolved,

First, That he had a fee, for the recompense and consideration, though it be
not to the value, makes a fee in construction of a will. Secondly, That though
paying in a Will, makes a condition, yet, here it is a limittation; otherwise it
would descend upon the Eldest Son, who is to take advantage of it, and then it
should be at his pleasure for to pay, or not, and therefore it shall be, as if
he had devised to the Eldest Quousque he fails in payment. So here the devisor
has computed, what profits of his Land, during the nonage of his Son, will
suffice for payment of his Debts, etc. and that he did not intend that the
term of the Executors should end by death of H. for so his Debts should
remain unsatisfied, and his Will unperformed, and therefore the Law says, it
shall be construed, that the Executors shall have till H. should have come to
21 years of age, and therefore the Executors have a term for twelve years,
which the Court agreed. And though (when) and (then) are Adverbes of time, yet,
when they refer to a thing which must of necessity happen, they make no
contingency, and it is certain, that H. did accomplish, or might have
accomplished the age of 21 years, and here, if the term should be ended by
death, the remainder should be void; and the Court agreed, that in Wilis, and
grants, the remainder ought to vest in possession, Eo instanti, the particular
estate ends; but, here the Term did not end, etc.

Walkers Case, 29. Eliz. in Banco regis.
WAlker Leased certain Lands to Harries for years, the Lessee assigned all
his interest to another, Walker brought an action of Debt against Harries, for
Rent arreare after the assignement, and if the action be maintainable or not,
was the Question, and upon great deliberation and conference with others, it
was adjudged per Wray chief Justice, Sir Thomas Gaudy, and Tot. Cur. that the
Action did lie, and was maintainable in the argument, whereof many things were
resolved.

If a man Lease a stock of Cattle or other goods, rendering a Rent at several
days, he shall not have an Action of Debt until all the days be expired.

Likewise, if a man make an obligation or other contract to pay several sums
of money at several days, he shall not have an action of Debt, until all the
days be expired, for these are personal contracts and not real, but in case
of a Lease for years, which is a real contract, the Lessor shall have an
action of Debt after every day.

By the Court, Debt does well lie in this case, against the Lessee, there are
three privities. 1. In respect of the estate only. 2. Of contract only. 3. Of
estate and contract together. The first between the Grantee of the reversion,
or Lord by escheate, and the Lessee, so betwixt the Lessor and the Assignee of
the Lessee; the second betwixt the Lessor and the Lessee (as here) for,
notwithstanding the assignement, and the privity of estate removed by the act
of the Lessee himself the privity of contract remains.

First, because the Lessee himself cannot prevent the Lessor of his remedy;
but when the Lessor grants his reversion against his own grant, he shall not
have remedy, because the Rent is incident to the reversion.

Secondly, the Lessee might grant it to a poor man, not able to manure the
Land, or for malice, will suffer it to lie fresh, so the Lessor shall be
without remedy, if Debt should not lie against the first Lessee.

Thirdly, there is privity of contract and estate together, as betwixt the
Lessor and the Lessee.

If a Tenant in Dower, or Tenant by curtesy, assign over their estate, yet the
privity of the action remains between the Heir and them, and he shall have
an action of wast against them for wast done, after the assignement, but if the
Heir grant over his reversion, then the privity of the action is destroyed,
and the Grantee may not have any Action of wast, but only against the
assignee, for between them is a privity of Estate, and between the Grantee
and the Tenant in Dower, etc is no privity at all.

If a lessor enter for condition broken, or if a lessee surrender to the
lessor, yet the lessor may have an action of Debt, for arrerages due before the
condition broken, or the surrender, and this is in respect of the contract
between the lessor and the lessee. 36. of the Queen, Vngle and Glovers Case
adjudged, the lessee assigns his interest, the lessor bargains, etc. the
reversion, the bargainee shall not have Debt against the lessee, but agreed,
that the lessor himself might.

37. Eliz. in Banco regis, Int. Overton et Siddall. Two points were resolved.
First, if an Executor of a Lessee for years, assign over his interest that an
Action of Debt does not lie against him for Rent due after the Assignement. If
a Lessee for years assign over his interest and dye, the Executor shall not
be charged for rent due after his death, for by the death of the Lessee, the
personal privity of the contract (as to the Action of Debt in both these cases
were determined; 40. of the Queen, Brom and Hores Case. A. Lessee of three
acres rendering Rent, assigns one to B. the Lessor suffers a recovery to the
use of C. in fee, who brought Debt against the first Lessee, adjudged it lies,
for the Lessee assigned his interest, but for part, for the privity of Estate
remains because he assigned but part. 41. of the Queen Marrow and Turpins
Case, in Debt against two administrators, upon a Lease made to their Testator,
the Defendants plead, that before the tren areare, the one of them had assigned
all his interest to I. S. of which the Plaintiff had notice, and accepted the
Rent by the hands of the assignee, due after the assignement, and before that
this rent now demanded was due, the Plaintiff demurred and adjudged against
him, because the privity of the contract was determined by the death of the
Lessee, and therefore after the assignement made by the administrator, Debt
does not lie for rent due after the assignement. Also it was said, that if a
Lessee assign over his term, the Lessor may charge the Lessee or his Assignee
at his Election. And if the Lessor accept the rent of the assignee, he has
determined his Election, and shall not have an action after against the Lessee,
for rent due after the assignement, no more then a Lord having received the
Rent of the Feoffee, shall avow upon the Feoffor afterward.

Butler and Bakers Case, 33. and 34. of the Queen fo. 25.
W. B. and his Wife seized of the manor of H. (by an Estate made to them
during coverture for the jointure of the Wife) in tail, holden In Capite, and
W. seized of Land in F. both which amount to a third part of all his Lands; and
also of the Manor of T. In capite, which amounts to two parts; W. devises T.
to his Wife, upon condition, that she should take no former jointure, and
dyed, the Wife in pays refused H. the question was, whither the Will were good
for the entire Manor of T. or but for part, by the Statutes of 32. and 34. H
8. Resolved, that at common Law if a gift be to a Husband and Wife in tail,
etc. the Husband dies, the Wife cannot divest the free hold by any verbal
Waiver, or disagreement in pays; as if she say before entry, that she will
never agree to it, she may enter when she pleases; so, if she says,
(reciting her estate) that she assents, etc. to the said estate, yet
afterward she may waive it in a Court of record; but if she enters into the
Land, and takes the profits, though she says nothing, it is a good agreement in
Law, for the Law more respects acts without words, then words without acts, and
a freehold shall not be so easily divested to the intent that the Tenant to the
Praecipe, should be the better known. But as an act in Pays may amount to an
agreement, so it may amount to a disagreement, but, this is always of one and
the same thing, if the Tenant by deed infeoffe the Lord, and a stranger and
makes livery to the Lord, if the Lord dissagree' by word, it is worth nothing,
and if he enters generally, and takes the profits, it is an agreement, but if he
distraines for his Seigniory, it is a dissagreement, yet in some cases, a claim
by words shall direct the entry to be an agreement to one Estate, and a
disagreement to another, etc. See the Book at large, but a man may divest the
property of goods and Chattells, or an obligation sealed to him, by
disagreement In pays.

Resolved, that though the estate was created by way of use, which use, before
the Statute, might have been waived in Pays, yet, now the Statute has so
incorporated the use and possession of the Land, that it cannot be waived In
pays, more then an Estate created by feoffment, etc. yet it was here resolved,
That the refusal In pays to have H. and the entry, and agreement to T. was a
good agreement to the one, and disagreement to the other. And this by 27. H. 8.
ca'. 10. If any Woman has Lands, etc. assured after Marriage, etc. after the
death of the Husband, She may refuse her jointure, and take her Dower, etc. And
upon these words the Court agreed, That a Woman might refuse her Jointure In
pays, and be endowed by consent or Writ. The great doubt was, if by this
refusal of H. by operation of Law, it does descend immediately to the Heir
after the death of the Devisor; for to satisfy the Statute which says, The
King shall take for his third part such Manors etc. as shall descend, etc.
immediately after the death of the devisor.

Resolved, First, Upon the reason of the common Law, the refusal shall not
have such relation that the devise shall be good, for the entire Manor of T.
for a relation is a fiction of Law, to make a nullity of a thing Ab initio, to
one certain intent, which in truth had being, and that Propter necessitatem,
ut res magis valeat, quam pereat. 11. E. 3. The Law will make a nullity Ab
initio, that the Wife shall have dower, but not as to a collateral intent, as
if the reversion were granted of the Lands which the Husband and Wife held in
tail, and the Wife for to have Dower dissagrees, yet the grant is good, for
she may be endowed though the grant stand; and Relatio est fictio juris, et
intenta ad unum: And though relations aid acts in Law, as Dower, yet twill
never aid the acts of the party, to avoid them by relation, as a man infeoffes
an Infant, or Feme covert, and after gives, etc. or devises the Land, or any
thing out of it, the Infant or Husband disagrees, this shall have relation
betwixt the parties, that the Infant or Husband, shall not be charged in
damages, but shall not make the void devise, etc. good. A Lease for life, the
remainder to the King, the King grants his remainder, the deed is in-rolled, it
shall have relation to make this pass Ab initio, to the King, not to make the
void pattent good. And as relations extend only to the same thing, and the
same intent, so, also to the same parties, not for to prejudice a Stranger,
feoffement of a Manor, and a long time after livery, the Tenants attourne,
this shall have relation, to make the services pass Ab initio or otherwise
they could never pass, nor be parcel of the Manor, but not for to charge the
Tenants for the arrerages in the mean time. So here, the refusal shall relate
as to the manor, of H. only, not to T. and to the wife only, but not to
prejudice the Heir (upon whom part of the Manor of T. descended) to make the
devise good for the third part, which was void at the time of the death: For,
Omne testamentum morte consummatum est, and as it was at the death, so it shall
remain. Resolved, that after the Statute of 27. H. 8. and before the Statute
of 32 H. 8. the Manor of T. was not devisable, and therefore when the devisor
has not pursued the Authority; which the Acts of 32. and 34. H. 8. gives, it was
void for part.

The first branch he has not pursued, which says, (That all, etc. having a
sole estate in fee simple, in any Manors, etc. shall have full and free
liberty, etc. to dispose by his last will in writing, as much of, etc. as shall
amount to the clear yearly value of two parts in three to be divided) For he
had not the Manor of H. for his Wife had it jointly with him. See many
excellent Cases in the Book at large, adjudged upon this word (Having) in the
Statutes, the Initium of a Will ought to be full and perfect, which is the
writing, and therefore, if the devisor command one to write his Will, and he
devises white Acre to A. and his Heirs, and black Acre to B. and his Heirs,
and dies, before the devise to B. is written, yet the devise to A. is good. But
if he devises to A. etc. upon condition, and he writes the devise, and the
Testator dies before the Writing of the condition, it is void, for in the one
case, the devises are several, and the one is perfect, in the other Case it is
maimed, and imperfect, for the entire devise, was not fully put in writing, so
it was resolved in the Case at Bar, that neither the commencement nor the end
of the Will was full or perfect, for at the time of writing of it, and at the
death of the devisor, he had no power in respect of the joint estate in H. to
dispose all the Manor of T. which amounts to the value of two parts of all.
Also, upon the first Branch he ought to have a sole estate, and here his Wife
is jointly seized with him, and she cannot disagree during coverture. The
Statute gives liberty to him, for to devise two parts by will, but this is to
be intended of such Land, which he might convey by act executed, but, here by
reason of the undivided estate of the Wife, he cannot dispose it but during
coverture. Also, the third part of clear yearly value is saved to the King,
and the intent of the Statute was, that the King shall have the equal benefit
at least for his third part, as the devisee has for two parts, but here the
devisee had two parts absolutely, and the King but a possibility, Viz. If the
Wife would disagree which is at her pleasure, and this Statute has been
construed, that equality should be observed. A man which held three Manors of
three Lords, could not devise two of them, but two parts of every one; upon
these words (Clear yearly value) 'twas said that of Inheritances, which are
not of any yearly value, some are devisable, some not, as, Bona et catalla
felonum, fugit, or utlagat. Fines, amerciaments, within such a Manor or Town,
these cannot be devised, nor left to descend, but a Leete, Waife, or Stray, or
other hereditament appendant, or appurtenant to a Manor, pass by devise of
the Manor with th'appurtenances as incidents, and the Statute had no intent
for to dismember these things, which by lawful prescription had been united.
But if a hundred, with goods of Fellons, Outlaws, Fines, Amerciaments, return
of Writts, and such other casual hereditaments, within the same hundred, have
been accustomably demised for a yearly rent, they may be devised within the
purview of the said Act. 'Twas said upon the words of the Statute, which says,
that he may devise a rent common, etc. Out of two parts, that a devise of a
rent of the full value out of all is void, but out of two parts it is good. And
'twas observed, that upon 32. H. 8. a devile of all his land, had been good
for two parts, as adjudged in Vntons Case, for Land is severable, but a rent is
a thing entire, and 34. H. 8. only gives authority for to devise it.

The second branch which speaks of division, cannot be satisfied, for, during
his life, he himself could not (Set it out) and after his death, it survives
to the Wife. The third and fourth branch is not satisfied in this word
(immediately) for till disagreement, without question the Manor of H. survived
to the Wife, and if an Office had been found before disagreement, without
doubt, the Queen should have a third part of the Manor of T. and the devise
being void at the death of the devisor, and the third part lawfully vested in
the Heir by descent, it cannot be made good and divested by a subsequent
disagreement. Littleton, descent to the Heir of Tenant by the courtesy of a
disseissoresse, does not take away entry, for the Heir comes not in
immediately, and 'twas agreed if a man devises two acres holden by Knights
service, and a reversion upon a Lease for life discends to the heir, this is
no immediate descent within the Statute, but the third part of the two ought to
descend; see many excellent Cases of devises adjudged upon the Statute.

Another good Case of relations, Jennings and Braggs Case, a disseisee makes an
Indenture purporting a Lease for years, and delivers it to a stranger, out of
the Land, as an Escroule, and commands him for to enter, and deliver this as
his deed, to the Lessee, who does it, and adjudged a good Lease, and this
diversity agreed.

First, When the person at the first delivery has not ability, to make the
contract, and before the second delivery has, it is void, as an Infant, and a
Feme covert; otherwise, when at first delivery, the person has ability, but
cannot perfect it, till an impediment removed, which is done before the second
delivery, there it is good, as at Bar.

Resolved, secondly, that to some intent the second delivery shall have
relation to the former, by fiction of Law, Vt res magis valeat quam pereat, as
if a Feme sole deliver a Lease as an escroule, and after takes Husband or dies,
yet by the second delivery it is a good deed Ab initio; and to some intent Vt
res magis valeat, etc. it shall not relate, yet in truth, the second delivery
has all its force by the first, and is but an execution, and consummation of
the former, as at Bar, for if it should relate to the first delivery, then it
would avoid the lease, for it should be made by one, who was out of possession,
and fictio legis inique operatur alicui damnum vel injuriam.

Thirdly, 'twas resolved that as to collateral acts, that there shall be no
relation Omnino, as if the Obligee release before the second delivery, such
release is void.

Ratcliffes case. 34. of the Queen. fo. 37.
A. Feme sole devises Socage land to the son of her daughter in tail, the
remainder to two Sisters of the devisee, and to the heirs of their two bodies,
by equal portions to be divided, the remainder in fee to the Mother of the
daughters, and dies, the son dies without issue; Martha one of the daughters
dwelling in her Mothers house (daughter of the devisor) within the age of 16.
and above 14. departed at the second hour in the night, with the consent of
the husband of her Mother (in whose house she was) 8. miles, and there married
E. R. the issue was, whether E.R. the Mother, had the custody of the said M. at
the time of the contract, and marriage aforesaid, for if she had, then the land
of M. was lost by the Statute of 4. and 5. P. and M. ca'. 8.

Resolved, that there were two manners of custodies, or Gardianships, the one
by the common law, the other by the Statute; at common Law four manner of
Gardians, viz Guardian in Chivalry, Socage, Nature, by Nurture. The first two
are fully described in our Books; but great controversy was at bar, for
Guardian by Nature; Some held, that the Father only shall have the custody of
his son and heir apparent, within age, not the Mother, Grandfather, etc.
Also, that the Father shall not have the custody of his daughter and heir, for
it ought to be such an heir, as shall continue sole and apparent heir; as the
Father shall not have the custody of the youngest son, in Borough English,
for tenure in Chivalry. Others affirm, that not only the Father, but every
auncestor male or female, shall have the custody of his heir apparent, male or
female. Trespass quare (...) consanguinium and haeredem of the plaintiff, cujus
maritagium ad ipsum pertinet, etc. rapuit, etc. lies. The Mother (though she
had no land) brought ravishment of ward of J. her Son and heir, against the
grandfather, who had land that might descend. By the Court, both err; for it is
true, that every auncestor shall have trespass, or ravishment of ward against a
stranger, for his heir male or female, and the Writ shall say, Cujus
maritagium ad ipsum pertinet, and good reason, for the establishment of his
house consists upon providing of a convenient marriage for his heir apparent,
and it matters not, of what age such heir is, but such action lies not against
guardian in chivalry, by any of his ancestors but the Father. So the Court
resolved here, the Mother could not be guardian in Socage, if the land had
descended to the daughter, nor by nurture, because she was above 14. but the
common Law gives remedy against a Stranger, as aforesaid. Resolved, here the
Mother shall have the custody within the provision of the Act, which has
ordained two new manners of custodies. 1. By reason of nature. 2. By
assignation; the first, the Father, after his death the Mother; the second, by
assignation of the Father, by his will, or any act in his life. See the Book
at large for the exposition of this Statute.

Resolved, that the assent of the husband was not material, for the Statute
has annexed the custody, to the person of the Mother, jure naturae, which is
inseparable, and by marriage cannot be transferred to the husband, the Father
shall not forfeit the wardship by outlawry, nor shall his Executors have it.

Resolved, though she departed out of the house six hours before the
contract, yet, in judgment of Law, the Mother had the custody at the time of
the contract; for, it is inseperably annexed to the person of the Mother.

Resolved, that by this devise, the two daughters wete tenants in common in
tail, by these words (equally to be divided) though they never make partition
in facto, and so it has been often adjudged.

Resolved, that the husband and wife damsel, had good title upon this verdict,
against the other daughter; for, by these words (to the next of kin, to whom
the inheritance should, etc. come after her decease during the life of such
person, who shall so contract, etc.) it seems the daughter shall not have the
forfeiture, for though she be of the blood, yet, if M. dye, her issue shall
have the land, if without issue, the Mother in the remainder.

To the objection, that the Mother cannot have it, for she is not of the blood
of the daughter, but econtra. Father, or Mother, are not next, to whom
administration shall be granted; and land shall escheate, rather then it shall
go to Father, or Mother.

Resolved often against 5. E. 6. that the Father, or Mother, are next to whom
administration may be granted, and Littleton says that the Father is nearer of
blood, then the Uncle, and therefore the Father shall have a remainder limited
to the next of blood of the Son, but he shall not have an inheritance by
descent, from the Son, for a Maxim prohibits it. And 'twas said at bar, if
he in reversion had been brother of the half blood, he might have entered, as
Proximus de sanguine, yet none of the half blood could inherit. See the Book
at large, where is excellent learning of discents; as also the learning of
Possessio fratris, etc. Resolved by the Court, that it does not come in
question, who shall enter for the forfeiture by the Statute, for the issue was
joined upon a collateral point, whether the Mother had the custody at the time
of the contract; and the finding of the Jury is not material, and therefore,
though the Plaintiff (who was lessee of the husband of the damsel, as
appeared) had good title against the defendant, being lessee of the husband of
the other Sister, yet, because the issue was found against him, judgment was
given Quod nihil capiat, etc.

Boytons case, 35. Eliz. in Banco regis. fo. 43.
A Writ of cap: ad satisfaciendum is retornable at Westminster die Lunae prox
post Crastin. Animaru^, the party is arrested, the Sheriff is not bound to
bring the prisoner in recta Linea, from the place where he was arrested, or
from the County. But if he have the prisoner in Court at the day of the
return (being never out of his custody in the mean season) it is good; But if
a Sheriff or a Bayliffe assent that one who is in execution, and under their
custody, to go out of the Jail for a time, and then to return, yet although
he return at the time, it is an escape. And so it is likewise if a Sheriff
suffer him to go with a Bayliffe or a Keeper, for the Sheriff ought to have
him in arcta custodia, and the Statute of Westminster 2. cap. 11. says, Quod
carceri manucipentur in ferris. So as the Sheriff may keep him in iron and
fetters, to the intent, that they may sooner satisfy their Creditors. The
Sheriff upon a Habeas corpus for one in execution may bring the party what
way he will, so as he have his body at the day, according to the Writ; If one
in execution escape out of the Jail, and fly into another County, the
Sheriff upon fresh suite, takes him again before any action brought against
the Sheriff, the Judges have adjudged this no escape; and if one in execution
escape, de son tort. and be taken again, he shall never have an audita
querela, because a man shall not take advantage of his own wrong.

Sir George Brownes case. 36. of the Queen. fo. 50.
ISsue in special tail, the remainder to himself in fee, in the life of his
Mother, tenant in special tail, levies a Fine (in truth, with Proclamations,
though they were not found) to Sir G. B. the Mother (living the Son) leased
for three lives, which was not warranted by 32. H. 8. upon which Sir G. B
entered.

Resolved, that the lease for three lives, though without warranty, was within
11. H. 7. which says, (discontinue, alien, release, or confirm with warranty)
for, the intent of the Statute, was, to prohibit not only every bar, but
every manner of discontinuance, which puts the heir to his real action; and
because a release, or confirmation, is no discontinuance without warranty; the
warranty referres to them, to make them equivalent to an estate which passes
by livery. Note, the title of the Act (Discontinuance of right, or estate) also
in the Act it is said, If no such discontinuance, warranty, nor recovery had
been; so that discontinuance stands in equal degree with warranty.

Resolved, that if the issue had granted his remainder in fee only, and not
barred his tail, he might have entered by the words of the Act, for the
forfeiture, which says, Every person to whom the interest, etc. title, or
inheritance, after the decease of the woman should appertain, may enter and
enjoy, etc. As if no such discontinuance had been made, and if no such had
been, the land should descend to the issue.

Resolved, that in this case, Sir G. B. shall enter, for if no discontinuance
had been, he should enjoy it against Anthony the issue, and all the heirs of
his body, though the Fine be levied in the life of the auncestor, for 32. H. 8.
says, In any wise intailed to the person so levying the Fine, or to any of his
ancestors; and though it work, part by conveyance, part by conclusion, yet'
the tail being extinct by the Fine, Sir G. B. in remainder shall enter. The
same Law in this case, though the Fine were without Proclamations, for the
issue against his Fine cannot enter; but the entry of the conusee is lawful.

Anderson said, where 'twas invented (to make an evasion out of this Act) that
a woman should accept a Fine come ceo, etc. and render for a thousand years,
pretending this not within the words (discontinue, alien, release with
warranty, etc.) that this was an alienation within the intent of the Act, or
otherwise the Statute should serve for nothing, and so it has been resolved.

Rigewaies Case. 36. El. in Banco regis. fol. 52.
IT was resolved pro tot. Cur. although the prisoner in execution escape out of
view, yet if fresh suite be made, and he be taken again in recenti
insecutione, he shall be in execution, otherwise at the turning of a corner, or
by entering into a house, or other means, the prisoner may be out of view; And
although he fly into another County, yet because the escape was of his own
wrong, whereof he may not take advantage, the Sheriff upon fresh suite may
take him there, and he shall be in execution. But if the Plaintiff bring his
action against the Sheriff upon the escape, before that the Sheriff take him,
or if the Sheriff do not make fresh suite, yet in both these cases the
Sheriff may take him and keep him in his custody, until he make agreement
with him, or he may have an action of the case, for his wrongful escape. And
although the defendant be taken upon a cap: ad satisfaciendum, and escape, yet
if the Writ be not returned and filed, the Plaintiff may have a new cap: ad
satisfaciendum against him, and take him again, and he shall not take
advantage of his own wrong. But if the Plaintiff will, he may charge the
Sheriff with the escape, if he did not take him again in fresh suite before
the action brought, and when the prisoner escapes of his own wrong, and be
taken again, he shall never have an audita querela against the Sheriff. But
it is otherwise if he escape with the consent of the Jailer, then he may not
take him again, and if he do, then he may have an audita querela.

Resolved, that the bar was insufficient, for the plaintiff counted of an
escape in London, and the defendant justifies the retaking in Devonshire, so
that the escape at London was not answered; but the plaintiff not denying the
fresh suite, but by Protestation relying upon this that he was out of view,
'twas adjudged against him, but if he had demurred upon the bar, he should
have had judgment.

Resolved, that after Demurrer, there shall not be a Repleader, for the parties
by mutual consent, have put themselves upon the judgment of the Court, and
therefore without their consent, they cannot repleade, and so several times
adjudged.

Lincoln College case. 37. and 38. of the Queen. fo. 59.
HUsband seized to him and to his wife for life, and to the heirs of the body
of the husband, dyed, the issue, in the life of the wife, then tenant of the
freehold (for so the pleading was) which shall be intended by disseisin, for no
surrender, or forfeiture was alleged. 4. H. 8. Suffered a recovery, with
single voucher, by agreement, that the recoverors should infeoffe L, etc. to
diverse uses, and that the wife should release to them with warranty, which was
done according, 11. H. 8. The wife dyed, after the issue dyed, after his issue
in the third degree entered; the question was, whether the collateral warranty
should bind; the recovery did not come in question, for by the pleading it
shall be intended, that he was seized by other title, then by the tail, so the
single voucher not material.

Resolved, that though the first branch of the Statute of 11. H. 7. says, that
the warranty shall be void, yet the clause following (and that it shall be
lawful, etc. to enter) being annexed to the first, expounds the generality of
it, and though he to whom the interest, etc. after the death of the wife
appertains, may avoyde it by entry, yet, it is in force against all others; and
so the Judges have expounded other Statutes. 8. H. 6. All Outlawries shall be
void, except a Capias be awarded against the party, in the County, where, etc.
yet this ought to be avoided by error. The Statute of 1. of the Queen ordaines
that all grants, etc. by a Bishop, in other manner then etc. shall be utterly
void; but 32. and 33. of the Queen, betwixt Sale and the Bishop of C. and L. a
grant of a next avoydance of a Church (not warranted, etc.) was not voydable
against the Bishop himself, but only against his Successors. And with this
resolution agrees 27. H. 8. upon the same Statute of 11. H. 7.

Resolved, that this warranty was out of the intent of the Act, which only
restraines warranty, which prejudices the heir in tail, or those in
remainder, but when the warranty, etc. of the wife, is but for to perfect and
corroborate the estate assured by the issue himself, etc. it is not restrained
by the Act, for it shall be intended to the benefit of the heir, which is the
reason, that a common recovery is not restrained by W. 2. for the intended
recompense; and if the wife and the issue had joined in a Fine, this had barred
the tail; so, if the wife had surrendered, the issue might have suffered a
recovery. H. 39. of the Queen, the case was, that the younger Son tenant in
tail by devise, was vouched in a recovery suffered, by a woman tenant for
life, by the same devise, and this was to the use of the vouchee and his
heirs, who dyed; and 'twas adjudged that the Sister of the vouchee, by the
entire blood shall have it, not the elder brother, and that the recovery was
not within 14 of the Queen, though suffered by tenant for life; and the
Statute says, that it shall be utterly void; for 'twas not the intent, that the
Act should extend to a recovery, in which he in remainder in tail was vouched,
who had an estate that might continue for ever, and had the power to docke all
the remainders; so here, this Statute does not extend to this warranty,
because, etc.

Resolved, when the first issue disables himself, for to take advantage of the
forfeiture, and dies, his issue shall never take benefit of it, because, he was
not in rerum natura, nor had the immediate interest at the time; and this was
Sir George Brownes case before, where the issue in tail in the life of his
Mother, tenant in special tail, levied a Fine, without proclamations; and
here, if error were in the recovery, the warranty bars him of his action,
because he himself by his own act, has barred his entry. But here if the wife
had released, etc. after the death of the issue, his issue might have avoyed
the warranty.

Note, (Reader) it seems to me, if in such case a woman levies a Fine, or
suffers a recovery, though the daughter enters, or not, and though she joins
in the Fine, or is vouched in the recovery, or by any other act disables her
self, yet the Son borne after shall take advantage of it; for entry upon
this Act of 11. H. 7. is not like entry upon the Statute of 6. R. 2. ca'. 6.
For there the daughter by express words, has it as a perquisite, but upon 11.
H. 7. per formam doni.

Resolved, if tenant in tail, in of another estate, suffer a common recovery,
and a collateral auncestor releases with warranty to the recoveror, after the
recoveror makes a Feoffement to uses, which are executed by the Statute of 27.
H. 8. and the auncestor dies, though the estate be transferred in the post,
before the descent of the warranty, yet, it shall bind, and the terr-tenants
shall Rebutt. See excellent learning upon this point, where an estate
transferred in the post, before descent of the warranty, shall bind, where
not, and where there shall be Rebutter in such case, where not.

Pennants case. 38. of the Queen. fo. 64.
LEase for years upon condition, that the lessee shall not assign, etc.
without assent of the lessor, he assigns, etc. the lessor not having notice of
the assignement, accepts the rent due after; and enters; it was adjudged for
the lessor his entry lawful; for that the condition being collateral, the
breach whereof may be so secretly contrived, that it is not possible for the
lessor to have notice thereof, and notice in this case is material and
issuable; for otherwise the lessee might take advantage of his own fraud. But
if a man make a Lease for years, rendering rent upon condition, if the rent be
not paid to reenter. In this case if the Lessor demand the rent, and the same
is not paid, if after he accept the rent (before the reentry made) due at
another day, he has dispensed with the condition, for there the condition is
annexed to the rent, and he (having made demand of the rent) well knew the
condition was broken; but although in this case, that he accept the rent, due
at that day, for which he made the demand, yet he may reenter, for as well
before, as after his reentree, he may have an action of debt, for the rent upon
the contract between the Lessor and the Lessee.

If the Lessor distraine for the rent, for which the demand was made, he has
affirmed the Lease; for after the determination of the Lease, he may not
distraine for rent.

It was also resolved, that as well in case of the condition annexed to the
rent, as in case of a condition annexed to any collateral act, if the
conclusion of the condition be, that then the Lease for years shall be void,
there no acceptance of the rent due at any day after the breach of the
condition will make the void Lease good.

Resolved, that as a voidable Lease cannot be affirmed by word, for money, etc.
so the acceptance of a rent which is not In esse, nor due to him which accepts
it, does not affirm the Lease as a gift to a Husband and Wife, and to the
Heirs of the body of the Husband, the Husband dies, the issue accepts the rent
of the Lessee of the Husband, during the life of the Wife, the Wife dies, yet
the issue shall avoid the Lease, for no rent was due.

And there is a diversity between a Lease for life, and for years, in case of
a lease for life, though the conclusion of the condition be, that it shall be
void, yet acceptance of a rent due after the breach, shall affirm it, for the
freehold being created by livery, cannot be determined before entry. If the
successor accept the rent upon a Lease for years of a Parson, Vicar, Prebend,
it is worth nothing, for it is void by death, otherwise of a Lease for life. But
if the successor of a Bishop, Abbot, or Prior, accept the rent upon a Lease for
years, he shall never avoid it, for 'twas voydable only.

Note (Reader) it seems to me, if upon a Lease for life, the Lessor accepts
the same rent which was demanded, he has affirmed the Lease, for he cannot
accept it, as due upon any contract, as upon a Lease for years, for when he
accepts it, he cannot have an action of Debt for it, but his remedy was by
Assise, if he had seisin or by distress, but after reentry he may have an
action of Debt.

If he that has a rent service, or rent charge, accepts the rent due at the
last day, and therefore makes an acquittance, all the arrerages due before, are
thereby discharged, and so it has been adjudged, In Hopkins and Mortons Case
10. El. Dyer.

A man is not bound to pay an annuity without an Acquittance, but a rent
service, or rent charge he is.

If the Lord accepts the rent or service of the Feoffee, he loses the arrerages
in the time of the Feoffor, though he makes no acquittance, for, after such
acceptance, he shall not avow upon the Feoffor at all, nor upon the Feoffee,
but for the arrerages which incurred in his time; otherwise, where the Feoffor
dies, and there is such an acceptance. But acceptance of rent or service by the
hands of the Feoffee, shall not bar the Lord of relief due after, for that
is no service, if it were, Debt would not lie for it.

'Twas said, if the Lord accepts services by the hands of the Heir, infeoffed
within age by collusion, he loses the wardship. But against this 'twas
objected. First, because the Lord upon tender of the arrerages, and notice is
compellable to avow upon him. Secondly, he cannot be concluded before title
accrued. Answered, the Lord is not compellable etc. for he may show the
collusion, and avow upon the Feoffor, and by acceptance, the Lord waives the
benefit of the Statute, purges the collusion, and loses the wardship.

Westbyes Case, 40. Eliz. In Banco Regis, Fol. 71.
WEstby brought an action of Debt against Skynner and Catcher Sheriffs of
London, for an escape. One Buston was in execution, and in their custody, at
the Suite of one Dighton, and at the Plaintiffes Suite and at the end of their
year, the Sheriffs delivered the body of Buston (amongst others) unto the new
Sheriffs by Indenture, wherein the execution at the Suite of Dighton, was
mentioned, but the execution at the Suite of Westby was omitted, and Buston
still continued in the Jail, and if the Defendants should be charged in this
Case, with the escape, was the Question? And it was adjudged, that they should
be charged, for although he was within the walls of the Prison, yet that was an
escape in Law, as to the Plaintiff. And it was resolved, that Eo instanti,
that the ancient Sheriffs, delivered their Prisoners to the new Sheriffs, the
escape began as to the Plaintiff.

Note hereby, that the Law judges one that remains in the Jail to have
escaped, and it was resolved, that the ancient Sheriffs ought to give notice
to the new Sheriffs of all executions that they have against any, that are in
their custody, and it was also resolved, until the Prisoners be delivered to
the new Sheriffs, they remain in the custody of the old Sheriffs.
Notwithstanding the new Letters Patents, the Writ of discharge, and the Writ of
delivery. And 'twas resolved, that if the old Sheriff die before a new one be
made, the new Sheriff at his own peril ought to take notice of all executions
against any of the Prisoners; and this is for necessity, and if one in
Execution break the Jail between the death of the old Sheriff, and the
making of the new, this is no escape, but when the Sheriff is dead, all the
Prisoners are in the custody of the Law until the new Sheriff be made; and
although no fresh Suite be made after, they may be taken in Execution, in what
place soever they come in.

Deane and Chapter of Norwich Case, 40. and 41. of the Queen. fo. 73.
H. 8. Anno. 30. translated the Priory and Covent of the Cathedral Church of
the holy Trinity of Norwich, into the Deane and Chapter, etc. and discharged
them by their special names, Tam de habitu quam de regula; ipsosque decanum
and Capitulum, perpetuis temporibus duraturis corporavit, and granted them all
the Manors, etc. which of late belonged to the Priory, and granted that they
should be the Deane and Chapter of the Bishop of Norwich, and his Successors,
after 2. E. 6: the Deane and Chapter surrendered to the King their Church and
possessions, and he incorporated them by the name of the Deane and Chapter,
Sanctae and individuae, Trinitatis Norw' ex fundatione, E. 6. And regranted
them their Church and Possessions, by the name of the Deane, etc. omitting Ex
fundatione Regis. E. 6.

Objected, that Herbert heretofore Bishop of Norwich, was Founder, and being
not party to the translation, it is void.

Answered, the King was Founder, as appears by many Records, and by the
Foundation; but, admit the Bishop Founder, yet the translation was good: for
the Pope might have discharged a Monk of his profession, and therefore the
King may do it, by the Statute of 25. H. 8. And this translation is no
prejudice to the Founder, for he remains Founder, and nothing is altered but
the rule and profession; and rhis Prior was eligible. 11. of the Queen. Dyer.
Corbets case, proves this very translation good, and by judgment of
Parliament, 33. H. 8. such translations are good. All Chapters were Monks, and
notwithstanding their translation into Prebends, or Cannons, the Advowson
remains as before; But admit the translation void, yet, it is good by the
Statute of 35. of the Queen; see the Book at large.

Objected, when they surrendered to E. 6. and he regranted to them, by the
mis-naming of the Corporation, for ( ex fundatione Regis. E. 6.) was omitted,
the grant was void, and nothing passed, for the name of the Founder is parcel
of the Corporation.

Answered, notwithstanding the surrender of their Church, their Corporation
continues, and they remain the Chapter of the Bishop; though there cannot be a
Guardian of a Chapel, when the Chapel and all the possessions are aliened.
In Christian policy 'twas thought necessary (for that the Church could not be
without Sects and Heresies) that every Bishop should be assisted with a
Counsel; viz. a Deane and Chapter. 1. To consult with them in deciding of
difficult Controversies of Religion, to which purpose every Bishop habet
Cathedram. 2. To consent to every grant the Bishop shall make to bind his
successors; for the Law did not judge it reasonable, to repose such confidence
in him alone: at first all the possessions were to the Bishop, after a certain
portion was assigned to the Chapter, therefore the Chapter was, before they had
any possessions, and of common right, the Bishop is Patron of all the Prebends,
because their possessions were derived from him, so that so long as the
Bishopric continues, the Deane and Chapter (being his Counsel) remains,
though they have no possessions, as at first they were, when the Bishopric
consisted all of spiritualty. The Prior and Friars Carmilites had not any
possessions nor place. And 32. H. 8. Fitz. held if an Abbot or Prior and
covent, sell their possessions, yet their Corporation remains. All Bishoprics
were of the Foundation of the Kings of England, and anciently Donative by them;
but, by grants of the Kings, became after Eligible by their Chapter; wherefore,
if by their surrender, their Corporation should be dissolved: three
inconveniences would follow. First, to the Bishop, for his assistance in the
Episcopal function. Secondly, to the Bishop and others, touching the
confirmation of Grants. Thirdly, to all the Church, for how should the Bishop
be chosen?

Resolved, First, if there were any imperfection in the Translation the Statute
of 35. of the Queen has made it good.

Secondly, that the Act of 1. E. 6. has made it good, though the Corporation
were gone by the surrender, and the misnamer material.

Holden by the Justices and Lord Keeper, that the ancient corporation remains,
notwithstanding the surrender.

Fermors Case, 44. of the Queen, fo. 77.
SMith Lessee for years of a House, and Tenant at will of Land, and Tenant by
copy of other Land within the Manor of S. to Fermor, leased all for life to
I. S. and also seized of other Land there in Fee, levied a fine with
Proclamations of all Messuages, and Lands (which comprehends all those leases,
and also his inheritance) by covin, to dissinherit his lessor, and after the
fine, always continues in possession, and pays the several rents to F. The
lessee for life, dies, the years expire, S. claims the inheritance.

Resolved, that the Lord of the Manor was not barred by the said fine. 1. The
makers of the Statute of 4. H. 7. never intended that a fine levied by Tenant
at will, years or Copy, which pretend no Inheritance nor title to it, but
intend the disherison of the Lord, etc. should bar them of their inheritance,
and where the Statute says (That Fines ought to be of greatest strength to
avoid strife and debate.) This Feoffement and fine by the Lessee shall be the
cause of strife where none was before. 2. The Statute does not intend, that
those who of themselves without such fraud, could not levy a fine to bar
those which had the freehold and inheritance, should be enabled to levy a fine
by making of an estate to another, by practice and fraud. 3. If doubt be
conceived upon an act of Parliament, it is to be construed by the reason of the
common Law, and that so abhorres fraud, and covin, that all acts, as well
judicial, as others, and which of themselves are lawful and just, yet being
mixed with fraud and deceit, are tortious and illegal. If a Woman entitled to
have Dower (which is favored in Law) by covin, causes a stranger to disseise
the terretenant, to the intent to bring Dower against him, and recovers
accordingly, it is all void. So if a Feme covert, or Infant (much favored in
Law) of covin, causes another to disseise the discontinuee, and infeoffe them;
they are not remitted. Sale in Market overt shall not bind, if the Vendee had
notice that the property was to another, or if the Sale be by covin; the Law
has ordained the common Bench as a Market overt, for assurance of Land by
fine; for it says, Finis finem litibus imponit, yet covin shall avoid them: A
Vacat was made in Banco of a recovery had by covin, 33 and 34. of the Queen
adjudged, where Tenant for life levied a fine with Proclamations, and five
years passed, and he dyed, that the Lessor shall have five years after his
death, for though the Statute saves the right which First shall grow, and the
right first accrued to the Lessor, by the forfeiture, yet because the Lessor by
covin of the Lessee, might be barred, for he expected not to enter, till after
the death of the Lessee, it is no bar, and namely, when the Lessee has Land
of Inheritance in the same Town, (as in this case) so, 'twas agreed in the
same case, if the Feoffee of the Lessee for life has Lands in the same Town,
and levys a fine, etc. the Lessor shall have five years after the death of the
Lessee, for he knew not of what land the fine was levied (not being party to
the Indenture or agreement) etc. So, the Judges have construed the act against
the Letter, for Salvation of the Inheritance of him in reversion. And 'twas
said, if the Feoffee of a Lessee for years, who made a feoffement by practice,
has Land in the same Ville, and levy a fine, and the Lessee pays the rent to
the Lessor, it shall not bind, and in the principal case, the payment of the
rent after the fine, makes the fraud apparent, for by this the Lessor was
secure, and not cause of any doubt of fraud.

But 'twas resolved, if the Bargainee or Feoffee of A. perceiving that C. has
right, levies a fine, or takes a fine of a Stranger, to the intent, to bar C.
this fine levied by consent shall bind, for nothing was done in this, that was
not lawful, and the intent of the act was to avoid strife. So, if A.
(pretending title) disseise B. and to the intent to bar the disseissee,
levies a fine, for the desseisor, Venit tanquam in arena, and it is not possible
but the disseisee had knowledge of it, and if he does not enter, it is his
folly. But in the case at bar, every one will presume that the fine is levied
of his own Land, because that he might lawfully do; and though this conteines
more acres, then his own Land, this is usual almost in all fines; and the
covin of the Lessee is the cause of non-claime of the Lessor, and a man shall
not take advantage of his own covin; and here the fraud is the more odious,
because of the great trust, viz. Fealty. To the objection, that it should be
mischievous to avoid fines, upon such nude averments; 'twas answered, that it
should be a greater mischief, principally, if fines levied by such covin,
should bind. And an averrment of fraud may be taken by the Statute of 27. of
the Queen, against a fine leavyed to secret uses, by fraud, for to deceive
Purchasors. So by the Statute of 13. of the Queen, an averrment may be taken,
against a fine levied upon an usurious contract.

Twynes Case, 44. Eliz: in Came. Stel. fo. 80.
IN an Information per Cook Attorney General against Twyne of Hampshire, for
contriving and publishing of a fraudulent Deed made of goods. The case upon the
Statute 13. Eliz. ca. 5. was thus; Pierce was indebted unto Twyne, in 400. l.
and to one C. in 200. l. C. brought an action of Debt against Pierce (and
hanging the Writ) Pierce being possessed of goods and Chattells to the value of
300. l. in secret made a deed of all his goods and Chattells to Twyne in
satisfaction of his Debt, and yet Pierce continued in possession of the same,
and some of them he sold, and his Sheep he marked with his own mark; and
after, C. had judgment, and a Fire. fac. to the Sheriff, and by virtue thereof
Bailiffs came to make execution of the goods, and diverse persons by the
commandment of Twyne, with force resisted them, claiming them to be the goods
of Twyne by virtue of the same deed, and whether this deed was fraudulent or
no, was the Question? and 'twas resolved by Sir Thomas Egerton Keeper of the
Great Seal of England, and by the chief Justices, Popham and Anderson, and
all the Court of Star Chamber, that this deed was fraudulent and within the
Statute of 13. El. And in this Case diverse things were resolved.

First, That this Deed had the marks of fraud, it was general, and without
exception of his apparel, or any thing of necessity, for dolosus versatur in
generalibus.

Secondly, The Donor continues in the possession.

Thirdly, It was made in secret, Et dona clandestina semper sunt suspiciosa.

Fourthly, it was made hanging the Writ.

Fifthly, there was trust between the parties, for the Donor was in possession
and used them, and fraud is always apparelled with trust, and trust is the
cover of fraud.

Sixthly, it was contained in the deed that it was honesty, truly and bona
fide, Et clausulae inconsuetae semper juducunt suspitionem, and it was resolved
although it was a due debt to Twyne, and a good consideration of the deed, yet
it was not within the proviso of the said Act of 13. Eliz. By which it is
provided that the said Act does not extend to any estate or interest in Lands,
etc. goods and chattells made upon good consideration, and Bona fide, for
although it be upon good and true consideration, yet it is not Bona fide, for
no deed shall be deemed to be made Bona fide within the said proviso that is
accompanied with any trust, for the proviso says upon good consideration, and
Bona fide, so as good consideration does not serve, if it be not also Bona fide.

Therefore (good Reader) if any deed be made to thee in satisfaction of any
debt, by one that is indebted unto others also. First, let it be in public
manner before Neighbors. Secondly, valued-by good men to a true value.
Thirdly, take them out of the possession of the Donor presently, for
continuance of possession in the Donor is a mark of trust.

There are two considerations (Viz.) Consideration of blood or nature, and
valuable consideration. And if one that is indebted to five several persons
every one 20. l. in consideration of natural affection, does give all his
goods unto his Son or Cosen. The intention of the Statute was, that the
consideration in this case should be valuable, for equity requires that this
deed that defeates others, shall be made of as high a consideration, as the
things are, that are so defeated thereby, for it is to be presumed, that the
Father if he had not been indebted unto others, would not dispossess himself
of all his goods, and subject himself to his Cradle. And therefore it shall be
intended that it was to defeat his Creditors. And if a consideration of nature
or blood, should be a good consideration within this proviso, the Statute would
serve for little or nothing, and no creditor should be sure of his Debt.

A feoffment made solely in consideration of nature or blood, shall not take
away the use raised upon valuable consideration, but it shall take away a use
raised in consideration of nature, for both considerations are in Equali jure,
and of the same nature.

Many men marvel the reason that so many acts and Statutes are daily made:
this Verse answers.

Queritur ut crescunt tot magna volumina legis.
In promptu causa crescit in orb dolus.
And because fraud abounds in these days, more then in former times, it was
resolved, that all Statutes made against fraud, shall be liberally expounded,
for to suppress the fraud, and according to this, see several resolutions in
the Book at large.

It was resolved, that no purchasor may avoid a precedent conveyance made by
fraud, but he that is a purchasor for money or other valuable consideration
paid, for consideration of blood is a good consideration, but not such a
consideration as is intended by the Statute, 27. El. ca: 4. for valuable
consideration is only good consideration by the same act. Anderson chief
Justice of the common banck said, That a man who is of small capacity and not
able to govern his Lands, that discends unto him, and being disposed to riot
and disorder, by the mediation of his friends, by open Act conveyes his Lands
to them, upon trust and confidence, that he shall take the profits for his
maintenance, and that he shall have no power to wast or consume them. And
after, he being seduced by deceitful and covetous persons bargained for small
sums, his Lands of great value, this bargain although it were for money was
holden to be out of this Statute, for this act was made against all fraud and
deceit, and shall not aid any purchasor that comes not to the Lands for good
considerations lawfully without fraud or deceit. And in this case Twyne was
convicted of fraud, and he, and all the others of a riot.

Resolutions. P. 44. of the Queen upon the Statutes of Fines. fo. 84.
A. Tenant for life, the remainder to B. in tail, the remainder to B. and his
heirs, B. levies a Fine, has issue, and dies, before all the Proclamations
passed, the issue then beyond the Sea, the Proclamations are made, the issue
retournes, and upon the land claims the remainder.

Resolved, that the estate which passed, was not determined by the death of
tenant in tail; so, if tenant in tail of a rent, Advowson, Tithes, Common,
etc. grants by Deed, and dies; for if the issue brings a Formedon for the rent,
he makes the grant voidable, if he distraines, or claims it upon the land, he
by this determines his election. And there is no diversity, betwixt tenant in
tail of a rent, etc. and tenant in tail of a reversion, or a remainder upon
an estate for life, though in the first case, the issue may have a Formedon
presently after the death of tenant in tail.

Holden by Popham, and diverse other Justices, that the Statute of 32. H. 8.
has enforced the case, that the estate which passes by the Fine of tenant in
tail, shall not be determined by his death, for by this it is provided that
Fines levied of any lands, etc. intailed, immediately after the Fine engrossed,
and Proclamations made, shall be a bar, if the Fine cannot be a bar without
continuance, the Statute has provided, that the estate shall continue, for it
provides for all necessary incidents to the perfection, and consummation of it.
Every Fine shall be intended with Proclamations, for it is most beneficial for
the conusee, and all Fines being the general assurance of land are levied
according.

Resolved, that though by the death of tenant in tail, a right of the estate
tail descends to the issue, for that the tenant in tail dyed before all the
Proclamations passed, yet, when they are passed, without claim, this right is
barred by the Statute of 32. H. 8.

Resolved, by all the Judges and Barons (but three) that the issue (in this
case) being heir and privy, cannot, by any claim, save the right of the
tail, which is descended to him, but that after the Proclamations, he shall be
barred; for, it is provided (that every Fine after the engrossing of it, and
Proclamation had and made, shall be a final end, and conclude as well privies
as strangers.) And if no saving had been, all strangers had been barred also,
and all the exceptions extend only to Strangers, but the issue is privy.

To the objection; if by the equity of the Statutes, the issue cannot claim,
etc. to what purpose are the Proclamations with such solemnities?

Answered, 32. H. 8. being an Act of explanaiton of 4. H. 7. as to the Fine by
tenant in tail, shall not be taken by any strained construction against the
letter, for then it is requisite to have a new Act of explanation, upon the
explanation, and sic in infinitum. By 4. H. 7. every one has liberty to pursue
a Fine according to the said Act, viz. with proclamations, etc. or without (as
at common Law) and therefore the Act of 32. H. 8. of necessity prescribes that
Proclamations shall be made according to 4. H. 7. to distinguish it from a Fine
at common Law, and not to enable the issue for to make claim, for this should
be against the express intent of the Act, in the preamble, and purview. Also
it should be very inconvenient, if, when such Fine is levied, for a valuable
consideration, advancement of his issues, or payment of his debts, and he dies
before Proclamations, that all should be avoided by the claim of the heir,
when the conusee could not have better assurance, by Recovery, for that he was
not tenant to the Praecipe. See the Book at large, in what case the issue in
tail may aver seisin in a Stranger, and quod parts Finis nihil habuerunt,
what not.

Objected, 1. it is provided by the Statute de donis, etc. that as to the issue,
Finis ipso jure sit nullus. 2. That the Statute of 27. E. 1. extends not to the
heirs in tail, as 8. H. 4. is, for the issue is not bound by any Record,
which inures by way of Estoppell. 3. 27. E. 1. speaks De finibus rite levatis,
and when there wants seisin (which is the essence of a Fine) it is not rite
levatus, 46. E. 3. that it is a good plea.

Answered, the Statute de donis, etc. was made 13. E. 1. and the Statute of
Fines 27. in which the issue is not excepted, therefore he is bound, and
according there is a good opinion, 8. H. 4.

To the second, though the issue was not barred of his right before, 4. H. 7.
yet he was estopped to say, Quod parts Finis nihil habuerunt.

To the third, Finis rite levatus, is intended in due form of Law, which it
may be, though it be only by way of conclusion, for the same Act ousts the
parties from such averment, and 46. E. 3. is to be intended of a collateral
auncestor, from whom the heir does not claim the Land, and then the averment
is good.

In Conisbies case 'twas resolved, upon a Fine levied to tenant in tail in
remainder, by tenant for life, and a grant and render of a rent, that this was
not within the Statutes of 4. H. 7. or 32. H. 8. for the Fine was not of the
land it self which was intailed, but of the rent newly created out of the
land. And in the Lord Zouches case 'twas resolved, that 4. H. 7. and 32. H. 8.
do extend to Fines levied by conclusion, and shall bind, though parts, etc.
nihil habuerunt; as if tenant in tail makes a Feoffement, or be disseised, and
levies a Fine, for the Statute says, (All Fines of any lands, etc. in any wise
intailed to the person so levying, or to any of his ancestors) and in 4. H. 7.
the exception, Quod parts, etc. is saved to all persons not party, nor privy
to the said Fine, and the issue in tail is privy, for he claims as heir by
descent, and if such Fine shall bar, where the tenant in tail had nothing,
though the issue enter after the death of the auncestor, before all the
Proclamations pass; a fortiori here, when tenant in tail, at the time was
seized of an estate, though 'twere in reversion. See Archers case, where a Fine
shall bar the issue, where the Father had only a possibility at the time of
the Fine levied.

Purslowes case, 32. of the Queen, tenant in tail levies a Fine, Term. P. and
T. and dyed in August next, his daughter (being heir to the tail) and her
husband brought a Formedon, and, pending the plea, the Proclamations passed,
and 'twas agreed by the Court, that the tenant shall plead the Fine, and the
Proclamations which passed pending the Writ, and shall bar the demandant,
yet, there the issue did all that might be done; for the conveyance is the
Fine, and the Proclamations, are but a short repetition of the Fine; out of
this, four things are to be observed. 1. Though after the Fine, a right
descends to the issue, yet, after Proclamations, the right is barred. 2. Though
he pursues a Formedon, yet after Proclamations, he is barred; ergo, in the
principal case he is barred, notwithstanding his entry or claim in pays. 3.
When tenant in tail levies a Fine, and dies, before Proclamations, the issue
is not within any of the savings, for then the bringing of a Formedon should
avoid the bar. 4. The Proclamations serve for no purpose, but to distinguish
the Fine, from a Fine at the common Law. Trin. 4. of the Queen Bendlowes
tenant in tail, disseised the discontinuee, and levied a Fine, and took an
estate by render, the discontinuee enters, and claims, before all the
proclamations passed, and avoides the estate, after the proclamations pass,
tenant in tail continues his possession, and dies within the year, after the
entry and claim. Resolved, that the issue was not Remitted, but barred by 32.
H. 8. Though the estate was avoided, before all the Proclamations passed.

Resolved, though the issue be beyond the Sea, yet, because he is privy, etc.
he is bound, as if he he were within age, covert, or non compos. Which was
agreed by all the Justices: Ergo, the claim of the issue is not material, and
if Infancy, etc. should avoyde the Fine, no man should be assured of land
conveyed.

THE FOURTH BOOK.
Vernons Case. 14. and 15. of the Queen. fo. 1.
IN Dower, the tenant shows that the husband made a Feoffement of other Land,
to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of the demandant for
life, etc. and averres, that the said estate was for her Jointure, etc. and
that the demandant has entered, etc. and agreed to the estate; the demandant
shows that the estate was upon condition, for to perform the will of the
husband, and that diverse things were to be performed in it, judgment if the
tenant shall be admitted, etc.

Resolved, that at Common Law, a right or title to a Freehold, cannot be barred
by acceptance of a collateral satisfaction, or recompense. As if a disseisor
of the Manor of P. gives to the disseisee the Manor of S. in satisfaction of
all his right, etc. And therefore it is said in our Books, that an accord with
satisfaction is a good plea in a personal action, where damages are to be
recovered, not in a real; and therefore no bar in Dower; but Dower ad ostium
Ecclesiae, or ex assensu patris, concludes her, if she enters after, etc. for
the Law allows them, etc. to be Dowers in Law. Before 27. most lands were in
use, and because wives were not dowable of the use, estates were made by the
Feoffees, to the husband and his wife, before, or after the marriage for life,
etc. for a competent provision for the wife; then 27. transferred the
possession to the use, and if further provision had not been, the wives should
have their dowers and joyntures also; and therefore those branches were made in
the same Statute of 27.

Resolved, that the Feoffement to the use of himself for life, the remainder
to his wife for life, for the jointure of the wife, is within 27. for though
that five estates only are expressed. 1. To the husband and wife, and the
heirs of the husband. 2. etc. to the heirs of their two bodies. 3. Of the
body of one of them. 4. For their lives. 5. To the husband and wife for life of
the wife, yet, many other estates are within the Act, for these are put for
example, not to exclude others: But resolved, that no estate is a jointure,
except it takes beginning presently after the death of the husband; for so, are
all the examples: and therefore to himself for life, the remainder to B. for
life, the remainder to his wife, etc. is not within the Statute, etc. And
therefore though the wife enter and takes the profits, she shall have Dower. An
estate to one and his wife, and the heirs males of their two bodies, adjudged
a good jointure, yet none of the five estates mentioned; an estate made to a
woman for life, before marriage, adjudged a good jointure.

Resolved, though the estate here were upon condition, and though Dower (in
place of which the jointure comes) were absolute, yet because an estate for
life upon condition, is an estate for life, it is within the words, and the
intent of the Act, if the wife accept it, etc.

Resolved, that a wife cannot waive a jointure made before the coverture, as
she may a jointure made after; and this by the Proviso (if any woman has
lands, etc. assured after marriage for her life, etc. after death of the
husband she has liberty to refuse, etc.) and therefore the intent of the
Statute, was, that she should not refuse a jointure made before, and land
conveyed for part of her jointure, or in satisfaction of part of her Dower, is
no bar of any part, for the incertainty; for the Statute says, for the
jointure of the wifes, and not for part of the jointure.

Resolved, that though the estate of the wife be upon an express condition,
for to perform the will, which imports a consideration of making the estate,
yet, it may be averred for jointure, for the one consideration well stands with
the other, and though it be not expressed in the Deed, yet, it may be averred:
and the case is the stronger, because the averment is given by the words of the
Act. And a Fee simple to the wife, in satisfaction of her Dower, is a jointure
within the equity of 27. for the reasons aforesaid, as also because it is within
the express words (for term of life, or otherwise) for all estates as
beneficial, or more, are within, by this word otherwise in jointure, after
judgment was given against the demandant.

A devise to a wife for life, in tail, etc. for her jointure, is a good
jointure within 27. as 'twas resolved in Leake and Randalls case. Otherwise,
where a man devises to his wife for life, etc. generally, this cannot be
averred to be for jointure, and therefore no bar of Dower. 1. Because a
devise imports a consideration in it self, and shall be taken as a
benevolence. 2. All the will for land by 32. and 34. H. 8. ought to be in
writing, and no averrement ought to be taken out of the will, which cannot be
collected by the words within; an estate before marriage is within the equity
of the Statute; so an estate by devise, which takes effect after the marriage
dissolved is within 27.

Bevills Case. 27. and 28. of the Queen. fo. 8.
TEnant by Homage, Fealty, and Escuage, and suite to Court twice a year; the
Lord was seized of the Fealty only by the hands of the tenant. Resolved, that
seisin of Fealty, was a seisin of all the said services; for when the tenant
does fealty, he takes a corporal oath, that he shall be faithful and true to
the Lord, and shall bear him faith of the tenements, which he claims to hold
of him, and that he will lawfully do the customs and services, etc. And
though Homage be more honorable, and the most humble service, that a
Freeholder can do to his Lord, yet, Fealty is the more sacred service, for
this is done upon oath, not the other. And the words (shall be faithful, and
true) are also parcel of Homage; and Seisin of any part of any service, is a
Seisin of the whole, and the Law, for this reason, so respects these services,
that no distress for them, shall be excessive, and though distress be so
often, that the tenant cannot manure his land, he shall not have an Assise, as
for rent, or other profits.

Resolved, that seisin of a superior service, is a seisin of all inferior
services incident to it, as a seisin of escuage, of homage and fealty, homage
of fealty, rent of fealty, where the Seigniory is by fealty, and rent. Resolved
that doing of homage, is a seisin of all services inferior and superior,
because he takes upon himself to do all services. Resolved, that seisin of
rent or suite, or of other annual service, is seisin of escuage, homage,
fealty, ward, releife, heriot service, service for to cover the hall of the
chief house of the Manor, for to impale the Park of the Lord or such casual
services, which perchance will not fall in sixty years, but seisin of one
annual service is not seisin of another annual service, as rent, of suite nor
of work days, for it is the folly of the Lord, that he attained not seisin,
and it should be mischeivous to the tenant, for perhaps in ancient time the
work days are discharged, which now cannot be shown.

Note (Reader) all this is to be intended of a seisin in Law, for seisin of
fealty here, is no actual seisin of homage, nor of suite, nor fealty of rent,
but seisin of any part of a service, is an actual seisin of all to have an
Assise. And as to make a vowry seisin in Law suffices; but for an Assise
actual seisin is requisite; so in a Writ of right of Land. See the Book at
large, and there, where ancient seisin to an estate altered, or changed from
one person to another, shall be sufficient where not.

Resolved, that seisin in Law was sufficient to make an avowry within the
letter, and the intent of the Statute of 32. H. 8. for the intent was to limit
a time, within which, seisin ought to be had, not to exclude any seisin, which
was a lawful seisin by the common Law, which appears by the Preamble. Also,
the former acts of limitation as W. 1. ca'. 38. W. 2. ca'. 2. do not exclude a
seisin sufficient at common Law. And the Statute says (Actual possession, or
seisin) which (Seisin) is either actual or in Law.

Resolved, that the act does not extend to such a rent or service, which by
common possibility cannot happen within sixty years, as homage, fealty, for
the tenant may live beyond, or to cover the Hall, or to go in War, so of a
Formedon in Discender, for tenant in tail may live sixty years, after
discontinuance, and though In facto he dies, and the issue does not pursue his
Formedon, yet, he may have it at any time, and the seisin of the donee was not
traversable, so of homage and other casual services, though the Lord might
have had seisin. So, if the Lord release to the tenant, so long as I. S. has
heirs of his body, though sixty years pass, yet he may distraine, for
Impotentia excusat legem, and there may be a tenure by homage, etc. and yet
never done, as if the Land be conveyed to a Mayor, etc. or other Corporation
aggregate of many, they hold by fealty, yet they cannot do it. A Writ of
Escheate, Cessavit, Rescous, are not within the Act, for in them the seisin is
not traversable, but the tenure, and in the Escheate and Cessavit, they demand
the Land and can lay no seisin, and the Act extends only to those Writs where
the demandant or his Ancestors might have had seisin. So, Note, Land shall
escheate, though there be no seisin of the services, within the time of
limitation, for the Seigniory remains, though seisin wants; so if the tenant
cesse, and the Land be not overt, and sufficient to his distress the Lord
shall have a Cessavit though he wants seisin of the services. Resolved, if
nothing be arreare and the Lord distraines, the tenant may make rescous, or if
he be so often distrained, that he cannot manure his Land, he may have an
Assise, De souent distres, but for such tortious distress where nothing is
arreare, the tenant shall not have Trespass, Vi and armis, against the Lord,
for this is prohibited by the Statute of Marleb ca' 3. See the Book at large
in what case an incroachment of more rent by the Lord then he ought to have,
shall be avoided, in what not.

Resolved, that though a man has been out of possession of Land by sixty
years, yet if his entry be not taken away, he may enter, and bring any
possessory action of his own possession, for the first clause does not bar
any right, but prohibits that none shall have a Writ of right, etc. of the
possession of his ancestors, etc. but only of a seisin within sixty years;
the first and second clause extend only to seisin auncestrell; the third to an
action of his own possession, not to entry, the fourth to avowry, the fifth to
a Formedon, etc.

Note (Reader) out of this, that when the tenant has done homage and fealty,
which the Lord may enforce him to do, this shall be a seisin of all other
services, as to avowry, though the Lord nor those by whom he claims had seisin
within sixty years.

Actions of Slander.
The Lord Cromwells Case, 20o of the Queen, fo. 12.
THe Lord Cromwell brought an Action De Scandalis magnatum, against D. Viccar,
Tam pro domina regina, quam pro seipso, upon the Statute of 2. R. 2. ca' 5. The
Defendant said to the Plaintiff, It is no marvel though you like not of me,
for you like of those that maintain sedition against the Queens proceedings,
the Defendant justifies specially, that he being Viccar of N. the Plaintiff
procured I. T. and I. H. for to preach there, who in their Sermons inveyed
against the Book of common prayer, and affirmed it to be superstitious; upon
which the Viccar inhibited them, for they had not license nor authority to
preach, yet, they proceeded by the encouragement of the Plaintiff; and the
Plaintiff said to the Defendant, Thou art a false Varlet I like not of thee,
to whom the Defendant said, It is no marvel though you like not of me, for
you like of those (innuendo, the aforesaid I. T. and I. H.) that maintain
sedition (Innuendo seditiosam illam doctrinam) against the Queens proceedings.

Resolved in this case, that the Statute aforesaid concerning the King, the
Judges Ex officio, ought to take notice of it, as they ought of all Statutes
that concern him.

Resolved, that the justification is good, for in case of slander, the sense
of the words is to be taken, which may appear by the occasion of speech.
Sensus verborum ex causa dicendi accipiendus est, et sermones semper accipiendi
sunt secundum subjectam materiam. And here the sense of the words appears, and
his meaning in speaking them, and that he did not intend any public or
violent sedition, as the word of it self imports; and God defend, that the
words of one by a strict and grammatical construction, should be taken
contrary to the manifest intent; as in an Action for calling the Plaintiff
murderer, it is a good justification that the Plaintiff confessing that he had
killed diverse Hairs with Engines, the Defendant said, Thou art a Murderer,
and the Defendant shall not be put to a general issue, when he confesses the
words and shows that they are not actionable, as in maintenance the Defendant
may justify lawful mainteinance, whereupon the Plaintiff replied that the
Defendant, dixit, etc. Verba praedict. de iniuria sua propria absque tali
causa, upon this they were at issue, and after agreed.

Cutler and Dixons Case, 27. and 28. of the Queen, fo. 14.
IF one exhibit certain Articles to a Justice of peace, against one,
declaring diverse great abuses and misdemeanors, etc. to the intent to bind him
to the good behavior, In this case the party accused shall not have any action
upon the case, for it is in pursuit of ordinary justice, and if such actions
were permitted, none would complain for fear of infinite vexation.

Sir Richard Buckley and Woods Case, 33. and 34. of the Queen, fo. 14.
WOod exhibited a Bill in the Starrechamber against Sir R. B. and charged him
with diverse matters examinable there, and with other matters not determinable
there, as that he was a maintainer of Pirates and Murderers, and a procurer of
Pyracies, upon which Sir R. B. brought this action, etc. Resolved that no
action lies for matter examinable there, though 'twas merely false, because
that 'twas in course of justice.

Resolved, that an action lies for these words, not examinable there, for it is
not done in course of Justice, and great inconvenience would follow, if matters
may be inserted in Bills exhibited in so high and honorable a Court in
Slander of the parties, and they cannot answer there for their purgation, nor
have their action for purging themselves of the crimes, and recover damages for
the wrong, but that the said Bill shall remain always of record to their
infamy, and here no murder or piracy can be punished upon any Bill exhibited
in English, but he ought to have been indicted, and therefore he has not
only mistaken the Court, but also the nature of exhibiting the Bill, has not
appearance of any ordinary course of justice, but no action lies upon an
appeal of murder, returnable in the Common Bench, for though the Writ is not
returned before competent Judges, who may do justice, yet it is in nature of a
lawful Suite, namely, by Writ of appeal, wherefore judgment was given for
the Plaintiff. And in a Writ of error in the Chequer Chamber brought by Wood,
'twas resolved that Sir R. B. might have had a good action, but here, because
the action was not upon the Bill exhibited at Westminster, but because he said
in the County of S. that his Bill was true, In auditu quamplurimorum, without
expressing the said matters in particular, so that it was not any Slander,
judgment was reversed.

Stanhopp and Bliths Case, 27. of the Queen, fo. 15.
MAster Stanhopp (who was a surveyor of the Duchy and had diverse Offices and
was a justice of peace) Has but one Manor, and that he has gotten by
swearing, and forswearing. Resolved, that the action does not lie, for they are
too general and words which charge any one, in an action in which damages
shall be recovered, ought to have convenient certainty; and he does not charge
the Plaintiff with swearing, etc. and he may recover a Manor by swearing,
etc. yet not procuring or assenting to it. Resolved, if one charge another that
he has forsworn himself, no action lies. First, because he may be forsworn
in usual communication, Quia benignior sensus in verbis generalibus seu dubijs
est praeferenda. Secondly, it is an usual word of passion, and choler as also
to call another a Villain, a Rogue, or Varlet, these and such like will not
mayntaine Action, Boni judicis interest, lites derimere. But if one say to
another, that he is perjured, or that he has forsworn himself in such a
Court, etc. For these words an Action will lie.

Hext Justice of Peace against Yeomans. 27. of the Queen. fo. 15.
FOr my ground in H. Hext seeks my life, and if I could find one J. H. I do
not doubt, but within two days, to arrest Hext for suspicion of felony.
Adjudged, that no action lies for the first words; 1. Because, he may seek his
life lawfully upon just cause, and his land may be holden of him. 2. It Is too
general, and the Law inflicts no punishment for seeking of his life; but
adjudged that the action lies for the last words; for, for suspicion of felony,
he shall be imprisoned, and his life in question.

Birchleys case. 27. and 28. of the Queen. fo. 16.
THe Defendant said to B. (Clerk of the Kings Bench, and sworn to deal duly
without corruption) you are well known to be a corrupt man, and to deal
corruptly. Adjudged that the action lies; 1. Because the words Ex causa
dicendi, imply that he has dealt corruptly in his profession, Et sermo relatus
ad personam intelligi debet de condition personae. 1. This touches the
Plaintiff in his oath; 2. The words Scandalize him in the duty of his
profession, by which he gets his living. Skinner of London said, that Manwood
was a corrupt Judge; adjudged actionable. Resolved in this case, that if the
precedent parlance had been, that B. was a usurer, or executor of another, and
would not perform the will, and upon this the Defendant had spoken the words
following, no action would lie.

Weaver and Caridens case. 37. of the Queen. fo. 16.
AAjudged, that no action lies, for saying that the Plaintiff was detected for
perjury in the Starrechamber, for an honest man may be detected, but not
convicted.

Stuckley and Bulheads case. 44. and 45. of the Queen. fo. 16.
ADjudged, that an action lies for saying, Master St. (he was a Justice of
peace) covers and hides felonies, and is not worthy to be a Justice of
peace; for this is against his oath, and his office, and a good cause to put
him out of Commission, and for that he may be indicted and fined.

Snagg and Gees case. 39. of the Queen. fo. 16.
THou have killed my wife, and art a traitor. Adjudged that the action will not
lie, for the wife was in life, as appeared in the Declaration, and so the words
vain and no scandal, otherwise if she had been dead.

Eaton and Allens case. 40. of the Queen. fo. 16.
HE is a brabler and a quarreller, for he gave his Champion counsel to make a
Deed of gift of his goods to kill me, and then to fly out of the Country, but
God preserved me. Resolved, that the action will not lie, for the purpose
without act is not punishable and though he may be punished for such conspiracy
in the Star Chamber, yet, this is by the absolute power of the Court, not by
ordinary course of Law. Observe well this case, and the cause and reason of
this Judgment.

Anne Davies case. 35. of the Queen. fo. 16.
THe Defendant said to B. (a Suitor to the Plaintiff, and with whom there was
near an agreement of marriage) I know Davies daughter well, she did dwell in
Cheapside, and a Grocer did get her with child; and the Plaintiff declared,
that by reason thereof, the said B. refused to take her to wife.

Resolved, the action lies, for a woman is punishable for a Bastard by 18. of
the Queen, ca. 3. And though that fornication, etc. is not examinable by our
Law, because done in secret, and uncomely openly to be examined, yet the having
a Bastard is apparent, and examinable by the said Act.

Resolved, if the Plaintiff had been charged with nude incontinency only, the
action lies, for the ground of the action is temporal, viz. the defeating of
her advancement in marriage. By Popham an action lies, for saying that a woman,
Inholder, had a great infectious disease, by which she loses her guests.
Banister and Banisters case. 25. of the Queen. Resolved, that an action lies,
for saying to the son and heir, that he was a Bastard, for this tends to his
disinherison; but resolved, if the Defendant pretend that the Plaintiff is a
Bastard, and he himself right heir, no action lies, and this the Defendant
may show by way of bar.

Jeames case. 41. and 42. of the Queen. fo. 17.
THe Defendant said to B. Hang him (innuendo praedict. J:) he is full of the
pox (innuendo the French pox) etc. Resolved, two things are requisite to have
an action for slander 1. That the person scandalized be certain. 2. That the
scandal be apparent by the words themselves. And therefore if a man says, that
one of the servants of B. is a notorious felon or traitor, an action lies not
(if he have more servants) and (innuendo) cannot make it certain. So, I know
one near about B. that is a notorious thief. But if two speak of B. and the
one says, he is a notorious thief, an action lies, and B. may reduce this to a
certainty by (innuendo praedict. B.) for the office of an (innuendo) is for to
design the person that was named in certain before, and in effect, stands in
place of (praed.) but (innuendo) cannot make that certain, which was uncertain
before, and subject to a deceivable conjecture. But if one says to B. Thou art
a traitor, an action lies, for constat de persona. So here, when two speak of
the Plaintiff, and one says, Hang him; there (innuendo) will denote the
person, but (innuendo) cannot extend for to make the intent to be the French
pox, by imagination, which is not apparent by the precedent words; and the
words themselves shall be taken in mitiori sensu.

Oxford and his wife against Cross. 41. of the Queen. fo. 18.
THe Plaintiffes brought an action in London, for calling the wife of the
plaintiff whore; the defendant removed this out of London by habeas corpus, a
Procedendo was prayed, because the action was maintainable in London, though
not at common Law; denied by the Court, for such custom to maintain an action
for brabling words, is against Law.

Sir G. Gerrard Master of the Rolls against Mary Dickinson. 32. and 33. of the
Queen. fo. 18.
THe Plaintiff counts that he was in communication with R. E. for to demise to
him the Manor, etc. The Defendant said (Praemissorum non ignara) I have a
lease of 90 years of the Manor, and then showed and published a Demise made
by the Lord Audley, grandfather of the Lord A from whom the plaintiff claims,
where in truth the defendant knew this to be counterfeit, by reason of which,
etc. R. E. did not proceed, etc. The Defendant pleaded, Quod talis Indentura
(qualis in the count) came to his hands by trover, and traversed, that he knew
of the forgery.

Resolved, if the defendant affirm and publish that the plaintiff had not
right, but that she her self had, no action lies, though she has no right,
because she pretends title, for if an action should lie, how could any one
claim, or sue, or seek counsel for any land? Banisters case before resolved
according, and therefore 'twas here resolved, that no action lies for saying, I
have a Lease, etc. though it be false. And though it appears by the bar,
that she had not title, but is a Stranger, yet, because the matter in the count
does not maintain the action, the bar shall not make it good.

Resolved, that there was other matter in the count sufficient to maintain the
action, viz. that the Defendant knew of the communication, and that the Lease
was forged, and yet published it, by which, the Plaintiff lost his bargain.

Resolved, that the bar was insufficient, for the knowing of the Defendant of
forgery, is not traversable; as in an action, for that the Dog of the
Defendant had bit the beasts of the Plaintiff, Ipse sciens canem suum ad
mordendas oves consuetum. (Sciens) is not traversable, but it ought to be
proved upon the general issue, for (sciens) is not a direct allegation, nor
alleged in any place. And talis indentura, qualis, is no direct answer to the
Indenture mentioned in the count, for talis, non est eadem, and no simile est
idem.

Barhams case. 44. and 45. of the Queen. fo. 20.
MAster Barham did burn my barn (innuendo a barn with corn) with his own
hands, and none but he. Moved in arrest of judgment that the words were not
actionable, for it is not felony to burn a barn, if it be not parcel of a
mansion house, or full of corn; and in such case agitur civiliter, not
criminaliter, and verba accipienda sunt in mitiori sensu. And the (innuendo)
will not serve, when the words are not slanderous.

Britteridges case. 44. and 45. of the Queen. fo. 19.
B. Is a perjured old knave, and that is to be proved by a stake parting the
land of A. and B. Resolved, that the action lies for the first words. And
adjective words will maintain an action, when they presume an act committed
(as here) or when they scandalize a man in his office, or function, or trade,
by which he acquires his living. Philips, Bachelor of Divinity, brought an
action against B. for saying; Thou have made a seditious Sermon, and moved the
people to sedition this day; adjudged the action lies, because, though the
first part of the words were merely adjective, they scandalized him in his
function. So, if a man says to a Merchant, that he is a bankruptly knave, or a
bankrupt knave, as 'twas adjudged in Mittons case; or that he will be a
bankrupt within two days; but an action lies not when these adjective words
import not an act done, but an inclination, which does not scandal him in his
function, etc.

Resolved, in the case at bar, that upon all the words together, no action
lies, for the last words explain his intent to be, of no judicial perjury.
And it is not possible that a stake can prove a man perjured; as it has been
adjudged; Thou art a thief, for thou have stolen my apples out of my Orchard;
or robbed my hop-ground. Dobbins and Francklins case. 43. and. 44. of the
Queen. But if the counsel of the Plaintiff had disclosed the truth of the
case in the count, an action would lie, for in truth, there was a controversy
betwixt two, whether the stake stood upon the land of the one, or the other, or
as an indifferent boundary, and the Plaintiff was deposed in an action for
this, as a witness; and by the pretense of the Defendant, had perjured
himself in his Deposition.

Palmer and Thorpes case. 25. of the Queen. fo. 20. touching defamations in
the Ecclesiastical Court.
REsolved, that such defamation ought to have three incidents. 1. That the
matter be merely spiritual and determinable in the Ecclesiastical Court, as
for calling Heretic, Schismatique, advowterer, fornicator. 2. It ought to
concern matter merely spiritual only, for if it concern any thing
determinable at common Law, the Ecclesiastical Judge shall not have conusance
of it. See for this 22. E. 4. 20. the Abbot of St. Albanes case. 3. Though the
thing be merely spiritual, yet he which is defamed cannot sue there for
amends, or damages, but the suite there ought to be only for punishment of the
offender, Pro salute animae. For this, see Articulis cleri, and circumspecte
agatis, and Fitz: 51, 52, 53. But the Plaintiff shall recover costs there, and
there if the Defendant, to redeem his penance, agree to pay a certain sum,
the party may sue for this there, and no Prohibition lies.

Copyhold Cases.
Brownes case. 23. and 24. of the Queen. fo. 21.
Copyholder in fee, by license, leases for years, and dies, the eldest Son
dies before admittance, adjudged that the daughter of the entire blood shall
have it, not the younger son. Resolved, though a Copyholder, in judgment of
Law, has but an estate at will, yet, custom has so established and fixed his
estate, that by the custom of the Manor it is descendable to his heirs, and
is not merely ad voluntatem Domini, but, etc. secundum consuetudinem manerij;
so the custom is the soul and life of Copy-holds. See the book at large, of
what antiquity Copy-holds are, and some general learning concerning them.

Resolved, when custom has created such inheritances, the Law shall direct
the descent according to the Maxims and rules of the common Law, as incident
to every estate descendable. When uses had gained a reputation of inheritances,
the Law directed the descent, and of them there shall be a possessio fratris.
But resolved, that such customary inheritances shall not have any collateral
qualities, which do not concern descent of inheritance, which other
inheritances have; and therefore they shall not be assets to the heir, upon an
obligation, nor there shall not be Dower, nor tenancy by the Courtesy, nor a
descent shall toll entry, etc. For, as without custom, they cannot descend, so
without custom, they cannot have a collateral quality; for Copyholders have
inheritances secundum quid, viz. to descend to the heirs, and not to be
determined by the will of the Lord, not simpliciter, to a collateral quality.

Resolved, that the heir, before admittance, may take the profits, and may
surrender to the use of another, before admittance; but this shall not
prejudice the Lord for his Fine upon the descent, and he is a tenant by Copy of
Court-roll, for the roll made to his auncestor belongs to him, and admittance
of tenant for life shall serve for the remainder, yet, it shall not prejudice
the Lord for his Fine. And though 'twas objected, that every admittance amounts
to a grant, and so may be pleaded, and therefore nothing vests before
admittance, yet, 'twas resolved, that, as after admittance, the heir may in
pleading allege this as a grant, and this to avoyde inconveniences (for, if he
should be compelled to show the first grant, it was before time of memory, and
so not pleadable, or if within memory, then the custom fails) yet, he may
allege the admittance of his auncestor, as a grant, and show the descent to
him, and that he enterd, and this without admittance, but he cannot plead, that
his Father was seized, etc. by Copy, etc. and dyed seized, and that this
descended, etc. For in truth, it is but a particular estate at will in judgment
of Law, though descendable by custom.

Ryvets case. 24. of the Queen. fo. 22.
A Greed, that a husband shall not be tenant by the Courtesy of a Copyhold,
without special custom.

Deal and Rigdens case. 36. of the Queen. fo. 23.
ADjudged, that if a recovery be in plaint, in nature of a real action,
against tenant in tail (admitting Copyhold may be intailed) that this is a
discontinuance, for, in as much as plaints are warranted by custom, it is
incident, that it should make a discontinuance. The like judgment was between
Clun and Pease.

Bullock and Dibleys case. 35. of the Queen. fo. 23.
REsolved, that a surrender by the husband is no discontinuance to the wife,
nor her heirs. And if a Copyholder for life surrender to the use of another
in fee, this is no forfeiture, for it does not pass by livery. And
Copyholders have not such quality, without special custom; so also adjudged
in several cases.

Gravenus and Teds case. 35. of the Queen. fo. 23.
REsolved, that the descent of a Copyhold, does not toll entry; and that where
the custom was, that he may grant in fee simple, that he may, by the same
custom, grant to a man and the heirs of his body; for be it a fee simple
conditional, or a tail, it is within the custom, so, of a grant for life, or
years, for fee simple includes them.

Fitch and Huckleys case. 36. of the Queen. fo. 23.
REsolved, that admittance of a Copyholder for life, is an admittance of him in
remainder, but not to prejudice the Lord for his Fine. And that upon a
surrender, to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of his last
will, that the fee remains in the Copyholder, not in the Lord.

Clarke and Pennifathers case. 26. of the Queen. of. 23.
REsolved, that the heir of a Copyholder may enter, and have trespass, before
admission, and if the heir (as the principal case was) dye before admission,
his heir may take the profits, and have trespass. And Wray said, that 'twas
adjudged, that there shall be possessio fratris of it. Resolved, that where H.
8. granted a Manor to the Queen for life, that the Queen was a sole person
exempted by common law, and may make a lease or grant, without the King, and
may plead, and be impleaded: and that 32. H. 8. is but a declaration of the
common Law.

Adjudged, that a grant of a Copyhold in fee, escheated to her, by the Queen
tenant for life, binds the King, his heirs and successors, for she was domina
pro tempore, and the custom of the Manor binds the King. And that every one,
who has a lawful interest in a Manor, etc. though but at will, may grant
Copyholds escheated, etc. rendering the ancient rent, customs, and services,
and this shall bind the Lord, for, he is dominus pro tempore. For, a
Copyholder derives not his interest out of the estate of the Lord only, but
out of the custom, and the grantee is in by that, without regard to the estate
or person of the grantor; and therefore such a grant by the husband shall bind
the wife; so, of Infants, non compos mentis, Bishop, Prebend, Parson, shall
bind for ever, for the custom is, that the tenements are parcel of the
Manor, and demised, and demisable, etc. But the Lord must have a lawful
estate; for, if a disseisor, or Feoffee of a disseisor, etc. makes such grants,
this shall not bind him that has right, after a recontinuance of the Manor;
but admittances by such upon a surrender, or of the heir shall bind, etc. for
they are lawful, and quodam modo judicial acts, which to do, he may be
compelled in a Court of equity.

P. 26. of the Queen. fo 24.
ADjudged, if a Lord takes wife, and a Copyholder for life (according to the
custom) dies, and the Lord regrants for lives, and dies, that the wife in
Dower, shall not avoyde these grants, for though the grant were after the title
of Dower, yet, the custom was before. If a Feoffee upon condition, makes a
voluntary grant, the condition is broken, the Feoffor reenters, the grant shall
stand.

Rous and Arters case. 29. of the Queen. fo. 24.
ADjudged, that if tenant pur auter vie of a Manor, after the death of cestuy
que vie, continues in, and holds Courts, and makes voluntary grants, this shall
not bind the lessor (otherwise of admittances upon surrenders, or descents)
for he was tenant at sufferance, who has no lawful interest, and a Writ of
entry ad terminum qui praeteriit lies against him, and so he is a deforceor.

Murrell and Smiths case. 33. and 34. of the Queen. fo. 24.
THe Queen grants a Copyhold in fee, and after grants the inheritance of the
Copyhold to a stranger; the Copyholder devises to M. and after surrenders to
the use of his will. Resolved, that custom has so established the estate of a
Copyholder, that by severance of the inheritance of the Copyhold, from the
Manor, the Copyhold is not destroyed, for, being the Lord himself could not
ouste the Copiholder, no more can another claiming in by him. Objected that
every Copyhold ought to be parcel of the Manor; and to be demised, or
demisable, time out of memory. Resolved, that because once this had both the
incidents aforesaid, and its perfection, the severance made by the Lord, shall
not destroy it.

Resolved, that notwithstanding the surrender, and devise, the Copyhold
descended to the heir, for after the severance of the inheritance, from the
Manor, the surrender was utterly void, for, the land was not parcel of the
Manor at the time, and the devise only cannot transfer such a customary
estate, but it ought to be by surrender into the hands of the Lord, etc.

Resolved, that after severance, the Copyholder shall pay his rent to the
Feoffee, and shall pay, and do other services which are due, without
admittance, or holding of a Court, as to plough the demeanes of the Lord,
Heriot, etc. but suite of Court, and Fine upon alienation or admittance, are
gone, for now the land cannot be aliened, for, though the Copyholder has some
benefit by the severance, as appears before, so he has great prejudice, for
now he cannot surrender, or alien his estate, nor the Feoffee cannot make an
admittance, for he is not dominus pro tempore.

Resolved, that such forfeitures remain, as were before the severance, as
Feoffement, lease, wast, denier of rent; So, if the land were of the nature of
Borough English, or Gavelkind, and other customs which run with the land
remain. And 'twas said that such Copyholder has, no other means to alien,
but by Decree in Chancery against him and his heirs, but, by this, the
interest of the land is not bound, but the person only.

Kite and Queintons case. 31. of the Queen. fo. 25.
COpyholder in fee surrenders out of Court, by the custom, to the hands of
certain Copyhold tenants, to the use of another and his heirs, upon certain
condition, at the next Court, the surrender was presented, but the condition
omitted, he, to whose use, etc. dies, the Lord admits his heir, he that made
the surrender releases to the heir being in possession, and after enters.

Resolved, that the presentment of the surrender was void, for that the
condition was omitted, for, the surrender that the Copiholder made, was not
presented, but if the surrender and the condition had been presented, and the
Steward in entering of it, omits the condition, upon sufficient proof of it,
the surrender shall not be avoided, but the roll amended, for the roll does not
conclude the party for to plead, or give in evidence the truth of the matter.

Resolved, if a Copyholder be ousted by wrong, a release by him to the
disseisor, does not transfer his right, because, he has not any customary
estate, upon which the release of the customary right may inure; and this
should be prejudicial to the Lord, for, by this, he shall lose his Fine and
services; but a release made to him which is admitted by the Lord, and in
possession, is good; and a release of a customary right may inure to him, and
the Lord not prejudiced, and the release shall inure by way of extinguishment.
And Littleton speaks of an alienation by surrender only, which ought to be
into the hands of the Lord; but a release cannot be done to the Lord, and
Littleton says, He which claims a Copihold by surrender, has no other
evidence, but he which claims an extinguishment of a right, may have it by
release, by Deed; and it is no peril to purchasors, for if the Copiholder in
possession sels it, he will show the release, and he which is out of possession
cannot sell, till he has regained the possession, and caveat emptor. By Wray,
if he which has a pretensed title, etc. to a Copihold, bargains, etc. this is
within 32. H. 8. for the Statute says (any right or title) and great part of
the land within the Realm is in Copy, and therefore the intention was to
include them, to avoyde maintenance and champerty.

Melwich and Luters case. 30. of the Queen. fo. 26.
REsolved, that the lessee of a copiholder for a year, shall maintain an Ej'.
Firmae, for his term being warranted by Law, by force of the general custom
of the Realm, it is reason that he should have remedy by Ej'. Firmae. And this
is a speedy course against a Stranger. Resolved, that the Copiholds are not
destroyed, by severance of the inheritance of them from the Manor, but remain
in force. So Murrels case before adjudged.

Resolved, that when the Lord of a Manor having many ancient Copiholds in a
Town, grants the inheritance of all the Copiholds, the grantee may hold a
Court for the customary tenants, and accept surrenders, and make admittances,
and grants; for every Manor which consists of Freeholders, and Copiholders,
comprehends in effect two several Courts, the one, the Court Baron, for
Freeholders, and in this, the Suitors, viz. the Freeholders are Judges, and the
other Court for the Copiholders, and in this, the Steward, or the Lord himself
is Judge; and though this is not a Manor in Law, because it wants Freeholders,
yet, the grantee, may hold such Court, as aforesaid, for Copiholders only, as
the grantor himself might. So, if all the Freeholds escheate, or the Lord
releases the tenure, and services, yet, he may hold a customary Court for the
Copiholds. Note (Reader) though the Lord, by his own act, cannot make, of one
and the same Manor at common Law, diverse several Manors, consisting of
Demeanes and Freeholders, yet, he may make a customary Manor of Copiholders.

Resolved, that the Lord himself may make a grant, or admittance, of a
Copiholder, out of the Manor; at what place he pleases; but, if the Steward,
at any Court, holden out of the Manor shall make grants, or admittances, they
are void.

Neales case. 37. of the Queen. fo. 26.
ADjudged, that where the Lord of a Manor demises all his lands, granted by
Copy, for two thousand years, that the lessee may hold Courts for Copiholders
(as Melwiches case is before) and 'twas said so to be resolved in C. Hattons
case. Note (Reader) a good diversity, where the number of the Copiholders may
support the custom, and a singular case of a Copiholder (as in Murrels case
before) in which case, the Lord does not grant tacitly any customary Court.

Clifton and Molineux case. 27. and 28. of the Queen. fo. 27.
REsolved, if a Steward hold Court out of the Manner, all grants and
admittances there made, are void, for, the Court ought to be holden within the
Manor, not out of the jurisdiction of it (as Melwich case is before) but,
resolved that by custom, the Court may be holden out of the Manor, and
grants, etc. shall be good, as Abbots, etc. used for to hold Courts at one
Manor, for diverse several Manors. Resolved, that if a woman Copiholder for
life, takes husband, who commits wast, and dies, the Copihold is forfeited,
otherwise, if a stranger does wast, without the assent of the husband.

Taverner and Cromwells Case, 26 of the Queen, fo. 27.
REsolved, if a copiholder, seized of three several copiholds, of three
several acres, makes wast in part of one, etc. all that is forfeited, but not
the others, for though they are all in one hand, yet every one is severally
holden, and a several condition in Law annexed, and the several conditions
follow the several tenures. So, resolved, if the coppyholder surrender them to
the use of A. and the Lord admits A. Tenendum per antiqua servitia inde prius
debita and dejure consueta; and A. makes a forfeiture in one, he shall forfeite
that only, for, the Tenendum (red dendo singula singulis) continues the
several tenures, so that it is not material, if the copiholds are in one, or
several copies. So if diverse several copiholds escheate to the Lord, and he
grants them Tenendum per antiqua servitia, they shall be severally holden as
they were before, though he grants them to one man.

Resolved, that when he to whose use a surrender is made, is admitted, he is in
by him that surrendered, and in a plaint in the nature of an entry in the Per,
shall be supposed in by him, for the Lord is but an instrument to make the
admittance, and his charge shall not bind him that is admitted. So (Reader)
where before it is said, that by the forfeiture of the Husband, all the estate
of the Wife shall be forfeited, it is to be intended, all the copihold under the
same tenures.

Hubbard and Hamonds Case, 42. and 43. of the Queen. fo. 27.
REsolved, that if the fines of copiholders upon admittances, be incertaine,
the Lord cannot exact excessive and unreasonable fines, if he does, the
copiholder may deny to pay it, without forfeiture, and it shall be determined
before the Judges, upon a Demurrer, or evidence upon proof of the value of the
Land what fine was reasonable to be demanded; for if it should be otherwise,
great part of the Copy-holds should be destroyed at the will of the Lord, and
so was Hodesons Case adjudged.

Resolved, if the Lord assesse a reasonable fine, and require the Copyholder
to pay it, he is not bound to pay it presently, because he could not know what
the Lord would assesse, and nemo tenetur divinare, and he shall have a
convenient time to pay it, if the Lord limits no time, otherwise of a fine
certain.

Resolved, if a Copyholder has several Copy-holds, by several services, the
Lord ought to assesse and demand fines severally for every parcel, and the
tenant may refuse to pay his fiine for one, and forfeit that only, and every
several tenure has several conditions in law tacitly annexed to it. So, if
all the several Copy-holds are surrendered to the use of another, and the Lord
admits him, Tenendum per antiqua servitia, etc. the tenures are several and
fines several. Taverners ca'. before. Resolved, that no fine is due to the
Lord till admittance, for admittance is the cause of the fine, and if after the
tenant deny to pay it, it is a forfeiture. Bacon and Flatmans Case, and Sands
Case so resolved.

Westwick and Wyers Case, 43. of the Queen, fo. 28.
A Woman Copyholder in Fee, surrenders to the use of W. her Son in fee, and
at the next Court, the entry was, Ad hanc curiam venit, W. and I uxor ejus, and
ceperunt, etc. W. dyed, I. his Wife survived, and surrendered to the use of I.
S. in fee. Resolved when the Lord has the Copyhold by surrender, to the use
of another, he has but a customary power, to make admitance, Secundum formam
and effectum sursum redditionis; and it is not like to the Feoffee at common
Law, and though the Lord grant this by Copy to another, it is without warrant,
and notwithstanding he might make an admittance, according to the surrender,
and he which is admitted shall be in by him that surrendered (as Taverners Case
is before) and the Court agreed, if the Lord grant to Cestuy que use, and a
stranger, all shall inure to Cestuy que use, or if he admits him upon
condition, the condition is void. As Executors agree that the legatory and I.
S. shall have, etc. or, that the legatory shall have upon condition, the
legatory shall have only and absolutely, for, after the assent of the
Executors, he is in by the Devisee. And 'twas said, that 'twas adjudg'd in
Buntings Case, that where the Lord admits one to hold to him and his Heirs,
(where the surrender was for life only) that he has but for life. Resolved
that without special custom, or other special matter, the admittance shall
inure only to the Husband; and judgment was given according.

Buntang and Lepingwells Case, 27. and 28. of the Queen. fo. 29.
REsolved, that though T. who was Husband of the Wife, De facto was not party
to the Libell (for I. S. Libelled against the Wife, without naming her Husband,
for a divorse, upon a precontract betwixt him and the Wife) nor the sentence in
the Spiritual Court, which dissolved the Marriage betwixt him and his Wife,
yet the sentence against the Wife only, being but declaratory shall bind the
Husband De facto, and for that the conusance of the right of Marriages belongs
to the spiritual Court, and they have given sentence in it, the Judges of the
common Law, (though it be against the reason of the Law) shall give faith and
credence to their proceedings and sentences, as consonant to the Law of holy
Church; for, Cuilibet in sua art perito est credendum. So, 'twas adjudg'd that
the Plaintiff (borne in the second Marriage) was legitimate.

Resolved, when a Copyholder surrenders to the Lord, to the use of his Wife and
his younger Son, without limitting any estate, they have for life only, for,
as well estates as discents, shall be directed by the rules of Law, as
necessary consequents upon the custom, except there be a special custom
within the Manor, that Sibi, and suis, or Sibi, and assignatis, may create an
estate of inheritance. And 'twas observed, that the Estates limited upon
surrenders, are always annexed to the estates of him to whom the surrender is
made, and always the surrender to the Lord is general, without limitation of
any estate. Resolved, that when the Lord admits Cestuy que use, for life, the
reversion is in him that surrendered, not in the Lord, for he is but an
instrument.

Resolved, that a man may surrender to the use of his Wife, though that Cestuy
que use, is in by him that surrendered, because the Husband did not do this
immediately to the Wife, but by a second means, Viz. By surrender to the Lord,
and by admittance of the Lord.

Resolved, that when B. surrendered out of Court, and before that 'twas
presented in Court, he dies, yet after, being presented according to the
custom, it is good, otherwise, if it had not been presented according to
custom; so, if the Tenants in whose hands, etc. dies, yet if it be proved,
it is good enough; so Queintons Case before, if Cestuy que use, etc. dies,
before admittance, his Heirs shall be admitted.

Down and Hopkins Case, 36. of the Queen. fo. 29.
REsolved, that where the custom of a Manor was, to grant Coppies for one,
two, or three lives, that a grant to a Woman during her viduity, is within the
custom, for it is an estate for life, but every grant for life is not Durante
viduitate, issue was, whether the custom was, that the Wife of a Copyholder
after the death of the Husband, should have for life, and 'twas given in
evidence, that she should have during her viduity, and adjudged that the
evidence did not maintain such custom, for it is a less estate then for life.
But in the principal Case, it is a greater estate which is warranted by the
custom, and therefore a less is within it (according to Graveners Case
before) 'Twas said, that a Lord may retain a Steward by word, to hold Courts,
etc. as a Bayliffe, and this retainer shall serve till he be discharged.

Harris and Jayes Case, 41. of the Queen. fo. 30.
REsolved, that a Lord may retain one to be Steward of his Manor, and to hold
Courts by word, as in the Case before. Resolved, that where a Copyhold
escheates by attainder of felony of a Copyholder of the Queen, that the
Steward may grant it over, Ex officio, without special warrant, for the
custom warrants the Steward to grant it, and this shall bind the Queen and
her Heirs, etc. But yet his duty is before to inform the Lord, Treasurer,
Chancellor, or Barons of the Exchequer, or any of them, for his better
direction.

Resolved, that the Auditor or Receiver of the Queen has no power to retain
a Steward to hold courts, etc. But it behooves that the Steward (who makes such
voluntary grants upon escheats, or forfeitures to be good) to have Letters
Pattents of the Stewardship of the same Manor.

And 'twas said, that 'twas adjudged in the Lady Holcrofts Case, that where one
was retained generally by word, to be Steward of a Manor, and to hold Courts,
that he may take surrenders of customary tenants out of Court.

Shaw and Thompsons Case, 33. of the Queen. fo. 30.
REsolved, that a Woman shall not be endowed of Copyhold without special
custom, and that when a Woman is to be endowed by custom, she shall have all
incidents to Dower, and shall recover damages by the Statute of Merton, because
her Husband dyed seized, and therefore the recovery of damage of 50. l. in the
Court of the Manor, was allowed, though this exceeded 40 s.

Resolved, that no Action of Debt lies for these damages at common Law, for
upon such judgment no error or false judgment lies, but the remedy is, in the
Court of the Manor, or Chancery. Fenner Justice, said, That he had seen a
Record. 36. H. 8. where the Lord by Petition to him, had for certain errors in
the proceeding, reversed such a judgment, and upon this, the Defendant
maintained an Audita quaerela, to be restored to the damages recovered against
him. See 14. H. 4. cited before in Brownes Case. And 7. E 4. 29.

Hoe and Tailors Case, 37. of the Queen. fo. 30.
REsolved, that Underwood growing upon parcel of the Manor, may by custom,
be granted by Copy of Court roll; and it is a thing of perpetuity, to which a
custom may extend, for after every cutting the underwood grows, Ex
stipitibus. So, 'twas resolved that Herbage, or any profit of any parcel of
the Manor may, by custom, be granted by Copy; and 'twas said, that a fair
appendant to the Manor of C. in S. is granted by Copy, and this explaines the
reason of the first pillar in Murrels Case.

Frenches Case, 18. and. 19. of the Queen. fo. 31.
REsolved, if the Lord Lease for years, life, or make any other estate, by
deed, or without deed, of Copyhold Land forfeited, escheated, etc. to him,
that this Land can never be granted again by Copy, for the custom is
destroyed, for during these estates, the Land was not demised, nor demisable by
Copy. So, if the Lord make a feoffement, and enter for condition broken; but
if the Lord keep it in his hands a long time, or leases it at will, he, his
heirs or assigns, may regrant it. So, if the interruption be tortious, as by
disseisin, and descent, false verdict or erroneous judgment: for, Non valet
impedimentum, quod de jure non sortitur effectum, and quod contra legem fit,
pro infecto habetur. But if it be extended upon a Statute, or recognizance
acknowledged by the Lord, or if the Wife of the Lord has this Land assigned to
her in Dower, though these impediments are by act in Law, yet for that the
interruptions are lawful, the Land cannot be after granted by Copy. If a
Copyholder accept a Lease for years of the Lord, of his Copyhold, it is
destroyed for ever. If a Copyholder take a Lease for years of the Manor, his
Copyhold has not continuance, Hides Case adjudged, 17. of the Queen, But
there 'twas resolved, that such Lessee might regrant the Copy to whom he would,
for the Land was always demised or demisable. If a Coppy-hold be surrendered
to the Lessee, his Executors or assigns may regrant it. If a Copyhold
escheate to the Lord, his alienee by fine, feoffement, etc. may regrant it.

Foiston and Crachroodes Case, 29. and 30, of the Queen. fo. 31.
ADjudged, that where a Copyholder in pleading alleges, Quod infra Man. praed
talis habetur nec non a toto tempore cujus, etc. habebatur consuetudo, Viz.
quod quilibet tenentes praedictorum tenement. vocat. C. have used to have
common, in such a place parcel of the Manor, and that he is a Copyholder of
the said Tenement, that this custom, as well for the matter as the form, was
good; for the Copyholder cannot prescribe in his own name, for the exility
and baseness of his estate, and if he had claimed common in the soil of
another, he ought to prescribe in the name of the Lord, Viz. That the Lord, and
all his ancestors, and all those whose estate, etc. have had common in such a
place, for him, and his Tenants at will; but when he claims this in the soil
of the Lord, he cannot prescribe in the name of the Lord, for the Lord cannot
prescribe to have common, etc. in his own soil, and therefore he ought to
allege, that within the Manor there is such a custom.

Note, a good diversity between a prescription which is personal, and always
made in the name of a certain person, or his ancestors, or those whose
estate, etc. and a custom which is local and alleged in no person, but that
within the Manor, there is such a custom, this shall serve for those who
cannot prescribe in their own name, nor in the name of any person certain, as
the Inhabitants of a Town. Also, the allegation of a custom, shall serve,
when it is referred to a thing insensible, Viz. that all such Lands are
devisable. And, for that in the principal case, the custom may have a lawful
commencement, that one copyholder only shall have common, estovers, or other
profit in the land of the Lord and that in many Manors; some Copiholders have
common in one wast of the Manor, and others, in another severally, so that the
custom cannot be applied to all, and because, that all the other Copiholds may
be determined and extinct, 'twas adjudged, the custom was well alleged. So,
to have common of estovers in the wood of his Lord parcel of the Manor, etc.
was adjudged good, 10. of the Queen, as 'twas said.

Myttons case, 26. Eliz.
Queen Elizabeth by Letters Patents did grant the office of the Clerkship of
the County Court of Somerset to Mytton, with all fees, etc. for life. Arthur
Hopton Esquire, Sheriff of the same Shire interrupted him, because it was
incident to his office. Mytton complained to the Lords of the Council, and it
was referred to the two chief Justices, Wray and Anderson. And after many
arguments concerning the validity of the grant, and conference had with all the
other Justices. It was resolved by all the Justices, Nullo contradicente aut
reluctante, that the said Letters Patents were void: And their reasons were,
that the office of the Sheriff was an ancient office before the Conquest, and
of great trust and authority, for the King commits unto him Custodiam
Comitatus; And though the King may determine the office ad beneplacitum, yet,
he cannot determine this in part, as for one Town, or Hundred, nor abridge him
of any incident to his office; for the office is entire, and ought to continue
so without any fraction, or diminution without by Parliament, and the County
Court, and the entering of all proceedings therein, are incident to the
Sheriffs office, etc. And though 'twas granted when the office of the Sheriff
was void, yet, the new Sheriff shall avoyde it; as Scroges case, in the time
of vacation of the office of the Chief Justice of the Common Bench, Queen
Mary granted the office of the Exigenter of London; resolved, that the next
Chief Justice shall avoid it, for 'twas incident to his office.

Also in all Writs directed to the Sheriff concerning the County Court, the
King says, in comitatu tuo, and in return of exigents made by him, he says,
ad comitatum meum tent. etc. and the style of the Court proves it, and by the
Statute of 33. H. 8. the Sheriff of Denbigh shall keep his Shire Court at,
etc. In a false judgment it is said, in pleno com' tuo recordari facias, etc.
and in a precept of Tolt, it is said, summoneas, etc. quod sit ad comitatum
meum. And it should be very inconvenient, that another should have the custody
of the entries, and Rolls of Court, which may be imbesilled, and the Sheriff
responsable for them. And it was resolved that the custody of all the Gaoles
within every County belongs to the Sheriff by right, and are annexed and
incident by the Law to the Sheriffs office, vid. stat. An. 14o. E. 3. ca. 10.

Bozouns case. 26. and 27. of the Queen. fo. 34.
A. Portion of tithes in L. appertained to the Rectory of G. which was
presentable; and the Queen was seized of the Rectory of L. jure coronae, which
was appropriated to the Monastery of W. and grants to B. ex gratia speciali,
etc. totam illam portionem decimarum, etc. in L. etc. Cum omnibus alijs decimis
suis quibuscunque in L. tunc, vel nuper in occupatione J. C. and that the
pattents shall be of force non obstante aliquibus defectibus in non nominando,
male recitando, etc. alicujus occupatoris. And J. C. never had any tithes in L.

Resolved, that (in the occupation of J. C, referres to all the sentence; and
not only to (cum omnibus alijs decimis, etc.) 1 Because (illam) demonstrates
fully, that there ought to be words subsequent, to explain and reduce in
certainty what portion, by the intention of the Queen, should pass, viz. that
which was in the occupation of J. C. and it is not satisfied till it be come to
the full end of the sentence. 2. This conjunction (cum omnibus alijs, etc.)
couples the last words to the former, and makes the words subsequent to refer
to all the sentence. 3. If all the tithes in L. of the said Rectory should
pass, the addition of the occupation of J. C. should be vain, and maledicta
expositio, etc.

Resolved, that by grant of ( portionem decimarum, etc.) the tithes parcel of
the Rectory of L. do not pass, for (portion) properly signifies a part or
portion in gross, divided, and not parcel of the Rectory, and the Queen had
not any portion in gross, but all were parcel of the Rectory; And (ex gratia
speciala, etc.) shall not extend by any strained constructio^, to make a thing
pass, against the intention of the Queen expressed in her grant, and against
the apt, proper, and usual signification of the words of his grant.

Resolved, that because J. C. had not any tithes there, nothing passes, for
admit that a portion should be taken for a part, then the effect of the grant
is, totam illam portionem decimarum in occupatione J. C. and in truth, he never
had any part, nothing (without question) passes, in case of a common person, a
fortiori, not in the case of the Queen. As to the point, when a clause of Non
obstante shall make the grant of the Queen, good, when not.

Resolved, when the King by the common Law cannot in any manner make a grant,
there a Non obstante of the common Law, will not make the grant good, against
the reason of the common Law; as the King grants a protection in an Assise, or
Quare Impedit, notwithstanding any Law to the contrary, it is void, for
protection lies not in these cases, for the loss which may come to the
parties, by such great delay. But when the King may lawfully make a grant, but
the common Law requires, that he be so instructed, that he be not deceived,
there a Non obstante supplies it, and makes the grant good. As the King having
made a lease for life, or years, grants the land, Non obstante, that it be in
lease for life, years, etc. or if he grants the land, and further grants the
reversion of it, depending upon an estate for life, years, etc. it is good. See
the book at large.

Resolved, when the words are not sufficient, ex vi termini, to pass the thing
granted, but the grant is void, there a Non obstante will not serve, as in the
principal case; and the Pattents, were not helped by 18. of the Queen. ca'.
2. for Pattents of concealment are expressly excepted out of the Act.

Terringhams case. 27. El. in banco regis. fo. 36.
REsolved, that prescription does not make a thing appendant, except the thing
which is appendant agree in quality and nature to the thing unto which it
should be appendant, as a thing incorporate, as an advowson to a thing
corporate, as a Manor, or as a thing corporate, as Lands, to a thing
incorporate as an office, these may be appendant, but every thing incorporate
may not be appendant to a thing corporate, as common of turbary may not be
appendant to Land, but to a Message or house, as it is holden 5. ass 9. for
the thing which is appendant ought to accord with the nature and quality of the
thing to which it is appendant, and turves ought to be expended in a Message.

The commencement of common appendant by the ancient Law, was in this manner,
(viz.) When a Lord of a Manor infeoffed another of arrable Lands, to hold of
him in Soccage, (id est) per servicium socae the Feoffee ad maintenand'
servicium socae had common in the wastes of the Lord for his necessary beasts
that did plowe and air his Lands, and this common, is of common right, and
commenceth by operation of the Law, and in favor of tillage, and therefore it
needs not to prescribe in that, for so it is houlden 4. H. 6. and 22. H. 6.
as one ought if it were against common right. But it is only appendant to the
ancient arrable Lands, and only for oxen, horses, kyne, and sheep, etc. And
because it is against the nature of common appendant to be appendant to meadowe
or pasture, and because that here, the prescription was to have common time out
of mind to a house, meadow, and pasture, as well as to arrable, by which it
appears to the Court, that there has been a house, meadow, and pasture, time
out of mind, 'twas resolved that this common was appurtenant, not appendant.
But if of latter times, men have builded upon some part of such arrable Lands,
and some part thereof is employed to meadow and pasture; and this for
maintenance of tillage (the original cause of common) the common remains
appendant, and it shall be intended in respect of the continual usage of the
common for beasts leavant and couchant upon such lands, that at the beginning
all was arrable. But in pleading he ought to prescribe that the same is
appendant to Land, for though terra dicitur a terrendo, quia vomere territur,
yet (terra) includes all, and is arrable, though converted to meadow, etc. For
it may be plowed.

A man may prescribe to have common appendant to his Manor, for all the
demeanes shall be intended arrable; at least, in construction of Law (redd'.
singula singulis) it shall be appendant to such demeanes which are ancient
arrable, etc. And when a man claims common appendant to his Manor, no
incongruity appears of his own showing, as here. So common may be appendant to
a Carve of land, which may contain pasture, meadow, and wood, but it shall be
applied to that, which agrees with the nature of the common.

Resolved, that common appendant may be apportioned, because it is of common
right; for if a commoner purchase part of the Lands, in which he has common,
yet the common shall be apportioned, as well as if the Lord purchase parcel,
of the tenancy the rent shall be apportioned. And if A. a commoner enfeoffe B.
of parcel of his ancient Lands, the common shall be apportioned, and B. shall
have common pro rata. And 'twas agreed, that such common which is admeasurable,
remains after severance of part of the land, to which, etc. But here, for that
the common was appurtenant, 'twas adjudged, that by the purchase, all was
extinct, for 'twas against common right; for, by the act of the parties, it
cannot be in esse for part, and extinct for part.

'Twas said that pertinens is the Latin word as well for appurtenant as
appendant, and therefore subjecta materia, and the circumstances ought to
direct the Court to adjudge the common, appurtenant, or appendant.

Resolved, that unity of possession of the entire land, to which, etc and of
the entire land in which, etc. extinguishes the common appendant. By Wray,
chief Justice common for vicinage, is not appendant, but, for that it ought to
be by prescription, it is resembled to common appendant, but common appurtenant,
or in gross, may commence at this day, by grant, or prescription; and by him,
the one may enclose common for vicinage, against the other: as has been
adjudged in Smith and Redmans case. Resolved, that a man may chase out beasts
that do him trespass, with a small dog, and shall not be compelled to
distraine them damage feasant.

Cases of Appeals and Indictments.
Brooks case. 28. of the Queen. fo. 39.
REsolved, that in an appeal of Burglary, 'twas an insufficient count that the
defendant domum, etc. fel^ and burgaliter fregit, for it ought to be burgla^,
or burgulariter, which is vox artis, as murdravit, ^it, which cannot be
otherwise expressed.

Resolved, if the count had been sufficient, he being ^icted once, should not
be again impeached; but here he was discharged upon the insufficient count By
Wray, Chief Justice, if, upon accident, a man and all his family are out of
the house, and one, in the interim, breaks the house, and commits felony; it is
burglary, for the indictment is, domum mansionalem fregit; and so 'twas
resolved, 38. of the Queen, where a man has two mansion houses, and servants
in both, and in the night when the servants are out, etc. the house is broken,
it is burglary.

Wetherell and Darlys case. 35. of the Queen. fo. 40.
IN an appeal of murder, the Defendant was found guilty of homicide, and had
his Clergy, after indicted and arraigned for murder, pleaded this conviction;
Resolved, that it is a good bar at common Law, and restrained by no Statute;
the reason is, because the life of a man, shall not be brought twice in
question for the same offense.

Youngs case. 38. of the Queen. fo. 40.
AN Indictment that dedit unam plagam mortalem circiter pectus, is
insufficient, for it is incertaine whether it be in the neck, arm, or belly;
and Indictments ought to be certain, and show in what part the wound is, and
the profundity and latitude, that it may appear to the Court to be mortal,
and one of the wounds incertainly alleged, makes the whole Indictment
insufficient. 'Twas said, that the indictment ought to have been, that if the
party had (...) dyed of the first stroke, that he dyed of the other, and this
is the common course.

Upon a sudden affray, if the Constable or any of his assistants in
suppressing it, be killed, it is murder in Law, though the murderer knew not the
party killed, for the Law adjudges it murder, and that he had malice prepense,
for that he opposed him against justice So, in case of a Sheriff, or any of
his Bailiffs or Officers in execution of process; so, of a Watchman.

Walkers case. 41. of the Queen. fo. 41.
REsolved, that an indictment of murder (upon which the party was outlawed)
that he stroke the dead in sinistra part ventris circa umbelicum, was good,
for sinistra part, was sufficient, and the other superfluous, but in Youngs
before, there was no certainty before the circiter.

Heydens case. 28. of the Queen. fo. 41.
EXceptions to the indictment, 1. Because 'twas taken before B. Coronatore in
Com'. praed'. and does not say, de com'. praed. Resolved, it shall be so taken
by reasonable intendment, and the Writ de coronatore eligendo, is, quia A. B.
nuper unus Coronator' in Com'. tuo diem clausit, etc. and so it is taken in
Willoughbyes case in Plodon. 2 because he does not say, that E. S. (dead) fuit
in pace Dei and dominae reginae: Resolved, that they are only words of form,
to amplify the heinousness of the offense, not of substance, and perchance he
was not in peace. 3. Because he does not say, felonice nor ex malitia sua
praecogita dedit, etc. Resolved, that the word (et) couples the sentences
together, so that these words (felonice and ex malitia, etc.) and tunc and
ibidem makes it clear. 4. The profundity of the wound is not shown; Resolved,
it cannot be here; for all the pan of the knee was cut off. 5. It Is said,
tempore feloniae praed'. and murdredi, where it should be murdri, Resolved, the
first words were sufficient, and then murdredum being a word insensible is
superfluous, and shall not hurt. 6. The wound was the fourth of August, the
death the nineteenth of December, and the indictment is that T M etc. tempore
feloniae and murdredi praed'. viz. 4. Augusti felonice fuer'. praesentes etc.
auxiliantes, etc. 'Twas objected, that the death has relation to the stroke;
Resolved, that indictments have been often adjudged insufficient, when the
stroke is one day, the death another, and the Jury conclude the death to be
done the first day; But, here it ought to have been, that they were praesentes
and auxiliantes, etc. ad feloniam and murd'. praed'. and relation, which is a
fiction, shall make no man a felon. And Wray said, that without question, the
year of bringing the appeal, shall be accounted from the death, not from the
stroke.

Hume against Ogle 32. and 33. of the Queen. fo. 42.
ADjudged, that the count (that the defendant gave the stroke the 27. of
September at D. in the County of N. and that her husband of the same stroke at
D. etc. dyed, and so the said defendant murdered him at D. aforesaid) 'twas
repugnant and insufficient, for, as it cannot be said, that he murdered him the
first day (as Heydons case is before) so neither at the place where the stroke
was, but where he dyed.

Hudson and Lees case. 31. of the Queen. fo. 43.
IN an appeal, H. counted that the defendant, etc. felonice maimed him in his
left hand, the defendant pleaded, that before, etc the plaintiff recovered in
Trespass for the same battery and wounding 200. l. and satisfaction
acknowledged. Resolved, (...) the bar is good, for where the plaintiff is to
recover damage only (as in this case of the appeal (...) shall not be twice
satisfied for the same thing, nem^ debet bis puniri pro uno delicto. And here
the wounding in the first action includes the mayhem, and more, and the
defendant has averred that the wounding in the first action, and the mayhem
here is one.

Syers case. 32. of the Queen. fo. 43.
REsolved, if the principal be pardoned, or has his Clergy, the accessory
cannot be arraigned, for it is a Maxim, Vbi factum nullum, ibi fortia nulla,
and ubi non est principalis, non potest esse accessorius, and none can be
principal before it be so adjudged by Law, viz. by judgment upon verdict, or
confession, or by Outlawry; and it suffises not, that in truth, he be
principal; and the acceptance of pardon, or prayer of Clergy, is an argument,
but no judgment in Law, that he is guilty. But, if the principal, after
attainder, be pardoned, or has his Clergy, the accessory shall be arraigned
for it appears judicially that there was a principal.

Bibithes case. 39. of the Queen. fo. 43.
REsolved, that where the principal was found guilty of manslaughter, and not
guilty of murder, and had his Clergy, the accessory shall be discharged, for
till judgment, it does not appear judicially, that there was a principal.
So, if the principal, upon his arraignment, confesses the felony, and before
judgment obteines pardon, or has Clergy. Resolved, that there cannot be an
accessory before the fact, in manslaughter, for it is upon a sudden affray;
and if premeditated, it is murder.

Vauxes case. 33. of the Queen. fo. 44.
REsolved, that where a man was indicted for poisoning another, persuading him
that the potion mixed with Cantharides would cause him to have issue by his
wife, the indictment (nesciens praed'. potum cum veneno fore mixtum, sed fidem
adhibens praed'. persuasioni dict'. W. V. recepit, and bibit) was insufficient,
for it is not expressed that he received the poison, for (venenum praed') wants,
and the words after (immediate post receptionem veneni praed'.) are not
sufficient to maintain an indictment, which ought to be certain, and not by
implication.

Resolved, that Vaux, who persuaded, was a principal murderer, though he was
not present at the receipt of the poison, and here he cannot be accessory, for
there is no principal; and if any one had procured V. to do it, he had been
accessory before, which note, a special case, where principal and accessory
both are absent at the time of the felony.

Resolved, that (auter foits acquit) here is no plea, for, he was discharged
upon an arraignement upon this insufficient indictment, and the former
acquittall, or conviction, ought to be lawful, and the Maxim is, That the
life of a man shall not be twice in jeopardy for one offense, but here his life
was not in jeopardy. So, if a man be convicted by verdict, or confession, upon
an insufficient indictment, and no judgment given, he may be again indicted
and arraigned, for the law wants its end; but, if upon such insufficient
indictment, the felon has judgment quod suspendatur per collum, and so
attainted (which is the end of the Law) he cannot be indicted again, etc. till
this judgment be reversed; and upon such acquittall no conspiracy lies.

Wrote and Wigges case. 33. and 34 of the Queen. fo. 45.
THe defendant in an appeal of murder pleads that auter foits, by inquisition
taken before the Coronor of the Queens household, and B. one of the Coronors of
M. he was indicted of Manslaughter, which inquisition was certified to N. at
the Goal delivery, and the defendant upon this was arraigned, confessed the
felony, and had his Clergy, and it appears the arraignement, etc. was after
the purchase of the Writ of appeal, and before the return.

Resolved, that auter foits convict of manslaughter, and Clergy, is a good
bar in an appeal of murder, as 'twas adjudged in Holcrofts case. In which it
was likewise resolved, that an inquisition taken before B. Coronor of the
household, etc. and one of the Coronors of M. is well taken, and within the
Statute of articuli super chartas; though the Statute requires two persons; for
the intent of the Act was performed, and the mischief recited avoided, for
though the Court removes, yet, he may proceed as Coronor of the County.

Resolved also upon the Statute of 3. H 7. ca'. 1. that this case was out of
the Statute; for if the defendant had his Clergy, the appeal lies not, a
fortiori, when he is convicted only, and prays his Clergy; and the Act of the
Court to be advised as to the allowance of Clergy, (so the case was) shall not
prejudice the party in case of life: And 'twas resolved, that attaint of murder
in the Act, extends to a person convicted by confession, or verdict, as to a
person attaint, for he which is attainted, is convicted and more. And Agnes
Gainsfords case adjudged, that where 3. H. 7. is, That the wife, or heir of
him so slain shall have appeal, that the heir of a woman, etc. shall have it
against him, who was acquitted of the same murder. So resolved here, an
indictment and conviction, or acquittance of manslaughter, is a bar to an
indictment of the same death, for all is the same felony, though the
circumstance alter it.

Resolved, that at common law, the Coronor of the household had an exempt
jurisdiction within the Verge, and the Coronor of the County could not meddle,
as appears by Articuli super Chartas; and Swifts case adjudged where a Coronor
of the County took an inquisition within the Verge, 'twas avoided by plea, the
one cannot meddle within the power of the other. But Justices of the Kings
Bench, of oyer and terminer, etc. may inquire, hear, and determine all
murders, etc. within the Verge, for their authority is general, through all
the County: so resolved in Holcrofts case.

Resolved, that the indictment was insufficient, for it does not appear that D
(where the stroke and death was) was within the Verge, and though in truth, it
were within, yet, it ought to be found by the oath of the indictors, and cannot
be supplied by nude averrement, and it shall not be void and coram non judice,
as to the Coronor of the household, and good before the Coronor of the County,
for the Record is entire, and taken entirely before them, etc. And the
defendant in his plea has averred, that D. was within the Verge, so the
Coronor of the County could not take the indictment only.

Resolved, for that the indictment (upon which he was convicted) was
insufficient, that he may be newly indicted, etc. for his life never was in
jeopardy. Resolved, that where the stroke was one day, the death another, the
conclusion ought to be, that he was murdered the day of his death, otherwise
it is naught, for 'twas not murder before: and 'twas resolved, that the finding
of the stroke, and the death, were not sufficient of it self, without
conclusion; and so T. W murdered the said R. W. Resolved, that though the
conviction were pending the appeal, yet if it had been lawful, and before
that the defendant was compelled to plead, it had been a good bar.

Waits case. 45. of the Queen. fo. 47.
REsolved, that where a woman brought seven several appeals against several
persons, as principalls, all ought to abate, but the first, for all the
principalls and the accessories before the murder and after, and before the
Writ purchased, against whom the plaintiff will bring an appeal, ought to be
named in the Writ: for if all make default, except one, yet, the plaintiff
ought to count against all, therefore he ought to bring the appeal against
all. And the defendant shall not have damages by the Statute of W. 2. for it is
out of it, because the Writ abated. And the Statute of Magna Charta says
(appellum) in the singular number.

Hill'. 30. of the Queen. fo. 48.
AN indictment upon 8. H. 6. was quashed, Quia fuit inquisitio capta ad
sessionem pacis in Com'. S. tent'. die Martis, and die Mercurij; though the
sessions may endure two or three days, yet, the Record ought to mention, that
they were holden at a day certain; as also for that the Statute was misrecited
in a point material. Note, because misrecitall is fatal, the sure way is, to
draw the indictment with conclusion contra formam statuti, and with no recital
of the Act.

Ognels case. 29. of the Queen. fo. 48.
AN Executor possessed of a grange, consisting of diverse parcels, demises all
the grange (except H.) to A. for 23. years, and H. to F. for 23. years, and
grants all the residue of his term in the entire grange to A. and F. B. the
revertion or grants a rent charge in fee, out of all his lands, etc. called. C.
grange quondam in tenura B. (the testator) and now in tenura and occupatione de
A. The rent is areare, the entire term expires, the reversionor makes a
Feoffement, the grantee dies, the Feoffee leases at will, the Executors
distraine for arrearages.

Resolved, that at common law, in some case debt lies for arrearages of an
Annuity in fee, though it continues; as if a Parson, or Prebend resign, or
dies, because the Parson is chargeable; otherwise of a rent service, charge, or
secke, when the Freehold continues; and for a rent there is a diversity, when a
rent in fee is extinct by the act of the party, and when of the Law, and when
particular estates expire: see the book at large But 'twas resolved in the
case at bar, that the arrerages due in the life of the grantee, were lost at
common Law. Resolved, that H. was not charged with the rent, for though it be
parcel of the grange, and A. and F. have the reversion of the term, and so it
may be said in their tenure, yet, for that A. then had not H. in his
occupation, it is not charged.

Resolved, that the lessee at will is chargeable by 32. H. 8. ca'. 37. for
where things are due in right, and become remediless by the act of God, the
Parliament which gives remedy for this, shall be favorably construed, and
extend to advance the remedy proportionably to the defect of the Law, according
to the mind of the makers, and therefore the Feoffee of the Feoffee in
infinitum shall be charged, for, otherwise the Statute shall be in vain, etc.

Resolved, if the grantee in fee, or for life of a rent service, or charge,
(after it is arreare) grants over, the tenant attournes, the grantor dies, his
Executors are not within the Statute, for by the grant the arrerages are lost,
and were not due to the testator tempore mortis, as the Statute speaks; and
after the grant the testator could not distraine for the arrerages; and the act
gives remedy only, where the arrerages are due, and become remediless by the
act of God.

Sharp and Pooles case, 17. of the Queen; a rent was granted to a woman for
life, it is arreare, she takes husband, it is arreare, the wife dies, the husband
brings debt against the heir being terrtenant, for all arrerages: Resolved,
that for the arrerages before the marriage he had no remedy at common Law, but
for the other he had debt.

Objected, that the husband shall not have the arrerages due before by this
Statute; 1. Because at common Law the Executors of the wife may have an action
for them, and the Statute gives remedy, when Executors cannot have an action,
and does not intend to toll the remedy from the common Law. 2. The branch says
(due in the wives life) so the arrerages ought to incur, when she is his
wife. Resolved to the contrary, for the Statute says (due and unpaid in the
wives life) and the common Law gives remedy for the arrerages of an estate for
life incurred in the life of the wife, and therefore the Statute did not intend
to extend to these arrerages, but to the arrerages due before, for, Verba
accipienda sunt cum effectu.

Resolved, that a Feme covert cannot make an Executor without assent of her
husband, and the administration of her goods of right belong to the husband.
And the Statute in naming the woman (wife) intends noely to describe and
design the condition of the womaln, not to imply that the arrerages ought to
incur during coverture.

Rawlins case 29. and 30. of the Queen. fo. 52.
A. Possessed of a house for thirty years (except a Stable of which B. was
possessed for two years) granted all his interest to C and demised the Stable
to B. for six years by Indenture after the end of the two years; C.
redemises all to A. for twenty one years, rendering twenty pounds per annum,
and to pay a Fine of twenty five pounds, upon condition for to reenter for non
payment of the rent, or Fine; before the day of payment, A. redemises the
Stable to C. for ten years, the rent was behind, the Fine was not paid, C.
enters not into the Stable, nor B. attournes.

Resolved, that where the verdict was entered three terms past, and in the
Roll the demise to B. for six years was not enterd to be by Indenture, that
the Roll shall be mended, because the note of the special verdict, which the
Jury exhibited to the Court, remaining with the Secondary, purports that the
Jury found the demise prout; by which it does appear to the Court, that the
demise was shown in evidence, and reference made by the note to it; and so
'twas in Gomersalls case.

Resolved, though the condition is of two parts in the dis-junctive, for
non-payment of rent, or of the sum in gross, yet, if A. had redemised any
part of the house to C. and C. enters, by which the rent is suspended, that all
the condition as well for the collateral sum, as for the rent is also
suspended, because the condition is entire, and cannot be divided by the act of
the parties. Resolved, that if A. had redemised any part to C. though C. never
enters, the rent is suspended, and though a stranger occupy it.

Resolved, that the lease by A. to B. for six years, though he had nothing at
the time, was good by conclusion by the Indenture, and when C. redemised all to
A. then was the interest bound with this conclusion, then when A. redemises to
C. the Stable, C. is also concluded, for all parties and privies in estate or
interest are bound by the Estoppell; then the case is no other, but that A.
demises for six years the Stable to B and after demises to C. for twenty
years (which is a good Lease in reversion for fourteen years) this is no
suspension of the rent, or condition, for it is no grant of the reversion, but a
future interest in reversion, no term, but an interest of a term, as the
pleading is, and notwithstanding such grant, the reversion is in the grantor,
without atturnement, and he shall have the rent upon the first lease, but if
there be an atturnement, the reversion passes, and suspension will follow. And
therefore 'twas agreed, if a man leases for twenty one years rendering rent,
and a reentry, the lessee leases to the lessor for six years, to commence two
years after, the rent is arreare, and by this he shall defeat the future
interest vested in him.

Resolved, that this Estoppell being found by verdict, the Court ought to judge
upon all the special matter, according to Law, and because they are sworn ad
veritatem dicendam, they did well to find the truth of the case, and leave it
to the Court; by Wray chief Justice in Pledalls case the Jury was attainted,
for not finding such a lease by conclusion, intending (...) they (being sworn
ad veritatem dicend'.) (...) not bound to find it; for the Court held that the
interest of the land as to parties and privies was bound, and no conclusion
shall be by such Indenture, after the term ended, by Wray.

Resolved, if lessee for twenty years, leases for two years rendering rent,
and grants all his term and interest, if the lessee attournes, the reversion
passes, and if no attournement be, yet the interest in reversion passes, for
the grant of a man shall not be adjudged void, if, to any intent, it may take
effect.

Resolved, if lessee for twenty years of a house, leases part for two years,
and after leases to another all for ten years, rendering rent, so that it
inures as a Lease in reversion for part, that the rent shall issue out of all,
and of the interest of the term, though it be not any estate that may be
surrendered, and though it be conjoined with land in possession.

Error was brought upon this judgment, and this error assigned; for that R.
the plaintiff was an Infant, and was admitted by his Guardian, and no Record
made of it, as it is used in Banco, but only recited in the Count, J. R. per A.
B. gardianum suum (ad hoc per curiam specialiter admissum) queritur. Which was
disallowed by all the Justices, upon search and view of many presidents, which
make a Law in this Court, yet some presidents were as in Banco.

Note (Reader) according to the opinion of Wray 'twas resolved in Londons case,
that if a man takes a lease by Indenture, of his own land, this is an Estoppell
but during the term, and then both parts of the Indenture belong to the lessor.

Wardens and Commonalty of Sadlers case. 30. of the Queen. fo. 54.
BY Mandamus 'twas found before B. M^yor of London, Escheator of the City, and
the inquisition was returned in Chancery, that T. C. held of the King, etc. and
dyed seized without heir, the Wardens, etc. showed their right that R. M. was
seized in fee, and devised to them in fee, and that they were seized till by C.
disseised, and show the custom of London, that a Citizen and Freeman may
devise in Mortmaine, and averred that R. M. was, etc. Tempore mortis; and upon
this, great question was, whither a Monstrans de droit lies, or it ought to be
by Petition. See the Case at large for this Learning, Bereblock and Redes Case
was cited to be adjudg'd, if A. be bound in a recognizance, Statute, etc. and
after a recovery in Debt is had against him, and he dies, his Executors ought
first to pay the Debt upon the Recovery, though it be puny to the Statute, etc.
for though both be Records, yet the judgment in the Court upon judicial and
ordinary proceeding is more notorious and conspicuous, and of more high and
eminent degree then a Statute, etc. taken in private, by the consent of Parties.

Forse and Hemblings Case. 37. Eliz. in com. Banc fo. 60.
ALice Allen seized of certain Messuages in Fee makes her will in Writing,
and thereby demiseth that if James Amynd does survive her, that then she does
demise and bequeatheth the same message to him and his Heirs. And afterward
the said Alice did Intermarry with the said James, and during her coverture,
she said often the said James should never have the said Message by her said
Will; Alice dyed without issue, and James survived, and the Question was,
whither the Will was countermanded by the said Marriage, or not, and if not,
whither by the words of revocation after the Marriage, was a Countermand and it
was adjudged upon great deliberation, that the taking of a Husband, and the
coverture at the time of her death, was a countermand of the Will. For the
making of a Will is but an inception thereof, and it does not take any effect
until the death of the Devisor. For, Omne testamentum morte consummatum est,
and voluntas est ambulatoria usque extremum vitae exitum. And it should be
against the nature of a Will, to be so absolute, that he that made the same,
being of sane memory, may not countermand the same. And therefore the taking of
her Husband, being her own proper act, does amount to a countermand in Law:
Also 'twas said, that after Marriage all the will of the Wife in judgment of
Law, is subject to the will of her Husband, and a Feme Covert has no Will, and
therefore the Countermand after Marriage was of no force, Quod fuit concessum
per tot. Cur.

Harlakendens Case, 31. El. In banco regis. fo. 62.
THe Earl of Oxford leased to A. B. and C. (except the Trees) for 21. years,
C. assigned to D. the Earl sells the Trees to A. B. and D. they leased to E.
and after sell the Trees, the Vendee cuts them, the Lessee brings Trespass.
When a man makes a Lease for life or years, the Lessee has but only a
special interest or property in the Trees being Timber, as things annexed to
the Land, but if the Lessee or another severs them, the property and interest
of the Lessee is determined and the Lessor may take them, as things which were
parcel of his Inheritance.

It was also resolved that this clause (without impeachment of wast) does not
give to the Tenant for life, any greater interest in the Trees, then he had by
the demise of the Land, but only that it will serve, that he shall not be
impeached in any action of Wast, or to recover damages or the place wasted.
This is adjudged otherwise by all the Judges of England, in Jews Bowls Case,
in the 11. Report.
It was also resolved that if an House fall by tempest or other act of God, the
Lessee for life or years has a special interest to take Timber to reedifie
the same, if he will. But if the Lessee suffer the House to fall, or take it
down, the Lessor may take his Timber as parcel of his Inheritance, and the
interest of the Lessee is determined, and he may have wast, and treble damages.

Resolved, that the Lessee by the grant had an absolute property in the Trees,
so that by the Lease of the Land, they did not pass, and he has not equal
ownership in both, and it should be a prejudice to him if they should be joined
to the Land, for then he could not cut, during the term, without wast, and
after he shall not have them, and the Lessor shall not have them against his
own act And here A. B. and D. were Tenants in common of the Land, and
joyntenants of the Trees, and so their interest of several qualities, and
therefore cannot be a union betwixt them, but upon a feoffement, if the Feoffor
accept the Trees, they are in property divided, though, In facto, they remain
annexed to the Land, for it is not felony to cut them, etc. and if the Feoffor
grants them to the Feoffee, they are reunited in property, as well as De facto,
and the Heir shall have them, not the Executors, for the feoffee has an
absolute ownership in both, and it is more benefit to him that they are
reunited.

It was resolved, That if Timber Trees be blown down with the wind, the
Lessor shall have them, for they are parcel of his inheritance, and not the
Tenants for life, or years, but if they be Dotards without any Timber in them,
the Tenant shall have them.

It was adjudged that wast may be committed in glass in the Windows, for it
is parcel of the house, and discends as parcel of the inheritance to the
Heir, and the Executors shall not have them although the Lessee put the glass
in the Windows at his own cost, and if he take them away, he shall be
punished in wast. And 42. Eliz. in com. Banco. It was resolved that Wainscote,
whither it be annexed to the house by the Lessor or the Lessee, is parcel of
the House, and there is no difference in Law, whither it be fixed with great
Nails or little Nails, or Screws or Irons put through the Walls, for if it be
fixed by any ways or means to the house or Posts, or Walls thereof, the
Lessee may not remove it, but he is punishable in an action of wast. For it is
parcel of the house, and by Lease or grant of the house in the same Manor (as
Sealing or Plaistering) it shall pass as parcel thereof.

Fulwoods Case, 33. of the Queen. fo. 64.
C. Acknowledged a recognizance of 250. li. to the Chamberlain of London, and
his Successors, after acknowledges a Statute of 200. li. before the Recorder of
London, and Major of the Staple to A. after A. sues Execution by Liberate, but
it does not appear that it was ever returned, after the Successors of the
Chamberlain, sue Execution, by precept to the Sergeant of the Mase in nature
of an Elegit, and has a moyty, C. dies his Wife recovers Dower, and had this
house assigned for her third part, she dies, the Chamberlain assigns to
Fulwood after A. assigns also to F. after the Heir of C. demises to B. etc.

Resolved, that the Successors of the Chamberlain-shall have this recognizance,
though a body solee for that the Corporation was by custom to diverse;
purposes, for Orphanage, for the recognizance was acknowledged for Orphanage
money, and the same custom inables the Successors to take such an Obligation,
etc. otherwise of a Bishop, Parson, etc. and that the Execution by the Sergeant
of the Mase, was good, notwithstanding the Statute of W. 2. ca'. 18. which
says, Vic'. liberet ei medietatem, etc. By reasonable extent, to wit, by
inquisition of honest men, and the Sheriff is sworn, and the Sergeant is not
sworn to take the Jury, etc. For the Statute extends to every other immediate
officer, to any Court of the King of record, etc. Resolved, that execution of
the Elegit was good enough, without suing a Scire facias against A. being in by
matter of Record; bu 'twas said, if the Sheriff had returned the former
execution, he ought to have a Scire facias; by the Court, if the Sheriff makes
execution, it is good.

Resolved, that the Verdict was good, which finds, that C. acknowledged a
recognizance before the Mayor, though not said secundum formam Statuti. nor,
per scriptum suum obligatorium, for being the trover of lay People, it shall be
intended according to the Statute. Resolved, that the Conusee cannot have aid
of the Statute of 32. H. 8. ca'. 5. for which, see the Book at large.

Resolved, that if a man be bound in two Statutes, and the latter Statute be
first extended, and delivered in execution for a longer time, and a greater sum
then the first was, yet when the first Statute is satisfied, and his interest
lawfully determined, the second Conusee shall have the Land again, by force of
the first extent. It was resolved Per tot. Cur. that the execution of a
liberate is good, although the Writ be not returned, and so of a Capias ad
satisfaciendum, and an Habere fac'. sec.' seisinam, and other writs of
execution. And that the Conusee shall hold the Land, not only until he be
satisfied for damages for detayning of the Debt, and costs of Suite, but also
for his reasonable Labors and expenses, look the words of the execution; and
being in by matter of record, the conusor must bring his Scir. fac. but in Case
of an elegit, the Conusor after satisfaction may enter, for there is no costs
and damages, but the mere Debt.

Hyndes Case, in com. Banco. 33. Eliz. fo. 70.
WIlliam Hawe seized of certain Lands by deed, indented demised the same to
Robert Gerrard for 16. years, who assigned over to Elizabeth Hynd William Hawe
afterward by bargain and sale in consideration of money due, sold the
reversion to one Libb, and before the same was enrolled, the said William Hawe,
leavyed a fine to Libb, and his Heirs, etc. and after the leavying of the fine
the said Indenture of bargain and sale was inroled within six Months,
according to the form of the Statute, and Elizabeth Hynd the Tenant, did not
atturne. The question was, Whither the Conusee of the fine after the said
Indenture enrolled, Shall be in by the fine and by the bargain, and sale? for
if he shall be adjudged to be in by the fine, no action of wast lies, for
default of atturnement, and if he shall be in by the Indenture enrolled, then
there needs no atturnment. And it was resolved, Per tot. Cur. that when Hawe
by deed indented did bargain, and sell the reversion to Libb, and his Heirs,
and before the inrollment leavyed a fine to Libb, and his Heirs, and after the
Deed is enrolled, (within six months) that the Conusee shall be in by the
Fine, and not by the Deed enrolled, for the Fee simple passes by the fine to
the Conusee and his heirs, and after the inrollment of the deed may not divest
and turn the estate out of himself, which was absolutely established in him
by the fine, for when the common Law and the Statute Law concur, the common
Law shall be preferred. And it is true, that the inrollment shall have relation
to the delivery of the Deed. But that is only to avoid estates, or charges
made of the same thing by the bargainor, to strangers after the delivery of the
Deed, and before the inrollment, but not to divest any estate lawfully settled
in the interim, in the bargainee.

The Records are so high and sacred that they import in themselves inviolable
verity, which if any man dare to gainsay, the Law does attribute so great
honor, to them, that they shall be tryedonely by themselves, and not by the
Country, and if averrement against a Record should be permitted, then the
effect and validity of the record should be tried by the Country, which is
against the rule of the Law, Nullum iniquum est in jure presumendum. Yet,
resolved in this Case, that the Lessee shall be admitted to aver that the
Deed was enrolled, after the Fine, and not before, because it stands with the
Record, and does not impugn any thing within the Record, and great
inconvenience would follow, if such averrement should not be admitted.

Boroughes Case, 38. Eliz. In Banco Regis. fo. 72.
REsolved, that the rent reserved upon a demise ought to be demanded, if the
Lessee will take advantage of a condition for non payment of the same, and the
demand to be made at the place limited for the payment of the rent, although
there be no words of demand in the demise, and although it be out of the Land
demised, but in the Kings Case it is otherwise. Prerogativa Regis, for there
the rent upon a reentry reserved ought to be tendered; and in such Case, the
Pattentee of the King, shall demand the rent upon the Land.

Resolved, if the Queen leases rendering rent, without limitting any place, or
to whose hands, the Lessee may pay it at the Exchequer, or to the Bayliffes or
Receivers of the Queen, and when she so appoints it by express words, it is
no more then the Law appointed, and though the words be (Ad receptum scacc'.
apud Westminster.) it needs not that the receite be holden at Westminster, the Law
would have implied that. And when a common person appoints no place, the Law
appoynts the payment upon the Land.

Palmers Case, 39. Eliz. in Banco regis, fo. 74.
THe Sheriff by virtue of a Fire. Faci. may sell a Lease of the Defendant, and
in his Writing the true commencement and term of the Lease must be expressed,
or else, if he sells all the interest that the defendant has in the Lands,
he needs not to make any mention in the return, but generally Quod fieri
fecit de bonis and catallis, etc. But an inquisition found that the Debtor of
the King was possessed. Pro termino quorundam annorum, etc. 'twas void, for a
term cannot be extended without showing the certainty of the commencement, for
after the Debt satisfied, he is to have the remainder.

Resolved, for that the case at Bar was an execution by Elegit, which ought
to be made by inquisition; the sale here was void, for the term was mistaken
in the inquisition, and so mistaken was apprised by the inquisition, and the
Sheriff cannot sell any term, but that only which was apprised by the Jurors.

Hollands Case, 39. of the Queen. fo. 75.
REsolved, that before 21. H. 8. ca'. 13. if he which had a benefice with cure,
accept another with cure, the first is void, but this was no avoydance by the
common Law, but by constitution of the Pope, of which the Patron might take
notice if he would, and present, without deprivation, but because the avoydance
accrued by the Ecclessiasticall Law, no Lapse incurred without notice, as upon
a deprivation, or resignation; so, that the Church was void for the benefit of
the Patron, not for his disadvantage; But now, if the first benefice be of the
value of 8. l. per annum, the Patron at his peril ought to present, for to an
avoydance by Parliament, every one is party, but if not of 8. l. it is void by
the ecclesiastical Law, of which he needs not take notice. Resolved, that 21.
H. 8. is such a general Act, of which the Judges Ex officio (though it be not
pleaded) ought to take notice. See the Book at large upon this Learning, what
act shall be said a general act? Of which the Judges are bound to take notice,
what not?

The Case of Corporations, 40. and 41. of the Queen. fo. 77.
REsolved, that where diverse Cities, etc. are incorporated by the name of
Mayor and communalty, Mayor and Burgesses, etc. and in the Charters it is
prescribed that the Mayors, Bailiffs, etc. should be chosen by communalty and
Burgesses etc. which is as much as to say, as by all the Burgesses, or all the
communalty; that yet the ancient and usual Election, by a certain selected
number of the principal, of the communalty, etc. (Commonly called the
Common Council) and not by all of the communalty or so many of them as will
come to the Election, was good in Law, and warranted by their Charter; for, in
every Charter they have power given to them, to make Laws, Ordinances, and
constitutions, for the better government and ordering of their Cities and
Boroughes: by force of which, and to avoid popular confusion, they, by their
common assent have instituted, etc. that the election shall be by such a select
number. And though this ordinance cannot be now shown, yet, it shall be
presumed that such ordinance and constitution was made at first.

Digbyes Case, 41. Eliz. fo. 78.
IT was adjudged, that when a man has a benefice with cure, above 8. l. and
afterward takes another with cure, and is presented and instituted, and
before induction procure the Letters of dispensation, that this dispensation
comes too late, for by the institution, Ecclia plena and consulta existit,
against all persons but the King, for every rectory consists upon
spirituallty and temporallty. And as to the spiritualty, Viz. Cura animarum,
he is complete Parson by the institution, for when the Bishop upon examination
had, admits him able; then he does institute him, and says, Jnstituo te ad
tale beneficium and habere curam animarum, of such a Parish, and accipe curam
tuam, etc. Vide 33. H. 6.13. But touching the temporallties as the Glebe Lands,
etc. he has no freehold in them, until induction, for by the general
council of Lateran. Anno. Dom. 1215. it appears that by the acceptance of
two benefices the first is void. Aperto jure, for upon this Council are our
Books in this case founded. And 'twas resolved, that this was an acceptance of
a benefice. Cum cura, within the Statute of 21. H. 8. Institution is an
acceptance by our Law; and 'twas lately adjudged that if before induction, the
Clerk be inducted to another, the first is void by 21. H. 8. which says,
(Accept and take another) and for that now the avoidance is declared by 21. H.
8 he is bound to take notice, but till after induction, etc.

Nokes case, 41. Eliz. fo. 80.
A Man makes a Lease by these words. (Viz.) Demise, etc. Grant, etc. and
Covenants that the Lessee shall enjoy without eviction, by the Lessor or any
claiming under him, and was bound to perform all covenants, etc. the Lessee
assigns his term, a stranger enters upon the Assignee, and recovers in an Ej
firmae, after ouster, the first Lessee brings Debt. This is a covenant in Law,
and the assignee shall have a writ of covenant 9. Eliz. 257. Dyer. And if a man
be bound by obligation to perform all covenants, grants, etc. This does extend
as well to covenants in Law, as to Covenants in Fact.

Resolved, though the recovery were by verdict, yet he ought to show that the
Plaintiff in this recovery had an elder Title, for otherwise the Covenant in
Law is not broken. It was holden that an express Covenant does qualify the
generallity of the Covenant in Law, and restrains that by the mutual consent
of both parties, but a warranty in Law, and an express warranty, the party may
choose whither he will have, for this word Dedi imports a warranty.

Sir Andrew Corbets Case, 41. and 42 of the Queen fo. 81.
A Devises Land to B. etc. to have, etc. till 800. l. shall be paid by them of
the profits to marry his Daughters, and dies, the Heir conceales the Will,
takes all the profits, and dies, the will is found by office, the Devisee
enters, and has leavyed 640. l. and imployes it accordingly; whither the
profits taken by the Heir shall be parcel of the 800. l. was the Question.

Resolved, that the words (shall be leavyed) shall be construed (shall or might
be leavyed) and so 'twas holden of a Lease or limittation of a use, otherwise,
he which is to leavy the Sum, by deferring to do it, may exclude the
reversioner for ever: see the Book at large. Resolved, when the heir or
reversioner, etc. enters, and expulses him, to whom the Land is limited, he
has election to recover the Mesne profits, in an action, or reentry, and
retainer, till he leavyes the inteir Sum, and the other shall not have
advantage of his own wrong, and if a stranger had entered, and occupied, the
Devisee ought to have taken notice at his peril, for Vigilantibus and non,
etc. and none is bound to give notice, but here the Heir himself concealed
the will, and the Devisee had no remedy, for the Mesne profits after the death
of the heir. Resolved that a Guardian shall not ouste Tenant for life, nor
years of the Tenement.

Resolved, that admitting the Guardian shall ouste Tenant for years yet he
shall not hold over, because his term is certain in the commencement,
continuance, and end; otherwise of Tenant by Elegit, Statute, etc. they shall
hold over, because the term is uncertain.

Southcots Case, 43. Eliz. in banco regis. fo. 83.
IF A. do deliver goods to B. for to keep, the goods be purloyned away, yet
B. shall be charged in a Writ of detinue. For, to keep, and to keep safely is
all one, but if B. do take them to keep as his own goods, he shall not be
charged with them. And if A. do pledge or Guage goods unto B. in this Case B.
shall not answer for them, if they be purloyned, for he had some property in
them, and not a custody only, but a ferryman a common Inkeeper, or a Carrier,
which takes hyre, they ought to keep the goods safely, and they shall not be
discharged, if they be stolen or purloyned. But a Factor or a Servant
(although he have wages) doing his endeavor, shall not be charged.

Luttreles Case, 43. Eliz. in banco regis. fo. 86.
IF a man have estovers either by grant or prescription to his house, although
he alter the Rooms, and Chambers in his House, it seems that the alteration
of the qualities, so as it be not of the house it self, and without making new
Chimnyes, by which, no prejudice accrewes to the owners of the Wood, is not any
destruction of the prescription, and though he make new Chimnyes, or make a new
addition to his old house, he shall not loose his prescription thereby, but he
may employ or spend any of his new estovers in the Chimnyes, or in that part
newly added. It was also resolved, that if a House or Milne do fall, or be
taken down by the act of the owner, or by wrong of another, yet for that the
perdurable part, which includes all, does remain, which is the Land, whereupon
the Fabric is built, he may reedifie the same again without any Loss of his
apendant or apurtenant, but it ought to be upon the same place which was the
Foundation of the old House, for as it did support, and in judgment of Law
included the ancient house when it was standing, so it supports and includes
the new house, so as it is in a manner a continuance of the ancient house.

Diverse Tenants do hold of another, as of his Manor by fealty and suite to
the Lords Milne, the Lord does alien his Milne with the suite of his Tenants,
and after, the vendor dies, and his Son enters and builds a new Milne
upon the other part of his demean, he shall have the suite to his own Milne,
which the Vendee had before, for the suite belongs to him that has the
Manor, for no man may have suite to his milne, by reason of a Tenure, If it be
not of Corn growing upon the Lands, within the Seigniory or Manor, and the
Lord may erect a new Milne within any part of the Manor, and the Tenure is due
to the same, and not to any particular Milne.

Druries Case, 43. Eliz. Error in Banco Regis. fo. 84.
A Countess being a Widow retains three Chaplains, he who is last
retained, is not capable of a dispensation, for the Statue of 21. H. 8. c. 13.
is executed by reteining of two, and the reteining of the third, shall not
divest the capacity, which was in the first two, but if the reteiner had been
at one time, he who is first promoted, shall be first preferred, because in
Aequali jure, etc. 2. Resolved, if the two first die, the third is not capable
of dispensation without a new reteiner, because he was retained at the common
Law, and not according to the Statute, Quod ab initio non valet, etc. As if the
Son and Heir of a Baron reteineth a Chaplain and gives him Letters under
his Seal, and after the Father dies. And it was said, that the said Act shall
be taken strictly; as if a Baron be made Guardian of the 5. parts, he shall
retain no more Chaplains then before, and if a Baron retain two Chaplains
who are promoted, he cannot discharge them, and retain others, during their
lives.

Slades Case, 44. Eliz. fo. 92.
IT was resolved that every contract executory imports in it self an
assumpsit. For when one does agree to pay money, or to deliver any thing, by
that he does assume and promise to pay or to deliver the things, and therefore
when he sells any goods to another, and agrees to deliver them at a day to
come, and the other in consideration thereof agrees to pay so much money, at
such a day; in this case both parties may have an Action of Debt, or Action
upon the case, upon the assumpsit, for the mutual executory agreement of both
parties, import in themselves as well a reciprocal Action upon the Case, as an
action of debt and a recovery or bar in an action of debt, is a good Bar in
an action upon the Case, brought upon the same contract, and so likewise in an
Action upon the Case, a recovery or Bar, in the same, is a good plea in an
Action of Debt, upon the same contract.

The Defendant in an Action of the Case upon the assumpsit may not wage his
Law, as he may do in an action of Debt.

If a Sum of money be promised in Marriage, to be paid at several days, an
Action upon the assumpsit lies for non payment of the first, although no
Action of Debt lies, until all the days be past, Multitudo errantium non
parit errori patrocinium, and if the Debtor of the King sueth by Quo minus, in
the Exchequor, the defendant shall not have his Law for the benefit of the King.

Adams and Lamberts Case, 44. and 45. Eliz. in banco Regis, in Ejectione
firmae. fo. 104.
UPon consideration of the Statute of 1 E. 6. cap. 14. it was resolved.

1. That if one demise to any of his Kindred, to superstitious uses, although
he limit them to pay certain Sums of money to the said uses, yet these Lands
are given to the King, for it shall not be intended to be upon other
consideration, but that which they at that time conceived to be the service of
God, which is the most worthy consideration, and the reason wherefore the
demise was made to his Friends was, because he imposed more trust in them then
others, therefore the persons shall not be regarded.

2. A demise of an estate for life, or in tail is within this Statute by
equity, although that the Statute says, To have continuance for ever, for the
intent of the Statute was, to toll such uses, and regards not the time of
their continuance.

2. An estate tail may continue for ever, and so was the intent of the devisor
in this case, that the uses should continue for ever, for he limits his heir
to do it. 3. Without this construction the Statute should be defrauded.

3. The Statute gives to the King, Lands given for the finding of a Priest,
and giving of Lands upon condition to find a Priest, is within the Statute, for
this is more compulsory then the other.

4. All the Land is given to the King, but not by the first Branch, for that
extends only to lawful Chanteries, or those who have countenance of lawful
comencement, but not to such who are without any color of lawful comencement:
as if they were founded by license of the Pope, this chantry is without color
of lawful comencement or foundation: also if Lands be given to the finding of
a chantery without Corporation, this is out of the said Branch. Neither by the
second Branch, for that gives the Lands belonging to such Colleges to the
King, without which, he shall have only the Scites; but by the third Branch;
for this extends to finding of a Priest without Corporation. But 'twas
objected, that the Land was not given to the finding of a Priest, for he had
but a pension out of it, and the Statute is, that the King shall have in as
large, etc. as the Priest had it. 2. Here is a good use limited, six pence by
the Week to six poor men, and although it be Ad orandum, etc. this is not
within, for it is out of the Statute, except that Orisons be to be performed in
public. For answer to these, these differences were taken. 1. If one give 20.
li. per annum, for the finding of a Priest, and limit to the Priest 10. li. per
annum all is given to the King, for the residue shall be intended for the
finding of necessaries: otherwise it is, if a condition be annexed to the gift,
to give 10. l. per annum to a Priest, there the King shall have but 10. li.

2. Land of 20. l. per an. is given to find a Priest, with 10. l. thereof, and
that the other ten pound shall be to the Poor, the King shall have but ten
pound, but if it be for finding of a Priest, and maintenance of Poor Men,
without limitting how much the Priest shall have, the King shall have the Land
for otherwise he shall have nothing. 3. If Land of 20. l. is given for finding
Sallary for a Priest with 10. l. of it, and also a good use is limited, there
the King shall have but ten pound, although that other necessaries are to be
found for the Priest, because a good use in certain shall be preferred before
a superstitious incertaine use; but if nothing in certain be limited to the
Priest, the King shall have the Land. 4. If Land be given to find a Priest the
King shall have it, but if a Priest have but a stipend, the King shall have but
the stipend. 5. When a certain sum is limited to a Priest, and other good
uses are also limited, which depend upon the superstitious use, all is given
to the King. 6. If all the uses be superstitious, of what certainty soever they
are, the land is given to the King, otherwise it is, if there be any good use,
and as to that which was objected, that the King shall have no more then the
Priest. It was answered, that that extends to the 1.2. and 4. Branches, and not
to the third, for otherwise the King should never have the land it self, for
this was never used to be limited to the Priest himself.

And although that these Orisons are to be made out of any Church, yet it is
within the Statute, for the words Church or Chapel, extend to Lamps and
lights, and not to prayers. 2. The Statute speaks of an anniversary, etc or
other like thing, and this is a like thing, but in the Case at Bar, if he had
said that his Friends should have the residue of the profits of the Land, this
had saved the Land.

Actons Case, 45. Eliz, com. banco in a Quare imperit. fo. 117.
A Noble Woman reteineth a Chaplain who purchases a dispensation, she takes
a Husband, the Chaplain is promoted to another benefice then that which he had
before the reteiner, his first benefice is not void.

It was Objected that the Statute speaks of duches, etc. being Widows or
Married under the degree of a Baron, and for that, when she Marries above the
degree she is out of the Statute, and it is not sufficient that she be within
the Statute at the time of the reteiner, but she ought to be so also at the
time of the promotion.

It was answered, that all which the Statute requires at the time of the
reteiner, is, that she be a Noble Woman, Married under the degree of a Baton,
or a Widow, and to be noble at the time of the promotion; therefore a noble
Woman Married above that degree cannot retain, or if at the time of the
promotion she be not noble, as if her Earl be attainted, and although that
Baron and Feme have but one body, yet they have two souls, wherefore it is not
inconvenient that they should have several Chaplains, and the reason for
which the said provision was made for a noble Woman who marries an ignoble
Husband was not to exclude those who married Nobles, but because such Femes are
in Law ignoble (except they be noble by descent) and without such provision
shall be out of the Statute: Baron reteineth a Chaplain and dies, the
Chaplain may retain both the benefices, but he shall be punished for non
residency, without suing a non obstante.

Dumpors Case, 45. Eliz. banco regis in Trespass. fo. 119.
A Man makes a Lease, provided that the Lessee or his assigns shall not alien
the premises without special license of the Lessor, etc. The Lessor gives
license to the Lessee to alien the same, or any part thereof, etc. in this Case
the Lessee may alien and his assigns, Ad infinitum without any more license,
and the proviso is determined.

The Lord Stafford made a Lease to three persons, upon condition that they, nor
any of them should alien, without the consent of the Lessor, and after one of
them did alien with his consent, and after the other two did alien without
license, and it was adjudged 28. Eliz. that in this case, the condition being
determined, as to one person, by the license of the Lessor, it was determined
in all, for when the Lessee alieneth any part of the residue, the Lessor may
not enter into any part aliened with license, and therefore the condition being
determined in part, is determined in all, for the condition being entire, may
not be apportioned, and 16. Eliz. Dyer. 334. fuit deny per Popham Chief
Justice, Vide lit. 80. b. and 4. and 5. Ph. and M. Dyer. 152.

Bustards Case, 1. Jac. fo. 121.
IN every lawful exchange of Land, this word Excambium imports in it self
Tacit, a condition and a warranty, and the other a Voucher and recompense, and
all in respect of reciprocal consideration, the one land being given in
exchange for the other, but that is a special warranty, for upon the voucher
he shall not recover other Lands in value, but those only which were given in
Exchange, and this warranty follows only in privity, for none may vouch by
force thereof, but the parties to the Exchange, and their heirs and no
assigns.

If A give in Exchange three acres of Land to B. for other three acres, and
after one Acre is evicted from B. in this Case all the exchange is defeated,
and B. may enter into all his Lands.

Beverleys Case. de non compos mentis in banco regis. 1. Jac. fo. 123.
EVery act that a man De non compos mentis does, either concerning his Lands
life or goods, either done in Court of record or out of Court of record, all
acts that he does in any Court of record either concerning his Lands or goods
shall bind himself and all others for ever, and those acts which he does out
of Court of record, shall bind himself during life, and in some Cases shall
bind all others for ever, so as the party himself shall not be admitted to
stultifie himself or disable himself, but an idiot a nativitate may not make
Feoffment, Gift, Lease, or Release, but it may be avoided, during his Life, by
office at the Kings suite, which shall have relation, a tempore Nativitatis, to
avoid all acts done by him, and after his death, the King shall deliver his
Lands Rectis Haeredibus. four manner of men, de non compos mentis 1. An idiot
or fool naturally. 2. One which was of good and perfect memory, and by the
visitation of God has lost the same. 3. Lunaticus, qui gaudet lucidis
intervallis, who sometimes is of good and perfect memory, and some other times
Non compos mentis. 4. He that is so by his own act as a Drunkard.

All acts, which a Lunatic during the time of his Lunacy does, and all acts
which a mad man does, who once was of perfect memory, and by the act of God,
has lost his understanding, are equivalent to the act done by an Idiot, but
the act which a man does, Qui Gaudet lucidis intervallis, at such time as he is
of good and perfect memory, shall bind him and are good. And a Drunkard who
for the time of his Drunkenesse is Non compos mentis, yet his drunkenness
shall not extenuate his act or offense, but does aggravate his offense, and
does not derogate from the act, which he does, during the time of his
drunkenness, and that as well touching his Life, Lands, and goods, as any
other thing that concerns him. The King shall have the custody of the Land,
goods, Chattells, etc. of one non compos mentis, to the use of him, his Wife,
Children, and Family, a man non compos mentis, shall not loose his life for
felony or murder, for no felony or murder can be committed, without a felonious
intent and purpose, and he is deprived of reason, understanding, and
intentions. Dicta est fellonia quia fieri debet felleo animo, and furiosus non
intelligit quid agit, and animo and ratione caret and non mulum distat a
brutis, as Bracton says, and stultus dicitur a stupore.

The End of the Fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
Claytons Case, 37. Eliz. in Com. Banco. fo. 1.
AN Indenture of demise dated 26. May, 25. Eliz. to hold for three years from
henceforth, it was delivered at four a clock in the afternoon, of the
twentieth of June after. The Question was, when the Lease should begin, from
henceforth shall be taken the day of the delivery inclusive idefi, from the
making or delivery.

Traditio loqui facit cartam, this Lease must end the nineteenth of June, in
the third year after. The day of the delivery is parcel of the term, but a
Die confeccionis, or a Die datus, the term begins the day after the date,
from the date, and from the day of the date is all one, because that in
judgment of Law, the date includes all the day of the date, etc.

Elmers Case, 30. Eliz. Banco Regis. fo. 2.
1. REsolved, that the Statute of 1. El. is a private act, whereof the Court
shall not take notice without pleading of it. 2. Whereas the Bishop ousted his
Lessee, for years, and made a Lease for three lives, this is voidable by the
successor; for, first, the Statute gives him power to make a Lease for twenty
one years, or three lives, and therefore cannot make both. 2. Lessee for lives
shall have the rent reserved upon the Lease for years, and shall not pay rent
to the Bishop, until the term determined, and so hospitality will decay in
the mean time, and where 32. H. 8. ca'. 8. provided that the old Lease be
surrendered before the making of a new, illusory surrender upon condition is
not within the act, but judgment given against the Plaintiff for not pleading
of the said act of 1. Eliz.

Jewels Case, 30. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 3.
LEase of a fair reservaing rent, is not within the Statute of 1. Eliz. for
although the rent be due by reason of the contract, yet it is not incident to
the reversion, and it is also without remedy by assise or distress.

Lord Mountjoyes Case. 31. and 32. El. banco regis. fol. 3.
TEnant in tail according to the Statute, with power to make Leases, etc.
reserving the ancient rent, makes a Lease of two distinct farms, re^erving
the ancient rents in one sum, out of both sthe farms, this is a new rent,
and not the accustomed rent, and if he reserve a lesser rent (during his life,
and after his death) then the ancient rent, the Lease is not good.

If Tenant in tail be seized of three acres of Land, every one of them of
equal annual value, and all have been demised for 3. shil. per annum, in
this case he may not demise one of them for 12. d. per annum, or two of them
for 2. shil. per annum, and so Pro rata.

Justice Windams Case, fo. 31. and 32. Eliza. Banco Regis, in a Writ of Error.
fo. 7
A Man leaseth S. for 10. years, and C. for 20. years, and both to another
for 40. years, after the end of the said several demises, ten years expire,
the last Lessee enters into S. and upon ouster brings trespass and recovereth,
for the joint words of the parties shall be taken, Respective, and the leases
shall commence severally, upon the several determination of the said leases.
Joint words shall be taken severally. 1. In respect of the several interest of
the grantors, as if two Tenants in common grant a rent charge. 2. In respect of
the several interest of the grantees, as a joint warranty to two several
Tenants. 3. In respect that the grant cannot commence at one time, as a
remainder limited to the right heirs of I. S. and I. N. 4. In respect of the
incapacity of the grantees, to take jointly. 5. Ratione subjectae materiae, as
rent granted to two copartners for equality of partition. 6. Ne res destruatur,
and ut evitetur absurdum, as in Cessavit, the tenure is alleged by homage,
fealty, and rent, and quod in faciendo servitia praedicta cessavit, it shall be
construed to such services only, as of which a man may cease.

Brudenells Case, 34. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 9.
IF a lease be made to A. during the life of B. and C. without saying, during
the life of the survivor of them, if one of them die, yet the estate is not
determined. But A. shall have the land, during the life of the survivor; for if
a man make a lease of Land to two persons, during their lives, they assign
over their estate, now the assignee has estate for life of them too, and if
one dye, he shall have the land, during the life of the Survivor. Note, two
diversities the one a limitation in this Case aforesaid, the other a condition,
for if a man demyse Land for 100. years if A. and B. live so long, in this
case, if the one of them dye the Lease is determined, for the Lease is
conditional, and not Determinable by limmitation of estate, and the life of a
man is collateral to the Lease, which is but only a Chattle. If an
administrator have judgment and dye, his Executors cannot sue execution of
that judgment, but he that shall be subject to the payment of the Debts of the
first intestate, and that are not the Executors of the administrator. vide 26.
H. 8. fo. 7.

Hensteads Case. 36. and 37. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 10.
A Feme lessor or lessee at will takes Husband, the will is not determined,
for it may be prejudicial to the Husband to have it determined: So, if one of
the Lessees, or Lessors at will dye, but in case where one of the joint Lessees
at will dies, nothing surviveth but the others shall pay all the rent.

Jues Case, 39, and 40. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 11.
I. Leaseth a Manor to S. for thirty years, excepting Wood and underwood
growing upon it, and after Leased to him the Wood for 62. years, without
impeachment of wast, and leaseth to him the Manor for thirty years, after
expiration of the first thirty years, thirty years expire, S. makes wast, I
brings an action of wast. 1. Resolved, by the exception of Wood, and
Underwood, the soil is excepted, and the woods growing, etc. are of abundance.
2. The Wood remains parcel of the Manor, because the Lessor had the entire
freehold, otherwise if he had leased for life with such an exception, so if one
lease a Manor excepting the advowson for life, the advowson is in gross for
life, but if he grant the advowson for life, it remains appendant. 3. By the
acceptance of the third lease, the said Lease of the Wood for 62. years, was
presently surrendered, because the Lessee has affirmed the Lessor to be able
to Lease.

Saunders Case, fo. 12.41. Eliz. com. banco. In an Action of wast.
IF a man have Land, in part whereof there is a Cole-myne appearing, and he
demise the Land to another for life or years, the Lessee may dig for cole,
etc. And the reason is, for that the Mine is open at the time of the demyse,
etc. and when he demyseth all his Lands, it shall be intended, that his meaning
was, that all the profit of the Land should pass, etc. but if the Mine be not
open, but within the Bowels of the Earth, at the time of the demise, it is
otherwise.

Also if a man have in his Lands, hidden or unknown Mines, and Lease the same
Lands and all Mines therein, the Lessee may dig for them.

Rosses case, 41. and 42. Eliz.
A Lease is made to A. and his Assigns, for his life, and the life of B. and
C. this is a Lease for three lives, and the Survivor of them.

Countess de Salops Case. fo. 13.42, and 43. Eliz. banco regis.
SHe brought an action of the Case against Crompton, and declared, that she
demised to him a House at will, Et quod ille tam negligenter and improvide
custodivit ignemsuum quod domus illa combusta fuit. the defendant pleaded, Non
culpa, and it was found not guilty. And 'twas adjudged, that for the permissive
wast, no Action lies against the opinion of Brook, in Title wast, 52. And the
reason of this judgment was, for that at the common Law no remedy lies, for
wast, either voluntary or permissive, against the Lessee for life or years,
because the Lessee has interest in the Land by the act of the Lessor, and it
was his folly to make such a Lease, and not to restrain him by Covenant,
condition, etc. And by the same reason Tenant at will shall not be punished for
permissive wast: But if Tenant at will commit voluntary wast, as pulling down
of houses, cutting of Trees, a general action of trespass lies against him,
for that these do amount to the determination of the will, without the entry
of the Lessor: but it was agreed, that in some Cases where there is confidence
put in the party, an action of the Case lies for negligence, although the
Defendant comes to the possession by the act of the Plaintiff, as, 12. E.
4.13. If one do commit his Horse to one to keep safely, the Defendant Equum
illum tam negligenter custodivit quod ob defectum bonae custodiae interijt, an
action upon the Case, lies for this Breach of trust, also 2. H. 7.11. If my
Shepherd which I trust with my Sheep, and by his negligence they be drowned
or otherwise perish, an action upon the case lies against him; but in this
case at the Bar, there was a demise at will made to the Defendant, and no
confidence reposed in him, wherefore it was ordered, that the Plaintiff should
not recover by her Bill.

Case of Ecclesiastical Persons. 43. Eliz. fo. 14. In the High Court of
Parliament.
AT a Parliament holden in this Michaelmasterme, it was resolved by the two
chief Justices, Popham and Anderson, and diverse other Justices Assistants, to
the Lord of the Parliament, in the upper House, that Leases made to the Queen,
by Colleges Deans, and Chapters, or any other, having spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Livings, against the provision of the Act, 13. Eliz. ca'. 10.
are restrained by the same Act, as well as Leases made to common persons, for
they are disabled by Parliament to make estates, the King being the head of the
Commonwealth may not be an Instrument to defeat the provision of an Act of
Parliament made, Pro bono publico. For though the Queen by the common Law, had
ability to take it, yet insomuch the Parliament had dissabled them to make
states, estates made to the Queen against the Act, are void.

Covenants, etc. Concerning Leases, Assurances, etc.
Spencers Case. 25. Eliz. fo. 16. Banco Regis.
A Lessee does Covenant for himself, his Executors, and Administrators, with
the Lessor, that he, his Executors or Assigns shall build a Brick Wall upon
parcel of the Land demised, etc. afterward the Lessee assigns over his
term to B. in this Case B. is not bound to build the Wall.

When the Covenant extends to a thing In esse, parcel of the demise, then the
thing to be done by force of the Covenant, is, Quodammodo, annexed and
appurtenant to the thing demised, and shall run with the Land, and bind the
Assignee, although he be not bound by express Covenant. But when the Covenant
extends to a thing which had not essence, at the time of the demise made, that
cannot be appurtenant, or annexed to a thing which had not essence. As if a
Lessee Covenant to repair the housses to him, demised during the term, this
is parcel of the contract, etc. and shall bind the Assignee, although he be not
bound expressly by the Covenant. But in this Case, the Covenant concerns a
thing which had not essence at the time of the demise, but to be made after,
and therefore it shall bind the Covenantor, his Executors and administrators,
and not the assignee, for the Law will not annexe the Covenant to a thing which
had not essence. It was resolved in this Case, if the Lessee had Covenanted for
him and his assigns, etc. that in as much as it was to be builded upon the
thing demised, it should bind the assignee, by express words. Also, if a
warranty be to one, his Heirs and assigns by express words, the assignee
shall take benefit thereof, and have a Warrantia cartae.

But although the Covenant be for him and his Assigns, yet if the thing to be
done be merely collateral to the Land demised, and do not concern the same,
the Assignee shall not be charged as if the Lessee Covenant for him and his
Assigns to build a house upon the Land of the Lessor, which is not parcel of
the demise, or to pay any collateral Sum of money to the Lessor, or to a
stranger, this shall not bind the Assignee. Also in a case of goods, as
Sheep, Chattell, etc. there is not any privity or reversion in the Assignee,
but merely a thing in action in the personalty, which cannot bind any but the
Covenantor, his Executors or administrators, which do represent him. The same
Law is, if a man demise Lands for years with a stock of Cattle, or Sum of
money rendering rent, and the Lessee Covenants for him, his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns to deliver the Stock of Cattle, or the Sum of
money, at the end of the Term, yet the Assignee shall not be charged with the
Covenant.

This word (Concessi) or (Demisi) imports a Covenant, and if an Assignee of a
Lessee be evicted, he may have a Writ of Covenant, so shall Tenant by Statute,
or Elegit of a Term, or he to whom the Lease is sold by force of any
Execution, etc.

If a man grant to a Lessee for years, that he shall have so many estovers, as
shall serve to repair his House, or that he shall burn within his House, or
such like during the Term, that is appurtenant to the Land, and shall run
with the same as a thing appurtenant, in whose hands soever the same comes.

Assignee of an Assignee, Executors of an Assignee, ASSIGNS of Executors, or
Administrators of every Assignee, may have Action of Covenant, for all are
comprised within this word (Assignees) for the same right that was in the
Testator, or intestate shall go to the Executors or administrators. It was
resolved, That the Act of 32. H. 8. c. 24. extends only to Covenants which
touch the thing demised, and not to collateral Covenants

Slingsbyes Case, 29. Eliz. fo. 18. Upon error, in the Exchequer Chamber.
IF any party Covenantor in a Tripertite Indenture break Covenant, all the
rest of the parties, Covenantees, are to maintain the Action, notwithstanding
the words of the Covenant, are Et ad and cum quolibet eo^um. But if a man
demise to A black Acre, to B. white acre, to C. green Acre, and Covenant with
them, and every of them, in this Case, in respect of the several interest by
these words, And every of them, the Covenant is made several, but if the
demise be made to them jointly, then these words in the Covenant (And every of
them) are made void.

A man cannot bind himself to three, and to every of them, to make that joint
or several at the Election of several persons, for one self same cause, for
the Court will be in doubt for which of them to give judgment

It was resolved, that an interest cannot be granted jointly and severally, as
if a man grant, Prox imam advocationem, or make a Lease for Term of years of
Land to two jointly and severally, these words severally are void, and they are
joyntenants; but a power and authority may be jointly and severally, as to make
livery, or to sell, for they have no interest or Action, but are as servants to
others. And judgment was reversed.

Rosewells Case, 35. Eliz. fo. 19.
BArgainor of Land covenanteth to make to the Bargainee such assurance as his
Council shall advise, the Bargainee himself cannot devise it, although he be
Learned in the Law, for then it would be no good plea to say, Quod consilium
non dedit advisamentum.

Higginbottoms Case, 35. Eliz. Banco regis, fo. 19.
A Parson assumeth to I. S. to make him such an estate in a Rectory, as the
Counsel of the said I. S. shall devise, the Counsel shall be given to I. S.
and he shall notify it to the Parson.

Styles Case, 38. Eliz. Banco regis, fo. 20.
A Charter with the words Haec indentura, without a manual Act of indenting of
the paper or parchment, is not an Indenture.

Sir Anthony Maynes Case, 38. Eliz. fo. 20. Error in Banco regis.
SIr A. M. Leaseth to S. for twenty one years, and binds himself to make a
new Lease unto him, upon surrender of the old; and Leaseth to another for 80.
years by fine. Scott the first Lessee brings debt, and had judgment. If you
be bound to enfeoffee one in the Manor of D. before such a Feast, if you make
a Feoffement to another of this Manor, before the same Feast, you have
forfeited the obligation, although that you purchase the Land again, before
the said Feast, because that you were once disabled to make the feoffement.

If a man Lease a Manor for years, and the Lessee covenanteth to uphold the
Houses, and to leave the same Manor in as good an estate as he found it, and
during the term, the Lessee makes wast in Houses, and cutting of Timber, etc.
the Lessor may have a Writ of Covenant before the end of the Term, for
cutting the Timber, for it was impossible that the Covenant should be performed
after, for the Timber, but otherwise of the Houses, Fitz Na. br. fo. 145 K. It
was also resolved, that if a man seized of Lands in Fee covenant to infeoffee
I. S. upon request, and after he makes a feoffement of the same to a Stranger,
in this Case I. S. may have an Action of Covenant without request.

Laughters Case, 37. Eliz. fo. 21. Banco regis
WHere a condition of an obligation consists upon two parts in the
disjunctive, and both possible at the time of the obligation made, and after
one of them becomes impossible, by the Act of God, the obligor is not bound to
perform the other part, for the condition is made for the benefit of the
obligor, and shall be taken most beneficial for him, and he had an Election
either to perform the one, or the other, for the saving of his Obligation, but
now, Impotentia excusat legem.

Hallings Case. 38. Eliz. Com. banco. fo. 22.
ONe Covenanteth to make an estate in Fee at the costs of the Covenantee, the
Covenantor is to do the first Act, Idest to Notify what assurance he will
make, that the Covenantee may know what sum to tender.

Mathewsons Case, 39 Eliz. fo. 23. Com. banco.
Several persons make several Covenants in one Indenture, or Writing, the
Seal of one of them is broken away, that shall not avoid the Covenant of the
rest, but only the Covenant of him, whose Seal is so debrused, or defaced.
Vide, Piggots Case, in the 11th Report, because several Covenants, otherwise
if joint.

Lambs case, 41. Eliz. fo. 23. com. banco.
A. Is bound unto B. to give unto B. such a release, etc. before the 22. day of
October next, as by the Judge of the Prerogative Court is thought fit. In this
Case A. must procure the Judge to do it, or devise it, for the Judge is a
stranger to the condition, and the condition is for the benefit of the
Obligor, and he has taken upon him to perform the same at his peril, but it
is otherwise if the Obligee or his Council should devise it.

Broughtons case, 43. Eliz. fo. 24. Banco regis.
IN an Action of Debt by Broughton Plaintiff against Pretty, upon an
Obligation, with condition, where the Plaintiff was bound in an obligation of
200. l. for the Defendant, for the payment of 100. l. to C. if therefore the
Defendant should save and keep harmless the said Broughton, from all Suites,
quarrels, and Demands, touching the said Obligation, etc. that then the
Obligation to be void, etc. at the day of payment of the 100. l. the Plaintiff
comes to the place where the 100 l. ought to be paid, and perceiving there
not any person present to pay the 100. l. for the Defendant, Broughton to save
the penalty of the Obligation, paid the money to C. and brought his Action upon
the Counter-bond, and it was adjudged that the Plaintiff should recover; for
the payment of the 100. l. is damage and harm. And it is not necessary,
whither the Plaintiff was arrested or sued, etc. Terror of suite, (so as he
dare not go about his business) is Damnification, although he be not arrested.

Deane and Chapter de Winsors Case, 44. Eliz. fo. 24. Banco regis.
A Man Leased a House by Indenture for years; the Lessee Covenants and grants
for him and his Executors with the Lessor, to repair the house at all times
necessary, the Lessee Assigns over, and the Assignee suffers the house to
decay, the Lessor brought an Action of Covenant against the Assignee, and it
was adjudged per Popham, and all the Court, that the Action lies although the
Lessee had not Covenanted for his Assigns, because in respect thereof the rent
is the less, which is, for the benefit of the Assignee, Qui sentit commodum
sentire debet and onus. If a man grant one Estovers to repair his house, this
is appurtenant to the house, Fitz H. not. br. 181.28. H. 8.28.

Sir Thomas Palmers Case, 43. El. fo. 24. banco regis.
SIr Thomas Palmer seized in Fee of a great Wood. Did bargain and sell to one
Cornford, and his Assigns 600. cords of Wood, to be taken by Assignement of
Sir Thomas, Cornford assigns his interest to one Basset, and afterward Sir
Thomas sells to one Maynard such quantity of Wood as will make 4000. cords at
Election of the Vendee; and afterward Sir Thomas assigns to Basset 600. cords
of Wood, to be taken by him, who does fall the same, and Maynard did take them
away, and converted them, etc. an Action upon the case was brought by Basset,
and judgment was given for him, for Corneford had an interest which he might
assign over, and not a thing in action or a possibility, for it was resolved,
if Sir Thomas did not assign them to Cornford upon request, Cornford might
take them without assignment, for the Grantor cannot by his own act or default
either subvert or derogate from his own grant. Therefore it ensues, that
Cornford had an interest that he might assign over. If A. have a house and
Land, and reasonable estovers in the Woods of another, by view and livery of
the Bayliffe, etc. if A. take estovers without view or livery, etc. he is a
trespassor, although he take less then he ought to have by livery. But if A.
demand his estovers and the Owner or his Bayliffe will not deliver to him, he
may have an Assize. 2. If the Assignement were void, yet the Defendant cannot
take Trees cut by another, but out of the residue of the Wood.

The Earl of Rutlands case, 2. Ja. fo. 25. banco regis.
EDward Earl of Rutland seized of the Manor of Eykering, by Indenure dated
10. March. Anno. 21. El. for augmentation of the jointure of Issabell his
Countess, did Covenant with Sir Gilb. Gerrard, and Thomas Houlcroft his
Brother, that before the end of Trinity term, then next following, he would
assure by fine, or other conveyance, the said Manor to the said Sir Gilb.
Gerrard, and Thomas in Fee, which syne or other conveyance, should be to the
use of the said Earl, and Issabell his Wife, and the Heirs of the said Earl,
which Indenture was acknowledged and enrolled in the Chancery, the 28. of the
same Month of March, by another Indenture between the said Earl on the one
part, and the Lord Burleigh on the other part, and Sir Gilb. Ger. and others on
the same part, for the advancement of the Heirs Males, of the said Earl, the
Earl did covenant, etc. to convey the said Manor amongst others, to the said
Lord Burgleigh, Sir Gilb. Gerrard, and others, or to any of them, before the
Feast of the Annunciation of our Lady next ensuing, which Assurance should be
to the use of the said Earl Edward and the Heirs, Males of his body, and for
want of such issue, to the use of the Heirs Males of Thomas Earl of Rutland,
with diverse remainders over, and in the same Indenture, the said Earl Edward,
did Covenant, etc. to stand seized to the uses contained in the second
Indenture. No fine or other assurance was leavyed or made by the said Earl
Edward, before the end of Trinity Term.

Afterward, (Viz.) 17. September. next following, the said Earl Edward,
acknowledged a note of a fine of the said Manor of Eikering, only to Sir
Gilb. Gerrard, and Thomas Ho: and the Heirs of Sir Gilb. And the 18. day of
the said Month acknowledged another ^ote of a fine of the said Manor of
Eckering, amongst many other Manors mentioned in the later Indenture to the
Lord Burghley, Sir Gil. Gerrard, and other parties to the later Indenture, and
both fines were entered in Octabis Mich. next after. And it was proved by
diverse testimonies, that the said Earl Edward, as well before the Indentures
as after the fine leavyed, said, that the said Countess should have the Manor
of Eckering. And it was resolved, by Popham chief Justice, and all the Court.

First, although the Indenture being made for declaring of uses of a subsequent
fine, recovery or other conveyance, to certain persons, and within a certain
time, and to certain uses, yet they are but only directory, and do not bind
the estate or inerest of the Land, yet if the fine, recovery, or other
assurance be persued according to the Indenture, there cannot be any averrment
made against the Indentures taken in this Case; that after the making of the
Indentures, and before the assurance by mutual agreement of the parties, was
concluded and agreed, that the assurance should be to other uses, but if other
agreement or limitation of uses, be made by writing or by other matter of as
high, or higher nature, then the later agreement should stand, for every
contract or agreement ought to be dissolved by matter of as high nature as the
first was. Nil tamconveniens est naturali aequitati quam unum quodq: dissolui
eo ligamine quo ligatum est.

Also, it was very inconvenient, that matters in writing should be controuled
by averrment of parties, to be proved by incertaine testimony of slippery
memory, and should be perilous to purchasors, Farmers, etc.

2. It was resolved, that if the form of the Indentures be not pursued (as for
quantity of Land, the time within which the fine should be leavyed, etc.)
Averrment without writing may be taken, that the fine, etc, was to other use,
then was contained in the Indenture, by reason of a new agreement subsequent
which in this case, may be as well by word as writing.

3. It was resolved, that although the indentures be not pursued, in
circumstance of time, quantity, person, etc. yet if no other means new
agreement be proved the fine, etc. in judgment of Law shall be to the use
named in the Indenture. The fines cannot be directed by both the Indentures
although perhaps it was the meaning of the parties, because the directions and
declarations of the first Indenturs were controuled and frustrated by the said
second Indentures.

Cases of Executors.
Russells Case, 26. Eliz. fo. 27. banco regis.
A Release by an Infant Executor, under the Age of 21. years, is no bar, but
upon payment or satisfaction to an Infant Executor, he may acquit and
discharge the Debt, for so much as he receives: All things that he does
according to the Office and duty of an Executor, shall bind him, an Executor
may release before probate of Testament, for although he may not have an
Action, yet the Interest of the Action is in Law in him at the time of the
release.

Middletons Case, 1. Ja. in com. banco. fo. 28.
IT was adjudged between Middleton and Rymot, that an Executor before probate
may release action, although that before the probate, he may not have action
for the right of the Action is in him: but if A. release, and after take
administration that shall not bar him, for the right of the Action, was not in
him at the time of the release. Two Executors prove the Testament, the third
refuses, yet he may release Littlet. 117. if one be bound to pay a sum of
money at a day to come, a release of actions before the day is a Bar, and yet
before the day he could have no action.

Harrisons Case, 40. Eliz. fo. 28. com. banco.
IT was adjudged, that a judgment upon Debt due by obligation, shall be paid
before a Statute made for performance of Covenants, which are things in
contingency, and in future, or other Statutes or recognizances for Debt vide
Sadlers Case in the Fourth Book, although the judgment be after the
acknowledgment of the Statute.

Piggots Case, 40. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 29.
ONe brings Debt as administrator, Durante minore aetate, of one whhom he
averred to be within age, and he does not say, that he was within the age of
17. years, and the Plaintiff was barred, because at that age the
Administration cease.

Princes Case, 41, and 42. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 29.
AN Infant is made Executor, Administration durante minori etate, may be
committed to the Mother or other Friend of the Infant, which shall cease and be
void, when the Infant is at the age of 17. years, and this administrator may
not sell any goods of the Decest, unless it be for necessity of payment of
Debts, for he has his Office of administrator, Pro bono and commodo Infantis,
and not for his prejudice, also he cannot assent to pay legacies unless there
be assents to pay Debts, etc. and if it be a Woman under the age of 17. years,
and take a Husband of full age, the Administration cease.

Where one has goods solely, in an inferior Dioces, yet the Metropolitan of
that Province, pretending that he had Bona notabilia, in diverse Diocesses
committed the Administration, etc. this Administration is not void, but
voidable by sentence, because the Metropolitan has Jurisdiction in all places
within his Province, but if the ordinary of one Diocese commit the
administration of goods, when the party has Bona notabilia, in diverse
Diocese this administration is merely void, as well for his goods within the
Diocese as without, vide, Vere and Jeffrays Case, 22. Eliz. in banck le roy,
there cited and so adjudged.

Caulters Cose, fo. 30. 40. and 41. Eliz. banco regis.
AN Executor in his own wrong ought not to retain goods in his own hands to
satisfy his own just Debt, for every Creditor by such means when the goods
be not sufficient, would strive to make himself Executor, De son tort, to
satisfy himself, and bar others, etc. And it is not reasonable that one
should take advantage of his own wrong, Non facies malum, ut inde fiat bonum,
and melius est omnia mala pati quod malo consentire. It is also clear, that
all lawful acts, that such an Executor does, or disseisor or an abator, etc.
are good.

Hargraves Case, 41. and 42. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 31.
LEssor brings Debt against the Administrator of the Lessee for years, for
rent due after the Administration committed in the Debet, and so it ought to
be, because he himself took the profits, and nothing is assets in his hands,
but the profits, besides the rent, but in all Actions brought by Executors (as
Executors) the Writ shall be always in the Detinet tantum, although the duty
accrue in their own time.

Pettifers Case, 45. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 32.
UPon a fieri facias de bonis, testatoris the Sheriff returns Nulla bona, a
Writ issues to the Sheriff to inquire by inquest, if the Executors have
wasted, and how much who returns that they have, and judgment given against
them, De bonis proprijs, they bring error in redditione Executionis, and the
Execution was reversed, for the course is, upon Nulla bona, to have a special
Fieri Facias to make Execution De bonis proprijs, if they have wasted, and if
the Sheriff so does, where they have not wasted, they have remedy against him:
but if he takes an inquest, and returns it, although it be false, there is
no remedy against the Sheriff, or any other.

Robinsons Case, 1. Jac, com. banco. fo. 32.
EXecutor brings Debt as Administrator, and is barred by Plea, that he is
Executor, he may bring Debt, as Executor, for he was barred, as to the Action
of the Writ, to have Debt as Administrator, but not to the Action.

Reads Case, fo. 33. 2. Jac. com. banco.
WHen a man dies intestate, and a strange person takes the goods of the
intestate, and uses them, or sells them; this makes him an Executor of his
own wrong, for when none assumeth to be Executor, nor takes Letters of
administration, there the using of the goods is sufficient to charge one as
Executor, De son torte, for those to whom the Deceast was indebted unto have
not any other in this case, against whom they may bring their actions, for
recovery of their Debts. When an Executor is made, and he proves the
Testament, or assumeth upon him the charge, and does administer, in this case,
if a stranger take any of the goods, and claim them for his own, this does
not make him an Executor of his own wrong, because there is another lawful
Executor.

A lawful Executor shall not be charged, but with the goods that come to his
hands, after that he assumes upon him the charge of the Will, etc. but if
another man first take the goods, etc. before the lawful Executor has assumed
the Execution, or proved the Testament, in this case, he may be charged, as an
Executor of his own wrong.

Constructeon of the Statutes of Jeofails, etc. Amendment of Records, Fines,
Recoveries, etc.
Playters Case, 25. and 26. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 34.
THe Defendant was found guilty in trespass Quare clausum fregit and pisces
suos cepit, and damages assessed entirely; it was moved in arrest of judgment,
because in the Count, neither the nature nor the number of Fishes was showed.
It was answered by the Plaintiff, That the Defendant is found guilty to
damages, and so Non refert, of what nature or number they are. 2. That the
Fishes themselves are not to be recovered but damages for them, therefore no
need to show the certainty. 3. All the damages shall be intended to be given
for the close broken, which is laid in the Declaration. 4. It is matter of
form, aided by the Statute of 18. Eliz cap. 14. But judgment was stayed, for
the Office of the Declaration is to reduce the Writ to certainty, for otherwise
upon such a general Issue, if the Jury give a false Verdict, they cannot be
attainted, and damages shall be intended to be given for all, because they are
entire, but if they had been severed, the Plaintiff shall recover for so much
as is well pleaded, and this is matter of substance, and not of form, because
it is no default of the Clerk, but of the Plaintiff, and therefore not aided
by the Statute.

Walcots Case, 30. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 36.
DEbt was brought against Baron and Feme, in the Detinet tantum, upon an
Obligation by the Feme before Marriage; it ought to be in the Debet, and
Detinet because the Baron had the goods of the wife in his own right, and for
that reason debt is brought against the Heir in the Debet, and this is matter
of substance, and point of the Action, not remedied by the Statute of 18. Eliz.
c. 14.

Baynehams Case, 30. Eliz. in Scaccar, fo. 36.
AN Ejectione firmae of Lands in A. B. and C. tried for the Plaintiff by a
Visne out of A. only, this is insufficient, and not remedied by any Statute.

Gardiners Case, 21. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 37.
23. Jurors are returned, 12. appear and find for the Plaintiff, this is
remedied by 18. Elizabeth, cap. 14.

Bishops Case, 34. Eliz. banco regis, fo. 37.
VAriance is between the Writ and count in name, the Plaintiff recovers, the
Defendant brings Error, the Writ was removed into the Kings Bench, and the
judgment was reversed, because the Statute remedieth where there is no
Original, but not where the Original is vicious, and although it were removed
after pleading, etc. yet because the fault appeared to the Court, the judgment
was reversed.

Teys Case, 34. Eliz. Banco regis fo. 38.
BAron and Feme levy a fine to one who grants and renders to them two, and to
the Heirs of the Baron, and after renders part to the Feme in tail, the
remainder over, the Heir of the Husband brings a Writ of Error, and assigns
for error the said Variance. 1. Resolved, that there needs not a precise
form in render upon a fine, but it shall be in this case construed, as a grant
by Charter, for it is but a grant of record.

2. There are five parts of a fine.

1. The Original.

2. The License to accord, for which the Kings Silver is due, and ought to be
entered upon the Writ of Covenant, and the sum, and he who pays it, that
is, he in whom the fee reposeth, the Plea, and betwixt whom, etc. and the Land
ought to be mentioned.

3. The concord, which is the substance of the fine, for if upon that, the
Kings silver be paid, although the party dye, the fine is good.

4. The Note, which is many times taken for the Concord.

And lastly, the Foot of the fine, after delivery of the Indentures of the
fine, the fine is said to be engrossed.

3. The Conusor shall not assign error in the render, because it is to his
advantage, and none shall assign Error, except it be to his disadvantage.

Dormers Case, 35. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 40.
A Common recovery is had in a Writ of Entry, in the Post de uno annuali
redditu sive pensione quatuor marcarum, and of an advowson, whereupon a Writ of
Error is brought. 1. Because every Praecipe ought to be certain, but here it
is in the Disjunctive. 2. A Writ of entry in the Post lies not of an advowson:
But judgment was affirmed, and thereby 'twas resolved. 1. That a common
recovery is not like to other recoveries, for it may be averred to an use. 2.
It is by mutual consent, and consensus tollit errorem. 3. A Writ of entry in
the Post lies of an advowson common, etc. to suffer a common recovery and not
otherwise, for no other assurance can be had to bar the remainders.

2. The demand of the rent is good, for one of two things is not demanded, but
one thing by two names, for rent and pension are Synonima, and the rather here,
because it is said to issue out of Land, which a Pension properly cannot. 3.
Common recoveries are so usual, that the Court shall take notice that they are
common recoveries.

Rowlands Case, 35. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 41.
A Pannell of a Jury is annexed to the Venire facias without return, this is
vicious and not remedied by 18. Eliz. cap. 14. for that remedieth insufficient
returns, but not where no return.

The Countess of Rutlands Case, 36. Eliz. fo. 42.
RObert Moore is returned upon the Venire facias, but in the panell before the
Justices of Nisi prius, and in the Postea he was named Robert Mawre; if it
appear that Moore is his right name, and that it is he who was sworn, it is
good, for by the common Law this was a discontinuance against all the Jurors,
and discontinuances are aided by the Statute, otherwise if he were misnamed in
the Venire facias, and had his right name in the Panell and Postea.

Codwells Case, 36. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 42.
A Juror who gave verdict, was misnam'd in the Venire facias, and had his right
name in the Distringas, and Postea, and for that the judgment was arrested.

Nicholls Case, 38. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 43.
C. Brings Debt upon a single Bill against N. who pleaded Payment without
Acquittance, which was found for the Plaintiff, although issue was joined upon
a point not material, yet after Verdict this is aided by 32. H. 8. and 18.
Eliz.

Bohuns Case, 39. Eliz. fo, 43.
A Fine was levied of a Manor, and other Lands, to the value of twenty Marks
per annum, so that the Kings silver is 40 s which was paid, but in entering of
it upon the Writ of Covenant, the Manor was omitted, and thereupon error was
brought; but after that, the transcript of the fine was removed into the Kings
Bench, the Judges of the common place amended the Record because it appears to
them that the Kings silver was paid for the Manor, and where the Writ of
Covenant was, Deed meipso, for, Test meipso, they amended that also, and
certified it into the Kings Bench upon dimunution, and allowed.

Freemans Case, fo. 45. 41. Eliz. Banco regis.
IN an original Writ etc. Quod nullus faciat vastum venditionem et
destrictionem, where it should be destructionem, the fault was only in one
Letter, the Court resolved upon good Consideration, that it was matter of
substance: for Destrictio is a Latin word, and alters the sense of the
Statute; and matter of Substance in an Original Writ is not remedied, but
matter of form only, Vide Statute 32. H. 8. ca. 30. and 18. Eliz. ca. 14.

If an Original at this day want form, or contain false Latin, or vary from
the Register in matter of form, after Verdict no judgment shall be stayed or
reversed. But if it want substance, although it be the misprision of the
Clerk, this is not remedied by any Statute.

Gages Case, 41. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 45.
A Writ of Covenant to levy a fine, boar Date after the return, this is
amendable because a common assurance, but in other actions, no amendment, etc.

Cooks Case, 41. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 46.
A Common recovery of the Manor of Isfeild, by the name of Iffeld, is
amendable, because it appeared to the Court, by collateral things, showed unto
them that Isfield was intended to pass.

Cases of Pardons.
Francklyns Case, 36. Eliz. fo. 46. In the Starr-Chamber.
A Bill was exhibited for a Riot in the Star Chamber, five years before the
general Pardon 35. Eliz. and it was resolved, that the Kings fine was
excepted, but not the corporal Punishment, but if it were exhibited within
four years, all shall be accepted. In this Case, the Kings attorney may
proceed for the fine.

Guilbert Littletons Case, 39. Eliz. fo. 47. Star Chamber.
A Bill exhibited in the Star Chamber before the Parliament 35. Eliz. and
returned after, this is excepted out of the general pardon, for it was
depending before the return, but if an Original Writ issues out of the
Chancery, returnable in the common place, this is not depending before the
return, because out of another Court, but after the return, it shall be said
depending by relation, from the day of the Test: and if the Tenant alien
before the return, and after the Test, this shall be said an alienation,
pending the Writ.

Drywoods Case, 42. Eliz. Star Chamber. fo. 48.
A Bill in the Star Chamber more then four years, and within 8. years,
before the Parliament in 39. Eliz. the Plaintiff dies before the general
pardon, this is pardoned, for this does not depend now, and the words remaining
to be prosecuted, shall be intended for the party, and not for the Kings
Attorney.

Vaughans Case, 40. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 49.
A Writ of entry in the Quibus, depends in Wales, before the general Pardon,
and after the Demandant had judgment, but the Tenant was not amerced. 1.
Resolved, the Amercement is pardoned, because the Torte was pardoned, which
together with the delay was the ground thereof. 2. The Statutes of Jeofailes
extend to Wales, because it is made parcel of England, by the Act of 27. H. 8.

Wyrrells Case, 41. Eliz. In the Exchequer, fo. 49.
THe Queen brings debt upon an Obligation made by the Defendant, to one who
was Outlawed, the Defendant pleads the general Pardon; and although that Debts
due to the Queen are excepted, yet Debts Originally due to the Subject, and
after came to the Queen, are not excepted, also the genetall pardon is to be
taken beneficially, for the subject, and most strong against the King.

Biggens case, 41. Eliz. Banco regis, fo. 50.
THe King may pardon burning in the hand, where the Defendant is found guilty
of Manslaughter, and has his Clergy in an appeal. 1. Because it is but to
notify to the Judges, that he has once had his Clergy, and that he shall not
have it again, by the Statute of 4. H. 7. c. 13. 2. Because it is no part of
the judgment, and the party shall go at large, although he be not burned by
good construction of the Statute of 18. Eliz. c. 7. which provideth, that after
Clergy allowed and Burning, he shall go at large, for otherwise, when he is
pardoned, he shall be imprisoned for ever. In the Star Chamber, the King may
Pardon corporal punishment for forgery, etc. but not if attainted at the
common Law in an Action of forgery of false deeds.

Halls Case, 2. Jacobi. com. banco. fo. 51.
A. C. Libelled, for defamation in the Court Christian against H. and had
sentence and costs taxed at a day to be paid, H. sueth an appeal, and obtaines
a Pardon from the King, and brings a prohibition. 1. Resolved, all Suites in
the Court Christian, Pro salute animae, or reformatione morum, are for the King
as suits in the Starr-chamber, and he may pardon them before or after the Suite
comenced, but he cannot Pardon, where the party sueth for a thing in which he
had interest, as Tithes. 2. All proceedings in the Court Christian Ex officio,
are for the King, and he may pardon them. 3. Although the suite may be
pardoned, yet he cannot pardon the costs which are taxed. 4. Although the
sentence by the appeal is suspended to many purposes, yet until reversall,
the party had interest in the costs, not pardonable, and after a consultation
was granted for the costs.

Pages case. 30. Eliz. in the Exchequer. fol. 52.
I. Demiseth to his wife who is an Alien, and before the death of the Testator
indenized, the date of the Letters Patents is corrupted, so that they bore date
after his death, she obtaines an exemplification, by Commission under the
Exchequer Seal, it is found that she was an alien, and an Information is
brought against her, and she pleads the exemplification. 1. Resol. This office
is void, for every office of Intitling, as this is, ought to be by Commission
under the Great Seal; but an office of Instruction may be under the Exchequer
Seal: 2. It appeared not, what authority the Commissioners had, but Inquisitio
capta virtute Cujusdam Commissionis, etc. 2. That the Exemplification was
pleadable by the Statute of 13. Eliz. c. 6. which extends to all Patents
whatsoever without any restraint: An Exemplification, and an Inspeximus, as an
Innotescimus and a Vidimus are all one: A Constat cannot be had without
Affidavit, and it is when Letters are casually lost: An Innotescimus, or a
Vidimus, are always of a Charter of Feoffment, or other Instrument, not of
Record.

Knights case. 31. Eliz. Communi Banco. fol. 54.
THe Prior of St. John of Je: 29. H. 8. Leased diverse houses, reserving 5. li.
10. s. 11. d. per annum at the four usual feasts in L. viz. for one house 3.
li. 11. d. and so severally of the others, with condition of reentry for non
payment, and after surrenders to H. 8. who in Anno 36. grants one house to the
lessee, and another in fee, the lessee dies; It is found by Inquisition in the
Com'. of Mid'. by Commission under the Exchequer Seal, that 37. s. 5. d.
parcel of the said rent was arreare at M. for a quarter of a year, before the
return of the office or seizure the King grants the residue of the houses to
one who leaseth to the Plaintiff, who upon entry of the Executors of the first
lessee brings Trespass, and the Court being divided, it was argued in the
Exchequer Chamber by all the Judges.

1. Resol. This is an entire Lease, and the viz. is but a declaration of the
several values of the houses, and no severance of the reservation, but by apt
words diverse parcells may be severally leased by one demise, and several rents
reserved. 2. Admitting them several rents, yet the condition is entire, and in
case of a common person by severance of any part of the reversion, will be
extinct. 3. This being in case of the King his patentee of part shall not take
advantage of the condition, but the King himself may, and the Patentee to whom
he grants the residue, although the Lease originally made by a Subject. 4.
Although it be found that more was arreare then was reserved quarterly, yet it
suffices that the office had matter of substance, and the Jury in M. may find
which are the usual feasts in L. 5. The grant after office and before the
return of it is good, and by entry without other seizure the Lease is void.
6. This office under the Exchequer Seal is sufficient to entitle the King to a
Chattell.

Specots case. 32. Eliz. Banco Regis in Error. fol. 57.
S. and sa feme bring a Qu: impedit against the Bishop of E. and declare that
J. A. was seized of a Manor, to which an advowson was appendant, and demised
it to the feme for life, and they presented D. W. who dyed, and so it belongs
to them to present; the defendant pleads that the plaintiff presented one who
is schismaticus inveteratus, whereof he gave notice to the plaintiff: It was
adjudged for the plaintiff, in the Common place, and Error brought thereupon.

1. Error. Because no presentment alleged in J. A. but over ruled for the
presentment of the plaintiff, is sufficient for themselves. 2. The Bishop
ought not to show any particular schism, for the Court of the King cannot
judge of it, but the Bishop is Judge: also it is cause to remove a Coroner,
quia minus Idoneus: It was answered that he ought to show the heresy in
certain, and although the Bishop is Judge, yet because his Act is not of
Record, it is traversable, and although it belongs not to the Kings Court to
judge of Heresies, yet the general cause of suite being in their conusance,
they shall determine of it by advise of Divines, and the cause of removing a
Coroner is not traversable. 3. The Bishop is twice amerced, and a man can be
amerced but once toward one man, etc. It was answered, that he was but once
amerced; for the Judgment in the Kings Bench was but a rehersall of the
former, yet admitting the second Judgment thereby void; nevertheless the
first Judgment is good by the Common Law without damages, Quod fuit concessum
per totam Curiam.

Fostar. 32. El. in Banco le roy. fol. 59.
IT was resolved that the Constable having a warrant to bring one coram aliquo
Justiciar'. etc. it is at the election of the Officer to bring the party so
attached to what Justice he will; For it is greater reason to give the election
to the Officer, who (in presumption of Law) is a person indifferent, and sworn
to execute his Office duly then to the Delinquent Wray chief Justice said,
that a Justice of Peace may make his warrant to bring the party before
himself, and it is good and sufficient in Law; for it is most like, that he
has the best knowledge of the matter, and therefore most fit to do Justice in
that matter: upon refusal to find surety the Constable may commit him without
a new warrant.

Gooches case. 32. El. in banco le roy. fol. 60.
WRay chief Justice said, that if A. make a fraudulent conveyance of his Lands
to deceive a purchasor against the Statute of 27. El. and continues in
possession, and is reputed as owner; B enters in communication with A. for
the purchase, and by accident B. has notice of this fraudulent conveyance,
Notwithstanding he concludes with A. and takes his assurance. In this case B.
shall avoid the said fraudulent conveyance by the said Act, notwithstanding
the notice, for the Act by express words has made the fraudulent conveyance
void, as to the purchasor. And for as much as that is within the express
provision of the Statute, it ought to be taken and expounded in suppression of
fraud. Resolved, that fraud may be given in Evidence, because the estate is
void by the Act of 13. Eliz. and fraud is hatched in secret, in arbore cava
and opaca.

And according to this opinion, it was resolved Per tot' Cur' in communi banco
Pasche 3o. Jac. where one Bullock had made a fraudulent estate of his Lands
within the Statute of 27. El. to A. B. and C. and after offered to sell the same
to one Standen, and before the assurance by Bullock, Standen had notice
thereof, and notwithstanding proceeded, and took the assurance from Bullock,
Standen avoided the former assurance of fraud by the said act, for the notice
of the purchasor cannot make that good, which an Act of Parliament has made
void as to him. And it is true, Quod non decipitur qui scit se decipi. But in
this case the purchasor is not deceived; for the fraudulent conveyance whereof
he had notice is made void, (as to him) by the Statute, and therefore he knew
it could not hurt him.

Sparries case. 33. Eliz. in Scaccar. fol. 61.
IN action of Trover and convertion, the defendant pleads that there is another
action depending in the Kings Bench for the same Trover, and good; for in
actions which comprehend no certeinty, as assize or trespass, this is no plea
before a Count, because thereby it is made certain, and then it is a good
plea, and not before: but in this action and debt and detinue, it is a good
plea at the first, because they are certain: that an action is depending in an
inferior Court is no plea.

Cases of By-Lawes.
Chamberlain de Londons case. 32. El. in Banco le roy. fol. 66.
THe Inhabitants of a village without any custom, may make Ordinances or
By-Lawes for reparation of the Church, or of highways, or any such thing,
which is for the public weal generally; and in this case the consent of the
greater part shall bind all without any custom, vide 44. E. 3.19. But if it
be for their own private profit for that Town, as for their well ordering of
their common of pasture, or such like, then without custom they cannot make
by-Lawes. And if it be a custom, yet the greater part shall not bind all, if
it be not warranted by the custom; for as custom has created them, so they
ought to be warranted by the custom, 8. E. 2. tit. ass. As pontage, murage,
Toll, and such like, as appears in 13. H. 4.14. In which cases the sums
for reparations of the Bridge walls, etc. ought to be so reasonable, that the
Subject may have more benefit thereby then charge.

Clerks case. 38. Eliz in communi banco. fol. 64.
KIng Edward 6. did incorporate the Town of St. Albones, and granted them to
make Laws and Ordinances, etc. The Term was kept there, and the Major, etc.
by assent of the plaintiff, assessed every Inhabitant for the charges in
erecting of the Courts there, and if any did refuse to pay, etc. to be
imprisoned, etc. the plaintiff being Burges refused to pay, etc. and the Major
justified, etc and it was adjudged no plea, etc. For this Ordinance is against
Magna Charta, ca. 29. Nullus liber homo imprisonetur, which act has been
confirmed diverse times (viz.) thirty times, and the assent of the plaintiff
cannot alter the Law in this case. But it was resolved that the Major, etc.
might inflict reasonable penalty, but not imprisonment, which penalty ought
to be Levied by Distress; for which offense an action of Debt lies, and the
plaintiff in this case had judgment.

Jeffrays case Michaelis 31, 32. en Bank le Roy. fol. 66.
WIlliam Jeffray Gent. brought a prohibition against Abraham Kenshley and
Thomas Forster, Churchwardens of Haylesham in Com' Sussex, for that they sued
him in Court Christian before Doctor Drury for certain money imposed upon him
without his assent, for repair of the Church; That the Churchwardens with the
assent of the greatest part of the Parishioners, juxta quantitatem and
qualitatem possessionum and reddit' infra dict' parochiam existent. Determined
and agreed to make a taxation for repair of the said Church, and that notice
of such assembly was given in the Church, at which day the Churchwardens and
greater part of the Parish, which were there assembled, made a taxation (viz.)
every occupier of Land for every acre 4. d. etc. Geffray dwelt in another
Parish, and declared that the Parishioners of every Parish ought to repair
their Church, and not the Church of another Parish. Cook of council with the
defendant demurred in Law, and after many arguments a Writ of consultation was
granted. And it was resolved, that the Court Christian has conusans de
reparatione corporis sive navis Ecclesiae: Britton who writ in 5. E. 1.

And in the Statute of Circumspecte agatis, but in Rebus manifestis errat qui
authoritates legum allegat quia perspicue vera non sunt probanda. It was also
resolved, that although Geffray did dwell in another Parish, yet for that he
had Lands in the said Parish, in his proper possession, he is in the Law
Parochianus de Haylesham.

But it was resolved, that where there was a Farmor of the same Lands, the
Lessor that receives the rent shall not be charged, but the Inhabitant is the
Parishioner, and the receipte of the rent does not make the Lessor a
Parishioner.

Diverse of the civil Lawyers certified the Court, that the Church Wardens and
a greater part of the Parishioners (upon a general warning) assembled, may
make a Taxation by their Law, and the same shall not charge the Land, but the
Person in respect of the Land, for equality and indifferency, and this was the
first leading case that was adjudg'd and reported in Our Books touching these
matters, and many causes after were adjudged thus, and now it is generally
received for Law.

The Lord Cheneys Case. 33. Eliz. In cur. wardo. fol. 68.
IN a devise of Lands by writing, an averment out of the will, shall not be
received for a Will concerning Lands, etc. ought to be in Writing, and not by
any averrment out of the same; otherwise it were great inconvenience that not
any might know by the written words of the will, what construction to make, if
it might be controuled by collateral averrment out of the will.

Cases of Usury.
Burtons Case, 34. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 69.
A. Lends to T. W. 100. l. 7. July 21. Eliz. in consideration of which, T. W.
grants to him a rent charge of 20. l. per annum, the first payment to be at the
Nativity, 1580. upon condition of payment of the said 100. l. this is out of
the Statute of Usury, for he had a 100. l. for a year and a quarter, without
consideration, and if he pay it within this Time, A. shall not have the rent,
so that he was not assured of any consideration: But if it were agreed between
them that the 100. l. shall not be paid, this is within the meaning of the
Statute. A Demurrer is a confession of all such matters in fact only as are
well and sufficiently pleaded.

Claytons Case. 37. Eliz. Com'. Banco. fol. 70.
THirty pound was lent for half a year to have for it thirty-three pound, if
the son of the obligee be then in life, if not 27. pound. this is within the
intent of the Statute of Usury: Vsura dicitur ab usu and aere, quasi usuaera,
(1.) usus aeris; Et usura est commodum certum, quod propter usum rei mutuatae
recipitur: Glanvile. lib. 7. cap. 16.

Hoes Case, 34. Eliz. fo. 70.
A Duty certain upon a condition subsequent may be released, before the day of
the performance of the condition, but a duty uncertain at the first, and upon
condition precedent to be made certain after, this in the mean time is but
only a mere possibility, and therefore cannot be released. And it was
adjudged 4. El. in communi Banco, that by a release of all actions, suites, and
quarrels, a covenant before breach of it is not released thereby. But by a
release of covenants, the covenantor is discharged before the breach, vide
Litt'. 170.

A release in the time of vacation to the Patron discharges an annuitie,
wherewith the Parson is charged in respect of the parsonage, and a warranty may
be released before suite, because he may have a warrantia chartae.

St. John's case. 34. El. Banco Regis. fol. 71.
DAggs, Pistolls, etc. are within the Statute of 33. H. 8. ca'. 6. the same
Statute does prohibit Crosse-bowes, and under the same name stone-bowes are
forbidden; for if a small alteration or addition should defeat the penalty of
the act, the Statute should be of small effect. And it was resolved, that the
Sheriff, or any of his Officers, for the better execution of Justice, may
carry handguns or other weapons invasive or defensive, and not restreined by
the general prohibition of the said act, vide 3o. H. 7. fo. 1.

Williams case. 37. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 72.
ONe man shall not have an action of the case for common Nusans made in the
high way, because it is a common Nusans, and it is not reason, that any
particular person should have an action, for then every particular person might
have an action for the same, and so thereby one might be punished an hundred
times for one cause. But if any particular person have more particular damage
then another, he may have a particular action upon the case for this
particular injury, and for common Nusances, which are equal to all the Kings
people; the common Law has appointed other Courts (viz.) Leets, etc. A
prescription to do divine service in a Chapel for the Lord and his tenants
is remediable only in the Court Christian; but for the Lord and his private
family, an action of the case lies for the Lord only.

Case of Orphans of London. 35. El. Banco Regis. fol. 73.
IF any Orphane of London sue for goods, etc. in the Court Christian, or of
Requests, a prohibition lies, because their government by their custom
belongs to the Major of L. So, if a Will be proved in the Court Christian, the
probate whereof belongs to the Lord of a Manor.

Wymarkes case. 36. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 74.
Plaintiff in an Ejectione firmae, counts of a Lease of R. S. the defendant
pleads in bar an Indenture of bargain and sale (and shows it) by the said
R. S. to E. W. who was seized until disseised by R. S. who leased to the
plaintiff, and he as servant to E. W. enters; Three Terms after the
plaintiff replies, that the bargain and sale was upon condition, which was
broken, and the bargainor entered and leased to him, and did not show forth the
deed of bargain and sale: Judgment given for the defendant.

1. Resol. When a Deed is showed to the Court, it remains in the Court all
the Term in Judgment of Law, because the Term is but one day in Law, and
this as well to strangers as parties, to take advantage thereof without
showing, but at the end of the Term it shall be delivered to the party, if it
be not denied, for then it shall remain in Court to be damned, if it be found
not his Deed.

2. The Course in the Kings Bench is, that Imparlances to plead in bar are
entered, but not Imparlances to Reply or rejoyne, so that the Replication here,
although it be three Terms after the Bar, yet it shall be intended here the
same Term, and so he shall not need to show the Deed.

Cliftons case. 35. Eliz. fol. 75.
IF a woman tenant for life take an husband which commits wast, and after
the wife dies the husband is dispunishable of and for such wast; for the Writ
is Quare cum de communi consilio, etc. provisum sit quod non liceat alicui
vastum venditionem seu destructionem facere de terris, etc. sibi demissis ad
terminum vitae vel annorum, etc. And in this case the husband has not any
estate for life in this Land; but the wife has estate for life, and the
husband but only an estate in her right, and so he is not within the Act.

Pilkintons case. 43. Eliz. in banco le Roy. fo. 76.
IT was resolved, Per tot' Cur', that when a distress is taken for damage
fesant, that the party may tender amends until the beasts be impounded; but
after they be in the pound, they are in the custody of the Law, and then the
tender comes too late. It was also resolved, that tender of amends to the
Bayliffe or servant that takes them, will not serve; for he cannot deliver the
distress once taken, no more then change the avoury of his Master, or demand
rent upon a condition of reentry.

The Earl of Pembrookes case, 36. El. Banco Regis. fol. 76.
WHere the defendant shows a Deed to the Court, the plaintiff may pray it to
be entered in haec verba the same Term, but not after.

Pagetts case. 35. El. in communi banco. fol. 76.
IT was resolved, that if tenant for life, the remainder for life, the
remainder in fee, if tenant for life makes wast in trees, and after he in
remainder for life dye, an action of wast is maintainable, for the wast done in
the life of him in remainder for life, because it was to the disinheritance of
him in remainder in fee. And now the impediment (which was the mean estate for
life) is taken away. Et remoto impedimento emergit actio; It was resolved, that
when the trees are cut down, the property thereof belongs to him in
remainder in fee. And where it is said in some Books, That he in remainder or
reversion in fee, shall not have an action of wast, it is to be intended,
during the continuance of the mean remainder. And in other Books is said in
this case, that an action of wast does lie, it is intended after the death of
him in remainder for life.

Boothes case. 36. Eliz. in communi Banco. fol. 77.
GEeorge Booth brought an action of wast against Skevington, and declared that
Sir William Booth demised for years to Ensor, who assigned to Skevington. The
defendant pleaded an assignement to Elizabeth Cave, before which assignement no
wast was made; the plaintiff replied, and showed the Statute 11. H. 6. ca. 5.
and that the grant to Elizabeth Cave was made to the intent he should not know
against whom to bring his action, and averred, that Skevington did take the
profits; the defendant rejoyned that Elizabeth Cave granted her estate to A.
who demised to the defendant at will, and traversed the fraud, etc. the
plaintiff demurred, it was resolved, that every assignee of every Lessee
mediatly or immediately is within the said act; for the Statute was made to
suppress fraud, and deceit, and therefore it should be taken most
beneficially. Secondly, that he in remainder is within the said act, as well as
he in reversion. Thirdly, the intent of fraud aforesaid, is not traversable,
but the taking of the profits, which is a thing notorious, whereof the Country
may have knowledge. In a formedon the tenant pleaded, Non tenure, the demandant
said, that he made a Feoffment to persons unknown, to defraud him of his
tenancy, and to keep the profits, the pernancy of the profits, and not the
Feoffment is traversable.

Samons case. 36. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 77.
THe plaintiff and defendant referred all controversies to the Arbitrament of
J. S. who did arbitrate that the defendant shall enter into an obligation to
the plaintiff, that the plaintiff and his wife shall enjoy certain lands
which he had not done; this is void for the incerteinty of what sum the
obligation shall be, for the award ought to be certain, like a Judgment: Also
the award was void as to the feme, for she was a stranger to the submission.

Grayes case. 37. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 78. Replevin.
THe plaintiff intitles himself in bar to the avowry to Common, etc. which
was traversed, the Jury found that every, etc. time of mind have used to pay
for the Common a hen and five eggs; the plaintiff had Judgment, for he
needs not show more then makes for him, for this is not Modus Communiae, paying
so much, nor parcel of the issue, but a collateral recompense to be paid for
the Common, for which the Terretenant had remedy, but if the Terretenant had no
remedy, then the Commoner shall have the Common sub modo, and may be disturbed
by the Terretenant.

Fitz-Herberts case. 37. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 79.
THe father tenant for life, the remainder to the son in tail, leaseth for
years to A. to the intent to bar the son, A. infeoffeth J. S. to whom the
father releaseth with warranty, and dies, this does not bar the son, for
although that the disseisin which is made by the feoffment, precedes the
warranty, yet because it was to that intent, the Law will adjudge upon the
entire act, and so a warranty by disseisin. 2. Although the disseisin was made
to the father, yet because he consented unto it, the warranty commenceth by
disseisin; but if the father had made a feoffment in fee and dyed; this shall
bind the son, if it be with warranty.

Foordes case. 37. Eliz. Com'. Banco. fol. 81.
A Prebend leaseth for 70. an. Patron Deane and Chapter confirm dimissionem
praedictam in forma praedicta fact'. for 51. years and non ultra; this is a
confirmation for all the Term; for when they confirm dimissionem, etc. for
51. years, it is repugnant, but if they had recited the Lease, and confirmed
the land for 51. years, this had been good, for they have an authority,
coupled with an interest, otherwise if only a bare authority: but by what
words soever they confirm a lease for life, or a gift in tail for part, this
is a confirmation of all, because they are entire; so if the estate of the
disseisor, or his lessee for life be confirmed for an hour, yet all is
confirmed.

Cases of Customs.
Snellings case. 37. Eliz. Com'. Banco. fol. 82.
S. Brings Debt upon an Obligation against an Administrator, who pleads there
is a custom in L. that an Administrator shall pay debts upon contract to a
Citizen, as well as upon Obligation, and that J. S. upon a Contract had
recovered; and good. 1. Resol. Although that debt is given against an
Administrator by the Statute of 31. E. 3. yet because they were charged as
Executors before, so that only the name is changed, the custom generally
alleged is good. 2. The ordinary by taking the goods was chargeable at the
Common Law. 3. This custom binds strangers.

The case of Markett overt. 38. Eliz. fo. 83.
SHopps in L. are Marketts overt for things to be sold there by the trade of
the owner, therefore if plate be sold there in a Scriveners shop, the property
is not altered, otherwise if in a Goldsmiths shop, if he who passes in the
street may see it. Nota, the reason of this case extends to all Marketts overt
in England.

Perimans case. 41. Eliz. Com. Banco. fol. 84.
IT is a good Custom of a manor that all sales of lands within that manor be
presented at the Court of the Manor. Obj. What remedy if the Steward will not
accept the presentment. Resp. What remedy if the Clerk will not Inrolle a
deed of bargain and sale, and therefore Caveat Emptor. 2. Obj. That Interest
is by the feoffment vested in the feoffee, which shall not be divested by the
Custom. Resp. That livery was ordained to give notice, and a Custom which
adds more solemnity and notice is good.

Sir Henry Knivets case 38. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 85.
TEnant for life, the remainder in fee, leaseth for years, the Termor is
ousted, the disseisor leaseth for years, his lessee sowes the land, tenant for
life dies, he in the remainder enters, J. S. takes the Corn, he in remainder
brings Trespass. The right of the Corn is not in the plaintiff or defendant,
but in the lessee for years of lessee for life, but the lessee of the
disseisor had right against the plaintiff by reason of the possession: and for
that if he had pleaded that he had entered to take the Corn, this had been
good, but because he pleaded Non culp the plaintiff had judgment for the
Entry, and was barred for the residue.

Penrins case. 38. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 85.
W. P. Brings a Quod ei deforceat in nature of a Writ of Right in Wales, and
after the mise joined is nonsute, Judgment final is given, he brings the like
Writ, and the first Judgment is pleaded in bar, the demandant demurres, and
adjudged against him, and he brings Error. 1. Although by the Statute of 12. E.
1. Trial of right in Wales shall be by Common Jury, yet Judgment final shall
be given. 2. Erroneous Judgment final in right shall bind until it be
reversed. 3. Judgment final shall not be given upon default of the Tenant in
a Writ of right, but a Petit Cape shall issue, for peradventure he may save
his default.

Cases of Executions.
Blumfeilds Case, in banco le roy. 39. Eliz. fo. 86.
TWo men were bound jointly and severally in an Obligation, the one was sued
condemned, and taken in Execution, and after, the other was sued, condemned,
and taken in Execution, and after, the first escaped, and the other brought an
Audita quaerela; and although the Plaintiff might have his Action against the
Sheriff upon the escape, yet until he be satisfied indeed, the other cannot
have his Audita quaerela, for if the Defendant be sued by one Writ or several
Process, although the entry be, Quod unica fiat executio. This is to be
understood, of one Execution with satisfaction, for he may have three bodies in
Execution. In communi banco inter Lynacre and Rodes Case, Hill. 33. Eliz. It
was adjudged, that notwithstanding the Conusor in a Statute Staple was taken
and escaped, yet his goods and Lands upon the same Statute, may be extended,
for the Escape, and the Action which the Plaintiff might have against the
Sheriff, is not a satisfaction of the Debt. And if so, the Conusor be taken
and dye in Execution, the Conusee shall have Execution of his goods and Lands.
And it was adjudged, 24. Eliz. int. Joanes and Williams, that where two men
were condemned in a Debt, and the one taken and dyed in Execution, yet the
taking of the other was lawful, and then it was resolved, Per. tot. Cur. that
if a Defendant dye in Execution, yet the Plaintiff may have a new Execution by
Elegit, or Fieri facias, etc.

The Execution of the body is an Execution, but not a satisfaction, as
appears in 4. H. 7. 8. and 33. H. 6. 47. in Hillaryes Case adjudged, but a
gage for the Debt, for the words of the Writ are, Capias I. S. Ita quod habeas
corpus ejus coram Justic. nostris, etc. ad satisfaciendum G. L. de debito and
damnis, etc. and so his body is taken to the intent he should satisfy, and
when the Defendant has paid the money, he shall be discharged out of Prison.

Garnons Case, 40. Eliz. fo. 88.
LAyton recovered against Wallwyn, in an Action of Debt, and Outlawed the
Defendant after judgment, and sued a Cap. Vtlag. and delivered the same to
Garnon the Sheriff, who did take the Party, and before the return of the
Writ, the Defendant escaped: and thus it was resolved, that if one at the
common Law have judgment in an Action of Debt, and after judgment Outlaw the
Defendant, then the Plaintiff is at the end of the Suite, for any process to
be sued in his name. Yet if the Defendant be taken by Vtlary, at the Suite of
the King, no Laches being in the Plaintiff, in continuance of his Process, he
shall be in Execution for the Plaintiff, if he will, for reason requires,
that if the King shall have benefit by the Suite of the party. So the
Plaintiff shall have benefit by the Suite of the King, if judgment in error
be affirmed within the year, a Capias or Fieri facias, lies without any Scire
facias, although in another Court.

Frosts Case, In communi banco. 41. Eliz. fo. 89.
FRost recovered Debt and damages against B. who was Outlawed after judgment,
and a Cap. Vtlagatum, delivered to the Sheriff of London, Laborne a Sergeant
arrested the said B. in Fleete-streete, Ad respondendum, A. Laborne kept B. in
his House, and then Frost came to Laborne with the Sheriffs Warrant, to Arrest
B. upon the said Cap. Vtlagat. the which to do, Laborne refused, and
afterward the Sheriff suffered the said B. to go at large, and upon this
matter, Frost brought his Action upon the case against the Sheriff, and
supposed that the Sheriff did arrest the said B. by virtue of the said Cap.
Vtlagat and that he suffered him to go at large, and the Defendant pleaded,
Non permisit eum ire ad largum. The Jury found all the said special matter,
and judgment was given for the Plaintiff. For, first it was resolved, That
when a man is in custody of the Sheriff by Process of the Law, and after
another Writ is delivered unto him to apprehend the body of him who is in his
custody, immediately he is in his custody by force of the second writ, by
judgment of Law although he make no actual arrest of him, for to what purpose
should he arrest the party that is already in his custody, Et lex non precipit
inutilia quia inutilis labor stultus, and the words of the writ are, not only
Capias, etc. but also Salvo custodias, etc. Ita quod habeas corpus coram, etc.
and so he ought safely to keep him, Vide 7. H. 4. 30. And the Defendant ought
not to be discharged. until he had found surety to satisfy the Plaintiff by
5. E. 3. cap. 12.

Hoes Case, 42. Eliz. fo. 89. In the Exchequer.
EXecution of a writ of Execution, as well at the Suite of a common person, as
at the Kings suite, is good without return of the writ, for if a man be
arrested upon a Cap. ad satisfaciendum, the Execution is good, although the
Sheriff do not return the writ, and so in all writs of Execution, where the
Sheriff does only execute the same as Cap ad satisfaciendum, habere fac.
seisinam vel. possessionem Fieri Facias Liberat. If the Execution be duly
made, it is good, but if Cap. in Process be not returned, the Arrest is not
lawful, for there the intent of the writ is, to bring the party to answer the
Plaintiff, and in case of an Elegit, for there the extent is to be made by
Inquest, and not by the Sheriff only; and the writ ought to be returned,
otherwise it is of none effect. In this case it was resolved, that when one
has a power of revocation, yet if he suffer any thing to be lawfully executed,
as touching that, he cannot make any revocation: as if a man make a Letter of
Attorney to another, to do any thing, before Execution he may revoke it, but
after Execution lawfully done it cannot be revoked; if one to whom another is
indebted, be Outlawed, and he that owes the money, pays it to the King, and
the Outlary is after reversed, yet the Creditor shall recover his Debt against
the party, if the goods of an Outlawed person be sold by the Sheriff upon a
cap. utlagat' and after the Outlary is reversed by Error, the Defendant shall
have restitution of his goods, for the Sheriff or Escheator, is not
compellable to sell the goods, but he may keep them, to the use of the King,
agreeing to the Book, 20. Eliz. Dyer. 363. but if a Sheriff by virtue of a
Fieri facias, sell the goods, and after the judgment be reversed by error, the
Defendant shall not have restitution of the goods, but the value of them, for
which they were sold. And the reason is, the Sheriff is compellable to Levy
the Debt of the goods of the Defendant, and therefore great reason that the
Sale should stand.

Semaynes case, 2. Jac. fo. 91. Banco regis.
THat the House of every man is to him as his Castle, and Fortress, as well
for his defense against injuries and violence, as for his repose; that if a man
kill another in his defense or permisfortune, without any intent, yet it is
felony, and he should loose his goods and Chattells, for the great regard that
the Law has to the life of a man. But if Thieves come to the House of a man to
rob or murder, and the owner or his servant kill any of the Thieves, in
defense of him or his House, this is not felony, neither shall he loose any
thing; any man may assemble his Neighbors or friends to Guard his House
against violence, but he may not assemble them to go with him to the Market or
abroad, to safe-gaurd him against violence, and the reason of all this, is,
Domus sua cuique est tutissimum refugium. It is resolved, that when any House
is recovered by any real Action, or by Ejectione firmae, the Sheriff may
break the House, and deliver seisin or possession. It was also resolved, that
in all cases where the King is party, the Sheriff may break the House (if the
Doors be shut) and make Execution of his Writ, but before he break the House,
he ought to signify the cause of his coming, and make request to have the
Doors opened. West. 1. ca. 17. which Act is but an affirmance of the common
Law, but if the Officer break the House when he might have the Doors opened,
he is a Trespassor, 41 Ass. pl. 35. For felony, or suspicion of felony, the
Officer may break open the Door; in all Cases where the Door is open, the
Sheriff may enter, and make Execution of his writ either for body or goods, at
the suite of a subject, or the Lord may distraine for his rent. But it was
resolved, that the Sheriff at the Suite of a common person (upon request made
to open the Doors and denial thereof) ought not to break open the Door or
the House, to Execute any process at the Suite of any Subject, or to execute a
Fieri facias, being a Writ of Execution, but he is a Trespassor, yet if he do
Execution in the House, it is good in the Law, being done, it was also
resolved, that the house of a man is not a Castle or defense for any other
person but for the owner, his Family and goods, and not to protect another,
that flies into the same, or the goods of another, for then the Sheriff upon
request and denial, may break the House, and do Execution. And this is
proved by the Statute of West. 1. ca. 17. whereby is declared, that the
Sheriff may break the House or the Castle to make replevin, when the goods of
another that he has destrayned, are conveyed away, to prevent the owner, but
in this case the Sheriff must demand the goods first

Barwicks Case, 39. Eliz. in Exchequer. fo. 93.
THe Queen 28. Die Julij, Anno. 26. demised the Manor of Sutton, to Humfrey
Barwicktenend. sibi a die confectionis. It was resolved that the same 28. day
of July, is excluded, and the demise began the 29. of July. It was also
resolved, that an estate of freehold cannot commence In futuro, but ought to
take effect presently in possession, Reversion, or Remainder. A Lease for
years may commence in future, but not a Lease for life, and the reason is, for
that a Lease for years may be made without livery and seisin, but an estate of
freehold may not be made without livery, either in deed or in Law, and
therefore when a man makes a Lease for Life, to commence at a day to come, he
cannot make a present Livery to a future estate, and therefore in this case
nothing passes, and it is all one whither it commenceth at a day to come, or
years to come, for the distance of the times does not make alteration in this
Case, but in the case of two joint Lessees, the Livery made to one is good in
the name of both, for they have an interest in the Land, before their entry,
and livery to one in the name of both, makes an actual possession in both,
which is sufficient to support the remainder to a third person in Fee, Vide,
Claytons' Case, in the Fifth Book, Lycense to occupy Land for one year, is a
Lease for one year. 5. H. 7. 1. in consideration of a former demise to be
surrendered, which was false and void, is a void consideration, as to the
Queen.

Goodalls case. 40. El. Banco Regis. fol. 95.
COnditions for payment of money touching inheritance, ought to be truly
performed, and not covenous, if they concern a third person. The Law does not
find an assignee in Law where there is an assignee in fact. Expressum facit
cessare tacitum; affirmed in the Exchequer chamber upon Error there brought.

Countess of Northumberlands case. 40. El. Communi Banco. fol. 97.
FItton and the Countess of Northumberland his wife, Sir Thomas Cecill,
Knight, and Dorothie his wife, William Cornewalleys, and Lucy his wife, and the
Lady Davers, Daughters and heirs of the Lord Latimer, brought a (Quare
impedit) against Hall, who pleaded a release of William Cornewalleys, pendente
breve, and it was adjudged that this should but go in bar only against
William Cornewalleys and his wife, and the Writ should stand for others, and
all shall vest in the others, because entire, and in the realty, presentment of
the lessor and lessee is not double, for the lessors only traversable.

Buries case. 40. El. in communi banco. fol. 98.
BEtween Whebster and Bury in Ejectione firmae, a special verdict was given
upon divorce between Bury and his wife, causa frigiditatis, and that his wife
for three years after the marriage, Remansit virgo intacta propter perpetuam
impotentiam generationes in viro, and quod vir fuit inaptus ad generandum; and
in this special verdict, all the examinations of the Witnesses, upon which the
Judge in the spiritual Court was moved to give his sentence, by which the
perpetual disabilitie of Bury ad generandum was manifest, were read; and by
which it was pretended, that the issue which he had by a second wife was
illegitimate, and this was the doubt of the Jury. And it was adjudged, that the
issue of the second wife was lawful, for it is clear that by the Divorce
(causa frigiditatis) the marriage is dissolved a vinculo matrimonij, and by
consequence, either of them might marry after, then admitting that the second
marriage was avoydable, yet it remained a marriage until it was dissolved, and
by consequence, the issue that is borne during the coverture, (if no divorce be
in the life of the parties) is lawful, Et homo potest esse habilis and
inhabilis diversis temporibus, and Judgment affirmed in Error.

Flowers case. 41. El. Banco Regis. fol. 99.
AN indictment of perjury upon 5o. El. for giving false evidence to the great
Inquest, is not within the Statute, for it must be in matter depending in suite
by Bill, Writ, action, or information, vide le Statut. Plus peccat author quam
actor.

Rookes case. 40. Eliz. fol. 99.
THat the Commissioners in the Commission of Sewers ought to tax all which are
in damage, or in danger of damage, for non-repaire of the Bancks, and not only
him, which has the Land next adjoining to the River. The Commission is
grounded upon the Statute 6. H. 6. cap. 5. for if the Law were otherwise, great
inconvenience might follow, for it might be, that the rage and force of the
water might be such, that the value of the Land adjoining would not serve to
amend the Bancks, and therefore the Statute would have all in peril, and which
take commodity by the making of the Bancks to be contributory; for qui sentit
commodum sentire debet and onus and ipsae leges cupiunt, ut jure regantur.

And notwithstanding by the words of the Commission authority is given to the
Commissioners, to do according to their discretions; yet their proceedings
ought to be limited and bounded with the rule of the Law, and reason. For
discretion is a knowledge or understanding to discern between right and
falsehood, truth and wrong, shadows and substances, equity and colorable
glosses and pretenses, and not to do according to their wills and private
affection; For a learned Man says; Talis discretio discretionem confundit.

Penruddocks case. 40. Eliz. fol. 100.
IN a quod permittat between Clarke assignee of Thomas Chichley, plaintiff,
and Ed: Penruddock and Mary his wife defendants, assignee of one John Cock, for
that Cock 2o. 8 bris 1o. Mariae erected upon his freehold a house in St. John's
street so near the Curtelage of an house of Thomas Chichley, that Domus illa
super pendet, Anglice, does overhang magnam partem videlicet 3. pedes
curtilagij the plaintiff, sic quod aquae pluviales de eadem domo decedentes
solum ejusdem curtilagij conterunt and magnopere ac indies magis magisque
consumunt and Devastant, ac ea ratione curtilag' praed. quolibet pluviale
tempore humectat'. and inundat. existit, quod praedictus Henricus Clarke
inhabitans in eodem Messuagio nullum proficuum seu easiamentum de eodem
curtilagio percipere possit, ad necumentum liberi tenuenti praed'. etc. And it
was resolved, that the distilling of the waters in the time of the Feoffee or
assignee is a new wrong; and this Writ lies after request of amendment, but
not before, but it lies against him that did the wrong without request, and
the action good, etc.

Windsors case. 41. Eliz. fol. 102.
IN a quare impedit by Windsor against the Archbishop of Canterbury for the
Church of Buscott in the County of Bark: It was adjudged that if two have title
to present by turn, and the one present, who is admitted, instituted, and
inducted, and afterward is deprived for Crime, Heresy, etc. yet that Patron
should not present again, but that shall serve for his turn. So likewise if
he present a mere Laicus, which was admitted, instituted, and induced,
although it be declared by sentence, that he was incapable, and therefore void
ab initio, yet because the Church was full until the sentence declaratory be
pronounced, yet that shall serve for his Turn. But when the admission and
institution are merely void, then that shall not serve for one Turn, as if a
presentee be once admitted, instituted, and inducted, but has not subscribed
to the Articles, etc. according to the Statute of 13. El. by which in this case
the admission, institution, and induction are void, 23. El. Dier pl'. ult'.
acc.

Hungatts case. 43. El. Com. Banco. fol. 103.
HVngatt brought an action of debt upon an Obligation against Mese and Smith,
the condition was to perform an award between the plaintiff on the one
party, and the defendants on the other; Ita quod arbitrium praed fiat and
deliberetur utrique partium praed. before such a day, the arbitrament before
the day was delivered to the plaintiff, and to Mese, but not to Smith,
Judgment was given against the plaintiff. It was resolved, that if two be of
one party, and two of another, and the words are, Ita quod deliber. utrique
partium, That the delivery of the arbitrament to one of the one part, and
another of the other party is not sufficient; For the party is to be intended
of the whole party, for one is as well within the penalty and danger of the
Obligation as the other; and uterque is taken sometime Discretive, sometimes
Collective, Secundum subjectam materiam; but here it is taken Collective.

Bakers case. 42. Eliz. fol. 104.
IF a plaintiff in evidence show any matter in writing or record, or any
sentence in the Ecclesiastical Court, whereupon Law does arise, and the
defendant offer to demurre in Law upon the same, the plaintiff cannot refuse
to join, or wave his evidence, and so on the other party, and the reason is
for that matter in Law, shall not be put in the mouth of Laymen; but the King
in this case is at liberty.

Boulstons case. 40. El. in communi Banco. fol. 104.
IT was adjudged that if a man make Cony-borrowes in his own Land, and the
Conies increase to so great a number, that they destroy his Neighbors ground
adjoining; The Neighbors may not have an action of the case; for presently
when the Coneys come into his Neighbors ground he may kill them, because they
are ferae naturae. And in this case it was resolved, that none may newly erect
a Dove-house, but the Lord of a Manor, and if any do, he may be punished in
the Leete; But no action of the case lies for any particular man, for the
infiniteness of actions that might be brought. And of this opinion touching the
new erecting of a Dove-cote, was Sir Roger Manwood, chief Baron, and the
Barons of the Exchequer in the Exchequer chamber.

Aldens case. 43. Eliz. Com. Banco. fol. 105.
Ancient demise is a good plea in an Ejectione firmae, although it is not in
trespass, because by intendement the freehold may come in debate, and the
interest of the Land is bound; ancient demesne is extendable upon a Statute by
Elegit, but in an assise by tenant by Elegit, ancient demesne is a good plea.
22. Ass. Pl. 45.

Sir Henry Constables case. 43. El. in banco le roy. fo. 106.
NOthing shall be said Wreccum maris, but such goods only, which are cast or
left upon the Land by the Sea: Flotsam maris, is when a Ship is drowned, or
otherwise perish, and the goods flote upon the Sea; Jetsam maris, is when a
Ship is in peril of drowning, and for disburthening thereof, the goods are
cast into the Sea, and after notwithstanding the Ship perish. Lagan vel potius
Ligan, is when the goods so cast out of the Ship, and the Ship perish, and such
goods are so ponderous that they sink to the bottom, and the mariners to the
intent to find them, bind thereunto a Boy or a Cork, or other such thing to
find them again; Et dicitur Ligan a Ligando, and none of these words which
are called Flotsam, Jetsam, or Ligan, are called wreck, so long as they remain
in or upon the Sea; But if any of them be cast upon the Land by the Sea, then
it is said to be wreck, and by the Statute 15. R. 2. ca. 3. the Lord Admiral
shall not have conusance or jurisdiction of wreck of Sea; but of the other
three he has; for wreck is when the goods are cast upon the Land, and so
within some County, whereof the Common Law may take conusance; But the other
three are upon the Sea, Magis proprie dici poterit wreccum, si Navis frangatur
and ex qua nullus vivus evasit, and maxim si dominus rerum subversus fuerit,
and quicquid inde ad terram venerit erit domini regis; wreck may by
prescription belong to the Lord of a Manor. It was resolved also, that the
soil upon which the Sea does flow and reflow, scil. Between the high water
mark, and the low water mark may be parcel of the Manor of a Subject 16.
El. Dier. And it was resolved, that when the Sea does flow, ad plenitudinem
maris, the high Admiral shall have jurisdiction of every thing done upon the
water, between the high water mark, and the low water mark, as felony, etc.
No proof is allowable by the Law, but the verdict of twelve men; part of the
goods were wreck, and part not, and damage assessed entirely, ergo Judgment
given for the defendant. The King shall have flotsam upon the Sea, because
within the ligeance of the King.

Foxleys case. 43. El. Banco Regis. fol. 109.
IT was resolved, if a Felon steal any goods, and leave them in a Manor, or
Town, or in his house, or in the house of another, or hide them in the earth,
or any other secret place, and afterward fly, these goods are not forfeited,
nor waife goods in the Law, for waife is where a felon in pursuit, waveth or
leaves the goods, or for fear to be taken thinking that pursuit was or is
made, having the goods with him in his possession flies away, and leaves the
goods. In these cases the goods shall be said waved in Law; But if he had not the
goods with him, when he did fly being pursued, or for fear of being
apprehended, the goods are not waved, nor forfeited, but the owner may take
them again when he will, without any fresh suite. But if the Felon in his
flying wave them, the goods are forfeited by the Common Law; If the Felon upon
fresh suite be not attaint, at the suite of the owner of the goods. And the
reason that wave is given to the King, is for default of the owner, that he
does not make fresh suite after, for to apprehend the felon. Wherefore the Law
does impose the penalty on the owner.

Bona fugitivorum are the proper goods of him that flies away for felony; But
it is to be observed, that if a man fly for felony, his goods are not
forfeited, until they be found by indictment or otherwise lawfully found of
record upon his acquitall, that he fled for the felony, they cannot be claimed
by prescription, because that things forfeited by matter of record, cannot be
claimed by prescription.

But waife, stray, treasure trove, wreck of the Sea, etc. which things may be
gained by usage without matter of record, there a man may prescribe to have
Bona and catalla felonum: in some cases bona and catalla felonum shall be
forfeited by conviction, and sometimes without conviction, but always when any
forfeiture is of any goods of felons, it ought to appear of record, and that
is the cause that such goods cannot be claimed by prescription.

Deodanda, are goods which cause the death of a man by misadventure, and are
not forfeited, until they be found of record, and therefore cannot be claimed
by prescription, and the Jury that presents or finds the death, ought to find
and apprise the Deodandum also, omnia quae movent ad mortem sunt deodanda; Bona
and catalla in exigendo positorum, are when any be appealed or indicted of
felony, and he withdraw or absent himself, for so long time as an exigent is
awarded against him for his absenting (which is a flying away in Law) he shall
forfeite all his goods and chattells which he had at the time of the exigent,
and after be found not guilty, 22. Lib. Ass. Look the Statute 21. H. 8. ca.
11. concerning goods waved, and for restitution, etc.

Mallaryes case. 43. Eliz. fol. 111.
Rendering rent to one and his heirs, and to one or his heirs, are all one;
But a Feoffment tenendum to one or his heirs is but during the life of the
Feoffee; Nemo potest plus juris in alium transfer quam ipse habet: this case
consists much upon atturnements. vide le case.

Wades case. 43. Eliz. in Communi Banco. fo. 114.
A Man was bound to pay 250. li. Legal. monet. Angliae, on a day certain, the
last time of the day, that so much money can be numbered is the best time, so
that it be before the setting of the Sun, and the most convenient time by
Law, that both parties may meet: five shillings in Spanish money, and two
pistolets in gold were tendered. It was resolved that the Spanish silver was
lawful money of England by Proclamation in tempore Philippi and Mariae, and so
French Crowns; for the King by his Prerogative and Proclamation may make any
foreign coin lawful money of England: That if a man tender more then he is
bound to pay, it is good, Omne majus continet in se minus, That the tendering of
250. li. in bags without showing or numbering the same is good tender, if the
truth be that there was so much, vide Winters case, if there be any counterfeit
money in the same, yet if the party then accept the same, he cannot compel
the party to change it, or if it be a rent, or for non-payment a reentree, yet
the once acceptance is good, and the lessor may not reenter.

Foliambes Case, 43. Eliz. fo. 115.
IN a writ of Estrepement, the Sheriff may resist them that will make wast, or
cut down Trees, and if he cannot otherwise, he may Imprison them, and may make
warrants to others, and he may take Posse comitatus for his aid. A writ of
Estrepement lies in an Action of wast, as well before judgment as after.

Olands Case, 44. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 116.
A Feme Copy holder Durante viduitate, sowes the Land, and takes Husband, the
Lord shall have the Corn, for although her estate was incertaine, yet it was
determined by her own act; so if Lessee at will sow the Land, and determine
the will, but if Baron and Feme are Lessees during the coverture, and the Baron
sow the Land, and they are after Divorsed, Causa praecontractus, the Baron
shall have the Emblements, because this is the Act of the Court.

Pynnells Case, 44. Eliz. fo. 117. com. banco.
PYnnell brought an Action of Debt upon an Obligation against Cole, of 16. l.
for payment of 8. l. 10. s. on the 11. of Nov. 1600. The Defendant pleaded,
that at the instance of the Plaintiff before the said day he paid him 5. l 10.
s. and it was resolved by all the Court, that the payment of a lesser sum in
satisfaction of a greater sum, cannot be satisfaction for all, so that by no
possibility a meaner sum may satisfy the Plaintiff of a greater; but the
Gift of an Horse, Cow, Robe, etc. in satisfaction is good.

But in this case it was resolved, That the payment of a parcel, and
acceptance thereof before the day, in satisfaction of all, is a good
satisfaction, in respect of the circumstance of time; for paradventure, parcel
of that before the day, may be more beneficial unto him then the whose sum
of money at the day, and the value of satisfaction is not material, for if I
be bound to pay you 10. l. at Westminster, and you request me to pay 5. l. at
York, and you will accept the same in full satisfaction of the 10. l. this is
a good satisfaction in respect of the place, but in this case, the Plaintiff
had judgment for the insufficient pleading, for he did not plead that he had
paid 5. l. 10 s in full satisfaction, (as by Law he ought) but pleaded the
payment of part generally, and the Plaintiff accepted the same in full
satisfaction, and always the manner of the tender, and of the payment shall be
directed by him that makes the tender and payment, and not by him that
accepts it.

Edriches Case, 1. Jacobi. com. banco. fo. 118.
A Rent charge is granted to B. for the life of C. the Grantor leaseth for life
to D. the remainder in Fee to E. C. and D. dies, B. distraines E. for all
arreares, this is good by the Statute of 32. H. 8. cap. 37.

Whelpdales Case, 2. Jacobi. com. banco. fo. 119.
IN Debt brought against one joint Obligor the Defendant pleads Non est factum,
adjudged for the Plaintiff.

1. Resolved, he may plead in abatement of the Writ, but not Non est factum,
for every one is obliged in the intirety, therefore if Debt be brought against
both, and one is outlawed, the other who appears shall be charged with all.

2. If a Deed be avoidable by plea he shall not plead, Non est factum.

3. If a Deed be made void by Statute he shall not plead Non est factum, but
shall avoid it by plea, but if a deed by matter Ex post facto, become not his
deed, he may plead Non est factum, as if one deliver a deed to deliver over
to I. S. who refuses, etc.

Longs Case, 2. Jacobi banco regis. fo. 120.
EXception to the Indictment of Murder, the Indictment was taken, Infra
libertatem villae de C. and C. where the Torte is done, is not said to be
within the Liberty. Response, that to Inditements certainty to a certain
intent in general suffices, and not to every particular intent, for that is,
Nimia subtilitas, and it shall be intended, that the Ville of C. is within the
liberty of C. the Indictment is, Quod dedit vulnus super anteriorem partem
corporis subter mamillam, where it should be Mammillam. Resolved, that false
Latin shall not quash an Indictment, if the word be sensible, and these two
words are good Latin, also this is superfluous, for Super anteriorem partem
corporis, is sufficient, and shall be intended the Trunk betwixt the Neck and
Thighs. 3. Vulnus, where it should be Plaga, overruled because Synonima. 4. Le
depthe is not showed, it was said, that it did penetrate all his body, whereby
it appears that it was mortal. 5. It is said, that the wound did penetrate
his body, and not the Bullet, this is significant enough. 6. Percussit wants,
and for this cause the Indictment was quashed, for in all cases of death this
ought to be except in case of poisoning, and for this last error the Outlary
was reversed, and H. D. was discharged.

Saffins Case, 3. Jacob. fo. 123. com. banco.
A Man makes a Lease for years to commence after the end or determination of
a former Lease. In esse. The first Lease ends, the second Lessee does not
enter, but he in reversion enters, and makes a Feoffement, and levyeth a
fine with Proclamations, and five years pass without entry, or claim of the
second Lessee. If this fine be a Bar, was the Question, and it was resolved to
be a Bar, for the Statute of 4. H. 7. c. 24. speaks of interest, and a Lease
for years is an interest within the Statute, so o^ tenant by Elegit, etc.

De Libellis famosis 3. Jac. fo. 125.
A Libell may be made as well against a private man as against a Magistrate,
Non refert, whither the Libell be true, or whither the party be of good fame,
or ill fame, for it inciteth all the same Family, Kindred, or Society to
revenge, and so tends by consequence to the effusion of blood. It was
resolved in the Star Chamber, 44. Eliz. Hallywoods Case, that if any find a
Libell, and would preserve himself out of danger, if it be against a private
man, the finder may either burn it, or presently deliver it to a Magistrate,
but if it concern a Magistrate or public person, then he ought to give it to
a Magistrate. A Libell may be as well by words, Verbis aut cantilenis, as
Writings, and by Pictures or Ignominious Signs, as Gallows, etc. The
Punishment is by Indictment, as in the Star Chamber.

Palmers Case, 8. Jac. fo. 126. banco regis.
THe Guardian in Chivalry shall have the single value of the Marriage of the
Heir without tender, otherwise the Heir may defeat the Lord by Marriage, or
go beyond the Sea, and so prevent the Lord of any tender, if it were requisite.

Caudreyes Case, 33. Eliz. in Trespass.
THe Jury found the Statute of 1. Eliz. cap. 1. and cap 2. and that the
Plaintiff was deprived for Preaching against the Book of Common Prayer; by
the Bishop of London, una cum assensu, etc.

Resolv. 1, The deprivation was good for the first offense, because the Act of
1. Eliz. for uniformity of Common Prayer does not abrogate 1. Eliz. for
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction without negative words, and by an express proviso
the Jurisdiction of the Bishop is saved.

Resolv. 2. That sentence given by the Bishop by assent of his Colleagues, ought
to be allowed by our Law.

Resolv. 3. The Commissioners shall be intended Subjects borne, etc. Stabitur
praesumptionj, etc. Also it is found that the King authorized them, Secundum
formam Statuti.

Resolv. 4. The Act of 1. Eliz. for Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was only
declaratory, for the King being an absolute Monarch, and head of the body
politic, had plenary power to minister justice to his Subjects in Causes
Ecclesiastical and temporal. See Circumspecte agatis. 13. E. 1. and Articulj
Clerj. 9. E. 2. Reges sacro oleo uncti sunt spiritualis jurisdictionis capaces
See there diverse judgments, Laws, and Acts of Parliament, cited to prove the
Kings supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
Where Services entire shall be Apportioned.
Bruertons Case, 36. Eliz. In the Court of Wards. Fol. 1.
LORD and Tenant of three Acres, by Homage, Fealty, a hawke and Suite of Court,
the Tenant makes a Feoffement of one Acre, the Feoffee by the common Law shall
hold by all entire services, annual and casual, and the Statute of Quia
emptores Terrarum, does not extend to entire services, but by the Statute of
Marlebr. c. 9. the Feoffees shall make but one Suite, and he who does it shall
have Contribution against the others, if they are severally infeoffed,
otherwise if jointly.

2. Entire services shall be multiplied by the Act of the Tenant, and extinct
by the Act of the Lord, as if he purchase part.

3. By Act of the Lord entire service for his private benefit is extinct,
otherwise if it be for the public good, for works of Charity, Devotion, or
administration of Justice.

4. If part comes to the Lord by act in Law, yet the entire service remains,
except in Case where Contribution is to be made, for the Lord shall not
contribute.

5. If part comes to the Lord by Act in Law, and of himself as by recovery in
a Cessavit, all the entire services are gone.

Where the Paroll shall demurre for the nonage of the Demandant, and where the
Tenant shall have his Age.
Markals case, 35. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 3.
IN a Formedon in the remainder by an Infant of a remainder limited to his
Father, and his heirs, the tenant cannot pray, that the parol may demur, but in
a Formedon in the reverter he may: In actions auncestrell, the Tenant may pray
that the parol may demurre, because a right only discends to the Infant, and
the Law will not suffer him to sue, for fear that he may loose for want of
understanding; but in possessory Actions he cannot, because then every one will
put Infants out of possession, and it would be mischevious if they should not
regaine their possession until full age: So it is in all Writs, where the
cause of action happens in the time of the Infant. And as to Actions
auncestrell, they are of two sorts. Droiturell and possessory, the first is,
where a right only discends from the Auncestor, and the Infant ought to lay
the explees in the Auncestor, and there the Tenant (without plea pleaded) may
pray that the paroll may demurre, but if the Auncestor were never in possession
(as in this case he was not) and the Infant himself is the first in whom it
vests there (without plea pleaded) he shall not pray that the Parol may
demurre: but if a right descend from an auncester who was in possession,
although the Action does not descend, the Tenant may pray that the parol may
demurre, as if Non compos mentis alien and dye: In actions auncestrell
possessory, the parol shall not demurre without plea: but if at the common Law
the Tenant had pleaded a feoffement of the auncestor, then he may pray, etc.
but the Statute of Gloucester, cap. 2. aideth that, in writs of Cosinage,
Besaiell, and aiell, but this extends not to other actions, in a Formedon in
the discender, where an Infant recovers, but a limited estate the Parol shall
not demurre without plea, in an Assize, or assize of Mortdauncester, the Parol
shall not demurr because the Jury is to appear the first day, and try all
things.

The Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 46. Age is taken away in entry upon disseisin,
where fresh suite is made, but an Infant shall have his age in all real
Actions, where he is in by descent, and the Action is not founded upon his own
wrong, except in Nuper obijt, and Partitione facienda, where both are in
possession or attaint, for the mischief of the death of the Petty Jury. The
Statute of West. 2. cap. 40. Ousteth the age of the Vouchee in cuj. in vita.
and Sur cuj. in vita, although that the Tenant will answer, if the parol ought
to demurre, yet the Court ought to award that the parol shall demurre.

Sir John Molyns Case, 40. Eliz. in Scaccar. fo. 5.
KIng Edward the third, Lord, Abbot of Westminster, Mesne, and C. Tenant. C is
attainted of Treason, the King grants to Sir Jo. Mo. Tenendum de nobis and
alijs capitalibus dominis feodi illius per servitia, etc. the Mesnalty is
revived. Obj. 1. That the tenure shall be Per servitia inde debita, at which
time no service was due to the Mesne. 2. An express tenure of the King is
limited, and it cannot be immediately holden but of one. To the first it was
answered, that there are sufficient words to renew the Mesnalty, because the
intention of the King, appears to be so, and it is reasonable, that the Mesne
who offended not, should not suffer loss. 2. It shall be holden imediatly of
the Abbot, and mediatly of the King.

Wheelers Case, 43. Eliz. in Scaccario. fo. 6.
THe King grants Land Tenendum by a Rose, Pro omnibus servitijs, this is Socage
in chief, and the tenure shall be by fealty and a Rose, and (Pro omnibus) is
to be intended of other services which the Law does not implie.

Resolutions and Diversities when a bar in one action shall be a bar in
another.
Ferrers Case. 41. Eliz. Com. Banco. fol. 7.
IF one be barred by plea to the Writ, he may have the same Writ again;
if by plea to the action of the Writ he may have his right action: If the
plea be to the action, and he be barred by Judgment upon demurrer, confession,
or verdict, in personal actions it is a bar for ever, and in real actions
he is put to a Writ of higher nature, as bar in assize barreth one in Entry
in nature of an assize, but he may have an assize of Mortdaumester, etc. But
bar is not perpetual if those who are barred have not the mere right,
therefore the heir in tail who is barred shall have the same action, so of
the successor of a Parson, if he does not pray in aid of the Patron and
Ordinary: He who lost by default before the Statute of Westminster 2. cap. 4.
was put to a Writ of right, and if he could not have this Writ, he was
without remedy: In case where a Writ of Entry in the post lies now, no
remedy was before the Statute of Marlebridge, cap. 29. but a Writ of right.
See there diverse inconveniences which ensue upon the breach or alteration of
the ancient and fundamental rules of the Common Law: Interest Reipublicae ut
sit finis litium.

Where a Writ shall be brought by Journeys accounts.
Spencers case. 45. Eliz. Com. Banco. fol. 9.
IF a formedon abate for undue summons, the demandant may have another by
Journeys accounts.

1. Resol. If a Writ abate by default of the demandant himself, he shall not
have another Writ by Journeys accounts, otherwise it is if by default of the
Clerk or Sheriff as in this case: If a Writ abate for nontenure of all, he
shall not have, etc. but if a Praecipe abate for non-tenure of parcel, he
shall have another; so if it abate for joyntenancy of part of the demandant he
shall not have a new Writ, because he had notice, otherwise it is of the part
of the tenant: And this Writ shall be always betwixt the parties to the
first Writ, and of the same quantity of acres: A Judicial Writ shall never
be sued by Journeys accounts, because it shall never abate for form. 2. The
second Writ is quasi, a continuance of the first Writ, therefore all pleas
which relate to the purchase of the Writ shall be pleaded from the purchase
of the first Writ, and costs of the first Writ shall be recovered. 32. E.
3. Journeys accounts. 16. 15. days were allowed.

Jentlemans case. 25. Eliz. concerning Judges of Courts. fol. 11
IN the Hundred Courts the Suitors are Judges, in the Court of Pypowders, the
Steward is Judge; In a Leet, the Steward is Judge; In a Court Baron, the Suitors
which are by the common Law are Judges, Rex sectatoribus Curiae, etc. Vobis
mandamus, etc. ad judicium reddendum, etc. procedatis: but in Redisseisin the
Sheriff is Judge, by the Statute of Merton. cap. 3. and in the Turn.

Morrices case. 27. Eliz. Com. Banco. fol. 12.
IT was adjudged, that after the act of 28. H. 8. ca. 1. although joyntenants
be compellable to make partition by Writ, as well as Copartners, yet they may
not make partition by words, as Copartners may do by the common Law. If two
joyntenants make partition by Writ, the warranty remains, otherwise it is
if it be by deed by Consent.

Cases of pardon. 29. Eliz. fol. 13.
BVrton Parson of Isbock in Leic: was deprived Anno 12. El. for committing
Adultery, and after by the general pardon 2. Apr. 13. El. the offense of
adultery (int. alia) was pardoned, before the 14. of February then last past.
And it was said, that before the pardon, that crimen adulterij praed. transivit
in rem judicatam, and therefore the sentence should remain in force; And
therefore until the sentence were reversed the deprivation was in force. But
it was resolved, that Burton by virtue of the said pardon is become Parson
again, without any sentence declaring the said deprivation to be void; For by
the pardon the adultery which was the cause of the sentence is discharged, and
by consequence, all that which did stand or depend upon the same foundation is
also discharged, vide 20. El. Dier

A. was bound in a Statute of 20. li. to B. B. sued Execution, and the Lands of
A. were delivered in Execution, and after B. makes Defeasance to A. by
Indenture, that if A. do pay to B. 8. li. at a certain day, that then the
Statute to be void; And it was adjudged that although the Statute was
executed, yet the Defeasance of the Statute was sufficient in Law to defeat as
well the Statute, as the Execution thereof; For the Statute is the foundation
of all, and if that be defeated, all that is builded on the same, shall be
defeated also. 20. ass. pla. 7. Burglary was excepted out of the general
pardon of 28. Eliz. by that the attainder of burglary is excepted, for the
offense remains after judgment, and is the foundation of it.

Arundells case. 36. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 14.
AN Indictment of murder in King-streete in W. and the visne from W. and it
was vicious, for it ought to be from the most certain place, that is the
Parish, for W. being a City it shall be intended that it is greater then the
Parish, and therefore a new Venire facias was awarded.

Treports case. 36. El. Banco Regis. fol. 14.
A. Tenant for life, remainder in fee to B. both by Deed indented, join in a
Lease to Treport; the question was, whether the same shall be adjudged in Law,
the Lease of both of them or not; And it was resolved, that it was the Lease of
A. during his life, and the confirmation of B. And after the death of A. it was
the Lease of B. and the confirmation of A. and because the plaintiff had
declared of a joint demise of A. and B. it was adjudged against the plaintiff
in an Ejectione firmae. If tenant for life, and he in remainder join in a
Lease, rendering rent, tenant for life shall have the rent during his life.

Edens case. 37. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 15.
RIens passa by Letters patents shall be tried where the Land is, and not where
the patent bears date, for the Patent is not traversed, but the effect of the
issue is, whether the Queen had the said Land to grant or not.

Colyers case. 37. Eliz. Com. Banco. fol. 16.
ONe demiseth to his daughter for life, and after to his brother, paying 20. s.
to J. S. the brother had fee for the sum to be paid by him, for otherwise he
may pay the 20. s. and die without satisfaction; but if the payment be to be
made out of the profits of the Land, he shall have but for life, for there he
can be at no prejudice.

Wyldes case. 41. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 16.
A Man devises Lands to the husband and the wife, and to the children of their
bodies; The question was, whether they have an estate for life, or an
inheritance in tail. And it was resolved, that if they had children at the
time of the Demise made, then they had but an estate for life; But if they had
no children, then they had an estate of inheritance in tail.

Sir Edward Cleeres case. 42. Eliz. fol. 17.
A Man is seized of three acres of Land houlden in Capite, and makes a
Feoffment in Fee of two of them, to the use of his wife for her life; and after
makes a feoffment by Deed of the third acre, to the use of such persons, and
of such estate and estates as he should limitt and appoint by his last Will in
writing; And afterward by his last Will in writing, he Devised the said third
acre to one in fee; and if this Devise was good for all the third acre, or not,
or for two parts thereof, or void for all, was the question; And it was
adjudged, that the Devise was good; For the Feoffor by his last Will limited
the estates according to his power, reserved to him upon the Feoffment, the
estates should take effect by force of the Feoffment, and the use is directed
by the Will; So as in this case the Will is only directory; But if he declared
his Will by writing without any reference to his authority or power, as owner
of the Land, and to limitt no use according to his power. In this case the Land
being houlden in capite, the Devise is good for two parts, and void for the
third part. If a man make a Feoffment in Fee of Lands in capite, to the use of
his last Will, although he Devise the Land with reference to the Feoffment, yet
the Will is void for a third part; for a Feoffment to the use of his last Will,
and to the use of him, and his heirs is all one.

In this case when the party had conveyed two parts to the use of his wife, by
his act executed he cannot as owner of the Land Devise any part of the residue
by his Will, and therefore because he has not an election, as in the case put
before, whether to limit according to his power, or Devise the same as owner of
the Land, (for in the case at Bar as owner of the Land, (having conveyed two
parts to the use of his wife,) he cannot make any Devise.) The Devise of
necessity must inure to a limitation of the use, otherwise the Devise should
be altogether void.

Packmans case. 37. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 18.
WIlson brought an action upon the case upon a trover against Packman. The case
was thus; A man dyed intestate, and the Ordinary committed the administration
to a stranger, and after the next of kindred of the Decedent sued out a
Citatio^ in the Court Christian, to have it repealed, and (pendente lite) the
administrator to defeat the plaintiff sells the goods of the decedent to
the defendant, and after the Letters of administration were revoked by
sentence, and the first sentence anulled and made void, and the administration
granted to the plaintiff. And it was resolved, that the action did not lie;
and in this case the diversity was houlden, between a suite by Citation, for
to countermand or revoke the former administration, and an appeal, which is
always a reversing of a former sentence; for an appeal does suspend the
former sentence, otherwise of a Citation. And in this case because the first
administrator had the absolute property of the goods in him, without question
he may sell them to whom he will, and although the administration be revoked
afterward, yet that cannot defeat the Sale. But if the sale or gift be by
covine, it is void against Creditors by the Statute of 13. El. but it is good
against a second administrator. And if an administrator wast the goods, and
afterward the administration is granted to another, yet every debtor shall
charge him in debt. An administration may be granted upon condition, and
whatsoever the administrator does before the condition broken, is good.

Gregory's case. 38. El. Banco Regis. fol. 20.
VErba aequivoca and in dubio posita, intelliguntur in digniori and potentiori
sensu, secundum excellentiam, as if the speech be or writing of J. S. generally
it shall be intended of the father, where the father and son are both of a
name; and if it be of two Brothers both of a name, it shall be intended of the
eldest, for these are more worthy; so where the Statute of 4. and 5. Phil. and
Ma. speaks in any Court of Record it shall be intended of the four Courts at
Westminster, because the Kings Attorney is attendant there.

Michelbornes case. 38. Eliz. Banco Regis. fol. 21.
THe Court of Marshalsea, does only hold plea of actions of trespass, within
the verge, if the one of the parties be of the Kings household, and in contracts
and Covenants, where both parties are of the Kings household, and of none other
actions, nor persons, by the Act of Articuli super Chartas. 28. E. 1.

Butler and Goodalls case. 40. El. Banco Regis. fol. 21
IT was resolved upon the Statute of 21. H. 8. that a Parson of a Church ought
to stay and be Commorant upon his Rectorie (viz.) upon the Parsonage-house, and
not in any other house, although it be within the Parish, but lawful
imprisonment without covine, is a good excuse of non-residence: also if there
be no Parsonage-house, for impotentia excusat Legem; also sickness without
fraud, if the patient remove by advice of his Council in Physic bona fide,
for better air, and recovery of his health.

Ambrosia Gorges case. 40. El. fol. 22. in Cur. Wardorum.
IT was resolved, that the Father shall have the Wardship of his Daughter and
heir apparent, so long as she continues his heir apparent; But when the
Father has issue a son, then she shall be in ward to the Queen; for then
he is heir apparent, and not the Daughter. Ambrosia was daughter of Sir Arthur
Gorge by Douglas, Daughter and heir of Vicount Bindon, and was married to
Francis Gorge, which Francis dyed, when Ambrosia was of ten years of age. It
was resolved also that the Queen notwithstanding the said marriage, should
have the Wardship of the said Ambrosia; for it was not a complete marriage,
because to every marriage there ought to be a consent; For consensus non
concubitus facis matrimonium, and consentire non possunt ante annos nubiles;
And upon conference had with the Civilians, it was agreed after such a
marriage, if the husband and the wife marry again, it shall not be counted
Bigamie And 30. E. 1. tit. Guard. 156. if the ancestor marry his heir infra
annos nubiles, and dye, the Lord shall recover the body of the Infant, because
the heir may disagree; It was agreed that the grandfather shall not have the
wardship of the son within age, the father being dead in his life time.

Marquess of Winchester his case. 41. Eliz. fol. 23. in Banco Regis.
BY the Law it is not sufficient, that the testator be of memory (when he makes
his Will,) to answer to ordinary and usual questions, but he ought to have a
disposing memory, so as he is able to make disposition of his Lands with
understanding and reason. And this is such a memory, which is called safe and
perfect memory, otherwise a Prohibition lies at the common Law generally, to
stay all the proceedings in the spiritual Court, as the probate of the Will,
etc. until this Suggestion be tried at the common Law.

Reads Case, 42. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 24.
IN trespass the Defendant makes Title, for that A. W. was seized in fee, and
leased to him, the Plaintiff makes title by descent, and traverseth the Lease
and good, for it may be true, that A. W. was seized, and yet that a descent was
cast to the Plaintiff, therefore the Lease is most material to be traversed.

Helyars Case, 41. Eliz. banco regis. fo. 24.
IN a Replevin the Defendant avoweth by grant of a term by I. A. to S. from
whom he claims, the Plaintiff pleads in bar that I. A. married T. who by a
former deed granted the term to the plaintiff, and traverseth the grant made
to S. and vicious, for he who claims by the first assignement shall not
traverse the second, but he who claims by the second shall traverse the first.
But the first Feoffee shall traverse the last feoffment, and the last feoffee
shall not traverse the first feoffement, because fee may be gained by disseisin
after the first feoffement, but a Lease for years caanot.

Ruddocks case, 41. Eliz. banco regis, fo. 25.
IN replevyn against six the Plaintiff recovers, the Defendants bring error,
the Plaintiff pleads the release of one of them not good: Where diverse are to
recover a personal thing, the release or default of one bars all, but not
where they are to discharge themselves of a personalty, if they are compelled
to join, as in error and attaint, otherwise in Outlary, because not
compellable to join, for where they are to discharge themselves, they have no
joint interest, and although they shall have their damages again, it shall be
intended that they paid them of their several goods, otherwise it may be
doubted, if Execution had been made of goods, which they have jointly.

Sharps case, 42. Eliz. fo. 26. com. banco.
IF a man make a feoffement in Fee, or a Lease for life, and say to the Feoffee
(being either on the Lands of within the view) Enter into this Land and enjoy
the same, according to this deed, etc. this is a good livery, but the delivery
of the deed upon the Lands without any further ceremony or saying, does not
amount to a livery. Throughgoods Case. 9. Jacob, in the nineth Book. The
actual delivery of a Writing, sealed to the party without any words, is a good
livery, but not a livery of seisin, although the Party be upon the ground.

If I deliver a deed unto the feoffee or Lessee of the Message, mentioned in
the deed in the name of seisin of the said Message, and of all the Lands,
tenements, etc. in the same contained, or other such like words, without any
ceremony, or act done, this is a good seisin.

The Case of Soldiers. 43. Eliz. fo. 27.
THe Statutes of 7. H. 7. cap. 1. and 3. H. 8. cap. 5. against Soldiers who
run away, are acts perpetual, for the word King includes all his succession,
and a gift to the King inureth to his Successors.

Vicount Mountagues Case, 43. Eliz. in Scaccar. fol. 27.
VIcount M. with License of the K. suffers a recovery to B. and D. to uses with
power of revocation and limitting of new, and revokes and limits new uses, the
King shall have no fine for alienation.

1. Resolved, if the King does license to alien to one, and alienation is made
to the use of another, the King shall not have a fine, for although that the
King was not informed of his Tenant, yet the use is executed by the Statute of
27. H. 8. which can do no wrong, and the proviso in the Statute, that a fine
shall be paid for executing of uses, is to be intended of uses raised by
Covenant, or declared upon a Fine, Feoffement, etc. when no License of
alienation is obtained.

2. Although that by revocation, and new limittation of uses, the tenant of the
King be altered, yet no fine is due, because all arises out of the estate of
B. and D. which was made with License.

Greenes Case, 44. Eliz. banco regis. fol. 29.
TEnant for life, of a Manor to which an advowson is appendant, the remainder
in Fee to I. S. presents one, who at the suite of the Tenant for life is
deprived for not reading the Articles; but no notice is given to the Patron,
the Queen by lapse presents the Defendant, Tenant for life, and his incumbent
die, he in the remainder presents the Plaintiff Green who recovereth.

1. Resolv. Although the Patron were party to the Suite, and so had notice, yet
lapse shall not incur without notice given by the ordinary, as the Statute
speaks, and the notice ought to be special, that he did not read the
Articles, and therefore was deprived, and general notice is not sufficient.

2. The Church is void, Ipso facto, by the Statute of 13. Eliz. without
deprivation.

3. If the Queen present Ratione Lapsus, where she is Patron, this is void, A
fortiori, when she had no title at all.

4. The Patron is not put to a Quare impedit, by presenting him who read not
the Articles, nor by Collation, but by Collation of him who had right to
Collate, the Patron is put out of possession.

5. The Queen may be put out of possession of an advowson, because it is
transitory, but she cannot be put to a Writ of right of advowson, for none can
gain the Inheritance from her by wrong.

Boothies Case, 3. Jacobi. com. banco. fol. 30.
THe condition of an Obligation, is, to deliver an Obligation to the Obligee,
and to acknowledge satisfaction, it must be done in convenient time, for acts
transitory to be done to the Obligee, although a place be appointed, shall be
done in convenient time, and acts of their nature local, ought to be performed
in convenient time, if concurrence of the Obligor and Obligee be not requisite:
Also here the delivery of the bond being transitory, and the acknowleding
satisfaction such an act as may be performed in the absence of the Obligee,
they ought to be done in convenient time, without request: but if the Act be
local, and their concurrence necessary, the Obligor had time, during his Life,
if not hastened by request: If the concurrence of the Obligor and a stranger be
necessary, it ought to be done in convenient time, if concurrence of the
Obligee and a stranger, it ought to be hastened by request: And always, if the
Act to be done is not for the benefit of the Obligee, but a labor to the
Obligor, or a stranger, there he had time during his Life.

Fitz-Williams Case, 2. Jacobi. banco regis. fol. 32.
BAron and Feme Tenants for life, and to the heirs of the body of the Baron,
the Baron sole is vouched, in a common recovery, the tail is barred.
Copledicks Case, 3. Report. 2. Resol. If Tenant in tail suffer a recovery to
his own use, the remainder to his wife with diverse remainders over, with
power of revocation and limittation of new uses by any such writing, he
revoketh all the remainders except that to his Wife, and by the same deed
limits new uses; this is good, for by any such writing shall be intended the
same or any such, and it may be by the same deed, for, first it takes effect
as a revocation. 2. By limittation of new uses, and there are not more
instances then one in it. See there Leaper and Wroths Case, cited 30. El. to
prove, that powers whereby the interest of Strangers shall be changed, shall be
taken strictly, as a power to make leases for twenty one years, he cannot make
a Lease for 21. years, to commence in Futuro.

The Bishop of Bathes Case. 3. Jacobi. com. banco. fo. 34.
THe B. 18. H. 8. Leaseth to E. and R. for sixty years, proviso, if they dye
within the term, that the B. and his Successors shall reenter. E. dies, the B.
dies, the Successor Leases to C. Cum post sive per mortem etc. praedict. R.
acciderit vacare, for sixty years with confirmation. R. dies: Resolv. every
Lease ought to have a certain beginning, and the continuance ought also to be
certain, either by express number of years, or by reference to an express
certeinty, or where a Lease may be reduced to a certeinty by matter, Ex post
facto. Agreed, the second Lease vests presently in point of interest, to take
effect in possession at the end of the first Term, if by none of the accidents
the first Lease become void in the mean time, and then the Lease shall
commence at the first accident which does happen, and the Lessee has no
Election.

The Deane and Chapter of Worcesters Case. 3. Jacobi. fo. 37.
THe D. and Chapter seized of a Manor in Fee, in which were Copy-holds grantable
for three lives, for 8. s. 8. d payable quarterly, and herriotable, grant a
copyhold for the Life of three, reserving the old rent half yearly, this is
not void by 13. Eliz. cap. 1. Resolved, the grant of a copyhold for the life
of 3. is good, for although there may be an occupancy, yet it is not
inconvenient, for an occupant shall be punished in wast. 2. Grant of a
Copyhold is a demise by the intent of the Statute, for in Law it is a Lease at
will. 3. The omission of Herriot does not make it void, because the annual
rent is reserved. 4. It is sufficient that the yearly rent be reserved twice
in the year, for the Statute says, yearly, which makes a difference between
this Case, and the Lord Mountjoyes Case, in the fifth Report.

Bellamyes case, 3. Jacobi. com. banco. fol. 38.
A Lease upon condition, that the Lessee shall not alien without License,
Assignee of the Lessee pleads that the Assignement was with License, and showed
not forth the Deed of License. 1. Because he did not claim by it. 2. Because
the License was, Ex provisione hominis, and not Ex institutione legis. 3.
Because it was executed and good.

Henry Finches Case, 3. Jacobi. banco regis. fol. 39.
A Grant of a rent charge out of diverse Manors, etc. in the Parishes of E.
and W. Aut alibi dictis marerijs spectantur, and out of Lands, which is not
parcel of any of the Manors, these are not charged with the distress, for,
Alibi does not charge more Land then is parcel of those Manors, but all
parcells of the said Manors out of the said Parishes.

Sir Anthony Mildmayes Case, 3. Jacob. banco regis. fol. 40.
1. REsolved, a perpetuity is against the rules and policy of the common Law.
2. It is impossible that an estate tail shall cease, before that Tenant in
tail dies without issue, and an estate cannot be made to continue as to one,
and determine as to another except by Statute. 3. A gift in tail upon
condition that he shall not suffer a common recovery, is void, because he had
power by the Law. 4. It is a void saying, that his estate shall cease, if he
go about, etc. for, Non officit conatus nisi sequatur effectus. Also, many
ambiguities will arise thereupon because the Law does not define it, and it is
so uncertain, that is not traversable.

Blakes Case, 3. Jacobi. com. banco. fo. 43.
AN accord with satisfaction is a good bar in a Writ of Covenant, because the
duty accrueth not merely by the deed, but by a torte subsequent, together with
the deed, and it is a good bar in an attaint, because this is not founded
upon the record only, but upon the false Oath also: In all cases where an
arbitrament is a good Plea, an accord with satisfaction is also, and so
generally in all Actions where damages only are to be recovered.

Higgins Case, 3. Jacob. com. banco. fo. 44.
IF a man have judgment upon an Obligation, so long as this judgment is in
force, he may not have a new action upon the same Obligation. For, Interest
reipublicae ut sit finis litium and infinitum in jure reprobatur. A Statute
Staple is but an Obligation recorded, and one Obligation cannot drown another,
although they be both for one Debt, and the Obligee may choose upon whither he
will bring his Action. 11. H. 4. and 2. Jac. Sir William Cornewalles Case, and
Branthwaytes Case, and in every judgment, the Defendant is amerced, and so he
shall be amerced, in Infinitum.

Dowdales Case, 3. Jac. com. banco. fol. 46.
IN Debt against an Executor, the Defendant pleads, fully administered, the
Plaintiff says, that he has assets at E. the Jury found assets in Ireland.

1. Resol. when the place is material the point in issue cannot be found in
another place. 2. Where the place is named but for conformity assets may be
found in another County. 3. In a general issue, the Jury shall find all
material local things in another County. 4. The Jury by a mean shall try
local things in another County, as a release in a foreign County, the Jurors
shall assesse damages for the profits of the Land in the other County. Multa
conceduntur per obliquum quae non, etc. but in case of felony, the Trial shall
be where the offense was done. 5. The finding of assets is the substance, and
that it is in Ireland is surplusage: A thing done beyond the Sea shall be tried
here, if the foundation of the Action be here.

Boswells Case. 3. Jac. banco regis, fol. 48.
IN a Quare impedit, judgment was given, to remove the incumbent of the
Queen, not party to the Writ who was presented, pending the Writ. Resolv. That
by the common Law, by admission and institution, the Usurpor gains the
inheritance of the advowson, without regard of the nonage of the Patron,
because he is in by judicial act, and the Bishop shall be supposed not to do
wrong to the Patron, and the incumbent shall not be disturbed to exercise his
function, but the King shall have a Quare impedit at the common Law. Collation
does not put him who has right to present, out of possession, but if one have
right to Collate it does, an infant by the Act of W. 2. c. 5. shall have a
Quare impedit, if a man usurp upon an infant who had a Manor, to which, etc.
by descent, who at full age infeoffeth B. the Church voideth, etc. by the
usurpation the infant was out of possession, and his right passed not, and
seems the Infant is without remedy: If a Clerk comes in by course of Law,
this gains not the inheritance against the right Patron who was not party to
the writ. The King shall not recover damages by this Statute, for he is not
within the first branch, Si tempus semestre transierit, nor within the second
Branch, for that depends upon the first, yet he shall count to damages. An
incumbent shall not be moved if he be not named in the writ, and if he be not
admitted, etc. pending the writ, and lapse shall not incur if the Bishop be
named in the Writ, otherwise if he be not: If he who is presented pending the
Writ be in by rightful Patron or not, yet he who recovereth in a Quare
impedit, shall have a general Writ to the Bishop, which he must execute of
necessity, and after that, the parties may try their titles as the Law shall
determine.

Countess of Rutlands Case. in the Star Chamber. 3. Jacobi. fo. 52.
THat the person of a Countess or a Baroness may not be arrested for Debt or
trespass, for although in respect of their Sex they may not sit in the
Parliament, yet they are Peers of the Realm, and shall be tried by their
Peers, Stat. 20. H. 6. Peers of the Realm may not be sworn in any inquest; a
Countess in Marrying with a Husband, does loose her Name of a Countess.

If a Baroness. etc. by Marriage, marry again under the Nobility, she
loses her dignity, but if she be Noble by Birth, or descent, yet whomsoever
she Marryeth, she remains Noble; for Birthright is Character intelebilis,
and that which is gained by Marriage, may also be lost by Marriage.

A Sheriff ought not to dispute the Authority of Courts, but he ought to
Execute the Writs to him directed, for thereunto be they Sworn. Sergeant at
Mace upon a cap. ad satisfaciendum, came to the the said Countess in
Cheapside, being in her Coach, and touched her body with the Mace, and said, I
arrest you Madame at the Suite of S. and those were all the words that were
used, and thereupon compelled the Coach man to carry her unto the Counter-gate
in Woodstreete, and the Sheriff took her into his house. In this Case it was
resolved, that the Sheriff, Bayliffe, etc. upon the Arrest ought to show at
whose suite, out of what Court, for what cause it is, and when the process is
returnable, and that this general Arrest of the Countess cannot be said, that
it was by force of the said Writ of Execution, and that this Arrest was of the
Sergeants own head, without warrant, and against Law, and that the said
Countess was falsely imprisoned, but she remained in the Sheriffs custody 7.
or 8. days, until she paid the Debt, but because the Arrest was by a fained
Action, entered in the Counter, the Sergeants were sentenced.

The Lord Chandos case. 4. Jacobi. fol. 55.
THe King grants to B. in tail, and in consideration of the surrender of the
Letters Patents by force, whereof the King is seized in fee, grants to him
and his wife, and to the heirs of B. the reversion passes, for the recital
that the King was seized in fee, was but the Collection of the King, and no
part of the consideration or suggestion of the party; And when the King grants
land in posse^, if he had but a reversion this shall pass, for he is not
deceived because less passes then he intended.

Bredimans case. 4. Jacobi. Com. Banco. fol. 56.
A Man devises a rent for life out of a Manor, and he devises the Manor for
years, the termor enters, and pays the rent, after the Term, the devisee
brings an assize against the Terretenant. Resol. Payment by lessee for years
of the rent gives no seisin to have an assize. 1. In respect of the
imbecility of his estate. 2. He cannot give seisin because he had not seisin,
and therefore a Pracipe lies not against him because he cannot render seisin;
but he may take seisin to the use of him in the freehold: A disseisor may give
seisin of a rent secke, because he has a freehold, and it is lawful. 3. A
rent secke is caecus and siccus, therefore it behooves the first payment (which
gives life unto it) shall be made by a Tenant of the freehold, and in this
case being created by devise an Annuity lies not thereupon, otherwise if it be
by grant: and Tenant of the freehold ought to attorne to a grant of such a rent
over, therefore he shall give seisin: But seisin by a Bailiffe is good, if
seisin were had before within sixty years, and seisin given by Tenant at will
is good, but it ought to be pleaded as payment by the lessor himself. If the
King has rent out of a ville to be paid by all the Inhabitants, seisin
alleged in general without naming any is good.

Gatewards case. 4. Jac. in Com. Banco. fol. 59.
TO claim common ratione Commorantiae and residen. in villa de B. is not good;
for no man may have interest ^ommon in respect of a Message, wherein he has
no interest; For custom should always extend to that which has certenty and
continuance, and without question tenant in fee simple ought to prescribe in
his own name, and tenant for life or years, by elegit at will, etc. in the
name of him that has the Fee, and he that has no interest cannot have any
common, and none that has any interest, although it be but at will, and ought
to have common, but by good pleading he may enjoy the same.

No improvement might be made in any wastes, if this custom (viz.) in respect
of habitation and Comorance) should be allowed, for tenants for life or years
at will, by elegit, by Statute, etc. of the houses of the Lord, should have
common in the wastes of the Lord, if this prescription were allowed, which were
inconvenient: A Custom that every Inhabitant in B. shall have a way over such
grounds, either to the Church, or Markett, etc. is a good custom, for that is
only easement, and no profit, and a way or passage may well sequi personam;
The Lord cannot claim common in his own soil.

A diversity was taken and agreed upon between a prescription and a custom, a
prescription is always alleged in the person, and a custom ought always to
be alleged in the Land, for every prescription ought to have by common
intendment a lawful commencement, but otherwise of a custom, for that ought to
be reasonable, and ex certa causa rationabili usitata, as Littleton says; But
it needs not to have intendment of a lawful commencement, as custom to have
Land Devisable, or of the nature of Gavelkinde, or Borough English. These and
such like customs are reasonable, but by common intendment, these cannot have
lawful commencement, by grant, or act, or agreement, but only by Parliament;
and the custom in the case at bar was repugnant, for it was alleged that
the Custom of the Town was, that every Inhabitant had used to have common
within a place in the Town of H. which was another Town.

Catesbyes Case. 4o. Jac. fol. 61.
SIx months being half a year (semestre) is given to the Patron of an
advowson to present, and according to the Kalander and not after 28. days to a
Month; and the Statute says, Si tempus semestre non transierit adjudicentur
damna ad valorem, etc. per dimidium anni; and being ambiguous, it shall be
construed for the benefit of the Patron.

Sir Moyle Finches case. 4. Jac. Com. Banco. fol. 63.
THe Lady M. tenant for life of the Manor of B. the remainder in fee to the
Lady Finch, she and S. her husband and D. levied a fine to one of the
demesnes, who grants and renders to D. for 50. years, the reversion to S. and
his wife and her heirs, with proviso in the Deeds which directed the fine
that the reversioner shall enter and hold Courts; And it was averred that this
was known by the name of the Manor of B. D. makes his son of three years
of age executor, and administration was committed to R. T. S. and his wife levy
a fine of all the lands of the wife in K. except the Manor of B. to the use of
the feme for life, the remainder to Sir M. F. R. T. demiseth to P. L. for ten
years, Dame M. dies, P. L. enters, by virtue of a power of revocation and
limitation of new uses, S. with the assent of the Lady F. his wife limitteth
the uses to one who ousteth P. L. and makes a feoffment to the use of the La:
F. for life, the remainder to H. F. in tail, P. L. reenters, Dame F. dies, H.
F. for rent arreare distraineth.

1. Resol. By the grant and render of the demesnes the Manor is destroyed,
because in an instant the services and demesnes are severed by act of the
party; but otherwise it is, if by act in Law, as upon partition; so it is of an
advowson appendant, etc. and upon partition many Manors may be made of one,
but not by the act of the party. 2. B. is excepted by the name of a Manor. 1.
Because the intent of the parties is so. 2. Exception of misnosmer shall not be
favored in Law. 3. It is sufficient in Law in many cases, that a thing be
reputed as it is named, as if a remainder be limited to a Bastard by the name
of son of J. S. and as to that was objected, that this reputation is not time
out of mind, this needs not, if it be of convenient time as this was, for it
was a Manor revera before to levy a fine, and continue the name after, so that
this reputation is stronger having such a ground, and reputation serves in
Writts amicable, although not in adversary.

3. The lease made by the administrator durante minori aetate, is good, because
the administration is general, and not special to the benefit of the Infant,
but howsoever this is good during the administration.

4. P L. in the life of the Lady M. had but interesse Termini, so that
attornement cannot be in his life, but after the death of the La. Mo. by entry
of the lessee the reversion is in S. and his wife without attornement, because
attornement needs not, because the reversion is settled, and he has no means
to compel, etc. otherwise it is where an attornement may be had: and although
that P.L. lessee of a lessee of part cannot make an express attornement, yet
his reentry shall be an attornement in Law, so he who has interesse termini,
may make a surrender in Law, but no express surrender, and a man of non-sane
memory may make an attornement in Law, but not an express attornement.

The Lord Darcies Case. 4. Jacobi Com. Banco. fol. 70.
TEnder is not necessary to have the single value of the heir male or female;
but the heir female shall not forfeit the double value, because the Statute of
Merton is si se mavitaverit at the age of 14. years, etc. at which time the
heir female is out of Ward: and where by the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 22. it
is provided that the Lord shall have two years to make a Tender, it gives not
the double value, but if he waive the two years, he shall have the value
without Tender; quia de mero Jure, etc.

Burrells case. 5. Jac. Com. Banco. fol. 72.
IF the father make a lease by fraud and dies, the son sells the land knowing
or not knowing of it, the vendee shall avoid it. 2. If the father makes a lease
to the son, who assigns it over by fraud, the father dies, the son sells
the land, the vendee shall avoid it.

Sir Drue Druries case. 5. Jac. Cur. Wardor. fol. 73.
E. 1. granted to the Town of Y. Quod omnes de villa oriundi licet terras,
etc. extra libertatem villae, etc. te nuerint in Capite, se maritare possint
juxta libertates villae praedictae: R. D. dyed seized of a house parcel of a
Monastery, dissolved in the time of H. 8. houlden in Capite, the King grants
the wardship of his son to the plaintiff, and makes the Ward Knight, the
plaintiff brings a valor Maritagij.

The Charter does not discharge the defendant; 1. Because it is juxta
libertates villae praedict'. and the liberties are not showed. 2. This Charter
cannot extend to a Tenure created in the time of H. 8. 3. It is not showed that
the defendant was borne within the Town.

1. Resol. If the heir in Ward be made a Knight he is out of Ward for his
body, because by intendment he is able to do Knights service, otherwise if
made a Nobleman.

2. By the death of the tenant the value of the marriage is vested in the Lord,
and cannot be divested by Knighthood, etc.

3. If he be Knighted in the life of his auncestor, he shall not be in Ward at
all.

4. If making of the heir in ward Knight shall divest the value, it will be
prejudicial to the Subject, and to the King, for none will buy their Wardships.

5. After Tender and refusal if the heir be made Knight, and marry, he shall
not forfeite the double value, because he is out of Ward, but immediately the
Lord shall have a Writ de valor maritagij.

This was the last Case that Sir John Popham chief Justice of England, etc.
ever Argued.

Sir George Cursons case. 7. Jac. Cur. Wardor. fol. 75.
SIr W. L. seized of a reversion expectant upon tail (made to his son) of
land in Capite, Covenants to stand seized to the use of his niece, the son
dies, the King shall not have primier seisin.

1. Resol. It was Collusion apparent within the Statute of Marlebr. cap. 6. to
infeoffe the heir apparent; and if he infeoffe others upon Collusion
averrable; but no averrement shall be where the remainder or reversion is left
in a stranger, or upon a Devise.

2. Or otherwise to dispose in the Statute of 32. H. 8. have relation to wills
only, for before the Statute every man might dispose of his lands by act
executed.

3. The Clause in the said Statute which saves primier seisin to the King,
has relation only to acts executed, for the King shall have without that
primier seisin of the third part not devised, but without that he shall not
have it of any part conveyed by act executed.

4. If the grandfather convey land to the son living the father, this is out
of the Statute, otherwise if the father be dead: and so a gift to a Collateral
Kinsman, who is not heir apparent, is out of the Statute, for none will (by
intendment) disinherit his heir to defeat the King of the Wardship, or primer
seisin, and so is the experience of the Court of Wards.

Bullens case. 5. Jacobi Com. Banco. fol. 77.
THe Lord may have a certain sum pro certo letae, for it shall be intended
it was granted at the first by purchase of the Leete for the ease of the
Tenants, and in consideration of the Lords claiming of it at his own costs
every Air: The issue was if the plaintiff was a chief pledge, and by
special verdict he was found a Resiant, and certified by the chief pledges to
be a chief pledge, and was amerced for his default. It seems he was not, Sed
materia praedicta consopita fuit in arbitrio. See 30. E. 3.23. of frank
pledges.

Lord Abergavenies case. Com. Banco. fol. 78.
A Judgment in an action of Debt is had against a joyntenant for life, who
afterward releaseth to his companion all the right, etc. yet that moytie is
liable to the Judgment, and so it is of a rent charge during the life of the
Releasor.

Sir Edward Phyttons case. Com. Banco. fol. 79.
EXecutors may take benefit of the Kings general pardon, by which is enacted
that all Subjects of the King, their heirs, Successors, Executors and
Administrators, shall be acquitted and discharged of all offenses, contempts,
etc. and that shall be expounded most beneficially for the Subject. And further
does give and grant all goods, Chattells, Debts, etc. forfeited; And
prohibiteth any Clerk to make out any Writ, etc. Provided that every Clerk
may make forth cap. ut. at the suite of the plaintiff against persons
outlawed, to the intent to compel them to answer; and that the party shall
sue forth a scir. fac. before the pardon in that behalf shall be allowed;
which is as much to say, having regard only to the plaintiff; But in regard
of the King, it is an absolute pardon, and grant of his goods, and he is a
person enabled against the King but not against the party plaintiff. And
every person by himself, or his Attorney, may plead this act for discharge:
Executors shall have restitution upon the Statute 21. H. 8. Also Administrators
shall have a Writ of error upon the Statute 27. El as was adjudged in the Lord
Mordants case, 36. El. And yet these Statutes speak only of the party, and
not of the Executors or Administrators, and because no Writ can be against
Executors, they may plead it without Process.

The End of the Sixth Book.
THE SEVENTH BOOK.
Postnati.
Calvin's case. 6. Jacobi Banco Regis. fol. 1.
R. C. By his guardian brings an assize, the defendants say, the plaintiff
ought not to be answered Quia est alienigena natus 5o. Novembris Anno Domini
Regis Angliae, etc. tertio apud. E. infra. regnum Scotiae ac infra ligeanciam
Domini Regis Regni sui S. ac extra ligeanciam Regni sui Angl. etc. the
plaintiff demurreth.

The Case was Adjourned into the Exchequer Chamber, and was argued by two
Justices every day, and by the Chancellor, and resolved by the Chancellor,
and all the Justices (except Walmesley and Foster) that the plaintiff ought to
be answered.

For these six demonstrative Conclusions drawn from the Law of Nature, the Law
of the Land, Reasons of State, and Authorities of Records and Book Cases.

1 Every one that is an Alien by birth, may be, or might have been an Enemy by
accident, but C. could never be an Enemy by any accident whatsoever; ergo, no
Alien by birth.

2. Whosoever are borne under one natural ligeance, due by the Law (...)
nature to one Sovereign, are natural borne Subjects; But C. was borne under
one, etc. ergo, a natural borne Subject.

3. Whosoever is borne within the Kings protection, is no Alien; But C. was
borne under, etc, ergo, he is no Alien.

4. Every stranger borne, must at his birth be either amicus or inimicus; but
C. at his birth could neither be amicus, nor inimicus, because he was subditus,
ergo, no stranger borne.

5. Whatsoever is due by the Law of man, may be altered, but natural legeance
of the Subject to the Sovereign cannot be altered; ergo, not due by man's Law.

Lastly, whosoever at his birth cannot be an alien to the King of E. cannot be
an alien to any of his Subjects of E. but C. at his birth could be no alien to
the King of E. Ergo, he cannot be an alien to any of the Subjects of E. the
Mayor and Minor both be Propositiones perspicue verae, and although Alienigena
dicitur ab aliena gente: yet that is all one, as Alienae ligeantiae, and
arguments drawn from Etymology are feeble, for Saepenemero ubi proprietas
verborum attenditur sensus veritatis amittitur, yet when they agree with Law,
Judges may use them for Ornament, and d^verse inconveniences would follow, if
the Plea against the Plaintiff should be allowed: For first, it makes
legeance local, wereupon should follow, first that legeance which is
universal, should be confined within local limits. 2. That the Subject should
not be bound to serve the King in Peace or in War out of those bounds. 3. It
should illegitimate many, which were borne in Gascayne, Guyan, Normandy, etc.
and diverse others of his Majesty's Dominions whilst the same were in actual
obedience. And lastly, this strange and new devised Plea inclines too much to
countenance that dangerous and desperate error of the Spencers. (viz.) That
Homage and Oath of legeance, was more by reason of the Kings Crown, (that is,
of his politic capacity) then by reason of the person of the King, which was
condemned by two Parliaments, one in the Reign of E. 2. called, Exilium
Hugonis le Spencer, and the other in 1. E. 3. cap. 1. No one Opinion in all our
Books is against this judgment: The Lord Chancellor and 12. of the Judges,
concurred in one opinion herein, and not in any remembrance so Honorable, and
Intelligent an Auditory as was at this Case.

Bulwers Case, 27. Eliz. fol. 1.
H. H. recovered against the Plaintiff in the common place, and dies the
Defendant in the name of H. Outlawed the Plaintiff who brings an Action of the
Case in N. where the first Action was brought, and recovered, for there was the
visible torte; when matter in one C^unty depends upon matter in another
County, the Plaintiff may choose in which County to bring his Action (except
that the Defendant upon general issue pleaded, may be prejudiced of his
Trial,) as if two conspire in one County, to Endite one in another County and
do it, an Action may be brought in either, but if he be indicted, but not by
them, there it shall be brought where the conspiracy was. If Manasse be made in
E. whereby my Tenants recede into L. an Action shall be brought in E. if an
action be founded upon two things, material and traversable in two several
Counties an action may be brought in any of them. An Annuity granted in one
County to be paid in another, the Action shall be brought where the grant was,
he who is robbed may have an appeal of felony, in every County where the goods
came, but of robbery where the fact was done only: A lease for years in one
County of Land, in another, Debt shall be brought, where the Lease was made,
and wast where the Land lies, every Action which concerns the life of a man
shall be brought where the offense is committed: Every issue which arises upon
an Action in which Land shall be recovered, shall be brought where the Land
lies, as in right of ward of Land or body, or intrusion of ward, and
forfeiture of Marriage, and Valor maritagij, and Quare impedit, but ravishment
of ward, where the ravishment was, and a Quare non admisit where the refusal
was, before the Statute of 7. R. 2. c. 10. an Action for Land in diverse
Counties, or for common in one County appendant to Land in another County,
shall be brought by several Writs in both Counties, but now, In confinio
comitatuum: a per quae servitia shall be brought where the note of the fine is
levied.

Sir Miles Corbets case. 27. Eliz. in Scaccario. fol. 5.
REsol: That the special manner of Common in Norf: called Shacke, to be taken
in arrable land after harvest until sowing begin is good. Resol. also if in D.
there are fifty acres, and in S. 100. l. who ought to intercommon for vicinage,
D. cannot put in more in their Common then it will depasture, and so to escape
reciprocally, for the original cause of this Common was only to prevent suits
in Champian Countries.

Cases upon the Statute of 13. E. 1. of Winchester upon hue and cry.
Sendills case. 27. Eliz. in Com. Banco. fol. 6.
A Robbery for which the Hundred must answer by force of the said Statute, is
to be done openly, so as the Country may take notice thereof themselves; but a
Robbery done secretly in the house, the Country cannot take notice thereof, for
every one may keep his house as strong as he will at his peril; For it was
adjudged in Ashpoles case, that the party robbed, needed not to give notice
thereof to the Country; For it may be that the party robbed was bound or
maimed, etc. so as he could not make hue and cry to give notice. A robbery was
done in January presently after the Sun setting during daylight; and it was
adjudged, that the Hundred should answer for the same; for it was a convenient
time for men to travel, or to be about their business. One was killed in the
Evening and escaped, and by the common Law the Town was amerced, for that was
accounted in Law parcel of the day, and not of the night But by the Statute
27. El. ca. 13. none shall have action upon the said Statute, except the party
robbed so soon as he may give notice of the same to any of the Inhabitants of
any Village, Town, or Hamlet, next to the place where the robbery was done,
and if they in pursuit apprehend any of the offenders, that will excuse the
Town.

Mibornes case. 29. Eliz. in Com. Banco. fol. 6.
A Robbery was done in the morning ante lucem, the Hundred shall not be
charged, Cum quis felonice occisus fuit per diem, nisi felocaptus fuit tota
villata illa amercietur.

The Earl of Bedfords Case. 29. Eliz. fol. 7.
1. REsol. If tenant in tail make a voydable lease for years, and dies, his
heir in ward to the King, or other Lord, the Lord shall avoyde this lease; but
if an infant make a feoffment, the Lord by Escheate shall not avoyde it, but a
guardian shall, because he does it in right of the infant.

2. This avoidance is but during the interest of the Lord, for afterward the
heir may make it good: But if he who has a particular estate avoideth an act
in all, after his Interest determined it shall not be made good: as if a feme
be endowed of an appropriation, and her clerk inducted, the appropriation is
defeated for ever; so if a feme Covert (as a feme sole) levy a fine, and the
Baron enters, and dies, the Con^see shall not have the land, for the estate is
wholly defeated.

Vghtreds Case. 33. Eliz. fol. 9.
THe M. of W. granted the Captainship of a Fort to the plaintiff, and for
exercising of the said office, and for finding a Master Gunner, and six
Soldiers, granted to him an Annuity of 32. li. per annum, the plaintiff
brings an Annuity.

1. Except. It does not appear by the Count that the M. had power to grant
this office, Non allocatur.

2. The plaintiff does not aver the exercising of the said office; Non
allocatur; for if he had not used it, that shall come in on the other part,
because this is a condition subsequent, and not precedent; but if one be to
have a thing in consideration of an act to be done by him, there he must show
the performance, because that amounts to a condition precedent, as in debt for
salarie, but if each party had equal remedy, one for the money, and the other
for the act to be done, there the Count shall be without showing the
performance, as if one Covenant to serve, etc. and the other Covenants to give
money, etc. But although that an interest vested is to be divested by non
feasance, if it appear to the Court that an action is not maintainable without
the doing of it, there the doing of it must be averred; as if an Abbot sole
grants an annuity to J. S. Pro Consilio, etc. in action brought against the
successor, he must aver that he had given Counsel, etc. to the use of the
House, otherwise if against the grantor.

Englefields case. 34. Eliz. in Scaccario. fol. 11.
SIr F. E. covenanted to stand seized to the use of himself for life, the
remainder to his Nephew, Proviso that it shall be void upon tender of a Ring
by him, after he was attainted of Treason, and all his inheritances forfeited
by Statute; the Queen leaseth to the defendant for forty years, by Statute it
was inacted that every one who had a patent of land of a person attainted,
shall exhibit it into the Exchequer within two years to be Enrolled, one
authorized by Letters patents in the name of the Queen tenders the Ring in the
life of Sir Fr. the Queen brings Intrusion.

1. Resol. When the Q. tenant pur auter vie leaseth for years, this is good
without recital of her estate, for it is less then her estate, as if she
grant Totum statum suum, for there is no torte, and she is not deceived.

2. That this condition is given to the Q. but object. 1. That it was
inseparable from Sir Fr. for his intent was the substance of it, and his intent
cannot be transferred over. 2. Natural affection is made the Judge whether the
Nephew deserve that the use shall be revoked, and in so much that natural
affection cannot be transferred, no more can this condition which was created
by natural affection, and natural affection determines the estate. 3.
Although the benefit of this collateral condition be given to the Q. the
performance is not: As to the first and second; It was answered, that the
condition is only the substance, and all the residue is but a flourish, and
that is not an inseparable condition, for any one may tender a Ring as well as
he.

As to the third; The performance is given to the Q. as incident to the
Condition.

4. It was objected, that the estate of Sir Fr. was not subject to the
condition, because he was not possessed by limitation of use, and by 27. H. 8.
but he was seized of his ancient inheritance, ergo, the lease shall not be
avoided in the life of Sir Fr. It was answered, that Sir Fr. was seized by
limitation of use, and that the lease shall be avoided.

5. It was objected, that the Q. having made this lease, being seized pur auter
vie, by her own act she shall not defeat it after: It was answered, that the
Q. shall avoyde it, for her grant shall not inure to two intents; 1. to make
the lease, etc. 2. to suspend the condition, and when the Q had two rights, she
shall not loose both without special words.

6. It was objected, that this tender ought to be found by office, because
matter in paijs, and if it be false the party has no remedy, because the
certificat is not traversable: It was answered that Certificats which inform
the Q. of her title are traversable, but Certificats which are in nature of
Trialls are not: also by the Tender the uses are determined, and by the
attainder, and the act of 33. H. 8. the land is vested in the Q.

7. It was objected, that the conveyance was void, because it was not enrolled
within two years, as the Statute requires, and so Sir Fr. was seized in fee,
and the lease unavoydable It was answered that it was tendered in the Exchequer
to be enrolled within two years, which is all the Statute requires; the
forfeiture was established by a special act, 35. Eliz.

The Case of Swannes, 34. Eliz. fol. 15.
A Game of Swannes in a common River are seized into the Queens hands upon
office found, I. Y. pleads that Abbas, etc. gavisi fuerunt totoproficuo omnium
cignorum in aestuaria praedict. indificantium, and makes her self title to
them, and prays an ouster Le many: All White Swannes in a common River who
have gained their natural liberty, may be seized for the King, because they
are Volatilia regalia, but a Subject may have them in his own River, and if
they escape into a common River, he may take them again, upon fresh persuite,
Cignets shall be divided between the owners, of the Swannes equally, but upon
the Thames the owner of the Land shall have the third by the custom: whosoever
has a Swan-marke must have it by grant of the King, or prescription, and he
may grant it over, and he ought to have freehold of five Marks per annum, by
the Statute of 22. E. 4. c. 6. A man may prescribe to have Wyld Swannes, but
not as here, but that the Abbot, etc. have used to take of them to their own
use, and therefore adjudged against I. Y. A Swanne may be an estray, and so
cannot any other foul.

Sir Thomas Cecils Case, 40. Eliz. in Scaccario. fol. 18.
SIr T. C. entered into an obligation to the Queen to perform Covenants, and
showed in the Exchequer-Chamber matter of equity to discharge him of the said
Debt, according to the Statute of 33. H. 8. c. 39.

1. Resol. that Branch of the Statute which gives liberty to the Subject to
plead matter in equity in bar of Debt due unto the King, extends to Debts
due at the common Law, as well as by this Statute, because this Statute gives
more speedy remedy for them, and so within the purview thereof, and so the
other proviso of equal charging of Lands Subject to Deb. ts of the King is
general.

2. The Court of Exchequer-Chamber in this case may decree upon English bill,
although that Process be in the Exchequer at the common Law, because to that
purpose they are as one Court.

3. An obligation to perform Covenants after Breach of them is within the
Statute.

The Lord Andersons Case, 41. Eliz. in Scaccar. fo. 21.
TEnant in tail is bound by recognizance to I. S. who is attainted, Tenant in
tail dies, his issue aliens Bona fide, the King shall not extend these Lands
by the Statute. 33. H. 8. c. 39.

1. Before that Statu^e the King could not extend Lands in the hands of the
issue in tail for the Debt of his auncestor, because he was bound by W. 2. De
Donis.

2. By that Statute Lands are extendable in the hands of the issue in tail,
for Debt due to the King by judgment, recognizance, obligation, or other
specialty, and other cases are out of the Statute.

3. The Alienee Bona fide, is not within the Statute, because favored as a
purchasor, and he is a stranger to the Debt, and comes in upon good
consideration, and benefit is given against the issue in tail, which was not
before.

4. Debts due to a Subject, and forfeited to the King, are not within the
Statute, for they are not due originally to the King by any of the said four
ways mentioned in the Act.

Butts Case, 42. Eliz. in com. banco. fo. 23.
A. Seized of black acre in fee, and of white acre for years, grants a rent
charge to B. for life with distress in both, B. distreines, and avowes in
white acre, and good.

1. Resol. white acre is charged during the term and life of B.

2. All the rent issues out of black acre, for as an estate of freehold it
cannot issue out of white acre, nor as freehold out of black acre, and a
chattell out of white acre, because entire, it cannot be construed to be two
rents contrary to the intent of the parties, and therefore an acceptance of a
Lease of white acre does not suspend it, and in an assize, black acre only
shall be put in view.

3. Although the rent issues only out of black acre, yet white acre is
charged with a distress. If a rent be granted out of three acres with clause
of distress in one, this is a rent seck for all, yet the grantee shall
distreine in the third acre for it, so if a rent be granted to two with clause
of distress to one of them, but a rent may be seck, and charge at several
times, and therefore if a rent be granted in fee with distress for life, it is
a rent charge for life, and seck after, but if the Clause of distress be for
years, it is a rent seck for all, because the freehold is seck.

The avowry was insufficient. 1. Because he said the rent issued out of white
acre, where it issued out of black acre, and although the Plaintiff had
disclosed the truth in his plea in bar, this does not salve the matter in
substance vicious in the avowry. 2. He deriveth the rent but of white acre,
Virtute cujus, he was seized for life, which is repugnant to have a freehold
out of a Chattell, and so judgment given against him for insufficient pleading.

Cases of Quare Impedit.
Halls Case, 31. Eliz. fo. 25.
A Quare impedit against the Bishop, and incumbent, without naming the Patron,
the writ shall abate. 1. It is not reason the Patron shall loose his Patronage,
without being named, in case where he may be named, as here. 2. The incumbent
at the common Law could not plead to the Patronage, and therefore it is no
reason that he who cannot plead be named, and he who can, omitted, but now the
incumbent may plead to the patronage by the Statute of 25. E. 3. cap. 7. which
inableth the possessor to counterpleade the title of the King, and by equity
against a common person, in the one case after induction, in the other after
institution: But in case where the Patronage shall not be recovered, or that
the Patron cannot be named, as in the Kings Case, a Quare impedit shall be
against the incumbent sole, or against him and the ordinary, so if a Bishop
disturb and die, it shall be against the incumbent sole, if a Patron be named
and die, if the writ shall not abate he shall be out of possession, and if it
shall abate, the torte shall not be punished, but if the Patron be put out of
possession, he has remedy by writ of right, and if it shall abate, the
Plaintiff is without remedy, therefore the writ shall stand.

Sir Hugh Portmans Case, 40. Eliz. fol. 27.
IF the Plaintiff in a Quare impedit, after appearance be non-suite, or
discontinue or be made a Knight, pending the writ, this is peremptory, because
it is his own act, otherwise if the writ abate for default of form, or by
misnosmer, for this may be the default of the Clerk.

Baskervills Case, 27. Eliz. fo. 28.
TItle devolveth to the King to present by lapse, the Patron presents one who
dies, the King has lost the presentation, for he having the first
presentation, he shall not have the second: otherwise the King may suffer
Strangers to present one after another, and take his turn when he pleases,
and by that means the Patron shall be in a manner disinherited; and the
Statute of Praerogativa Regis, nullum tempus occurit Regi, is to be intended
when the King has a permanent Title, and not transitory, when time is the
substance of his Title.

Maunds Case, 43. Eliz. fo. 28.
IN case of a reentry for non-payment of rent, or when any sum, Nomine penae,
is to be forfeite, in both the cases demand ought to be made precisely on the
day, a convenient time before the setting of the Sun, in the one case in
respect of a condition, and in the other in respect of the penalty; but in case
of a distress, he that has the rent may demand the same at what time pleases
him, for no Loss or penalty insueth thereupon, but only a remedy to come by
his rent, and if demand be made any time after the day, and before the
distress, it suffices.

Discontinuance of Process, etc. by the Death of the Queen. Trin. (...)
Jacobi fol. 29.
UPon a general resummons the original, and the issue are revived, and not
the mean processed or Voucher, nor Garnishment, but all the Process is
revived upon a special resummons, but not in aid prayer, or if a Verdict be
given, and the King dies before the day in banck, because there summons lies
not, therefore he shall not have resummons, but in case of Verdict, he for whom
it is given may have his judgment upon Scire facias But now, by the Statute of
1. E. 6. an action, suite, bill, or plaint, shall not be discontinued, if they
are returned, otherwise if not, because the Statute says, Depending. If one
deliver an appeal to the Sheriff within the year, and the King dies, for
necessity the Plaintiff shall have a Certiorari, and reattachment: so if a
formedon be brought within a year against the pernor of the profits; offices
of Sheriffs, not being of inheritance or by Charter, are determined by the
death of the King. Suites depending in inferior Courts are out of the Statute;
if the King dye after information preferred by him, all the proceeding is lost,
but the information shall stand. 1. Because this is a record for the King,
which shall not abate. 2. Because informations upon certain Statutes are to be
preferred within certain time, but if the King bring an original and dye,
this is lost, if one plead to an Indictment, and the King dye, he shall plead
De novo, but if he be convicted, judgment may be given in the time of another
King, by the said Statute, and no^

Case of a Fine levied by the King, tenant in tail, fo. 32 Michaelmas. 2.
Jacobi.
A Fine levied by the King, tenant in tail by gift of his auncestor who was a
subject, barreth the tail. 1. It is reason, that as the King is bound by the
Statute of W. 2. De donis, that he should have benefit of the Acts of 4. H. 7.
and 32. H. 8. 2. A general Statute binds the King of Lands descended from an
auncestor a Subject, but not where it discends from an auncestor who was King,
except in special cases. 3. The issues of the King at the time of the levying
of the fine are subjects therefore within the Statute, and it seemd to them
that there ought to be Letters Patents to give power to the Conisee to enter
into the Land.

Nevills Case, 2. Jacobi fo. 33.
THe dignity of an Earl intailed is forfeitable for treason. 1. Resolved, this
is within the Statute of W. 2. De donis, and experience is to give dignities in
tail, with remainders over, also, this was an office anciently, and offices
may be intailed. 2. A dignity may be forfeited at the common Law, by a
condition in Law, for the Office of Earl was, Ad consulendum Regem tempore
pacis, and defendendum Regem tempore belli; therefore he forfeits it when he
takes Council, and Arms against him. 3. If it were not forfeited by the
common Law, yet it is by 26. H. 8. cap. 13. by this word Hereditament, and the
words use or possession which are added, are to show, that every Hereditament
shall be forfeited: at the common Law, Donee in tail had Potestatem alienandi
post prolem suscitatam, but if he retain the Land himself, he has no
absolute fee, for none shall inherit but the heir, Per formam doni, so it is
now in case of annuity, and other things out of the Statute.

Penal Statutes, 2. Ja. fo. 36.
WHen a Statute is made by Parliament, the King cannot give the penalty,
benefit or dispensation of the same to any Subject, but the King may make a Non
obstante, to dispense with any particular person, that he shall not incur the
penalty of a Stature, and the King after a forfeiture or penalty of a Statute
by judgment and recovery may grant the same to any of his Subjects, by way of
reward; and all the Judges of England subscribed to this, the 8. Day of
November. 1604.

Lillingstons Case, 5. Jacobi. fo. 38.
TEnant in fee grants a rent charge, proviso, that the person of the grantor
shall not be charged, the grantee acknowledges a recognizance according to 23.
H. 8. and after releaseth to the grantor, the conisee sueth an extent, and
brings debt against the grantor Terretenant. 1. Resolved, the rent is
extendable, for notwithstanding the release it is In esse as to the Conisee,
and cannot be discharged by the act of the Conisor, also, the extent relates
to the judgment, at which time it was extendable. See the Lord Aburgavenies
Case, in the sixth Report. 2. Debt lies not so long as the extent indureth,
for so long the rent has continuance, although that by the release the
freehold be determined: if a rent charge be granted for life with proviso, as
abovesaid, if the rent be determined, debt lies against the grantor, because
he had no other remedy.

Bedels Case, 5. Jacobi. fo. 40.
R. B. Covenants in consideration of paternall love, etc. to stand seized to
the use of himself for life, the remainder to his Wife for life, the remainder
over. 1. Resolv. although the consideration in the deed runs not to the
Wife, yet another consideration may be averred, which stands with the Deed. The
limittation of an use to the Wife imports a consideration in it self, so if
it be to any of his blood, but if he Covenant in consideration of a 100. l. to
stand seized to the use of his Son, nothing passes until inrollment, Quia
expressum facit cessare tacitum.

Beresfords Case, 5. Jacobi. fo. 41.
AN use is limited to A B. and of the heirs Males of the said A. lawfully
begotten, this is fee tail, notwithstanding the words (of the Body) be
wanting, and that lawfully begotten, are implied, for no heir shall inherit
who is not lawfully begotten. Resolved, that to create an inheritance the word
Heirs is necessary, but the words De corpore are not necessary to make an
estate tail, if there be words which Tantamount, and here the sense according
to the intent of the Donor, is of or by the said A. lawfully begotten. A gift
to a man and haeredibus de se exeuntibus, or Haeredibus suis de prima uxore
sua, are estates tail.

Kenns Case, 4. Jacobi fo. 42.
C. K. had issue by E. S. M. K. and they are divorced, and the Marriage
sentenced void, C. K. marries F. they have issue E. K. C. dies, E. K. is
found by office to be Heir, M. and W. her Baron prefer a bill, in the Court
of wards to traverse the Office to which the Committees of the wardship answer,
one of the Committees dies, M. and W. sue a Bill of Reviver, and M. having
issue E. dies. E. her issue, and R. her Baron, bring a new Bill of Reviver.

1. Resolved, so long as the sentence stands in force, the issue of the first
feme is a Bastard, because the spiritual Judge has jurisdiction thereof, and
our Law gives faith unto it: Sentence of divorse may be repealed after the
death of the parties, but no divorse can be after their dearh, for that will
Bastardise the issue, and the Court of the King has trial of it originally,
not being hindered by any Sentence.

2. The Plaintiff shall not have a traverse without an office found for her,
for the King being sure of wardship shall not be ousted by one, before that he
be sure to have benefit by him, and 2. E. 6. cap 8. does not extend to give a
traverse without office, but if by two offices two are found Heirs, whereof
one is within age, by that Statute the other may traverse immediately.

3. A bill of reviver upon a bill of reviver shall not be suffered, for the
infiniteness, no more then a Writ by Journeys accounts. By all, the last bill
was absurd, which prays, that the first bill be revived, because M. was dead,
but it ought to be, that her Heir may traverse.

The End of the Seventh Book.
THE EIGHTH BOOK.
The Princes Case, 3. Jacobi. in Chancery. fo. 1.
THE Queen, 37. Eliz. grants three Manors parcel of the Duchee of C. to H.
L. and G. M. the King (at the supplication of the Prince) brings a Scire facias
against the said H. L. and S.H. to make Livery to the Prince by force of the
Statute of 11. E. 3. H. L. pleads, Null tielum record, S. H. pleads the
Patents with a Non obstante. 32. H. 8. whereby these Manors were made parcel,
of, etc. and the Act of Confirmation, 43. Eliz. As to the plea of H. L. the
Attorney shows an Inspeximus, and demurreth upon the plea of the other two
who join, and as Amici curiae repeat part of the Statute of 1. H. 7. touching
the Duchy, H. L. demurreth.

1. Resolv. the Charter of creation of the Prince, Duke of C. 11. E. 3. is an
Act of Parliament, for such a limittation to the first-begotten Son is void
without Statute, for if Grandfather King, the Father Duke, and Son be, if the
King dies, the Father is King, and the Son Duke, by the said Statute, against
the rules of Law.

2. The Lands cannot be so annexed to the Duchy that they cannot be severed
without Statute. 3. The estate is limited to cease when the King has no first
begotten Son, and to revive when he has, which cannot be without Statute. 4.
It should be absurd, that six being then created Earls, that their creation
should be firm, and the Creation of the Prince void.

5. In the Charter there is De communi consilio Praelatorum, etc. and in the
end, Per ipsum Regem and totum concilium in Parliamento; such an Act as
begins Rex Statuit, and always reputed for a Statute shall not be drawn in
question, but if it be Rex ex assensu, the Commons or Lords omitting the other
part, it is void. 2. The said Charter having the force of a Statute, is good,
without aid of any other Statute, and although the King in his Scire facias,
recite another Act for th^s surplus, the writ shall not abate. 3. The Prince
had the Dukedom in Fee, for it is an inheritance, because, 21. E. 3. 41. the
Princess was endowed, and it is no estate tail because it is not limited of
what body it shall come, but only that they shall be Heirs to the black
Prince. 4. Against a general Statute Null tiel record shall not be pleaded,
for although it be lost, yet the Judges ought to take notice of it, and this is
such an one which concerns the Prince, and the Statute of confirmations does
not extend unto it. 1. Because this has a special relation to certain
defects, as Misnosiner, etc. 2. Patents are made good only against the King,
saving the right of others, therefore the Princes right is saved: In a Scire
facias the King or Prince may reply, but the most formal way is, for the
Attorney to reply, as here he did: No Son of the King but his first
begotten, shall be Duke of C. although he be Heir apparent to the Crown.

Calyes Case, 26. Eliz. Banco regis. fo. 32.
1. REsolved, that to maintain an action against an Inkeeper for goods lost,
etc. it ought to be a common June. 2. He ought to be a Passenger, therefore a
Neighbor shall not. 3. An inholder shall not answer for any thing, but that
which is Infra hospitium, therefore if a Passenger require that his Horse be
put to grass, the inholder shall not answer if he be stolen, otherwise if he
require it not. 4. There ought to be a default in the Inholder or his Servants,
therefore if a Guest bring one with him who steals the goods, the Inholder
shall not be charged; otherwise, if the Hostler appoint one with him in his
Chamber who does it. But an inholder shall not be charged, if he require the
Guest to put his goods in a Chamber, and he leaves them in the Court, but it is
no excuse to the Inholder that he delivered the Key of the Chamber to the
Guest, or that no goods were delivered to him. 5. The Hostler shall answer for
Charters if they be stolen, but not if a Guest be beaten, and all this
appears by the Writ, and the words of it.

Pains Case, 29. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 34.
A Feme, Tenant in tail takes Baron, and has issue who is heard to cry, and
dies, the Feme dies without issue, the Husband shall be Tenant by the
courtesy, for although the state of the Feme be determined, yet it is Tacit,
implied in the gift, that every Husband of a Feme inheritable to the said
estate, shall have the Land for his life, after the death of the Feme, if he be
entitled to be Tenant by the courtesy. If a Feme be delivered of a Monster,
this does not entitle the Husband to be Tenant by the courtesy, otherwise it
is, if the issue had humane shape, but is blemished: if a Feme be ripped, and
the issue taken out of her Womb, the Baron shall not be Tenant by the
courtesy, otherwise it is, if the issue which they had dies, and Lands discends
after. A man shall not be Tenant by the courtesy, but where his issue may
inherit as heir to the Feme, therefore he shall not be of a possession in Law,
because there he makes title from the auncester of the Feme, and not from the
Feme.

Barretry, 30. Eliz. fol. 36.
A common Barretor is a common maintainer of Suites or quarrels, in Courts or
in the Country: As first, in disturbance of the peace. Secondly, in taking and
keeping of possession, with force or deceit. Thirdly, by false calumniation
and sowing of Quarrels, but to indite him of it, it ought not to be, that he
has done so twice or thrice, but that he is a common doer of them.

Grieslies Case, 30. Eliz. com. banco. fo. 38.
BY the custom, one is chosen in a Leete to be Constable, who refuses, and
departs out of the Court, the Steward imposes a Fine of 5. l. upon him, for
which the Bailiffes of the Lord distreine, and he brings a replevin.

1. Resolved, every Judge of record may assesse a reasonable fine upon any man
who makes contempt or disturbance to the Court, but a Judge who is not of
record cannot.

2. This fine heeds not to be afferred, because the Statute of Mag. Chapter speaks
of Amerciaments, and not of Fines, for a fine is imposed by the Court, and an
Amerciament by the Jury: therefore the Judgment in an Amerciament is general,
Quod sit in misericordia, and after upon estreits directed to the Coroners they
are afferred, and the Statute is, that a Noble man shall be Amerced by his
Peers, which is not used at this day, because it is reduced to a certeinty,
(Viz.) A Duke to 10. l. and others to 5. l. but an Amerciament of an Officer of
the Court, or he who has execution of Writs shall be afferred by the Court, so
of any who is Judge as Suitors: If a Juror appear, and is adjourned to a day,
of which he makes default, this shall be inquired by his Companions, for he
shall be fined to the value of his Land, per annum, which the Court cannot know.

3. A distress may be taken for a fine without custom, or for an Amerciament
which is less.

Whittinghams Case, 45. Eliz. fo. 42.
IT was resolved, that if there be Lord and Tenant an Infant, and the Infant
make a feoffement in fee, and execute the same by livery of seisin by his own
hands, and after dye without heirs, in this case the Lord shall not have the
benefit of the escheate, and the Feoffement is unavoidable.

There be three manner of privities, (Viz.) privity in blood. 2. Privity in
estate. 3. Privity in Law. Privities in blood, as heirs in blood, privity in
estate as joyntenants. Baron and Feme, Donor, and Donee, Lessor and Lessee,
etc. privities in Law as Lord by escheate, Lord of a Villain, etc.

If a Lessee for life make a Lease for years, and after enter into the Land,
and make wast, and the Lessor recover in an Action of wast against the Lessee
for life, he shall avoid the Lease for years, made before the wast committed.
But if a Lessee for life make a Lease for years, and after enter and make a
feoffement in fee, the Lessor shall not avoid the Lease for years; and so, if
a Tenant make a Lease for years, and after is attainted of felony, or dies
without heir, the Lord by escheate shall not avoid the term. But because
the feoffement in the case at bar was executed by Letter of Attorney, it was
resolved to be void, and the Land escheated to the Queen.

Jehu Webbes Case, 6. Jacobi. com. banco. fo. 45.
THe King grants the office of the Kings Tennis, plays at W. to one, who being
disseised brings an assize.

The Patent shall have a reasonable construction, not only when the King
himself plays, but when any of his Household. As if a Commission be made to
take Singing-Boys in a Cathedrall-Church for the Kings Chapel, those that
Sing there for their pleasure, cannot be taken, but such as get their living by
it. There were but two manner of assizes at the common Law, assizes De libero
tenemento, and, De communia pasturae, but for no other common, but for this
only there is a Writ in the Register. But the Statute of W. 2. c. 25. gives
it, De proficuo in certo loco capiendo in lieu of a Quod permittat, and
although that there offices amongst other things are named, yet an assize lay
of an office at the common Law, and although that no Tenant for life may have a
Quod permittat, yet an assize did lie for him, but that is to be understood of
an office of profit, for it lies not of an office of charge: Original Writs
made by Statute cannot be altered without Statute: In an assize of a new
office, it ought to be showed, what profit belongs to it, but not for an
ancient office, because that is sufficiently known.

Syms Case, 6. Jacobi. fo. 51.
TEnant in tail levyeth a fine with warranty, and dies, the warranty discends
upon the issue of him in the remainder, inheritable to the tail, and another,
the issue in tail brings a formedon, and is barred for all, for the warranty
is entire, and barreth every one upon whom it discends, of all his right: as if
one seized of three acres makes a feoffement of one with warranty, and dies,
having issue two Daughters who make partition, the Mother purchases the part
of one, and brings dower against the feoffee who Vouches the Daughters, she
shall recover all the other acre of the other Daughter, if Tenant by the
courtesy make a feoffement with warranty, and dies, and his Son heir of the
Feme recovers, and assets discends after, the feoffee shall have a Scire
facias, to have the Land first recovered, by the Statute of Glouc. c. 3. but if
assets descend to the Heir in tail, bound with a lyneall warranty, after
recovery in formedon, the Feoffee shall have a Scire facias, to have the
assets, for otherwise if the recoverer alien the assets, the issue of him will
recover the Land in tail again; but in these cases the discontinuee ought to
confess the title of the Demandant, and pray, that if assets descend after,
they may descend unto him, for if he plead a warranty and assets, this is
peremptory unto him, if it be found that assets did not descend; for the
Statute is, that a Scire facias shall issue out of the rolls of the Justices,
and in this case there is no ground for the Scire facias in the Record, but in
this case if the issue in tail pleads no assets, and assets are found, but not
to the value, the tenant shall have a Scire facias to recover the assets
descended after, for that false plea of the Vouchee. Warranty and estoppell
descend upon the heir general, and warranty barreth although that he upon
whom it discends, claims not by him that made it, but so does not an
estoppell, but estoppells with recompense bind the right of one who claims
not by him that made it.

Roger, Earl of Rutlands Case, 6. Jacobi fo. 55.
THe King grants the pannage and herbage of a Park to M. for life, and reciting
this, grants it to the Earl of Rutland for his life.

1. Resolved, the King has three manner of inheritances. 1. Some which he
cannot exercise himself, and cannot grant them in reversion or remainder, as
Corodies and Churches of which he is Patron. 2. Others which he cannot
exercise himself, but may grant them in reversion or remainder, as offices.
3. Others which he may exercise himself, and may grant as Lands, Houses, etc.

2. The King here is not deceived, for when he recites here that M. had for
life, and grants for life, this inureth, as by Law it may, that is as a grant
in reversion.

3. In this case the grant to the Earl shall commence after the determination
of the estate of M. and if the King grants Land to one and his Heirs, Habendum
to him and his Assigns, it is good, and the Habendum shall be rejected for the
honor of the King. See the Lord Chandos case in the sixth Book, and when a
Charter of the King may be taken to two intents good, in many cases it shall be
taken to such intent as is most beneficial for the King, but if it may be
taken to one intent good, and to another void, then for the honor of the King,
and benefit of the Subject, then it shall be taken so that it may take effect.

Beechers Case, 6. Jacobi. fo. 58.
B. Plaintiff in Debt, Se retraxit by attorney, and by the judgment is not
amerced, he brings eror. 1. Resolved, a Retraxit ought to be in proper person,
for at the common Law every one who appeared ought to come in proper person and
make his attorney after, by license of the Court, but if it be without writ, he
cannot without a writ of Attornato faciendo: In cases where one may make an
attorney, but for contempt is bound to appear in person, if he appear by
attorney, this is not error, because the court may dispens with the contempt,
otherwise where he cannot appear by Law by attorney, as here, for if he
appear by attourny, this is error. 2. B. ought to be amerced if upon a
Nonsuite, a Fortiori upon a Retraxit, and although it is for his advantage, yet
he may assign it for error, because the judgment is not perfect, and because
it is for the advantage of the King, and it shall not be amended because the
act of the Court. 3. Where one disclaimes he shall not have a Writ of error,
because he has confessed that he had no right, otherwise it is upon a
Retraxit, for this is but a bar of the action, a fortiori here, where it wat
void, done by an attorney, a Retraxit ought to be when the party is supposed
to be present, therefore it shall not be when he imparleth.

Swaynes Case. 6. Jac. fo. 63.
1. REsolved, the King grants a Manor for life except Timber Trees, the
Lessees grant copyhold, the Grantees may shrowde Timber Trees because they come
in by custom, Paramount the exception. 2. If Copyholders prescribe to take
profit in any part of the Manor, if the Lord aliens it, a Copyholder admitted
after shall have it, because he is in paramount the severance, but he shall
prescribe and plead specially, that is, until such a time, (Viz.) Before the
severance Talis habebatur, etc. consuetudo, etc. and then show the severance.

Sir William Fosters Case, 6. Jac. fo. 64.
C. F made a feoffement 4. E. 6. reserving a rent charge, which rent descends
to T. F. who dies intestate, his administrators avow for it, and allege no
seisin within 40 years, yet good, for the Statute of 32. H. 8. c. 3. that none
shall avow for rent if he had not seisin within 40. years, is to be intended
when it was necessary to allege, as upon rent betwixt very Lord and Tenant,
for this may be had by incroachment, and perhaps the comencement of the
Seigniory was before time of memory, but where rent is by deed or reservation,
as here, or upon an estate tail, the seisin is not material, for the deed or
reservation is the Title and incroachment shall not hurt, and they shall not
have a Ne injuste vexes, but shall avoid it in an avowry, and Magna Charta c.
10. Quod nullus distringatur ad faciendum majus servitium, etc. does not extend
to donee in tail, Lessee for life, etc. but is intended between very Lord and
very Tenant.

Lovedayes Case, 6. Ja. fo. 65.
IF a Jury who appears to try a certain issue, give a verdict which is
accepted, be it perfect or imperfect, they are discharged, and shall not try
the same issue, upon a new Nisi prius, but a Venire facias de novo shall issue,
otherwise it is of the Recognitors of an assize, they shall try all the issue,
because they are not to try any certain issue, and because they come in upon
an Original, the Court will not award a new Original, but the Plaintiff
shall have a Certificate of assize to try the imperfections, the Plaintiff
sueth a Venire facias against diverse, the Sheriff returns no Writ, the
Plaintiff shall not have several Venire facias after, for he cannot vary from
the first.

Crogates Case, 6. Jacobi. fo. 66.
THe Defendant pleads in bar to trespass that the B. of N. leased by Copy to
W. M. to which copyhold there is common in B. and justifies as Servant to the
said W. the Plaintiff replies, De injuria sua propria, etc. this is an
insufficient replication, for, De injuria, etc. has reference to all the plea
in bar, and not to the Commandment, Ergo, if the Defendant in false
Imprisonment justify, for that a Capias was awarded to the Sheriff, who made
a warrant to him to take the Plaintiff; De injuria, etc. is no plea, because
it refers to all, and so Record shall be tried by Jury, but he shall
traverse the Warrant, which is matter in fact, but this had been a good plea,
if the proceeding be in a Court, which is not of Record. 2. De injuria, etc. is
to be pleaded, where the plea is matter of excuse, and not where he claims an
interest in his own right, or in the right of his Master, for there he shall
traverse the Commandment. 3. Where authority is derived from the Plaintiff
himself, or is given by Law, as to fee if wast, the Plaintiff ought to answer
to it, although no interest be claimed, and he shall not plead De injuria, etc.
4. If this plea be admitted here, all parts of the plea in bar shall be
tried, and the issue will be full of multiplicity.

Trollop Case, 6. Jacobi. fo. 68.
THe Defendant in error pleads excommunication, etc. and shows the Certificat
of the Vicar general, de D. the words of which were, Vniversis clericis and
literatis per totam diocesim D. the Plaintiff pleads the general pardon 3.
Jac.

1. Resolved, the official cannot certify excommunication, for none shall do
that, but he to whom the Court may Write to assoile the party, as the Bishop
and Chancellor of C. or O. and for that, if a Bishop certify and dye Before
the return of the Writ, it shall not be received, but the Successor shall do
it, and one Bishop shall not certify an Excommunication made by a Bishop in
another Court, but a Bishop after Election before Consecration may, and so may
the Vicar general, if it appear that the Bishop is in Remotis agendis. 2. The
Certificat is insufficient because by the particular direction to the Clerks of
D. the Kings Court and all others are excluded, and so a protection in one
Court serves not in another, and Excommunication is such a thing, as the Court
of the King has conusance, and therefore the Suite and the Cause are to be
expressed in the Certificat, that the Kings Court may judge of the sufficiency,
and if it be insufficient (as if a Bishop certify an excommunication made by
himself in his own Cause) the Court may write to absolve him. If the
Certificat had been good, the point was, whither the general pardon
discharges an excommunication or not.

Whitlocks Case, 6. Jacobi. fo. 69.
A Revertioner upon an estate for life levys a fine to the use of himself,
until Marriage of his Son, and then to the use of himself for life, with
power to make Leases, so that they exceed not 21. years, or three lives
reserving the ancient rent, the remainder to his Son in fee, the Son is
Married, the Father makes a Lease for 99. years, if two shall so long live,
reserving rent to him, his heirs, and the reversioners, this is a good Lease.

1. Resolved, he had pursued his authority, for if he had a particular power to
make Leases for 21. years. or three lives, he cannot make leases determinable
upon lives, but having a general power to make Leases, so that they do not
exceed 21. years, or three lives, he may.

2. The rent reserved goes to the Son, although that he who reserved it had
but for life, because the Lease for years has no being out of the Lease for
Life, but out of the Fee, and in judgment of Law preceedeth both in
construction upon the limitation of uses, but the most safe way here had been
to reserve the rent generally, and lest it to the distribution of the Law.

Greenelyes Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 71.
BAron and Feme, Tenants in special tail, the Baron infeoffeth P. G. and
dies, the Feme dies, the Son enters, and Leaseth to the Plaintiff.

1. Resolved, if Baron joyntenant in special tail with his Wife, had made a
Feoffement, or had been disseissed, at the common ley, and dyed, and the Feme
before entry dyed, this is a discontinuance to the Son, because he cannot
enter as Heir to both, but if the Feme enter, the discontinuance is purged.

2. The estate which the Feme had jointly with her Baron is within the purviewe
of the Statute of 32. H. 8. c. 28. That no fine levied by the Baron sole of
Lands of the Feme shall hurt her, and within the Statute of West. 2. c. 3.

3. The entry of the Son is lawful, although he claims not as heir to the
Feme, as the Statute speaks, but as heir to both, because he is within these
words, or to such as have right by the death of such Wife, and this is to be
intended of discontinuances made by the Baron, and not of a rightful bar of
the issue, for they cannot avoid it, and the Statute is that they may enter,
which they cannot do where they are barred: and if the Feme enter within 5.
years, as she may after a Fine levied by the Baron, this does not take away
the future bar of the issue, and if she enter not within 5. years, she
also is barred: Baron, tenant in tail, the remainder to the Feme in tail
makes a feoffement, the Feme may enter after his death, by this Statute, but if
the Baron suffer a recovery she shall not enter, in the Case at bar the son
may have a Formedon at the common Law, and where before this Statute a Cuj in
vita, or Sur cuj in vita did lie, entry is given by this Statute, and not
otherwise.

The Lord Staffords Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 73.
THe Queen revertioner upon an estate tail grants the revertion to T. T. in
tail upon condition, is to have Praedictam reversionem in fee, the condition
is performed, the Lord Stafford Tenant in tail levyeth a fine, his issue is
barred. 1. Resolved, that a condition of accruer may be annexed to a thing
which lies in grant, and to an estate tail, as if Lessee for life be the
remainder for life, with condition of accruer to the first, this is good, and
yet no Merger of estate. 4. things are requisite to an accruer. 1. A particular
estate as the Foundation, Ergo, a Lease at will shall not be. 2. The estate
ought to continue in the Grantee until accruer, therefore if the Grantee alien
and repurchase the condition is Tolled, but Quaere if the Tenant alien upon
condition which is broken, if the fee shall accrue, but grantee may grant part
of his estate, as if Lessee for life make a Lease for years, he may perform
the condition after, so may Tenant in special tail, after he is become tenant
in tail after possibility, etc. so may the surviving jointenant, and the heir
of Tenant in tail. An instant is sufficient to support an accruer, as if the
condition be, if the Lessee be ousted, Eo instante, that the ouster is the fee
accrueth, but if Lessee for years accept a confirmation for life, the
condition is gone: but it is not necessary, that the estate of the grantor or
Lessor continue, because by his own act he shall not defeat his grant. 3. It
ought to vest at the time of the condition performed or never, and for that,
rather that it shall not vest at this time by performance of the condition, the
fee without office or other ceremony shall be divested out of the King, 4. It
is necessary that the particular estate and the condition be in one deed, or
two deeds delivered at the same time, for in Law they are but one grant, and by
the condition performed, he had fee from the delivery.

Resolved, Praedict. reversionem signifies the reversion which the Queen had.
Viz. That which depends upon both the estates tail, and so was the intent,
also she granted. Omnia praemissa, which makes it clear. Resolved also, that
these words Will and Declare, do amount to a grant, and are so used in Patents
of Liberties, and things to take effect in Futuro. Tenant in tail, the
remainder in tail, the remainder to the King, Tenant in tail suffers a
recovery, this does not bar the remainder in tail, because the issue in
rail is not barred, and therefore the revertions and remainders in tail are
preserved by the Statute of 34. H. 8. c. 20.

Lastly, Resolved, if the reversion in fee had remained in the Crown, that the
fine levied by Ed: Lord Stafford the Father, had not barred the Lord that now
is. Notlyes Case, 31. Eliz. com. banco.

Wiat Wields Case, 7. Jacobi. 78.
W. W. seized of Land, to which he had common appurtenant, aliens 5. acres to
one who in replevin counts that he and those, whose estate he had in the said
5. acres, have had common there, etc. and good. 1. Resolved, although by
purchase of part of the Land in which, etc. the common appurtenant is destroyed
in all, yet it is not so by alienation of part of the Land to which, but all
remains without damage to the Tenant of the Land. 2. That the pleading of it
was sufficient.

Vinyors Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 80.
ONe was bound to stand to the award of W. R. and revokes the submission, the
Obligee brings Debt. 1. Resolved, the Countermand is good, for an authority
Countermandable by the Law, cannot by any way be made irrevocable. 2. Although
that the Plaintiff does not show, that the Defendant had given notice to the
arbitrator, yet it is good because this is implied, for without notice the
revocation is void. 3. The Obligation by the Countermand is forfeited, because
he does not stand to, etc. when he Countermands it. 2. By his own act he had
made the condition impossible, Ergo, the Obligation is single, if one binds
himself to give License to carry Wood, etc. for a certain time, if he give
it, and disturb him the Obligation is forfeited.

Sir Richard Pexhalls Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 83.
SIr R. P. seized of Lands, part whereof is houlden in Capite, devises 100.
Sheep, 10. Bullocks, and 10. l. quarterly, to one with clause of distress,
and that the Grantee shall hold his Courts for his life, for rent arreare for
2. years, the grantee avoweth. 1. Resolved, a devise of rent out of all is
good, and takes effect out of two parts, and as to the third is void. 2 The
grantee shall have an estate for life in rent, and so he shall if it be granted
by Deed, also by the Intent of the Devisor it appears, that the Grantee shall
hold Courts, and have 10. l. per annum, for his wages, and quarterly here had
relation to rent only, because the word Et, disjoyneth it from Sheep and
Bullocks, and judgment given for the Avowant.

Buckmers Case, 7. Jac. fo. 86.
T. B. gave a House in Gavellkinde to M. his Eldest Daughter in tail, the
remainder of one Moity to J. a second Daughter in tail, the remainder of the
other Moity to K. a third Daughter in tail, with cross remainders to J. and
K. M. discontinueth and dies without issue, J. dies without issue, K. dies,
and her issue brings a Formedon in the remainder, and good, although several
remainders, for they depend upon one estate, and commence by gift at one time:
In actions real, in which title is expressed, a man shall not have one Writ
for Lands, to which he had several Titles, as in escheate, cessavit, Writ of
Mesne, etc. but he may have a Writ of ward of Land only, although it be by
several Tenures, nor one formedon upon two distinct gifts, where the
foundation is several, but he shall have it if there be one gift, although it
take effect at several times, because the foundation was joint and single, as
upon a gift in tail, to Brother and Sister, who dye without issue, or if the
Brother dye without issue, and the Sister dye having issue, who dies without
issue, he to whom the remainder limited shall have one formedon although it
vest at several times, so in an estate tail to Father and Son, and so here:
In actions real, founded upon Torte, a man shall have one Writ to recover
Lands, to which he had several Titles, as in an assize, a Writ of entry, etc.
but in a Writ of entry upon disseisin made to my Mother, and her Sister
Coperceners, because there title is in the Writ, it appears he ought to have
several actions; but in personal actions, one may comprehend several torts,
and causes of actions, as trespass for trespass made at several days and
places, wast upon several Leases, and so of Debt. Nota, if a remainder be
executed, issue in remainder shall not have a formedon in remainder, but in the
discender, and Count of an immediate gift, but if there be a Lease for life to
one, the remainder in tail to A. the remainder in tail to B. A. dies without
issue, if B. be chased to his formedon, he shall not count of an immediate
remainder, but shall show the first remainder to A. and that he is dead without
issue. 2. In formedon in the remainder or reverter, omission of issue
inheritable in the pedigree of the demandant, abates the Writ, but not upon the
part of the particular Tenant. 3. The Demandant must make mention of the Son
who survived the Father, to which Son the Land descended, but was not seized by
force of the tail, but he shall name him Son, but not heir. 4. The
Demandant in a formedon in the Discender must make himself heir to him that
was last seized, and he to the Donee. Note here, because K. was never seized,
the Writ shall say Remanere, not descendere, and the Writ was, Remansit jus,
because a discontinuance, otherwise it should be Tenementa remanserunt.

Fraunces Case, 7. Jac. fo. 89.
THe Plaintiff pleads in bar of avowry, that R. F. devised to I. his Son,
who leased to him, the avowant replyeth, that after the devise, R. F. made a
Feoffement to the use of the said I. upon condition, that he shall suffer his
Executors to take away his goods, and the estate limited to him was for sixty
years, if he should so long live, with diverse remainders over, and that after
the death of F. I. hindered the Executors, to carry away the goods, whereupon
T. in remainder entered, and judgment given for the Plaintiff.

1. Resolv. Although the condition be taken strictly, the uses to I. only, and
to his Heirs, are only avoided by it. 2. A disturbance by paroll is no Breach
of the condition, and because the avowant did not show a special disturbance,
his replication was void. 3. I. ought to have notice of the condition being a
Stranger to it, or otherwise he cannot break it, as a Copyholder shall not
forfeite for denial of rent, to him to whose use a Manor is transferred
before notice, but he who binds himself to do any thing must take notice at
his peril, because he has taken it upon him. 4. Although that the Title which
the Plaintiff had made in bar to the avowry, be destroyed, yet he shall have
judgment, because his count is good, and another Title (that is to have the
Land for sixty years, by force of the uses declared upon the feoffement) is
given unto him by the Replication; although that the title which he made for
himself be destroyed, yet the Court must adjudge upon all the record, and
judgment was entered for him accordingly.

Edward Foxes Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 93.
A Revertioner upon a Lease for life, the remainder for life in consideration
of 50. l. demiseth, grants, etc. his reversion for 99. years rendering rent,
this is a bargain and sale, and there needs no attornement, for the words of
bargain and sale are not necessary if there are words which tantamount, as if
at the common Law one had sold his Land, an use had been raised to the
Vendee, because their intent so appeared, so here, but if it appear that their
intent was to pass it at the common Law, as if a Letter of Attorney be made to
make livery, the use had not risen, and here appears their intent to pass it
as a bargain and sale, because rent is reserved presently, therefore it is
reason that he shall have the rents of the particular Tenants presently, which
cannot be if it pass not by bargain and sale, and inrollment is not
necessary, because a term for years only passes in this case, and ^o
freehold. See Sir Rowland Heywards Case, 2. Report. fo. 35.

Matthew Mannings Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 94.
LEssee for years is bound in 200. Marks to W. C. and devises to his Wife
for life, and after her death to M. M and makes his Wife Executrix, who agrees
and dies intestate. M. M. enters, and takes administration of the goods, not
administered. W. C. brings Debt against him Resolved, that M. M. takes by
Executory devise, and not as a remainder, and the estate limmitted to him in
construction, precedeth the limittation to the Wife, as if he had devised, that
if the Wife die within the term, that then M. M. shall have the residue, and
also devised it to his Wife for life. 2. This case is most strong, because a
Chattell which may vest and revest at pleasure of the Devisor, without
mischief to the Praecipe. 2. A devise of the Term, and Occupation thereof,
all one (Viz.) So many years as the Feme shall live, the remainder to M. M. 4.
After the Executrix had agreed, the first devisee cannot bar the Executory
devise. 5. A man may devise an estate, which he cannot convey by act executed
as to his Executors, until his Debts shall be paid, the remainder over, they
have a Chattell determinable, upon payment of the Debts, which cannot be at the
common Law. If a Sheriff sell a Term upon a Fieri facias, and judgment is
reversed, the sale shall stand, otherwise none will buy any thing upon
Execution, and judgment was given for the Plaintiff, and affirmed in Error.

Baspoles Case, 7. Jac. fo. 97.
F. And B. put themselves in Arbitrament for all demands, Suites, so as the
aforesaid award be delivered in Writing, etc. at the Feast of Saint James, the
Arbitrator awards that B. shall pay 22. l. to F. B. refuses to pay, F. brings
Debt upon the bond to stand to the award, and good: 1. Resolved, that the award
was of both parts, for the one was to pay money, and the other to discharge the
Debt. 2. Resolved, that whereas the Plaintiff says, that the award was made
De premissis, which until the contrary be showed shall be intended of all:
when the submission is general, an award of part is good, for otherwise the
parties may conceal one thing, and make the award void; but if it be of
diverse things in special, Ita quod arbitrium fiat de premissis, an award of
part is void, but good without such conclusion, so if two of one part, and one
of the other part, submit themselves, arbitrament between one of the one part,
and another of the other part is good.

Sir Richard Lechfords Case, fo. 99.
TEnant by copy in fee, (where there is a custom that the heir after the
death of his auncestor, within three Courts and Proclamations made, shall be
barred if he claimed not) dies, his heir beyond the Seas until three Courts
and Proclamations pass, and returns and claims to be admitted, he is not
barred no more then by Non-claime upon a fine, Ergo, this custom shall be
construed, if he be within the realm of full age, etc. but if he go over the
seas after the death of his auncestor, he shall be barred, as in case of a
fine. 2. Resolved, although he was not in the Kings service, this is not to the
purpose, because by intendment he cannot have notice; But a Mulier puisne, over
the Seas shall be barred, by the dying, seized of the Bastard Eigne, for the
right of the Mulier is barred, and the Bastard is made Mulier, although that a
descent of the disseisor of a rent or thing which lies in grant barreth not
the disseisee, yet if a Bastard eigne, dye seized of it, this bars the
Mulier. If two Daughters, whereof one is a Bastard, eigne, enters and dies,
before or after partition, the Mulier is barred: Otherwise, if two Daughters,
and one of them had no color of partition, if Bastard eigne dye in the life
of his Father, having issue, who enters after the death of the Father, and
dies seized, having issue. Quaere, if the Mulier be barred, mulier is barred
by descent, before entry of the Son of the Bastard, eigne, as if issue be in
Ventre sa mere, or the Wife of the Bastard endowed.

John Talbots Case, 7. Jaco. in Second deliverance fo. 102.
LOrd and Tenant by Homage, Fealty, and Herriot service of 50. acres, the
Tenant infeoffeth the Lord of three acres, and after infeoffeth the Plaintiffs
father of three other acres, parcel, etc. who dies, the Lord distreineth for
Herriot, the Plaintiff brings replevin, and good. 1. All entire services to
render an entire Chattell of profit, or pleasure, by alienation of part shall
be multiplied, and by purchase of part by the Lord, extinct. 2. Personal
services for the public good, which are entire, as Chivalry, Homage, and
Fealty, shall be multiplied, and not extinct. 3. Other personal services, as
Butler, Sewer, etc. shall not be multiplied, but shall be exinct. So of a
personal office, and mannuall labor. 2. There is no diversity between an
entire Chattell be it annual or not, as if it be to render a Horse every five
year by purchase of part, it shall be extinct. 3. If the Father of the
Plaintiff had been first infeoffed, and then the Lord, the Herriot had
remained, because there the Father of the Plaintiff, held by a several
Herriot before the Lord was infeoffed. 4. But Herriot custom, by purchase of
part is not extinct.

Doctor Bonhams Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 114.
THe President and Censors of the College of Physicians in L. by color of
Letters Patents of H. 8. and the Statutes of 14. H. 8. and 1. Mar. fined and
Imprisoned Doctor Bonham, for practicing of Physic in L without their
allowance, (the fine to be paid to them,) and also for contempt made to the
College, whereupon he brings false imprisonment, and adjudged for the
Plaintiff.

1. Whither a Doctor of one University or other, be within the act.

2. Admitting that he is, whither he be within the exception in 14. H. 8.
Justice Daniell held, that such a Doctor was not within the body of the Act,
and if he were, yet he is within the Exception, but Warburton econtra, for both
points: Cook spoke not to them, but they all agreed that the Action was
maintainable for two other points.

1. Whither the Censors have power to fine and imprison.

2. Admitting that if they have pursued it. The Censors have no power in this
case to imprison the Defendant, for they have no power to punish by fine and
Imprisonment, those who practice without their license, but those practisers
who misadminister physic.

1. Because the clause that none shall practice without their License, and the
clause which gives to them the said power, are distinct clauses.

2. The first clause imposes another penalty, and 5. l. every month that he
practices, but leaves the evil administration of Physic to be punished, by
the College, because this is uncerteine.

3. To make one punishable by the first Branch, he ought to practice by a
month, otherwise it is by the second.

4. By this way they shall be both Judges and parties in one cause.

5. If Doctor B. shall be punished by 5. l. by the month, and also at their
pleasure, he will be often punished for one offense. 2. Admitting that they had
power, yet they have not pursued it. 1. Because the President, who has no
power, joined with them. 2. The fine was imposed for not appearing before the
President and Censors, and the President had no power. 3. Half of the fine
belongs to the King, and here all is to be paid to them. 4. The Imprisonment
ought to be presently, as upon the Statute of W. 2. cap. 12. 5. their authority
being by Patent and Statute, their proceedings ought not to be by Paroll, and
the rather, because they claim authority to fine and imprison.

6. It shall be taken strict, because against the liberty of the Subject,
therefore before 1. Mar. the Jailer was not bound to receive them, and this
does not enlarge their power, but that the Jailer shall forfeite double the
Amerciament, if he refuse. Admitting the replication void, although that the
College demurre upon it, yet the Plaintiff shall have judgment, because in
the bar, the Defendants have showed that they have imprisoned him without
cause, for upon all the pleading, it appears, that he had cause of action;
but if a bar be insufficient, and by the replication it appears, that the
Plaintiff had no cause of Action, he shall not have judgment: a Count may be
made good by bar, and a bar by replication in matters of circumstance but
not of substance. See there seven things observed by Cook, for the better
direction of the President and Comminalty of the said College hereafter.

The Case of the City of London, 7. Jac. fol. 121.
IT is a good custom within a City that a Forreinor within the said City
shall not sell things by retaile, and it is good also upon pain of 5. l. but
it is not good by Charter, therefore Cities which are incorporate within time
of memory cannot have such privileges without Parliament: so of a custom,
that goods foreign bought and foreign sold, shall be forfeited: So one may
prescribe to have a Bake-house in a Town, and that no other shall have one
there, and the Statutes which provide that every one may sell in retaile, or in
gross, extend only to Merchands, aliens and demisens, who export and import
things vendible. Three inconveniences by confluence of people to London, etc.

The Case of Thetford School, fol. 130. 8. Jac.
LAnds of the yearly value of 35. l. in ao 9. El. was devised by the will of
Thomas Fulmerston, to certain persons and their Heirs for maintenance of a
Preacher, four days in the year, of the Master and Usher of a free
Grammar-Schoole, and four poor People, Viz. Two men and two women, and the
Defendant delayed to accept a Release to defraud the Plaintiff: adjudged for
the Plaintiff. 1. Although that two recoveries are without covin, yet the
composition so operates, that nothing shall be accounted administered, but only
so much as he has paid by composition, and the converting of any part to his
own use, and the deferring to accept a Release, is against the office of an
Executor, and shall not aid him. 2. The bar is insufficient because he has
not showed that the Court of C. had power to hold plea of debt. 2. Because he
has not showed that the Testator was bound in an Obligation, and if it were
only upon contract, the administrators were not chargable in Debt. 3. Be the
replication evil yet because the Bar is insufficient, the Plaintiff shall
have judgment, because he had not showed any thing against himself, but if it
appear by the replication that he had no cause of Action he shall be barred.

Mary Shipleys Case, 8. Jac. fol. 134.
AN action of Debt against an Executor of 200. l. the Defendant pleaded, Plene
administravit, the Plaintiff replies, that the Executor had assets, the Jury
found assets to the value of 172. l. judgment was given to recover the whole
Debt of 200. l. and damages, and costs of the goods of the Testator. S. etc. Et
si non, then the damages of the proper goods of the Defendant.

Sir John Nedhams Case, 8. Jacobi, Communi Banco, fol. 135.
IN debt as administratrix upon administration committed by the Bishop of R.
the Defendant pleads administration committed unto him by the Deane and Chapter
of C. sede vacant, because the Intestate had bona notabilia, etc. the
Plaintiff replies that that administration was repealed: adi. for the
Plaintiff.

1. Resol. Because it is not showed that the Intestate had bona notabilia, etc.
it shall be intended that he had not, and yet the administration is not void,
but voydable.

2. Before the repeal of administration committed by the Metropolitan, the
inferior Ordinary may commit administration, because this is by the repeal
declared void, ab initio, and an administration is but an authority which may
well commence in futuro.

3. The committing of administration to the obligor has not extinguished the
bebt, because it is in another right, otherwise it is, if the obligee himself
make the Obligor his executor, because this is his own act, De bonis defuncti
trina dispositio. 1. Necessitatis, ut funeralia. 2, Vtilitatis, that every one
shall be paid in due order. 3. Voluntatis, as Legacies.

Sir Francis Barringtons Case, 8. Jacobi, Communi Banco, fol. 136.
THe Lord R. granted wood within a Forest. in which the Plaintiff had common,
which grant is confirmed by Statute, the grantee cuts wood, and enclose it, the
commoner shall loose his common for seven years.

1. Resol. The grantee had an inheritance to take in another soil, and the
soil is to the Lord R. 2. Although the grantee had not the inheritance, yet
the Statute extends to him, and he may enclose, for the Statute is, or any
other person to whom wood is sold, 3. 22. E. 4. cap. 7. extends to wood which
one had in severalty, and not where another had common there; for at the common
Law, one who had wood in a Forest cannot incloser against a commoner, but if
it be his several wood, he might enclose, parvo fossato, etc. for three years.

4. The said Statute is as a conveyance between the King and his Subjects,
which takes not away the right of third persons, as the commoner here is.

5. In the said Statute there is a clause that he may enclose without suing to
the King, or other owner, so that power is given against them, and not against
a commoner. Beasts of Forest are Heart, Hind, Hare, wild Boar, and Wolf: of
chase, Buck, Do, Fox, Martin, and Roe.

6. By the Statute of 35. H. 8. cap. 17. he is barred of his common, which
provideth that no Beasts shall be suffered to come there for seven years.

7. The Statutes which concern Forests are general, because they concern
the King, and the Court shall take notice of them.

Doctor Druries Case, 8. Jacob. fol. 141.
DOctor Drury recovers against B. who is outlawed, and taken by Capias
ut-legatum, and escapes, the Utlary is reversed, Doctor Drury sueth execution,
B. brings an Audita quaerela, adjudged that it lies not. It was resolved that
if A. be in execution at the suit of B. upon an erroneous judgment, and after
escape, and after the judgment is reversed by a Writ of error, the action
against the Sheriff is extinct, for he may plead Null tiel record: But until
it be reversed, it remains in force, be it never so erroneous; and if the
party have judgment and execution upon the escape against the Sheriff or
Jailer, and after the first judgment is reversed, yet for as much as judgment
upon this collateral thing is executed it shall remain in force,
notwithstanding the reversall of the first, 7. H. 6. 4. Yet it seems to me,
he may have remedy by Audita quaerela, for that the ground and cause of the
collateral action is disproved by the reversall of the first judgment, a
difference between mean acts, compulsatory, and voluntary, and between a
recovery by eigne title, and reversall of a recovery.

Davenports Case, 8. Jacobi, fol, 144.
TEnant for years of an advowson grants proximam advocationem and
donationem, si eadem Ecclesia contingerit vacua fore durante termino, etc. And
afterward surrenders his term, yet if the prochein avoidance be within the
term, the grant is good, for years cannot determine, but the effluxion of
time, and the Law implies this limitation, if the Church do come void, during
the term: For expressio eorum quae tacit insunt nihil operatur: Likewise if
a lessee for years grant a rent charge, and after surrender, yet for the
benefit of the grantee the term has continuance, although in rei veritate,
it is determined, and the grantor himself shall not derogate from his own
grant to make it void at his pleasure.

The six Carpenters Case, 8. Jacobi, fol. 146.
IT was resolved when entry, authority, or license, is given to any by the Law,
and he abuse the same, in this case he shall be a trespassor ab initio: But
where entry, authority, or license, is given by the party and he abuse the
same, there he shall be punished for this abuse, but he shall not be said to be
a trespassor ab initio; and the diversity is this, because the Law does judge
by the act subsequent, quo animo, or to what intent he enters, acta exteriora
judicant interiora secreta: But when the party gives authority, etc. to do a
thing, he cannot for any subsequent cause punish the same.

1. The Law does give authority of entry into a common Inn, Tavern, etc.

2. To a Lord to enter and distreine.

3. To an owner of the soil to enter and distreine damage feasant.

4. To him in reversion to view if waste be committed.

5. To a commoner to enter into his Land to view his Cattle, etc.

But if he that enters into an Inn, etc. do trespass, or take any thing
away, or if the Lord that distreines for rent, or owner for damage feasant,
labor, or kill the distress, or he that enters to view wast, bruise the house,
or stay there all night, or if a commoner sell Timber; in these cases and such
like, the Law judges that he entered for the same purpose; and therefore the
act that does demonstrate this, is, to be a trespass, and he shall be a
trespassor ab initio: It was resolved, that the non-seasons, or not doing of a
thing is not any trepasse, where the Law gives license or authority to enter,
(viz.) to deny to pay for Wine in a Tavern, is not a trespass, but the
Taverner may have an action of debt, 12 E. 4.8. If a Tailor overvalue the
making of a Garment, and the necessaries thereunto, he shall not have an action
of debt for his own values, unless it be specially agreed upon before, but he
may detain the Garment, until he be paid or satisfied; and if the party sue
for the same: the Jury shall set down the value, and the Tailor shall have no
more, but be barred for the rest: Likewise an Ostler may deteine an Horse, etc.
Tender of sufficient amends for damage fesant before the distress taken, is
good, and the taking of a distress afterward is wrong; tender after the
taking of a distress, and before the impounding, makes the detaining wrong,
but not the taking; but tender after the impounding comes too late, for then
the cause is put to the trial of the Law.

Edward Althams Case, 8. Jacobi, fol. 159. In dower and pleaded,
N. Seized in fee of Lands in W. and G. devises the Lands in G. to his younger
Son for life; it was agreed between the eldest Son and the Widow of T. N. that
she should release her dower in W. she releaseth unto him, omnes actiones
demand. etc. necnon omnem dotem and titulum dotis, etc. de aliquibus terris in
W, both the Sons dye, she brings dowre of the Lands in G. and judgment given
for the demandant.

1. Resol. A release of all actions to him in the reversion barreth not dowre,
because she had no cause of action against him, but against the tenant of the
free hold, but a release of all her right to him in the reversion extinguisheth
dowre, for a release of right bears actions, but a release of actions barreth
not a right, if there be other mean to come to it; otherwise not, as if the
disseisee release all actions to the heir of the disseisor, the right is
extinct, otherwise it is if the release be to the disseisor, and a descent
after, or if the release be to the lessee for life of the heir; a release of
all actions real and personal is no bar in a Writ of error, but a release
of a Writ of error is; a release of actions is no bar to have execution; if
he be not put to a Scire facias, a release of a thing due before the time of
payment thereof, is good: Quaerela is more then an action, for by that the
cause of action is released; by release of suites, executions are barred, for
none shall have execution without suite for it, so it is of all duties; but a
release de quaerelis infectis, in that case barreth not dowre; by release of
titles dowre is barred; and by release of demands, which is the most ample
release of all.

2. The collateral agreement is not of any force or effect, but general words
ought to be qualified by apt words contained in the same Deed as in this case,
mihi contingent per mortem dicti T. viri mei de aliquibus terris in W. etc. and
so extends not to any Lands in G. but restrains the general words to the
Lands in W. only: Quando carta continet generalem clausulam, posteaque
descendit ad verba specialia, quae clausu^ae generali sunt consentaneae,
interpretanda est carta secundum verba specialia: As if a man grants a rent in
manerio de D. precipiendum, in 100. Acres parcel thereof with clause of
distress in the 100 Acres, the rent shall issue out of the 100. Acres only.

Arthur Blackamores Case. 8. Jacobi, fol. 156.
THe Defendant is named Gent. in the original Writ, but by negligence of the
Cursitor he is outlawed by the name of Knight; this is amendable at the common
Law, but in case of the King, default of the Court was amendable at the Common
Law, as erroneous entrance of the continuance, essoyne, etc. and any part of
the Record the same Term; and therefore diverse Statutes of amendments were
made, one of the last whereof was 8. H. 6. cap. 12. which was more large, and
extends to process, and to seven other things, to Records, Pleas, Parolls,
Warrants of Attorney, to Writs original and judicial,, Pannels, and Returns;
that is, where it was the misprision of the Clerk, and only the default of
the Clerk by negligence is amendable, but not by his nescience; as if an
action be brought against executors in the debet and detinet, or if it be false
Latin, but if a word which is not Latin be written for a Latin word, this is
amendable, as Imaginavit, for Imaginatus est: In a Writ of trespass against
diverse, if it abate for default against one, it shall abate against all, but
if it be for matter in fact only, as for misnaming one Defendant, it shall
abate only against him; omission or addition which does not alter the form is
amendable, as if Dei gratia be omitted: Voluntary or negligent keeping of
Records by the Clerk is amendable by other parts of the Record, or by
exemplification: Count or plea in bar, etc. which wants substance, shall not
be amended in another Term, but default in the color (because this is the
default of the Clerk) shall be; a Record shall be amended in another Term by
the paper Book, and a thing apparent to be the fault of the Clerk, shall be
amended in another Term, as rien luydoit. de hoc, etc. and predictus defend.
pro quaerent. Nisi prius shall be amended by this Statute, if power be given to
the Justices to proceed, otherwise not, as if issue joined in the Record be
mistaken in the Nisi prius, it shall not be amended, but misprision of damages
shall be, because this is not material to the issue, and it is the default of
the Clerk: Warrant of attorney, and returns are amendable by this Statute,
but if there be none at all, it is out of the Statute; and because this Statute
leaves many cases without remedy, the Statutes of 32. H. 8. cap. 30. and 18.
Eliz. cap. 14. were made: Ten misprisions as yet not remedied.

1. Variance material between the original and the Count.

2. Want of substance in the original, or Count.

3. Insufficient trials.

4. If a Coroner returns the Jury where the Sheriff ought.

5. Lack of name of the Sheriff to the return.

6. Where no return is indorced upon the Venire facias.

7. When one who is not returned, gives a Verdict.

8. Pleas of the Crown.

9. If it appear to the Court that he who has a Verdict had no cause of
action.

10. Error in Law.

Cases in the Court of Wards.
Myghts Case, 7. Jacobi. fol. 163.
1. REsolved, if J. M. purchase Lands to him, and an Infant in fee, it cannot
be averred that this was to take away the wardship, because he never was sole
Tenant to the King.

2. No feoffement that I. M. can make of his moity, can be aver'd to be by
collusion, etc. because without feoffement no wardship shall be, and also the
Statute speaks of sole seisin.

3. A feoffement to the wife or younger Child cannot be averred to be by covin,
etc. upon construction of the Statute of 32. and 34. H. 8. where collusion
cannot be averred by the Statute of Marlebridge, it cannot be now to seize all
the Land, but it may be for the third part which belongs to the King: If a
third part be left to the King, no averrement of covin may be for the other two
parts, the Father makes a feoffement to diverse uses, the remainder to his
second Son and dies, his Eldest Son dies, the second Son shall not be in
ward by averment of covin.

Digbies Case, 7. Jacobi. fo. 165.
TEnant of the King conveys his Lands to the use of himself for life, the
remainder to his Son and Heir in tail, and after is attainted of Treason,
the King shall have no wardship of any part of the Land by 32. and 34. H. 8.
because there is no Heir, and livery must be sued in the name of the Heir,
but the King shall have wardship in such a case before 26. H. 8. because there
was an Heir.

The Earl of Cumberlands Case, 7. Jacobi. fol. 166.
E. 2. granted the Castle and Manor of S. in tail to R. C. H. 6. granted the
reversion to T. C. if the tail be good, if not, he grants it in possession,
this is good one way or other, and so are many Patents from time to time.

Paris Stoughters Case, 7. Jacobi. fol. 168.
BY Mandamus it was found that P. S. dyed seized 40. El. and held of the Queen
in common socage, 7. Jacobi. a Melius inquirendum was awarded, whither he held
of the King by common socage, or in chivalry, and it is found that he held of
the Queen by chivalry. This Writ of Melius, etc. is repugnant, and gives no
authority to find this office, because a Tenure cannot be of the King, in the
time of Queen Elizabeth, and therefore a new Writ shall be awarded, but if the
first Melius be good, no other shall issue. 1. For avoiding Infiniteness. 2. A
Diem clausit, etc. shall not issue upon a Diem, etc. Nor Mandamus upon a
Mandamus, so a Melius, etc. shall not issue upon a Melius. 3. If an Office be
found against a Subject, he shall have a traverse, and if upon that it be found
against him, he has no remedy: So the King shall have but one office, and a
Melius, and no more, although that a Tenure be found of two Subjects, or one
has an Ouster le maine, the King shall not reseise without a Scire facias.

Toursons Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 170.
IF Tenant of the King commit Felony Ao 1. Jaco. and after is attainted Ao 3.
for the same, and after in Ao 4. all is found by office. Now this office shall
have relation to the time of the Felony, to avoid all mean alienations and
incumbrencies, but for the mean profits it shall have relation to the time of
the Attendor for their the Kings Title appeared of Record, and the like Law is
of an Idiot. But in case of a ward within age, the King shall have the mean
profits from the death of the Auncestor, because he has it by reason of his
Seigniory, and he loses the rent and services in the mean time; the
difference is, when the King seiseth jure protectionis regae, or Nomine
destrictionis, and when Ratione Prioris recti seu tituli.

Sir Gerrard Fleetewoods Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 171.
SIr William Fleetewood receiver of the Revennues of the Court of Wards, in
Anno. 35. Eliz. was possessed of a Message and certain Lands in Harrow in
Com: Mid: for a term of years, in Anno. 36. Eliz. he became Receiver
general, and was bound in 20. Obligations of 200. l. a piece to make true
account etc. And after upon several accounts he became indebted in great
Sums of money to the Queen, and being so indebted in consideration of 1100.
l. did bargain and sell the said Lease to James Pemberton, which by mean
conveyance came to Sir Gertard Fleetwood. Question, Whither this Lease, etc.
was extendable and liable to the Kings Debt, etc. and it was resolved, that the
said sale of the term was good against the King, because the term was but a
Chattell, and the sale of Chattells after judgment, Bona fide, is good, but
not after Execution awarded.

And Cook Chief Justice, said, that a Receiver or other accomptant which is
indebted, shall not be in worse case then a Fellon or a Traitor, that may after
Felony or Treason, and before conviction, sell, Bona fide, for his sustenance,
etc. his Chattells, either real or personal.

Hales Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 172.
THe Heir Ward comes to full age, and tenders his livery, and bargains and
sells, and dies, the interest of the King is determined, and the Bargainee
shall not answer for the mean profits, for the Heir had done all that he
could do, and no default in him, otherwise if he had not tendered it.

Sir Henry Constables Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 173.
THe Son of the Tenant of the King is made a Knight in the life of his
Father, the Father dies, the Son within age tenders his livery, by that, the
mean profits are saved, and the King shall not have the rates within age.

Virgill Parkers Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 173.
VIrgill Parker seized of the Manor of Fushell in fee, houlden of the King in
Chivalry of his Duchy of Lancaster, makes a feoffement of the one half to
the use of himself for life, and after to the use of Mary Coney (whom he
intended to Marry) for her life for her jointure, and after he Married her, and
then Leased the other half to I. C. for years, for payment of his Debts and
Legacies, and dyed, his Heir within age. Question, whither the King should
have the third part out of the Manor so Leased only, or out of the whole; and
it was resolved, that it shall be out of the whole Manor, although the estate
of the Wife was precedent, that is, equally out of both parts.

The End of the Eighth Book.
THE NINETH BOOK.
Dowmans Case, 28. Eliz. Communi Banco. fol. 7. An Assize pleaded.
THe Defendant in an Assize makes Title by a recovery, suffered by P. V. to
certain uses, the Plaintiff confesses the recovery, and says, That it was
to the use of the said P. in fee, and traverseth that it was to the uses
mentioned by the Defendant, the Jury found that it was suffered as the
Defendant had alleged, and that by Indenture subsequent, the intent of the
parties was declared by them to be as the Defendant had alleged, adjudg'd for
the Defendants.

1. Resolved, that this subsequent Indenture directs the uses of the precedent
recovery by estoppell against the Recoveree, and his Heirs, and although that
it be granted, that a deed is requisite to the privilege without impeachment
of wast, yet the estate without deed is good: No averrment can be taken that
the recovery was to other uses then are mentioned in a precedent indenture,
otherwise in an Indenture subsequent, because, if uses were declared by a
precedent indenture, no Declaration after, shall divest them: So if P. V. had
charged the Land, and then had made such a Declaration, this shall not divest
estates of grantees, etc. but no declaration, being the uses by Declaration
subsequent, be divested.

2. In all actions between all persons, and in all issues the Jury may give a
Verdict at large, and the Statute of W. 2. cap. 30. which gives it in Assize,
is but an affirmance of the Common Law, but a Jury cannot find a thing
impertinent to the issue.

The death of Sir James Dyer Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, with an ample
and memorable Encomium of him by Sir Edward Cook, etc. Vivit post funera
virtus.

Anna Bedingfeilds Case, 28. Eliz fol. 15. In dower.
A Common essoyne is allowable in dowre, and the Statute of 12. E. 2. is to be
intended of an essoyne in the Kings service, for the Statute says in
prorogation of the right which is properly this essoyne which is for a year
and a day.

2. If tenant of the King dies seized of diverse Manors, and it is found by
office that he dyed seized of one, in dowre brought against the Heir of full
age he sueth a Circumspecti agatis, this extends not to more then is in the
Office, for this Writ is in the nature of an aid prayer, and the King has no
right to seize more then is in the Office, and as to this Manor it was
objected, that it shall be allowed as well as if the Heir be within age, for
in this Case, by the Statute of Praerogat. Regis cap. 4. that the Feme may be
endowed in Chancery: It was answered, that by the Statute of Bigamis. cap. 4.
aid shall not be granted of the King in that Case, and therefore before the
Statute of Praerogat. the King nor other Lord could not indow the Feme, if the
Heir were of full age, because he is not then Guardian, and the Statute of
Praerogat. gives power to the King to indow the Wife in such case, if she
will, and not otherwise: Where the Heir pleads to Dower, detinue of Charters,
they ought to concern the same Land, and this Plea is to be allowed, because
the Feme who deteineth Chartars is not worthy to have Dower, and also for the
privity which is between the Heir and her.

2. The Heir ought to show the certeinty of the Charters, or that they were in
a Chest.

3. None but the Heir himself shall have this plea, nor the Heir himself,
if he comes in by purchase, or if the Feme had them by his delivery, nor if
he comes in as Vouchee having no Lands in the same County, or as Tenant by
resceite, because in these Cases he cannot plead as he ought, that he is ready
to render Dower.

4. A Guardian shall not plead it, because the Charters do not belong unto
him, but he may plead, detinue of the Ward, and if be be not restored unto him
unmarried, the Feme shall loose her Dower, and after, the Tenant waived this
plea, and pleaded, Vnques accouple, in loyal Matrimony, and the Bishop of N.
certified, that they were lawfully married where upon the Demandant had
judgment.

Case of Avowry, fol. 20.
IF there be Lord and Tenant by fealty, and rent, and the Tenant make a Lease
for years, and the Lessee has done his fealty and paid his rent continually,
and yet the Lord distreineth the Beasts of the Lessee for the rent, and avowed
upon a mere stranger as upon his very Tenant.

Question, whither the Lessee be without remedy, for it is a position in Law,
that a stranger to the avowry shall not plead, but Horse de son fee, etc. But it
was resolved, that the Lessee shall be releeved, and he must allege, that the
Lessor is seized of the Tenancy, etc. and the Lord shall be compelled to avow
upon the Tenant, and the false avowry of the Lord upon a stranger, which is not
very Tenant, shall not hurt the Lessee against the verity of the Case, Quia
veritas nihil veretur nisi abscondi.

If one come to distreine for damage Fesant, and sees the Beasts, and the
owner chase them out, the party may not distreine them, damage feasant but is
put to his Action of Trespass, for the beasts must be damage feasant, at the
time of the distress taken, he who distreines for services upon fresh suite
may avow upon the Land by the equity of 21. H. 8. c. 19. if the Lord distreine
when no rent is arreare, the Tenant or Lessee may make rescons, and so relieve
himself.

The Abbot of Strata Mercella his Case, 34. Eliz. fol. 23.
IN a Quo warranto for claiming Waifes, etc. and Fellons goods, etc. the
Defendant pleaded as to the Fellons goods, that the Abbot of S. M. Licite
habuit and gavisus fuit them until the Abbey was granted to the King by 27. H.
8. and pleads also, 32. H. 8. c. 20. of reviving of privileges, of Abbeys, and
that the K. granted a Manor parcel of the Abbey, and tot talia and tanta
privilegia, as the late A. had to one by whom he claimed by feoffement, and
pleaded not the feoffement by deed: Judgment against the Defendant, for the
Queen it was said, that the Charter of the Defendant was void.

1. Because it appears not what estate the Abbot had.

2. Because the Defendant claims Catalla felonum appendant to a Manor,
because he pleaded a feoffement of the Manor, and had not pleaded it by deed,
without which, the privileges do not pass.

To the first the Court answered, that it shall be intended a seisin in fee
until the contrary be showed.

To the second no resolution, but it was resolved, that if the K. grant a
Manor, and bona and catalla felonum dicto Manerio spectant. these pass,
although they cannot be appendant.

But for the third exception, judgment was given against the Defendant: In
this Case four things worthy of consideration.

1. What ancient franchises ought to have allowance, as to that, some may be
claimed by prescription without record, and some by record only, and a Charter
of the latter shall not be allowed, if it be before time of memory, if it be
not allowed within time of memory, as allowance in Air, or confirmation by the
K. but usage will not serve, and no more shall be allowed then are confirmed:
Obscure words in these ancient Charters shall be construed according to ancient
usage, and not according to usage at this day.

2. A man may prescribe in Franchises lying in point of Charter, with aid of
allowance in Air without showing the Original Charter.

3. If a Patent of privileges whereby they are granted in fee refer to a
grant made before to one for life only, this is good, for the relation is to
the quality, and not to the quantity of the estate. See there what trialls
shall be allowed by Law, such privileges as are ancient flowers of the Crown,
as, Bona and catalla felonum fugitivorum, etc. if these come again to the K.
they are merged in the Crown, but not those which were erected and created by
the K. as Faires, Markets, Parkes, Warren, and the like.

Bucknalls Case, 42. Eliz. Com. banco. fol. 33.
IF the Lord avow for other services then the Tenure is traversable, if for
more services of the same nature, the seisin is traversable, for he may
incroach, and it cannot be avoided in an avowry, if it be not for an outrageous
distress, but seisin binds not in Ne injuste vexes, Cessavit, Assize, Rescons,
or Trespass, but in them he shall traverse the Tenure, but issue in tail,
successor of a Bishop, etc. shall avoid seisin in an avowry, and every one
may, that can show a deed of the tenure, but none shall have a Contraformam
feoffamenti, but the feoffee or his Heirs, and incroachment hurts not, where
there is no Tenure, and if an incroachment be of payment at more days if they
agree in the Sum, it does not prejudice. Seisin in an avowry is not traversable
generally as never seized of the services, because by that means he leaves no
remedy to the Lord by avowry, but in such a Case he shall disclaim or plead
out of his fee, and so traverse the Tenure: He who denies seisin after the
limittation, must first acknowledge a Tenure, that the Lord may have his Writ
of Customs, and Services, as if the Avowry be for rent, fealty, and suite.

Henslowes Case, 42. Eliz fol. 36.
AN Action of Debt was brought against Gage and others as Executors, one of the
Executors refused before the ordinary the probate, and the rest of the
Executors proved the Testament, it was adjudged, that notwithstanding that
refusal, he may administer the will afterward at his pleasure, for when many
are named Executors, and some of them refuse, and other some prove the
Testament, those which refused may afterward administer, notwithstanding the
refusal before the Ordinary, but if all refuse before the Ordinary, and the
Ordinary commit the administration to another, then they cannot prove at any
time, and the Executor that proves the will ought to name every other of the
Executors that refused in every action for recovery of Debts of the Testator,
and they may release the debts, duties, etc. and they which refused may have an
Action by survivor, and after that Executors have administered, and have once
taken upon them the charge of the Executor-ship, they cannot refuse at any time
after.

It is holden in 2. R. 3. tit. testament. 4. that it is but of late times that
the Church had the probate of Testaments in this Land, for 'twas given by an
act, etc. and in all other Nations it is not so, but in England, and in many
places of England, the Stewards in their Courts Baron, have probate of
Testaments in their temporal Courts at this day.

Lynwood who was Deane of the Arches and writ in Anno. Dom. 1422. did confess
the probate of Testaments to belong to the Ordinaries De consuetudine Angliae
and non de communi jure, and that in other Realms the Ordinaries have not so,
and in another place he affirms that the power of the Bishop in probate of
Testaments, is, Per consensum regni and suorum procerum ab antiquo. And I have
seen a Book in Latin, published, 1573. by the Reverend Father Matthew
Parker, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, who was very Learned in matters of
Antiquity, in these words, Rex Angliae olim erat consiliorum Ecclesiasti orum
praeses, vindex temeritatis romanae, propugnator Religi nis, nec ullam habebant
Episcopi authoritatem praetam eam quam a rege acceptam referebant, jus
testamenta probandi non habebant administrationis potestatem cuique delegare
non poterant. It was resolved by Littleton, Newton, and Danby, in 7. E 4. 14.
that if all the Executors refuse before the Ordinary, they may prove the
Testament afterward, but I think this is before the Ordinary has committed
the administration, for afterward they cannot, The Executors have their Title
by their Testament; which is temporal. But to the suing of Actions in the
Kings Courts, the Judges will not admit the Executors for to sue, except that
they show the Testament proved, under the seal of the Ordinary duly, but
always the Kings Courts have used to allow the probate of any of the Executors
to enable them all to sue actions, but the probate of the Testament does not
give to them any interest or Title, either to the things in action or
possession, for they have all their title and interest by the Testament, and
not by the Probate.

Power to grant administrations was granted to the Ordinary, by the act of 31.
Ed. 3. ca. 11. for before that time, when a man died intestate, the King who
is, Parens patriae, was accustomed by his Ministers to seize his goods, to the
intent they might be preserved, and bestowed for the Burial of the dead, for
payment of his debts, for advancement of his Wife and Children (if he had any)
otherwise to his Kindred as appears in Rot. Claus. de 7. H. 3. in ib. bona
intestatorum capi solebant in manus regis, etc. And after this care and trust
was committed to the Ordinaries, and it was resolved. Per totam Cur. M. 8. and
9. Eliz. Dyer. that the Ordinary himself has not any authority to sell any
goods of the intestate, although they be in danger of perishing, neither can he
release any debt due unto the intestate, by a statute, in Ao 31. Ed. 3. ca. 11.
the Ordinary shall depute the next and most lawful friends of the dead person
intestate to administer his goods. And the Statute in Ao 21. H. 8. ca. 5. is,
that the Ordinary shall grant the administration to the widow of the same
person so deceast, or to the next of his Kin, or to both, as by the discretion
of the Ordinary shall be thought good, etc.

Read this latter Statute, to whom administrations shall be granted.

The Earl of Shrewsburies Case, 8. Jacobi, fol. 46.
1. REsolved, that the grant of the Stewardship of the Manors of M. and B.
without naming the County, in which, etc. is good, as if the K. grants all the
Lands of priors, aliens, without naming the County, but the party in pleading
must name the County, and upon Non concessit pleaded, it will appear by the
evidence, and by circumstances, what Manor was granted: but if he had demanded
oyer, and demurred, it will be adjudged against him, for it is matter in fact,
and the acts of confirmations extend not where the County is omitted, but where
the County is misnamed.

2. The grant from a day past is good, and the intent was, that the Earl shall
have the fees from that day, but if that cannot be, it shall be good for the
time to come.

3. The Earl had no power to make Deputies, for three offices pass by these
Letters Patents severally, whereof this is the middle, and to the first power
is annexed to make Deputies, but not to the second; the words are Habendum
offic. praed. (with such a contraction) To that the Court answered, that this
Habendum shall have relation to this office, for it is intended, that the Earl
shall exercise this base office by Deputy, for if a Sheriff shall do it, a
Fortiori, an Earl. 2. Admitting that he cannot make a Deputy, this Non user is
no cause of forfeiture, for true it is, when an office touches administration
of Justice, Non user, without request, is cause of forfeiture, but if he be not
bound to exercise it without request, otherwise it is as here, he is not bound
by the Letters Patents to hold Courts until he be required: if an office be
private and not for administration of Justice, Non user, without damage or
request is no forfeiture. 4. Resolved, that the Writ and count were good,
although they were Vi and armis, and the difference is between Non feasans, or
negligence, and mis-feasance, that may be Vi and armis, therefore if one bring
an Action upon the Case, Quare vi and armis, he hindered men from coming to
his Fair, which is Causa causans, whereby he lost his toll, which is, Causa
causata, and the point of the Action, this is good. 5. The office not being
meinorable, it is in his election to have an Action of the Case, or an assize,
otherwise it is of Land. See five Exceptions taken, to the Verdict: Falsa
Orthographia, Non vitiat concessionem, and the difference is between Writs and
Grants: Ille numerus and sensus abbreviationum accipiendus est, ut concessio
non sit in anis, and judgment was given for the Earl of R.

Hickmots Case, 8 Jacobi. Com. banco. fol. 52.
IN Debt upon an Obligation, the Defendant pleads a release, which is in these
words, The Obligee confesses himself to be discharged of all bonds, etc. and
that he will deliver all but one bond, whereupon the action is brought, which
was made by the Plaintiff and another.

1. Resol. These words that the Obligee confesses himself to be discharged of
all bonds, is a release and amounts to that that the bonds are discharged.

2. The exception extends to all the premises, and not only to the delivery.

3. The Plaintiff by confessing that the Obligation was made by another, and
the Defendant against whom only he brought the Action, had abated his own
Writ, and after the Plaintiff was Nonsuited.

Batens Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 53.
A Quod permittat to abate a House levied, Ad nocumentum liberi tenementi, I.
P. and now of the Plaintiff, and Counts, that the House of the Defendant does
juttie over the House of the Plaintiff, and judgment given for the Plaintiff.

1. Resolved, the Plaintiff needs not show how he had the estate of I. P.

2. The Writ is, Ad nocumentum liberi tenementi. I.P. and now of the
Plaintiff, and counts to the Nusans of the Plaintiff only, it is good for
the levying in the time of I. P. imployeth a Nusans to him, and he must show a
Nusans to himself to maintain the action.

3. If it appear to the Court, that the Nusans is to the damage of the
Plaintiff, he needs not show it specially, as if the House of the Defendant
hangs over the House of the Plaintiff, as here, for it appears that the
light was stopped, and that the rain descended: Quod constat clare, non debes
Verificare, and the Plaintiff may abate the Nusans if he will: the Statute of
Westminster. 2. c. 24. which gives the Quod permittat against the alienee of him who
levied the Nusans extends not to the alienee of the alienee.

The Poulters Case, fol. 55.
IF one were taken for the death of a man, he was not bailable at the Common
Law, without a Writ De Odio and acia, which serves not if he be appealed or
indicted. 2. If he be found not guilty upon the said Writ, he was not bailable
without a Writ, De ponendo in ballivum. 3. A Writ of conspiracy lies not
before acquittall, but the conspirators may be indicted or censured in the
Star Chamber. Confedracies punishable by Law before Execution, ought to have
4. incidents.

1. They must be declared by some manner of prosecution, as was in this Case.
2. They ought to be malicious and for revenge. 3. They ought to be false
against an innocent. 4. They ought to be out of Court voluntarily.
Aldreds Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 57.
WHen a man has lawful profit by prescription of time, whereof the memory of
man is not to the contrary, other custom of the like time also, cannot take
the former away, for the one custom is as ancient as the other. As if a man
have a way over the Lands of B. to his freehold Land by prescription of time, B
cannot allege prescription or custom to stop the said way, for it may be,
that before the time of memory the owner of the said Lands had granted such
away without any stopping, and so the prescription might have a lawful
beginning.

29. Eliz. Banco regis.
Thomas Brand prescribed time out of memory to have the light of 7. Windows
toward a piece of Land of Thomas Mosely, in the City of York, but Mosely
erected a new building upon the said piece of Land, so near, etc. as the light
of the Windows were stopped. Brand brought his action on the Case, and
judgment was given for the Plaintiff, for it might be that before the time of
memory, the owner of that piece of Land did grant License to the owner of the
Message, to have the said 7. Windows without stopping them, and so the
prescription might have a lawful beginning.

If a man have a watercourse to his House for necessary uses, if a Glover make
a Lime-pit for Calf-skins so near the said Course, that the corruption does
corrupt the same, an Action of the Case lies. 13. H. 7. 26. 6. Likewise a man
shall not make or erect a Swyne-sty so near his Neighbors House, as to annoy
him with the contagion thereof.

John Lambs Case, 8. Jacobi. Star Chamber. fol. 59.
IT was resolved, that every one that shall be convicted in case of Libelling,
ought to be either a contriver of the Libell, or a procurer of the contriver,
or a malicious publisher thereof, knowing it to be a Libell; For if one read a
Libell or hear the same read, it is no publication, for before he hear or
read the same, he cannot know the same to be a Libell, or if he read or hear
the same, and laugh thereat, this is no publication; but if after he has read
or heard the same read, he repeat the same or any part thereof in the hearing
of others, or if he write a Copy thereof, and do not publish the same to
others, this is no publication of the Libell, but it is good for him after he
has so written the same, to deliver it to a Magistrate, for then the act
subsequent does declare his intention precedent.

Robert Bradshawes Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 60.
LEssor for six years during the life of R. Covenants that he had power to
make this Lease, the Lessee brings Covenant, and shows not that R. was in
life, nor what person had right, and yet good: because if R. were not in life
at the time of the Lease made, the Lease was absolute, if he died after, yet
the Action lies, and he needs not show who had right, for he had pursued the
words of the Covenant, and it lies not properly in his notice.

Mackallies Case, In killing of a Sergeant, etc. 9. Jacobi. fol. 65.
FIve exceptions to the Indictment.

1. The Arrest was in the night, between five and six of the Clock, in
November, at the suite of a Subject, which being tortious, the killing of the
Sergeant is but Manslaughter. Non alloc. 1. Because the Arrest may be at the
Suite of a Subject in the night. 2. Although that between five and six in
November be in the night, yet the Court is not bound to take notice of it,
without the showing of the party, as in case of Burglary.

2. The Sunday is not Dies juridicus, therefore the arrest that wast made upon
it was Tortious, etc. Resol. that judicial acts shall not be done this day,
but ministerial may for necessity.

3. The Indictment is in Computat in parochia S. M. in W. emitting the Ward,
yet good, as if one name the Town, he is not bound to say in what Hundred it
is, 4. and 5 the precept was to arrest him, Infra liberiates L. and the arrest
was in L. yet good, because the Liberties of L. includes the City of L. it
self. 1. Exception to the verdict, that the Indictment and the Verdict vary,
for the Indictment is, that the arrest was by precept and by Verdict, it is
found that it was by custom without precept. Answered, that the precept is but
circumstance, and varience in it is not material, having found the substance,
as if the Indictment be, that he killed him with a Daggar, and it is found that
it was with a Sword, so if he be indicted of murder, and it is found
manslaughter, this is good; for Ex malitia is but circumstance. 2. The
Indictment may be general, Ex malitia, etc. because the Law imployeth malice,
and so the precept not material. 2. The custom is not good, to arrest one
without summons: it is good, and if the process be erroneous, yet killing of
him who did execute it, is murder, because he is not to dispute whether it be
good or not, and if any officer in doing his office be slain, this is murder,
and in such a case an officer is not bound to fly to the Wall, as another is.
3. The Arrest cannot be before the plaint entered of record before the
Sheriff. Resp. it may by the custom after entry of it in the Porters Book.

4. The Sergeant ought to show at whose Suite the Arrest is, and in what Court,
and for what cause, true it is, if the party submit himself, but here he was
killed before he could speak, and if they kill him before the Arrest, knowing
that he came for that purpose, this is murder.

5. It is not found that the killing was felony. Resp. It is sufficient for
the Jurors, to find the killing, which is the substance, and leave it to the
Judgment of the Court if it be felony.

6. The Sergeant did not show his Mace: He ought not.

1. Because he was commonly known.

2. The party arrested is to obey at his peril, and if showing of the Mace be
requisite, it will be a warning to the party to fly.

7. The arrest ought to be upon request after the plaint entered: the request
may be before or after.

8. The verdict is repugnant, for they find that the plaint was entered of
record, 17. Nov. and after they found that it was 19. Nov. this is more strong
against the Prisoners, because the entry was before the Arrest. 18. Nov.

9. The Plaint is without form, this is not to the purpose, for it is but a
remembrance to draw the count by at large after. And Mackalley and the other
prisoners were Executed at Tyborne.

Peacocks Case, 9. Jacobi. in Camera Stellata fol. 70.
SIr George Reynell Plaintiff, Richard Peacock and others Defendants, J.H.
J.B. Commissioners to examine Peacock upon Interr. and Peacock being examined
would have declared all the truth, but J.H. a Commissioner for the Plaintiff,
held him strictly to the Interr. so as the truth could not appear: and this
was holden by the Lord Chancellor and the two Chief Justices, the Chief
Baron, and all the Court of Star Chamber, a great Misdemeanour, etc. as the
Statute of Exceter says, Per quod institia and veritas suffocantur, and
Commissioners to examine ought to be indifferent, and by all means to express
the Truth. And they are not bound strictly to the Letter of the Interr. but to
every thing also, that arises necessarily for manifestation of the truth. Also
the said J. H. when he was in Examination of Peacock, went forth of the place
to the Plaintiff, being in another Room, and had secret conference with him:
And it was holden by all the Court, that a Commissioner, before publication of
the depositions, ought not to discover to any of the parties the matter
thereof, nor after that he begins to examine Interr. to confer with the
parties, to take new instructions to examine further then he knew before: and
if he did, they were great misdemeanors, and punishable by Fine and
Imprisonment, for if such things should be suffered, perjury would abound. I.
H. was put forth of the Commission of the Peace, and the Attorney general was
required to prefer an Information against him, for the said misdemeanors.

Doctor Husseys Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 71.
IN Ravishment of Ward against a Feme Covert, and others, they were found
guilty, and the Baron, Non culp: and the Age of the Infant above sixteen, and
Married: Foster and Warberton, a Feme Covert is within the Statute, because the
Action lay at the common Law, and the Statute gives but greater punishment, and
so she is within the Statute of Merton, cap. 6. De Malefactoribus in parcis,
of forcible entry, and redesseissin, Cook and Walmsley to the contrary: the
Statute of Westminster 2. c. 35. has made these alterations, this extends to Heirs
Females, which the Statute of Merton did not. 2. It extends to Heirs Ravished
after years of consent, so does not the Statute of Merton. 3. It extends to
the Clergy, the Statute of M. does not. 4. M. gives a light of Ward, this
gives ravishment of Ward. 5. This gives more speedy process, and the death
of the Plaintiff or Defendant abateth not the Writ. 6. It gives greater
punishment. 2. A Feme Covert is not within this Statute, for it is Si haeredem
maritaverit, and satisfacere non potuerit abjuret regnum, or be perpetually
imprisoned, and because the Law disableth the Feme to satisfy, she shall not
therefore be exiled, nor perpetually imprisoned, and the Baron being innocent
shall not be punished, for the punishment is personal, and he shall not have
judgment at the Common Law, the Action being brought upon the Statute, nor
judgment upon the Statute where the Action is brought at the Common Law. 3.
The Verdict is insufficient, because no Case, is within the Statute, except the
Ravishor marry the Infant, so that if the Infant Marry himself, or be Married
by another, it is out of the Statute, and the Verdict found that he was
Married, and did not say by whom. 4. Damages shall be recovered upon this
Statute, and where the Statute says, that he shall be banished, or perpetually
imprisoned, the Election is in the Court,

Combs Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 75. Upon a special Verdict.
A Copyholder in fee (where there is no custom to that purpose) makes two
his Attorneys, to surrender to the use of I. N. in fee, they in Court show the
Letter of Attorney, and by the said Letter of Attorney surrender.

1. Resolved, surrender by Letter of Attorney is good, for a surrender may be
by the common Law without custom, and may be by Attorney as incident to it: If
one have a bare authority, coupled with a confidence, he cannot do it by
Attorney, as Executors cannot sell by Attorney, but if he had authority to
dispose, as owner of the Land, he may, as Cestuy que use, by the Statute of 1.
R. 3. but if one had particular personal power to dispose, as owner of the
Land, he cannot do it by Attorney, as if Lessee for life had power to make
Leases for 21. years: There are personal things which cannot be done by
Attorney, as homage, Fealty, beating his Villeine: admittance of him to whose
use the surrender is made, may be by Attorney if the Lord will, and yet he may
upon the admittance compel the Tenant to do fealty, A fortiori here: and
otherwise it would be a mischief, for it may be he is beyond the Sea, or sick,
and cannot be present, to surrender for payment of his debts or preferment of
his Children, but if a custom be, that an Infant may make a feoffement at 15.
years, he cannot do it by attorney.

2. The Attorneys have pursued their authority, although they have not done it
in the name of the Authorizor, for they did show the Letter of Attorney, and
surrendered by authority thereof, which is all one, but if it be to make a
Lease by Indenture, this shall be in the name of him who gave the authority,
but Executors must sell Land in their own name, for necessity, and yet the
Vendee is in by the Devisor.

Henry Peytoes Case, 9. Jacobi. Com. banco.
IT was resolved, Per tot. curiam, that accord in all Actions, wherein is
supposed the Tort to be made (Vi and armis) where cap. and the exigent lies at
the Common Law, is a good plea, as in Trespass, and Ejectione firmae, detinue
of Charters, house, or other goods, for where the certainty is to be recovered
an Action is a good plea, when the condition in a Deed by the Original
contracts of the parties, is to pay money, yet by accord and agreement between
the parties, any other thing may be given in satisfaction of the money, Res per
pecuniam estimatur and non pecuniae per rem. And in this sense the saying is
true, Quod pecuniae obediunt omnia.

Every Accord ought to be plain, perfect, and complete, for if diverse things
are to be observed and performed by the accord, the performance of part is not
sufficient 17. E. 4. 2. and 6. H. 7. 10. Pl. com. 5.

If a man be bound in an Obligation, in one hundred Quarters of Wheat, upon
condition to pay 58. Quarters, he cannot give money or other thing in
satisfaction thereof, because the contract Originally was not for money, but
for a collateral thing.

Also, if the things to be performed be at a day to come, tender and refusal
is not sufficient without actual satisfaction and acceptance.

If a man be bound in a Statute, Recognizance, or Obligation, and after a
defeasance is made to pay a less Sum, now this Sum in the defeasance is
collateral, and therefore if the Obligor render the same at the day, and it be
refused, the Obligee shall loose the same for ever, as is holden in 33. H. 6.
fol. 2. and yet in this Case, the obligor by accord between the parties may
give any Horse or other thing in satisfaction of the money in the defeasance,
for the Contract originally was for money. But if a man by Contract or
assumpsit without Deed be to deliver an Horse, or to build an House, or to do
any collateral thing, money may be paid by accord, in satisfaction of such
contract, for as a contract in consideration may commence by word, so by
accord, by words for any valuable consideration, the same may be dissolved.

Agnes Gores Case, 9. Jacobi. fol 81.
WHerein was resolved, that if A. put poison into a Pot, to the intent to
poison B. and set the same in a place where he supposes B. will come, and
drink thereof, and by accident one C. unto whom A. had no malice, comes, and
of his own will, takes the Pot, and drinks thereof, of which poison he
dies, this is murder in A. for the Law coupleth the event with the intention,
and the end with the cause. But if one prepare Rats-Bane to kill Rats or Mice,
and lay the same in certain hidden places to this purpose, and with no ill
intent, and another person finding the same does eat thereof and dies, this is
no Felony. But when one prepares poison with a Fellonious intent to kill any
reasonable Creature, whatsoever reasonable Creature is killed thereby, he that
had the fellonious intent shall be punished. Resolved by all the Justices of
England.

Coneys Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 84. in banco.
THe Lord of a Manor, and Tenant within the age of 21. years by Fealty and
rent, the Lord infeoffeth a Stranger; to which feoffement the Tenant
attourneth. Question, whither the attournement of an Infant will bind him to
the payment of the services or not, and by Cook, Walmsley, Warberton, and
Foster, it shall bind, for he is compellable in a Per quae servitia, and shall
not have his age, but he may avoid any prejudice thereby at his full age: and
if a fine here had been levied, he had been compellable: and the rather
because it is but a bare assent.

Pinchons Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 86.
IT was adjudged, that an Action of the Case, will lie against Executors, for a
Debt due by the Testator upon a simple contract. An Action upon assumpsit, made
by the Testator, was maintainable, against the Executors, upon a contract for
Corn. Norwood and Reads Case, plow: com. 181.

Debts upon simple contracts ought to be paid before Legacies, and reasonable
part of the goods of the Wife or Infant, which proves that they still remain;
the Spiritual Court does give remedy for payment of Legacies; and the reason
of all this is, for that the Testator in his life time, upon his action of the
case upon the assumpsit, might not wage his Law, as he might have done upon his
action of debt; for no action is maintainable against Executors, where the
Testator might have waged his Law in his life time: If a Prisoner do eat and
drink with his Jailer, and dye, the Jailer shall have an action of debt
against his Executors, for the meat and drink of the Testator; and the reason
is, for that in this case the Testator might not wage his Law, as is adjudged,
27. H. 6. fol. 46. in Thomas Bodulgates Case, and the reason that no wager of
Law in this Case is, because that every Jailer ought to keep his Prisoner in
salva and arcta custodia, and thereby the Jailer is in a manner compelled to
find Victuals for his prisoners, and therefore the Prisoner may not wage his
Law; but if A. contract with B. for his commons for a month, etc. there, in an
action of debt brought against A. he may wage Law.

If a Victualer, or common Innkeeper bring an action of debt for victuals
delivered to his Guest, the Guest may wage his Law; for the Victualler, or
Host, is not compellable to deliver Victuals until he be paid for them in
hand, 10. H. 7, 8. in Anno. 4. H. 6. R. G. brought an Action of Debt for 10.
Marks against Thomas Timberhull, and others, Executors of William Webb, and
declared that the Testator had detein'd the Plaintiff to be with him for a
year in the Art of Limming of Books, paying per annum 10. Marks: And Martin
did hold opinion, that the Action was not maintainable against Executors, and
he took diversity between this Case of a Limmer, and of a common Labourer, for
the Labourer may be compelled in spite of his head to serve, and his wage is
put in certeinty by the Statute, and it is no reason the Servant should loose
his wages by the death of their Master, whom he was bound by the Law to serve,
but in case of a Limmer he is not bound by the Law to serve, and so when he
makes a Covenant it is his own Act and folly, and not the Act of the Law, for
he might have taken a specialty, and the opinion of Martin in this Case, is
good Law: But the true reason of this diversity, is, because that in this Case
of the common Labourer, the Testator might not wage his Law as he might against
the Lymmer, and this appears in 11. H. 6. fol. 48. where the Guardian of
Freres Minors in Coventry, brought an Action of Debt against John Burton of
Coventry, Executor of John Goat, and declared that the said John Goat
retained at Coventry, Friar John Bredon, a Brother of the said House by License
of the said Guardian, to Sing for him Masses for one whole year, and to say
Saint Gregory's Trentalls in the next year after, and showed in certainty upon
what services Saint Gregory's Trentall did consist, taking for this, xl. s. per
annum, and within four days John Goat dyed, and the Defendant his Executor,
and the said John Burton, granted to the said Friar to pay him the said Sum,
for doing the said services according to the Reteinor of the Testator, which
Divine services the Friar did perform according to the reteinor, and all his
wages were Arr. And in this Case the diversity was taken, that a Labourer may
have an Action of Debt against Executors, without specialty, because that he
may be compelled to serve by the Statute, and the Testator shall not wage his
Law in this Case. But the Priest or Friar is not bound to Sing Masses, by the
Law, against his will. And in every Case where the Testator might have waged
his Law, the Action is not maintainable against his Executors without
specialty, for Executors may not wage the Law, upon the contract of another. In
2. H. 4. fol. 16. Lawr. Saint Martin retained one for Term of his life, in
the time of peace and Wars for 100 s. per annum, which service he (as his
Servant) did do for two years, for which he brought his Action of Debt
against John Belton, and others, Executors of the said Lawr. And judgment was
given against the Plaintiff, for the reason, and upon the same diversity, as
is aforesaid; an Assumpsit without specialty is no more personal then a
Covenant by specialty, and therefore dies not with the person.

William Banes Case, in banco regis, 9. Jacobi. fol. 93.
UPon an Action of Assumpsit against Executors, the Plaintiff needs not to
averr, that the Executors have assets in their hands, of the goods of the
Testator, to the value of the said Debt, for it shall be intended Prima facie,
that they have Assets, for the Law does presume, that the Testator will not
leave a greater charge upon his Executors, then he will leave benefit to
discharge.

If a Stranger do say unto a man to whom a Debt is owing, I pray ^ou forbear
your Debt, and do not sue the Party until Michaelmas, etc. and then I will
pay you the Debt. This is a good consideration, although it be no benefit to
him that made the promise for it; It is a damage to the Creditor to forbear
his Suite or debt, he may have his Action of assumpsit against such a
Stran-ger after the day.

Sir George Reynells Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 95. In Chancery.
IT was found by Office, by Commission under the great Seal, That the Marshall
of the Kings Bench had committed diverse Forfeitures of his Office, by
suffering voluntary escapes of Prisoners; That Office, and such like may not be
granted for years, because it is an Office of trust, and personal, and he
must continually attend, and be Sworn in Court.

Two matters of record amount to an Office, as in the Case of Sir John Savage,
who was Sheriff of the County of Worcester for life, by Letters Patents under
the Great Seal, and was Indicted of two voluntary escapes of Fellons: and the
King may seize his Office into his own hands, without suing forth any Scire
facias, 5. Mar. Dyer. The Abbot of Saint Albones, had a Jail, and detained
Prisoners therein, and because he would not be at charges to sue forth a
Commission for the Jail delivery, the King caused his Franchise and Liberty
thereof to be seized into his own hands.

The Abbey of Crowland had a Jail and Prisoners, and for that he once
detained men that were quit of Felony, the King reseised the Jail for ever.

If a man grant an Office to another for life, or for years, and he will not
do his Office, or otherwise misuse his Office, the Grantor may reseize the
said Office. 39. H. 6. fo. 34.

If a Jailer commit voluntary escapes, or permit them, this is a forfeiture of
his Office, Cook, Lib. 9. in the Countee of Salops Case.

The King may grant the custody of the Jail to one in fee, and also to the
Sheriff of a County, to one, and his Heirs, which estate in fee simple,
includes all other estates, and it is true, that these grants may be made by
Law, for in these Cases, there is not any intermission, for presently after the
death of the Ancestor the Office discends to the Heir.

2. This Office cannot be forfeited by Outlary, as if it were granted for
years, it might; grants of these Offices in fee, or for life, have been
allowed, and approved, but such grants for years were never allowed or
approved, Et periculosum existimo quod bonorum virorum non comprobatur exemplo:
He that has the custody of the Jail, whither by right or wrong, shall be
charged with escapes of Prisoners until he be actually removed.

Margaret Podgers Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 104.
I. P. Copyholder for life, the remainder for life, the Lord bargained and
sold, and levied a fine to I. P. this descended to M. P. who levied a fine,
five years pass without claim of them in remainder, adjudged no bar.

1. Resolved, that Copyhold estates are within 4. H. 7. by the word Interest,
but if the Fine be by covin, this barreth not the issue, if Lessee for years,
or Copyholder be ousted, the Lord shall not have five years after a fine
levied by the disseissor, after their estate determined, because he may
presently have an assize, otherwise where Lessor for life is ousted: A mere
Stranger cannot enter to avoid a fine without Commandment, or assent of the
party who has right, but a Guardian in socage, or Lessor for life, or Lord of a
Copyholder, may, for the privity between them, and the Infant or Lessees.

2. A Fine barreth not any by Non-claime who is not put to a right, therefore
here they in remainder are not barred, because the bargain and sale, and Fine
to the Tenant in possession puts them not to a right.

1. Because it is a lawful act.

2. Tenant in possession devesteth not the remainder by acceptance, as if
Lessee for life accept a fine, Corn ceo, although it be a forfeiture.

3. Because he is in by 27. H. 8. of uses which does no wrong.

3. After the bargain and sale he in the next remainder shall not enter, for
by the custom his estate was to commence after the death of the Tenant in
possession, so if Tenant in possession forfeite, the Lord and not he in
remainder shall enter, but thereby without a special custom the remainder is
not destroyed: If a Copyholder in fee surrenders to the use of one for life,
no more passes then serves the estate limited, and he shall pay no fine for
admittance after the death of Tenant for life: It seemed to the Chief Justice,
that if the Lord here had charged the Land, I. P. shall not hold it charged,
for the estates in remainder preserve him from encumbrances of the Lord.

Meriel Treshams Case, 10. Jacobi. Communi Banco. fol. 108.
AN Administratrix, Defendant in Debt pleads that the Testator and his Son
acknowledged a recognizance to the King, of a hundred pound, and another of
800. l. to B. and another of a 1000. l. to M. and diverse others, over and
about which she had not assets, and after said she had not sufficient assets,
the Plaintiff replieth; that the recognizance to B. was for payment of 400. l.
which is paid, and the other to M. is to perform Covenants, whereof none is
broken, and the recognizance remains in force by Covin of the Defendant.

1. Resolved, that the bar is insufficient, for she first confesses that
she had sufficient assets to pay the said recognizances, and after denies it.

2. She says she had assets, but not sufficient, this is too general, but
she must confess how much she had, because she had knowledge thereof.

3. The pleading by the Plaintiff, that the Obligation was made to perform
Covenants, is good, without more certainty, because he is a Stranger.

4. The general allegation of Covin is good, without showing of refusal to
release, etc. and fraud may be in one only, also the bar is insufficient,
because the intestate was bound in the recognizances, with another, and the
Defendant had not averred, that the other had not satisfied them.

Robert Marys Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 111.
A Commoner being Copyholder brings an Action of the Case, for putting Beasts
into the Common, whereby he lost his Common, the Jury found, that the Defendant
did not put in the Beasts, but they of themselves depastured there.

1. The Jury have found the substance of the issue for the Plaintiff, the
depasturing there, and it is not material if he put them not there.

2. This Action lies, for the Commoner, for he may distreine damage feasant,
and it may be, that with strong hand he is hindered to distreine, and so if he
shall not have this Action he is remediless.

2. A Commoner who had freehold in the common shall have an Assize, Ergo, a
Copyholder shall have this Action.

3. The wrong ought to be so great, that the Commoner loose his Common, as a
Master shall not have an Action for beating his Servant without loss of his
Service, and it appears not to the Court that there are more Commoners then
he, and if there be, yet an Action lies, because each had private damage, and
it is not like to a common Nusans, which shall be punished only in a Leete, if
there be not special damage, but be the Trespass never so little, the Lord
may have an Action of Trespass.

The Lord Sanchars Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 117. For procuring the Murder of
John Turnor, Mr. of Defense.
1. REsolv. That a Baron of Scotland shall be tried by Commons of England.

2. The Indictment of the accessory in one County to a Felony in another
County, by the Statute of 2. E. 6. c. 24. shall recite, that the felony was
done in the other County, for an Indictment is no direct affirmation of the
fact.

3. The Justices of the Kings Bench are within these words of the Statute,
Justices of Gaole-delivery, or Oyer and Terminer, for they are the supreme
Judges of Gaole-delivery.

4. The Lord Sanchar cannot be in the Terme-time Arraigned in Midd. before
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, because Justices of Oyer and Terminer shall not
sit in the same County where the Kings Bench is, but the principalls were
Arraigned in L. in the Terme-time, because this is another County.

5. There needs not be 15. days for the return of the Venire facias, upon an
Indictment in the same County where the Kings Bench is, otherwise in another
County.

6. Because there is no direct proof that the Lord S. commanded one of the
principalls, but that he associated himself to one who was commanded, the best
way is to arraigne him as accessory, to him whom he commanded, but if he be
Indicted as accessory to two, and found accessory to one of them, this is good.

The word Appeal in the Statute of W. 1. c. 14. is to be intended generally,
(Viz.) By Indictment, by Writ or Bill, etc. and attainders is to be intended
upon any such accusation, Ergo, if upon any such accusation the principal be
attainted erroneously, the accessory may be arraigned, because the attainder is
good, until it be reversed, but if the Accessory be Hanged, and after the
Attainder against the principal is reversed, the Heir of the Accessory shall
be restored to all which his Father lost, either by entry or Action: By 5. H.
4. cap. 10. none shall be imprisoned by Justices of Peace, but in the Common
Jail; whereby it appears that Justices of Peace offend, who commit Fellons to
the Counters in L. and other Prisons, which are not Common Gaoles.

Cases in the Court of Wards.
Anthony Lowes Case, 7. Jacobi. fol. 122.
A. L. Tenant of 59. Acres, parcel of the Manor of A. by chivalry, and Suite
of Court to B. whereof A. was parcel, and both A. and B. were parcel of the
Duchy of L. out of the County Palatine holden formerly of the King in
Chivalry, in Capite, and of another House there, holden of A. by fealty, and
rent, H. 8. grants the rent by release to him and confirms his estate in the
said Lands by fealty only, and grants to him the Manor of A. Tenendum by
fealty and rent: It was Objected, that when the King grants the Seigniory to
his Tenant, the ancient Seigniory is extinct, and a new one that is best for
the King created, (Viz.) Chivalry. 2. When he extinguisheth services parcel of
the Manor of A. this shall be holden as the Manor of A. is, that is by
Chivalry.

But resolved, that the 59. acres and house, shall be holden by fealty only,
and as to the said Objection the release of the King does not extinguish
service, which is inseparable to a Tenure that is fealty, but all others are
gone, and true it is, when the K. grants, and expresses no tenure it shall be
by Chivalry, but when the Land moves from a Subject, and the Tenure is
changed, the new Tenure shall be as near the ancient as may be, as Feoffee of
Tenant in Frankalmoigne, shall hold by fealty only, and here, although they
grant the services, yet he limits the grantee to do fealty. A Knights fee is
not to be taken according to the quantity, but the value of the Land, as 20. l.
per annum, and a Hide of Land, is as much as a Plough can Plough in a year;
Relief is the fourth part of the annual value that is of a Knight; five
pound, of a Baron, a 100. Marks, of an Earl, 100. l. of a Marquis, 200.
Marks, of a Duke 200. l. The Eldest Son of E. 3. called the black Prince,
was the first Duke in England, and Robert, Earl of Oxford, in the Reign of R.
2. was the first Marquis, and the Lord Beaumont was the first Viscount created
by K. H. 6.

Floyers Case, 8. Jacobi, fol. 125.
BAron and Feme seized of Lands holden in Chivalry in right of the Feme in Fee,
levy a Fine to one who grants and renders to them and the heirs of the Baron,
and levy another Fine to their use for life, the remainder to their three Sons
in tail, one after another, the remainder in fee to the heirs of the Baron;
the K. shall have neither wardship of body nor Land.

1. Resol. That is out of the Statute of 32. H. 8. cap. 2. if he who had the
fee dye, etc. in respect the estate by the first Fine did not continue, and
this although both the Conveyances are voluntary.

2. The King shall not have wardship of the third part, because it is not for
advancement of the Wife, for in the first Fine the Land moved from her, and
she had no more by the second Fine then by the first.

3. In regard the particular estate is out of the Statute, no wardship accrueth
to the King, by advancement of him in the remainder; but if a revertioner upon
an estate for life, convey it to the use of his Wife, this will give wardship
of the body of the heir, for he in revertion is tenant; if a Lease for life be
the remainder to two, and to the heirs of one, he who has the fee dies, his
heir shall not be in ward; if the heir of one joyntenant, who had the fee dye
of full age (living the tenant for life) his heir shall not be in ward,
although he be within age by that Statute, because he is not immediate heir.

Sondayes Case, 8. Jacobi, fol. 127.
M. S. devises to his Wife for life, the remainder to W. S. and if he shall
have issue, that then his issue shall have it, the remainder to S. the
remainder to T. etc. Totidem verbis, upon condition that if any of them, or
this heirs of their bodies, go about to alien, that he in the next remainder
to enter after the death of M. W. and S. T. suffers a common recovery to his
own use in fee, he in the next remainder enters.

1. Resol. Every one of the Sons has an estate tail. 1. These words if he
dye without issue Male, are sufficient to create an estate tail. 2. The
general clause, if any of his Sons, or heirs of his body do it, makes it
manifest. 3. The condition proves it, for they cannot alien if they have but
for life, for this would be a forfeiture.

2. The restraint of tenant in tail, to suffer a common recovery is void: See
Mildmayes Case in the sixth Book.

Quicks Case, 9. Jacobi, fol. 129.
THe King Lord, I. N. and Tho. Q. mesnes of a Manor which they hold in common
in Capite, and tenant of three Acres holden in Chivalry, T. Q. makes a
feoffment of his moity to the use of himself for life, the remainder to I. Q.
his Son in tail, the tenant infeoffeth I. Q. who infeoffeth T. Q. to defraud
I. N. of the wardship of his Son within age, and dies, I. N. seiseth the Son,
T. Q. dies, the King shall not have wardship of the body, and moity of the
three Acres.

1. Resol. By the death of I. Q. it was a Chattell vested in I. N. and the King
had but a possibility to have it, if T. Q. dye during the minority of the ward,
which possibility shall not divest the wardship out of I. N.

2. When the tenant infeoffeth a stranger to defraud the Lord of wardship, the
Lord shall not have ravishment of ward, before recovery of the Land in a right
of ward, and although the title of I. N. be but in action, yet it shall not be
divested by a descent after: See the Statute of 34. H. 8. in Case of collusion.

Bewleys Case, 9. Jacobi, fol. 130.
THe King Lord, mesne by Socage, and tenant, the tenant is attainted of
Treason, the King grants to one tenendum by Chivalry and Rent, and to do his
services to other Lords, the tenant shall hold by Socage of the mesne, and he
by Socage of the King, because the intent of the King was to revive the
mesnalty, which cannot be by any other way, and the reviving of the ancient
tenure shall be in construction preferred before the reservation of a new; and
the honor of the King shall be preferred before his profit, and there was no
default in the mesne.

Thomas Holts Case, 9. Jacobi, fol. 131.
GRandfather tenant in Chivalry in Capite, Father, and Son, the Grandfather
conveyeth part of his Lands to the use of the Father and his Wife, the
remainder to the Son in tail, etc. the remainder to the right heirs of the
Grandfather, and conveys other Lands to his younger Children for life, with
diverse remainders over, and dies, the Father tenders livery, and before he
sueth it, dies.

1. Resol. By the death of the Father before livery sued, and after tender, the
King loses the primer seisin, but not mean rates, if any be due.

2. The Son shall not pay primer seisin, nor sue livery, because the Father and
not he, was within the Statute of 32. H. 8. 3. If the King had had one primer
seisin, he shall not have another of the Lands conveyed to the younger
Children, but that ought to be an effectual seisin; Ergo, here because the
King had not the effect of the primer seisin of the Father, he shall have
primer seisin of the Lands conveyed to the younger Children, as if he had the
grant of a prochein avoidance and presents, and his Clerk dies before
Induction, he shall present again, and before the Statute of Donis: If tenant
in tail the revertion to the King had aliened post prolem suscitatam, with
warranty which descends upon the King it is no bar without assets, the effect
of the warranty.

4. The King shall not have primer seisin in regard of a secke revertion which
descends to the Son, otherwise if a rent be reserved, the King may have that
for a year: So note, for a fruitless revertion there shall be wardship, but
no primer seisin.

Matthew Menes Case, 9. Jacobi, fol. 133.
TEnant of the King of a Message in Capite, who holds other Gavelkinde Land,
devises all to his 4. Sons equally: 1. Whether the King shall have a third
part of the Message only: 2. Whether out of the part of the heir only;
because Praerogativa Regis, cap. 1. Rex habebit, etc. De quocunque tenuerint,
etc. is intended, if the Land descend to the same heir to whom the Land holden
did discende.

1. Resolved if no Will had been made, the King shall not have the Lands,
holden of others in socage, but when by the Will, (to which he is enabled by
the Statute) he devises it to his Sons, there the saving in 32. H. 8. gives
to the King ward and primer seisin; So if Lands in chivalry, devisable by
custom, are devised to the Feme, although the devisee be good, for all without
aid of the Statute, yet the King shall have a wardship of a third part.

2. The King shall have his third part out of all their Estates equally.

Ascoughs Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 134.
THe King Lord, Mesne in Capite, and Tenant in socage, the Mesne grants to the
use of himself for life, the remainder to the Tenant in tail, if the
remainder suspends the Mesnalty during the life of the Mesne.

Resolved, that during his life the Mesnalty is not suspended. 1. Not as to the
Mesne, because he remains Tenant to the Lord, nor by reason of the remainder
for the avo^ding of Fractions, otherwise if the remainder be liimitted in fee,
for then he has as high an estate in the Mesnalty, as in the Tenancy, and this
can never be revived, and otherwise a Seigniory in fee shall issue out of a
Mesnalty for life, and there will be Lord and Tenant in fee, and Mesne for
life: but if the Lord Grant his Seigniory for years, the remainder for life to
the Tenant, the Mesnalty is suspended: A Mesnalty or Seigniory cannot be
suspended in part, and in esse, for part by the Act of the party, but they may
by act of Law, or of a third party: As if the Lord take a Lease of part of the
Tenancy, all the Seigniory is suspended; but if a Guardian indow the Feme the
Seigniory is in esse, for that part, and suspended for the residue: If two
Coparceners are of a Seigniory, and one comes to the Tenancy by defeasible
Title, the other shall distraine for the moity of the Seigniory, and the Act of
the Coparcener shall not prejudice her.

There are four manner of Avowries.

1. Upon his very Tenant. 2. Upon his very Tenant by the manner, where the
Tenant had but a particular estate. 3. Upon his Tenant by the manner when the
Lord had but a particular estate. 4 Upon the matter in the Land, as within his
fee, but the Lord has liberty to Avow according to the Common Law.
Thoroughgoods Case, 9. Jacobi. fol. 136.
TEnant in fee infeoffeth one by Deed indented, and delivers it upon the
Land, in the name of seisin, this is good, and has a double operation at one
instant, Viz. to deliver the Writing as a Deed, and to deliver seisin of the
Land according to the Deed.

1. Resolved, this is his Deed although he does not say so, but delivers it in
the name of seisin, for delivery is good without any words: if one deliver a
Deed to one as an escrow, to be his Deed upon performance of conditions, this
is his Deed presently, otherwise if he deliver it to a stranger: so words are
good without actual delivery, as if he says, take it like to a livery within
view. If the Obligee deliver the Obligation to the Obligor, to redeliver, the
Obligor may retain it, for the words to redeliver are void.

2. Delivery of the deed upon the Land, amounts not to livery and seisin,
but it does, if delivered in the name of seisin, so of any other thing, or if
he says, I deliver you seisin, without delivering any thing, this is good also.

Beaumonts Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 138.
I. B. and E. his Wife, Tenants in special Tail, the remainder to the Heirs
of the Baron, I. B. levies a Fine to K. E. 6. who grants to the Earl of H. in
fee, I. B. dies, E. enters, the Earl of H. confirms her estate, to have to
her, and the Heirs of the body of I. B. E. dies seized, having issue F. B.
who accepts a fine, Sur conusans de droit tantum, with Proclamations, and dies,
having issue Sir H. and I. Sir H. in Ward to the K. after full age, and before
livery, Covenanteth to stand seized to the use of himself, and his heirs
Males of his body, and dies, having issue only a Daughter in Ward, whether
she or I. B. shall have the Land, etc.

1. Resolved, that E. had an estate tail, and the Statute of 4. H. 7. c. 24.
which inableth the Baron to bar the issue, saves the right of the Feme if
she enter, or, etc. and one may have an estate tail which cannot descend, as
if the Son in the life of the Father levyeth a fine, the Father remains
Tenant in tail still, although it cannot descend, and E. here has an estate
tail so long as she lives, or the Heirs in tail remain.

2. The Confirmation is void, for he who did confirm had but a possibility,
which passes not by the confirmation, and if he had a reversion in fee, yet it
should be void.

1. Because the tail which the Feme had was confirmed, which cannot descend.

2. The confirmation does not add a descendible quallity, where he who should
have it is disabled to receive by descent.

3. This would in effect repeal 4. H. 7. and 32. H. 8. two of the principal
Pillars of the Law.

4. and 5. If Tenant in Dower grants her estate, there is a discendible quality
in the Heir, to bring wast against Tenant in Dower, and although the Heir
confirm her estate for life, and after she assigns it to I. S. who
commits wast, yet the action of wast is maintainable against her, Pari
ratione, in the Case at Bar, in regard the confirmation does not enlarge the
estate of E. it cannot add unto it a discendible quallity.

6. There are but three manner of Confirmations, Viz. Perficiens, Crescens, aut
diminuens, and the Confirmation in this Case, is none of them: and if E. had no
power to levy a fine or suffer recovery, the reason is, because she cannot
bar that which was barred before by her Husband, but this point was not now
in Question.

The End of the Ninth Book.
THE TENTH BOOK.
The Case of Suttons Hospital, Baxter Plaintiff, Sutton and Law Defendants,
in Trespass, in the Kings Bench, and adjourned into the Exchequer Chamber; and
judgment given against the Plaintiff.
1. Obj.

BY the Parliament 7. Jacobi. the Hospital was Founded at H. in Essex, Ergo,
the incorporation made after by the Kings Letters Patents, is void, and the
Charterhouse is not given by the said Statute because S. purchased it after.

2. Sutton who had License to Found an Hospital before the Foundation, dyed.

3. The K. cannot name the House and Lands of S. to be an Hospital, because in
Alieno solo.

4. Every Corporation ought to have a place certain, but here the License is
to found an Hospital at, or in the Charterhouse, Ergo, before that S. had made
it certain, there was no incorporation, also the place of Corporation ought to
be certain by Meats and Bounds, and a place known will not serve.

5. The King intended to make an incorporation presently, which cannot be
before that S. name a Master.

6. Governors cannot be, until there be poor in the Hospital, Ergo, S.
calls it in his Will his intended Hospital.

7. The Foundation cannot be without the words, Fundo, erigo, etc. and before
such Foundation, a Stranger cannot give Lands unto it.

8. The Master was named at will, where he ought to be for life, and have
freehold in the Lands, also the Hospital must be Founded before a Master be
named.

9. The bargain and sale made by S. is void.

1. Because the Money paid by the Governors in their private capacity, shall
not inure to them in their politic capacity.

2. The Habendum is to them upon trust, which cannot be in a Corporation.

3. Because as before no Hospital was Founded.

10. The King cannot make Governors of a thing not in Esse.

To the first it was answered, that the Letters Patents recite the preamble of
the Act whereby, and in many parts of the Act it appears that the
incorporation was to be In futuro, when it shall be erected, and the Statute
does not give any Lands unto it, but power to give without License of
alienation and mortmaine, and it appears by the Letters Patents that the
erection precedes the License.

2. The License is to him, his Heirs, Executors, etc. at any time hereafter,
and the words of incorporation are in the present, and so the incorporation
precedeth the execution of this License.

3. Although the King gave the name, yet S. devised it, and assented to it, and
the K. did it at his Suite.

4. The K. makes an Hospital of all the premises, so that it is certain, and
as to that which was said, that a place uncertain cannot be an Hospital; It
was answered, that a Manor may be, which is more uncertain then the
Charterhouse. To the essence of a Corporation five things are requisite. 1.
Lawful authority to incorporate, and that may be four ways by the common
Law, as the King himself by authority of Parliament, by the K. Chartar, and by
prescription. 2. The persons either natural or political. 3. A name by which,
etc. 4. A place. 5. Words sufficient, but not restrained to a strict form.

5. A Corporation may be without head, as if the K. incorporate a Town, and
give to them power to choose a Mayor, they are a Corporation before Election.

6. It is a sufficient incorporation that there be an Hospital potestate, for
the Temple was a Corporation in the time of H. 1. and yet was not built till H.
2. time, but here the House was built before.

7. The first Donor is in Law the Founder, and when the K. gives a name, and
designs the place and the persons, the Founder has nothing to do but the
Donation; but if the K. leaves the nomination to the party, there many times,
although not of necessity he uses the words Fundo erigo, etc. But in truth the
incorporation is made by the K. Chartar, and the Founder is but an instrument.

8. The Master may be at will, for by the Letters Patents S. had power to name
one at his will and pleasure.

9. The money paid by some of the Governors in their private Capacity is good,
but the payment was as Governors, and so they are acquitted. 2. A rent was
reserved, which is a good consideration. 3. A bargain and sale may be upon
confidence and trust.

10. They may plead that they are seized In jure incorporationis, although then
it be not In esse. In Answer to the presidents, some are Explanatory, some
Nugatory, Ex consuetudine clericorum.

Sir Thomas Fleming Chief Justice of England, became sick, whereof he after
died, so that he never argued the Case: See there his several advancements and
commendations.

Mary Portingtons Case, 11. Jacobi. fol. 35.
AFter many things said concerning Perpetuities, in this Case it was said, that
a recovery in value, barreth an estate tail, although no recompense be had,
because it is by judgment, as if issue in tail be barred in a formedon, by
warranty and assets, but if the issue before judgment given, alien the assets,
his issue shall recover the Land in tail, if Tenant in tail suffer a
recovery, and die before Execution the issue is barred: It is absurd that one
may bar one of going about to suffer a recovery, when he cannot bare the
recovery it self, but if such a condition had been good, a Feme Covert by
that shall not loose her Land, for she shall not loose her Land by any
conclusion without examination upon Writ in Court, and if she acknowledge a
recognizance, this is void, although it be with her Husband, because there is
no Writ to examine her, if an Infant levy a fine, this is voidable, and shall
be tried by inspection, but a fine levied by a Feme Covert is void, if the
Husband enter, otherwise not.

Jennings Case, 38. ElIz. Banco regis. fol. 43.
Tenant for life suffers a common recovery, in which he in remainder in tail
is vouched, who dies, the reversion in fee is barred.

1. Resolved, that at the common Law a recovery against Tenant for life, upon a
true warranty, and recovery in value binds him in the remainder.

2. No Statute was made to provide for him, who had a reversion or remainder
upon an estate tail, and the Statute of W. 2. c. 3. which gives receite to a
revertioner upon default of him who holds Per donum, is to be intended of
Tenant after possibility of issue extinct, and 32. H. 8. c. 31. provides only
for a reversion or remainder upon a Lease for life.

3. There have been diverse evasions out of the Statute of 32. H. 8. as if
Lessee for life Lease for years to one who infeoffeth one who in recovery
Vouches Lessee for life, this was out of the Statute, because the Lessor and
Lessee were put to a right, whereupon 14. Eliz. c. 8. was made.

4. 14. Eliz. extends not where Lessee for life vouched him in remainder in
tail, because it is in the power of him in remainder to dock the reversion,
etc. and the course is, that Tenant in tail bargains and sells to one who
suffers a recovery, in which, Tenant in tail is Vouched, and yet the bargainee
had but for life: judgment affirmed in Error.

Lampets Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 46.
LEssee for 5000. years devises for life to one whom he makes Executor, the
remainder to his Sister, and the Heirs of her body, and dies, the Sister
takes Husband, they release to the Executor, who demiseth for ten years to
the Defendant, the Baron dies, the Executor dies, the Feme takes another Baron
who demise to the Plaintiff, judgment against the Plaintiff.

1. Resolved, a devise of the use of a Term to one for life, the remainder to
another for life is good, as an Executory devise.

2. A devise of the term it self in such manner is good.

3. The first Devisee cannot bar him who had the Executory devise.

4. Assent of the Executor to the first devise, is an assent for all.

5. If such a devise be made to the Executor, and he enter, generally he shall
have it as Executor.

6. Such an Executory devise cannot be granted over.

7. Such an Executory devise may be extinguished by release to the first
devisee.

Object. That the first devisee had all the interest in him, and the other but
a possibility, which cannot be released, as if Conisee of a Statute release his
right in the Land, yet he may sue Execution.

It was answered, that a thing in Action cannot be granted to a Stranger,
neither by the Act of the party nor of Law, but it may be released to the
Terretenant, and here to him who had the present interest, 1. Because as it may
be easily created, being a Chattell, so it may be easily determined. 2. Every
right as well present as future, by joining all who have interest one way or
other may be extinguished; so if the Executor and the Sister here, had joined
in an assignement, this had been good. 3. When many things are requisite to
the perfection of any thing, the Law respects the Original Act, and here the
fundamental acts were the devise, death of the devisor, the assent of the
Executor, and death of the first devisee, and she has a right that may be
released, and the death of the Executor is but a means to bring it into
possession; as a Feme Covert barreth her self of Dower by joining in a Fine
with her Husband, but if the Baron sole levy a fine, and dies, and five years
pass, the Feme is not bound; so if Tenant in ancient demesne levy a fine, he
had possibility to have the Land again, if the Lord bring a Writ of desceit,
but he may release that possibility; but such a possibility as may be released,
ought to be Propinqua, and not Remota, and it is more then a common possibility
that an Executor will dye before 5000. years, and the person who releaseth it
ought to have it in certain, therefore if a remainder be limited to the right
Heirs of I. S. his Eldest Son cannot release it, because he is not certain
whither he shall be Heir at the death of his Father, so if a Lease be made to
Baron and Feme, the remainder to the survivor of them for 21. years, the Baron
cannot grant this Term. 4. This by her death goes to her Executors,
therefore it may be extinguished by her, if the disseissee release all actions
to the disseissor, who dies, the disseissee shall have a Writ of entry against
his Heir, or if Bailor release all Actions to the Bailee, he shall have
adetinue against his Executors. 5. It is a present Legacy, although the
interest be In futuro, and therefore the Legacy may be discharged, and
consequently the interest it self; For, Qui destruit medium destruit finem,
and this may be before assent of the Executor. 6. Otherwise there would be a
perpetuity of Chattells.

2. By this release the Executor had a perfect estate for 5000. years
absolutely.

3. The request and acceptance of the release by the Executor amounts to an
agreement.

The Case of the Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of the University of
Oxford, 11. Jacobi, fol. 53.
THe Statute of 3. Jacobi, gives presentiments of Churches, which belong to
Recusants, convicted to the Chancellor and Scholars of O. and makes grants of
such Recusants void: One indicted of recusancy grants a prochein avoidance, and
is after convicted, the Church becomes void, the Chancellor, Masters, and
Scholars, bring a Quare impedit, and averr that he remained a Recusant.

1. Resol. The grant of the next avoydance betwixt the Indictment and
conviction, is void, for the Statute is, that a Recusant convicted shall be
disabled, etc. from the time of the Session of the Parliament, so a grant of
the next avoidance by an Abbot before surrender, and after the Statute of 31 H.
8. cap. 13. of Monasteries is void; so if an Officer of the King purchase Land,
and alien it, and become indebted to the King, this Land is liable to the debt.

2. Covine shall not be presumed if it be not averred, and if the Jury find
that Covine was to one intent, that shall not be taken to another intent,
therefore because it is not said that this grant was by Covine, it shall not be
intended.

3. Although the Statute gives the avoydances to the Chancellor, and
Scholars of O. yet they may bring a Quare impedit, in the name of their
Corporation, and the misnaming of the Corporation does not avoid the act when
it appears what Corporation is intended.

2. It was pleaded that the Statute gives it to the Chancellor, Master, and
Scholars, and the Defendant had demurred upon it.

3. This being a private act, it shall be taken as it is pleaded.

4. The University must show that the Grantor was a Recusant, convicted at the
time of the avoydance, but not that he continued so, because it is a Chattell
vested in them, which shall not be divested by his conformity after. Judgment
for the Plaintiffs.

The Bishop of Salisburies Case, 11. Jacobi, fol. 58.
THe Defendant in a second deliverance, pleads a grant of the Bishop of S. to
E. G. and himself of the office of Surveiorship of his Manors, with a rent
charge of twenty Nobles per annum, with confirmation of the Deane and Chapter,
and that it is Antiquum officium, used to be granted in such manner to such
person and persons as the Bishop and his Predecessors shall please: The
Plaintiff pleads the Statute of 1. Eliz. and that the said Office has not
been used to be granted, but for the life of one, whereby the grant is void,
Et hoc paratus est verificare: It was excepted to the Bar, that the avowant
had pleaded that the Bishop and his Predecessors have used to grant the said
Office to such person or persons, etc. And the Plaintiff pleads in bar, that
it had not been used to be granted but for one life, and concludes, and hoc
paratus est, etc. where it ought to have been, quod inquiratur per, etc. yet it
is good, because the avowry is in the disjunctive.

2. It is not averred that the Bishop is dead, and if he be not, the grant is
good during his life; it is good, for it appears by the words nuper
Episcopum, that he was dead, or removed exceptions to the avowry, that to say
this is an ancient Office is too general, because he made title to the Office
it self, but it had been good if he had claimed another thing, by reason of
the Office, and the exception holden good: It was objected that this grant was
out of the Statute of 1. Eliz. because no parcel of the possessions of the
Bishopric, as the Statute speaks.

2. Such things are restrained by the Statute whereof a rent may be reserved.

3. If it had been an Office, parcel of the Bishopric which the Bishop might
exercise, this had been within the Statute, but this is not so.

4. If it be restrained for two lives, then also for one life: But it was
Resolved, that the said grant for two lives was void against the successor by
the Statute of 1. Eliz.

1. Resol. This grant had been good at the Common Law, by confirmation of the
Deane and Chapter.

2. The Act of 32. H. 8. cap. 28. inableth the Bishop to make a Lease for 21.
years, or three lives, observing the limitations of the Statute without the
Deane and Chapter.

3. The Statute of 1. Eliz. restrains the Bishop to grant any parcel of his
possessions, or any thing belonging to his Bishopric, but for 21. years, or
three lives, etc. but against the Bishop himself it is good, and this Office
may be said belonging to his Bishopric, because he had an inheritance in the
disposition of it, and the intent of the Statute was to avoid diminutions and
dilapidations, therefore a grant of such an ancient Office of service and
necessity for one life, as was accustomed, is out of the Statute, but more then
that he cannot do, because it is not of necessity; and the death of one of
them in the life of the Bishop is not to the purpose, for the grant was void
against the successor, and it shall not be made good by accident after.

4. Such a grant for one life, without confirmation of the Deane and Chapter is
void, because it is out of the Statute of 1. Eliz. and resolved also, that
although the Bishopric be new, yet a grant of a necessary Office, with a
reasonable Fee (of which the Court shall judge) binds the successor.

Nota, Where there was a clause in 1. Eliz. that Bishops may grant to the
Queen, etc. 1. Jacobi. by Parliament restrains them, and after Judgment was
given for the Plaintiffs.

Whistlers Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 62. Upon a special Verdict.
BEfore the Statute of Praerogativa Regis. cap. 15. by the grant of the King of
a Manor, all appendants (without naming them) pass, and the Statute excepteth
Knights Fees, Advowsons, and Indowments, but all other appendants now pass
without naming them, and so do Advowsons pass in case of restitution, for the
Statute speaks of Grants, and in Grants also, without express mention by the
words Adeo plene and integre, etc. See other good matter there, touching this
Subject.

The Church Wardens Case of Saint Saviors in Southwark. fol. 66.
Queen Elizabeth leased the rectory to the Churchwardens of St S. for 21.
years, and after leased to them for 50. years, in consideration of the
payment of 20. l. and surrender of the Letters Patents by the Churchwardens,
Modo habentes and ad presens possidentes, and the special Verdict found, that
they paid the 20. l. and that they delivered the Charter in Court to be
cancelled, and that they paid the Fees, but that no Vacat was made, yet the
grant is good, for it appears that the intent was not to make a surrender in
deed, because he says, Modo possidentes, but a surrender in Law by acceptance
of the second Letters Patents, and although a Corporation cannot make a
surrender in deed, yet they may make a surrender in Law.

2. Although an actual surrender is requisite, they have done all, which
belongs to them by delivery of the Chartar, and payment of the fees, and the
Cancelling belongs to the Court.

3. Although it was recited that 20. l. was paid, yet it needs not to be found,
for it is but in the personalty, and is affirmed by the King to be paid, and is
also executed: See Barwicks Case, 5. Report, 93.

The Case of the Marshalsea, 10. Jacobi. fol. 68. In false Imprisonment.
AN Action upon the Case, upon an assumpsit is brought in the Marshalsea,
whereas no party was of the Kings House, the Plaintiff recovered, the
Defendants arrested the Plaintiff by a precept, in the nature of a Capias ad
satisfaciendum, and he brings false Imprisonment, and judgment given against
the Defendants.

1. Resolved, the Steward and Marshall at the Common Law has two Authorities:
One general, as Vicegerents of the Chief Justice, in his absence, within the
Verge: Another, as Judges of the Marshalsea. This last was limited to Debt and
Covenant, where both are of the House, and to trespass, Vi and armis, where
one is, but not if it concern Land, and because they have the general
authority at will, and the other for life, they draw many cases to the
Marshalsea which ought to be in other Courts: Their Jurisdiction by Fleta, Lib.
2. cap. 2. Infra metas hospitij continentes 12. Leucas in circuitu. And the
Statute of 13. R. 2. c. 3. limits the 12. miles to be accounted about the Kings
Tonnell.

2. The reasons wherefore this special authority was given them, were,

1. Because the Suite there, is by Bill, by reason of their Privilege, which
cannot be elsewhere.

2. In respect of the necessity of attendance of the Kings Servants.

3. If Strangers shall be suffered to sue there, one Carman would sue another
Carman there, In aula Regis, which were undecent, but the general authority
vanished by the Act of 28. E. 1. c. 5. which Ordained, that the Chancellor and
Justices of the King should follow him, therefore in Praesentia Majoris cessat,
etc. and about 4. E. 3. the Court of K. Bench became Resident.

3. The Statute of Articuli super Chartas, is as much as an explanation of the
great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest, and not introductory of a new
Law, and the third Chapter of that act explaines the Jurisdiction of the
Marshalsea, as before, and if he hold plea, otherwise a prohibition lies, and
the party shall have an Action upon the Case as a consequent upon the Statute.

4. That part of the Statute which gives them Jurisdiction in trespass, shall
be intended trespass, Vi and armis.

5. This action lies against the Defendants, because the Court had not
Jurisdiction, and so have not done it by command of the Judge, otherwise if the
Court had Jurisdiction, but proceeds Inverso ordine, or erroneously, as if a
Capias be awarded, against an Earl, etc. one who is Indicted before Justices
of the Peace, cannot approve. 1. Because he cannot assign a Coroner. 2.
Because it is out of their Commission, if a Court Leete be holden at another
day then it ought to be, the proceeding is Coram non judice, otherwise it is of
a Court Baron, 6. R. 2. Action upon the Statute Plac. ultimo, in the point,
that judgment in the Marshalsea, when none of the parties is of the K. house,
may be avoided by plea without any Writ of Error, which proves that it is void.

Leonard Loveis Case, 11. Jacobi. fol. 78. In ejectione firmae, for 8. acres.
etc.
L. L. seized of diverse Manors in socage and in chivalry, In Capite, makes a
feoffement to diverse uses, in an Indenture precedent, whereby he limits to
himself for life, without impeachment of wast, and to the use of his Lessees
and devisees, the remainder to his second Son in tail, etc. the reversion to
himself with power of revocation, after he purchases 8. acres in socage, and
revoketh, as to certain Manors holden in socage, and devises them and the 8.
acres to his Eldest Son, and the heirs, Males of his body for 500. years,
provided that if he alien otherwise then for years determinable, upon the
deaths of three persons or less number, rendering the old rent, or die without
issue Male, then to his second Son in tail, with proviso to make Leases
according to 32. H. 8. only, L.L. dies, the Eldest Son enters into the 8.
acres, and dies, leaving one Daughter who Marries R.D. who enters into the 8.
acres, etc. second Son dies, having L. L. who enters upon R. D. and leaseth
to the Plaintiff, who enters, upon whom the Defendant enters, and ejecteth,
etc. and if the entry of L L. the Lessor was congeable or not, was the
Question, and it was adjudged that his entry was not lawful, and judgment was
given against the Plaintiff, in this Case diverse points resolved, some at the
common Law, and some upon 32, and 34. H. 8. of Wills.

1. Resolv. if a man seized of three acres of equal value, one holden in
Capite, and gives that and one of the other to his younger Son in tail, he
cannot devise any part of the third Acre, because he had executed his power,
and if he purchase other Land in socage, he can devise but two parts of that by
reason of his reversion in Capite, expectant upon the estate tail.

Object. that the K. was once satisfied of the wardship by the Statute, in
respect of the Acre holden and the reversion thereupon shall not hinder the
devise of Land, purchased after.

2. The statute does not regard this seck reversion, but inheritances of
annual value. Resp. To the first, that this reversion shall hinder the devise,
by the words of the Statute, for he had a reversion of Lands holden, but
although the Statute says, that he may alien two parts, by act executed or
will, if he alien to one of the three uses by act executed, he may devise the
reversion, for the Statute is to be intended of an entire Alienation, and where
the Statute says in reversion or remainder, it is to be intended, that the
devisor be seized of such a remainder which draws wardship.

To the second it was answered, that things which of their nature are seck are
out of the Statute, but not things which of their nature are of annual value,
but are not of value in respect of some Lease or gift, Absque abliquo inde
reddendo, and therefore seck reversions are devisable by the said Statutes; but
if they be not, yet they shall hinder the devises of other Lands: To make one
able to devise by those Statutes the time of Having, Holding, and disposing,
must concur, and therefore if a grant to the second Son here, had been in
fee, although with power of revocation, the devise had been good, because he
had no Lands In Capite, at the time of the devise, if the Father conveyeth his
Land to the use of his younger Son, the eldest being within age, after the
death of his Father, he shall be in ward although nothing descend: A true
Child, and not in reputation is within the Statute, and if the Son purchase
Land Bona fide, of his Father, this is out of the Statute, because it is not
for his advancement; If Tenant in socage devise, and after purchase Land in
Chivalry, the devise is void for a third part, but if Tenant in Chivalry and
socage devise all, and after aliens the Land holden, this is good. To make
division, that the King shall have a third part holden, the Lands shall be
taken according to their value at the time of the death of the Devisor. The
time of provision that a third part must descend, needs not concur with the
time of alienation, but it is sufficient that he had it at the time of his
death. The estate to any of the three purposes ought to continue to the time of
death, and the Tenure must till after death, to make it within the Statute, and
the estate also of Lands holden, ought to continue after death, therefore if
Tenant in tail, in Capite devise socage Land, and dye without issue, this is
good, so privity must continue after death, therefore if he who made the
conveyance be attainted, this is out of the Statute: The uses to the second
Son are in contingency, and not executed by 27. H. 8. by the power to make
Leases, and devise reserved to the feoffor, and therefore the fee is in the
feoffor in the mean time, so that having disposed of it, and being seized of
it, he cannot devise the Land purchased after.

It was Objected, that the Statute says, lawfully executed in his life, but
here no use was to be executed in the second Son until after his death.

It was Answered, that after his death the uses were derived out of the
feoffement, and so are as it were executed in his life.

It was holden by the Chief Justice, that the remainder to the second Son is
contingent, in regard no alienation is found to be made by the Eldest, and if
there had been, then it would be repugnant, that after alienation the Land
should remain to the second Son, and so Quacunq, via data, the remainder (as
this Case is) cannot vest in him, but this point was not resolved by the Court.
2. The revocation is good, although the Indenture precedeth the feoffement, and
that the uses are in contingency, and that the revocation is but in part, and
the Chief Justice held, that the Eldest Son had but a term determinable,
and the second an estate tail; But in this, the Kings Bench and Common pleas
differ in Opinion, and that if Lands be devised to one and the Heirs of his
body for 500. years, the Executors shall have it, and not the Heir, and the
devisee may alien it, for it cannot be intailed, and so in Peacocks Case, 28.
Eliz. Banco Regis, was it resolved.

Doctor Leyfields Case, 8. Jacobi. fol. 88. in Trespass.
IN Trespass for Corn taken at O. C. the Defendant pleads that Q. Eliz.
granted the Rectory of O. C. to C. P. (without showing the Letters Patents) who
demised to G. P. for 8. years, if the said C. P. so long live, and that he, as
servant of G. P. took the Corn, and avers the life of C. the Plaintiff
demurreth, because the plea amounts to the general issue, and it was
adjudged in the K. Bench that the bar was insufficient, because the Defendant
showed not the Letters Patents, and Error was brought in the Exchequer-Chamber,
because the plea amounts to the general issue, because the Defendant gave no
color, wherein judgment ought not to be given against the Defendant, but
only to answer over.

2. Because he is not bound to show the Letters Patents.

It was answered, that color shall not be given, for color shall not be given
where the plea goes to the bar of the right, for it would be in vain to
give color of right, and to bar him if he had right, as if a collateral
warranty, fine, Statute be pleaded, or if he claims by a waife, otherwise
where he pleads a descent, for this does not bar the right, but the
possession; he who claims by sale in a Market overt, shall not give color if
he pleads generally, but if he pleads that I. S. was possessed, as of his own
goods, and sold them in a Market overt, or waived them, there he shall give
color, because he confesses no interest in the Plaintiff.

2. If the Defendant claims by the Plaintiff, he shall not give color.

3. If the plea be to the Writ, or action of the Writ, no color shall be given.

4. Color shall not be given in case of Tithes, for to whomsoever the Lands
belong, the Tithes belong to the Parson.

1. Color ought to be a doubt to the Laygents.

2. It must have continuance.

3. It must be such a color that if it be effectual, will maintain the
Action.

4. It ought to be given by the first conveyance.

2. Resolved, Lessee for years of Lessee for life of the K. must show the
Letters Patents, for he who is privy in estate or interest, or who justifies
in right of a Party or privy, although he claim but part, must show the first
deed, and the reason that deeds are showed to the Court, is, that the Judges
and Jury (that which respectively to them belongs) shall judge of the
sufficiency thereof, therefore a deed shall not be suffered to be given in
evidence, by Witnesses, or Copy except it be burned or some such inconvenience,
but a Copy of a record is good evidence: if a release be made to Tenant for
life, this inureth to the reversioner, yet he cannot plead it without showing,
a Fortiori, here because the Lessee may contract with the Lessor, to suffer him
to have the deed to show, but Strangers who claim not the thing granted, nor
interest out of it, need not to show the deed, otherwise if he claims the
thing granted, or interest out of it; Ergo, the second grantee of a rent charge
must show the first grant, but he who claims as Guardian, or merely by the Law,
without privity or power of providing the deed need not to show it: But Tenant
by the courtesy must show it, because the deed was in his power living the
Wife, otherwise of Tenant by Statute. etc.

3. The not showing of the deed is matter of substance, therefore judgment
shall be given against the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, although it was not
showed as Cause of Demurrer. And judgment was affirmed.

Nota, when a plea amounts to a general issue, if the Plaintiff demurre
specially, upon 27. Eliz. and the Defendant join, judgment shall be given for
the Plaintiff.

Edward Seymors Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 95.
THe Lord Cheyny Tenant in tail, the remainder in tail to I. C. the reversion
to the Lord C. bargains and sells, and levyes a fine to the bargainee, with
warranty to him and his Heirs, the bargainee nfeoffeth the Lord S. who
infeoffeth E. S. I. C. dies, having issue T. the Lord C. dies without issue,
Edward, Lord S. leaseth to the Plaintiff, the Defendant by the command of T.
ejected him; and judgment was given for the Defendant, and affirmed in Error.

1. Resolved, the bargainee had an estate discendible, during the life of the
bargainor (whereof his Wife shall have Dower) and also the reversion in fee
expectant upon the remainder in tail.

2. The fine after bargain and sale, is not discontinuance of the remainder,
for this operates upon the estate passed by bargain and sale, and
corroborateth that and makes it determinable only, upon the death of the
bargainor without issue, otherwise if the fine had preceded the bargain and
sale.

3. It was Objected that the feoffement of the bargainee displaceth the
remainder, so that the warranty which discends upon him, barreth him: But
resolv. that the warranty does not bind him.

1. Because it was annexed to an estate determinable by the death of Tenant in
tail, without issue, and to the reversion in fee, granted by bargain and
sale, and fine, and not to the remainder in tail, and the Conisee by his own
Act cannot make it to extend any further, therefore the estate tail being
determined, the warranty cease.

2. A warranty barreth not an estate, which is not displaced at the time of the
warranty annexed, as if the Father makes a feoffement of Land (out of which
his Son has a rent) with warranty, this binds not the Son as to the rent.

3. The feoffement was lawful because he had fee, therefore he cannot make
discontinuance.

4. A warranty cannot enlarge an estate, the remainder in tail to I. C. was
not discontinued, for the feoffor was not then seized by force of the tail.

5. A collateral warranty may be given in evidence, if it be not pleaded, for
although it gives not a right, yet it barreth another right, and the rather
in an Ejectione firmae, and other personal actions, because in them it cannot
be pleaded by way of bar.

Note, there are some Titles to which a warranty extends not, as in case of
Mortgage, Mortmaine, consent to a Ravishor, for in these cases no Action lies,
in which Voucher or Rebutter, can be, neither shall a descent take away an
entry.

Bewfages Case, 10, Jacobi. Common Pleas. fol. 99.
THe Sheriff upon a Fieri facias executed, did take an Obligation of the
Defendant to pay the money in Court, at the return of the Writ, and this was
adjudged good, notwithstanding the Statute of 23. H. 6. Before this Statute the
Sheriff could not let any person to bail which was taken, Ad respondend. as
may appear, Fitz. Na. br. 25. a and b. and in 34. Eliz. in Debt by Dawson
Sheriff of B. against Burnam upon an Obligation, the Defendant pleaded the
Statute 23. H. 6. and showed, that one K. recovered Debt and damages against
him, and pursued one Writ of Fieri facias against him, directed to the Sheriff
of B. and that he made the Obligation to the Plaintiff, for the Execution, and
that the Obligation was void by the Statute, whereupon the Plaintiff demurred,
and it was resolved.

First that the Obligation was not within the Statute, because that the Statute
extended only to such Obligations which any who is in their ward did make unto
him.

Secondly, that the same Obligation was not void at the Common Law, whereupon
the Plaintiff had judgment, and another judgment 28 El. Inter Burwey and
Kett, upon an Obligation, taken by the Sheriff, Pro solutione pecuniae debitae
dominae reginae, upon extent out of the Exchequer.

Now it is said in the later clause of the Act, that if any of the Sheriffs or
other Officers or Ministers aforesaid, take any Obligation in other form, by
color of their Offices, that it should be void, etc. There are two manner of
forms, (Viz.) Forma verbalis and forma legalis, for Verbalis stands upon the
Letters and Sillables of the Act, Forma legalis, is Forma essentialis, and
stands upon the substance of the thing to be done, and upon the sense of the
Statute, Quia notitia ramorum hujus Statuti, non in sermonum folijs sed in
rationis radice posita est, and according to this distinction this Branch of
this Statute is to be expounded, and therefore in 37. H. 6. 1. If the Sheriff
take a single Obligation of one in his ward that was bailable, this was void,
for this Obligation wants essential form, prescribed by the Statute; for the
condition prescribes the fault, which is part of the substance. And there Moyle
said, that if the Sheriff let one to Bail or Mainprise, that is excepted in
the Statute, and not mainpernable, and take a simple Obligation, that the same
is void, Quod alij Justiciarij concesserunt, for by the exception it appears,
that it was not the intention of the Statute, that such should be let to Bail,
and therefore the Obligation is taken in another sense then the Statute
intends. And it seems to me, that as well in the same Case of 37. H. 6. as in
the principal Case of Dive and Manningham, plow. 67. the Obligation which has
the condition to save the Sheriff harmless (when the Sheriff against the
Law lets one to Bail who is not Baileable) is against the Law, and void by
the Common Law. And with this accords William Wishams Case, 15. Eliz. Dyer.
324. and in 7. E. 4. One was in custody of the Sheriff by force of a Capias,
upon an Indictment of the Trespass, and the party makes the Obligation to
another, by the direction of the Sheriff, upon this condition, as the Statute
prescribes for the suerty of the Sheriff, etc. and there it is holden that the
Obligation is void, because the Statute prescribes, that the Obligation shall
be made to the Sheriff, and that is part of the essential form; and so, if
the Sheriff add to the condition, that he shall be kept harmless against the
King and the Plaintiff, etc. this is void, so if a Jailer or a Sheriff take
an Obligation of the person, with condition to be true Prisoner or to pay for
his meat and drink. So if the Sheriff add any other thing to the matter
prescribed by the Statute, as to pay such a Sum of money for a Horse, etc. This
condition makes all the Obligation void, for it is taken in another form
(touching the substance of the matter,) then is prescribed by the Statute, but
in Pasche 27. Eliz. in the Kings Bench, in an Action of Debt brought by Sir
William Drury, late Sheriff of Suffolk, upon an Obligation of 20. l. against
A. B. it appeared that the Defendant was solely bound in the same, and with
condition, that one Moore who the Sheriff had arrested upon a Latitat, should
appear in person at the day contained in the Writ, the Defendant pleaded the
Statute, 23. H. 6. and that the obligation was made in other form then is
mentioned in the Statute, whereupon the Plaintiff demurred in Law, and it was
Objected that there were 3. variances from the Statute. (Viz.) one in the
Obligation, and two in the condition. First, in the Obligation, for that there
was but one surety, and the Statute prescribes reasonable surety of sufficient
persons in the Plural number, having sufficient within the said County, etc.
in which case there ought to be two Sureties at the least, and the Plural
number cannot be satisfied with the Singular number, and so contrary to the
words of the Statute. And so was the Opinion of Mountegue Chief Justice of the
common Place in the Case of Dive and Manningham.

Also, in the condition that the Prisoner should appear in person, where the
words of the Statute are, that he should appear (generally) without these
words (in person.)

2. That he should appear at the day, etc. Ad respondendum, where these words
Ad respondendum are more then the Statute prescribes, and therefore the
Obligation is void, etc. but it was resolved by Sir Christopher Wray, Sir
Thomas Gaudy, and all the Court, that the Obligation was not void, by the said
Act.

For to the first; The words reasonable surety of sufficient persons are added
for the surety of the Sheriff, and therefore if he will but take one surety,
be it at his peril, for he shall be amerced if the Defendants appear not; and
therefore the Statute does not make void the Obligation in this Case, for the
same Branch that requires the form, requires also that the Obligation shall be
made to the Sheriff himself, by the name of his Office, and that the
Prisoners should appear, in which clause no mention is made of the sureties,
so as the intent of the Act was, that in so much as it was at the peril of the
Sheriff to leave to his discretion, to take one or more for his indemnity, and
although the sureties have not sufficient within the same County as the Statute
mentions, yet the Obligation is good: For these words of the Act, (as to this
point) are more for council or direction of the Sheriff, then for precept or
constraint to him, and that for the safety of the Sheriff, for if the
Defendant cannot find two sufficient persons, having sufficient within the same
County, the Sheriff is not bound to let him to Bail, and this resolution
agrees with the ancient rule, Quilibet potest reminutiare juri per se
introducto. And as concerning the second Additions to the condition of the said
Obligation, more then is in the Statute.

It was resolved, that true it is there is a Verbal difference of the form
prescribed by the Statute, but not in the substance and effect, for he that is
so letten to Bail, ought to appear in person, for so much is employed in the
words of the Act, (shall appear) and by the common Law, every Tenant or
Defendant ought to appear in propper person, and with this accords Fitz. Na.
br. 25. and he that ought to appear, ought to appear Ad respondend. and parum
differunt quae re concordant and est ipsorum legistlatorum tanquam viva vox
rebus and non verbis legem imponere; vide Dier. 21. Eliz. 364. where the
condition was in the conjunctive (appear and answer) and yet the obligation
good, 27. Eliz. in Darby and Hethcot, if a Jailer or Sheriff for ease or
enlargement of any Prisoner, take promise to save him harmless, that although
the Statute speaks only of Obligations with condition, yet it is an equal
mischief. And Wray Chief Justice said, that the Statute should serve for
small or nothing, if the premises should not be taken to be within the Statute,
and the latter clause is general. (Viz.) If the Sheriff take any Obligation
in the other form, that it shall be void, and within the equity of these
words, (any Obligation,) an assumpsit is comprehended; for the ancient Verses
are, Verba ligant homines, taurorum cornua bones,
Cornu bos capitur, voce ligatur homo.


Quando verba Statuti sunt specialia, ratio autem generalis, generaliter
Statutum est intelligendum: It was said, that the Assumpsit did not bind the
Prisoner at the common Law, because the consideration was against the Law, vide
Dyer. 19. Eliz. Oneleys Case.

Alfridus Denbawds Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 102. In Error.
ONe Jury only appeared at the Assizes to try an Issue in Trespass, a Tales
de circumstantibus is awarded at the Prayer of the Plaintiff; the title of
which, was, Nomina december Talium, and verdict and judgment was given against
the Defendant, who brings Error.

It was Objected, 1. That the judgment was erroneous, for the Title being
Nomina 10. Talium, the Sheriff cannot return 11.

2. Because the Statute speaks with those persons that were before
impannelled, which cannot be satisfied, where one only appears, as the
Statute of Westminster. 2. c. 11. is not satisfied with one Auditor, so of the
Statute of Merton. c 3. of Redisseisin: It was resolved, that the Tales was
well awarded, for the Statute shall be taken beneficially in favor of speedy
Trialls, and the title is the misprision of the Shetiffe, which shall be
amended.

The time of granting the Tales is when so many of the Jurors make default,
that the inquest cannot be taken; if two of the principal pannell appear, and
at the Prayer of the Plaintffe 12. de Circumstant. are returned, and then the
two principalls are withdrawn, now the trial shall be all by the 12. de
circumstant. but the Lord Dyer made a Quaere of that, if one of the Jurors die
before Verdict be given, a Tales shall be granted, he who is merely a Defendant
cannot pray a Tales until default be made by the Plaintiff, the number ought
to be under the number in the principal pannell, except in an appeal, because
there the Defendant may challenge peremptorily: the number shall be diminished
in every new Tales, and they ought to be of the same quality with the former,
as if the principal pannell were Per medietatem linguae, so shall the Tales
be: Justices of Assize shall not award a Tales, de circumstantibus in an Assize
for the Statute of 35. H. 8. c. 6. speaks where the Trial is Habeas corpora,
distringas, or Nisi prius, for an Assize cannot be taken by Nisi prius, but
must be taken in the proper County; and after, by advice of all the Justices of
the common place, and Barons of the Exchequer, the judgment was affirmed.

Humphrey Lofields Case, 10. Jacobi, fol. 106. In debt upon Bond.
D. Leased for a year to H. L. and if the parties shall please to renew the
term at the end of that year, that he shall have for three years, rendering
40 l. per annum, H. L. binds himself to perform Covenants, and fails of
payment of 20 l. at Christmas Quarter, D. brings debt: It was resolved for
the Plaintiff. It was objected against the action.

1. That the reservation was upon a contingency, if the term shall revive.

2. Because the reservation is durante termino praedicto (Viz.) the last term.

3. The reservation shall be taken strictly, because the words of the Lessor.

But it was resolved that the reservation extends to the first year, for the
proper place of a reservation is after the limitation of the estate; as if a
Lease be made with diverse remainders over, reserving Rent, this goes to all;
and although the second term be in contingency, yet the first is certain, and
Termino praedicto, signifies both the terms for it is Nomen collectivum, and
the reservation shall be taken reasonably, according to the intent of the
parties. Tenant in tail of an Acre in borough English, and of another by the
Common Law, by an Ox, dies, having issue two Sons, the service shall not be
increased: And Increase is only between very Lord, and very Tenant, for there
may be an increaser, but not where there is a reservation; or if the Seigniory
be by Deed, and services are reserved within time of memory, for he shall have
no more then he himself reserved: In the Case at Bar in respect the
obligation was forfeited, the Court moved the Plaintiff to take his arrerages,
costs, and damages, with which he was contented, and so no judgment was given.

Arthur Legates Case, in subversion of pestilent Patents of theevish Concealors,
10. Jacobi, fol. 109. in Communi Banco.
THe King, ex certa scientia, etc. grants fifteen Acres as concealed, which
were parcel of a Manor of the profits, whereof the King was answered: Nothing
passes.

1. Resol. If the King were answered of the old Rent of the Manor, and the
Fermors, etc. suffer one to intrude in part, this is not concealed. 2. The
grant is void; for quae quidem, etc. is the suggestion of the party.

2. This is a clause of restraint, and nothing passes which is not concealed.

3. The King did not intend to diminish his Revenue, which will be if the grant
be good.

4. The clause, quae quidem has a double conjunctive, concelata and detenta,
and Land cannot be detained from the King.

3. Ex mero motu, etc. aydeth it not.

4. If the Officers of the King may by matter of Record, have notice of putting
the Land in charge in Court of Record, and do it not, yet this is not
concealed, and if the clause quae quidem be added for more certainty, the grant
shall not be vicious by it, if it be false, as if a Manor be granted, quod
quidem, was in the tenure of I. S. where it was not, this is good: If one
substract, or take the Kings Rents, this is not concealed, for the King may
charge him as Baily, and the Law will make a privity: See the Statute of 4. H.
4 cap. 4. called in the Roll Brangwyn, in English, White Crow. And it was said
that Perpetuities, Monopolies, and Patents of concealment, were borne under
one unfortunate constellation, for as soon as they came in question, judgment
was ever given against them, and none ever for them, and they have all two
inseparable qualities (Viz.) to be troublesome and fruitless.

Robert Pilfolds Case, 10. Jacobi, fol. 115.
THe Plaintiff in trespass, counts to damages of 40 l. and at the Nisi prius,
the Jury assessed for damages 49 l. and 20 s. costs, at the day in bank, he
released 9 l. parcel of the damages, and had judgment of 40 l. and 10 l. for
costs de incremento, the defendant brings error, because the damages and costs
surmount the sum in the Count; but judgment was affirmed; for in real
actions before the Statute of Gloucester, 6. E. 1. cap. 1. no damages were
recoverable, but in personal actions and mixed they were, and by that Statute a
man shall have costs in all cases where he recovers damages (Viz.) before, or
by the same Statute; therefore if after this damages are given where they were
not at the Common Law, costs shall not be recovered, as in a Quare impedit, but
if a Statute after this give double or treble damages, where damages and costs
were by the common Law; there the Plaintiff shall recover the damages
increased, and costs also; but in waste against tenant for life, costs shall
not be recovered, for although that this Statute was at the same Parliament,
yet it was an act of Creation, and therefore no costs: And true it is, that
damages include costs, in a general sense, but in the count it is taken for
damages, before the action brought in a relative signification; therefore
expensae litis may be added to it; although he count not of them, as a man
shall do in real actions without counting of them, because he shall recover
them pending the Writ, In entry sur disseisin, the Plaintiff shall recover
damages from the disseisin to the Writ of Inquiry, etc. and if the issue be
tryable by verdict, etc. to the verdict, but in a Praecipe of Rent of his own
possession he shall recover all arreares to the judgment: Judgment affirmed
by all.

Cheyneyes Case, 10. Jacobi, fol. 118.
IN a Valor maritagij, issue is joined upon the tenure, and found for the
Plaintiff, but the Jury did not inquire of the value: Adjudged the verdict is
insufficient, and shall not be supplied by a Writ of Inquiry.

1. In this Writ three things are to be recovered, the value, damages, and
costs, and although the issue be joined upon the tenure; yet as a consequent
upon the issue, and their charge they ought to inqure of the value, if they
find for the Plaintiff, as in an Assize, if issue be joined upon a release,
and found for the Plaintiff, yet the recognitors must inquire of the seisin
and disseisin, and this defect shall not be supplied with a Writ of inquiry,
because then the Defendant would be prevented of his Writ of attaint: But if
the Court ought to inquire of things whereof no attaint lies, this being but
of Office, it may be supplied by a Writ of inquiry, as the four points in a
Quare impedit (Viz. De plenitudine, ex cujus praesentatione, si tempus semestre
transierit, and the value of the Church per annum: and in the case at Bar by
the rule of the Court, a new Venire facias was awarded.

The Case of the Mayor and Burgesses of Lynn Regis, touching misnaming of
Corporations, 11. Jacobi, fol. 122. Communi Banco.
H. 8. in the 29. year of his Reign, did incorporate that Town by the name
of Majoris and Burgensium burgi domini Regis de Lynn Regis, and one made an
Obligation to them by the name of Mayor and Burgesses of Lynn Regis, omitting
these words, Burgi Regis; this is good, because it is the same name in
substance, and does not vary in material words, and though it be not Idem
nomen sillabis, yet it is Re and sensu; for Burgesses that implies it is a
Borough, for Buroughs and Burgesses are conjugata, and by Lynn Regis, it
appears that it is Burgus suus (i.) Regis, a fortiori, because there is no
other Corporation of the same name. Apices juris, non sunt jura; there may be a
difference between ancient Corporations, and new; for ancient Corporations may
by usage have several names; and the Mayor and Burgesses (notwithstanding Non
est factum, pleaded) had judgment to recover.

William Cluns Case, 11. Jacobi, fol. 127. Banco Regis.
A Lease for years, if the Lessor should so long live, rendering Rent at the
four Feasts, or within thirteen weeks after, after one of the Feasts the
Lessor dies, and before the thirteen weeks be past, the Executor brings debt
against the Lessee, and the Defendant demurreth upon the Count, and it was
adjudged a good demurrer, and that the action did not lie.

1. Because the disjunandive is added for the benefit of the Lessee; and the
first day was but for voluntary payment, but the legal time of payment was the
end of the thirteen weeks, before which when the Lessor dies, the Lessee is
discharged by act of God for that Quarter; if Lessee before the day, pay the
Rent, this is voluntary and not satisfactory, but it is good to give seisin; if
payment be in the morning, and the Lessor dies at noon, this is voluntary and
satisfactory against the heir, but not against the King: Payment the last
instant of the day is satisfactory, and after the day it is coercive and
satisfactory.

2. When the first day is past, it is as if the Rent had been only reserved
the second day, for the election is good.

3. The rent is to he paid out of the profits of the Land; Ergo, in regard of
time it shall not be apportioned; and if the Lessor dye betwixt the first day
and the last day, his heir, and not the Executor shall have the rent, because
it was not then due; if a man lease for years, rendering Rent at M. or within a
month after, with a condition of re-entry, and the Lessee tenders it at the
last instant of M. the Lessor shall not re-enter upon demand the last day of
the month, because the Lessee had liberty to pay it then; and the difference
was taken betwixt the said disjunctive Reservation, and when the reservation is
at a certain Feast, and a condition is added, that if it be arrere by the
space of a month after the Feast, that then the Lessor, etc. there the Lessee
for salvation of his Lease, cannot tender it at the last instant of the Feast,
because he had no such liberty as in the other Case: A Lease for years
rendering Rent at M. or within twelve days after, upon condition to re-enter if
it be arreare by the space of twelve days after any of the said Feasts, or
days, the Lessee shall have twenty four days in safeguard of his Lease after
the Feast of M. and in the Case at Bar judgment given, Quod quaerens nil
capiat per billam.

James Osbornes Case, 11. Jacobi, fol. 130. Banco Regis.
IN an action upon the Case, for that the Plaintiff had bought of the
Defendant diverse goods, which he refused to deliver, whereof one was unum
fulchrum lecti, Anglice, a Field Bedstead with a Testerne, and Curtains of
Say, the Plaintiff recovers, and damages assessed entirely, where none ought
to be given for the Testerne, etc. for Fulchrum signifies a Bedstead only;
upon error brought therefore, judgment was affirmed, for one thing only is
here put in issue, for the other things are not alleged Positive, sed
expositive, and are nugation, but when two things are put in issue, or Oblique,
inquired of by the Jury, there it is not good; and it shall not be intended
that damages were given for that only for which the action was brought, but in
an action upon the Case for words spoken at one time, whereof some are
actionable and some not, there damages may be assessed entirely, and shall be
intended to be given for the words actionable only.

1. Because the Plaintiff must declare as the words were.

2. Because the words not actionable aggravate the damages, otherwise if spoken
at several times; but here damages shall be intended to be for that which is
actionable only, and the rest, as if never alleged: and in Writs or Pleas
English words are not admitted by 36. E. 3. cap. 15. except they be parcel of
a name, as Jo. in the Hall. 2. words which pass under the name of Latin, are,
1. Good Grammatical Latin. 2. Words significant in Law, and not in Grammar.
3. Incongruous Latin, which does not vitiate a Plea, or Grant, nor judicial
Writ. 4. Words insensible having no countenance of Latin, and are rejected;
but fained words as Velnetum; Stapedia, etc. are good.


Read, and Redmans Case, 10. Jacobi, fol. 134.
THe Defendant in debt brought by two Executors, pleads the death of him who
was summoned and severed.

Resolved, The Writ shall not abate; if two purchase an original real action,
and one dies pending the Writ, this shall abate in all, as in case of
joyntenants, or parceners, where one dies having issue or no issue, because
that she may have a Writ for the whole, and shall not recover a moity, and one
shall not recover upon a false real Writ, or unapt for his Case, in respect
he may have an apt Writ, although it happen after by act of God; but if two
purchase a judicial Writ. and one is summoned, and severed, and dies without
issue, the Writ shall not abate; the same law where jointenants, but if the
Coparcener had issue, then it shall abate: If one of the Plaintiffs after
summons and severance marryeth, this shall not abate the Writ. In personal and
mixed actions, although an entire Chattell be demanded, the death of one after
summons and severance does not abate the Writ; as in a Writ of ward of the
body: In a Quare impedit without severance, etc. If one dye the Writ shall not
abate, because thereby the other should be dis-inherited, as upon plenarty and
six months passed; but without question, if one of the Plaintiffes in a Quare
impedit be severed and dye, the Writ shall not abate; where the Plaintiffes are
only to discharge themselves, the Writ shall not abate by the death of one of
the Plaintiffs or Defendants, and therefore there the Non-suite of one, is not
the Non-suite of the other; but otherwise it is in a Writ of Error: Note,
summons and severance is before appearance, and Non-suite after appearance, where
the severance is without Process.

Richard Smiths Case, 10. Jacobi, fol. 135.
R. S. brings a Quare impedit praesentare ad medietatem Ecclesiae, and adjudged
the Writ was good. 1. None shall have such a Quare impedit, but when there are
two several Patrons: And 2. Incumbents of the Church; therefore if two present
by turn the Quare impedit must be praesentare ad Ecclesiam: when the Register
gives a Writ for the whole, this is a good warrant to bring it of any part, if
the case will warrant it; but it seemed to the Chief Justice that in the Case
at Bar, the Writ might have been ^ood, Praesentare ad Ecclesiam, for as to him
it is one Church.

Cases upon the Commissions of Sewers, 7. Jacobi.
The Case of Chester Mill upon the River of Dee, fol. 137.
ADjudged that the Statute of Magna Charta omnes Kidelli deponantur, extends
only to open Wears for taking of Fish; and that Commissioners of Sewers cannot
subvert a Causey, etc. erected before the time of E. 1. but by the S^atutes of
25. E 3. cap. 4. and 1. H. 4. cap. 12. if they be inhaunced, they ought to be
amended by abatement of the inhauncement; and the Causey in question was
erected before the time of E. 1. and never since inhaunced, and therefore out
of all the said Statutes.

Keighleys Case, 7. Jacobi, Communi Banco, fol. 139.
IT was Resolved, that if one be bound by prescription to keep a Wall contra
fluxum maris, and the wall is subverted by a sudden inundation of waters,
salt or sweet, by the Statute of 23. H. 8. cap. 5. the Commissioners have power
to tax all equally who have damage by such surrounding, for no default was in
the party; so if the wall be in inevitable danger, but if it be through his
neglect, each one may have his action upon the Case against him, and if the
danger be not inevitable, he only shall be charged.

2. Resol. By the said Statute, the Commissioners are not bound to observe the
customs of Romney Marsh, but where such customs are in any places within
their Commission.

3. According to your wisdoms and discretions in the said Act are to be
interpreted according to law and Justice, for every Judge or Commissioner ought
to have duos sales, salem sapientiae ne sit insipidus, and salem conscientiae
ne sit diabolus: and discretion is scire per legem quid sit justum: and every
of their Ordinances ought to consist upon four causes.

1. The material cause, and that is the substance. 2. The formal cause, and
that is the manner. 3. The efficient cause, that is their authority. 4. The
final cause, and that is for the public good.
The Case of the Isle of Elie, 7. Jacobi. fol. 141.
THe Commissioners of Sewers decreed that a new River shall be cut out of Owse,
seven miles within the maine soil of the Isle, and for the doing thereof, and
for the effecting thereof, taxed diverse Towns in the County of C. out of the
Isle generally; that is, so much upon every Town. 2. questions.

1. If the Commissioners have power to make such a new River? 2. If such a
general tax be lawful?
By the Common Law the King ought to defend the Realm, as well against the
Sea, as Enemies, and to provide that the Subjects may have safe passage over
Bridges, and high ways, and therefore if the Walls of the Sea, or Gutters be
not scoured, he ought to award a Commission, to inquire of such defaults as by
the Register amongst the Commissions of Oyer and Terminer. See there a
president, 44. E. 3. for reparation of ancient Sewers, etc. or making them new,
but the Statute of 6. H. 6. cap. 5. and diverse others, for making new Walls,
etc. were only temporary, and that power is omitted in the Act of 23. H. 8. c.
5. which is made perpetual by 3. E. 6. cap. 8. and so the Commission in this
point insueth the Commission which was at the Common Law: Therefore it was
resolved, that the Commissioners in this Case could not make the said new
River, because their Commission extends only to the reparation and new making
of ancient Walls, Gutters, etc. And it would be hard to give power to
Commissioners to try new inventions to charge the Country, which may never
take effect: And it appears by the Register, 252. that a new River ought not
to be made, and the old stopped, without an Ad quod damnum, and the Kings
license; yet when a new Sewer is to be made, any small alteration for the
public good of such a place may be made; so of an ancient Wall against the
rage of the water, in case of inevitable necessity, but if by timely reparation
that peril may be avoided, no other ought to be made: Si assuetis mederi
possis nova non sunt tentanda: but if new inventions appear profitable,
contribution must be voluntary, and not by compulsion; and in 3. Jacobi Popham,
Chapter Justice preferred a Bill in Parliament to make a new River in that Isle,
but it was rejected.

2. Resolved, None ought to be taxed, but he who may have damage by the
default, or profit by the reformation; also the assessement must be according
to the quantity of their Lands, and number of Acres, and according to the rate
of every man's profit and portion, and the taxation in general was not
warranted, but it ought to have been in particular upon every owner or
possessor, observing the said qualities. Some Statutes of Sewers are in
defendendo and reparando Wallias, etc. Some in destruendo and amovendo
nocumenta, and some touching both.

In the Court of Wards.
Scroops Case, 10. Jacobi, fol. 143.
N. S. made a Feoffment to diverse uses, with power of revocation by Indenture,
and after by another Indenture (observing all incident circumstances
prescribed) the Feoffor covenanteth to stand seized to several other uses.

1. Resol. This inureth to a revocation.

2. To raise new uses: And so it was resolved in the Kings Bench, between
Frampton and Frampton, Tr 2. Jacobi. Quia non refert an quis intentionem suam
declaret verbis, an rebus ipsis vel factis, and when he limits new uses, he
signifies his purpose to determine the uses before.

The End of the Tenth Book.
THE ELEAVENTH BOOK.
The Lord de la Wares Case, 39. Eliz. in Parliament, fol. 1.
THOMAS la Ware great Grandfather of the now Lord in 3. H. 8. was summoned to
the Parliament by Writ, and by 3. E. 6. it was enacted, that William the Father
of the now Lord Thomas, shall be disabled to claim any dignity, during his
life, notwithstanding W. was called to Parliament by Q. Elizabeth, and sat as
Puisne Lord, and dyed, and Thomas now Lord, sued in Parliament to the Q. to be
restored to the place of his Great-Grandfather, that is, betwixt the Lord
Barkly, and the Lord Willoughby of Eresby; and resolved, that he should be
restored, for his Fathers disability was not absolute by attainder, but only
temporary and personal, during his life, and the acceptance of the new Dignity
shall not hurt the Petitioner, the Father being then disabled, and an Esquire
only, so that when the old and new Dignity descend together, the old shall be
preferred: which resolutions by the Judges, was well approved of by the Lords
Committees, and after confirmed by the Queen.

Auditor Curles Case, 7. Jacobi. fol. 2.
Queen Elizabeth grants Officium unius Auditorum Curiae Wardorum, to W. T. and
W. C. for life; and eorum diutius viventi, the K. grants it in reversion to I.
C. and I. T. I. C. dies, the K. grants it in reversion to R. P. W. T. dies.

1. Resolved, the grant of the Office Vnjus auditorum, etc. is good to two, and
the survivor of them, for, 32. H. 8. c. 46. makes the two Auditors one
Officer, and the word Vnjus is not numerative, but denotes the unity of the
Office.

2. In such a grant the words and eorum diutius viventi, are not void, for
otherwise by the death of one of them, the interest of both would be ended; but
now the survivor remains auditor, and another shall be added to him, and till
another is added to him, his voice in Court is suspended, because by the
Statute there must be two, so if the K. grant by a Patent to one, and by
another to another, this is good, and until the second is added the first has
no voice in Court.

3. The Nomination of Auditors ought to be under the Great Seal.

4. This Office cannot be granted in reversion.

1. Because it is judicial, and one cannot be Judge in futuro, and perhaps he
was sufficient at the time of the grant, but not when it takes effect.

2. Although it be in part judicial, and in part ministerial, yet it is
entire, and although ministerial Offices may be granted in futuro, yet this
cannot, because it is inseparably judicial also, for the K. cannot grant the
judicial part to one or two, and the ministerial to others.

3. If the grant be good, as to the ministerial part yet it shall not take
effect now, because one of the ancient Officers is living, and if he should
exercise the ministerial part, with the survivor, there would be three Offices.

5. He who surviveth remains Auditor, yet had no voice in Court, until the
King add another to him.

6. The grant to P. is void.

1. Because in reversion.

2. Because it recites a void grant to I. C. and I. T. as good, and so the K.
is deceived in his grant.

Sir John Heydons Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 5.
SIr J. H. brings trespass against F. C. T. C. and I. C. F. C. appears,
against whom the Plaintiff declares, with Simul cum, etc. who pleads Non
culp. so does T. C. which issues were tried severally, and the issue between
the Plaintiff and F. C. was first tried, and damages assessed to 200. l. and
the other against T. C. 50. l. I. C. appears, and confesses the Action, a
Writ of inquiry of damages is awarded, but none issued, judgment for the
Plaintiff, and affirmed in Error.

1. Resolved, in trespass against diverse who plead Non cul. or several Pleas
which are found in all for the Plaintiff, damages shall not be assessed
severally, although one did more wrong then another, because the trespass is
entire, and the Act of one, is the Act of all, but if they be found guilty at
several times, they may, and if the Plaintiff confess the trespass to be at
several times, the Writ shall abate.

2. If two trespassors plead severally, both shall be bound with the damages
taxed by the first Jury, and the other shall have an attaint although he be a
Stranger to the issue, because he is privy to the charge; if one of them after
appearance make default, a Writ of inquiry shall be awarded to save a
discontinuance, but none shall issue, because he shall be contributory to the
damages taxed by the Jury, who tried the other issue, and the other shall not
be charged in damages assessed, upon a Writ whereupon he can have no attaint,
but if the other issue be found against the Plaintiff, then it shall issue.

3. Although there was a discontinuance against I. C. because in the common
place, where the Action was brought, there is no continuance after a Writ of
inquiry, (otherwise it is in the Kings Bench) yet it is aided by the Statute of
32. H. 8. c. 30.

4. If two Juries give a Verdict at one time the Plaintiff shall have
judgment, De melioribus damnis, if he will; but fiat nisi unica executio, in
trespass against diverse who plead several pleas triable by the same Jury, if
the Jury sever the damages, all is vicious.

Priddle and Nappers Case, 10. Jacobi. fol. 8.
THe Plaintiff in a prohibition declares, that the Prior of M. was seized of
22. acres, and of a rectory time out of mind, etc. until the dissolution, etc.
and so, for all that time held them discharged of Tithes, and conveys the said
22. acres from the King, to himself, and that the Defendant Proprietarius
rectoriae praedict. sued the Plaintiff for Tithes, the Defendant traverseth
the prescription of discharge; the Jury found that the Prior, time out of, etc.
was seized of the said 22. acres, and of the advowson of the Rectory, and did
appropriate it by License, 20. H. 8. the Incumbent then being living, who
dies, and that the Prior held it united to the dissolution: judgment for the
Plaintiff.

1. Resolved, although that every Church parochial is supposed to be
presentative, yet the Plaintiff may plead, that the Prior, etc. time out of,
etc. were Rectors of it, for this amounts to so much, that it was impropriated,
but he needs not show how, because before time of memory, but the conclusion of
the prescription of unity. Viz. Ratione cujus, he was discharged of tithes, was
not good, for Land is not discharged of Tithes by unity, but of payment of
them, notwithstanding the mistaking of the conclusion does not vitiate the
Count when the cause to have a prohibition, is good.

2. The plea of the Defendant to have a prohibition, is not good, because he
traverseth the conclusion, Viz. The prescription of discharge, where he ought
to traverse the prescription of unity, for the conclusion is not traversable,
and because it is matter in Law.

3. The issue is not well joined.

1. The matter of discharge, is by reason of discharge by the Statute, and the
issue is by discharge at the common Law.

2. In every issue there must be an affirmative and a negative, but here is no
affirmative, for the conclusion is no affirmative, but an inference.

4. The impropriation is sufficient, although the License were general, and
the incumbent living, for it shall be construed in such a special sense, that
it may take effect, and the License is always general, for the incumbent may
dye or resign, before the impropriation.

5. Admitting the impropriation void it had not been made good by 35. Eliz. c.
3. for this settles in the K. all possessions of Abbeys with qualification,
notwithstanding any defect in any surrender, etc. which intitleth the K. and
this defect is not within this qualification, but if the impropriation had been
good by reputation, and so used, this had been given by the Statutes of 27.
and 31. H. 8.

6. If the Jury found matter to bar the Plaintiff, this is not to be
regarded, because an attaint lies not, nor the Witnesses punished for perjury,
that matter not being material, to the issue.

7. Resolved, that perpetual unity until the dissolution is by the Statute,
Prima facie, a discharge of payment of Tithes, except that the Fermors have
paid Tithes, and such an unity ought to be Justa, aequalis, that is, fee in
one, and other, Perpetua and libera, but if the Abbey were founded within time
of memory, he cannot at all, and here it appears that the impropriation was
made in 20. H. 8. so that it appears to the Court, that before that the 20.
acres were charged with Tithes, for of common right all Lands ought to pay
Tithes; therefore the Chief Justice concluded, that the said 20. acres (as
this Case is) were chargeable with Tithes, but in regard the information is
good, and the plea Pro consultatione habenda, altogether insufficient, and the
Verdict impertinent to the issue, they would not grant a consultation.

Doctor Grants Case, 11. Jacobi. Communi Banco. fol. 15. In a prohibition.
1. REsolved, it is a good prescription that every Inhabitant in a Parish, have
paid 2. s. in the pound, of the value of their houses, per annum, in Lieu of
Tithes, because it may have a lawful comencement, for it may be, that this was
so time out of mind for the Lands, whereupon the Houses were built, as a Modus
decimandi.

2. That the Parson may sue for it in the Court Christian, for that it is in
the nature of Tithes; and every ancient City and Borough, had for the most part
such a custom for their Houses, for the maintenance of their Parson, and
obvensions include oblations, rents, or other revennues, and after, a
consultation was granted.

Sir Henry Nevills Case, 11. Jacobi. fol. 17.
IT was resolved, that a customary Manor may be holden of another Manor, and
there may be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant of it, and such a customary Lord may hold
Courts, and grant Coppies, and such a Manor shall pass by surrender and
admittance, and fines shall be paid upon alienation or descent, and if it be
forfeited, the Lord shall have the services as anexed to the Manor, so if
Tenant at will, etc. admit Copyholders reserving rent, this shall go with the
Manor, after the will determined; and so note, a difference between
reservations at the common Law, and by the custom of the Manor. And it was
said, that the Manor of Aylesham in Norfolk, is holden by Copy, and others in
diverse other places: And judgment was affirmed in Error.

Doctor Ayrayes Case, 11. Jacobi. fol. 18.
14. E 3. the K. Lycensed R. de E. to Found in Oxford a Hall, sub nomine aulae
Scholarium Reginae de Oxonio, in the exemplification 8. Jac. it was, Sub nomine
aulae Reginae de Oxonio, they present to the Church by the name of praeposit.
Coll. Reginae in Vniversitat, Oxonio and soci^r and Scholar. ejusdem, the
incumbent devises the Rectory, and they by the name of praeposit. Socior and
Scholar Aulae vel Collegij reginae in Vniversitate Oxonii, confirm the demise;
and notwithstanding these variances it was adjudged, that as well the
confirmation as the presentation was good; and the sole doubtful variance is,
that it was Aulae Reginae, where it ought to be Aulae Scholarium Reginae, but
good, for the true name of the College is so, for the word Scholarium is not
necessary, but once, and if it be taken in construction to come after Aulae,
the provost will be the sole Corporation, by the name of praeposit. Aulae
Scholar. reginae, Ergo, it does precede in good construction. Also, the Founder
named it so, and so it has been always taken, and if there be a small
variance, this is not to the purpose, if it be so described that another cannot
be meant, as a gift Omnibusfilijs I.S. or filiae I.S. when there is but one, or
if Richerus Abbot of W. grant by the name of Richardus; Nil facit error nominis
cum de corpore constat, and this was the ancient and constant Opinion in Case
of Corporations. See the Case of the Major and Burgesses of Lin, in the tenth
Book.

Henry Harpurs Case, 12. Jacobi, fol. 23.
IN ejectione firm upon a Lease to J. W. in unam capellam, and Land in W. in
the Parish of B. and Tithes, without showing the certainty of them, the Visne
was from B. the Case was. Sir H. B. seized of G. of the value of 30 l. per
annum, and of N. of the annual value of 18 l. in capite, covenanted to stand
seized to the use of him and his Wife in tail, with remainders in tail, the
reversion to himself, and after purchases Lands in Socage, and devises them
to be sold by his Executors, the matter in Law resolved, but no judgment
given, because diverse exceptions taken, etc.

1. Resol. That if tenant of the King in capite conveyes his Land to one of the
uses, etc. and after purchase Socage, he may devise all the Socage.

2. A seck revertion upon an estate tail shall hinder the devise of Socage
Land for a third part.

3. Although the reversion in fee continue in him, yet he may devise two parts
of the Socage, and all if he had granted the reversion over.

4. Although he had exercised his power in making a Jointure of more then two
parts, yet if the reversion in fee had not hindered, he might have devised all
the Socage purchased after, howsoever the devise is good for two parts; for the
reasons reported in Loveyes Case.

5. Although the consideration of advancing his Wife and their issues, extends
not to the Brothers, yet the use is well raised to them, because the Law
implies a consideration, and it is not to the purpose that they are found
Brothers, because it appears in the Deed.

6. For the Manor of G. the estate tail vanishes by the death of Sir H.
without issue male, and therefore that estate is no cause to restrain the
devise for any part, but the reversion in fee is for a third part: So resolved
that the Plaintiff shall have judgment for two parts. Exceptions to the count
and Visne.

1. The Ejectione firmae is of Tithes, without showing the kinds of them; Ergo,
not good, for a certain judgment and execution cannot be made. 2. It may be
it is in a modus decimandi, for which an Ejectione firmae lies not.

2. Capella is demanded, which ought to be demanded by the name of a house.

3. The Venire facias is not well awarded, for it appears that there are two
B. one a Ville, the other a Parish, and W. a Ville in the Parish of B. and the
Tithes are alleged to be in W. in parochia de B. so the Visne must be out of
B. and W. because there is the most certainty; so that by reason of these
exceptions, no Judgment was entered, but it was said that the Court of Wards,
where a Bill depends for this matter, will take order for the possession
accordingly.

Henry Pigots Case, 12. Jacobi, fol. 26.
B. W. brings debt upon Obligation made to him when he was Sheriff, omitting
the name of his Office, but it was after interlined by a stranger, the
Defendant pleads Non est factum, without Oyer of the Deed, and judgment was
given for the Plaintiff.

1. When a Deed is rased, the Obligor may plead Non est factum.

2. If a Deed be rased by the Obligee himself in a place not material, it is
void, but not if done by a stranger, except in a place material, and here it
was in a place not material, because it appears not to the Court that he was
Sheriff. If a Deed consist of diverse parts, whereof one does not depend upon
the other, and some of them are against Law, the Deed is good in part, but if
any of them be rased it is void in all, so if the Seal of one be debrused, all
is void: See Matthewsons Case in the fifth Book.

Alexander Powlters Case, 12. Jacobi, fol. 29. Indictment.
A. P. felleo animo, burned a House in New Market, whereby the greatest part of
that Town was burned.

Resol. He shall not have his Clergy, for this was felony by the Common Law,
and so heinous, that he was not replevishable, no more then for Treason, as
appears by Westminst. 1, cap. 15. but he shall have his Clergy at the Common
Law; for impediments to have Clergy, were first disability to be a member of
holy Church, as a blind man, or woman.

2. Heresy.

3. Infidelity, as a Saracen or Jew, but a man excommunicated, or outlawed,
shall have it.

5. Confession before the Statute of Articuli Cleri, cap. 15. because he cannot
make his purgation.

6. High Treason, or petty Treason before 25. E. 3. cap. 4. So of Sacrilege,
and of insidiatores viarum, and depopulatores agrorum: See the Statute of 4. H.
4. cap. 2. but the Statute of 23. H. 8. cap. 1. takes away Clergy where one is
found guilty of burning of Houses, but that is to be intended by verdict or
confession; for if he stand mute, or challenge more then he ought, or be
outlawed, these are out of the Statute, or if he commit Burglary, and not
Robbery, he shall have his Clergy; by 25. H. 8. cap. 3. he who is found guilty
of any of the said offenses shall loose his Clergy; and if he stand mute, or
challenge above his number, but that extends to the principal only in case of
indictment, and not to the accessory before the fact, nor to appeals or
approvements, nor to outlary; but these two Statutes were taken away by 1. E.
6. cap. 12. but 25. H. 8. was revived by 5. and 6. E. 6. cap. 10.

Obj. That the said Statute was not revived in all, but as to stealing of Goods
in one County, and flying into another, for so is the style of the Act.

2. If it be revived, this takes not away Clergy, where one is found guilty by
Verdict; but the Statute of 23. H. 8. which is not revived. But it was Re^olved
that the entire Act is revived.

1. Although the Statute of 5. E. 6. recites these offenses solely, and
reviveth the Act as to Clergy, touching such offenses, that shall be intended
such in mischeife; so Westminster, 2. cap. 5. is expounded touching Infants
having advowsons, whether they be in ward or not; and the style is not to the
purpose, for many Statutes are of greater extent then the style, as 27. H. 8.
of uses concerning Joyntures; yet the preamble is of transferring uses into
possession, also otherwise these words and every clause, etc. shall be
surplusage, if it extend not to all the Act, for there is but one clause in it
which concerns the offenses in 5. and 6. E. 6. also it is that every Article
concerning Clergy as to such offenses shall be revived, and there is but one
which concerns these offenses; and many times penal Statutes are taken by
Equity, as 8. H. 6. cap. 12. ordains that the imbezelling, or withdrawing a
Record, whereby a Judgment may be reversed, shall be Felony, and by Equity,
making of a badd Judgment good, is Felony; so 25. E. 3. for killing of a
Master, extends to the Mistress.

2. 25. H. 8. takes away Clergy, where one is found guilty by Verdict; because
it takes away if he stand mute, or challenge, etc. in like manner as if he were
guilty after the Laws of the Land, which are affirmative words: And 4. and 5.
Phil. and Mary, cap. 4. takes away Clergy from the accessory before, which they
would not have done if they had not thought that it was taken away from the
principal by the other Act. By 18. Eliz. cap. 7. Clergy is taken away in case
of Burglary, where he is found guilty by Verdict, confession, or Outlary; but
if he be indicted at the Common Law, and stand mute, or challenge over, etc. he
shall have it, and not if he be indicted by 23. H. 8. or 5. E. 6. of Burglary,
and put them who were in the House in fear with Robbery, or upon 1. E. 6.
without Robbery: 4. and 5. Phil. and Mary, takes away Clergy where one is
accessory before to a Robbery in a dwelling House; Ergo, before that such an
accessory shall have it: Breaking of a House in the night without Robbery, is
no Burglarie, and if he does robb he shall have his Clergy, if none were put in
fear, or that any of the Family (and not a Stranger) be not in another part of
the House; but this was before 39. Eliz. cap. 15. whereby clergy is taken away
without putting any fear, if he rob any man of above the value of five
shillings.

Accessory before in robbing a House in the day is ousted of Clergy by 4. and
5. Phi^. and Mary. Accessory in robbing a Booth in the night or day, or out
House upon 39. Eliz. shall have his Clergy: Nota, Although a Statute takes away
Clergy from the principal, yet the accessory before or after, shall have it;
and where by statute for any offense a man is ousted of his Clergy, the
indictment must contain the offense, with the circumstances in the Statute:
Dyer, 99. and 183. And A. P. was ordered to be hanged in Chains, etc.

Metcalfs Case, 12. Jacobi, fol. 38. In Account.
Judgment is given against M. Quod computet and ideo in misericordia quia
prius non computavit; and before final Judgment, Error is brought.

1. Resol. It lies not: 1. Because the Writ of Error says, Si juditium inde
redditum sit, which shall be intended of the principal Judgment, as the Feast
of St. M. shall be intended the principal Feast, and the Feme shall be
received upon default of her Baron after judgment of admeasurement before the
principal judgment.

2. It shall be intended an entire judgment, therefore in an action against
two, if one plead to the issue, and the other confesses, and judgment given
against him, he shall not have error before the Plea determined against the
other, for otherwise there would be a failer of right: for the Kings Bench
cannot proceed upon the Record, nor the Common place, because it is removed.

3. The first judgment is not ad grave damnum, for by that he loses nothing,
but judgment of the arrearages and damages is the end of the original.

4. This is not properly a Judgment, but an Award of the Court, as ouster of
aid, in partitione facienda, an awarde quod partitio fiat, etc. which are but
interlocutory, and not definitive.

5. They have day by the Roll until the last judgment; but if a Felon dye
after the exigent awarded, and before attainder, a Writ of Error lies for
necessity, for otherwise his goods are forfeited by awarding of the exigent
without remedy; if diverse are sued by several Praecipes, and Judgment given
against one, he shall have error before judgment given against the other, and
if error be in the original, the tenor only shall be certified, for otherwise
the Court cannot proceed against the others.

2. It was Resolved, That the Record is not removed, because until final
Judgment be given, the Chief Justice of the Common place has no authority to
send it, and they may proceed, notwithstanding the Roll be marked Mittitur.

Richard Godfreys Case, 12. Jacobi. fol. 42.
TWelve chief pledges according to the custom of the Manor, to present at
the Leet that every one of themselves ought to pay for themselves 10 s. pro
certo letae, the Stewart imposes a Fine of 6 l. upon them, the Lord
distreineth for the Fine, and certainty of Leet, one of the pledges brings
Replevin, and judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

1. Resol. The Fine is not well assessed, for it ought to be several, and not
joint as it is, because the offense is several, and although that the offense
be joint, yet the Fine shall be several as in disseisin and trespass: But for
the incertainty of the persons and infiniteness of the number many may be
fined together, as a Town for the escape of a Felon; and the reasonableness
and excessivenesse of the Fine shall be determined by the Judges: Excessus in
re qualibet jure reprobatur communi, as excessive distress, excessive aid,
and excessive amerciament, are against the Common Law.

2. If the Fine be imposed erroneously, it may be avoided by Plea, for he had
no other remedy.

3. The Lord cannot distraine, pro certo Letae, without prescription, because
it is against common right, but he may for a Fine or amercement; but for an
amercement in a Court Baron the Lord must prescribe; a Fine because it is
assessed by the Court, needs not to be affered, but an amercement must be
affered by the Country.

4, Admitting that he may distraine pro certo Letae, he shall have a return,
although he had not cause to distraine for the Fine, for where one brings an
Action for two things, and it will not lie for one of them, it shall abate
only for that if he cannot have a better action for it, but if he may it shall
abate for the whole; as in a Formedon of Land, and of an advowson, the Writ
shall stand for the Land; so if a man avow for diverse Rents arreare, and it
appears that parcel is not yet due, yet the avowry is good for the residue;
but if a man bring a Writ of Entry in nature of an Assize of two Acres, where
it appears that for one Acre he ought to have a Writ of Entry in the per,
there all shall abate, for this extends not to the action, but to the Writ
only.

Richard Lifords Case, 12. Jacobi, fol, 46.
IN trespass the Defendant pleads that J. L. was seized in fee, and demised to
T. S. and M. P. (excepting Trees above twenty one years growth) if not decayed
for their lives, and covenanted to stand seized de tenementis predictis cum
pertinentijs superius dimissis, to the use of R. L. in tail, etc. and the
Defendant as Servant to the said R. L. entered and sold Trees; and Judgment
was given against the Plaintiff.

1. Resol. That the Trees notwithstanding the exception, remain parcel of the
inheritance, and are not Chattels, but shall descend to the Heir, for the Law
does not favor severance of the Trees from the Land, therefore if one bargain
and sell Land, upon which there are Trees, they shall not pass without
inrolement.

2. If there had not been such an exception, the general interest of them is
in the Lessor; and the Lessee had but a particular interest in them, and the
Lessor may sell them without license of the Lessee, to take effect after the
Lease determined, and tithes shall not be paid for them because they are
parcel of the inheritance: 2. By the exception of them, the soil is not
excepted, but only so much as sustaineth the Tree, and if he by license of the
lessee root them up, the lessee shall have the soil, but by exception of Wood,
the Land it self is excepted; if an Acre, or an advowson be severed from the
Manor by exception upon a Lease for life, it shall not be parcel of the
Manor again; otherwise of trees for they were not severed in facto, because
they grow out of the Land.

3. A thing in possession cannot be parcel of a reversion upon an estate for
life, but Trees which grow out of the Land, and Fish or Deer in the Land may,
and shall pass with it.

4. In this Case by grant of the reversion generally, or of the Tenements the
Trees pass, for the inheritance of all the Land passes, and thereby the Trees
annexed to it; the disseisee by his entry shall have the Corn upon the ground,
as well as the Grass, by relation of continuance of possession, but this
relation is not of effect to have a trespass against any, but the first
disseisor; for in fictione juris semper aequitas existit, and the emblements
shall be recovered in damages.

5. In the Case at Bar by exception of the Trees power is reserved to the
lessor, or his servants, to enter and show the Trees to the Vendee: Cuicunque
aliquis quid concedit, concedere videtur and id, etc.

6. The plea in Bar is insufficient, for he shows that there was another
joyntenant for life not named in the Writ, and demands Judgment if action
which is an unapt conclusion.

2. The Plea is double, one to the Writ, another to the Action.

3. He pleads the entry of the lessees for life, which is surplusage.

4. He averreth not that the Trees which were sold were nor Dotards which are
excluded out of the exception, but that they, de jure pertinebant to R. L.
which is not formal: but upon all the matter there appeared sufficient cause
to give Judgment against the Plaintiff, and therefore by the rule of the
Court, Quaerens nil capiat per billam.

The Case of the Tailors of Clothes, etc. of Ipswich, 12. Jacobi, fol. 53.
THe Tailors of I. make an Ordinance that none shall exercise the Trade in I.
if he have not been an Apprentice for seven years, and if he do not appear
before them to be approved, upon forfeiture of five Marks, and for breach of
it, bring debt; the Defendant pleads that he was retained by A. P. to be a
domestic Servant, and that he made Garments by his command.

1. Resol. At the Common Law none may be prohibited to exercise any Trade,
although he has never been an Apprentice, and be ignorant; but if he misdoe
any thing, an action of the Case lies.

2. This Ordinance for so much as is not prohibited by the Statute of 5. Eliz.
is against Law, for after seven years Apprentiship he may exercise his Trade
without allowance of any.

3. The Statute of 5. Eliz. does not prohibit the private exercise of any
Trade in a Family, therefore this is out of the said Ordinance.

4. The Statute of 19. H. 7. cap. 7. does not corroborate any Ordinance against
Law, if it be allowed, but the allowance discharges the penalty of 40 l. for
putting in use any ordinances which are against the Prerogative of the King, or
the common profit of the people; and Judgment was given, Quod querentes nil
caperent per billam.

Edward Savells Case, 12. Jacobi. fol. 55.
AN Ejectione firmae lies not of a Close, but it must be of a certain number
of Acres, and the nature of them must be showed: A Writ shall not abate for
want of order. Viz. Of a House before Land, etc. and judgment was stayed.

Benthams Case, 12. Jacobi. fol. 56.
IF damages or costs are omitted, or not well assessed by the Jury, if the
Plaintiff release them, he may have his judgment, and it shall not for that
be reversed: Insufficient assessement of damages, and no assessing is all one.

Doctor Fosters Case, concerning Recusants. 12. Jacobi. fol. 56.
AN Information was preferred against a Recusant, by an Informer, Tam pro
domino rege quam pro seipso, before the recusant was convicted for 220. l. that
is, 20. l. a Month for a 11. Months absence from the Church, etc. And
judgment given against the Defendant.

1. Resolved, that he may be convicted (to satisfy the Statute of 23. Eliz. in
this same Suite, and convicted shall be taken for attainted, for he shall
forfeit nothing before judgment.

2. The Branch of distribution in the Act of 23. Eliz. extends as well to the
clause of penalty for recusancy, as to that of hearing or saying Masses, for it
is all one to say, shall forfeite, and shall forfeite to the King.

2. Diverse acts of Parliament give the penalty to the King, and yet after make
a distribution thereof to another who will sue, as 3. H. 6. cap. 3. and 3. H.
7.3.

3. He against whom judgment is given, upon demurrer or default, or otherwise,
is convicted, within the Statute, for he is attainted, which implies it, for
it is so found by the Judges: so by the Statute of 8. H. 6. treble damages are
given where a disseisin is found to be with force, this extends to a judgment
by Nihil dicit, or default.

4. The Statute of 28. Eliz. does not take away the Statute of 23. which gives
liberty to the informer, etc. for,

1. It is made for more speedy execution of it.

2. It does not alter the suite of the party, but of the King and leaves the
Informer as he was before.

3. The Act of 28. gives not the penalty to any new person, for it was given
to the K. by 23. Eliz.

4. The Statute of 28. extends only to Indictments, and touches not
informations.

5. The Defendant is not within 28. Eliz. if he be not convicted at the suite
of the K. Ergo, this is left as before.

6. Because the Statute is in the affirmative, and they may stand together, but
the Statute of 28. alters the Statute of 23, in this, that it confineth Suites
against Recusants in the K. Bench, or Assizes, etc. which clause extends as
well to the suite of the informer, as of the Queen, and the Statute of 35.
Eliz. and 3. Jacobi. enlarge the Jurisdiction, as to Suites of the K. and touch
not the suite of the party.

5. The Statute of 35. takes not away the Action popular given by 23. for it
was made to give more speedy remedy, and not to take it away, a feme Covert is
within the Statute of 23. and 1. Eliz. but before the Statute 35. Eliz. if a
Feme Covert had been indicted of recusancy, the forfeiture should not have been
levied of the goods of the Husband, because he was not party thereunto;
otherwise in an Information or Debt brought by the informer; and in that that
the Statute of 35. is, that the K. shall recover all the pains, etc. in such
sort, etc. this alters the remedy only, as to the Queen, for now she may
proceed by action, as for recovery of any other Debt by the Common Law, in
such manner as 1. H. 7. c. 1. gives a Formedon against Parnor of the profits,
etc. also 35. Eliz. is in the affirmative, and although it gives the penalty
of 20. l. by the Month, yet it takes not away 1. Eliz. which gives 12. d.
for every Sunday and Holy day, and where this Statute says, that the
conviction shall be in the K. B. or at the Assizes, yet the Justices of Peace
and others authorized by 23. may take Indictments: The Statute of 3. Jacobi.
inflicteth Imprisonment upon a feme Covert, yet it takes not away the
forfeiture before: where a new person is designed by a new Statute, this takes
away the ancient Statute if they cannot stand together, and although there are
exclusive words concerning Courts, yet the Court of K. Bench is not excluded,
because it is Coram Rege.

6. A Recusant may plead Auterfoits convict. or other collateral bar,, as
pardon, submission, etc. out of the Indictment, for 3. Jacobi. c. 4. extends
only to defects, within the Indictment or other proceedings; and the informer
cannot charge any who is convicted before at the suite of the Queen, upon 23.
or 35. Eliz. or 3. Jacobi, and upon 23. the Informer must sue within a year
and a day.

Nota if after a popular action comenced the K. Attorney will not prosecute,
the Informer may for his part, and condemnation or acquittall at his suite, is
a bar against the K. and all others, yet the K. may pardon it before an
Action commenced, and if the informer die, the Attorney may prosecute the
suite, and the Information shall serve for the King.

The Case of the Masters and Fellows of Magdalen College in Cambridge, 13.
Jacobi. fol. 66.
DOctor K. Master of M. College, and the Fellows 17. Eliz. grant to the
Queen, reserving rent, upon condition to grant over, which is done
accordingly, the Jury find 13. Eliz. of Deanes and Chapters, and 18. Eliz of
Confirmations, a fine with Proclamations is levied, and five years pass:
Doctor K. dies, the successor accepts the rent, and within five years after
his Election enters, and he and the Fellows demise to the Defendant. And
judgment given for the Defendant.

1. Resolved, the Master and Fellows are restrained by the Statute of 13.
Eliz. to grant to the Queen for the Q. is a Parson within the letter of the
Statute, and if he should be exempted, this should be by construction of Law,
which cannot be.

1. Because a general Statute for maintenance of Religion and good literature
and releife of the poor, binds the K. although he be not named: and it
appears by the Statute of 1. Eliz. that the K. is included within the words
Person or Persons, for there he is exempted.

2. Because the Statute is made to suppress a tort, therefore the Statute of
Donis binds him.

3. A Statute made to perform the intent of the Donor binds the K. without
being named, as the Statute of Donis.

4. The Master and Fellows are disabled to grant, therefore the K. cannot
purchase of them.

5. The intent is to be observed, which was to convey by the Queen to a
Subject, and so to make her an instrument of wrong, as one who holds of the
Bishop grants to the Queen to regrant to a Corporation by Covin, to take away
the Seigniory of the Bishop by extinguishment, and to make an evasion out of
the Statute of Mortmaine, this Patent shall be repealed Jure regio, so here:
and this Act extends to a Corporation not incorporate by such names as are in
the Statute

2. The Statute of 18. Eliz. c. 2. does not confirm this grant, for it is out
of the words of the Statutes, because it is not made upon consideration, and
here the reversion of the rent is not considered, because the Queen was to
grant it before the rent be due; 2. grants to the E. may be void or voidable.

1. In respect of the Grantor, as if an infant grant unto him.

2. In respect of the thing granted, as if a Foundership be granted.

3. In respect of the estate, as tail.

4. In respect of the grant, if it agree not with the rules of Law.

5. In respect of omission of any circumstance, as Inrollment, this Statute
aideth not grants of the first sort, for it does not enable persons disabled by
the Law to grant, as here, nor of the second sort, but confirms grants of
Tenant in tail, because he was able to grant, but aides not grants of the
fourth sort: For, Quae malo sunt inchoata principio vix est, etc. but it aideth
grants of the fifth sort

3. At the time of the said Statute this grant needed no confirmation, because
Doctor K. the Master was living.

3. The fine and Non-claime does not bar them.

1. Because although it was not a conveyance made by them, yet it was suffered
by them within the words of the Statute.

2. Doctor K. nor any in his time, cannot make his claim, and claim was made
within 5. years after his death.

4. Acceptance of the rent does not bar them, because it is a body agregate
of many, and acceptance by the Master sole, does not bar all, and the rather
being without deed: And judgment given, Quod querens nil caperet per billam.

Lewis Bowls Case, 13. Jacobi. fol. 79. in Trover and Conversion.
T.B. Covenants to stand seized to the use of himself and his Wife for life,
without impeachment of wast, the remainder to their first, second, and third
Son, successively in tail, the remainder to the heirs of their two bodies,
the remainder over, they have issue I. T. B. dies, the issue dies, the Wind
blows down a Barn, parcel of etc. and the Timber in the Count mentioned,
was parcel of that Barn, the Feme carries the Timber out of the Manor, he
in remainder assigns by fine to the Plaintiff, the Feme dies, the Plaintiff
brings an Action of trover and conversion against the Executors of the Feme;
and judgment given against the Plaintiff.

1. Resolved, until the birth of the issue, T. B. and his Wife have an estate
tail executed, but after this it is divided and they have for life, the
remainder to the issue in tail.

2. Tenant in tail after possibility had a greater estate as to the quallity,
then Tenant for life: Therefore,

1. He shall not be punished for wast.

2. He shall not be compelled to attorne.

3. He shall not have aid.

4. Upon his alienation a Consimili casu, lies not.

5. After his death intrusion lies not.

6. He may join the mise upon the mere right.

7. He shall not be named in an Action for, or against him Tenant for life, but
not as to the quantity, therefore his feoffement is a forfeiture, resceit lies
upon his default, and exchange by him, and Tenant for life is good.

3. The Feme is not Tenant in tail after possibility, etc. for this must be a
remainder of an estate tail by act of God, and not by limitation of the party:
and although she be Tenant in tail after possibility of the remainder, this
does not extinguish the estate for life, because it is not a greater estate.

4. She shall have the privileges of Tenant in tail, after possibility, for
the inheritance which was in her, and because she is Tenant in tail after
possibility of the remainder, although she cannot claim it in possession.

5. If Tenant for life or years cut Trees, or prostrate Houses, the Lessor
shall have the Trees and Timber, for the Lessee had them only as things
annexed to the Land, and he shall not have a greater interest by his tortious
severance, but he shall have a special interest in the Timber blown down, to
build again withal.

6. The Law gives many privileges to a Mansion house.

7. The Lessee without impeachment of wast shall have Trees which he cuts, for
without impeachment of wast, is as much as without demand for wast done,
otherwise it is, if it be without impeachment, etc. by Writ of wast.

8. The privilege of without impeachment of wast is annexed to the estate,
therefore if he accept a confirmation of a greater estate, or assign over, it
is gone.

9. If Trees are blown down with the wind, the Lessee without impeachment of
wast shall have them; therefore judgment given, Quod querens nil caperet per
billam.

The Case of Monopolies, 44. Eliz. fol. 84.
THe Queen grants to one of the Privy Chamber, the sole making and importation
of Cards, this grant is void.

1. The grant of making of Cards is void: For,

1. All Trades are for the public good, for the exercise of Youth in labor,
and therefore it cannot be appropriated to one solely.

2. A Monopoly had three incidents against the weal public.

1. Raising of the price. 2. The Commodity is not so well made. 3. The
impouerishing of poor Artificers.
3. The Q. is deceived in her grant, because she thought it to be for the
public good: It prohibits them who have skill to make Cards, and gives
License to one of the privy Chamber who had not skill, and the K. cannot
suppress Cardplaying, because it is not Malum in se, and no Trade may be
prohibited but by Parliament.

2. The License of importation of Cards is void, being without limmitation or
stint, for the Q. may dispense with the Statute of 3. E. 4. c. 4. which does
prohibit it, but that ought to be with limittation.

Nota, The K. that now is in a Book, Printed, 1610. has Published, that
Monopolies are against Law, and commanded no Suitor to presume to move him for
the granting of them: But admitting the grant good in the Case at bar, the
Plaintiffes sole remedy had been that which 3. E. 4. in such case gives, and
that ought to be pursued; and judgment entered, Quod querens nil caperet per
billam.

The Earl of Devonshires Case, 4. Jacobi. fol. 89.
THe King reciting that decayed Munition belongs to the Master of the Ordnance,
grants it unto him who sells it, and dies, his Executors are chargeable to the
K.

1. Resolved, this cannot be claimed as fees of the Office, because it was
erected but in 35. H. 8.

2. The grant is void, because it was upon a suggestion, that it was due to him.

3. Although the Testator claims them to his own use, yet he shall be
accountable to the K. for the Law will make a privity, as if any man takes the
K. goods, he shall be charged in an Account, for the K. is not bound to charge
any man as receivor, but generally, and otherwise the King may loose them by
his death, and although the Kings goods came not to the hands of the Testator,
yet he shall be charged if he were a means of the Kings damage and prejudice.

In Sir W. M. Case it was resolved, That no Officer of the K. can dispose of
any part of the K. treasure, for the profit or honor of the K. without warrant
under the great or privy Seal, and after the Executors satisfied the K. for
the said Munition.

James Baggs Case, 13. Jacobi. Banco regis. fol. 93. In restitution.
1. REsolved, that to the Kings Bench authority belongs not only to correct
errors in judicial proceedings, but other errors and misdemeanors
extrajuditiall, tending to the Breach of the peace, or oppression of the
Subject.

2. Causes of disfranchisement of a Citizen ought to be acts against his duty
and Oath, but words against a Chief Magistrate are not, but may be of the good
behavior, and so of an attempt without an act done.

2. A Citizen cannot be disfranchised without Chartar or prescription, if he
be not convicted by due course of Law, as if he be attainted of forgery,
perjury, or conspiracy at the Kings suite, or of any other crime whereby he
becomes infamous.

3. If a Citizen is disfranchised and has a Writ of restitution, and they
return sufficient cause, which is false, a Writ to restore him shall not be
awarded, but he may have a special Action upon the Case.

4. Such a return ought to be certain, because the party cannot have an
answer unto it; and after the Court awarded a Writ to restore the said I B. and
so he was accordingly.

FINIS.
These two Cases (being accidentally Omitted) should have come in in the
beginning of the Third Report.
THE THIRD BOOK.
Dowties Case, 26. Eliz. An information in the Exchequer, fol. 9.
THe Duke of N. seized in fee of 5 Messuages in St. S. Parish in H in the
tenure of W. G. bargains and sells his Tenements in the Parish of St. A. in H.
in the occuporation of W.G. and is attainted and Executed, Queen Elizabeth
grants them to I. F. if concealed, the Defendant D. claims under that Patent,
against whom the Attorney informs, etc. And Judgment was given for the
Queen.

1. Resolved, nothing passes by the bargain and sale because the first
certeinty was false, otherwise it is, if the first certeinty be true, and the
second false, so the Bargainee was a disseisseresse.

2. These Lands were not in the Q. by the Statute of 33. H. 8. c. 20. without
Scire facias or seizure, because the words of the Statute, that Lands shall be
in the K. without Office, shall be construed, as if an Office had been found:
And Lands of a Disseissee attainted, shall not be in the K. by Office without
Scire facias, or seizure, also all possessions, etc. are saved by the said Act,
as if it had not been made.

3. That the Q. having but a right it does not pass by the grant of the said
five Messuages; and after, a special Office was found, and a Scire facias
brought against the Terretenant, and judgment given, and the Tenements seized
into the Q. hands, and she by new Letters granted them to S. and his Heirs,
who peaceably enjoyed them.

Sir William Harberts Case, 26. Eliz. In the Exchequer, in Error, fol. 11.
M. H. acknowledged a Recognizance of 3000. l. to the K. and dyed, a Scire
facias issued against his Executors, and haeredes terrarum, etc. The Sheriff
returned, that he had no Executors within his Bayliwick, and further, that
Scire fecit. W. H. militi, filio and haeredi dicti. M H. W. H. makes default,
and judgment is given against him generally, and he brings Error, but upon
his Petition to the Queen, he was admitted to Compound with her.

1. Resolved at the common Law (except in special Cases) neither Land nor body
were liable to Execution in Debt or damages recovered, but Execution was to be
done by Fieri facias; or Levari facias of his Goods and Chattells, and profits
growing upon his Land, but in debt brought against one, as heir, his Land was
liable to Execution, because the Plaintiff had no other remedy, for the goods
belong to the Executors, but the body, goods, and Lands of the K. Debtor or
accomptant were ever liable to Execution, but such Levari facias or Fieri
facias, ought to have been sued within the year, or otherwise he was chased
to his Writ of Debt, and now by Westminster. 2. c. 45. he may have a Scire facias,
and by the 18o Chapter of that Statute, an Elegi^ is given of the moity of the
Land, which was the first Act that subjected Land to Execution for Debt or
Recognizance, and by the Statute of 13. E. 1. de Mercatoribus 27. E. 3. c. 9.
and 23. H. 8. c. 6. In Statute Merchant, and Statute Staple all the Lands of
the Conusor at the day of acknowledgement shall be extended, into whose hands
soever they shall after come: But in all Actions Vi and armis, where a Capias
lies in Process, there after judgment a capias ad satisfaciendum lies, and
the K. shall have a Capias pro fine, and in such cases the Law (the preserver
of peace) subjecteth the body to Imprisonment, and by Marlebridge, c. 23. West.
2. c. 11. a Capias was given in an account, the process before being a distress
infinite, and by 25. E. 3. c. 17. the same process given in Debt, as in account,
for before this Act the body was not liable to Execution, for Debt as aforesaid.

2. If Land of the heir be seized in Execution, upon a recognizance of his
auncestor, he shall not have contribution against a purchasor of his Auncestor,
although he come in without consideration, and although the Heir be not
charged as Heir, but partly as Terretenant; but one purchasor shall have
contribution against another purchasor, and one Heir against another Heir,
because they are in Aequali jure, and therefore the Writ here which issued
against the Heirs, without naming the purchasor is good, although he be
charged as Terretenant: The Heir shall have an Audita quaerela, as well as the
Conusor himself before Execution sued, and a Supersedeas, but a Stranger shall
not: If diverse acknowledge a recognizance, the charge does not survive, and
the Land of one shall not be put in Execution, but all their Lands equally: so
if two are bound to warranty, both, or their Heirs, and the survivor, and the
Heir of the other shall be jointly vouched, and the Land of both shall be
rendered in value. But if Baron and Feme, and the Heirs of the Feme are bound
to warranty, and the Feme dye, the Land of the Baron may be solely taken in
Execution, because there are no Moities between Baron and Feme: So that when
Land shall be charged by any Lien, the charge ought to be equal, but in a Lien
personal, otherwise it is, as if two are bound in an Obligation, there the
charge shall survive: But a Purchasor, Bona fide, before any Action brought,
shall not be subject to any charge. And three Errors were moved in the record.

1. The Scire facias was Haerediterrarum, etc. which is improper, for he is not
Heir to the Land, but to his auncestor.

2. The Writ is Scire facias haeredi terrarum, etc. and the Return is, Scire
fecit W. H. militi haeredi praedicti M. and every Return must answer the point
of the Writ.

3. The judgment is general against Sir W. H. where it ought to be special,
for otherwise his own Land shall be liable, where, by the Law, the Land only,
which came to him by his Father, ought to be charged, and he is charged as
Terrtenant as aforesaid, but these points were not resolved by the Court.

Nota, the new Writ of Error, after entry of the first was not brought, Quod
coram vobis residet, because the Record is not removed out of the keeping of
him who had the custody thereof before.

A Perfect Table of the Principal matters contained in every Case in this
Book.
WHAT words do make a general warranty, and to whom the custody of evidences
does belong Page 1 Tenant for life comes in as Vouchee in a common recovery,
it is a forfeiture Page 1, 2 23. H. 8. Extends not to suppress good uses, the
conveyance good, and the bad use void, any man may give Lands to Charitable
uses Page 2 Touching the Exposition of the Kings grants, and how the words Ex
speciali gratia, mero motu, etc. therein shall be construed Page 3 A common
Recovery by Tenant in tail binds them in remainder and reversion, and all
Leases and charges granted by them ib. A feoffement by Tenant for life
destroys a contingent remainder Page 4 Conusee of Tenant for life, and him in
remainder in tail, renders a rent to Tenant for life, it is good during his
life ib. Tenant for life, and he in remainder in tail, infeoffe I. S. it is no
discontinuance or forfeiture, otherwise if without deed Page 5 Perpetuities
are against Law, but the Parliament or Law may make an estate as to one, and
good to another Page 5, 6 Tenant in tail suffers a recovery, and dies before
Execution, it may be sued against the issu^, and when a man may enter or
claim, the Law will not put things in him till entry, or claim Page 7 A man
may be in by descent, and yet not have his ^ge ib. A future power of revocation
may be released Page 8 When any thing Executory is created, by consent of all
it may be voided Page 8 A feoffement by feoffees devesteth all future uses
contingent Page 9 27. H. 8. Transferreth the possession to uses only In esse
ib. When a remainder ought to vest ib. 27. H. 8. Of uses shall not be taken by
equity ib. A diversity when Tenant for life infeoffeth the reversioner mediate,
and when imediate, there it is no forfeiture ib. A disseissor may make
admittances, but not voluntary grants Page 11 A difference when a confirmation
is made to one that is in upon an express condition, and when not, there the
estate is absolute ib. Every fee simple may be charged one way or other Page 12
A difference between Terminus annorum, and Tempus annorum Page 13 A Termor
grants to B. so many years as shall be behind Tempore mortis suae, it is void,
otherwise if for a certain number of years ib. A lease cannot comence upon a
double contingency Page 14 He who has a power of revocation may do it, part
at one time and part at another time, till he has revoked all Page 15 By the
same conveyance the old uses may be revoked, and new raised Page 16 Upon what
conveyances uses may be raised upon a general consideration Page 16, 17 An
Action of the Case lies, for disparaging the Plaintiffes Title unto Lands Page
17
THE SECOND BOOK.
AN illiterate man is not bound to seal a Deed without hearing the same read,
and Ignorantia facti may excuse, but Ignorantia juris does not Page 19 If a man
plead that he has kept I. S. indemnified he must show how, but not if he
pleads in the negative Page 19, 20 The Date of a Deed is not of the substance
thereof Page 20 If a Deed be made by Menace it is avoidable by Plea ib. If it
be read in other words then it is, it binds not Page 21 But if he require it
not to be read, it shall bind him ib. Touching considerations to raise an use
Page 21 Where an estate tail is barrable, notwithstanding 34. H. 8. Page 22 A
Lease by the Q. under the Exchequer Seal is good ib. What Act does extinguish
a Copyhold Page 23 Things which lie in grant are effectual by delivery of the
Deed, without other ceremony ib. Where the Habendum in a Deed is void, and
where voidable ib. A sale by the Bankrupt after a Commission awarded is void
Page 24 13. Eliz. gives benefit to such only as comes in ib. The possession
of the House is a good possession of the Lands also Page 25 What passes by
this word, Cum pertinentijs ib. Where by a Deed Lands are granted Situate in
one place, and they lie in another, what passes thereby ib. Where the Act of
34. H. 8. aideth a voidable grant Page 26 A. demiseth, bargains and sells to
B. upon consideration for years, and no Attornement to B. what passes to him.
Page 27 Much learning of Elections ib. What Persons capable of Tithes at the
Common Law Page 29 Where a man may prescribe to have Tithes appurtenant to a
Manor Page 30 Where a Religious House or College is given to the K. by 1. E.
6. Page 31 Where a perpetual unity discharges Tithes by 31 H. 8. or 1. E. 6.
Page 32 Where a possibility shall make a grant good Page 33 Where a Tender upon
a condition shall divest an estate Page 34 An estate of freehold cannot
commence in Futuro Page 35 The Office of the premises, and Habendum ib. Where
the Husband solely may declare the use of a fine of his Wifes Land, and when it
shall bind her, and when not Page 36 Where a Variance in the Declaration
avoideth all Page 37 What act of the feoffor dispenses with a condition Page
38 Where a feoffee is disabled to perform a condition ib. An estate made to
three, and to the Heirs of one, the jointure continues ib. A demise made by
Baron and Feme without saying by Deed ib. Attornement of one Tenant for life to
the grantee is good Page 39 Where one jointenant may prejudice another ib. In
what clauses this word Proviso makes a condition Page 40 By a fine levied, a
condition is not extinct, much good matter Page 43 Common assurances construed
favorably ib. Where another use may be averred upon a fine upon grant and
render, or another consideration then is expressed Page 44 When a request is
necessary, and in what cases ib. The remainder to the right Heirs of the
Conisor is a reversion Page 45 Where a Donee in tail shall hold of no body
Page 46 A man wounded upon the Sea, dies upon the Land, unpunishable ib. The
Law respects the Original Act Page 47
THE THIRD BOOK.
WHere a Writ of Error, or right of Action is given to the King by 28. H. 8.
Page 49 A diversity between inheritances, and Chattells personal Page 50
Neither an Action without a Right, nor a right without an Action shall make
Remitter ib. A reversion upon an estate tail, is out of the Statute of 9. R.
2. c. 3. Page 51 Where a grant from the Q. ought to have precise words ib. A
render to the Wife only voidable, where she is not party Page 52 The Husband
only vouched, where it barreth the remainder Page 53 A recovery against Tenant
for life, and he in remainder in tail, shall not bind the tail Page 54 A
grant of a Copyhold for life, is within 31. H. 8. of Monasteries ib. Excellent
Rules for interpretation of all Statutes ib. What Statutes extend to
Copyholders, and what not ib. Whether West. 2. c. 1. extends to Copy-holds
Page 55 Where the rents shall be intended to be the old rents Page 56 If the
particular estate may determine before the remainder can comence, what is
become of it ib. In Wills the intent of the Devisor must be considered Page 57
Paying in a Will where it is a condition, and where a limittation ib. Where
Debt lies for rent before the last day of payment Page 58 Three sorts of
privities Page 59 Lessee assigns, Bargainee of the reversion shall not have
Debt against the Lessee, but the Lessor might Page 60 An Executor of a Termor
not liable to Debt after Assignement ib. The Lessor may charge the Lessee or
his Assignee Page 61 Where an estate may be waved in pays at the common Law,
and where by the Statute of 27 H. 8. of Uses Page 61, 62 Much notable Learning,
upon the Statutes of 32. and 34. H. 8. of Wills, and of Relations, and what
inheritances are devisable Page 63, 64. etc. Where the second delivery of a
Deed, shall relate to the former Page 67 The several sorts of custodies and
Gardians Page 68 Who shall have the custody of the Heir apparent, an infant
Page 68, 69 The Mother shall have the custody, etc. within 4, and 5. Phil. and
Mar. c. 8. Jure naturae Page 69 Equally to be divided in a Will, and their
construction Page 70 Excellent Learning of discents, and of Possessio fratris
ib. The Sheriff is not bound to bring a prisoner, in Recta lin^a Page 71 What
Act is an escape, and how prevented by the Sheriff ib. A lease for three lives
by a fine where within 11. H. 7. c. 20. Page 72 What person may take advantage
by entry within that Act ib. A Woman accepts a fine, and renders back for
1000. years, it is within that Statute Page 73 A prisoner taken again in
Recenti insecutione, is in Execution again Page 73 An Action will lie against
the Sheriff before he be retaken ib. And after he is taken, he shall be in
prison again ib. After a demurrer there shall be no repleader Page 74 Issue,
Tenant in tail suffers a recovery, the Mother releaseth with warranty, this is
not within 11. H. 7. Page 74, 75 Otherwise if the Wife had released after the
death of the issue Page 76 An estate transferred in the Post before the
warranty descend Page 77 The Lessor having cause of entry, but no notice
accepts rent ib. The Lessor may have debt after a reentry Page 78 A Lease for
years is not made good by acceptance, if the condition be to be void, othewise
of a Lease for life ib. Acceptance and an acquittance barreth all former
arrerages Page 79 A rent must be paid without an acquittance, but not an
annuity ib. The Heir is infeoffed by collusion within age, the Lord accepts
services, he loses the wardship ib. The Law adjudgeth an escape, although the
party be in prison Page 80 Until the prisoners be delivered to the Sheriff,
they are in the custody of the old, but if the old dye, the new must take
notice Page 81 If a prisoner break Jail in such Case, before the new be made,
this is no escape, for they are in custody of Law ib. A Translation by the K.
of a priory into a Deane and Chapter, is good by 25. H. 8. Page 82
Notwithstanding a surrender of their Church, the Corporation remains ib. The
Deane and Chapter, are to assist the Bishop in two things ib. The Bishop is
Patron of all Prebends of common right ib. Originally all Bishoprics were
donative by the King ib. If by their surrender to the King, the Corporation
should be dissolved, three inconveniences would follow Page 83 A fine levied by
covin, by a Copyholder, barreth not the Lord Page 84 All acts mixed with fraud,
are tortious and illegal ib. The Judges have construed the Act against the
Letter for Salvation of the inheritance of the reversioner Page 85 An averrment
of fraud may be taken by 27. Eliz. and so upon 13. Eliz. an averrement may be
against a fine, upon an usurious contract Page 86 Six Marks of fraud, within
13. Eliz. c. 5. Page 87 The Deed must be upon good consideration, and Bona fide
ib. Directions to make a Deed, by one that is indebted unto others Page 87, 88
A consideration of nature is not good within this Statute Page 88 Statutes
against fraud, shall be liberally expounded to suppress it ib. None but a
purchasor for money, without fraud, shall avoid a faudulent Deed Page 89 The
issue in tail is barred after Proclamations made, although he claim Page 90
Quod parts finis nihil habuerunt, where it is a good plea Page 92 To what
purposes the proclamations serve Page 93 Though the issue be beyond the Seas,
yet he is bound, because privy, etc. ib.
THE FOURTH BOOK.
Where a right to a freehold cannot be barred by acceptance of a collateral
satisfaction Page 95 Wherefore those Branches touching jointures in 27. H. 8.
were made Page 96 No estate a good jointure, except it take effect presently
after his death ib. An estate for life upon condition, is a good jointure ib.
Where a jointure may be waived ib. Where a d^vise to the Wife for life, or in
tail, etc. is a good jointure Page 97 Seisin of fealty, is a seisin of all
other services Page 98 No distress excessive for homage, fealty, escuage, etc.
ib. Seisin of a superior service is seisin of all inferior services incident
ib. Doing of homage is a seisin of all services inferior and superior ib.
Seisin of one annual service is not seisin of another Page 98, 99 Seisin in
Law sufficient to make avowry within 32. H. 8. Page 99 To what services that
act does not extend ib. Writs of Escheate, Cessavit, and rescons, are not
within that act Page 100 If a distress be, and nothing arreare, the tenant may
rescue, but he shall not have Trespass, Vi and armis, against the Lord ib. See
the Book at large, where an incroachment is avoidable ib. If a man has been
out of possession sixty years, if his entry be not taken away, he may enter,
and bring any possessory Action ib. Actions of Slander.
The Judges must take notice of all statutes which touch the King Page 101
Articles of the good behavior exhibited against I. S. are no cause for him to
bring an Action upon the Case Page 102 A Bill in the Star Chamber for Causes
examinable there, no cause of action, otherwise if not examinable there Page
103 No action lies upon an appeal of Murder, returnable in the Common Bench
Page 103 To say to one, that he is perjured, an Action will lie Page 104 Sermo
relatus ad personam intelligi debet de condition personae Page 105 Two things
requisite to have an Action for Slander Page 107 Where an Action will lie for
Slaundering a man's Title Page 108, 109 Verba accipienda sunt in mitiori sensu
Page 110 Three things incidents to a Defamation in the Ecclesiastical Court
Page 111
Copyhold Cases.
When custom has created such inheritances, their descent shall be according
to the rules of Law, but not to have collateral qualities Page 112 The heir
before admittance, may take the profits and surrender ib. Admittance of a
Copyholder for life, inureth to him in remainder, but not to prejudice the
Lord of his fine Page 114 The heir before admittance may have Trespass ib. One
who has no title makes voluntary grants, they bind not, but otherwise it is
of admittances upon surrenders or discents Page 116 Quid operatur by severance
of the inheritance, of the Copyhold from the Manor Page 116, 117 A release to
a disseisor of Copyhold, where it is good Page 118 A Copyhold is within 32.
H. 8. of maintenance and Champerty ib. Copyholder for a year may maintain
an Ejectione firmae ib. Every Manor comprehends in effect two several Courts
Page 119 The Lord may admit out of the Manor, but not the Steward ib. The Lord
cannot exact unreasonable fines Page 121 If the Tenant deny to pay his fine, it
is a forfeiture Page 122 Sentence against the Wife shall bind the Husband, De
facto Page 123 A man may surrender to the use of his Wife Page 124 The Lord may
retain a Steward by Parol Page 125 What things are grantable by Copy Page 126
What acts are destructions of Copyholds Page 127 How a custom ought by a
Copyhold to be alleged Page 128 What things are incident to the Office of
Sheriff Page 129, 130 Touching Exposition of the Q grant, and where a Non
obstante aideth Page 131 What things may he appendant to others Page 132 The
Originanall of Common appendant, by the Common Law Page 133 That it is
apportionable Page 134 See many excellent Cases of Appeals, and Indictments,
and much good matter thereupon, from Folio. 135. to 143. Touching arrerages of
rents, and the remedy given for them by 32. H. 8. c. 37. Page 144 The Roll
amended according to the special verdict Page 146 Where a condition or rent
shall be suspended ib. The Jury must find matters of estoppell Page 147 An
infant admitted by Guardian, and no record made of it, yet good Page 148 Debt
upon a puisne judgment must be paid before Statutes, etc. ib. Marriage is a
countermand of a Will Page 149 Touching a Lease for life or years of Land,
whereon Trees are growing, and what property the Lessee has in them, and of
Timber Trees blown down with the wind, and wast committed in VVindowes,
VVainscot, etc. Page 150, 151 Touching a recognizance, acknowledged before the
Chamberlain of London, and of Execution thereupon by Elegit Page 152, 153 How
long the Conisee shall hold the Land Page 153 Concerning Deeds enrolled, and
levying of fines of Land, the Common Law preferred before the Statute Law, the
excellency and antiquity of Records Page 154, 155 Rent must be demanded at the
place limited, although out of the Land, before advantage of a condition taken
Page 155 Upon a Lease by the Q it must be paid at the Exchequer ib. By virtue
of a Fieri facias, the Sheriff may sell a Lease, but the beginning and ending
must be expressed Page 156 If the first benefice be of 8. l. per annum, upon
acceptance of another with cure, the Patron must take notice upon 21. H. 8. c.
13. Page 157 Touching Corporations, and their Elections and Ordinances ib. The
effect of institution, and also of induction, and of Letters of dispensation
Page 158 Touching Covenants and warranties in Law, and when broken Page 159
Touching Strangers occupying Lands without notice of the Devisee Page 160 Goods
delivered to one to keep or carry, and they are purloyned Page 160, 161
Estovers appendant to a house, by grant or prescription, and when destroyed,
and of suite to the Lords Milne Page 161, 162 Touching reteining of Chaplains
by a Countess, within 21. H. 8. c. 13. Page 162 Of Contracts executory, and
Actions of the case, upon Assumpsit, and wager of Law Page 163 An ample and
exact explanation of 1. E. 6. c. 14. of Chanteries Page 164, 165 Touching
reteining Chaplains and dispensations Page 166, 167 That the Lessee shall not
alien without License, and where a condition may be apportioned Page 167
Concerning Exchanges, and what the word Excambium imports, and of the warranty
thereunto annexed, and the nature of it Page 168 Arts done by a man Non compos
mentis, some bind himself, and some others, and how many sorts of them Page
169

THE FIFTH BOOK.
A Lease to begin from henceforth, and delivered after, when it begins Page
171 What power the Bishop has to make Leases, by the private act of 1. Eliz.
ib. A Lease of a Fair, rendering rent, is void by 1. Eliz. Page 172 What rent
shall be said to be the true and ancient rent ib. Joint words taken severally
in six respects Page 173 A Lease to A. during the life of B. and C. how long it
lasts ib. Therein is a difference between a limittation, and condition Page
174 An Administrator has judgment, and dies, who shall sue execution
thereupon ib. By what act an estate at will is determined ib. By exception of
Wood the soil is excepted ib. Acceptance of a new Lease is a surrender of the
first Page 175 If the Lessee of Lands may dig for Coals ib. A Lease to A. for
his life, and the life of B. and C. when it ends ib. No Action of wast for
permissive wast Page 176 Where there is a confidence, an Action of the Case for
negligence ib. Leases made to the Q. by Colleges, Deanes, etc. are restrained
by 13. Eliz Page 177 When a Covenant extends to a thing In esse of the demise,
it shall bind the Assignee, otherwise when to a thing not in essence Page 178
If the thing to be done be merely collateral, the assignee shall not be
charged Page 178 Concessi or demisi import a Covenant Page 179 If any
Covenantor break the Covenant, all the Covenantees must join, otherwise when
several interests pass Page 180 A diversity between a power and an authority
ib. The Covenantee himself, cannot devise the assurance ib. The Counsel must
be given to the Purchasor Page 181 An Indenture void without a manual act of
indenting ib. Where a Condition or Covenant once broken, may be salved after
Page 181 A condition of two parts, and both possible, and one becomes
impossible Page 182 An estate to be made at the costs of the Covenantee, the
Covenantor must do the first act (i.) give notice what assurance he will have
ib. The Seal of one Covenantor is broken, it is void against him only Page
182, 183 A. is bound to give such a release, as by the Judge of, etc A. must
procure him Page 183 Terror of Suite is a damification upon a Counterbond ib.
An action for reparations lies against the assignee Page 184 What interest is
assignable over Page 185 Where an Indenture precedent to declare uses, is only
directory Page 186 Where an averment may be against a matter in writing Page
187 Cases of Executors.
Where a release by an Infant Executor is a bar Page 188 An Executor may
release before probate, but not have an action ib. A judgment for Debt shall
be paid before a Statute Page 188, 189 Administration during minority cease
at 17. years of age Page 189 Such an administration may not sell goods, but
for necessity ib. Where an administration is void, and where voidable ib. Where
an Executor of his own wrong may retain goods Page 190 An action against an
Executor, or by him where it must be in the Debet, and where in the Detinet
tantum ib. What return the Sheriff must make upon a Devastavit Page 191
Administrator brings Debt barred, because Executor ib. What act makes a man
Executor of his own wrong ib.
Constructions of the Statutes of Jeofails, etc. Amendment of Records, Fines,
etc.
In Trespass, the nature of the Fishes must be showed Page 192 Where a Debt
against Baron and Feme must be in the Debet Page 193 An ejectment of Lands, out
of A. B. and C. tried by a visne out of A. only, it is insufficient ib. 23.
Jurors are returned, and 12. appear, and find for the Plaintiff, it is good
ib. Variance between the Writ and Count is not aided by 18. Eliz. ib. Five
parts of a fine, and where the Conisor may assign Error Page 194 A common
recovery not like other assurances, more favored Page 195 A pannell is annexed
to the Venire facias, without return, not good ib. A difference where a man is
misnamed in the Venire, and where in the pannell Page 196 Issue joined upon a
point not material, aided by the Statute ib. An amendment good, after the
transcript removed Page 196, 197 Error in the Original matter of Substance
Page 197 A writ of Covenant upon a fine, dated after the return, is there
amendable, but not in other actions ib. A common recovery taken by intendment
Page 197, 198
Cases of Pardons.
When a Writ shall be said to be depending Page 198 Where an Amerciament is
pardoned, the Statutes of Jeofailes extend to WALES Page 199 Debts to the Q
are excepted, but not Originally due to the Subject ib. Where the K. may
pardon corporal punishment Page 200 The K. may pardon the Suite in the Court
Christian, but not costs ib. An Office of intitling (but not of Instruction)
may be under the great Seal Page 201 Where the rents are several and where
joint, and where the Patentee of part, may take advantage of a condition Page
202 A grant after Office, and before the return is good ib. The Bishop must
show the cause of refusing a Clerk Page 203 The Constable may bring an
Offender to what Justice he will ib. Upon refusal to find surety, the
Constable may commit him ib. Where a man shall avoid a fraudulent deed by 27.
Eliz. Page 204 The Defendant pleads another Action depending for the same Page
205
Cases of Bylaws.
Where the Inhabitants of a Town may make Bylaws, and where the consent of
the greater part shall bind all ib. Who are liable toward the repaires of a
Church Page 207 Against a devise of Lands by writing, no averrment can be
received Page 208
Cases of Usury.
What manner of contract is Usury Page 208, 209 A demurrer is a confession of
all matters in fact, well pleaded Page 208 What things may be released before
the day Page 209 Daggs, Pistolls, etc. are within the Statute of 33. H. 8. c.
6. ib. The Sheriff or his officers may carry Weapons invasive or defensive ib.
One man cannot have an Action for a common nuisance Page 210 If an Orphan sue
for goods in the Court Christian, a prohibition lies ib. A Deed showed in
Court, remains there all that Term Page 211 In the K. B. imparlances in
bar are entered, but not to reply ib. The Wife, Tenant for life dies, the
Baron is not liable for wast ib. When amends may be tendered after a distress,
but not after impounding, tender to the Bailiffe is not good Page 212 The
Plaintiff may pray a Deed to be entered, In haec verba, the same Term, but
not after ib. An action of wast lies, after the death of him in remainder for
life ib. Every assignee of every Lessee, mediate, or immediate, is within 11.
H. 6. c. 5. Page 213 An award must be certain, and binds none but parties Page
214 A prescription for common, where it is good ib. Where a warra^ty comenceth
by disseissin Page 214, 215 A confirmation of the Land, and of the term, a
diversity Page 215
Cases of Customs.
Where a custom binds Strangers Page 216 Where property is altered by sale in
a Market Overt ib. A custom which adds more solemnity to the Law, is good
ib. Who shall have the Corn upon the ground Page 216, 217 Where judgment
final shall be given in Wales Page 217
Cases of Executions.
One in execution escapes, yet the other is liable Page 218 Where the
Defendant is in Execution for the King, he shall be also for the Plaintiff
Page 219 If a Man be in custody, and another Writ comes to the Sheriff, he
is in custody of force of the second Writ also Page 220 A judicial Writ
needs no return, but not so of an Elegit ib. Where restitution shall be after
reversall of Outlarly, or judgment Page 221 Where the Sheriff may break the
House to make Execution Page 222 That a House is not a defense of Strangers ib.
A false consideration is void, as to the Queen Page 223, 224 The Law finds
not an assignee in Law, where one in Fact Page 224 Four bring a Quare impedit,
and one releaseth, it barreth only him ib. After a Divorce issue by the second
Husband legitimate Page 225 False evidence to the Grand Inquest is not within 5
Eliz. ib. Commissioners of Sewers must tax all who are in danger ib. A Quod
permittat for a Nuisance where it lies without request Page 226, 227 And where
against a Feoffee or assignee Page 227 Two have Title to present by turn, one
presents I. S. who is deprived, or Mere laicus, it is a turn, not if the
admission be void ib. Vterque taken sometimes discretive, sometimes collective
Page 228 The Plaintiff cannot refuse to join in demurrer, but the King may
ib. A man cannot have an Action for damage by Coins ib. None may erect a
Dovehouse, but the Lord of a Manor ib. Ancient demesne is a good plea in
Ejectione sirmae, not in Trespass Page 229 Excellent diversity of Learning
touching Wrecke ib. When the high Admiral shall have jurisdiction Page 230
Plentiful matter touching goods wayved, goods of Fellons, Deodands, etc. Page
231 What things may be gained by usage, without matter of Record ib. Rendering
rent to one and his heirs, and to one or his heirs, is all one Page 232 The
King by his Proclamation may make foreign Coin current ib. A Tender of money
in bags is a good tender, Page 233 In a writ of Estrepement the Sheriff may
take posse com. ib. Estrepement lies in wast as well before judgment as after,
ib. Feme Copiholder, durante viduitate sows the Lord shall have it, ib.
Payment of parcel before the day, is satisfaction for all, Page 234 Grantee of
a remainder liable for arreares of a rent charge, ib. Debt against one joint
obligor, he cannot plead Non est factum. Page 235 But he may, if the deed
become void by matter, Ex-post facto, ib. In Indictments certainty to a
certain in general is good, ib. False Latin shall not quash an Indictment,
ib. In Indictments of death, Percussit must be, except in case of poisoning,
Page 236 A lense for years is an interest within 4 H. 7. c. 25. ib. A libell
may be as well against a private man, as a Magistrate, ib. Non refert, whether
it be true, or the party of good fame, ib. If a man find a Libell, advise how
to to preserve himself, Page 237 Guardian in chivalrie shall have the single
value of the marriage without Tender. ib. The great Case, De jure regis
Ecclesiastico upon the Statutes of 1 Eliz. c. 1. p. 2. Touching a Deprivation
by the Bishop, and the Kings supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical. Page 237, 238

THE SIXTH BOOK.
Where services shall be multiplied, apportioned, or extinct. Page 239 Where
the parole shall demurre for nonage of the demandant, and where the Tenant
shall have his age, much good learning, Page 240 The King grants the tenancy by
attainder, the mesnalty is revived, Page 241 The K. grants land Tenendum by a
rose pro omnibus, etc. what Tenure. Page 242 Resolutions and Diversities, when
a bar in one action shall be a bar in another. ib. Where a Writ shall be
brought by Journeyes accounts. Page 243 Who are Judges in Inferior Courts.
Page 244 Jointenants cannot make partition by words after 28. H. 8. c. 1. ib. A
Parson deprived for Adultery, which is pardoned, he is restored. Page 245 A
Visne must be from the most certain place, ib. Tenant for life, and he in
remainder join in a lease, how it inureth. Page 246 Riens passa tried where
the land is, not where the patent dated, ib. A devise to his brother paying 20.
s. he has fee, ib. A devise to Baron and Feme and their children, what estate
it is, Page 247 Where the will is directory, and where declaratory without
reference to power, ib. A diversity between a suite by Citation, and an
Appeal, Page 248 If a Statute speaks in any Court of Record, it shall be
intended, of the four Courts of Westminst. propter excellentiam, Page 249 Of
what actions the Marshalsea holds plea, ib. A Parson must be resident, and
what is a good excuse of it, Page 250 Where the Father shall have the wardship
of his daughter, ib. If the daughter be married, infra annos nubibiles, and the
Baron dye, yet she may be in ward to the Queen, ib. By the law the Testator
must have a disposing memory, Page 251 Where the lease and not the seisin must
be traversed, ib. He who claims by the first assignment shall not traverse
the second, Page 252 Where the Release of one Plaintiff barreth the rest, ib.
What act shall amount to a livery of seisin ib. The word King includes all
his Successors Page 253 Where the King shall have a fine for alienation ib
Where Lapse shall not incur without notice Page 254 If the Q. present Ratione
lapsus where she is Patron, it is void ib. Acts transitory and local must be
done in convenient time Page 255 Where they must be hastened by request ib.
What is a good revocation of uses Page 256 Every Lease must have a certain
beginning and continuance ib. Grant of a Copyhold for three lives by Deane and
Chapter good by 13. Eliz. Page 257 Where an Assignee may plead a Deed of
License without showing ib. The Construction of Alibi in a grant of rent charge
Page 258 A condition of an intaile, not to suffer a recovery, is void ib. Where
an accord with satisfaction is a good plea ib. So long as judgment in Debt is
in force, no new action lies Page 259 When the place is material, the issue
cannot be found elsewhere ib. Where a thing done beyond the Sea is triable here
Page 259, 260 Where the Vsurpor gains the inheritance against an Infant Page
260 Where collation puts a man out of possession ib. An Incumbent shall not
be moved, if not named in the Writ ib. A Peer cannot be Arrested for Debt
Page 261 A difference between nobility by descent, and by Marriage ib. The
duty of the Officer upon an arrest ib. The K. grant good if he be not deceived
Page 262 Payment of rent by a Termor gives no seisin to have an Assize ib. In
the Kings Case, general alleging of seisin is good Page 263 To claim common
Ratione commorantiae, is not good ib. Tenant for life or years, must prescribe
in his name, who has fee ib. A custom for every inhabitant to have a way, is
good ib. The difference between a prescription, and a custom Page 264 Six
Months given to present, according to the Calendar ib. By grant and render of
the Demesnes, the Manor is destroyed Page 265 But otherwise it is, if by act
in Law, as upon partition ib. Who may surrender, and where it is requisite Page
266 The heir Female, shall not forfeite the donable value ib. Where the
purchasor shall avoid a Lease by fraud Page 267 If the Heir be Knighted in the
life of his Auncestor; no wardship Page 268 Where the Heir shall forfeite the
double value ib. What shall be collusion within Marlebridge, c. 6. ib.
Excellent Resolutions upon 32. H. 8. of Wills ib. The Lord may have a certain
sum, Pro certo letae Page 269 Judgment in Debt against a jointenant, who
releaseth to his Companion, that Moity is liable to the Judgment ib. Executors
(though not named) are within diverse Statutes Page 270
THE SEVENTH BOOK.
SIx demonstrative conclusions resolved, why Calvin the Postnatus ought to be
answered Page 271 Where the Plaintiff may choose in what County to bring his
Action. Page 273 The Common in Norfolk, called Shack, is good Page 274 Cases
upon the Statute of 13. E. 1. of VVinchister, for Hue and Cry, and what
alteration is made therein by 27. Eliz. c. 13. Page 275 What acts a Guardian
shall avoid, but not the Lord by escheate Page 276 If one be to have a thing in
consideration of an act to be done by him, he must show the performance of it
Page 277 The Q Tenant, Pur auter vie, leaseth for years, good without recital
Page 278 What conditions are given to the Q ib. What kind of Certificats are
traversable Page 279 All wild Swannes in a Common River may be seized for the
K. ib. A Swan-marke must be by grant of the K. or prescription ib. And he must
have five Marks per annum, by 22. E. 4. c. 6. ib. To what Debts the Statute of
33. H. 8. c. 39. extends Page 280 Process in one Court, and decree in
another, Bond for Covenants is within it ib. In what Cases Lands are extendable
by the K. within 33. H. 8. Page 281 What debts are not within that Statute ib.
A rent issues out of one acre, and the other liable to the distress ib. A
rent may be seck and charge at several times Page 282 Cases of Quare impedit.
Where a Quare impedit may be without naming the Patron Page 282 283 If the
Plaintiff in a Q. I. after appearance be Non-suite, where it is peremptory and
where not Page 283 When the King has a transitory title only, it may be lost
ib. Where a demand of rent must be made precisely on the day Page 284
Discontinuance of Process, and what is revived by general resummons, and what
by special ib. What fine levied by the King barreth the tail Page 285 What
Statutes bind the King ib. A dignity may be intailed and forfeited Page 286 The
King cannot grant the penalty of a Statute to a Subject ib. A rent extinct
shall be in esse to some purposes Page 287 A consideration may be averred,
which stands with the Deed ib. Where an estate tail may be with the words (Of
the body of) Page 288 The sentence of Divorce being in force, the issue before
is a Bastard Page 288 Such sentence may be repealed after death of the parties
ib. One Bill of reviver upon another not sufferable Page 289

THE EIGHTH BOOK.
THe Charter of Creation of the Prince, Duke of C. 11 E. 3. is an act of
Parliament Page 291 The grant to the Patentees is not aided by the Statute of
Confirmations Page 292 Five things requisite to maintain an Action against an
Inkeeper for Goods lost Page 293 Where the Husband shall be Tenant by the
courtesy ib. Who shall be said a common Barretor Page 294 Who may assesse a
fine for a contempt, and what remedy for it Page 294, 295 Who shall avoid a
feoffement by an Infant Page 295 Three manner of Privities ib. Lessor for life
shall avoid a Lease for years, made by Tenant for life ib. There were but two
manner of Assizes at the Common Law Page 296 In an assize of a new Office, the
profit thereof must be showed Page 296, 297 A warranty is entire, and barreth
all upon whom it discends Page 297 Good matter upon the Statute of Glouc. c. 3.
ib. The King has three manner of inheritances grantable in him Page 298 When
the Kings Charter shall be taken to two intents good, how it shall be expounded
ib. A Retraxit must be in proper person, and where one may appear by Attorney
Page 299 No writ of Error lies after disclaimer, it does after Retraxit, ib.
The copiholder comes in by custom paramount, Page 300 Where seisin of a rent
needs not to be alleged within forty years, ib. If the Jury try an Issue,
they shall not try it again by new nisi prius. Page 301 Where de Injuria sua
propria is a good plea, and where not, Page 301, 302 Who may certify
excommunication, and when it rightly done, ib. When a power to make leases for
21. years, or 3. lives rendering the ancient rent, is well pursued, Page 303
Baron and Feme tenants in special tail, she is within 32. H. 8. c. 28. Page
304 To what things a condition of accruer may be annexed, Page 305 Four things
requisite to an accruer, ib. By purchase of part of the land in which, etc.
common appurtenant destroyed, Page 306 An authority is countermandable, but
then the bond is forfeited, Page 307 A devise of rent out of all the Capite
land is good, out of 2. parts, ib. Where one formedome lies upon two distinct
gifts, Page 308 In actions real founded upon tort, one writ lies upon
several Titles, ib. In personal actions one may comprehend several torts,
ib. The demaundant must make himself heir to the party last seized, Page 309
A disturbance by parol is no breach of a condition, Page 310 Where the
Plaintiff shall have judgment, although his title destroyed, ib. What words
with consideration amount to a bargain and sale, ib. An Inrollment not
necessary where a chattell only passes, Page 311 Where a will inureth by way
of executory devise. ib. A man may devise an estate, which he cannot do by act
executed, ib. What shall be said a good awarde, Page 312 Where the heir of a
copyholder beyond the seas shall be barred, etc. ib. Mulier prisne over the
seas barred by the death of bastard eigne, Page 313 What manner of services
multiplied, and what extinct, ib. Herriot custom by purchase of part is not
extinct, Page 314 What power the Censors of Physicians College have, ib. Where
a count may be made good by the bar, and that by Replication. Page 316 Many
things good by custom, which cannot be by Charter, ib. The improvement shall
be employed to the former charitable uses, Page 317 Nothing accounted
administered but the money paid by Composition, Page 318 Where the plaintiff
shall have judgment, the Replication being evil, ib. Fully administered
pleaded, the Jury find asset^s for part, what judgment, ib. The force of a
Repeal, and where the ordinary may commit administration, Page 319 A
difference where obligor is made administrator, and where executor, ib. A
commoner in a forest, where he may enclose within the stat. of 22. E. 4. c. 7.
ib. If A. be in execution upon an erroneous judgment, and escape, and the
judgment is reversed, the action against the Sheriff is gone, Page 320 But if
judgment and execution be against the Sheriff before that, it shall stand
good against him, ib. Tenant for years grants the next avoidance, and
surrenders how it works, Page 321 Where a man abusing his License, he shall
be Trespasser ab initio, ib. Tender of sufficient amends for damage feasant,
when good, Page 322 What is barred by a Release of di^ctions, Quarrels,
Suites, etc. ib. What Errors in a Record are amendable, much good matter Page
324, 325 See there ten Misprisions not yet remedied Page 326 Cases in the Court
of Wards.
Where Collusion may be averred to defraud the King of Wardship ib. The King
shall have no wardship, where there is no heir Page 327 Where a Patent shall
he good Quacunque via data ib. If the first Melius inquirendum be good, no
other shall issue Page 328 To what several times an Office shall have relation
ib. A sale of Chattells after judgment Bona, is good, not after Execution Page
329 A Bargain and Sale by the heir after livery tendered, is good ib. The
Heir Knighted in the Life of the Father, who dies, the Heir tenders livery,
the mean rates are saved ib. Where the King shall have his third part out of
the whole Page 330

THE NINTH BOOK.
WHere a subsequent Indenture may direct uses in a precedent recovery Page 331
Where an averrment of other uses may be made ib. A common essoyne is allowable
in Dower Page 332 In a Writ of Dower who may plead deteinment of Chartars Page
333 The Beasts of the Termor are distreined, and an avowry made upon a mere
Stranger, what remedy for the Termor Page 334 No distress for damage feasant,
if the Cattle be chased out ib. What ancient Franchises ought to have
allowance Page 335 What privileges are extinct, if they return to the Crown
ib. Where the Tenure, and where the seisin is traversable Page 336 A difference
when one Executor refuses, and when all do Page 337 They can bring no actions
before probate Page 338 What power the Ordinary has over the goods of the
intestate ib. See 21. H. 8. c. 5. touching granting administrations Page 339
The grant of the Stewardship of the Manor of D. good, without naming the
County where it lies ib. Where such a Grantee may make a Deputy without
express power Page 339 Where Non user is a forfeiture of an Office Page 340
What Writs, Vi and armis, are good, Causa causans, and Causa causata ib. What
words amount to a Release Page 341 If it appear, that the Nusans is to the
damage of the Plaintiff, he needs not show it, he may abate the Nusans if he
will ib. Westminster. 2. c. 24. extends not to the Alienee of the alienee ib. How
conspirators may be punished before acquitall Page 342 Conspiracies punishable
before Execution must have four incidents ib. What Act shall be said to be a
Nusans, as a Limepit, etc. Page 343 What things requisite to convict a man of
Libelling ib. A man needs not to show that which lies not properly in his
notice Page 344 Much noteable matter touching Indictments, and a Sergeants duty
Page 344, etc. Commissioners to examine witnesses, are not bound strictly to
the Letter Page 346 What the duty of a Commissioner is, and how he must demean
himself Page 347 Whither a Feme Covert be within the S^ of Westminster. 2. c. 35.
ib. What Marriage is within that Statute Page 348 A surrender made by a
Copyholder by Letter of Attorney is good ib. What authorities may be Executed
by Attorney ib. Where the Act must be done in the name of the authorizor Page
349 Where an accord is a good plea, and what is requisite thereunto Page 349,
350 What Act shall be adjudged murder, Ex eventu Page 351 Where an
Attornement shall bind an Infant ib. An action of the Case lies against
Executors for the Testators Debt Page 352 Where a man may wage his Law Page
353 What words shall be adjudged a good consideration Page 354 What Offices
grantable for years, and by what Acts Offices may be forfeited, and where the
King may seize without Scire facias Page 355, 356 Copyhold estates are within
4. H. 7. of fines Page 356 Disseissor of Copyhold levyes a fine, what time the
Lord has ib. Who may enter without command to avoid a fine Page 356, 357 A
plea by an administratrix of fully administered, must be certain Page 358
Where an Allegation generally of Covin, is good ib. A commoner Copyholder may
have an Action of the Case for the loss of his Common, so he may distreine
damage feasant ib. A Baron of Scotland shall be tried by Commons of England
Page 359 See the diverse Resolutions of difficulties arising upon the
Indictment of the Lord Sanchar, and others Page 359, 360 Cases in the Court of
Wards.
The Kings release does not extinguish a service inseparable Page 361 When the
Land moves from a Subject, and the Tenure is changed, the new Tenure shall be
as near the ancient as may be ib. Where the particular estate is out of 32.
H. 8. no wardship accrueth to the King, by advancement of him in remainder,
otherwise of a reversion, for he is Tenant Page 362 What words are sufficient
to create an estate tail Page 363 The Kings possibility shall not divest a
Wardship vested Page 364 The reviving of an ancient Tenure preferred before
the reservation of a new ib. By death of the father before livery sued, and
after tender The King loses primer seisin, but no mean rates Page 365 Of a
fruitless reversion, a wardship, but not primer seisin ib. Where the saving in
32. H. 8. gives ward and primer seisin Page 366 A Mensnalty cannot be
suspended in part, and in esse for part by the act of the party, but it may by
Act of Law, or a third person ib. There are four manner of Avowries Page 367
What Act is a good delivery of a Deed, or of seisin of Land ib. One may have an
estate tail which cannot descend Page 368 Three manner of Confirmations Page
369

THE TENTH BOOK.
WHat things requisite to the Founding of an Hospital, see at large Page 371
An estate tail barred by recovery in value without recompense Page 374 A Feme
Covert shall not loose her Land by any conclusion, without examination upon a
Writ in Court. ib. Tenant for life suffers a recovery, and he in remainder in
tail is vouched, the reversion in fee is barred Page 375 The devise of a term
to one for life, the remainder to another for life, is good, as an Executory
devise Page 376 The first Devisee cannot bar him who has the Executory
devise ib. Assent to the first devise is an assent for all ib. Such an
executory devise not grantable over ib. but it may be extinguished by release
to the first Devisee ib. Qui destruit medium destruit finem Page 377 If a
Recusant grant the next avoidance before conviction, it is void by 3. Jacobi.
for he is disabled from the beginning of the Session, etc. Page 378 Covin shall
not be presumed, if it be not averred ib. A private Act shall be taken as it is
Pleaded ib. What grants of Offices by a Bishop are void by 1. Eliz. except for
twenty one years, or three lives, and what Circumstances requisite Page 380
Praerogativa Regis, c. 15. excepts Knights fees, and advowsons and indowments,
all other appendants now pass by grants, and so do they in Case of
Restitution Page 381 A Corporation aggregate may make a surrender in Law, not
in Deed Page 382 The Jurisdiction of the Marshalsea, and the reasons thereof
Page 382, 383 About 4. E. 3. the Court of Kings Bench became resident Page 383
A good diversity where the Court has Jurisdiction, but proceed, In verso
ordine, and where they have not Jurisdiction, there all they do is Coram non
judice, and void Page 383, 384 Diverse abstruse points resolved, some at the
common Law, and several upon the Statutes of 32. and 34 H. 8. of wills Page
385, 386 What Color is, and where it must be given Page 388 Where a privy
interest, although he claim but part must show the first Deed, except he claim
merely by Law Page 388, 389 Where a man may have a freehold discendible Page
390 A warranty bars no estate which is not displaced, at the time of etc. ib.
A warranty cannot enlarge an estate, where it may be given in evidence Page 391
What Obligations made to Sheriffs are within the Statute of 23. H. 6. Page
391 Forma verbalis, and Forma legalis, or Essentialis Page 392, 393 The time of
granting a Tales, and when it is well granted Page 396, 397 The proper place of
a reservation is after limitation of the estate Page 397 Increase of services
is between very Lord, and very Tenant Page 398 When Lands shall be said to be
concealed from the K. 398, 399 A man shall have costs in all cases where he
recover damages Page 400 Where a man shall recover damages and costs also, ib.
Where to the writ of Inquiry, and to the verdict, and judgment, ib. Where
insufficient verdict may be supplied by a writ of Inquiry, and where it cannot,
a good difference, Page 401 A difference between ancient Corporations, and
new, in matter of Misnosmer, Apices Juris, non sunt Jura, Page 401, 402 Which
is the legal time of payment of Rent, Page 402 If payment be in the morning,
and the lessor dye at noone, this is satisfactory against the heir but not
against the King, ib. Where the lessee shall hold rent free for a quarter, Page
402 Where Damages may be assessed entirely, and where not, Page 403, 404 What
words pass under the name of Latin, Page 404 Where by death of one of the
Plaintiffes after summons and severance the writ abateth, diverse good
diversities, Page 404, 405 A Qu. impedit praesentare ad medietatem Ecclesiae,
where good, ib. Cases upon the Commissions of Sewers.
Where the Commissioners may subvert a Cawsey, and where not, Page 406 If a
wall be subverted by a sudden inundation, the Commissioners may tax all
equally who have damage thereby, ib. Otherwise if it come by neglect of him who
ought to do it, ib. If the Commissioners have power to make a new River, and a
general tax, so much upon every Town for doing thereof, Page 407 What is a
good revocation of old uses, and limitation of new. Page 409

THE ELEVENTH BOOK.
A Difference between a disability absolute, and temporary, or personal, Page
411 The grant of the office of Auditor to two is good, Page 412 What offices
grantable in reversion, ib. Where the Jurors may assesse damages severally,
Page 413 Where one shall have an attaint that is a stranger to the issue, ib.
Where a writ of Enquiry shall issue, Page 414 The plaintiff shall have
judgment, de melioribus damnis, ib. The conclusion of a plea is not
traversable, Page 415 In every issue there must be an affirmative, and a
negative, ib. The Impropriation sufficient in the life of the Incumbent, ib.
Where the witnesses are not punishable for perjury Page 416 Perpetual unity a
discharge, and what requisite thereunto. ib. What prescription for tithes of
houses is good, ib. A customary Manor may be holden of another Manor. Page
417 What variance in the name of a Corporation does vitiate. Page 418 What
devise of socage by tenant is Capite is good. Page 419 An Ejectione firmae of
tithes without showing their kinds, not good. ib. If a deed be rased, the
obligor may plead Non est factum. Page 420 A diversity where it is rased by the
obligee himself, and where by another. ib. Where Clergy allowable at the
Common law, and where at this day, copious and excellent matter, Page 421
Where an Error lies not before the final Judgment. Page 423 A fine by the
Stewart of a Manor where it is well assessed. Page 425 Where the Lord may
destreine for it without prescription. ib. Where an action shall abate in
part, and where for the whole. Page 426 Notwithstanding the exception trees
remain parcel of the Inheritance. ib. A thing in possession cannot be parcel
of a reversion upon an estate for life. Page 427 None may be prohibited by the
common law to use any trade. Page 428 An ordinance by a Corporation against
law, is void. ib. How an Ejectione firmae must be brought, Page 429 Although
the damages are not well assessed, yet the Plaintiff may have judgment. ib.
Much variety of Learning touching Recusancy, and upon the several Statutes
concerning them, Page 429, 430 Master and Fellows of a College restrained to
grant by 13. Eliz. what statutes do bind the King. Page 432 Some grants to
the King void, and some voidable. Page 433 Where acceptance of Rent does
bar, and where not. Page 434 Tenant in tail after possibility of etc. has a
greater estate in quality, then tenant for life not in quantity. Page 434, 435
What privileges belong to his estate. Page 435 A lease without impeachment of
wast, what passes thereby. ib. A monopoly is against law, and has three
incidents against the weal public. Page 436 What fees belong to the office
of Master of the Ordnance. Page 427 In the Kings Case the law makes a privity
to be accomptable. ib. For what causes a Citizen may be disfranchised. Page 438
The 3. Book, fol. 9. Dowties Case.
A Difference where the first certainty is false in a grant, and where the
first is true, and the second false. Page 439 Where lands are in the Q. by 33.
H. 8. c. 20. without seizure. ib.
Fol. 11. Sir William Harberts Case.
What remedy for debts at the common law, and when the body and lands became
liable thereunto. Page 440, 44^ In all actions, vi et armis, the body was
subject unto Imprisonment, and so for debt at the Kings suite. Page 441 The
heirs of the con^is^ser shall not have contribution against a purchasor. ib.
Changes real do not survive, but personal do. Page 442 Three Errors there
moved, but not resolved. ib.

FINIS.

