CERTAIN SELECT CASES IN LAW, REPORTED: BY Sir EDWARD COKE, Knight, LATE Lord
CHIEF JUSTICE OF ENGLAND And one of His Majesty's Council of STATE.

Translated out of a Manuscript written with his own hand.

Never before Published.

With two Exact Tables, the one of the Cases, and the other of the Principal
Matters therein contained.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft for J. Sherley, H. Twyford, and Tho. Dring,
and are to be sold at their Shops, at the Pelican in Little-Brittain, in
Vine-Court Middle Temple, and at the George in Fleetstreet. 1659.

TO THE READER.
READER,
IT may seem altogether an unnecessary work to say any thing in the praise and
vindication of that Person and his Labors, which have had no less then the
general approbation of a whole Nation convened in Parliament: For if King
THEODORICK in Cassiodore could affirm, Neque enim dignus est a quopiam
redargui qui nostro judicio meretur absolvi, That no man ought to be reproved
whom his Prince commends. How much rather then should men forbear to censure
those and their Works which have had the greatest allowance and attestation a
Senate could give, and to acquiesce and rest satisfied in that judgment? Such
respect and allowance has been given to the learned Works of the late
Honorable and Venerable Chief Justice, Sir EDWARD COKE, whose Person in his
life time was reverenced as an Oracle, and his Works (since his decease) cyted
as Authentic Authorities, even by the Reverend Judges themselves. The
acceptance his Books (already extant) have found with all knowing Persons, has
given me the confidence to commend to the public view some Remains of his,
under his own handwriting, which have not yet appeared to the World, yet
(like true and genuine Eaglets) are well able to behold and bear the light:
They are of the same Piece and Woofe with his former Works, and in respect of
their own native worth, and the reference they bear to their Author, cannot be
too highly valued: Though, in respect of their quantity and number, the Reports
are but few; yet, as the skillful Jeweller will not lose so much as the very
filings of rich and precious metals; and the very fragments were commanded to
be kept where a Miracle had been wrought, Propter miraculi claritatem and
evidentiam: So these small parcels, being part of those vast and immense
labors of their Author, great almost to a Miracle (if I may be allowed the
comparison:) were there no other use to be made of them (as there is very much,
for they manifest and declare to the Reader many secret and abstruse points in
Law, not ordinarily to be met with in other Books so fully and amply related)
deserve a publication, and to be preserved in the respects and memories of
Learned men, and especially the Professors of the Law; and to that end they are
now brought to light and published. If any should doubt of the truth of these
Reports of Sir EDWARD COKE, they may see the original Manuscript in French,
written with his own hand, at Henry Twyfords Shop in Vine-Court Middle Temple.

Farewell.
J. G.

MICH. AN. 6 JACOBI REGIS In the Common Pleas.
Willowes Case.
IN Trespass brought by Richard Stallon one of the Attorneys of the Court
against Thomas Bradye (which began in Easter Copyhold Fine reasonable.
Term, An. 6 Jacobi Rot. 1845.) for breaking of his House and Close at
Fenditton in the County of Cambridge; And the new Assignment was in an Acre of
Pasture: The Defendant pleads that the place where, etc. was the Land and
Freehold of Thomas Willowes and Richard Willowes; and that he as Servant, etc.
And the Plaintiff for Replication says, that the place where, was parcel of
the Manor of Fenditton, and demisable, etc. by Copy of Court-roll in
Fee-simple: And that the Lords of the Manor granted the Tenements in which,
etc. to John Stallon and his heirs, who surrendered them unto the said Willowes,
and VVillowes, Lords of the said Manor, to the use of the Plaintiff and his
heirs, who was admitted accordingly, etc. The Defendant does rejoyn, and says,
That well and true it is, that the Tenements in which, etc. were parcel of the
Manor, and demisable, etc. And the surrender and admittance such, pro ut, etc.
But the said Thomas Bradye further says, that the Tenements in which, etc. at
the time of the Admission of the said Richard Stallon, were, and yet are of the
clear yearly value of fifty three shillings and four pence; And that within the
said Manor there is such a Custom, Quod rationabilis denariorum summa legalis
monetae Angliae super quamlibet admissionem cujuslibet personae, sive
quarumcunque personarum tenent. vel tenent. per Dom. vel Dominos Manerii
praedict. sive per Seneschallum, etc. ad aliquas terras sive Tenementa
Customaria Manerii praedict. secundum Consuetudinem Manerii illius debetur and
a tempore quo, etc. debitum fuit Dom. etc. tempore ejusdem admissionis pro sine
pro admissione illa, quod idem Dominus, vel idem Dom. praedict. vel
Seneschallus suus Curiae ejusdem Manerii pro tempore existen. usus fuit, vel
usi fuerunt per totum Tempus supradict. in plena Curia Manerii illius pro
Admissione ejusdem personae, seu earundum personarum sic facta, assidere and
appunctuare, Anglice, to Assesse, and appoint eandem rationabilem denariorum
summam pro fine pro eadem Admissione sic and praefertur facta, nec non
superinde eandem denariorum summam sic assessam and appunctuatam, praefatae
personae sive personis sic admissae sive admissis, solveret and solverent, etc.
eidem Domino, etc. praedictam rationabilem denariorum summam pro fine, pro
Admissione sua praedict. sic assessam and appunctuat. And further says, That
the Steward of the said Manor, at a Court holden 1. October. in the fourth year
of the Reign of the King that now is, admitted the Plaintiff to the Tenements,
in which, etc. and assessed and set a reasonable sum of money, that is to say,
five pounds, six shillings, eight pence, that is to say, Valorem corundem
tenementorum per duos annos, and non ultra pro fine pro praedict. Admissione
praedict. Richard. Stallon to the said Lords of the Manor to be paid: And also
the said Steward at the same Court did give notice and signify to the
Plaintiff the said sum was to be paid to the said Lords of the Manor, etc.
And further says, that the said VVillowes and VVillowes, afterward, that is
to say, the second day of November, in the fourth year aforesaid, at Fenditton
aforesaid, requested the said Richard Stallon to pay to them five pounds, six
shillings, eight pence there, for the Fine for his admittance, etc. which the
said Rich. Stallon, then and there utterly denied and refused, and as yet does
refuse. By which the said Richard Stallon forfeited to the aforesaid Thomas and
Richard VVillowes all his Right, Estate, etc. of and in the Tenements aforesaid
in which, etc. The Plaintiff surjoyneth, and says, that the said sum of five
pounds, six shillings, eight pence, etc. was not rationabilis finis, as the
said Thomas Bradye above has alleged, etc: upon which the Defendant does
demur in Law. And in this Case these points were resolved by Coke chief
Justice, VValmesly, VVarberton, Daniel, and Foster Justices, 1. And
principally, If the Fine assessed had been reasonable, yet the Lords ought to
have set a certain time and place when the same should be paid, because the
same stands upon a point of forfeiture: As if a man bargains and assures Land
to one and his heirs, upon condition that if he pay to the Bargains or his
heirs ten pounds at such apiace, that he and his heirs shall re-enter: In that
case because no time is limited, the Bargainor ought to give notice to the
Bargains, etc. when he will tender the money, and he cannot tender it when he
pleases, and with that agrees, 19 Eliz. Dyer 354. For a man shall not lose his
Land, unless an express default be in him; and the Bargaineein such Case is
not tied to stay always in the place, etc. So in the Caseat Bar, the
Copyholder is not tied to carry his Fine always with him, when he is at
Church, or at Plow, etc. And although that the Rejoinder is, that the Plaintiff
refused to pay the Fine, so he might well do, when the request is not lawful
nor reasonable, for in all cases when the request is not lawful nor
reasonable, the party may without prejudice deny the payment. And he who is to
pay a great Fine as a 100 l. or more, it is not reasonable that he carry it
always with him in his Pocket, and presently the Copyholder was not bound to
it, because that the Fine was uncertain and arbitrable, as it was resolved in
Hulbarts Case in the fourth part of my Reports, amongst the Copyhold Cases. 2.
It was resolved, that although the Fine be uncertain and arbitrable, yet it
ought to be secundum arbitrium boni viri: And it ought to be reasonable and not
excessive, for all excessivenesse is abhorred in Law, Excessus in re qualibet
jure reprobatur Communi; For the Common Law forbids any excessive distress, as
it appears in 41 E. 3. 26. Where a man avowed the taking of sixty Sheep for 3
d. Rent, and the Plaintiff prayed that he might be amerced for the Distress:
And the Court (who is always the Judge whether the Distress be reasonable or
excessive) held, that six Sheep had been a sufficient Distress for the said
Rent, and therefore he was Vi. F. N. B 82 a reasonable Aid uncertain until the
Statute of Glanvi. lib. 9. fol. 70. 14 H. 4 9. by Hill. 14 H. 4. 1. 3.
amerced for so many of them as wereabove six Sheep: And the Court said, that
if the Avowant shall have return, he shall have a return but of six Sheep: And
this appears to be the Common Law; for the Statute of Artieuli super Cartas
extends only where a grievous Distress is taken for the Kings Debt. See F. N.
B. 174. a. and 27. Ass. 51. 28. Ass. 50. 11 H. 4. 2. and 8 H. 4. 16. etc. Non
Capiatur gravis Districtio. etc. And so if an excessive or an unreasonable
Amerciament be imposed in any Court Baron or other Court which is not of
Record, the party shall See Glanvil lib. 9. cap. 8. Optime, B. rationabilibus
auxiliis, ita tamen moderat. secund. Quantitatem feodorum suorum and secundum
facultates ut nemini gravidae viderentur, etc. Vide Bracton. 84. b. cationab.
relev. 1. quod rationem and mensuram non excedat. and see him there 86. optime,
etc:
have Moderata Misericordia: And the Statute of Magna Charta is but an
affirmance of the Common Law in such point. See F. N. B. 75. Nullus liber homo
amercietur nisi secundum quantitatem delicti. And gravis Redemptio non est
exigenda. And the Common Law gives an Assise of Sovient Distress, and
Multiplication of Distress found which is excessive, in respect of the
multiplicity of vexation. And therewith agrees 27. Ass. 50, 51. Non Capiatur
multiplex districtio, F. N. B. 178. b. And if Tenant in Dower has Villains, or
Tenants at Will who were rich, and she by excessive Tallages and Fines makes
them poor and Beggars, the same is adjudged Wast. And therewith agrees F. N.
B. 61. b. 16 H. 3. Wast 135. and 16 H. 7. And see the Register Judicial, fol.
25. b. Wast lies, in exulando Henricum, and Hermanum, etc. Villeius, Quorum
quilibet tenet unum Messuagium and unam virgat. terrae, in Villinagio in
praedict. villa de T. by grievous and intolerable Distresses: By all which it
appears, That the Common Law does forbid intolerable and excessive
oppressing and ransoming of Villains, whereby of Rich they become Poor: And yet
it may be said, that a man may do with his Villain what he pleases, or with
his Tenant at Will; but the Law limits the same in a reasonable and convenient
manner: For it appears, that such intolerable oppression of the poor Tenants
is to the disinherizin of him in the Reversion. So in the Case at Bar, Although
that the Fine is uncertain, yet it ought to be reasonable, and so it appears
by the said Custom which the Defendant has alleged. And therefore in such
Case, the Lord cannot take as much as he pleases, but the Fine ought to be
reasonable according to the Resolve of the Court in the said Case of Hubbard in
the fourth part of my Reports 30. Vide 14 H. 4. 4. by Hill.
It was resolved, That if the Lord and Tenant cannot agree of the Fine, but the
Lord demands more then a reasonable Fine, that the same shall be decided and
adjudged by the Court, in which any Suit shall be for, or by reason of the
denying of tho Fine, And the Court shall adjudge what shall be said a
reasonable Fine, having regard to the quality and value of the Land, and other
necessary circumstances which ought to appear in pleading upon a Demurrer, or
found by Verdict: And if the Fine which the Lord or his Steward assesseth be
reasonable, Bracton l. 2 fo. 51. Quam longuin debet esse tempus non definitur
in jure, sed pendet ^ex justicianorum discretiono.
Let the Copyholder well advise himself before he deny the payment of it: And
always when reasonableness is in question, the same shall be determined by
the Court in which the Action depends: As reasonable time, 21 H. 6. 30. 22 E.
4. 27. and 50. 29 H. 8. 32. etc. So if the Distress be reasonable, and the
like, etc.

It was resolved, That the said Fine in the Case at the Bar was unreasonable,
viz. To demand for a Cottage and an acre of Pasture, five pounds, six shillings
eight pence, for the Admittance of a Copyholder in Fee-simple upon a Surrender
made; For this is not like to a voluntary Grant, as when the Copyholder has
but an Estate for life, and dies, Or if he has an Estate in Fee-simple, and
commits Felony, there Arbitrio Dom. res estimari debet; but when the Lord is
compellable to admit him to whose use the Surrender is, And when Cestui que use
is admitted, he shall be in by him who made the Surrender, and the Lord is but
an Instrument to present the same: And therefore in such Case, the value of two
years for such an Admittance is unreasonable, especially when the value of the
Cottage and one acre of Pasture is a Rack, at fifty three shillings by the year.

5. It was resolved, That the Surjoynder is no more then what the Law says.
For in this Case in the Judgment of the Law, the Fine is unreasonable; and
therefore the same is but ex abundanti: and now the Court ought to judge upon
the whole special matter; And for the Causes aforesaid, Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff.

And Coke chief Justice said in this Case, That where the usage of the Court of
Admiralty is to amerce the Defendant for his default by his discretion, as it
appears in 19 H. 6. 7. That if the Amerciament be outrageous and excessive,
the same shall not bind the party, and if it be excessive or not, it shall be
determined in the Court in which the Action shall be brought, for the levying
of it: And the Writ of Account is against the Bailiff, or Guardian, Quod reddat
ei rationabilem Computum de exitibus Manerii. And the Law requires a thing
which is reasonable, and no excess or extremity in any thing.

II. Mich. 6 Jacobi, in the Common Pleas.
Porter and Rochesters Case.
THis Term Lewis and Rochester who dwelt in Essex within the The Statute of 23
H 8. of citing out of Dioces.
Dioces of London, were sued for substraction of Tithes growing in B. within
the County of Essex, by Porter, in the Court of the Arches of the Bishop of
Canterbury in London. And the Case was, That the Archbishop of Canterbury has
a peculiar Jurisdiction of fourteen Parishes, called a Deanery, exempted from
the Authority of the Bishop of London, whereof the Parish of S. Mary de Arcubus
is the Chief: And the Court is called the Arches, because the Court is holden
there: And a great question was moved, If in the said Court of Arches holden in
London within his Peculiar, he might cite any dwelling in Essex for
substraction of Tithes growing in Essex; Or if he be prohibited by the Statute
of the twenty third year of King Henry the eighth, cap. 9. And after that the
matter was well debated as well by Council at the Bar, as by Dr. Ferrard, Dr.
James, and others in open Court, and lastly, by all the Justices of the Common
Pleas,, A Prohibition was granted to the Court of Arches. And in this Case
diverse Points were resolved by the Court.

1. That all Acts of Parliament made by the King, Lords, and Commons of
Parliament are parcel of the Laws of England, and therefore shall be expounded
by the Judges of the Laws of England, and not by the Civilians and Commonists,
although the Acts concern Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Jurisdiction; And
therefore the Act of 2 H. 4. cap. 15. by which in effect it is enacted, Quod
nullus teneat, doceat, informet, etc. clam, vel public aliquam nefandam
opinionem contrariam sidei Catholicae seu determinationi Ecclesiae
sacro-sanctae, nec de hujusmodi secta, and nephandis Doctrinis Conventiculas
faciat: And that in such Cases, the Diocessan might arrest and imprison such
Offender, etc. And in 10 H. 7. the Bishop of London commanded one to be
imprisoned, because that the Plaintiff said that he ought not to pay his Tithes
to his Curat: and the party so imprisoned brought an Action of False
Imprisonment against those who arrested him by the commandment of the Bishop;
and there the matter is well argued, What words are within the said Statute,
and what without the Statute: So upon the same Statute it was resolved in 5 E.
4. in Keysars case in the Kings Bench, which you may see in my Book of
Presidents: And so the Statutes of Articuli Cleri, de Prohibitione regia; De
Circumspecte agatis, of 2 E. 6. cap. 13. and all other Acts of Parliament
concerning Spiritual Causes, have always been expounded by the Judges of the
Common Law: as it was adjudged in Woods Case, Pasch. 29 Eliz. in my Notes, fol.
22. So the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. has been expounded by the Judges of
the Realm concerning Pluralities, and the having of two Benefices: Common Laws
and Dispensations, see 7 Eliz. Dyer 233. The Kings Courts shall adjudge of
Dispensations and Commendams: See also 17 Eliz. Dyer 251. 14 Eliz. Dyer 312. 15
Eliz. Dyer 327 18 Eliz. Dyer 352. and 347. 22 Eliz. Dyer 377. Construction of
the Statute cap. 12. Smiths Case, concerning Subscription which is a mere
Spiritual thing. Also it appears by 22 Eliz. Dyer 377. That for want of
subscription the Church was always void by the said Act of 23 Eliz. and yet
the Civilians say, that there ought to be a Sentence Declaratorie, although
that the Act makes it void.

2. It was resolved by Coke chief Justice, Warberton, Daniel, and Foster
Justices, That the Archbishop of Canterbury is restrained by the Act of 23 H.
8. cap. 9. to cite any one out of his own Diocese, or his Peculiar
Jurisdiction, although that he holds his Court of Arches within London. And
first it was objected,

That the Title of the Act is; An Act that no person shall be cited out of the
Diocese where he or she dwells, except in certain Cases: And here the
Archbishop does not cite the said Party dwelling in Essex, out of the Diocese
of London, for he holds his Court of Arches within London.

2. The Preamble of the Act is, Where a great number of the Kings Subjects
dwelling in diverse Diocesses, etc. And here he does not dwell in diverse
Diocesses.

3. Far out of the Diocese where such men, etc. dwell, and here he does not
dwell far out, etc.

4. The body of the Act is, No manner of person shall be cited before any
Ordinance, etc. out of the Diocese or peculiar Jurisdiction where the person
shall be inhabiting, etc. And here he was not cited out of the Dioces of
London. To which it was answered and resolved, That the same was prohibited by
the said Act for diverse Causes.

1. As to all the said Objections, One answer makes an end of them all: For
Diocesis dicitur distinctio, vel divisio, sive gubernatio, quae divisa, and
diversa est ab Ecclesia alterius Episcopatus, and Commissa Gubernatio in unius;
and is derived a Di^ quod est duo and electio, id est, seperatio, quia seperat
duas Jurisdictiones: So Dioces signifies the Jurisdiction of one Ordinary
separated and divided from others; And because the Archbishop of Canterbury
has a peculiar Jurisdiction in London, exempt out of the Dioces or
Jurisdiction of the Ordinary or Bishop of London: For that cause it is fitly
said, in the Title, Peramble, and body of the Act, That when the Archbishop
sitting in his exempt Peculiar in London, cites one dwelling in Essex, he cites
him out of the Dioces or Jurisdiction of the Bishop of London, ergo he is cited
out of the Dioces: And in the clause of the penalty of ten pounds, It is said,
out of the Dioces, or other Jurisdiction where the party dwells, which
agrees with the signification of Dioces before. And as to the words, Far off,
etc. they were put in the Preamble, to show, the great mischief which was
before the Act: As the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 33. in the Preamble, it is
Disseisins with strength; and the body of the Act says, such Disseisor, yet
the same extends to all Disseisors, but Disseisin with force was the greatest
mischief, as it is holden in 4. and 5 Eliz. Dyer 219. So the Preamble of the
Statute of West. 2. cap. 5. is, Heirs in Ward, and the body of the Act is,
Hujusmodi praesentat. as it is adjudged in 44 E. 3. 18. That an Infant who has
an Advowson by descent and is out of Ward, shall be within the remedy of the
said Act, but the Frauds of the Guardians was the greater mischief. So the
Preamble of the Act of 21 H. 8. cap. 15. which gives falsifying of Recoveries,
recites in the Preamble, That diverse Lessees have paid diverse great Incomes,
etc. Be it enacted, That all such Termors, etc. and yet the same extends to all
Termors: and yet all these Cases are stronger then the Case at Bar, for there
that word (such) in the body of the Act refers the same to the Preamble,
which is not in our Case.

2. The body of the Act is, No manner of person shall be henceforth cited
before any Ordinary, etc. out of the Dioces or peculiar Jurisdiction where the
person shall be dwelling: And if he shall not be cited out of the Peculiar
before any Ordinary a Fortiori, the Court of Arches which sits in a Peculiar,
shall not cite others out of another Dioces: And these words, Out of the Dioces,
are to be meant out of the Dioces or Jurisdiction of the Ordinary, where he
dwells; but the exempt Peculiar of the Archbishop is out of the Jurisdiction
of the Bishop of London, as S. Martins, and other places in London, are not
part of London, although they are within the circumference of it.

3. It is to be observed, That the Preamble reciting of the great mischief,
recites expressly, That the Subjects were called by compulsary process to appear
in the Arches, Audience, and other high Courts of the Archbishopric of this
Realm; So as the intention of the said Act was to reduce the Archbishop to his
proper Dioces or peculiar Jurisdiction, unless it were in five Cases.

1. For any Spiritual Offense or cause committed, or omitted contrary to the
right and duty by the Bishop, etc. which word (omitted) proves that there ought
to be a default in the Ordinary.

2. Except it be in case of Appeal and other lawful cause wherein the party
shall find himself greived by the Ordinary after the matter or cause there
first begun; ergo the same ought to be first begun before the Ordinary.

3. In case that the Bishop of the Dioces, or other immediate Judge or Ordinary
dare not, or will not convent the party to be sued before him, where the
Ordinary is called the immediate Judge, as in truth he is; and the Archbishop
unless it be in his own Dioces (these special Cases excepted) mediate Judge,
scil. by Appeal, etc.

4. Or in case that the Bishop of the Dioces, or the Judge of the place within
whose Jurisdiction, or before whom the Suit by this Act should be begun and
prosecuted be party directly or indirectly to the matter or cause of the same
suit; Which clause in express words is a full exposition of the body of the
Act, scil. That every suit (others then those which are expressed) ought to be
begun and prosecuted, before the Bishop of the Dioces, or other Judge of the
same place.

5. In case that any Bishop or any inferior Judge having under him
Jurisdiction, etc. make request or instance to the Archbishop, Bishop, or other
inferior Ordinary or Judge, and that to be done in cases only where the Law
Civil or Common does affirm, etc. By which it fully appears, That the Act
intends, That every Ordinary and Ecclesiastical Judge should have the
Conusance of Causes within their Jurisdiction, without any Concurrent Authority
or Suit by way of prevention: And by this, the Subject has great benefit as
well by saving of travel and charges to have Justice in his place of
habitation, as to be judged where he and the matter is best known; As also that
he shall have many Appeals as his Adversary in the highest Court at the first.
Also there are two Provisoes which explains it also, scil. That it shall be
lawful to every Archbishop to cite any person inhabiting in any Bishops
Diocese within his Province, for matter of Heresy, (which were a vain
Proviso, If the Act did not extend to the Archbishop: But by that special
Proviso for Heresy, it appears, that, for all causes not excepted, is
prohibited by the Act) Then the words of the Proviso go further, If the Bishop
or other Ordinary immediately hereunto consent, or if the same Bishop or other
immediate Ordinary or Judge do not his duty in punishment of the same; which
words immediately and immediate expound the intent of the makers of the Act.

2. There is a saving for the Archbishop the calling any person out of the
Dioces where he shall be dwelling to the probate of any Testaments; which
Proviso should be also in vain, if the Archbishop notwithstanding that Act
should have concurrent Authority with every Ordinary through his whole
Province: Wherefore it was concluded that the Archbishop out of his Dioces,
unless in the Cases excepted, is prohibited by the Act of 23 H. 8. to cite any
man out of any other Dioces. And in truth the Act of 23. of Henry the eighth,
is but a Law declaratory of the ancient Canons, and of the true exposition of
them: The Act of 23 H. 8. is a Declaration of the old Canon Law.
And that appears by the Canon: Cap. Romana in sexto de Appellationibus, and
Cap. de Competenti in sexto. And the said Act is so expounded by all the Clergy
of England, at a Convocation in London, An. 1 Jac. Regis 1603. Canon 94. Where
it is decreed, ordained, and declared, That none should be cited to the Arches,
or Audience, but the Inhabitants within the Archbishops Dioces, or Peculiar,
other then in such particular Cases only as are expressly excepted and reserved
in and by a Statute, Anno 23 H. 8. cap. 9. And the King by Letters Patents
under the great Seal has given his royal Assent to this Canon 1. Jac. at the
Synod at London. Vi. Linwood de excusationibus 200. Lit. m. 5. and page 2. L. 2.
amongst others from time to time to be observed, fulfilled, and kept, as well
by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops and their Successors, and the rest
of the whole Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, in their several Callings,
Offices, Functions, Ministeries, Degrees, and Administrations; as also by all
and every Dean of the Arches, and other Judge of the said Archbishops Courts,
Guardians of Spiritualties, Chancellors, etc. So the same is also expressly
confirmed under the great Seal. And although the Archbishopric of Canterbury
was then void, yet the Guardian of the Spiritualties was there, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury that now is, and then Bishop of London, was by Letters
Patents, President of the said Council in the place of the Archbishop then
deceased: And the King gave his royal Assent to the same, and the said Canon
is of as full force as if the said late Archbishop of Canterbury had been then
alive. And whereas it is said in the Preamble of the Act, In the Arches,
Audience, and other high Courts Archbishops were Legati nati, and had Legatine
power which is now abolished, vi. Linwood.
of the Archbishop of this Realm; It is to be known, That the Archbishops of
this Realm before that Act had power Legatine from the Pope, by which they
pretended to have not only supereminent Authority over all, but concurrent
Authority with every Ordinary in his Dioces, not as Archbishop of Canterbury,
etc. but by his power and authority Legatine: For Sunt tria genera Legatorum 1.
quidam de latere Dom. Papae mittuntur, ut Cardinales quos appellant fratres. 2.
Alii sunt Dativi, and non de latere, qui simpliciter in Legatione mittantur,
etc. 3. Sunt Nati, sive Nativi, qui suarum Ecclesiarum praetextu legatione
fingantur, and Tales sunt quatuor. scil. Archepiscopus Cant. Eboracensis,
Remanensis, and Pisanis. So as before that Act, the Archbishop of Canterbury,
was Legatus Natus, and by force of his authority Legatine usurped against the
Canons upon all the Ordinaries in his Precinct, and by color thereof claimed
current authority with them, which although they held in the Courts of the
Archbishop, the same was remedied by the Act of 23 H. 8. cap. 9. and all that
which he usurped before, was not as he was Archbishop, for as to that he was
restrained by the Canons, but as he was Legatus Natus, which authority is now
taken away and abolished utterly.

Lastly, If the said Act of 23 H. 8. cap. 9. should not be so expounded, Vi
lib. Arch. Cant. p. 39. that the Archbishop of Cant. has a Peculiar in many
Dioces.
Then the Act which is principally made (as it appears by the Preamble
against the Courts of the Archbishopricks should be as to them illusory, For if
the Bishop of Canterbury in respect of his exempt Peculiar in London may draw
to him all the Dioces in London. So might he at Newington which is a Peculiar
in Winchester Dioces, draw to him the whole Dioces of Winchester: And at
Totteredge near Bornet, the whole Dioces of Lincoln, and so of the like.

3. It was resolved, That when any Judges are prohibited by any Act of
Parliament, that if they do proceed against the Act, there a Prohibition lies.
As against the Steward and Marshall of the Household. Quod seneschallus and
Mariscallus non teneant Placit. de libero tenem. de Debito, de Conventione*
etc. So the Statute of Articuli super chartas cap. 3. Register fol. 185. inter
Brevia super statuta. So against the Constable of the Castle of Dover: Quod non
tangit Custodiam Castri. So to Justices of Assise upon the statute Quod
Inquisitiones quae sunt magni exactionis non Capiantur in Patria. Also to the
Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, upon the statute Vi. Pasc. 42 Eliz. Rot.
139. Rudds case, a Prohibition for citing out of the Dioces. Tr. 44 Eliz. Rot.
1073. the like in an information upon the Statute against Zachary Babington.
Vi. If any one in the Spiritual Court appeals contrary to the Statute of 24 H.
8. cap. 12. although the matter be mere Spiritual a Prohibition lies. So upon
the Statute of 2 H 5. cap. 2.
De Articul. super Cartas Cap. 4. The statute of Rutland, Cap. ultimo. Quod
communia Placit. non teneantur in Scaccario. All which, and many more, you may
see in the Register inter Brevia super Statuta. See F. N. B. 45, and 46. etc.
17 H. 6. 54. vi. 13 E. 3. to Prohibition: A Prohibition to the Chancellor, and
diversity of Courts in the Title of Chancery. So against all Ecclesiastical
Judges upon the statute of 2 H. 5. cap. 3. If the Judges there will not give or
deliver to the party a Copy of the Libell, although that the matter be mere
Ecclesiastical: and therewith agrees 4 E. 4. 37. and F. N. B. 43. c. So the
Case upon the Statute of 2 H. 5. cap. 15. If the Ecclesiastical Judges in case
of Heresy, and other matters of mere Spiritualty do not proceed according to
the intention of the same statute; as it appears by the President in 5 E. 4.
Keysons Case, 10 H. 7. 17. See the opinion of Paston, 9 H. 6. 3. A man
excommunicated by the Bishop of London for a Crime done in another Dioces,
shall not be grieved thereby, so as the Common Law takes notice of the Canons,
in such case, as Coram non Judice. And although the statute of 23 H. 8.
inflicts a penalty, yet a Prohibition lies, for the inflicting of the penalty
does not take away the Prohibition of the Law: and therefore, Cap. which
inflicts punishment if the Sheriff does not put his Name unto the Return; yet
the same is Error if he does not put to his Name: see 35 H. 6. 6. when any
thing is prohibited by a Statute if the party be convicted he shall be fined
for the contempt to the Law: and 19 H. 6. 4. agrees in Maintenance: And if
every person should be put to his Action upon the Statute, the same See 2 H. 4.
10 by Haukford, and so affirmed by the Court, when one who has not authority,
holds plea in spiritual things, whereof the Jurisdiction does not belong to
him, yet no consultation shall be granted, because a consultation shall not be
granted to one that has not power. etc.
should be cause of Suits and veration, and the shortest and more easy is to
have a Prohibition: See the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 6. of Mortuaries, by which
it is enacted, That no Parson, Vicar, Curat, etc. demand any Mortuary but in
such manner as is mentioned in the Act, upon pain of forfeiture of so much in
value as they take, more then is limited by the Act, and forty shillings over
to the party grieved. Yet it appears by Doctor and Student lib. 2. cap. 55.
fol. 105. That if the Parson, etc. sueth for Mortuaries otherwise then the Act
appoints, that a Prohibition lies; yet there is a Penalty added, which is an
authority expressly in the Point: And the Case at Bar is a more strong Case, and
that for three reasons.

1. It was made in affirmance of the Canon Law.

2. It was made for the ease of the People and Subjects, and for the
maintenance of the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary, so as the Subjects have
benefit by the Act; and therefore although that the King may dispense with the
penalty, yet the Subject greived shall have a Prohibition. And the Rule of the
Court was, Fiat Prohibitio Curiae Cantuar. de Arcub. Inter parts praedict. per
Curiam. And Sherly, and Harris Junior, Sergeants at Law, were of Council in
the Case.

III. Mich. 6 Jacobi Regis.
Edwards Case.
THe high Commissioners in Causes Ecclesiastical objected diverse High
Commission.
Articles in English, against Thomas Edwards dwelling in the City of Executer.

1. That Mr. John Walton has been many years trained up in Learning in the
University of Oxford* and there worthily admitted to several degrees of
Schools, and deservedly took upon him the degree of Doctor of Physic.

2. That he was a Reverend, and well practiced man in the Art of Physic.

3. That you the said Thomas Edwards are no Graduate.

4. That you knowing the Premises, notwithstanding you the said Edwards, etc.
of purpose to disgrace the said Dr. Walton, and to blemish his Reputation,
Learning, and Skill with infamy and reproach, did against the Rules of Charity
write and send to the said Mr. Doctor Walton, a lewd and ungoodly, and
uncharitable Letter, and therein tared him of want of Civility and Honesty, and
want of Skill and Judgment in his Art and Profession, etc. And you so far
exceeded in your immoderate and uncivil Letter, that you told him therein in
plain terms, He may be crowned for an Ass, as if he had no manner of skill in
his Profession, and were altogether unworthily admitted to the said Degrees,
and therein you purposely and advisedly taxed the whole University of rashness
and indiscretion for admitting him to that Degree without sufficiency and
desert.

5. And further to disgrace the said Mr. Doctor Walton, in the said University,
did publish a Copy of the said Letter to Sir William Courtney and others, and
in your Letter was contained, Sipsilam lichenen mentegram, Take that for your
Inheritance, and thank God you had a good Father: And did not you thereby
covertly mean, and imply, That the Father of the said Dr. Walton (being late
Bishop of Exeter, and a Reverend Prelate of this Land) was subject to the
Diseases of the French Pox and Leprosy, to the dislike of the Dignity and
Calling of Bishops.

6. That in another Letter you sent to Mr. Doctor Maders Doctor of Physic, you
named Mr. Doctor Walton, and made a Horn in your Letter: And we require you
upon your Oath to set down, whether you meant not that they were both
Cuckoulds, and what other meaning you had.

7. You knowing that Dr. Walton was one of the high Commission in the Dioces of
Exeter, and having obtained a Sentence against him in the Star Chamber, for
contriving and publishing of a Libell, did triumphingly say, That you had
gotten on the hipp a Commissioner for Causes Ecclesiastical in the Dioces of
Exeter, which you did to vilify and disgrace him, and in him the whole
Commission Ecclesiastical in those parts.

Lastly, That after the Letter missive sent unto you, you said arrogantly, That
you cared not for any thing that this Court can do unto you, nor for their
censure, for that you can remove this matter at your pleasure.

And this Term it was moved to have a Prohibition in this Case. And the matter
was well argued; And at last it was resolved by Coke chief Justice, Warberton,
Daniel, and Foster Justices, That the first six Articles were mere Temporal
concerning Doctor Walton in his Profession of Physic. and so touched the
Temporal person, and a temporal matter, and in truth, It is in the nature of
an Action upon See Book of Entries 444. and 447. Non est Juri consentanium quod
quis super iis quo rum cognitio ad nos pertinet in Curia Christianitatis
trahatur in placita vi. Stat. Circumspecte agatis, An. 13. E. 1. Episcopus
teneat. plicita in Curia Christianitatis de his quae sunt mere Spiritualia. Et
vi. Linwood f. 70. Lit. m. dicuntur mere Spiritualia quia non habent mixturam
Temporalem. vi. 22 E. 4. l. Consultat. vi. 22 E. 4 the Abbot of Sion case.
the Case for Scandal in his Profession of Physic: And yet the Commissioners
themselves do proceed* in the same Ex Officio. And it was resolved, that as for
them, a Prohibition does lie for diverse causes.

1. Because that the matter and persons are Temporal.

2. Secondly, Because it is for Defamation, which if any such shall be for the
same, it ought to begin before the Ordinary, because it is not such an Enormous
Offense, which is to be determined by the high Commissioners: And for the same
reason Suit does not lie before them, for calling the Doctor Cuckould, as it
was objected in the seventh Article: And it was said, that the high
Commissioners ought to incur the danger of Praemunire.

2. It was resolved, That the Ecclesiastical Judge cannot examine any man upon
his Oath, upon the intention and thought of his Heart, for Cogitationis penam
nemo emoret. And in cases where a man is to be examined upon his Oath, he ought
to be examined upon Acts or words, and not of the intention and thought of his
heart; and if every man should be examined upon his Oath, what opinion he
holds concerning any point of Religion, he is not bound to answer the same,
for in time of danger, Quis modo tutus erit, if every one should be examined of
his thoughts. And so long as a man does not offend neither in act nor in word
any Law established, there is no reason that he should be examined upon his
thought or Cogitation: For as it has been said in the Proverb, Thought is
free; And therefore for the sixth and seventh Articles, they were resolved as
well for the matter as for the form in offering to examine the Defendant upon
his Oath, of his intention and meaning, were such, to which the Defendant was
not to be compelled to answer: Ergo, It was resolved, that as to the Article,
he might justify the same, because as it appears upon his own showing, that
the Doctor was sentenced in the Star Chamber: Also the Libell is matter mere
Temporal, and if it were mere Spiritual such a Defamation is not examinable
before the high Commissioners.

As to the last Article, It appears now by the Judgment of this Court, that
he might well justify the said words: Also the high Commissioners shall not
have Conusance of any Scandal to themselves for Judex non potest injuriam sibi
datam punire. Vi. the Stat. of 23 H. 8. c. 9.
that they are parties; and such Scandal is punishable by the Common Law, as
it was resolved in Hales Case, which see in the Book of the Lord Dyers Reports,
and see in my Book of Presidents, the Copy of the Indictment of Hales, for
scandaling of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners.

Note, the Bishop of Winchester being Visiter of the School of Winchester of
the Foundation of Wickam Bishop of Winchester; and the Bishop and Cant. and
other his Colleagues, An. 5 Car. cited the Usher of the said School, by force
of the said Commission to appear before them, and proceed there against him,
for which they incurred the danger of a Praemunire. And so did the Bishop of
Canterbury and his Colleagues, by force of a high Commission to them directed,
cite one Humphrey Frank Master of Arts and Schoolmaster of the School of
Sevenock of the Foundation of Sir William Sevenock, in the time of King Henry
the sixth) to appear before the high Commissioners at Lambeth the sixth day of
December last past, which citation was subscribed by Sir John Bennet Doctor of
Law, Doctor James, and Doctor Hickman, three of the high Commissioners: and Sir
Christopher Perkins procured the said Citation to be made, and when the said
Frank appeared, the Archbishop being associated with Sir Christopher Perkins,
and Doctor Abbot Dean of Winchester, made an Order concerning the said School
(scil.) That the said Frank shall continue in the said School until the
Annunciation, and that he should have twenty pounds paid to him by Sir Ralph
Bosoile Knight.

IV. Mich. 6 Jacobi Regis.
Tailor and Shoiles Case.
Tailor informed upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 4. Tam pro Domino Reg. quam
pro seipso in the Exchequer, That the Defendant had exercised the Art and
Mystery of a Brewer, etc. and averre^ that Shoile the Defendant did not use or
exercise the Art or Mystery of a Brewer, at the time of the making of the Act,
nor had been Apprentice by seven years at least, according to the said Act,
etc. The Defendant did demur in Law upon the Information, and Judgment was
given against him by the Barons of the Exchequer. And now in this Term upon a
Writ of Error, the matter was argued at Serjeants-Inne, before the two chief
Justices, and two matters were moved; The One, That a Brewer is not within the
said Branch of the said Act: For the words are, That it shall not be lawful to
any person or persons, other then such as now lawfully use or exercise any Art,
Mystery, or manual Occupation, to set up, use, or exercise any Art, Mystery,
or manual Occupation, except he shall have been brought up therein seven years
at the least, as an Apprentice. And it was said, That the Trade of a Brewer is
not any Art, Mystery, or manual Occupation within the said Branch, because the
same is easily and presently learned, and he needs not to have seven years
Apprentiship to be instructed in the same, for every Huswife in the Country can
do the same: and the Act of Henry the eighth is, That a Brewer is not a
Handycraft Artificer.

2. It was moved, That the said Averment was not sufficient, for the Averment
ought to be as general as the exception in the Statute is (scil.) That the
Defendant did not use any Art, Mystery, or Occucupation at the time of the
making of the same Act, for by this pretense if any Art, etc. then as a Tailor,
Carpenter, etc. he may now exercise any other Art whatsoever.

As unto the first, It was resolved, That the Trade of a Brewer (scil.) to hold
a common Brewhouse, to sell Beer or Ale to another, is an Art and Mystery
within the said Act,; for in the beginning of the Act, It is enacted, That no
person shall be retained for less time then a whole year in any of the
Services, Crafts, Mysteries, or Arts of Clothing, etc. Bakers, Brewers, etc.
Cooks, etc. So as by the judgment of the same Parliament, The Trade of a Brewer
is an Art and Mystery; which words are in the said Branch upon which the said
Information is grounded. Also because that every Huswife brews for her private
use; so also she bakes, and dresseth Meat: And yet none can hold a common
Bakehouse, or a Cooks Shop to sell to others, unless that he has been an
Apprentice, etc. for they are expressly named also in the Act as Arts and
Mysteries: And the Act of 22 H. 8. cap. 13. is explained, That a Brewer, Baker,
Surgeon, and Scrivener Alien, are not handycrafts mentioned within certain
penal Laws: But the same does not prove, but that they are Arts or Mysterys,
for Art or Mystery is more general then Handycrafts, for the same is
restrained to Manufactures.

As to the second Point, It was resolved, That the intention of the Act was,
That none should take upon him any Art, but he who has skill or knowledge in
the same: And therefore the Statute intends, That he who uses any Art or
Mystery at the time of the Act, might use the same Art or Mystery; for Quod
quisque norit in hoc se exerceat: And the words of the Act are, As now do
lawfully use, etc. And it was said, That it was very necessary, that Brewers
should have knowledge and skill in brewing good and wholesome Beer and Ale, for
that the same does greatly conduce to men's healths: And so the first Judgment
was affirmed.

V. Mich. 6 Jacobi, In the Common Pleas.
The Case of Modus Decimandi.
SHerley Sergeant moved to have a Prohibition, because that a person Tithes.
sued to have Tithes of Silva Cedua under twenty years growth in the Weild of
Kent; where, by the Custom of it which is a great part of the County, Tithes
of any Wood was never paid. And if such a Custom in non Decimando for all Lay
people within the said Weild, were lawful or not was the question; And to have
a Prohibition it was said, That although one particular man shall not prescribe
in non decimando, yet such a general Custom within a great Country might well
be, as in 43 E. 3. 32. and 45 E. 3. Custom 15. It was presented in the Kings
Bench, That an Abbot had purchased Tenements after the Statute, etc. And the
Abbot came and said, That he was Lord of the Town, etc. And the custom of the
Town was, That when the Tenant cesseth for two years, that the Lord might enter
until agreement be made for the Arrerages; And that he who held these
Tenements was his Tenant, and cessed for two years, and he entered: and the Rule
of the Court is, Because it was an usage only in that Town, and not in the
Towns, that is, in the Country adjoining; he was put to answer: So as by the
same it appears, that a Custom was not good in a particular Town, which
perhaps might be good and of force in a Country, etc. See 40 Ass. 21. and 27,
39 E. 3. 2. A Custom within a Town, that an Infant, etc. might alien, is not
good; But yet such a Custom within Kent has often times been adjudged to be
good. See 7 H. 6. 26. b. 16 E. 2. Prescription 53. Dyer 363. 22 H. 6. 14. 21 E.
4. 15. and 45 Ass. 8. See Doctor and Student lib. 2. cap. 55. A partciular
Country may prescribe to pay no Tithes for Corn, Hay, and other things, but
that is with this caution, so as the Minister has sufficient portion besides
to maintain him, to celebrate the Divine Service: And fol. 172. It is holden,
That where Tithes have not been paid of under-woods under twenty years growth,
that no Tithes shall be paid for the same, because that they do not renew nor
increase from year to year, so as they are not due to the Parson but by
Custom. And he says fol. 174. That such a Custom of a whole Country, that no
Tithes of a Lordship shall be paid, is good; and it is to be observed, that in
all Libells for Tithes of Woods, they allege a prescription to have Tithes of
them: But the Court would advise, whether such a Custom for a Town or a
Country should be good; But in ancient times, The Parishioners have given or
procured to the Parson a Wood or other Lands, etc. to have and to hold to him
and his Successors in satisfafaction of all Tithes of Wood in the same Parish,
and the Parson is now seized of the same Wood, and that without question is a
good discharge of his Tithes; and that in such case, if he sueth for Tithes of
Wood a Prohibition lies: And therefore it has been said now of late. That
such opinions were new and without any antiquity, unto the great prejudice of
the Church: I will cite you an ancient Judgment many years past, Mich. 25 H. 3.
Wilts. Rot. 5. before the King at Westminster, Samson Foliet brought an Attaint
upon a Prohibition, against Thomas Parson of Swynden, because he sued him in
the Spiritual Court for a Lay Fee of the said Sampson, in Draycot, contrary to
the Kings Prohibition; etc. The Defendant pleaded, Quod Coram Judicibus
Delegatis petiit de eodem Decimas foeni de quodam prato ipsius Samsonis in
Walcot unde est in possessione per sententiam Judicum suorum and fuit antequam
Prohibitio Dom. Regis ad eum pervenerit, and quod Pratum praedict. est in
Walcot unde ipse est Persona, and non in Draycot: To which the said Samson
replied and said, Quod Antecessores sui antiquitus dederunt Duas acras prati
Ecclesiae de Draycot pro decimis foeni quam praedict. Thomas modo petit in
eodem prato, quas quidem duas acras prati eadem Ecclesia adhuc habet, and
semper hucusque habuit, unde videtur ei quod illud quod praedict. Thomas ultra
petit, est de laico feodo suo, and dicit quod pratum illud in quo idem Thomas
petit Decimas est in Draycot sicut Breve dicit, and non in Walcot, and de hoc
ponit se super Patriam: And the Jury found, Quod praedict. Thomas Persona de
Swyndon secutus fuit placita in Curia Christianitatis de Laico feodo praedict.
Samsonis contra Prohibitionem Dom. Regis, petendo ab ipso Decimas foeni de
quodam prato ipsius Samsonis in Draycot unde Antecessores sui antiquitus
dederunt Ecclesiae de Draycot duas acras prati pro Decima faeni quam praedict.
Thomas modo petit, and quas eadem Ecclesia adhuc habet and semper hucusque
habuit, etc. Et quod Pratum praedict. in quo idem Thomas petiit Decimas est in
Draycot, and non in Walcot, etc. Ideo Consideratum est quod praedict. Thomas
sit inde in misericord. and reddat praedi. Samsoni 20. Marcas quas versus eum
pro Damnis, etc. Which ancient Judgment I have recited at large, because that
the same agrees with the Rule and reason of the Law continued until this day:
For Judgments or Presidents in the time of Ed. 2. E. 1. H. 3. John R. 1. and
more ancient are not Authorities or Presidents to be now followed, unless that
they concur and agree with the Law, and common experience and practice at this
day; for many Acts of Parliaments (and some of them not extant) have changed
the ancient Laws in diverse Cases: and Desuetudo has antiquated and time and
Custom has taken away diverse others; So as the Rule is good, Quod Judiciis
posterioribus sides est a^hibenda; Et a Communi observantia non est recedendum.
There are two points adjudged by the said Record.

1. That satisfaction may be given in discharge of payment of Tithes; And if
the Successor of the Parson enjoys the thing given in satisfaction of the
Tithes, and sueth for Tithes in kind, he shall have a Prohibition, because that
he charge his Lay Fee with Tithes, which is discharged of them. By which it
appears that Tithes cannot be discharged, and altogether taken away and
extinct: And herewith agrees the Register which is the most ancient Book of
the Law, fol. 38. Rex, etc. tali Judici, etc. saltem. Monstravit nobis A.
tenens quandam partem Manerii de D, quod licet E. nuper Dominus Manerii
praedict. per quoddam scriptum Indentat. dedisset and concessisset F. nuper
Personae Ecclesiae de D. quatuor acras terrae cum pertin. in eodem Manerio
Habend. and tenend. eidem F. and successoribus suis Personae Ecclesiae
praedict. in perpetuum. Et eidem F. per praedictum scriptum de assensu and
voluntate Episcopi Lincoln. Diocesani loci praedict. and J. tunc Patroni
Ecclesiae praedict. concessit pro se and successoribus suis quod idem E.
haeredes and assignati sui essent quieti de Decimis vitulorum, etc. in Manerio
praedict. pro praedict. quatuor acris sibi datis, etc. Et tamen nunc Persona
Ecclesiae praedict. tenens praedict. quatuor acras terrae praedict. praedict.
A. assignato praedict. E. super decimam hujusmodi vitulorum, etc. in eodem
Manerio, sibi praesentand. trahit in placitum coram, etc. in Curia
Christianitatis, etc. Et quia discussio hujusmodi Donationis de laico feodo in
regno nostro in Curia nostra, and non alibi tractari and fieri debet, vobis
prohibemus, Quod placitum aliquod laicum feodum in Regno nostro non teneatis in
Curia Christianitatis, nec quicquam in hac part quod in enervationem dicti
scripti aut Donationis, and concessionis praedict. quae in Curia nostra and non
alibi tractari sicut praedict. est cedere poterit attentetis, sive attentim
faciatis quovismodo; By which also it appears, That Tithes may be discharged,
and that the matter of discharge ought to be determined by the Common Law, and
not in the Spiritual Court: And it is to be observed, That in the said
Judgment, nor in the Register any averment is taken of the value of the thing
given in satisfaction of the Tithes. Also by the Act of Circumspecte agatis
made, 13 E. 1. It is said, S. Rector petat versus parochianos oblationes, and
decimas debitas, seu consuetas, etc. which proves that there are Tithes due in
kind. and other Tithes due by Custom, as a Modus Decimandi, etc. And yet it is
resolved in 19 E. 3. Jurisdiction 28. That the Ordinance of Circumspecte agatis
is not a Statute; and that the Prelates made the same, and yet then, the
Prelates acknowledged, That there were Tithes due by Custom, which is a Modus
Decimandi, By which it appears also, That Tithes by Custom may be altered
into another thing: So where a man grants a parcel of his Manor to a Parson in
Fee to be quit of Tithes and makes an Indenture, and the Parson with the assent
of the Ordinary (without the Patron) grants to him that he shall be quit of
Tithes of his Manor for that parcel of Land: Afterward if he or his Assignee
be sued in the Spiritual Court for Tithes of his Manor, he or his Assignee
shall have a Prohibition upon that Deed. And if that Deed was made before time
of memory, and he has so continued to be quit of Tithes, he shall have a
Prohibition upon that Deed, if he be sued for the Tithes of that Manor or of
any parcel of the same upon that matter showed: See 8 E. 4. 14. F. N. B. 41.
g. vi. 3. E. 3. 17. 16 E. 3. t. Annuity 24. 40 E. 3. 3. b. and F. N. B. 152.
And therefore if the Lord of a Manor has always holden his Manor discharged
of tithes, and the Parson had before time of memory, or in ancient times diverse
Lands in the same Parish of the Gift of the Lord, of which the Parson is seized
at this day in Fee, in respect of which, the Parson nor any of his Predecessors
ever had received any tithes of the said Manor: If the Parson now sueth for
tithes of the Manor, the Owner of the Manor may show that special matter,
and that the Parson and his Successors time out of mind have holden those
Lands, etc. of the Gift of one who was Lord of the said Manor, in full
satisfaction of the tithes of the said Manor; And the proof, that the Lord of
the Manor gave the Lands, that tithes should never be paid, at this day is
good evidence to prove the surmise of the Prohibition. And so of the like: and
19 E. 3. t. Jurisdiction 28. it is adjudged, That Title of Prescription, shall
be determined in the Kings Court: And therefore a Modus Decimandi which
accrueth by Custom and Prescription in the Kings Court. And it appears by
the Statute of 6 H. 4. cap. 6. That the Pope by his Bulls discharged diverse
from payment of tithes, against which the Act of Parliament was made; and by
the Statute of 31 H. 8. cap. 13. That the Possessions of Religious persons
given to the King, were discharged of payment of tithes in certain Cases: and
by the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 7. it is provided, That all and singular
persons shall divide, set out, yield, and pay all and singular tithes and
Offerings aforesaid, according to the lawful customs and usages of the
Parishes and places where such tithes or Duties shall come, or immediately arise
or be due: Provided always, and be it enacted, That no person or persons shall
be sued or otherwise compelled to pay any manner of tithes, for any Manors,
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, which by the Laws or Statutes of this Realm
are discharged, or not chargable with the payment of any such tithes: And the
Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 13. Enacts, That every of the Kings Subjects shall from
henceforth justify, and truly without fraud or guile, divide, set out, etc.
all manner of their prediall tithes in their proper kind as they will rise and
happen, in such manner and form as has been of right yielded and paid, within
forty years next before the making of this Act, or of Right or Custom ought to
be paid. So as it appears by this, that tithe is due of Right, and by Custom:
And also in the same Act there is a Proviso in these words; Provided always
and be it enacted, That no person shall be sued, or otherwise compelled to
yield, give, or pay any manner of tithes for any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, which by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or by any
Privilege or Prescription, are not chargable with the payment of any such
tithes, or that he discharged by any composition real: so as it appears by
that Act, that one may be discharged from the payment of tithes five manner of
ways.

1. By the Law of the Realm, that is, the Common Law; As Tithes shall not be
paid of Coals, Quarries, Brick, Tiles, etc. F. N. B 53. and Register 54 Nor of
the after Pasture of a Meadow, etc. nor of Rakings, nor of Wood to make Pales,
or Mounds, or Hedges, etc.

2. By the Statutes of the Realm: As by the Statute of 31 H. 8. cap. 13. the
Statute of 45 E. 3. etc.

3. By Privilege, as those of S. John's of Jerusalem in England; The
Cistertians, Temptors, etc. as it appears by 10 H. 7. 277. Dyer.

4. By Prescription, As by Modus Decimandi, or an annual Recompense in
satisfaction of them, as appears before by the Authorities aforesaid.

5. By real Composition, as appears by the said Writ cited out of the
Register: And so you have one or two examples (for many others which may be
added) of these five manners of discharges of Tithes. And by them all it
appears, That a man may be discharged of the payment of Tithes, as before is
said: So as now it apparently appears by the Laws of England, both Ancient
and Modern, That a Layman ought prescribe in modo Decimandi, but not in non
Decimando: and that in effect agrees with the Opinion of Thomas Aquinas in his
Secunda secundae, Quaest. 86. ar. ultimo. For there he says, Quod in veteri
lege praeceptum de solutione Decimarum, partim erat morali inditum ratione
naturali quae dictat Quod iis Qui Divino Cultui ministrant ad salutem totius
populi necessaria victui debent ministr. juxta illud, 1 Cor. 9. Quis militat,
etc. Who goes to War at his own charges, etc. Partim autem erat judiciale ex
Divina institutione robur habens, (scil.) Quantum ad determinationem certae
partis: And all that agrees with our Law; And he goes further, In tempore vero
Novae Legis etiam est determinatio partis solvendae authoritate Ecclesiae (That
is by their Canons) Instituta secundum quandam humanitatem, ut scilicet non
minus populus Novae Legis Ministros novi Testamenti exuberat, quam populus
veteris Legis ministris veteris Testamenti exhibebat, praesertim cum Ministri
Novae Legis sunt Majores Dignitate, ut probat Apostolus 2 Cor. 3. Sic ergo
patet Quod ad solutionem Decimarum tenentur homines partim quidem ex jure
naturali, quantum ad hoc quod aliqua portio data est ministris Ecclesiae,
partim vero ex institutione Ecclesiae quantum ad determinationem Decimae
Partis. See Doctor and Student Lib. 2. cap. 55. fol. 164. That the tenth part
is not due by the Law of God, nor by the Law of Nature, which he calls the
Law of Reason: And he cites John Gerson who was a Doctor of Divinity, in a
Treatise which he calls Regulae morales (scil.) Solutio Decimaram
sacerdotibus est de jure Divino, quatenus inde sustententur, sed quo ad tam
hanc vel illam assignare aut in alios redditus Commutare positivi juris est.
And afterward, Non vocatur Portio Curatis debita propterea Decimae, eo quod
est Decima pars, imo est interdum vicesima, aut tricesima. And he holds, That
a Portion is due by the Law of Nature, which is the Law of God, but it
appertains to the Law of Man to assign, Hanc vel illam portionem, as
necessity requires for their Sustenance. And further he says, That Tithes may
be exchanged into Lands, Annuity, or Rent, which shall be sufficient for the
Minister, etc. And there he says, That in Italy, and in other the East
Countries, they pay no Tithes, but a certain Portion according to the Custom,
etc. And all this is true, if not, that Tithes be discharged or changed by one
of the said five ways: And forasmuch as it appears by themselves, that the
part or value was part of the Judicial Law, certainly the same does not bind
any Christian Commonwealth, but that the same may be altered by reason of
time, place, or other consideration, as it appears in all punishments
inflicted by the Judicial Law, they do not bind none, for Felony is now
punished by death, etc. which was not so by the Judicial Law, etc. Also
forasmuch as now it is confessed, that the tenth part is now due, Ex
institutione Ecclesiae, that is to say, By their Canons, and it appears by
the Statute of 25 H. 8. cap. 19. That all Canons, etc. made against the
Prerogative of the King in his Laws, Statutes, or Customs of the Realm are
void; and that was but a Declaratory Law; For no Statute or Custom of the
Realm can be taken away or abrogated by any Canon, etc. made out or within the
Realm, but only by Act of Parliament: and that well appears by 10 H. 7. f.
17. c. 18. That there is a Canon or Constitution, That no Priest ought to be
impleaded at the Common Law. And there Brian says, That a grave Doctor of the
Law once said unto him, That Priests and Clarks might be sued at the Common Law
well enough; For he said, that Rex est persona mixta, and is Persona unita cum
Sacerdotibus Statutis Ecclesiae. In which case the King might maintain his
Jurisdiction by prescription; By which it appears that prescription does
prevail against express Canons or Constitutions and is not taken away by them,
which proves that the Statute of 25 H. 8. was but a Declaration of the ancient
Law before: And there is an express Prohibition in Numb. 18. Nihil aliud
possedebunt, Decimarum oblatione contenti quas in usus eoram and necessaria
separavi: Which was not part of the Moral Law, or Law of Nature, but part of
the Judicial: And therefore men of the holy Church at this day do possess
Houses, Lands, and Tenements, and not Tithes only. The second point which
agrees with the Law at this day, which was adjudged in the said Record of 25 H.
3. is, That the limits and bounds of Towns and Parishes shall be tried by the
Common Law, and not in the Spiritual Court: and in this the Law has great
reason, for thereupon depends the Title of Inheritance of the Lay Fee, whereof
the Tithes were demanded for Fines, and Recoveries are the common assurances of
Lay Inheritances: and if the Spiritual Court should try the bounds of Towns,
if they determine that my Land lies in another Town then is contained in my
Fine, Recovery, or other assurance, I shall be in danger to lose my
Inheritance, and therewith agrees 39 E. 3. 29. 5 H. 5. 10. 32 E. 4. t.
Consultation, 3 E. 4. 12 19 H. 6. 20. 50 E. 3. 20. and many other Presidents
until this day. And note, there is a Rule in Law, that when the Right of
tithes shall be tried in the Spiritual Court, and the Spirit. Court has
jurisdiction thereof that our Courts shall be ousted of the Jurisdiction, 35 H.
6. 47. 38 H. 6. 21. 2 E 4. 15. 22 E. 4. 23. 38 E. 3. 36. 14 H 7. 17. 13 H. 2.
Jurisd. 19. but that is when debate is between Parson and Vicar, or when all is
in one Parish, but when they are in several Parishes, then this Court shall
not be ousted of the Jurisdiction. See 12 H. 2. to Jurisdiction 17. 13 R. 2.
ibid. 19. 7 H. 4. 34. 14 H. 4. 17. 38 E 3. 56. 42 E. 3. 12. And yet there is a
Canon expressly against this, which see in Linwood titulo de penis 55. And so
fol. 227, 228. amongst the Canons or Constitutions of Bonaface, An. Dom. 1277.
And the causes wherefore the Judges of the Common Law would not permit the
Ecclesiastical Judges to try Modum Decimandi, being pleaded in their Court is,
because that if the Recompense which is to be given to the Parson in
satisfaction of his tithes, both not amount to the value of the Tithes in
kind, they would overthrow Note this difference; Although that the parties do
admit the Jurisdiction of the Court, yet upon the pleading, if the right of the
Tithes shall come in debate, there this Court shall be ousted of the
Jurisdiction, and the Spiritual Court shall have Jurisdiction: But when the
right of tithes comes in debate, and the Spiritual Court cannot have
Jurisdiction or Conusance of it, as where a Layman is Plaintiff as Farmor, or
Defendant as Servant of the Parson, as a Lay man Farmor cannot sue there, nor
he who justifies as Servant cannot be sued in Trespass: But if the Suit be
between Parson and Vicar, or Parson and Parson, and other Spiritual persons, if
the Kings Court be ousted of the Jurisdiction after severance of the ninth
part; yet the Libel ought to be for substraction of Tithes, for of that they
have jurisdiction, and not of Tithes severed from the nine parts; for that
shall be in Case of a Praemunire, and it appears to the Common Law: See 16 H.
2. in the Case of Mortuary. Vide Decretalia Sexti, Lib. 3. tit. de Decimis,
cap. 1. fo. 130. Col. 4. Et summa Angelica, fo. 72.
the same: And that also appears by Linwood amongst the Constitutions Simonis
Mephum, tit. de Decimis cap. Quoniam propter, fo. 139. 6. verbo Consuetudines,
Consuetudo ut non solvantur, aut minus plene solvantur Decimae non valet: and
ibidem secundum alios, Quod in Decimis realibus, non valet Consuetudo ut
solvatur minus decima part, sed in personalibus, etc. And ibidem Litt. M.
verbo, Integre, faciunt express contra opinionem quorundum Theologorum, qui
dicunt sufficere aliquid dari pro Decima. And that is the true Reason in both
the said Cases, scil. de modo Decimandi, and de Limitibus Parochiorum, etc.
that they would not adjudg according to their Canons; and therefore a
Prohibition lies: and therewith agrees 8 E. 4. 14. and the other Books
abovesaid, and infinite presidents; and the rather after the Statute of 2 E. 6.
cap. 13. And also the Customs of the Realm are part of the Laws of the Realm;
and therefore they shall be tried by the Common Law, as is aforesaid: See 7 E.
6. Dyer 79. and 18 Eliz. Dyer 349. the Opinion of all the Justices.

VI. Mich. 6 Jacob. in the Exchequer.
Baron and Boys Case.
IN the Case between Baron and Boys, in an Information upon the Sur Stat. 2 E.
6. cap. 14. of Ingrossers.
Statute of 5 E. 6. cap. 14. of Ingrossers, after Verdict it was found for the
Informer, That the Defendant had engrossed Apples against the said Act: The
Barons of the Exchequer held clearly, That Apples were not within the said Act,
and gave Judgment against the Informer upon the matter apparent to them, and
caused the same to be entered in the Margent of the Record where the Judgment
was given: and the Informer brought a Writ of Error in the Exchequer chamber,
and the only Question was, Whether Apples were within the said Act? the letter
of which is, That whatsoever person or persons, etc. shall ingross or get into
his or their hands, by buying, contracting, or promise, taking (other then by
Demise, Grant or Lease of Land, or Tithe) any Corn growing in the Fields, or
any other Corn or grain, Butter, Cheese, Fish, or other dead Victual within the
Realm of England, to the intent to sell the same again, shall be accepted, etc.
an unlawful Ingrosser. And although that the Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 15. made
against Sellers of Victual, which for their great gain conspire, etc. numbereth
Butchers, Brewers, Bakers, Cooks, Costermongers and Fruterers, as Victualers:
yet Apples are not dead Victuals within the Statute of 5 E. 6. For the Buyers
and Sellers of Corn and other Victuals have diverse Provisoes and Qualifications
for them, as it appears by the said Act, but Costermongers and Fruterers have
not any Proviso for them: also, always after the said Act they have bought
Apples and other Fruits by Ingross, and sold them again, and before this time
no Information was exhibited for them, no more then for Plums or other fruit,
which serves more for delicacy then for necessary Food. But the Statute of 5
E. 6. is to be intended of things necessary and of common use for the
sustenance of man: and therefore the words are, Corn, Grain, Butter, Cheese, or
other dead Victual: which is as much to say, as Victual of like quality, that
is, of like necessary and common use: But the Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 15. made
against Conspiracies to enhaunce the prices, was done and made by express
words, to extend it to things which are more of pleasure then of profit: So it
was said, That of those Fruits a man cannot be a Forestaller within this Act of
5 E. 6. for in the same Branch the words are, any Merchandise, Victual, or any
other thing. But this was not resolved by the Justices, because that the
Information was conceived upon that branch of the Statute concerning Ingrossers.

VII. Hill. 27 Eliz. in the Chancery.
HIllary Term, the 27 of Eliz. in the Chancery the Case was thus: One Ninian
Menvil seized of certain Lands in Fee, took a wife, Fine. Dower. Relation.
and levied a Fine of the said Lands with proclamations, and afterward was
indicted and outlawed of High Treason, and dyed: The Conusees convey the Lands
to the Queen, who is now seized, the five years pass after the death of the
Husband: The Daughters and Heirs of the said Ninian, in a Writ of Error in the
Kings Bench, reverse the said Attainder, M. 26 and 27 Eliz. last past: and
thereupon the Wife sueth to the Queen (who was seized of the said Land as
aforesaid) by Petition containing all the special matter, scil. the Fine with
proclamations, and the five years passed, after the death of her Husband, the
Attainder and the reversal of it: and her own title, scil. her marriage, and
the seisin of her Husband before the Fine: And the Petition being endorsed by
the Queen, Fiat droit aux parties, etc. the same was sent into the Chancery, as
the manner is.

And in this case diverse Objections were made against the Demandant.

1. That the said Fine with proclamations should bar the Wife of her Dower, and
the Attainder of her Husband should not help her; for as long as the Attainder
does remain in force, the same was a bar also of her Dower, so as there was a
double bar to the Wife, viz. the Fine levied with proclamations, and the five
years past after the death of her Husband, and the Attainder of her Husband of
his Treason. But admit that the Attainder of the Husband shall avail the Wife
in some manner, when the same is now reversed in a Writ of Error, and now upon
the matter is in Judgment of Law, as if no Attainder had been: and against that
a man might plead, That there is no such Record, because that the first Record
is reversed, and utterly disaffirmed and annihilated, and now by Relation made
no Record ab initio: and therewith agrees the Book of 4 H. 7. 11. for the
words of the Judgment in a Writ of Error are, Quod Judicium praedict. and
Errores praedict. and alios in Recordo, etc. revocetur and admittetur, etc. and
quod ipsa ad possessionem suam sive seisinam suam (as the case requires)
tenementorum suorum praedictorum, una cum exitibus and proficuis inde a tempore
Judicii praedict. reddit, praecept. and ad omnia quae occasion Judicii illius
omisit restituatur. By which it appears, that the first Judgment, which was
originally imperfect and erroneous, is for the same Errors now adnulled and
revoked ab initio, and the party against whom the Judgment was given restored
to his possession, and to all the mean profits, from the time of the erroneous
Judgment given, until the Judgment in the Writ of Error, so as the Reversal
has a Retrospect to the first Judgment, as if no Judgment had been given: And
therefore the Case in 4 H. 7. 10. b. the case is, A. seized of Land in Fee, was
attainted of High Treason, and the King granted the Land to B. and afterward
A. committed Trespass upon the Land, and afterward by Parliament A. was
restored, and the Attainder made void, as if no Act had been; and shall be as
available and ample to A. as if no Attainder had been: and afterward B.
brings Trespass for the Trespass Mesue; and it was adjudged in 10 H. 7. fo.
22. b. That the Action of Trespass was not maintainable, because that the
Attainder was disaffirmed and annulled ab initio. And in 4 H. 7. 10. it is
holden, That after a Judgment reversed in a Writ of Error, he who recovered the
Land by Erroneous Judgment shall not have an Action of Trespass for a Trespass
Mean, which was said, was all one with the principal case in 4 H. 7. 10. and
diverse other Cases were put upon the same ground.

It was secondly objected, That the Wife could not have a Petition, because
there was not any Office by which her title of Dower was found, scil. her
marriage, the seisin of her Husband, and death: for it was said, that although
she was married, yet if her Husband was not seized after the age that she is
Dowable, she shall not have Dower: as if a man seized of Land in Fee, takes to
Wife a woman of eight years, and afterward before her age of nine years, the
Husband alieneth the Lands in Fee, and afterward the woman attaineth to the
age of nine years, and the Husband dies; it was said, that the woman shall not
be endowed. And that the title of him who sueth by Petition ought to be found
by Office, appears by the Books in 11 H. 4. 52. 29 Ass. 31. 30 Ass. 28. 46 E.
3. bre. 618. 9 H. 7. 24. etc.

As to the first Objection, it was resolved, That the Wife should be endowed,
and that the Fine with proclamations was not a bar unto her, and yet it was
resolved that the Act of 4 H. 7. cap. 24. shall bar a woman of her Dower by a
Fine levied by her Husband with proclamations, if the woman does not bring her
Writ of Dower within five years after the death of her Husband, as it was
adjudged Hill. 4 H. 8. Rot. 344. in the Common Pleas, and 5 Eliz. Dyer 224. For
by the Act, the right and title of a Feme Covert is saved, so that she take her
action within 5. years after she become uncovert, etc. but it was resolved,
That the wife was not to be aided by that saving: for in respect of the said
Attainder of her Husband of Treason, she had not any right of Dower at the time
of the death of her Husband, nor can she after the death of her Husband bring
an Action, or prosecute an Action to recover her Dower, according to the
direction and saving of the said Act: But it was resolved, That the Wife was to
be aided by another former Saving in the same Act, viz. And saving to all other
persons (scil. who were not parties to the Fine) such action, right, title,
claym, and interest in or to the said Lands, etc. as shall first grow, remain,
descend, or come to them after the said Fine engrossed and proclamations made,
by force of any Gift in Tail, or by any other cause or matter had and made
before the said Fine levied, so that they take their Actions and pursue their
right and Title according to the Law, within five years next after such Action,
Right, Claim, Title, or Interest to them accrued, descended, fallen, or come,
etc. And in this case the Action and right of Dower accrued to the wife after
the reversall of the Attainder, by reason of a Title of Record before the Fine
by reason of the seisin in Fee (had) and the Marriage (made) before the Fine
levied, according to the ^^^ention and meaning of the said Act.

And as to the said po^^t of Relation, It was resolved, That sometimes by
construction of Law a thing shall relate ab initio to some intent, and to some
intent not; For Relatio est fictio Juris, to do a thing which was and had
essence, to be adnulled ab initio, betwixt the same parties to advance a Right,
or Ut res magis valeat quam pereat: But the Law will never make such a
construction to advance a wrong, which the Law abhors, Or to defeat
Collateral Acts which are lawful and principally if they do concern
Strangers: And this appears in this Case (scil.) when an erroneous Judgment
is reversed by a Writ of Error: For true it is as it has been said, That as
unto the mean Profits, the same shall have relation by construction of Law,
until the time of the first Judgment given, and that is to favor Justice and
to advance the right of him who has wrong by the erroneous Judgment. But if
any stranger has done a Trespass upon the Land in the mean time, he who
recovereth after the Reversall shall have an Action of Trespass against the
Trespassors, and if the Defendant pleads that there is no such Record, the
Plaintiff shall show the special matter, and shall maintain his Action, so as
unto the Trespassors who are wrong Doers, the Law shall not make any
construction by way of relation ab initio to excuse them, for then the Law by a
fiction and construction should do wrong to him who recovereth by the first
Judgment: And for the better apprehending of the Law on this point, it is to
know, That when any man recovers any possession or seisin of Land, in any
Action by erroneous Judgment, and afterward the Judgment is reversed as is
said before, and upon that the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error shall have a Writ
of Restitution, and that Writ recites the first recovery, and the reversall of
it in the Writ of Error, is, that the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error shall be
restored to his possession and seisin, Una cum exitibus thereof from the time
of the Judgment, etc. Tibi praecipimus quod eadem A. ad plenariam seisinam
tenementorum praedict. cum pertinentiis sine dilatione restitui facias, and per
sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum de Com. suo diligenter inquires ad
quantum exitus and proficua tenementorum illorum cum pertinentiis a tempore
falsi Judicii praedict. reddit. usque ad Oct. Sanct. Mich. anno, etc. quo die
judcium illud per praefat. Justiciar, nostros revocat. fuit, se attingunt,
juxta verum valorem eorundem, eadem exitus, and proficua de terris and catallis
praedict. B. in baliva tua fieri facias, and denarios inde praefato A. pro
exitibus et proficuis tenementorum per eundem B. dicto medio tempore percept.
sine dilatione haberi sacias: Et qualiter hoc praeceptum nostrum fuerit execut
constare facias, etc. in Octab. etc. By which it appears, That the Plaintiff
in the Writ of Error shall have restitution against him who recovereth of all
the mean Profits, without any regard by them taken, for the Plaintiff in the
Writ of Error cannot have any remedy against any stranger, but only against him
who is party to the Writ of Error, and therefore the words of the said Writ
command the Sheriff to enquire of the Issues and Profits generally, between the
Reversal and the Judgment, with all which he who recovers shall be charged: and
as the Law charge him with all the mean profits, so the Law gives to him
remedy notwithstanding the Reversal against all Trespassors in the interim, for
otherwise the Law should make a construction by relation to discharge them who
are wrong doers, and to charge him who recovers with the whole, who
peradventure has good right, and who enters by the Judgment of the Law,
which peradventure is reversed for want of form, or negligence or ignorance of
a Clark. And therefore as to that purpose the Judgment shall not be reversed ab
initio by a Fiction of Law, but as the truth was, the same stands in force
until it was reversed: and therefore the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error after
the Reversal shall have any Action of Trespass for a Trespass mean, because he
shall recover all the mean profits against him who recovered, nor he recovereth
after shall be barred of his Action of Trespass for a Trespass mean, by reason
that his recovery is reversed, because he shall answer for all the mean profits
to the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error: and therewith agrees Brian Chief
Justice, 4 H. 7. 12. a.

Note Reader, If you would understand the true sense and Judgment of the Law,
it is needful for you to know the true Entries of Judgments, and the Entries of
all proceedings in Law, and the manner and the matter of Writs of Execution of
such Judgments. See Butler and Bakers Case, in the third part of my Reports,
good matter concerning Relations. So as it was resolved in the Case at Bar,
Although that to some intent the Reversal has relation, yet to bar the Wife of
her Dower by Fiction of Law, by the Fine with proclamations, and five years
past after the death of her Husband, when in truth she had not cause of Action,
nor any right or title so long as the Attainder stood in force, should be to do
wrong by a Fiction of Law, and to bar the Wife, who was a mere stranger, and
who had not any means, to have any Relief until the Attainder was reversed.

And as unto the other point or Objection, that the Demandant on the Petition
ought to have an Office found for her, it was resolved, that it needed not in
this case, because that the title of Dower stood with the Queens title, and
affirmed it, otherwise if the title of the Demandant in the Petition had
disaffirmed the Queens title: also in this Case, the Queen was not entitled by
any Office that the Wife should be driven to traverse it, etc. for then she
ought to have had an Office to find her title: But in Case of Dower, although
that Office had been found for the Queen which does not disaffirm the title of
Dower, in such case the Wife shall have her Petition without Office, because
that Dower is favored in Law, she claiming but only for term of life, and
affirming the title of the Queen. See the Sadlers Case in the fourth part of my
Reports.

And the case which was put on the other side was utterly denied by the Court,
for it was resolved, That if a man seized of Lands in Fee, takes a Wife of
eight years of age, and alieneth his Lands, and afterward the Wife attaineth
to the age of nine years, and afterward the Husband dies, that the Wife shall
be endowed: For although at the time of the alienation the Wife was not
dowable, yet for as much as the marriage, and seisin in Fee, was before the
alienation, and the title of Dower is not consummate until the death of her
Husband, so as now there was marriage, seisin of Fee, age of nine years during
the Coverture, and the death of the Husband, for that cause she shall be
endowed: For it is not requisite that the marriage, seisin and age concur
together all at one time, but it is sufficient if they happen during the
Coverture: So if a man seized of Lands in Fee take a Wife, and afterward she
elopes from her Husband, now she is barrable of her Dower, if during the
Elopement the Husband alieneth, and after the Wife is reconciled, the Wife
shall be endowed: So if a man has issue by his Wife, and the issue dies, and
afterward Land descends to the Wife, or the Wife purchases Lands in Fee,
and dies without any other issue, the Husband (for the issue which he had
before the Descent or purchase) shall be Tenant by the courtesy, for it is
sufficient if he have issue, and that the Wife be seized during the Coverture,
although that it be at several times. But if a man takes an Alien to Wife, and
afterward he alieneth his Lands, and afterward she is made a Denizen, she
shall not be endowed, for she was absolutely disabled by the Law, and by her
birth not capable of Dower, but her capacity and ability began only by her
Denization, but in the other case there was not any incapacity or disability in
the person, but only a temporary Bar, until such age or reconcilement, which
being accomplished the temporary Bar cease: As if a man seized of Lands in
Fee, takes a Wife, and afterward the Wife is attainted of Felony, and
afterward the Husband alieneth, and afterward the Wife is pardoned, and
afterward the Husband dies, the Wife shall be endowed, for by her birth she
was not incapable, but was lawfully by her marriage and seisin in Fee entitled
to have Dower; and therefore when the impediment is removed, she shall be
endowed.

VIII. Trinit. 44 Eliz. In the King's Bench.
Sprat and Heals Case.
JOhn Sprat Libelled in the Spiritual Court against Walter Heal for Tithes.
Covin.
substraction of Tithes, the Defendant in the Spiritual Court pleaded, that he
had divided the Tithes from the nine parts: and then the Plaintiff made
addition to the Libel (in the nature of a Replication) scil. That the Defendant
divided the Tithes from the nine parts, quod praedict. the Plaintiff non
fatetur, sed prorsus diffitetur; yet presently after this pretended division in
fraudem legis, he took and carried away the same Tithes, and converted them to
his own use; and the Plaintiff thereupon obtained sentence in the Spiritual
Court, and to recover the treble value according to the Statute of 2 E. 6. cap.
13. And thereupon Heal made a surmise, that he had divided his Tithes, and that
the Plaintiff ought to sue in the Spiritual Court for the double value, and at
the Common Law for the treble value: And it was objected, That when the Owner
of the Corn divides them, then they are become Lay-Chattels, for the taking of
which an Action lies at the Common Law: and therefore after severance from the
nine parts, the Parson shall not sue for them in the Spiritual Court: But it
was resolved by the whole Court, That the said division or severance mentioned
in the Libel, was not any division or severance within the Statute of 2 E. 6.
cap. 13. For the same Act provides, That every of the Kings Subjects shall from
henceforth truly and justly without fraud or guile, divide, set out, yield, and
pay all manner of other prediall Tithes in their proper Land, so as when he
divides them to the purpose to carry them away, he does not divide them justly
and truly without fraud or guile, but here is fraud and guile, and no way a
just division, and therefore the same is out of the Statute, for the makers of
the Statute respect quo animo, he divides them (scil.) with a mind and
intention that the Parson carry them away, as in right be ought, or with a mind
and intention that he himself carry them away which he ought not, Quia fraus
and dolus alicui prodesse, aut simplicitas alicui obesse non debet: And the
same is Crimen Stellionatum, which we call fraudem rem and imposteram: And
where the words of the Statute are divided, set out, etc. their prediall
Tithes, etc. And if any person carries away his Corn and Hay, and his and
their prediall Tithes, etc. And to make an evasion out of these words, this
Invention was devised, the Owner of the Corn by Covin sold his Corn before
severance to another, who as Servant to the Vendee reaped the Corn, and carried
away the Corn, without any severance, pretending that neither the Vendee,
because he did not carry them away, nor the Vendor because he had no property
in them, for he did not carry away his Corn, or his prediall Tithes, should be
within that Statute: But it was resolved, that the Vendor should be charged in
that case with the penalty of the Statute, for he carries them away, and his
fraud and covin should not help him or avail him. See 8 E. 3. 290. A real
Action brought by a man of Religion by Collusion, although that he has right,
yet he shall not have execution, 9 H. 6. 41. A recovery upon a good Title by
Collusion, shall not abate the Writ, 33 H. 6. 5. A sale in open Market by Covin
shall not bind the property of a stranger: But it was resolved, That the
Plaintiff could not sue in the Spiritual Court for the treble value, but for
the double value that he might.

IX. Hill. 6 Jacobi, In the Common Pleas.
Neale and Rowses Case.
AT a Nisi prius in London, before my self this Term, the Case was Extortion,
Stat. 21 H. 8. cap. 5.
this: Edward Neale informed upon the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 5. which Plea
begun Mich. 6 Jac. Rot. 1031. against James Rowse Commissary and Official
within the Archdeaconry of Huntington, within the Dioces of Lincoln, and having
probat of Wills and Testaments, etc. within the same Archdeaconry; And that
Nicholas Neale, the third year of the Reign of the King that now is, made his
Testament and last Will in writing, and made the Plaintiff his Executor, and
died possessed of Goods and Chattells to the value of a hundred and fifty
pounds: The Defendant then Commissary and Official, etc. the twenty third of
Febr. 1605. at the Parish of S. Mary Bow, Testament. praedict. probavit,
insinuavit, registravit and sigillavit; ac per manus cujusdem Thomae Nicke tunc
ministri ipsius Jacobi Rowse in ea part deputat. and authorizat. 14. s. 10 d.
pro probatione, insinuatione and registratione Testamenti praedict. de eodem
Edwardo, etc. qui tam, etc. Color Officii sui praedict. ad tunc and ibidem
extortive recepit, and habuit contra formam statuti praedict. with this that
the said Edward, qui tam, etc. will add, That the writing of the said Testament
according to the rate of a penny for every ten Lines of the said Testament,
every line thereof containing in length ten Inches, non attingebat, to the
sum of twelve shillings four pence, according to the form of the Statute
aforesaid, etc. The Defendant pleaded Nihil debet, And at the Nisi prius, the
Evidence of two Witnesses was, That the Plaintiff caused the said Testament
which was in Paper, to be engrossed in Parchment; And the Plaintiff offered
both to the said Rowse, the Official, to be proved, and he answered, That he
would prove it, if his Fees shall be paid to him, And the Plaintiff asked him
what were his Fees, and he wrote them in a paper, which amounted to fourteen
shillings ten pence for the Probat, insinuation, Registring, and sealing: And
thereupon the Plaintiff laid upon the Table twenty shillings, and desired him
to take as much as was due to him, and all that was in the house of the
Official; But he would receive nothing there, but appointed the Plaintiff to
come in Court, where he would receive his Fees, and accordingly the Plaintiff
came to him in Court, and prayed to have the said Will proved; And the
Defendant required the said Nicke his Minister, to take of him for the
probation, insinuation, registring, and sealing, fourteen shillings ten pence,
and thereupon he put the Seal of his Office to the said Parchment engrossed,
which the Plaintiff brought with him, and which he delivered to the Defendant.
And it was objected. That this Case was out of the said Statute, for thereby as
to this purpose, it is provided, viz. And where the Goods of the Testator, etc.
amount above the value of forty pounds, That then the Bishop, nor Ordinary by
him or themselves, nor any of his or their Registers, Scribes, Praysers,
Summoners, Apparators, or any other their Ministers, for the probation,
insinuation, and approbation of any Testament or Testaments, etc. for the
registring, sealing, writing, praising, making of Inventories, making
Acquittances, Fines, or any thing concerning the same Probate of Testaments,
shall take or cause to be taken of any person or persons, but only four
shillings, and not above, whereof to the Bishop, ordinary, etc. for him and his
Ministers two shillings six pence, and not above, and two shillings six pence
to the Scribe for Registring of the same, etc. And it was objected by the
Council of the Defendant, that the Defendant did not take the fourteen
shillings ten pence for the probation, insinuation, registring, or sealing of
the Testament, for no Probat was written upon the Testament it self, nor any
Seal put to it, but the Testament was engrossed in Parchment, and the Probat
and Seal put to the Transcript engrossed, and not to the Testament it self,
and so out of the Statute; and the Statute extends only, when the Probat and
Seal is put to the Testament it self, and for the engrossing of it after the
Probate, no certain Fee is provided by the Statute; But for the Registring of
it after it is proved, there is an express Fee in the Statute: But I conceived
that the said taking of the fourteen shillings ten pence in the Case at Bar,
was directly against the Statute. For the Act is in the Negative, and if the
Executor requires the Testament to be engrossed in Parchment, he ought to
agree with him who he requires to do it, as he may: But the Ordinary,
Official, etc. ought not to exact any Fee for the same of the party as a thing
due to him, for diverse Causes:

1. Because the words of the Act are expressed, for the Probation, etc. and for
the registring, sealing, writing, praising, making of Inventories, Fines,
giving of Acquittances, etc. which word (writing) extends expressly to this Case.

2. The words are, Or any thing concerning the same Probate, and when the Seal
and Probate is put to the Transcript, the same without question concerns the
Probate, for the Probat is not put to any writing but only to that, therefore
the same concerns the Probate.

3. Such a Construction should make the Act idle and vain, for if the Ordinary,
Official, etc. might take as much as he pleases for the engrossing done by
his Ministers as a Fee due to him, all the purview of the Statute which is
penned so precisely concerning persons, scil. Bishops, Ordinaries, and all
persons who have power to prove Wills and Testaments, Registers, Scribes,
Summoners, Apparations, or any other the Ministers, as for the thing it self,
scil. the probation, insinuation, approbation, registring, sealing, writing,
praising, making of Inventories, Fines, giving of Acquittances, or any other
thing concerning the same, should be all in vain, by that evasion of
Transcribing of it, as well against the express Letter of the Act as the
intention and moving of it: Also the Statute says five shillings, and not
above, so as the manner of precise penning of it excludes all nice evasions:
And the Act ought to be expounded to suppress Extortion, which is a great
affliction, and impoverishing of the poor Subjects.

4. As this Case is, he annexeth the Probate and Seal to the Transcript
engrossed, which the Plaintiff brought with him and offered to the Defendant;
so as the Case at Bar was without question, And generally the Ordinary,
Official, etc. cannot exact or take any Fee for any thing which concerns the
Probate of a Will or Testament, but that which the Statute limits: And
afterward the Jury found for the Plaintiff; and of such opinion was Walmesley,
Warberton, Daniel, and Foster Justices, the next Term in all things, But upon
exception in Arrest of Judgment for not pursuing of the Act, in the
Information; Judgment is not yet given, etc.

X. Hillar. Anno 6 Jacobi Regis, In the Common Pleas.
NOta that in this Term, a Question was moved to the Court, Aid to make the
Kings eldest Son Knight.
which was this: If Tenant in Burgage should pay Aid unto the King to make his
eldest Son Knight. And the Point rests upon this, If the Tenure in Burgage be a
Tenure in Socage; For by the ancient Commmon Law every Tenant in Knights
Service, and every Tenant in Socage, was to give to his Lord a reasonable Aid
to make his eldest Son a Knight, and to marry his eldest Daughter, and that was
uncertain at the Common Law, and also uncertain when the same Vide F. N. B. 82.
20.
should be paid. And this appears by Glanvil, Lib. 9. cap. 8. fol. 70. who
wrote in the time of Henry the second, Nihil autem certum Statutum and de
hujusmodi auxiliis dandis, vel exigendis, etc. sunt alii praeterea See the
statute of 27 H. 8 cap 10 of uses in the Preamble, concerning Aides, to make
the eldest Son Knight, and to marry the Daughter.
Casus in quibus licet Dominis auxilia solvenda sunt certa forma praescripta ab
hominibus suiis ut silius suus and haeres fiat miles. vel si primogenitam suam
filiam maritaverit, etc. And in the beginning of the Chapter, it is called
Rationabile Auxilium, because that then it was not certain, but to be moderated
by reason in respect of Circumstances: And by the Preamble of the Statute of
West. 1. An. 3 E. 1. cap. 35. Where it is said, Forasmuch as before that time
reasonable Aid to make ones Son Knight, or to marry his Daughter, was never
put in certain, nor when the same ought to be paid, nor how much be taken; the
said Act put the said two incertainties to a certainty, 1. That for a whole
Knights Fee there be taken but 20 s. and of 20 l. Lands holden in Socage 20 s.
and of more, more, and of less, less, according to the rate; by which the Aid
it self was set certain. 2. That none might levy such Aid, to make his son a
Knight, until his son be of the age of fifteen years; nor to marry his
daughter, until she be of the age of seven years. And Fleta, who wrote after
the said Act, calls them rationabilia auxilia ad filium militem faciendum, vel
ad filiam primogenitam maritandum: And by the Statute of 25 E. 1. where it is
provided, That no Taxes shall be taken but by common consent of the Realm,
there is an exception of the ancient Ayds, etc. which is to be intended of
these Ayds due unto the King by the ancient Common Law: But notwithstanding the
said Act of Westminster. 1. it was doubted, whether the King, because he is not
expressly named, were bound by it; and therefore in the twentieth year of E. 3.
the King took an Aid of 40 s. of every Knights Fee for to make the Black Prince
Knight, and nothing then of Lands holden in Socage; and to take away all
question concerning the same, the same was confirmed to him in Parliament: and
afterward, anno 25 E. 3. cap. 11. it is enacted, That reasonable Aid to make
the Kings eldest Son Knight, and to marry his eldest Daughter, shall be
demanded and levied after the form of the Statute made thereof, and not in
other manner, that is to say, Of every Fee holden of the King without Mean 20
s. and no more, and of every 20 l. Land holden of the King without Mean in
Socage 20 s. and no more. Now Littleton, lib. 2. cap. 10. fol. 36. b. Burgage
Tenure is, where an ancient Borough is of which the King is Lord; and those who
have Tenements within the Borough, hold of the King their Tenements, that every
Tenant for his Tenement ought to pay to the King a certain Rent: and such
Tenure is but Tenure in Socage; and all Socage Land is contributary to Aid, and
therefore a Tenant in Burgage shall be contributary to it.

And it is to be observed, and so it appears in the Register, fo. 1, and 2.
That in a Writ of Right, if the Lands or Tenements are holden by Knights
service, it is said, Quas clamat tenere de te per servitium unius feodi
Militis: and if the Lands be holden in Socage, the Writ is, Quis clamat tenere
de te per liberum servitium unius libri cumini, etc. so as Socage Tenure in all
Writs is called Liberum servitium. And by the Writ of Aid, Fitz. N. B. 82. it
is commanded to the Sheriff, Quod just, etc. facias habere A. rationabile
Auxilium de Militibus, and liberis tenentibus suis in Baliva tua, etc. so as
the same Writ makes a distinction of Knights service by the name of Militibus,
and of Socage by the name of Liberis tenentibus. And in the Register, fol. 2.
6. the Writ of Right for a House in London (which is holden of the King in
Burgage) is in these words, Rex, Majori, vel Custodi and Vicecom. London:
Praecipimus vobis quod sine dilatione teneatis G. de uno Messuagio, etc. in
London, quae clamat tenere de nobis per liberum servitium, etc. which proves,
That Tenure in Burgage is a Tenure in Socage: But it appears by the Books of
Avowry 26. and 10 H. 6. so Ancient Demesne 11. it was resolved by all the
Justices in the Exchequer Chamber, That no Tenure should pay for a reasonable
Aid to marry the Daughter, or to make the Son a Knight, but Tenure by Knights
service, and Tenure by Socage; but not Tenure by Grandserjanty, nor no other:
and 13 H. 4. 34. agrees to the Case of Grandserjanty: and by the said Books it
appears, that Tenure by Frankalmoign, and Tenure by Divine Service, shall not
pay, for they are none of them: but Tenure in Burgage is a Tenure in Socage;
and therefore the said Books prove, that such a Tenure shall pay Aid. And I
conceive, that Tenure by Petit-Serjanty shall pay also Aid: for Litt. lib. 2.
cap. 8. fo. 36. says, That such a Tenure is but Socage in effect: but Fitz. N.
B. 83. a. avoucheth, 13 H. 4. 34. That Tenant by Petit-Serjanty shall not pay
Aid; but the Book only extends to Grand-Serjanty: If the Houses in a City or
Borough are holden of the King in Burgage, and the King grant the Seignories to
one, and the City or Borough to another to hold of him, then those Houses shall
not be contributary to Aid, for they are not immediately holden of the King, as
is required by the Law.

And I conceive that he who holds a Rent of the King by Knights service, or
in Socage, shall pay Aid; for the words of the Act of Westminster. 1. cap. 35. are,
From henceforth of a whole Knights Fee only be taken 20 s. of 20 l. Land
holden in Socage 20 s. and the Mean is said in supposition of Law to hold the
Land: and it is not reason that the Tenant by his Feoffment before the Statute
should prejudice the Lord of his benefit. And although it was said, that a
Tenure in Socage, in servitium Socae, as Littleton says, and the same cannot
be applied to Houses: to that it was answered, That the Land upon which the
House is built, or if the House falls down, may be made arable, and be
ploughed. And a Rent may be holden in Socage, and yet it is not subject to be
plowed, but by a possibility after words escheat to the Lord of the Land. See
Huntington, Polidor Virgill. and Hollinsheds Chronicle, fol. 35. 15 H. 4. Aid
was levied by Hen. 7. 1. to marry Mawd his eldest Daughter to the Emperor, viz.
3 l. of every Hide of Land, etc. And see The Grand Customary of Normandy, cap.
35. there is a Chapter of Ayds, whereof the first is, to make the eldest Son of
his Lord a Knight; and the second to marry his eldest Daughter. And see a
Statute made in anno 19 H. 7. which begineth thus, Item praefati Communes in
Parliamento praedicto existentes ex assensu duorum Spiritualium and Temporalium
in dicto Parliamento similiter existen. concesserunt praefato Regi quandam
pecuniae summam in loco duorum rationabilium auxiliorum suae Majestatis de jure
debit. tam ratione creationis nobilissimi filii sui primogeniti bonae memoriae,
Domini Arthuri nuper Principis VValliae, quam ratione Matrimonii and
traductionis nobilissimi Principis Margaritae filiae suae primogenit. quam
etiam multiplicare pro Regni sui perpetua pace and tranquillitate, etc. certis
viis and modis levand. cujus quidem concessionis Tenor, etc. sequitur in haec
verba: For as much as the King our Sovereign Lord is rightfully entitled to
have two reasonable Ayds according to the Laws of this Land, the one for the
making Knight the right honorable his first begotten Son Arthur, late Prince of
Wales deceased: and the other, for that the marriage of the Right Noble
Princess his first begotten Daughter Margaret, now married to the King of
Scots: and also that his Highness has born great and inestimable charges for
the defense of the Realm, etc. considering the premises. And if the same Ayds
should be levied, and had by reason of their Tenures according to the ancient
Laws of the Land, should be to them doubtful and uncertain, and great
unquietness, for the search and not knowledge of their several Tenures, and
their Lands chargeable to the same, have made humble Petition unto his
Highness, graciously to accept and take of them the sum of 40000 l. as well in
recompense and satisfaction of the said two Ayds, as for the said great and
inestimable charges, etc. as is aforesaid. The King, to eschew and avoid the
great vexation, troubles and unquietness which to them should have ensued, if
the said Ayds were levied after the ancient Laws: and for the good and
acceptable services of the Nobles of this Realm, and other his faithful
Subjects, in their own persons and otherwise, done to his Grace, and thereby
sustained manifold costs and charges, to his great honor and pleasure, does
pardon the said two Ayds, and accepts the offer aforesaid: and that the
poorest of his said Commons should not be contributary to the said sum of 40000
l. has pardoned 10000 l. parcel thereof, and does accept of 30000 l. in full
satisfaction, etc. And that the Cities and Boroughs, Towns and places, being in
every Shire not by themselves accountable in the Exchequer for Fifteens and
Tenths, be chargeable with the Shires, etc. And all Cities and Boroughs, not
contributary, etc. but accountable by themselves, etc. shall be chargeable by
themselves toward the payment of the said 30000 l. with such sums as under the
Act particularly appear, etc. And there under the Act appear the several
Taxations of every several County, City, Borough, etc. and that the City of
London is taxed to 618 l. 3 s. 5 d. the City of Norwich to 8 l. 6 s. 11 d. the
City of Canterbury to 53 l. 13 s. 3 d. ob. Norfolk 285 l. 6 s. 10 d. Suffolk
1214 l. 5 s. 4 d. ob. etc. The sum of all the sums then expressed is 31648 l.
whereof allowable for Fees and Wages of Commissioners and Collectors 651 l. 16
s. 2 d. and so remains 31006 l. 4 s. and 10 d. Note, that the Universities of
Cambridg and Oxford, and the College of Eaton be excepted.

See Rot. 30. H. 3. ex part reman. Dom. Thesaur. in Scemino, in auxilio, nobis
concess. ad primogenitam siliam nostram maritand. And note, that King Henry the
third had Aid granted to him in Parliament ad Isabellam sororem suam Imperatori
maritand. but that was of Benevolence.

Rot. 42. H. 3. ibid. 6 Monstrat R. Johannes le Francois Baro de Scaccario,
quod cum Dominus Rex non caperet nisi 20 s. de integro feodo militis de auxilio
ad primogenitam filiam suam maritand. Radol. fill. Rad. fill. Mich. injuste
exegit de eodem 30 s. ad primogenitam filiam suam maritand. pro duabus
partibus, unius feodi militis, and averia sua cepit, and eadetinet. Et ideo
mandatum est Vic. Com. Bed. and Buck. quod venire faciant, etc. praedict. R.
ad respondendum eidem Johanni de praedict. transgressione, and praedict.
averio, etc. So as it appears by this, that some held, that the Statute of
Westminster. 1. aforesaid was but a confirmation of the Common Law, and that the King
also ought not to take more: but that was doubted.

Ibid. in Regno. 2 E. 1. Rot. 3. de auxilio ad militiam, (which is meant of
Knight. of the Kings Son) in the time of Henry the third, and Isabella
Comitissa Albermarte, perdonata 116 l. 8 s. 7 d. pro eodem auxilio, quia
Boldwinus de Insula fratre ejus cujus haeres ipsa est fuit infra aetatem, and
in custodia ejus: and quia tenentes dictae Isabellae onerentur per servitium
militare de praedict. pecuniis. Note, that that was before the Statute of West.
1. and by that it appears, That if one within age be in Ward of the King, he
shall not be contributary to Aid, but his Tenants which hold of him (and then
held of the King by reason of Ward) shall pay Aid unto the King, as it
appears by that Record.

Ibid. 30 E. 1. Rex dilectis and fidelibus, Vic. Kauc. and Rico. de R. salutem,
Sciatis, quod in primo die Junii anno Regni nostri 18. Praelati, Comites,
Barons, and caeteri Magnates, de regno nostro conceditur, pro fe and tota
communitate ejusdem Regni in pleno Parliamento nostro, nobis concesserunt 40 s.
de singulis feodis militum in dicto Regno ad auxilium Note, that this double
charge was in respect that they were discharged of any contribution for Socage,
which I conceive was for the difficulty to find the Socage Tenure.
ad primogenitam filiam nostram maritand. levandos sicut hujusmodi auxilium
alias in casu consil. levari consuevit, cui quidem levationi faciend. pro dicta
communitatis easiamento hucusque supersedimus faciend. gratiose assignavimus
vos ad praedictum auxilium, etc. Note, that his eldest Daughter was married to
the Earl of Bar.

Ibid. T. R. 34 E. 1. De auxilio concesso ad militiam filii Regis.

Ibid. Hill. 4 H. 4. Rot. 19. de rationabili auxilio de Will. Domino Roos, for
the marriage of Blanch the Kings eldest Daughter, out of the Manor of Wragby
in the County of Lincoln: The like M. Rot. 5. H. 4. Rot. 33. Lincoln. and Rot.
34. Lincoln, and Rot. 35. Lincoln, and Tr. R. 5. H. 4. Rot. 2. Kauc. and Rot.
3. Kauc. and Rot. 5. Kauc.

See ibid. P. R. 21 E. 3. Rot. Cantab. de auxilio ad filium Regis primogenitum
faciend. per Episcopum Eliensem: by which it appears, that a Bishop for his
Lands which he holds by Knights service, or Socage, shall pay Aid: but those
who hold by Frankalmoign, or by Divine service, shall not pay Aid, as before is
said.

See ibid. 20 E. 3. Rot. 13, and 14. de auxiliando ad primogenitum filium Regis
militem faciend. and Collectors thereupon appointed. By all which before cited,
it appears, that Tenure in Burgage is subject to the payment of Aid. And
note, that a great part of London was Abbey or Chauntry Land, and the Lands of
persons attainted: and all those which are immediately holden of the King by
Knights service, or in Socage, shall be contributary to the payment of Aid, etc.

XI. Hill. 6 Jacobi Regis. Prohibitions.
UPon Wednesday, being Ashwednesday, the (...) day of February, 1606. A great
Complaint was made by the President of York unto the King, That the Judges of
the Common Law had, in contempt of the Command of the King the last Term,
granted sixty or fifty Prohibitions at the least out of the Common Pleas to the
President and Council of York after the sixth day of February, and named three
in particular, (scil.) between Bell and Thawptes, another between Snell and
Huet, and another in an Information of a Riotous Rescue preferred by English
Bill by the Attorney General against Christopher Dickenson, one of the Sheriffs
of York, and diverse others, in rescuing of one William Watson out of the
Custody of the Deputy of one of the Pursuivants of the same Council who had
arrested the said Watson by force of a Commission of Rebellion awarded by the
President and Council, which Prohibition in the said Information was (as was
affirmed) denied upon a motion made in the Kings Bench the last Term, and yet
granted by us. And the King sent for me to answer to that Complaint: and I
only, all the rest of the Justices being absent, waited upon the King in the
Chamber near the Gallery; Who, in the presence of Egerton Lord Chancellor, the
Earl of Salisbury Lord Treasurer, the Lord of Northampton Lord Privy Seal, the
Earl of Suffolk Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of Worcester, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Wotton, and others of his Council, rehearsed to me the
Complaint aforesaid: and I perceived well, that upon the said Information he
had conceived great displeasure against the Judges of the Common Pleas, and
chiefly against me; To which I (having the Copy of the Complaint sent to me by
the Lord Treasurer the Sabbath day before) answered in this manner, That I had,
with as much brevity as the time would permit, made search in the Offices of
the Preignothories of the Common Pleas: and as to the said Cases between Bell
and Thawptes, and Snell and Huet, no such could be found: but my intent was not
to take advantage of a Misprisal: and the truth was, that the sixth day of
February the Court of Common Pleas had granted a Prohibition to the President
and Council of York, between Lock Plaintiff, and Bell and others Defendants:
and that was, a Replevyn in English was granted by the said President and
Council, which I affirmed was utterly against Law: For at the Common Law no
Replevyn ought to be made, but by Original Writ directed to the Sheriff. And
the Statute of Marlbridg cap. 21. and West. 1. cap. 17. has authorized the
Sheriff upon Plaint made to him, to make a Replevyn; and all that appears by
the said Statutes, and by the Books of 29 E. 3. 21. 8 Eliz. Dyer 245. And the
King neither by his Instructions had made the President and Council Sheriffs,
nor could grant to them power to make a Replevyn against the Law, nor against
the said Acts of Parliament; but the same ought to be made by the Sheriff. And
all that was affirmed by the Lord Chancellor for very good Law: And I say, that
it might well be that we have granted other Prohibitions in other Cases of
English Replevyns. Another Prohibition I confess we have granted between Sir
Bethel Knight, now Sheriff of the County of York, as Executor to one
Stephenson, who had made him and another his Executors, and preferred an
English Bill against Chambers, and diverse others in the nature of an Action
upon the Case, upon a Trover and Conversion in the life of the Testator of
goods and Chattels, to the value of 1000 l. and because the other Executor
would not join with him, although he was named in the Bill, he had not any
remedy at the Common Law, he prayed remedy there in Equity: and I say, that the
President and Council have not any authority to proceed in that Case, for
diverse causes.

1. Because there is an express limitation in their Commission, that they shall
not hold plea between party and party etc. unless both parties, or one of them,
tanta paupertate sunt gravati, that they cannot sue at the Common Law: and in
that case the Plaintiff was a Knight, and Sheriff, and a man of great ability.

2. By that Suit the King was deceived of his Fine, for he ought to have had
200 l. Fine, because that the damages amounted to 4000 l. and that was one of
the causes that the Sheriff began his Suit there, and not at the Common Law:
another cause was, that their Decrees which they take upon them are final and
uncontrollable, either by Error, or any other remedy. And yet the President is
a Nobleman, but not learned in the Law; and those which are of the Council
there, although that they have the countenance of Law, yet they are not learned
in the Law; and nevertheless they take upon them final and uncontrollable
Decrees in matters of great importance: For if they may deny Relief to any at
their pleasure without controulment, so they may do it by their final Decrees
without Error, Appeal, or other remedy: which is not so in the Kings Courts
where there are five Judges; for they can deny Justice to none who has Right,
nor give any Judgment, but the same is controulable by a Writ of Error, etc.
And if we shall not grant Prohibitions in Cases where they hold Plea without
authority, then the subjects shall be wrongfully oppressed without Law, and we
denied to do them Justice: And their ignorance in the Law appeared by their
allowance of that Suit, scil. That the one Executor had no remedy by the Common
Law, because the other would not join in suit with him at the Common Law:
whereas every one learned in the Law knows, that summons and severance lies
in any Suit brought as Executors: and this also in that particular Case was
affirmed by the Lord Chancellor; and he much inveighed against Actions brought
there upon Trover and Conversion, and said, that they could not be found in our
ancient Books.

Another Prohibition I confess we have granted, between the L. Wharton, who by
English Bill sued before the Counsel, Banks, Buttermere, and others, for
fishing in his several Fishings in Darwent in the County of C. in the nature of
an Action of Trespass at the Common Law, to his damages of 200 l. and for the
causes next before recited, and because the same was merely determinable at the
Common Law, we granted a Prohibition, and that also was allowed by the Lord
Chancellor. And as to the case of Information upon the Riotous Rescous, I
having forgotten to speak to that, the King himself asked what the Case was? to
whom I answered, that the case was, That one exhibited a Bill there in the
nature of an Action of Debt, upon a Mutuatus against Watson, who upon his Oath
affirmed, that he had satisfied the Plaintiff, and that he owed him nothing,
and yet because the Defendant did not deny the Debt, the Council decreed the
same against him, and upon that Decree the Pursuivant was sent to arrest the
said Watson, who arrested him upon which the Rescous was made: and because that
the Suit was in the nature of an Action of Debt upon a Mutuatus at the Common
Law, and the Defendant at the Common Law might have waged his Law, of which the
Defendant ought not to be barred by that English Bill, quia beneficium juris
nemini est auferendum: the Prohibition was granted; and that was affirmed also
by the Lord Chancellor: whereupon I concluded, that if the principal cause does
not belong unto them, all their proceedings was coram non Judice, and then no
Rescous could be done: but the Lord Chancellor said, that though the same
cannot be a Rescous, yet it was a Riot, which might be punished there: which I
denied, unless it were by course of Law by force of a Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, and not by an English Bill: but to give the King full satisfaction in
that point, the truth is, the said Case was debated in Court, and the Court
inclined to grant a Prohibition in the said case; but the same was stayed to be
better advised upon, so as no Prohibition was ever under Seal in the said Case.

Also I confess, that we have granted diverse Prohibitions to stay Suits there
by English Bill upon penal Statutes: for the manner of prosecution, as well for
the Action, Process, etc. as for the count, is to be pursued, and cannot be
altered; and therefore without question the Council in such cases cannot hold
Plea, which was also affirmed by the Lord Chancellor. And I said, that it was
resolved in the Reign of Queen Eliz. in Parots Case, and now lately in the Case
of the President and Council of Wales, That no Court of Equity can be erected
at this day without Act of Parliament, for the reasons and causes in the Report
of the said Case of Parrot.

And the King was well satisfied with these reasons and causes of our
proceedings, who of his Grace gave me his Royal hand, and I departed from
thence in his favor. And the surmise of the Number, and that the Prohibition
in the said Case in the Information was denied in the Kings Bench, was utterly
denied: for the same was moved when two Judges were in Court, who gave not any
opinion therein, but required Sergeant Hutton who moved it, to move the same
again when the Court was full, etc.

XII. Pasch. 7 Jacobi Regis.
NOte, that this Term a Question was moved at Serjeants-Inne: Who by the Common
Law ought to repair the Bridges, common Rivers, and Sewers, and the Highways,
and by what means they shall be compelled to it; and first of the Bridges: And
as to them it is to be known, That of common Right all the Country shall be
charged to the Reparation of a Bridge, and therewith agrees 10 E. 3. 28. b.
That a Bridge shall be levied by the whole Country, because it is a common
Easement for the whole Country, and as to that Point, the Statute of 22 H. 8.
cap. 5. was but an affirmance of the Common Law: And this is true, when no
other is bound by the Law to repair it, but he who has the Toll of the men or
Cattle which pass over a Bridge or Cawsey, ought to repair the same, for he
has the Toll to that purpose, Et qui sentit commodum sentire debet and onus:
and therewith agrees 14 E. 3. Bar 276. Also a man may be bounden to repair a
Bridge, ratione Tenurae of certain Land, But a particular person cannot be
bound by prescription, scil. That he and all his Ancestors have repaired the
Bridge, if it be not in respect of the Tenure of his Land, taking of Toll, or
other profit; for the Act of the Ancestor, cannot charge the Heir without
profit. But an Abbot or other Corporation who has a lawful being may be
charged, scil. That he and his Predecessors time out of mind, etc. have
repaired the Bridge; For the Abbot and Covent may bind their Successors, vide
21 E. 4. 28. 27 E. 3. 8. 22 Ass. 8. 5 H. 7. 3. And if an Abbot and his
Predecessors time out of mind have repaired a Bridge of Alms, they shall be
compelled to repair it; and therewith agrees 10 E. 3. 28. So it is of a
Highway of common Right, all the Country ought for to repair it, because that
the Country have their ease and passage by it, which stands with the reason of
the Case of the Bridge, but yet some may be particularly bounden to repair it
as is aforesaid. He who has the Land adjoining, ought of common Right without
prescription to scour and cleanse the Ditches, next to the way to his Land:
and therewith agrees the Book of 8 H. 7. 5. But he who has Land adjoining
without prescription, is not bound to repair the way. So of a common River, of
common Right all who have ease and passage by it, ought to cleanse and scour
it; For a common River is as a common Street, as it is said in 22 Ass. and 37
Ass. 10. But he who has Land adjoining to the River is not bounden to cleanse
the River, unless he has the benefit of it, scil. a Toll, or a Fishing, or
other profit. See 37 Ass. p. 10.

XIII. Pasch. 7 Jacobi.
Sir William Reads and Boothes Case.
IN the great Case in the Star Chamber, of a Forgery, Between Sir William Read
Plaintiff, and Roger Booth, and Cutbert Booth, and others Defendants: the Case
was this;

The said Roger Booth 38 Eliz. was convicted in that Court of the publication
of a Writing under Seal, forged in the name of Sir Thomas Gresham, of a
Rentcharge of a hundred pounds, cut of all his Lands and Tenements, to one
Markham for ninety nine years, bearing date the one and twentieth year of Queen
Elizabeth; the said Roger knowing it to be forged, And afterward the said Sir
William Read exhibited the said Bill against the said Boothes, and others, for
forging of another writing under Seal bearing date the twentieth of Eliz. in
the name of the said Sir Thomas Gresham, purporting a Deed of Feoffment of all
his Lands (except certain) to Sir Rowland Heyward and Edward Hoogon and their
Heirs, to certain uses, which was in effect to the use of Markham the younger
and his Heirs: And for the publication of the said Writing, knowing the same to
be forged, was the Bill exhibited. And now upon the hearing of the Cause in the
Star Chamber this Term: These doubts were moved upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. 1.
If one who is convicted of publication of a Deed of Feoffment of Rentcharge,
knowing the same to be forged: Again at another day forge another Deed of
Feoffment, or Rentcharge, if he be within the case of Felony within the said
Act, which doubt arises upon these words (eftsoons) committed again any of the
said Offenses) And therefore it was objected, that he ought to commit again the
same natute of Offense, scil. If he were convicted of Forgery he ought to forge
again, and not only publish, knowing, etc. And if first he were convicted of
publishing, knowing, etc. he ought to offend again in publication, knowing,
etc. and not in Forgery, for (eftsoons) which is (iterum) implies that it
ought to be of the same nature of Offense. The second doubt was, If a man
commits two Forgeries, the one in 37 of Eliz. and the other in 38. and he is
first convicted of the last, if he may be now impeached for the first. The
third doubt was, when Roger Booth was convicted in 38 Eliz. and afterward is
charged with a new Forgery in 37 Eliz. If the Witnesses proving in truth that
it was forged after the first conviction, if the Star Chamber has Jurisdiction
of it. The last doubt was, when Cutbert Booth who never was convicted of
Forgery before, if in truth the Forgery was done, and so proved in 38 Eliz. If
he might be convicted upon this Bill, because that the Forgery is alleged
before that it was done. As to the first and second doubts, it was resolved by
the two chief Justices and the chief Baron, that if any one be convicted of
Forgery or publication of any Writing concerning Freehold, etc. within the
first Branch; or concerning Interest or Term for years, etc. within the second
Branch, and be convicted, if afterward he offend either against the first
Branch or second, that the same is Felony: As if he forgeth a Writing
concerning interest for years within the second branch, and be convicted, and
afterward he forgeth a Charter of Feoffment within the first branch, or e
converso, that that is Felony, and that by express words of the Act: That if
any person or persons being hereafter convicted or condemned of any of the said
Offenses, which words (any of the said Offenses, extend to all the Offenses
mentioned before, either in the first branch, or in the second branch) by any
the ways or means above limited, shall after any such conviction or
condemnation, eftsoons commit or perpetrate any of the said Offenses, in form
aforesaid, which words, Any of the said Offenses, etc. do extend to the nature
of all the Offenses mentioned in the first and second Branches: But if one
forge a Writing in 37. of Eliz. and afterward he forge another in 38. of Eliz.
yet it is not Felony, although that he forgeth many Writings one after the
other, for by the express words of the Act, it is not Felony. The Forgery,
etc. which is Felony by the Act, ought to be after conviction or condemnation
of a former Writing. As to the third doubt, it was resolved, That the
allegation of the time by the Plaintiff in the Bill, shall not alter the
Offense, but shall give unto the Court Jurisdiction: but if it appears to the
Court, that the Forgery or Publication was after the Sentence, then the Court
shall surcease. As to the last Point, it was resolved, that the time of the
Forgery is not material, be it before or after the Offense in truth committed,
if it be committed before the exhibiting of the Bill, but if the date of the
Writing supposed to be forged, had been mistaken, there the Defendant could not
be condemned of a Deed of another date, for that is not the Offense complained
of in the Bill, of which the Court can give Sentence.

XIV. Pasch. 7. Jacobi Regis.
The Case of Sewers.
THe Case was, That there was a Cawsey, or Milstanke of Stone in the River of
Dee and City of Chester, which Cawsey before the Reign of King Edward the
first, was erected for the necessary maintenance of certain Mills, some of the
Kings, and others of the Subjects at the end of the said Cawsey: and now a
certain Decree was made by certain Commissioners of Sewers, for a breach to be
made by ten Poles in length in the said Cawsey, which Cawsey as it was admitted
by both parties was errected before the Reign of King Edward the first, and so
has continued until this day without any exaltation or inhancing: and if by
any Decree of the Commissioners by force of any Statute, any breach may be made
in that Cawsey, was the Question. And it was referred by the Letters of the
Lord of the Privy Council, to the two chief Justices, and the chief Baron; and
upon hearing of Council learned at diverse days, and good consideration had in
the time of the last Vacation, of all the Statutes concerning Sewers, and upon
conference had amongst themselves, it was resolved as follows.

1. Whereas it is provided by the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 23. Quod omnes
Kidelli deponantur de cetero per Thamesiam, and Medeweiam and per totam Angl.
nisi per Costeram Maris. It was resolved, That that Stat. extended only to
Kidells, sc. open Wares for taking of Fish; but the first Statute which
extended to pulling down, or abating of any Mills, Mill-stankes, and Cawseys,
was the Statute of 25 E. 3. cap. 4. which Act appointed such only to be thrown
down or abated, which were levied or erected in the Reign of King Edward the
first, or after: But by the Statute made, An. 1 H. 4. cap. 12. upon complaint
in Parliament of the great damages which have risen by the outrageous inhansing
of Mills, Mill-stanks, and other impediments made and erected before the Reign
of King Edward the first: The said old Mills and Mill-stanks were appointed by
Act then made to be surveyed, and such as were found to be much inhansed to be
corrected and amended; saving always reasonable substance of such Mills,
Mill-stanks Wears, etc. so in old time made and levied: None of which Acts
extended to tho Case in question; For that Cawsey was erected before the Reign
of Edward the first, and never exalted or inhansed after the errection of it:
And the statute of 12 H. 4. cap. 7. does confirm all the said Acts; and by them
the generality of the Act of Magna Charta is restrained, as by the said Acts
appears. And by the statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 5. None of the said Acts as to
the Case in question is repealed; for first, the same Act appoints the manner,
form, tenor, and effect of the Commission of Sewers, by which power is given to
the Commissioners to survey, Walls, etc. Fences, Cawseys, etc. Mills, etc. and
then to correct, repair, amend, pull down or over*throw, or reform, as cause
requires, according to their wisdoms and discretions; and therein as well to
ordain and do after the form, tenor, and offect of all and singular the
Statutes and Ordinances made before the first of March, in the twenty third
year of Henry the eighth, as also to enquire by the Oaths of honest and
lawful men, etc. through whose default the said hurts and damages have
happened, etc. By which it appears, That the discretion of the Commissioners
was limited, scill. to proceed according to the statutes and Ordinances before
made, etc. And also to reform, repair, and amend the said Walls, etc. by force
of that word (said) has relation to the precedent purview of the Act, etc. And
further to reform, prostrate and overthrow all such Mills, etc. and other
impediments and annoyances (aforesaid) as shall be found by Inquisition, or by
your survey and discretion to be excessive, i. e. hurtful; which word
(aforesaid) refers that clause also to the precedent purview, scil. such
immpediments and annoyances as are against the Statutes and Ordinances before
made. Also it is further provided by the same Act, That all and every Statute,
Act, and Ordinance heretofore made concerning the Premises or any of them, not
being contrary to this present Act, nor heretofore repealed, shall from
henceforth stand and be good and effectual for ever. But the said Acts of 25
E. 3* and 1 H. 4. are not contrary to any clause of that Act, nor were repealed
before: And always such construction ought to be made, that one part of the
Act may agree with another, and all to stand together: and if they had intended
a repeal of the said former Acts, they would not have repealed them by such
general and doubtful words, when they concerned the Inheritances of many
Subjects: and according to this resolution we certified the Lords of the
Council, that the said Statutes of 25 E. 3. and 1. of H. 4. remained yet in
force; and that the Authority given by the Commission of Sewers, did not extend
to Mills, Mill-stanks, Cawseys, etc. errected before the Reign of King Ed. 1.
unless that they have been inhaunsed and exalted above their former height,
and thereby made more prejudicial, etc. In which case they are not to be
overthrown or subverted, but to be reformed by abating the excess and
inhaunsment only.

Trinit. 7 Jacobi Regis.
XIV. The Case De Modo Decimandi, and of Prohibitions, debated before the Kings
Majesty.
RIchard, Archbishop of Canterbury, accompanied with the Bishop of London, the
Bishop of Bathe and Wells, the Bishop of Rochester, and diverse Doctors of the
Civil and Canon Law, as Dr. Dunn Judge of the Arches, Dr. Bennet Judge of the
Prerogative, Dr. James, Dr. Martin, and diverse other Doctors of the Civil and
Canon Law came attending upon them to the King to Whitehall the Thursday,
Friday, and Saturday after Easter-Term, in the Councel-Chamber; where the Chief
Justice, and I my self, Daniel Judge of the Common Pleas, and Williams Judge of
the King's Bench, by the command of the King attended also: where the King being
assisted with his Privy Council, all sitting at the Councel-Table, spoke as a
most gracious, good, and excellent Sovereign, to this effect: As I would not
suffer any novelty or Innovations in my Courts of Justice Ecclesiastical and
Temporal; so I will not have any of the Laws, which have had judicial
allowances in the times of the Kings of England before him, to be forgotten,
but to be put in execution. And for as much as upon the contentions between the
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Courts great trouble, inconvenience and loss may
arise to the subjects of both parts, namely when the controversy arises upon
the jurisdiction of my Courts of ordinary Justice; and because I am the head of
Justice immediately under God, and knowing what hurt may grow to my Subjects of
both sides, when no private case, but when the Jurisdictions of my Courts are
drawn in question, which in effect concerns all my Subjects, I thought that
it stood with the Office of a King, which God has committed to me, to hear the
controversies between the Bishops and other of his Clergy, and the Judges of
the Laws of England, and to take Order, that for the good and quiet of his
Subjects, that the one do not encroach upon the other, but that every of them
hold themselves within their natural and local jurisdiction, without
encroachment or usurpation the one upon the other. And he said, that the only
question then to be disputed was, If a Parson, or a Vicar of a Parish, sueth
one of his Parish in the Spiritual Court for Tithes in kind, or Lay-fee, and
the Defendant alleges a custom or prescription De modo Dec^mandi, if that
custom or prescription, De modo Decimandi, shall be tried and determined before
the Judge Ecclesiastical where the Suit is begun; or a Prohibition lies, to try
the same by the common Law. And the King directed, that we who were Judges
should declare the reasons and causes of our proceedings, and that he would
hear the authorities in the Law which we had to warrant our proceedings in
granting of Prohibition in cases of Modo Decimandi. But the Archbishop of
Canterbury kneeled before the King, and desired him, that he would hear him and
others who are provided to speak in the case for the good of the Church of
England: and the Archbishop himself inveighed much against two things: 1. That
a Modus Decimandi should be tried by a Jury, because that they themselves claim
more or less modum Decimandi; so as in effect they were Tryors in their own
cause, or in the like cases. 2. He inveighed much the precipitate and hasty
Trials by Iuries: and after him Doctor Bennet, Judge of the Prerogative Court,
made a large Invection against Prohibitions in Causis Ecclesiasticis: and that
both Jurisdictions as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal were derived from the
King; and all that which he spoke out of the Book which Dr. Ridley has lately
published, I omit as impertinent: and he made five Reasons, why they should try
Modum Decimandi.

And the first and principal Reason was out of the Register, fo. 58. quia non
est consonans rationi, quod cognitio accessarii in Curia Christianitatis
impediatur ubi cognitio Causae principalis ad forum Ecclesiasticum noscitur
pertinere. And the principal cause is Right of Tithes, and the Plea of Modo
Decimandi sounds in satisfaction of Tithes; and therefore the Conusance of the
original cause, (scil.) the Right of Tithes appertaining to them, the Conusance
of the bar of Tithes, which he said was but the accessory, and as it were
dependant upon it, appertained also to them. And whereas it is said in the
Bishop of VVinchesters Case, in the second part of my Reports, and 8 E. 4. 14.
that they would not accept of any Plea in discharge of Tithes in the Spiritual
Court, he said, that they would allow such Pleas in the Spiritual Court, and
commonly had allowed them; and therefore he said, that that was the Mystery of
iniquity founded upon a false and feigned foundation, and humbly desired the
reformation of that Error, for they would allow Modum Decimandi being duly
proved before them.

2. There was great inconveniency, that Laymen should be Tryers of their own
Customs, if a Modus Decimandi should be tried by Jurors; for they shall be upon
the matter Jurors in their own cause.

3. That the custom of Modo Decimandi is of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and
Conusance, for it is a manner of Tything, and all manner of Tything belongs to
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: and therefore he said, that the Judges, in their
Answer to certain Objections made by the Archbishop of Canterbury, have
confessed, that suit may be had in Spiritual Courts pro modo Decimandi; and
therefore the same is of Ecclesiastical Conusance; and by consequence it shall
be tried before the Ecclesiastical Judges: for if the Right of Tithes be of
Ecclesiastical Conusance, and the satisfaction also for them of the same
Jurisdiction, the same shall be tried in the Ecclesiastical Court.

4. In the Prohibitions of Modus Decimandi averment is taken, That although the
Plaintiff in the Prohibition offers to prove Modum Decimandi, the
Ecclesiastical Court does refuse to allow of it, which was confessed to be a
good cause of Prohibition: But he said, they would allow the Plea De Modo
Decimandi in the Spiritual Court, and therefore cessante causa cessabit and
effectus, and no Prohibition shall lie in the Case.

5. He said, that he can show many consultations granted in the cause De Modo
Decimandi, and a Consultation is of greater force then a Prohibition; for
Consultation, as the word imports, is made with the Court with consultation and
deliveration. And Bacon, Solicitor-General, being (as it is said) assigned with
the Clergy by the King, argued before the King, and in effect said less then
Doctor Bennet said before: but he vouched 1 R. 3. 4. the Opinion of Hussy,
when the Original ought to begin in the Spiritual Court, and afterward a thing
comes in issue which is tryable in our Law, yet it shall be tried by their
Law: As if a man sueth for a Horse devised to him, and the Defendant says,
that the Devisor gave to him the said Horse, the same shall be tried there. And
the Register 57 and 58. If a man be condemned in Expenses in the Spiritual
Court for laying violent hands upon a Clark, and afterward the Defendant pays
the costs, and gets an Acquittance, and yet the Plaintiff sueth him against his
Acquittance for the Costs, and he obtains a Prohibition, for that Acquittances
and Deeds are to be determined in our Law, he shall have a Consultation,
because that the principal belongs to them. 38 E. 3. 5. Right of Tithes
between two spiritual persons shall be determined in the Ecclesiastical Court.
And 38 E. 3. 6. where the Right of Tithes comes in debate between two spiritual
persons, the one claiming the Tithes as of common Right within his Parish, and
the other claiming to be discharged by real composition, the Ecclesiastical
Court shall have Jurisdiction of it.

And the said Judges made humble suit to the King, That for as much as they
perceived that the King in his Princely Wisdom did detest Innovations and
Novelties, that he would vouchsafe to suffer them with his gracious favor, to
inform him of one Innovation and Novelty which they conceived would tend to the
hinderance of the good administration and execution of Justice within his Realm.

Your Majesty, for the great zeal which you have to Justice, and for the due
administration thereof, has constituted and made fourteen Judges, to whom you
have committed not only the administration of Ordinary Justice of the Realm,
but crimina laesae Majestatis, touching your Royal person, for the legal
proceeding: also in Parliament we are called by Writ, to give to your Majesty
and to the Lords of the Parliament our advice and counsel, when we are
required: We two chief Justices sit in the Star Chamber, and are oftentimes
called into the Chancery, Court of Wards, and other High Courts of Justice: we
in our Circuits do visit twice in the year your Realm, and execute Justice
according to your Laws: and if we who are your public Judges receive any
diminution of such reverence and respect in our places, which our predecessors
had, we shall not be able to do you such acceptable service as they did,
without having such reverence and respect as Judges ought to have. The state of
this Question is not in statu deliberativo, but in statu judiciali; it is not
disputed de bono, but de vero, non de Lege fienda, sed de Lege lata; not to
frame or devise new Laws, but to inform your Majesty what your Law of England
is: and therefore it was never seen before, that when the Question is of the
Law, that your Judges of the Law have been made Disputants with him who is
inferior to them, who day by day plead before them at their several Courts at
Westminster* and although we are not afraid to dispute with Mr. Bennet and Mr.
Bacon, yet this example being primae impressionis, and your Majesty detesting
Novelties and innovations, we leave it to your Grace and Princely
consideration, whether your Majesty will permit our answering in hoc statu
judiciali, upon your public Judges of the Realm? But in Obedience to your
Majesty's command, We, with your Majesty's gracious favor, in most humble
manner will inform your Majesty touching the said Question, which we, and our
predecessors before us, have oftentimes adjudged upon judicial proceedings in
your Courts of Justice at Westminster: which Judgments cannot be reversed or
examined for any Error in Law, if not by a Writ of Error in a more high and
supreme Court of Justice, upon legal and judicial proceedings: and that is the
ancient Law of England, as appears by the Statute of 4 H. 4. cap. 22.

And we being commanded to proceed, all that which was said by us, the Judges,
was to this effect, That the Trial De Modo Decimandi ought to be by the Common
Law by a Jury of twelve men, it appears in three manners: First, by the
Common Law: Secondly, by Acts of Parliament: And lastly, by infinite judgments
and judicial proceedings long times past without any impeachment or
interruption.

But first it is to see, What is a Modus Decimandi? Modus Decimandi is, when
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments have been given to the Parson and his
successors, or an annual certain sum, or other profit, always, time out of
mind, to the Parson and his successors, in full satisfaction and discharge of
all the Tithes in kind in such a place: and such manner of Tything is now
confessed by the other party to be a good bar of Tithes in kind.

I. That Modus Decimandi shall be tried by the Common Law, that is, that all
satisfactions given in discharge of Tithes shall be tried by the Common Law:
and therefore put that which is the most common case, That the Lord of the
Manor of Dale prescribes to give to the Parson 40 s. yearly, in full
satisfaction and discharge of all Tithes growing and renewing within the Manor
of Dale, at the Feast of Easter: The Parson sueth the Lord of the Manor of
Dale for his Tithes of his Manor in kind, and he in Bar prescribes in manner
ut supra: The Question is, if the Lord of the Manor of Dale may upon that have
a Prohibition, for if the Prohibition lies, then the Spiritual Court ought not
to try it; for the end of the Prohibition is, That they do not try that which
belongs to the Trial of the Common Law; the words of the Prohibition being,
that they would draw the same ad aliud examen.

First, the Law of England is divided into Common Law, Statute Law, and Customs
of England: and therefore the Customs of England are to be tried by the Trial
which the Law of England does appoint.

Secondly, Prescriptions by the Law of the Holy Church, and by the Common Law,
differ in the times of limitation; and therefore Prescriptions and Customs of
England shall be tried by the Common Law. See 20 H. 6. fo. 17. 19 E. 3.
Jurisdiction 28. The Bishop of Winchester brought a Writ of Annuity against the
Archdeacon of Surry, and declared, how that he and his successors were seized
by the hands of the Defendant by title of Prescription, and the Defendant
demanded Judgment, if the Court would hold Jurisdiction being between spiritual
persons, etc. Stone Justice, Be assured, that upon title of prescription we
will here hold Jurisdiction; and upon that, Wilby chief Justice gave the Rule,
Answer: Upon which it follows, that if a Modus Decimandi, which is an annual
sum for Tithes by prescription, comes in debate between spiritual persons, that
the same shall be tried here: For the Rule of the Book is general, (scil.) upon
title of prescription, we will hold Jurisdiction, and that is fortified with an
Asseveration, Know assuredly; as if he should say, that it is so certain, that
it is without question. 32 E. 3. Jurisd. 26. There was a Vicar who had only
Tithes and Oblations, and an Abbot claimed an Annuity or Pension of him by
prescription: and it was adjudged, that the same prescription, although it was
betwixt spiritual persons, should be tried by the Common Law: Vide 22 H. 6. 46.
and 47. A prescription, that an Abbey time out of mind had found a Chaplain in
his Chapel to say Divine Service, and to minister Sacraments, tried at the
Common Law.

3. See the Record of 25 H. 3. cited in the case of Modus Decimandi before: and
see Register fo. 38. when Lands are given in satisfaction and discharge of
Tithes.

4. See the Statute of Circumspecte agatis, Decimae debitae, seu consuetae,
which proves that Tithes in kind, and a Modus by custom, etc.

5. 8 E. 4. 14. and Fitz. N. B. 41. g. A Prohibition lies for Lands given in
discharge of Tithes. 28 E. 3. 97. a. There Suit was for Tithes, and a
Prohibition lies, and so abridged by the Book, which of necessity ought to be
upon matter De Modo Decimandi, or discharge.

7. 7 E. 6. 79. If Tithes are sold for money, by the sale the things spiritual
are made temporal, and so in the case De modo Decimandi, 42 E. 3. 12. agrees.

8. 22 E. 3. 2. Because an Appropriation is mixed with the Temporalty, (scil.)
the Kings Letters Patents, the same ought to be showed how, etc. otherwise of
that which is mere Temporal: and so it is of real composition, in which the
Patron ought to join: Vide 11 H. 4. 85. Composition by writing, that the one
shall have the Tithes, and the other shall have money, the Suit shall be at the
Common Law.

Secondly, By Acts of Parliament.

1. The said Act of Circumspecte agatis, which gives power to the
Ecclesiastical Judge to sue for Tithes due first in kind, or by custom, i. e.
Modus Decimandi: so as by authority of that Act, although that the yearly sum
sounds in the Temporalty, which was paid by Custom in discharge of Tithes,
yet because the same comes in the place of Tithes, and by constitution, the
Tithes are changed into money, and the Parson has not any remedy for the same,
which is the Modus Decimandi at the Common Law; for that cause the Act is
clear, that the same was a doubt at the Common Law: And the Statute of Articuli
Cleri, cap. 1. If corporal penance be changed in poenam pecuniariam, for that
pain Suit lies in the Spiritual Court: For see Mich. 8 H. 3. Rot. 6. in
Thesaur. A Prohibition lies pro eo quod Rector de Chesterton exigit de Hagone
de Logis de certa portione pro Decimis Molendinarium; so as it appears, it
was a doubt before the said Statute, if Suit lay in the Spiritual Court de Modo
Decimandi. And by the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 20. it is provided and enacted,
That every of the subjects of this Realm, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws
of the Church, and after the laudable usages and customs of the Parish, etc.
shall yield and pay his Tithes, Offerings, and other duties: and that for
substraction of any of the said Tithes, offerings, or other duties* the Parson,
etc. may by due Process of the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws, convent the person
offending before a competent Judge, having authority to hear and determine the
Right of Tithes, and also to compel him to yield the Duties; i. e. as well
Modus Decimandi, by laudable usage or Custom of the Parish, as Tithes in kind:
and with that in effect agrees the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 7. By the Statute
of 2 E. 3. cap. 13. it is enacted, That every of the Kings Subjects shall from
henceforth, truly and justly, without fraud or guile, divide, etc. and pay all
manner of their predial Tithes in their proper kind, as they rise and happen
in such manner and form as they have been of Right yielded and paid within
forty years next before the making of this Act, or of Right or Custom ought to
have been paid. And after in the same Act there is this clause and Proviso,
Provided always, and be it enacted, That no person shall be sued, or otherwise
compelled to yield, give, or pay any manner of Tithes for any Manors, Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, which by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or
by any privilege or prescription, are not chargeable with the payment of any
such Tithes, or that be discharged by any compositions real. And afterward,
there is another Branch in the said Act; And be it further enacted, That if any
person do substract or withdraw any manner of Tithes, Obventions, Profits,
Commodities, or other Duties before mentioned (which extends to Custom of
Tything, i. e. Modus Decimandi, mentioned before in the Act, etc.) that then
the party so substracting, etc. may be convented and sued in the Kings
Ecclesiastical Court, etc. And upon the said Branch, which is in the Negative,
That no person shall be sued for any Tithes of any Lands which are not
chargeable with the payment of such Tithes by any Law, Statute, Privilege,
Prescription, or Real Composition. And always when an Act of Parliament
commands or prohibits any Court, be it Temporal or, Spiritual, to do any thing
temporal or spiritual, if the Statute be not obeyed, a Prohibition lies: as
upon the Statute de articulis super Cartas, ca. 4. Quod Communia Placita non
tenentur in Scaccario: a Prohibition lies to the Court of Exchequer, if the
Barons hold a Common-Plea there, as appears in the Register 187. b. So upon
the Statute of West. 2. Quod inquisitiones quae magnae sunt examinationis non
capiantur in patria; a Prohibition lies to the Justices of Nisi Prius. So upon
the Statute of Articuli super Cartas, cap. 7. Quod Constabularius Castr. Dover,
non teneat Placitum forinsecum quod non tangit Custodiam Castri, Register 185.
So upon the same Statute, cap. 3. Quod See Lib. Entr. 450. a Prohibition was
upon the Statute that one shall not maintain; and so upon every penal Law. See
F. N. B 39. b. Prohibition to the Common Pleas upon the Stat. of Magna Charta
that they do not proceed in a Writ of Praecipe in Capite, where the Land is not
holden of the King. 1 and 2 Eliz. Die. 170, 171. Prohibition upon the Statute of
barrenes, and pettit is only prohibited by implication.
Senescallus and Mariscallus non teneant Placita de libero tenemento, de
debito, conventione, etc. a Prohibition lies, 185. And yet by none of these
Statutes, no Prohibition or Supersedeas is given by express words of the
Statute. So upon the Statutes 13 R. 2. cap. 3. 15 R. 2. cap. 2. 2 H. 4. cap.
11. by which it is provided, That Admirals do not meddle with any thing done
within the Realm, but only with things done upon the Seas, etc. a Prohibition
lies to the Court of Admiralty. So upon the Statute of West. 2. cap. 43.
against Hospitalers and Templers, if they do against the same Statute, Regist.
39. a. So upon the Statute de Prohibitione regia, Ne laici ad citationem
Episcopi conveniant ad recognitionem faciend. vel Sacrament. praestanda nisi in
casubus matrimonialibus and Testamentariis, a Prohibition lies. Regist. 36. b.
And so upon the Statute of 2 H. 5. cap. 3. at what time the Libel is grantable
by the Law, that it be granted and delivered to the party without difficulty,
if the Ecclesiastical Judge, when the cause which depends before him is mere
Ecclesiastical, denies the Libel, a Prohibition lies, because that he does
against the Statute; and yet no Prohibition by any express words is given by
the Statute. And upon the same Statute the Case was in 4 E. 4. 37. Pierce
Peckam took Letters of Administration of the Goods of Rose Brown of the Bishop
of London, and afterward T. T. sued to Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, That
because the said Rose Brown had Goods within his Diocese, he prayed Letters of
Administration to be committed to him, upon which the Bishop granted him
Letters of Administration, and afterward T. T. libelled in the Spiritual Court
of the Archbishop in the Arches against Pierce Peckam, to whom the Bishop of
London had committed Letters of Administration to repeal the same: and Pierce
Peckam, according to the said Statute, prayed a Copy of the Libel exhibited
against him, and could not have it, and thereupon he sued a Prohibition, and
upon that an Attachment: And there Catesby Sergeant moved the Court, that a
Prohibition did not lie, for two causes: 1. That the Statute gives that the
Libel shall be delivered, but does not say that the Plea in the Spiritual Court
shall surcease by Prohibition. 2. The Statute is not intended of matter mere
spiritual, as that case is, to try the Prerogative and the Liberty of the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of London, in committing of
Administrations. And there Danby Chief Justice, If you will not deliver the
Libel according to the Statute, you do wrong, which wrong is a temporal matter,
and punishable at the Common Law; and therefore in this case the party shall
have a special Prohibition out of this Court, reciting the matter, and the
Statute aforesaid, commanding them to surcease, until he had the Copy of the
Libel delivered unto him: which case is a stronger case then the case at the
Bar, for that Statute is in the Affirmative, and the said Act of 2 E. 6. cap.
13. is in the Negative, scil. That no Suit shall be for any Tithes of any Land
in kind where there is Modus Decimandi, for that is the effect of the said
Act, as to that point. And always after the said Act, in every Term in the
whole Reigns of King E. 6. Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, until this day,
Prohibitions have been granted in Causa Modi Decimandi, and Judgments given
upon many of them, and all the same without question made to the contrary. And
accordingly all the Judges resolved in 7 E. 6. Dyer 79. Et contemporanea
expositio est optima and fortissima in lege, and a communi observantia non est
recedendum, and minime mutanda sunt quae certam habuerunt interpretationem.

And as to the first Objection, That the Plea of Modus Decimandi is but
accessory unto the Right of Tithes; it was resolved, that the same was of no
force, for three causes:

1. In this case, admitting that there is Modus Decimandi, then by the Custom,
and by the Act of 2 E. 6. and the other Acts, the Tithes in kind are extinct
and discharged; for one and the same Land cannot be subject to two manner of
Tithes, but the Modus Decimandi is all the Tithe with which the Land is
chargeable: As if a Horse or other thing valuable be given in satisfaction of
the Duty, the Duty is extinct and gone: and it shall be intended, that the
Modus Decimandi began at the first by real composition, by which the Lands were
discharged of the Tithes, and a yearly sum in satisfaction of them assigned to
the Parson, etc. So as in this case there is neither Principal nor Accessory,
but an Identity of the same thing.

2. The Statute of 2 E. 6. being a Prohibition in it self, and that in the
Negative, If the Ecclesiastical Judge does against it, a Prohibition lies, as
it appears clearly before.

3. Although that the Rule be general, yet it appears by the Register it
self, that a Modus Decimandi is out of it; for there is a Prohibition in Causa
Modi Decimandi, when Lands are given in satisfaction of the Tithes.

As to the second Objection, it was answered and resolved, That that was from,
or out of the Question; for status Quaestionis non est deliberativus sed
judicialis, what was fit and convenient, but what the Law is: and yet it was
said, It shall be more inconvenient to have an Ecclesiastical Judge, who is not
sworn to do Justice, to give sentence in a case between a man of the Clergy and
a Layman, then for twelve men sworn to give their Verdict upon hearing of
Witnesses viva voce, before an indifferent Judge, who is sworn to do Right and
Justice to both parties: But convenient or inconvenient is not the Question:
Also they have in the Spiritual Court such infinite exceptions to Witnesses,
that it is at the Will of the Judge with which party he shall give his sentence.

As to the third Objection, it was answered and resolved: First, That
satisfactio pecuniaria of it self is Temporal: But for as much as the Parson
has not remedy pro Modo Decimandi at the Common Law, the Parson by force of
the Acts cited before might sue pro Modo Decimandi in the Ecclesiastical Court:
but that does not prove, That if he sueth for Tithes in kind, which are
utterly extinct, and the Land discharged of them, that upon the Plea de Modo
Decimandi, that a Prohibition should not lie, for that without all question
appears by all that which before has been said, that a Prohibition does lie.
See also 12 H. 7. 24. b. Where the original cause is Spiritual, and they
proceed upon a Temporal, a Prohibition lies. See 39 E. 3. 22 E. 4.
Consultation, That Right of Tithes which is merely Ecclesiastical, yet if the
question arises of the limits of a Parish, a Prohibition lies: and this case
of the limits of a Parish was granted by the Lord Chancellor, and not denied by
the other side.

As to the Objection, That an Averment is taken of the refusal of the Plea de
Modo Decimandi; it was answered and resolved, That the same is of no force for
diverse causes:

1. It is only to enforce the contempt.

2. If the Spiritual Court ought to have the Trial de Modo Decimandi, then the
refusal of acceptance of such a Plea should give cause of Appeal, and not of
Prohibition: as if an Excommunication, Divorce, Heresy, Simony, etc. be
pleaded there, and the Plea refused, the same gives no cause of Prohibition:
as, if they deny any Plea, mere spiritual Appeal, and no Prohibition lies.

3. From the beginning of the Law, no Issue was ever taken upon the refusal of
the plea in Causa Modi Decimandi, nor any Consultation ever granted to them,
because they did not refuse, but allowed the plea.

4. The refusal is no part of the matter issuable or material in the plea; for
the same is no part of the suggestion which only is the substance of the plea:
and therefore the Modus Decimandi is proved by two Witnesses, according to the
Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 13. and not the refusal, which proves, that the Modus
Decimandi is only the matter of the suggestion, and not the refusal.

5. All the said five matters of Discharge of Tithes mentioned in the said
Branch of the Act of 2 E. 6. being contained within a suggestion, ought to be
proved by two Witnesses, and so have been always from the time of the making of
the said Act; and therefore the Statute of 2 E. 6. clearly intended, that
Prohibitions should be granted in such causes.

6. Although that they would allow bona fide de Modo Decimandi without refusal,
yet if the Parson sueth there for Tithes in kind, when the Modus is proved,
the same being expressly prohibited by the Act of 2 E. 6. a Prohibition lies,
although the Modus be spiritual, as appears by the said Book of 4 E. 4. 37.
and other the Cases aforesaid.

And afterward, in the third day of debate of this case before his gracious
Majesty, Dr. Bennet and Dr. Martin had reserved diverse consultations granted in
Causa Modi Decimandi, thinking that those would make a great impression in the
Opinion of the King: and thereupon they said, That Consultations were the
Judgments of Courts had upon deliberation, whereas Prohibitions were only
granted upon surmises: And they showed four Presidents:

One, where three jointly sued a Prohibition in the case of Modo Decimandi, and
the Consultation says, Pro eo quod suggestio materiaque in eodem contenta
minus sufficiens in Lege existit, etc.

2. Another in Causa Modo Decimandi, to be paid to the Parson or Vicar.

3. Where the Parson sued for Tithes in kind, and the Defendant alleged Modus
Decimandi to be paid to the Vicar.

The fourth, where the Parson libelled for Tithe Wool, and the Defendant
alleged a custom, to reap corn, and to make it into sheaves, and to set forth
the tenth sheaf at his charges, and likewise of Hay, to sever it from the nine
cocks at his charge, in full satisfaction of the Tithes of the Corn, Hay, and
Wool.

To which I answered, and humbly desired the Kings Majesty to observe that
these have been reserved for the last, and center point of their proof: And by
them your Majesty shall observe these things:

1. That the Kings Courts do them Justice, when with their consciences and
oaths they can.

2. That all the said Cases are clear in the Judgment of those who are learned
in the Laws, that Consultation ought by the Law to be granted.

For as unto the first president, the case upon their own showing appears to
be, Three persons joined in one Prohibition for three several parcels of Land,
each of which had a several manner of Tything; and for that cause they could
not join, when their interests were several; and therefore a Consultation was
granted.

As to the second president, The manner of Tything was alleged to be paid to
the Parson or Vicar, which was altogether uncertain.

As to the third president, The Modus never came in debate, but whether the
Tithes did belong to the Parson or Vicar? which being betwixt two spiritual
persons, the Ecclesiastical Court shall have Jurisdiction: and therewith
agrees 38 E. 3. 6. cited before by Bacon: and also there the Prior was of the
Order of the Cistertians; for if the Tithes originally belonged to the Parson,
any recompense for them shall not bar the Parson.

As unto the last president, the same was upon the matter of a Custom of a
Modus Decimandi for Wool: for to pay the Tithe of Corn or Hay in kind, in
satisfaction of Corn, Hay and Wool, cannot be a satisfaction for the Wool; for
the other two were due of common right: And all this appears in the
Consultations themselves, which they show, but understand not. To which the
Bishop of London said, that the words of the Consultation were, Quod suggestio
praedicta materiaque in eadem contenta minus sufficiens in Lege existet, etc.
so as materia cannot be referred to form, and therefore it ought to extend to
the Modus Decimandi.

To which I answered, That when the matter is insufficiently or uncertainly
alleged, the matter it self fails; for matter ought to be alleged in a good
sentence: and although the matter be in truth sufficient, yet if it were
insufficiently alleged, the plea wants matter. And the Lord Treasurer said
openly to them, that he admired that they would alledg such things which made
more against them then any thing which had been said. And when the King relied
upon the said Prohibition in the Register, when Land is given in discharge of
Tithes, the Lord Chancellor said, that that was not like to this case; for
there, by the gift of the Land in discharge of Tithes, the Tithes were actually
discharged: but in the case De Modo Decimandi, an annual sum is paid for the
Tithes, and the Land remains charged with the Tithes, but ought to be
discharged by plea de Modo Decimandi: All which was utterly denied by me; for
the Land was as absolutely discharged of the Tithes in casu de Modo Decimandi,
when an annual sum ought to be paid, as where Land is given: For all the
Records and presidents of Prohibition in such cases are, That such a sum had
been always, etc. paid in plenam contentationem, satisfactionem and
exonerationem omnium and singularium Decimarum, etc. And although that the sum
be not paid, yet the Parson cannot sue for Tithes in kind, but for the money:
for, as it has been said before, the Custom and the said Acts of Parliament
(where there is a lawful manner of Tything) has discharged the Lands from
Tithes in kind, and prohibited, that no suit shall be for them. And although
that now (as it has been said) the Parsons, etc. may sue in the Spiritual
Court pro Modo Decimandi, yet without question, at the first, the annual
payment of money was as Temporal, as annual profits of Lands were: All which the
King heard with much patience. And the Lord Chancellor answered not to that
which I had answered him in, etc.

And after that his most excellent Majesty, with all his Council, had for three
days together heard the allegations on both sides, He said, That he would
maintain the Law of England, and that his Judges should have as great respect
from all his Subjects as their predecessors had had: And for the matter, he
said, That for any thing that had been said on the part of the Clergy, that he
was not satisfied: and advised us his Judges to confer amongst our selves, and
that nothing be encroached upon the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and that they
keep themselves within their lawful Jurisdiction, without unjust vexation and
molestation done to his Subjects, and without delay or hindering of Justice.
And this was the end of these three days consultations.

And note, That Dr. Bennet in his discourse inveighed much against the opinion
in 8 E. 4. 14. and in my Reports in Wrights Case, That the Ecclesiastical Judge
would not allow a Modus Decimandi; and said, That that was the mystery of
iniquity, and that they would allow it. And the King asked, for what cause it
was so said in the said Books? To which I answered, that it appears in
Linwood, who was Dean of the Arches, and of profound knowledge in the Canon and
Civil Law, and who wrote in the Reign of King Henry the sixth, a little before
the said Case in 8 E. 4. in his title de Decimis, cap. Quoniam propter, etc.
fo. 139. b. Quod Decimae solvantur, etc. absque ulla diminutione: and in the
gloss it is said, Quod Consuetudo de non Decimando, aut de non been Decimando
non valet. And that being written by a great Canonist of England, was the cause
of the said saying in 8 E. 4. that they would not allow the said plea de Modo
Decimandi; for always the Modus Decimandi is less in value then the Tithes in
specie, and then the same is against their Canon; Quod decimae solvantur absque
diminutione, and quod consuetudo de non plene Decimando non valet. And it
seemed to the King, that that Book was a good Cause for them in the time of
King Edward the fourth to say, as they had said; but I said, That I did not
rely upon that, but upon the grounds aforesaid, (scil.) The common Law,
Statute-Laws, and the continual and infinite judgments and judicial
proceedings, and that if any Canon or Constitution be against the same, such
Canon and Constitution, etc. is void by the Statute of 25. H. 8. Cap. 19. which
see and note: For all Canons, Constitutions, etc. against the Prerogative of
the King, the common Laws, Statutes, or Customs of the Realm are void.

Lastly, the King said; That the high Commission ought not to meddle with any
thing but that which is enormious and exorbitant, and cannot permit the
ordinary Process of the Ecclesiastical Law; and which the same Law cannot
punish. And that was the cause of the institution of the same Commission, and
therefore, although every offense, ex vi termini, is enormious, yet in the
Statute it is to be intended of such an offense, is extra omnem normam, as
Heresy, Schism, Incest, and the like great offenses: For the King said, That
it was not reason that the high Commission should have conusance of common
offenses, but to leave them to Ordinaries, scil. because, that the party cannot
have any appeal in case the high Commisson shall determine of it. And the King
thought that two high Commissions, for either Province one, should be
sufficient for all England, and no more.

XV. Mich. 39 and 40 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
Bedell and Shermans Case.
MIch. 39 and 40 Eliz. which is entered Mich. 40 Eliz. in the com-Pleas, Rot.
699 Cantabr. the Case was this: Robert Bedel, Gent. and Sarah his wife, Farmors
of the Rectory of Litlington in the County of Cambridge, brought an Action of
Debt against John Sherman, in the custody of the Marshall of the Marshalsey,
and demanded 550 l. And declared, that the Master and Fellows of Clare-Hall in
Cambridge, were seized of the said Rectory in fee, in right of the said
College, and in June 10. 29 Eliz. by Indenture demised to Christopher Phesant
the said Rectorie, for 21 years, rendering 17 l. 15 s. 5 d. and reserving
Rent-corn according to the Statute, etc. which Rent was the ancient Rent, who
entered into the said Rectory, and was possessed, and assigned all his interest
thereof to one Matthew Bat^, who made his last Will and Testament, and made
Sarah his wife his Executrix, and died; Sarah proved the Will, and entered, and
was thereof possessed as Executrix, and took to husband the said Robert Bedel,
by force whereof, they in the Right of the said Sarah, entered, and were
possessed thereof; and that the Defendant was then Tenant, and seized for his
life of 300 acres of arable Lands in Litlington aforesaid, which ought to pay
Tithes to the Rector of Litlington, and in anno 38 Eliz. the Defendant, grano
seminavit 200 acres parcel, etc. And that the Tithes of the same, did amount to
150 l. and that the Defendant did not divide nor set forth the same from the 9
parts, but took and carried them away, against the form and effect of the
Statute of 2 E. 6, etc. And the Defendant pleaded Nihil debet, and the Jury
found that the Defendant did owe 55 l. and to the residue they found Nihil
debet, etc. and in arrest of Judgment, diverse matters were moved.

1. That grano seminata is too general and uncertain, but it ought to be
expressed with what kind of corn the same was sowed.

2. It was moved, If the Parson ought to have the treble value, the forfeiture
being by express words limited to none by the Act, or that the same did belong
to the Queen.

3. If the same did belong to the Parson, if he ought to sue for the same in
the Ecclesiastical Court, or in the Kings Temporal Court.

4. If the husband and wife should join in the Action, or the husband alone
should have the Action, and upon solemn argunent at the Bar, and at the
Bench, the Judgment was affirmed.

XVI. Trinity Term 7 Jocob. in the Court of Wards.
John Bailies Case.
IT was found by Writ of Diem clausit extremum, That the said John Bailie, was
seized of a Message or Tenement, and of, and in the fourth part of one acre of
land, late parcel of the Demesne lands of the Manor of Newton, in the County
of Hereford, in his Demesne as of fee, and found, the other points of the Writ;
and it was holden by the two chief Justices, and the chief Barons:

1. That Messuagium, vel Tenementum, is uncertain; for Tenementum is nomen
collectivum, and may contain land, or any thing which is holden.

2. It was holden, that is was void for the whole, because that no Town is
mentioned in the Office where the Message or Tenement, or the fourth part of
the acre lies, and from the Visne of the Manor upon a Traverse none can come,
because it is not affirmed by by the Office, that they are parcel of the
Manor, but Nuper parcel of the Manor, which implies, that now they are not,
and it was holden by them, that no Melius inquirendum shall issue forth,
because that the whole Office is uncertain and void.

XVII. Trinity. 7 Jacobi Regis in the Court of Wards.
THe Attorney of the Court of Wards, moved the two chief Justices and chief
Baron in this Case, That a man seized of lands in feesimple, covenants for the
advancement of his son, and of his name, and blood, and posterity, that he will
stand seized of them, to the use of himself for the term of his life, and after
to the use of his eldest son, and to such a woman which he shall marry, and
to the heirs males of the body of the son, and afterward the father dies, and
after the son takes a wife and dies; if the wife shall take an Estate for
life, and the doubt was, because the wife of the son was not within the
Considerations, and the use was limited to one who was capable (scil.) the son,
and to another who was not capable, and therefore the son should take an estate
in tail executed. But it was resolved by the said two chief Justices and chief
Baron, That the Wife should take well enough: and as to the first Reason, they
resolved, That the Wife was within the consideration, for the consideration was
for the advancement of his posterity; and without a Wife, the Son cannot have
posterity: also when the Wife of the Son is sure of a Ioynture, the same is for
the advancement of the Son, for thereby he shall have the better marriage. And
as to the second, it was resolved, That the Estate of the Son shall support the
use to the Defendant: and when the contingent happens, the Estate of the Son
shall be changed according to the limitation, scil. to the Son and the woman,
and the Heirs of the body of the Son: And so it was resolved in the King's Bench
by Popham chief Justice, and the whole Court of the King's Bench, in the Reign
of Queen Eliz. in Sheffields Case, for both points.

XVIII. Trinit. 7 Jacobi Regis: In the Court of Wards.
Sparies Case.
JOhn Spary, seized in fee in the right of his Wife of Lands holden of the
Crown by Knights service, had issue by her, and 22 December. anno 9 Eliz. aliened
to Edward Lord Stafford; the Wife dyed, the issue of full age, the Lands
continue in the hands of the Alienee, or his Assigns; and ten years after the
death of the Father, and twelve years after the death of the Mother, Office is
found. 7 Jacobi, finding all the special matter after the death of the Mother:
the Question was, Whether the mean profits are to be answered to the King? and
it was resolved by the said two chief Justices, and the chief Baron, That the
King should not have the mean profits, because that the Alienee was in by
title; and until Entry the Heir has no remedy for the mean profits, but that
the King might seize and make Livery, because that the Entry of the Heir is
lawful by the Statute of 32 H. 8.

XIX. Trinit. 7 Jacobi Regis: In the Court of Wards.
IT was found by force of a Mandamus at Kendal in the County of Westmerland
the 21 of December, 6 Jacobi Regis, That George Earl of Cumberland, long before
his death, was seized in tail to him and to the Heirs males of his body, of the
Castles and Manors of Browham, Appleby, etc. the Remainder to Sir Ingram
Clifford, with diverse Remainders over in tail; the Remainder to the right Heirs
of Henry Earl of Cumberland, Father of the said George: and that the said
George, Earl, so seized by Fine and Recovery, conveyed them to the use of
himself and Margaret his Wife for their lives, for the Ioynture of the said
Margaret; and afterward to the Heirs males of the body of George Earl of
Cumberland, and for want of such issue, to the use of Francis, now Earl of
Cumberland, and to the Heirs males of his body begotten; and for want of such
issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the said George: and afterward, by
another Indenture, conveyed the Fee-simple to Francis, Earl: By force of which,
and of the Statute of uses, they were seized accordingly: and afterward, 30
October. anno 3 Jacobi, the said George. Earl of Cumberland dyed without Heir
male of his body lawfully begotten: and further found, that Margaret, Countess
of Cumberland that now is, was alive, and took the profits of the premises
from the death of the said George Earl of Cumberland until the taking of that
inquisition; and further found the other points of the Writ.

And first it was objected, that here was no dying seized found by Office, and
therefore the Office shall be insufficient: But as to that, it was answerod and
resolved, That by this Office the King was not entitled by the common Law for
then a dying seized, or at first a dying the day of his death was necessary:
But this Office is to be maintained upon the Statute of 32 and 34 H. 8. by
force of which no dying seized is requisite, but rather the contrary, (scil.)
If the Land be (as this case is) conveyed to the Wife, etc. And so it was
resolved in Vincents case, anno 23 Eliz. where all the Land holden in Capite
was conveyed to the younger Son, and yet the eldest Son was in Ward,
notwithstanding that nothing descended.

The second Objection was, It does not appear that the Estate of the Wife
continued in her until the death of the Earl, for the Husband and Wife had
aliened the same to another; and then no primer seisin shall be, as it is
agreed in Binghams case.

As to that, it was answered and resolved, That the Office was sufficient prima
facie for the King, because it is a thing collateral, and no point of the Writ;
and if any such alienation be (which shall not be intended) then the same shall
come in of the other part of the Alienee by a Monstrans de droit; and the case
at Bar is a stronger case, because it is found, that the said Countess took the
profits of the premises from the death of George the Earl, until the finding
of the Office.

XX. Trinity Term, 7 Jacobi: In the Court of Wards.
Wills Case.
HEnry Wills, being seized of the fourth part of the Manor of Wryland in the
County of Devon, holden of Queen Elizabeth in Socage-tenure in capite, of the
said fourth part enfeoffed Zachary Irish and others, and their Heirs, to the
use of the said Henry for the term of his life, and afterward to the use of
Thomas Wills his second son in tail, and afterward to the use of Richard Wills
his youngest son in tail; and for default of such issue, to the use of the
right Heirs of the said Henry* and afterward the said Henry so seized as
abovesaid dyed, thereof seized, William Wills, being his Son and Heir of full
age; Thomas the second son entered as into his Remainder: All this matter is
found by Office, and the question was, If the King ought to have primer seisin
in this case, and that Livery or Ouster le main shall be sued in this case by
the Statutes of 32 and 34 H. 8. And it was resolved by the two chief Justices
and the chief Baron, that not: if in this case by the common Law no Livery or
Ouster le main shall be sued: and that was agreed by them all by the experience
and course of the Court. See 21 Eliz. Dyer 362. If Tenant in Socage dies
seized in possession his Heir within the age of fourteen years, he shall not
sue Livery, but shall have an Ouster le main, una cum exitibus; but otherwise
it is, if the Heir be of the age of fourteen years, which is his full age for
Socage: and therewith agrees 4 Eliz. Dyer 213.

And two presidents were showed, which were decreed in the same Court by the
advice of the Justices Assistants to the Court.

One in Trinity Term, 16 Eliz. Thomas Stavely the Father enfeoffed William
Strelley and Thomas Law of the Manor of Ryndly in the County of Nottingham,
upon condition that they re-enfeoff the Feoffor and his Wife for their lives,
the remainder to Thomas Stavely son and heir apparent of tho Feoffor in Fee,
which Manor was holden of Queen Elizabeth in Socage in capite: and upon
consideration of the saving in the Statute of 32 H. 8. next after the clause
concerning Tenure in Socage in chief, it was resolved, That no Livery or Ouster
le main should be sued in such case, and the reason was, because that the
precedent clause gives liberty to him who holds in Socage in chief, to make
disposition of it, either by act executed, or by Will at his free will and
pleasure: and before the said act, no Livery or Ouster le main should be sued
in such case: and the words of the Saving are, Saving, etc. to the King, etc.
all his Right, etc. of primer seisin and relief, etc. for Tenure in Socage, or
of the nature of Tenure in Socage in chief, as heretofore has been used and
accustomed: But there was no use or custom before the Act, that the King should
have any primer seisin, or relief in such case: and the words subsequent in the
said Saving depend upon the former words, and do not give any primer seisin or
relief where none was before.

Another president was in Pasc. 37 Eliz. in the Book of Orders, fo. 444. where
the case was, that William Allet was seized of certain Lands in Pitsey called
Lundsey, holden of the Queen in Socage in chief, and by Deed covenanted to
stand seized to the use of his Wife for life, and afterward to the use of
Richard his younger son in Fee, and dyed, his Heir of full age; and all that
was found by Office, and it was resolved, ut supra, That no Livery or Ouster le
main should be sued in that case: but the doubt in the case at Bar was, because
that Henry the Feoffor had a Reversion in Fee, which descended to the said
William his eldest son.

XXI. Trinity Term, anno 7 Jacobi Regis.
The Case of the Admiralty.
A Bill was preferred in the Star Chamber against Sir Richard Hawkins
Vice*Admiral of the County of Devon: and was charged, that one William Hull and
others were notorious Pirates upon the High Seas, and showed in certain, what
Piracy they had committed: the said Sir Richard Hawkins knowing the same, did
them receive, abet and comfort within the body of the County, and for bribes
and rewards suffered them to be discharged. And what offense that was, the
Court referred to the consideration of the two chief Justices and the chief
Baron, who heard Council of both sides diverse days at Sergeants Inn.

And first, it was by them resolved, that by the Common Law the Admirals ought
not to meddle with any thing done within the Realm, but only with things done
upon the Sea; and that appears fully by the Statute of 13 R. 2. cap. 5. by
which it appears, that such was the Common Law in the time of King Edw. the
third, and therewith agrees the Statute of 2 H. 4. cap. 11. and the Statute of
15 H. 2. cap. 3. That because the Admirals and their Deputies encroach to
themselves diverse Jurisdictions and Franchises more then they ought to have, Be
it enacted, that all Contracts, Pleas and Complaints, and all other things
arising within the bodies of the Counties as well by Land as by Water, as also
of Wreck of the Sea, the Admiral Court shall not have any conusance, power, or
jurisdiction, etc. Nevertheless of the death of a man, and of Mayheme done in
great Ships, being in the main stream of great Rivers, only below the Bridges
nigh to the Sea, and not in other places of the same Rivers; and to arrest
Ships in the great Flotes for the great Voyage of the King and of his Realm:
and by the Statute of 2 H. 5. cap. 6. the Admirals of the King of England have
done and used reasonably, according to the ancient Law and Custom, upon the
main Sea. See the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 5. And all this appears to be by
the common Law: and with that agrees Stamford, fo. 51. And if a man be killed
or slain within the Arms of the Sea, where a man may see from the one part of
the Land to the other, the Coroner shall enquire of it, and not the Admiral,
because that the Country may well know it: and he voucheth 8 E. 2. Coron. 399.
So says Stamford, the same proves that by the common Law before the Statute of
2 H. 4. cap. 11. the Admiral shall not have Jurisdiction unless upon the High
Sea. See Pla. Com. 37. 6. If the Marshal holds Plea out of the Verge, or the
Admiral within the body of the County, the same is void. See 2 R. 3. 12. 30 H.
6. 6. by Prisoit.

2. It was resolved, that the said Statutes are to be intended of a power to
hold Plea, and not of a power to award execution, (scil.) de jurisdictione
tenendi placiti, non de jurisdictione exequendi: For notwithstanding the said
Statutes, the Judge of the Admiralty may do execution within the body of the
County: and therefore in 19 H. 6. 7. the case was, W. T. at Southwark affirmed
a Plaint of Trespass in the Court of Admiralty before the Steward of the Earl
of Huntington against J. B. of a Trespass done upon the High Sea, upon which
issued a Citation to cite the said J. B. to appear before the Steward aforesaid
at the common day then next ensuing, directed to P. who served the said
Citation: at which day the said J. B. made default: and the usage of the Court
is, that if the Defendant makes default, he shall be amerced by the discretion
of the Steward, to the use of the Plaintiff: The which J. B. for his default
aforesaid, was amerced to twenty marks; whereupon command was made to the said
P. as Minister of the Court aforesaid, to take the goods of the said J. B. to
make agreement with the beforesaid W. T. by force of which he for the said
twenty marks took five Cows, and an hundred sheep, in execution for the money
aforesaid, in the County of Leicester. And there it is holden by Newton, and
the whole Court, that the Statutes restrain the power of the Court of Admiralty
to hold Plea of a thing done within the body of the County, but they do not
restrain the execution of the same Court to be served upon the Land: for it may
be that the party has not any thing upon the Sea, and then it is reason to
have it upon the Land: and if such a Defendant have nothing wherewithal to
make agreement, they of the Court have power to take the body of such a
Defendant upon the Land in execution.

In which case these points were observed:

1. Although that the Court of Admiralty is not a Court of Record, because they
proceed there according to the Civil Law, (see Brook, Error 77. acc.) yet by
custom of the Court they may amerce the Defendant for his default by their
discretion.

2. That they may make execution for the same of the goods of the Defendant in
corpore Comitatus: and if he has not goods, then they may arrest the body of
the Defendant within the body of the County.

But the great Question between them was, If a man commits See this point
resolved 8 Eli. Dyer per curiam, which is omitted out of the printed Book.
Piracy upon the Sea, and one knowing thereof, receives and comfort the
Defendant within the body of the County? if the Admiral and other the
Commissioners, by force of the Act of 28 H. 8. cap. 16. may proceed by
Indictment and conviction against the Receiver and Abettor, in as much as the
offense of the Accessory has his beginning within the body of the County?

And it was resolved by them, that such a Receiver and Abettor by the common
Law could not be indicted or convicted, because that the common Law cannot take
conusance of the original Offense, because that is done out of the Jurisdiction
of the common Law: and by consequence, where the common Law cannot punish the
principal, the same shall not punish any one as accessory to such a principal.
And therefore Coke chief Justice reported to them a Case which was in Suffolk
in anno 28 Eliz. where Butler and others upon the Sea, next to the Town of
Laystaft in Suffolk, robbed diverse of the Queens subjects, and spoiled them of
their goods, which goods they brought into Norfolk; and there they were
apprehended, and there brought before me, then a Justice of the Peace within
the same County, whom I examined, and in the end they confessed a cruel and
barbarous Piracy, and that those goods which then they had with them, were part
of the goods which they had robbed from the Queens subjects upon the High Sea:
and I was of opinion, that in that case it could not be Felony punishable by
the common Law, because that the original act, (scil.) the taking of them, was
not any offense whereof the common Law takes knowledge; and by consequence, the
bringing of them into a County could not make the same Felony punishable by our
Law: and it is not like, where one steals goods in one County, and brings
them into another, there he may be indicted of Felony in any of the Counties,
because that the original act was Felony, whereof the common Law takes
knowledge: and yet notwithstanding I committed them to the Gaol, until the
coming of the Justices of Assizes. And at the next Assizes the Opinion of Wray
chief Justice, and Periam Justices of Assise, was, That for as much as the
common Law does not take notice of the original Offense, the bringing of the
goods stolen upon the Sea into a County, did not make the same punishable at the
common Law: and thereupon they were committed to Sir Robert Southwell, then
Vice Admiral of the said Counties: and this in effect agrees with Lacies case,
which see in my Reports cited in Binghams case in the 2 Reports 93. and in
Constables case, C. 5. Reports 107.

See the Piracy was Felony, the Book of 40 Assis. 25. by Schard. where a Master
or Captain of a Ship, together with some Englishmen, robbed the Kings sujects
upon the High Seas; where he says, that it was Felony in the Norman Captain,
and Treason in the Englishmen his companions: and the reason of the said case
was, because the Normans were not then under the Obedience and Allegiance of
the King of England (for King John lost Normandy) and for that cause Piracy was
but Felony in the Norman, but in the English, who were under the Obedience and
Allegiance of the King of England, the same was adjudged Treason, which is to
be understood of Pettit Treason, which was High Treason before: and therefore
in that case, the Pirates being apprehended, the Norman Captain was hanged, and
the English men were hanged and drawn, as appears by the same Book: see
Stamford 10.

And some objected, and were of opinion, That Treasons done out of the Realm
might have bin determined by the common Law; but truly the same could not be
punishable, but only by the Civil Law before the Admiral, or by Act of
Parliament, as all Foreign Treasons and Felonies were by the common Law: and
therefore where it is declared by the Statute of 25 E. 3. That adherence to the
Enemies of the King within England, or elsewhere, is Treason, the same shall be
tried by the common Law: but where it is done out of the Realm, the Offender
shall not be attainted but by Parliament, until the Statute of 35 H. 8. cap. 2.
although that there are Opinions in some Books to the contrary: see 5 R. 2.
Quare impedit, etc.

XXII. Trinit. 7 Jacobi Regis: In the Common Pleas.
Pettus and Godsalves Case.
IN a Fine levied Trinity Term, anno quinto of this King, between John Pettus
Esquire; Plaintiff, and Roger Godsalve and others, Deforceants of the Manor of
Castre, with the appurtenances, etc. in the County of Norfolk, where in the
third proclamation upon the Foot of the same Fine the said proclamation is said
to have been made in the sixth year of the King that now is, which ought to
have been anno quinto of the King: and whereas upon the Foot of the same Fine,
the fourth proclamation is altogether left out, because upon the view of the
proclamations upon Dorsis, upon Record, not finis ejusdem Termini per
Justiciarias, remaining with the Chyrographer, and the Book of the said
Chyrography, in which the said proclamations were first entered, it appears,
that the said proclamations were rightly and duly made, therefore it was
adjudged, that the Errors or defects aforesaid should be amended, and made to
agree as well with the proclamation upon Record of the said Fine, and Entry of
the said Book, as with the other proclamations in Dorsis super pedes aliorum
finium of the same Term: and this was done upon the motion of Haughton Sergeant
at Law.

XXIII. Mich. 7 Jacobi: In the Court of Wards.
Sammes Case.
JOhn Sammes being seized of Grany Mead by Copy of Court Roll of the Manor of
Tollesham the great, of which Sir Thomas Beckingham, etc. and held the same of
the King by Knights service in capite; Sir Thomas by his Deed indented, dated
the 22 of December in the first year of King James, made between him of the one
part, and the said John Sammes and George Sammes Son and Heir apparent of the
said John of the other part, did bargain, sell, grant, enfeoff, release, and
confirm unto the said John Sammes the said Mead called Grany Mead, to have and
to hold the said Mead unto the said John Sammes and George Sammes, and their
Heirs and Assigns, to the only use and behoof of the said John Sammes and
George Sammes, their Heirs and Assigns for ever: and by the same Indenture Sir
Thomas did covenant with John and George, to make further assurance to John and
George, and their Heirs, to the use of them and their Heirs, and Livery and
Seisin was made and delivered according to the true intent of the said
Indentures of the within mentioned premises to the uses within mentioned.

John Sammes the Father dies, George Sammes his Son and Heir being within age,
the Question was, Whether George Sammes should be in Ward to the King or no?
And in this case three points were resolved:

1. For as much as George was not named in the premises, he cannot take by the
Habendum; and the Livery made according to the intent of the Indenture, does
not give any thing to George, because the Indenture as to him is void: but
although the Feoffment be good only to John and his Heirs, yet the use limited
to the use of John and George, and their Heirs, is good.

2. If the Estate had been conveyed to John and his Heirs by the Release or
Confirmation, as it well may be to a Tenant by Copy of Court Roll, the use
limited to them is good: for upon a Release which creates an Estate, a use may
be limited, or a Rent reserved without question; but upon a Release or
Confirmation, which enures by way of Mitter le droit, an use cannot be limited,
or a Rent reserved.

But the third was of greater doubt, If in this case the Father and Son were
Ioynt-tenants, or Tenants in common? For it was objected, when the Father is
only enfeoffed to the only use of him and his Son, and their Heirs in the
Per, that in this case, they shall be Tenants in common. By the Feoffment the
Father is in by the common Law in the Per, and then the limitation of the use
to him and his Son, and to their Heirs, cannot divest the Estate, which was
vested in him by the common Law, out of him, and vest the Estate in him in the
Post by force of the Statute, according to the limitation of the use: and
therefore, as to one moiety, the Father shall be in by force of the Feoffment
in the Per, and the Son, as to the other moiety, shall be in by force of the
Statute, according to the limitation of the use in the Post, and by consequence
they shall be Tenants in common. But it was answered and resolved, That they
were Ioynt-tenants, and that the Son in the Case at Bar should have the said
Grange by the Survivor: for if at the common Law A. had been enfeoffed to the
use of him and B. and their Heirs, although that he was only seized of the
Land, the use was jointly to A. and B. For a use shall not be suspended or
extinct by a sole seisin, or joint seisin of the Land: and therefore if A. and
B. be enfeoffed to the use of A. and his Heirs, and A. dies, the entire use
shall descend to his Heir: as it appears in 13 H. 7. 6. in Stoners Case: and
by the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. of Uses, it appears, That when several
persons are seized to the use of any of them, that the Estate shall be executed
according to the use.

And as to that which was said, That the Estate of the Land which the Father
has in the Land, as to the moyetyof the use which he himself has, shall not
be divested out of him: To that it was answered and resolved, That that shall
well be: for if a man makes a Feoffment in Fee to one, to tho use of him and
the Heirs of his body, in this case, for the benefit of the issue, the Statute
according to the limitation of the uses, devests the Estate vested in him by
the common Law, and executes the same in himself by force of the Statute; and
yet the same is out of the words of the Statute of 27 H. 8. which are, Where
any person, etc. stand or be scised, etc. to the use of any other person; and
here he is seized to the use of himself: and the other clause is, Where diverse
and many persons, etc. be jointly seized, etc. to the use of any of them, etc.
and in this case A. is sole seized: But the Statute of 27 H. 8. has been
always beneficially expounded, to satisfy the intention of the parties, which
is the direction of the uses according to the Rule of the Law. So if a man,
seized of Lands in Fee-simple, by Deed covenant with another, that he and his
Heirs will stand seized of the same Land, to the use of himself and the Heirs
of his body, or unto the use of himself for life, the remainder over in Fee; in
that case, by the operation of the Statute, the Estate which he has at the
common Law is divested, and a new Estate vested in himself, according to the
limitation of the use. And it is to be known, that an use of Land (which is but
a pernency of the profits) is no new thing, but part of that which the owner of
the Land had: and therefore, if Tenant in Borrough-English, or a man seized of
the part of his Mother, makes a Feoffment to another without consideration,
the younger Son in the one case, and the Heir on the part of the Mother on the
other, shall have the use, as they should have the Land it self, if no
Feoffment had been made: as it is holden in 5 E. 4. 7. See 4 and 5 Phil. and
Mar. Dyer 163. So if a man makes a Feoffment unto the use of another in tail,
and afterward to the use of his right Heirs, the Feoffor has the Reversion of
the Land in him; for if the Donee dies without isse, the Law gives the use,
which was part of the Land, to him: and so it was resolved, Trinity, 31 Eliz.
between Fenwick and Milford in the King's Bench. So in 28 H. 8. Dyer 11. the
Lord Rosses Case: A man seized of one Acre by Priority, and of another Acre by
Posteriority, and makes a Feoffment in Fee of both to his use: and it was
adjudged, that although both pass at one instant, yet the Law shall make a
Priority of the uses, as if it were of the Land it self: which proves, that the
use is not any new thing, for then there should be no Priority in the Case: See
13 H. 7. b. by Butler.

So in the Case at Bar, The use limited to the Feoffee and another, is not any
new thing, but the pernancy of the old profits of the Land, which well may be
limited to the Feoffee and another jointly: But if the use had been only
limited to the Feoffee and his Heirs, there, because there is not any
limitation to another person, nec in praesenti, nec in futuro, he shall be in
by force of the Feoffment.

And it was resolved, That Ioynt-tenants might be seized to an use, although
that they come to it at several times: as, if a man makes a Feoffment in Fee
to the use of himself, and to such a woman, which he shall after marry, for
term of their lives, or in tail, or in fee; in this case, if after he marryeth
a Wife, she shall take jointly with him, although that they take the use at
several times, for they derive the use out of the same fountain and Freehold,
scil. the Feoffment: See 17 Eliz. Dyer 340. So if a Disseisin be had to the use
of two, and one of them agrees at one time, and the other at another time,
they shall be Ioynt-tenants; but otherwise it is of Estates which pass by the
common Law: and therefore if a Grant be made by deed to one man for term of
life, the Remainder to the right Heirs of A. and B. in Fee, and A. has issue
and dies, and afterward B. has issue and dies, and then the Tenant for life
dies; in that case the Heirs of A. and B. are not Ioynt-tenants, nor shall
join in a Scire facias to execute the Fine, 24 E. 3. Joynder in Action 10.
because that although the remainder be limited by one Fine, and by joint words,
yet because that by the death of A. the Remainder as unto the moiety vested in
his Heir, and by the death of B. the other moiety vested in his Heir at several
times, they cannot be Ioynt*tenants: But in the case of a use, the Husband
takes all the use in the mean time; and when he marryeth, the Wife takes it by
force of the Feoffment and the limitation of the use jointly with him, for
there is not any fraction and several vesting by parcels, as in the other case,
and such is the difference. See 18 E. 3. 28. And upon the whole matter it was
resolved, That because in the principal case the Father and Son were
Ioynt-tenants by the original purchase, that the Son having the Land by
Survivor, should not be in Ward: and accordingly it was so decreed.

XXIV. Pasc. 39 Eliz. Rot. 233. In the King's Bench.
Collins and Hardings Case.
THe Case between Collins and Harding was, A man seized of Lands in Fee, and
also of Lands by Copy of Court Roll in Fee, according to the Custom of the
Manor, made one entire Demise of the Lands in Fee, and of the Lands holden by
Copy according to the Custom, to Harding for years, rendering one entire Rent:
and afterward the Lessor surrendered the Copyhold Land to the use of Collins
and his Heirs: and at another time granted by Deed the Reversion of the
Freehold Lands to Collins in Fee, and Harding attorned; and afterward for the
Rent behind, Collins brought an Action of Debt for the whole Rent: And it was
objected, That the reservation of the Rent was an entire contract, and by the
Act of the Lessee the same cannot be apportioned: and therefore if one demiseth
three Acres, rendering 3 s. Rent, and afterward bargaineth and sells, by
Deed indented and enrolled, the Reversion of one Acre, the whole Rent is gone,
because that the Contract is entire and cannot be severed by the Act of the
Lessor: Also the Lessee by that shall be subject to two Fealties, where he was
subject but to one before.

As to these points, it was answered and resolved, That the Contract was not
entire, but that the same by the Act of the Lessor, and the assent of the
Lessee, might be divided and severed: for the Rent is incident to the
Reversion, and the Reversion is severable, and by consequence the Rent also:
for accessorium sequitur naturam sui principalis, and that cannot be severed or
divided by the assent of the Lessee, or express attornment, or employed by force
of an Act of Parliament, to which every one is a party, as by force of the
Statute of Inrolments, or of Uses, etc. And as to the two Fealties, to that the
Lessee shall be subject, although that the Rent shall be extinct: for Fealty is
by necessity of Law incident to the Reversion, and to every part of it; but the
Rent shall be divided pro rata portionis: and so it was adjudged.

And it was also adjudged, That although Collins comes to the Reversion by
several Conveyances, and at several times, yet he might bring an Action of Debt
for the whole Rent. Hill. 43 Eliz. Rot. 243. West and Lassels Case: A man made
a Lease for years of certain Lands, and afterward devises the Reversion of
two parts to one, he shall have two parts of the Rent; and he may have an
Action of Debt for the same, and have Judgment to recover. Hill. 42 Eliz. Rot.
108. in the Common Pleas, Ewer and Moyls Case: The Devisee of the Reversion of
part shall avow for part of the Rent, and such Avowry shall be good and
maintainable.

Note well these Cases and Judgments, for they are given upon great reason and
consideration, for otherwise great inconvenience would ensue, if by severance
of part of the Reversion, the entire Rent should be lost: and the opinion
reported by Sergeant Bendloes, in Hill. 6 and 7 E. 6. to the contrary, nihil
valet, (scil.) That the Rent in such case shall be lost, because that no
contract can be apportioned, which is not Law: For, 1. A Rent reserved upon a
Lease for years is more then a Contract, for it is a Rent-service. 2. It is
incident to the Reversion which is severable. 3. Upon recovery of part in
Waste, or upon entry in part for a forfeiture, or upon surrender of part, the
Rent is apportionable.

25. Note; It was adjudged 19 Eliz. in the King's Bench, That where one obtained
a Prohibition upon Prescription de Modo Decimandi, by payment of a certain sum
of money at a certain day; upon which Issue was taken, and the Jury found the
Modus Decimandi by payment of the said sum, but that it had been paid at
another day: and the Case was well debated, and at the last it was resolved,
That no Consultation should be granted; for although that the day of payment be
mistaken, yet it appears to the Court, that no Tithes in kind were due, for
which the suit was in the spiritual Court: and the Trial of the Custom de Modo
Decimandi belongs to the Common Law, and a Consultation shall not be granted
where the Spiritual Court has not Jurisdiction of the Cause: Tanfield, chief
Baron, has the Report of this Case.

XXV. Mich. 7 Jacobi Regis.
IN an Ejectione Firmae, the Writ and Declaration were of two parts of certain
Lands in Hetherset and Windham in Norfolk, and does not say in two parts, in
three parts to be divided; and yet it was good as well in the Declaration as in
the Writ: for without question the Writ is good, de duabus partibus, generally,
and so is the Register. See 4 E. 3. 162. 2 E. 3. 31. 2 Assis. 1. 10 Assis. 12.
10 E. 3. 511. 11 Ass. 21. 11 E. 3. Bre. 478. 9 H. 6. 36. 17 E. 4. 46. 19 E. 3.
Bre. 244. And upon all the said Books it appears, that by the intendment and
construction of the Law, when any parts are demanded without showing in how
many parts the whole is divided, that there remains but one part not divided:
As if two parts are demanded, there remains a third part; and when three parts
are divided, three remains a fourth part, etc. But when any demand is of other
parts in other form, there he ought to show the same specialty: as if one
demands three parts of five parts, or four parts of six, etc. And according
to this difference it was so resolved in Jourdens Case in the King's Bench: and
accordingly Judgment was given in this Term in the Case at Bar.

XXVI. Mich. 7 Jacobi Regis: In the Common Pleas.
Muttons Case.
AN Action upon the Case was brought against Mutton, for calling of the
Plaintiff, Sorcerer and Inchantor, who pleaded Not-guilty; and it was found
against him to the damages of 6 d. And it was holden by the whole Court in the
Common Pleas, that no Action lies for the said words: for Sortilegium est rei
futuri per sorts exploratio: Et Sortilegus sive Sortilegista est qui per
sorts futura praenunciat. Inchauntry est verbis aut rebus adjunctis aliquid
praeter naturam moliri: whereof the Poet says,

Carminibus Circes socios mutavit Ulyssis.

See 45 E. 3. 17. One was taken in Southwark with the Head and Visage of a Dead
man, and with a Book of Sorcery in his Mail: and he was brought into the
King's Bench before Knevet Justice, but no Indictment was framed against him:
for which the Clarks made him swear, that he should never after commit any
Sorcery; and he was sent to prison: and the Head and the Book were burned at
Tuthill, at the charges of the Prisoner. And the ancient Law was, as it
appears by Britton, that those who were attainted of Sorcery were burned: but
the Law is not such at this day; but he who is convicted of such imposture and
deceit shall be fined and imprisoned. And it was said, that it was adjudged,
That if one calls another Witch, that an Action will not lie, for it is too
general: Et dicitur Latin Venefica: But if one says, She is a Witch, and has
bewitched such a one to death, an Action upon the Case lies, if in truth he be
dead. Conjuration is derived of these words, Con and juro: Et propria dicitur
quando multi in alicujus pernitiem jurant: And in the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap.
16. it is taken for Invocation of any evil and wicked Spirits, i. est conjurare
verbis conceptis aliquos malos and iniquos spiritus; the same is made Felony:
But Witchcraft, Enchantment, Charm, or Sorcery, is not felony, if not by them
any person be killed or dies. So that Conjuration est verbis conceptis
compellere malos and iniquos spiritus aliquod facere vel dicere, etc. But a
Witch, who works any thing by any evil spirit, does not make any Conjuration or
Invocation by any powerful names of the Devil, but the wicked spirit comes to
her familiarly, and therefore is called a Familiar: But if a man be called a
Conjurer, or a Witch, he shall not have any Action upon the Case, unless that
he says, That he is a Conjurer of the Devil, or of any evil or wicked spirit:
or, that one is a Witch, and that she has bewitched any one to death, as is
before said.

And note, that the first Statute which was made against Conjuration,
Witchcraft, Sorcery, and Enchantment, was the Act of 33 H. 8. cap. 8. and by it
they were Felony in certain cases special: but that Act was repealed by the
Statute of 1 E. 6. cap. 12.

XXVII. Mich. Term, 7 Jacobi Regis: In the Court of Wards.
Sir Allen Percies Case.
SIr John Fitz and Bridget his Wife, being Tenants for life of a Tenement
called Ramshams, the remainder to Sir John Fitz in tail, the remainder to
Bridget in tail, the Reversion to Sir John and his Heirs: Sir John, and Bridget
his Wife, by Indenture demised the said Tenement to William Sprey for diverse
years yet to come, except all Trees of Timber, Oaks and Ashes, and liberty to
carry them away, rendering Rent, and afterward Sir John dyed, having issue
Mary his daughter, now the Wife of Sir Allen Percy Knight: and afterward the
said William Sprey demised the same Tenement to Sir Allen for seven years: The
Question was, Whether Sir Allen, having the immediate inheritance in the right
of his Wife, expoctant upon the Estate for the life of Bridget, and also having
the possession by the said Demise, might cut down the Timber Trees, Oaks, and
Ashes: And it was objected, that he might well do it: for it was resolved in
Saunders Case, in the fifth part of my Reports, fo. 12. That if Lessee for
years, or for life, assigns over his term or Estate unto another, excepting the
Mines, or the Trees, or the Clay, etc. that the exception is void, because that
he cannot except that which he cannot lawfully take, and which does not belong
unto him by the Law. But it was answered and resolved by the two chief
Justices, and the chief Baron, That in the Case at Bar, the Exception was good
without question, because that he who has the Inheritance, joins in the Lease
with the Lessee for life. And it was further resolved, That if Tenant for life
Leaseth for years, excepting the Timber Trees, the same is lawfully and wisely
done: for otherwise, if the Lessee or Assignee cutteth down the Trees, the
Tenant for life should be punished in Waste* and should not have any remedy
against the Lessee for years: and also if he demiseth the Land without
exception, he who has the immediate Estate of Inheritance, by the assent of
the Lessee, may cut down all the Timber Trees, which when the term ended, all
should be wasted, and then the Tenant for life should not have the Boots which
the Law gives him, nor the pawnage and other profits of the said Trees, which
he lawfully might take: But when Tenant for life upon his Lease excepteth the
Trees, if they be cut down by the Lessor, the Lessee or Assignee shall have an
Action of Trespass, Quare vi and armis, and shall recover damages according to
his loss.

And this case is not like to the said case of Saunders, which was affirmed to
be good Law; for there the Lessee assigned over his whole interest, and
therefore could not except the Mines, Trees, and Clay, etc. which he had not
but as things annexed to the Land: and therefore he could not have them when he
had departed with his whole interest, nor he could not take them either for
Reparations or otherwise: But when Tenant for life Leaseth for years, except
the Timber Trees, the same remains yet annexed to his Freehold, and he may
command the Lessee to take them for necessary Reparations of the Houses. And in
the said case of Saunders, a Judgment is cited between Foster and Miles
Plaintiffs, and Spencer and Bourd Defendants, That where Lessee for years
assigns over his term, except the Trees, that Waste in such case shall be
brought against the Assignee, but in this case without question Waste lies
against the Tenant for life, and so there is a difference, etc.

XXVIII. Mich. Term, 7 Jacobi Regis: In the Court of Wards.
Hulmes Case.
THe King (in the right of his Duchy of Lancaster) Lord: Richard Hulm (seized
of the Manor of Male in the County of Lancaster, holden of the King as of his
Duchy by Knights service) Mesne: and Robert Male (seized of Lands in Male,
holden of the Mesn as of his said Manor by Knights service) Tenant. Richard
Hulm dyed; after whose death, 31 Hen. the eight, it was found, that he dyed
seized of the said Menalty, and that the same descended to Edward his Son and
Heir within age, and found the Tenure aforesaid, etc. And during the time that
he was within age, Robert Male the Tenant dyed; after which, in anno 35 H. 8.
it was found by Office, That Robert Male dyed seized of the said Tenancy
peravail, and that the same descended to Richard his Son and Heir within age,
and that the said Tenancy was holden of the King, as of his said Duchy, by
Knights service; whereas in truth the same was holden of Edward Hulm, then in
Ward of the King, as of his Menalty: for which the King seized the Ward of the
Heir of the Tenant. And afterward, anno quarto Jacobi Regis that now is, after
the death of Richard Male, who was lineal Heir of the said Robert Male, by
another Office it was found, That the said Richard dyed seized of the said
Tenancy, and held the same of the King, as of his Duchy, by Knights service,
his Heir within age: whereupon Richard Hulm, Cousin and Heir of the said Richard
Hulm, had preferred a Bill to be admitted to his Traverse of the said Office
found in quarto Jacobi Regis: And the Question was, Whether the Office found in
35 H. 8. be any estoppel to the said Hulm, to Traverse the said last Office? or
if that the said Hulm should be driven first to Traverse the Office of 35 H. 8.

And it was objected, That he ought first to Traverse the Office of 35 H. 8. as
in the Case of 26 E. 3. 65. That if two Fines be levied of Lands in ancient
Demesne, the Lord of whom the Land is holden ought to have a Writ of Deceit to
reverse the first Fine; and in that the second Fine shall not be a Bar: And
that the first Office shall stand as long as the same remains in force.

To which it was answered and resolved by the two Chief Justices and the Chief
Baron, and the Court of Wards, That the finding of an Office is not any
estoppel, for that is but an enquest of Office, and the party grieved shall
have a Traverse to it, as it has been confessed, and therefore without
question the same is no estoppel; But when an Office is found falsely, that Land
is holden of the King by Knights service in capite, or of the King himself in
Socage, if the Heir sueth a general Livery, now it is holden in 46 E. 3. 12. by
Mowbray and Persey, that he shall not after add, that the Land is not holden of
the King; but that is not any estoppel to the Heir himself who sueth the
Livery, and shall not conclude his Heir: for so says Mowbray himself expressly
in 44 Assis. pl. 35. That an Estoppel by suing of Livery shall estop only
himself the Heir during his life: And in 1 H. 4. 6. b. there the case is put of
express confession and suing of Livery by the issue in tail upon a false
Office: and there it is holden, that the Jurors upon a new Diem clausit
extremum, after the death of such special Heir, are at large, according to
their conscience, to find that the Land is not holden, etc. for they are sworn
ad veritatem dicendum: and their finding is called veredictum, quasi dictum
veritatis; which reason also shall serve, when the Heir in Fee-simple sueth
Livery upon a false Office, and the Jurors after his death ought to find
according to the truth: So it is said 33 H. 6. 7. by Laicon, that if two
sisters be found Heirs, whereof the one is a Bastard, if they join in a Suit of
Livery, she which joyneth with the Bastard in the Livery, shall not alledg
Bastardy in the other: but there is no Book that says, that the Estoppel shall
endure longer then during his life: and when Livery is sued by a special Heir,
the force and effect of the Livery is executed and determined by his death, and
by that the Estoppel is expired with the death of the Heir; but that is to be
intended of a general Livery: but a special Livery shall not conclude one: But
as it is expressed, the words of a general Livery are; When the Heir is found
of full age: Rex Escheatori, etc. Scias quod cepimus homigium I. filii and
haeredis B. defuncti de omnibus terris and tenementis quae idem B. Pater suus
tenuit de nobis in capite, die quo obiit, and ei terras and tenement. illa
reddidimus, ideo tibi praecipimus, etc. And when the Heir was in Ward, at his
full age, the Writ of Livery shall say, Rex. etc. Quia I. filius and haeres B.
defuncti qui de nobis tenuit in capite aetatem suam coram te sufficienter
probavit, etc. Ceperimus homagium ipsius I. de omnibus terris and tenementis,
quae idem B. Pater suus tenuit de nobis in capite die quo obiit, and ei terras
and tenement. illa reddidimus, and ideo tibi praecipimus, ut supra, etc. Which
Writ is the Suit of the Heir, and therefore although that all the words of the
Writ are the words of the King, as all the Writs of the King are; and although
that the Livery be general, de omnibus terris and tenementis de quibus B. pater
I. tenuit de nobis in capite die quo obiit, without direct affirmation that any
Manor in particular is holden in capite, and notwithstanding that the same is
not at the prosecution of the Kings Writ, and no Judgment upon it; yet because
the general Livery is founded upon the Office, and by the Office it was found,
That diverse Lands or Tenements were holden of the King in capite, for this
cause the suing of the Writ shall conclude the Heir only which sueth the
Livery, and after his death the Jurors in a new Writ of Diem clausit extremum,
are at large, as before is said. And if that Jury find falsely in a Tenure of
the King also, the Lord of whom the Land is holden may traverse that Office: Or
if Land be holden of the King, etc. in Socage, the Heir may traverse the last
Office, for by that he is grieved only; and he shall not be driven to traverse
the first Office: and when the Father sueth Livery, and dies, the conclusion
is executed and past, as before is said. And note, that there is a special
Livery, but that proceeds of the Grace of the King, and is not the Suit of the
Heir, and the King may grant it either at full age, before aetate probanda,
etc. or to the Heir within age, as it appears in 21 E. 3. 40. And that is
general, and shall not comprehend any Tenure, as the general Livery does, and
therefore it is not any estoppel without question. And at the Common Law, a
special Livery might have been granted before any Office found: but now by the
Statute of 33 H* 8. cap. 22. it is provided, That no person or persons, having
Lands or Tenements above the yearly value of 20 l. shall have or sue any
Livery, before inquisition or Office found, before the Escheator or other
Commission: But by an express clause in the same Act, Livery may be made of the
Lands and Tenements comprised or not comprised in such Office; so that if
Office be found of any parcel, it is sufficient: And if the Land in the Office
does exceed 20 l. then the Heir may sue a general Livery after Office thereof
found, as is aforesaid: but if the Land does not exceed 5 l. by the year, then
a general Livery may be sued without Office by Warrant of the Master of the
Wards, etc. See 23 Eliz. Dyer 177. That the Queen ex debito Justitiae is not
bound at this day, after the said Act of 33 H: 8* to grant a special Livery;
but it is at her election to grant a special Livery, or to drive the Heir to a
general Livery.

It was also resolved in this Case, That the Office of 35 H. 8. was not
traversable, for his own Traverse shall prove, that the King had cause to have
Wardship by reason of Ward: And when the King comes to the possession by a
false Office, or other means, upon a pretense of right, where in truth he has
no right, if it appears that the King has any other right or interest to
have the Land there, none shall traverse the Office or Title of the King,
because that the Judgment in the Traverse is, Ideo consideratum est, quod manus
Domini Regis a possessione amoveantur, etc. which ought not to be, when it
appears to the Court, that the King has right or interest to have the Land,
and to hold the same accordingly: See 4 H. 4. fo. 33. in the Earl of Kents
Case, etc.

XXIX. Mich. 7 Jacobi Regis.
NOte; The Privilege, Order, or Custom of Parliament, either Parliament.
of the Upper House, or of the House of Commons, belongs to the determination
or decision only of the Court of Parliament: and this appears by two notable
Presidents:

The one at the Parliament holden in the 27 year of King Henry the sixth, There
was a Controversy moved in the Upper House between the Earls of Arundel and of
Devonshire, for their seats, places, and preheminences of the same, to be had
in the Kings presence, as well in the High Court of Parliament, as in his
Councels, and elsewhere: The King, by the advice of the Lords spiritual and
temporal, committed the same to certain Lords of Parliament, who for that they
had not leisure to examine the same, it pleased the King, by the advice of the
Lords at his Parliament, in anno 27 of his Reign, That the Judges of the Land
should hear, see, and examine the Title, etc. and to report what they conceive
herein: The Judges made report as follows; That this matter (viz. of Honor
and precedence between the two Earls, Lords of Parliament) was a matter of
Parliament, and belonged to the Kings Highness, and the Lords spiritual and
temporal in Parliament, by them to be decided and determined; yet being there
so commanded, they showed what they found upon examination, and their Opinions
thereupon.

Another Parliament in 31 H. 6. which Parliament begun the sixth of March, and
after it had continued sometime, it was prorogued until the fourteenth of
February: and afterward in Michaelmas Term, anno 31 H. 6. Thomas Thorp, the
Speaker of the Commons House, at the Suit of the Duke of Buckingham, was
condemned in the Exchequer in 1000 l. damages for a Trespass done to him: The
14 of February, the Commons moved in the Upper House, That their Speaker might
be set at liberty, to exercise his place: The Lords refer this Case to the
Judges: and Fortescue and Prisoit, the two chief Justices, in the name of all
the Judges, after sad consideration and mature deliberation had amongst them,
answered and said, That they ought not to answer to this question, for it has
not been used aforetime, That the Justices should in any wise determine the
Privilege of this High Court of Parliament; for it is so high and mighty in its
nature, that it may make Laws; and that that is Law, it may make no Law: and
the determination and knowledge of that Privilege belongs to the Lords of the
Parliament, and not to the Justices: But as for proceedings in the lower Courts
in such cases, they delivered their Opinions. And in 12 E. 4. 2. in Sir John
Pastons case, it is holden, that every Court shall determine and decide the
Privileges and Customs of the same Court, etc.

XXX. Hillary Term, 7 Jacobi Regis: In the Star Chamber.
Heyward and Sir John Whitbrokes Case.
IN the Case between Heyward and Sir John Whitbroke in the Star Chamber, the
Defendant was convicted of diverse Misdemeanors, and Fine, and Imprisonment
imposed upon him, and damages to the Plaintiff: and it was moved that a special
Process might be made out of that Court to levy the said damages upon the Goods
and Lands of the Defendant: and it was referred to the two chief Justices,
whether any such Process might be made? who this Term moved the Case to the
chief Baron, and to the other Judges and Barons; and it was unanimously
resolved by them, That no such Process could or ought to be made, neither for
the damages nor for the costs given to the Plaintiff: for the Court has not
any power or Jurisdiction to do it, but only to keep the Defendant in prison
until he pay them. For, for the Fine due to the King, the Court of Star Chamber
cannot make forth any Process for the levying of the same, but they estreat the
same into the Exchequer, which has power by the Law to writ forth Process to
the Sheriff to levy the same. But if a man be convicted in the Star Chamber for
Forgery upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. that in that case, for the double costs and
damages, that an English Writ shall be made, directed to the Sheriff, etc.
reciting the conviction, and the Statute for the levying of the said costs and
damages of the goods and chattels, and profits of the Lands of the Defendant,
and to bring in the money into the Court of Star Chamber, and the Writ shall be
sealed with the great Seal, and the Test of the King: For the Statute of 5
Eliz. has given Jurisdiction to the Court of Star Chamber, and power to give
Judgment (amongst other things) of the costs and damages, which being given by
force of the said Act of Parliament, by consequence the Court by the Act has
power to grant Execution; Quia quando aliquid conceditur ei omnia concedi
videntur per quod devenitur ad illud. And it was resolved, That the giving of
the damages to the Plaintiff was begun but of late times: and although that one
or two Presidents were showed against this Resolution, they being against the
Law, the Judges had not any regard to them. The like Resolution was in the Case
of Langdale in that Court.

XXXI. Hillary Term, 7 Jacobi Regis: In the Common Pleas.
Morse and Webbs Case.
IN a Replevin brought by John Morse: against Robert Webb of the taking of two
Oxen the last day of November in the third year of the Reign of the King that
now is, in a place called the Downfield in Luddington in the County of
Worcester: The Defendant, as Bailiff to William Sherington, Gent. made
Conusance, because that the place where is an Acre of Land which is the
Freehold of the said William Sherington, and for damage-feasants, etc. In Bar,
of which Avowry the Plaintiff said, That the said Acre of Land in parcel of
Downfield, and that he himself, at the time, and before the taking, etc. was
and yet is seized of two yard Land, with the appurtenances, in Luddington
aforesaid: And that he, and all those whose Estate he has in the said two
yards of Land, time out of mind, etc. have used to have Common of pasture per
totam contentam, of the said place called the Downfield, whereof, etc. for four
Beasts called Rother Beasts, and two Beasts called Horse-beasts, and for sixty
Sheep, at certain times and seasons of the year, as to the said two yards
Lands, with the appurtenances appertaining: and that he put in the said two
Oxen to use his Common, etc. And the Defendant did maintain his Avowry, and
traversed the Prescription, upon which the parties were at issue, and the Jury
gave a special Verdict. That before the taking, one Richard Morse, Father of
the said John Morse, and now Plaintiff, whose Heir he is, was seized of the
said two yards Lands, and that the said Richard Morse, etc. had the Common of
Pasture for the said Cattle, per totum contentum of the said Downfield, in
manner and form as before is alleged, and so seized; The said Richard Morse,
in the twentieth year of Queen Elizabeth, demised to William Thomas and John
Fisher diverse parcels of the said two yards Lands, to which, etc. viz. the four
Buts of arable, with the Common and intercommon to the same belonging, for the
term of four hundred years; by force of which the said William Thomas and John
Fisher entered, and were possessed: and the said Richard so seized, dyed
thereof seized; by which the said two yards Lands in possession and Reversion
descended to the said John Morse the now Plaintiff: And if upon the whole
matter, the said John Morse now has, and at the time of the taking, etc. had
Common of Pasture, etc. for four Beasts called Rother Beasts, and two Beasts
called Horse-beasts, and for sixty Sheep, etc. as to the said two Acres of
Land, with the appurtenances belonging, in Law or not, the Jury prayed the
advice of the Court.

Note, that this Plea began Trin. 5 Jacobi, Rot. 1405. And upon Argument at the
Bar, and at the Bench, it was resolved by the whole Court, that it ought to be
found against the Defendant, who had traversed the Prescription: For although
that all the two years Lands had been demised for years, yet the Prescription
made by the Plaintiff is true; for he is seized in his Demesne as of Fee of the
Freehold of the two yards of Land, to which, etc. And without question the
Inheritance and Freehold of the Common, after the years determined, is
appendant to the said two yard Lands; and therefore clearly the issue is to be
found against the Defendant: But if he would take advantage of the matter in
Law, he ought (confessing the Common) to have pleaded the said Lease; but when
he traverseth the Prescription, he cannot give the same in evidence.

2. It was resolved, That if the said Lease had been pleaded, that the Common,
during the Lease for years, is not suspended or discharged; for each of them
shall have Common Rateable, and in such manner, that the Land in which, etc.
shall not be surcharged: and if so small a parcel be demised, which will not
keep one Ox, nor a Sheep, then the whole Common shall remain with the Lessor,
so always as the Land in which be not surcharged.

3. It was resolved, That Common appendant unto Land, is as much as to say,
Common for Cattle levant and couchant upon the Land in which, etc. So that by
the severance of part of the Land to which, etc. so prejudice can come to the
Ter-tenant in which, etc.

4. See the Case of (...) in the fourth part of my Reports, fo. (...) was
affirmed for good Law: and there is no difference, when the Prescription is for
Cattle levant and couchant, and for a certain number of Cattle levant and
couchant: But when the Prescription is for Common appurtenant to Land without
(alleging that it is for Cattle levant and couchant) there a certain number of
the Cattle ought to be expressed, which are intended by the Law to be levant
and couchant.

XXXII. Hill. 7 Jacobi Regis: In the Common Pleas.
Hughes and Crowthers Case.
IN a Replevin, between Robert Hughs Plaintiff, and Richard Crowther Defendant,
which began, Trin. 6 Jacobi, Rot. 2220 The Case was, that Charles Fox was seized
of six acres of Meadow in Bedston, in the County of Salop, in Fee, and 10
October. 9 Eliz. leased the same to Charles Hibbens, and Arthur Hibbens for 60
years, if the aforesaid Charles Hibbens and Arthur Hibbens should so long live,
and afterward Charles died; and if the Lease determine by his death was the
Question, and it was adjudged, That by his death the Lease was determined; for
the life of a man is mere collateral unto the Estate for years, otherwise it
is, if a Lease be made to one for the lives of J. S. and J. N. there the
Freehold does not determine by the death of one of them, for the reasons and
causes given in the Case of Brudnel, in the fifth part of my Reports, fol. 9
Which Case was affirmed to be good Law by the whole Court.

XXXIII. Easter Term, anno 8 Jacobi: In the Common Pleas.
Heydon and Smiths Case.
RIchard Heydon brought an Action of Trespass against Michael Smith and others,
of breaking of his Close called the Moor in Ugley in the County of Essex the 25
day of June in the fifth year of the King, and quendam arborem suum ad
valentiam 40 s. ibidem nuper crescen. succiderunt: The Defendants said, that
the Close is, and at the time of the Trespass was the Freehold of Sir John
Leventhrop Knight, etc. and that the said Oak was a Timber Tree of the growth
of thirty years and more, and justifies the cutting down of the Tree by his
commandment: The Plaintiff replyeth and says, That the said Close, and a
House, and 28 Acres of Land in Ugley, are Copyhold, and parcel of the said
Manor of Ugley, etc. of which Manor Edward Leventhrop Esquire. Father of the
said Sir John Leventhrop, was seized in Fee, and granted the said House, Lands
and Close to the said Richard Heydon and his Heirs by the Rod at the Will of
the Lord, according to the custom of the said Manor: and that within the said
Manor there is such a custom, Quod quilibet tenens Customar. ejusdem Manerii
sibi, and haeredibus suis, ad voluntatem Domini, etc. a toto tempore supradicto
usus fuit, and consuevit ad ejus libitum amputare ramos omnimodum arborum,
called Pollingers, or Husbords, super terris and tenem. suis Customar. crescen.
pro ligno combustibili, ad like libitum suum applicand. and in praedicto
Messuagio comburend. and also to cut down and take at their pleasure all manner
of Trees called Pollengers or Husbords, and all other Timber trees, super
ejusdem Custumariis suis crescen. for the reparation of their Houses built upon
the said Lands and customary Tenements; and also for Ploughbote and Cartbote:
and that all Trees called Pollengers or Husbords, and all other trees at the
time of the Trespass aforesaid, or hitherto growing upon the aforesaid Lands
and Tenements customary of the said Richard Heydon, were not sufficient, nor
did serve for the necessary uses aforesaid: And that the said Richard Heydon,
from the time of the said Grant made unto him, had maintained and preserved all
trees, etc. growing upon the said Lands and Tenements to him granted: And that
after the death of the said Edward Leventhrop, the said Manor descended to the
said Sir John Leventhorp: and that at the time of the Trespass the aforesaid
Message of the said Richard Heydon was in decay, and egebat necessariis
reparationibus in Maremio ejusdem. Upon which the Defendant did demur in Law.

And this Case was oftentimes argued at the Bar: and now this Term it was
argued at the Bench by the Justices: And in this case these points were
resolved.

1. That the first part of the Custom was absurd and repugnant, scil. Quod
quilibet tenens Customarii ejusdem Manerii habens and tenens aliqua terras seu
tenementa Custom. etc. usus fuit amputare ramos omnimodum arborum, vocat.
Pollingers, etc. pro ligno combustabili, etc. in praedicto Messuagio comburend.
(which ought to be in the Message of the Plaintiff, for no other Message is
mentioned before) which is absurd and repugnant, That every customary Tenant
should burn his Fuel in the Plaintiffs house: But that Branch of the Custom
does not extend unto this case: for the last part of the custom, which
concerns the cuting down of the Trees, concerns the point in question; and so
the first part of the custom is not material.

It was objected, That the pleading, that the Message of the Plaintiff was in
decay, and egebat necessariis reparationibus in maremio ejusdem, was too
general: for the Plaintiff ought to have showed in particular, in what the
Message was in decay: as the Book is in 10 E. 4. 3. He who justifies for
Housebote, etc. ought to show that the House has cause to be repaired, etc.

To which it was answered by Coke chief Justice, That the said Book proved the
pleading in the case at Bar was certain enough, scil. Quod Messuagium praed.
egebat necessariis reparationibus in maremio, without showing the precise
certainty: and therewith agrees 7 H. 6. 38. and 34 H. 6. 17.

2. It was also answered and resolved, That in this case without question it
needs not to alledg more certainty, for here the Copyholder according to the
custom does not take it, but the Lord of the Manor does cut down the Tree, and
carries it away where the rest was not sufficient, and so preventeth the
Copyholder of his benefit, and therefore he needs not to show any decay at
all, but only for increasing of the damages; for the Lord does the wrong when
he cutteth down the Tree which should serve for reparations when need should be.

3. It was resolved, That of common Right, as a thing incident to the Grant,
the Copyholder may take Housebote, Hedgbote, and Plowbote upon his Copyhold:
Quia concesso uno conceduntur omnia sine quibus id consistere non potest: Et
quando aliquis aliquid concedit, concedere videtur and id sine quo res ipsa
esse non potest: and therewith agrees 9 H. 4. Waste 59. But the same may be
restrained by custom, scil. That the Copyholder shall not take it unless by
assignment of the Lord or his Bailiff, etc.

4. It was resolved, That the Lord cannot take all the Timber Trees, but he
ought to leave sufficient for the Reparation of the Customary houses, and for
Ploughbote, etc. for otherwise great Depopulation will follow; scil. Ruin of
the Houses, and decay of Tillage and Husbandry. And it is to be understood,
That Bote being an ancient Saxon word, has two significations; the one
compensatio criminis, as Frithbote, which is as much as to say, to be
discharged from giving amends for the breach of the peace; Manbote, to be
discharged of amends for the death of man: And secondly, in the latter
signification, (scil.) for Reparation, as was Bridgbote, Burghbote, Castlebote,
Parkbote, etc. scil. Reparation of a Bridge, of a Borough, of a Castle, of a
Park, etc. And it is to be known, that Bote and Estovers are all one: Estovers
are derived of this French word, Estouer, i. e. fovere; i. e. to keep warm, to
cherish, to sustain, to defend: And there are four kinds of Estovers, (scil.)
ardendi, arandi, construendi, and claudendi: (scil.) Firebote, Housebote,
Ploughbote, and Hedgbote.

5. It was resolved, That the Copyholder shall have a general Action of
Trespass against the Lord, Quare clausum fregit, and arborem suam, etc.
succidit; for Custom has fixed it to his Estate against the Lord: and the
Copyholder in this case has as great an interest in the Timber Trees, as he
has in his Message which he holds by Copy: and if the Lord breaks or
destroys the House, without question the Copyholder shall have an Action of
Trespass against his Lord, Quare Domum fregit, and by the same Reason for the
Timber Trees which are annexed to the Land, and which he may take for the
Reparation of his Copyhold Message, and without which the Message cannot
stand. Trinit. 40 Eliz. Rot. 37. in the King's Bench, between Stebbing and
Grosener, The custom of the Manor of Netherhall in the County of Suffolk was,
that every Copyholder might lop the Pollengers upon his Copyhold pro ligno
combustibili, etc. And the Lord of the Manor cut down the Pollingers, being
upon the Plaintiffs Copyhold, upon which he brought his Action upon the case,
because that the lops of the Trees in such case did belong to the Copyholder,
and they were taken by the Lord. See Tailors case in the fourth part of my
Reports 30 and 31. and see 5 H. 4 2. Guardian in Knight Service, who has
Custodiam terrae, shall have an Action of Trespass for cuting down the Trees
against the Heir who has the inheritance: Vide 2 H. 4. 12. A Copyholder
brought an Action of Trespass, Quare clausum fregit, and arbores succidit: and
see 2 E. 4. 15. A Servant who is commanded to carry goods to such a place,
shall have an Action of Trespass or Appeal: 1 H. 6. 4. 7 H. 4. 15. 19 H. 6. 34.
11 H. 4. 28. It after taking the goods, the owner has his goods again, yet he
shall have a general Action of Trespass, and upon the evidence the damages
shall be mitigated: so is the better Opinion in 11 H. 4. 23. That he who has a
special property of the goods at a certain time, shall have a general Action of
Trespass against him who has the general property, and upon the evidence
damages shall be mitigated; but clearly, the Baylee, or he who has a special
property, shall have a general Action of Trespass against stranger, and shall
recover all in damages, because that he is chargeable over. See 21 H. 7. 14. b.
acc. And it is holden in 4 H. 7. 3. That Tenant at sufferance shall have an
Action of Trespass in respect of the possession, and if the Defendant plead
Not-guilty, but he cannot make title, 30 H. 6. Trespass 10. 15 H. 7. 2. The
King, who has profits of the Land by Out-lawry, shall have an Action of
Trespass, or take goods damage-feasants: 35 H. 6. 24. 30 H. 6. Tresp. 10. etc.
Tenant at will shall have an Action of Trespass: 21 H. 7. 15. and 11 H. 4. 23.
If a man Bayl goods which are taken out of his possession, if the Baylee
recover in Trespass, the same shall be a good Bar to the Baylee: 5 H. 4. 2. In
a Writ of Waste brought against Tenant for life, and assigned the Waste in
cutting down of Trees: the Defendant pleaded in Bar, that the Plaintiff himself
cut them: and Culpeper, the Sergeant of the Plaintiff, objected against it,
that it should be no Plea, because the Defendant had not any thing in the
Freehold, no more then a mere stranger; and if a stranger had cut down the same
Trees, he should be chargeable in Waste.

Also in this case, we should be at a mischief if we should not recover against
him; for if at another time he brings an Action of Trespass against us, he
shall recover damages against us for the cutting, id est, for the value of the
Trees: and yet it was holden by the Court, that the same was a good Bar: And it
was said by the Court that the Plaintiff was not at any mischief in this case:
for in as much as the Defendant shall have advantage now to discharge himself
of Waste against the Plaintiff, upon this matter he shall be barred for ever of
his Action of Trespass, scil. to recover the value of the Trees, which was the
mischief objected by Culpeper: But without question he shall have an Action of
Trespass, Quare clausum fregit, for the Entry of the Lessor, and for the
cutting of the Trees, but he shall not recover the value of the Trees, because
he is not chargeable over, but for the special loss which he has, scil. for
the loss of the Pawnage and of the shadow of the Trees, etc. See Fitz. Trespass
ultimo, in the Abridgment: And afterward, the same Term, Judgment was given on
the principal case for the Plaintiff.

XXXIV. Easter Term, 8 Jacobi: In the Common Pleas.
THe Parishioners of St. Alphage in Canterbury by custom ought to choose the
Parish-Clark, whom they chose accordingly: The Parson of the Parish, by coulor
of a new Canon made at the Convocation in the (...) year of the King that now
is (which is not of force to take away any Custom) drew the Clark before Doctor
Newman, Official of the Archbishop of Canterbury, to deprive him, upon the
point of the right of Election, and for other causes; and upon that it was
moved at the Bar to have a Prohibition: And upon the hearing of Doctor Newman
and himself, and his Council, a Prohibition was granted by the whole Court,
because the party chosen is a mere temporal man, and the means of choosing of
him, scil. the custom, is also mere temporal, so as the Official cannot deprive
him; but upon occasion the Parishoners might displace him: And this Office is
like to the Office of a Churchwarden, who although they be chosen for two
years, yet for cause they may displace them, as it is holden in 26 H. 8. 5. And
although that the execution of the Office concerns Divine Service, yet the
Office it self is mere temporal: See 3 E. 3. Annuity 30. He who is Clark of a
Parish is removable by the Parishioners: See 18 E. 3. 27: A gift in tail was
made of the Serjanty or Clarkship of the Church of Lincoln, and there adjudged,
that the Office is temporal, and shall not be tried in the Ecclesiastical
Court, but in the Kings Court: And it is to be known, that the deprivation of a
man of a temporal Office, or place, is a temporal thing, upon which no Appeal
lies by the Statute of 25 H. 8. but an Assise, as in 4 Eliz. Dyer 209. The
President of Magdalen College in Oxford was deprived of the Bishop of
Winchester their Visitor; He shall not have an Appeal to the Delegates, for the
Deprivation is temporal, and not spiritual; but he may have an Assise: and
therewith agrees the Book of 8 Ass. Siracses Case: But if a Dean of a
Cathedral Church, of the Patronage of the King, be deprived before the
Commissioners of the King, he may appeal to the Delegates within the said Act
of 25 H. 8. For a Deanery is a spiritual promotion, and not temporal: and before
the said Act, in such case, the Appeal was to Rome immediately.

XXXV. Mich. Term, 5 Jacob. Rot. 30. In the King's Bench.
Prichard and Hawkins Case.
JOhn Prichard brought an Action upon the Case against Robert Hawkins for
slanderous words published the last day of August in the third year of the
King, viz. That Prichard which serves Mistress Shelley did murder John Adams
Child, (Quandam Isabellam Adams modo defunct. filiam cujusdem Johannis Adams,
of Williamstre in the County of Gloucester, innuendo) upon which a Writ of Error
was brought in the Exchequer Chamber upon a Judgment given for Prichard in the
King's Bench: and the Judgment was reversed in Easter Term, 7 Jacobi, because
that it does not appear, that Isabel was dead at the time of the speaking the
words; for tunc defunct. ought to have been in the place of modo defunct.

XXXVI. Easter Term. 8 Jacobi: In the King's Bench.
Dison and Bestneys Case.
HUmphrey Dison said of Nicolas Bestney, utter Barester and Councellor of
Gray's Inn, Thou a Barester? Thou art no Barester, thou art a Barretor; Thou
were put from the Bar, and thou dare not show thy self there. Thou study Law?
Thou have as much wit as a Daw. Upon Not-guilty pleaded, the Jury found for the
Plaintiff, and assessed damages to 23 l. upon which Judgment was given: and in
a Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber, the Judgment was affirmed.

XXXVII. Easter Term, 8 Jacobi Regis: In the King's Bench.
Smith and Hills Case.
NOah Smith brought an Action of Assault and Battery against Walter Hill in the
King's Bench, which began Pasc. 7 Jacobi, Rot. 175. upon Not-guilty pleaded, a
Verdict and Judgment was for the Plaintiff, and 107 l. assessed for damages and
costs. In a Writ of Error brought in the Exchequer Chamber, the Error was
assigned in the Venire facias, which was certified by Writ of Certiorari: and
upon the Writ no Return was made upon the back of the Writ, which is called
Returnum album; and for that cause, this Easter Term the Judgment was reversed.

XXXVIII. Trinity Term, 7 Jacobi: In the Court of Wards.
Westcots Case.
IT was found by a Writ of Diem clausit extremum, after the death of Roger
Westcot, That the said Roger the day that he dyed was seized of and in the
moiety of the Manor of Trewalliard in his Demesne as of Fee, and of such his
Estate dyed thereof seized: and that the moiety of the said Manor, anno 19 E.
3. was holden of the then Prince, as of his Castle of Trematon, parcel of his
Duchy of Cornwall, by Knights-service, as it appears by a certain
exemplification of Trematon for the same Prince, made 9 Marcii, 19 E. 3. And
the words of the Extent were, Willielmus de Torr tenet duo feoda and dimid.
militis apud Pick, Striklestomb, and Trewalliard, per servitum militare, and
reddit inde per annum 8 d. And it was resolved by the two chief Justices and
the chief Baron, That the Office concerning the Tenure was insufficient and
void, because that the Verdict of a Jury ought to be full and direct, and not
with a prout patet, for by that the whole force of their Verdict relyeth only
upon the Extent, which if it be false, he who is grieved shall have no remedy
by any Traverse; for they have not found the Tenure indefinite which might be
traversed, but with a prout patet, which makes the Office in that point
insufficient, and upon that a Melius inquirendum shall issue forth: and
therewith agrees F. N. B. 255. that a Melius inquirendum shall be awarded in
Inch a Case.

The NAMES of the CASES.
CAse of the admiralty 7. Jac. 51. Case of S. Alphage parish in Canterbury 8.
Jac. 70. Baron and Boys case 6. Jac. 18. Case of repairing Bridges, etc. 7.
Jac. 33. Bedell and Shermans case 40. Eliz. 47. Baylyes case 7. Jac. 48. Case
in Chancery. Hill. 27. Eliz. 19. Case in the common Pleas. 6. Jac. 26. Collings
and Hardings 39. Eli. 57. Case of Modus decinandi 6. Jac. 12. Case de Modo
Decimandi and of prohibitions before the King 7. Jac. 37. Disow and Bestneyes
case 8. Jac. 71. Edwards case. 6. Jac. 9. Case in ejectione firmae 7. Jac. 58.
Hulmes case 7. Jac. 61. Haywards and Sr. John Whitebrookes case. 64. Hughes and
Crowthers case 7. Iac. 66. Haidon and Smiths case. 8. Iac. 67. Muttons case, 7.
Iac. 59. More and Webs case 7. Iac. 65. Neale and Rowses case, 6. Iac. 24.
Porters and Rochesters case, 6. Iac. 4. Ca. of prohibition 6. Iac. 30. Sir.
Allen Percies case 7. Iac. 60. Parliaments case 7. Ia. 63. Prichard and Haukins
case. 5. Iac. 71. Sir, William Reads and Boothes case 7. Iac. 34. Syrat and
Heales case 44. Eliz. 23. Case of sewers 7, Iac. 35. Sparye case 7. Iac. 49.
Samms case 7. Iac. 54. Smith and Hills case 8. Iac. 71. Tailor and Moyls case 6.
Iac. 11. Willowes case 6. Iac. 1. Case in the court of wards 7. Iac. 48. Case
in the Court of wards 7. Iac. 49. Wills case 7. Iac. 50. Westcots case 7. Iac.
72.

THE TABLE.
A Acts of Parliament are parcel of the Law, so to be judged by the judges of
the Law. fol. 4. Acts, none may take upon him any act, etc. but who has
knowledge in the same 12. Apples, not contained within the words of Stat. 5. E.
6. 14. against ingrossors. 18. 19. Actions of claim to be brought within 5.
years. 21. Aid to the King, who to pay it. 26. 27. 28. For what. 29. 30. Made
certain and when to be paid. 25. Admiral, his power how far it extends. 51.
52. Court of Admiralty, no Court of record. 53. Avoury where it shall be good
and maintaineable. 58. B Brewer is within the act of the 5. El. 4. for that
none may keep a common brewhouse, unless formerly apprentice. 11. 12. Burgage
tenure, what it is. 27. Bridges, rivers, sewers, etc. who ought to repair them,
and how compellable to it. 33. Boot, a saxon word, the signification whereof
various. 68. Boot and estovers, signify all one thing. 68. C Copyhold, where
a Copyholder may deny to pay his fine. 2. Canterbury, Arch bishop thereof
cannot cite one out of his own Diocese, and the reason thereof. 5. 6. 7. 8.
Commission, High commissioners their power and to whom extendible. 11. 47.
Customs, what Customs shall be good and when, and what not. 12. 13. Customs,
where the Kings Court shall be ousted of jurisdiction in Modo decimandi and
where not. 18. Customs and prescriptions to be tried by the common Law. 40.
Canon Eccles. against the Kings perrogative, the common law etc. ipso facto
void. 47. Common of Pasture who shall have it and who shall be debared and
why. 66. Common divided shall be rateable so that the land in which, etc. shall
not be surcharged. 66. Coppyholders may of common right take House-boote, hedge
boot, and Plough-boote, upon his copy hold. 68. Shall have an action against
his Lord for cutting down* Timber trees. 69. D Dower, how a wife may be barred
of her dower and for what. 19. 20. 21. 22. Where she shall be endowed and
when. 20. 22. 23. Damages treble, where to be sued for. 24. Decimandi modus,
what it is and by whom to be tried. 37, 38, 39. 40 Plea of Modus decimandi
where good and where not. 43. E Error, writ of error, so annihilates a record
as if it had never been. 20. What shall be recovered therein. 21. 22. Executor,
summons and severance lies in any suite brought as executors. 32. Error, where
amended, and where not. 54. Error, what is sufficient to renew a judgment, or
confirm it. 71. Estopel what, and the force thereof 62. F Fine reasonable in
Copihold must have a set time for payment. 2. It must be reasonable, and not
excessive 2. 3. 4. By whom to be adjudged. 3. What is a reasonable fine and
what not. 3. Fees, what Fees may be taken for proving a will and extortion
therein how punishable. 24. 25. 26. Forgery what and how punishable 34. 35. H
Heir, entry of the heir where lawful. 49. I Judge ecclesiastical his power
to examine upon oath. 10. Ioint-tenants and tenants in common the difference
between them. 55, 56, 57. Ioint-tenants, may be seized to answer though they
come at unusual times to it. 56. K King, Land given to the King discharged of
tithes. 15 Where the Kings have the mean profits of Land and where not, 49. L
Lands, how they may be discharged of Tithes 15. Land, where it shall descend
and and where not. 50. Law will do no wrong. 21. Law of England how divided.
40. Livery where no livery or Ouster le maine shall need to be sued. 50. 51.
The manner of suing livery and the form of the writ. 62. Lease for years to
two, if they so long live, if one dye the leaf is determined* 66. M
Messuagium, and Tenementum their difference. 48. Manor, how a Lord of a Manor
may wrong his Copyhold tenant. 68: Mvlius inquirendum where it lies and for
what. 72. O Office, where necessary to be found where not, and when it must be
found. 22. 63. Where it shall be insufficient. 50. It shall not be an estopel,
and the reason thereof. 61. P Prohibition when and where it lies and against
whom. 8, 9, 10. 41, 42, 43, 70. Parishes and towns, their bounds triable only
by common law, the reason why 17, 18. Pirates, how, when, and by whom
punishable, 53, 54. Parliament, privileges, orders and customs of Parliament
only to be decided in Parliament 63. Process, star chamber cannot make
Process against either Lands or goods. 64. R Rex est persona mixta: 17.
Replevin, by whom grantable and for what 31. Rent when it may be divided and
upon what occasion. 57. Reparations in houses, if necessary to be showed in
certain et contra. 68. S Statutes, to be repealed by none but by statutes. 17.
Socage tenure what* 27. Sewers, Commissioners thereof their Power how far and
to what it extends. 35, 36. Seizin, where no primer Seizin shall be, 50.
Severante of part of a reversion loses not the entire rent. 58. Sorcerers and
inchanters, who, and their punishment, 59. T Tithes how satisfaction may be
given in discharge of tithes. 14: 46. They cannot be altogether taken away. 14.
Where and how they may be altered into an other thing. 15, 16. 41. How many
ways one may be discharged of tithes, and of what payable. 16. If divided from
the nine parts not to be sued for in Court Ecclesiastical, if it be without
fraud, 23. Where the right of tithes may be tried. 39. 58. Treason, how and by
whom punishable. 54. Timber trees who may cut them and who may not. 60.
Trespass, action therein, where it lies, against whom, and for what. 69 V Use,
where a use may be limited and where not. 55. Who shall have the use. 56. W
Wast, what adjudged Wast and where it lies. 61. Wife, where a wife shall have
an estate for life. 49. Wards, who shall be a ward to the King. 55. 57. Waste,
who shall be chargeable in a writ of Wast. 69. sY York, the President and
council of York their power how far it extends. 31.

FINIS.

