portrait of Lord Chief Justice Sir Edward Coke PRVDENS QVI PATIENS.

Juris prudentium eloquentissimus et Eloquentium Juris prudentissimus



AN ABRIDGEMENT OF The Lord COKE'S COMMENTARY on LITTLETON: Collected by an
unknown Author; yet by a late Edition pretended to be Sir Humphrey Davenports
Knight.

AND In this Second Impression purged from very many gross ERRORS committed in
the said former Edition.

With a TABLE of the most remarkable things therein.

LONDON: Printed for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedell. 1651.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader;
THis little Book was lately sent abroad with many gross Errors, as an
Abridgement of the Lord Cokes Comment on Littleton, under the Name of Sr
Humphrey Davenport Knight (long since deceased) though indeed many very material
things in the Lord Cokes Comment is not in the late Edition or Abridgement at
all hinted or mentioned. If thou art curious to understand the Law, be pleased
to consult the large Volume (which is an exact learned Work, and curiously
corrected, and approved by all learned in the Common Laws) but if thy leisure
(for the present) will not permit thee to read that learned Work at large, know
that thou may, for Twelve-pence, have this Compendium, and be welcome to the
careful Publishers hereof, who desire thy benefit and the public good.

W. Lee. D. Pakeman. G. Bedell.

From our Shops in Fleetstreet, Nov. 24. 1651. Monday.
portrait of Sir Thomas de Littleton The true portraiture of Judge Littleton the
famous English Lawyer


CAP. I. De Feodo Simplici.
FEodum simplex idem est quod haereditas legitima, vel pura. Tenant in fee
simp. 1. He has the estate in the land. 2. He holds the land of some
superior Lord. 3. He is to perform the services due, and 4. He is thereunto
bounden. 5. By Doom and judgment. Praedium domini regis est directum dominium,
cujus nullus Author est nisi Deus. Subjectus habet utile dominium. Bract. l. 1.
c. 8,

Fee ex feif (i) praedium beneficiarum. Fee divided into 3 parts, viz. simple
or absolute, conditional, qualified, or base. Bract. 263. and 207. Pl. Com.
Walsing c. Di. 252, 253. Fee signifies that the land belongs to us and our
heirs, and in this sense the King is said to be seized in fee. It is also
taken, as it is holden of another by service, and that only belongs to the
subject. Brit. 205. 207. Item dicitur feodum alio modo ejus qui alium feoffat,
and quod quis tenet ab alio, ut sit qui dicat, talis tenet de me tot feoda per
servitium militare, and Fleta says, poterit unus tenere in feodo quoad
servitia, sicut dominus Capitalis, and non in dominico; alius in feodo, and
dominico, and non in servitio, sicut libere tenens alicujus; and therefore if a
stranger claim a Seigniory, and distrain, and a vow for the service, the Tenant
may plead, that the Tenancy is extra feodum, etc. Of him (that is) out of the
surrendry, or not holden of him that claims it, but he cannot plead horse de
son fee, unless he take the Tenancy, that is, the State of the land upon him.
2 Ass. p. 4. 12 Ass. 38. 12 E. 3. tit. horse de son fee 28. (i. b.) ignoratis
terminis, ignoratur and ars. Si un annuitie soit grant al home and a ses heirs
ceo est fee simple personal.

Simplex idem est quod purum, and purum dicitur, quod est merum and solum sine
additione. Simplex donatio and pura est, ubi nulla addita est conditio sive
modus simplex enim datur quod nullo additamento datur, every fee is not
legitimate; for a disseisor, abator, intruder, usurper, etc. has a fee, but
not a lawful fee, fo. 2. a.

Si un alien purchase tre^s, etc. Le roy sur office trove eux aura, home
attaint de felony, and capacity de purchaser, sinon pur le benefit del roy,
Dier 283. An Alien Merchant whose King is in league with ours, may take a lease
for years of a house for habitation, as incident to commercery, and as necessary
to his trade and tratfique, but not for the benefit of his Executors or
Administrators; for if he die possessed of the lease, or relinquish the Realm,
the King shall have it, 5 Mar Br. tit-denizen 22.

If a man commit felony, and after purchase lands, and is attaint, the Lord of
the fee, shall have the Escheat, 49 Ass. p: 2. 49 E. 3. 11.

If any sole corporation, or aggregate of many, religiosus vel alius,
ecclesiastical or temporal; purchase Lands in fee, without license, they cannot
retain, for if the mesn Lords make default, and do not enter, etc. the King
shall have the Lands, etc. 7 E. 1. De Relig. per alienation in Mortmain les
Seignors perdont lour escheats, and in effect the service de chivaler per
defense del royalm, ward, marriage, relief, etc. Et pur ceo fut dit mortmain
quod rend. null. service.

Stat. delig. 7 E. 1. per quod quae servitia ex hujusmodi feodis debentur, and
quae ad defensionem regni ob initio provisa fuerunt, indebite subtrahuntur, and
capitales domini eschaet. suas ammittunt. M. Chapter c. 36. Praelatus ecclesiae
suae conditionem meliorare potest, deteriorare nequit. Est enim eccle, ejusdem
conditionis, quae fungitur vice minoris. Sed nullum simile quatuor pedibus
currit. (2. b.) Brac. l. 2. f. 12. and. 32 Si feme covert purchase Lands, etc.
Le baron poit disagreer and divest tout lestate; but albeit her husband agreed
thereunto, after his death she may wave the same, and so may her heirs also,
if she her self agreed not, etc. After the decease of her husband. The Queen
is an exempt person (by the common law) from the King, and may purchase and
grant, etc. Vxor is a good name of purchase, without a Christen name, and so it
is, if a Christen name be added and mistaken. V^ile enim per inutile non
vitidtur, 1. H. 5. 8. Purchases are good in many cases by a known name, or by a
certain description of the person without either surname, or name of Baptism,
as uxor: I S or primogenite filio I.S. or rect. hered. I. S. But regularly in
writs the demandant or plaintiff is to be named by his Christen name and
surname, unless it be the case of some corporations, or bodis politic (3.
a.) 8. E 3. 437. qui ex damnato coitu nascuntur inter liberos non computentur.
Bastardus est quasi nullius filius. A man makes a Lease for life to B. the
remainder to the eldest issue male to be begotten of the body of Jane S.
whether the same issue be legitimate or illegitimate B. has issue a bastard on
the body of I. S. this Son or issue shall not take the remainder, because in
Law he is not his issue. M. 38. and 39. el. in bre. de err.

A Bastard may purchase by his reputed name to him and his heirs, although he
can have no heir but of his body, 39. E. 3. 11. 24. 17. E. 3. 42. 35. As. 13.
41. E. 3. 19 An office which concerns the benefit or safety of the
commonwealth, etc. granted to a man which is unexpert, and has no skill or
science to exercise or execute the same the grant is merely void, and the party
disabled by law, to take the same, pro commodo regis and populi. Dier 150.

An infant or minor is not capable of an office of Stewardship of the Court of
a Manor either in possession or reversion. No man though neven so skilful etc.
Is capable of a judicial office in reversion, but must expect until it fall
in Possession, l. 11. 2. Sect. 378. The King is capable of an office, not to
use, but to grant. A purchase is, etc. when one comes to lands by conveiance
or title; and not by tort, as by disseisin, etc. Note that purchasers of lands,
tenants, leases, and hereditaments, for good and valuable consideration, shall
avoid all former fraudulent and convin conveiance, estates, grants, charges,
and limit of uses, of or out of the same. Stat. 27 El. cap. 4. (3. b.) 13 El,
c. 5. l. 3. 80. Twines c. States of inheritances of lands, are either certain
or unmovable, whereof Littl. here speaks; or uncertain and moveable, as if
partition be made between two Copartners of one and the self same land, that
the one shall have it the first year, and the other the second year alternis
vicibus, etc. (4. 2.) l. 1. 87. F. N. B. 62. Between pastura and pascuum the
legal difference is this, that pastura in one signification contains the
ground it self called pasture, and by that name is to be demanded. Pascuum is
wheresoever cattle are fed, of what nature soever the ground is, and cannot be
demanded in a praecipe by that name, (4. b.) many things may pass by a name,
that by the same name cannot be demanded by a praecipe, for that does require a
more perscript form) but whatsoever may be demanded by a praecipe, may pass by
the same name by way of grant, Ibid. (5. b.) If the feoffor be bound to
warranty, and so to render in value, then is the defense of the title at his
peril, and therefore the Feoffee in that case shall have no deeds that
comprehend warranty, whereof the Feoffor may take advantage. Also he shall have
such charters as may serve him to deraign the warranty paramount; but other
evidences which concern the possession, and not the title of the land, the
Feoffee shall have them. (6. a.) l. 1. 1. and 2. There have been eight formal
or orderly parts of a deed of feoffment, viz. 1. The premises. 2. Habendum. 3.
Tenendum. 4. Reddend. 5. The clause of warrant. 6. The in cujus rei testimonium
sigillum, etc. 7. The date. 8. The clause of his testibus.

The office of the premise of the deed is twofold, 1. Rightly to name the
feoffor and the feoffee; and 2. to comprehend the certainty of the lands to be
conveied, etc. Either by express words, or which may by reference be reduced to
a certainty, for certum est quod cert. reddi potest, etc. Vide libr. The Seal
is of the essential part of the deed. The date many times antiquity omitted,
for that the limitation of prescript or time of memory did often in process of
time change, and the law was then holden that a deed bearing date before the
limited time of prescript, was not pleadable; and therefore they made their
deeds without date, to the end they might allege them within the time of
prescription. The date was commonly added in the Reign of Ed. 2. and 3. (6. a.)
quae sunt minoris culpae sunt majoris infamiae. Reg. he that loses liberam
legem, becomes infamous, and can be no witness: As if a Champion in a writ of
right become recreant or coward. But oftentimes a man may be challenged to be
of a Jury, that cannot be challenged to be a witness, and therefore though the
witness be of the nearest alliance or kindred, or of counsel, or tenant, or
servant to either party, (or any other exception that makes him not infamous,
or to want understanding, or discretion, or a party in interest) though it be
proved true, shall not exclude the witness to be sworn. 22 Ass. 12. 41. If a
witness be outlawed in a personal act, he cannot be joined to the Jury; but
yet that is no exception against him to exclude him to be sworn as a witness
to the Jury; for that he with others should join in verdict with the Jury in
affirmance of the deed, the party should be barred of his attaint, because
there is more then twelve, that affirm the verdict. But note, there must be
more then one witness, that shall be joined to the enquest, Inst. 6. b.

Max. Witnesses cannot testify a negative, but an affirmative; when a trial is
by witnesses, the affirmative ought to be proved by two or three witnesses, as
to prove a summons of the Tenant, or the challenge of a Juror, etc. But when
the trial is by verdict of 12 men, there judgment is not given upon witnesses,
etc. but upon the verdict, etc.

Probatio duplex viva, sc. per testes mortua par chartas, etc. presumptio
triplex. 1. Violenta. 2. Probabilis. 3. Levis seu temeraria.
Many time Juries together with other matters, are much induced by
presumptions. In case of a Charter of feoffment if all the witnesses be dead,
etc. Then violent presumption which stands for a proof, is continual and quiet
possession: for, ex diuturnitate temporis omnia praesumuntur solenniter esse
acta. Also the deed may receive credit per collationem sigillorum scripturae,
etc. Glan. l. 10. c. 12.

A wife cannot be produced either against, or for her husband, quia sunt duae
animae in carne una. In some cases women are by law wholly excluded to bear
testimony, as to prove a man to be a Villain. Mulieres ad probationem Status
hominis admitti non debent. Fleta l. 2. c. 44.

In an information upon the statute of usury, the party to the usurious
contract, shall not be admitted to be a witness against the usurper, for in
effect he should be testis in propria causa, and should avoid his own bonds,
etc. Smiths case T. 8. J. in C.B. and Brit. 134. He that challenges a right in
the thing in demand, cannot be a witness; for that he is a party in interest.
Britton fol. 134. (6. b.)

Tenementum, is a large word not only to pass lands and other inheritances
which are holden, but also offices, rents, commons, profits apprehender out of
lands, etc. wherein a man has any franktenement, and whereof he is seized ut
de libero tenemento. But haereditamentum, is the largest word of all in that
kind, for whatsoever may be inherited, is an haereditamentum, be it corporeal
or incorporeal, real, or personal, or mixed.

(6. a.) If a man by deed give lands to another, and to his heirs, without more
saying, this is good, (ut res magis valeat, quam pereat) if he put his seal to
the deed, deliver it, and make livery accordingly. So it is if A give lands, to
have and to hold to B and his heirs, this is good by construction of the Law:
but when form and substance concur, then is the deed fair and absolutely good.
( fol. 7. a.) In ancient charters, etc. there was never mention made of the
delivery of the deed, or any livery of seisin indorsed: for the witnesses named
in the deed, were witnesses of both, ib.

Witnesses are very necessary, for the better strengthening of deeds, fol. 7. b.

Haeres legitimus est quem nuptiae demonstrant, and is he to whom Lands,
Tenemenrs, and Hereditaments, by the act of God, and right of blood, do descend
of some estate of enheritance, for Solus Deus facere potest haeredem non homo;
haeres ab haerendo, nam qui haeres est, haeret, vel dicitur ab haerendo quia
haereditas sibi haeret, etc. Vide libr. Partus cui natura aliquantulum
ampliaverit vel diminuerit, non tamen superabundanter, been debet inter liberos
connumerari. Si inutilia nostra reddidit, ut si membra tortuosa habuerit, non
tamen is partus monstrosus. Bract. l. 5. f. 437.

A denizen by the Kings Letters Patents, cannot be heir, etc. But otherwise is
it, if he be naturalized by Act of Parliament: and if one be made denizen, the
issue that he has afterward shall be heir to him. An alien cannot he heir,
etc. Propter de sectum subjectionis. Fol. 8. a.

Where the Sons by no possibility can be heir to the Father, the one of them
shall not be heir to the other; as if an alien comes into England, and has
issue, etc. l. 7. Calvin's Case.

A man attainted of Treason or Felony can be heir to no man, nor any man heir
to him, propter delictum. A man has issue two sons, and after is attaint, etc.
And one of the sons purchase Lands, and dies without issue, the other brother
shall be his heir, for the attainder, etc. corrupts the lineal blood only,
and not the collateral blood between the brethren, which was vested in them
before the attainder. But if a man after he be attainted have issue, etc.
Autrement est. In case, where filiatio non potest probari, the child may choose
his Father.

A man by the common law, cannot be heir to Goods or Chattels, for haeres
dicitur ab haereditate. Haeres astrarius: so called ab astre, i. e. an harth of
an house; cum Antecessor restituat haeredi in vita sua haereditatem, etc. fol.
8. b.

Si uxor dicit se esse praegnantem de ipso defuncto cum non sit, habeat haeres
brevium de ventre inspic. nemo est haeres viventis; apparens dicitur.

If a man give land unto two, and haeredibus, omitting suis, they have but an
estate for life, for the uncertainty. 10 H. 6. 7. Pl. Com. 28. b.

Ceux parolx (ses heirs) tantsolement font lestate denheritance en touts
Feoffments and grants.

Here Littleton treats of purchases by natural persons, and not of bodies
politic or corporate.

As the heir does inherit to the ancestor, so the successor does succeed to the
predecessor, and the executor to the Testat.

An ancient grant must be expounded as the law was taken at the time of the
grant. 17 E. 3. 25. b.

Sub vocabulis (haeredibus suis) omnes haeredes propinqui comprehenduntur, and
remoti, nati, and nascituri. fo. 9 a. Fleta l. 3 c. 8.

The law is precise in prescribing certain words to create an estate of
inheritance, for avoiding of uncertainty, the mother of contention and
confusion. Pl. Com. 163.

There be many words so appropriated, as that they cannot be legally expressed
by any other words, etc. Some to estates of lands; some to tenures; some to
persons; some to offenses; some to forms of Original Writs; some to warrant.
etc.

Satus dicitur a stando. An estate of inheritance granted by the great Seal,
etc. is descendible according to the course of the common law.

Hereditas est duplex. Corporata, viz. Of Lands and Tenements, which may pass
by Livery, by Deed, or without Deed. Incorporata, as Advowsons, Commons, etc.
which cannot pass by livery, but by Deed.


The Deed of incorporaet inheritances does equal the livery of corporeate.

al I. S. habend. sibi and succes. sive haered. suis e^ fee s. Si. soit per
Letters Patents.

A conveiance by feoffment clears all disseisins, abatements, intrusions, and
other wrongful or defeasible estates, where the entry of the feoffor is lawful,
which neither fine, recovery, nor bargain and sale by deed indented and
enrolled does. Sometime, when an estate of freehold only does pass, improperly
it is called a feoffment.

Done est nosme general plus que nest feoffment, car done est general a touts
chooses moebles and nient moebles, Feoffment est riens forsque del soil.

If a man devise lands to a man in perpepetuum, or to give, and to sell etc. A
fee simple does pass by the intent of the devisor. Fol. 9. b.

A man devises land to one and sanguini suo, that is, a fee simple, but if it
be semini suo, it is an estate tail. Br. tit tail 21.

So that, ceux parolx ses heirs tantsolement, etc. Extend not 1. To last Wills,
and Testaments. 2. Not to a fine, sur conusans de droit come ceo, etc. 3. Nor
to certain releases. 4. Nor to a recovery. 5. Nor to a creation of Nobility by
Writ.

But out of This rule of our Author, the Law does make diverse exceptions; as,
1: If the Son infeoff the Father, as fully as the Father infeoffed him. 2. In
respect of the consideration, as if lands be given in frankmarriage generally.
3. If a feoffment or grant be made to any corporation aggregate of many persons
capable. 4. In case of a sole corporation, as if a feoffment in fee be made to
a Bishop, habendum, etc. In libera elemosina. 5. In grants sometimes, as if one
coparcenor for owelty of partition grant a rent to the other generally, etc.
Ipsae etenim leges cupiunt ut jure regantur. 6. By the Forest Law, if an
Assart be granted by the King to another habendu^ and tenend. sibi in
perpetuu^, he has a fee simple without this word (heirs) fol. 10. a.

And this rule, etc. extends to the passing of estates of inheritances, in
exchanges, releases, or confirmations that enure by way of enlargement of
estates, warranty, bargains and sales by Deed indented and enrolled, etc. In
which, this word (heirs) is also necessary, for they do taptamount, to a
Feoffment or grant, and ubi eadem ratio, ibi idem jus.

A man may purchase lands to him and his heirs, 1. By Feoffment. 2, By Grant.
3. By Fine which is a Feoffment of Record. 4. By common recovery, in nature of
a Feoffment of recovery. 5. By Exchange. 6. By Release to a particular Tenant.
7. By confirmation, etc. which are in nature of Grants, etc. 9. By bargain and
sale by Deed, etc. Ordained by Statute. 10. By devise, by custom of some
particular place, and by Will in Writing, generally by authority of Parliament.
27 H. 8. ca. 16. 32 H. 8. ca. 2. 34 H. 8. cap. 5.

If a disseisin, abatement, or intrusion be made to the use of another; if
cesty que use agrees thereunto in pays, by this bare agreement he gains a
Fee Simple without any livery of seisin, etc.

Sect. 2.
Linea recta semper praefertur transversali. Proximus excludit propinquum, and
propinquus remotu^, and remotus remotiorem, fol. 10. b.

Proximum Sumitur duplici sc. Jure propinquitatis, and he that is, thus next,
etc. is mediately inheritable. Jure representationis, and so one is immediately
inheritable, and accounted in Law next of blood.


A Lease for life is made to A. the remainder to his next of blood, in this
case, he that is next of blood, and capable by purchase, shall have the
remainder, though he be not legally next to take as heir by descent; note the
diversity.

Sect. 3.
Maxim so called, quia maxima est ejus dignitas and certissima autoritas,
atque quod maxim omnibus probetur. Pl. com. 27:

Lineal ascent is prohibited by the law, but not Collateral, etc. fo. 11. a.

Littletons proofs and arguments drawn from the common law, are first, from the
maxims, rules, intendment and reason of the common law. 2. Ab autoritate and
pronu^ciatis. 3. A rescriptis valet argumentum. 4. From the form of good
pleading. 5. From the right entry of judgments. 6. A praecedentibus approbatis
and usu. 7. A non usu. 8. Ab artificialibus argumentis consequentibus and
conclusionibus. 9. A communi opinione jurisprudentium. 10. Ab inconvenienti.
11. A divisione, vel ab enumeratione partium. 12. A Majore ad minus, and a
minore ad majus, a simili, a pari. 13. Ab impossibili. 14. A fine. 15. Ab
utili, vel inutili. 16. Ex absurdo. 17. A natura and ordine naturae. 18. Ab
ordine religionis. 19. A communi praesumptione. 20. A lectionibus
jurisprudentium.

From Statutes his Arguments and proofs are drawn. 1. From the rehearsal or
preamble of the Statute. 2. By the body of the law diversely interpreted,
sometimes by other parts of the same statute, which is benedicta expositio, and
ex visceribus causae; Sometime, by reason of the common Law.

But ever the general words are to be intended of a lawful act, and such
interpretation must ever be made of all statutes, that the innocent may not be
damnified, etc. fol. 11. b.

There be diverse laws in England: As first, lex Coronae. 2. Lex and consuetudo
Parliamenti. 3. Lex naturae. 4. Lex communis Angliae. 5. Statute Law. 6.
Consuetudines. 7. Jus belli, in republica maxim conservanda sunt jura belli.
8. Ecclesiastical, or Canon Law in Courts in certain cases. 9. Civil Law in
certain cases, only in Courts Ecclesiastical, but in the Courts of the
Constable, and Marshal, and of the Admiralty. 10. Lex Forestae. 11. The Law of
Marque or Reprisal. 12. Lex Mercatoria. 13. The Laws and Customs of the Isles
of Jersey, Gernsey, and Man. 14. The Law and privilege of the Stannery. 15.
The Laws of the East, West, and middle Marches, which are now abrogated.

A man that claims as heir in fee simple to any man by descent, must make
himself heir to him that was last seized of the actual freehold, and
inheritance; where the uncle cannot get an actual possession by entry, or
otherwise, there the Father cannot inherit, etc.

Warranties shall descend to him that is heir at the common law. Fol. 12. a.

And a warranty shall not go with Tenements, whereunto it is annexed, to any
special heir, but to the heir at the common law.

Sect. 4.
None shall inherit any lands as heir, but only the blood of the first
purchaser. Plow. 447. refert a quo fiat perquisitum. Fleta l. 6. c. 1. 2.
Bract. l. 2. fo. 65. 67.

Multa transeunt cu^ versitate, quae par se non transeunt (vid. libr. fo. 12.
b. 5 E. 2. Avowry 207. Whenever lands do descend from the part of the Mother,
the heirs of the part of the Father shall never inherit, and e converso, 39 E.
3. 29. fol. 13. a.

Escheat i.e. cadere, excidere, vel accidere, quod accidit duobus modis, aut
perfectu^ sanguinis; aut per delictu^ tenentis, atque illud est.

Per judicium (...) modis. aut quia suspensus per collu^. aut quia abjuravit
regnu^. aut quia utlegatus.


In an appeal of death, etc. hanging the Process, the defendant conveyeth away
the land, and after is outlawed, the conveiance is good, and shall defeat the
Lord of his escheat; but otherwise is it if a man be indicted of felony, etc.
for in the case of Appeal the Writ contains no time when the felony was done,
and therefore an escheat can relate but to the outlawry pronounced; but the
indictment contains the Time when the Felony was committed, and therefore the
escheat upon the outlawry shall relate to that time.

If lands holden of I. S. be given to a Dean and Chapter, Major and Commonalty,
and to Their successors, etc. And after such body politic or incorporat is
dissolved, the donor shall have again the Land; (for that the cause of the gift
or grant fails:) and not the Lord by Escheat. But no such condition is
annexed to the estate in see simple vested in any man in his natural capacity,
but in case where the donor or feoffor reserveth to him a tenure, and then the
law does imply a condition in law by way of escheat, fol. 13. b.

Sect. 5.
Descent is a means whereby one does derive him title to certain lands, as heir
to some of his Ancestors. Quod prius est, dignius est, and qui prior est
tempore, potior est jure.

Sect. 6.
Null au^a tre^. de fee simp. per descent come heir, etc. Si non que il soit
heir dentier sanke.

The half blood, is no blood inheritable by descent, being not complete and
perfect. Fol. 14. a.

Sect. 8.
Lands, etc. shall descend to him that can make himself heir to him that was
last actually seized of the Freehold of the land, etc. Fol. 15. a.

Whether the seisin of a rent reserved upon a seize for life be such an actual
seisin of the land in the eldest son, as the sister in a writ of right may make
her self heir of this land to her brother; admitting there be son and daughter
by one venture, and a son by another venture. Vid. lib. Qu. 7 H. 5. 34. per Hals
and Lodington. * 35 Ass. p. 2.

When an entry shall vest or divest an estate, there must be several entries
into several parcels of land, etc. but where the possession is in no man, but
the freehold in law is in the heir that enters, there the general entry into
one part reduces all into his actual possession. Fol. 15. b.

Possessio fratris de feodo simplici facit sororem esse haeredem. 11 H. 4. 11.
l. 3. Ratcliffs case.

All the lands and possessions whereof the King is seized in Jure Coronae,
shall secundum jus Coronae, attend upon and follow the Crown.

The quality of the person does alter the descent.

Sect. 9.
Inheritance is not only intended, where a man has Lands, etc. By descent of
inheritage, but also by purchase. Fol. 16. a. 7. H. 4. 5. * 6. E. 3. 30.

A man may have inheritance in title of Nobility, by creation, by descent, and
by praescription. By Creation, by Writ and by Letters Patents. If he be called
by Writ to the Parliament, he has a Fee simple in the dignity, etc. Without
any words of inheritance; but if he be created by Letters Patents, the state of
inheritance must be limited by apt words, or else the grant is void. The
creation by Writ is the ancienter, by Letters Pattents the surer; for he may be
sufficiently created by Letters Pattents, and made noble, albeit he never sit
in Parliament.

Simulier nobilis nupserit ignobili de sinit esse nobilis; that is if she gain
her Nobility by marriage. But if a woman be noble by descent, etc. It is
otherwise. Fol. 16. b. l. 4. 118. Actons Case.

Littleton cites no Authority, but when the Case is rare, or may seem
doubtful; Prespecua vera non sunt probanda. Vide Libru^, etc.

Sect. 10.
Placitum, a placendo, quia been placitare super, omnes placet. Fol. 17. a.

Seized, is properly applied to Freehold, possessed, to Goods and Chattells.
Bract. lih. 4. f 263.

Demain, of the hand, i.e. manured by the hand, or received by the hand.

Seisitus, etc. in dominico suo ut de feodo, sc. de tres, etc. D^ qu^x home
poit aver un manuel occupation, etc. Seisitius ut d^ feodo sc. de Advowson,
etc.

Vt de feodo, is to be understood positively; where (ut) denotat ipsam
veritatem, and non similitudinem rei. Idonea persona for the discharge of the
Cure should be presented freely, etc. By the Patron, Guardian in Socage shall
not present to an Advowson because by the Law he can meddle with nothing, that
he cannot account for. Fol. 17. b.

Advocatio, is an advowing or taking into protection; and est jus patronatus. 7
E. 3, 4. 45 E. 3. 5.

Two coparceners, one of them shall have a writ of right of Advowson de
medietate advocationis; for in truth she has but a right to a moity: but where
there be two Patrons, and two Incumbents in one Church, each of them shall have
a Writ of Advowson de advocatione medietatis.

Two fee simples absolute cannot be of one and the self-same land, fo. 18. a.

Sect. 11.
And yet the several persons by Act in law, a reversion may be in fee simple in
one, and a fee simple determinable in another by matter ex post facto; as if a
gift in tail be made to a Villain, and the Lord enter, the Lord has a fee
simple qualified, and the donor a reversion in fee; but if the Lord infeoff the
donor, now both fee simple are united, and he has but one fee simple in him:
but one fee simple cannot depend upon another by the grant of the party: as if
lands be given to A, so long as B has heirs of his body, the remainder over in
fee, the remainder is void.

Sect. 12,
A purchase is always intended by title, and most properly by some kind of
conveiance for money or some other consideration, or freely of gift.

An heir-loom, is called principalium or haereditarium. Si un monument soit
deface in lesglise, le heir del Ancestor poit aver son action, etc. 9 E. 4. 24.

CAP. II. De Fee Tail:
Sect. 13.
TAllium, derived of tailler scindere. Modus and conventio vincont legem. Fol.
19. a.

Before the statute of West. 2. De donis conditionalibus, the heir in Tail had
no Fee simple absolute at the common law, though there were diverse discents.
Annuities and such like inheritances as cannot be intailed within the said
Stature, remain at the common law.

If the King before the statute, etc. had made a gift in tail etc. in this
case, if the Donee had no issue, and before the statute had aliened with
warranty, and died, and the warranty had descended upon the King, this should
no^ have bound the King of his reversion without assets: b^ otherwise it was in
the case of a common person, fol. 19. b. 6 E. 3. 56. 45 Ass. p. 6. The King can
do no wrong, Pl. c. 246.

Sect. 14, 15.
Not only all corporate inheritances which are or may b^ holden, but also all
inheritances issuing out of any of those inheritances, or concerning or annexed
to, or exercisible within the same though they lie not in tenure, may be
intailed. As Rents, Estovers, Commons, etc. Or Uses, Offices Dignities which
concern lands, or certain places, etc. But if the grant be of an inheritance
mere personal, or to be exercised about chattels, and is not issuing out of
land, etc As the grant of an annuity of the office to be faulconer, master of
horse, etc. Such inheritances cannot be intailed, because they savor nothing of
the reality. Fol. 20. a. 7 E. 3. 363.

In these cases the grants, etc. has a fee conditional, and by his grant or
release he may bar his heir, as he might have done at the common law, viz. In
grant de personal inheritances. Pl. C. Manxels c.

Idem semper proximo antecedenti refertur. fol. 20, b.

These words (de son corpse) are not so strictly required but that they may be
expressed by words that amount to as much. 5 H. 5. 6.

Voluntas donatoris in Charta doni sui manifest expressa observetur. Quer.
etc.

If a man make a charter of feoffment of an acre of land to A. and his heirs,
and another Deed of the same acre to A and the heirs of his body, and deliver
seisin according t^ the form and effect of both deeds; it shall enure by
moities, i.e. to have an Estate Tail in the one moity, with the Fee Simple
expectant, and a Fee Simple in the other moity, etc. Fol. 21. a. 2 H. 6. 25. 45
E. 3. 20.

Sect. 17.
Robert gave the reversion of lands, which Agnes his wife did hold for life to
Stephan de la More, Habendum post mortem dictae Agnetis in liberum Maritagium
cum Johanna filia ejusdem Roberti, and it is adjudged that is a good Estate
Tail. 5 E. 3. 17.

Four things be incident to a frank-marriage. 1. That it be given for
consideration of marriage, etc. 2. that the woman or man, that is the cause of
the gift, be of the blood of the donor. 3. If the gift be made of a thing which
lies in tenure (as of Lands, etc. A rent Common, etc.) That the donees hold of
the donor at the time of the Estate in frankmarriage made. 4. That the donees
shall hold freely of the donor till the fourth degree be past, fo. 21 b.*

These words (in liberum maritagium) did create an estate in fee simple at the
common law. And these are such words of art and so necessarily required, as
they cannot be expressed by words aequipollent, etc.

Sect. 18.*
Feodum talliatum, i.e. haereditas in quandam certitudinem limitata, viz. Quel
issue inheritra per force de tiels dones, and come longement lenheritance
endurera.

A gift made to a man and haeredi masculo de corpore suo Reg. Judic. fol. 6.
Haeredi unide corpore, etc. An exception from the rule, that all estates Tail
were fee simple at the common law. 39 Ass. pl. 20.

Sect. 19. *
Whenever the Ancestor takes an estate for life, and after a limitation is
made to his right heirs, the right heirs shall not be purchasors, fol. 22. b.
Vide Libr. Non est haeres viventis. And no diversity when the law creates the
estate for life, and when the party. A man seized of lands in fee by Indenture
makes a Lease for life, the remainder to the heirs male of his own body, this
is a void remainder. So it is of a gift intaile, the remainder to his own right
heirs for the reversion is in the Ancestor, who during his life bears in his
body, all his heirs. And the donor cannot make his own right heir a purchaser
of an estate tail without departing of the whole Fee simple out of him. Vide
Libr. Dier 156.

If a man make a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself in tail, and after to
the use of the Feoffe in Fee, the Feoffee has no reversion, but in nature of a
remainder, albeit the Feoffor have the Estate tail executed in him by the
Statute, and the Feoffee is in by the common law. Dier 362. b.

Whosoever is seized of Land has not only the estate of the land in him, but
the right to take profits, which is in nature of the use, and therefore when he
makes a Feoffment in Fee without valuable consideration to diverse particular
uses, so much of the use as he disposes not is in him as his ancient use in
point of reverter. Fol. 23. a. Vide Libr. Dier. 12. Fealty is incident to every
tenure (exc. frankalm.) and cannot be separated from it.

Sect. 20.
Certain Rules touching degrees, etc: The first is, That a person added to a
person in the line of consanguinity makes a degree. 2. So as how many persons
there be, take away one and you have the number of degrees. 3. It is to be
noted that in every line the person must be reckoned from whom the computation
is made. Vide Libr. gradus dicitur a gradiendo, quia gradiendo ascenditur, and
descenditur. Fol. 24. a. Vide, etc.

Sect. 21.
Exempla illustrant, non restringunt legem. Aequitas est convenientia rerum,
quae cuncta coaequiparat, and quae in paribus rationibus paria jura and judicia
desiderat; and jus respicit aequitatem. Aequitas enim est perfecta quaedam
ratio quae jus scriptum interpretatur and emendat. Bract. lib. 4. Fo. 186.

Sect. 22 and 23.
De dones fait en le tail, la volunt del donor se^r. observe. And these words
(queux doient inheriter) imply a diversity between a descent and a purchase.
Fol. 24. b. Vide libr. Br. t. done 42. t. nosme 1. and 40. A gift is made to a
man, and to the heirs female of his body, the donee is capable by purchase, and
the heir female by descent. Fo. 25. a.

Sect. 24.
Quaecunque que ser. inheriter per force d'un done en le tail fait as heirs
males, covient conveier son title tout per les heir males. Fol. 25. a. Vide 28
H. 6. t. devise c. 18. 1.*

A devise may create an inheritance by other words then a gift can, yet cannot
a devise direct an inheritance to descend against the rule of law. Vide lib.

In an Estate Tail, etc. The male must make his conveiance by males, and the
female by females.

If A has issue a son and a daughter, and dies, and the son has issue a
daughter and dies, and a Lease for life is made, the remainder to the heirs
females of the body of A. In this Case the daughter of A shall not take, because
she is not heir. But albeit the daughter of the son makes her conveiance by a
male male, she shall take an Estate Tail by purchase, for she is heir and a
female. Fol. 25. b. 11 H. 6. 13. 9 H. 6. 25.

Sect. 25.
No cross remainder, or other possibility shall be allowed by Law, where an
Estate is once settled, etc. and takes effect. As if Lands be given to two
husbands and their wives, and to the heirs of their bodies begotten, they have
a joint estate for life, and several inheritances. 24 E. 3. 29. a.

Sect. 29. and 30.
20 H. 6. 36. Vide lib. * 5 H. 4. 3. a. Fol. 26. b. A man by Deed gave lands to
Em. late wife of I.M. habend. etc. praedict. E. and haered. I.M: de corpore
ejusdem E. procreat. In this case the son and heir of I.M. begotten on the body
of Em, took no Estate with Em. in the lands, because he was named after the
habendum.

A man seized of two acres of land in fee simple has issue two daughters and
dies, and the one coparcenor gives her part to her sister, and to the heirs
of the body of her father.

In this case the donee has an estate tail in the moity of the donors part;
for the don^^ is not entire heir, but the donor is heir with the donee, and she
cannot give to the heirs of her own body, and the don^^ has the other moity of
her sisters part for life. Les heirs, and ses heirs differ.

For if lands be given to the son, and to his heirs of the body of his father,
the son has a fee simple. But if the land be given to the son, and to the
heirs of the body of, etc. e^. est. ta. f. 27. a.

Sect. 31.
Every estate tail within the statute of Westminster. 2. must be limited either by
express words, or words aequipollent of what body the heir inheritable shall
issue. The grant of a subject shall be taken most strongly against himself.*
Fo. 27. b. Vide libr. 18 Ass. p. 5. Armories are descendible to the heirs males
lineal or collateral.

CAP. III.
Sect. 32.
TEnant in Tail after possibility of issue extinct, has certain privileges in
respect of the privity of his estate, and of the inheritance that was once in
him, which Tenant in Tail himself has, and which Lessee for life has not. As
1. He is dispunishable for wast. 2. He shall not be compelled to atturn. 3. He
shall not have aid of him in the reversion. 4. Upon his alienatio^ no writ of
entry in consimili casu, lies. 5. After his death no writ of intrusion does
lie. 6. He may join the mise in a writ of Right in a special manner. 7. In a
praecipe brought by him he shall not name himself Tenant for life. 8. In a
Praecipe brought against him, he shall not be named barely Tenant for life, fo.
27. b.

And yet he has four other qualities agreeable to a bare Lessee for life, and
not to an Estate in Tail. 1. If he make a Feoffment in fee, this is a
forfeiture of his estate. 2. If an estate in fee, or in fee tail, in reversion
or remainder, descend or come to this Tenant, his estate is drowned, and the
fee or fee tail executed. 3. He in the reversion or remainder shall be received
upon his default. 4. An exchange between a bare Tenant for life and him is
good; for their estates in respect of their quantity are equal, so as the
difference stands only in the quality.

The state of this Tenant must be created, altered, etc. by the act of God, and
not by the limitation of the party, ex dispositione legis, and non ex
provisione hominis. Vide Sect. 33. fol. 28. a. l. 11. Jews Bowls.

CAP. IV. Courtesy D'engleterre.
Sect. 35.
A Man seized of an advowson or rent in fee, has issue a daughter, who is
married and has issue, and dies seized, the wife before the rent became due,
or the Church void, dies, she had but a seisin in law, and yet he shall be
Tenant by the courtesy, because he could by no industry attain to any other
seisin. Et impotentia excusat legem.

But if the wife in this case dye before her entry into lands, etc. it is
otherwise. Vide lib. fo. 29. a. Dier 55. 3 H. 7. 5.

A man shall not be tenant by the courtesy of a bare right, title, use, or of a
reversion, or remainder ex^ectant upon any Estate of Freehold, unless the
particular Estate be determined during the coverture. * If an estate of
freehold in Seigniories, Rents, Commons, etc. be suspended, a man shall not be
Tenant by the courtesy. As if a Tenant make a Lease for life of the Tenancy to
the Seignioress, who takes a husband and has issue, the wife dies, he shall
not be tenant etc. But if the suspension be for years, he shall be Tenant by
the courtesy, fo. 29. b. Vide li. 1 E. 3. 6. If a woman makes a gift in Tail,
and reserve a rent to her and her heirs, and the donor takes husband and has
issue, and the donee dies without issue, and the wife dies, the husband shall
not be tenant by the courtesy of the rent; for that the rent newly reserved, is
by the act of God determined, and no Estate thereof remains. But if a man be
seized in fee of a rent, and makes a gift in Tail general to a woman, she
takes husband and has issue, the issue dies, the wife dies without issue,
he shall be Tenant by the Courtesy of the rent, because the rent remains,
fol. 30. a.

Four things do belong to an Estate of Tenancy by the Courtesy, viz. Marriage,
seisin of the wife, issue and death of the wife. But it is not requisite that
these should concur, etc. at one time, and therefore if a man takes a woman
seized of lands in fee, and is disseised, and then has issue, and the wife
die; he shall enter, and hold by the courtesy. So if he has issue which dies
before the descent, etc. Vide lib. By the custom of Gavelkind, a man may be
Tenant by the courtesy without having any issue. 9 E. 3. 38.

If after issue, etc. in this case the husband makes a feoffment in fee, and
the wife dies, the feoffee shall hold it during the life of the husband, and
the heir of the wife shall not during his life in sur cui in vita; for it could
not be a forfeiture, for that the estate at the time of the feoffment was an
Estate of Tenancy by the Courtesy initiate and not consummate. Vod. l. Dier
363. 34 E. 3. Cui in vita 13.

In diverse Cases a man shall by having of issue, be Tenant by the Courtesy,
where a woman shall not be endowed, etc. 7 E. 3. 6. 17 Ed. 3. 51.

A man shall be Tenant by the Courtesy of a Common Sans number, but a woman
shall not be endowed thereof. A man entitled to be Tenant by the Courtesy,
makes a feofment in Fee upon condition, and enters for the condition broken,
and then his wife dies, he shall not be Tenant, etc. for his title, etc. was
inclusively absolutely extinct by the Feoffment. * Vide librum. fo. 30. b.

Trs sona done al Beron and feme, and a les heireo que le baron ingenera de
corpse sa feme, en ceo case ambideux ont estate en la T, i will, pur ceo que ce^
parol (heirs) nest limit a lun plius que a lautre.

Lect. 28.
Null poit e^re Tenant in tail appears possibility d'issue extinct, forsque un
des donees ou le donee en special tail: ne un ques serra punie de wast, pur
lenheritance que fuit lun foits en luy. Mes cesty en le reversion poit enter,
sil alien en fee.

Sect. 36
Baron prist feme enheritrix, Sil ad issue per luy ne vife, il scera Tenant per
le Courtesy.

I (trust me) was even now so full of my Courtesy, that I had almost forgotten
my craft in the tail, wot you what I mean? why, the two last precedent
Sections. * If any before stay behind, I Will bring them after with a witness,
Thomas More, Thomas de la More Antecessor meus, miles, creatus fuit, in
Parliamento, cum Edwardus Princeps ille niger, dux cornubiae creatus fuerit.
Anno Regni Reg. Edwardi tertii vndecimo. Anno Dom. 1337.

CAP. IV. Dower:
Sect. 36.
LA feme serra endowe de la 3. part des tre^s, etc. que sueront a sa baron
durant le coverture; issint que el pass l' ago de 9. ans al temps del mort sa
baron. lib. 2. fol. 93. Binghams Case.

Dower in the common Law, is taken for that portion, etc. which the wife has
for term of her life of the lands or tenements of her husbands, etc. Propter
onus matrimonii, and ad sustentationem suiipsius and educationem liberorum, cum
fuerint procreati, si vir praemoriatur. Dos, ex donatione, and est quasi
donarium, because the law it self does (without any gift) of the husband
himself give it to her; it is commonly taken for the third part which she has
of her husbands lands, etc. After his decease. lib. rub. c. 70. Bract. l. 2. s.
92.

To the consummation of this dower, three things are necessary, viz. Marriage,
seisin, and the death of her husband. s. 31. a.

Secundum consuetudinem regni mulieres viduae, etc. Debent esse quietae de
tallagiis, etc. doti ejus parcatur, quia praemium pudoris est. Ockam f. 40.

Where lands or tenements descend to the husband, before entry he has but a
seison in law, and yet the wife shall be endowed; for it lies not in the power
of the wife to bring to be an actual seison as the husband may do of his
wifes land, when he is Tenant by the Courtesy F. N. B. 149.

Grandfather, Father and Son, the Grandfather, and father die, etc. In this
Case: dos de dote peti non debit; if lands descend to the Father; otherwise is
it in a purchase, if the Grandfather infeoffe the Father, etc. Vide lib. 5. E
3. t. Douch. 249. Paris c. Non debent mulieribus assignari in dotem castra quae
fuerunt virorum suorum and quae de guerra existunt, vel etiam homagia and
servitia aliquorum de guerra existentia. Fo. 31. b. Pat. 1. E. 1. Part. 1. m.
17.

Tenant in Fee Tail general makes a feoffment in Fee, and takes back an
estate to him and to his wife, and to the heirs of their two bodies, and they
have issue, and the wife dies, the husband takes another wife, and dies, the
wife shall not be endowed, for during the Coverture, he was seized of an estate
Tail special, and yet the issue which the second wife may have, by possibility
may inherit. Vide lib. 41. E. 3, 30. Dier. 41.

Albeit of many inheritances that be entire, whereof no division can be made by
metes and bounds, a woman cannot be endowed of the thing it self, yet she
shall be endowed thereof in a special and certain manner. As of the third part
of a piscary, tertium piscem, vel jactum retis tertium, etc. Fo. 32. a. 17. E.
Dow. 104.

A woman shall not be endowed of a common sans number en gross, nor of an
annuity, etc. Nor of Rents, etc. If the freeholds of the Rents were suspended
before the coverture. But a woman shall be endowed of Tithes of the third part
of profits of Courts, Fines, Heriots, etc. De nullo quod est sua natura
indivisibile, and secationem sive divisionem non patitur nullam partem habebit,
sed satisfaciat ei ad vi^lentiam, Brac. 97. Brit. 146.

If the heir improve the value of the Land by building, etc. And on the other
side, if the value be impaired in the time of the heir, she shall be endowed
according to the value at the time of the assignment, and not according to the
value, as it was in the time of her Husband. 30. E. 1. Vouch. 298.

It is not necessary that seisin should continue during the coverture; for
albeit the husband alieneth the Lands, etc. or extinguisheth the Rents, etc.
Yet the woman shall be endowed. But it is necessary that the marriage continue,
for if that be dissolved the Dower cease. Vbi nullum matrimonium, ibi nulla
dos; but this is to be understood when the husband and wife are divorced a
vinculo matrimonii, as in case of precontract, consanguinity, affinity, etc.
And not a mensa and thoro only, as for Adultery. In case of elopement, she
shall lose her Dower, but she is not barred of her appeal. Sponte virum mulier
fugiens and adultera facta dote sua careat, nisi sponso sponte retracta. Fol
32. b. Mirr. ca. 5. Sec. 5. li. Intract 224. If a man seized of Lands in Fee
took a wife, and infeoffed eight persons, Writ of Dower was brought against
these eight persons, and two confess the action, and the other six plead in
Bar, and descend to issue, the demandant shall have judgment to receive the
third part of two parts of the land in eight parts to be divided, and after the
issue being found for the demandant against the six, the demandant shall have
judgment to recover against them the third part of six parts of the same land
in eight parts to be divided, and so in some cases, where the husband was sole
seized, the wife shall not be endowed in severalty by metes and bounds. M. 2.
and 3. Eliz. Dier 187. b.

Nota. The endowment by metes and bounds, according to the common right, is
more beneficial to the wife then to be endowed against common right; for there
she shall hold the land charged, in respect of a charge made after her title
of Dower. It is necessary for the wife after the decease of her husband, as
soon as she can to demand Dower before good testimony; for otherwise she may by
her own default lose the value after the decease of her husband, and her
damages for detaining of her dower. Vide lib. Et Dotes suas habere non possunt
sine placito. The mean values and damages are to be recovered against the
Tenant in a Writ of Dower. M. 8. and 9. Eliz. Rot. 904. conj. Banco. Vid. etc.

If the wise be past the age of 9 years at time of the the death of her
husband, (albeit he were but 4 years old) she shall be endowed, quia minor non
potest dotem promereri, neque virum sustinere; nec obstabit mulieri petenti
minor aetas viri. So that albeit concensus non concubitus facit matrimonium,
and that a woman cannot consent before twelve, nor a man before fourteen. Yet
this inchoate or imperfect marriage (from the which either of the parties, at
the age of consent, may disagree) after the death of the husband shall give
Dower to the wife, Fo. 33. a.

Est, uxor de facto, and de jure. Fol. 33. b. Vid. etc. Only she that is a
wise, and de jure in favorem vitae, shall have an Appeal, etc. But a wife de
facto, shall have Dower, if divorce be not had, etc. 50. E. 3. 15 10. E. 3. 35.

Sect. 37.
Rationabilis dos est cujuslibet mulieris de quocunque tenemento tertia pars
omnium tium, etc. quae vir suus tenuit in dominico suo ut de feodo, etc..

By the custom of Gavelkind the wife shall be endowed of the moity, so long as
she keep her self sole and without child, which she cannot wave, and take her
thirds for her life: for consuetudo tollit communem. legem. Stat. de consuet.
Canciae, etc. And as customs may enlarge, so it may abridge and restrain it to
a fourth part, etc. Senentia signifies widowhood, fo. ^3. b. in fine marg.

Sect. 39.
Affidare est fidem dare, and sponsalia dicuntur futurarum nuptiarum
repromissio and conventio.

But (this) Dower ad ostium ecclesiae is ever after marriage solemnized; for
that before marriage the woman is not entitled to have dower; certainty is the
mother of quiet and repose, Fol. 34. b.

The Law has provided, quod vidua post mortem mariti sui non det aliquid pro
dote sua, and maneat in Capitali messuagio mariti sui per 40. dies post obitum
mariti sui, infra quos dies assignetur ei dos sua nisi prius ei assignata
fuerit, etc. and habeat rationabile estoverium suum interim in Communi, yet
because there was no penalty, etc. inflicted, the Tenant of the land may drive
her to sue for her Dower. Mag. Chart. ca. 7.

If the heir, etc. put her out within the 40 days, etc. She may have her Writ
de quarentina habenda. A jointure made in satisfaction of Dower, is now the
furest way, etc. fol. 34. b.

Wheresoever the Writ demands Land, Rent, etc. In certain, the demandant after
judgment may enter or distrein before any seisin delivered to him by the
Sheriff upon a Writ of habere facias seisinam. But in Dower, etc. the demandant
cannot enter, etc. until execution sued, for the Writ demands nothing in
certain. Assignment of Dower must either must be by the Sheriff, by the Kings
writ, or else by the heir or other Tenant of Land by consent and agreement
between them.

If the husband make several feoffments of several parcels, and dies, and one
Feoffee assign Dower to the wife of parcel of Land in satisfaction, etc. The
other Feoffees shall take no benefit of this assignment, because they are
strangers thereunto and cannot plead the same. But in that case, if the husband
dies seized of other lands in see simple, etc. And his heir endoweth the wife
of certain of those lands in full satisfaction, etc. This assignment is good,
and the several Feoffees shall take advantage of it. And therefore if the wife
bring a writ of dower against any of them, they may vouch the heir, etc. So as
there is a privity in this respect between the heir and the feoffees, and by
this means, the same assignment may be pleaded by the heir that made it. 33 Ed.
3. tit. Judgm. 254, etc.

The assignment must be certain, and absolute, and by such as have a freehold,
or against whom a writ of dower does lie, etc. fol. 35. a. Vide lib.

There needs neither livery of seisin, nor writing to any assignment of
dower, because it is due of common right. Assignment must be of some part of the
land, or of a rent, etc. issuing out of the same, Dier 91.

Sect. 40.
Tenant for life of a carue of land, the reversion to the father in fee, the
son and heir apparent endoweth his wife, etc. Ex assensu patris. Tenant for
life dies, the husband dies, this is no good endowment, etc. because the
father at the time of the assent, had but a reversion expectant upon a
freehold, whereof he could not have endowed his own wife; and albeit the Tenant
for life died, living the husband yet, quod initio non valet, tractu temporis
non convalescet. Fo. 35. a.

If the heir apparent be within age, yet the endowment ex assensu patris is
good; but otherwise it is of dower ad ostiu^ ecclesiae. 2 H. 3. Dower 199. Fo.
35. b.

Ten things are necessarily incident to a deed, viz. First, Writing. 2. In
Parchment or Paper. 3. A person able to contract. 4. By a sufficient name. 5. A
person able to be contracted with. 6. By a sufficient name. 7. A thing to be
contracted for. 8. Apt words required by Law. 9. Sealing. 10. Delivery.

Tradition of a deed (only) to the party to whom it is made, is sufficient; and
then when words are contrary to the Act which is the delivery, the words are of
none effect, non quod dictum est sed quod factum est inspicitur. But it may be
delivered to a stranger as an escrow, etc. Because the bare Act of delivery to
him without words works nothing, fol. 36. a. H. 12. R. in C.B. Dier 95.

Cartarum alia regia, alia privatorum, and regiarum alia privata, alia
communis, and alia universitatis. Privatorum, alia de puro Feoffamento and
simplici, alia de Feoff. conditionali, sive conventionali, alia de recognitione
pura, vel conditionali, alia de quiet clamantia alia, de confirmatione, etc.
Verba intentioni, non e contra debent inservire.

Carta non est nisi vestimentum donationis, sive orationis. Fleta l. 6. ca. 28.
Nemo tenetur armare ad versarium suum contra se. Scriptum est instrumentum ad
instruendum quod men's vult. Carta est legatus mentis. Benignae sunt faciendae
interpretationes cartarum, propter simplicitatem laicorum, ut res magis valeat
quam pereat. Bract. l. 2. fo. 94, etc.

Nihil tam convenias est naturali aequitati quam voluntatem domini volentis rem
suam in alium transfer ratam habere. Plow. Com. fo. 161. b.

Re, verbis, scripto, consensu, traditione Junctura vestes sumere pacta solent.
Pl. Co. 161. Verba cartarum fortius accipiuntur contra proferentem. Generale
dictum generaliter est intelligendum. Verba debent intelligi secundum subictam
materiam. Carta de non ente, non valet.

Sect. 41.
A jointure was no bar of Dower at the Common Law. For a right or title that
one has to a Freehold cannot be barred by acceptance of collateral
satisfaction. But now by the statute of 27 H. 8.

If a jointure be made to the wife according to the purvieu of that statute, it
is a bar of her Dower.

Six things are required to a perfect Jointure. 1. It is to take effect for her
life in possession or profit presently after the decease of her husband. 2.
That it be for term of her own life, or greater estate. 3. It must be made to
her self, and to no other for her. 4. It must be made in satisfaction of her
whole dower, and not of part. etc. 5. It must be either expressed, or averred
to be in satisfaction, etc. 6. It may be made either before or after marriage.
If the jointure be made before marriage, the wife cannot wave it, and claim her
dower at the Common Law; but if it be made after marriage, she may wave the
same, etc. Fo. 36. b. Vide, etc. Dier 358.

The wife shall not be barred of her jointure, albeit her husband commit
Treason or Felony, as she shall be of her Dower ad ostium Eccle. etc. By the
Common Law. But now at this day by the statute of the 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. and 5 Ed.
6. c. 11. The wife of a man attainted of Felony shall not lose her dower.

A jointure made to the wife, under or above the age of nine years is good; and
so if Dower ad ostium ecclesiae, etc. being made by assent, etc. Consensus
tollit errorem, fol. 37. a.

Sect. 43.
Lou le certainty appiert queux terres, etc. Feme avera per la Dower, la le
feme entra apres la mort sa baron, sans assignment de nulluy.

Sect. 45.
The wife shall not be endowed of lands, etc. which her husband holds jointly
with another at the time of, etc. Of his death: for the jointenant which
surviveth claims the land by the feoffment, and by the survivorship, which is
above the Title of Dower, etc. But Tenants in common have several freeholds and
inheritances, and their moities shall descend to their several heirs, and
therefore their wives shall be endowed, fol. 37. b.

Sect. 46.
Lissue en le Tail, poit enter sur la possession la feme endowe ad ost. eccles.
apres la mort sa baron.

The husband is seized, etc. being within age he cannot by a voluntary Act bind
himself: but otherwise is it where he does an act, whereunto he is compelled
by Law. Fo. 38. a. And so an Infant cannot endow his wife aed osti. eccl. but
he may endow her ex Ass. patris; because the Father is sole seized, etc. And
the Son has nothing, etc.

Sect. 48.
Guardian in chivalry, etc. Is not possessed of the Land until he does enter,
because it is permanent; of the wardship of the body he is possessed before
seizure, because it is transitory.

After the guardian has entered, etc. A Writ of Dower lies against him, and
not against the heir who is Tenant of the Freehold; because the Law has
trusted him to plead for the heir within age, that is in his custody, and also
for his own particular interest, etc. Fo. 38. b. Vide and quaere. 44. E. 3. 13.
4. H. 6. 11.

If the heir (before the gardein enter) endow the wife of more than she ought,
and the gardein assign over his Estate, his Assignee shall have no Writ of
Admesurement, because it was a thing in action: But the gardein himself shall
have a Writ, etc. Stat. West. 2. ca. 7.

And so shall the heir have a Writ etc. At full age: and some have said, that
in that case he may have it within age. Fo. 39. a Vide, etc. F.N.B. 149.

Judicium quasi juris dictum, the very voice of Law and right, and therefore
judicium semper pro veritate accipitur. In every judgment there ought to be
three persons, actor, reus, and judex. Fo. 39. a.

The common Law gives this privilege to the Land holden by Knights service,
viz. That it shall not be dismembered; but the whole Dower taken of the Lands
holden in Socage, for that the Knights service is for the defense of the Realm,
which is pro bono publico, and therefore to be favored.

Sect. 49. Sect. 50.
Lou le judgment est fait en Court le roy, ou en aut. Court, etc. le feme poit
perender ses vicines and en lour presence endow luy inper metes and bounds de
la pluis beale, etc. que el ad come gardein en socage, and cei e^ solva^on del
Gardein en Chivelry durant le nonage lenfant.

Lect. 52.
If a man takes a wife seized of Lands, etc. In Fee has issue, and after the
wife is attainted of Felony, so as the iss^^ cannot inherit to her, yet he
shall be Tenant by the Courtesy, in respect of the issue which he had before
the Felony, and which by possibility might then have inherited. But if the wife
had been attainted of Felony before the issue, albeit he has issue afterward,
he shall not be Tenant, etc. Fo. 40. a. Except the wife be actually seized, the
heir shall not make himself heir to the wife, and this is the reason that a
man shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy of a seisin in Law. Lib. 8 fo. 34. in
Pains Case.

Sect. 53.
Si Teniments sont dones a un home, and a les heirs quae il engendera de corpse
sa feme, en tiel case la feme and riens, etc. Vnc'si le baron devie sans issue,
me la feme ser. endowe, per ceo que lissue que el per possibility puissoit au^.
per. me le baron puit enheriter.

A man seized of land in general Tail, takes wife, and after is attainted of
Felony, before the Statute of 1. E. 6. The issue should have inherited, and yet
the wife should not have bin endowed: For the Statute of West. 2. ca. 1.
relieveth the issue in tail, but not the wife in that case. But at this day if
the husband be attaint of Felony the wife shall be endowed, and yet the issue
shall not inherit the lands which the Father had in Fee simple. If the wife
elope from her husband, etc. she shall be barred of her dower, and yet the
issue shall inherit.

Sect. 55.
The Law has inflicted five punishments upon him that is attainted of Treason
or Felony. 1. He shall lose his life by an infamous death of hanging, etc. 2.
His wife shall lose her Dower. 3. His blood is corrupted, his children made
ignoble if, etc. And cannot be heirs to him. 4. He shall forfeit all his Lands,
and Tenements. 5. All his goods and Chattels. But the wife of a man attaint of
Felony shall be endowed by force of the statute in that case provided.

If the heir be vouched by the Tenant in the Writ of Dower in the guard of the
gardein, The gardein shall plead it as well when he comes in as vouchee, as
when he is Tenant. Also if the Lands holden in socage be not equal to the
lands holden in chivalry, some say that the defendant in the Writ of dower,
must have assets in her hands to the value of her Dower, so as he shall not be
partly indower against the gardein, and partly retain in her own hands. 18. E.
3. 4. But by 25. E. 3. 52. b. auterment est que est melior opinion, etc.

CHAP. VI. Tenant a Term de vie.
Sect. 56.
IF Tenant per term dauter vie dies, living cesty que vie, he that first
enters shall hold the land during that other man's life; and he is in Law
called an Occupant, because his title is by his first occupation. And so if
Tenant for his own life grant over his Estate to another, if the grantee dies,
there shall be an Occupant; so it is if Tenant by the Courtesy or Tenant in
Dower grant over his Estate, or hers, etc. Fo. 41. a. l. 6. 37. nullum tempus
occurrit regi in this case.

There can be no occupant of any thing that lies in grant, and that cannot
pass without deed, because every Occupant must claim by a que estate, and
averr. the life of Ce' que vie. It were good to prevent the incertainty of the
estate of the Occup. to add these words (to have and to hold to him and to his
heirs during the life of Ce' que vie) and yet the Lessee may assign it to whom
he will, or if he has already an Estate for another man's life without these
words, then it were good for him to assign his Estate to diverse men and their
heirs, during the life of Ce' que vie. Lit. 167. Dier 253.

If a Lease be made to A, etc. For term of his own life, and the lives of B.
and C; the lessee has but one freehold, which has this limitation, during his
own life, and the lives of two others; and here note a diversity between
several estates in several degrees, and one Estate with several limitations;
for in the first, an Estate for a man's own life is higher then for another
man's life; but in the second it is not. l. 5. Rosses case.

If Tenant for life infeoffe him in the remainder for life, this is a
surrender, and no forfeiture; and albeit an Estate for term of a man's own life
be but one Freehold, yet may several Freeholds in certain Cases be derived out
of the same, Vide libr.

A. and B. joyntenants, A. for life and B. in Fee, join in a Lease for life,
A. has a reversion, and shall join in an action of Waste. Tenant for life and
he in the reversion join in a Lease for life, it is said that they shall join
in an action of wast, and that the lessee for life shall recover the place
wasted, and he in reversion, damages. Fo. 42. a F.N.B. 59. F. 13. H. 7. 15.

If a man make a Lease of a Manor worth 20. l. per annum to another until 100
l. be paid, in this case, because the annual profits of the Manor are
uncertain, he has an estate for life, if livery be made determinable upon the
levying of a 100 l. Fol. 42. a.

And yet in some Cases a man shall have an incertaine interest in Lands, etc.
and yet neither an Estate for life, for years, or at will. As if a man by his
will in writing devise his lands to his executors for payment of debts, and
until his debts be paid; in this Case the executors have but a chattell, and
an uncertain interest in the land until his debts be paid; for if they should
have it for their lives, then by their death their estate should cease, and the
debts unpaid; but being a Chattell, it shall go to the executors of executors,
etc. And so note a diversity between a devise and a conveiance at the common
Law in his life time. l. 8. Mannings. The Law which abhors injury and wrong,
will never so construe any Act, etc. as it shall work a wrong; whenever the
words of a Deed, or of the parties without Deed may have a double intendment,
and the one stands with Law and Right, and the other is wrongful and against
Law, the intendment that stands with Law shall be taken, Fo. 42. b.

The Law more respects a lesser estate by right, than a larger estate by
wrong.

Tenant in tail made a Lease to another for term of life generally, and after
released to the Less^e and his heirs; albeit between the Tenant in Tail and
him a Fee simple passed, yet after the death of the Lessor, the entry of the
issue in Tail was lawful; which could not be, if it had been a Lease for the
life of the Lessee, for then by the release it had been a discontinuance
executed.

Sect. 57.
Tenant per vie ad franktenement, and null auter de meind. Estate. Many that
have capacity to take, have no ability to infeoffe, etc. As Aliens borne,
Tratiors, Felons, etc. Idiots, madmen, a feme covert, an infant, a man by
dures, etc. For the feoffement, etc. of these may be avoided. Brit. fo. 88.

In judgment of Law, the King as King cannot be said to be a minor, for when
the Royal body politic of the King does meet with the natural capacity in
one person, the whole body shall have the quality of the Royal politic, etc.
omne majus trabit ad se quod est minus.

A License for alienation grew by the Statute of the 20. H. 3. 20. Ass. pl. 17.
by Skipwith. vide lib.

By the Statute 1 E. 3. ca. 12. and 34. Ed. 3. cap. 15. Although the Kings
Tenant in chief, etc. do alien all or any part without License, yet is there
not any forfeiture of the same, but a reasonable fine therefore to be paid.

The Statute of 18. E. 1. De quia Emptor, etc. has in effect as to the common
persons, taken away the Statute of Mag. Charta cap. 32. for thereby it is
provided, Quod liceat unicuique libero homini trans suas, etc. Seu partem inde
ad voluntatem suam vendere, ita quod Feoffatus teneat, etc. de capitali domino.
Note first, that this word liceat, proves that the Tenant could not, or at
least was in danger to alien parcel of his Tenancy, etc. upon the said Act of
Mag. Charta. 2. That upon the Feoffment of the whole, the Tenant shall hold of
the chief Lord. 3. That the Tenant might enfeoffe one part to hold pro
particula of the chief Lord. But this Act (the King being not named) does not
take away the Kings Fine due to him by the Statute of Mag. Charta. Tenant by
Statute Merch. Statute Staple, or Elegit, are said to hold land, ut liberum
Tenementum, until their debt be paid; and yet they have no Freehold, but a
Chattel, etc. But (ut) is similitudinary, because they shall by the Statutes
have an Ass. as the Tenant, of the Freehold shall have: and yet nullum simile
est idem. 28. Ass. p. 7. w. 2. c. 18. St. Merc. 13. E. 1. 27. E. 3. c. 9. 23.
H. 8. c. 6. F.N.B. 178.

CHAP. VII. Tenant for Term of years.
Sect. 58.
THere be three kinds of persons who at this day may make leases for three
lives, or XXI years, etc. which could not so do when Littleton wrote: viz. 1.
Any person seized of an estate tail in his own right. 2. Any person seized of
an estate in Fee simple in the right of his Church. 3. Any husband and wife
seized of any estate of inheritance in Fee simple, or Fee tail in the right of
his wife, or jointly with his wife, before the coverture, or after: And these
are made good by the Statute of 32. H. 8. But the Statute of 1. Eliz. 13. El.
18. El. and 1. Reg. Jac. are disabling. Vide libr. etc. l. 5. fo. 6.

If two several Tenants of several Lands, join in a lease, for years by Deed
indenture, these be several leases, and several confirmations of each of
them, from whom no interest passes, and work not by way of conclusion in any
sort, because several interests pass from them. Fol. 45. a. Vide and quaere.

Whenever any interest passes from the party, there can be no estoppell
against him. H. 44. El. R. 1459. ca. 8.

Leases for lives or years are of three natures, some be voidable by entry, and
some void without entry. Vide, etc. 32. H. 8. c. 28. l. 3. 59. 60. 33. H. 8. Die.

Entry Terminus (in Law) does not only signify the limits and limitation of
time, but also the estate, and interest that passes for that time. As if a man
make a Lease for 21. years, and after make a Lease to begin a Fine and
expiratione praedicti termini, etc. and after the Lease first made is
surrendered, the second Lease shall begin presently: but if it had been to begin
post finem and expirationem praedict. 21 ann. etc. the second Lease should not
begin, till after the first Term etc. be ended by effluxion of time. ( Fol.
45.) l. 1. 154. l. 8. 145. Pl. c. 198.

Terminus annorum certus esse debet and determinatus. Id certum est quod certum
reddi potest. 14. H 8. 14.

The years must be certain when the Lease is to take effect in interest or
possession. l. 1. 155. 156. l. 6. 34. 35.

If the Parson of D. make a Lease of his glebe for three years, and so from
three years to three years, so long as he shall be Parson, this is a good Lease
for six years, if he continue Parson so long, first for three years, and after
that for three years; and for the rest uncertain. Terminus vitae est incertus,
etc. And therefore if a man makes a Lease for 21 years if I.S. live so long,
this is a good Lease, and yet certain in incertainty. 1. Pl. c. 273.

Any estate for life, being an estate of Freehold, against whom a Praec. quod
redd. does lie, is an higher and greater estate then a Lease for years. Fo.
45. b.

Albeit a Lease for years must have a certain beginning and a certain end, yet
the continuance thereof may be uncertain, for the same may cease and revive
again in many Cases. Vide etc. (Fo. 46. a.) 6. E. 6. Die. 72. accord.

If a feme covert leavie a fine alone, If the husband enter and avoid the fine,
and die, the whole estate is so avoided, as it shall not bind the wife after
his death. If a woman be endowed of an Advowson which is appropriated, and she
present, and her Incumbent is admitted, instituted, and inducted, albeit the
Incumbent die, yet is the appropriation wholly dissolved; because the Incumbent
which came in by presentation, had the whole state in him. 2. E. 3. 8. per
Scroop.

A release made to Tenant for years, is not good to him to increase his estate
before entry; but he may release the rent reserved before entry, in respect of
the privity.

Neither can the Lessor grant away the reversion by the name of the reversion
before entry. But the Lessee before entry has an interest, interesse termini
grantable to another. ( Fo. 46. b.) Vide etc. D. 454. 567. If a lease be made
to a baron and feme for term of their lives, the remainder to the executors of
the survivor of them, the husband grant away this term and dies, this shall
not bar the wife, for that the wife had but a possibility, and no interest. H.
17. El. B. R.

If a lease be made by Indenture, bearing date 26. Maii, etc. To have and to
hold from the making hereof, or from henceforth, it shall begin on the day in
which it is delivered, etc. But if it be a die confectionis, then it shall
begin the next day after the delivery. l. 2. 5. Pl. Com. 148. l. 5. Fo. 1. Die.
286. and 307. l. 5. f. 1.

A rent must be reserved out of lands or tenements, whereunto the Lessor may
have recourse to distreine, and therefore a rent cannot be reserved by any
common person out of any incorporeall Inheritance, as Advowson, Common Offices,
Corrodie, Malcture of a Mill, Tithes, Fairs, Markets, Liberties, Privileges,
Franchises, etc. But if the Lease be made of them by Deed for years, it may be
good by way of contract, to have an Action of Debt; but distraine the Lessor
cannot. Neither shall it pass with the grant of the reversion, for that it is
no rent incident to the reversion. But if any rent be reserved in such case
upon a Lease for life, it is void; for that no action of debt does lie. ( Fo.
47. a.) l. 7. 23. l. 10. 59. 30. Ass. p. 5.

Note a diversity between an exception, which is ever part of the thing
granted, and of a thing in esse, and a reservation which is always of a thing
not in esse, but newly created or reserved out of the Land or Tenement demised.
Ex verbo generali aliquid accipitur. Vide etc.

Valuable things shall not be distrained for rent, for benefit and maintenance
of Trades, which by consequent are for the Commonwealth; as cloth in a Tailors
shop, etc. 7. H. 7. 1. b.

Nothing shall be distress for rent, that cannot be rendered again in as good
plight, etc. but for damage feasant it is otherwise, Vide, etc. 11. H. 7. 14.
a. 21. H. 7. 39. b. and 2. H. 4. 15.

For rent due the last day of the Term, the lessor cannot distrain, because the
Term is ended. Fo. 47. b.

Note a diversity between a rent reserved upon a Lease for years, reserving a
yearly rent: the lessor may have several actions of debt for every years
rent. But upon a bond or contract for payment of several sums, no action of
debt lies till the last day be past. In every contract there must be quid pro
quo, for contractus est quasi actus contra actum. Vide, etc. l. 2. 15. a.

If the Lease be made by Deed Poll, the Lessee is not estopped to say that the
lessor had nothing at the time of the Lease made; but if it be by Deed
indented, then are both parties concluded, etc. 20. E. 4. 10. 2. E. 2. 253.

Si hom pt. Lease de son tr. them. per fet. indent. lestop. ne continue apres le
term expire. M. 31. 32. El. in 8. Fo. 4^. a.

Sect. 59.
Il ne besoigne asc' livery de seisin desire ft. allessee per ans, mes il poit
enter quant il voit per force de m. le Leas: mes lou franktenement passa.
auterment est.

A livery in Deed, may be done either by a solemn act and words, as by
delivery of the ring, or haspe of the door, etc. And the Feoffor saying, here I
deliver you seisin and possession of this house, in the name of all the Lands
and Tenements contained in this Deed, according to the form and effect of this
Deed. Or by words without any ceremony or act; as the Feoffor being at the
house door, or within the house, saying, here I deliver you seisin, etc. in the
name of seisin and possession of all the Lands, etc. contained in this Deed.
For if words may amount to a livery within the view, much more it shall upon
the land. ( Fo. 48. a.) 4. 41. E. 3. 17. b. 41. As. p. 10. l. 6. 26.

These words, secundum formam cartae, are understood according to the quantity
and quality of the effectual estate contained in the Deed. 7. E. 4. 25. 29.
Ass. 40.

If A. by Deed give land to B. to have and to hold after the death of A. to B.
and his heirs, this is a void Deed, because he cannot reserve to himself a
particular estate; and construction must be made upon the whole Deed, etc. Fo.
48. b. Vide, etc. M. 33. 34. El. B. R. Hog. and Xs.

A livery in Law is when the Feoffor says to the Feoffee being in view of the
house or land (I give you yonder Land to you and your heirs, and go enter,
etc. and take possession thereof accordingly) and the Feoffee does accordingly
in the life of the Feoffor enter, this is a good Feoffment, for signatio pro
traditione habetur.

And livery within the view is good, where there is no Deed of Feoffment. 9. E.
4. 39. 38. E. 3. 11.

And note, a livery in law, shall be perfected and executed by an entry in law.
38. Ass. p. 23.

If a man be disseised, and make a writing of a Lease for years, and deliver
the Deed, and after deliver it upon the ground, the second delivery is void,
for the first delivery made it a Deed; and for that the Lease for years must
take effect by the delivery of the Deed, therefore the Deed delivered when he
was out of possession was void. But so it is not of a Charter of Feoffment, for
that takes effect by the livery and seisin. But if the Lessor had delivered it
as an escrowe, to be delivered as his Deed upon the ground, this had been good.
(Vide libr.) l. 3. 35. Jennings. Brag.

Of Freehold and inheritances some be corporeal, as lands, etc. these are to
pass by livery of seisin, by Deed or without Deed; some be incorporeall, as
Advowsons, Rents, Commons, etc. These cannot pass without Deed, but without
any livery. Et est traditio de re corporali de una persona in personam de manu,
etc. and quia non possunt res incorporales possideri sed quasi, ideo
traditionem non patiuntur, etc. Bract. lib. 2. c. 18.

In some cases a Freehold shall pass by the common law, without livery of
seisin: as if a house or Land belong to an office, by the grant of the office
by Deed, the house, etc. passes as belonging thereunto. Vide etc. So if the
house belong to a Corodie, by the grant of the Cor. the house passes. 31. H.
6. 16. 8. H. 7. 4.

Sect. 60.
Lease est fait per ans, le remainder ouster a un auter per vie; en cest case
livery de seisin est requisite, ou auterment riens passa a celluy en remainder.

But livery cannot be made to the next in remainder, because the possession
belongs to the Lessee for years; and for that the particular term, and all the
remainders in law make but one estate, and take effect at one time, therefore
the livery is to be made to the Lessee. Remanere, is a residue of an estate
depending upon a particular estate, and created together with the same. A man
being absent cannot take a Freehold by a livery, but by his Attorney being
lawfully authorized to receive livery by Deed, unless the Feoffment be made by
Deed, and then livery to one (Jointenant) in name of both is good. ( Fo. 49. b.)

If a man deliver a Deed without saying any thing, it is a good delivery, but
to a livery of seisin of land words are necessary. Vide, etc.

A man makes a Lease for years to A. the remainder to B. in Fee, and makes
livery to A. within the view: this livery is void, for no man can take by force
of a livery within view, but he that takes the freehold himself.

By the entry of the Lessee he is in actual possession, and then the livery
cannot be made to him that is in possession, for, quod semel meum est, amplius
meum esse non potest. Vide, etc.

Affectio tua nomen imponit operi tuo. Bract. lib. 1.

But the disso^r infeoff, the dissee and others, albeit the disseisee came to
take livery, he is remitted to the whole.

Sect. 62. etc.
An exchange of Lands, etc. is good without livery of seisin. And in case of a
fine which is a Feoffment of Record, of a devisor by a last will, of a
surrender of a Release, or confirmation to a Lessee for years, or at will. In
all these cases and some other, a Freehold, etc. may pass without livery, Fo.
50. a.

In exchanges many things are to be observed. First, that the things exchanged
need not to be in esse at the time of the exchange made, (I grant a rent newly
created out of my Lands in exchange, for the Manor of D.) this is a good
exchange. 2. There needs no transmutation of possession, and therefore a
Release of a rent, or estovers, or right to Land in exchange for land is good.
3. The things exchanged need not to be of one nature, so they concern Lands or
Tenements. As Land for rent or Common, etc. Vide, etc. Fo. 50. b. But
annuities, etc. which charge the person only, cannot be exchanged, etc.

Sect. 64, and 65.
There be five things necessary to the perfection of an exchange: 1. That the
Estates given be equal, viz. that there be equality of the quantity of the
estate, as if the one has a Fee-simple, etc. the other shall have a like
Estate, etc. But equality in value of Lands in an exchange, is not requisite;
neither equality in the quality or manner of the estate. 2. That this word (
excambium exchange) be used, which is so individually requisite, as it cannot
be supplied by any other word, or described by any circumloquution. 3. That
there be an execution by entry or claim in the life of the parties. 4. That if
it be of things that lie in grant, it must be by Deed. 5. If the L^nds be in
several Counties, there ought to be a Deed indented; or if the thing lie in
grant (as an Advowson, etc.) albeit they be in one County, fol. 51. a. and b.

The agreement of the parties cannot make that good which the law makes void.

Sect. 66.
The interest of the term does pass and vest in the Lessee for years before
entry; and therefore the death of the Lessor cannot divest that which was
vested before.

Infants, Feme coverts, persons attainted, outlawed, excommunicated, villains,
aliens, etc. may be private Attorneys to deliver seisin, fo. 52. a. vide and
quaere.

The authority of an Attorney is twofold, expressed in his Warrant, and employed
in law; both which he must pursue; and if he do less, it is void. 12. Ass. p
24.

There is a diversity between an Authority coupled with an interest, and a
bare Authority. fo. 52. b. vide etc.

The Custom that enableth the Lord of a Manor to grant a greater estate,
enableth him to grant a lesser. Omne majus continet in se minus. H. 36. El. R.
492. Barnes B. R.

A letter of Attorney may be contained in a Deed of feoffment, beginning,
Omnibus Christ fidel. etc. for one continent may contain diverse Deeds to
several persons: but if it be by Indenture, etc. it is otherwise.

Though the Attorneys warrant be general, to deliver seisin: yet he cannot
deliver seisin within the view; for his warrant is intendable (or employed) in
law, of an actual and express livery, and not of a livery in law. P. 3. El.
in C.B. in Yachams case.

Oportet quod donationem sequatur rei traditio, etiam in vita donatoris, and
donatorii. Bract. l. 2. fo. 16.

Therefore a letter of Attorney to deliver livery of seisin after the decease
of the Feoffor, is void. But this is to be understood of sole persons, etc. and
not of a Congregation aggregate of many persons capable. 18. H. 8. 3. 11. H. 7.
19.

Sect. 67.
There be two kinds of Wastes, viz. Voluntary and Actual, or Permissive. Waste
may be done in houses, by pulling them down, or by suffering the same to be
uncovered.

If the Tenant do or suffer Waste to be done in houses, yet if he repair them
before any action brought, there lies no action of Waste against him; but he
cannot plead, quod non fecit vastum, but the special matter.

If the tenant build a new house it is waste, and if he suffer it to be wasted,
it is a new waste, 42. E. 3. 21.

If the tenant suffer the houses to be wasted, and then fell down Timber to
repair the same; this is a double waste, 44. E. 3. 44. F. N. B. 59. B.

Note, there is a waste, Destruction, and Exile. Waste properly is in houses,
gardens, and in timber trees, either in cutting of them down, or topping of
them, or doing any act whereby the timber decaies. The cutting of dead wood,
that is, ubi arbores sunt aridae, mortuae, cavae, non existentes marhemiu^, nec
portantes fructus, nec folia in aestate, is no Waste, Dier. 332.

If the tenant cut down underwood (as he may by law) yet if he suffer the young
germins to be destroyed, this is destruction, 20 E. 3. Waste 32. 10 H. 7. 2.

Exile or destruction of Villains, or tenants at will, or making them poor,
where they were rich when the tenant came in, whereby they depart from their
tenures, is Waste, fol. 53. a. and b. vide libr.

If the estate of the reversion continues not, but is altered, the action of
Waste, for Waste done before (which consists in privity) is gone.

An action of waste does lie against the Assignees of tenant by the Courtesy,
and of tenant in Dower, and against the Assignee of the Guardian in Chivalry:
in all other cases the action of waste shall be brought against him that did
the waste. fo. 54 a. vide, etc.

An Infant, a Baron and Feme, shall be punished for waste done by a stranger;
and so shall the wife that has the estate by survivor, for waste done by the
husband in his life time, if she agree to the estate. F.N.B. 36. b.

If a lease be made to A. for life, the remainder to B. for life, the remainder
to C. in fee: After the death or surrender of B. in the mean remainder, an
Action of waste does lie. But if a lease for life be made, the remainder for
years, the remainder in fee, an Action does lie presently during the term in
remainder.

But if a man make a lease for life or years, and after grant the reversion for
years, the lessor shall have no Action of waste during the years; for he
himself has granted away the reversion, in respect whereof he is to maintain
his Action. Otherwise it is, if he had made a lease in reversion, which had
been but a future interest, etc. Vide etc. 4. E. 3. 18. F. tit. Waste.

No Action of waste lies against a Guardian in Soccage, but an action of
trespass: Nor against Tenant by Statute Staple, etc. or Elegit. Stat.
Marlebridge, cap. 17. F. N. B. 59. E.

See in the Register five several writs of waste; Two at the Common law, for
waste done by Tenant in Dower, or the Guardian; and three by special or
statute Law, for waste done by Tenant for life, for years, and Tenant by the
courtesy.

Qui haeret in littera, haeret in cortice. Vide etc. As tenant for half a year
is within the remedy of Stat. Gloc. ca. 5. which gives waste against a lessee
for life or years.

Lessee for life, the remainder to him for 21 years, he has both estates in
him so distinctly, as he may grant away either of them: For a greater estate
may uphold a lesser, but not e converso. fol. 54. b.

If a man make a lease for life to one, the remainder to his Executors for
twenty one years, the term for years shall vest in him: For even as an Ancestor
and an Heir are correlativa, as to inheritance (as if an estate for life be
made to A. the remainder to B. in tail, the remainder to the right heirs of
A. the fee vesteth in A. as if it had been limited to him and his heirs) even
so are the T^stators and Executors Correlativa as to any Chattel.

CHAP. VIII Of Tenant at will.
Sect. 68.
EVery lease at will must be in law, at the will of both parties. Possessio
precaria and nuda and pro voluntate domini potest revocari, fol. 55. a. Fleta.
l. 3.

Tenant at will shall reap the crop which he sowed in peace, albeit the lessor
does determine his will before it be ripe; for that the estate of the lessee
is uncertain, and it is good for the Commonwealth that the ground be sown. And
this is not only proper to a lessee at will; but to every particular tenant
that has an estate uncertain. And therefore if tenant for life sows the
ground, and dies, his executors shall have the Corn. And the same law is for
lessee for years of tenant for life. So if a man be seized of land in the
right of his wife, etc. his executor shall have the Corn. But if husband and
wife be joynt-tenants of the land, and the husband sows the ground, and the
land surviveth to the wife, it is said that she shall have the Corn, Dier 316.

But where the estate of the lessee being uncertain, is defeasible by a right
Paramount, or if the lease determine by the act of the lessee, as by
Forfeiture, Condition, etc There he that has the right Paramount, or that
enters for any forfeiture, etc. shall have the Corn. fol. 55. b. l. 5 106

If a disseissor sow the ground and sever the Corn, and the disseissee
re-enter, he shall have the Corn, because he enters by a former title, and
severance or removing of the Corn alters not the case; for the regresse is a
continuation of the Freehold in him in judgment of law from the beginning.

If the husband and wife make a lease at will of the wifes land, reserving a
rent, and the husband dye, yet the lease continues. So if a lease be made by
two to two others at will, and the one of the lessors or of the lessees dye,
the lease at will is not determined, etc. l. 5. 10. Hensteads case, Dier 269.
b. *

Quando lex aliquid alicui concedit, concedere videtur and id fine quo res ipsa
esse non p^test. 14. H. 8. 2.

If the lessee at will be disturbed of his free entry, egresse and regress to
carry away his Corn, etc. he shall have his action upon his case, and recover
his damages; for whenever the law gives any thing, it gives also a remedy
for the same, fo. 56. a.

Any Inhabitant of Southwark having by custom a watring place for Cattle, which
being stopped, may have an action. etc.

Sect. 69. and Sect. 70, 71, and 72.
Messuagium, contains Buildings, Curtelage, Orchards and Garden. A Praecipe
lies not de Domo, but de Messuagio.

Nothing that is contrary to reason is consonant to Law.

Si home fait un ft. de feoffment de terre etc. a un auter, and deliver a luy
le fait, mes nemy livery de seisin, en ceo case le feoffee enter, and tener a
volunt, etc.

The lessor has no remedy at all against tenant at will for permissive Waste,
fo. 57. a. If tenant at will grant over his estate, and the grantee enter, he
is a desseisor, and the lessor may have an action of trespass against him,
though the grant is void, for the will is determined.

A Trespass or Transgression passes that which is right. Transgressio est cum
modus non servatur nec mensura: debet enim quilibet in suo facto modum habere,
and mensuram. Nota, in the lowest offenses there are no Accessaries, but all
are Principals, as in Riots, Routs, Forcible entries, etc. and so in the
highest offense, which is Crimen laesa Majestatis, there be no Accessaries; but
in Felonies there be Accessaries both before and after.

Si le lessor sur tiel leas a volunt reserve a luy un annual rent, il poit
distr. per se rent arere, ou aver de ceo un action de debt.

Note, he may distrain, etc. and yet it is no rent service, for no Fealty
belongs thereunto, but a rent distrainable of common right, fo. 57. b.

Tenant at will is always by right, and tenant at sufferance enters by a
lawful lease, and holds over by wrong. Sic vide diversitatem.

Note a diversity between particular estates made by the terretenant, and
particular estates created by act in law; as if a Guardian after the full age
of the heir, continues in possession, he is not tenant at sufferance, but an
Abator, against whom an Assize of Mortdanc. does lie, etc. F.N.B. 196.

CHHP. IX. Tenant by Copy.
Sect. 73.
TEnantes per Copy de Court-Roll out use dau^. terres, etc. a eux and a lour
heirs in fee fee tail, ou a term de vie, etc. a volunt le sur. solonque le
custom del Manor.

Eundum veteres aut ex scripto qui Bockland; aut fine scripto qui Folkland
dicebatur, possidebant.

Curia, Court is a place where Justice is judicially administered, and is
derived a cura, quia in curiis publicis curas gerebant. Court Baron, so called
of the Baron who is Lord of the Manor, fo. 58. a. or for that it has relation
to the Freeholders.

As there may be a Court Baron of Freeholders only, without Copiholders, and
then is the Steward the Register; So there may be a customary Court of
Copiholders only, etc. then is the Lord or his Steward the Judge.

And when the Court Baron is of this double nature, the Court Roll contains
as well matters appertaining to the customary Court, as to the Court Baron.

Manerium dicitur a manendo, secundum excellentiam seeds magna fixa and
stabilis. Et sciendum est quod Manerium poterit esse per se ex pluribus
edificiis coadjuvatum five villis and Hamletis adjacentibus Poterit etiam esse
Manerium and per se and cum pluribus villis, and cum pluribus Hamletis
adjacentibus, quorum nullum dici poterit Manner. perse, sed villae suae
Hamlettae, poterit etiam esse per se Manerium Capitale, and plura continere sub
se Maneria non Capitalia, and plures villas and plures Hamlettas quasi sub uno
Capite, aut dominio suo. Bract. l. 4. fo. 212.

Tenant for years, Tenant by Statute Merch Staple, Elegit, Guardian in chivalry,
etc. who are not properly seized but possessed, are domini pro tempore, not
only to make admittance, but to grant voluntary Copies of ancient Copihold
Lands which come into their hands. Fo. 58. b.

And in some special Case an estate may be granted by Copy, by one that is not
dominus pro tempore, etc. As if the Lord of a Manor, by his will in writing,
devises that his executor shall g^ant the Customary Tenements of the Manor
according to the custom of the Manor for the payment of his debts, and dies,
the executor having nothing in the Manor, may make grants, etc. Consuetudo,
properly signifies a custom, as here, etc. But legally it signifies also
Tolles, Murage, Pontage, etc.

Sect. 74. and 75.
Et tiel Tenant ne poit alien sa terre per fait, etc. Fo. 59 a.

But when a man has but a right to a Copihold, he may release it by Deed or by
Copy, to one that is admitted Tenant de facto. l. 4. 24. b. Kite and Queinton.

For is facere i.e. extra legem seu consuetudinem facere, to do a thing against
or without Law or Custom, and that legally is called a forfeiture.

Si tiel tenant voit alien sa terre a un aut. il covient, etc. de surrender les
tenements en asc' Court, etc. en le main le signior, al use celuy que at avera
le state.

Ils nont auter evidence concernant lour tenements, forsque le. Copies des
Rolls de Court.

Of Fines due to the Lord by the Copyholder, some be by the change or
alteration of the Lord, and some by the change of the Tenant; the change of the
Lord ought to be by the Act of God, otherwise no Fine can be due, but by the
change of the Tenant either by the act of God, or by the Act of the party a
Fine may be due. Of Fines taken of Copyholders, some be certain by custom, and
some be uncertain; but that Fine though it be incertus, yet must it be
rationabilis. Fo. 59. b. Vide, etc.

The Lord of a Manor is described by Fleta, as he ought to be, in these words.
Fleta lib. 2. ca. 65. and 71.

In omnibus autem and supra omnia decet quemlibet dominum verbis esse veracem,
and in operibus fidelem, deum and justitiam amantem, fraudem and peccatum
odientem, voluntariosque, malevolos, and injuriosos contemnentem, and apud
proximos pietatem vultumque motibilem and plenum, ipsius enim interest potius
consilio, quam viribus uti, propriove arbitrio: non cujuslibet voluntarii
juvenis menestralli vel adulatoris, sed jurisperitorum virorum fidelium and
honestorum, and in pluribus expertorum consilio debet favere. Qui been sibi
vult disponere and familiae suae, scire veram executionem terrarum suarum,
necessarium erit, ut perinde sciat quantitatem suarum facultatum, and finem
annuarum expensarum.

Quae omnia distinct scribantur in membranis, ut perinde sagacius vitam suam
disponat and facilius convincat mendacia compostariorum.

Sect. 76, and 77.
If by custom, Copyhold may be intailed, the same by like custom by surrender
may be cut off.

Some have holden that there was a Formodon in the discender at the common Law.
10 E. 2. Formedon. 55, etc.

Si le fignior ousta tiels tenants, etc. ils nont aut. remedy, forsque de suer
a lour signiors per Petition; car auterment ils ne serrent dits tenants a
volunt le Seignior, etc. Mes le Seignior ne voile enfreind le Custom que est
reasonable en tiel case. Mes Brian. H. 21. E. 4. dit que, fi tiel tenant per le
custom paiant ses services soit eject per se Seignior, que il avera action de
trns. verse luy. Et issint Danby M. 7. Ed. 4. dit, que le tenant per le custom
e^ cibien inheriter daver son te^r solonque le custom, come cesty que ad
franktenement al common ley.

CHAP. X. Tenant per le vergs.
Sect. 78.
Custom que nest pas encounter reason poit bien estr. admit seneschallus is
derived of Sein an house or place, and Schalc. an Officer or Governor; some
say that Sen is an ancient word for Justice, so as Seneschall should signify
Officiarius justitiae. In this place it signifies an Officer of Justice, viz.
A Keeper of Courts, etc. Fleta. lib. 2. ca. 66. Describes his Office at large
most excellently.

Providiat sibi Dominus de Scneschallo circumspecto and fidels, viro provido
and discreto and gratioso, humili, pudico, pacifico, and modesto, qui in
legibus consuetudinibusque provinciae and officio Seneschalciae se cognoscat
and jura domini sui in omnibus teneri affectet, quique sub ballivos domini in
suis erroribus and ambiguis sciat instruere and docere, queque egenis parcere,
and qui nec prece vel pretio velit a tramite Justiciae deviare, and perverse
judicare, cujus officium est, Curias tenere Maneriorum and de substractionibus
consuetudinum, serviciorum, reddituum, fect' ad Cur. Mercata, Molendina domini,
and ad visus francpledg: aliarumque libertatum domino pertinentium inquirat,
etc.

Sect. 79.
Ballivus, Bailiff signifies a safe Keeper, or protector. Praefectus or
Praepositus, Reve, signifies a disposer or director. Vide Fleta lib. 2. cap.
67. Where he treats of the Office of the Bailiff. And cap. 69. Of the office
of the Reve, or reeve, etc.

Ballivus autem Cujuscunque Manerii esse debet in verbo verax, and in opere
diligens and fidelis, ac pro discreto appruatore cognitus plegiatus and
clericus, qui de communioribus legibus pro tanto officio sufficienter se
cognoscat, and quod sit ita justus, quod ob vindictam seu cupiditatem non
quaerat versus tenentes domini nec alios, etc.

Praepositus autem tanquam appruator and cultor optimus, etc. Domino vel ejus
Seneschallo palam debet presentari cui injungatmr officium illud indilate, non
ergo fit piger aut somnolentus sed efficaciter and continue commodu^ domini
adipisci nitatur and exarare, etc.

Sect. 80, etc. 81.
Whatsoever is not against reason may well be admitted and allowed. This is not
to be understood of every unlearned man's reason, but of artificial and legal
reason warranted by authority of Law. Lex est summa ratio Fo. 62. a.

Sect. 81, 82, 83, etc.
Tenant per le Custom, etc. sont appelles tenants per base tenure, pur ceo que
ils nont asc' franktenement per le course del common ley. Tiel tenant en asc'
lieux doit repair measons, etc. Auxi il ferra fealty. Mes tenant a volunt per
le Common ley, nemy; and si tiel tenant que est ejus per Lease al Common ley
mor. and son heir enter, le lessor avera action de^trns. enu^s. luy; auterment
est de tenant a volunt per le Custom, etc. Vide Diversitat. etc.

Consuetudo Manerii est observanda. But if there be no Custom to the contrary,
wast either permissive or voluntary of a Copiholder, is a forfeiture of his
Copihold. The doing of fealty by a Copiholder, proves that so long as he
observes the custom of the Manor and pays his services, he has a fixed
estate. Vide Cook. Report. lib. 4. fo. 21, 22, 23, etc.

Finis Libri primi.
Liber Secundus.
CHAP. I. Homage.
Sect. 85.
HOmage est le pluis honorable service, et le pluis humble service de
reverence, que franktenant poit fair a Son Seignior. 1. It is most honorable,
etc. For, honor plus e^ in honorante, quam in honorato. 2. It is pluis humble
de reverence, for the Tenant when he does his Homage is, discinctus, nudo
capite. Ad pedes domini super genua projectus. Ambas manus vinctas inter manus
domini porrigit, and per verba omni supplici veneratione plena, he says, jeo
deveigne vostre home, etc.

Debet quidem tenens * manus suas utrasque ponere inter manus utrasque domini
sui, per quod significatur ex part domini protectio, defensio, and warrantia;
and ex part tenentis reverentia and subjectio. Fo. 65. a.

Homagium ligeum, is due to the King only.

The King is sovereign Lord, or Lord paramount, either mediate or immediate of
all and every parcel of land within the Realm; for all the Lands, etc. were
originally derived from the Crown. 18 E. 3. 35.

Item videndum est quis potest homagium facere. Sciendum est quod quilibet
liber homo tam masculus qu^m faemina, Clericus and Laicus, Major and Minor, dum
tamen electi in Episcopos, post consecrationem hom. non faciant, quicquid
fecerint ante, sed tantum fidelitatem. Conventus autem hominum non faciet de
jure ficut nec Abbas, nec Prior, eo quod tenent nomine alieno sc. nomine
Ecclesiarum. Mirror cap. 1. S. 2. and ca. 2. Sect. 1. and 2. Fo. 65. b. *

Nil sine prudenti fecit ratione vetustas.. Fo. 65. a.

Nunquam prospere succedunt res humanae, ubi negliguntur divinae. Fol. 64. b.

Sex horas somno, todidem des legibus aequis.

Quatuor orabis, des Epulisque duas.

Quod superest ultro sacris largire camenis.

Sect. 86. and 87.
Nota, in old Books and Records, the Homage which a Bishop, Abbot or other man
of Religion does, is called fealty, for that it wants these words (cieo
deveign vostre home) But yet in judgment of Law it is Homage, because he
says, I do to you homage, etc. and so of a Woman.

Argumentum ab inconvenienti plurimum valet in lege.

Non solum quod licet, sed quid est conveniens est considerandum, nihil quod
est inconveniens e^ licitum.

Sect. 89. and 90.
Null fer. homage, mes tiel que ad estate in fee simple ou en fee tail, en son
drt. them. ou en droit dun auter.

Si un home ad several tenancies queux il tient de several seignieurs, per
homage, donques quant il ft. homage a un des seignieurs, il dirra en le fine de
son homage fait, salve la foy que ido doy a nature seignieur le Roy and a mes
auters seignieurs.

Non Corporation aggregate of many persons capable, shall do homage; because
that homage must be done in person, and a Corporation, etc. cannot appear in
person. But an Abbot in nature of a sole Corporation shall do homage; because
the Covent are all dead persons in law. Vide, etc. fo. 66. b.* lib. 4. 11. l.
7. 10.

Contra negantem principia non est disputandum.

A Parson or Vicar of a Church that has a qualified fee, and yet to many
intents upon the matter but an estate for life, can neither receive homage nor
do homage, as a Bishop, etc. that a fee absolute may.

Tenant per le Courtesy, etc. ne far homage, etc. per ceo que il adonque and
estate forsque per term de vie. Et Nota.

He that cannot receive homage in respect of the weakness of his estate in the
Seigniory, shall not do homage if he has a like estate in the tenancy, fo. 67.
a. vide lib. etc.

Primogenita filia tantum faciet homagium Domino pro se and omnibus sororibus
suis. Quia omnes sorores sunt quasi unus haeres de una haereditate, 14 H. 3.
tit. Praerog. 5.

Every tenant in common shall do several services.

If homage be parcel of a Tenure, it is a presumption that the Tenure is by
Knights service, unless the contrary be proved.

CHAP. II. Fealty.
Sect. 91, 92, 93, and 94.
TEnant for years shall do Fealty, Littl. fo. 29. nu. 132.

Sciendum est quod non per procuratores nec per literas fieri poterit homagium,
sed in propria persona tam domini quam tenentis, capi debet and fieri. Bract.
lib. 2. fo. 8.

Mes le Seneschal del Court le Signieur ou Baylife poit purender fealty pur le
Seignieur. Item tenant a term de vie far fealty and encore il ne far
homage. Sic vide diversitatem.

The tenant must do fealty in person, because he must be sworn unto it, and no
man can swear by the Common Law by Attorney or Proctor, fo, 68. 8.

Whosoever is above the age of 12 years, is to take the Oath of Allegiance, and
he is to be sworn in the Turn, unless he be within some Leet, and then in the
Leet.

CHAP. III. Escuage.
Sect. 94.
SCutagium (id est) servitium scuti.

Nomina si nescis perit cognitio rerum.

Bracton says, Item scutagium dicitur quod talis praestatio pertinet at scutum
quod assumitur and servitium militare, fol. 68. b.

Every Tenure by Escuage is a Tenure by Knights service. Sed non e converso.
But note here the wisdom of Antiquity, Mavult enim princeps domesticos quam
stipendiarios bellicis apponere casibus, lib. rub.

Quant le Roy fait royal voyage en escoce, etc. donque il que tient per un fee
de Chivaler, etc. covient err oue le Roy per 40. jours, bien and
convenablement array pur le guerre, and sic de caeteris, etc.

In the ancient Treatise, De modo tenendi Parliamentum tempore Regis Edw. filii
Regis Etheldredi, it appears, That Comitatus (to wit) an Earldom constat ex
viginti feodis unius militis, quolibet feodo computato ad viginti libratas.
Baronia constat ex 13. feodis, and 3. part unius feodi militis secundum
comput' praedictam; unum feodum militis constat ex terris ad valentiam, 20. l.
fol. 79. a.

A Marquisdome consists of the Revenue of two Baronies, which amount to 800
Marks. And a Dukedom consists of the Revenues of two Earldoms, viz. 800 pounds
per annum, fol. 79. b.

Note, That the relief of a Knight, and all above him which be Noble, is the
fourth part of their yearly revenue, as of a Knight 5l, which is the fourth
part of 20l, etc.

Edward the eldest Son of King Edw. 3. called The Black Prince, was the first
Duke in England after the Conquest; and Robert Vere Earl of Oxford in the reign
of R. 2. was the first Marquis. Et Dominus de Bellomonte was the first Viscount
created by King H. 6.

A voyage Royal is not only when the King himself goes to War, as Littleton
here says, but also when his Lieutenant, or Deputy of his Lieutenant goes.

He that holds by Castle guard or Cornage, holds by Knights service, and yet
he shall pay no Escuage, because he holds not to go with the King to War.

Sir Richard Rocgesly Knight did hold Lands at Seaton by Seargeanty, to be
vantrarius Regis, the Kings fore Footman when the King went to Gascoigne, donec
per usus fuit pari solutarum precii 4d. that is, until he had worn out a pair
of shoes of the price of four pence.

And this service being permitted to be performed when the King went to
Gascoigne to make war, is Knights service. See an ancient Record, Rot. de
finibus Termino Mich. 11. Edw. 2.

If the tenant peravaile goes with the King, it excuses all the means, etc.
For one tenancy shall pay but one Escuage, F.N.B. 83, 84.

Sect. 96.
Albeit the Tenure is, That he which holds by a whole Knights fee ought to be
with the King, etc. to do a corporal service, yet he may find another able man
to do it for him. But it may be objected; That in some particular cases the
tenant might find a man, but not when he himself is able without all excuse or
impediment. To this it is answered, That sapiens incipit a fine. And the end of
this service is for the defense of the Realm, and so it be done by an able and
sufficient man, the end is effected.

2. Seeing there are so many just excuses of the tenant, it were dangerous, and
tending to the hindrance of the service, if these excuses should be issuable,
Multa in jure communi contra rationem disputandi pro communi utilitate
introducta sunt.

3. Both Littleton and the book in 7 Ed. 3. gives the tenant power, without
any excuse to be showed, to find an able and sufficient man, and oftentimes
Jura publica ex privato promiscue decidi non debeut.

Praepostera lectio, and praepropera praxis, are enemies to learning, fol. 70.
b.

Cessante ratione legis, cessat ipsa lex. If Mayor and Commonalty convey over
their Lands holden by Knights service to any natural man and his heirs, now
Homage-ward, etc. belong to the Tenure, etc.

Note, That every Bishop in England has a Barony, and that Barony is holden of
the King in Capite, and yet the King can neither have Wardship or relief.

Nemo militans Deo implicetur' secularibus negotiis.

Ferdwit in Saxon' significat quietanciam murdri in exercitu. Worscet
signifies, Liberum esse de oneribus armorum, fo. 71. a. Fleta lib. 1. cap. 42.

Miles haec tria curare debeat, corpus ut validissimum and perniciosissimum
habeat, arma apta ad subita imperia, caetera Deo and Imperatori curae esse.
Livius.

Sapiens non semper ita uno gradu, sed una via, non se mutat sed aptat. Qui
secundos optat eventus, dimicet art non casu. In omni conflictu non tam
prodest multitudo quam virtus. Vegetius.

Est optimi ducis scire and vincere, and cedere prudenter tempori. Multum
potest in rebus humanis occasio, plurimum in bellicis. Polibius.

Quid tam necessarium est quam tenere semper arma quibus tectus esse possis.
Vegetius.

Concerning the point in Law demurred in judgment in the 7 Ed. 3. here
mentioned by Littleton. The Law accounts the beginning of the 40 days after
the King enters into the Foreign Nation, for then the War begins, etc.
Vide, etc.

The knowledge of the Law is like a deep Well, out of which each man draws
according to the strength of his own understanding. And as the Bucket in the
depth is easily drawn to the uppermost part of the water (for nullum elementum
in suo proprio loco est grave) but take it from the water, it cannot be drawn
up but with great difficulty; for albeit the beginnings of this study seem
difficult, yet when the Professor of the Law can dive into the depth, it is
delightful, easy, and without any heavy burden, so long as he keep himself
in his own proper element. Justiciari de banco, etc. Communia placita non
sequantur Cur' nostram sed teneantur in aliquo certo loco. Mag. Charta.

He which demurreth in law, Moratur, or Demoratur in lege. Matters in Law are
decided by the Judges, and matters in fact by Juries. Now as there is no issue
upon the fact, but when it is joined between the parties; so there is no
Demurre in law, but when it is joined, etc Vide and quaere, fol. 71. b.

In some cases a man shall allege special matter, and conclude with a Demurre;
as in an action of Trespass brought by I. S. for the taking of his Horse, the
defendant pleads that he himself was possessed of the Horse, until he was by
one I.S. dispossessed, who gave him to the Plaintiff, etc. the Plaintiff says,
that I. S. named in the Bar, and I.S. the Plaintiff, were all one person and
not diverse; and to the Plea pleaded by the Defendant in the manner, he
demurres in law, and the Court did hold the Plea and Demurrer good, for without
the matter alleged he could not demurre. Now as there may be a demurre upon
Counts and Pleas, so there may be of Aid, Prior, Voucher, Resceit, Waging of
Law, etc. There is a general Demurre, that is, showing no cause; and a
special Demurre, which shows the cause of his Demurrer. Also there is a
Demurre upon pleading, etc. and there is also a Demurre upon Evidence, Vide
Lib. fol. 72. a.

Sect. 97, 98. and 99.
No escuage was assessed by Parliament since the eighth year of the reign of
Edw. 2. fol. 72. b.

Quemadmodum incertitudo scutagii facit servitium militare, ita certitudo
scutagii facit socagium.

Si home parle generalement descuage, il ser. entend' etc. descuage noncertaine
que est service de Chivaler, and tiel escuage trait, a luy homage, and fealty,
car fealty est incident a chesc' manner de service forsque a le tenant in
Frankalmoigne. Verba equivoca and in dubio posita intelliguntur in digniori and
potentiori sensu.

Tenure in capite ex vitermini, is a Tenure in Gross, and it may be holden of a
subject, but being spoken generally, it is secundum excellentiam, intended of
the King, for he is caput reipublicae, fol. 73. a. Escuage can be assessed only
by Parliament, and not by the King.

Sect. 101.
Les seignieurs poient distrein per Escuage assess. per Parliament, ou ils en
asc' cases purront au. breve le roy direct' as viconts de in les counties, etc.
de levier tiel Escuage per eux, Vide de Regist.

Writs are the foundations whereupon the whole Law does depend. Fitzherbert in
his Preface to his Not. Br.

Breve sicut regula juris rem quae est breviter enarrat, non tamen ita breve
esse debeat quin rationem and vim intentionis contineat. Bract. lib. 5. fo.
413, etc.

Of Writs some be Original, and some be Judicial.

Also of Originals, Quaedam sunt formata sub suis casibus and de cursu, and de
communi consilio totius regni concessa and approbata, quae quidem nullatenus
mutari poterint absque consensu and voluntate eorum; and quaedam sunt
Magistralia and saepe variantur secundum varietatem casuum, factorum and
quaerelarium As Actions upon the Case, which vary, etc. Item brevium
originalium, alia sunt realia, alia personalia, alia mixta. Item, etc. alia
sunt patentia sive aperta, and alia clausa.

Certain it is that the Original Writs are so artificially and briefly
compiled, as there is nothing redundant or wanting in them; of which one said,
That it was impossile to comprehend so much matter, so perspicuously, in fewer
words.

Brevia judicialia saepius variantur secundum varietatem placitorum proponentis
and respondentis.

Sect. 102.
Mareschallus exercitus, in Saxon Marischalk, i.e. equitum Magister. Marshal is
either derived of Mars, or of Marc an horse, which signifies in the Saxon
tongue a Master or Governor.

I read of six kinds of Certificates allowed for Trials by the Common Law:
The first whereof Littleton speaks, in time of War out of the Realm by the
Marshal, etc. 2. In time of Peace out of the Realm. As if it be alleged in
avoidance of an Outlawry, That the Defendant was in Prison at Bourdeaux, etc.
it shall by tried by the Certificate of the Mayor, etc. 2 E. 4. 1. b. 4 E. 4.
10. 3. For matters within the Realm, 5 E. 4. 30. the Custom of London shall be
certified by the Mayor and Aldermen by the mouth of the Recorder. 4. By
Certificate of the Sheriff upon a Writ to him directed, 10 H 10. in case of
Privilege, if one be a Citizen or a Forreiner. 5. Trial of Records by
Certificate of the Judges in whose custody they are by Law. All these be in
Temporal causes. 6. In causes Ecclesiastical, as loyalty in Marriage, general
Bastardy, Excommengment, Profession, etc. which are to be tried by the
Certificate of the Ordinary.

Also if a Subject of the King be killed by another of his Subjects out of
England, in any Foreign Country, the wife, or he that is heir of the dead, may
have an Appeal for this Murder or Homicide before the Constable and the
Marshal, whose sentence is upon the Testimony of Witnesses or Combat, fo. 74.
a. vide lib. Stat. 1 H. 4. cap. 14. 13 H. 4. fol. 5. etc. Anno 25 El, etc.

CHAP. IV. Knights service.
Sect. 103.
TEnure per homage, fealty and escuage est a tener per service de Chivaler, and
trait a luy guard, marriage and relief.

Si haereditas teneatur per servitium militare, tunc per leges infans ipse, and
haereditas ejus, etc. per dominum feodi illius custodientur, etc. Fortesc. ca.
44.

Audacter quilibet facit quod se scire non diffidit.

Amongst the Laws of St Edward the Confessor, it is thus provided; Debent enim
universi liberi homines, etc. secundum foedum suum, and sciendum tenementa sua
arma habere, and illa semper prompta conservare ad tuitionem regni, and
servitium dominorum suorum juxta praeceptum domini Regis explendum and
peragendum, Lambert fo. 135. a.

And William the Conqueror confirmed that Law, etc.

And therefore if after the Lord has the Wardship of the body and land, the
Lord does release to the Infant his right in the Seigniory, or the Seigniory
descends to the Infant, he shall be out of Ward, etc. for he was in Ward in
respect he was not able to do those services which he ought to do to his Lord,
which now are extinct, and cessante causa, cessat causatum, fol. 76. a.

Regularly there be six incidents to Knights service, viz. Two of Honor and
Submission, as Homage and Fealty, and four of Profit, as Escuage, Ward,
Marriage and Relief.

Also these be other incidents to Knights service besides these; as aid per
fair fitz Chivalrer, and aid per file marier, etc.

Relevium is derived from Relevare; Quia haereditas quae jacens fuit per
antecessoris decessum, relevatur in manus haeredum, and propter factam
relevationem facienda erit ab haerede quaedam praestatio quae dicitur relevium.
Bract. lib. 2. ca. 36. fo. 84. By custom the heirs of him that holds in
Socage may be in a word. * By the common Law, the heir shall not be in ward,
unless he claim as heir by descent. Vide Libr.

In many Cases the heir shall be in ward, albeit the Tenant died not seized,
etc nor in the Homage of the Lord.

But if one levy a fine executory (as fur grant and render) to a man and his
heirs, and he to whom the Land is granted and rendered, before execution dies,
his heir being within age enters, he shall not be in ward, for his ancestor
was never * tenant to the Lord. Vide, etc.

If the disseisie die his heir being within age, the Lord shall have the
wardship of the heir of the body of the disseisee; and if the disseisor dies
seized and his heir within age, the Lord may seize the wardship of his heir
also, and of the Land also, etc. Vide, etc.

For the ease of the heir, and for avoiding of danger, etc. The heir for the
most part (after his full age) sueth out a special livery, which contains a
beneficial pardon, etc. Fo. 77. a. Vide and quaere.

A common person shall have nothing in ward but that which is holden of him.
But the King by his Prerogative shall not only have such Lands, etc. which the
heir of his Tenant by Knights service in Capite holds of others, but such
inheritances also as are not holden at all of any, as rent-charges, rent-seck,
Fayres, Markets, Warrens, Annuities, etc. Fo. 78. a. Stamf. pr. Fo. 8. *

The Law is changed, since Littleton wrote in many Cases both for the marriage
of the body, and for the wardship of the Lands, and a far greater benefit
given to the Lords, then the common Law gave them, and some advantage given to
the heirs, which before they had not.

As if the Father had made an estate for life or a gift in tail of Lands
holden by Knights service to his eldest Son, or other heir apparent within age,
the remainder in Fee to any other, and dyed, the heir should not have been in
ward, for this was out of the Stat. Merlebridg: But at this day the heir shall
be in that case in ward for his body and a third part of his land. So if the
Father had infeoffed his eldest Son within age and a stranger, and the heirs of
the son, and died, the son should have been out of ward; but at this day he
shall be in ward for his body, and for a third part of his moity. Fo. 78. a
Vide, etc.

The benefits that grew to the subject by acts of Parliament, were, that
Tenants in Fee simple, might devise their lands in such manner and form, etc.
Also that the Father might infeoffe his eldest Son or other heir lineal or
collateral holden by Knights service, and two parts of the Land shall be out
of ward. Lib. 8. fo. 83. and fo. 163.

And both the Statute of 32 and 34 H. 8. Concerning Wills and Wardships are
many ways prejudicial to the heirs: as, if Tenant by Knights service make a
Feoffment in Fee to the use of his wife and heir heirs, or to the use of a
younger Son and his heirs, or wholly for the payment of his debts. In these
cases, although nothing at all of the Lands so holden descend to the heir, but
he is disherited of the same, yet his body shall be in ward.

In facto quod se habet ad bonum and malum, magis de bono, quam de malo lex
intendit. Lex intendit vicinum vicini facta scire. Nulla impossibilia aut
inhonesta sunt presumenda, vera tamen and honesta, and possibilia. Lex semper
intendit quod rationi convenit. By intendment of Law the heir is not able to do
Knights service before his full age of 21. years, and therefore has a guardian,
etc.

A woman has seven ages for several purposes appointed to her by Law: as,
seven years for the Lord to have aid pur file Mar. Nine years to deserve
Dower, 12. years to consent to marriage, until 14. years to be in ward, 14.
years to be out of ward, if she attained thereunto in the life of her ancestor;
16. years for to tender her marriage if she under the age of 14. at the death
of her Ancestor, and 21. years to alienate her Lands, goods and Chattels. Fo.
78. b. 35. H. 6. 40. Bract. l. 2. c. 37.

A man also by the Law for several purposes has diverse ages assigned unto
him, viz. 12. years to take the oath of Allegiance in the Torn or Leet. 14.
years to consent to marriage, 14. years for the heir in socage to choose his
guardian, and 14. years is also accounted his age of discretion. 15. years for
the Lord to have aid pur fair fitz Chivaler: under 21. to be in ward to the
Lord by Knights service: under 14. to be in ward to guardian in socage: 14. to
be out of ward of Guardian in Socage, and 21. to be out of ward of Guardian in
Chivalrie, and to alien his Lands, Goods, and Chattels. 34. E. 1. St. 3. F.N.B
202.

But put case the Lord cannot have the wardship of the Land, as if the Lord
before the age of 14. grant over the wardship of the body, the grantee cannot
have the two years because he cannot hold over the Land, and the Lord which
has the wardship of the land only should lose the benefit of the two years
because he has the lands only and cannot tender any marriage, therefore in
this cause the heir female shall enter into her land at her age of 14. years.

Cessante causa cessat effectus; and cessante ratione legis cessat beneficium
legis. Vide, etc.

If the Lord tender a convenable marriage to the heir within the two years, and
she marry elsewhere within those two years, the Lord shall not have the
forfeiture of the marriage, for the Statute gives the two years only to make a
tender: Lib. 6. fo. 71. Lord Darcies Case. And if after such tender, etc. the
heir female refuses, then the Lord shall hold the Land until her age of 21.
years, and further until he has levied the value of her marriage. Statute of
West. 1. 31. Ass. p. 26.

The tender of a marriage to an heir female before the age of 14. is void
(i.e.) where the Lord may hold the Land for the said two years, for then the
Statute appoints the time of tender; but where the Lord cannot have the two
years he may tender, etc. At any time after the age of 12. and before 14. for
so he might have done at the common Law. L. 6. 71. Darcy. Le Seignor. nau^a les
2. ans apres les 14. ans, mes lou l' heir female est dens l' age de 14. ans
nient marry al temps de Mort son Ancestor.

Sect. 104. and 105.
The time of agreement or disagreement, when they marry infra annos nubiles, is
for the woman at 12. or after, and for the man at 14. or after, and there need
no new marriage if they so agree, but disagree they cannot before, etc. But if
a man of the age of 14. marry a woman of the age of 10. at her age of 12. he
may as well disagree, as the may, though he were of the age of consent; because
in contracts of Matrimony either both must be bound, or equal election of
disagreement given to both, and so e converso, if the woman be of the age of
consent, and the man under.

Dominus non maritabit minorem in custodia sua nisi semel. Fo. 79. b. Vide, etc.

Sect. 107. and 108.
Per le stat. de Merton. ca. 6. null disparagement est, mes lou celuy que est en
guard e^. marie deins lage de 14. ans.

There be four kinds of disparagements. 1. propter vitiu^ animi. 2. Sanguinis.
3. Corporis. 4. propter jacturam privilegii. Vide Libr.

Of disparagements at large, Vide Libr. in Fo. 80. etc.

Magna Charta, is, Charta libertatum; magnum in parvo. Et magna fuit quondam
magnae reverentia Chartae. Periculosum existimo quod bonorum viror. non
comprobatur exemplo. Usage is a good interpreter of Laws, and non usage is an
intendment that the Law will not bear it.

Sect. 110. and 111.
It is in the election of the Lord, whether for the single value the Lord will
tender a marriage or no; for he shall have the single value without any tender.
Lib. 6. fo. 70. L. Darcies Case.

If the heir male before any tender, marries himself within age, he shall pay
but the single value of the marriage. Fo. 82. b. Vide Libr.

He that holds by Castlegard, holds by Knights service but not by Escuage;
for Escuage is due when the King makes a voyage royal out of this Realm, and
the Tenant makes default, but Castlegard is to be done within the Realm, etc.
l. 4. Luttrels Case, and l. 6. Gregory's Case.

Relief is no service, but an improvement of the service, or an incident to the
service, for the which the Lord may distrein, but cannot have an action of
debt; but his executors or Administrators may have an action of debt, and
cannot distrein.

A Knights Fee consists of 20l land, and he pays for his relief for a whole
Knights Fee, the 4th part of his Fee, viz. Five pound, and so according to the
rate. In some case the heir shall pay relief, when he was within age, at the
time of the death of his Ancestor. The Lord upon every descent ought to have
either wardship or relief. Fo. 83. b. Vide, etc.

And in some case one Lord of the heir of one Tenant shall have both wardship
during his Minority, and relief at his full age. Vide, lib. etc.

Sect. 114.
Null ser. ingard de son corpse a asou^ Seignior. vivant son pier, etc. Fo. 84. a.

Where the Lord has a double interest in the wardship of the body, one as
Lord, and another as Father; in that case the wardship by reason of nature
cannot be waived, and claim made in respect of the Seigniory. Vide lib. etc.
35. H. 6. 55. l. 7. fo. 13. Calvin's Case.

Sect. 115. and 116.
L' estatute de ann. 4. H. 7. ca. 17. done le Gardianship del use, sicome del
seisin in demesne.

Guardian en droit en chivalry est lou le Seignior. e^. seize de guard de terre
and de! heir per cause de lon Seigniory. Mes ore si il grant le guard, etc. le
grantee est appell guardian en fait. Fol. 85. a. Br. t. grant. 85 Dyer 371. 381.

If a man make a Lease for years of a villeine, this cannot be done without
Deed, neither can the Lessee assign it over without Deed; because it is derived
out of a Freehold that lies in grant: but the warship of the body is an
original Chattell, during the Minority derived out of no Freehold, and
therefore as the Law creates it without Deed, so it may be assigned over
without Deed, the wardship of an Advowson cannot be granted without Deed. Causa
qua supra. Vide Diverse.

CHAP. V. Socage.
Sect. 117.
OMnium rerum ex quibus aliquid exquiritur nihil agricultura melius, nihil
uberius, nihil dulcius, nihil libero homine dignius. Cicero lib. 1. offic.

Virg. Lib. 1. Georg.
O Fortunatos nimium, sua si bona norunt
Agricolas, quibus ipsa procul discordibus armis
Fundit humo facilem victum justissima tellus.
Nullum laborem recusant manus quae ab aratro ad arma transferuntur, etc.
Fortior autem Miles ex confragoso venit, sed ille unctus, and nitidus in primo
pulvere deficit. Seneca in Epist.

In the Book of Doomesday, Land holden by Knights service was called Taniland,
and Land holden by Socage, was called Reveland. Fo. 86. a.

Nota, that the legal signification of (agium) in composition termineth
service or duty, as Homagium, the service of the man, etc. Vide Libr. a woundy
mistake (fignum pro termino.)

Ex donationibus autem feoda militaria, vel magnam serjeantiam non
continentibus oritur nobis quoddam nomen generale, quod est socagium.

It is a presumption where homage is due, that the land is holden by Knights
service.

Sect. 118. and 119.
Home poit tener per fealty tantum, and est a tener en Socage Car chescun
tenure, que nest pas in Chivalry est tenure en Socage. Here Littleton speaks
of Tenures of common persons, for grand Serjeanty is not Knights service, and
yet is not a Tenure in Socage, Vide etc. And note, That some Tenures in Socage
are named a causa, and some and the greater part ab effectu

Socagium idem est quod servitium Socae, and Soca idem est, quod caruca. s. un
soke, ou un carve.

As carucata terrae, a plough land may contain houses, mils, pasture, meadow,
wood, etc. as pertaining to the plough, so under the service of the Plough, all
services of tillage or husbandry are included.

Although the cause whereupon the name of Socage first grew be taken away, yet
the name remains the same it has been, and is used to distinguish this Tenure,
from a Tenure by Knights service.

Nomina si perdas certe distinctio rerum perditur.

Sect. 120. and 121.
Escuage certain, is not in rei veritate servit' scuti, which is to be done by
the body of a man; but it is servitium Crumenae, of money, which is to be drawn
out of the purse, and that is in effect a Tenure in Socage.

If a rent be paid for Castlegard, it is clear a Socage Tenure; but if a sum in
gross or other thing be voluntarily paid or given by the tenant, and
voluntarily received by the Lord in lieu of Castlegard, yet the Tenure by
Knights service remains, vide lib. 4. fo. 88. in Lutterels Case.

Rent service is accompanied with some corporal service, as fealty at the
least, Sect. 122.

Sect. 123.
If lands holden in Soccage be given to a man, and the heirs of his body, and
he dies, his heir within age, the next Cousin of the part of the father, albeit
he be worthier, shall not be preferred before the next Cousin of the part of the
mother; but such of them as first seiseth the heir shall have his Custody, fo.
88. a.

If A. be Guardian in Soccage of the body and lands of B. within age of 14
years. A. shall be Guardian per cause de guard. But an Infant, etc. that is not
in the custody of another, cannot be Guardian en Soccage, because no Writ of
Account lies against an Infant.

Alium regere non potest, qui seipsum regere non novit. Bract. lib. 2. fo. 88.

Minor minorem custodire non debet, alios enim presumitur male regere, qui
seipsum regere nescit, Fleta lib. 1. cap. 10.

Haeres sokmamii sub custodia capitalium dominorum non erit, sed sub custod'
consanguineorum suorum propinquorum, hoc est, eorum qui conjuncti sunt jure
sanguinis, and non jure successionis, ex part quor' non descendit haereditas,
etc.

Hereby not only an immediate descent, but all possibility of descent is
excluded. Vide lib. fo. 88. b.

The father Guardian in Soccage must by law be accountable to the son, both for
his marriage, and also for the profits of his lands, which he should not if he
had the custody, etc. in this case as father in respect of nature.

And the act of the law never does any man wrong, sic vide diversitatem, etc.

Guardian in Soccage shall not forfeit his interest by outlawry or attainder of
Felony or Treason, because he has nothing to his own use, but to the use of
the heir.

Legitima aetas, as the Statute of Merlebridge, 52 H. 3. speaks; or plena
aetas, as the Writ of Account does render it, are to be understood secundum
subjectam materiam, that is of the heir of Soccage land, whose lawful and full
age as to Guardianship is 14 years.

And as to the recital of the Statute, it is evident, That an action of
Account did lie against Guardian in Soccage at the Common Law, Vide lib. fo.
89. a. *

If the Guardian receive the rents and profits, etc. and he be robbed without
his default or negligence, he shall be discharged thereof. But otherwise it is
of a Carrier, for he has his hire, and thereby implicitly undertaketh the
safe delivery of the goods delivered to him. H. 38. Eliz. inter Woodlief and
Curteis.

Note, it is necessary for any that receives goods to be kept, to receive in
this special manner, viz. To be kept as his own, or to keep them at the peril
of the owner. To be kept, and to be safely kept, is all one in Law, sic vide
diverfit' Pascha, 43 Eliz. Southcote and Bennet.

The Guardian en Socage shall account for the marriage of the heir: so for so
much as any man bona fide had offered for the marriage unto him.

Le enfant al age de 18 years poit fair son testament, etc.

Nota, Executors could not have an action of Account at the Common Law, in
respect of the privity of the account; but the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 23.
has given the action of account to Executors, the Statute of 25. E. 3. cap. 5.
to Executors of Executors, and the Statute of 31 E. 3. cap. 11. to
Administrators.

The Guardian en Socage is bounden by Law, That the heir be well brought up, and
that his Evidences be safely kept.

Sect. 124. and 125.
Sed quaere si apres lage de 14 ans, etc. This quaere came not out of
Littletons quiver; for it is evident, That after the age of 14 years, Guardian
en Socage shall be charged Bailiff at any time when the heir will, either
before his age of 21. years, or after.

Guardian en Chivalry ad le guard a son proper use, and Guardian en Socage, and le
guard a son use, mes al use del heir.

Et si Guardian en Socage devie devant asc' account fait per luy al heir, de
ceo le heir en sans remedy, per ceo que null bre. de account gift tenus les
execut' sinon pur le roy tautsolement.

For albeit in an action of account against a Guardian in socage, etc. the
defendant cannot wage his Law, yet in respect of the privity of the matters of
account, and the discharge resting in the knowledge of the parties thereunto,
an action of account lies not, etc. but that is helped by Statute. Vide, etc.
fo. 90. b. Rot. Parl. 50. E. 3. nu. 123.

The Kings Treasure is Firmamentum belli, and Ornamentum pacis. Nullum tempus
occurrit Regi.

Prerogative extends to all Powers, Preheminences and Privileges, which the
Law gives to the Crown. Stans. Praer. 5. 10.

Sect. 126, and 127, 128, 129.
Le snr. au^a del heir son tenant pur relief, tant come le rent amount que il
paya per an, ouster le rent, etc.

Of corporal service, or labor or work of the tenant, no relief is due, but
where the tenant holds by such yearly rents or profits which may be paid or
delivered.

Et le snr. poit incontinent distreine per relief; sinon que il soit tiel
service, que nest donques an esse, sicome le tenant tient per un prose, and
devie en yuer, etc.

For Flowers, that are fructus fugaces, cannot be kept, and therefore are not
to be delivered till the time of growing; (otherwise it is of corn, etc.)

Lex spectat naturae ordinem, non cogit ad impossibilia.

Impossible est quod naturae rei repugnat.

Sect. 130, and 131, 132.
Il est reason que le snr and ses heirs ont asc' service fait a eux per prou^
and testifier que la terre est tenus de eux, fol. 92. b.

An Escheat is a casual profit, quod accidit domino ex eventu, and ex insperato.

Of incidents there be two sorts, s. Separable, as rents incident to
Reversions, etc. Inseparable, as Fealty to a Reversion or Tenure.


Where the Tenure is by Fealty only, there is no relief due, fol. 93. a. vide
lib.

Lessee per ans ferra fealty al lessor, per ceo que il tiel de luy, auterment
est de tenant a volunt; car il and asc' sure estate.

And because the matter of an oath must be certain, therefore tenant at will
shall not do fealty.

CHAP. VI. Frankalmoigne.
Sect. 133.
OF Ecclesiastical persons some be Regular, and they live under certain Rules,
and have vowed three things; True Obedience, perpetual Chastity, and Wilful
Poverty. Secular, as Bishops, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Prebends,
Parsons, Vicars, etc.


All Ecclesiastical persons may hold in Frankalmoigne be they Secular or
Regular; but no Lay person, etc.

By the ancient Common Law of England, a man could not alien such lands as he
had by descent, without the consent of his heir; yet he might give a part to
God in Free-almoigne, or with his daughter in free marriage, or to his servant
in remuneratione servitii, fol. 94. b. Glanville l. 7. cap. 1. fo. 44, 45. acc.

Lands must be given to a Corporation aggregate of many by deed, and they have
a Fee simple without these words (Successors) for the body never dies.

Otherwise is it of a sole Corporation. But yet out of the general rules the
case of Frankalmoigne is excepted. And there is a diversity, when the head and
body both are capable, as Dean and Chapter; and when one, as in case of Abbot
or Prior and Covent.

Ancient Grants shall be allowed, as the Law was taken when such Grants were
made.

Sect. 134.
Decanus is derived of (...), which signifies Ten, for that he is an
Ecclesiastical secular Governor, and was anciently over ten Prebends or Canons
at the least in a Cathedral Church, and is head of his Chapter. Capitulum est
Clericorum congregatio sub uno Decano in Ecclesia Cathedrali. And Chapters be
twofold, viz. the Ancient, and the Later. The ancient Deans come in, in much
like sort as Bishops do; for they are chosen by the Chapter, by a Conge de
estier, as Bishops be, and the King giving his Royal assent, they are confirmed
by the Bishop; but they which are either newly translated, or founded, are
Donative, and by the Kings Letters Patents are installed, fo. 95. a.

Ecclesiastical persons have not capacity to take in Succession, unless they
be bodies Politic, as Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans, Parsons, Vicars, etc. or
lawfully incorporate by the Kings Letters Patents, or Prescription.

Sect. 135.
Of Tenures, some be Spiritual, and some be Temporal; and of Spiritual, some be
uncertain, as Tenures in Frank-almoigne, and some be certain, as Tenures by
Divine service. Again, Divine service is twofold, either Spiritual, as Prayers
to God; or Temporal, as distribution of Alms to poor people.

Since Littleton wrote, the Book of Common Prayer, etc. is altered; yet the
Tenure in Frankalmoigne remains, and such Prayers and Divine service shall be
said and celebrated, as now is authorized: for the change is by general
consent etc. of Parliament, 2 E. 6. c. 1. 5. and 6. c. 1. 1 El. c. 2. whereunto
every man is party.

And as Littleton has said before in the case of Soccage, Sect. 119. The
changing of one kind of Temporal services into other Temporal services,
alters neither the name nor the effect of the Tenure: so the changing of
Spiritual services, etc. alters neither the name, etc.

Frankalmoigne est le pluis haute service.

-- fuit haec sapientia quondam

Publica privatis secernere, sacra profanis.

Tant solement divine and spiritual service en destr. fait per terres etc.
tenus en Frankalmoigne.

Sect. 136. and 137.
No distress can be taken for any services that are not put into certainty, nor
can be reduced into any certainty.

Oportet quod certa res deducatur in judicium.

And yet in some cases there may be a certainty in uncertainty: as a man may
hold of his Lord to shear all the sheep depasturing within his Manor; and the
Lord may distrain for this uncertainty, 7 E. 3. 38.

Ordinarius, so called, Quia habet ordinariam jurisdictionem in jure proprio,
and non per deputationem; as a Bishop, etc.

Where the right is Spiritual, and the remedy thereof only by the
Ecclesiastical Law, the conusans thereof does appertain to the Ecclesiastical
Court, fo. 96. a.

And so where the Common or Statute Law gives remedy in foro seculari (whether
the matter be spiritual or temporal) the conusance of that cause belongs to
the Kings Temporal Courts only, etc. fo. 96. b.

There were within this Realm 118 Monasteries founded by the Kings of England.
So all Bishops, etc. which hold of the King by Barony, and are Lords of
Parliament, called by Writ, etc. Ante fol. 83. and 69.

Sect. 138. and 139.
Nihil quod est inconveniens, est licitum, fol. 97. b.

It is better, says the Law, to suffer a mischief (that is peculiar to one)
then an inconvenience that may prejudice many, 42 Ed. 3. 5. 28 E. 3. 395. 20 H.
6. 28.

There is no Land that is not holden of some Lord or other, by some service
Spiritual or Temporal.

Nihil quod est contra rationem est licitum. For Reason is the life of the Law;
nay, the Common Law it self is nothing else but Reason, which is to be
understood of an artificial perfection of Reason, gotten by long study,
observation and experience, and not of every man's natural Reason: for, Nemo
nascitur artifex.

Neminem oportet esse sapientiorem legibus.

Si un Abbot, etc. alien his lands holden in Frankalmoigne to a secular man in
fee simple; In this case, albeit the Alienor held not by fealty nor any other
terrene service, but only by Spiritual services, and those uncertain, yet the
Alience shall hold by the certain service of fealty, fol. 98. a.

Sect. 140.
Il est ordeigne per lestatut Quia empt. terrum fait 18 Ed. 1. que null poit
alien, ne grant terres, etc. en fee simple a ten de luy mesme.

Alienatio, licet prohibeatur, consensu tamen omnium in quorum favorem
prohibita est, potest fieri, and quilibet potest renunciare juri pro se
introducto.

Praesumitur rex habere omnia jura in scrinio pectoris sui. Dispensatio est
mali prohibiti provida relaxatio, utilitate seu necessitate pensata, vide libr.
and quaere, fo. 99. a.

By Prescription the successor of an Abbot may pay relief.

Sect. 141.
Null poit tenure terres etc. en frankalm. forsprise del grantor on de ses
heirs. Here (or) has the sense of (and) etc. For the heir cannot take any
thing in the life of the ancestor, neither can the heir take any thing by
descent, when the ancestor himself is secluded. Vide, etc. As a man cannot
grant lands in Tail and reserve a rent to his heirs. 15. E. 4.

The tenure in frankalmoigne is an incident to the inheritable blood of the
grantor, and cannot be transferred or forfeited to any other. But it is not an
incident inseparable, etc. For the Lord may release to the Tenant in
frankalmoigne and then the tenure is extinct, and he shall hold of the Lord
Paramount by Fealty. As in Littl. S. 139. And if the Seigniory be transferred
by act in Law to a stranger, thereby the privity is altered, and the tenure
changed. Fo. 99. b.

And a Bishop with assent of his Chapter, etc. may give Lands in Frankalmoigne,
to hold of them and their successors, by license, etc. Always the Seigniory
nearer to the Land, drowns the Seigniory that is more remote, etc.

Sect. 142.
L^mesne est tenus de acquiter son Tenant en frankal. de Chesc' manner de
service, que asc' Seignior. Paramount de luy void demand. He is also to aquitt.
him of improvement of services, as if he be distrained for relief, aid per file
mar. etc. Also for suit service to a hundred; but for suit real in respect of
resiance within any hundred, etc. it is otherwise. There be three kinds of
Acquitals. 1. An acquitall by Deed. 2. An acquitall by prescription. 3. An
acquitall by tenure; and that is four manner of ways. 1. By owelty of service,
for service acquites service. 2. Tenure in Frankalm. 3. Tenure in Frankmar. 4.
Tenure by reason of Dower. F. N. B. 135. etc. There be six Writs in Law
maintainable before any molestation, etc. As 1. A man may have his Writ of
Mesne before he be distreined. 2. A War. Cartae, before he be impleaded. 3. A
Monstraver. before any distress or vexation. 4. An And. quer. before any
execution sued. 5. A Curia claudend. before any default of enclosure. 6. A ne
injuste vexes, before any distress or molestation: and these be called, brevia
anticipantia.

Nota, the Plaintiff in a Writ of Mesne, may choose either process at the
common Law, or upon the Statute of West. 2. And upon process given by the said
Statute, viz. Summons, Attachment, and grand distress, if the Mesne comes
not, he shall be fore-judged: and the judgment is, quod T. (le mesne) amittat
servitia de A, (le Tenant) de tenemtis praedictis, and quod omisso praedicto,
T. praefat. R. (le Seignior. Paramount) modo sit attendens and respond. per
eadem servit. per quae T. tenuit. Also if the Tenant be not acquitted, after he
has recovered in a Writ of Mesne, he shall have a Writ of Distringas ad
acquietand. Fo. 100. Vide, etc. F.N.B. 138.

If two joyntenants bring a Writ of Mesne, and the one is summoned and severed,
the other cannot fore-judge the Mesne, for he ought to be attendant to the Lord
Paramount, as the Mesne was, and that cannot he be alone. And so if there be
two joyntenants Mesnes, and in a Writ of Mesne, brought against them, one
makes default, and the other appears, there can be no fore-judger. Vide Libr.
and quaere. If the Daughter, the Son being in venture sa mere, before judged, it
shall bind the Son that is born afterward; for he had no right at the time of
fore-judgement.

CHAP. VII. Homage Auncestrel.
Sect. 143. etc.
HOm. Aunc. est lou un tenant tient sa terre de So^ Seigper Homage, and m. le
tenant and ses Ancestors que heir il est ont tenus m. la terre del dit
Seignior and de ses ancestors, etc. de temps don't memory ne court, per homage,
and ont st. a eux homage. Tiel Seignior doit garrant. son tenant queunt il e^
implede de la terre, etc.

Auxi^il doit acquiter le tenant envers touts Seigniors Paramount luy de chesi
manner de service. Mes si le Seignior navoit recieve pas homage del tenant,
etc. Need asc' de ses ancestors il poit disclaimer en le tenancy qua^nt il est
vouch, and issint oust le tenant de son garrantie.

Sect. 145.
Est tanta and talis connexio per homagium inter dominum and tenentem, quod
tantum debet dominus tenenti, quantum tenens domino, praeter solam reverentiam.
Bract. Fo. 78. Glan. li. 9. ca. 4. and Brit. Fo. 170. a.

Ancient continued inheritance on both parties has more privilege and account
in Law, then inheritances lately or within memory acquired. Fol. 101. a.

Warrantus, vouchee is either to defend the right against the demandant, or to
yield him other Land, etc. in value, and extends to Lands, etc. of an estate
of Freehold, or inheritance: and not to any Chattell real, personal, or mixed,
saving only in case of a wardship granted with warrant; for in the other cases
concerning Chattels, etc. The voucher shall have his action of Covenant, if he
has a Deed, or if it be by parol, then an action upon his Case, or an action
of deceit, etc.

The process whereby the vouchee is called is a Summon. ad War. whereupon if
the Sheriff return that the vouchee is summoned and he makes default. Mag.
Cape ad valentiam is awarded, when if he make default again, then judgment is
given against the Tenant, and he over to have in value against the vouchee. But
if the Sheriff return that he has nothing, then after Writs of Alias, and
pluries, a Writ of sequatur sub suo periculo shall be awarded, etc. and the
demandant shall not have judgment to recover in value, because the vouchee was
never warned. Vide Libr. Fo. 101. b.

When the tenant being impleaded within a particular jurisdiction (as in
London, etc.) Voucheth one to war. and prays that he may be summoned in some
other County out of the jurisdiction of that Court: this is called a foreign
voucher. By the Civil Law every man is bound to warrant the thing, that he
sells or conveyeth, albeit there be no express warrant, but the Common Law
binds him not, unless there be a warranty either in Deed, or in Law, for,
Caveat emptor, etc.

There be three kinds of disclaimer, i. e. in the Tenancy; in the blood, and
in the Seigniory. F.N.B. 197. and 151. b.

In the case of Homage Auncestrel (which is a special warranty in Law, by the
authority of Littleton) the Lands generally that the Lord has at the time of
the voucher, shall be liable to execution in value, whether he has them by
descent or purchase. But in the case of an express warranty the heir shall be
charged but only for such Lands as he has descent from the Auncestrel which
created the warranty. F.N.B. 152.

And note, the Lands of the vouchee shall be liable to the warranty, that the
vouchee has at the time of the voucher; for that the voucher is in lieu of an
action, and in a War. Cartae, the Land which the defendant has at the time of
the Writ brought shall be liable to the warranty. Fo. 102. a.

Upon a judgment in debt, the Plaintiff shall not have execution, but only of
that Land which the Defendant had at the time of the judgment, for that the
action was brought in respect of the person, and not in respect of the Land.
Vide Lib. etc.

If a man give Lands in Fee with warranty, and bind certain Lands specially to
warranty, the person of the Feoffor is hereby bound, and not the land, unless
he has it at the time of the voucher. 32. E. 1. voucher 292.

Sect. 146.
En Chesc' case lou le Seignior poit disclaymer, etc. Et de ceo poit disclaimer
en Court de Record, son Seigniory e^ extinct and le rerant tiendra del Seignior
procheine Paramount, etc.

Meliorem conditionem Ecclesiae suae facere potem praelatus deteriorem
nequaquam; and again, Ecclesiae suae condici. melior. facere possunt sine
consensu, deteriorem non possunt sine consensu.

Expedit reipublicae ut sit finis litium, vide fol. 103. a.

If an action of Debt upon an Obligation against an Abbot, the Abbot
acknowledges the action, and dies, the successor shall not avoid Execution,
though the Obligation was made without the assent of the Covent, for he cannot
falsify the Recovery in an higher action. Et res judicata pro veritate
accipitur; and this is but a Chattel, 7 Reg. 2. tit Abbot 7.

Sect. 147, and 148.
If the tenant make a feoffment in fee upon condition, and dies, his heir
performs the condition, and re-entreth, the Homage ancestrel is destroyed in
respect of the interruption of the continuance of the privity and estate, 1.
Mich. 14, and 15 El.

Tenant que fist homage al pere, ne far homage al fits, fo. 103. b. vide le
except. a ce rule.

Sect. 149, 150, etc.
Fealty est incident a chesc' atturnment del tenant grant le seigniory est
grant None shall do homage but the tenant of the Land, to the Lords of whom it
is holden, fol. 104. a. 8 Ed. 4. 27. b. *

The recovery of the seigniory differs from the alienation of the Lord, which
is his own act, or the descent of the seigniory to the heir, which is an act in
law; for that by the Recovery, the state of him that received the homage is
defeated, for it shall not lie in the mouth of the tenant, to falsify the
recovery which was against his Lord, etc. for that the tenant had nothing
therein, etc.

If a man had made a Lease for years to begin at Michaelmas, reserved a rent,
and he had suffered a Common Recovery before Michaelmas, the Recoverer should
distrain for rent, which the lessor before the recovery could not, 28 H. 8.
Dyer 41. fol. 104. b.

The tenant ought to seek the Lord to do him homage, etc. for this service is
personal, etc. but rent may be paid and received by other; and therefore a
tender of the rent upon the land is sufficient, fo. 105. a.

CHAP. VIII. Grand Sergeanty.
Sect. 153.
GRand Sergeanty, est lou home tient ses terres del Roy per les services que il
doit fair en son proper person, com de port. le banner del Roy, out sa lance,
etc.

Ceo tenure en ten. per service de Chivalry; mes le livery paiam al Roy pur
reliese, le value (ouster les charges and reprises) des terres pur an S. 154,
and 158.

Magna Sergeanty; i. e. Magna Servitium: because it is greater and more worthy
than Knight service; for this is Revera servitium Regale, and not Militare,
only.

This Tenure has seven special properties: 1. To be holden of the King only.
2. It must be done when the tenant is able in proper person. 3. This service is
certain and particular. 4. The Relief due, etc. differs from Knights service.
5. It is to be done within the Realm. 6. It is subject to neither Aid pur fair
fits Chivaler, or file marriage. And 7. it pays no Escuage, fo. 105. b. 11 H.
4. 34. F.N. B. 83.

There were diverse Lords Marshals of England before the reign of R. 2. yet King
R. 2. created Tho. Moubrey Duke of Norfolk, and first Earl Marshal of England,
per nomen Comitis Marischalli Angliae. in Rot. pat. 20. R. 2.

Thesaurus Regis rospicit Regem and Regnum; And Census Regis est anima reipub.
fol. 106. a. Dyer 4 El. 213.

Where the Grand Sergeanty is to be done to the Royal person of the King, or to
execute one of those high and great Offices, there his tenant cannot make a
Deputy without the Kings license, etc. But he that holds to serve him in his
War within the Realm, or by Cornage, may make a Deputy, fol. 107. a. vide libr.
etc. qu.

CHAP. IX. Petit Sergeanty.
Sect. 159.
PEtit Serjeanty est lou home tient, etc. del Roy, de rend. al Roy annualment
un arc, ou un Espee, etc. petit chooses touchant le guerre. Et tiel service ne
forsque Socage en effect.

If one holds Land of a common person in gross as of his person, and not of
any Manor, etc. and this Seigniory escheateth to the King (yea though it be by
Attainder of Treason) he holds of the person of the King, and not in Capite,
because the original Tenure was not created by the King. And therefore it is
directly said, That a Tenure of the King in Capite, is when the Land is not
holden of the King, as of any Manor, Castle, Honor, etc. but of his Crown.

Nota. A man may hold of the King in Capite, or of his Crown, as well in
Socage, as by Knights service, fol. 191. 4.

CHAP. X. Tenure en Burgage.
Sect. 162.
ESt lou les tenants deins le Burgh sont tenus del seignieur del Burgh per
cert' rent, etc. and tiel tenure ne forsque tenure en Socage.

Burgh is an ancient Town holden of the King or any other Lord, which sends
Burgesses to the Parliament, fo. 109. a. l. 10. 123. Major de Lynns C.

A City is a Borough incorporate, which has, or (within time of memory) have
had a Bishop: and though the Bishopric be dissolved, yet the City remains;
as Westminster. Cambridge an ancient City, Mich. 7. R. 1. Rot. 1. vide libr.
fo. 109. b.

Cities were instituted for three purposes: 1. For conservation of Laws,
whereby every man enjoys his own in peace. 2. For tuition and defense of the
Kings Subjects, and for keeping the Kings peace in time of sudden uproar. And
3. For defense of the Realm against outward and inward hostility.

There is lex and consuetudo Parliamenti, quae quidem lex quaerenda est ab
omnibus, ignorata a multis, and cognita a paucis. Of the Members of this Court
of Parliament, some be by descent, as ancient Noblemen; some by creation, as
Nobles newly created; some by succession, as Bishops; some by election, as
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, fol. 110. a. ante Sect. 3.

The Jurisdiction of this Court is so transcendent, that it makes, enlarges,
diminishes, abrogateth, repealeth and reviveth Laws, Statutes, Acts and
Ordinances, concerning matters Ecclesiastical, Capital, Criminal, Common,
Civil, Martial, Maritine, etc. None can begin, continue or dissolve the
Parliament but by the Kings Authority.

Of this Court it is said, Que il enim de tresgrand honor and justice, de que
null doit imaginer chose dishonorable.

Habet Rex Cur' suam in Concilio suo in Parliamentis suis praesentibus
Praelatis, Comitibus, Baronibus, Proceribus, and aliis viris peritis, ubi
terminatae sunt dubitationes judiciorum, and novis injuriis emersis nova
constituuntur remedia, and unicuique justitia prout meruerit retribuetur, Pl.
c. 398. b. d. Pet. St. c. 55. fo. 164. Flet. l. 2. c. 2.

The King of England is armed with diverse Counsels; as first, Commune
Concilium, and that is the Court of Parliament. 2. Magnum Concilium, and this
is sometime applied to the Upper House of Parliament, and sometime out of
Parliament time to the Peers of the Realm. 3. The Privy Council. And 4. the
Kings Council for Law matters, and they are his Judges of the Law.

Sect. 165, etc.
Ascun Burghs ont tiel Custom, que le puisne fits inherita, etc. Consuetudo
quandoque pro lege servatur, in partibus ubi fuerit more utentium approbata,
and vicem legis obtinet, longae vi enim temporis usus and consuetudinis non
vilis authoritas. Longa possessio (sicut jus) parit jus possidendi, and tollit
actionem vero domino. Bracton.

Of every Custom there be two essential parts; Time out of mind, and
Continuance and peaceable usage without lawful interruption.

If Lands be within a Manor, Fee, or Seigniery, the same by the Custom of the
Manor, etc. May be devisable; or of the nature of Gavelkinde, or of Borough
English. 21. Ed. 4. 53. 54. otherwise is it. In an upland Town etc.

Nota, That in special Cases a Custom may be alleged within a Hamlet, a
Town, a Burgh, a City, a Manor, an Honor, an Hundred, and a County: but a
Custom cannot be alleged generally within the Realm, etc. For that is the
Common Law. Fo. 110. b. F.N.B. 122. Dyer 54. By some Customs the youngest
brother shall inherit.

Sect. 166. and 167.
Item en asc' Burghs per le oustom. feme avera pur sa Dower touts les tenement
que feront a sa baron, etc. And this called Frank Bank. Here is employed by
(etc.) that in some places the Wife shall have the moity of her Husbands Lands,
so long as she lives unmarried, as in Gavelkind. And of Lands in Gavelkind a
man shall be Tenant by the Courtesy, without having of any issue.

In some places the Widow shall have the whole, or half, Dum sola and casta
vixerit, etc. F.N.B. 150.

Item, home poit deviser ses terres qui il ad en Fee simple, deins mesme le
Burgh, etc. A devisor per son Testam. is to speak by his Testament, what his
mind is to have done after his decease. Testamentum est duplex, 1. In Scriptis.
2. Nuncupatinum, seu fine scriptis. The devisee, cannot take goods, etc.
without the assent of the Executors; otherwise it is of Lands devised by
Custom.

If a man has Lands holden by Knights service in Capite, and lands in Socage,
he can devise but two parts of the whole; But if he hold lands by
Knight Service of the King, and not in Capite, or of a mean Lord, and has
also Lands in Socage he may devise two parts of his Land holden by Knights
service and all his Socage Lands. Vide lib. and quaere. Fo. 111. b.

If a man make a Feoffment in Fee of his Lands holden by Knights service to the
use of such person and persons, and of such Estate and estates, etc. As he
shall appoint by his Will, in this case by operation of Law, the use and State
vests in the Feoffor, and he is seized of a qualified Fee. In this Case if the
Feoffor limit Estates by his will, by force and according to his power, there
the use and the Estates growing out of the Feoffment are good for the whole,
and the last will is but directory. Vide Lib. etc.

If a gift in Tail, or a Lease for life be made the remainder in Fee, this
remainder is not within the Statute.

Sect. 168. Fo. 112.
By no conveyance at the Common Law a man could during the Coverture either in
possession, reversion or remainder limit an estate to his Wife. But a man may
by his Deed Covenant with others to stand seized to the use of his wife, or
make a Feoffment, etc. to the use of his Wife, and now the state is executed to
such uses by the Statute of 27 H. 8. for an use is but a trust and confidence,
which by such a mean might be limited, by the husband to the wife,

Omnia quae sunt uxoris sunt ipsius viri, non habet uxor potestatem sui sed
vir. Bract. lib. 2. ca. 15.

Vir and uxor sunt quasi unica persona quia caro una, and sanguis unus, res
licet sit propria uxoris, vir tamen ejus custos, cum sit caput mulieris. Bract.
5. tract. 5. ca. 25. al. 2. Baron. 10 H. 720. Extrix delce^ que use, poit vend.
terres devisi.

In contractibus benigna, in testamentis benignior, in restitutionibus
benignissima interpretatio facienda est voluntas testatoris est ambulatoria
usque ad mortem.

The first grant and the last will is of greatest force.

Cum duo inter se pugnantia reperiuntur in testamento ultimum ratum est. If a
feme covert be seized of Lands in Fee, she cannot devise the same to her
husband; because she is sub potestate viri, etc.

Sect. 169. of 113.
Item per tiel custom home poit deviser per sen testamentum que les executors
point aliewr les tenements in Fee, etc. pur cert. sum. de money a distribut. pur
son alme, and issint. poies veir icy un case ou home poit fair loial estate.
and encore il navoit riens en les tenements al temps del estate ft. quia
consuetudo ex certa causa rationabili usitata, private communem legem. Here it
appears that the Executors having but a power, as Littl. puts the Case, to
sell, they must all join in the sale. Fo. 112. b. Vide, etc. Dyer 177.

But if a man devises Lands to his executors to be sold and makes two
Executors and the one dies, yet the survivor may sell the Land, because as the
state, so the Trust shall survive; and so note a diversity between a bare
trust, and a trust coupled with an interest. 39. Ass. p. 17. Dyer 210. and 371.

By the Statute of 21 H. 8. it is provided that where Lands are willed to be
sold by Executors, that though part of them refuse, yet the residue may sell.
Lib. 1. 173.

Mine advise to them that make such devise by will is, to make it as certain
as they can, as that the sale be made by his Executors or the survivors or
survivor of them, if his meaning be so, or by such, or so many of them as take
upon them the probate of his will, etc. And it is better to give them an
authority then an estate, unless his meaning be they should take the profits
of his Lands in the mean time, and then it is necessary that he devises, that
the mean profits till the sale shall be assets in their hands, for otherwise
they shall not be so. Vide lib. (fo. 113.) Stat. 32. H. 8. c. 2. 34. H. 8. cap.
5.

Consuetudo prescripta and legitima vincet legem. But no Custom or
prescription can take away the force of an Act of Parliament. Praescriptio est
titulus ex usu and tempore substantiam capiens ab autoritate legis, A title
taking his substance of use and time allowed by the Law. 12 E. 4. 1. 2 M. Br.
pr. 100. 6 E. 6. Die. 31. 45. Ass. 8.

Sect. 170.
I. S. Seized of the Manor of D. in Fee prescribes thus: that I.S. his
ancestors, and all those whose estate he has in the said Manor, have time out
of mind of man had and used to have common of pasture, etc. in such a place,
etc. Being the Land of some other, etc. as pertaining to the said Manor. A
Custom, is in this manner: A. Copyholder of the Manor of D. does plead, etc.
that all the Copyholders, etc. have had and used to have common of pasture,
etc. in such a wast of the Lord, parcel of the said Manor. But both to
customs and prescriptions these two things are incident inseparable, viz.
possession, or usage: and time: Possession must have 3 qualities, it must be
long, continual, and peaceable. S. 170.

Note, 1. To what things a man may make a title by prescription without
Charter; and 2. How it may be lost by interruption. For the first, as to
Franchises and liberties as cannot be seized as forfeited, before the cause of
forfeiture appear of Record, no man can make a title by prescription, etc. as
to the goods and Chattels of Felons, etc. to make a Coroner, etc. l. 5. 109. l.
9. 29.

But to treasure trove, waifes, estraies, etc. to hold Pleas, etc. A man may
make a title by usage only, etc. Without any matter of Record ( Fo. 114. 6.) 9
H. 7. 11. 20.

And for the second, it is to be known that the title being once gained by
prescription or custom, cannot be lost by the interruption of the possession,
for 10 or 20 years, but by interruption in the right, as if a man have had a
rent or common by prescription, unity of possession of as high and perdurable
estate is an interruption in the right. Vide, etc. (Fo. 114. b.)

A Modus decimandi was alleged, Mich. 42. and 44 Eliz. in banco Reg. by
prescription time out of mind for tithes of Lambs, and thereupon issue
joined, and the Jury found that before 20 years then last past there was such a
prescription, and that for this 20 years he had paid the Lambs in specie; and
it was objected first, that the issue was found against the plaintiff, for the
prescription was general, for all the time of prescription, and 20 years fail
thereof. 2. That the party by payment of tithes in specie had waived the
praescription or custom. But it was adjudged for the plaintiff in the
prohibition, for albeit the modus decim. had not been paid by the space of 20
years, yet the prescription being found, the substance of the issue is found
for the plaintiff. Vide Lib. etc. M. 43. and 44 Eliz. B.R. Nowell and Hicks.

Note, all the prescriptions that were limited from a certain time, were by
Act of Parliament, as from the time of H. 1. After that, from the time of H. 2.
By the Statute of Merton; and from the time of R. 2. By the Statute of Westminster.
1. But the prescription of time out of memory of man, was at the Common Law,
and limited no time. Memory or knowledge is twofold. First, by knowledge, by
proof, as by Record, or sufficient matter of writing. 2. by his own proper
knowledge. 28. Ass. 25. 11 H. 7. 21. Die. 273.

There is a diversity between an Act of Parliament in the Negative, and in the
Affirmative: for an Affirmative Act does not take away a custom, as the
Statute of Wills of 32. and 34 H. 8. Do not take away a custom to devise Lands,
etc. Also there is a diversity between Statutes that be in the Negative: for if
a Statute in the Negative be declarative of the Ancient Law, that is in
Affirmative of the common Law, there as well as a man may prescribe, etc.
Against the common Law, so a man may do against such a Statute. Fo. 115. a.
Vide and qu. M. Carta. c. 35.

None shall cut down any trees of his own within a forest, without view of the
Forrester. Statute 34 E. 1. 4. Forest. Rast. But a man may prescribe to cut
down his woods, etc. 16 El. in le Escheq.

The common Law appears in the Statute of Mag. Cart. and other ancient
Statutes: (which for the most part are Affirmative of the Common Law) in
original writs, in judicial Records, and in our books of terms and years.
Acts of Parliament appear in the Rolls of Parliament, and for the most part are
in Print. Particular customs are to be proved. Fo. 115. b.

Sect. 171.
Every City is a Burgh, but every Burgh is not a City. And it appears by
Littleton, that a Town is the Genus, and a Borough is the species, for he says
that every Borough is a Town, but every Town is not a Borough. Et sub
appellatione villarum continentur Burgi and Civitates. Fortescue cap. 24.

CHAP. XI. Tenure en Villenage.
Sect. 172.
TEnure en Vill vnage e^ pluis properment qut un villein tien terres, etc.
Solonq. le custom del Manner, ou auterment a la volunt son Seignior, and de
fair a son Seignior villeine service; Null terre tenus en villenage ne unqs.
fer. home frank, villain.

Villain, a villa; quia villae adscriptus est.

And therefore a Tenure in Villenage is twofold, one where the person of the
Tenant is bond, and the Tenure servile, the other where the person is free, and
the Tenure servile. Serva terra liberos de sanguine existentes, villanos facere
non potest; quia licet faciunt opera servilia, tamen non faciunt ea ratione
personarum, sed ratione tenementorum, etc.

A villain, is called Nativus, a nascendo; quia plerumque natus est servus. Fo.
116. b.

Est autem libertas, naturalis facultas cjus quod cuique facere libet * nisi
quod de jure, aut vi prohibetur. Servitus est constitutio de jure gentium, qua
quis domino alieno contra naturam subjicitur. Bract. l. ca. 6. It was ordained,
for the cruelty of some Lords that he that killed his villein, should have the
same judgment as if he had killed a freeman, and thereupon they were called
Servi, quia servabantur a dominis, and non Occidibantur, and non a serviendo.

Servitude was first inflicted upon Cham for dishonouring of his Father Noah.
Ante vini inventionem inconcussa libertas: non esset hodie servitus si ebrietas
not fuisset. Ambrose.

When the villain has an estate of any thing certain, the Lord shall have it,
as a Rent, Commons Certain, etc. But the Lord shall not take advantage of any
Obligation, or Covenant, or other thing in action made to the villain, because
they lie in privity, and cannot be transferred to others D. and St. c. 43. 22.
Ass. p. 37.

Quicquid acquiritur servo, acquiritur Dom. Fo. 117. a.

The Statute of Donis Condic. gives remedy to the issues of the Donee (in
Tail) that have capacity and power to take and retain such a gift. Pl. C. 555.
Walsing. c.

Modus and conventio vincunt legem.

Sect. 174.
Aliud est tenere libere, and aliud tenere per liberum Servitium. Fleta. l. 3.
c. 13. Mirr. ca. 2. Sect. 18.

Sect. 175
Chesc. villain, ou est un villeine pur tille de prescription sc. que il and
ses Ancestors ont este villeines de temps don't memory ne Court, ou il est
villain per son confession them. en court de Record. And every Court of Record
is the Kings Court, albeit another may have the profit, wherein if the Judges
do err, a Writ of error does lie. But the County Court, the 100 Court, etc.
are no Courts of Record; and therefore the proceedings therein may be denied
and tried by Jury, and upon their judgments a Writ of error lies not, but a
Writ of false judgment, for that they are no Courts of Record, because they
cannot hold Plea of debt or tre^^^^s, if the debt or damages do amount to 40.
s. or of any trespass. Vi and armis. l. 6. 11. 12. Jentlemans Case.

Sect. 177.
Il serr. adjudge le folly del seignieur s'il neutra pas quent les terres, etc.
sont en le maine de son villeine.

For before entry, the Lord has neither jus in re, nec jus ad rem: sed, nullum
tempus occurrit Regi.

The act of law, i. e. the descent or escheat may as well prevent the Lord of
his entry, as the act of the party by alienation, fo. 118. a. 9 H. 6. 21.

Goods or Chattels are either personal, as a horse and other beasts,
household stuff, etc. or real, as terms for years of Lands, etc. Wardships, the
interest of tenant by Statute Staple, etc.

Nota, That as the title of the Lord to his villains lands, begins by his
entry; so his title to the goods begins by the seizure of them.

Si le seignieur claim les biens and feisist parcel en nosm. de seisin de
touts les biens que le villeine ad ou aver poit, etc.

Such a claim does not only vest the goods which the villain then has, but
also which he after that shall acquire and get.

Sect. 179.
Le seignieur poit maintenant claim le reversion de son villain, car en
altar form il ne poit vener al reversion.

And the Lord cannot claim the reversion, but upon the Land, and he by his
coming upon the Land for that purpose is no Trespasser.

Sect. 180.
Issent le seignieur, etc. poit vener al esglise and claim le Advowson ac son
villein, etc. for every claim or demand to divest any estate or interest, must
be made in that place, which is most apt for that purpose.

Advowson of a Church is the Right of Presentation or Collation to the Church.
Every Church is either Presentative, Collative, Donative, or Elective.

If the Church be Presentative, the Church is full by admission and institution
against any common person; but against the King it is not full before
induction, fo. 119. b.

Incumbent, of incumbo, i.e. to be diligently resident, id est, obnixe operam
dare, 10 H. 6, 7.

A Church Presentative may become void five manner of ways, viz. 1. By Death.
2. By Creation. 3. By Resignation. 4. By Deprivation. 5. By Cession, as by
taking a Benefice incompatible, fo. 120. a. F.N.B. 31, 32.

By the Statute of 31 Eliz. the Presentation, Admission, Institution, and
Induction into a Benefice by Simony, are made void; which before were but
voidable by Deprivation. Note: If the Church becomes void, albeit the present
avoidance be not by law grantable over, yet may the Lord of the villain
present, etc. and thereby gain the inheritance of the Advowson, etc. because it
is not merely a Chose in action; for if a feme covert be seized of an Advowson,
and the Church becomes void, and the Wife dies, the husband shall present,
etc. but otherwise it is of a bond made to the wife, because that is merely in
action, 14 H. 4. 12. 43 E. 3. 10. 39 E. 3. 5. 4 H. 6. 5.

Sect. 181.
Ou le villain and ses Ancestors ont este regardant al Manor, fi le seignieur
grant mes les villeine par son fait a un auter, donques il est villeine en
gros. He is called Regardant to a Manor, because he has the charge to all base
and villainous services within the same, etc. and his service is not certain,
but he must have regard to that which is commanded him. In gross, is that which
belongs to the person of the Lord, and belongs not to any Manor Lands, etc.
Auxi sont villains en gros par prescript. etc. Mirr. c. 2. sect. 18.

Sect. 183.
A man cannot prescribe in any thing by a que estate, that lies in grant, and
cannot pass without Deed or Fine, but in him and his Ancestors he may, because
he comes in by descent, without any conveyance. Neither can a man plead a que
estate in himself, of any thing that cannot pass without Deed, but in another
he may, as in bar of an avowry, the Plaintiff may plead que estate in the
seigniory in avowant, 39 H. 6. 8. fo. 121. a.

When a thing that lies in grant is but a conveyance to the thing claimed by
prescription, there a que estate may be alleged of a thing that lies in
grant, as a man may prescribe, that he and his Ancestors, etc. in an hundred,
have time out of mind, etc. had a Leet, etc. 11 H. 4. 89. The Plaintiff shall
not entitle him by a que estate, but he must show how he came by it, but after
avowry made the Plaintiff shall plead a que estate, because he is now become as
a Defendant, 9 E. 4. 3. b.

A man may plead a que estate of a tenancy in tail, or an estate for life, so
as he averreth the life of them, otherwise it is of a lease for years, or at
will, 41. Ass. 2. A Disseisor, Abator, Intruder, Recoverer, or any other that
comes in the post, shall plead a que estate, 22 H. 6. 34. 6 E. 4. 12. 31 H. 8.
que estate, Br. 48.

A que estate must be alleged in the tenant or defendant himself, and not in
one in the mean Conveyance from whom he claims, 11 H. 4. 81. 9 E. 4. 3. 1 E.
6. quae estate, Br. 49.

A Deed pleaded ought to be showed to the Court, because every Deed must prove
it self to have sufficient words in law, whereof the Court must adjudge, and
also to be proved by witnesses, and other proof if the Deed be denied, which is
matter of fact, fo. 121. b. A manor may pass by livery of seisin without Deed,
with all things appertaining, etc. without saying, cum pertinent, etc.

Sect. 184.
Null chose en regardant a un Manor, etc. forsque villeine, mes aute^ chooses
come Advowsons, etc. sont appendants, etc.

Appendants are ever by prescription, but appurtenants may be created in some
cases at this day, fo. 121. b.

Things incorporeal which lie in grant, as Advowsons, Villains Commons, etc.
may be appendant to things corporeal, as a Manor, house, and lands; or things
corporeal to things incorporeal, as Lands to an Office. But yet they must agree
in nature and quality, for a Common of Turbary, or of Estovers, cannot be
appendant or appurtenant to land, but to a house to be spent there, vide lib.
etc.

Item, Nothing can be properly appendant or appurtenant, etc. unless the
principal or superior thing be of perpetual subsistence and continuance.
Offices of fee, are of perpetual subsistence, either being in esse, or in that
they are grantable over, fo. 121. a. vide, etc.

Note, That an Advowson at one turn may be appendant, and at another turn in
gross; as if the Manor be divided between Coparceners, and every one has a
part of the Manor, without saying any thing of the Advowson appendant, the
Advowson remains in Coparcenary, and yet in every of their turns, it is
appendant to that part which they have, and so it is if they make Composition
to present against common right, yet it remains appendant. But if upon such a
partition an express Exception be made of the Advowson, then the Advowson
remains in Coparcenary and in gross, and so are the books reconciled, 13 E. 2.
qu. imp. 170, 9 El. Dyer 249. 2 H. 7. 5. vide, etc.

If a man purchase part of the Land wherein Common appendant is to be had, the
Common shall be apportioned, because it is of Common right, but not so of a
Common appurtment, or of any other Common of what nature soever. But both
Common appendant and app^^^ment shall be apportioned by alienation of part of
the Land, etc. and for Common appurtment one must prescribe, i. e. for Beasts
not commonable, as Swine, Goats, etc. l. 4. 35, etc. Tirringhams Case.

A Common in gross appertains to no Land, and must be by writing or
prescription. Fo. 122. a.

If a tenancy escheat the Lord ne in cresa son common car e^ aper^ al dems. and
nemy al services.

A man may prescribe to have Sepa^alem pasturam, or to have solam vesturam
terrae, from such a day till such a day, and hereby the owner of the soil
shall be excluded to pasture or feed there. So a man may prescribe to have
separalem piscariam in such a water, and the owner of the soil shall not fish
there, but if he claim to have Communiam piscariae, or liberam piscariam, the
owner of the Soil shall fish there, 3 E. 3. 29. 30. 20 H. 6. 4. 10 H. 7. 24.

A man seized of Land, whereunto Common is appendant, and is disseised, the
Disseisee cannot use the Common until he enters into the land, etc. because
it should be a prejudice to the tenant of the soil; for if the Disseisee might
do it, the Disseisot also might put on his cattle, which should be a double
charge to the tenant. But otherwise it is in case of an Advowson appendant,
etc. 19 H. 6. 33. vide Sect. 541.

Sect. 185. and 186.
Si home voile en Court de Record soy conuster dest villeine, que ne fuit
villeine adevant, tiel est villeine en gross.

This is intended whete he is brought into Court by course of Law, Vide libr.
etc. fo. 122. b. 26. Ass. 62. 37. Ass. 17.

Feme que est utlage enim dit waive, waiviata, i. e. derelicta, left out, or
not regarded, and not utlegata, or exlex; for that women are not sworn in
Leers, or Tourns, as men which be of the age of 12 years or more be, vide. etc.
Reg. Orig. 132. 3 H. 5. tit. Vtlawry Statham.

Sect. 187, etc
Lex Angliae nunquam matris sed semper patris conditionem imitari partum
judica. Surculus totum alimentum a^ stipite capit, poma tamen edit sua.
Fortescue c. 42.

Si mulier serva copulata sit libero, etc. quod partus habebit hereditatem and
matter nullum dotem, quia mortuo vito libero redit iu pristinum statum
servitutis nifi haeres ei dotem secerit de gratia^. Bract lib. 4. fo. 298. b.

A child was born after the father deceased per undecim dies post ultimum
tempus legitimum (sc. nine months, or forty weeks) mulieribus constitutum: and
it was adjudged, Quod dici non debet filius, etc. Trin. 18. E. 1. Rot. 61.
Beaf. coram Rege.

Un villeine n'avar action envers son seigneiur; mes en special cases, etc. il
poit aver action, etc. sicome appeal de mort son pere, etc. Auxi un Niefe avaunt
un appeal de Rape en v^rs sa seignieur. W. 1. c. 13. W. 2. cap. 35.

Sect. 191, and 192.
The Villain shall have an action as Executor against his Lord, and it is no
plea for the Lord to say, that the Plaintiff is his villain, for he shall not
be enfranchised by the user of this action, because he has it by a gift in Law
to the use of the Testator, and not to his own use. Note, Damages recovered by
the Executor in an action of Trespass shall be assets, and yet they were never
in the Testator, 21 E. 4. 4. b. 1 H. 4. 6.

Not only tenant in tail, and tenant for life of a Villain, shall have the
perquisite of the Villain in fee, but tenant for years, and tenant at will also
shall have it in fee; for the law respects not the quantity of the estate,
but the law respects the quality; for in what right he has the Villain, in
the same right he shall have the perquisite, etc. For if a man has a Villain
in the right of his wife, and after he is entitled to be tenant by the Courtesy
in his own right, he shall have the perquisite to him and his heirs, vide lib.
etc. fo. 124. b.

Protestation is an exclusion of a Conclusion, that a party to an action may by
pleading incur; or it is a safeguard to the party which keeps him from being
concluded by the plea he is to make, if the issue be found for him: but in this
case without a Protestation, albeit the issue be found for the Lord, the
Villain shall be en franchised. S. 192 Pl. c. 276. in Greysbrooks Case.

Sect. 193.
Three things be favored in Law, Life Liberty, Dower.

Trial, is to find out by due examination the truth of the point in issue or
question between the parties, whereupon Judgment may be given.

Quaestio juris, shall be tried by the Judges either upon a Demur, special
Verdict, or Exception, for cuilibet in sua art perito est credendum, and quod
quisque norit in hoc se exerceat, and ad quaestionem juris non respondeant
juratores: But quaestio facti shall be tried by the Verdict of Twelve men, fo.
125. a, vide, etc.

If the Jury comes out of a wrong place, or returned by a wrong Officer, and
give a Verdict, Judgment ought not to be given upon such a Verdict, qu. etc.

Every (...) must come out of the Neighborhood of a Castle, Manor, Town, or
Hamlet, or place known; out of a Castle, etc. as some Forests, etc. for that
the inhabitants, etc. may have the better and more certain knowledge of the
fact, 3 E. 3. 73. 20. H. 6. 30, 7. H. 4. 27.

Every plea concerning the person of the Plaintiff, etc. shall be tried where
the Writ is brought. Where the matter alleged extends into a place at the
Common Law, and a place within a Franchise, it shall be tried at the Common Law.

In an action against two, the one pleads to the Writ, the other to the action,
the plea to the Writ shall be first tried, for if that shall be found, all the
whole Writ shall abate, and make an end of the business, 8 E. 4. 24.

In a plea personal against diverse Defendants, the one Defendant pleads in
bar to parcel, etc. and the other pleads a plea which goes to the whole.
sc. to both Defendants; this last plea shall be first tried: for in a personal
action the discharge of one is the discharge of both; but in a plea real it is
otherwise, 15 E. 4. 25. b. etc. vide lib. etc, fo. 125. b. 9. H. 6. 46.

Where an issue is joined for part, and a Demurre for the residue, the Court
may direct the trial of the issue, or judge the Demurre first, etc. l. 5. 36 b.

Omnis consensus tollit errorem, fol. 1126. a. *

Issue, exitus, a single, certain and material point issuing out of the
allegations or pleas of the Plantiff and Defendant, consisting regularly upon
an Affirmative, and Negative, to be tried by Twelve men; and it is twofold; A
special Issue, as here in the case of Littleton; or general, as in Trespass,
Not guilty, in Assise, null tort, null disseisin, etc. And as an Issue natural
comes of two several persons, so an Issue legal issues out of two several
Allegations of adverse parties, vide Sect. 414.

An Issue being taken generally, refers to the Count, and not to the Writ,
7. E. 3. 34. vide. etc.

A special Issue must be taken in one certain material point which may be
best understood and best tried. 20 E. 3. Issue 31. 22. E. 4^ 28.

An Issue shall not be taken upon a Negative pregnant, which implies another
sufficient matter, but upon that which is single and simple, as Ne dona pas par
left. imply a gift by Parol, therefore the Issue must be Ne dona pas mo do and
forma. 21. H. 6. 9: b. 16. E. 4, 5.

An Issue joined upon an Absque hoc, etc. ought to have an Affirmat^ve after
it: Two Affirmatives shall not make an Issue, unless it be left the Issue
should not be tried. 18. Eliz Dyer 253. 22. H. 6. 19. 11. H 4. 79.

Some Issues be good upon matter Affirmative and Negative, albeit the
Affirmative and Negative be not in precise words; as in Debt upon a lease for
years, the Defendant pleads that the Plaintiff had nothing at the time of the
lease made, the Plaintiff replies, that he was seized in fee; etc. this is a
good Issue. 2 H. 7. 4. 5. H. 7. 12. 26. H. 8. in formedon.

Where the Issue is joined of the part of the Defendant, the entry is and de
hoc ponit se super patriam; but if it be of the part of the Plaintiff, he entry
is and hoc petit quod inquiratur per patriam, 26 H. 8. 3. 18 Eliz. Dyer 353.

There be Negative pleas, that be issues of themselves, whereunto the Demandant
or Plaintiff cannot reply, no more than to a general Issue, which is, Et
praedictus.

A, similiter, As if the tenant do vouch, and the Demandant counterp^^ad, That
the Vouche or any of his Ancestors had any thing, etc. whereof he might make a
feoffment, he shall conclude, Et hoc petit quod inquir' per patria^, and praed'
tenens similiter. So in a fine Pleaded by the tenont, etc. the Demandant may
say, quod parts finis nihil habuerunt, and hoc petit, etc. And so in a Writ of
Dower, the Tenant plead unques seisie Dower, he shall conclude, Et de hoc point
se, etc. 22. H. 6. 57. 59. 3. H. 7. 9. 12. E. 4. 13.

Filiatio nou potest probari, and therefore the issue must be whether the wife
was ensenit the day of her husbands death. 41. E. 3. 11. b.

A protestation avails not the Party, that raketh it, if the issue be found
against him; except in some special Case *, as if a man enter into warranty,
and takes by protestation the value of the Land, albeit the plea be found
against him, yet the protestation shall serve him for the value. 10 E. 4.
Protest. 5. Vid. S. 192. * 30 E. 3. 14.

Sect. 194.
Si le Seignior Mayhem son villeine, il ser. de ceo endite a le suit del roy,
and sil soit de ceo attaint il ferr. un fine al roy. Mes le villein nava, etc.
appeal de Mayhem, because that in appeal he shall recover but damages, which
the Lord after execution might take again, and so the judgment inutile and
illusory, and the Law never gives an action, when the end of it can bring no
profit or benefit to the pl. 1 H. 4. 6. b.

Mahemium (i. e.) membri mutilatio Endite (i. e.) an accusation found by an
equest of 12. or more upon their oath: (...), to accuse.

Finis Sumitur tripliciter. 1. For a pecuniary punishment for an offense, etc.
against the King. 2. For a sum given by the Tenant to the Lord* 3. For the
highest and best assurance of lands.


If a praecipe be brought against an infant, and hanging the Plea, he comes
of full age, he shall be amerced for the delay after his full age. Lib. 5. fo.
49 Vaughans Case.

So if the demandant or plaint, be nonfute, or judgment given against him, he
shall be likewise amerced pro falso clamore. Vide lib. fo. 126. b. etc.

If a Writ do abate by the act of the demandant or plaintiff, or for matter of
form, the demandant or plaintiff shall be amerced, but if it abate by the act
of God, as by the death of one, etc. it is otherwise. Lib. 8. fo. 60. b.
Bechers Case.

Wit, wita, Bote, wera or were old Saxon words, signify amerciament or
compensation, etc.

Ransom ne forsque redemption de pain corporel pro fine des deniers. Mirror
ca. 1 S. 1. and 3.

Ransom is ever when the Law inflicteth a corporal punishment by
imprisonment, (and so is also a fine) but otherwise it is of an amerciament.

Always at the common Law when the Defendant should lose life or member, the
writ said Felonice, etc.

And now albeit the Law be changed (for the Plantiff shall recover but damages
(yet the writ of appeal says still felonice. Vita and membra sunt in manu, seu
protestate regis. Bract. Lib. 1. fo. 6.

This offense of Mayhem, is under all felonies deserving death, and above all
other inferior offenses.

Inter crimina majora minimum, and inter minora maximum. Inutilis labor and
fine fructu non est effectus legis. Non licet, quod dispendio licet. Sapiens
incipit a fine. Lex non praecipit inutilia.

Therefore the Law forbids such recoveries whose ends are vain, chargeable
and unprofitable.

Sect. 195.
Demandant and Tenant, in real actions; plantiff, and defendant in actions
personal and mixed. In a personal action brought by A. B. against C.D. the
defense is, and praed. C.D. defendit vim and injuriam quando, etc. Et damna,
and quicquid quod ipse defendere debet. Vide libr. etc. fo. 127. b.

The defendant in this and the like action can plead no Plea at all before he
make himself party by this part of the defense. 1 E. 4. 15.

Sect. 196. etc.
6. Manners de homes y sont queux sils suont action judgment poit estr. demand
sils serront respous, etc. 1. Lou villein suist action euvers son Seignior. 2.
Lou hom. est utlage, sur act. de debt trns. etc. ou enditement 3. Un alien,
etc. 4. Un home que per judgment done envers luy sur un bre^ de praemunire
facias, etc. e^ horse del protection le roy. 5. Un home enter, etc. en Religion.
6 Un home que est excommenge per le ley de St. Esglise. Sils sorront respondus,
etc. This is the legal conclusion of the plea, when the plea is in disability
of the person. Fo. 128. a.

By the common Law, the plaintiff, or defendant, the demandant or Tenant could
not appear by attorney, without the Kings special Warrant by Writ, or Letters
Patents.

Abusion e^ a reteiner Attorney sans bre^ de la Chancery, Mirr. ca. 5.

Attorneys point estr. touts ceux, aux queux, le voile suffer, fems ne poient
este. Attor. ne ensans, ne serfs, ne null que e^ en guard non auterment faut de
foy, ne null criminous, ne null essoigne, ne null que nest a le foy le roy null que
ne poit este Counter, etc. Mir. ca. 2. Sect. 21.

If an executor, etc. Sueth any action, utlary in the plaintiff shall not
disable him, because the suit is in auter droit, 21 E. 4. 49. b. 21 H. 6. 30. b.

In a Writ of error to reverse an utlary, utlary in that suit, or at any
strangers suit shall not disable the plaintiff, because if he in that action
should be disabled, if he were outlawed at several men's suits, he should never
reverse any of them. 7 H. 4. 40.

When any man pleads an outlawry in disability of the person he must show forth
the Record of the Outlawry, Maintenant sub pede figilli (because the plea is
dilatory) unless the Record be in the same Court. But if he plead an outlawry
in bar, if it be denied, he shall have a day to bring in. 6 Eliz. Dyer, 228.
F.N.B. 241. Stanf. pl. cor. 105.

Note, there be two kind of appearances before the Quinto exactus, to avoid the
outlawry, viz. an appearance in Deed, i.e. to render himself, etc. and the
other is by appearance in Law, i. e. by purchasing a supersedeas out of the
Court where the Record is, etc. Tr. 44. El. in Co. banco inter Mere and
dolburie.

If the ground or cause of the action be forfeited by the Outlawry, then may
the Outlawry be plead in Bar of the action, as in an action of debt, detinue,
etc. But in real actions, or in personal, where damages be uncertain, (as in
trns. of Battery, of goods, of breaking his clo^e, etc.) and are not forfeited
by the outlawry, their outlawry must be pleaded in disability of the person. 9
Eliz. Dyer 262. 7 H. 4. 4. b. l. 5. 109. Foxleyes C.

In the reign of King Alfred, and after the Conquest, no man could have been
outlawed, but for Felony, the punishment whereof was death, Mir. c. 1. S. 3.

Vtlagatus and waiviata capita gerunt Lupina, quae ab omnibus impune poterunt
amputari, merito enim sine lege perire debent, qui secundum legem vivere
recusant. Fleta lib. 1. cap. 27. But now the Law is changed, for avoiding of
inhumanity, etc. Vide 2 Ass. Pl. 3. 2 E. 3. tit. Coron. 148.

In Bractons time, and somewhat before, process of outlawry was ordained to ly
in all actions that were, qu. vi, and armis, which Bracton calls delicta, for
there the King shall have a fine. But since by diverse Statutes Process of
outlawry does ly in Account, Debt, De^inue. Annuity, Covenant, Action sur le
Case, Action sur le Statute. De 5 R. 2. and in diverse other common or civil
actions, Bract. lib. 5. fo. 421. 8 H. 6. 9. b. 40 E. 3. 5, etc. 35 H. 6. 6. 40
E. 3. 2.

Sect. 198.
If an alien had issue in English before his denization, that issue is not
inheritable to his Father; but if his Father be naturalized by Parliament, such
issue shall inherit.

Ligeantia est vinculum fidei, ligeantia e^ legis essentia. Et est duplex, 1
Perpetua, and ista ligeantia est aut nata, aut data. 2 Temporanea, quae e^ aut
localis, aut limitata, sc. denizatio pro vita, etc. Vide libr fo. 129. a.

A man may be born out of the realm of England, yet within the legeance, as in
Ireland etc.

An alien that is in league shall maintain personal action, for an alien may
trade, etc. but not real or mixed actions. An alien that is condemned in an
information, shall have a Writ of error to relieve himself, and sic. etc.

If an alien be made a Prior or Abbot, the Plea of Alien nee shall not disable
him to bring any real or mixed action concerning his house, because he is in
auter droit. 29 E. 3. Br. Denizen 15. Sic vide diversitat.

In Littletons Case the tenant or defendant shall neither plead alien nee to
the Writ, or to the action, but in disability of the person as in villenage or
outlawry; and Littleton is to be intended of an Alien in league; for if he be
an Alien enemy, the defendant may conclude to the action. Liver de entries
Alien. 1.

Sect. 199.
The judgment in a Praemunire, is that the defendant shall be from thenceforth
out of the Kings protection, and his lands and tenements, goods and chattels
forfeited to the King, and that his body shall remain in prison at the Kings
pleasure. And a man might do to him as to the Kings enemy, and a man may
lawfully kill an enemy. 24 H. 8. Brook Coron. 196.

But by the Statute 5 Eliz. ca. 1. It is not lawful for any person tn slay any
person attaint. in praemunire, etc. Tenant in tail attaint. in a praemunire
shall forfeit the Land, but during his life. Vide lestat. 16 R. 2. c. 5.

There be three things whereby every subject is protect. viz. Rex, lex, and
rescripta regis. The law is the rule, but it is mute; The King judges by his
Judges, and they are lex loquens The process and the execution which is the
life of the Law, consists in the Kings Writs. Rex tuetur legem, and lex
tuetur jus.

A man attainted of Treason, or Felony, is disabled to bring any action, for he
is, extra legem positus, and accounted in Law civiliter motuus. 4 E. 4. 8.

There is a general protection of the King, and this extends to all the Kings
loyal subjects, etc. and there is a particular protect. by Writ, etc. And this
is of two sorts, one to give a man immunity from actions or suits. The second,
for the safety of his person, servants and goods, lands, etc. from unlawful
molestation, or wrong.

The first is of right, and by law, the second are all of grace, (saving one)
for the general Protection implies as much. Of the first sort some are, cum
clausula (volumus) and of these protections,

There be four kinds, viz. 1 Quia profecturus. 2 Quia moraturus. 3 Quia
indebitatus nobis existit of the matter. 4 When any sent into the Kings service
in war is imprisoned beyond Sea. The former two are for staying of suits and
actions in general; and for these, nine things are to be observed. 1 The cause
of granting the protect. must be expressed, etc. and it is of two natures, the
one concerns service of war, as the Kings Soldier, etc. The other wisdom and
counsel, as the Kings Ambassador, pro negotiis regni, both these being for the
public good of the Realm, private men's actions and suits must be suspended
for a convenient time; for jura publica anteferenda privatis, and jura publica
ex privatis promiscue decidi non debent. A man in execution, in salva custodia,
shall not be delivered by a protection. 5 Mar. 162 Dyer.

2 These protections are not allowable only for men of full age, but for men
within age, and for women as necessary attendants upon the Camp, and that in
three Cases, quia lotrix, seu nutrix, seu obstetrix. 19 H. 6. 51. Vide libr.
and qu. fo. 130. a F. N.B. 28. l.

Corpor. aggreg. of many are not capable of protect. profecturae, or moraturae,
for the Corpor. it is invisible.

In every action or plea real, or mixed against two, etc. a protection cast for
the one does put the plea without day for all, as in debt, etc. 9 E. 3. Prot.
80, 81.

3 A protect. profecturae must not be purchased, pendente plito. unless it be
in a voyage royal: But otherwise it is, of a protect. Moraturae. 3 H. 6. prot.
2.

A protection cannot be cast, but when the party has a day in Court, and when
if he made default, it should save his default, etc. 4. (6 H. 22.

If a man has a protection and notwithstanding plead a plea yet at another day
of continuance, after that a protection may be cast, so at a day after an
exigent, but after appearance he cannot cast a protection in that term, until
a new continuance be taken, * 22. F. 3. 4.

And no protect. either Profect. or Morat. shall endure longer than a year and
a day, next after the rest or date of it. 39. H. 6. 39. *

4. The protection must be to some (certain) place out of the Realm of
England. Lib. 7. fo. 8. Calvin's Case.

5. In some actions Protection shall not be allowed by the Common Law as
appeals of Felony, and Mayhem; so it is where the King is sole party, etc.
And, in a Decies tant. where the King and the subject are plaintiff.

But in late acts of Parliament, Protections in personoll actions are
expressly ousted. Bract. Lib. 5. 139. etc.

In a Writ of Dower unde nihil habet, in a qu. imp. or ass. of Darr.
presentment, in ass. of no diss. In a qu. non misit, etc. no protection is
allowable. Vide.

By act of Parliament no protection shall be allowed in attaint nor in action
against a Jailer for an escape; nor in pleas of trns. or other contract made,
etc. after the date of the same protection. 23. H. 8. ca. 3.

Note in judicial Writs which are in nature of actions where the party has
day to appear, there a protection does lie, as in Writs of Scire fac. upon
Recoveries, Fines, Judgments, etc. So it is in a quid Iuris clamat, etc. But
in Writs of execution, as habere fac. Scis. Elegit, execution upon a Statute.
cap. ad Satisf. Fieri fac. There no protection can be cast for the defendant.
causa qua supra. 13. E. 3. Prot. 72.

6. No Writ of protection can be allowed, unless it be under the great Seal,
and it is directed generally, Libr. 2. fol. 17. Lanes Case, lib. 8. fol. 68.
Trallops Case, 35. Hen. 6: 2.

7. The Courts of Justice are to allow or disallow of the Protection, etc. be
they Courts of Record or not, and not the Sheriff, or any other Officer, 43 E.
3. Prat. 96.

8. The protection may be cast by a stranger, or by the party himself; an
Infant seem convert, etc. may cast a Protection for the tennant or Defendant.
And the Defendant or tenant casting it, he must show cause wherefore, etc. but
a stranger need not show any cause, but that the tenant or Defendant is here by
Protection, 21. E. 4. 18. 38. H. 6. 131

9. A protection may be avoided: 1. By the casting of it before it be allowed.
2. By repeal thereof after it be allowed; by disallowing of it mnny ways, as
for that it lies not in that action, or that he has no day to cast it, or for
material variance between the Protection and the Record, or that it is not
under the Great Seal, etc. 3. After it be allowed by innotescimus, as if any
tarry in the country, without going to the service, etc. over a convenient time
after he had any Protection, or repair from the same service, upon information
thereof to the Lord Chancellor he shall repeal the Protection by Innotescimus,
13. R 2. cap. 16. 21. E. 4. 20. vide lib. fo. 131. a and b:

As to the third Protection, cum clausula volhmus, the King by his prerogative
is to be preferred in payment of his duty or debt, by his Debtor, before any
Subject, Register 281. b.

Thesaurus Regis est fundamentum belli and firmamentum pacis.

By the Statute of 25 E. 3. cap. 19. the other creditors may have their actions
against the King, debtor, and proceed to Judgment, but not to Execution,
unless he will take upon him to pay the Kings debt, and then he shall have
Execution for both the two debts.

But in some cases the Subject shall be first satisfied, viz. where the King is
entitled to any fine or duty by the suit of the party, as in a decies tantum.
And so if in an action of Debt, the Defendant deny his Deed, and it is found
against him, he shall pay a fine to the King, but the Plantiff shall be first
satisfied, 41. E. 3. 15. 4. E. 4. 16. 17. E. 3. 73. 29. E. 3. 13.

The fourth Protection cum clasula volumus, is when a man sent into the Kings
service beyond Sea, is imprisoned there, so as neither Protection, Profection
or Moration will serve him, and this has no certain time limited in it, F. N.
B. 28. c.

Of Protections cum clausula nolumus, that are of Grace, vide lib. 7. fo. 9.
Calvin's Case, Regist 280.

The protection cum clausula nolumus, that is of Right, is, That every
Spiritual person may sue a Protection for him and his goods, and for the
Fermors of their lands, etc, that they shall not be taken by the Kings
Purveyor, not their carriages or cattells taken by other Ministers of the King;
Which Writ does recite the Statute of 14. E. 3. F. N. B, 29, 30.

Albeit Queen Eliz. maintained many wars, yet she granted few or no
Protections; and her reason was, That he was no fit Subject to be employed in
her service, that was subject to other men's actions, lest She might be thought
to delay Justice, fol 131. b.

Sect. 200.
Un home que est enter profess religion, est civiliter mortuus or mortuus
seculo,

To three purposes, Profession, i. e. the civil death, has not the effect of
a natural death: 1. This civil death shall never derogate from his own grant,
nor be any mean to avoid it; for if tenant in tail make a Feoffment in fee, and
enter into Religion, his issue shall have no Formedon during his life. 2. It
shall never give her a vail, without whose consent he could not have entered
into Religion, and therefore his wife shall not be endowed until his natural
death. But if the wife, after her husband has entered into Religion, alien the
land which is her own right, and after her husband is deraigned, the husband
may enter, and avoid the alienation, 31 E. 1. Dower 176. 21. E. 4. 14. 3. It
shall not work any prejudice to a stranger that has a former right.

If a disseisor is professed, so as the lands descends to his heir, this
descent shall not toll the entry of the disseisee.

A woman cannot be professed a Nun during the life of her husband, 5 E. 4. 3.

But if a man holds lands by Knights service, and is professed, etc. his heir
within age, he shall be in Ward, 31 E. 3. Collusion 29.

If one joynt-tenant be professed, etc. the land shall survive to the other, 21
R. 2. Judgment 263.

An Abbot, etc. may sue and be sued, etc. for any thing that concerns the house
of Religion, Bract. fo. 415.

A wife is disabled to sue without her husband, as much as a Monk is without
his Sovereign, 4 H. 3. Br. 766.

And yet the wife of Sir To. Belknap Justice of the Common Pleas, who was
exiled beyond Sea, did sue a Writ in her own name, without her husband, he
being alive; whereof one said, Ecce modo mirum, quod faemina fert breve Regis
non nominando virum conjunctim robore legis, 2 H. 4. f. 7. a. And King E. 3.
brought a qu. imp. against the Lady of Maltravers, 10. E. 3. 53. And King H. 4.
brought a Writ of Ward against Sibel B. 1. H. 4. 1. b.

And Tho. of Weyland being abjured the Realm for Felony, in the year before,
Margery de Mose his wife, and Richard, son of the said Tho. exhibited their
Petition of Right into the Parliament, Anno 19. E. 1. for the Manor of Sobbir,
wherein her husband had but an Estate for life jointly with her, and the
inheritance in Richard the son by fine.

The Earl of Gloucester Lord of the fee (who claiming the land by Escheat) had
taken the possession thereof) alleged, Quod non fuit jure consonum quod aliqua
foemina intraret in aliquas terras vivente marito suo, etc. Tamen Coram
Consilio Domini R. vocat' Thesaurar' and Baron. and Justiciariis de utroque
Banco concordat' est, quod praedicta Margeria rehabeat talem seiseinam, etc.
secundum perportum finis praedict' etc. Vide lib. fo. 33. a.

If the husband had aliened the land of his wife, and after had been abjured
the Realm for Felony, the wife shall have a Cui in vita in his life time, 31 E.
1. Cui in vita, 31.

The wife of the King of England is of ability and capacity to grant and to
take, to sue and to be sued, as a feme sole by the Common Law. And such a Queen
has many Prerogatives; as, she shall find no pledges, for such is her dignity,
as she shall not be amerced, 18 E. 3. 1, and 2. The Queen shall pay no Toll, N.
B. 235. The Writ of Right shall not be directed to the Queen, no more than to
the King, but to her Bailiff, F.N.B. 1. F. But a Protection shall be allowed
against the Queen, but not against the King: neither shall the Queen be sued by
Petition, but by a Praecipe, 21 E. 3. 13. 11 H. 4. 76. b.

If A. be bound to the Abbot of D.A. is professed a Monk in the same Abbey, and
after is made Abbot thereof, he shall have an action of Debt against his own
Executors, 4 E. 4. 25. 6 E. 4. 4. 22 H. 6. 5. 45 E. 3. 10. a. 5 H. 7. 25. b.

Sect. 201.
Excommunicato interdicitur omnis actus legitimus, ita quod agere non potest,
nec aliquem convenire, licet ipse ab aliis possit conveniri. Excommunicatio
nihil aliud est quam Censura a Canone vel judice ecclesiastico prolata and
inflicta privans legitima Communione Sacramentorum and quandoque hominum,
Bract. lib. 5. fo. 415. and 426, etc. F.N.B. 64. F.

None can certify Excommengment, but only the Bishop, or one that has
Ordinary Jurisdiction, and is immediate Officer to the Kings Courts. As the
Archdeacon of R. or the Dean and Chapter in time of vacation.

The Common Law disallows all acts done in disability of any Subject of this
Realm by any foreign power, as things not authentic, whereof the Judges should
give allowance, 16 E. 3. Sxcom. 4. N.B. 64.

For the manner of Election of Bishops, vide le statute of 25 H. 8.

None but the Kings Courts of Record, as the Kings Bench, etc. Justices of
Jail-deliver, etc. can write to the Bishop to certify Bastardy, Mulierty,
loyalty of Matrimony, etc. for it is a rule in Law, That none but the King can
write to the Bishop to certify. Nullus alius praeter Regem potest Episcopo
demandare inquisitionem faciendam, Bract. l. 3. 106.

Jour. is the day of appearance of the parties, or continuance of the plea. And
in all Summons upon the Original, there be 15 days after the Summons before
the appearance. But if the Original be returned tarde, and Sommons alias goes
forth, there be nine Returns between the Test and the Return, 8 H. 6. 20. 8
Eliz. Dyer 251.

And before the Statute of Articuli super Chart. cap. 15. 28 E. 1. in all
Summons and Attachments in plea of Lund, there shall be contained the term of
15 days. But by consent other than common days may be taken, 11 H. 6. 23

The use of the Kings Bench at this day is, That if the offense be committed in
another county than where the Bench sits, and the Indictment be removed by
Certiorari, there must be 15 days between every Process, and the Return
thereof, etc. Lib. 9. 118 Zanchers Case, fo. 134. b. vide, etc.

There is dies specialis, as in an Assize in the Kings Bench or Common Pleas,
the Attachment need not be 15 days before the appearance. F.N.B 177. cap.

The day of Nisi prius, and the day in bank, is all one day as to pleading, but
not to other purposes, 21 H. 6. 10. 20. vide and qu. fo. 135. a.

Resummons or Reattachments, are Writs that the Demandant or Plaintiff, after
he has obtained the Letters of his Absolution, may sue out to bring the Tenant
or Defendant again into Court, to have day to answer unto him; and these Writs
do lie in all cases when the plea is discontinued, or put without day, either
in this case, or in case where the Demandant or Tenant has his age, or for the
non venue of the Justices, or in case of a protection or Essoign de service le
Roy, etc. Bracton, lib. 5. 425. Brit. cap. 74. l. 7. 29, 30.

Note, That in the case of Excommengement, the Writ shall not abate, but the
plea to be put without day, until the plaintiff purchase his Letters of
Absolution, etc. but in the other five cases ( sc. of a Villain, etc. ante fo:
55. a.) the Writ shall abate, fo. 135. b.

But in the case of Outlawry the writ shall abate if he obtain not his pardon.
44 E. 3. 27.

At this day Idiots, Madmen, etc. may sue, for the Suits must be in their name,
but it shall be followed by others. An Idiot shall not appear by Guardian or
Prochein amy, or Attorney, but he must be ever in person, 33 H. 6. 18. F. N.
B. 27. G.

But an Infant or a minor shall sue by Prochein amy, and defend by Guardian, 27
H. 8. 11. 20 E. 4. 2. F. N. B. 27. H.

Sect. 202, 203, 204.
Si lenfant al age de 14 ans enter en religion, and est profess, le gaodein
and aver remedy (quant al guard le corpse) forsque breve de ravishment de guard
enve^s le sovereign del meason, and l'entry d'asc' estaut de pleine age que e^
heir lenfant e^ congeable: and legardein en tiel case and asc' remedy pur le
terre, etc. Manumittere idem est quod extra manum, vel extra potestatem
alterius ponere.

Every Manumission is an infranchisement, but every infranchisement is not a
Manumission, Mirr. cap. 2. Sect. 18.

There be two kinds of Manumissions: 1. Express, when the Villain by deed in
express words is manumissed and made free. 2. Employed, by doing some act, that
makes in judgment of Law, the Villain free, etc.

Libertinum ingratum leges civiles in pristinam redigunt servitutem, sed leges
Angliae semel manumissum semper liberum judicant gratum and ingratum,
Fortescue, cap. 46. fol. 137. b.

There be some cases wh^re the Villain shall be privileged from the seizure of
the Lord, etc.

1. Ratione loci, as if a Villain in the ancient Demesne of the King a year and
a day, without claim or seizure of the Lord, the Lord cannot seize him, etc. so
long as he remains and continues there, 39 E. 3. 6. b. F.N. B. 79. a.

2. Ratione professionis, as if he a Monk be, etc. Gla^v. l. 5. cap. 5.

3. Ratione dignitatis, if he be made a Knight, etc. Britt. fo. 79.

4. Ratione matrimonii, as if a Neife marry a freeman, she is privileged
during the marriage, etc. But if the Lord himself marry the Neife, then she is
infranchised for ever, Mirr. c. 3. sect 18. acc. Doct. and S^u. 141.

If a Niefe ^e regardant to a Manor, and she takes a freeman to husband by
license of the Lord, and the Lord make a feoffment in fee of the Manor, the
husband dies, the feoffor shall have the Neife, for that during the marriage
she was severed from the Manor,* and so is lib. 29. Ass. (which is falsely
prin^ed) to be understood.

If two Coparceners be of a Villain, and one of them takes him to husband she
and her husband shall not have a Nuper obiit against her Coparcener, but after
the decease of her husband she shall, 16 H. 3. Nuper ob. 17.

When the Lord enableth the Villain to have an action against him, as for Debt,
or Annuity, etc. or if he sue against his Villain an Action of Debt, or of
Covenant, etc. or gives to the Villain a certain and fixed estate in Lands,
etc. as a lease for years by Deed, or without Deed, this is an infranchisement
for ever. But if the Lord atturn to his Villain, etc. or if he release all his
right in black Acre, and the Villain is not thereof seized, this is no
infranchi^ement, because it is void, and can give no cause of action, fol. 138.
a. 11 H. 7. 13.

Sect. 208.
The Tenant infeoffs the Villain of the Lord, and a stranger * upon by
Collusion; in this case although the Lord may enter upon the Villain for the
moity, yet may he have a Writ of Ward against them both, without
infranchisement of the Villain; for if the Lord should enter upon the Villain,
then should the seigniory be suspended, and then could he not have a Writ of
Ward against the other, vide etc.

There is a Nonsure before appearance at the return of the Writ, or after
appearance at some day of continuance.

A Nonsute is ever upon a demand made when the Demandant or Plaintiff should
appear, and he makes default.

A Retraxit is ever when the Demandant or Plaintiff is present in Court, etc.
and this is either Privative, as upon demand made, that he depart in despite
of the Court having made default, etc, or Positive, as when he says, that he
will not prosecute his plea, etc. sed abin^e omnino se retraxit, etc. fol. 139.
a. *

Also a Retraxit is a bar of all other actions of like or inferior nature; qui
semel actionem renunciavit amplius repetere non potest. But Reg. a Nonsute is
not so, but that he may commence an action of like nature, etc. again, lib 8.
fo. 58. Bechers Case.

But yet for some special reasons. Nonsute in some actions is peremptory: as
in a qu. imp. if the Plaintiff be Nonsute after appearance, the Defendant shall
make a Title, and have a Writ to the Bishop, etc. and the Incumbent that
comes in by that Writ shall never be removed, 5 E. 3. 35. lib. 7. fo. 27. b.
Sir Hugh Portmans c. So it is in a Writ de Nativo habendo in favorem
libertatis, 6 E. 2. Vill. 26. F. N. B. 78. c. And in an appeal of Murder,
Rape, Robbery, etc. in favorem vitae, 9 H. 4. 1. Pl. Com. 148 a. 171. And in an
appeal of Mayhem, for the Writ says, Feloni^e Mayhemavit, 43 Ass. 39. And in
Attaint; and the reason is, for the faith that the Law gives to the Verdict,
and for the fearful Judgment that should be given against the first Jury, if
they should be convicted; and therefore upon the Nonsute the Plaintiff shall be
imprisoned, and his pledges amerced; but if the Process in an attaint be
discontinued, the Plaintiff may have another Writ of Attaint, because upon the
Nonsute there is a Judgment given, but not upon the discontinuance, F. N. B.
108. d. 32 Ass. 13.

Nonsuit before appearance is not peremtory in any case, for that a stranger
may purchase a Writ in the name of him that cause of action has. *

In realor mixed actions the Nonsuit of one Demandant is not the Nonsuit of
both, but he that makes default shall be summoned and severed, but Reg. in
personal actions the Nonsuit of one is the Nonsuit of both, unless it be in
certain particular cases. * F. N. B. 35. b. as in personal actions brought by
Executors, etc. lib. * 6. fo. 25. Ruddocks Case, And in an And. quaer.
concerning the personalty * vide and qu. lib. fo. 139. a.

In a quid Juris clamat, the Nonsuit of the one, is the Nonsuit of both,
because the tenant cannot attorn according to the grant, 20. E. 3. Severance 17.

Some actions follow the nature of those actions whereupon they are grounded,
as the Writs of Error, attaint, Scire fac' etc. If a real action be brought by
several Praecipes against two or more, if the Demandant be Nonsuit against
one, he is a nosuit against all, for as to the Demandant it is but one Writ
under one Test, 47. E. 3. 6. b.

Severance is twofold; viz. by Summons ad sequend' simul, and that is when one
of the Demandants or Plantiffs never apeared, and by award of the Court of
Nonsuit, without any Summons, and that is after appearance, fo. 149. b.

At the Common Law upon every continuance or day given over, the Plantiff might
have been Nonsuit, and therefore after Verdict given, if the Court gave a day
to be advised, at that day the Plantiff was demandable, and therefore might
have been Nonsuit, which is now remedied by the Statute of 2 H. 4. cap. 7. But
after demurre in law joined, if the Court does give a day over, at that day the
Demandant or Plantiff is Demand, and may be Nonsuit, for that is not helped by
any Statute, 2 H. 5. 5. and after an award to account, the Plantiff may be
Nonsuit, and so note a diversity between an interlocutory award of the Court,
and a final Judgment, l. 11. fo. 39. 41. Medcalfs Case.

Albeit the Lord be Nonsuit, yet the infranchisment of the villain does remain,
for that grew by the appearance to the Writ. So it is if the Writ do abate.

Wheresoever the Lord gives to the villain a just cause of action, he is
infranchised. Kellaway. 134.

But if the Lord sue his vill. by appeal of Felony, where he was indicted of
the same before, this shall not enfranchise the villain, and although he be
acquitted upon the appeal, for he shall recover no damages against his Lord. W.
2. c. 12. 22. Ass. p. 39. 14 H. 7. 2.

Sect. 204. and 210. etc.
None ought to pay fines for the marriage of their daughters without license of
the Lord, etc. but villains of blood, or freemen holding in Villenage. 43 E. 3.
5.

Additio probat minoritatem. Haereditas inter masculos jure civili est
dividendae. Fort. c. 40.

Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi --
Horace. By the Statute of 31 H. 8. a great part of Kent is made descendable to
the eldest son. 18 H. 6. c. 1.

For In plures quoties rivos deducitur amnis Fit minor, aec unda deficiente,
perit.


Sect. 211. and 212.
There is a special kind of Borough of Engl. as it shall descend to the
younger son, if he be not of the half blood, and if he be, then to the eldest
son. 32 E. 3. tit. age 81. within the manor of B. in Commit. Berks, there is
such a custom, that if a man has diverse daughters, and no son, and dies, the
eldest daughter shall only inherit, and if he have no daughter but sisters,
the eldest sister by the custom shall inherit, and sometime the youngest. M.
10. Ja. Eliots c. Brit. 187. b.

Hor. Imberbis juvenis tandem Custode remoto,
Gaudet equis, Canibusque, and aprici gramine Campi,
Cereus in vitium flecti, monitoribus asper,
Vtilium tardus provisor, prodigus aeris,
Sublimis, cupidusque and amata relinquere pernix.
Nil homine insirmum tellus animalia nutrit
Inter Cuncta magis -- Home.
Aliquis non debet esse judex in propria causa. 10 E. 3. 23. 2 H. 3. 4. H. 4 H.
4. Salop. Coram Rege

Praescription que est encounter reason, ne doit est. allow quia malus usus
abolendus est. In consuetudmibus non diuturnicas temporis, sed soliditas
rationis consideranda est. Fo. 141. a.

Rex, etc. pro co^i utilitate terrae Hiberniae, and pro unitate terrarum,
provisum est quod omnes leges etc. quae in Reg. Angl. tenentur, in Hybernia
teneantur, etc Sicut Johannes Rex cum illic esset, statuit and firmiter
mandavit, etc. Rot. pat. 30 H. 3. Vid. lib. 141. b.

By an Act of Parliament tent. 10 H 7. est enact, que touts stat. ft. in
England devant cela temps ferront in force in Royalme de Ireland.

CHAP. XII. Of Rents.
Sect. 213.
REnt service est lou le tenant tient la terre de son Seignior per service and
certain ^ent, and le Seignior poit distr. pur ceo de common right. Rent is
reserved out of the profits of the Land, and is not due till the Tenant or
Lessee take the profits: for reddere nihil aliud est quam acceptum aut aliquam
partem ejusdem restituere; seu reddere est quasi retro dare. Lib. 10 148. Cluns
Case. Pl. Com. 138, 139, etc. Browning. c.

A rent service cannot be reserved out of any inheritance, but such as is
manurable; whereinto the Lord may enter, and take a distress, as in Lands,
etc. Reversions, Remainders, and as some have said out of the herbage of Lands,
and reg. not out of any inheritance incorporeall, or that lie in grant. Lib. 5.
fo. 4. Seignior Mountjoyes c. l. 7. f. 23. Buts c. Pl. com 139. By Act of Law
one rent or service may issue out of another. 3, H. 6. 21. And though it be out
of Lands, etc. Yet it must be out of an estate that passes by the conveyance,
and nor out of a right, 10 E. 4 3. b. As if the disseisee release to the
disseisor of the Land, reserving a rent, the reserve is good, Fo. 144. a.

Non debet esse reservatio de proficuis ipsis, quia ea conceduntur, sed de
redditu novo extra preficua, 38 H. 6. 38. a Fol. 142. a.

The common Law is the best and most common birthright that the subject has
for the safeguard of his lands, etc. 2 H. 4. c. 1. Justice is the daughter of
the Law, for the Law brings her forth.

A rent service may be reserved without Deed, 35 H. 6. 34.

Sect. 215, etc.
Ou home sur un done en Tail ou lease, etc. voile reserv. a lu rent service,
il covient que le reversion, etc. Soit en le donor ou lessor, etc. This is not
to be understood only of a reversion immediately expectant upon the gift or
Lease, for if a man make a gift in tail, the remainder in tail, reserving a
rent, and keep the reversion in himself, this is a rent service. Fo. 142. b.

Reserver, sometimes has the force of saving or except. so as sometimes it
serves to reserve a new thing, viz. a Rent. 8 E. 4. 48. Sometime to except
part of the thing in esse that is granted. 35 H 6. 34. In the grant of a
reversion, the rent may be excepted, but not the services. If a man make a gift
in tail, without any reservation, the donee shall hold of the donor by the same
services that he held over. The Law regards equity and equality without any
provision or reservation on the party, B. f. 100. Ipsae etenim leges cupiunt ut
jure rega^tur.

But if the Lessor for life or years reserveth nothing, he shall have fealty
only, which is an incident inseparable to the reversion. 38 E. 3. 7. Littl. fo.
4.

Sect 217. and 218.
Rent must be reserved to him from whom the state of the Land moves, and not
to a stranger, 18 E. 2. Ass. 381. But some do hold that otherwise it is in the
case of the King, 35 H. 6. 36 *

Note, that upon a reservation of a rent upon a feoffment in Fee by Deed
Indenture, the feoffor shall not have a Writ of annuity, because the words of
reservation, as Reddendo, etc. are the words of the Feoffor, and not of the
Feoffee, albeit the Feoffee by acceptance of the State is bound thereby, 33 E.
3. Annuity 52. 1 H. 4. 5.

And it is holden, that a reservation upon a Feoffment in Fee made by Deed
Poll, is good, 8 E 4. 8.

Auxi si un home Se^i. de cert. terre grant per unft. Poll ou per Indentare un
annual rent issuant horse de m. la terre a un auter in Fee, ou in fee tail, ou
per term de vie, etc. ovesque clause de distress, etc. donques ceo est rent
charge, and si le grant soit sans clause de distress donques il est r. seck i.
e. redditus siccus.

Also a man may have a rent by prescription, 19 E. 3. Title 34.

Sect. 219.
If a man grant by his Deed a rent charge to another, and the rent is behind,
the grantee has election to bring a Writ of annuity,* and charging the person
only, etc. or to d^straine upon the Land, and to make it real,* and charging
the person only, to make it personal. Put case that A. be seized of Lands in
fee, and he and B, grant a rent charge to one in fee, this prima fact is the
grant of A, and the confirming of B. but yet the grantee may have a Writ of
Annuity against both. Two men grant an annuity of 20 l. per an. to another,
although the persons be several, yet he shall have but one annuity: But if the
grant be, Obligam. nos, and utrumque nostr. The grantee may have a Writ of
Annuity against B either of them, but he shall have but one satisfaction, 16 E.
2. tit. annuity 47. If a rent charge be granted to a man and his heirs, he
shall not have a Writ of annuity against the heir of the grantor, albeit he
has Assets, unless the grant be for him and his heirs. 2 H. 4. 13. Dyer 17
Eliz. 344. b. Vide etc. Fo. 144. b.

But Littl. is to be understood with some limitation: for of a rent granted for
owelty of partition, a writ of annuity does not ly, because it is of the nature
of the Land descended. Also of such a rent as may be granted without Deed a
Writ of annuity does not lie, though it be granted by Deed. 29 Ass. p. 23.

Note, as to elections, these diversities following.

1 When nothing passes to the Feoffee or Grantee before election, etc. There
the election ought to be made in the life of the parties, etc. But when an
estate or interest passes immediately to the Feoffee, Donee, or Gaantee, there
the Election may be made by them, or by their heirs, or executors, Lib. 2. fo.
36. etc. Sir Row. Haywards c.

2 When one and the same thing passes, etc. and the Donee, or grantee has
election in what manner or degree he will take this, there the interest passes
immediately, and the party, his heirs or executors may make election when they
will.

3 When election is given to several persons, there the first election made by
any of the persons shall stand.

4 In case an election be given of two several things, always he which is the
first agent, and ought to do the first Act, shall have the. election. 2 H. 7.
23. a.

5 When the granted is of things annual, and are to have continuance, there
the election remains to the grantor (in case where the Law gives to him
election) as well after the day as before; otherwise it is when the things are
to be performed unica vice. 9 E. 4. 36. and ^3 E. 4. Grantee for life, etc.
ought to bring his Writ of annuity in the disjunctive, else the judgment, etc.
shall determine his election for ever: herein Fitzh. is mistaken.

6 The Feoffee by his act and wrong may lose his election and give the same to
the Feoffer: as if one infeoffe another of two acres, to have and to hold, the
one for life, and the other in tail, and he before election make a Feoffment of
both, in this case the Feoffer shall have election to enter into which of them
he will, etc.

Note that this determination of the election of the grantee must be by action
or sure in Court of Record. If the grantee does bring a Writ of annuity, and at
the return thereof appear and account, this is a determination of his election
in Court or Record, albeit he never proceeds any further. F.N.B. 152. a. 5 H.
7. 33. b So if the grantee bring an Ass. for the rent, and make his plaint, he
shall never after bring a Writ of annuity. 10 E 4. 17.

For an Anvowry in Court of Record, which is in nature of an action, is a
determination of his election before any judgment given. F. 145. b.

It is a general rule, that the plaintiff must have the property of the goods
in him at the time of the taking. 3 E. 3. 74. 6 H. 4. 2. But yet if the goods
of a villain be distreined, the Lord of the villain shall have a Replevy,
because the bringing of a Replevy amounts to a claim in Law, and vests the
property in ^he plaintiff. But in that case if the goods of a villain be taken
by a trns. the Lord shall have no Replevy. because the villain had but a right.
33 E. 3. Repl. 43. F.N. B. 69 F.

Property ought to be tried by Writ. 30 E. 3. 22.

A man cannot claim property by his Bayliffe or servant, for that, if the claim
fall out to be false, he shall be fined for his contempt, which the Lord cannot
be unless he makes claim himself, for nemo punitur pro alieno delicto. 5 E. 3
38. 11 H. 4. 4. fo. 145. b.

In a special case a man may have a Replevy of goods not distreined, as if the
Mesner put in his catrell in lieu of the cattle of the tenant peravaile, that
he is bound to acquit, he shall have a Replevy, etc. 34 H. 6. 47.

It is against the nature of a distress taken, etc: to be irreplevisable. 31
E. 3. Gage Deliu^. 5. And Bract. Lib 4. fo. 233. a. and b. Says, E^dem modo de
via obstructa, per breve quod justiciet propter co^em utilitatem, ne
transeuntes ire diu impediantur, quia hoc esset commune damnum, and in hoc
vicecomes and Justiciarii faciant sicut super detensionem averior. contra
vadium plegii propter commune utilit. ne animalia diu inclusa pereant.

If the beasts of diverse several men be taken, they cannot join in a Repleg,
but every one must have a several Repl. and so in a Repleg. it is a good plea,
to say that the property is to the plaintiff, and to a stranger, and where
there be two plaintiffes, that the property is to one of them. 28 E. 3. 92. 2
E. 4. 23.

Electio semel facta, and placitum cestatum o^ patitur regressum Quod semel in
electionibus placuit amplius displicere no^ potest.

Note, a diversity between the case (* fo. 65. a.) aforesaid of the grant of
the rent, where he may take it either real or personal, and when a man may
have election to have several remedies for a thing that is merely personal, or
merely real from the beginning. As if a man may have an action of account, or
an action of debt at his pleasure, and he brings an action of account, and
appear to it, and after it Nonsuit, yet may he have an action of debt
afterward, because both actions charge the person. So it is of an Ass. and of
a Writ of entry in the nature of an Ass. etc. 28 E. 3. 98. b. 27 E. 3. 89. b.
Fo. 146. a.

Sect. 220.
By this Section it appears, that when in a general grant, the Law does give
two remedies, that the grantor may provide, that the grantee shall not use one
of them, and leave the party to the other. But where the grantee has but one
remedy, that remedy cannot be barred by any proviso, for such a proviso should
be repugnant to the grant. 28 H. 8. Dyer. 9. b.

And if a man by his Deed grant a rent Charge out of land provid. that it shall
not charge the Land, albeit the grantee has a double remedy, yet the proviso
is repugnant, because the Land is expressly charged with the rent, but the Writ
of annuity is but employed in the grant, and therefore that may be restrained
without any repugnant, and sufficient remedy left for the grantee; for which
cause Littl. puts his case of the restraint of bringing a writ of annuity.
Also our Author puts his case of a rent charge continuing; and of a rent
charge issuing truly out of Land, 9 H. 11. 53. 11. H. 8. etc. mala grammatica
non vitiat carta^. For the Law that principally respects substance, does
judge sometimes a double negative, to be a negative, according to the intent of
the parties, and not according to grammatical construction.

Sect. 221.
A. grants that B. shall distrein for such a yearly sum of money in his
manor of D. in judgemeet of Law the Manor is charged with the rent, but the
person of the grantor cannot be charged, because he expressly grants no rent,
* for that would charge his person, but that the grantee should distreine, etc.
which only charge the land. Fo. 146. b.

If a rent be granted out of the Manor of D. and the grantor grant over, That
if the rent be behind, the grantee shall distrein, etc. in the Manor of S. this
is but a penalty in the Manor of S. But both Manors are charged, the one with
the rent, the other with the distress for the rent, the one issuing out of the
land, and the other to be taken upon the land, lib. 7. fo. 23, etc. in Buts
Case.

Quoties in verbis nulla est ambiguitas, ibi nulla expositio contra verba
expressa fienda est.

And if in this case, this shall amount to the grant of a rent out of the Manor
of S. then the grantor shall be twice charged; and so the Law by construction
against the words, and the intention of the parties, shall do injury to the
grantor, etc. fo. 147. a.

And there is no diversity in this case, when the Manor of S. lies in the same
county, and when it lies in another county, for the words in both cases are
all one, and there is no reason to say that he shall fail of a Recovery by
Assize, lib. 7. f. 3. Bulwars Case, 1. Ass. p. 10. Vide etc.

If a man grant a rent out of three acres, and grant over, that if the rent be
behind, that he shall destrain, etc. in one of the acres, this rent is entire,
and cannot be a rent seck out of two acres, and a rent charge out of the third
acre; and therefore it is a rent seck for the whole, and yet he shall distrain
for this in the third acre, vide and qu.

A. does bargain and sell land to B. by Indenture, and before Inrolment they
both grant a rent charge by Deed to C. and after the Indenture is enrolled; by
the operation of the Statute, it shall be the grant of B. and the confimation
of A. But if the Deed had not been enrolled, it had been the grant of A. and
the confirmation of B. and so quancunque via data the Grant is good.

Home seize de 20 acr. grant rent 20 s, horse de chesc. acre. etc. le grantee
au^a 20 l. 22. H. 6. 10. b.

Sect. 222, etc.
Si home ad un rent charge a luy and a ses heirs issunt horse de cert' terre,
sil purchase asc' parcel de cel a luy, and a ses heirs, tout le rent charge
est extinct, and l'annuity auxi, pur ceo que rent charge ne port estr. per tiel
Manor apportion, mes si tiel parcel descend, etc. (S. 224.) a le fits,
auterment est. Auxi per purchase de parcel, etc. rent service point estre
apportion.

A rent charge by the act of the party may in some case be apportioned: As if a
man has a rent charge of 20 s. he may release to the tenant of the land 10 s.
and reserve part, for the grantee deals not with the land, as in case of
purchase, Hill. 14. Eliz. in Communi Banco F. N. B. 152. d. e.

If tenant pur auter vie, by his Deed grant a rent charge to one for 21 years,
Cesty que vie dies, the rent charge is determined, and yet the grantee may
have during the years a Writ of annuity for the arrerages incurr. after the
death of Cesty que vie, because the rent charge did determine by the act of
God, and by the course of Law, Actus leg is nulli facit injuriam. Wards cited
in lib. 2. In Heywards case fo. 36.

There be diverse kinds of rent services which are not within the Statute of
Quia empt. terrae, and yet such rent services are apportionable by the common
Law. As if the lessor recover part of the land, etc. in an action of waste, or
enter for a forfeiture in part, etc. Lib. 6. f. 1. etc. Bruerton. c. Lib. 8. f.
105. etc. Talbots case. So likewise if the lessor grant part of the reversion
to a stranger, the rent shall be apportioned, for the rent is incident to the
reversion. Lib. 8. fo. 79. Wilds case.

A rent service may be extinct for part, and apportioned for the rest, but a
rent service cannot be suspended in part by act of the party, and in esse for
other part.

For if the lessor desseise the lessee, the rent is suspended for the whole,
and cannot be apportioned for any part. But otherwise it is where the lessor
enters lawfully, as upon a surrender, forfeiture, etc. Where the rent is
lawfully extinct in part. 21. E. 4. 29.

And yet by act in Law a rent service may be suspended in part, and in esse for
part. As if the tenant give a part of the tenancy to the Father of the Lord, in
tail, the Father dies, and this discends to the Lord, in this case by act in
Law the Seigniory is suspended in part and in esse for part, and the same Law
is of a rent charge. 30. Ass. p. 12.

And when the Guardian in chivalry enters into the Land of his ward within
age, now is the Seigniory suspended: but if the wife of the tenant be endowed,
etc. Now shall she pay to the Lord, the third part of the rent, 33. E. 3. Dower
138, this case I should have put first Tho. More.

Item, a Seigniory may be suspended in part by the act of a stranger, as if two
jointenants or corperceneis be of a Seigniory, and one of them disseise the
Tenant of the Land, the other joyntenant or copercener shall distreine for his
or her moity. 27. E. 3. 88.

Concerning the apportionment of rents there is a difference between a grant of
a rent, and a reservation of rent. 22 H. 4. 17. A man against his own grant
shall not take advantage of the weakness of his own estate in part. vide lib:
etc. Fo. 148. 6.

And note a diversity between a rent in gross, and a rent incident to a
reversion.

If a man grant a rent charge out of two acres, and after the grantee
recovereth one of the acres against the grantor by a Title Paramount, the whole
rent shall issue out of the other acre: But if the Recovery be by a feint Title
by Covine, then the rent is extinct in the whole, because he claims under the
grantor, Doct. and Stud. l. 2: c. 17.

And yet in some cases a rent charge shall not be wholly extinct, where the
grantee claims from and under the grantor. As if B. make a lease of one acre
for life to A. and A. is seized of another acre in fee; A grants a
rentcharge to B. out of both acres: and does waste in the acre which he
holds for life, B. recovers in waste, the whole rent is not extinct, but
shall be apportioned, etc. for that, Nullus Commodum capere potest de injuria
sua propria.

If the King give two acres of land of equal value to * another in fee, fee
tail, for life or for years, reserving a rent of Two shillings, and the one
acre is evicted by a Title Paramount, the rent shall be proportioned, F. N. B.
234. b.

If an entire service be pro bono publico, as Knights service Castlegard, etc.
though the Lord purchase part, the service remains: but when entire services
are for the private benefit of the Lord, it is otherwise, lib. 6. fo. 1, 2.
Bruertons Case. Sed vide lib. etc. fo. 149. a.

Sect. 223. and 224.
Reg. it holds, That quae in parts dividi nequeunt, solida a singulis
praestantur, Vide los reports Bruertons Case, lib. 6. Talbots Case, l. 8. f.
104.

It there be Lord and Tenant by Fealty and Herriot service, and the Lord
purchase part of the land, the Herriot service is extinct, and yet it is not
annual because it is entire and valuable. But otherwise it is of Herriot
Custom, fo. 149. b.

If the tenant gives to the father of the grantee of a rent charge part of the
rent in tail, and this descend to the grantee, the rent charge shalll be
apportioned, and so by act in law a rent charge may be suspended for one part,
and in esse for another. 30. Ass. p. 12, fol. 149. b.

And so it is if the father be grantee of a rent, and the son purchase part of
the land charged, the father dies, and the rent descends to the son, the rent
shall be apportioned: and so it is if the grantee grant the rent to the tenant
of the land, and to a stranger, the rent is extinct but for a moity 34. H. 6.
41. b.

If a man has Issue two daughters, and grant a rent Charge to one of them out
of his land, and dies, the rent shall be apportioned; and if the grantee in
this case infeoffeth another of her part of the land, yet the moity of the rent
temaineth issuing out of her Sisters part, because the part of the grantee in
the land by the descent, was discharged of the rent.

But in all these Cases where the rent charge is apportioned by act in law, yet
the Writ or Annuity fails; for if the grantee should bring a Writ of Annuity,
he must ground it upon the grant by Deed, and then must he bring it for the
whole, 9 Ass. 22. 5. R. 2. Annuity 21.

Annua nec debitum judex non separat ipsum. Also in respect of the reality, the
rent is apportioned, but the personality is indivisible, etc.

If Execution be sued etc. upon a Statute Merchant or Staple, and after the
inheritance of part of those lands descend to the Conusee, all the Execution is
avoided, for the duty is Personal, and cannot be divided by act in Law, Pl.
Com. 72. 15. E. 4, 5.

If the father within age purchase part of the land charged, and alieneth
within age, and dies, the Son recovereth in a Writ, Dum fuit infra aetat. or
enters; in this case the act of the Law is mixed with the act of the party, and
yet the rent shall be apportioned; for after the recovery or entry, the Son
has the land by descent, fo. 150. vide, etc.

A relation or fiction of Law shall never work a wrong, or charge to a third
person, but in fictione juris semper est aequitas. lib. 3. fo. 29. Butler and
Bakers Case.

^s if the Feoffee grant a rent charge, al feoffer and son seem and al heirs
del Baron' feme recover Dower; le rent charge ferra apportion' and el
distreinam, etc.

Sect. 225.
If there be Lord and Tenant by Fealty and Rent, and the Lord by his Deed
reciting the Tenure, release all his Right in the Land, saving the said rent;
the seigniory remains, and he shall have the rent as a rent service, and the
fealty incident to it, etc. 12 E. 4. 11. 9 E. 3. 1.

If the Donee hold of the Donor by fealty and certain rent, and the Donor grant
the services to another, and the tenant attorn, the rent shall pass as rent
seck, fol. 150. b.

If there be Lord and Tenant by fealty and certain rent, and the Lord grant the
rent in tail, or for life, saving the fealty; and further grant, That the
grantee may distrain for it, albeit the reversion of the rent be a rent
service, yet the Donee or Grantee shall have it but as a rent seck, and shall
not distrain for it 7 E. 3. 2, 3. adjudg.

Whereas in an Assize for a rent service, all the tenants of the land need not
be named, but such as did the disseisin; yet in Assize for the rent seck, which
sometimes was a rent service, all the tenants must be named, as in case of a
rent charge, albeit he was disseised but by one sole tenant, 4 E. 2. Ass. 449.
26 H. 8. Dyer 31.

But if the Lord of a Manor release the Fealty to his Tenant, saving the rent;
or that a Mesnalty become a rent by Surplusage, those that are now seck (and
sometimes were service) are part of the Manor; but a rent charge cannot be part
of a Manor, 31 Ass. 23. 22 Ass. 53.

Sect. 226, etc.
If there be Lord and Tenant by Fealty and Rent, the annual rent, which is a
profitable service, is of higher and more respect in Law, than the fealty, and
therefore by the grant of the rent, the Fealty shall pass as incident, etc. but
it is an incident separable, and therefore may be by a saving, as Littleton
has said, separated by it. And so when the Tenure is by Fealty and rent, and
the rent be recovered, the Fealty shall includedly be recovered, 44 E. 3. 19.
26 Ass. 38. 8 E. 4. 28.

So long as Homage continues, the Fealty cannot be divided from it, vide lib.
etc. 151. a.

Note a diversity between these corporeal services of Homage, Fealty and
Escuage, which cannot become seck or dry, but make Tenure, whereunto
Distresses, Escheats, and other Profits be incident; and other corporeal
services, ast ^o Plough, Repair, Attend, etc. And all Rents whatsoever, for
they may become seek, and make no Tenure.

Rent and Fealty are incident to the Reversion, viz. Rent separably, and Fealty
inseparably, 12 E. 4. 3. Doct. and Stud. lib. 2. c. 9.

The incident shall pass by the grant of the Principal, but not e converso.
Accessorium non ducit sed sequitur suum principale. fo. 152. a.

If the Tenant infeoff the Lord Paramount, and his wife, and their heirs, in
this case the Mesnalty is but suspended; for if the wife survive, both Mesnalty
and Seignory are revived, 7 Ass. 2. 7 E. 3. 20.

It is said, that if there be Lord Mesne and Tenant, each of them by Fealty and
6 d. the Lord confirm the state of the Tenant to hold of him by Fealty and 3 d.
that the Mesnalty is extinct. So it is if ^he Lord release to the Tenant; for
whether the Lord purchase the Tenancy, or the Tenant the Seigniory, the
Mesnalty is extinct. 8 H. 6. 24. fo. 152. b.

So if there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant make a gift in tail, the
remainder to the King, the Seigniory it extinct, 4 and 5 P. and M. Dyer 154.
Lex citius tolerare vult privatum damnum quam publicum malum, 13 H. 4. 3. 40.
Ass. p. 27.

No man can hold one and the same land immediately of two several Lords. And
one man cannot of the same land be both Lord and Tenant.

It is Reg. true, Res inter alios acta alteri nocere non debet. Et factum unius
alteri nocere non debet; which are true, with this Exception, unless an
inconvenience should follow, etc.

Quando lex aliquid alicui concedit, concedere videtur and id sine quo res ipsa
esse non potest: And therefore if a man makes a lease for life, reserving a
rent, and bind himself in a Statute, and the Cognisee has the rent extended,
and delivered to him, he shall distrain for the rent, because he comes to it
by course of Law, 13 H 4 Avowry 237.

La ley voet plus toft suffer un mischief que un inconvenience; and pur ceo si
Mesne tient per 12 d. and tenant per 5 s. and le seignieur purchase le tenancy,
le seigniory del Mesnalty e^ extinct. Et le mesne au^a 4 s. come rent seck de
le seignieur.

Sect. 233.
Si home que ad rent seck est un foits sei, d'asc' parcel de le rent, and apurs
le tenant ne voile payer le rent aver, il au^a ass. de novel diss.

A rent seck or rent charge may be demanded after it is behind at any time,
etc. for, Remedies for Rights are ever favorably expounded, M. 41. E. 4
adjudged.

If the demand be made upon the land, and the rent is not paid, whether the
tenant be present or absent, yet this is a denial in Law, etc.

Disseisina, is a putting out of a man out of seisin, and ever implies a
wrong. But dispossessing or ejectment is a putting out of possession, and may
be right or by wrong, Bract. l. 4 f. 161. Mirr. c. 2. s.

Disseisin est un personal trespass de tortius ouster del seisin.

Where the Statute of Merton (20 H. 3.) says, Disseisitus de libero tenemento.
Littleton expounds it to extend to a rent seck or rent charge, albeit they be
against common rights, yet a man has a Freehold in them, 40. Ass. 23. ac.

And he that grants omnia tenementa sua, a rent charge or a rent seck, does
pass, 14 E. 4. 4. 11 H. 6. 22.

Recuperare, i. ad rem per injuriam extort' sive detentam per sententiam
Judicis restitui.

Execution is the obtaining of actual possession of any thing acquired by
Judgment of Law, or by a Fine executory levied, whether it be by Sheriff, or
by the entry of the party, vide Sect. 504.

If the Recovery in Assize, etc. be had against one, and he and another
redisseise the Plaintiff, he shall not have a Redisseisin; for he^e is alius,
and he cannot have a Redisseisin against the former disseisor alone, because
he is joynt-tenant with another. For joint tenancy in a Writ of Redisseisin, is
a good plea, and a stranger shall not be subject to double imprisonment and
double damages, 33 E. 3 Redisse^st 17. 9 H. 4. 5. F.N.B. 118. e.

A Redisseisin does lie against the disseisor which does redisseise, and his
Feoffee after the second disseisin, for otherwise the redisseisor might prevent
the Plaintiff of his redisseisin.

If the Mesne recovereth a rent when it is a rent service, and after the rent
becomes a rent seck by surplusage, and does redisseise him of the rent, he
shall have a redisseisin; for the substance of the rent remains, though the
quality be altered.

Sect. 234.
He that is of a Jury, must be liber and legalis homo. 9. E 4. 16. First he
ought to be dwelling most near to the place where the question is moved. 2. He
ought to be most sufficient both for understanding, and competency of estate.
3. To be least suspicious, that is, to be indifferent as he stands unsworn.
Vide S. 102. 193. Ad questionem facti non respondent Indices. Ad quaestio juris
non respondent lu^atores. Calumniare to challenge, i. e. to except against them
in Court that are returned to be Jurors. Fo. 155. b.

It is most necessary, that Jurors be omni exceptione majores; forasmuch as
men's lives, etc. are to be tried by them.

Nota, that there is a principal cause of challenge to the array, and a
challenge to the favor, Fol. 156. a. Vide and nota.

The challenge to the array is in respect to the cause of unindifferency or
default in the Sheriff, or other officer that made the return, and not in
respect of the persons returned, where there is no default in the Sheriff, etc.
for if the challenge to the array, be found against the party that takes it,
yet he shall have his particular challenge to the Polls, that is to the
particular persons; and these be of four kinds, i.e. peremptory, principal,
which induce favor, and for default of hundredors, fo. 156. b.

A man may challenge peremptorily, without showing any cause, and this only is
in case of Felony, etc. In favorem vitae. Vide, etc.

Principal challenges to the Poll may be reduced to four heads. 1. Propter
honoris respectum, as no Peer of the realm is to be sworn on Juries, l. 6. 52.

2. Propter defectum, patriae, libertatis, liberi tenementi; Hundredorum, for
vicini vicinorum facta praesumuntur scire.

3. Propter affectum; and this is either working a principal challenge, or to
the favor, and again a principal challenge is either by judgment of Law
without any act of his, as if the Juror be of blood or kindred to either party.
Brit. f. 135. if the Juror have part of the Land that depends upon the same
title, Bract. fo. 18

If a witness named in the Deed be returned of the Jury, etc. f. 23. Ass. 11.
Fo. 157. a. Vide and nota. Or upon his own act, as if the Juror had given a
verdict before, for the same cause, albeit it be reversed by Writ of error, or
if after verdict Judgment were arested. So if he has given a former verdict
upon the same title or matter though between other persons. 8 H. 5. 10. 18. E.
4. 12. 21. E. 4. 74. fo. 157. b. Vide, etc.

If a Juror has been an arbitrator chosen by the plaintiff or defendant in the
same cause, and have been informed of or treated of the matter, this is a
principal challenge. 9. E. 4 46. But a Commissioner chosen by one of the
parties for examination of witnesses, etc. may upon cause he challenged so
favor. l. 9. fo. 71. Peacocks Case.

Challenge concluding to the favor must be left to the conscience of the
triors, etc. As if the Juror be of kindred, or under the distress of him in
the reversion or remainder, or in whose right the Avowry or justification is
made, etc.

These be no principal challenges, because he in reversions, etc. is not party
to the Record, otherwise it is if they were made parties by Aid, Rescepit, or
voucher, and yet the cause of favor is apparent; so it is of all principal
causes if they were party to the Record. 10. E. a. 12. vide, etc.

4. Propter delictum, as if the Juror be attainted or convicted of treason or
felony, etc. for repellitur a sacramento infamis, So it is if a man be outlawed
in trespass, etc. Mirror. cap. 3. d' attaint. Fol. 158. a. Vide, etc.

Nota, the array of the Tales shall not be challenged by any one party, until
the array of the principal be tried; but if the plaintiff challenge the array
of the principal, the defendant may challenge the array of the Tales, (and
there the one of the principal, and the other of the Tales, shall try both
arrayes) after one has taken a challenge to the Poll, he cannot challenge the
array. 9. E. 4. 27. 9. H. 5. 11.

If a pannell upon a ven. fac. be returned, and a Tales; and the array of the
principal is challenged, the Triors which try and quash the array, shall not
try the Array of the Tales; for now it is as if there had been no appearance
of the principal panel; but if the riors affirm the array of the principal,
then they shall try the array of the Tales. 9 E. 4. 46. 7. E. 6. Dyer. 78. When
any challenge is made to the Polls, two triors shall be appointed by the Court,
and if they try one indifferent, and he be sworn, then he and the two triors
shall try another, and if another be tried indifferent, and he be sworn, then
the two triors cease, and the two that be sworn in the Jury shall try the
rest. 22. E. 4. Chal. 61. 62. If the plaintiff challenge ten, and the
defendant one, and the twelfth is sworn, because one cannot try alone, there
shall be added unto him one challenged by the plaintiff, and the other by the
defendant. 7. H. 4. 41. If the cause of challenge touch the dishonor or
discredit of the Juror, he shall not be examined upon his oath, but in other
cases he shall be examined upon his oath to inform the triors. 49. E. 3. 1. 2.

Fems ne serfs, ne enfans, ne null infamys, ne null que ne^ fise tenant, ne poet
estr. bone summonere. Brit. ca. 121. Vide libr. Fo. 158. b.

Of an Ass. of no disseim Vide l. 8. f. 45. Iehu Webbs case.

Whenever a Statute gives a forfeiture or penalty against him which
wrongfully detaineth, or dispossesseth another of his duty or interest, in that
case he that has the wrong shall have the forfeiture, etc. and not the King.
P. 29. Eliz. between the Queen and Wood, and so it was adjudged, etc. M 4. Ia.
Re. and note, that the Act of Parliament does give a temporal remedy at the
Common Law to Parsons, etc. for an ecclesiastical duty, and to lay men
proprietaries of tithes the like remedy, but they have election either to sue
for the treble value at the Common Law, or for the double value in the
Ecclesiastical Court, or for substraction of tithes there also. Vide and nota
159. a. etc. 2. E. 6. ca. 13. Donee treble value al party grieve p. praediall
dismes detain per tort, etc.

Sect. 235. 236.
Payment of any money (or of any valuable thing) in the name of seisin of a
rent seck, before any rent become due, is a good seisin of the rent* to have an
Ass. (of no disseis.) when it is due, and that which is given in the name of
seis. etc. works his effect to give seisin, and yet it is no part of the
rent, nor shall be abated out of the rent. S. 565.

The grant and delivery of the Deed (and atturnement) is no seisin of the
rent: and a seisin in Law which the grantee has by the grant, is not
sufficient to maintain an Ass or any other real action, but there must be an
actual seisin. Fo. 160. a.

Also of a rent seck (and so it is of a rent charge) home poit aver ass. de
mortd. ou Bre. de Ayel, ou de Cosinag. and touts auters manners dactions reals,
come la case gift, sicome i poet au^ daesc' auter rent.

Hereupon some have gathered, that a man shall have a Writ of right of a rent
seck, or of a rent charge, albeit they be against common right. F. N. B. 6. 14.
E. 4, 5.

Sect. 237.
Sont 3. causes de disseisine de rent service sc. rescous. replevin. and
enclosure; car per tiels chooses le Seignior e^ disturb de le mean per que il
doit au^ and vener a son rent, sc. de le distress.

But you may make six disseisins of a rent service: Rescous of a distress,
resistance to distrein, Repl. inclos. counter pleading of the title, and
vouching of a Record and sailing. Fo. 160. b.

In some cases the Tenant may make Rescous, etc. 1. if no rent be behind when
the distress is taken. 2. If the Tenant tender the rent to the Lord, when he is
to take the distress, and yet the Lord will distreine, etc. 3. If the rent be
behind, and the Lord destreine the Cattle of the Tenant in the high way within
his Fee. 4. If the Lord will distreine, averia Carurae, where there is a
sufficient, etc. to be raken beside.

5. If the Lord coming to distreine had no view of the Cattle within his Fee,
though the Tenant drive them off purposely, or if the Cattle of themselves
after the view go out of the Fee, or if the Tenant after the view remove them
for any other cause, than to prevent the Lord of his distress. In all these
cases if the Lord distreine the Tenant may make rescous. Vide les autorities en
ceux cases (1.) 6. E. 4. 11. b. F. N. B. 102. E. Lib. 4. f. 11. Bevills c. 8.
H. 4. 1. (2) 17 E. 3. 43. Rescous 14.

If a man come to distreine for damage feasant, and see the beasts in his
soil, and the owner chase them one of purpose before the distress taken, if
the owner of the Soil disterine them, the owner of the cattle may tescue
them, for the beasts must be damage fesant at the time of the distress. 16. E.
4. 10. Lib. 9. fo. 22. in case de avowrie.

There is a diversity between a Warrant of Record, and a war. or an Authority
in Law; for if a Capias be awarded to the Sheriff to arrest a man for felony,
albeit the party be innocent, yet cannot he make rescous. But if a Sheriff
will by authority which the Law gives him arest any man for Felony which is
not guilty, he may rescue himself. 14. H. 7. 20. tit. Just. de. peace 9.

To counterplead the Plantiff in an Ass. by which he is delayed, makes him
that pleads it a disseisor. Otherwise it is if he had pleaded null tort, etc.
24. Ass. 3. 29. Ass. 52. Brit. Fo. 108.

If any man be disturbed to enter and manure his Land, this is a disscisin of
the Land it self: for qui adimit medium dirimit finem; and qui obstrnit aditum
destruit commodum. 26. Ass. 17. 3 E. 4. 2. par Littleton.

Sont 4. causes de disseisin de rent charge sc. Rescous, replevin, enclosure,
and denier. and you may add a Fifth, oiz. reststance to distreine,
counterpleading, and vouching a Record and failer thereof.

Denial is a desseisin of a rent charge as well as of a rent seck, albeit he
may distreine for the rent charge as well as for rent service. Nota. that when
Books say that detainer of a rent charge or seck is a disseisin, it must be
intended upon a demand made, 14. E. 4. 4. Et Sont 2. causes de disseisin de
rent seck, viz. denier and enclosure.

Sect. 240.
Maxim paci sunt contraria vis and injuria.

Omnes illos dicimus armatos qui habent cum quo nocere possunt, etc. Bract.
Lib. 4. f. 162.

Armorum appellatione non solum scuta and gladii and galeae continentur, sed
and fustes and lapides, as the Poet.

Jamque faces and saxa volant, furor arma mini^^rat. Virgillius 1. Aeneid.

Sed vim vi repellere licet, modo fiat moderamine inculpatae tutelae, non ad
sumendam vindictam, sed ad propulsandam injuriam. Vide Sect. 589. Where a
disseisin shall be by way of admittance of the owner of the rent.

Since Littletons time a right profitable Statute 32. H. 8. ca. 37. has been
made for the recovery of arrerages of rents in certain cases, etc.

First, When Littleton wrote, the Heirs, Executors or Administrators of a man
seized of a rent service, rent charge, rent seck, or fee fame, in fee simple or
fee tail, had no remedy for arrerages incurred in the life of the owner of
such rents. But now a double remedy is given to the Executor or Administrator
for payment of debts, etc. viz. either to destrain, or to have an action of
Debt.

2. The preamble of the Statute concerning Executors or Administrators of
Tenant for life, is to be intended of Tenant pur auter vie, so long as Cesty
que vie lives, who are also so hol^en by the said double Remedy: but after the
estate for life determined, his Executors or Administrators might have had an
action of Debr by the Common Law, but they could not have distrained, which now
they may, etc. l. 4. 49. Ognels Case. Dyer 375.

3. If a man make a lease for life or lives, or a gift in tail, reserving
rent, this is a rent service within the Statute.

4. The action of debt must be brought against them that took the profits when
the rents became arrere, or against their Executors or Administrators, but the
distress may be taken upon the land, be it in the Tenants hands, or of any
other that claims by or from him; i. e. from, or under him by purchase, gift
or descent, and not above him, as the Lord by Escheat claims, etc. by reason
of his Seigniory, which is a Title Paramount, l. 7. 39. Lillingtons Case, 11.
H. 4. 94.

5. Lord and Tenant, rent is arrere, the Lord grants his Seigniory, and dies,
The Executor shall have no remedy for these arrerages, because the grantor
himself had no remedy for them when he dyed, in respect of his grant; and the
act is accordingly.

6. If the Tenant make a lease for life, remainder for life, remainder in set,
Tenant for life pays not the rent due to the Lord, the Lord dies, Tenant for
life dies, the Executor cannot distrain upon him in remainder, for he claims
not by descent by or from Tenant for life. And so it is of a Reversion.

But if a man grant a rent charge to A. for the life of B. and lets the
lands to C. for life, the remainder to D. in fee, the rent is arrear for diverse
years; B. dies, C dies, A. may destraine D. in remainder for all the
arrerages, by the latter branch of the Statute, 22. H. 8. l. 5. 118. Edridges
Case.

7. For the arrerage of a Nom. Paenae, and for relief, or for Aid pur fair
fits Chivaler, etc. This Statute gives no remedy.

For arrerages of the Nom. Paenae, the grantee or his Executor, etc. may have
an action of Debt, for Relief the Lord must distrain, but his Executor by the
Common Law shall have action of Debt, W. 1. c, 36. F.N B. 122.

Note, all manner of arrerages of rents issuing out of a Freehold, or
inheritance, whether they be in Money, or Corn, Cattle, etc. within the
Statute; but work days, or any corporal service, etc. are not.

8. If a Feme sole seized of a rent in fee, takes husband and dies; the
husband by the Common Law should not have the arrerages due before marriage,
but now the Statute gives him remedy for the same. L. 4. Ognels Case.

Liber Tertius.
CAP. I. Of Parceners.
Sect. 241.
OUr Author having treated in his two former Books, 1. Of Estates of Lands and
Tenements; and in his second Book of Tenures whereby the same have been holden:
Now in his third Book does teach us diverse things concerning both of them: as
1. the Qualities of their Estates. 2. In what cases the entry of him that Right
has may be taken away. 3. The Remedies, and in what Cases the same may be
prevented or avoided. 4. How a man may be barted of his Right for ever, and in
what Cases the same may be prevented or avoided, vide lib. and Nota, fol. 163.

2 ou^ 3 parceners sont forsque un heir a lour Auncest'; for albeit where
there be two parceners, they have moities in the lands descended to them, yet
are they both but one heir, vid. S. 8. verse. fin.

Nota diversitat' between a Descent, which is an act of the Law, and a
Purchase, which is an act of the party. For if a man has two daughters, etc.
and one of them is attaint of Felony, the father dye h^ the one moity shall
descend to the one daughter, and the other shall escheat. But if a man make a
lease for life, the remainder to the right heirs of A. being dead, who has
issue two daughters, and one is attainted, etc. the remainder is void for the
whole, for that both the daughters should have been but one heir. Fleta l. 5. c
9. and l. 6 c. 47. fo. 164. a. vide and qu.

Sunt autem plures participes quasi unum corpus in eo quod unum jus habent, and
oportet quod corpus sit integrum and quod in nulla part sit defectum.

If lands be given to a man, and to the heirs females of his body, and he has
issue a Son and a Daughter, and dies, the Daughter shall have the land by
descent; but if a remainder be limited to the heirs females of the body of I.
S. etc. the daughter shall never take it by Purchase, for that she is not heir
female of the body of I. S. because he has a Son. And when the right heir does
claim by purchase, he must be a complete heir in judgment of Law.

And as they be but one heir, and yet several persons, so have they one
Freehold in the land so long as it remains undivided in respect of any
strangers Praecipe. But between themselves to many purposes they have in
Judgment of Law several Free-holds, for the one of them may infeoff another of
her part, and make livery, 10 E 4. 17. E. 3. 46. fol. 164. a. vide and qu.

Note a diversity, inter descensum in capita, and in stirpes.

If a man has issue two daughters, and dies, this descent is in capita, viz.
that every shall inherit alike. But if a man has issue two daughters, and the
eldest daughter has issue three daughters, and the youngest one daughter; all
these four shall inherit, but the daughter of the youngest shall have as much as
the three daughters of the eldest, ratione stirpium, and not ratione capitum,
for every daughter has a several root etc.

Men descending of daughters, may be Coparceners as well as women, and shall
jointly implead and be impleaded.

Item est alia actio mixta, quae dicitur actio Familiae hirciscundae, and locum
habet inter eos qui communem habent haeredit' etc. Et locum habet ut videtur,
inter cohaeredes, ubi agitur de proparte sororum, vel inter alios ubi res inter
parts and cohaeredes dividi debeat sicut sunt plures forores, quae sunt quasi
unus haeres, vel inter plures fratres, qui sunt quasi unus haeres ratione rei
quae divisibilis est inter plures masculos, etc. Bract. l. 2. fol. 66. 71, etc.
and l. 5. fol 443. b. vide and qu.

Sunt aliae res haereditariae quae veniunt in partitionem, quae ^um dividi non
possunt conceduntur uni, ita quod aliae cohaeheredes alibi de communi
haereditate habeant ad valorem, sicut sunt vivaria, Piscariae, parci, vel
saltem quod partem habeant pro defectu, sicut secundum piscem, tertium, vel
quartum, vel secundum act^m tertium vel quartum retis. Item in parcis secundam,
tertiam, aut quartam damam. Bract. l. 2. 76. fo. 165. a.

Regnum non est divisibile.
Praterea sceptrum Ilione quod gesserat olim
Maxima natarum Priami --
Virg. 1. Aeneid. If there be two Coparceners of certain lands with Warrant,
and they make partition, etc. the Warranty shall remain, because they are
compellable to make partition.

Tho. de Eberston in Foresta de Pickering, had kept time our of mind a
Woodward for keeping of the Woods parcel of that Manor, and had the bark of all
the Trees felled, etc. as belonging to his Manor; and this was adjudged a good
prescription. Itin. Pickr. 8 E. 3. Rot. 34.

Sect. 243, and 244, 245.
If Coparceners make partition at full age, and unmarried, and of sanae
memoriae of lands in fee simple, it is good and firm for ever, albeit the the
values be unequal; but if it be of lands intailed, etc. it shall bind the
parties themselves, but not their issues unless it be equal. Or if any be
Covert, it shall bind the husband, but not the wife or her heirs. It shall
not bind the Infant, etc. Modus and conventio vincunt legem. Pacto aliquid
licitum est, quod sine pacto non admittitur. Quilibet potest renunciare juri
pro se introduct' Conventio autem privatorum non potest publico juri derogare.

Aei^ne^ia semper est perfren da propter privilegium aetatis, sed esto quod
filia primogenita relicto nepote, vel nepte in vita patris vel matris
decesserit, praeferenda erit soror antenata tali nepoti vel nepti quantu^ ad
Ecisnetiam quia mortem parentum expectant.

If there be diverse Coparceners of an Advowson, and they cannot agree to
present, the Law does give the first presentment to the eldest, and this
privilege shall descend to her issue, nay her Assigns shall have it, and so
shall her husband that is tenant by the Courtesy, etc. But it is otherwise of
a partition in Deed by the act of the party. Sic vide diversit' fol. 166. b.

Cujus est divisio, alterius est electio.
Dedi vobis possessionem quam dividetis sort.
Numb. c. 26. Sect. 247.
If one Coparcener makes a lease pur ans, yet a Writ of Partition does lie;
but otherwise is it, if one or both make a lease for life, because non in simul
and pro indiviso tenent, and the writ of Partition must be against the Tenant
of the Freehold, 11 H. 4. 3. F.N.B. 62. g.

And if one Coparcener disseise another, a Writ of Partition does not lie, etc.
for that non pro indiviso tenent, etc. 4 H. 7. 9. 11 Ass. 23.

If two Coparcerners have two Manors by descent, and they make partition, that
the one shall have one Manor for one year, and the other the other Manor for
this year, and so alternis vicibus to them and their heirs, this is a good
partition, Temps. E. 1. partit. 21. F.N.B. 62. 1.

Of partitions in Law, some be by act in Law without Judgment, and some be by
Judgment, and not in a Writ de Partit. fac.

If there be Lord, three Coparceners Mesnes, and Tenant, and one Coparcener
purchase the Tenancy, this is not only a partition of the Mesnalty, being
extinct for a third part, but a division of the Seigniory Paramount, for now he
must make several Avowries, 26 H. 6. 7.

If one Coparcener make a Feoffment in fee of her part, this is a severance of
the Coparcenary, and several Writs of Praecipe shall lie against the other
Coparcener, and the Feoffee, 37 H. 6. 8. So it is if two Coparceners have issue
and dye, 17 E. 3. 15, and 16.

Et si asc' des parceners sont enget ou disturb de sa seisin per ses auters
parceners, ou plusor, al disseisee viendran^ ass per several pleint sur les
parceners and recovera, mes nemy a tener en severalty, mes en common solonque
ceo que avaunt le fist, etc. Britton fol. 112. a. And this seems reasonable,
for he must have Judgment according to his pleint, and that was of a moity, and
not of any thing in severalty; and the Sheriff cannot have any warrant to make
any partition in severalty, or by Metes and Bounds. Lib. 6. fol. 12, and 12.
Morrices Case.

Sect. 248.
Si parceners ne voilont agere a partition dest. fr. enter eux, donque lun poit
aver breve partition fac. envers les auters, etc. and le vic. en son propter
persona alera a les terres, etc. and per le serement de 12 loial homes de son
bail, etc. ilserra partit. enter les parties, etc.

There is a book in the Exchequer, called Doomsday, dies judicii. Sententia
ejusdem libri inficiari non potest, vel impune declinari, ob hoc nos eundem
librum judiciarum nominamus.

Sheriff is the Reve of the Shire, Praefectus Satrapiae, Provinciae, or
Comitatus, and habet triplicem custodiam, 1 Vitae Legis, 2. Vitae Reipublicae.
Vicecomes dicitur, quod vicem Comitis suppleat. Marculphus says, This Office
is, Judiciaria Dignitas. Lampridius, That it is Officium Dignitatis. Forter
says, Quod Vicecomes est nobilis Officiarius. Fortesc. c. 24. R. 2. cap.

Verum quod modo vocatur Comitatus, olim apud Britones temporibus Romanorum in
Regno isto B^tan. vocabatur consulatus, and qui modo vocantur Vicecomites tunc
temporis vice-consules vocabantur; ille vero dicebatur vice-consul qui consule
absente ipsius vice supplebat in jure and in foro. Lambert. fol. 129. 12.

Bailiff is an Officer concerning the administration of Justice of a certain
Province. Flet. l. 2. c. 67.

Sect. 249, 250.
Et de la partition que l' vicount ad issint ft. il. fer. notice la Justices
south son seal, and les seals de ches^' de les 12. etc. this etc. does imply,
That the principal Judgment upon the partition so returned, is, Ideo
consideratum est per Cur' quod partitio firma and stabilis in perpetuum
teneatur. Lib. 11. fol. 40. Metcalfs Case.

Partition per agreement per curer parceners poit estre, auxibien per parol
sans fait, come per fait. But a partition between joint-tenants is not good
without Deed, albeit it be of lands, and that they be compellable to make
partition by the Statute of 31 H. 8. c. 10. and 32 H. 8. c. 32. because they
must pursue that act by Writ de Partit. fac. And a partition between
joynt-tenants without Writ, remains at the Common Law, which could not be done
by Parol. And where books say, That joynt-tenants made partition without Deed,
it must be intended of Tenants en Common, and executed by livery, S. 290. 3 H.
4. 1. lib. 6. 12, 13. 2 Eliz. Dyer 179. 28 H. 8. Dyer 29. 1* Mar. Dyer 98.

Nota, between joynt-tenants there is a two fold privity, viz. in estate, and
in possession; between tenants in common, there is a privity only in
possession, but parceners have a threefold privity, viz. in estate, in person,
and in possession.

Sect. 251, etc.
A rent may be granted for owelty of partition without Deed. So it is of Common
of Estovers, or a Corody, or a Common of Pasture, etc. albeit they lie in
grant, etc. But if rent be granted out of other lands, then descended to the
Coparceners, then there must be a Deed, 1 Mar. Dyer 18.

Sect. 253, etc.
Mes tiel rent e^ rent charge de common droit eroe reserve pur egality de
partit. Et nota, that Reservation here, is taken for a Grant.

I. S. seized of lands in fee, has issue two daughters, R and A. Bastard
eigne, and Mulier puisne, and dies, R. and A. enter and make partition: A. and
her daughter are concluded for ever, 21 E. 3. 34, 35. 11 Ass. 23.

Sect. 256, 257, 358.
2 parceners prent Barons, si parit. fait perenter eux * soit egall etc. donque
il ne poit estre apurs defeater, etc.

Judicicis officium est, us res ita tempera rerum

Quaerere, quaesito tempore tutus eris.

An unequal partition in the Chancery, shall not bind an Infant, F.N.B. 256,
259, 260, etc. But it may be avoided either by Scire sac. in the Chancery, or
by a Writ de partit. fac. at the Common Law, 21 E. 3. 31.

A partition made by the Kings Writ de partit. fac. by the Sheriff by the Oath
of 12 men, and Judgment thereupon given, shall bind the Imfant, though his
part be unequal, causa qua supra, so. 171.

Sect. 259.
Si asc' fait, feoffment, grant, release, confirmation, obligation, ou auter
escript' soit fait per asc' devant son plein age sc. 21 ans ou si asc' deins
tiel age soit Bailiff ou receivor a a sc' home, tout sera pur nient, etc. Auxi
home devant le dit age ne sera my jute en Enquest, etc.

Fait, is an instrument consisting on three things; viz. Writing, Sealing, and
Delivery, comprehending a Bargain, or Contract between party and party, man or
woman.

Obligation, is commonly taken in the Common Law for a Bond containing a
penalty with condition for payment of Money, or to do or suffer some act or
thing, etc. And a Bill is most commonly taken for a single Bond without
condition, f. 172. a.

An Infant may bind himself to pay for his necessary Meat, Drink, Apparel,
necessary Physic, etc. and likewise for his good tea^^ing, and instruction,
whereby he may profit himself after^ards. But if he bind himself in an
Obligation or other Writing, with a penalty for the payment of any of these,
that Obligation shall not bind him, 18 E 4. 2. lib. 9. fol. 87. Pinchons case.

Also other things of necessity shall bind him, as a presentation to a
Benefice, for otherwise the laps shall incur against him. And it an Infant be
Executor upon payment of any debt due to the Testator, he may make an
Acquittance, but in tha^ case a Release without payment is void, and generally
what soever an Infant is bound to do by Law, the same shall bind him, albeit
he does it without suit of Law. 2 M. Dyer 104.

An action of account does lie against a Bailiff that has administration and
charge of lands, goods. etc. for the profits which he has raised or made, or
might by his industry or care have reasonably raised, or made (his reasonable
charges and expenses deducted) Brit. fol. 62. 70. 41 E. 3. 39.

An Account against a Receiver, is when one receives money to the use of
another, to render an account, but upon his account he shall not be allowed his
expenses and charges: Except in some cases; As if two joint Merchants occupy
their Stock, etc. in common; one of them naming himself a Merchant, shall have
an account against the other naming him a Merchant, and shall charge him as
Recep ot denariorum ipsius B. ex quacunque causa and contractu ad comm unem
utilitatem ipsorum A. and B. provenient sicut per legem mercatoriam
rationabiliter monstrare potuit, 43 E. 3. 31. 30 E. 1. Account 127. 10 H. 7.
16. lib. Intrat. 17, 18, 19. F.N.B. 118.

So as there be but three kinds of Writs of Account, viz. 1. Against one as
Guardian. 2. Against one as Bailiff. And 3. as Receiver, F. N. B. 219. d.

And to maintain an action of account, there must be either a privity in deed
by the consent of the party, 2 Mar B. Account 89. F. N. B. 117. Pl. Com. 542. 2
H. 4. 12. 4 H. 7. 6, etc. or a privity in law ex provisione legis, as against a
Guardian, etc.

Minor surare no potest. Bract. l. 5. f. 340. b. For an infant cannot make his
Law of Non-Summons, 13 E. 3. Ley 50. and therefore the default shall not
prejudice him. 2. Mar. Dyer. 104. 105. But an infant of the age of 12 years
shall take the oath of allegiance, and. Vide Sect. 85. 91.

An infant cannot upon his oath make his Law in an actio^ of debt, 1. H 7. 25.
15. E. 4. 2. and the husband and wife of full age for the debt of the wife,
before the converture shall make their Law. 9. E. 4. 24. 15 E. 4. 2.

Grant is a conveyance of a thing which cannot pass without Deed, as advowsons,
rents, etc. Lib. 3 f. 63. Lincol. Coll. c.

Sect. 260, 261.
The reversion expectant upon an estate tail is of no account in Law, for that
it may be cut off by the Tenant in Tail. Tres. in fee S. and fee Tail descend
al 2. files, etc. If the youngest daughter alien part of the Lands in Fee
simple and dies, so as a full recompense for the lands entailed descends not
to her issue, she may waive the taking of any profits thereof, and enter into
the Land entailed, for the issue in tail shall never be barred without a full
recompense, though there be a war. in Deed, or in Law descended. Fo* 173. a.

If a man be seized of three Manors of equal value in Fee and takes wife, and
charge one of the Manors with a re^^ charge, and dies, she may by the
provision of the Law take a third part of all the Manor and hold them
discharged, b^ if she will accept the entire Manor charged, it is holden that
she shall hold it so. 26. E. 3. Dower 133. 18. H. 6. 17.

A partition of lands intailed between perceners, if it be equal at the time
of the partition shall bind the issues in tail for ever, albeit the one do
alien her part. Dyer 1. Mar. 98.

Sect. 262.
When the privity of the estate is destroyed by the Feoff. of one parcener,
upon eviction of a moity by force of an entaile against the other, she shall
not enter upon the alienee. But in the case that Littleton puts (of
disseisin of an Infant, etc.) when the privity of the estate remains, and the
part of one is evicted, she shall enter and hold in Coparcenary with her other
copercener, and so it is in the case of an ex^hange. 15. E. 4. 3. a. per.
Littleton Lib. 4. 221, etc. Bastards c.

If the whole estate in part of the p^^p^^ty be evicted, that shall avoid the
partition in the whole, be it of a Manor that is entire, or of acres of ground,
etc. that be several; for the partition in that case implies for this purpose
both a war. and a condition in Law, and either of them is entire, and gives
an entry in this case into the whole. 13. E. 4. 3. 42. Ass. 22. and Lib. 4.
ante, etc.

Also if any estate of freehold be evicted from the Coparcener in all, or part
of her p^^p^^ty, it shall be avoided in the whole. vide. libr. and nota Fo.
170. a, ex great.

If but part etc. be evicted, as an estate in tail, or for life, leaving a
reversion in the Copercener.

Where one Copercener takes benefit of the condition in Law she defeateth the
partition in the whole. But when she vouched by force of the war. in Law for
prrt, the partition shall not be defeated in the whole, but she shall
recompense for that part Sic nota diversit. 5 E. 3. Tit. Voucher 249.

Also; there is another diversity between a recovery in value by force of the
warranty upon the exchange and upon the partition, for upon the exchange he
shall recover a full recompense for all that he loses: but upon the pahtition
she shall recover but the moity or half of that which is lost, to the end that
the loss may be equal. There are more and greater privities in case of
partition in persons, blood, and estates, than there is in exchanges, 19. H. 6.
26. 18. E. 2. t. aid. 171.

When the whole Privity between Coparceners is destroyed, there cease any
recompense to be expected either upon the condition in Law, or warranty in Law
(by force of the partition) Fo. 174. a.

If one coparcener makes a Feoffment in Fee, and after her Feoffee is
impleaded, and voucheth the Feoffer, she may have aid of her coparcener to
deraign a Warrant Paramount, but never to recover pro rata against her by force
of the warrant in law upon the partition, for by her alienation she has
dismissed her self to have any part of the land, as Parcener. And as parcener
she must recover pro rata, etc. 31. E. 3. 24. 11. H. 4. 22, 23. And yet in some
case the Feoffee of one coparcener shall have aid, etc. and therefore if there
be two coparceners, and they make partition, and the one of them infeoffs her
Son and Heir apparent, and dies, the Son is impleaded, he shall pray in aid,
etc. for that the warranty between the Mother and the Son is by Law adnulled,
and therefore the Law gives the Son, albeit he be in by Feoffment, to pray in
aid of the other parcener to deraign the Warrant Parramount: wherein note the
great Equity of the Common Law, 43. E. 3. 23. Pl. Com. 32. E. 1. tit. Aid 178.

But if a man be seized of lands in fee, and has issue two daughters, and make
a gift in tail to one of them, and dye seized of the Reversion in fee which
descends to both Sisters, and the Donee of her issue is impleaded, she shall
not pray in aid, etc. either to recover pro rata or to deraign the Warrant,
etc. for that the other Sister is a stranger to the State tail, whereof the
eldest was sole tenant, and never partition was or could be thereof made, 2 H.
6. 16.

Albeit it is in the power of the Tenant tail to cut off the Reversion: yet if
the Infant enter before it be cut off, the Law has such Consideration of this
Reversion, that she that loses it shall enter into her Sisters part, and hold
with her in Coparcenery, for that the privity between them was not wholly
destroyed.

Sect. 263, 264.
Si le part dn parcener soit defeat per loial enter, etc. el poit enter and
occupier ouesque les auter parceners, etc. and eux compeller de fair novell
partition, etc.

Breve de partit, fac. gift pur parceners tantsolement. Et ciel breve gift
envers tenant per le curt' and encore il men ne poit au^ tiel breve.

Albeit that the Tenant by the Courtesy be an estranger in blood, yet the Writ
de partit. fac. clearly lies against the Tenant per Courtesy, because he
continues the state of Coparcenery, 3. E. 3. 47.

Also if two Coparceners be, and one does alien in fee, they are Tenants in
Common, and several Writs of Praecipe must be brought against them; and yet
the parcener shall have a Writ of partition against the alienee at the Common
law, 28 E. 3. 5.

If there be three Coparceners, and the eldest takes husband, and the husband
purchase the part of the youngest, he and his wife shall have a Writ of
Partition against the middle Sister at the Common Law, because he is seized of
one part in the right of his wife who is a parcener, Dyer 1 Mar. 98. F. N. B.
52, Regist.

Since Littleton wrote, by the Statute 31 H. 8. c. 1. 32 H. 8. cap. 32. vide
Sect. 290. one joynt-tenant, or tenant in common, may have a Writ of Partition
against the other, and therefore the alienee of one parcener may have a Writ of
Partition against the other parcener, because they are Tenants in common.

So Tenant per Courtesy shall have a Writ, etc. upon the Statute, for albeit he
is neither joynt-tenant nor tenant in common, for that a Praecipe lies against
the parcener and tenant per Courtesy, yer he is in equal mischief as another
tenant for life. Br. tit. Partit. 141. Dyer 3 M. 128. A. and 7 Eliz. 243.

CHAP. II. Parceners by Custom.
Sect. 265, etc.
PArcenery per le Custom est lou terres descend a les fits en Gavelkind, etc.
and in Wallia, haereditas partibilis est inter haeredes masculos. Sect. 212.
Stat. Walliae 12 E. 1.

Sons are parceners in respect of the Costom of the fee or inheritance, and not
in respect of their person, as Daughters and Sisters, etc. be Bracton l. 5. fo.
428.

Hotchpot, est de mitt. les terres leigne soer en frankmarriage, and les terres
del auter soer en fee simple ensemble, and donques partit. serre fert, etc.
Vide Sect. 6. 266. etc.

There must be a Custom alleged in some County, etc. to enable the wife or
children to the Writ de rationabile part bonorum, Regist. 142. 34 E. 1. Detin.
56. 7 E. 4. 21.

But such as be reasonably advanced by the Father, etc. shall have no further
part of the goods; for the words of the Writ be, Nec in vita patris promoti
fuerunt. 3 E. 3. Detin. 156. 40 E. 3. 18. fo. 176. b. vide and nota.

Sect. 268. and 269.
After this putting into Hotchpot, and partition made, the lands given in
Frankmarriage, are become as the other lands which are descended from the
common Ancestor; and of these lands if she be impleaded, she shall have aid,
etc. So if he Coparcener that has a rent granted to her for owelty of
artition, has the rent, as it had descended to her, etc. Brit. cap. 72. 10 E.
3. 37. 29 Ass. 23.

Et tout foits sur tiel partit' les terres dones en frankmarriage demurgent a
les Donees, and a lour heirs solonque le form de le done. Car lauter
parcenter navoit riens de ceo, etc. vide lib. so. 177. b.

Quod est inconveniens, aut contra rationem, non est permissum in lege.

Sect. 271, 272, 273.
Dones en frankmarriage fueront per la common ley deu^^^ lest. west. 2. and
tout temps puis ad este continue, etc.

The gifts do continue, but not the estates, 12 H. 4. 11.

Item tiel mitter en Hotchpot, etc. est lou les auters terres ou tenements que
ne fuer' Dones en frankmarriage descend de les Donors en frankmarriage
tousolement, etc.

Si les terres dones in frankmarriage sont de tant egall va. pur le an. que le
remnant sont ou de pluis valtie en vain tiels tres, etc. ser. mis en Hotchpot,
etc:

Lex non praecipit inutilia, inutilis labor stultus.

The Law shall adjudge of the value, as it was at the time of the partition,
fo. 179. a. vide and nota, unless the land be improved or decaid by the proper
act or default of the parties.

Sect. 174, etc.
Nota, que terres ne ser. mis, etc forsque ou ils descend en fee simple car de
terres discendus en fee tail partit. serra fait sicome null tiel done en
frankmarriage ad este fait; for the issue claims per formam doni, and
voluntas donatoris, etc. observetur.

If the Ancestor infeoff one of his daughters of part of his land, or purchase
lands to him and her, and their heirs, or gives her part of his lands in
tail, yet she shall have a full part of the remnant of the lands in fee
simple, for the benefit of putting, etc. into Hotchpot, is only appropriate to
a gift in frankmarriage (quia maritagium cadit in partem) which shall be
accounted as parcel of her advancement, 13 E. 2. tit. Tail. Bract. l. 2. fo.
77.

Sect. 276.
Nota, that modus and convent uicunt legem; and consensus tollit errorem. But
if partition be by the Kings Writ, then every parcener must have his part, 24
H. 3. tit. partit. 19.

CHAP. III. Of Joynt-tenants
Sect. 277.
THere be joynt-tenants by other Conveyances than Littleton here mentions; as
by Fine, Recovery, Bargain and Sale, Release, Confirmation, etc. So there be
diverse other limitations, etc. As if a rent charge be granted to A. and B.
habendum to them two, viz. to A. until he be married, and to B. until he be
advanced to a Benefice, they be joynt-tenants in the mean time, etc. And if A.
dye before marriage, the rent shall survive; but if A. had married, the rent
should have ceased for a moity: and sic e converso, on the other side.

If an alien and a subject purchase lands in fee, they are joynt-tenants, and
the survivorship shall hold place; Et nullum tempus occurrit regi upon an
office found, 7 E. 4. 29. 11. H. 4. 26.

Sect. 278.
Omnis rati-habitio retrotrahitur and mandato aequiparatur.

Nota, That seeing Coadjutors, Counselors, Commanders, etc. are all
disseisors, albeit the disseisor which is tenant dies, yet the Assize lies
against the Coadjutor, etc. and tenant of the land, though he be no desseisor.

The Demandant and others in a praecipe did disseise the tenant to the use of
the others, and the Writ did not abate, for the Demandant was a disseisor, but
gained no tenancy in the land, for that he was but a Coadjutor, 50. E. 3. 2.

A man disseised tenant for life to the use of him in the reversion, and after
he in the reversion agrees, etc. he is a disseisor in fee, for by the
disseisin the reversion was divested which (some say) cannot be revested by the
agreement of him in the reversion, for that it makes him a wrong doer, and
therefore no relation of an estate by wrong can help him.

Sect. 27. 9
Disseisin est properment lou un home enter eu asc' terres, etc: lou son enter
nem pas congeable and ousta celuy que ad franktenement, etc. This description,
etc. is understood only of such lands, etc. whereinto an entry may be made,
and not of Rents, Commons, etc.

Every entry is no disseisin, unless there be an ouster also of the free hold;
as an Entry and a Claimer or taking of Profits, etc. 3 E. 4. 2. 34 Ass. 11. 12.
Pl. Com. 89. Parson de Honeylane.

Now as there be joynt-tenants by Disseisin, so are there joynttenants by
Abatement, Intrusion, and Usurpation.

Sect. 280.
Nota que le nature de joyntenancy est, que le survivor au^a solement lentier
tenancy solunque tiel estate que il ad, si le jointure soit continue, etc. mes
auterment est de parceners.

Although survivorship be proper to joynt-tenants, yet it is not proper quarto
modo: for if a man lets lands to A. and B during the life of A. if B. dies,
A. shall have all by the survivor, but if A. dies, B. shall have nothing.

Two or more may have trust or authority committed to them jointly, and yet it
shall not survive. But with a diversity between a naked Trust, etc. and a Trust
joined to an estate or interest. 2. There is a diversity between Authorities
created by the party for private causes, and Authority created by Law for
execution of Justice, Ex gr.

As if a man devise that his two Executors shall sell his land, if one of them
dye, the survivor shall not sell it, but if he had devised his lands to his
Executors to be sold, there the survivor shall sell it, 39. Ass. p. 17. 30 H.
8. tit. Devise B. 31 Dyer. 3 El. 190. Br. tit. Cond. 190.

If a man make a Letter of Attorney to two to do any act, the survivor shall
not do it: but if a Venire fac. be awarded to four Coroners to impannel and
return a Jury, and one of them dye, yet the other shall execute and return the
same.

If a Charter of Feoffment be made, and a Letter of Attorney to four or three
jointly or severally to deliver seisin, two of them cannot make livery, because
it is neither by them four or three jointly, nor any of them severally, 38 H.
8. Dyer 62 27 H 8. f. 6.

But if the Sheriff upon a Capias directed to him, make a Warrant to four or
three jointly or severally, to arrest the Defendant, two of them may arrest
him, because it is for the execution of Justice, which is pro bono publico.
Pasch. 45 Eliz. in Banco Reg. inter King and Hobbes. (Not of that kind of the
infidel of Malmsbury)

Sect. 281, 282.
Survivor holds place regularly as well between joynt-tenants of goods and
chattels in possession or in right, as of Inheritance or Free hold, fo. 182. a.

Si un obligation soit f^. a plusors pur un debt celuy que survequist avera
tout le debt ou duty, and issent est daverts Covenants and Contracts, etc. Mes,
Jus accrescendi inter mercatores pro beneficio commercii locum non habet,
F.N.B. 117. E. 38. E. 3 7.

Sect. 283.
Terres sont dones a 2. homes, and a les heirs de lour 2. corpse engendres, en
cen case les donees ont joint estre pur lour 2. vies, and encore ils ont
several inheritances entant que ils ne poient aver per null possibility un heir
enter eux engendre, sicome home and feme point aver, etc.

Note, albeit they have several inheritances in tail, and a particular estate
for their lives, yet the inheritance does not execute, and so break the
joynt-tenancy, but they are joynt-tenants for life, and tenants in common of
the inheritance in tail.

Here a diversity is employed, when the state of inheritance is limited by one
Conveyance, as in this case it is, there are no several estates to drown one
in another: but when the states are divided into several Conveyances, their
particular estates are distinct, etc. and the one drownes the other. As if a
lease be made to two men for term of their lives, and after the lessor
grants the reversion to them two, and to the heirs of their two bodies, the
juynture is severed, and they are tenants in common in possession; and it is
further employed, that in this Case of Littletons there is no division between
the estates for lives, and the several inheritances, because they cannot
convey away the inheritance after their decease, for it is divided only in
supposition of law, and to some purposes the inheritance is said to be
executed, 12 E. 4. 2. b.

If a man make a lease for life, and after grants the reversion to the tenant
for life and to a stranger, and to their heirs, they are not joynt-tenants of
the reversion, but the reversion by act of law is executed for the one moity in
the tenant for life, and for the other moity he holds it still for life, the
reversion of that moity to the grantee, 39 H. 6. 2. b.

And so it is if a man make a lease to two for their lives, and after grants
the reversion to one of them in fee, the jointure is severed, and the reversion
is executed for the one moity, and for the other moity there is tenant for
life, the reversion to the grantee. Vide Westcotes Case, lib. 2. fo. 60, 61.

If lessee for life grants his estate to him in the reversion and to a
stranger, the jointure is severed, and the reversion executed for the one moity
by the act of the Law, 7 H. 6.

If a man make a lease for life, and grant the reversion to two in fee, the
lessee grants his estate to one of them, they are not joynt-tenants of the
reversion, for there is an execution of the estate for the one moity, and an
estate for life, the reversion to the other of the other moity.

Si home voet lesser terre a un auter par fait, ou sans fait, nient fesant
mention que estate il avoit, and fert livery, etc. en ceo cas le less ad
estate pur tinere de sa vie.

Quaelibet concessio fortissime contra donatorem interpretanda est. Legis
(autem) constructio non facit injuriam. Pl. Com. in Throgmortons case.

If a lease be made to two, habendum, to the one for life, the remainder to the
other for life, this does alter the general intendment of the premises. Et
semper expressam facit cessare tacitum, 30 H. 8. tit. Joyntenans* Br. 53. Dyer
fo. 361. Pl. Com. 100.

Nota, where the grant is impossible to take effect according to the letter,
there the Law shall make such a construction as the gift by possibility may
take effect, Benignae faciendae sunt interpretationes cartar. propter
simplicitatem laicorum ut res magis valeat quam pereat, fo. 183. b.

Cognitio legis est copulata and complicata. Tunc unumquodque scire dicimur cum
primam causam scire putamus: scire autem proprie est rem ratione and per causam
cognoscere. Arist. 1 Metap. Virg. 1. Georg.

Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. If a gift be made to two men, and
the heirs of their two bodies begotten, the remainder to them two and their
heirs, they are joynt-tenants for life, tenants in common of the estate tail,
and joynt-tenants of the fee simple in remainder, for they are joint purchasers
of the fee simple, and the remainder in fee is a new created estate, but the
reversion remaining in the Donor, or his heirs, is a part of his ancient fee
simple, Dyer 14 Eli. 309.

Sect. 284.
Lou terre e^ done a. 2. females and a les heirs de lour 2. corpse ingendres.
It has been said, that the husband, etc. should be Tenant pur le Curt' living
the other sister, 17 E. 3. 51. 78. and that the issue of the one should recover
the moity in a Formedon, living the other sister, 44 E. 3. Tail 13. 7. H. 4.
16. Corbets c. l. 1. fo. 8. 84. 6. 4. Mar. Dyer 145. But Littleton has
resolved this doubt, Vid. fo. 183. a.

If a man give lands to two men and one woman, and the heirs of their three
bodies begotten, they have several inheritances. For the Law will never intend
a possibility upon a possibility. Fo. 184. a.

Sect. 285.
If a fine be levied to two and to the heirs of one of them by force whereof he
is seized, he that has Fee dies, and after the joint-tenant for life dies,
and an estranger abates in this case the heir may either suppose the Fee simple
executed, and have an Ass. of Mordanc. ou brief de droit: or he may have a
scire fac. to execute the fine, or maintain a Writ of intrusion by which the
heir supposes that the Fee was not executed. 11 H. 4. 55. F.N.B. 196. and 219.
and he shall term it a remainder; and yet when Land is given to two, and to the
heirs of one of them, he in the remainder cannot grant away his Fee simple.

Sect. 286.
2 Jointenants de terre, etc. celuy que survesquist claima and ad la terre per
le survivor, and nemy ad, ne poit de ceo claimer rien per descent de son
compagnon, etc. Mes auterment est de parceners, etc. and the diversity is, for
that the Survivor does claim above the grant, etc. and the heir by descent
under, etc.

If two joyntenants be of a term, and the one of them grant to I.S. that if he
pay to him 10. l. deuteronomy. Mich. that then he shall have his term, the grantor
dies before the day, I.S. pays the sum to his executor at the day, yet he
shall not have the term, but the survivor shall hold place, for it was but in
nature of a communication, but if he had made a Lease for years to begin at
Mich. it should have bound the Survivor. 14 Pl. 8. 22. Pl. Com. 263. b. Hales
case. Ius accrescendi praefertur oneribus, and alienatio rei praefertur juri
accrescendi.

If one joyntenant in Fee simple be indebted to the King, and dies, no extent
shall be made upon the land in the hands of the Survivor. 40 Ass. 36. F. N. B.
149. Pl. Com. 321.

If a recovery be had against one joyntenant who dies before execution, the
Survivor shall not avoid this recovery, because that the right of the moity is
bound by it.

If one joynt-tenant in Fee take a Lease for years of a stranger per ft.
indent. and dies, the Survivor shall not be bound by the conclusion, because
he claims above it, etc.

If two joynt-tenants be in Fee, and the one make a Lease for years reserving a
rent, and dies, the surviving Feoffee shall have the reversion by survivor,
but not the rent, because he claims in from the first Feoffer which is
paramount the rent. Dyer M. 2. and 3. El. 187. Lib. 1. f. 96. and Lib. 6. fo.
78, 79.

If one joynt-tenant grants a rent charge out of his part, and after release
to his joint companion, and dies, he shall hold the land charged, because he
claims not by the survivor, in as much as the rel' prevent. the same. 33 H.
6. 3 a. 9 El. Dyer 263. fo. 185. a.

But all men agree, that if A. B. and C. be joynt-tenants in Fee, and A. charge
his part, and then release to B. and his heirs and dye, that the charge is
good for ever; for B. cannot be in from the first Feoffer, because he has a
joint companion at the time of the release made, and several Writs of praec.
must be brought against them. 37 H. 8. tit. alienation. Br. 31. 10 E. 4. 3. b.

Sect. 287
Jus accrescendi prefertur ultimae voluntati.

Although an in^ant, est unum indivisible tempore quod non e^ tempus nec pars
temporis, ad quod tamen parts temp. connectuntur, and that instans est finis
unius temporis, and principium alterius: yet in consideration of Law, there is
a priority of time, in an instant, as here the survivor is preferred before the
devise, which Littleton distinguishes by these words, post mortem, and per
mortem. Pl. Com Fulmerstons case.

Two femes ioynt-tenants of a Lease for years, one of them takes husband, and
dies, yet the term shall survive; for though all chattels realls are given to
the husband, if he survive, yet the survivor between the joynt-tenants is the
elder Title, and after the marriage the feme continued sole possessed, for if
the husband dies, she shall have it, and not the executors of the husband, but
otherwise it is of personal goods, fol. 185. b. vide etc.

Inprimis autem debet quilibet qui testaverit, dominum suum de meliore re quam
habuerit recognoscere, and postea ecclesiam de alia meliore, etc. Fleta, lib.
2. cap. 50.

Sect. 288.
Chesc' joint. est sei del terre que il tient joint. per my and per tout. and
sic totum tenet and nihil tenet, sc. totum conjunctim, and nihil per se
separatim; and albeit they are so seized, yet to diverse purposes each of them
has but a right to a moity, as to enfeoffe, give, or demise, or to forfeit or
lose by default in a Praec. 40. Ass. 79. Brit. cap. 35.

A communi observantia non est recedendum.

If two joyntenants be, and both they make a feoffment in Fee upon condition,
and that for breach thereof one of them shall enter into the whole, yet he
shall enter but into a moity, because no more in judgment of Law passed from
him; and so it is of a gift in tail, or a Lease for life, etc. Pl. com.
Brownings c.

If two joyntenants make a feoffment in fee, and one of the feoffors die, the
feoffee cannot plead a feoffment from the survivor of the whole, because each
of them gave but his part, but otherwise it is on the part of the feoffees, 14
E. 4. 5. fol. 186. a.

Two joyntenants de terres, etc. And one of them by Deed indent^^ bargain and
sell the Lands, and the other joyntenant dies, and then the Deed is enrolled,
there shall pass but a moity, 6 E. 6. Tit. Faits inroll. 9. Br.

Sect. 289.
En grant de rent charge per joint. etc. les tenements demurg. touts foits come
ils fuer. adevat. sans ceo que asc' ad asc' drt. dau^ asc' parcel de les tenem.
fors. eux me. and les tenem. sont en tiel plite come ils fueront devant le
charge etc. mes ou leas e^ ft. per un joint. a un aut. per term de ans etc.
maint. per force de lease, le lessee ad drt. en m. la terre se de tout ceo que
a son lessor affiert, and dau^ ceo per force de lease durant son Feme. Fo. 186.
b.

If two joyntenants be of an Advowson, and the one present, etc. and his Clark
is admitted and instituted, this in respect of the privity shall not put the
other out of possession, but if that joyntenant that presents dies, it shall
serve for a tittle in a Qu. Imp. brought by the survivor. 11 H. 4. 54. 10 E. 4.
94. 1 H. 7. 1. b. 9 El. Dyer 259. 6 E. 4. 10. b. Doct. and St. 116. F. N. B.
34. u. But yet if one jointenant or tenant in common present, or if they
present severally, the ordinary may either admit or refuse, etc. such a
presentee, unless they join in a presentation and after the six months he
may present by lapse. But if two coperceners be etc. and they cannot agree to
present, the eldest shall present, and if her sister does disturb her, she
shall have a qu. imp. and so shall the issue and the Assignee of the eldest,
and yet he is tenant in common with the youngest, and so tenant per Courtesy of
the eldest shall present. 38 H. 6. 9. 5 H. 5. 10. F.N.B. 34.

Sect. 290.
Jointenants (fills violont) fair partition, etc.

But this partition must be by Deed. Vide Sect. 249. 318.

But jointenants for years may make partition without Deed 18 Eliz. 350. b.
Dyer. Since Littleton wrote, joyntenants and tenants in common are compellable
to make partition by writ Stat. 31 H. 8. c. 1. 32 H. 8. c. 32. Sect. 264. 247.
259. F.N.B. 9. b. 62. b. lib. 6. Fo. 12, 13. Morrices c.

If one joyntenant or tenant in common disseise another, and the disseisee
bring his Ass. for the moity, though the plaintiff prays it, yet no judgment
shall be given to hold in severaltie, for then at the common Law there might
have been by compulsion of Law a partition bteween Joyntenants and tenants in
common, and by rule of Law the plaintiff must have judgment according to his
plaint or demand, 187. a.

Sect. 291. etc.
Baron and feme sont forsq. un person en ley. vir and axor sunt quasi unica
persona, quia caro una, and sanguis unus. Lib. 4. fo. 68. Tokers c. Pl. com.
483. Nicholls ca.

If an estate be made to a man and a woman and their heirs before marriage, and
after they marry the husband and wife have moities between them. If a Feoffment
be made to a man and a woman, and their heirs with warranty, and they
entermarry, and after are impleaded and vouch, and recover in value, moities
shall not be between them; for though they were sole when the warranty was
made, notwithstanding at the time when they recovered and had execution they
were husband and wife, in which time they cannot take by moities. Fo. 187. b.
Vide, etc.

A right of Action, and a right of entry may stand in jointure. Vide Sect. 302.
F.N.B. 193. k.

A right of action, or a bare right of entry cannot stand in jointure with a
freehold or inheritance in possession; and therefore if the husband make a
Feoffment of the moity, this was a discontinu. of that moity, and the other
joyntenant remained in possession of the freehold and inheritance of the other
moity, which for the time was a severance of the jointure. Statute of 32 H. 8.
ca. 1.

If two joyntenants be of a rent, and one of them disseise the tenant of the
Land, this is a severance of the jointure for a time, for the moity of the rent
is suspended by unity of possession, and therefore cannot stand in jointure
with the other moity in possession, Pl. com. 419.

Nihil de re accrescit ei, qui in re quando jus accresceret habet. A State of
Freehold cannot stand in jointure with a term for years: nor a reversion upon
a Freehold, with a Freehold and inheritance in possession. Neither can a seisin
in the right of a politic capacity stand in jointure with seisin in a natural
capacity. 37 H. 8. 8. 3 E. 4. 10. Fo. 188. a. Vide, etc.

In all cases where the joyntenants pursue one joint remedy and the one is
summoned and severed, and the other recover, he that is summoned, etc. shall
enter with him: but where their remedies be several, there the one shall not
enter with the other till both have recovered. Littleton cap. Remitt. the last
case. If Lands be demised for life, the remainder to the right heirs of I. S.
and of I. N. I. S. has issue and dies, and after I. N. has issue and dies,
the issues are not joyntenants; for the one moity vested at one time, and the
other at another time. 24 E. 3. 29. And yet in some cases there may be
joyntenants, and yet the estate may vest in them at several times: As if a man
make a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself, and of such wife as he should
afterward marry, for terms of their lives, and after he takes wife, etc. 17
El. Dyer. Brents c.

CHAP. IV. Of Tenants in Common.
Sect. 292.
JOyntenants have the Lands by one joint title, and in one right; but Tenants
in Common by several titles, or by one title and by several rights, which is
the reason that joyntenants have one joint freehold, and Tenants in Com. have
several freeholds, only this property is common to them both, viz. that their
occupation is individed, and neither of them knows his part in several. Vide
Sect. 296.

Addition probat minoritatem. If Lands be given to two Bishops (or to two
Abbots) to have and to hold to them two and their successors; in respect of
their several capacities, albeit the words be joint, yet the Law does adjudge
them to be severally seized. Vide Sect. 200. 7 H. 7. 9. b. 16 H. 7. 15. b. 10
E. 4. 16. b. Fo. 189. b. 190. a.

If a Corodie be granted to two men and their heirs, because the Corodie is
uncertain and cannot be severed, it shall amount to a several grant to each of
them one Corodie; for the persons be several, and the Corody is personal.

Sect. 297.
If Lands be given to J. Bishop of N. and and his successors, and to J. Overl.
Doctor of D. and his heirs being one and the same person, he is Tenant in
Common with himself, 13 Hen. 8. 14.

But our Authors rules do not hold in Chattels realls, or personalls: for if a
Lease for years be made, or a ward granted to an Abbot and a secular man, or to
a Bishop and secular man, or if goods be granted to them, they are Joyntenants,
because they take not in their politic capacity. An express estate controlls
an employed estate. Si home sei de cert. terre infeoffe un aut. del moitie de m.
la terre, etc. Such a feoffment is good by parol without writing, and such an
uncertain estate shall pass by livery, 21 E. 4. 22. b. 10 Eliz. Dyer 28. 33 H.
6. 5. a. vide Sect. 299. fol. 190. b. quaere etc.

Sect. 301.
Expressio eorum quae tacit insunt nihil operatur.

In case of Leases for life it is more beneficial for the Lessor to have the
jointure severed then to have it continue.

Vbi eadem ratio, ibi idem jus esse debet, for, ratio est anima legis, and
ratio potest allegari deficiente lege. But it must be ratio vera and legalis
and non apparens. Arg. a simili, is good in Law, sed similitudo legalis est
casuum diversor. int. se collatorum similis ratio, Quod in uno similium valet,
valebit in altero, Dissimilium dissimilis est ratio.

Sect. 302.
Two joyntenants, si lun de cux lessa ceo que a luy affiert a un aut. pur term
de sa vie, per tiel Lease le franktenement e^ sever de le Jointure, and per
cest le reason le reversion que e^ dependant sur in le franktenement e^ sever
del jointure and si lessor mor. vivant lessee pur vie le reversion discenda al
heir del lessor, and nemy devienda a lauter joint. joyntenant per le survivor.

Un franktenement ne poit per nature de jointure estre anex a un reversion,
etc. fo. 191. b. vide etc.

If two joyntenants be of a Lease for 21 years, and the one lets his part
for certain years part of the term, the jointure is severed and survivor
holds not place, for a term for a small number of years is as high an
interest, as for many more years. Hill. 18 Eliz. Com. Banco.

If two joyntenants make a Lease for life reserving a rent to one of them, the
rent shall enure to them both, because the reversion remains in jointure,
unless the reservation be by Deed indenture, and then he only to whom it is
reserved shall have it. fol. 192. a. quae. 27 Hen. 8. 16. a. 7 E. 4. 25. vide
lib. etc.

And so it is if such a Lessee for life should surrender to one of them, it
shall inure to them both, for that they have a joint reversion. But if the
Lessee grant his estate to one of them, no part of it shall inure to his
companion, because for the moity belonging to his companion, it is in esse in
him to whom the grant is made, the reversion to the other in fee, 5 E. 4. 4. 38
H. 6. 24. b.

2 Joyntenants font lease pur vie remainder a son comp. in fee, ceo e^ bon
remainder de son moity and al on comp.

Sect. 303.
If the Jointure be severed at the time of the death of him that first
deceased, the benefit of survivor is destroyed for ever, vide S. 291.

Two joyntenants in fee, and the one lets his part to another for the life
of the lessor, and the lessor dies, some say that his part shall survive etc.
for by his death the lease was determined; and others hold the contrary, for
that at the time of his death the jointure was severed, for so long as he lived
the lease continued. And secondly, that notwithstanding the act of any one of
the joyntenants, there must be equal benefit of survivor, as to the freehold.
But here if the other joyntenant had first died, there had been no benefit of
survivor to the lessor without question, fol. 194. Vide and nota.

Sect. 304, 305.
If two joyntenants be of 20 acres, and the one make a feoffment of his part in
18 acres, the other cannot release his entire part, but only in two acres, for
that the jointure is severed for the residue.

Nota, upon a Release that creates, or inlargeth an estate, or inures by way of
Mitter le estate, a Rent may be reserved, but not upon a release that inureth
by way of Mitter le droit, or which inures by way of Extinguishment, fol. 193.
b. *

Of a release inuring by way of extinguishment made to the husband, the wife
shall take benefit, or to the wife, the husband shall take benefit. But
otherwise it is of a Release which inures by way of Mitter l'estate. * 10 E. 4.
3. b. 21 H. 6. 8. b. *

En ascun case un release vera de mitter tout le drent que il que fert le
release ad celuy a que le release e^ fait. Vide S. 306. f. 194. a.

An usurpation shall work a Remitter to one that has a former Right, F. N. B.
35. Right and wrong cannot consist together, 194. a.

Sect. 307.
Et en asc' case un release vera per voy dextinguisment, and aydera le
joyntenant a que le release ne fuit fert etc. sicome un home soit disseisee,
and le disseisor fort feoffment a 2. homes in fee, si le disseisee release per
son f^rt a un des feoffees cel release vera a ambideux etc. pur ceo que les
feoffees ont estate per la ley scil. per feoffment and nemy per tort fert a
nulluy etc.

The reason of the diversity between the desseisors and their feoffees, is for
that the feoffees coming in by Title and Purchase, are intended in Law to have
a Warranty (which is much esteemed in Law) and therefore lest the Warranty
should be avoided, the Release shall inure to both the feoffees in favor of
purchasors, and so the right and benefit of every one saved. And therefore in
ancient time if the feoffee of a disseisor had continued in seisin quietly a
year and a day, the entry of the disseisee had not been lawful upon him, 20 H.
3. Ass. 432.

Sect. 311.
Note, that in real actions, and in actions also that are mixed with the
personalty, Tenants in common shall sever, because they have several Freeholds
etc. Come si 2 tenants in common sont disseisees, ils doient aver 2. Ass. pur
ceo que ils fueront seisees per several titles etc. Vide lib. fol. 195. b.
Auterment est de joyntenants.

Sect. 313.
Quant a suer des actions que touchant le realty, y sont diversities perenter
parceners que sont eins per diverse discents and tenants in common. Vide Sect.
241.

Sect. 314.
If two Tenants in common be, and they grant a rent of 20. s. per annum out of
their land, the Grantee shall have two rents of 20. s. Pl. Com. Hill and
Granges Case, 171. vide Sect. 219.

But if they two make a gift in tail, a lease for life, etc. reserving 20. s.
rent to them and their heirs, they shall have but one 20. s. for they shall
have no more then themselves reserved. And albeit the reservation of rents
severable be in joint words, yet in respect of the several reversions the law
makes thereof a severance, fol. 197. a

Lex spectat naturae ordinem, vide Sect. 129. and lex neminem cogit ad vana seu
inutilia, lib. 5. fol. 21.

The law wills that in every case where a man is wronged and endamaged, that he
shall have remedy.

Aliquid conceditur, ne injuria remaneret impunita quod alias non concederetur,
31 E. 3. 35. 3 E. 3. 19. a.

Tenants in common shall join in a Qu. imp. because the Presentation to the
Advowson is entire, 5 H. 7. 8. 33 H. 6. 11. 6 E. 4. 10.

Also Tenants in common of a Seigniory shall join in a Writ of Right of Ward,
and Ravishment of Ward for the body, because it is entire, 6 H. 4. 6, 7.

If two Tenants in common be of the Wardship of the body, and one does ravish
the Ward, and the one Tenant in common releases to the Ravisher, this shall go
in benefit of the other Tenant in common, and he shall recover the whole, and
the release shall not be any bar to him. And so it is if two Tenants in
common be of an Advowson, and they bring a Qu. imp. and the one does release,
yet the other shall sue forth and recover the whole Presentment.

Two Tenants in common shall join in a Detinue of Charters, and if one be
Nonsuit, the other shall recover.

It is said that Tenants in common shall join in a War. Chartae, but sever in
Voucher, 18 E. 3. 56.

Sect. 315.
Item Tenants in common averont un action joynt-tenement, and recoveront
joynt-tenement lour damages, quant l' action est en le personalty, and nemy en
le realty, etc.

Note, a diversity between a Chatel in possession, and a personal chose in
action belonging unto them: As if two Tenants in common be of land, and one
does a trespass therein, of this action they are joyntenants, and the survivor
shall hold place, 22 H. 6. 12. S. 319, 320.

But if two Tenants in common be of goods, as of an horse, etc. there if one
dye his Executors shall be Tenant in common with the survivor, fol. 198. a.

If two Tenants in common be of an Advowson, and a stranger usurp, so as the
right is turned to an action, and they bring a Writ of Qu. imp. which concerns
the realty, the six months pass, and the one dies, the Writ shall not abate,
but the survivor shall recover, otherwise there should be no remedy to redress
this wrong. And so it is of Coparceners, and this is one exception out of our
Authors rule, 14 H. 4. 12. 38 E. 3. 5. 37 H. 6. 9. b. 10 El. Dyer 279. F.N.B.
35. Pl. Com. Seignieur Barkleys Case.

But if three Coparceners recover land and damages in an Assize of Mordane'
albeit the judgment be joint, that they shall recover the land and the damages,
yet the damages being accessory, though they be personal, do in judgment of
Law depend upon the Freehold, being the Principal, which is several. And
though the words of the judgment be joint, yet shall it be taken for
distributive: And therefore if two of them die, the entire damages do not
survive, but the third shall have Execution according to her portion, and this
is another Exception, 14 E. 3. Execution 75. 45 E. 3. 3. b. But if all three
had sued Execution by force of an Elegit, and two of them had dyed, the third
should have had the whole by survivor, till the whole damages be paid.

Sect. 317, 318.
En avowry pur rent tenants en common covient sever, car ceo e^ en le realty,
come le Ass. e^ supra.

Tenants en common poient bien fair partition enter eux sils voilont etc.

Sect. 321.
Lou diverse persons ont chateux reals ou personals en common, and pur diverse
Titles, si lun de eux mor' ses executors tienderant and occupier. ceo ovesque
eux que survesquont etc.

Sect. 322, 323.
Albeit one Tenant in common take the whole profits, the other have no remedy
in Law against him, for the taking of the whole profits is no Ejectment: but if
he drive out of the land any of the Cattle of the other Tenant in common, or
not suffer him to enter and occupy the land, this is an Ejectment, etc.
Whereupon he may have an Eject. firmae for the one moity, and recover damages
for the entry, but not for the mean profits, fo. 199. b.

Note a diversity between actions which concern Right and Interest (as of
Eject' firmae, Eject' de guard, quare ejecit infr. Term. of a Chattel real upon
an expulsion or Ejectment) and actions concerning the bare taking of the
profits rising out of the land, or doing of Trespass upon the land, as here by
the Exam^na^^^^s do appear, for the right is several, and the taking of the
profits in common, 21 E. 4. 11. 22. 22 H. 6. 50. 58. 10 H. 7. 16. F.N.B. 117. a.

The second diversity is between Chattels reals that are apportionable or
severable, as leases for years, Wardship of Lands, Interest of Tenements by
Elegit, Statute Merchant, Staple, etc. of Lands and Tenements; and Chattels
reals entire, as Wardship of the body, and a Villain for years, etc. for if one
Tenant in common take away the Ward or Villain, etc. the other has no remedy
by action, but he may take them again.

Another diversity is between chattels reals and chattels personals; for if one
Tenant in common take all the chattels personals, the other has no remedy by
action, but he may take them again: And herein the like Law is concerning
chattels reals entire, and chattels personals for this purpose. But of chattels
entire, as of a Ship, Horse, or any other entire chattel real or personal, no
survivor shall be between them that hold them in common, 10 H. 4. Trespass
178. 11 H. 4. 3.

And Tenants in common shall not join in an Eject' firm etc. for that such
actions concern the Right of Lands which are several, 21 E. 4. 11. 12. fo. 200.
a.

If two Tenants in common be of a Dove-house, and the one destroy the old
Doves, whereby the flight is wholly lost, the other Tenant in common shall have
an action of Trespass, and he cannot plead in bar Tenancy in common, 47 E. 3.
22. b.

And so it is if one Tenant in common etc. destroy all the Deer in a Park, etc.
4 E. 2. Trespass 233.

And so it is, if one Tenant in common carry away the mere stones, etc. 1 H. 5.
1. 2 H. 5. 3. And if two Tenants in common be of a folding, and the one of them
disturb the other to erect Hurdles, etc. 13 E. 3. Trespass 212. 18 H. 6. 5.

If two several owners of houses have a River in common, etc. if one of them
corrupt the (Water) River, the other shall have an action upon his Case, 13 H.
7. 26.

If two Tenants in common or joyntenants be of an house or Mill, and it fall in
decay, and the one is willing to repair the same, and the other will not, he
that is willing shall have a Writ de reparatione fac. pro bono publico, F. N.
B. 127.

All those Books which affirm that an action of Account lies by one Tenant in
common or joyntenant against another, must be intended, when the one makes the
other his Bailiff, for otherwise never his Bailiff to render an Account is a
good plea: F.N.B. 118. 1. 10 H. 7. 16. 2 E. 4. 25. Westminster. 2. cap. 23.

If there be two Tenants in common of a Wood, Turbary, Piscary, etc. and one of
them does waste against the will of his companion, his companion shall have an
action of Waste. vide lib. fo. 200. b. and Nota.

Some do hold that an action of Waste does not lie upon the Statute W.C. 23.
against Tenant in common, etc. for destroying the whole flight of Doves, 47 E.
3. 22. 50 E. 3. 3.

Note, that one Tenant in common may infeoff his companion, but not release,
because the Freehold is several. Joyntenants may release, but not infeoff,
because the Freehold is joint: but Coparceners may both infeoff and release,
because their seisin to some intents is joint, and to some several.

Sect. 324.
Quant un home voile merrer un feoffment fait a luy, ou un done en tail, ou
lease pur vie d'ascun terres etc. la il dirra par force de quel feoffment etc.
il fuit seisee, etc. Mes lou un voile plead un lease ou grant fait a luy de
chattel real ou personal, la il dirra, per force de quel il fuit possess, etc.

When a man pleads a lease for life, etc. which passes by livery, he is not to
plead an entry, for he is in actual seisin by the livery it self. Otherwise it
is of a lease for years.

CHAP. V. Of Estates sur Condition.
Sect. 325.
COnditio dicitur cum quod in casum incert' qui potest tendere ad esse aut non
esse confertur.

Condic' est 2ex 1. Facti, i. e. upon a condition expressed by the party in
legal terms of Law. 2. Juris, i. e. Tacit created by law, without any words
used by the party.


Littleton subdivideth Condition in Deed, into Condition precedent (of which it
is said, Condic' adimpleri debet, priusquam sequatur effectus) and Condition
subsequent.

Again, of Condition in Deed, some be Affirmative and some Negative, and some
in the Affirmative which imply a Negative. Some make the estate whereunto they
are annexed, voidable by Entry or Claim, and some make the estate void ipso
facto without entry, etc. Also of Condition in Deed, some be annexed to the
rent reserved out of the land, and some to collateral acts, etc. some be
single, some in the conjunctive, some in the disjunctive, Mirror cap. 2. 8. 15.
17. fol. 101. b.

Sur Condic' en fait e^, sicome un home per fait indent, infeoffa un auter in
fee render certain rent, etc. Here Littleton puts one Example of six several
kinds of Condition: 1. Of a * Condition * single, in Deed. 2. Of a Condition
subsequent to the estate. 3. Of a Condition annexed to the rent. And 4. a
Condition that defeateth the estate. 5. A Condition that defeateth not the
estate before entry. And 6. a Condition in the Affirmative which implies a
Negative (as behind or unpaid implies a Negative) viz. not paid. Bendloes en
Trespass, 5 Mar. Et en cest case si le rent ne soit pay, etc.

The Land is the principal debtor, for the rent issues out of the Land, and
that is the place of demand, appointed by Law, and the demand must ever be made
at the most notorious place; and the last time of demand of the rent is such a
convenient time, before the Sunsetting of the last day of payment, as the money
may be numbered and received. 40 Ass. 11. 49. Ass. 5. 15. Eliz. Die. 329. lib. 4.
Burroughes c. f. 72. etc. Pl. Com. 70. and 172. Hill and Granges c. Lib. 5. f.
114. Wades c.

If a rent be granted payable at a certain day, and if it be behind and
demanded that the grantee shall distrein for it, in this case the grantee need
not demand it at the day, but if he demand it at any time after, he shall
distrein for it. Lib. 7. f. 28. Maundes c. Mich. 40, 41. El. Stanly, etc.
Regularly it is true, that he that enters for a condition broken shall be
seized in his first estate; or of that estate which he had at the time of the
estate made, etc. 8 H. 7. 7. b. 1. Limitation in respect of impossibility. 4 H.
6. 2. Lib. 8. Fo. 43. etc. Whittinghams c. 5. H. 7. a.

2. Limitation in respect of necessity: Fo. 202. a. Vide, etc.

3. In some cases the Feoffor by his reentry shall be in his former estate, but
not in respect of some collateral qualities; as if a Copihold escheat; and the
Lord make a Feoffment in Fee upon condition, and enter for the condition
broken; for that the custom or prescription for the time is interrupted.

Lord and Tenant by Fealty and rent, the Lord is seized of his rent, and
grants his Seigniory to another in Fee upon condition, the Tenant attorn. and
pays his rent to the grantee, the condition is broken, the Lord distreins for
his rent and rescous is made, he shall be in his former estate, and yet the
former seisin shall not enable to have an Ass. without a new seisin. 15. Ass.
12. Tenant in tail, It. Feoffment in Fee Sur. condition. 8 H. 7. 7.

If tenant for life ft. Feoffment, etc. and ent. pur condition broken, the
state is reduced, but the forfeiture is not purged. 43. Ass. 47. 13. E. 4. 4.

Sect. 327.
When the Feoffor is satisfied either by perception of the profits, or by
payment, or tender and refusal, or partly by the one, and partly by the other.
Fo. 203.

The Feoffor by his reentry gains no estate of freehold but an interest by
the agreement of the parties to take the profits in nature of a distress.

If a man make a Lease for life with a reservation of a rent, and such a
condition, if he enter for the condition broken and take the profits of the
land Quousq. etc. he shall not have an action of debt for the rent arere, for
that the freehold of the Lessee does continue; and therefore the book (to the
contrary 30. E. 3. f. 7.) is false Printed, and the true case was of a lease
for years.

Note a diversity, viz. If a man make Aleas pur ans. reserve a rent with a
condition, that if the rent be behind, that the lessor shall reenter and take
the profits until thereof he be satisfied, there the profits shall be counted
as parcel of the satisfaction, and during the time that he so takes the
profits, he shall not have an action of debt for the rent. But if the condition
be that he shall take the profits until the Feoffor be satisfied, etc. without
saying thereof, etc. There the profits shall be taken to be no part of the
satisfaction, but to hasten the lessee to pay it. 27 H. 8. 4. And as Littleton
here says, that until he be satisfied, he shall take the profits in the mean
time to his own use. 31 Ass. pl. 26. Vide lestatute de Morton c. 6. and c. 7.
without this word (inde.)

Sect. 329.
If a man by Indenture lets Lands for years, provided always, and it is
counted and agreed between the said parties, that the lessee should not alien;
it was adjudged that this was a condition by force of the proviso, and a
Covenant by force of the other words. Vide Sect. 220. Dyer 28 H. 8. fo. 13. 27
H. 8. fo. 14. 15. Seignior Cromwells c. Lib. 2. fo. 71. Lib. 8. 89. Frances c.

Un Feoffment in Fee e^ fait rendition rent, etc. Sur. condition, etc. en cest
case lestate del Feoffee e^ defeasible, si le condition ne soit perform, etc.
vide Sect. 325.

Sect. 330.
Inesse potest donationis modus, conditio, sive causa. Scito quod (ut) modus
est, (si) condi. (quia) causa. 4. Mar. Dyer 138. b.

If a man grant an annuity pro una acra terre, this word pro shows the cause
of the grant, and therefore amounts to a condition; for if the acre of land be
evicted by an elder title, the annuity shall cease, for cessante causa cessat
effectus, 24 E. 3. 34. 9 E. 4. 20. 14 E. 4. 4. 15 E. 4 2.

But if A. pro consilio impenso make a Feoffment or a Lease for life, of an
acre, or pro una acra terrae, etc. Albeit he denies counsel, or that the acre
be evicted, yet A. shall not reenter, for in this case there ought to be legal
words of condition or qualification, for the cause or consideration shall not
avoid the state of the Feoffee, and the reason of this diversity, for that the
state of the land is executed, and the annuity is executory, fol. 204. a. vide
etc.

If a man make a Feoffment in Fee, ad faciend. or faciendo, or ea intention,
or ad effectum, or ad proposit. that the Feoffee shall do, or not do such an
act, none of these words make the state in the land conditional, Hill. 18
Eliz. in Com. Ban. Dyer 138. Pl. Com. 142. d. and st. lib. 2. c. 34. It was
adjudged H. 40 Eliz. Rot. 161. Brown, etc. That a Lease for years was but a
contract, which may begin by word, and by word may be dissolved, Pl. Com. 142.
Sometime in case of lands, etc. (casa) shall make a condition; as if a woman
give lands to a man and his heirs, causa matrimonii prolocuti, and if she marry
the man, or the man refuse to marry her, she shall have the land again to her
and to her heirs. But otherwise it is if a man give land to a woman, etc. For
the man may and ought to ask advise of learned counsel, 34 Ass. 1. 5 H. 4. 1.

Quod non licebit, to the lessee dare, vendere, etc. Sub poena forisfacturae,
amounts to make the Lease for years defeasible, 3 E. 6. Dyer 65, 66. 4 Mar. 138.

Sect. 331, 332.
Quae dubitationis causa tollendae inseruntur, communem legem non laedunt, and
expressio eorum quae etc.

Mortgage, i.e. mortuum vadium. Vivum vadium, is,

As if a man borrow 100. l. of another, and makes an estate of lands unto him,
until he has received the said sum of the issues and the profits of the
land, so as in this case, neither money nor land dies or is lost.

Vivum autem dicitur vadium, quia nunquam moritur ex aliqua part quod ex suis
proventibus acquiratur.

Sect. 334.
Feoffment e^ fait en mortgage, le feoffor mor' devant le jour de payment des
deiners etc. Si l'heir del feoffor tender le money al mes le jour, etc. and le
feoffee ceo refuse etc. donques poit le heir enter en le terre, pur ceo que il
ad interest de droit en le Condition, etc.

Et le feoffee en ceo case and asc' remedy daver le money per le Commonley,
Sect. 335.

The Condition descends unto the heir, and therefore the Law that gives him an
interest in the Condition, gives him an ability to perform it; and hereby the
intent of the Condition is performed, and the Feoffee does receive no damage,
etc. fol. 205. b.

The Executor or Administrator of the Mortgagor, or in default of them, the
Ordinary may also tender, Sect. 337.

If the Condition annexed to lands, be possible at the making of the Condition,
and become impossible by the act of God, yet the state of the Feoffee etc.
shall not be avoided. Pl. Com. 456. Wrothes Case. 14 Hen. 7. 3. 15 Hen. 7. 1.
14 Ed. 4. 3.

But where a Condition of a Bond, Recognizance, etc. is possible at the making
of the Condition, and becomes impossible by the act of God, or of the Law, or
of the Obligee etc. there the Obligation etc. is saved, and the reason of the
diversity, because the state of the land is executed, and settled in the
Feoffee, and cannot be redeemed back again but by matter subsequent, viz. the
performance of the Condition. But the Bond etc. is a thing in action, and
executory, whereof no advantage can be taken, until there be a default in the
Obligor, 15 H. 7. 18. 9 Eliz. 262. Dyer lib. 5. 22. Laughters Case. 38 H. 6. 2.
Brit. c. 36. fol. 89, 99, 114, 130.

But if the condition of a Bond etc. be impossible at the time of the making of
the condition, the Obligation etc. is single. And so it is of a Feoffment in
fee with a condition subsequent, that is impossible, the state of the Feoffee
is absolute; but if the condition precedent be impossible, no state or interest
shall grow thereupon, 14 Hen. 8. 28. 10 Hen. 7. 22. 5 Eliz. Dyer 222. Pl. Com.
22. 272. Fullers Case. fol. 206. b.

If A. be bound to B. that J. S. shall marry J. G. before such a day, and
before the day B. marry with Jane, he shall never take advantage of the Bond,
for that he himself is the mean, that the condition could not be performed, 4
H. 7. 4. 30 H. 8. Dyer 42.

The Law distinguishes between a Condition against law for the doing of any
act that is malum in se, and a Condition against law, that is either repugnant
to the State, or against some Maxim or Rule in Law: As

1. If a man be bound upon Condition, That he shall kill J.S. the estate is
absolute, and the Condition void, 4 H. 7. 4. But if a man make a Feoffment in
fee upon Condition, that the Feoffee shall kill J.S. the estate is absolute,
and the Condition void, Pl. Com. 133. Brownings Case.

2. If a man make a Feoffment etc. that he shall not alien (or that the Feoffee
shall not take the profits, etc.) this Condition is repugnant and against Law,
and the state of the Feoffee is absolute. But if the Feoffee be bound etc. that
he or his heirs shall not alien, this is good, for he notwithstanding alien if
he will forfeit his Bond, etc. 20 Ed. 4. 8. 21 Hen. 7. 11. 30. 27 Hen. 8.

Albeit a convenient time before Sunset be the last time given to the Feoffor
to tender, yet if he tender it to the person of the Mortgagee at any time of
the payment, and he refuses it, the Condition is saved for that time, vide S.
325.

Guardian in Socage may render in the name of the heir, because he has an
interest, etc. vide S. 401. Hill. 28 Eliz. in Banco Reg. inter Walkins.

If the Mortgagee accept of a strangers tender in the name of the Mortgager,
etc. this is good, etc.

Omnis ratihabitio retro trahitur, and mandato aequiparatur, 36 Hen. 6. tit.
Bar 166.

Sect. 335.
The Obligor tenders the money at the day etc. and the Obligee refuses the
same, yet in an action of Debt upon the Obligation, if the Defendant plead the
tender, etc. he must also plead that he is yet ready to pay the money and
tender the same in Court. But if the Plaintiff will not then receive it, but
take issue upon the tender, and the same be found against him, he has lost the
money for ever, 22 Hen. 6. 39 lib. 9. fol. 79. H. Peytoes Case.

And the reason wherefore the money is not lost by the tender and refusal, is
not only for that it is a duty and parcel of the Obligation, but also for that
the Obligee has remedy by Law for the same.

Liberata pecunia non liberat offerentem, 8 E. 2. tit. Assize, Ass. 389.

When the Condition is collateral to the Obligation, a tender and refusal is
a perpetual bar, 7 Hen. 4. 18. 5 Mar. Dyer 150. 21 E. 4. 25. 31 Ass. 25. Pl.
Com. fol. 6.

Obligor makes a lease and a release to the Obligee, and his heirs, this
amounts in law to a feoffment; and albeit this be a collateral Condition, yet
it is well performed.

Cuna dicitur a cudendo, of Coining, etc. In French, Coin signifies a Corner.
Some say that Coin dicitur a (...), i. e. Communis, quod sit omnibus rebus
communis. Moneta dicitur a monendo, not only because he that has it, is to be
warned providently to use it, but also because Nota illa de authore and valor
admonet. lib. 5. fol. 114. Wades Case, lib. 9. fol. 78.

Pecunia dicitur a pecu. Omnes en. veterum divitia in animalibus consistebant.
Arist. l. 5. c. 8.

Nummus (...) quia lege fit non natura, 9 Hen. 5. Stat. 2. cap. 7.

Sect. 336, and 337.
Note, he that has interest in the Condition on the one side, or in the land
on the other, may tender, fol. 207. b. and vide Sect. 334.

Auxi en case de Mortgage, si null jour de payment soit limit, and le feoffor
mor. etc. donques le temps de le tender est pas.

Note diverse diversities. *

1. Between a Feoffment in fee with Condition for the payment of a sum of
money, where no time is limited; and the Condition of a Bond, etc. 21 E. 4. 38.
b.

2. Between a Condition of an Obligation, which concerns the doing of a
transitory act without limitation of any time as payment of money, delivery of
Charters, etc. for there the condition is to be performed presently, i.e. in
convenient time; and when by the condition of the Obligation the act is local,
for there the Obligor has time during his life to perform it, as to make a
feoffment etc. if the Obligee does not hasten the same by request.

3. In case where the Condition is local, when the concurrence of the Obligor
and the Obligee is requisite (as in the said case of the Feoffment) and when
the Obligor may perform it in the absence of the Obligee, as to acknowledge
satisfaction in the Court of Kings Bench, for there he must do it in
convenient time.

4. Where the Condition concerns a transitory or local act, and is to be
performed to the Feoffee or Obligee, and where it is to be performed to a
stranger: As if A. be bound to B. to pay 10. l. to C. A. tenders to C. and he
refuses, the Bond is forfeit. But if the act had been by the Condition to be
made to the Obligee, or to any other for his benefit a tender, etc. shall have
the benefit, because he himself is the cause that the Condition could not be
performed, 22 E. 4. 13. 10 H. 7. 14. b. 35 H. 8. Dyer 56. lib. 5. fo. 23.
Lambs Case * 8 E. 4. 14.

5. Between a Condition of an Obligation and a Condition upon a Feoffment,
where the act that is local is to be done to a stranger, and where to the
Obligee or Feoffor himself: for the stranger shall be infeoffed as soon as
conveniently may be, otherwise it is of the Feoffor, etc. for the privity of
the Condition, etc. Lib. 6. fo. 31. Boothies Case, l. 2. fo. 79. b. Seignieur
Cromwels Case. 21 E. 4. 41. 2 E. 4. 3, 4. 4 E. 4. 4. b. 26 H. 8. 9. b.

6. When the Obligor or Feoffor is to infeoff a stranger as has been said, and
when a stranger is to infeoff the Feoffee or Obligee: As if A. infeoff of black
acre, upon Condition, that if C. infeoff B. of white acre, A. shall re-enter,
C. has time during his life, if B. does not hasten it, etc. and so of an
Obligation, fo. 108. b.

7. But in some cases albeit the Condition be collateral, and is to be
performed to the Obligee, and no time limited, yet in respect of the nature of
the thing, the Obligor shall not have time during his life to perform it. As
if the Condition of an Obligation be, To grant an Annuity to the Obligee during
his life, payable at Easter; this Annuity must be granted before Easter, etc.
Dyer 14 Eliz. 311.

8. When the Obligor, Feoffor or Feoffee, or a stranger etc. is to do a sole
act, as to go to Rome, etc. they have time during life, etc.

The Executor etc. may (when a man is limited) pay the money, vide S. 334. l.
5. fo. 96, 97. Goodales Case.

If I infeoff one in fee upon Condition to make a gift in tail to I.S. and he
refuses it, and a tender and refusal is made, there the Feoffor shall not
re-enter, for it was intended, that the Feoffee should have an estate in the
land. And so it is if the Condition be, That the Feoffee shall grant a rent
charge to a stranger, 2 E. 4. Enter Congeable 25.

But otherwise it is if the Condition be to infeoff I. S. and his heirs, and a
tender and refusal is made, etc. 19 H. 6. 34.

When the Executors make a tender, and the Feoffee refuses, albeit the heir
(who has a Title of Entry) be a third person, yet is he no stranger, but he
and the Executors also an^ privies in Law. Concerning goods and chattels,
either in possession or in action, the Executor does more actually represent
the person of the Testator; then the heir does the person of the Ancestor. For
if a man binds himself, his Executors are bound, though they be not named,
but so it is not of the heir.

Sect. 338, 339.
En touts cases de Condition de payment de certain fum en gross touchant terres
etc. si loial tender soit unsoits refuse, celuy que doit le tender money e^ de
ceo assouth and discharge pur touts temps apres; i. e. for ever to make any
other tender, but if it were a duty before, though the feoffor enter by force
of the Condition, yet the debt or duty remains: As if A. borrow 100 l. of B.
and after mortgage lands to B. and he refuse it, A. may enter etc. and the land
is freed for ever of the Condition; but yet the debt may be recovered by action
etc. But if A. without any loan, debt or duty preceding, infeoff B. of land
upon Condition for the payment of 100 l. to B. in nature of a gratuity or gift;
in that case if tender be made, and he refuse, B. has no remedy therefore,
fol. 209. b. Vide Libr. etc.

The Agreement precedent does guide the payment subsequent, and the payment
ought to be real, and not in show or appearance, 18 E. 4. 18. 19 H. 6. 54. 20
E. 3. Account page 70.

If the Condition upon Mortgage be, To pay to the Mortgagee or his heirs the
money, etc. and before the day of payment the Mortgagee dies, the Feoffee
cannot pay the money to the Executors, etc. for, In hoc casu designatio unius
personae est exclusio alterius, and expressum facit cessare tacitum, Lib. 5.
etc. Dyer 2 Eliz. 181. 44 E. 3. 1. b. fo.

If a man make a Feoffment in fee upon Condition, That if the Feoffor pay to
the Feoffee his heirs or assigns 20 l. before such a Feast, and before the
Feast the Feoffee makes his Executors, and dies, the Feoffor ought to pay the
money to the heir, and not to the Executors, for the Executors in this case are
no Assignees in Law. And the Feoffee has an estate in the land which he may
assign over, and where there may be Assignees in Deed, the Law shall never seek
out, or appoint any assigns in Law, 27 H. 8. 2. 4 Mar. 140. a. M. 23, 24. El.
in Curia Wardorum inter Randall and Brown. 2 El. Dyer 181. Pl. Com. Chapmans
Case. 186. 188. 17 Ass. Pl. 2.

Sect. 240.
Comment ascun. ont dit que le feoffor e^ tenus de tender etc. sur la terre
tenus in Mortgage, pur ceo que le condition e^ dependant sur le terre, uncore
ceo ne prove que le feasans de le condition deste perform, covient err fait
sur la terre etc. and lestate de la terre e^ dependant sur la condition etc.

The money is a sum in gross and collateral to the Title of the land, and the
Feoffor must tender the money to the person of the Feoffee, and it is not
sufficient for him to tender it upon the land, 8 E. 4. 4. and 14. 11 H. 4. 62.
17 Ass. p. 2. 21 H. 7. Kelway 74. 16 Eliz. Dyer 327. l. 4. f. 73. Boroughs Case
21 E. 4. 6.

Otherwise it is of a rent that issues out of the land, 8 E. 4. 2.

But a corporal service is issuing out of land, as Homage, etc. must be done to
the person of the Lord, 21 Ass. 3. 7 E. 4. 4. 21 E. 4. 17. 19 Eliz. Dyer 354.
lib. 8. fo. 92. Frances Case.

If A. be bound to B. with condition that C. shall infeoff D. on such a day, C.
must give notice to D. thereof, and request him to be on the land at the day to
receive the Feoffment, and he is bound to seek D. and to give him notice, 2 E.
4. 3. and 4.

Sect. 341, 342.
Est diversity quant al tender de le rent que e^ issuant horse de la terre, and
del tender davert sum en gross que nem pas issuant. etc.

If the Condition be broken for non-payment of the rent, yet if the Feoffor
brings an Assize for rent due at that time, he shall never enter, etc.
because he affirms the rent to have a continuance, and thereby waveth the
Condition. And so it is if the rent had a clause of distress, etc. and the
Feoffor had distrained for the rent, for non-payment whereof the Condition was
broken, he should never enter for the Condition broken, but he may receive that
rent, and acquit the same, and yet enter, etc. But if he accept a rent due at a
day after, he shall not enter, etc. because he thereby affirms the lease to
have a continuance, 14 Ass. 11. 45 Ass. 5. 6 H. 7. 3. Pl. Com. 133. 22 H. 6. 57.

It will be a good and sure thing, to set down in Conveyances every thing in
certainty and particularity; and not to trust only to a President, without
advice of learned and well experienced men. For as the rule is concerning the
state of a man's body, Nullum medicamentum est idem omnibus; so in the state and
assurance of a man's lands, Nullum exemplum est idem omnibus, fo. 212. a.

Sect. 343, 344.
Lou le lieu de payment est limit, le feoffee nem. oblig. de receiver le
payment en null auter lieu etc. Mes encore si il receivst etc. ceo est assets
bone etc.

The place is but a circumstance, etc.

Nota diversit. 1. When the Condition is for payment of money, there if the
Feoffee or Obligee accept an horse etc. in satisfaction, this is good; but if
the Condition were for the delivery of a horse etc. albeit the Obligee, etc.
accept money etc. for the horse etc. it is no performance of the Condition. The
like Law is if the Condition be to acknowledge a Recognizance of 20 l. if the
Obligee or Feoffee accept twenty pound in satisfaction of the condition it is
not sufficient in Law, etc. And so it is of all other collateral conditions 3
H. 7. 4. b. 11 H. 7. 20. 21. 19 E. 4. 1. b. 22 E. 4. 24. l. 9. f. 78. 12 H. 4.
23.

2. When the money is to be paid to a stranger there if the stranger accept an
horse, or any collateral thing in satisfaction of the money, it is no
performance of the condition, because the condition is strictly to be performed
in that case. But if the condition be, that a stranger shall pay to the
obligee, etc. a sum of money, there the obligee (being party, etc.) may
receive a horse, etc. in satisfaction. l. 5. f. 17. Primels case.) * Vide 4. H.
7. 4. Dyer 35 H. 8. 56. 27 H. 8. 1. If the obligor or lessor pay a less sum
either before the day, or at another place then is limited by the condition,
and the obligee * or Feoffee (* lessee) receives it, this is a good
satisfaction. Vide lib. fo. 212 b.

Sect. 345.
Un annual rent reserve al estranger, e^ sum. engrosse.

This reservation is merely void. l. 8. f. 70. 71. words in a condition shall
be taken out of their proper sense, ut res magis valeat quam pereat. 6. E. 2.
entr. Cong. 55. recipere. 8 Ass. 34. Revertere.

But if A. be seized of certain Lands, and A. and B. join in a Feoffment in fee
reserving a rent to them both, and their heirs, and the Feoffee grant that it
shall be lawful for them and their heirs to distraine for the rent, this is a
good grant of a rent to them both, because he is party to the Deed, and the
clause of distress is a grant of the rent to A. and B. But if B. had been a
stranger to the Deed, then B. had taken nothing, and upon this diversity are
all the Books which prima facie seem to vary reconciled. 18 E. Ass. 381. 26 H.
8. 2. 31 Ass. p. 31.

Arg. a divisione est fortissimum in lege. Sect. 381.

Sect. 346. etc.
Nota 2. chooses, 1. null rent (que properment e^ dit rent) poit estr. reserve
sur asc' Feoffment, done, ou lease, forsque tantsolement al Feoffor, donor,
etc. ou a lour heirs. 2. Null enter, ou reenter (que e^ tout un) poit estre
reserve, ne done a asc' person, forsque, etc. al Feoffor, etc. Littletons
meaning is, that either the Feoffor, etc. may reserve the rent to himself
only, or to himself and his heirs. Fo. 213. b.

If a man make a Feoffment in Fee, reserve a rent to him or his heirs, it is
good to him for term of his life, and void to his heir l. 5. fo. 111.
Mallories case.

If two joyntenants without a Deed indenture make a lease for life reserving a
rent to one of them, it shall enure to them both, in respect of the joint
reversion, and so it is of a surrender, etc. 5 E. 4. 4. a. 27 H. 8. 16. S. 58.

But if Tenant for life, and he in the reversion join in a Lease for life, or
a gift in tail by Deed reserving a rent, this shall enure to the Tenant for
life only, during his life, and after to him in the reversion, for every one
grants that which he may lawfully grant. M. 36. and 37. Eliz. in Banco R.

Sect. 347.
Nothing in action, entry, or reentry can be granted over, for avoiding of
maintenance, suppression of right, and stirring up of suits. No stranger shall
take advantage of a condition that requires a reentry.

But of limitations it is otherwise. As if a man make a lease Quousq. i. e.
until I. S. come from Rome, the lessor grant the reversion over to a stranger,
I. S. comes from Rome, the grantee shall enter, because the estate by the
express limitation was determined. Pl. Com. 27. F. N. B. 201. l. 10. fo. 36.
Mary Portingtons case.

2. Another diversity is, between a condition annexed to a freehold, and a
condition annexed to a Lease for years; for a Lease for years may begin, or
end without ceremony; but an estate of Freehold cannot, etc. And of a void
thing an estranger may take benefit, but not of a voidable estate by entry. 10
Ass. pl. 24. Pl. Com. 36. 11 H. 7. 17.

3. Diversity between a reservation of a rent, and a re-entry, for a rent
cannot be reserved to the heir of the Feoffor, but the heir may take advantage
of a condition which the Feoffor could never do; as if I. infeoffe another of
an acre of ground, upon condition, that if mine heir pay to the Feoffee, etc.
twenty shillings, that he and his heirs shall re-enter, this condition is good,
etc. for he is privy in blood, and shall enjoy the Land as heir to me. Pl.
313. Scho. 15. E. 4. 14. a.

And if a man have a Lease for years, and demise, or grant the same upon
condition, etc. and dye, his executors or administrators shall enter for the
condition broken, for they are privy in right, and represent the person of the
dead. Vide 21 H. 7. 18. a. fo. 214. b. etc.

If cesty que use had made a Lease for years, etc. upon condition, the Feoffes
should not enter for the condition broken, for they are privy in estate, but
not privy in blood. 27 H. 8. 1.

4. Diversity is in case of a Lease for years, where the condition is that the
Lease shall cease or be void, and where the condition is that the lessor shall
reenter, for there the grantee as Littleton says, shall never take benefit of
the condition: And note that where the estate or Lease is ipso facto void, by
the condition or limitation, no acceptance of the rent after can make it to
have a continuance: otherwise it is of an estate or Lease voidable by entry.
Pl. 136. Brownings case.

5. Diversity between condition in Deed, and condition in Law.

As if a man make a Lease for life, there is a condition in Law annexed unto
it, that if the lessee does make a greater estate, etc. that then the lessor
may enter of this and the like condition in law, which do give an entry to the
Lessor, the lessor himself and his heirs shall not only take benefit of it,
but also his Assignee and the Lord by escheat, every one for the condition in
law broken, in their own time.

6. Diversity is between the judgment of the common Law, and the Law at this
day by force of the Statute of 32. H. 8. ca. 34. for by the Common Law no
grantee, or Assignee of a reversion could take advantage of a re-entry by force
of a condition. But now by the said Statute, it is otherwise. By which act it
is provided, that as well every person which shall have any grant of the King
of any reversion, etc. of any Lands, etc. which pertained to Monasteries, etc.
as also all other persons being Grantees or Assignees, etc. to or by any other
person or persons, and their heirs, executors, successors and Assignees, shall
have like advantage against the Lessees, etc. by entry for non-payment of the
rent, or for doing of waste, or other forfeiture, etc. as the said lessors, or
grantors themselves ought or might have had. 26 H. 6. tit. entreconge. 49.

Upon this act diverse judgments, etc. have been given, which are necessary to
be known.

1. That the said Statute is general, that the grantee of the reversion of
every common person, as well as of the King shall take advantage of condition.
Pl. 175. 76. Hill and Granges case M. 10. and 11 Eliz. 180. Dyer.

2. That the Statute does extend to grants made by the successors of the King,
albeit the King be only named in the Act.

3. That where the Statute speaks of Lessees, that the same does not extend
to gifts in Tail 14. El. Dyer 309. Winters case.

4. That where the Statute speaks of Grantees and Assignees of the reversion,
that an Assignee of part of the estate, of the reversion may take advantage of
the condition. As if Lessees for life be, etc. and the reversion is granted for
life, etc. So if Lessee for years be etc. and the reversion, etc. the grantee
for years shall take benefit of the condition in respect of this word
(execution) in the Act. Pl. 69. Kidwellies case 7 E. 3. 54. and Vide Dyer 309.

5. That a grantee of part of the reversion shall not take advantage, etc. As
if the Lease be of three Acres, reserving a rens upon condition, and the
reversion is granted of two acres, the rent shall be apportioned by the act of
the parties, but the condition is destroyed, for that it is entire, and against
common right, lib. 5. fol. 54. Knights Case, Winters Case, etc.

6. That in the Kings case, the condition, etc. is not destroyed, etc.

7. By act in Law a condition may be apportioned in the case of a common
person, as if a Lease for years be made of two acres, one Borough English, and
the other at the common law, and the lessor having issue two sons dies, each
of them shall enter for the condition broken, and likewise a condition shall be
apportioned by the act and wrong of the Lessee, as in the Chap. of Rents, l. 4.
f. 120. Dumpers Case.

8. If a Lease for life be made, reserving a rent upon condition, etc. the
Lessor levies a fine of the reversion, he is Grantee or Assignee of the
reversion, but without atturnment he shall not take advantage of the condition.
P. 20. El. in Com. Ba. Dukes Case lib. 5. 112. b. Mallories Case.

9. Diversity between a condition that is compulsory, and a power of a
revocation that is voluntary: for a man that has a power of revocation, may by
his own act extinguish his power, etc. in part, as by levying of a Fine of
part, and yet the power shall remain for the residue, because it is in nature
of a limitation, and not of a condition. P. 39. El. and 40, 41 H. Earl of
Salisburies case in Court of Wards, 14 El. Die. 39.

10. If the Lessor bargain and sell the reversion by Deed indenture and inroll.
the Bargainee is not in the Per by the Bargainor, and yet he is an Assignee
within the Statute.

So if the Lessor grant the reversion in Fee, to the use of A. and his heirs,
A. is a sufficient Assignee, etc. because he comes in by the act and limitation
of the party, albeit he is in the Post, and the words of the Statute be To, or
By, and they be Assignee to him, although they be not by him: but such as come
in merely by act in Law, as the Lord of the villain, the Lord by Escheat, etc.
shall not take benefit of this Statute.

11. If the Lessor bargain and sell the reversion, etc. Or make a Feoffment in
Fee, and the Lessee reenter, the grantee, or Feoffee shall not take advantage,
etc. Without making notice to the Lessee, l. 8. f. 92. Frances Case.

And 12. albeit the whole words of the Statute be for non-payment of the rent,
or for doing of wast, etc. yet the Grantees and Assignee shall not take benefit
of every forfeiture, etc. but only of such conditions as either are incident
to the reversion as rent, or for the benefit of the State, as for not doing of
wast, for keeping the houses in repair, for making of fences, scouring of
ditches, for preserving of woods, etc. and not for payment of any sum in
gross delivery of corn, wood, etc.

So as other forfeiture, shall be taken for other forfeitures, like to those
examples which were there put, (viz.) of payment of rent, and not doing of
wast, which are for the benefit of the reversion, Dyer 309.

Sect. 348, 349.
Seign. and Tenant, and le tenant ft. lease pur vie rend. rent, etc. and apres
il mor. sans heir, etc. Note, that the Lord by Escheat shall distreine for the
rent, and yet the rent was reserved to the lessor and his heirs, but both
Assignees in Deed, and Assignee in Law shall have the rent, because the rent
being reserved of inheritance to him and his heirs, is incident to the
reversion, etc. The Guardian, etc. shall in the right of the heir take benefit
of a condition, by entry or reenter, by the common law, 21 H. 7. 18. 17. Ass.
20. 18. Ass. pl. 18. lib. 7. f. 7. Earl of Bedfords Case, otherwise it is of
Assignees.

Si terre soit grant a un home pur 2. ans sur condition que sil payroiit al
grantor deins les 2. ans 10. l. donques il averoit Fee, etc. Si livery de feign.
soit sait en ce case, donques le grantee avoit le franktenement and le Fee
sur^m. le condition.

Note, First, A condition precedent. 2. A condition which creates an estate
may be made by parol without deed. 3. Livery, etc. in this case must be made
before the lessee enter; for after his entry livery made to him that is in
possession is void. 4. If no livery be made, no Fee simple does pass. 5. It is
inconvenient that the Fee should pass without livery, etc. 6. Argumentum ab
inconvenienti, is forcible in law. vide Sect. 60. fol. 216. a.

Sect. 350.
Si terre soit grant a un home pur term de 5 ans, sur condition que sil paya
al grantor deins les 2 primer ans 40 M. que adonque il avaunt fee, ou auterment
forsque pur les 5 ans, and livery est fait etc. per force del grant, ore il ad
fee simple condition, etc. Many are of opinion a against Littleton in this
case, and their reason is, because the Fee simple is to commence upon a
condition precedent, and therefore cannot pass until the condition be
performed. And that Littleton here of a condition precedent, does (before
performance) make it subsequent; and they avouch many Authorities, as 31 E. 1.
Feoffments and Faits 119. 12 E. 2. Voucher 265. 7 E. 3. 10. Pl. Com. 272. Says
Case. 44 E. 3. Attaint 22. 43 Ass. p. 41. 10 E. 3. 39, 40. 10 Ass. 15 Ass. 161.
Pl. Com. 135. Brownings Case. 6 R. 2. tit. quid juris clamat, 20. And generally
the Books are cited that make a diversity between a condition precedent and a
condition subsequent, 15 H. 7. 1. a. 14 H. 8. 18. 20. 3 H. 6. 6. b. And lastly,
they cite Dyer 10 El. 281. and in Say and Fullers Case. Pl. 272. the opinions
of Dyer and Brown, vide lib. fol. 217. a.

Notwithstanding all this, there are those that defend the opinion of
Littleton, both by Reason and Authority. By Reason, for that by the Rule of
Law, a Livery of Seisin must pass a present Freehold, and cannot give a
Freehold in futuro. 2. It cannot stand with Reason, that a Freehold should
remain in the lessor, against his own Livery of Seisin, seeing there is a
person able to take it. A Livery of Seisin cannot expect.

And they say further, That seeing all the Books aforesaid prove that such a
Condition is good, and that the Livery made to the Lessee is effectual, by
consequence the Freehold and Inheritance must pass presently, or not at all;
and it is not rare, say they, in our Books, that words shall be transposed and
marshalled, so as the Feoffment or Grant may take effect, Pl. 171. Hill and
Granges Case. 10 Eliz. 3. lib. 8. fol. 74. Seignior Staffords Case. Pl. 487.
Nichols Case.

And further they take a diversity in this case between a lease for life, and a
lease for years. For in this case of a lease for life, with such a Condition to
have fee, they agree that the Fee simple passes not before the performance of
the Condition, for that the Livery may presently work upon the Freehold: But
otherwise it is in case of a lease for years.

Also they take a diversity between Inheritances that lie in grant, and that
lie in livery, fol. 217. b.

They also make several Answers to the Authority before cited: for, as to the
case in 31 E. 1. they say, That either the case is misreported, or else the law
is against the judgment:

For the case is but this, That a man make a lease of a Manor to B. for 20
years, and after the 20 years B. shall hold the Manor to him and his heirs by
12. l. rent, and (as it must be intended) makes Livery of Seisin; in this case
it is clear (say they) that B. has a Fee simple maintenant, for there is no
Condition precedent, etc.

As for the case in 12 E. 2. the case is, That J. de M. made a Charter to J. de
Burford of Fee simple, and the same day it was covenanted between them, That J.
de B. should hold the same Tenements for 8 years, and if he did not pay 100
Mark at the end of the term, that the land shall remain to J. de B. and his
heirs. In which case say they, there is a repugnancy etc. for the Covenant
being made after the Charter. could neither alter the absolute Charter, nor
upon a Condition precedent give him a Fee simple that had a Fee before.

To all the other Books, viz. 7 E. 3. etc. they say, that being rightly
understood, they are good law, for in some of those Books, as in 10 E. 3. 10
Ass. etc. it appears, That there was a Charter made in surety of the Term,
which say they must be intended thus, viz. A man makes a lease for years, the
lessee enters, and the lessor makes a Charter to the lessee, and thereby does
grant unto him, that if he pay unto the lessor 100 Mark during the term, That
then he shall have fee, etc.

In this case, say they, there need no livery seisin, but does enure as an
Executory grant by increasing of the state, and the fee simple passes not
before the condition performed, Pl. 487. Nichols Case. And therefore Littleton
warily puts his case made all at one time by one Conveyance, and a Livery
made thereupon.

And this diversity (say they) is proved by Books, 10 E. 3. 54. 32 E. 3. Garr.
30. 43 E. 3. 35. 20 Ass. Pl. 20.

And they add, That Littleton had seen and considered of the said Books, and
has set down his Opinion, etc. Fol. 118. a.

Benign lector utere tuo judicio, nihil enim impedio. Conditi^ beneficialis
quae statum construit benign secundum verbor' intentionem est interpretanda,
odiosa autem quae statum destruit stricte secundum verborum proprietatem est
accipienda, Lib. 8. fol. 90. Frances Case.

Note, a precedent Condition to increase an estate must be performed, and if it
become impossible, no estate shall rise.

Regularly when any man will take advantage of a Condition, if he may enter, he
must enter, and when he cannot enter, he must make a claim, because a Freehold
and Inheritance shall not cease without entry or claim, and also the Feoffor or
Grantor may wave the condition, Pl. 133. b. Browning.

If a man bargain and sell land by Deed indented and enrolled, with a proviso,
That if the Bargainor pay etc. that then the state shall cease and be void, he
pays the money, the state is not revested in the Bargainor before a re-entry.
And so it is if a bargain and sale be made of a reversion, remainder, advowson,
rent common, etc. l. 2. f. 50. Sir Hugh Cholmleys Case, fo. 218. vide and nota.

But the said Rule has diverse Exceptions:

1. In this present case of Littleton, for that he can make no entry, he shall
not be driven to make any claim to the reversion, for seeing by construction
the Freehold and Inheritance passes maintenant out of the lessor: by the like
construction the Freehold and Inheritance by the default of the lessee shall be
revested in the lessor without entry or claim, l. 1. f. 174. Digs Case, 20 E.
4. 19. 20 H. 7. 4. b.

2. If I grant a rent charge in fee out of my land upon condition; if the
condition be broken, the rent shall be extinct, etc.

3. If a man make a feoffment unto me in fee upon condition that I shall pay
unto him 20 l. at such a day etc. before the day I let unto him the land for
years, reserving a rent, and after fail of payment, the feoffee shall retain
the land, etc. and the rent is extinct, etc. for that the feoffor could not
enter, etc. for he himself was in possession, and the condition being
collateral, is not suspended by the lease: otherwise it is of rent reserved.

If a man make a lease for 40 years, and the lessor grant the reversion to the
lessee upon condition, and after the condition is broken, the term was
absolutely surrendered. And the diversity is when the lessor grants the
reversion to the lessee upon condition, and when the lessee grants or
surrenders his estate to the lessor, for a condition annexed to a surrender,
may revest the particular estate, because the surrender is conditional. But
when the lessor grants the reversion to the lessee upon condition, there the
condition is annexed to the reversion, and the surrender absolute, 7 E. 4. 29.
14 E. 4. 6. 45 E. 3. 8 E. 2. Ass. 395. A Guardian in Chivalry took a Feoffment
of the Infant, etc. 50 E. 3. 27. Vide lib. fo. 218. b.

Ou le feffor poit loialment enter pur le condition enfreint etc. la il and
franktenement devant son entry etc. S. 351.

Sect. 352.
It is necessary when a day is limited, to add to the condition, that the
Feoffee or his heirs do perform the condition; but when no time is limited,
then the Feoffee at his peril must perform the condition during his life
(although there be no request made) or else the Feoffor or his heirs may
re-enter. And when the Feoffee is to give the land to the Feoffor and his wife
in Tail before Michaelmas, etc. and if the Feoffee dye before the day, the
state of the heir of the Feoffee shall be absolute, 15 H. 7. 13. 33 H. 6. 26,
27. 9 Eliz. Dyer 262. Pl. 456. lib. 2. f. 79. Seignior Cromwels Case.

If a man make a Feoffment in see upon condition that the Feoffee shall make a
gift in Tail to the Feoffor, the remainder to a stranger in fee, there the
Feoffee has time during his life, because the Feoffor who is party and privy
to the condition, is to ^ake the first estate. But if the condition were to
make a gift in Tail to a stranger, the remainder to the Feoffor in fee, there
the Feoffee ought to do it in convenient time, for that the stranger is not
privy to the condition, and he ought to have the profits presently.

A condition that is to create an estate, is to be performed, by construction
of Law, as near the condition as may be, and according to the intent of the
condition, albeit the letter etc. cannot be performed. But otherwise it is of a
condition that destroys an estate, for that is to be taken strictly, unless
it be in certain special Cases, etc. As if a man mortgage his land to W. upon
condition, that if the Mortgagor and I.S. pay 20 s. at such a day to the
Mortgagee, that then he shall re-enter, the Mortgagor dies before the day I.S.
pay the money to the Mortgagee, this is a good performance of the condition.
But if a man make a lease to two for years, with a proviso, if the lessees dye
during the term, the lessor shall re-enter, one lessee alien his part and dye,
the lessor cannot re-enter, but the Assignee shall enjoy the term so long as
the survivor lives, because the lease by the proviso is not to cease till both
be dead, 30 H. 8. Condition. Br. 190. 33 H. 8. Joyntenants. Br. 62.

Note a diversity, when the feoffee dies, for then the condition is broken;
and when the feoffor dies, for then the estate is to be made as near the
intent of the condition as may be, 2 H. 4. 5. fo. 219. b.

Note, That after the decease of the husband, the state is not to be made to
the wife, and the heirs of her body by her late husband engendered, and so to
have an estate of Inheritance, as she should have had by survivor, if the
estate had been made according to the condition, but only an estate for life
without impeachment of Waste etc.

Sans impeachment per action de Waste, extends but to the action, etc. Lib. 11.
fo. 83. l. 9. f. 9. l. 2. 23.

Sect. 353, 354.
Note, That the feoffee has time during his life to make the estate, unless he
be reasonably required by them that are to take the estate. This is to be
intended of parties or privies, and not of mere strangers, for there the state
must be made in convenient time, fo. 220. a.

Si feoffment soit fait sur condition que le feoffee re-enfeoffor plusors
homes, a av. and tener a eux, and a lour heirs etc. and touts ceux que devient
av. estate mor' devant afc' estate fait a eux, donque doit le feoffee fair
estate al heir celuy que survesquist de eux, a aver and tener a luy, and les
heirs celuy que survesquist, 220. b.

The reason wherefore the Habendum is thus limited etc. is, for that if it were
made to the heirs of the heir, then some by possibility should be inheritable
to the land, which should not have inherited if the estate had been made to the
survivor and his heirs, and consequently the condition broken.

Sect. 355, 356.
Of Disabilities, some be by act of the party, and some by act in Law, and some
by act in praesenti, and some in futuro.

The feoffee is disabled when he cannot convey the land over according to the
condition in the same plight, quality and freedom, as the land was conveyed to
him, 13 H. 7. 23. b. 32 E. 2. Bar 264. 21 Ass. 28. 38 Ass. pl. 7.

Sect. 357.
Si le Feoffee sur condition d'enfeoffer un auter, etc. fait lease pur ans a
commencer al jour a vener; this is a present disability and cause of entry, for
that the land is not in that freedom, etc. as it was conveyed to the Feoffee,
and after the State made over according to the condition the land shall be
charged therewith. l. 2. f. 59, 60. Julius Winningtons case.

Plight signifies not only the estate, but the habit and quality of the land,
and extends to rent charges, and to a possibility of Dower. Vide S. 289. fo.
221. b.

If the feoffee were married at the time of the feoffment, then the dower can
be no disability, because the land shall remain, etc. as it was at the time of
the feoffment made unto him.

The Feoffee being disabled at any time, though the same continue not, yet the
Feoffor may re-enter.

And note a diversity between a disability for a time on the part of the
Feoffee; and on the part of the Feoffor. For if a man make a Feoffment in fee
upon condition, that the Feoffee before such a day shall re-enfeoffe the
Feoffor, the Feoffee takes wife, and the wife dies before the day, yet may
the Feoffor re-enter for that, maintenant by the disability of the Feoffee the
condition is broken: But so it is not by the disability of the Feoffor, or his
heirs, for if they perform the condition within the time it is sufficient. 21
E. 4. 55. Trin. 18 El. in C. Ban. Sir Th. Wiats case.

Sect. 358.
If the Feoffee be disseised, and after bind himself in Statute Staple, etc.
or take wife, this is no disability in him, for that during the disseisin, the
land is not charged therewith, etc. Fo. 222. a. Note, there are other
disabilities implied. 18 Ass. pl. ultimo. 19 E. 3. 39. Lib. 2. fo. 80. b. Snr.
Cromwels case.

If a man grant an advowson upon condition that the grantee shall regrant the
same to the grantor in tail. In this case if the Church become void before any
regrant, or before any request made by the grantor, he may take advantage of
the condition, because the Advowson is not in the same plight, etc. P. 14. El.
in Com. ban.

If the Feoffee suffer a recovery by default upon a fained title, before
execution sued the Feoffer may reenter for this disability. 44 E. 3. 9.

Sect. 359, 360.
If an agreement be made between two, that the one shall infeoffe the other
upon condition in surety of the payment of certain money, and after the livery
is made to him, and his heirs generally, the State is holden by some to be upon
condition, in as much as the intent of the parties was not changed at any time,
but continued at the time of the livery. 34 Ass. pl. 1. 13 E. 3. Estopp. 177.

Un Feoffment sur condition que le Feoffee ne alienam a nulluy, cest condition
est void. So it is of a devise, grant, release, confirmation, etc. whereby a
fee simple does pass. 33 Ass. 11. Doct. and St. 39. 124. 13 H. 7. 23. 21 H. 6.
34. a. 8 H. 7. 10. b. Arg. ex absurdo. Vide S. 7 22. fo. 213. a. Vide, etc.

Iniquum est ingenuis hominibus non esse liberam rerum suarum alienationem; and
rerum suarum quilibet est moderator, and Arbiter. and Reg. Non valet pactum de
re mea non alienanda. But these are to be understood of conditions annexed to
the grant or sale it self, in respect of the repugnancy, and not to any other
collateral thing.

Some have said that a man may grant a rent charge newly created out of Lands
to a man and his heirs upon condition, that he shall not alien that, that is
good, because the rent is of his own creation, but it is against the reason of
Littleton, etc.

Before the Statute of Quia empt. ter. the Lord might have restrained the
alienation of his Tenant by condition, because the Lord had a possibility of
Reverter; and so it is in the Kings case at this day, because he may reserve a
tenure to himself. 14 H. 4. 13 H. 7. 23. 21 H. 7. 8. l. 5. 56. Knights case.

If A. be seized of bl. acre in fee, and B, infeoffe him of wh. acre upon
condition, that A. shall not alien B. acre, the condition is good; for it is
annexed to other land, and ouster not the Feoffee of his power to alien the
land whereof the Feoffement was made, and so no repugnancy, etc. And so it is
of gifts, or sales of Chattels reals, or personals.

Sect. 361.
If a Feoffment in fee be made upon condition, that the Feoffee shall not
infeoffe F.S. or any of his heirs or issues, etc. this is good. Pl. Com. 77. a.
8 H. 7. 10. b. 21 E. 4. 47. a.

If the feoffee in this case infeoffe I. N. of intent that he shall infeoffe
I.S. this is a breach of the condition; for, quando aliquid prohibetur fieri ex
directo, prohibetur and per obliquum. Fo. 223. b. 10 H. 7. 11. D. and St. 124.
13 H. 7. 23. In ancient Deeds, etc. there was commonly a clause, Quod licitum
sit donatori^ rem datam dare vel vendere cui voluerit, except. viris Religiosis
et Judais, Brac. l. 1. fo. 13. a.

Sect. 362.
A double Neg. in legal construction, shall not hinder the Neg. 33 Ass. 11. 21
H. 7. 11. Vide S. 220.

If a man make a Lease for years, or for life upon condition that they shall
not grant over their estate, or let the Land to others, this is good, and yet
the grant or Lease should be lawful. 21 H. 6. 33. 31 H. 8. Die. 45. 27 H. 8.
17, 19.

Quilibet potest renunciare juri pro se introducto. Die. 33 H. 8. fo. 48, 49.
lib. 6. 40, 41. Sir Ant. Mildmayes case.

Note, that to estate tail, etc. there be diverse incidents. 1. To be
dispunished of waste. 2. That the wife of the donee in tail shall be endowed.
3. The Husband, etc. shall be Tenant by the Courtesy. 4. That, Tenant in tail
may suffer a common recovery: and therefore if a man make a gift in tail upon
condition to restrein him of any of these incidents, the condition is repugnant
and void in Law. 22 E. 3: 19. 17 El. 343. Die. And note, that a collateral
warranty or a lineall with Assets in respect of the recompense, is not
restrained by the Statute of Donis Cond. no more is the Common recovery in
respect of the intended recompense. 13 H. 7. 24. b.

If a man make a feoffment to a Baron and feme in fee, upon condition that they
shall not alien, to some intent this is good, and to some intent it is void:
for to restrain an alienation by Feoffment, or alienation by Deed, it is good,
because such an alienation is tortious and voidable: but to restrein their
alienation by fine is repugnant and void, because it is lawful and
unavoidable: Whatsoever is prohibited by the intent of any Act of Parliament,
may be prohibited by condition.

Sect. 363.
A man makes a gift in tail to A. the remainder to him, and to his heirs upon
condition that he shall not alien: some are of opinion, that this is a good
condition, and shall defeat the alienation for the estate tail only, and leave
the fee simple in the alienee; for that, the condition in Law extends only to
the estate tail. 11 H. 7. 6. etc. fo. 224. a.

But a gift in tail may be made upon condition that tenant in tail, etc. may
alien for the profit of his Issues.

Sect. 364. * Nota.
Home poit doner terres en tail sur condition que si le tennant en le tail ou
ses heirs alienont en fee, ou en tail ou pur term daut. vie, etc. and auxy
que si touts issues veignants del Tenant in tail soient morts sans issue; que
donques bien lirroit al donor and a ses heirs d' enter, etc. and partiel voy
le droit del tail poit ere^ solve apres discontent in all issue en le tail, si
ass' y soit, issint que per voy dentre del donor, ou de ses heirs, le tail ne
serra my defeat per tiel condition. Littleton to make the condition good,
adds an alienation which amounted to a wrong, and he restrains not the
alienation only, but added, and die without issue, to the end that the right
of the estate in tail might be preserved, and not defeated by the condition,
but might be recovered again by the issue in tail in a Formedon. Si plures
conditiones ascriptae fuerunt donationi conjunctim omnibus e^ parendum, and ad
veritatem copulative requiritur quod utraque pars sit vera. Brac. l. 2. fo. 19.
Pl. 76. Wimbesh case, and 107. Fulmerstons case. But, si divisim, cuilibet, vel
alteri eorum satis e^ obtemperare and in disjunct. sufficit alteram partem esse
veram.

If a man make a Lease to the husband and wife for 21. years, if the husband
and wife, or any child between them so long shall live, and then the wife die
without issue, the Lease shall continue, for the disjunctive refers to the
whole. Pl. 30 El. Com. ban. Baldwin and Cock, Trupennies case; and so it is if
any use be limited to certain persons, until A. shall come from beyond Sea,
and attain unto his full age, or die; if he does beyond Sea come from, or
attain to his full age, the use does cease. H. 35 El. Trans per sur. Mordant.
ban. R.

Sect. 365.
Il e^ common erudit. que home per plee ne defeatera asc' estate de
franktenement per force dasc' tiel condition. Sin que il mer^^^ le propo^e de
condition en escript, etc. Si non en special cases, etc. Mes de chattels
reals, sicome de Lease pur ans, auterment est; and issint e^ de dones and
grants, de chattels personals, and contracts personals, etc.

Be the action real, personal, or mixed, if a condition be to defeat a
freehold, it is Reg. true, that a Deed must be showed forth in Court. Because
every Deed ought to approve it self, that it be sufficient in Law, and that the
Court shall adjudge: and secondly be proved by others, and this concerns
matters of Fact, as sealing and delivery, and belongs to the jurors. 9 E. 4.
25, 26. 14 H. 8. 22. b. 28 Ass. pl. 1. l. 10. fo. 92. Dr Layfields case. 11 H.
7. 22. b.

Upon a gift in tail, or a Lease for life a rent may be reserved without deed,
but a condition with re-entry cannot be reserved without deed in this case. 45
E. 3. 21. a.

By the Statute of 3 and 4 E. 6. ca. 4. and 13 El. ca. 6. the exemplification
or constat under the great Seal of the inrolment of any Letters Patents made
since the 4 of Feb. 27 H. 8. or after to be made, shall be sufficient to be
pleaded and showed forth in Court as well against the King, as any other person
by the Patentees themselves, etc. Dyer 1 El. 167. 12 H. 7. 12. b.

A constat Inspeximus, etc. ought to be had only of the inrolment of Record,
and no deed, etc. can be enrolled, unless it be duly and lawfully
acknowledged. Lib. 8. fo. 8. The Princes case. l. 5. fo. 52, 53. Pages case.

If Guardian in Chivalry in right of the heir enter for a condition broken, he
shall plead the state upon condition without showing of any Deed, because his
interest is created by the Law; and so it is of a Tenant by State Merch. etc.
and of Tenant in Dower, etc. 20 H. 7. 5. 35 H. 6. Manors des faits 11. b.

But the Lord by escheat albeit his estate be created by law shall not plead
condition to defeat a freehold without showing of it, because the Deed does
belong unto him. A Tenant by the Courtesy shall not plead a condition made by
his wife, etc. without showing the Deed.

But lessees for years, and all others that claim by any conveiance from the
party, of justify as servant by commandment, etc. must show the Deed, 14 H. 8.
8. Pl. 149.

R. brought an ejection firm against E. of the Manor of D. which he had for
years of the demise of C. etc. E. maintained his entry, etc. and showed no
deed, and the plea was good, because the thing was executed, Vide le case fo.
226. a. 44 E. 3. 22. Nota the defendant being issue in tail was remitted to the
estate tail.

If land be morgaged upon condition, and the morgagee lets the lands for
years, reserving a rent, the condition is performed, the morgagor reenters, in
an act of debt brought for the rent, the lessee shall plead the condition, and
reentry without showing forth the Deed. 45 E. 3. 68. Finch. 10 H. 4. 9. b.

If a woman give land to a man and his heirs by deed, or without generally, she
may in pleading aver the same to be causa matrim. prolocuti, albeit she has
nothing in writing to prove the same. 9 E. 4. 25, 26. 14 H. 8. 22. b. 11 H. 7.
22. b. F.N.B. 205. b.

Sect. 366.
Item Comt. que home ne poit en asc' act' pleaded un condition que concern le
franktenement, sans manurer escript de ceo; encore poit home estre aid sur tiel
condition per verdict de 12. homes prise ^large en Ass. de no. diss. etc. Vide
S. etc.

Judicium, est quasi juris dictum. l. 8. fo. 155. l. 9. f. 13. l. 11. f. 10. Ex
facto jus oritur. fo. 266. Vide etc.

Omnis conclusio boni and very judicii sequitur ex bonis and veris promiss. and
dictis Jurator. Trin. 33 E. 1. in Thesaur. utile per inutile non vitiatur. M.
28 El. and 29. Gomershall account in Ban. R. 32 E. 3. Cessavit 25. 5. 484, 485.

If the matter and substance of the issue be found, it is sufficient. S. 58. 35
Ass. 8. 1 H. 4. 6. b. 27 H. 8. 22. b. Pl. 515. l. 4. f. 53. Raulins case, and
Pledols case. H. 31. El. Sutton, etc. Com ban.

Estopper which bind the interest of the Land, as the taking of a lease of a
man's own land by deed indenture etc. being specially found by the Jury, the
Court ought to judge according to the special matter; for albeit estopper Reg.
must be pleaded and relied upon by an apt conclusion, and the Jury is sworn ad
verit. dicendam, yet when they find veritatem facti, they pursue well their
oath, and the Court ought to judge according to law. So may the Jury find a
warranty being given in evidence, though it be not pleaded, because it binds
the right, unless it be in a writ of right, when the Mesc. is joined upon the
Mere right. 34 E. 3. Droit 29.

After the verdict recorded, the Jury cannot vary from it, Pl. Fremans case. 11
H. 4. 2. 20 Ass. 12. 5 H. 7. 22.

An issue found by verdict shall always be intended true until it be reversed
by attaint, and thereupon, etc. no Supersedeas is grantable by Law.

If the Jury after evidence at Bar, etc. do at their own charges eat or drink
either before or after they be agreed on their verdict, it is finable, but it
shall not avoid the verdict. P. 24 H. 8. Just. Spilman Ban. R. 29 H. 8. 37.
Dier P. 6 E. 6. Com. Ban. 11 H. 4. 16, 17. 24 E. 3. 75.

The King cannot be Nonsuit, for he is ever present in Court in judgment of
Law. 21 E. 3. 18.

The condition is executed by re-entry, and yet the Lessor after his re-entry,
shall not plead the condition without showing the deed, because he was party
and privy to the condition, for the parties must show forth the Deed, unless
it be by the act and wrong of the party; but an estranger which is not privy to
the condition, nor claims under the same, shall not after the condition is
executed in pleading, be forced to show forth the Deed. Pl. 92. 9 H. 7. 3. Lib.
9. 12, 13. Downams case. 31 Ass. p. 21. 10 H. 4. 9.

Note, that a special verdict or at large, may be given in any action, and
upon any issue, be the issue general or special. 8 E. 4. 29. 11 Eliz. Dyer
283, 284.

Discretio e^ discernere per legem quid sit justum. Si a jure discedas, vagus
eris, and erunt omnia omnibus incerta. l. 10. fo. 4. case de Sewers.

Sect. 367.
A verdict is twofold. 1. A verdict at large, or a special verdict, because it
finds the special matter, etc. Or leaves it to the judgment of the Court.
2. A general verdict, that is generally found according to the issue, as if
the issue be not guilty, to find the party guilty, or not guilty generally,
etc. There is also a verdict given in open Court, and a privy verdict given out
of Court before any of the Judges of the Court.

To find the special matter is the safest way for the Jury where the case is
doubtful.

Sect. 369.
Lease pur vie rendt. rent and re-entry sur condition, etc. and ceo est sans
fait; lessor enter pur non payment, etc. lessee enter sur le lessor et luy
disseist, etc. en ce^ case le disseisee navera Ass. et enc' si le lessee soit
pl'. et le lessor defendant, il bar. se lessee par verdict de Ass. etc. Mes en
ceo case lou lessee est defendant sil ne voile plead le lease pur vie, etc. en
bar. mes plede nultort null diss. donques le lessor recovera per Assize, 4 El.
Dyer 207. 8 El. Dyer 246. A lease for life, the reversion to the Plaintiff was
a good bar in Assize, and also that a lease for years, the reversion to the
Plaintiff might be pleaded in an Assize; and so of a Feoffment with Warranty.

And note a diversity, viz. of a lease for life, the Tenant shall plead it in
bar. But in case of a lease for years, or of an estate of Tenant by Statute
or Elegit, the Defendant shall not plead in bar, as to say, Ass. non, etc.
but justify by force of the lease, etc. and conclude, and issint sans tort.
And if the Tenant of the Freehold be not named, he shall plead Null tenant de
franktenement nosme en le breve; and in the case of the Feoffment with
Warranty, he must rely upon the Warranty, 18 E. 4. 10. 12 Ass. 38.

Sect. 370.
Si Indenture soit bipartite, ou tripartite etc. touts les parts del endent' ne
sont que un fait en ley, and chesc' part del endent' est auxi de grand force
and effect, sicome touts les parts ensemble, l. 5. fol. 20. Styles Case. An
Indenture may be without words, but not by words without indenting. A Deed
poll, because it is cut even, polled, etc.

Note, That if the Feoffor, Donor or Lessor, seal the part of the Indenture
belonging to the Feoffee, etc. the Indenture is good, albeit the feoffee never
seals the Counterpart belonging to the feoffor, fo. 229. a. 9 E. 4. 18. Pl.
134.

Sect. 371, 372.
A communi observantia non est recedendum, and minime mutanda sunt quae cert'
habuerunt interpretationem; Magister rerum usus, 17 El. Dyer 342. 12 H. 4. 12.
30 Ass. 31.

It is provided by the Statute of 38 E. 3. cap. 4. That all penal bonds in the
third person be void; wherein some of our books seem to differ etc. But the
Statute was principally intended of the Courts of Rome; in which Courts bonds
were taken in the third person: So as such bonds made out of the Realm are
void, but other bonds in the third person are Resolved to be good as well as
Indentures in the third person, 40 E. 3. 1. 2 H 4. 10. 8 E. 4. 5.

Brevis via per exempla, longa per praecepta. It is a safe thing to follow
approved Presidents; for, Nihil simul inventum est, and perfectum.

Sect. 273. Fol. 230. b.
Si en l'endenture fait en le 3. person, ou en le 1. person mention foit fait
que le grantor avoit mise solement son seal and nemy le grantee, donques est
l'endent' tantsolement le fait le grantor. Mes lou mention est fait que le
grantee ad mise son seal etc. donques il est le fait d'ambideux etc.

The feoffee is no way made party to make it, being made in the first person,
but only by the clause of putting his Seal thereunto. Vide Lib. etc.

Sect. 374.
If A. by Deed indented between him and B. let lands to B. for life, the
remainder to C. in fee, reserving a rent; Tenant for life dies, he in
remainder enters into the lands, he shall be bound to pay the rent, because he
agrees to have the lands by force of the Indenture, 50 E. 22. 3 H. 6. 26. b.
fo. 231. a.

An Indenture of lease is engrossed between A. of the one part, and D. and R.
of the other part, which purport a demise for years by A. to D. and R. A.
seals and delivers the Indenture to D. and D. seal the Counterpane to A.
but R. did not seal and deliver it. And by the same Indenture it is mentioned,
that D. and R. did grant to be bound to the Plaintiff in 20 l. in case that
certain conditions comprised in the Indenture were not performed. And for this
20 l. A. brought an action against D. only, and sued forth the Indenture.

The Defendant pleaded, That it is proved by the Indenture, that the demise by
Indenture was made to D. and R. which R. is in full life, and not named in the
Writ, Judgment of the Writ. The Plaintiff replied, That R. did never seal and
deliver the Indenture, and so his Writ was good against D. sole. And there the
Counsel of the Plaintiff took a diversity between a rent reserved, which is
parcel of the lease, and the land charged therewith, and a sum in gross, as
here the 20 l. is; for as to the rent, they agreed, That by the agreement of R.
to the lease, he was bound to pay it, but for the 20 l. that is a sum in gross,
and collateral to the lease, and not annexed to the land, and grows due only
by the Deed, and therefore R. said he was not chargeable therewith, for that he
had not sealed and delivered the Deed. But in as much as he had agreed to the
lease which was made by Indenture for the same sum in gross, and for that R.
was not named in the Writ, it was adjudged that the Writ did abate, 38 E. 3. 8.
a. vide 44 E. 3. 11, 12.

Qui sentit commodum, sentire debet and onus: and transit terra cum enere.

Sect. 375.
Le feoffer poit pledere condition en fait Poll; pur ceo que il est privy al
fait etc.

Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.

Et ratio melior semper praevalet.

Fol. 231. b. If the Deed remain in one Court, it may be pleaded in another
Court without showing forth: Quia lex non cogit ad impossibilia. 40 Ass. 34. l.
5. 75. b. Wymarks. 12 H. 4. 8. F. N. B. 243.

Sect. 376.
When diverse do a Trespass, the same is joint or several, at the will of him to
whom the wrong is done; yet if he release to one of them, all are discharged,
because his own Deed shall be taken most strong against himself; but other wise
it is in case of Appeal of Death, etc. As if two women be jointly and severally
bound in an Obligation, if the Obligee release to one of them, both are
discharged; and seeing the Trespassers are parties and privies in wrong, the
one shall not plead a Release to the other, without showing of it forth, albeit
the Deed appertain to the other, 27 E. 3. 83. 13 E. 4. 2. 15 E. 4. 26. 21 E. 4.
72. 22 E. 4. 7. 13 H. 8. 10. 34 H. 8. estrange al fait 21.

Sect. 377.
Semper quaere de dubiis, quia per rations pervenitur ad legitimam rationem,
etc. Ratio, est radius divini luminis.

If a man has an Obligation, though he cannot grant the thing in action, yet
he may give or grant the Deed, viz. the Parchment and Wax to another, who may
cancel, and use the same at his pleasure.

Omnia praesumuntur legitime facta, donec probetur in contrarium. Injuria non
praesumitur, fo. 232. b.

There be three kinds of unhappy men: 1. Qui scit, and non docet. Infelix
cujus nulli sapientia prodest. 2. Qui docet, and non vivit. Infelix qui recta
docet cum vivit inique. 3. Qui nescit, and non interrogat. Infelix qui pauca
sapit spernitque doceri. Inter cuncta leges, and percunctabere doctos.



Sect. 378.
Estates que homes ont sur condition en ley, sont tiels estates que ont un
condition per la ley a eux annex, comment que ne sont specify en escript:
sicome home grant person fait a un auter le office del Parkership pur term de
son vie, le estate que il ad en le office sur condition en ley sc. que le
Parker bien and loialment guardian le Park, etc. (issint est de offic' de
Seneschalship etc.) auterment bien lirroit al grantor and a ses heirs de luy
ouste etc. Quia in eo quo quis delinquit, in eo de jure est puniendus, 15 E. 4.
3. l. 5 E. 4. 26. 28 H. 8. Bendloes etc. Lib. 6. fo. 50. 95. 96, 99. Mich. 33
E. 1. Coram Rege in Thesaur' levesque de Durhams Case.

Forresta est tuta ferar'mansio non quarumlibet, sed silvestrium, non
quibuslibet in locis, sed certis and ad hoc ideonis, unde Foresta E. mutata in
O. quasi feresta, hoc est, ferarum statio. Ockam. vide Bract. fo. 231. and 316.

Non-user of it self without some special damage, is no forfeiture of private
Offices; but Non-user of public Officers which concern the administration of
Justice, or the Commonwealth, is of it self a cause of forfeiture, Pl. 379,
380. 2 H. 7. 11. 30 H. 6. 32 etc.

There is a diversity between Officers that have no other profit, but a
collateral certain fee, for there the grantor may discharge him of his service;
as to be a Baily, Receiver, Surveyor, Auditor, etc. the exercise whereof is but
labor and charge to him, but he must have his Fee: for the main Rule of Law
is, That no man can frustrate or derogate from his own grant to the prejudice
of the grantee, 18 E. 4. 8. 31 H. 8. Grants Br. 134. 34 H. 8. ibid. 93. 11 El.
Dyer 285.

But in all cases where the Officer relinquisheth his Office, and refuses to
attend, he loses his office, fee, profit, and all.

There is another diversity, where the grantee, besides his certain fee, has
profits and avails by reason of his Office, as the Office of Stewardship of
Courts, there the grantor cannot discharge him of his service or attendance,
for that should be to the prejudice of the grantee, 22 H. 6. 10. 3. 6 E. 6.
Dyer 72.

Conditions in Law be of two natures, i.e. by the Common Law, and by Statute;
and those by the Common Law are of two natures, i.e. the one is founded upon
skill and confidence, as here the Office of Parkership; the other without skill
or confidence; whereof some by the Common Law, and some by the Statute. By the
Common Law, as to every estate of Tenant by the Courtesy, Tenant in Tail after
possibility, etc. Tenant in Dower, Tenant for life, for years, Tenant by
Statute Merchant, or Staple, by Elegit, Guardian, etc. there is a condition in
Law secretly annexed to their estates, that if they alien in fee, etc. that he
in the reversion or remainder may enter, etc. or if they claim a greater estate
in Court of Record, etc. Pl. Com. 373. a. Sir H. Nevils case. 21 E. 4. 20. 93.
l. 8. f. 44. Wittinghams case, concerning condition in law founded upon
Statutes, for some of them an entry is given, and for some other a recovery by
action: where an entry is given as upon an Alienation in Mortmain, etc. and the
like where an action is given, as for Waste against Tenant for life and years,
etc.

As for Example, admit that an office of Parkership be granted or descend to an
Infant or feme Covert; if the conditions in law annexed to this office which
require skill and confidence be not observed and fulfilled, the office is lost
for ever, because it is as strong as an express condition. But if a lease for
life be made to a feme covert, or an Infant, and they by Charter of Feoffment
alien in fee, the breach of this condition in Law, that is, without skill, etc.
is no absolute forfeiture of their estate. So of a condition in Law given by
Statute, which gives an entry only. As if an Infant or feme Covert with
husband, aliens by Charter of Feoffment in Mortmain, this is no bar to the
Infant or feme Covert. But if a recovery be had against an Infant or feme
Covert in an action of Waste, there they are bound and barred for ever.

And note, that a condition in Law by force of a Statute, which gives a
recovery, is in some case stronger then a condition in Law without a recovery:
for if lessee for life make a lease for years, and after enter into the land
and make Waste, and the lessor recover in an action of Waste, he shall avoid
the lease made before the waste done, (because of necessity the action of Waste
must be brought against the lessee for life, which in that case must bind the
lessee for years, or else by the act of the lessee for life, the lessor should
be barred to recover locum vastatum, which the Statute gives.) But if the
lessee for life make a lease for years, and after enter upon him, and make a
Feoffment in fee, this forfeiture shall not avoid the lease for years.

Reg. A man that takes advantage of a condition in Law, shall take the land
with such charge as he finds it.

And a condition in Law, is as strong as a condition in Deed as to avoid the
estate, or interest it self, but not precedent charges to avoid, but in some
particular cases. Vtique fortior and potentior est dispositio legis quam
hominis. Vide S. 419, 429, 430. fo. 234. a.

For Offices in any wise touching the Administration or execution of Justice,
or Clerkship in any Court of Record, or concerning the Kings Treasure, Revenue,
Account, Customs, Alnage, Auditorship, Kings Surveyor, or keeping of any of his
Majesty's Castles, Forts, etc. Conditions in Law are annexed, etc. 3 H. 7. c.
11. 7 E. 6. c. 1. 5 E. 6. c. 16.

And note, that all Promises, Bonds and Assurances (for such Offices etc.) as
well on the part of the bargain or, as of the bargainee, are void, etc. Nulla
alia re magis Romans Respub. interiit, quam quod Magistratus officia venalia
erant. M. 13 Ja. R. lib. 3. f. 83. Colshils case. Aerod. fo. 343.

Jugurtha going from Rome, said to the City, Vale venalis Civitas, mox peritura
si emptorem invenias. Salust. 12 R. 2. cap. 2.

Sect. 379.
The Oath of a Beadle (or under-Bayliff) of a Manor, is, That he shall duly and
truly execute all such Attachments and other Process as shall be directed to him
from the Lord or Steward of his Court, and that he shall present all
Poundbreaches, which shall happen within his Office, and all Chattels waved,
and Estrayes.

Sect. 380.
Si lease soit fait al Bar. and feme, a aver and tenant a eux durant le
coverture enter eux, en ce^ case ils ont estate pur term de lour 2. vies, sur
condition en ley, sc. si un de eux devie, ou que devorce soit fait enter eux,
donques bien lirroit a lessor and a^ses heirs dentr. etc.

Durante, dummodo, dum, quamdiu, donec, quousque, usque, ad, Tam, Diu,
ubicunque, are words of limitation, 37 H. 6. 27. 10 Ass. 4. 11 Ass. p. 8. 7 E.
4. 16. 9 E. 4. 25, 26. 14 H. 8. 13.

Divorces, a vinculo Matrimonii are these, causa praecontracti, causa metus,
impotentiae seu frigiditatis, Assinitatis, consanguinitatis, etc. Divorce, a
mensa and Thoro, dissolveth not the marriage a vinculo Matrimonii, for it is
subsequent to the marriage, as causa Adulterii, 18 E. 4. 28. 24 H. 8. 8.
Bastards. 11 H. 4. 14. 76. Vide S. 399. 32 H. 8. c. 38.

A man married the daughter of the sister of his first wife, and it was
declared by Act of Parliament to be good. Tr. 2. Ja. Rot. 1032. Ri. Parsons
case, fo. 235. b.

Sect. 381.
Logic teaches a man not only by just argument to conclude the matter in
question, but to discern between truth and falsehood, and to use a good method
in his study, and probably to speak to any legal question.

Arg. a divisione. Pl. Com. 561. b. Vide S. 345.

Sect. 383.
Note a diversity, viz. when a man devises that his executor shall sell the
land, there the lands descend in the mean time to the heir, and until the sale
be made, the heir may enter to take the profits. But when the land is devised
to his Executors to be sold, there the devise takes away the descent, and
vesteth the state of the Land in the Executor, and he may enter and take the
profits, and make sale according to the devise, and the mean profits taken
before the sale, shall not be Assets, so as he may be compellable to pay debts
with the same, and therefore he must sell the lands as soon as he can, for
otherwise he shall take advantage of his own Laches.

A man seized of certain lands holden in Socage, had issue two daughters A. and
B. and devised all his lands to A. and her heirs, to pay unto B. a certain
sum of money at a certain day and place, the money was not paid, and it was
adjudged that those words, To pay etc. did amount in a Will to a Condition,
because the land was devised to A. for that purpose; otherwise B. should be
remediless. Et interest Reipublicae suprema hominum testamenta rata haberi: and
the lessee of B. upon an actual ejectment recovered the moity of the land
against A, M. 31. and 32 El. Ban. R. Crickmers case, Dyer 6 E. 6. fo. 74. 7 E.
6. 70. Judicium pro veritate accipitur, Fo. 236. b.

Sect. 384.
Defaire, i.e. to defeat or undo, infectum reddere quod factum est. There is a
diversity between inheritances executed, and inheritances executory, as lands
executed by livery etc. cannot by Indenture of defeasance be defeated
afterward; and so if a disseisee release a disseisor, it cannot be defeated
afterward, etc. but at the time of the release etc. the same may be defeated
etc. for, Quae incontinenti fiunt inesse videntur, Bract. l. 2. f. 16. 17 Ass.
p. 2. 30 Ass. p. 1. 11. But rents, annuities, conditions, warranty, etc. that
be inheritances executory, may be defeated by defeasances made either at that
time, or at any time after, and so the Law is of Statute, Recognizance,
Obligation, and other things executory, 20 Ass. p. 7. 7 E. 4. 29. Brown and
Bestons case, Pl. 131. 28 H. 8. Die. 6. 27 H. 8. 15.

If a man seized of lands in fee, and having issue diverse sons, by Deed
indented covenanteth in consideration of fatherly love etc. to stand seized of
three acres of land, to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of
Thomas his eldest Son in Tail; and for default of such issue to the use of his
second Son in Tail, with diverse like remainders over; with a Proviso, that it
shall be lawful for the Covenantor at any time during his life, to revoke any
of the said uses etc. This Proviso being coupled with an Use, is allowed to be
good: but in case of a Feoffment, or any other Conveyance, whereby the feoffee
or grantee etc. is in by the Common Law, such a Proviso were merely repugnant
and void, 27 H. 8. cap. 10. And first in the case aforesaid if the Covenantor
who had an estate for life, do revoke the uses according to his power, he is
seized again in fee simple without entry or claim. 2. He may revoke part at one
time, and part at another. 3. If he make a Feoffment in fee, or levy a Fine
etc. of any part, this does extinguish his power but for that part, whereas in
that case the whole condition is extinct; but if it be made of the whole, all
the power is extinguished. So as to some purposes, it is of the nature of a
condition, and to other purposes in nature of a limitation. Lib. 1. fo. 173,
174. Digges case. l. 1. f. 107. Albainers case. l 10. f. 143. Screops case.
Lib. 7. fo. 12, 13. Sir Francis Englefields case. 4. If he that has such a
power of revocation has no present interest in the land, nor by the Leasor of
the estate shall have nothing, then his Feoffment or Fine, etc. of the Land is
no extinguishment of his power, because it is mere collateral to the Land. 5.
By the same conveyances, that the old uses be revoked, may new be created and
limited where the former cease ipso facto by the revocation, without either
entry or claim. 6. That these revocations are favorably interpreted, because
many men's inheritances depend upon the same.

Ex paucis dictis intendere plurima possis. CAP. VI. Descent que tollent
entries.
Sect. 385.
DEscendere, i.e. ex loco superiore in inferiorem movere. Brit. fo. 115 215.
Vide S. 5.

The Civilians call him, haeredem qui ex testamento succedit in universum jus
testatoris. But by the Common Law he is only heir which succeeds by right of
blood. Haeres dicitur ab haerendo, quia, qui haeres e^, haeret, hoc est,
proximus est sanguine illi cujus est haeres. So as he that is hares, sanguinis
est haeres and he^us haereditatis. Nota, in ancient time, if the disseisor had
been in long possession, the disseisee could not have entered upon him, Brit.
Fo. 115. Likewise the disseisee could not have entered upon the Feoffee of the
disseisor if he had continued a year and a day in quiet possession. But the law
is changed in both these cases, only the dying seized being an act in Law,
does hold at this day. 1 Ass. 13. 9. Ass. 15. Lamb. explic. fo. 120. 70. Porro
autem quam maritus sine lite and controversia sedem incoluerit, eam conjux and
proles sine controversia possidento, siqua in illum lis fuerit illata viventem,
eam haeredes ad se (perinde atque is vivus) accipiunto.

And one of the reasons of this ancient Law may be, that the heir cannot
suddenly by intendment of Law, know the true state of his title. Vide lib. fo.
237. b.

To a descent that takes away an entry, a dying seized is necessary, but a man
to other purposes may have lands by descent, though his Ancestour died not
seized. 11 H. 7. 12. 40 E. 3. 24.

Discents of inheritance incorporeall which lies in grant, as Advowsons, Rents,
Commons in gross, etc. do not put him that right has to an action; otherwise
it is of houses and lands. 6 H. 4 4. 15 E. 4. 14. F.N.B. 143. 9. 7. H. 4. 12.
5. 2. Ass. p. 9.

A recovery is had against Tenant for life, where the remainder is over in fee,
Tenant for life dies, he in remainder enters before execution and dies
seized, the entry of the recoveror is lawful, because he is privy in estate,
otherwise it is if the descent had been after execution. 3 E. 4. 6. 12 E. 4.
19. 3 H. 7. 3. 6 E. 4. 11. 7 H. 7. 15. 5 H. 7. 31. 10 H. 7. 5. b. 5 H. 7. 2.

A. recovereth an Advowson against B. in a Writ of Right, and has judgment
final, the incumbent dies, B. by usurpation presents to the Church, and his
clark is admitted and instituted, B. dies, A. is out of possession, and the
heir of B. is not so bound by the judgment either in blood or estate, but that
he shall present, 45 E. 3. qu. imp. 139. B. levies a fine to A. of an advowson
to him and his heirs, after the Church becomes void. B. presents by usurpation,
and his Clark is admitted and instituted this shall put A. the Conusee out of
possession. 8 E. 2. Qu. imp. 166. Albeit the usurpation were in both the said
cases before execution, yet it put the rightful Patron out of possession. So
note a diversity between a recovery of Land, and of an Advowson.

Now by the Statute made since Littleton wrote, it is enacted that except the
disseisor has been in the peaceable possession of such Manors, Lands, etc.
whereof he shall dye seized by the space of five years next after such
disseisin, etc. without entry or continual claim, etc. that there such dying
seized, etc. shall not take away the entry etc. 17 H. 6. 1. Lestat. 32 H, 8. c.
33. Sect. 422, 426. Pl. 47. Wimbishes case. Fo. 231. a. vid. etc.

Ad ea que frequentius accidunt, jura adaptantur. The Feoffee of a disseisor is
out of the said Statute, and remains as at the Common Law, M. 4. and 5 El. Dyer
219.

But if a man make a lease for life, and the lessee for life is disseised, and
the disseisor dye seized, within 5 years the lessee for life may enter; but if
he dye before he does enter, it is said that the entry of him in the reversion
is not lawful, because his entry was not lawful at the time of the descent.

Sect. 386.
If a disseisor make a gift in Tail, and the donee discontinueth in fee, and
disseise the discontinuee, and dies seized, this descent shall not take away
the entry of the disseisee, for the descent of the fee simple is vanished and
gone by the Remitter, and albeit the issue be in by force of the estate Tail,
yet the donee dyed not seized of that estate, Fol. 238. b.

If a disseisor make a gift in Tail, and the donee has issue, and dies
seized, now is the entry of the disseisee taken away; but if the issue dye
without issue, the entry of the disseisee is revived, and he may enter upon him
in the reversion and remainder, 9 H. 7. 24.

So if there be Grandfather, Father and Son, and the Son disseise one, and
infeoff the Grandfather, who dies seized, etc. the entry is taken away; but if
the Father dies seized, and the land descend to the Son, now is the entry of
the disseisee revived, and he may enter upon the Son, who shall take no
advantage of the descent, because he did wrong unto the disseisee, 13 H. 4. 8,
9. 33 H. 6. 5. b. per Moyl. 34 H. 6. 11. a. per Cur. S. 393, 395. 13 E. 3. Br.
Ent. cong. 127. vide and qu.

If a disseisor make a lease to an Infant for life, and he is disseised, and a
descent cast, the Infant enters, the entry of the disseisee is lawful upon him.

Of Writs of Entry sur disseisin there be four kinds:

The 1. is a Writ of Entry in the nature of an Assize, 19 H. 6. 56. 9 H. 5. 9.

2. A Writ of Entry sur disseisin in le per, Brit. fo. 264, etc. (...) E. 3.
216.

3. A Writ etc. en le per and cui, as where A. being the feoffee of D. the
disseisor makes a feoffment over to B. there the disseisee shall have a Writ
of Entry sur disseisin of lands etc. in which B. had no entry but by A. to whom
D. demised the same, who unjustly and without Judgment disseised the
Demandant: These are called gradus, degrees, which are to be observed, or else
the Writ is abateable; for sicut natura non facit saltum, ita nec lex, 22 E. 3.
1. b. F.N.B. 192.

4. A Writ of Entry sur disseisin en le post, which lies when after a
disseisin the land is removed from hand to hand above the degrees, 14 H. 4. 40.
vide etc.

No estate gained by wrong does make a degree, and therefore neither abatement,
intrusion, or disseisin upon disseisin, does make a degree. Neither does every
change by lawful Title work a degree; as if a Bishop or an Abbot etc. disseise
one and dye, where his successor is in by lawful Title, for though the person
be altered, yet the Right remains where it was, viz. in the Church, and both of
them seized in the same Right, etc. An faciunt gradum de Abbate in Abbatem
sicut de haerede in haeredem? Et videtur quod non magis quam in computatione
descensus, quia etsi alternetur persona, non propter hoc alternatur dignitas
sed semper manet, Br. l. 4. f. 321.

If a disseisor by Deed enrolled convey the land to the King, and the King by
his Charter grants it over, the disseisee cannot have a Writ of enter en le
per and cui, but in le post, for the Kings Charter is so high a matter of
Record, as it makes no degree, 22 E. 3. 7. F.N.B. 191. k.

Also an estate of a Tenant by the Courtesy, or of the Lord by Escheat, or of
an execution of an Use, by the Statute of 27 H. 8. or by Judgment or Recovery,
or of any others that come in, in the post, work no degree, 5 E. 2. Entry 66. 7
E. 3. 360.

But a Tenancy in Dower by assignment of the heir, does work a degree, because
she is in by her husband; but assignment of Dower by a disseisor works no
degree, but is in the post, 36 H. 6. Dower 30.

When the degrees are past, so as a Writ of Entry in le post does lie, yet by
event it may be brought within the degrees again; as if the disseisor infeoffe
A. who infeoffs B. who infeoffs C. or if the disseisor die seized, and the land
descend to A. and from him to C. now are the degrees past; and yet if C.
infeoffe A. or B. now it is brought within the degrees again. 44 E. 3, 4, 5. 5
H. 7. 6.

If the disseisor make * a lease for life, the remainder in * fee, Tenant for
life dies, he in the remainder is in the per, because he now claims
immediately from the disseisor, and both these estates make but one degree, 50
E. 3. 27.

Note, there be diverse other Writs of Entry, besides this of entry sur
disseisin, as a Writ of Entry ad Term qui praeter' in casu proviso, in
confirm' casu, ad com. legem, sine assensu capituli, dum fuit infra aetat' dum
non fuit compos mentis, cui in vita, sur cui in vita, Intrusion, cessavit, etc.
and that which has been said of one may be applied to all.

Sect. 387.
If a disseisor make a lease to a man and his heirs, during the life of I. S.
and the lessee dies living I. S. this shall not take away the entry of the
disseisee, because he that died seized, had but a Freehold only, and heirs
were added to prevent an Occupant, for the heir in that case shall not have his
age. Pl. 16 El. Com. Banco. Lambs Case. Dyer 8 El. 253. 7 H. 4. 46. 8 H. 4. 15.
11 H. 4. 42. 17 E. 3. 48.

But if the Kings Tenant for life be disseised, and the disseisor die seized,
this descent shall not take away the entry of the lessee for life, because the
disseisor had but a bare estate of Freehold during the life of the lessee. *

If the heir of the disseisor die before he enter, the entry of the disseisee
is taken away; and yet in pleading, the second heir shall make himself heir to
the disseisor, etc. 24 E. 3. 47. An infant is disseised, and after comes to
full age.

Sect. 388, etc.
En discents que tollent entry, il covient que celuy que mor' seisee ad fee and
franktenement al temps de son morant, on fee tail and franktenement al temps,
etc. fo. 239. b.

Note, the law does ever give great respect to the estate of Freehold, though
it be but for term of life.

A descent in the collateral line does take away an entry, as well as in the
lineall.

Sect. 390.
A dying seized, and a descent, and not a dying seized, and an Escheat, does
take away the entry: for the descent is the worthier Title. But if the
disseisor die seized, and the heir of the disseisor die without heir, the
disseisee cannot enter upon the Lord by Escheat. So as there is a diversity as
touching the descent, when after a descent cast, the issue in tail dies
without issue, and when after a descent cast, the heir in feesimple dies
without heir, for he in the reversion, or remainder upon a state Tail, claims
in above the state Tail; but the Lord by Escheat claims in under the heir in
fee simple, 37 H. 6. 1. 9 H. 7. 24. b.

Sect. 391, 392.
Note, a diversity between a Right, for which the Law gives a remedy by
action, and a Title, for which the Law gives no remedy by action, but by entry
only. For example; The feoffor upon (* this case in) Condition, has a Right
to the land, * and therefore his entry may be taken away, because he may
recover his right by action; but the Feoffor or Donor that has but a
condition, his Title of Entry cannot be taken away by any descent, because he
has no remedy by action to recover the land. And therefore if a descent should
take away his entry, it should bar him for ever, 3. 3 Ass. 11. 24. 21. H. 6.
17.

Also he that has a Title to enter upon a Mortmain, shall not be barred by a
descent, Br. Mortmain 6. 47 E. 3. 11.

And so it is, where a woman has a Title to enter, Causa matr. praelocuti, 40
Ass. 13.

And so it is where the Freehold in Law is cast upon the Devisee, and the heir
before any entry made by the Devisee, enter, and dies seized.

And so it is of him that enters for consent to a Ravishment, P. 32 El. Com.
Ban. Martin Trotte of London, 41 E. 3. 14. per Finchden. P. 1 Ja. Com. Ban.

To this may be added, as a like case, the Kings Patentee, before he enter, etc.

Another reason, wherefore a descent shall not take away the entry of him that
has a Title to enter by force of a Condition etc. is, for that the Condition
remains in the same essence that it was in at the time of the creation of it,
and cannot be divested, or put out of possession, as Lands and Tenements may.

Sect. 393.
8 E. 2. Enter 75. 24 E. 3. 40. 38 Ass. p. 26. 11 H. 4. 11. 7 H. 5. 3. 36 H. 6.
Dower 30. fo. 241. a. le heir endow la feme de le disseisor etc.

If there be Lord, Mesne and Tenant, the Mesne does grant to the Tenant, to
acquit him against the Lord and his heirs, the Lord dies, his wife has the
Seigniory assigned to her for her Dower, and distraineth the Tenant; albeit the
grant was to acquit him against the Lord and his heirs only, yet because she
continued the estate of her husband, and the reversion remained in the heir,
this grant of Acquittal did extend to the wife, 31 E. 1. Mesne 55. Nota etc.

If after the dying seized of the disseisor, the disseisee abate, against whom
the wife of the disseisor recover by confession in a Writ of Dower, in that
case though the descent be avoided, yet the disseisee shall not enter upon the
Tenant in Dower, because the recovery was against himself: but if he had
assigned Dower to her in paiis, some say he should enter upon her.

Donor in Tail reserves 20 s. rent, and dies, the Donee takes wife, and dies
without issue, the heir of the Donor enters and endows the wife, she is so in
of the estate of her husband, that albeit the estate Tail be spent, and the
rent reserved thereupon determined, yet after she be endowed, she shall be
attendant to the heir, in respect of the said rent.

And so it is of Lord and Tenant, the wife that is endowed, shall be attendant
for the due services; but if any services be incroached, albeit that
incroachment shall bind the heir, yet the wife shall be Contributory but for
the services of right due, 10 E. 3. 26.

Nota, albeit the disseisor after a descent takes to him but an estate for
life; yet when the disseisee does enter upon him, he shall thereby divest the
reversion, for a Freehold is that whereupon a Praecipe does lie; and therefore
the entry of the disseisee is as available in Law; as if he had recovered it in
a Praecipe. And so it is if a disseisor make a lease for life, and grant the
reversion to the King, etc. 25 E. 3. 48. Pl. C. 553. Vide S. 302, 388.

Sect. 394.
Si un feme seisie de terra en fee, don't jeo aye droit and title dent. prent
baron, and ont issue enter eux. and puis la feme devie seisie, and apres le
baron devie, and lissue enter, etc. en ce^ case jeo poy enter sur le poss.
lissue, pur ceo que lissue ne vient a les tenements immediate par descent apres
la mort. sa mere, etc. eins per le mort. del pier, 9 H. 7. 24. 37 H. 6. 1. An
immediate descent may take away an entry for a time, and immediately may be
avoided by matter ex post facto. But if a dying seized, take not away the entry
of him that right has at the time of the descent, it shall not by any matter
ex post facto take away his entry. If a disseisor make a gift in Tail, the
remainder in fee, and the donee dies without issue, leaving his wife privement
enceint with a Son, and be in the remainder enters, and after the Son is born
who entered into the land, this descent shall not take away the entry of the
disseisee; because the issue comes not to the lands immediately by descent etc.

Sect. 395.
Disseisor enfeoff son quier en fee, and le pier mor. seisie, etc. ce^ne tolla
entry etc. Reg. it is true, that albeit a descent be cast, and the entry of the
disseisee taken away, yet if the disseisor comes to the land again, either by
descent or purchase, of any estate of freehold which is employed in the (etc.)
the disseisee may enter upon him, or have his Assize against him, as if no
descent or mean Conveyance had been, quia particeps criminis. 15 E. 4. 23. a.
11 E. 4. 2. 18 E. 4. 25. a. 33 H. 6. 5. b. 34 H. 6. 11. 12 H. 8. 9. 24 H. 8. 3.
9. 18 H. 8. 5. 5 H. 7. 29. Ass. 54. 39 E. 3. 25, 26.

Sect. 396, 397.
Note, that Ass. mort. Antecess. non tenet inter conjunctas personas sicut
fratres and sorores etc. for these are privy in blood, Brac. l. 4. f. 261, 282.
29 Ass. 11. F.N.B. 196. b.

Albeit the eldest son has issue and dye, and after the youngest son or his
heir enter, and many discents be cast in his line, yet may the heirs of the
eldest son enter in respect of the privity of the blood, and of the same claim
by one Title; but otherwise it is if the Feoffee of the youngest son dye seized
etc. and admit that the youngest son be of the half blood to his brother, yet he
is of the whole blood to his Father; and therefore if he enter by abatement
(and so gain a fee simple) and dye seized, it shall not bar his elder brother
of his entry. But if the eldest son enter, and gain an actual possession and
seisin, then the entry of the youngest is a disseisin, Br. ent. 27.

Si le puisne friar ent. apres le mort. le pier and mor. seisin etc. leign.
friar poit ent. sur lissue, etc. pur ceo que ambiz. les freres claim per m. le
title, auterment e^ ou leigne friar ent. etc. and puis e^ disseisin per le
puisne friar, que mort. seisee etc.

If the Father make a lease for life, and has issue two Sons and dies, and
the Tenant for life dye, and the youngest Son intrude, and dye seized, this
descent shall not take away the entry of the eldest: But if the Father had made
a lease for years, it had been otherwise; for that the possession of the lessee
for years makes an actual freehold in the eldest Son. Fol. 243. a. 22 E. 4. 4.

If two Coparceners be, and they severally present to the Ordinary, yet the
Church is not litigious, because they claim all by one Title. Doct and St. cap.
30. fol. 117.

If upon a Writ ad diem clau. extr. the youngest Son be found heir, the eldest
Son has no remedy by the Common Law, because they claimed by one Title; but
otherwise it is if they claim by several Titles. But this is now helped by the
Statute of 2 E. 6. c. 8.

If two Parsons be in debate for Tithes which amount to above the fourth part,
and one man is Patron of both Churches, no Judicavit does lie, for that both
Incumbents claim by one and the same Patron, 2 H. 7. 12. a.

There is a great diversity holden in our books, where one has a color or
pretense of right, and when he has none at all, 2 E. 2. Bastar. 19. 21 E. 3.
34. 22 Ass. 85. 11 E. 3. Ass. 88. 21 H. 6. 14. 11 E. 3. Age 3. Sect. 400.

Sect. 398.
When one Coparcener enters generally, and takes the profits, this shall be
accounted in Law the entry of them both, and no devesting of the moity of her
sister, 21 Ass. 19. 21 E. 3. 7. 27. 32. 4 H. 7. 10. 16 H. 7. 4. fo. 243. b.

If the privity of Coparcenary be once destroyed, a dying seized shall take
away entry, etc. 28 Ass. 30. Vide S. 710.

Sect. 399.
Filius natus, vel filia nata ex justa uxore, appellatur in legibus Angliae
filius mulieratus, seu filia mulierata. Glanvil. lib. 2. ca. 2. Bract. 5. ca.
10. Brit. ca. 70.

Bastardus dicitur a graeco verbo Bassaris, i. Meretrix seu concubina. Vide S.
188. Fleta l. 1. c. 5. vide S. 380.

Manseribus scortum, notho moechus dedit ortum.

Vt seges e spica, sic spurius est ab amica.

If the husband be within the four Seas, and the wife has issue etc. in that
case, filiatio non potest probari. Bract. lib. 4. fo. 278, 279. 7 H. 4. 9. 43
E. 3. 10. 29 Ass. 54.

If the issue be born within a month, or a day after marriage, between parties
of full lawful age, the child is legitimate, 18 E. 4. 28. fo. 244. ^.

It is holden, that the mulier be within age at the time of the dying seized
(of the Bastard) that nevertheless he shall be barred, because the issue of the
bastard is in judgment of Law become lawful heir, and the Law does prefer
legitimation before the privilege of infancy, and justum non est aliquem post
mortem facere bastardum, qui toto tempore vitae suae pro legitimo habebatur, 5
E. 2. Descent. Br. 49. 31 Ass. 18. 22. Pl. Com. Stowels case, 10 E. 3. 2.

If a man has issue a Son being bastard eigne, and a daughter, and the
daughter is married, the Father dies, the son enters and dies seized, this
shall bar the feme covert, 13 E. 1. Bast, 28. and the descent in this case of
Services, Rents, Reversions expectant upon estates tail, or for life, whereupon
rents are reserved, etc. shall bind the right of the mulier, but a descent of
these shall not drive them that right have to an action, 14 E. 2. Bast. 26. So
if the bastard dye seized, and his issue endoweth the wife of the bastard, yet
is not the entry of the mulier lawful upon the Tenant in Dower for his right
was barred by the descent, Sir Ri. Ledfords case, lib. 8. 101, 102.

Ass. Mortdanc. lies not between the bastard and the mulier in respect of the
proximity of blood, and the bastard being impleaded or vouched shall have his
age, 21 E. 3. 34. b. 30 Ass. p. 7. 11 E. 3. Age 3. 5 H. 7. 2.

Sect. 400.
At a Parliament holden 20 H. 3. for that to certify upon the Kings Writ, that
the son born before marriage is a Bastard, was Contra Com. forma^ Ecclesiae;
Rogaverunt omnes episcopi, magnates ut consentirent quod nati ante Matrimonium,
essent legitimi, sicut illi qui nati sunt post matrimonium quantum ad
successionem haereditariam, quia Ecclesia tales habet pro legitimis: Et omnes
Comites, and Barons una voc^ respondent, Quod noiunt leges Angl-mutare, quae
huc usque usitatae sunt and approbatae. Stat. de Merton cap. 9. Bract. l. 5.
fo. 410. 417. ^0. Ass. pl. 10.

Note, that the law more respects him, that has a colorable title, though
it be not perfect in Law, than him that has no title at all. Vide S. 39.

Sect. 401.
Est diversity lou Bastard continue la possession tou^ sa vie sans
interruption, and lou le mulier enter and interruption, le possession de tiel
Bastard. Reg. none shall enter but the mulier, or some other by his
commandment. M. 38. and 39. El. Com. Banco, Vide 31 H 8, ent. cong. Br. 23.

Omnis ratibabitio retrotrahitur, and mandato aequiparatur. 4 H 7. ca. Vide
Sect. 334.

But in the case of the Bastardeigne, Gardein en Socage, or gardein in Chivalry
may enter, for they are no strangers.

If an Infant make a Feoffment in fee, an estranger of his own head cannot
enter to the use of the infant, for the State is voidable. But where an infant,
or a man of full age is disseised, an entry by a stranger of his own head is
good and vesteth presently the estare in the Infant or other disseisee. So it
is if Tenant for life make a Feoffment in fee, an estranger may enter for a
forfeiture in the name of him in the reversion, and thereby the estate shall be
vested in him. P 39. El. Com, Banco per Cur. 10. H 1. 16, 7. E 3. 69, 6. E 3.
6^ pe^ Thorp.

If the Mulier enter upon the Bastard, and the Bastard recover the land in an
Ass. against the Mulier, now is the interruption avoided, and if the bastard
die seized, this shall bar the Mulier.

The possession of the King when he has no cause of seizure shall be adjudged
the possession of him for whose cause he seized. 2. Ass. 9. fo. 245. b. Vide,
etc.

And note, that the bastard must enter in vacuam poss. and continue during his
life, without interruption made by the Mulier. Acts without words, may make an
entry, but not words without an act, viz. an entry, etc. Pl. 91. Parson de
Honi^awes case. 35. H 6. 24. 1 E 3. 21 E 4. 3 21. E 4. 5. 5. E 60, 21. H. 6. 9.

Sect. 402.
Null laches ser. adjudge en un Infant, lou descent e eschew durant son nonage.
33. E 3. qu. imp 46. But in some other cases Laches shall prejudice an infant,
as if he present not to a Church within six months; for the Law respects
more the privilege of the Church (that the cure be served) than the privilege
of Infancy; and so the public repose of the Realm concerning men's Freeholds
and inheritance shall be preferred before the privilege, etc. in case of a
Fine where the time begins in the time of the Ancestor. Pl. 372. So non-claime
of a villeine, of an infant by a year and a day, who has fled into Ancient
demesne, shall take away the seizure of the infant; and if an infant bring not
an appeal of the death of his Ancestors within a year and a day, he is barred
of his appeal for ever, for the law respects more liberty and life, than the
privilege of infancy; and note, that Littleton puts his case, that an
Infant shall enter upon a descent, when a stranger dies seized, but he put it
not so before in the case of the Bastardeigne. B. Tenant in tail, infeoffes A.
in fee, A. has issue within age and dies; B. abateth and dies seized, the
issue of A. being still being within age, this descent shall bind the infant;
for the issue in tail is remitted, and the Law does more respect ancient right
in this case, than the privilege of an infant that had but a defeasible
estate. 11. E. 4. 1. 2. F.N.B. 35. (35) m, And it is said, if the King
dieseised of lands, and the land descend to his successor, that this shall bind
an Infant, for that the privilege of an infant in this case hold not against
the King. 35. H. 6. 60. Fo. 246. a.

Sect. 403.
Si bar. and feme come en droit sa feme ont title and droit denter, etc. and
Tenant delterre mor. seisie, etc. These words are general, but are
particularly to be understood, viz. when the wrong was done to the wife during
the Coverture; for if a feme sole be seized of lands in fee, and is disseised,
and then takes husband; in this case the husband and wife, as in the right of
the wife, have right to enter; and yet the dying seized of the disseisor in
that case shall take away the entry of the wife after the death of her husband,
and the reason is as well for that she her self when she was s^^e might have
entered and recontinued the p^ssession; as also it shall be acc^unted her folly,
that she would take such a husband, which would not enter before the descent. 9
H 7. 24. a. 2, E 4 25. 7 E. 4. 7. b. 15. E. 4 Descent 30. Negligentia semper
habet infortunium comitem. Laches le baron ne turnara la feme etc. al prejudice
Note a diversity, albeit reg. No Laches shall be accounted in infants or feme
Coverts, as is aforesaid, for not entry or claim to avoid discents, yet Laches
shallbe accounted in them, for no performance of a condition anexed to an
estate of land. For if a feme be infeoffed either before or after marriage
reserving a rent, and for default of payment a re-entry, I^ that case the
Laches of the baron shall disherit the wife forever. 20. H. 6. 28. b.

And so it is of an Infant, his Laches for not performing of a condition anexed
to a State either made to his Ancestor or himself, shall bar him of the right
of the Land for ever. 31. Ass. p. 17. 42. E. 31. Pl Com. 55. 10. H. 7. 13. H.
7. 35. H. 6. 41. Pl. 136. b. Pleta lib. 2. ca. 50.

If a man make a Feoffment in fee to another reserving a rent, and if he pay
not the rent within a month, that he shall double the rent, and the Feofee
dies, his heir within age, the Infant pays not the rent, he shall not by
this Laches forfeit any thing. But otherwise it is of a feme covert, and the
reason of this diversity is, for that the Infant is provided for by the
Statute. Non current usurae contra aliquem infra aetatem existen. etc. Stat.
Mert. ca 5

But that Statute does not extend to a condition of a reentry, which the Infant
ought to perform, etc.

Sect, 405
If an idiot make a Feoffment in fee, he shall in pleading never avoid it, etc.
But upon an office found for the King the King shall avoid the Feoffment, for
the benefit of the Idiot whose custody the Law gives to the King. 3^ H, 42, b
Abb, 5, E 3. ^0. Brit. c 28 fo. ^6. 25, Ass, p, 4, 35. Ass, p, 10 32. E 3 scire
fac. 1^0. Stanf. pr, ^4.

Upon all which books, there have been four several opinions concerning the
alienation, or other act of a man that is non compos mentis. ^c.

1. That he may avoid his own act by entry, or plea.

2. That he may avoid it by writ, and not by plea.

3. That he may avoid it either by plea, or by writ; and of this op^nion is
Fitzh. in his N, B, 202.

And 4. Littleton here is of opinion, that neither by plea, not by writ, nor
otherwise he himself shall avoid it, but ^is heir (in respect his Anc. was
non comp. etc,) shall avoid it by entry, plea, or writ, for it is a maxim of
the Common Laws, that the party shall not disable himself. Lib. ^. fo. 126,
127. Beverl^es case. But this holds only in civil causes for in criminal
causes, as felony, etc. the act of wrong of a mad man, shall not be imputed to
him, for that in those causes, actus non facit reru^, nisi men's sit rea, et,
furiosus solo furore pun^tur. And so it is of an Infant until he be of the age
of 14. Fo, 247. b

Also if the Father disseise the Grandfather, and make a Feoffment in fee,
(etc) without warranty, the Grandfather dies, albeit the right descend to the
Father, yet he cannot enter against his own Feoffment; but if he die, his Son
shall enter and avoid the State of the Feoffee 16, Ass, 27, 21, H, 7, 31,
Stanf. ^6 b 8, E 3, 2, Coron, 413, 414, 351, 22 E 3 ibid, 12, 4, 2 H. 7, 2, 3,
E, 3. enter Cong. Statham. 12, E, 4, 8. 39. H, ^. 4 Abbr ass 89. 39. H. 6. 43.
15. E. Descent 30.

If Lands ^e given to two, and to the heirs of one of them, he that ha^h the
fees shall not have an action of waste upon the Satut of Gloc. against the
joint tenant for life, but his heir shall maintain an action of waste against
him.

Sect. 406, 407, 408.
A Dum fuit infra aetat' lies as well for the Ancestor himself after his full
age, as for his heir.

And note, where an Infant disseisor aliens the lands in fee, that if the
descent be cast, the Infant being within age, he may enter at any time, either
within age ^or after his full age. And so it is if an Infant make a feoffment
etc. he may enter etc, and so in both cases may his heir, 43 E, 3, Enter cong,
vet N, B, 126, b, F, N, B, 192. 45 E, 3, 21.

Sect, 40^. fol, 2^8 a.
Tenant in Capite makes a Feoffment in fee to the use of the feoffee and his
heirs, until the feoffor pay 100 l. to him or his heirs, the feoffee dies, his
heir within age; now has the King the Wardship of the body, and is entitled
to the guard of the land. But if the feoffor pay the 10^ l. according to the
limitation, the Wardship is divested, both for the body and the land: and so it
is in case of a Condition, for the descent which is the cause of Wardship, is
utterly defeated; and, Cessante causa, cessat causatum, Dyer 13 Eliz fo. 298
299, So as there is no difference, where the descent is disaffirmed by a Right
Paramount as where the estate was never lawful (as in the case of an Infant)
and where the descent is affirmed for a time, the estate being lawful and
being after defeated by matter ex post facto, by a Title of re-entry.

Sect. 410.
Disseisor ad issue and enter en Religion etc. This descent shall not bar the
entry of the disseisee, for that the descent comes by the Deed of the Father.
And the Law respects the original ^ct and that is his entry in^o Religion,
which is his own act, whereupon the profession followed, whereby the descent
happened, for Cuiusque rei potissima pars principium est. And, Origo rei
inspici de^et, Pl. Dame Hales Cases 6 E. 3. 4^, etc.

But it is said in the case of a bastardeigne, and Mulier puisn^, such a
descent shall bin^e the Mulier, and such an hei^ by descent shall have his age,
to E 3. 55, fo. 248. b.

Nota if a man be Tenant or Defendant in a real or personal ^ction, and
hanging the suit, the Tenant or Defendant enter into Religion; by this the Writ
is not abated, because it is by his own act. And so it is of a Resignation, but
otherwise it is of a Deposition or Deprivation, because he is expelled by
Judgment, and yet his offense etc was the cause thereof. Sed in praesumptione
legis, judicium redditur in invitum, ^8 E. 4. 19. 9 E. ^. 25. 52. 7 E. 4. 15.
Bract. lib. 4. fol. 189.

Sect. 411.
No descent or dying seized can be of a Chattel.

A man seized of an Advows^n in ^e^, grants three Avoidances one after another,
and after the Church becomes void, and the Grantor presents, and his Clerk is
admitted and instituted, and after the Church becomes void again, the Grantee
may present to the second Avoidance, for that he was not put out of possession
thereof; for as the lessor having the Freehold and Inheritance, cannot disseise
his lessee for ye^rs, having but a Chattel, that any descent may be cast, to
take away his entry: so in the said case the Grantor has the Franktenement and
the Fee of the Advowson rightfully, so as he cannot make any usurpation, to
gain any estate, etc. Also in respect of the privity, etc. the usurpation of
the Grantor not put the Grantee out of possession for the two latter
Avoidances, Hill. 18 El. Com. Banco.

Claim daver terres pur term d'ans, nest pas expulsment de le franktenement
del heir que est eins per descent.

Sect. 412, 413.
Time of Peace is the time of Law and Right; and time of War is the time of
Violent Oppression, which cannot be resisted by the equal Course of Law, Cum
silent leges inter arma, fo. 249. b.

Succession of Bodies Politic or Corporate, is in the post, and the heir of
the natural man is in the per, 7. E 3. 25 a. 5 E. 3. 13. and 3^.

A Body Politic is so called, because it is to take in Succession, framed (as
to that capacity) by Policy; and it is also called a Corporation, or a body
incorporate, because the persons are made into a Body, and are of capacity to
take and grant, etc. And this body Politic or Incorporate may commence and be
established three manner of ways, viz. by Prescription, by Letters Patents, or
by Act of Parliament. Every Body Politic or Corporate is either
Ecclesiastical or Lay; Ecclesiastical, either Regular, as Abbots, Priors etc.
or Secular, as Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, etc. Lay, as May
or and Commonalty, Bailiffs and Burgesses, etc. Also every Body Politic or
Corporate is either Elective, Presentative, Collative, or Donative; and again
it is either sole, or aggregate of many: And this Politic etc. Body aggregate
of many, is by the Civilians called Collegium, or Vniversitas, Lib. 3. fo. 73.
Dean and Chapter of Norwich.

CHAP. VII. Continual Claim.
Sect. 414, etc.
SI disseisee fait Continual Claim a les tenemenes in la vie le disseisor
comment que le disseisor de vie seisee en fee, and la terre discendist a son
heir, encore p^it le disseisee enter sur la possession le ^erre etc. Null po^t
fair continnal Claim mes quant il ad title d^vant etc. S 416. And yet in some
cases a Continual Claim may be made by him that has Right and cannot enter.

If Tenant for years, Tenant by Statute Staple, Merchant or Elegit, be ousted,
and he in the reversion disseised, the lessor, or he in reversion may enter to
the intent to make his Claim, and yet his entry as to take any Profits, is not
lawful during the Term: And the lessor or he in the reversion in that case may
enter to avoid a collate^al Warranty, or the lessor in that case may recover in
an Assize, and so (as some have holden) may the lessor enter in case of a lease
for life, to this intent, to avoid a dis^ent or a Warranty, Dyer 19 El. Pl.
Com. 374. 15 H 7, 3, 4. Iacobius Case. 28. H 6, 28. S 442. 45 E 3, 21.

If the disseisee make continual Claim, and the disseisor dye seized within the
year, his heir within age, and by Office, the King is entitled to the Wardship,
albeit the entry of the disseisee be not lawful, yet may he make continual
Claim to avoid a descent, and so in the like, 7 H 6. 40. Con. Claim 1 Dounclers
Case, 5 E 4, 4.

No continual Claim can avoid a descent, unless it be made by him that has
Title to enter, and in whose life the dying seized was, 22 H 6, 37. 9 H. 4. 5.
a. 15. E 4, 22. a.

Sect. 415. fol. 251. a.
A continual Claim may be made as well where the lands are in the hands of a
feoffee etc. by Title, as in the bands of a Disseisor, Abater or Intruder by
wrong.

Sect. 416.
Note, that a Forfeiture may be made by the alienation of a particular Tenant,
either in paiis, or by matter of Record.

1. In paiis of lands and tenements which lie in Livery, where a greater estate
is by liver^, then the particular Tenant may lawfully make, wher^by the
reversion or remainder is divested, vide S 581, 609, 610. 611, 17 El. Dyer 339.
16. El. Dyer ^2^.

A particular estate of any thing that lies in grant, cannot be forfeited by
any grant in fee by Deed; for that nothing passes thereby, but that which
lawfully may pass, 3^. E 3. Devise 21, 15 E 4, 9. vide S 608.

But if Tenant for life or years of land, the reversion or remainder being in
the King, make a feoffment in fee, this is a forfeiture, and yet no reversion
or remainder is di^ested out of the King; and the reason is in respect of the
solemnity of the feoffment by livery, tending to the Kings disherison, 35 H 6,
62. Tr. 32 El. in Informat' de intrusion verse Rebinson. Exchequers.

2. By matter of Record, and that by three manner of ways: 1. By Alienation.
2. By Claiming a greater estate then he ought. 3. By affirming the reversion or
remainder to be in a stranger.

1. By Alienation, and that either divesting, as by levying of a Fine, or
suffering a Common Recovery of Lands, whereby the reversion or remainder is
divested: or not divesting, as by levying of a fine in fee, of an Advowson,
Rent Common, or any other thing that lies in the grant: And of this Opinion is
Littleton in our Books; and so note two diversities, 1. Between a grant by Fine
(which is of Record) and a grant by Deed in paiis; and yet in this they both
agree, That the reversion or remainder in neither case is divested. 2. Between
a matter of Record, as a Fine, etc. and a Deed recorded, or a Deed enrolled,
for that works no forfeiture, because the Deed is the Original, 15 E. 4. 9.

2. By Claim, and that may be in two sorts; either Express, as if Tenant for
life, will in Court of Record claim fee, or if lessee for years be ousted, and
he will bring an Assize, ut de libero tenemente: or Employed, as if in a Writ of
Right brought against him, he will take upon him to join the Misce upon the
mere Right, which none but Tenant in fee simple ought to do. So if lessee for
years do loose in a Praecipe, and will bring a Writ of Error, for Error in
Process, this is a Forfeiture, 15 E. 4. 29. 36. H. 6. 29. 2 H. 6. 9. 4. El.
Dyer. 9. H. 5. 14. 22 Ass. 31. 18 E. 3. 28. 16. Ass. 16.

3. By affirming the reversion or remainder to be in a stranger, and that
either actively or passively.

Actively, by five manner of ways; as

1. Tenant for life pray in aid of a stranger, whereby he affirms the reversion
to be in him.

2. If he Attorn to the grant of a stranger; and there note also a diversity
between an Attornment of Record to a stranger, and an Attornment in paiis, for
an Attornment in paiis works no Forfeiture.

3. If a stranger bring a Writ of entry in casu proviso, and suppose the
reversion to be in him, if the Tenant for life confess the action, this is a
forfeiture.

4, If Tenant for life plead covinously, to the disherison of him in the
reversion, this is a forfeiture.

5. If a stranger bring an action of Waste against lessee for life, and he
plead Null waste fait, this is a forfeiture, or the like, 21 E. 3. ^4. a. 5 E.
4. 2. 24 H. 8. Forf. br. 87. lib. 2. fo. 55, 56. Bucklers Case. 24. E. 3. 68. 1
H. 7. 15 Ass. 3.

Passively, as if Tenant for life accept a Fine of a stranger Sur conusans de
droit come ceo, etc. for hereby he affirms of Record, the reversion to be in
a stranger, 3 M. Dyer 148.

Note, that the Right of a particular estate may be forfeited also, and that he
that has but a Right of remainder or reversion, shall take benefit of the
forfeiture, as if Tenant forlife be disseised, and he levy a Fine to the
disseisor, etc. fo. 152. a. 13 E. 4, 4.

If Tenant for life make ale s^ for life, or a gift in Tail, or a Feoffment in
fee, upon Condition, and enter for the Condition broken, yet the Forfeiture
remains. So it is of Tenant in Ta^l, apres possi ilit^ etc. tenant per le
Courtesy etc. Tenant for years, Tena^^ ^y sta^ute Merchant etc, 39 Ass. 15. 43
E. 3 Enter co^g 3 ^2. H 5. 7 39 E. 3. 16. 45 E 3. 25.

If Tena^^ ^or life in rema^^der make continual Claim, and the Aliene ^f the
first Tenant for life dye seized, then may he in the remainder for life enter,
and the right of entry, which he gained by his entry, shall go to him in the
remainder in fee, in respect of the privity of the estate. And so it is of him
in the reversion in fee, in like case, for he is also privy in estate.

If Tenant i^ Tail, the remainder in fee, with garr. have Judgment to recover
in value, and dye before execution, without issue, he in remainder shall sue
Execution, for he has right thereunto, and is privy in estate. So if a
Seigniory be gra^te^ ^o one by Fine, the grantee for life dies, he in
remainder shall have a per que servit, for he has right to the remainder, and
is privy in estate,

Sect 417,
It is not sufficient to tell one generally what he should do, but to direct
him how, and in what manner he shall do it.

Note, that the entry of a man to recontinue his Inheritance or Freehold, must
ensue his action for recovery of the same, Mich. 14 ^5 El. Rot. 1458. in the
Earl of Arundels Case, lib. fo 252, b.

But if a disseiser had letten severally three acres to three persons for
years, there the entry upon of the the lessees in name of all the three acres,
shall recontinue and revest all the three acres in the disseisee, for that the
disseisee might have had one Assize against the disseisor, because he remained
Tenant of the Freehold for all the three acres, 7 Ass. 18. 12 E. 4. 10 36 H 6.
27. 32 Ass. p, 1,

If I infeoffe one of one acre of ground upon Condition, and at another time I
infe^ffe the same man of another acre in the same county upon Condition also,
and both the Conditions are broken, an entry into one acre in the name of both
is not sufficient, for that I have no right to the land, nor action to recover
the same, but a bare Title. But an entry into one part of the land, in the name
of all the land subject to one Condition, is good, although the parcels be
several, and in several Towns. And so n^^e a diversity between several rights
of entry, and several Titles of entry, by force of a Condition, 11 H. 7. 25.
Dyer 16 El. 33^.

Ennosme de tout etc. don't il ad Title d'entry; here in a large sense Title of
entry is taken for a Right of entry.

If I b^i^g an Assize of two acres, if I enter into one hanging the Writ,
albeit it shall revest that only acre, yet the Writ shall abate, 5 H. 7, 7. 4
E, 4, 19. 12 E, 9, 11. a,

Sect. 418,
Nota, A man may make a feoffment of lands in another County, and make livery
of seisin within the view, albeit he might peacably enter and make actual
livery, and so may he show the Recognitors in an Assize the view of lands in
another County: But a man cannot make an entry into lands within the view,
where he may enter without any fear (for it is one thing to invest, and another
to divest) 3^ E, 3, 11, 38 Ass, 3, fo 253, a,

If livery of seisin be made of parcel of the Tenements, etc. in one Town, in
the name of all etc. All the said Tenements etc. pass by force of the said
livery etc. Agr. a minore ad majus: if it be so in a Feoffment passing a new
right, a multo fortiori, it is for the restitution of an ancient right, as the
worthier and more respected in Law, which holds Affirmative. Vide S. 438.

Sect. 419,
Fear of imprisonment suffices to avoid a Bond or a deed; for the Law has a
special regard to the safety and liberty of a man. But note a diversity between
a Claim or an Entry into Land, and the Avoidance of an act or deed for fear of
Battery, 4 E 4, 7. 11 H 4, 6: 8 Ass, 25, vide S 434, 10, 2, cap, 49. 13 H ^.
Dures 2^

If a man has Title to enter into any Lands or Tenements, if he dares not
enter etc. for doubt of maiming etc. if he goes, and approach as near to the
Tenements as he dare for such doubt, and by word claim the lands to be his;
this entry in Law is as forcible i^ Law, as an entry in Deed; and upon such an
entry in Law an Assi^e does lie, as well as upon an entry in Deed; and such an
entry in Law shall avoid a Warranty, etc. vide S 378. 11 H 6, 5^.

But note a diversity here, between an entry in Law and an entry in Deed; for
that a^ ^ontinual Claim of the disseisee being an entry in Law, shall vest the
possession and seisin in him for his advantage, but not for his disadvantage;
And therefore if the diss^isee bring an Assize, and hanging the Assize he make
Continual Claim, this shall not abate the Assize, but he shall recover damages
from the beginning: but otherwise it is of an entry in Deed. Vide S 442. Pl.
Com. 93. Parson of Honey lanes Case.

Arg. ab autor' est fortissimum in lege. 38 Ass. p 13,

Sect, 421, 422.
Where a Continual Claim shall divest an estate, in any other person, in any
lands or tenements, there he that makes the Claim ought to enter into the
land, or some part thereof: But where the Claim is to bring him that makes it
into actual possession, there a Claim within the view suffices; as upon a
descent, the heir having the Freehold in Law, may claim land within the view to
bring himself into actual possession: and in that sense is the opinion of
Hull, and the Court to be intended, 9 H 4, 5, etc. But yet the entry in to some
parcel in the name of the residue is the surest way, vide S. 177. and 11 H 6.
accord with Li^tleton) 51.

At the Common Law upon a fine or f^^ll judgment given in a writ of right, the
party grieved had a year and a day to make his claim. So the wife or heir
has a year and a day to bring an appeal of death, etc. After judgment given
in a ^ea^^ action, the pl^i^tiffe within the year and day may have habere sac.
s^si^am and in an action of debt, etc. a Capias, fieri fac or a L^vari facias.

A protection shall be allowed but for a year and a day and no longer, and in
many other cas^ Vid. S. 385. 426. 14. H 4. 36. 7. E. 3. 37. Pl. 356. 357. 367,
Brit. fo. 45. b.

Sect. 423, 424. 426.
Il covient a luy que fist claim, etc. de fair un cl' deins chese' an and
jour prochein apres chesc' claim fait durant la vie son adversary, and
d^^^u^s a quecunque temps que son Adversary mor. Seisee son ^ntry ne ser. toll
per null tiel dis. cent. Brit. fo. 209. Die. 17. Eli. 345.

Si disseisor mor. Seise^ dein l'an and jour, etc. per que les tenements
descend a son heir, ^n ce^ case l'enter le disseisee e^ toll car l'an and le
jour que a^droit le lessee en tiel case ne serre pris de temps de title dent. a
luy accrue, mes tautsolment del temps de claim per luy fait en le manner
avantd. and pur cest causeil serre bo^e pur tiel disseisee pur fair son cla^me
en auxi breve temps queil puissoit apres le disseisin, etc.

This in case of a disseisor is now helped by the Statute of 37. H, 8. ca. 33.
For if the disseisor dye seized within five years after the disseisin, though
there be no cont. claim made, it ^^all not take away the entry of the
disseisee, but after the five years there must be such continual claim as was
at the Common Law: But that Statute extended not to any Feoffee or donee of the
disseisor immediate, or mediate, but they ^maine still at the common Law, Vi.
S. 385. 422.

Sect. 428, 429.
Item sicome e^ dit en les cases mises lou home ad title dent. pur cause dun
disseisin, etc. mes la ley e^, lou home ad droit dentr. par case d^asc' aut
title, etc. Here is employed abators or intrudors, and not only their
disseissors, but the Feoffees or donees of disseissors, abators, or intruders,
or any other so long as the entry is cong. and here title is taken in his large
sense to include a right. V Sect. 650. and 659.

Si tenant in tail immediate puis tiel claim continua son occupation en les
tenements ceo e^ un disseisin, etc. a celuy que sist tiel claim, and sic par
conseque le tenant adonques ad fee simple.

Sect. 430, 431.
The disseisee shall have an action of trespass against the disseissor, and
recover his damages for the first entry without any regresse, but after
regresse ^e may have an action of trespass with a continuando, and recover as
well for all the mean occupation as for the first entry; and note that
Littleton does here include costs within damages.

Ou il poit aver un breve sur lestat. 5 R. 2. ca. 7. Supposant par son breve
que son adversary avoit entry en les terres, etc. celuy que fist le claim,
etc. and par tiel action il recover ses damages, etc. i.e. that he shall
recover damages for the first tortious entry, but not for the mean profits,
though he made a regresse. 37. H. 6. 35. 2 E. 4. 18. 21 E 4. 5. 74. 38. Ass. 9.
44. E. 3. 20. 10. H 7. 27. Keilwey 1. b. And here note that also he shall
recover his costs of suit. 2 E. 4. 24. b. 9. E. 4. 4. b. 16. H. 7. 6. a. Fo.
257. a. One or more may commit a force, three or more may commit an unlawful
assembly, riot or rout. A multitude is not restrained to a certain number, but
left to the discretion of the Judges. A writ of forcible entry is grounded upon
the Statute of 8 H. 6. ca. 9. and lies where one enters with force, or where
he enters peaceably and detaineth it with force, or where he enters by force,
and detaineth it by force; and in this action without any regresse the
plaintiff shall recover treble damages, as well for the mean occupation, as
the first entry by force of the Statute; and he shall recover treble costs
also. 3 E 4-19, 24. F. N. B. 240. etc. 11 E. 4. 11. b 6 H 7. 12. 22 H 6. 57,

If three or four go to make a forcible entry, albeit one alone use the
violence, all are guilty of force, 10 H 7, 1^.

Note that there is a force employed in Law, as every trespass, and Rescous et
disseisin implies a force, and is vi et armis, and there is an actual force,
as with weapons, number of persons, etc. and when an entry is made with such
actual force, an action does lie upon the said Statute. Vide Sect. 240, 54 H
6, 20.

Sect. 433.
Qui per alium facit, per seipsum facere videtur.

If an infant or any man of full age have any right of entry into any lands,
any stranger to the use of the infant, etc. may enter into the lands, and this
Reg. shall vest the lands in them without any commandment pr^cedent or
agreement subsequent. But if a disseisor levy a fi^e with proclamation
according to the Statute, a stranger without a Commandment, etc. within the
five years cannot enter in the name of the disseisee to avoid the fine; and
that resolution was grounded upon the construction of the Statute of 4 H. 7.
ca. 24. But an assent subsequent within the five years should be sufficient,
omnis enim ratihabitio etc. 7 E 3, 69, 11. Ass p 11, 39. Ass. p, 18, 10 H 7,
12. a. 3 H 8. entry conque et faux recovery 29. lib. 9. fo. 106 a. L. Audeleyes
case 45 E 3. Release 18. and Breve 589, 20 E 3. 62 par Thorp.

Sect. 434.
Reg. it is true that where a man does less than the commandment or authority
committed unto him, there the act is void; and where a man does that which he
is authorized to do and more, there it is good for that which is warranted and
void for the rest. Impotentia aut^n excusat legem. 1 H. 4 3. 12 Ass. 24. 26.
Ass. 39, V. S 419. 46. E 3. petition 18. 33. H. 6. 8. Lex non permittit aliquod
inconveniens.

Albeit the Recluse or Anchorite be shut up himself, etc. yet to avod a
descent, he must command one to make claim, and such a recluse shall always
appear by Attorney in such cases, where others must appear in proper person. 43
E 3. 8. b. 30. a.

Sect. 436.
Quant home est in prison and est disseise, and le disseisor mor feign etc. The
disseisee shall not be bound in this case, for that by the intendment of Law he
is kept without intell^gence of things abroad, and also that he has not
liberty to go at large to make entry or claim, or seek counsel; and so note a
diversity between a Recluse, who might have intelligence, and a man in prison.
Pl. Com. 360. Stowels case.

But if he be disseised when he is at large, and the descent is cast during the
time of his imprisonment, this descent shall bind him. 9 H 7. 24. Vide lib. fo.
259. a.

Sect. 437.
Si t^el que est en prison soit utlage en action de debt ou trespass, ou en
apucal de Robbery, il reveria tiel utlage, per b^eve de error.

Outlawries may be reversed, either by plea, or by writ of error. By plea when
the defendant comes in upon the Caput utlagati. etc. he may by plea reverse
the same for matters apparent, as in respect of a supersedeas omission of
process, varience, or other matter apparent in the Record, and yet in these
cases some hold, that in another term the defendant is driven to his writ of
error. 2 E 4. 1, 4 E 4. 10. a 1 E 4. 73, 11 H 7. 5, 21 H 6. 50, 9 H 4^, ^3. El.
Die. 192. 2 El. 176. 37. H 6. 19.

But for any matters in fact, as death, imprisonment, service of the King, etc.
he is driven to his writ of error, unless it be in case of felony, and there
in favorem vitae, he may plead it, But albeit imprisonment be a good cause to
reverse an outlawry, yet it must be by process of Law in invitum, and not by
consent or covin; for such imprisonment shall not avoid the outlawry, because
upon the matter it is his own act. 8. H 4. 7, 21 H 7. 13, 39 H 6. 1, H 7. 1. 1
E 4. 2, 27 H 8. 2, 38. Ass. p. 17. V S. 439.

Sect. 438.
Auxi si un recovery soit per default verse tiel que est en prison, il avoidam
le judgment per breve de error, etc. For he shall have no writ of descent,
because the summons was according to law by summoners and v^iors, and the land
taken into the Kings hand by the Pernor. Fleta. l. 6. ca. 67 and 24. W. 2 ca.
48 4 E. 2. descent 51.

Defalta, is legally taken for non appearance in Court.

There be diverse causes allowed by law for saving a man's default. 1 By
imprisonment. 2. Per inundationem aquarum. 3. Per tempestatem. 4. Per pontem
fractum. 5. Per navigium substractum per fraudem petentis; non enim debet quis
se periculis and infortuniis gratis exponere, vel subjacere. 6. Per minorem
aetatem. 7 Per defensionem summonitionis per legem. 8. per mortem Attornati si
tenens in temopre non novit. 9 Si petens essionatus sit. 10. Si placitum
mittatur sine die, 11. per breve de war. Dici. 3 H. 6. 46. 38. E 3. 5. 12. H.
4. 13. 5 H 7. 3. F.N. B. 17. 4 H 5. challeng 153. Br. Saver defendant 45.

Legally records are restrained to the Rolls of such only as are Courts of
Record, and not the Rolls of inferior, nor of any other Courts which proceed
not secundum legem and consuetudinem Angl. Pl. 79. b. m. ^. and 8. Die. 242. 17
E 349, 11. H 4. 26. b 2* H 6. 34 error Br. 73. 7 H 7. 4, 19 Ass. 7. l. 4. fo.
52. Rawlins case Brit. cap. 17. l. 6. fo. 11. Ientlemans case, and 30. 45. lib
7. fo. 30. l. 8. fo. 60 b and 67. a. fo. 260. a.

During the term wherein any judicial act is done, the Record remains in the
breast of the Judges of the Court, and in their remembrance, and therefore the
roll is alterable during that term, as the Judges shall direct; but when that
term is past, then the Record is in the Roll, admits no alteration, averment
or proof to the contrary, 7 H 6 2^, 19, H, 6, 6

If the Tenant or defendant be in prison, he shall upon motion by order of the
Court be brought to the bar, and either answer according to Law, or else the
same being Recorded, the law shall proceed against him, and he shall take no
advantage of his imprisonment 18, El. Die. 353. 3. m. Die, 12^, Pl. 232. Seignior
Barkleyes case; 16. H 7, 11. b. 22. H 8, Record Br. 65, 39. H 6, 4, 3 El. Die.
187. lib. 6, fo. 15. Edens case.

If a man in prison shall not be bound by a recovery by default, for want of
answer in Court of Record in a real action which is matter of record a multo
fort. a descent in the Country which is a matter of deed, shall not for want of
claim bind him that is in prison. Quod in minori valor, valebit in majori; and
quod in majori non valet, nec valebit in minori. 7 H 6, 18, 8, H 6, 16. V.S.
418.

A man in prison by process of Law to be kept in salva and arota custodia: but
yet, Carcer ad homines custodiend^s, non ad puniendos dari debet.

Sect. 439.
If a man be upon the Sea aof England, he is within the Kingdom of England,
etc. And yet a tum mare is out of the jurisdiction of the Common Law, and
within the jurisdiction of the Lord Admiral, 6 R 2 Protection 46. V. S. 1, 8.
440 441. 677.

And note, Littleton says not, beyond the Sea, or extra 4 Maria, for a man
revera may be infra 4. maria. and yet out of the realm of England.

But infra. 4. Maria; or extra, is taken by construction to be within the realm
of England, or dominions of the same, 3 R. 3. continual claim 13. 4. E 3. 46.

If a man be out of the realm, and a recovery is had against him in a praecipe
by default, it seems that he shall not avoid the recovery; or by that means,
a man might be infinitely delayed of his freehold and inheritance, whereof the
Law has so special regard; and few or none go over, but it is either of their
own free will, or by suit, for what cause soever, and he is not in that case
without his ordinary remedy, either by his writ of higher nature, or by a quod
ei deforcrat. But outlawry in a personal action shall be avoided in that case,
quia de minimis non curat lex, and otherwise he should be without remedy. V.
S. 437. and note the diversity between that case of the imprisonment, and this
of being beyond Sea. Fo. 260 b nota, etc,

Sect. 440.
Excusatur quis quod clameum non opposuerit, ut si ^ote tempore litigii fuit
ultra mare quacunque occasion. Ve^us and constans opinio. Brac. l. 5, f 436.
and 163. Brit fo. 21, 216. 26 H 8, c, 18, 5 and 6 E. 6, ca, 11.

By certifitate a thing done beyond Sea may be tried. F.N. B 196, 29, Ass. 11.
l 7, f. 26, 27. Calvin's case. Stat. 25 E 3, de proditionibus does declare, that
it is treason by the common Law to adhere to the enemies of the King within the
realm or without, if he be thereof proveablement attaint of overt, fact. and
that he shall forfeit all his lands, etc. Certain it is, that for necessity
sake the adherence without the realm must be alleged in some place within
England; and if upon evidence they shall find any adherency out of the realm,
they shall find the delinquent guilty, 5 R 2, Trial 54. 35, H. 8, ca, 2, fo,
261, b. * Dyer, 360, contr, * When part of the act, especially the original is
done in England and part out of the realm, that part that is to be performed
out o^ the realm, if issue be taken thereupon, shall be tried he^ by twelve
men, and those twelve shall come out of the pla^^ where the writ is brought:
for example it was convenant^^ by Indenture by charter party, that a ship
should Sail from Blackney haven in Norf. to Muttrel in Spain, and there rema^^
by c^rtain days, 48 E 3, 3, 11, H 7, 16, 1 R, 3, 4.

In an action of Covenant brought upon this Charte^ party, the Indenture was
alleged to be made at Thetford Norfolk, and upon pleading the issue was joined,
wheth^^ the said ship remained at Muttrel etc. and it was adjudg^ That this
issue should be tried at Thetford where the acti^^ was brought, because there
the Contract took his Original etc. P 28 El, Constant, and Hughin, Ban, R l 6,
fo, 47, Dowdales Case.

An Obligttion made beyond the Seas, may be sued here in England in what place
the Plaintiff will 2 E 2, Oblig. 15, Whether Bourdeaux in France be in
Islington or no, is not traversable. Vide! fo, 261. b.

If a man be disseised before he go over Sea, or comes into the Realm again
before the descent, the descent shall take away his entry

Sect, 441
By the Statute of 4 H 7, cap, 34, five years after Proclamations made upon the
Fine, are given to him that right has to make his claim, or pursue his action,
where the Common Law gave him but a year and a day; but this Statute extends
only to Fines, and not to Non-claim upon a judgment in a Writ of Right: and
therefore the Statute of ^^ E 3, 16, which ousteth Non-claim, only to Fines
levied, extends not to a judgment in a Writ of Right to this day: and
therefore the Common Law in that case remains etc. viz that claim must be
made within a year and a day after judgment.

Also if a Fine be levied without Proclamations, or without so many as the Law
requires, then the Statute of Non-claim does extend to such a Fine, l 3, fo.
44, etc. Case del fines, l 1. fo. 96, Shelleys Case, l 2, f 93, Binghams Case,
l 8, f 100, Lechfords Case, l, 91 f 139, etc. Beaumands Case, l 10. f ^9, b
Lampots Case, and 99, a l 9, f, 105, Margaret Podgers Case, l 5. f 124, Saffins
Case, l 1^, 96, Seymors Case, l 8, f 72. Greysleys Case, l 11, ^65, 7^, 78. Pl.
Com. Smith and Stapl. Case, Stows Case, and Howels Case. Bract. 435, Brit. 216
fo 262, a

Finis finem litibus imponit.

A feme covert; also they in reversion or remainder expectant upon any estate
of Freehold, are helped by the Statute of 4 H 7, vide lib. fo. ^62, b

Sect. 442.
In a Writ of entry sur disseisin against one, supposing that he had not entry
but by I. S. who disseised him, the Tenant said that I.S. dyed seized, and the
land descended to him, and prayed his age: the Plaintiff counterpleaded his
age, for that he arraigned an Assize against S. who dyed hanging the Assize,
and he was ousted of his age, for that the bringing of the Assize amounted to a
Claim, 24 E 3. 25. 9 E 2. Age 1^1.

If Tenant in Dower alien in fee with Warranty, and the heir in the reversion
bring a Writ of entry in Casu proviso etc and hanging the plea, the Tenant
dies, the heir shall not be rebutted or barred by this Warranty, for that the
Praecipe did amount to a continual Claim, 3 E 3. Garr. 62. Fleta l. 6, c. 52,
Bract. l. 5, fo. 436, Fo. 263, a. Nota etc.

If the goods of Villain (before any seizure etc.) be distrained, the Lord may
have a Replevin, and the very bringing of the Writ does amount to a Claim of
the goods and vesteth the property in the Lord, 33 E 3, Repl. 43, ^2 E 3, 18.
b, 9 H ^ 25. Nemo debet rem suam sine facto, aut defectu suo emittere.

Sect. 443.
If an usurpation be had to a Church in time of vacation, this shall not
prejudice the Successor to put him out of possession, but that at the next
avoidance he shall present, F. N. B. 34 M.W. 2, c, 5. imp. excus. etc.

When there is no Dean or Mayor, the Chapter or Commonalty in that case cannot
make claim, because they have neither ability nor capacity to take or to sue
any action. But during the vacation of the Abathy of D. if a lease for life or
a gift in Tail be made, the remainder to the Abbot of D. and his Successors,
this remainder is good, if there be a^ Abbot made during the particular estate,
2 H 7, 13. 40 As. 26. 34 E ^. Garr. 29. Qu. de dubiis etc.

Inter cuncta leges, and percunctabere doctos, Hor. As, Collatio peperit arts,
so Collatio perficit arts.

Crescente scientia, cresunt simul and dubitationes.

Autortias Philosophorum, Medicorum and Poetarum, sunt in causis allegandae and
tenendae, fo. 264. a.

CHAP. VIII. Of Releases.
Sect. 444,
REleases are of two sorts, viz. a Release of all the right which a man has
either in lands and tenements, or in goods and chattels. Or there is a Release
of actions real, of or in lands or tenements; or personal, of or in goods or
chattels; or mixed, partly in the realty, partly in the personalty, vide S 4^2,

Remis. Relax. and quiet, clamasse, are proper words of Releases, and be much
of one effect, besides there is Renunciare, Acquietare, and there be many other
words of Release, as if the lessor grants to the lessee for life, that he shall
be discharged of the rent vide. S 532.

Express Releases must of necessity be by Deed. Releases in Law are sometime by
Deed, and sometime without Deed. As if the Lord dissease the Tenant, and make a
Feoffment in fee by Deed or without Deed, this is a Release of the Seigniory.
And so it is if the disseisee disseise the heir of the disseisor and make a
Feoffment etc, this is a Release in Law of the right. And the same Law is of a
right in action, 27 H 8. 29. Use 34 H 6. 44. Attaint. 3 E 3. 38. 21 E 4. 21.
Pl. Com. de la mere.

If the Obligee make the Obligor his executor, this is a release in law of the
action, but the duty remains, for the which the executor may retain so much
goods etc. 8 E 4. 3. 21 E 4. 2.

If the feme Obligee take the Obligor to husband, this is a Release in Law. So
it is if there be two femes Obligees, and the one take the debtor to husband,
11 H 7. 4, ^0 H 7. 29 8 E 4. 3.

If an Infant make the debtor his executor, this is a good Release in Law of
the action. But if a feme execu^rix take the Debtor to husband, this is no
Release in Law; for that should be a wrong to the dead, and in Law work a
Devastavit, which an act of Law shall never work. M. 30 and 31 E^. adjudged.

Note a diversity between a Release in Deed, and a Release in Law ^ for if the
heir of the disseisor make a lease for life, his right is gone for ever. But if
the disseisee does disseise the heir of the disseisor, and make a lease for
life, by this Release in Law the right is released but during the life of the
lessee; for a Release in Law shall be expounded more favorably, according to
the intent of the parties, then a Release in Deed, which is the act of the
party, and shall be taken most strongly against himself, 30 E 3. 24, 32 E 3.
sc. fac. 102.

Ius, includes not only a right, but also any Title or Claim, either by force
of a Condition Mortmain etc. for the which no action is given by Law, but only
an entry.

Sect. 446, fol. 265. a.
Null droit passa per un release; forsque le droit que le relesior ad al temps
del release fait.

Note, a man may have a present right, though it take effect in possession but
in futuro: As he that has a right to a reversion or remainder; and such a
right he that has it; may presently release, Brit. fo. 101.

The Baron makes a lease for life and dies, the Release made by the wife of
her Dower to him in reversion is good, albeit she has no cause of action
against him in present, 16 E 3. Bar. 245. Hoes Case, 5. part. fo. 70. 71.

If there be Grandfather, Father, and Son, and the (...) disseise the
Grandfather and make a Feoffment in fee, the Grandfather dies, the Father
against his own Feoffment shall not enter; but if he dye his Son shall enter.
And so note a diversity between a Release, a Feoffment, and a Warrant: A
release in that case is void; a Feoffment is good against the Feoffor, but not
against his heir; a Warrant is good both against himself and his heirs, 39. H
6. 43, 21. E 4. 81. 9 H 7. 1. b 2 E 3. 38 1^ H 4. 33.

Note three diversities, 1. Between a Power, and an Authority (...) a Right. 2.
Between Powers and Authorities themselves. 3. Between a Right and a
possibility, 43 E 3. 17. 42 E 3. 24. per Finchden. 17 E 3. 67.

As to the 1. If a man by his will devises, that his executors shall sell his
land, and dies, if the executors release all their right and title to the
heir, this is void^; for they have but only a bare Authority. And so it is if
cestu^ que use had devised, that his Feoffees should have sold the land; albeit
they had made a Feoffment over, yet might they sell the Use; for their
Authority in that case it not given away by the liver^, 1, H 7. 11.

As to the second, there is a diversity between such Powers and Authorities as
are only (...) the use of a stranger, and nothing for the benefit or him that
made the Release (as in the case before) and a Power or Authority which
respects the benefit of the Releasor, as in these usual powers of revocation,
when the Feoffor etc. has a power to alter, change, determine or revoke the
uses (being intended for his benefit) he may release; and where the estates
before were defeasible, he may by his release make them absolute, and seclude
himself from any alteration or revocation, l. 1. Alban^^s case, 10. H 6. 4.

As to the third, before Judgment the Plaintiff in an action of debt releaseth
to the Bail in the Kings Bench all Demands, and after Judgment is given, this
shall not ba^ the Plaintiff to have execution against the Bail, because at the
time of the release be had but a mere possibility, and neither Ius in re, nor
Ius ad rem, but the duty is to commence after upon a contingent, and therefore
could not be released presently.

So if the Conusee of a Statute etc. release to the Conusor all his right in
the land, yet afterward he may sue execution; for he has no right in the land
till Execution, but only a possibility, 25 Ass. p. 7. 27 E 3. Execut. 130. P.
38. El. Rot. 521. Borough and Gray.

Sect. 447.
En Releases de tout le droit que home ad en cert' terres, etc. il covient a
celuy a que le release est fait en asc' case, que il ad le franktenement en les
terres en fait, ou en ley al temps de release sait, etc. This must be intended
of a bare right, and not of a release of right, whereby any estate passes as
to a lessee for years, 49 E 3. 2^.

Also it must be intended of a right of Freehold at the least, and not to a
right to any term for years, or Chattels real; as if lessee for years be
ousted, and he in the reversion disseised, and the disseisor makes a lease for
years, the first lessee may release unto him, all which is employed in the
first, etc.

Also in some case a Release of a right made to one that has neither Freehold
in deed nor in Law, is good; as the Demandant may release to the Vouchee, and
yet the Vouchee has nothing in the Land, for that when the Vouchee enters into
the Warranty, he becomes Tenant to the Demandant, and may render the land to
him in respect of the privity; but an estranger cannot release to the Vouchee,
because in rei veritate he is not Tenant of the Land, 7 E 4. 13. 20 H 6. 29. 5
H 7. 41. 18 E 3. 12. 8 H 4. 5. vide Sect. 490, 491.

And so it is if the Tenant alien hanging the Praecipe, the Release of the
Demandant to the Tenant to the Praecipe, is good, and yet he has nothing in
the land, 20 E 4. 14. 12. Ass, p. 41.

In time of vacation an Annuity that the parson ought to pay, may be released
to the Patron in respect of the privity; but a release to the Ordinary only
seems not good, because the Annuity is Temporal, 8 E 3, 81. 46 E 3, 6. b, 21
H 7, 41.

If a disseisor make a lease for life, the disseisee may release to him; for to
such a release of a bare right there needs no privity. But if the disseisor
make a lease for years, the disseisee cannot relea^ to him because he has no
estate of free hold. And yet in some case a right of Freehold shall drown in a
Chattle, as if a feme has a right o^ Dower, she may release to the Guardian
in Chivalry, and her right of Freehold shall drown, because the Writ of Dower
does lie against him, and the heir shall take advantage by it. And note, That
by a Maxim, a right of entry or a chose in action cannot be granted or
transferred to a stranger. Mirr. cap. 2, S 17.

If a man be disseised of an acre of land, the disseisee has jus proprietatis,
the disseisor has jus possessionis; and if the disseisee release to the
disseisor, he has jus proprietatis and possessionis, and Reg.

When a naked right to land is released to one that has jus possessionis, and
the other by a mean title recovers the land from him, the right of possession
shall draw the naked right with it. For example; if the heir of the disseisor
being in by descent, A. does disseise him, the disseisee release to A. now has
A. the mere right to the land; but if the heir of the disseisor enter into the
land, and regain the possession, that shall draw with it the mere right, etc.
Br. l 2. f. 32. Brittf^. 8^. 121.

But if the Donee in Tail discontinue in fee, now is the reversion of the Donor
turned to a naked right: if the Donor release to the discontinuee, and dye, and
the issue in Tail recover the land etc. he shall leave the reversion in the
discontinuee; for the issue in Tail can recover but the estate Tail only, and
the Donor cannot have it against his release; but if the disseisee enter upon
the heir of the disseisor, and infeoff A in fee, and the heir of the disseisor
recover the whole estate, that shall draw with it the meet right, and leave
nothing in the Feoffee.

Another diversity is observable, when the naked right is precedent before the
accquisition of the defeasible estate, for there the re-continuance of the
defeasible estate shall not draw with it the preceding right, As if the
disseisee disseise the heir of the disseisor, albeit the heir recover the land
against the disseisee, yet shall he leave the preceding right in the disseisee.
So if a woman that has right of Dower disseis^ the heir, and he recover the
land against her, yet shall he leave the right of Dower in her, 5 Ass. 1, 10
Ass. 16. 50 E 3, 7, 30 Ass. ^ E 3. ^ntry 56.

Another diversity is to be noted, when the mere right is subsequent, and
translated by act in Law, there albeit the possession be recontinued, yet that
shall not draw the naked right with it; as if the heir of the disseisor be
disseised, and the disseisor infeof the heir apparent of the disseisee, being
of full age, and then the disseisee dies, and the naked right descends to him,
and the heir of the disseisor recover the land against him, yet does he leave
the naked right in the heir of the disseisee.

So if the discontinuee of Tenant in Tail infeoff the issue in Tail of full
age, and then the discontinuee recover etc. yet he leaves the naked right in
the issue, 12 Ass. 41. 27 E 3, 84, 488. 23 H 8. Restore al action Br, 5. vide S
473, 475, 478, 487,

But if the heir of the disseisor be disseised, and the disseisee release to
the disseisor upon Condition, If the Condition be broken, it shall revest the
naked right. And so if the disseis^e had entered upon the heir of the disseisor,
and made a Feofment in fee upon Condition, if he enter for the Condition
broken, and the heir of the disseisor enter upon him, the naked right should be
left in the disseisee. But if the heir of the disseisor had entered before the
Condition broken, then the right of the disseisee had been gone for ever, 38 E
3, 16, 9 H 7, 24

Sect, 448,
Natural seisin is the freehold in deed, and the civil the freehold in Law.
Bract, l 4, f 206, 236, Brit, f, 83, b, Vide S 680,

If a man levy a fine to a man Sur Com etc, Com, ceo, etc. or a fine Su^
conusee de droit tantum, these be feoffments of record; and the Conusee has a
freehold in Law in him before he enters. 42 E 2, 20, 10, H 6, 14, 17, E 3 7,
8, 2 E 3, 31.

Upon an exchange the parties have neither freehold* in Deed nor in Law, before
they enter; so upon a Petition the freehold is not removed until an entry, 11
H 4, 61, 21, H 7, 12

If Tenant for life by the agreement of him in the reversion surrender unto
him; he in reversion has a freehold in Law in him, before he enter, 32 E. 3,
Bar. 262, 4^, Ass. ^, 13, H 4, Surr. 10

Upon a livery within view, no freehold is vested before an entry, 31 E 3, 12,
Fo, 266, b

If a man do bargain and sell land by Deed indenture, and intollen^^^^, the
freehold in Law does pass presently, and so when use, are raised by covenant
upon good consideration. If a Tenant in a praecipe, being seized of Lands in
fee, confess himself to be a villain to a stranger, and to hold the land in
villenage of him, the stranger by this acknowledgement is actually seized of
the freehold, and inheritance without any entry, 17 E 3, 77, 18, E 4, 25

Sect, 449, 450, 451 Fo. 267, a,
A release of all the right may be good to him in revo^sion, (or to him in
remainder in deed, ^ E 3, 5^,) albeit he has nothing in the freehold, because
he has an estate in hi^, ^ E 4, 13, 14, H 4, 32, b, 41, E 3, 17, 49, E 3, 28,
case ult

For he to whom a release is made of a bare right in lands and tenements, must
have either a freehold in deed or in Law, in possession, or a state in
remainder or reversion in fee, or fee tail, or for life,

But note that the state which makes a man Tenant to the precipe, is said to
be the freehold, 3, E 2, enter 7. F. N.B. 20. E.

Sect. 452. Fo. 267. b.
Note, that as a release made of a right to him in reversion or remainder,
shall aid and benefit him that has the particular estate for years, life, or
estate tail: So a release of a right made to a particular Tenant for life, or
in tail, shall aid and benefit him or them in remainder. Sils ceo peient
monstre.

The one cannot plead the Release made to the other, without showing of it, for
that they are privy in estate.

There is a diversity between several estates, in several Lands and several
estates in one land; for if two Tenants in Common of Lands, grant a rent charge
of forty shillings, out of the same to one in fee, and the grantee release to
one of them, this shall extinguish but twenty shillings, for that the grant in
judgment of Law was several: But if one be Tenant for life of lands, the
reversion in fee over to another; if they two join in grant of a rent out of
the lands, if the grantee release, either to him in the reversion, or to Tenant
for life, the whole rent is extinguished; for it is but one rent, and issues
out of both estates.

Sect. 454. Fo. 68. a.
Note two diversities, 1 Between a Seigniory or rent service, and a rent
charge: for a Seigniory or rent service may be released, and extinguished to him
that has but a bare right in the land, in respect of the privity, betwenn the
Lord and the Tenant in right; for he is not only as Tennanr to the avowry, but
if he die, his heir within age, he shall be in ward and if of full age he
shall pay relief, and if he die without heir the land shall escheat. But
there is no such privity in case of a rent charge, for there the charge lies
upon the Land.

The second diversity is between a Seigniory, and a bare right to land: for a
release of a bare right to land, to one that has but a bare right, is void.
But a release of a Seigniory to him that has but a right, is good to
extinguish the Seigniory.

Nota; Seigniory, rent or right, either in praesenti, or in future, may be
released five manner of ways; and the first three without any privity. 1. To
the Tenant of the freehold in deed or in Law. 2. To him in remainder. 3. To him
in reversion. The other two in respect of privity, as 1. Where the Lord
releaseth his Seigniory to the Tenant being disseised, having but a right and
no estate at all. 2. In respect of the privity without any estate or right, as
by the demandant to the vouchee, or donor to the donee, after the donee has
discontinued in fee. vid. S. 455. l. 10. fo. 48. Lampets case.

If the Lord has accepted services of the disseisor, then the disseiser cannot
enforce the Lord to avow upon him, though his beasts be taken, etc 20 H. 6. 9.
b. 2 E 4. 6. a.

But some do hold, that if there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant be
disseised, and the disseisee die without heir, the Lord accepts rent by the
hands of the disseis^r, this is no bar to him; contrary it is, if he avow for
the rent in Court of Record, or if he take a corporal service, as homage or
fealty; for the disseisor is in by wrong: but if the Lord accept the rent by
the hands of the heir of the disseisor, or of his Feoffee, because they be in
by title, this shall bar him of his escheate, which is to be understood of a
descent or a Feoffment, after the title of escheat accrued; for if the
disseisor make a Feoffment in Fee, or die seized, and after the disseisee die
without heir, then there is no escheat at all, because the Lord hat^ a Tenant
in by title, 7 E 6. escheat Br. 18. F.N. B. 1440. 7. H 4. 17, 2 H 4. 8. 6 H 7.
9. vid. S. 556. Upon the Statute, 21 H 8. ca. 19. These four points are to be
observed.

1. That the Lord has still election, either to avow according to the Common
Law, by force of the Statute, by reason of this word (May.)

2. Albeit the purview of the act be general, yet all necessary incidents are
to be supplied, and the scope and end of the act to be taken; and therefore
though he need not to make his avowry, upon any person certain, yet he must
allege seisin by the hands of some Tenant in certain within 40. years.

3. That if the avowry be made according to the Statute, every plaintiff in
the replevin, or second deliverance, be he Termor or other, may have every
answer to the avowry that is sufficient; and also have aid, and every other
advantage in Law, (disclaymer only excepted) for disclaim he cannot, because in
that case the avowry is made upon no certain person.

4. Where the words of the Statute be, if the Lord distreine upon the Lands and
Tenements holden, yet if the Lord come to distraine, and the Tenant enchase the
beasts which were within the view, out of the land holden, ^. there the Lord
distreine, etc. in judgment of Law the distress is lawful, and as taken
within his fee and Seigniory, and the Statute being made to suppress fraud, is
to be taken by equity L 9. so. 136. Ascoughs case, 27 H 8. fo. 4. 32 H 8. ca.
2. l. 9. f. 36, ^ackna^^ case, 34 H 8. Avow. Br. 113. l. 9. f. 22, case davow.
11 H. 7. 4. 34 H 6. 18. 16 E 4. 10. 21 H 7. 40.

Sect. 445. Fo. 269.
Note a diversity between a release of a rent service out of Land, and a
release of right to land. As if a Lease be made to (F.) one for life reserving
to the lessor and his heirs a certain rent.

If the lessee be disseised, and after the lessor release to the lessee and his
heirs all the right which he has in the Land, and after the lessee enter,
albeit in this case the rent is extinct, yet nothing of the right of reversion
shall pass:

But admit that the Donee in tail, (in such case) make Feoffment in fee, and
the donor release unto him and hi^ heirs, all the right in the Land, this shall
extinguish the to ^t, because the Lord must avow upon him, and yet the Tenant
in Tail, after the Feoffment has no right in the Land, but the reason is in
respect of the privity, and that the donor is by necessity compellable to avow
upon him only, etc. 1 H. 5. garr. 43. 14. H. 4. 38. l. 3. fo. 29. l. 6. 58 10.
E. 3. 26. 48. E. 3 8. b. 31. E. 3. guard. 116. 5. E. 4. 3 7. E. 4. 27. 15. E. 4.
13. Trin. 18. Eliz. Sir Tho. Waits case in Com. Banco. Nota, etc.

Sect. 457, 458.
Si very Tenant que est disseisin reign del fi^gn. per service de chivalry and
mor. (son heir eant deius age) le siegn, avera and seisam le guard del heir:
mes si tiel tenant fist Feoffment in fee, etc. auterment est. 12 H. 4 13. 36 E.
3. guard. 10. 6. H 7. 9. 37 H. 6. 1. 32. H. 6. 27. 7. E. 6. guard. Br.

There be four manner of avowries for rents and services, etc. viz.

1. Super verum tenentem, as in the case here put.

2. Supra verum tenentem in forma praedicta, as where a Lease for life, or a
gift in tail be made, the remainder in fee.

3. Upon one as upon his Tenant of the Manor, omitting (very) and this is when
the Lord has a particular estate in the Seigniory, and so shall the donor upon
the donee, or lessor upon the lessee.

4. Sur la matter, en la terre, as within his fee and Seigniory. As where the
Tenant by knights service makes a Lease for life reserving a rent, and die,
his heir within age, the gardein shall avow upon the lessee. 2 H. 4. 24. 12. E.
4. 42. 26. H. 6. avowry 17. 9 El. Dyer 257. 5. H 7. 11. 7. E. 4. 24. 20. E. 3.
avow 131. 47. E. 3. fo. ult. 38. H. 6. 23. Now by the Statute 21. H. 8. ca. 19.
The very Lord may avow as in Lands within his fee and Seigniory, without
avowing upon person in certainty.

Note a diversity, if Tenant in Tail, make a Feoffment in fee, yet the right of
the Tenant in tail remains, and shall descend to the issue in tail. But when
the Tenant in fee simple make a Feoffment in fee, no right at all remains of
his estate, but when the whole is transferred to the Feoffee. Also the Lord is
not compellable in that case to avow upon the Feoffor, but if he will, as
Littleton here says, he may avow on the Feoffee, but so it is not in case of
tenant in tail, Fol. 269. b.

Note a diversity, between actions and acts which concern the right, and
actions and acts which concern the possession only; for a writ of customs and
services lies not against the Feoffor, nor a release to him shall extinguish
the Seigniory. So if a rescous be made, an Ass. shall not lie against the
Feoffor, and him that made the Rescous, because the Feoffee is Tenant and in
Ass. the surplusage incroached, shall be avoided; for these actions and acts
concern the right, but of a seisin and avowry which concern the possession, it
is otherwise; and if the Lord release to the Feoffor, this is good between
them, as to the possession, and discharge of the arerages, but the Feoffee
shall not take benefit of it, for that, it extended but to the right. But the
Feoffor shall plead a release to the Feoffee, for thereby the Seigniory is
extinct, as if the lessee for life does wast, and grant over his estate, and
the lesser release to the grantee, in an action of wast against the lessee, he
shall plead the release, and yet he has nothing in the land; and so in wast
shall Tenant in Dower, or by the courtesy in the like case, and the vouchee,
and the Tenant in praecipe after a Feoffment made, and so in a contra formam
collationis.

Nota, etc. If there be Lord and Tenant, and the rent is behind for diverse
years, and the Tenant make a Feoffment in fee, if the Lord accept the service,
or rent of the Feoffee due in his time, he shall lose the arrerages due in the
time of the Feoffor, for after such acceptance, he shall not avow upon the
Feoffor, nor upon the Feoffee, for the arrerages due, etc. But in that case if
the Feoffor dies, albeit the Lord accept the rent or service by the hand of
the Feoffee due in his time, he shall not lose the arrerages, for now the Law
compels him to avow upon the Feoffee; and that which the Law compels him
unto, shall not prejudice him. 4 E. 3. 22. 7. E. 3. 8. 7. E. 4. 27. 29. H. 8.
avow. Br. 111. l. 3. fo. 65. 66. Pennants case 7. H. 4. 14. 2. E. 4. 6 3. 4. H.
6. 46. 47. E. 3. 4. Vide lib. etc.

Sect. 459.
If a man make a lease for years, the Remainder for years; and the first lessee
does enter, a release to him in remainder for years is good to enlarge his
estate. 22. E. 4. Surr. 6.

But if a lease be made to begin at Michaelmas, reserving a rent, and before
the day the lesser release all the right that he has in the land, this cannot
enure to enlarge the estate, but to extinguish the rent in respect of the
privity. M. 39. and 40 El in Scacc. Sir H. Woodhouse, and Sir Will. Paston.

A man grants the next avoidance of an advowson to two, the one of them before
the Chapter become void (for after it becoms void, it is but a thing in action) may
release to the other; for although the grantor cannot release to them to
inc^ease their estate, because their interest is future, and not in possession;
yet one of them to extinguish his interest may release to the other in respect
of the privity. P. 38. El. Qu. imp. per Bonnet, verse levesque Norwich in Com.
Ban.

Note that, seeing lessee for years has interesse termini, before every he may
grant it over, albeit for want of an actual possession, he is not capable of a
release to enlarge his estate, Pl. Com. 423.

But if a man make a release for life, the remainder for life and the first
lessee dies, a release to him in remainder, and his heirs, is good before he
does enter to enlarge his estate, for that he has an estate of a freehold in
Law in him.

Sect. 460. and 461.
A release to a Tenant at will is good, because between them, there is a
possession with privity; but a release to a Tenant at sufferance is void,
because he has a possession without privity. 21. H 6. 37. 2 E. 4. 6. b. 7. E.
4. 27. 8. 4. 16. 29. H. 6. Rel. 6. Fo. 270. b.

But if a man enter into Land of his own wrong, and take the profits, his words
to hold it at the will of the owner cannot qualify his wrong, but he is a
disseisor, and then the release to him is good, or if the owner consent
thereunto, then he is a Tenant at will, and that way also the release is good.
Temps H 8 Tenant a. vol. l. 5. 2. E. 4. 38. 13. E. 3. Ass. 86.

But there is a diversity, when one comes to a particular estate in land by
the act of the party, and when by act in law; for if the Gardein hold over, he
is an Abator, because his interest came by acts in Law. 10. E. 4. 9. 10.

Privity is fourfold. First, Privies in estate, as between the donor and donee,
lessor and lessee, which privity is ever immediate.

2. Privies in blood, as the heir to his Ancestor, or between Coparcerners, etc.

3. Privies in representation, as executors, etc. to the Testator.

4. Privity in tenure, as the Lord and Tenant, etc. which may be reduced to
general heads, Privies in Deed, and Privies in Law Old N.B. 117. 137. l. 4.
fo. 23. Walkers case l. 4. f. 123. etc. Vide S. 454.

Sect. 462. and 463.
When a Feoffment is made to a future use, as to the performance of his last
Will, the Feoffees shall de seized to the use of the Feoffor, and of his heirs
in the mean time. And reason would, That seeing the Feoffment is made without
consideration, and the Feoffor has not disposed of the profits in the mean
time, that by construction and intendment of law, the Feoffor ought to occupy
the same in the mean time. And so it is when the Feoffor disposes the profits
for a particular time in praesenti, the use of the inheritance shall be to the
Feoffor and his heirs, as a thing not disposed of, 35. H. 6. Subpoena 22. 15.
H. 7. 12. b. 37. H. 6. 36. 11. H. 4. 52. 7. H. 4. 22. 1. M. 1 11. Dyer.

And note a diversity between a Feoffment at lands at this day upon confidence,
or to the intent to perform his last Will, and a Feoffment to the use of such
person and persons, and of such estate and estates, as he shall appoint by his
last Will; for in the first case the land passes by the Will, and not by the
Feoffment; for after the Feoffment the feoffor was seized in fee simple, as he
was before: but in latter case the Will pursuing his power is but a direction
of the uses of the feoffment, and the estates pass by execution of the uses
which were raised upon the feoffment, but in both cases the feoffees are seized
to the use of the feoffor and his heirs in the mean time, l. 6. fo. 17, 18. Sir
Edw. Cleres Case. fo. 271. b.

Note, uses are raised, either by transmutation of the state, as by Fine,
Feoffment, Common Recovery, etc. or out of the state of the owner of the land
by bargain and sale, etc. or by Covenant upon lawful cosideration, Dillon and
Frayns case, l. 1. etc. fo. 113.

There cannot be two uses in esse, of one and the same land.

But if A. disseise one to the use of B. and does bargain and sell the land for
money to C.C. has an use, and here be two uses of one land, but of several
natures, the one, viz. upon the bargain and sale to be executed by the Statute,
and the other not. But since Littleton wrote, all uses are transferred by Act
of Parliament into possession, 27. H. 8. cap. 10.

Sect. 464. Fol. 272. a.
By the Statute of 2. H. 5. cap. 3. Stat. 2. it is enacted, that in three
cases, he that passes in an Enquest, ought to have lands, tenements to the
value of 40. s. viz. 1. Upon Trial of the death of a man. 2. In Plea real
between party and party. And 3. In Plea personal, where the debt, or (or and)
the damages in the Declaration amount unto forty Marks, 28. H. 8. Dyer. fol. 9.
9. H. 5. fol. 5. 15. H. 7. 13. b. 5. E. 4. 7. a.

The surest construction of a Statute, is by the rule and reason of the Common
Law. Uses were at the Common Law.

When the Law gives to any man any estate or possession, the Law gives also a
privity, and other necessaries to the same.

Since Littleton wrote, the said Statute of 2. H. 5 is altered: for where that
Statute limited 40. s. now a later Statute has raised it to 4. l. and so it
ought to be contained in the Ven. fac. 27. El. cap. 6.

Nota. An use is a trust or confidence reposed in some other, which is not
issuing out of the land, but as a thing collateral, annexed in privity to the
estate of the land, and to the person touching the land, viz. that Cesty que
Use shall take the profit, and that the Terre-tenant shall make an estate
according to his direction. So as Cesty que Use had neither jus in re, nor jus
ad rem, but only a confidence and trust, for which he had no remedy by the
Common Law, but for breach of trust, his remedy was only by Subpoena in
Chancery. Fortescue cap. 25, 26 etc. Pl. Com. 352. b. in Dalameres case. and
349. b. l. 1. fo. 121 122, 127, 140. ^hudleys case, l. 2. fo. 58, 78 l. 6 fo.
64. l. 7. fo. 13 and 34. Vide Fortescue ut ante etc. How Jurors shall be
returned, etc.

Sect. 65. Fol. 273. a.
It is a certain rule. That when a Release does enure by way of enlarging of an
estate, that there must be privity of estate, as between lessor and lessee,
donor and donee, Fleta l. 5. cap. 34. 15. H. 7. 14. 22. E. 4 4.

But a Release to him that in rei veritate (albeit there be privity in Law, and
a tenancy in supposition of Law) has no estate, cannot enure to him by way of
enlargement, for how can his estate be enlarged that has not any? Vide Libr.

If a Tenant by the Courtesy grant over his estate, yet he is Tenant as to an
action of W^ste, Attornment etc. and yet a Release to him and his heirs cannot
enure to enlarge his estate, that has no estate at all.

If I grant the reversion of my Tenant for life to another for life, now shall
not he have an action of Waste. But if I release to the grantee for life and
his heirs, now he has the Fee simple, and shall punish the Waste done after,
48. E. 3. 16. a. per Persay and Finchden, 41. E. 3. 17. a. 7 E. 4. 17.

It is further to be observed, that to a release which enureth by way of
enlargement of the estate, there is not only required privity and an estate,
but sufficient words also in Law, to raise or create a new estate.

If a man make a lease to A. for term of the life of B. and after release to A.
all this right in the Land, by this A. has an estate for term of his own life,
for a lease for term of his life is higher in Judgment of Law, then an estate
for term of another man's life, vide 16. H. 6. Release 45. 22. E. 2. Rel.
Statham.

Nota, when a Release does enure by way of enlargement of an estate, no
inheritance, either in fee simple or fee tail, can pass without apt words of
inheritance: But there is a diversity between a Release that enureth by way of
Mitter lestate, and by way of enlargement of the state, 9. El. Dyer 263.

If there be three joyntenants, and one release to one of the other all his
right; this enureth by way of Mitter lestate, and passes the whole fee simple
without these words Heirs. But if there be two joyntenants, and the one release
of them all his right to the other, this does not to all purposes enure by way
of Mitter lestate, for it makes no degree, and he to whom the release is made,
shall for many purposes be adjudged in from the first Feoffor, and this release
shall vest all in the other joyntenant without these words (Heirs) 40. E. 3.
41. 46 E. 3. 19 H 6. 33 H. 6. 5. 10 E. 4. 3.

But if there be two Coparcerners, and the one release all his right to the
other, this shall enure by way of Mitter testate, and shall make a degree, and
without these words (Heirs) shall pass the whole fee simple.

And note, that to a release that enures by way of Mitter lestate, there must
be privity of estate at the time of the Release, 37 H. 8. Alienat. Br. 31. 8 H.
4. 8. 40 Ass. 5. 19.

If two Coparcerners be of a rent, and the one of them take the Terre tenant to
husband, the other may release to her, notwithstanding the rent be in suspense,
and it shall enure by way of Mitter lestate, and she may release also to the
Terre-tenant, and that shall enure by way of extinguishment. But if she release
to her sister, and to her husband, it is good to be seen how it shall enure. *

Nota, some releases do enure by way of enlargement of estate, some by way of
Mitter lestate, some by way of Mitter le droit, by way of Entry and Feoffment,
and some by Extinguishment, vide Littl. fo 68, 69.

Sect. 467. Fol 274. a.
Reg. he that has a fee simple at the time of the Release made of a right,
etc. needs not speak of his heirs; for a release of a right for a day is
sufficient, etc. But if a man be disseised of two acres, he may release his
right in one of them, and yet enter into the other, vide 6 E. 3. 17. alias 6.
E. 3. 17. 12. E. 3. descent F. 29.

So note a diversity, between a release of part of the estate of a right, and a
release of a right in part of the Land.

Again, note two diversities, 1. Between the quantity of the estate in a right,
and the quality thereof, for albeit the disseisee cannot release part of the
estate, yet may he release his right upon condition, 4. E. 2. Release 50. 43.
Ass. 12. 17. Ass. 2. 31. Ass Ass. 13 21. H. 24.

2. Diversity is between a right, which is favored in Law, and a condition
created by the party which is odious in Law, for that it desceateth estates;
and therefore if a condition be released upon condition, the release is good,
and the condition void, fo. 274. b.

An express Manumission of a Villain cannot be upon condition, for once free in
that case, and over free. Also an Attornment to a grantee upon condition, the
condition is void, because the grant is once settled But this is to be
understood of a condition subsequent, and not of a condition precedent, for in
both cases the condition precedent is good. But Letters Patents of Denization
made to an alien, may be either upon condition subsequent or precedent, and so
may the King make a Charter of Pardon to a man of his life, upon condition as
is abovesaid, Rot. Parliament. 18. H. 6. 11. 29. Ap Guilliams, case, 10. E. 3.
c. 2. 3. H. 7. f. 6.

Sect. 469.
Lou home ad forsque droit a la terre, and and riens in le reversion ne in le
remainder in fait; si tiel home release tout son droit a un que est tenant de
le franktenement, tout son droit ale, comment que null mention soit fait de les
heirs celuy a que le release est fait. To a release of a right, made to any
that has an estate of Freehold in Deed or in Law, no privity at all is
requisite. Lessee for life lets the same land over to another for term of
the life of his lessee, the remainder to another in fee; A release in this case
by the first lessor to the lessee, does not enure by way of Mitter le droit,
for then should he have the whole right, but as it were by way of
extinguishment in respect of him that made the release; and that it shall enure
to him in the remainder, which is a quality of an inheritance extinguished, but
yet the right is not extinct in deed.

Sect. 471. Fol. 275. b.
If a disseisor make a lease for life, the remainder in fee, albeit they to
some purposes are as one Tenant in Law, yet if the disseisee release all
actions to the Tenant for life, he in the remainder shall not take benefit of
this release, for it extends only to Tenant for life, l. 8 fo. 148. Edw.
Althams Case.

Also if the disseisor make a lease for life, and the disseisee release all
actions to the lessee, this enureth not to him in the reversion. And so our
Author is to be understood of a release of Rights, and not of a release of
actions to the Tenant for life, as to or for the benefit of him in the
remainder or reversion.

Sect. 472. Fol. 276. a.
If Tenant for life be disseised by two, and he release to one of them, this
shall enure to them both, for he to whom the release is made, has a longer
estate then he that releaseth, and therefore cannot enure to him alone to hold
out his Companion, for then should the release enure by way of Entry and grant
of his estate, and consequently the disseisor to whom the release is made,
should become Tenant for life, and the reversion revested in the lessor, which
strange transmutation of estates in this case the Law will not suffer, 13. E.
4. Descent. F. 29.

But if lessee for years be ousted, and he in the reversion disseised, and the
lessee release to the disseisor, the disseisee may enter, for the term of years
is extinct and determined. And so it is if Donee in Tail be disseised by two,
etc. But if the Kings Tenant for life be disseised by two, and he release to
one of them, he shall hold out his companion, for the disseisor gained but the
estate for life. So if two joynttenants make a lease for life, and after to
disseise the Tenant for life, and he release to one of them, he shall hold out
his companion, for the disseisin was but of an estate for life.

If Tenant for life be disseised by two, and he in the reversion and Tenant for
life join in a release to one of the disseisors, he shall hold out his
companion, and yet it cannot enure by way of entry and Feoffment. But if they
severally release their several Rights, it shall enure to both the disseisors.

But here in Littletons Case, where Tenant in fee simple is disseised by two,
and release to one of them; this for many purposes enures by way of entry and
Feoffment, and therefore he to whom the release is made, shall hold out his
companion, and be made sole Tenant of the fee simple. Mes fi un disseisor
infeffa 2 etc. auterment est. For that the Feoffees are in by Title, and are
presumed to have a Warranty, which is much favored in Law, and the disseisors
are merely in by wrong, 21 H. 6. 41.

If two men do gain an Advowson by usurpation, and the right Patron release to
one of them, it shall enure to them both, for seeing their Clerk come in by
admission and institution, which are judicial acts, they are not merely in by
wrong: for an usurpation shall cause a Remitter, F. N. B. 31. M.

But if a lease for life be made, the remainder for life, the remainder in fee,
and he in remainder for life disseise the Tenant for life, and then the Tenant
for life dies, the disseisin is purged, and he in remainder for life has but
an estate for life. And so note a diversity where the particular estate for
life is precedent, and when subsequent, 19. H 6. 21. 38. H. 6. 28. Case de
Occup.

Where our Author puts his case of one disseised, put the case that two
joyntenants in fee be disseised by two, and one of the disseisees release to
one of the disseisors all his right he shall not hold out his companion,
because the release is but of the moity, without any certainty.

If a man be disseised by two women, and one of them take husband, and the
disseisee release to the husband, this shall enure to the advantage of both the
disseisors, because the husband was no wrong doer, but in a manner by Title.

If two disseisors be, and they make a Lease for life, and the disseisee
release to one of them, this shall enure to them both, and to the benefit of
the lessee for life also: for he cannot by the release have the sole possession
and estate; for part of the estate is in another. And so it is if the
disseisors make a lease for years etc.

But the mortgage upon condition having broken the condition, is disseised by
two, the mortgager having Title of entry for the condition broken, releases to
the one disseisor, albeit they be in by wrong, yet the release shall enure to
them for two causes: 1. For that they are not wrong doers to the Mortgager, but
to the Mortgagee; and by Littletons case it appears, that wrong is done to
him that made the Release. 2. That he that makes the Release, has but a Title
by force of a condition, and Littletons case is of a right. Like Law is of an
entry for Mortmain, or a consent to Ravishment, etc.

Sect. 473.
Note, that a release by one whose entry is lawful to him that is in by wrong,
shall purge and take away all mean estates and titles.

If A. disseise B. who infeoff C. with warranty, who infeoff D. with warranty,
and E. disseise D. to whom B. releases, this does defeat all the mean estates
and warranty, causa qua suprae, 11. H. 4. 33. 9. H. 7. 25. 2. E. 4. 16. 21. E.
4. 78. 12. Ass. 22. vide 3. H. 6. 38.

Sect. 474. Fol. 276. b.
If the disseisor make a lease for life, and the lessee make a feoffment in
fee, and the disseisee release to the Feoffee, this release shall take away the
entry of the disseisor for the alienation which was made to his disinheritance,
he having the inheritance by disseisin, so as he could have no warranty annexed
to it, and Tenant for life forfeited his estate. But if the entry of the
disseisee were not lawful, it is otherwise; as the Book of 9. H. 7. 25. is, of
an estate Tail, mutatis mutandis. Vide l. fo. 277. a.

Sect. 475.
Abate. Vide N.B. 115. Brit. cap. 51. Bract. l. 4. cap. 2.

Abatamentum, is an entry by interposition.

A Disseisin is a wrongful putting out of him that is actually seized of a
Freehold, and Abatement is when a man died seized of an estate of Inheritance,
and between the death and entry of the heir, an estranger does interpose
himself, and abate.

Intrusion, 1. properly is when the Ancestor died seized of any estate of
inheritance expectant upon an estate for life; and then Tenant for life dies,
etc. and an estranger does interpose himself and intrude.

2. He that enters upon any of the Kings demesns, and takes the profits, is
said to intrude upon the Kings Possessions, F.N.B. 203. Fleta. l. 4. cap. 30.
Pl. Com. case de Mines.

3. When the heir in ward enters at his full age without satisfaction for his
marriage, the writ says quod intrusit. F.N. B. 141. F.

Deforciamentum, comprehends not only these aforenamed, but any man that
holds Land, whereunto another man has right, be it by descent or purchase,
is said to be a deforcer.

Usurpation has two significations in the common Law, one when an estranger
that no right has presents to a Church, and his Clark is admitted and
instituted.

2. When any subject does use without lawful warrant Royal franchises, he is
good to usurp, etc.

Purprestura est, etc. generaliter quories aliquid sit ad nocumentum regii
tenementi, vel regiae viae (vel aliquarum publicar.) vel civitatis, etc. Glanv.
l. 9. ca. 11. Brit. fo. 28. 29.

And because it is properly, when there is a house builded, or an enclosure
made of any part of the Kings demesne, or of an high way, or a common street,
or public water, or such public things, it is derived of the French word
Pourpris, which signifies an enclosure, but specially applied, as is aforesaid
by the common Law. Sic nota differentiam inter disseisinam, Abatamentum,
Intrusionem, deforciamentum, and usurpationem, and purpresturam.

Sect. 476. Fo. ^77. b.
But if the Feoffee upon condition make a Feoffment in fee over without any
condition, and the disseisee release to the second Feoffee, the condition is
destroyed by the release, before the condition broken or after; for the state
of the second Feoffee was not upon any express condition, as Littleton here
puts his case, and he may have advantage of the release, because it is not
against his own proper acceptance, as Littleton speaks in the next Section.
L. 1. fo. 147. Mayowes case.

But if it be a wrongful title, such a title is taken away by a release. As if
A. disseised B. to the use of C.B. release to A. this shall take away the
agreement of C. to the disseisin, because it should make him a wrong doer, as
if the disseisor be disseised, the disseisee release to the second disseisee,
this takes away the right of the first disseisor had against the second; and a
relation of an estate gained by wrong, shall never defeat an estate subsequent,
gained by right, against a single opinion, not affirmed by any other in our
books 14. H. 8. 11. per Portm.

Si disseisee release al Feoffee sur condition ceo namendre lestate le Feoffee,
etc.

Sect. 477. Fo. 478. a.
Home navera advantage per un release que serre enconter son proper acceptance,
and encounter son grant them. and count. que asc' ont dit que lou enier de h^me
est congeable sur un tenant sil release a mes le tenant, que ceo availoit a le
tenant, sicom il ust enter sur le tenant, and puis luy infeoffa, etc. ceo ne^
pas voier en chesc' cas. Car si le disseisee, ust enter sur le Feoffee sur
condition and puis luy infeoffa donques est le condition tout defeat, mes il ne
pas void per asc' tiel release sant entry fait, etc.

If A. and B. be joint disseisors, and B. grant a rent charge, and the
disseisee release to A. all his right, A. shall avoid the rent charge, because
it was not granted by him, and so not within the reason of our author.

If two disseisors be, and they infeoffee another, and take back an estate for
life or in fee, albeit they remain disseisors to the disseisee, as to have an
Ass. against them, yet if he release to one of them, he shall not hold our his
companion, because their state in the land is in by Feoffment,

If there be two disseisors, and they be disseised, and they release to their
disseisor, and after disseise him, and then the disseisee release to one or
both of them, yet the second disseisor shall reenter; for they shall not hold
the land against their own release.

If a disseisee release to one of the disseisors to some purpose, this shall
enure by way of entry and Feoffment, viz. as to hold out his companion. But as
to a rent Charge granted by him, it shall not enure by way of entry and
Feoffment, for if the disseisee had entered and enfeoffed him, the rent charge
had been avoided,

But it is a certain rule, that when the entry of a man is congeable, and he
release to one that is in by title (as here to the Feoffee upon condition is,
it shall never enure by way of entry and Feoffment, either to avoid a
condition, with which he accepted the land charged, or his own grant, or to
hold out his companion.

And where it appears by our author that acts done by the disseisor shall
not be avoided by the release of the disseisee; It is to be noted, that acts
made to the disseisor himself, shall not be avoided by the alteration of his
estate by the release of the disseisee, as if the Lord before the release had
confirmed the estate of the disseisor to hold by lesser services, the disseisor
shall take advantage of it, and so of estovers to be burnt in the house, and
the like Law is of a warrantty made unto him.

If an alien be a disseisor and obtain letters of denization, and then the
disseisee release unto him, the King shall not have the land, for the release
has altered the estate, and it is as it were a new purchase, otherwise it is
if the alien had been the Feoffee of a disseisor. Fo. 278. b.

If the Lord disseise the Tenant, and is disseised, the disseisee release to
the second disseisor, yet the Seignory is not revived, for between the parties,
the release enures by way of entry and Feoffment as to the land; but not having
regard to the Seigniory; and for that the possession was never actually
removed, or revested from the disseisor, who claims under the Lord, the
Seignory is not revived. But if the Lord, and the stranger disteise the Tenant,
and the disseisee release to the stranger, there the Seigniory by operation of
Law is revived, for the whole is vested in the stranger, which never claimed
under the Lord; and in that case if the Lord had died, and the land had
survived, the Seigniory had been revived.

Sect. 478. Fo. ^79. a.
Note, that where the Law in one case, does give a man several remedies and of
several kinds, there is a great art and knowledge for him to choose his aptest
remedy. 28. E. 3. 98. 9. E. 4 46. 21. E. 4. 55. 41. E. 3. 10. 2. H. 4. 12. 41.
E. 3.

A man makes a gift in tail, the remainder in fee, Tenant in tail dies without
issue, an estranger intrudes, and he in remainder brings a Formedon, and
recovered by default, and makes a Feoffment in fee, the intrudor reverse the
recovery in a writ of desceit and entry, he shall detain the Land for ever, and
the Feoffee shall not have a writ of right. And so likewise if a disseisor die
seized, and a stranger abate, and the disseisee release to him, the heir of the
disseisor shall enter, and detain the land for ever. 9. H, 7. 24.

Dormit aliquando jus, moritur nunquam; Right may be trodden down, but never
trodden out, for where it has been said, that a release of right does somewaies
enure by way of extinguishment; it is so to be understood, either (as Littleton
does here) in respect of him that makes the release, or in respect that in
construction of Law, it enureth not alone to him to whom it is made, but to
others also, who be estranger to the release, which as has been said, is a
qulaity of an inheritance extinguished.

As when the heir of the disseisor is disseised, and the disseisor make a Lease
for life, the remainder in fee, if the first disseisee release to the Tenant
for life, this is said to enure by way of extinguishment, for that it shall
enure to him in remainder, who is a stranger to the release, and yet in truth
the right is not extinct, but does follow the possession, viz. The Tenant for
life has it during his time, and he in remainder to him and his heirs, and the
right of inheritance is in him in the remainder. 14 H. 8. 6. b.

Sect. 479. and 480.
Here Littleton puts a diversity between releases, which enure by way of
extinguishment against all persons, and whereof all persons may take advantage;
and release which in respect of some persons enure by way of extinguishment,
and of other persons by way of mitter le droit. Or between releases which
indeed enure by extinguishment, for that he to whom the release is made, cannot
have the thing released; and releases which having some quality of such
release, are said to enure by way of extinguishment; but in troth do not, for
that he to whom the release is made, may take the thing released. 11. H. 7. 25.
37. H. 6. bar. 39. 38. E. 3. 10.

And here Littleton puts cases, where releases do absolutely enure by
extinguishment; as 1. Of the Lord and Tenant; for the Tenant cannot have
service to be taken of himself, nor one man can be both Lord and Tenant. 2. A
man cannot have land, and a rent issuing out of the same land. 3. A man cannot
have land, and a common of pasture issuing out of the same land. Fo. 280. a.

The mesne being a feme enter-marry with the Tenant peravaile, if the Lord
release to the feme, the Seigniory only is extinct, but if the release to the
husband, both Seigniory and mesnalty are extinct, and in this case if the Lord
release to the husband and wife, it is a question how the release shall enure;
but it is no question but that a release may be made to a measualty, or a
Seigniory suspended in part of the estate. 19. H. 6. 19.

The Lord may release his Seigniory to the tenant of the land for life or in
tail, and sic de coeteris. But so cannot one release a right or an action, etc.
13. E. 3. Extinguishment. Br. 45. and voucher F. 120.

Note, that by the release of all his right in the Seigniory or the Land, the
whole Seigniory is extinct without any words of inheritance. 12. H. 4. Release
21. 18. E. 2. ibid. 5. 26. H. 8. 57. 41. Ass. 6.

If there be Lord and Tenant by fealty and rent, the Lord grants the
Seigniory for years, and the Tenant atturn, the Lord release his Seigniory to
the Tenant for years, and to the Tenant of the land generally, the whole
Seigniory is extinct, and the state of the lessee also. But if the release had
been to them and their heirs, then the lessee had had the inheritance of the
one moity, and the other moity had been extinct, Vide lib. etc.

Sect. 481 and 482.
Here it appears by Littleton, That if a man make a lease for life, the
remainder in fee and Tenant for life suffer a recovery by default, that he in
remainder should not have a Formedon by the common Law: for Littleton says,
that he had not any remedy before the Statute. Neither is there any such Writ
in that case in the Register, albeit in some books mention is made of such a
writ, W. 2. ca. 5. 34. E. 3. Formedon. 31. 11. E. 3. ibi. 31. 8. E. 3. 59. F.
N. B. 117. b. 7. H. 7. 13.

Mes si celuy en le remainder ust entry sur le Tenant pur vie and luy
disseisist, and apres tenant entry sur luy, and apres tenant pur term de vie,
per tiel recovery perde per default and mor. ore celuy en remainder bien poit
aver breve de droit envers celuy que recovera, pur ceo que le mise Seigniory
join solement sur le mere droit, etc.

Here a disseisin gotten by wrong, and defeated by the entry of him, that right
has, is sufficient to maintain a writ of right against the recoverer in this
case; for albeit the seisin is defeated, between the lessee for life, and him
in the remainder, yet having regard to the recoveror, who is a mere stranges,
and has no title, it is sufficient against him. But otherwise it is, against
the party himself, that defeateth the seisin, and the law is propense to give
remedy to him that right has. 7. E. 3. 62. 38. E. 3. 37. Jur. utr. 1.

Lands are letten to A. for life, the remainder to B. for life, the remainder
to the right heirs of the heirs of A. A. dies, B. enters and dies, a stranger
intrudeth, the heir of A. shall have a writ of right of the seisin, which A.
had as Tenant for life, Fo. 281. a.

If Lands be given in tail to A. the remainder to his right heirs, A. dies
without issue, the Collateral heir of A. shall have a writ of right of the
seisin of A. 4. E. 3. 16. 17.

And so note a diversity between a seisin to cause posses. fratris, etc. for
there is required a more actual seisin, and a seisin to maintain a writ of
right. 40. E. 3. 8. 42. E. 3. 20. 37. Ass. 4. (14.) E. 4. 24. 7. H, 5. 4. 11.
H. 4. 11.

Sect. 483. 484.
Note a diversity; where the issue taken goes to the point of the writ or
action, there modo and forma, are but words of form; as in Littletons case of
the writ of entry in casu proviso, and so is the (etc.) well explained in this
Section.

But otherwise it is, when a collateral point in pleading is traversed, as if
a feoffment be alleged by two, and this is traversed modo and forma, and it
is found the feoffment of one, there modo and forma is material. So if a
feoffment be pleaded by deed, and it is traversed absque hoc quod feoffavit
modo and forma upon this collateral issue, modo and forma are so essential,
as the Jury cannot find a feoffment without deed. 9. H. 6. 1. 40 E. 3. 35. 21.
E. 3. 4. 22. F.N.B. 205. 206. g. 40. E. 3. 5. 32. H. 8. issue Br. 80. 12. E. 4.
4.

Here is another diversity to be observed, that albeit the issue be upon a
collateral point, yet if by the finding of part of the issue, it shall appear
to the Court, that no such action lies for the plaintiff, no more then if the
whole had been found, there modo and forma, are but words of form as here in
the case which Littleton puts of the Lord and Tenant appears. 10. E. 4. 7.
8. E. 4. 15. 20. and 21. E. 4. 3. Merlbr. cap. 3.

If the matter of the issue be found it is sufficient, and this rule holds in
criminal causes. Pl. Com. 101. v. 6. E. 3. 41. b. 9. H. 7. 3. 13. H. 7. 14. 8.
E. 3. 70. 8. Ass. 29. and 39. 5. H. 4. 22. 7. H. 4. 11. Pl. Com. 92. 3. Mar.
Dyer. 115. 116. 40. E. 3. 35. 31. E. 3. account 58. 28. Ass. 48.

The lessee covenants with the lessor not to cut down any trees, etc. and
binds himself in a bond of 40. l. for performance of covenants; the lessee cuts
down ten trees, the lessor brings an action of debt upon the bond, and
assigns a breach that the lessee cutteth down twenty trees, whereupon issue
is joined, and the Jury find that the lessee cut down ten, judgment shall be
given for the Plaintiff, for sufficient matter of the issue is found for the
Plaintiff.

Sect. 485. 486.
An assault, battery, or taking of goods, etc. alleged in another county,
cannot be traversed without special cause of justification, which extends to
some certain place; as if a Constable of a Town in another county arrest the
body of a man that breaks the peace, there he may traverse the county (but he
must not rest there) but all other places saving in the Town whereof he is
Constable.

And so it is of taking of goods, the Defendant justifies for damage feisant in
another county, he must as before traverse.

But where the cause of the justification is not restrained to a certain place,
that is so local as it cannot be alleged in any other Town, etc. then albeit
the action be brought in a foreign county, yet he must allege his
justification in the county where the action is brought.

In an action upon the case, the Plaintiff declared for speaking of slanderous
words, which are transitory, and laid the words to be spoken in London, the
Defendant pleaded a concord for speaking of words in all the counties of
England, saving in London, and traversed the speaking of the words in London:
the Plaintiff in his Declaration denied the concord, whereupon the Defendant
demurres, and Judgment, etc. for the Plaintiff. Tr. 30. El. Kings Bench.
Inglebert and Jones, and Com. Pleas. Pasche 38. El. Rot. 1656.

It is an ancient Principle in Law, That for transitory causes of action, the
Plaintiff might allege the fame in what place or County he would.

It is better that it be turned to a default, then the Law should be changed,
or any innovation made, 2. H. 4. 18. 38. E. 3. 1.

A man did grant a rent, that the grantee should hold the distress against
gages and pledges, and yet he shall gage delivery, for otherwise by this new
invention all Replevins shall be taken away, 4. E. 3. cap. 5. 4. H. 4. cap. 2.

Where the Jury is bound to find as well local things in many cases, as
transitory in other Counties, Vide lib. 6. fol. 46. Dowdales Case, 3. E. 3.
Ass. 446. 14. H. 4 35. 5. H. 5. 2. 37. H. 6. 2. 7. E. 4. 45. 18. E. 4. 1. 13.
H. 7. 17. 2 Mar. Br. at. 104. 20. El. Dyer 171. 19. H. 6. 48. 28. H. 8. Dyer
29. 12. H. 8. 1.

Reg. by the Common Law, if the Defendant has cause of justification or
excuse, then can he not plead Not guilty, for then upon the evidence it shall
be found against him, for that he confesses the battery, and upon that issue
cannot justify it, but he must plead the special matter, and confess and
justify the battery.

If in battery the Defendant may justify the same to be done of the Plaintiffs
own assault, he must plead it specially, and must not plead the general issue;
and so of the like.

In trespass of breaking his close, upon Not guilty, he cannot give in
evidence, that the beasts came through the Plaintiffs hedge, which he ought to
keep, nor upon the general issue justify, by reason of a rent charge common,
etc. 25. H. 8. Br.

In Detinue, the Defendant pleaded non detinet, he cannot give in evidence,
that the goods were pawned to him for money, and that it is not paid, but must
plead it, but he may give in evidence a gift from the Plaintiff, for that
proves he detaineth not the Plaintiffs goods, 22. H. 6. 33. 20. El. Dyer 276.
2. M. Dyer 212.

If two men be bound in a bond jointly, and the one is sued alone, he may plead
matter in abatement of the Writ, but he cannot plead Non est factum, for it is
his Deed, though it be not his sole deed, lib. 5. fo. 119. Whelpdales case,
vide etc. fo. 283. a.

Reg. whenever a man does any thing by force of a Warrant or Authority, he
must plead it.

But all that has been said must be under two cautions;

1. That whenever a man cannot have advantage of the special matter by way
of pleading, there he shall take advantage of it in the evidence: For example,
the Rule of Law is, That a man cannot justify in the killing or death of a
man, and therefore he shall be received to give the especial matter in
evidence, as that it was se defendendo, etc.

2. That in any action upon the case, Trespass, Battery, or of false
imprisonment against any Justice of Peace, Mayor, or Bailiff of City, etc. in
any his Majesty's Courts in Westminster or elsewhere, concerning any thing by
any of them done by reason of any of their Officers aforesaid, and all other in
their aid or assistance, or by their Commandment, etc. they may plead the
general issue, and give the special matter for their excuse or justification
in evidence, 7. Ja. c. 5. 23. H. 8. c. 5.

Probationes debent esse evidentes (i.e.) perspicuae and faciles intelligi.

If the Trespass were done the 4. of May, and the Plaintiff alleges the same
to be done the 5. of May, or the 1. of May, when no trespass was done, yet if
upon the evidence it falls out, that the trespass was done before the action
brought, it suffices, 19. H. 6. 47. 5. E. 4. 5. 21. E. 4. 66. And Littleton
says, That the Jury may find the Defendant guilty at another day then the
Plaintiff supposes.

Note, That the Law of England respects the effect and substance of the
matter, and not every nicety of form or circumstance. Qui haeret in litera,
haeret in Cortice, and apices juris non sunt jura.

Sect. 487. Fo. 283. b.
Note a diversity, when the possession is first, and then a right comes
thereunto, the entry of him that has right to the possession shall gain also
the right, 50. E. 3. 78. Vide S. 447.

But when the right is first, and then the possession comes to the right,
albeit the possession be defeated (as here in Littletons case it is by the heir
of the disseisor) yet the right of the disseisee remains. A, dies seized,
and the Land descends to B. his Son, before he enter, an estranger abate and
dies seized, B. enter, against whom the heir of the Abator recovers in an
Assize, B. may have a Writ of Mortdan. and recover the land against him. And if
the disseisin had been done to A. etc. then after the recovery in the Assize,
B. should have had a Writ of entry in the per, because the heir that is in by
descent, is in the per.

Sect. 490. and 491.
En praecipe quod red. If the Tenant alien the land, hanging the Writ, and puis
le Demandant release a luy tout son droit, etc. cel release est bone, pur ceo
que il est suppose terre tenant per le suit del Demandant and uncore il and
riens en la terre al temps de release fait. Item si en praecipe etc. le tenant
vouch, and le vouchee entry en garr' si apres le demandant release etc. al
vouchee, co est assets bone, pur ceo que apres le vouchee avoit entry en le
garr' il est tenant en ley al demandant, etc.

But if after the vouchee has entered into Warranty, and become Tenant in Law,
an Ancestor collateral release to the vouchee with Warranty, he shall not
plead this against the Demandant, for that the release by the estranger is
void, 10. E. 4. 13. 12. Ass. 41. 7. E. 3. 6. 8. H. 7. 5. Dyer. 17. El. 341.
Sect. 447.

Sect. 492. Fol. 285. a.
Nota, there be two kinds of actions, viz. concerning 1. Placita Coronae, or
Placita Criminalia. 2. Placita Communia, seu Civilia. Of actions concerning
Common Pleas, quaedam sunt ad rem, quaedam in personam, and quaedam mixtae,
Vide S. 444. Actio nihil aliud est quam jus prosequendi in judicio quod sibi
debetur. Or Action nest auter chose que loial demand de son droit. And by the
release of all actions, causes of action be released, but within a submission
of all actions to Arbitrament, causes of action are not contained, lib. 8. 153.
Althams Case, 35. H. 8. Dyer 57. 5. Mar. 217. 36. H. 6. 8. vide 42. E. 3. 22,
23.

Note a diversity: A man by his own cannot alter the nature of his action; and
therefore if the lessee for life or years do waste, now is an action of Waste
given to the lessor, wherein he shall recover two things, viz. the place
wasted, and treble damages. But by act in Law the nature of the action may be
changed; as if a man make a lease pur term daughter vie, and the lessee does
waste, and then Cesty que vie dies, an action of Waste shall lie for damages
only, because the other is determined by act in Law, 14. H. 8. 14. 23. H. 8.
Br. Waste.

And again hereupon is another diversity to be observed, that in case when an
action is well begun, and part of the action determined by act in Law, and yet
the like action for the residue is given, there the Writ shall not abate, but
proceed. But where by the determination of part, the like action for the
residue remains not, there the action well commenced shall abate. 9. E. 4. 50.

But if Tenant pur auter vie bring an Assize, and Cesty que vie dies, hanging
the Writ, albeit the Writ were well commenced, yet the Writ shall abate,
because no Assize can be maintained for damages only. Also an action of Waste
must be ad exbaereditatem, 2. H. 4. 22. 6. E. 2. breve 807. vide etc.

If a Writ of Annuity be brought, and the Annuity determines, hanging the
Writ, the Writ fails for ever, because no like action can be maintained for
the arrerages only, but for the annuity and arrerages, 34. H. 6. 10. 9. E. 4.
39. 14. H. 7. 31.

But where damages only are to be recovered, there albeit by act in Law, the
like action lies not afterward, yet the action well commenced shall proceed;
as if a Conspiracy be brought against two, and one of them die hanging the
Writ, it shall proceed, 22. R. 2. breve 888. 18. E. 4. 1. And in an Assize of
No. Diss. a Writ of Annuity, Qu. Imp. and other mixed actions, a release of
actions reals is a good plea, and so it is of a release of actions personalls,
2. H. 4. 13. 9. H. 6. 57.

But if three joyntenants be disseised, and they arraign an Assize, and one of
them release to the disseisor all actions personalls, this shall bar him, but
it shall not bar the other Plaintiffs for having regard to them, realty shall
be preferred, and omne majus trahit ad se minus dignum. 30. H. 6. Bar 59. 45.
E. 3. fo. 6.

So it is in a Writ of Ward brought by two, etc.

Nota diversit. In real actions where damages are not to be recovered by the
Common Law, as in an Assize, etc. but are given by the Statute, there a release
of all actions personalls is no bar, as in the Writ of Dower. Entry sur
disseisin in le per etc. Mordane. Aiel etc. Mert. cap. 1. Dower, Gloc. cap. 1.

Sect. 493, 494. fol. 258. b.
A Release of actions personalls is a good bar in a Qu. imp. because it is a
mixed action, 22. H. 6. 27. b.

A disseisor that has nothing in the land, may plead a release of actions
personalls, because damages are to be recovered against him, 11. Ass. 9. 18. E.
3. 2. 23, 24.

And the Tenant in an Assize shall plead a release of actions personalls to the
disseisor, for that plea proves that the Plaintiff has no cause of action
against him, 13. H. 4. 2. a.

If the disseisee release to the disseisor all actions realls, and the
disseisor makes a Feoffment in fee, and an Assize is brought against them, the
Feoffee shall not plead the release to the disseisor, for that he is not privy
to the Release, for a release of actions shall only extend to privies.

If the disseisee release all actions to the disseisor, and dye, this does bar
him but for his life. So note a diversity between a release of right, and a
release of actions, 19. H. 6. 23. a.

Sect. 496. Fol. 286. a.
If the disseisee release all actions to the heir of the disseisor which is in
by descent, he has no remedy to recover the land; but yet the disseisee has a
right, for that he has released his actions and not his right.

If the heir of the disseisor make a Feoffment in fee to two, and the disseisee
release to one of the Feoffees all actions, the survivor shall not plead this
Release.

Note, when a man has several remedies for one and the self-same thing, be it
real, personal or mixed, albeit he release one of his remedies, he may use the
other, 19. Ass. 3. 30. E. 3. 19. 6. 21. H. 7. 23.

Sect. 498. Fol. 286. b.
If the Plaintiff in an action of Detinue of Charters which concern the
inheritance of his land, can declare of one Charter in especial; the Defendant
shall not wage his Law, 41. E. 3. 2. 8. H. 6. 18. 28, 29. 10. H. 6. 20. 21. H.
6. 1. 14. H. 6. 4. 14. H. 4. 23, 24, 27.

An action of Detinue for Charters does sound in the realty, for therein
Summons and severance lies; and in Detinue of goods a Capias does lie, but for
Charters in special a Capias lies not, and yet a release of actions
personalls in a Writ of Detinue of Charters, is a good bar, 20. H. 6. 45. 19.
E. 3. Severance 14.

Sect. 499. Fol. 287. a.
In a Writ of Dower the Tenant pleaded that before the Writ purchased A. was
seized of the Land, etc. until by the Tenant himself he was disseised, and
that hanging the Writ A. recovered against him, etc. Judgment of the Writ, and
adjudged a good plea; in which plea, the Tenant confessed a disseisin in
himself, 15. E. 4. 4. b.

Sect. 500. Fol. 287. b.
Placitorum) criminalium alia majora, alia minora, alia maxima, secundum
criminum quantitatem; sunt enim crimina majora and dicuntur capitalia eo, quod
ultimum inducunt supplicium, etc. Minora vero quae fustigationem inducunt, vel
poenam pilloralem, vel tumboralem, vel carceris inclusionem etc. Bract. lib. 3.
101. b.

Criminalium quaedam sententialiter mortem inducunt, quaedam vero minime.
Fleta. lib. 1. c. 15.

Appellum signifies Accusatio; and the Appellant; Accusator is peculiarly in
legal signification applied to Appeals of three sorts:

1. Of wrong to his Ancestor, whose heir male he is, and that is only of death,
whereof our Author here speaks.

The 2. is of wrong to the husband, and is by the wife only of the death of her
husband to be prosecuted.

The 3. is of wrongs done to the Appellants themselves, as Robbery, Rape, and
Mayheme. The word Apellum is derived of Appeller, to call, because Appellans
vocat reum in judicium. Glanv. l. 7. c. 9. aestimatio capitis (i.e.) so much as
one paid for the killing of a man. Fleta lib. 1. cap. 42. Hoved. fol. 344.

You shall not read of any Insurrection or Rebellion before the Conquest, when
the view of Frankpledge and other ancient Laws of this Realm were in their
right use.

A release of all actions real and personal cannot bar an Appeal of Death,
because that release extends to common or civil actions, and not to actions
criminal, 21. H. 6 16.

Roberia, is a felonious taking away of goods de la Robe, that is, from the
person, 22. Ass. 39. W. 1. c. 20.

Sect. 502. Fol. 288. a.
En appeal de Mayhem un release de touts manners actions personalls est bone
plea, etc. for that every action wherein damages only are recovered by the
Plaintiff, is in Law taken for an action personal, 21. H. 6. 16.

Sect. 503. Fol. 288. b.
Before that time that the Outlary appear of Record, the Defendant does not
forfeit his goods, nor the Plaintiff can be disabled, nor any Writ of Error
does lie in that case, 28. Ass. 49. 12. E. 3. Vtlage 3. M. 4. and 5. Eliz. Dyer
222. S. 197.

If a man by process upon the Original be Outlawed, there he shall be restored
to nothing in the personalty against the Plaintiff. But whereby the Outlawry he
forfeited all his goods and chattells to the King, he shall be restored to
them; also thereby he shall be restored to the Law, and to be of ability to sue
etc. but if the Plaintiff in a personal action recover any debt etc. or
damages, and the Defendant be Outlawed after Judgment, there in a Writ of Error
brought by the Defendant upon the principal Judgment, a release of all actions
personalls is a good plea. And so it is where a Judgment is given in a real
action, a release of all actions realls is a good bar in a Writ of Error
thereupon.

And in this special case here put by Littleton, wherein the Plaintiff is to
recover, or to be restored to nothing against the party; yet for that the
Plaintiff in the former action is privy to the Record, a release of a Writ of
Error to him is sufficient to bar the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error of the
Suit, and vexation by the Writ of Error. And so note, that an action real or
personal does imply a recovery of something in the realty, or personalty, or a
restitution to the same, but a Writ implies neither of them, 1. H. 4. 6. 13.
E. 4. 1, 2. 26. H. 8. 3. b. 29. Ass. 35. 47. E. 3. 6. 35 H. 6. 19.

Sect. 504. fol. 289. a. and b.
A release of all actions reg. is no bar of execution, for the execution does
begin when the action does end. And therefore the foundation of the first is an
Original Writ, and does determine by the Judgment; and Writs of execution are
called Judicial, because they are grounded upon the Judgment, 13. H. 4. Rel.
53. 19. H. 6. 3. Where a Capias ad Sat. lies at the Common Law, and where it
is given by Statute, vide Sir William Herberts case, lib. 3. fo. 11, 12.

Maxims in the Law concerning Executions. Ea quae in Curia nostra rite acta
sunt, debitae executioni demandari debent; parum est latam esse sententiam nisi
mandetur executioni. Executio juris non habet injuriam. Executio est fructus
and finis legis. Juris effectus in executione coufistit. Prosecutio legis est
gravis vexatio, executio legis coronat opus. Boni judicis est judicium fine
dilatione mendare executioni. Favorabiliores sunt executiones aliis processibus
quibuscunque.

When Littleton wrote, by force of certain Acts of Parliament, execution mtght
be had of lands (besides by force of the Elegit) upon Statute Merchant, Statute
Staple, and Recognizances taken in some Court of Record, and since he wrote
upon a Recognizance or Bond taken by force of the Statute 23. H. 8. before one
of the Chief Justices, or the Mayor of the Staple, and Recorder of London out
of Term, which has the effect of a Statute Staple, 11. E. 1. Stat. de Acton
Burnel, 13. E. 1. de Market. 27. E. 3. c. 22. 23. H. 8. cap. 6. 25. E. 3. 53.
and vide 32. H. 8. c. 5. a profitable Statute, concerning executions of Lands,
Tenements, etc. Sed opus est interpret. Vide fo. 289. and lib. 4. fo. 66.
Fulwoods Case.

If a man have a Judgment given against him for debt or damage, or be bound in
a Recognizance, and dies, his heir within age, or having two daughters, and
the one within age, no execution shall be sued of the Lands by Elegit during
the minority, albeit the heir is not specially bound, but charged as
Terre-tenant, 15. E. 3. Age 95. 24. E. 3. 28. 29 Ass. 37. 29. E. 3. 50. 47.
Ass. 4. 47. E. 3. 7. lib 3. f. 13. Brook Age 33.

And so against an heir within age no execution shall be sued upon a Statute
Merchant or Staple, nor upon the obligation or recognizance upon the Statute,
23. H. 8. for it is excepted in the process against the heir. Neither if the
heir within age endow his mother shall execution be sued against her during his
minority, Temps E. 1. 402. 417. fo. 290. a.

Vide le statute 13. Eliz. cap. 5. made against fraudulent Feoffments, gifts,
grants, etc. Judgments and Executions, as well of lands and tenements, as of
goods and chattells, to delay, hinder or defraud Creditors, and others of their
just and lawful Actions, Suits, Debts, Damages, Penalties, Forfeitures,
Heriots, Mortuaries and Releases. Sed opus est, etc. Lib. 3. fo. 80. etc.
Troyns Case, l. 5. f 67. Gooches Case, l. 6. f. 18. Pakemans Case, l. 10. f.
56. the Chancellor of Oxfords Case. See the Statute of 3. H. 7. c. 4. and 50.
E. 3. c. 6. M. 12. and 13. Eliz. Dyer 295. 18. Eliz. 451. Dyer.

Elegit is a judicial Writ, and is given by the Statute, either upon a recovery
for debt or damages, or upon a Recognizance in any Court. The words of the writ
be Elegit sibi liberari, etc. By this Writ the Sheriff shall deliver to the
Plaintiff Omnia catalla debitoris (exceptis bobus and afris Carucae) and
medietatem terrae. And this must be done by an Enquest to be taken by the
Sheriff. W. 2. c. 18. W. 2. c. 18.

Fieri fac. is a Writ mentioned in the said Statute, but is a Writ of Execution
at the Common Law, and is called a Fieri fac. because the words of the Writ
directed to the Sheriff be, quod fieri fac. de bonis and catallis, etc.

But note, that a Capias ad satisfac. is not mentioned in the said Statute,
because no Capias ad satisfac. did lie at the Common Law upon a Judgment for
debt, etc. or damages, but only when the original action was Qu. vi and armis
etc. but later Statutes have given a Capias ad satisfac. where debt etc. or
damages are recovered, Lib. 3. fo. 11. Sir William Herberts Case.

And note, that these three Writs of Execution ought to be sued out within the
year and the day after Judgment; but if the Plaintiff sueth out any of them
within the year, he may continue the same after the year, until he has
execution.

And to none of these Writs of executions the Defendant can plead; but if he
has any matter since the Judgment to discharge him of execution (as a release
of all executions etc.) he may have an Audita querela, and relieve himself that
way.

Sect. 505. Fol. 290. b.
Scire fac. is a judicial Writ, and properly lies after the year and day
after Judgment given. But because the Defendant may thereupon plead, this Scire
fac. is accounted in Law to be in nature of an action, and therefore a release
of all actions is a good bar of the same, and so is a release of executions,
etc. 19. H. 6. 3. (4.) 18. E. 4. 7.

This Writ was given in this case by the Statute of W. 2. c. 45. for at the
Common Law, if the Plaintiff had surceased to sue execution by fieri fac. or
levari fac. a year and a day he had been driven to his new Original, 8. E. 3.
297, 298. 18 E. 3. 33. l. 3. 12.

Note, that every Writ whereunto the Defendant may plead, be it Original or
Judicial, is in Law an action.

Sect. 507. Fol. 291. a.
Note a diversity between a release of all actions, and a release of all suits.
If a man release all suits, all execution is gone, for no man can have
execution without prayer and suit, but the King only. 26. H. 6. Exec. 4 l. 8.
f. 153. Ed. Althams case. Brook tit. Rel. 87.

So if the body of a man be taken in execution, and the Plaintiff release all
actions, yet shall he remain in execution, but if he release all debts or
duties it is otherwise, 26. H. 6. Exec. 7.

If A. be accountable to B. and B. release him all his duties, this is no bar
in an action of account, for what shall fall out upon the account is uncertain,
but duties do extend to all things due that is certain, and therefore
discharges Judgments in personal actions and executions also, 20. H. 6. per
Paston.

Sect. 508, 509, 510, 511. Fol. 291. b. 292. a.
There be two kinds of Demands or Claims. Pl. Com. Styles Case, 359, etc. 1.
Express or in deed, as in all real actions. 2. Employed or in Law; as 1. In all
actions personal. 2. In actions of Appeals. 3. Of execution. 4. Of Title or
right of Entry either by force of a condition, or by any former Right. 5. Of a
rent service, rent charge, common of pasture etc. verte fol.


All which Littleton here and in the two next Sections following, puts but
for example, for by the release of all Demands, other things also be released,
as rents seck, all mixed actions, a Warranty which is a Covenant real, and all
other Covenants real and personal, Estovers, all manner of Commons, and
profit appender, Conditions before they be broken or performed, or after,
Annuities, Recognizance, Statute merchant, or of the Staple, obligations,
contracts, etc. are release and discharged, 38. H. 8. tit. Release, Br. 9. 6.
H. 7. 7. 15. 20. Ass. p. 5. 40. E. 3. 22. 49. E. 3. 7. b. 50. Ass. p. 6. 13. R.
2. Avow. 89. Althams case ante lit. Sec. 748. Die. 5. Eliz. 217.

Quaerela a quaerendo, this properly concerns personal actions of mixed at the
highest, for the plaintiff in them is called quaerens. And yet by a release of
all quarrels, all actions real and personal are released; likewise all
causes of action are released thereby, albeit no action be then depending for
the same. 39. H. 6. 9.

Sect. 512. 513. Fo. 292. b.
A sum of money to be paid at a day to come, is debitum in praesenti, quamvis
sit solvendum in futuro. 11. H. 4. 41. 43.

An Executor before probate, may release an action, and yet before probate he
can have no action, because the right of the action is in him. T. 2. Ja. in
C.B. inter Middleton and Rinnot. 18. H. 6. 23. b. Pl. Com. 277, 278.
Greysbrokes case per Weston.

If a man make a lease of land to another for years, rendering to him at Mich
40. shillings, and after before the day of payment, he release to the lessee
all actions, this is a void release. 7. H. 7. 5. a.

But the lessor before the day may acquit or release the rent. But if a man be
bound in a bond, or by contract to another to pay one 100. pound, etc. at five
several days, he shall not have an action of debt before the last day be
past, and so note a diversity between duties which touch the realty, and mere
personalty. But if a man be bound in a Recognizance to pay 100. pound, etc.
presently after the first day of payment he shall have execution upon the
Recognizance for that sum, etc. for that is in the nature of several
judgments; and so it is of a covenant or promise, and. and so note the
diversities. 45. E. 3. 8. 13. H. 4. Avow. 240. 30. E. 3. 13. 10. E. 2.
Execution. 137. F.N.B. 267. 9. E. 3. 7. 5. Mar. action sur le case. Br. 108. 3.
Mar. Die. 113. lib. 4. fo. 94. Slades case. lib. 5. fo. 81. b. Fords case.

If a man has an annuity for term of years, or for life, or in fee, and he
before it be behind does release all actions, this shall not release the
annuity, for it is not merely in action because it may be granted over. 39 H.
6. 28. b. 5 E. 4. 45. 2 H. 4. 13. 12 R. 2. release 29.

Sect. 514. Fo. 293. etc.
Mise, so called because both parties have put themselves upon the mere right
to be tried by grand Ass. or by Battle, so as that which in all other actions
is called an issue, in a writ of right in that case is called a Mise. But in a
writ of right, if a collateral point is to be tried, there it is called an
issue, 33 H. 8. c 13. 3. Ed. 6. ca. 36.

And seeing the Mise is joined upon the mere right, albeit the verdict of the
grand Ass be given upon another point, yet judgment final shall be given; and
so it is if the Tenant after the Mise joined make default, or confess the
action, or if the demandant be nonsuit, etc. 34 E. 3. Judgment 250. 13. H. 4
Judgment. 245. M. Die. 98. li. 5. fo. 85. Penerius Case, F.N.B. 5. 11. 13.

If the petty Jury be attainted of a false Oath, etc. The judgment of the
common Law is, 1. Quod amittat liberam legem imperpetuum. i. e. he shall never
be received to be a witness, or of any Jury. 2. Quod foris faciat omnia bona
and Catalla sua. 3. Quod terrae and tenementa in manus domini Reg. capiantur.
4. Quod uxores and liberi extra domus suas ejicerentur. 5. Quod domus suae
prostrentur. 6. Quod arbores sua extirpentur. 7. quod prata sua arentur. and 8.
quod corpora sua carceri mancipentur. So odious in this case, and the severity
of this punishment is to this end, ut paena ad pau^os, metus ad omnes
perveniat, for there is misericordia puniens, and there is crudelitas parcens.


In no case where a contempt, trespass, deceit, or injury is supposed in the
defendant he shall wage his Law, because the Law will not trust him with an
Oath to discharge himself in those cases, only in some cases, in debt, detinue,
account, the defendant is allowed by law, to wage his Law. 44 E. 3. 32. 18 E.
3. 4. 24 E. 3. 39.

In an action of account against a Receivor upon a receipt of money, by the hand
of another, etc. the defendant shall not wage his Law, because the receipt is
the ground of the action which lies not in privity between the plaintiff and
defendant, but in the notice of a third person, and such a receipt is
traversable. 15 E. 4. 16. 10 E. 4. 5. But in an action of debt upon a
arbitrament, or in an action of detinue by the baisement of another hand, the
defendant shall wage his Law, because the debt and detinet is the ground of
those actions, and the contract of bailement, though it be by another hand, is
but the conveiance, and not traversable. In an action of account against the
Bayliffe of a Manor, the defendant cannot wage his Law, because it sounds in
the realty. 33. H. 6. 24. 13 H 7. 3. a. 1 H. 6. 1. b. 11 H. 4. 54. 5. H. 5. 13.
9 E. 4. 1. 34. H. 8. ley gager Br. 97.

In an action of debt brought by an Attorney for his fees, the defendant shall
not wage his Law, because he is compellable to be his Attorney. 21 H. 6. 4. 10
H. 6. 7. 28. H. 6. 4. 38 H. 6 6.

Whenever a man is charged as Executor or Administrator, he shall not wage
his Law, for no man shall wage his Law of another man's deed but in case of a
successor of an Abbot, for that the house never dies. 5 H. 6. 38. 1 H. 7. 25.

CHAP. IX. Of Confirmation.
Sect. 515.
COnfirmatio omnes supplet defectus, licet id quod actum est ab initio, non
valuit. Brac. li. 2. 58.

A confirmation is a conveiance of an estate or right in esse, whereby a
voidable estate is made sure and unavoidable, or whereby a particular estate is
increased.

Confirmatio est nulla ubi donum praecedens est invalidum, and ubi donatio
nulla omnino nec valebit confirmatio. Brac. li. 2. fo. 27, 28.

Non valet confirmatio nisi ille qui confirmat, sit in possessione rei, vel
juris unde fieri debet confir. and eodem modo nisi ille cui confir. fit, sit in
possessione. 10 E. 2. confir. 14. 32. E. 3. 9. Pl. Com. Count de Leicesters
case.

Quaelibet confirmatio, aut est perficiens, crescens, aut diminuens. lib. 9.
fol. 142. Beaumonds case.

Carta autem de confirmatione est illa quae alterius factum consolidat and
confirmat, and nihil novi attribuit, quandoque tamen confirmat and addit. Flet.
l. 3. ca. 14.

En asc' case un fait de confirmation est bon and available, lou en tiel case
un fait de release nes pas bon, etc. Car release ne pas available, mes lou est
un privity, etc.

And note that where a confirmation shall enlarge an estate, there privity is
required, as well as in the case of the Release. 9 H. 6. 22. Release 44.
Littleton in this Chapter puts eight diversities between a confirmation and
release. And in this Chapter is also to be observed eight cases, wherein a
release and confirmation have the like opperation in Law. Vid. Sect. 516, etc.
fo. 296. a.

If the disseisor make a Lease for years, to begin at Michaelmos; and the
disseisee confirm his estate; this is void because he has but interesse
termini, and no estate in him, whereupon a confirmation may enure. 4 H. 7. 10.
by read. 22. E. 4. 39.

Sect. 519. etc. Fo. 296. b.
Si le desseisee confirm lestate le disseisor a aver and tentant a luy pur
term de sa vie enc'le disseisor ad fee simple, etc. pur ceo que quant son
estate fuit confime, donque il avoit fee, and tiel fait ne p^it change, son
estate sans enter fait sur luy, etc. alia ratio, quia confirmare, idem est quod
firmum facere. 19 H. 6. 22. 6 E. 3. confirmation, 4.

Sect. 520. Fo. 297. a.
Nota, a diversity between a bare assent without any right or interest, and an
assent coupled with a right or interest, and therefore an atonement cannot be
made for a time, nor upon condition, but if the person make a Lease for a 100
years, the Patron and ordinary may confirm 50 of the years, for they have an
interest, and may charge in time of vacation. Lib. 5. fo. 81. Fordes case.

If tenant for life make a lease for a 100 years, the lessor may confirm
either for part of the term, or for part of the land. But an estate of
freehold, cannot be confirmed for part of the estate, for that the estate is
entire, and not several as years be.

Sect. 521. Fo. 207. b.
If the disseisor make a gift in tail the remainder for life, the remainder to
the right heirs of tenant in tail, this extends only to the estate tail,
etc. If the disseisor infeoffe A and B and the heirs of B if the disseisee
confirm the estate of B for his life, this shall not only extend to his
companion, but to his whole fee simple, because to many purposes, he had the
whole fee simple in him, and the confirmation shall be taken most strong
against him that made it.

If a feme disseiseresse make a feoffment in fee to the use of A for life, and
after to the use of her self in tail, and the remainder to the use of B in
fee, and then takes husband the disseisee, and he release to A. all his right,
this shall enure to B. and to his own wife also, for by the rule of Littleton,
it must enure to all in the remainder.

But A. lets Land to B. for life, and B. makes a Lease to C. for his life, the
remainder to A. in fee, if A. release to C. all his right, this is good to
perfect the estate of C. for his life.

But when C. dies, A. shall be in of his old estate, etc. and note that in
these two cases, the fee is divested, and vested all at one instant, etc. Vide
fo. 297. b.

Pur ceo que le remainder est dependant, etc. by this some have gathered, that
if a disseisor make a Lease for life, reserving the reversion to himself, and
the disseisee, confirm the estate of the disseisor, that he may enter upon the
lessee, because the estate of him in the reversion depends not upon the
estate for life as the remainder: but all is one, for by the confirmation made
to him in the reversion, all the right of him that confirms is gone, as well
as when he makes it to him in remainder: and he cannot by his entry avoid the
estate of the lessee for life, but he must avoid the estate of the lessor,
which against his own confirmation he cannot do; and it has been adjudged,
that if a disseisor make a Lease for life, and after levy a fine of the
reversion with proclamations, and the five years pass, so as the disseisee is
for the reversion barred, he shall not enter upon the Lessee for life. Reported
by Sir Jo. Popham chief Justice.

Where the particular estate and the remainder depend upon one title, there the
defeating of the particular estate is a defeating of the remainder. But where
the particular estate is defeasible, and the remainder by good title, there
though the particular estate be defeated, the remainder is good. As if the
lessor disseise A. lessee for life, and make a Lease to B. for the life of A.
the remainder to C. in fee, albeit A. reenter, and defeat the estate for life,
yet the remainder to C. being once vested by good title, shall not be avoided,
for it were against reason, that the lessor should have the remainder again
against his own livery. So it is if a lease be made to an Infant for life, the
remainder in fee, the Infant at his full age disagree to the estate for life,
yet the remainder is good, Pl. Com. Colthirsts Case, fo. 298. a.

If a lease be made to A. for the life of B. the remainder to C. in fee, A.
dies before an Occupant enter, here is a remainder without a particular
estate, and yet the remainder continues, 17 E. 3. 48.

A rent is granted to the Tenant of the land for life, the remainder in fee,
this is a good remainder, albeit the particular estate continued not, for
coinstante, that he took the particular estate, eo instante, the remainder
vested, and the suspension in Judgment of Law grew after the taking of the
particular estate, 3 E. 3. Abb. Ass.

If a man grant a rent to B. for the life of Alice, the remainder to the heirs
of the body of Alice, this is a good remainder; and yet it must vest upon an
instant, 7. H. 4. 6.

Sect. 522, 523, 524. Fol. 298. 2.
A Release is more forcible in Law, then a Confirmation, if the disseisee and a
stranger disseise the heir of the disseisor, and the disseisee confirm the
estate of his companion, this shall not extinguish his right that was
suspended: So as if the heir of the disseisor re-enter, the right of the
disseisee is revived.

And so it is if the grantee of a rent charge, and a stranger disseise the
Tenant of the Land, and the grantee confirm the estate of his companion, the
Tenant of the land re-enter, the rent is received, for the Confirmation
extends not to the rent suspended, otherwise it is of a release in both cases.

Est bone and sure chose en chesc' confirmation d'aver ceux parolls a aver and
tener les tenements, etc. en fee, ou en fee tail, ou pur term de vie, ou pur
term dans solonque eo que le case est, etc.

Note the diversity between a Confirmation of the estate for life in the land,
to have and to hold the said state in the land to him and his heirs, this
cannot enlarge his estate, for his estate being but for life, cannot be
extended to his heirs. But in that case if he confirm the state for life in
the land, in the premises of the Deed, and the habendum is, to have and to hold
the land to him and his heirs, this shall create in him a fee simple, 18 E. 3.
40.

Sect. 525.
If a man lets land to the husband and wife, to have and to hold, the one
moity to the husband for term of his life, and the other moity to the wife for
her life, and the lessor confirm the estate of them both in the land, to have
and to hold to them and to their heirs; by this Confirmation, as to the moity
of the husband, it enureth only to the husband and his heirs, for the wife had
nothing in that moity, but as to the moity of the wife they are joyntenants,
for the husband has such an estate in his wifes moity in her right, as is
capable of a Confirmation. But if such a lease for life be made to two men by
several moities, and the lessor confirm their estates in the land to have and
to hold to them and to their heirs, they are Tenants in Common of the
Inheritance; for reg. the Confirmation shall enure according to the quality and
nature of the estate which it does enlarge and increase, 18 Ass. p. 3. 18 E. 3.
Confirmation 17. fol. 299. b.

If a lease for life be made to A. the remainder to B. for life, and the lessor
confirm, etc. A. takes one moity to him and his heirs, and therefore of the
one moity he is seized for life, the remainder to B. for life, and then to him
and his heirs: of the other moity A. ^is seized for life, the immediate
inheritance to B. and his heirs, because as to the moity which B. takes the
same is executed, 39 H. 6. 9

If lands be given to two men, and to the heirs of their two bodies begotten,
and the Donor confirm their two estates in the land, to have and to hold the
land to them two and to their heirs; in this case some are of opinion, that
they shall be joyntenants of the fee simple, because the Donees were
jointenants for life, and the Confirmation must enure according to the estate
which they have in possession, and that was joint. But others hold the
contrary: For

1. They say, that the Donees have to some purposes several inheritances
executed, though between the Donees survivor shall hold for their lives.

2. They say, that when the whole estate which comprehended several
inheritances is confirmed, the Confirmation must enure according to the
several inheritances, which is the greater and most perdurable estate, and
therefore that the Donees shall be Tenants in Common of the inheritance in this
case.

Albeit in this case of Littleton, the husband by the Confirmation gains an
estate for life in remainder, yet if the husband does waste, an action of Waste
shall lie against him and his wife, notwithstanding the mean remainder, because
the husband himself commits the wast and does the wrong, 17 E. 3. 68. b. Sir
Edward Caries Case, lib. 5. fo. 76. b.

Sect. 526, 527. Fol. 300. a.
Note a diversity between a lease for life and a lease for years, made to a
feme covert: for her estate of Freehold cannot be altered by the confirmation
made to her husband and her, as the term for years may, whereof her husband may
make disposition at his pleasure.

Chattels reals, as leases for years, Wardships, etc. are not given to the
husband absolutely (as all Chattels personals are) by the intermarriage, but
conditionally, if the husband happen to survive her, and he has power to alien
them at his pleasure: but in the mean time the husband is possessed of the
Chattels real in her right, 5 E 3. 17. b. Pl. Com. 418. b. 24. H. 4. 12. Pl.
Com. Dame Hales Case, 50 Ass. p. 15. 4 H. 6. 5. 7 H. 6. 1. 21 H. 7. 29. 21 E.
4. 40. 26 H. 8. 7.

Such a thing as I may defeat by my Entry, I may make good by my Confirmation,
11 H 7. 28. 3 H 4. 10.

If the feoffee upon condition grant a rent charge en fee, and the feoffor
confirm it, and after the Condition is broken, and the feoffor enter, he shall
not avoid the rent charge. And so it is if the heir of the diffeisor grant a
rent charge, and the disseisee confirms it, and after recover the Land, he
shall not avoid the rent. And yet in neither of these cases his entry was
congeable at the time of the Confirmation, Lib. 1. fo. 147. etc. Anne Mayowes
case.

Sect. 528. Fol. 300. b.
Persona, is said to be seized in jure Ecclesiae, and the Law had an excellent
end herein, viz. that in his person the Church might sue for and defend her
right, and also be sued by any that had an elder and better right; and when the
Church is full, it is said to be plena and consulta of such a one person
thereof, that may vicem seu personam gerere ejusdem Ecclesiae, Brit. fol. 234.
b. F.N. 48.

A. Parson of D. is Patron of the Church of S. as belonging to his Church, and
presents B. who by consent of A. and of the Ordinary, grant a rent charge out
of the Gleab; this is not good to make the rent charge perpetual, without the
assent of the Patron of A. no more then the assent of the Bishop who is Patron,
without the Dean or Chapter; or no more then the assent of the Patron being
Tenant in Tail or for life, as Littleton says. And Littleton here says, that
the Patron that confirms must have a fee simple, meaning to make the charge
perpetual. And Littleton after says, that in the case of the Parson the fee
is in abeiance; and seeing the consent of the Patron is in respect of his
interest as heir, it appears by Littleton he may consent upon Condition,
otherwise it is of an attornment, because it is a bare assent. Also if the
state of the Patron be conditional, and he confirms, and after the Condition
is broken, his Confirmation is void, Lib. 2. 39 and 24 l. 1. 153 l. 4 23, 24.
l. 5. 31. 81. l. 10. 6. l. 11. 19. l. 6. 34.

Note a diversity between a sole Corporation, as Parson, Prebend, Vicar, etc.
that have not the absolute fee in them, for to their grants, the Patron must
give his consent. But if there be a Corporation aggregate of many, as Dean and
Chapter, Mr. fellows and Scholars of a College, Abbot or prior, and Covent,
etc. or any sole corporation that has the absolute fee, as a Bishop with
consent of the Deane and Chapter, they may by the Common Law make any grant of,
or out of their possessions, without their founder or patron, albeit the Abbot
or prior, etc. were presentable: and so it is of a Bishop, because the whole
estate and right of the Land was in them, and they may respectively maintain a
writ of right. 12 H. 4. 11. 19 E 3. 7. 7. Eliz. Die. 238. 9. E. 4. 6. 2 H 4. 11.

And note a diversity between a confirmation of an estate, and a confirmation
of a deed, for if the disseisor make a charter feoffment to A. with a Letter of
Attorney, and before livery, the disseisee confirm the estate of A. or the Deed
made to A. this is clearly void, though livery be made after. But if a Bishop
had made a Charter, etc. and the Deane and Chapter, before livery confirm the
Deed, this is a good confirmation, and livery made afterward is good. The like
Law is of confirmation of a Deed; of grant, of a reversion before Attornement.

Grants made by Parsons, Prebends, Deane and Chapter, etc. are restrained by
diverse acts of Parliament, 13. El ca. 10. 1. Eliz. ca. 18. 18. El. ca. 11. 1.
Ja. ca. 3. Section 593 and 648. l. 2. fo. 46. l. 4. 76. and 120. l. 5. 9. 6.
14. li. 6. 17. li. 7. 8. lib. 11. 6. 7. defessus sum, etc.

Sect. 529. and Sect. 531. Fol. 301. a, and b.
Note a diversity, where the determination of the rent is expressed in the
Deed, and when it is employed in Law. For when Tenant for life grant a rent in
fee, this by Law is determined by his death, and yet a confirmation of the
grant by him in reversion, makes that grant good for ever, without words of
enlargement, or clause of distre^^e, which would amount to a new grant; and yet
if the Tenant for life had granted a rent to another and his heirs by express
words, during the life of the grantor, and the lessor had confirmed that grant,
it should determine by the death of Tenant for life 26. Ass. p. 38. 45. Ass. p.
13. 14. Ass. p. 14.

Dedi or concessi, may amount to a grant, a feoffment, a gift, a Lease, a
release, a confirmation, a surrender, etc. and it is in the Election of the
party, to use which of these purposes he will, Brit. li. 2. f. 59. b. Brook
tit. confir. 20. 14 H. 7. 2 37. H. 6. 17. Die. 8. Eliz. 4 H. 7. 10. 22 E. 4. 36.
40 E. 341.

But a release, confirmation, or surrender, etc. cannot amount to a grant, etc.
nor a surrender, to a confirmation, or to a release, etc. because these be
proper and peculiar manner of conveyances, etc.

Dimifi (and this verb, volo) will amount to a confirmation. 7 E. 3. 9. In
ancient statutes, and in original writs, as in the writ of entry in casu
proviso, in consimili casu ad com. legem. etc. this word dimifi is not applied
only in a Lease for life, but to a gift in tail, and to a state in fee. 32 E.
3. breve 29. 1. Stat. Gloc. ca. 4. Benignae enim faciendae sunt
intepraetationes cartarum, propter simplicitatem laicorum, ut res magis valcat
quam pereat; and he to whom such a Deed comprehending, dedi, etc. is made, may
plead it as a grant, as a release, or as a confirmation, at his Election. 14 H.
4. 36. li. 5. fo. 15. in Newcomens case.

If a disseisor make a Lease for life, or a gift in tail, the remainder to the
disseisee in fee, the disseisee by his Deed grants over the remainder, the
particular tenant attorneth the disseisee shall not enter upon the Tenant for
life, or in tail, for then he should avoid his grant demesne, which amounted
to a grant of the estate, and a confirmation also.

Sect. 543. Fol. 302. b.
If cesty que use and his feoffees after the Statute 1 R 3. and before the
Statute 27 H. 18 ca. 10. had joined in a f^offment, it shall be the feoffment
of the feoffees, because the State of the Land was in him. 21 H. 7. 34. b. Pl.
Com. 59. a. Wimbishes case.

So it is if the Tenant for life, and he in the remainder, or reversion in fee
join in a feoffment by Deed, the livery of the freehold shall move from the
leffee, and the inheritance from him in the reversion or remainder, from each
of them according to his estate. Pl. Com. 140. Brownings case. 2 H 5. 7. 13 H.
7. 14. 13 E. 4. 4. a. 27 H. 8. 13. M. 16. and 17 El. 339.

But if he in the reversion in fee and Tenant for life, join in a feoffment per
paroll, this shall be (as some hold) first a surrender of the estate of Tenant
for life, and then the Feoffment of him in the reversion, for otherwise if the
whole should pass from the lessee, then he in the reversion might enter for
the forfeiture, and every man's act (ut res magis valeat) shall be construed
most strongly against himself.

If the disseisor and disseisee join in a Charter of feoffment, and enter into
the Land, and make livery, it shall be accounted the feoffment of the
disseisee, and the confirmation of the disseisor.

Placitum a placendo, quia omnibus placet. Fo. 303. a.

Ordine placitandi servato, servatur and jus, etc. 1. In good order of
pleading, a man must plead to the jurisdiction of the Court. 2. To the person
of the plaintiff, and to the defendant. 3. To the Count. 4. To the Writ. 5. To
the action, etc. Bract. li. 5. fo. 400. Britton fo. 41. a. and 122. 40. E. 3.
9. b.

The count must be agreeable and conform to the writ, the bar to the count,
etc. and the judgment to the count.

Certa debet esse intentio and narratio, and certum fundamentum et certa res
quae deducitur in judicium. Note, three kind of certainties. 1. To a Common
intent, and that is sufficient in a bar, which is to defend the party, and to
excuse him.

2. A certain intent in general, as in Counts, replications, and other
pleadings of the plaintiff, that is to convince the defendant; and so in
indictments, etc.

3. A certain intent in every particular, as in Estoppells. Bract. l. 2. fo.
140. lib. 5. 120, etc. Lobs case.

Where a matter of Record is the foundation, or ground of the suit of the
plaintiff, or of the substance of the plea, there it ought to be certainly,
and truly alleged, otherwise it is, where it is but a conveiance, Pl. Com.
65. a 6. 100. 376. and 410. 8. Ass. 29. 5 E. 4. 70 E. 4. 1. Ambiguum placitum
interpretari debet contra proferentem. 3 H. 7. 3. 29 Ass. 10. 14 H. 4. 4. b.
lib. 3. fo. 59. Linc. Coll. cafe. Vide, etc. fo 303. b. Expedit Reipublicae ut
fit finis litium, 22 E. 4. 40.

All necessary circumstances employed by Law, in the plea need not to be
expressed, as in the plea of a feoffment of a Manor, livery and attornement
are employed. 40 E. 3. 40. 43. 46. 14 H. 4. 15. 12 E. 4. 1. 7 H. 7. 3.

A man is bound to perform all the Covenants in an Indenture: if all the
Covenants be in the affirmative, he may generally plead performance of all, but
if any in the negative, to so many he must plead specially (for a negative
cannot be performed) and to the rest generally. 2 H. 7. 15. 4 H. 7. 12. 26 H.
8. 5. b.

So if any be in the disjunctive, he must show which of them has performed. So
if any are to be done of Record, he must show that specially, and cannot
involve that in general pleading. l. 8. 133. Turners case, and 120. Benhams
case. l. 9. 25. 61. lib. 10. 100.

The Count or declaration is an exposition of the Writ, and adds time, place,
and other necessary circumstances, that the same may be triable, and any
imperfection in the Count does abate the Writ. Vide bone matter concernant
pleading. Fo. 303.

A departure in pleading, is said to be when the second plea contains matter
not pursuant to his former, and which fortifieth not the same. As if in Ass.
the Tenant plead a descent from his Father, and gives a color, the demandant
intituleth himself by a feoffment from the Tenant himself, the plaintiff
cannot say, that the feoffment was upon condition, and to show the condition
broken, for that should be a clear departure from his bar, because it
contains matter subsequent, but in an Ass. if the Tenant plead in bar, that
I.S. was seized and infeoffed him, etc. and the plaintiff shows, that he
himself was seized in fee, until I.S. disseised, who infeoffed the Tenant,
and he re-entred, the defendant may plead a release of the plaintiff to I. S.
for this does fortify the bar. Pl. Com. 105. 1 Mar. Die. 95. 28. H. 8. ib.
31. 6. H. 7. 8. 3 H. 6. departure 2.

Where the Tenant or defendant may plead a general issue, there upon the
general issue pleaded, he may give in evidence as many distinct matters, to
bar the action or right of the demandant, or plantiffe as he can.

A special verdict may continue double or treble matter, and therefore in
those cases, the Tenant or defendant may either make choice of one matter, and
so plead it to bar, the demandant or plantiffe, or to plead the general
issue, and to take advantage of all, or he may plead to part, one of the Pleas
in bar, and to another part, another plea, and his conclusion of his plea,
shall avoid doublenes, and hereby neither the Court, nor the Jury is so much
inveigled, as if one plea should contain diverse distinct matters. And if the
Tenant make choice of one plea in bar, and that be found against him, yet he
may resort to an action of an higher nature, and take advantage of any other
matter. And the law in this point, is by them that understand not the reason
thereof misliked, saying, nemo prohibetur pluribus defensionibus uti. 17 E. 3.
73. 39 H. 6. 27. Apiees juris, non sunt jura; and yet in law, praestat cautela
quam medela.

Sect. 535, 536, 537, 538. Fo. 305. a.b.
A Tenure may be abridged by a confirmation: but not a rent charge, or common.
But a man may release part of his rent charge, or common, etc.

The Lord by his confirmation may diminish and abridge the services, but to
reserve upon the confirmation new services he cannot, so long as the former
state in the Tenancy continues; and as where confirmation does enlarge an
estate in Land, there ought to be privity, so reg. where a confirmation does
abridge services, there ought to be privity. 28 E. 3. 92, 93. 26. Ass. 37. 6.
El. Die. 230 b. 7 E. 4. 25. a. 21 E. 4. 62. per Brian. 10 E. 3. avowry 100.

Also there is required privity, when the Lord by his release, abridgeth the
services of his Tenant. And therefore the Lord paramount cannot release to the
Tenant paravaile saving to him part of his services, but the saving in that
case is void, 4 E. 3. 19. 9. E 3. 1. 12 E. 4. 11. 16. E. 3. Fines 4.

If a man hold of me by Knights service, rent, suit, etc. and I release to him
all my right in the Seigniory, excepting the Tenure by Knights service, or
confirm his estate to hold of me by Knights service only, for all manner of
Services, Exactions and Demands, yet shall the Lord have Ward, Marriage,
Relief, Aid, pur file marier, and pur fair fits Chivaler, for these be
incidents to the Tenure that remain. But it is holden, That if a man make a
gift in Tail by Deed, reserving 2. s. rent, a luy and ses heirs pro omnibus
and omnimodis servitiis, exactionibus secularibus and cunctis demandis, If the
Donee dye, his heir of full age, the Donor shall have no relief; because
relief lies in demand, 13 R. 2. Avowry 29. Mota Fitzh. Confirm. Pl. 21.

Sect. 541. Fol. 306. b.
A man may be put out of possession of the custody of his Ward, but not of his
Villain in gross, 45 E. 3. 10. 1 H. 6. c. 5. Reg. 102.

Also of things that are in grant, as Rents, Commons, etc. it is at the
election of the party, whether he will be desseised of them or no, Brook tit.
Property, 28.

Non valet confirmatio nisi ille qui confirmat fit in possessione rei vel
juris, unde fieri debet confirmatio, and eodem modo nisi ille cui confirmatio
fit, fit in possessione, Bract. l. 2. 59. b. 9 E. 4. 38. Dyer 10 El. Growches
Case.

But of a Villain Regardant to a Manor, the Lord may be put out of possession,
for by putting him out of possession of the Manor, which is the principal, he
may likewise be put out of possession of the Villain Regardant, which is but
accessory: and by the recovery of the Manor, the Villain is recovered.

But if another does take away my Villain in gross or Regardant, he gains no
possession of him.

By the grant of the Manor without saying Cum pertinentiis, the Villain
Regardant, Advowson appendant, and the like, do pass: for if the desseisor
shall gain them as incidents to the Manor whose estate is wrongful, A multo
fortiori, the feoffee who comes to his estate by lawful Conveyance, shall
have them as incidents. But where the entry of the disseisee is lawful, he may
seize the Villain Regardant, or present to the Advowson, etc. before he enter
into the Manor, otherwise it is where his entry is not lawful, 9 E. 4. 38. 3 H.
4. 15. 18 E. 3. 44. 19 R. 2. Tresp. 255. 10 H. 7. 9. F.N.B. 33. q. 22 H. 6. 33.
per Moyle 43. E. 3. 12. Bract. 242, etc. Brit. fol. 126.

Sect. 545, 546, 547, 548, 549, etc. Fol. 308.
Si jeo lessa terra a un home pur term dans and puis jeo confirm son estate
sans pluis parols mitter en le fait parcel il and pluis grandeur estate que pur
term dans, sicome il avoit a devant. Mes si jeo release a luy, etc. il ad
estate de franktenement.

Si jeo estant deins age lessa terre a un auter pur term de 20. ans, and puis
il grant le terre a un auter 10. ans parcel de son term en cest case, quant
jeo sue de plein age, si jeo release al grantee de mon lessee, etc. cest
release est void, pur ceo que il luy ad asc' privity per-entrer luy and moy,
etc. Mes si jeo confirm son estate, ceo est bone. Mes si mon lessee grant tout
son estate a un auter, donque mon release fait al grantee est bon and effectual.

Si home grant un rent charge issuant horse de son terre a un auter pur term de
son vie, and puis il confirma son estate en le dit rent, a aver and tener a luy
in fee tail ou in fee simple cest confir' est void, quant a enlarge son estate,
pur ceo que celuy que confirm navoit asc' reversion en le rent. Mes si homo
soit seisin in fee de rent service, on de rent charge, and il grant le rent,
etc. auterment en, pur ceo que il avoit un reversion del rent.

So note the diversity between a rent newly created, and a rent in esse, 21 E.
3. 47. 15 E. 4. 8 b. Pl. Com. 35. 8 H. 4. 19.

But in the first case, the grantor may grant to the grantee for life, and his
heirs, that he and his heirs shall distrain for the rent, etc. and this shall
amount to a new grant, and yet amount to no double charge. Ex paucis plurima
concipit ingenium.

CHAP. X. Of Attornment.
Sect. 551. Fol. 309. a.
ATtornment, is an agreement of the Tenant to the grant of the Seigniory, or of
a Rent; or of the Donee in Tail, or Tenant for life or years, to a grant of a
reversion or remainder made to another, Bract. l. 2. fo. 81 Britt. f. 105. b.
176. and 177.

Si dominus Attornare possit servitium tenentis contra voluntatem tenentis,
tale sequeretur inconveniens, quod possit eum subjugare capitali inimico suo,
and per quod teneretur sacramentum fidelitatis facere ei qui eum damnificare
intenderat.

Every grant must take effect as to the substance thereof, in the life both of
the grantor and the grantee, l 1. fo. 104, 105. Shelleys Case.

Since Littleton wrote, if a Fine be levied of a Seigniory, etc. to another, to
the use of a third person and his heirs, he and his heirs shall distrain
without any Attornment, because he is in by the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. by
transferring the state to the use, and so he is in by act in Law, lib 6. fol.
68. Sir Moyles Finches Case.

So it is if a man by Deed indented and enrolled according to the Statute,
bargain and sell a Seigniory, etc. to another, the Seigniory shall pass
without Attornment; and so it is of ^ Rent, a Reversion, and a Remainder, 27 H.
8. cap. 16. Vide Sect. 584.

But if the Conusee of a Fine, before any Attornment by Deed indented and
enrolled, bargain and sell the Seigniory to another, the bargainee shall not
distrain, because the bargainor could not distrain, and sic de similibus; for
Nemo potest plus juris ad alium transfer quam ipse habet, vide Sect. 149.
where upon a Recovery, the Recoveror shall distrain and avow without Attornment.

A grant to the King, or by the King to another, is good without Attornment by
his Prerogative, 49 E. 3. 4. 34 H. 6. 8. 6 E. 4. 13.

If there be Lord, Mesne and Tenant, and the Mesne grant over his Mesnalty by
Deed, the Lord release to the Tenant, whereby the Mesnalty is extinct, and
there is a rent by surplusage, an Attornment to the grant of this rent seck is
good, although the quality of that part of the rent is altered, because it is
altered by act in Law.

If a reversion of two acres be granted by Deed, and the lessor before
Attornment levy a Fine of one of them, and the Tenant attorn to the grantee by
Deed, this is good for the other acre.

If the reversion be granted of three acres, and the lessee agree to the said
grant for one acre, this is good for all three, and so it is of an Attornment
in Law, if the reversion of three acres be granted, and the lessee surrender
one of the acres to the grantee etc. 18 E. 3. Variance 63. 22 E. 3. 18. l. 2.
fo. 67 b. Tookers case, fo. 309 b.

Reg. the Attornment must be according to the grant, either expressly or
impliedly, 39 H. 6. 3.

Impliedly, as if a reversion be granted to two by Deed, and the lessee Attorn
to one of them according to the grant, this Attornment shall enure to both the
grantees; and so it is if one grantee dye, the Attornment to the survivor is
good, 11 H. 7. 12.

If the Lord grant by Deed his Seigniory to A. for life, the remainder to B in
fee, A. dies, and then the Tenant Attorn to B. this Attornment is void,
because it is not according to the grant, for then B. should have a remainder,
without any particular estate, 20 H. 6. 7.

If a reversion be granted to a man and a woman, they are to have moities in
Law; but if they intermarry, and then Attornment is had, they shall have no
moities, beause it is by act in Law, Pl. Com. 187. 483.

If a feme grant a reversion to a man in fee, and marry with the grantee, the
lessee Attorne to the husband, this is a good attornment in Law to the husband,
2 R. 2. Attornment 8.

If a reversion be granted by Deed to the use of I. S. and the lessee hearing
the Deed read; or having notice of the contents thereof, Attorn to Cesty que
use, this is an employed Attornment to the grantee, l. 4. fo. 61. Hemings case.

Sect. 552. Fo. 310. a and b.
Note that Littleton expresses not what estate is granted, and very
materially, for if the former grant were in fee, and the latter grant were for
life, and the Tenant does first attorn to the 2d grantee, he cannot after
attorn to the first grantee to make the fee simple pass, for that should not be
according to the grant, but in that case the Attornment to the first is
countermanded.

If a reversion upon an estate for years be granted in fee, and the lessor
confirm the estate of the lessee for life, he cannot afterward attorn. And so
it is if the grantor before Attornment confirm the estate of the lessee for
life in Tail, etc.

If a feme sole make a lease for life or years reserving a rent, and grant the
reversion in fee, and takes husband, this is a Countermand of the Attornment,
11 H. 7. 19.

If in the case that our Author here puts of several grantees, if the
Tenant attorn to both of them, the Attornment is void, because it is not
according to the grant.

If a reversion be granted for life, and after it is granted to the same
grantee for years, and the lessee Attorn to both grants, it is void for the
uncertainty, 11 H. 7. 12.

A multo fortiori, if the Lord by one Deed grant his Seigniory to I. Bishop of
London, and to his heirs, and by another Deed to I. Bishop of London, and to
his successors, and the Tenant Attorne to both grants, the Attornment is void,
for albeit the grantee be but one, yet he has several capacities, and the
grants are several, and the Attorment is not according to either of the grants.

But if A. grant the reversion of black acre or white acre, and the lessee
attorn to the grant, and after the grantee makes his election, this Attornment
is good, for albeit the state was incertaine, yet he Attorneth to the grant in
such sort as it was made And so note a diversity between one grant and several
grants; and observe an Attornment good in expectation, which passed by the
election subsequent.

Sect. 553. Fol. 301. a.
Note, that when a man makes a feoffment of a Manor, the services do not pass
but remain in the feoffor, until the Freeholders do attorn, and then the
Attornment shall have relation to some purpose, and not to other; for albeit
the Attornment be made many years after this feoffment; yet it shall have
relation to make it pass out of the feoffor, Ab initio, even by the livery
upon the feoffment, but not to charge the Tenants with any mean arrerages, or
for Waste in the mean time, etc. Temps E. 2. Attorn. 48 E. 3 15.

If a reversion of land be granted to an alien by Deed, who is made Denizen,
and then the Attornment is made, the King upon Office found, shall have the
land: for as to the state between the parties, it passed by the Deed ab initio,
P. 5 E. 3. Coram Rege Sussex in Thesaur. 21 E. 3. 47.

If a man plead a feoffment of a Manor, he need not plead an Attornment of the
Tenants, but (if it be material) it must be denied, or pleaded of the other
side, 34 E. 3. Double Plea 24. 42. Ass. p. 6.

And upon consideration had of all the Books touching this point, whether the
services of the Freeholders do pass, wherein there have been three several
opinions, viz. some have holden that the services do pass in the right, by the
livery, as parcel of the Manor, but not to avow before Attornment, as in the
case of the Fine. And others have holden, that they do pass in right and
possession, to distrain without Attornment. 26 E. 3. per que servitia 21. 8 H.
4. 1. b. 12 H. 4. 20 H. 6, 7. 35 H 6 9 E. 4. 33. 13 H. 7. 14. a. 1 H. 7. 31. 4
E. 4. Attorn., Br. 30.

And the third opinion is, that in this case the said services pass neither in
possession, nor in right, but until Attornment remain in the Alienor as
Littleton here holds; and so it was resolved. P 15 Eliz. between Brasbitch,
and Barwell. vide H. 14. Eliz Rot. 508. in Com B.

Sect. 590, 591. Fo. 324.
Si home fait done en tail, ou lease pur term de vie, ou pur term dans del
parcel del demesne d'un Manor, etc. Savant le reversion a tiel donor, ou
lessor, etc. and puis il soit disseise del Manor, etc. and le disseisor mor.
seize, etc. and son heir evant eins pur descent, uncore tiel donor, etc.
distreina pur le rent arere; and tiel reversion apres tiel disseisin est sever
del Manor en fait, commit que ne soit sever en droit.

And so note a diversity between rents and services parcel of a Manor, and
rents and Services incident to a reversion parcel of a Manor. And the reason of
this diversity is, for that as long as the donee in tail, lessee for life or
lessee for years, are in possession, they preserve the reversion in the donor
or lessor, and so long as the reversion continue in the donor or lessor, so
long do the rents and services, which are incidents to the reversion belong to
the donor or lessor. Neither can the donor or lessor be put out of his
reversion, unless the donee, or lessee be out of their possession, etc. But if
the donee or lessee make a regresse, and regain their estate and possession,
thereby they do ipso facto revest the reversion in the donor or lessor.

And note, when a man is seized of a Manor and makes a gift in tail, or Lease
for life, etc. Of parcel of the demesne of the Manor; the reversion is part of
the Manor, and by the grant of the Manor the reversion shall pass with the
Attornment of the Donee or lessee. But if the Lord make a gift or a Lease for
life of the whole Manor, except bl. acre parcel of the demesne of the Manor,
and after he grant away his Manor, B. acre shall not pass, because during the
estate tail, or Lease for life, it is severed from the Manor. And so note a
diversity, that a reversion of part, may be parcel of a Manor in possession,
but a part in possession cannot be parcel of the reversion of a Manor
expectant upon any estate of freehold. But if a man make a Lease for years of
a Manor except B. acre, and after grant away the Manor, B. acre shall pass,
because the freehold being entire, it remains parcel of the Manor, and one
praecipe of the whole Manor shall serve. But otherwise it is in case of a gift
in tail, or Lease for life, excepting any part, there must be several Writs
of Praecipe, because the freehold is several, 18. Ass. p. 2. 38 H. 6. 33. Pl.
Com. Fulmerstons case. 103. lib. 5. 11. 22. 25. 19 E. 2. breve 845. 4 E. 3.
brief. 713.

Now let us Attorne to the precedent Sections.

Sect. 554. Fol. 311. a.
No man shall attorne to any grant of any Signiory, rent service, reversion, or
remainder, but he that is immediately privy to the grantor.

Sect. 556. Fol. 311. b.
Here observe a diversity, between a rent service, and a rent charge, or a
rent secke. And therefore (without respect of any privity) the disseisor only
in case of a rent charge, shall attorne, because he is Tenant of the freehold,
but in case of a grant of a rent service, the attornment of the disseisee
suffices. 21 H. 6. 9. b.

It was holden by Dyer and Mounson, in the Argument of Brace bridges case; that
if he that has a rent charge, grants it over for life, and the Tenant of the
Land attorn thereunto, and after he grant the reversion of the rent charge,
that the grantee for life may attorne alone; and that these words of Littleton
are to be understood, when a rent charge, or rent seck is granted in
possession, and a quid juris clamat, in that case, did lie against the grantee
for life. 46 E. 3. 27. 2 H. 6. 9. Vide Littleton. Sect 549. and 553.

A man makes a Lease for life, and after grants to A. a rent charge out of the
reversion. A. grants the rent over, he in the reversion must Attorne, and not
the Tenant of the freehold, for that the freehold is not charged with the rent,
for a release made to him by the grantee, does not extinguish the rent; and
Littleton is to be understood, that the Tenant of the freehold must attorne,
when the freehold is charged, Vide fo. 312. a.

Littleton speaks of five kinds of inheritances whereto an Attornement is
requisite. 1. Of a Seignory rent service, etc. 2. Of a rent charge. 3. Of rent
seck 4. Of a reversion. 5. Of a remainder of Lands. For the Tenant shall never
need to Attorne, but when there is tenure, attendance, remainder, or payment of
a rent. And therefore if an annuity, common of pasture, common of estovers, be
granted for life, or years, etc. the reversion may be granted without any
Attornment. 21 H. 7. 1. 1 H. 5. 1. 37. Ass. 14. 36. Ass p. 3. 31 H. 8. Attorn.
Br. 59.

Sect. 557. Fol. 312. b.
In this case of Littleton by this escheat of the remainder, the Seigniory is
extinct, for the fee simple of the Seigniory being extinct, there cannot remain
a particular estate for life thereof in respect of the tenure, and attendance
over 3. 3 H. 6. 1. old tenures 107. 15 E. 4. 15. a. per Littleton.

But otherwise it is of a rent charge in fee, for if that be granted for life,
and after he in the reversion purchase the Land, so as the reversion of the
rent charge is extinct, yet the grantee for life, shall enjoy the rent during
his life, for there is no tenure or attendance in this case.

Sect. 558, 559. Fo. 313. a.
Littleton now comes to speak of Atornments in Law or employed. 3 E. 3. 42. 15
E 3. Attorne 11.

If the Lord grant his Signiory to the Tenant of the land, and to a stranger;
and the Tenant accept the Deed, this acceptance is a good Attornment to
extinguish the one moity, and to vest the other moity in the grantee.

Suspense, is when a Seigniory, Rent, profit apprehend. etc. by reason of unity
of possession of the Rent, Seigniory, etc. of the Land out of which they issue,
are not in esse for a time; and they are said to be extinguished, when they are
gone for ever, and can never be revived, that is when one man has as high and
perdurable estate in the one, as in the other.

Sect. 560. 561. Fol. 313. a. and b.
Note, that albeit a grant may enure by way of release, and a release to the
Tenant for life does work an absulute extinguishment, whereof he in the
remainder shall take benefit, yet the Law shall never make any construction
against the purport of the grant to the prejudice of any, or against the
meaning of the parties, etc. Vide lib. etc.

Sect. 562. Fo. 314. a.
Note a diversity when the whole estate in the Seigniory is suspended, and when
but part of the estate in the Seigniory is suspended but for term of life, and
therefore as to all things concerning the right it has its being, but as the
possession during the particular estate, the grantee shall take no benefit,
therefore during that time, he shall have no rent service, Wardship, Relief,
Heriot, etc. because these belong to the possession, but if the Tenant dies
without heir, the Tenancy shall escheat unto the grantee, for that it is in the
right, and yet when the Seigniory is revived by the death of the Tenant, there
shall be wardship, as if the Tenant marry with the Seignioresse and dies, his
heir within age, they shall have the wardship of the heir. Also in the case
that Littleton here puts, albeit the Seigniory be suspended but for life,
yet some hold, that he cannot grant it over, because the grantee took it
suspended, and it was never in esse in him, but if the Tenant make a Lease for
years, or for life to the Lord, there the Lord may grant it over, because the
Seigniory was in esse in him, and the fee simple of the Seigniory is not
suspended, but if the Lord disseise the Tenant, or the Tenant infeoffe the Lord
upon condition, there the whole estate in the Seigniory is suspended; and
therefore he cannot during the suspension, take benefit of any escheat or grant
over his Seigniory. 34. Ass. p. 15. 16 E. 3. vouch. 83. 5 E. 3. Twongs case.

Sect. 563. 564. Fo. 314.
Attornment for part, cannot be void for that, and good it cannot be unless it
be for the whole. 4 E. 3. 55. Malmans case. 5 E. 4. 2. 7 H. 4. 10. 35 H. 6. 8.
per prisot.

And payment of any parcel of the services, is an agreement in Law to the
grant 40 E. 3. 34.

Intentio inservire debet legibus, non leges intentioni. 20 H. 6.

Judgment in scire facias pur parcel de le services est bone attorn. en ley,
commit que il est presume, quod judicium redditur in invitum. 48 E. 3. 24. 37
H. 6 14. per Moyle. 17 E. 3. 29.

Note that in case of Deed, nothing passes before attornment.

In the case of the fine, the thing granted passes as to the State, but not to
distraine, etc. without Attornment. In the case of the King, the thing granted
does pass both in estate and in privity to distreine, etc. without Attornment,
unless it be of Lands or Tenements, that are parcel of the Duchy of
Lancaster, and lie out of the County Palatine.

Sect. 565. Fo. 315. b.
Note a diversity between money given by way of Attornment, and where it is
given as parcel of the Rent, by way of seisin of the Rent. And therefore a
payment in name of seisin is more beneficial for the grantee, because this is
both an actual seisin, and an Attornment in Law, and yet being given before
the day in which the Rent is due, it shall not be abated out of the Rent. 39 H.
6. 3. 26. 5 E. 4. 2. Vide S. 235. 7 H. 4. 2. Attorney Br. 97.

Sect. 566.
As of an Attornment, so a seisin of a rent by the hands of one joynt-tenant is
good for all, and a seisin of part of the rent is a good seisin of the whole,
Lib. 2. fo. 67. Bookers case.

If either the grantor, or grantee dye, the Attornment is countermanded, but if
the Tenant dye, he that has his Estate may Attorn at any time; If the Tenant
grant over his estate, his Assignee may attorn. Lib. 4. fo. 8. l. 6. fo. 57. l.
9. fo. 34. 4 H. 6. 29. 18 E. 4. 10.

If an Infant has Lands by purchase, or by descent, he shall be compelled to
Attorn in a per que servitia. 42 E 3. Age 33. 18 H. 6. 2. l. 9. fo. 84. 85.
Coyns case. 4. M. Die. 137. 7 E. 2. Age 140.

If an infant be lessee, he shall be compelled to Attorn in a quid Juris
clamat, the Attornment of an Infant to a grant by Deed is good, and shall bind
him, because it is lawful, albeit he be not upon that grant by Deed
compellable to Attorne.

Sect. 567. Fol. 315. b.
The grant of the reversion by Deed, with the attornment of lessee for years,
do countervaile in Law, a feoffment by livery, as to the passing of the
freehold and inheritance.

And Tenant by statute Merchant, or Staple, or by Elegit, must also attorn, for
the grantee may have a venire facias ad computat. or tender the money, etc. and
discharge the Land, and if the reversion be granted by Fine, they shall be
compelled to attorn in a Quid juris clamat 6 E. 3. 53. 25 E. 3. 53. Br. Attor.
48. 32 E 3. scire facias 101. Die. 1. a.

And so the Executors that have the Land until the debts be paid, must attorn
upon the grant of the reversion, although they have not any certain term for
years.

Sect. 568. Fo. 316. a.
If Tenant in Dower, or by the courtesy grant over his or her estate, and the
heir grant over the reversion, the Tenant in Dower, or by the Courtesy may
attorn, because at the time of the grant made, they were attendant to the heir
in reversion, and the grantee cannot be Tenant in Dower, or by the Courtesy;
and if the reversion be granted by Fine, the Fine must suppose that the Tenant
in Dower, or by the Courtesy, did hold the land, albeit they had formerly
granted over their estate, and albeit the reversion does pass by the Fine, yet
the Quid juris clamat must be brought against him that was Tenant, at the time
of the note levied; and the grantee of the reversion must bring an action of
waste against the Assignee of Tenant in Dower, or by the Courtesy, for they
themselves cannot hold of any but of the heir; and therefore in respect of the
privity they shall attorn, and be subject to an action of waste, as long as the
reversion remains in the heir, albeit they have granted over their whole
estate: and note that if the grantee of the reversion, does bring an Action of
wast against the Assignee of Tenant by the Courtesy, the plaintiff must
rehearse the Statute, which proves that no prohibition of waste, in that case
lay at the common Law, as it did, if the heir had brought it against the Tenant
by the Courtesy himself: and therefore some do hold, that if the heir do
grant over the reversion, that the Attornement of the Assignee of the Tenant by
Courtesy, or of Tenant in Dower is sufficient, because they afterward, must be
attendant, and subject to the Action of waste. 10. H. 4 Attornment 16. 11 H. 4.
18. F.N.B. 55 E. Reg. fo. 72. 4 E. 3. 26.

If the reversion of lessee for life be granted, and lessee for life Assign
over his estate, the lessee cannot attorne, but the attornment of the Assignee
is good, because it behooves that the Tenant of the land do attorne, and after
the Assignment there is no tenure or attendance, etc. between the lessee and
him in reversion. 18 E. 4. 10. b. 26 E. 3. 62. 5 H. 5. 10.

Sect. 569, 570, 571, 552, 573. Fo. 316. b.
No Quid juris clamat lies against Tenant in tail, but if a man make a gift
in tail, the remainder in fee, and the Seigniory, or rent charge issuing out
of the land be granted by Fine, the Conusee shall maintain a per que servitia,
or a Quem redditum, and compel him to Attorne, for herein his estate of
inheritance is no privilege to him, for that a Tenant in fee simple (as his
Estate was at the Common Law) is also compellable in these cases to attorne.

Lou le reversion est dependant sur lestate del franktenement, suffist que le
tenant del franktenement attorn sur grant del reversion, etc. Si lease pur
term dans, etc. ou done en le tail, soit fait reserve un rent, per le grant
del reversion en tiel case, le rent passara, pur ceo que tiel rent est incident
al reversion, and nemy e converso.

If a man let land to another for his life, and after he confirm by his Deed,
the estate of the Tenant for life, the remainder to another in fee, and the
Tenant for life accept the Deed, etc. Albeit he in remainder in this case has
no remedy to come to the Deed, during the life of Tenant for life, yet because
he is privy in Estate, he shall not maintain an action of waste, without
showing the Deed, but when the remainder is once executed, he shall not need to
show the Deed, Vide Pl. Com. Colthirsts case. D and St. Chapter 20. fol. 93, 94.
Pl. Com. 149. Throckmortons case. 45 E. 3. 14. 15. 11 H. 4. 39. 14 H 4. 31.

As in Physic, nullum medicamentum est idem omnibus, so in Law one form or
president of conveyance will not fit all Cases.

Sect. 574. Fo. 318. a.
If one joyntenant make a Lease for years, reserving a rent and dye, the
survivor shall not have the rent, and therefore Littleton here adds
materially, for the privity that was between the Tenant for life, and them in
the reversion. 2 Eliz. Dyer 176.

Tenant for life shall not be compelled to attorn in a Quid juris clamat upon
the grant of a reversion by Fine holden of the King himself without license:
For it is a general rule, that when the grant by fine is defeasible, there the
Tenant shall be compelled to attorne. 45 E. 3. 6. b. 13 Eliz. Die. 188. Lib. 3.
fo. 86. Justice Windhams case. 36 H. 6. 24.

As if an Infant levy a Fine, this is defeasible by Writ of Error during his
minority, and therefore the Tenant shall not be compelled to attorn.

So if the land be holden in ancient Demesne, and he in the reversion levy a
Fine of the reversion at the Common Law, this is reversible in a Writ of
Deceit, etc. 5 E. 3. 25. 3 E. 3. Ancient Demesne 16.

So if an Alienation be in Mortmain, the Lord Paramount may defeat it, etc. 17
E. 3. 7. 22 E 3. 18.

So if a Tenant in Tail had levied a Fine it was defeasible by the issue in
Tail, 24 E 3. 25. b. 37 H. 6. 33. 48 E. 3. 23.

But now the Statute of 4 H. 7. 32 H. 8. having given a further strength to
Fines to bar the issue in Tail, the reason of the Common Law being taken
away, the Tenant in this case shall be compelled to attorn. Windams Case, ubi
supra.

Sect. 576. 577. fol. 319. a.
Where a lease is made for life, saving the reversion to the lessor, if the
lessor disseise the lessee, and make a feoffment in fee, if the Tenant for life
enter, and make Wast, the feoffee shall have a Writ of Wast without any other
Attornment; for the lessee shall not be misconusant of the Feoffments that were
made of and upon the same land. And the reason of the Attornment is, because
the whole fee simple pass by the feoffment, and the lessee by his Regress,
leaves the reversion in the feoffee, which is a good attornment. The same Law
it is of a Tenant by statute merchant, or Staple or Elegit; and so it is of a
lease for years, 46 E. 3. 30. b. 2 H. 5. 4. 5 H. 5. 12. Brasbritches case, P.
15 Eliz.

Some do hold, that in that case, if the lessee for life do recover in
assize, this is no Attornment, because he comes to it by course of Law, and not
by his voluntary act. And yet in that case as in the case of the Fine, the
state of the reversion is in the feoffee.

But others do hold it all one in case of a recovery and a regres, 18 E. 3.
48. b. lib. 6. fol. 60. b. Sir Moyle Fiuches Case.

If the lessor disseise Tenant for life, or ouste Tenant for years, and make a
feoffment in fee, by this the rent reserved upon the lease for life or years is
not extinguished; but by the regress of the lessee the rent is revived, because
it is incident to the reversion.

But if a man be seized of a rent in fee, and disseise the Tenant of the land,
and make a feoffment in fee, the Tenant re-enter, the rent is not revived.

And so note a diversity between a rent incident to a reversion, and a rent not
incident to a reversion, 9 H. 6. 16. Dean of Paul's Case, 20 Eliz.

If a man make a lease for life, and then grant the reversion for life, and the
lessee attorn, and after the lessor disseise the lessee for life, and make a
feoffment in fee, and the lessee re-enter, this shall leave a reversion in the
grantee for life, and another reversion in the feoffee, and yet this is no
Attornment in Law of the grantee for life, because he does no act, nor assent
to any which might amount to an Atonement in Law. Et res inter alios acta
alteri nocere non debet. Neither has the grantee for life, the land in
possession: So as he may well be misconusant of the feoffment made upon the
land, and so out of the reason of Littleton. But yet the reversion in fee does
pass to the feoffee.

Sect. 578, 579. fo. 319. b. and 320. a.
Where the Ancestor takes an estate of Freehold, and after a remainder is
limited to his right heirs, the fee simple vesteth in himself, as well as if
it had been limited to him and his heirs, for his right heirs are in this case
words of limitation of estate, and not a Purchase. Otherwise it is where the
Ancestor takes but an estate for years: As if a lease for years be made to A.
the remainder to B. in Tail, the remainder to the right heirs of A. there the
remainder vesteth not in A. but the right heirs shall take by purchase, if A.
dye during the estate Tail; for as the Ancestor and the heir are Correlativa of
Inheritances, so are the Testator and Executor, and the Intestate and
Administrator of Chattels. Quod vanum and inutile est, lex non requirit. Vide
Sect. 194. 273. fo. 320. a.

The Conusee of a Fine before Attornment, cannot distrain, because an Avowry is
in lieu of an action, and thereunto privity is requisite. So likewise, and for
the same cause he can have no action of Waste, nor Writ of Entry ad Com. legem,
or in consimili casu, or in casu proviso, Writ of Customs, and Services, nor
Writ of Ward, etc. 8 E 3. 44. 34 H. 6. 7. 12 E. 4. 4. 40 E. 3. 7. 5 H. 5. 12. 3
E. 2. Droit 33.

But if a man make a lease for years, and grant the reversion by Fine, if the
lessee be ousted, and the Conuse disseised, the Conusee without Attornment
shall maintain an Assize, for this Writ is maintained against a stranger, where
there needs no privity: and such things as the Lord may seize or enter into
without suing any action, there the Conusee before any Attornment may take
benefit thereof, as to seize a Ward, or Heriot, or to enter into the Lands or
Tenements of a Ward, or escheated to him, or to enter for an alienation of
Tenant for life or years, or of Tenant by Statute Merchant, Staple or Elegit,
to his disherison.

Sect. 580, 581, 582. Fo. 320. a.b.
It is said in our Books, that if Tenant for life have a privilege not to be
impeachable of Waste, or any other privilege, if he does attorn without saving
his privilege, that he has lost it, which is to be understood, where he
attorneth in a Quid juris clamat brought by the Conusee of a Fine, for that the
Writ supposes him to be but a bare Tenant for life, and by his general
Attornment according to the Writ he is barred for ever to claim any privilege
but a bare estate for life. But if upon a grant of the reversion by Deed, the
Tenant for life does attorn, he loses no privilege, for there can be no
conclusion or bar by the Attornment in palis; and so it is of an Attornment
in Law. As if the lessor disseise the lessee for life, and make a Feoffment in
fee, and the lessee re enter, etc. 43 E. 3. 5. 45 E. 3. 6. 39 H. 6. 25. F.N. B.
136. b.

But in the Quid juris clamat, if the Plantiff be within age, so as he cannot
acknowledge the privilege, the Tenant shall not be compelled to attorn until
his full age, when he may acknowledge it, 43 E. 3. 5.

But otherwise it is (as some hold) if a Quid juris clamat be brought by Baron
and feme, the privilege shall be entered into the Roll, notwithstanding she is
a feme covert, 45 E. 3. 11. a. Vet. N. B. in per que servitia, 39 H. 6. 25. 18
E. 4. 7.

And in a per que servitia brought by the Conusee of the Mesne, the Tenant may
show, that he held by Homage Auncestrel, and saving to him his Warrant and
Acquitall, he is ready to attorn. So if the Tenant has any other Acquittall,
and the Mesne levy a Fine to one for life, the remainder to another in fee, the
Tenant for life brings a per que servit. and the Tenant is ready to attorn,
saving his Acquitall, and the Plaintiff acknowledge it, and thereupon Tenant
attorn, Tenant for life dies; in this case albeit Reg. the Attornment to the
Tenant for life, is an Attornment to him in remainder, yet in this case he in
the remainder shall not distrain, till he has acknowledged the Acquitall,
which must be in a per que servit. brought by him against the Tenant, vide S.
557.

Sect. 583. Fol. 321. a.
Note a diversity between an act in Law, that gives one inheritance in lieu of
another, and an act in Law that conveyeth the estate of the Conusee only Of the
former Littleton here puts an Example, of the escheat of the Mesna^ty, which
drowneth the Seigniory Paramount, and therefore reason would that the Lord by
this act in Law should have as much benefit of the Mesnalty escheated, as he
had of the Seigniory that was drowned, and he has no remedy to compel the
Tenant to Attornment.

Also the Lord comes to the Mesnalty by a Seigniory Paramount, and therefore
needs no Attornment. As if lessee for life be of a Manor, and he surrender
his estate to the lessor, there needs no Attornment of the Tenants, because the
lessor is in by a Title Paramount, Temps E. 2. Attor. 18. 39. H. 38. per
Prifot. lib. 6. f. 68. Sir M. Finches Case. 5 H. 7. 18. per Cur.

But if the Conusee dye, and the Law casts his Seigniory upon his heir by
Descent, he shall not be in any better estate then his ancestor was, because he
claims as heir merely by the Conusee.

Sect. 584. Fol. 321. b. vide, etc.
If a man make a lease for life or years, and after levy a Fine to A. to the
use of B. and his heirs, B shall distrain, and have an action of Waste, albeit
the Conusee never had any Attornment, because the reversion is vested in him by
force of the Statute, and has no remedy to compel the lessee to attorn, 27 H.
8. c. 10.

Sect. 585. 586. Fol. 322. a.b.
Here does Littleton put a case where a man may have a Seignory rent, reversion
or remainder, merely by the act of the party, and may distrain, and have any
action without any Attornment; and that is by devise of Lands deviseable by
Custom, when Littleton wrote, by the last Will aad Testament of the owner, 34
H. 6. 6. 5 H. 7. 18, F N B. 121. n.

Omne Testamentum, morte consummatum ultima voluntas testatoris est perimplenda
secundum vera^ intentionem suam, and reipublicae interest suprema hominum
testamenta rata haberi. The Will of the Devisor expressed by his Testament,
shall be performed according to the intent of the Devisor, and it shall not lie
in the power of the Tenant or lessee to frustrate the Will of the Devisor by
denying his Attornment, vide S. 167. Brit. fol. 78. and 212. b.

Sect. 587, 588, 589. Fol. 323. a b
The disseisor cannot disseise the Lord of the Rents or Services, without the
Attornment of the Tenants to the disseisor; for seeing an Attornment is
requisite to a feoffment and other lawful Conveyances, A fortiori, a disseisor
or other wrong doer shall not gain them without Attornment. The like Law is of
an Abator, and an Intrudor. But albeit the disseisor has once gotten the
Attornment of the Tenants, and payment of their rents, yet may they refuse
afterward for the avoiding of their charge. And here the Attornment of the
Tenant of a Manor to a disseisor of the Demesns, shall dispossess the Lord of
the rents and services parcel of the Manor, because Demesns, Rents and
Services make but one entire Manor, and the Demesns are the principal: but
otherwise it is of rents and services in gross, 6 H. 7. 14. 11 H. 7. 28. 11 H.
4. 14. a.b.

For a man cannot be disseised of a rent service in gross, rent charge, or rent
seck by Attornment, or payment of the rent to a stranger but at his election;
for the Rule of Law is, Nemo redditum alterius invito Domino percipere aut
possidere potest, and vide S. 237, 238, 239, 240.

What be disseisins of rent services, rent charge, and rent secks, and payment
to a stranger, is none of them, but at the Lords election, 24 E. 3. 4. 1 E 5. 5.

A descent of a rent in gross binds not the right owner, but that he may
distrain, albeit he admitted himself out of possession, and determined his
election, as by bringing of an Assize, etc. 5 E. 4. 1. 23 H. 30. Ass. 439. 16
Ass. p. 15.

* * * CHAP. XI. Of Discontinuance.
Sect. 592. Fol. 325. a.
DIscontinuare nihil aliud significat quam intermittere desuescere,
interrumpere, 8 H. 4. 8. b. 11 H. 4. 85. b.

A discontinuance of estates in Lands or Tenements, is properly (in legal
understanding) an alienation made or suffered by Tenant in Tail, or by any
that is seized in auter debit, whereby the issue in Tail, or the heir or
successor, or those in reversion or remainder are driven to their action, and
cannot enter. I have added (properly) by good warrant of our Author himself,
for Sect. 470. he uses Discontinuance for a devesting or displacing of a
reversion, though the entry be not taken away. Also vide the Stature of 1 E. 6.
c. 7. 31. Eliz. c. 2. lib. 7. fo. 30, 31. le case de Discontin. de process.

When Littleton wrote, the estate in Lands and Tenemens might have been
discontinued five manner of ways, viz. By Feoffment, by Fine, by Release with
Warranty, Confirmation with Warranty, and by suffering of a Recovery of a
Praecipe quod red, and this was to the prejudice of five manner of persons, viz.
of Wives, of Heirs, of Successors, of those in Reversion, and of those in
Remainder. But for Wives and their Heirs, and for Successors, the Law is
altered by Acts of Parliament since Littleton wrote.

Sect. 593. Fol. 325. b.
Nota, that in Law the Covent, albeit they be Regular, and dead persons in Law,
yet are they said in Law to be Capitulum to the Abbot, as well as the Dean and
Chapter that be Secular to the Bishop. But it is to be observed, That a sole
Body Politic that has the absolute right in them, as an Abbot, Bishop, etc.
may make a discontinuance; but a Corporation aggregate of many, as Dean and
Chapter, Warden and Chaplains, etc. cannot make any descent, for if any join
the grant is good, and if the Dean, Warden, etc. make it alone where the Body
is aggregate of many, it is void, and works a disseisin, 21 E. 4. 86. vide
Sect. 528 and 648. By the Statute of 1 Eliz. c. 10. and 1 Iac. c. 3. Bishops,
and all other Ecclesiastical persons, are disabled to alien, or discontinue
any of their Ecclesiastical Livings.

Sect. 594. Fo. 326. a.
By the pur vieu of the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 28. the wife and her heirs after
the decease of her husband, may enter into the Lands and Tenements of the wife,
notwithstanding the alienation of her husband, Dyer 4 and 5. P. and M. 146. 3
El. Dyer 191. l. 8. f. 71, 72. Greveleys Case.

If the husband levy a Fine with Proclamations, and dye, the wife must enter,
or avoid the estate of the Conusee within five years, or else she is barred for
ever by the Statute of 4 H 7. for the Statute of 32 H 8. does help the
Discontinuancy, but not the bar; and the Statute speaks of a Fine, and not
of a Fine with Proclamations, 6 E 6. Dyer 72. b. 4 H 7. c. 24.

Feme Tenant in Tail takes husband, the husband makes a feoffment in fee, the
wife before entry dies without issue, he in the reversion or remainder may
enter. For 1. The reversion or remainder cannot be discontinued in this case,
because the estate Tail is not discontinued. 2. The words of the Statute be,
Shall not be prejudicial, etc. to the wife or her heirs, or such as shall have
Right, Title or Interrest by the death of such wife, but the same wife and her
heirs, etc. shall, or lawfully may enter, etc. By which words, the entry of him
in the reversion or remainder in that case is preserved. The husband is Tenant
in Tail, the remainder to the wife in Tail, the husband make a feoffment in
fee, by this the husband by the Common Law did only discontinue his own Estate
tail, but his wifes remainder, but at this day after the death of the husband
without issue, the wife may enter by the said action of 32 H. 8.

If the husband has issue, and makes a feoffment of his wifes land, and the
wife dies, the heir of the wife shall not enter during the husbands life,
neither by the Common law, nor by the Statute. 8 E. 2, tit. cui in vita. 26 34.
E. 1. ibid. 30. 10 E. 3. 12. Die. 21. Eliz. 363.

Sect. 565. Fo. 326. b.
By the Statute of 11 H. 7. ca. 20. If the woman has any Estate in tail
jointly with her husband, or only to her self, or to her use in any lands, or
haereditaments of the inheritance or purchase of her husband, or given to the
husband and wife in tail, by any of the Ancestors of the husband, or by any
other person seized to the use of the husband, or his Ancestors, and shall
hereafter being sole, or with any other after taken husband discontinue, etc.
the same; every such discontinuance shall be void, and that it shall be lawful
for every person to whom the interest title or inheritance, after the decease
of the said woman should appertain, to enter, etc. So as if such a feme Tenant
in tail, do make any discontinuance in fee, in tail, or for life, although it
be with warranty, yet this does not take away the entry after her death, either
of the issue, or of him in reversion or remainder. Vide Sect. 697. l. 3. fo.
50, 51. Sir George Brownes case, and l. 3. f. 60 etc. Lin. Coll. case P. 1. f.
176. Mildmayes case. Die. 3. and 4. P.M. 146. and 8 El. Die. 448 and 15 El. 340.
19 El. 354. and 20 El. 362. 27 H. 8. 23. l. 5. f. 79. Fitz. case, and Grevelys
case. l. 8. fo. 71, etc.

If Lands were intailed to a man and his wife, and to the heirs of their two
bodies, and the husband had made a feoffment in fee and dyed, and then the wife
dyed, this had been a discontinuance at the Common Law: for the title of the
issue is as heir of both their bodies, and not as heir to any one of them, and
his entry must ensue his title or action. But this is remedied by the Statute
of 32 H. 8.

Tenant in tail shall have a quod permittat. 4 E. 3. 38. 43 E. 3. 25. 4 E. 4.
25. F. N.B. 124.

And he shall have a writ of Customs and services, le debet, and solet, but
shall not have it in the debt only. 2 E. 2. droit 28.

So he shall have a Secta ad molendum in le debet and solet, but not in the
debet tantum. F.N.B. 123.

Tenant in tail shall have a writ of entry in consimili casu, and an
Admesurement, and a nativo habendo, cessavit, escheat, waste, etc. 21 E. 3. 11.
5 E. 3. 23. 11 H. 4. 49.

But tenant in tail, shall not have a writ of right sur disclaimer, nor a quo
jure, nor a ne injuste vexes, nor a nuper obiit, or Rationabile part, nor a
Mordanc, nor a sur cui in vita, for these and the like, none but Tenant in fee
shall have: and the highest writ that a Tenant in tail can have, is a
Formedon. 2 E. 3. droit 28. 13 H. 7. 24. 5 E. 4. 2. 20 E. 3. Avowry 13^. F.N.B.
10. 46 E. 3. cui in vita 33.

Sect. 596, 597. Fo. 327. b.
It is provided by the Statues of W. 2. c. 1 De donis cond. quod non habeant
illi quibus tenementum sic fuerit datum potestatem alienandi, etc. So as these
words (non habent potestatem alien:) do work these effects, viz. as to lands,
that a feoffment barreth not the issue, of his action, but works a
discontinuance to bar him of his entry; as to rents, or any thing in esse,
that lie in grant, that the said words do his power ^o make any discontinuance:
as to rents, etc. newly created that they take away his power to make them to
continue longer, than during his life. 18 E. 3. 12. 24 E. 3. 28. 36 Ass. 8. 5
E. 4. 3. 4 H. 7. 17. Pl. Com. Smith, and Stapletons case.

But there is a diversity between alienation, working a discontinuance of an
estate, which takes away an entry; and an alienation working, divesting or
displacing of estates, which take away no entry. As if there be Tenant for
life, the remainder to A. in tail, the remainder to B. in fee, if Tenant for
life does alien in fee, this does divest and displace the remainders, but
works no discontinuance; and so note that to every discontinuance, there is
necessary a divesting, or displacing the estate, and turning the same to a
right: for if it be not turned to a right, they that have the Estate, cannot be
driven to an action; and therefore such inheritances as lie in grant, cannot by
grant be discontinued, because such a grant divests no Estate, but passes only
that which he may lawfully grant, and so the Estate it self does descend,
revert, or remain, as shall be said hereafter.

A. makes a gift in tail to B. who makes a gift in tail to C. C. makes a
feoffment in fee, and dies without issue. B. has issue and dies, the issue
of B. shall enter, for albeit the feoffment of C. did discontinue in reversion
of the fee simple, which B had gained upon the estate tail made to C. yet it
could not discontinue the right of entaile which B. had, which was discontinued
before: and therefore when C. died without issue, then did the discontinuance
of the Estate tail of B. which passed by his livery cease, and consequently
the entry of the issue of B. lawful. * Also nate that a discontinuance made by
the husband, did take away the entry only of the wife, and her heirs by the
common Law, and not of any other which claimed by title paramount above the
discontinuance. As if lands had been given the husband and wife and to a third
person, and to their heirs, and the husband had made a feoffment in fee, this
had been a discontinuance of the one moity, and a disseisin of the other moity:
if the husband had dyed, the survivor should have entered in the whole, for he
claimed not under the discontinuance, but by title paramount, from the first
feoffor, and seeing the right by law does survive, the Law does give him a
remedy, to take advantage thereof by entry, for other remedy, for that moity he
could not have.

Sect. 600. Fo. 328 a.
It is a Rule in Law, that the disseisee, or any other that has a right only,
by his release, or confirmation, cannot make any discontinuance: because
nothing can pass thereby, but that which may lawfully pass. 9 E. 4. 18. 12 E.
4. 11. 5 H. 4. 8. 21 H. 6. 58.

By a feoffment the freehold does pass by open livery to the feoffee, and by a
Release, a bare right; Sic nota diversit.

Sect. 601, 602, 603. fo. 328. b. and 329. a.
A warranty being added to a release, or confirmation, and descending upon him,
that right has to the lands makes a discontinuance, otherwise it is out of
the reason of the Law, and works no discontinuance, if the warranty descend
upon another.

If Tenant in tail release to his disseisor, and bind him and his heirs to
warranty, this is a discontinuance. For if the issue in tail, should enter in
this case, the warranty (which is so much favored in Law) should be destroyed:
and therefore to the end, that if Assets in fee simple do descend, he to whom
the release is made, may plead the same, and bar the demandant, by which
means all rights and advantages are saved.

Sect. 604.
When a Bishop, etc. make an Estate, Lease, grant or rentcharge, warranty, or
any other act, which may tend to the diminution of the revenues of the
Bishopric, etc. which should maintain the successor, there the privation, or
translation of the Bishop, etc. is all one with his death. But Where the Bishop
is patron and ordinary, and confirms a Lease made by the parson, without the
Deane and Chapter; and after the Parson dies, and the Bishop collateth
another, and then is translated, yet his confirmation remains good, for the
revenues that are to maintain the successor, are not thereby diminished; and
so it is in case of resignation. 29 E. 3. 16. ibid. garr. 99. cl. contr.

Vide Sect. 608, 609, 610, 611, 612, 613 Fo. 330, 331. a.
Tiels chooses queux passunt en asc' cases de tenant en le tail tantsolement
per voy de grant, ou per confirmation, ou per releaserien poit pass pur fair
estate a celuy, a que tiel grant, ou confirmation ou release est fait, forsque
ceo que le tenant en tail poit droitulerment fair, and ceo ne forsque pur
term de la vie, etc.

Hereby it appears, that a feoffment in fee (albeit it be by parol) is of
greater operation and estimation in Law, then a grant of a reversion by Deed,
though it be enrolled, and Attornment of the lessee for years of a release, or
a confirmation by Deed.

Also having regatd to the issue in tail, and to them in reversion, or
remainder, Tenant in tail cannot lawfully make a greater Estate than for term
of his life. But in regard of himself a release or grant made by him, leaves
no reversion in him, but put the same in Abeiance, so as after such release or
grant made, he shall not have any action of wast; and he shall not enter for a
forfeiture, etc. 13 H. 10. a. Br. Release 95.

Sect. 614. Fo. 331. b.
The Feoffee of Tenant in tail has no rightful Estate, having respect to two
persons, the one is the donor, whose reversion is divested and displaced, and
the other is to the issue in tail, who is driven to his action to recover his
right.

Deforciare, signifies, to withold Lands or Tenements from the right owner, in
which case either the entry of the right owner is taken away, or the deforceor
holds it so fast, as the right owner is driven to his real praecipe, wherein
it is said, unde A. eum just deforceat, or the deforceor so disturbeth the
right owner, as he cannot enjoy his own. Brac. l. 4. fo. 238. Fleta. l. 5. ca.
11.

There is a writ called a Quod ei deform. and lies where Tenant in tail, or
tenant for life, loses by default, by the Staute he shall have a Quod ei
deforc. against the recoveror, and yet he comes in by course of Law. Westminster. 2.
ca. 4.

Sect. 615, 616, 617, 618. Fo. 332. a.b.
An Advowson is a thing that lies in grant, and passes not by livery of
seisin. 5 E. 3. 58. 21 E. 3 37, 38. 43 E. 3. 1. b. 11 H. 6. 4. 5 H. 7. 37. 18
H. 8. 16. El. Die. 323. b.

If a remainder, or a rent service, or a rent charge, or an Advowson, or a
common, or any other inheritance that lies in grant, be granted by Tenant in
tail, it is no discontinuance. Brac. l. 2. f. 3. and f. 266. 318. Brit. fo.
187. Mir. ca. 2. S. 17. Fle. l. 3. c. 15.

For that it is a maxim in Law, That a grant by Deed of such things as do ly in
grant, and not in livery of seisin, do work no discontinuance. But the
particulars reason is, for that of such things the grant or Tenant in tail
works no wrong, either to the issue in tail, or to him in reversion, or
remaindet, for nothing does pass, but only during the life of Tenant in
tail, which is lawful, and every discontinuance works a wrong. 6 E. 3. 56.
4 H. 7. 17. 21 H. 7. 42. 21 H 6. 52. 53. 5 E 4. 3. 21 E. 4. 5. ^2. R. 2.
discontinuance 35. Br. 19 E. 3. Br. 468. Pl. Com 435. 18 Ass. p. 2.

If Tenant in tail of a rent service, etc. or of a reversion, or remainder in
tail, etc. grant the same in fee with warranty, and leaves assets in fee
simple and dies, this is neither bar, nor discontinuance to the issue in
tail, but he may distreine for the rent or service, or enter into the Land,
after the decease of Tenant for life. But if the issue brings a Formedon in
the discending and admitting himself out of possession, then he shall be barred
by the warranty, and Assets. 33. E. 3. from. 47. 13 H. 7. 10. 36. Ass. 8. 4 H.
7. 17.

Tenant in tail, of a rent disseises the Tenant of the Land, and makes a
feoffment in fee with warranty and dies, this is no disccontinuance of the
rent. 3 H. 7. 12. 9 E. 4. 22.

And where the thing does ly in livere, as Lands and Tenements, yet if to the
conveyance of the freehold, or inheritance, no livery of seisin is requisite,
it works no discontinuance.

As if Tenant in Tail exchange Lands, etc. or if the King being Tenant in
Tail, grant by his Letters Patents the Lands in fee, there is no
discontinuance wrought. 38 H. 8. Pat. Br. 10. 1. Pl Com 233. l. 1. f. 26.
Altwoods case.

Of a thing that lies in grant, though it be granted by Fine, yet it is no
discontinuance, and this is Regularly true, 48 E. 3. 23.

If Tenant in tail make a Lease for years of Lands, and after levy a Fine,
this is a discontinuance; for a Fine is Feoffment of Record, and the freehold
passes. 15 E. 4. discontinuance, 30.

But if Tenant in tail make a Lease for his own life, and after levy a Fine,
this is no discontinuance, because the reversion expectant upon a Statute of
freehold, which lies only in grant, passes thereby. 6 H. 8. 56, 57.

Sect. 620.
Si Tenant in tail fait Lease a Term de vie le lesee, etc. and apres tenant in
tail, grant per son fait le reverson in fee a un auter, and le tenant a term
de vie attornment, and mor. vivant le Tenant in tail, and le grantee del
reversion enter, etc. en la vie le Tenant in tail donque ceo est un
discontinuance en fee. For when the revetsion in this case executed in the life
of Tenant in tail, it is equivalent in judgment of Law to a Feoffment in Fee;
for the state for life passed by livery. 32 E. 3. discontinuance 2. 3 H. 4. 9.
34. Ass. 6. p. 4. 38. Ass. 6. p. 6.

But if the Tenant in tail make a Lease for Term of the life of the Lessee,
etc. and grant over the reversion and dies, and after the death of Tenant in
tail, the Lessee dye, the entry of the issue is lawful, because by the death
of the Lessee, the discontinuance is determined, and consequently the grant
made of the reversion, gained upon that discontinuance, is void also.

If Tenant in tail make a Lease for life the remainder in fee, this is an
absolute discontinuance, albeit the remainder be not executed in the life of
Tenant in tail, because all is one estate and passes by livery; and so note a
diversity between a grant of a reversion, and a limitation of a remainder. 21
H. 6. 52, 53.

B. Tenant in Tail makes a gift in Tail to A. and after B. releases to A. and
his heirs, and after A. dies without issue, the issue of the first Donee may
enter upon the collateral heir, because A. had not seisin, and execucion upon
the reversion of the land in the demesne as of fee.

But if Tenant in Tail make a lease for the life of the lessee, and after
release to him and his heirs, this is an absolute discontinuance, because the
fee simple is executed in the life of Tenant in Tail.

If Tenant in Tail of a Manor whereunto an Advowson is appendant, make a
feoffment in fee by Deed of one acre, with the Advowson, and the Church
becomes void, and the feoffee present, Tenant in Tail dies, the Church
becomes void, the issue shall not present until he has reconcontinued the
acre. But if the feoffee had not executed the same by Presentment, then the
issue in Tail should have presented. And so was it at the Common Law, of the
husband seized in the right of his wife, Mutatis mutandis, 34 E. 1. Qu. imp.
179. 22 E. 3. 6. 17 E. 3. 3. 33 E. 3. qu. imp. 196. 23 Ass. 8.

If the husband and wife make a lease for life by Deed of the wives land,
reserving a rent, the husband dies, this was a Discontinuance at the Common
Law for life, and yet the reversion was not discontinued, but remained in the
wife, otherwise it is as if the husband had made the lease alone, 38 E. 3. 32.
18. Ass. 2. 18 E. 3. 54. 22 H. 6. 24.

If Tenant in Tail make a lease for life of the lessee, and after grant the
reversion with Warranty, and dies before execution, this is no discontinuance,
because the discontinuance was but for life, and the Warranty cannot enlarge
the same. Bro. Discontinuance 3. 21 H. 7. 11. l. 1. fo. 85. l. 10. fo. 96, 97.

If Tenant in Tail make a Lease for life, and grant the reversion in fee, and
the lessee attorn, and that grantee grant it over, and the lessee attorn, and
then the lessee for life dies, so as the reversion is executed in the life of
Tenant in Tail, yet this is no Discontinuance, because he is not in of the
grant of the Tenant in Tail, but of his grantee, 15 E. 4. Discont. 30. Vide
Sect. 642. fol. 333 b.

If Tenant in Tail make a lease for life, and after disseiseth the lessee for
life, and makes a feoffment in fee, the lessee dies, and then Tenant in Tail
dies, albeit the fee be executed, yet for that the fee was not executed by
lawful means, it is no Discontinuance.

Sect. 625. Fol. 335. a.
Littleton here puts his case of a reversion immediately expectant upon the
gift in Tail. Also it is to be intended of a feoffment made to the donor solely
or only, for if the donee infeoff the donor, and a stranger, this is a
Discontinuance of the whole land, 41 Ass. 2. 41 E. 3. 2. 28 H 8. Dyer 12. lib.
1. fo. 140. in Chudleys case, 9 E. 4. 24. b.

But if Tenant for life make a lease for his own life to the lessor, the
remainder to the lessor and estranger in fee; in this case forasmuch as the
limitation of the fee should work the wrong it enureth to the lessor as a
surrender for the one moity, and a forfeiture as to the remainder of the
stranger. Null poit discont' lestate en tail, si non que il discont' le
reversion, etc. ou le remainder, etc. 40 Ass. 36. 61 Ass. 36. 18 E. 3. 45. F N
B. 142 a. Pl. Com. 555.

And therefore if the reversion or remainder be in the King, the Tenant in Tail
cannot discontinue the estate Tail. But Tenant in Tail, the reversion in the
King, might have barred the estate Tail by a Common recovery, until the
Stature of 33 H. 18. cap. 20. which restrains such a Tenant in Tail, but that
Common Recovery never barred, nor discontinued the Kings reversion, 33 H 8.
Tail. Br. 41.

If a feme covert be Tenant for life, and the husband make a Feoffment in fee,
and the lessor enter for the forfeiture, here is the reversion revested, and
yet the Discontinuance remained at the Common Law, 27 Ass. p. 60. 29 Ass. 43.
11 Ass. 11. 16. Ass. 11 18 E. 3. 45.

Sect. 632. Fol. 336. b.
Si le Baron soit seisee de cert. terre en droit sa feme, and fait feoffement
in fee sur Condition and devy, etc. When the heir in this case has entered for
the Condition broken, and has avoided the feoffment, the estate of the heir
vanishes away, and presently the estate vesteth in the feme or her heirs,
without any Entry or Claim by her or them: for the heir enters in respect of
the Condition upon the real Contract, and not of any right; and if the husband
himself had re-entred, the state had vested in his Wife. And therefore where
Littleton and our Books say, That the wife shall enter upon the heir, the
meaning is, That after the re-entry of the heir, she may enter, 4 H. 6. 2. 9 H
7. 24. b. l. 8. f. 43, 44. Whittinghams Case.

Sect. 633. Fo 337. b.
If the husband within age take a wife feme Tenant in Tail general, and the
husband make a gift in Tail, and dies within age, in this case the wife may
enter, as Littleton here holds; or the heir of the husband, in respect of the
new reversion descended unto him, may enter. But if the heir enter, presently
thereupon his estate vanishes.

If husband and wife be both within age, and they by deed indented join in a
Feoffment reserving a rent, the husband dies, the wife may enter, or have a
Dum fuit infra aetat. But if she were of full age, she shall not have a Dum
fuit infra aetat. for the Nonage of her husband, albeit they be but one person
in Law, 14 E. 3. Breve 282. 14 E. 3. Dum fuit, etc. 6. F.N B. 892.

Sect. 634.
2. Joyntenants estant deins age, fontun feoffment in fee, and lun de les
infants devy, celuy que survesquist poit enter en bentierly, etc. For that they
may join in a Writ of Right, and therefore the Right shall survive. But they
cannot join in a Dum fuit infra aetat. because the Nonage of the one, is not
the Nonage of the other, 21 E 3. 50. 18 E. 2. Breve 831. 6 E. 3. 4. 9 H. 6. 6.
19 H. 6. 6. 39 H. 6. 42. 34 H 6. 31.

In this case if one joyntenant had made a Feoffment in fee and dyed, the right
should not have survived, for the jointure was severed for a time.

If two joyntenants be, and the one is of full age, and the other within age,
and both they make a Feoffment in fee, and he of full age dies, The Infant
shall enter, or have a Dum fuit, etc. but for the moity.

Sect. 635. Fol. 337. b.
Serroit encounter reason, que un feoffment fait per celuy que ne fuit able de
fair tiel feoffment greevara, ou ledare auter, de toller eux de lour enter
etc. Meliorem facere potest minor condic' deteriorem nequaquam, Bract. fo. 14.
Brit. f. 88. a.

Nota, a special heir shall take advantage of the infancy of the Ancestor. As
if Tenant in Tail of an acre of the Custom of Borough English, make a
Feoffment in fee within age, and dies, the youngest Son shall avoid it, for he
is privy in blood, and claims by Descent from the Infant.

And so note, that a cause to enter by reason of infancy, is not like to
Conditions, Warranty, and Estoppels, which ever descend to the heir at the
Common Law.

Sect. 636. Fol. 338. a.
Note, there be 3 kinds of Surrender, viz. a Surrender properly taken at the
Common Law, which is a yielding up of an estate for life or years to him that
has an immediate estate in reversion or remainder, wherein the estate for life
or years may drown by mutual agreement between them. 2. A Surrender by Custom
of Lands holden by Copy, or of Customary estate, vide Sect. 74. homo com. genesis
* * And 3. A Surrender improperly taken ( vide S. 550.) of a Deed. And so of a
Surrender of a Patent, and of a rent newly created, and of a fee simple to the
King, 2 El. Dyer 176. 14 H. 7. 3. 27 Ass. 37. 49 E. 3. 2. 11 H. 4. 2. 12 H. 4.
21. 13 H. 4. 13.

And a Surrendr properly taken, is of two sorts, viz. 1: A Surrender in Deed,
by express words, whereof Littleton here puts an Example; and he puts
his case of a Surrender of an estate in possession, for a right cannot be
sureendered. 2. A surrender in Law, which in some cases is of greater force,
then a Surrender in Deed.

As if a man make a lease for years to begin at Michaelmas next, this future
interest cannot be surrendered, because there is no reversion wherein it may
drown, but by a surrender in Law it may be drowned.

As if the Lessee before Michaelmas take a new lease for years, either to begin
presently or at Michaelmas, this is a surrender in Law of the former lease.
Fortior, et aequior est dispositio legis quam hominis, 14 H. 8. 15. 50 E. 3. 6.
44 Ass. 3. 35 H. 8. Dyer 37. 8 Ass. 20. 4 M. Dyer 141. 11 El. Dyer 280. 21 H.
7. 6. 14 H 7. 4. li. 6. fo. 69. Sir Moyl Finches Case.

Also there is a Surrender without Deed, whereof Littleon puts here an
Example of an estate for life of lands. And also there is a Surrender by Deed,
and that is of things that lie in grant, 16 H. 6. 33. 27 Ass. 46. 14 H. 7. 4. 1
H. 6. 1 Pl. Com. 541.

And albeit a particular estate be made of lands by Deed, yet may it be
surrendered without Deed, in respect of the nature and quality of the thing
demised, because the particular might have been made without Deed. and so on
the other side.

If a man be * Tenant by the Courtesy, or Tenant in Dower of an Advowson, Rent,
or other thing that lies in grant, albeit the estate begin without Deed, yet in
respect of the nature and quality of the thing that lies in grant, it cannot be
surrendered without Deed. And so if a lease for life be made of lands, the
remainder for life, albeit the remainder for life began without Deed, yet
because remainder and reversions, though they be of lands, are things that lie
in grant, they cannot be surrendered without Deed. Qu. fi le fits la feme poit
enter, etc.

It is holden of some, That after the surrender, the issue in Tail during the
life of Tenant for life may enter, for that having regard to the issue, the
state for life is drowned, and consequently the inheritance gained by the
lease, is by the acceptance of the surrender vanished and gone; as if Tenant in
Tail make a lease for life, whereby he gains a new reversion, if Tenant for
life surrender to the Tenant in Tail, the estate for life being drowned, the
reversion gained by wrong is vanished, etc. and he is Tenant in Tail again
against the opinion Obiter of Portington, 21 H. 6. 53. vide lib. fo. 338. b.
Mes il nost rien a fair, pur ceo que tout le matter est icy transcribe
verbatim.

But herein are two diversities (Notable) The first is that having regard to
the parties to the surrender, the estate is absolutely drowned, as in this case
between the lessee, and the second Baron. But having regard to strangers, who
were not parties or privies thereunto, lest by a voluntary surrender they may
receive prejudice, touching any right or interest they had before the
surrender, the estate surrendered has in consideration of Law a Continuance.

As if a reversion be granted with Warranty, and Tenant for life surrender, the
grantee shall not have execution in value against the grantor, who is a
stranger, during the life of Tenant for life; for this surrender shall work no
prejudice to the grantee, who is a stranger, 45 E. 3. 13. 5 H. 5. 9. 9 E. 4. 18.

So if Tenant for life surrender to him in reversion, being within age, he
shall not have his age, for that should be a prejudice to a stranger, who is
become Demandant in a real action, 40 E. 3. 13. 1 H. 6. 1. 24 E. 3. 77.

If Tenant for life grant a rent charge, and after surrender, yet the rent
remains; for to that purpose he comes in under the Charge, 5 H. 5. 8. 26
Ass. 38. 7 H. 6. 1. b.

If a Bishop be seized of a rent charge in fee, the Tenant of the land infeoff
the Bishop and his successors, the Lord enter for the Mortmain, he shall hold
it discharged of the rent, for the entry for the Mortmain affirms the
alienation in Mortmain, and the Lord claims under his estate; but if Tenant
for life grant a rent in fee, and after infeoff the grantee, and the lessor
enter for the forfeiture, the rent is revived, for the lessor does claim above
the Feoffment. But if I grant the reversion of my Tenant for life to another
for term of his life, and Tenant for life attorn, now is the waste of Tenant
for life dishpunishable, 48 E. 3. 16.

Afterward I release to the grantee for life and his heirs, or grant the
reversion to him and his heirs, now albeit the Tenant for life be a stranger to
it, yet because he attorneth to the grantee for life, the estate for life which
the grantee had, shall have no continuance in the eye of Law as to him, but he
shall be punished for Waste done afterward.

The second diversity is, That for the benefit of an estranger, the estate for
life is absolutely determined.

As if he in the reversion make a lease for years, or grant a rent charge, etc.
and then the lessee for life surrender, the lease or rent shall commence
maintenance.

So in the case of Littleton, first between the lessee, and the second husband,
the state for life is determined. And 2. for the benefit of the issue it shall
be so adjudged in Law. Here note a diversity when it is to the prejudice of a
stranger, and when it is for his benefit.

If a man make a lease to A. for life, reserving a rent of 40. s. to him and
his heirs, the remainder to B. for life, the lessor grant the reversion in fee
to B. A. attorneth, B. shall not have the rent, for that although the fee
simple do drown the remainder for life between them, yet as to a stranger it is
in esse, and therefore B. shall not have the rent, but his heir shall have it.

A Master of an Hospital being a sole Corporation, by the consent of his
Brethren makes a lease for years of part of the possession of the Hospital;
afterward the lessee for years is made Master, the term is drowned, for a man
cannot have a term for years in his own right, and a Freehold en auter droit,
to consist together (as if a man lessee for years take a feme lessor to wife.)
But a man may have a Freehold in his own right, and a term in auter droit; and
therefore if a man lessor take the feme lessee to wife, the term is not
drawned, but he is possessed of the term in her right during the Coverture, 6
H. 4. 7. Pl. Com. 419.

So if the lessee make the lessor his executor, the term is not drowned, 32 H.
8. Br. Surr. 5. 2.

But if it had been a Corporation aggregate of many, the making of the lessee
Master had not extinguished the term, no more then if the lessee had been made
one of the Brethren of the Hospital.

Sect. 637. Fo. 339. a.
Nota que un estate tail ne poit este discont, mes la ou cestuy que fait
discont. fuit un foit^ seisee (quia, omnis privatio praesuppo^it habitum)
perforce de la tail, sinon que foit per reason de garrantie, etc. for in many
cases a Warranty added to a Conveyance, is said to make a Discontinuance, ab
effectu, because it takes away the entry of him that right has, as a
Discontinuance does.

As if Tenant in Tail be disseised, and dies, the issue in Tail releaseth to
the disseisor with Warranty, etc. 9 E. 4. 19. 12 E. 4. 11. 21 E. 4. 97. Vide
Sect. 592, 596, 597, 601, 640, 658.

Sect. 642. Fo. 340. b.
Albeit the reversion in this case be executed in the Lord by the Escheat in
the life of Tenant in Tail, yet because he is not in by the Tenant in Tail, but
by Escheat, it works no discontinuance. But if it had been executed in the
life of Tenant in Tail, in the grantee which was in by Tenant in Tail, then the
Lord by Escheat should have taken advantage by it, Vide Sect. 620. lib. 1. fo.
136. and lib. 2. fo. 62, 63.

Sect. 643, 644, and 645.
In whom the fee simple of the Gleab, etc. is, is a question in our Books: Some
hold that it is in the Patron, 8 H. 6. 24 12 H. 8. 8. But that cannot bt for
two Reasons.

1. For that in the beginning the Land was given to the Parson and his
successors, and the Patron is no successor.

2. The words of the Writ of Juris utrum, be, Si sit libera Eleemosyna
ecclesiae de D. and not of the Patron, Reg. 307. a. 45 E. 3. Eschang. 12 H. 8,
9.

Some others do hold, That the fee simple is in the Parson and Ordinary, F N B
19. I. But this cannot be for the causes abovesaid; and therefore of necessity
the fee simple is in abeiance, as Littleton says.

Upon consideration of all our Books, I observe this diversity, That a Parson
or Vicar for the benefit of the Church, and of his successor, if in some cases
esteemed in Law to have a fee simple qualified, but to do any thing to the
prejudice ofs successors in many cases, the Law adjudgeth him to have in effect
but an estate for life. Causae Ecclesiae publicis causis aequiparantur, and
summa ratio est quae pro religione facit, Bract. lib. 3 f. 226. Et Ecclesia
fungisur vice minoris, meliorem facere potest condic' suam, deter' nequaquam,
Brit. f. 143.

As a Parson, Vicar, Archdeacon, Prebend, Chantry, Priest, etc. may have an
action of Waste, and in the Writ it shall be said. Ad exhaereditationem
ecclesiae, etc ipsius B. or Praehendae ipsius A. F N B 55. d. and 57 E. 2. 10
H. 7. 5.

And the Parson etc. that makes a lease for life, shall have a Consimili casu
during the life of the lessee, and a Writ of Entry ad Com. legem after his
death, or a Writ ad terminum qui praeteriit, or a quod permittat in the debet,
and none can maintain any of these Writs but a Tenant in fee simple or fee
tail, F N B l. m. n. 20 H. 3. Jur. utr. Temps E. 3. Jur. utr. 141. 14 E. 3.
ibid. 4. F N B. 50. 30 E. 3. 26. 21 E. 3. 11. Entry 10. F N B 206. fol. Reg.
237. 4 E. 4. 2. 8 E. 3. Entry 3. 7 E. 3. 54, 55.

And a Parson etc. may receive Homage, which Tenant for life cannot do, Temps
E. 1. Encumbent 19.

Item, a Parson ande. shall have a Writ of Mesne, and a Contra formam
feoffmenti, F N B. 49. l. 50. a. fo. 341. b.

But a parson cannot make a discontinuance, for that should be to the prejudice
of his successor, to take away his entry, and to drive him to a real action.
Also if a parson, etc. make a Lease for years, reserving a rent and dies, the
Lease is determined by his death, as if Tenant for life had made a Lease, no
acceptance of the rent by the successor can make it good. Also in a real
action, a Parson, Vicar, Archdeacon, etc. shall have aid of the Parron, and
ordinary, as. Tenant for life shall have. 20 E. 3. aid. 30. 25 E. 3. 54. 8 E.
3. 45. 8 H. 6. 24. 11 H. 6. 9, 6 E. 3. 45. 43. Ass. p. 13. F.N.B. 129.

So as it is evident, that to many purposes a parson has but in effect an
Estate for life, and to many a qualified fee simple; but the entire fee and
right is not in him, and that is the reason that he cannot discontinue the fee
simple that he has not, nor ever had; for as it has been said, Omnis privatio
presupponit habitum, and for the same cause he cannot have a writ of right, nor
a writ of right in his nature as a writ of right for disclaimer of customs and
services, ne injuste vexes, rationalibus divisis, quo jure, etc.

But here it appears by Littleton, that such bodies politic or corporate as
have a sole seisin, and may have a writ of right for that the fee and right is
in them (albeit they cannot absolutely convey away their Lands, etc. without
assent of others) may make a discontinuance, as a Bishop, an Abbot, a Dean, a
Master of an Hospital, etc. But this is to be understood, where a Dean, etc.
are solely seized of distinct possessions, for if the body that is seized be
aggregate of many, as the Dean and Chapter, Master and confrates, etc. then the
Feoffment of the Dean or Master is so far from a discontinuance, as it is a
disseisin.

But at this day, the Bishop, Dean, Master of an Hospital, etc. that have the
fee and right in them, cannot discontinue, neither can they, or any Parson,
Vicar, Archdeacon, Prebendary, or any other having any Ecclesiastical living
with assent of Dean and Chapter, Patron and Ordinary, or the consent of any
others, make any Lease, gift, granr, or Conveyance, Estate, Charge or
Encumbrance to bind his successors or others, then for term of 21 years, or
three lives in possession, whereupon the accustomed rent or more shall be
reserved, Vide S. 528. 593. etc. 1 El. c. 18. 13 El. c. 10. 1 Ja. c. 3. l. 2.
fol. 46. l. 4. fol. 76. and 20 El. 5. fo. 9. and 14. l. 6. fo. 37. l. 7. fo. 8.
l. 11. fo. 67. 27 H. 8. 31 H. 8. 32 H. 8. 37 H. 8. 1 E. 6. etc.

These points concerning Hospitals were resolved by the Justices, P. 24. Eliz.
The Cheneys case, l. 2. fo. 48, 49. Evesque de Cant. case.

First, That no Hospital was given to the Crown by the Statute of 27 H. 8. nor
any Hospital is within the Statute of 31 H. 8. of Monasteries, but only
Religious and Ecclesiastical Hospitals, and that no Lay Hospital was within
those Statutes.

2. If upon the Foundation of any Hospital, or after it was ordained, That one
or diverse Priests should be maintained within the Hospital, to celebrate Divine
Service to the poor, and to pray for the Soul of the Founder, and all Christian
Souls, or the like, and that the poor of such Hotals should make the like
Orisons; yet such an Hospital is not within the said Statute, for the Hospital
is Lay and not Religious; and all, or the most part of ancient Lay Hospitals
were founded or ordained after the like sort, and the makers of those Statutes
never intended to overthrow works of Charity, but to take away the abuse.

3. That no Hospital was given to the King by the Statute of 37 H. 8. but in
two cases, where the Donors, Founders, or Patrons, etc. had entered and expulsed
the Priests, Wardens, etc. between the 4. of Febr. 27 H. 8. and the 25. of
December. 37 H. 8. or where King H. 8. by Commission according to that Act should
enter, and seize the same; but that determined by the death of that King, l. 1.
f. 24. Porters Case.

4. That the Statute of 1 E. 6. extended not to any Hospital whatsoever, either
Lay or Religious, as by the same appears, l. 4. 111, 113, 114, 116. in
Lamberts case.

Nota, of Hospitals, some are Corporations aggregate of many, as of Master or
Warden, etc. and his Confratres: some where the Master or Warden has only the
estate of Inheritance in him, and the Brethren and Sisters power to consent,
having College and Common Seal; some where the Master or Warden has the estate
in him, but has no College and Common Seal, and such a Master or Warden shall
have a Juris utrum; and of these Hospitals some be Eligible, some Donative, and
some Presentative, 14 E. 3. Juris utrum, 4.

Sect. 646, 647. Fol. 342. b.
If Tenant pur term dauter vie dies, the Freehold is said to be in Abeyance
until the occupant enter.

If a man make a lease for life, the remainder to the right heirs of I. S. the
fee simple is an Abeyance, until I.S. dies, Vide Sect. 1. Virg. 4. Aen.
Insequiturque solo, and caput inter ^ubile condit.

Also when a Parson dies, we say, That the Freehold (of the Gleab, etc.) is in
consideratione sive intelligentia leg^, because a suceessor is in expectation
to take it, 24 E. 3. 63.

So it is of a Bishop, Abbot, Dean, Archdeacon, Prebend, Vicar, and of every
other sole Corporation, or Body Politic, Presentative, Elective or Donative;
which inheritances put in Abeyance, are by some called Haereditates jacentes,
Bract. l. 1. c. 2. and some say, Que le fee est en baiaunce, Brit. fo. 249.

Sect. 641. Fol 343. b.
Principium est quasi primum caput, from which many cases have their original
or beginning, which is so strong, as it suffers no contradiction. Contra
negantem principia non est disputandum, 11 H. 4. 9.

Note a diversity, when the right of fee simple is perpetually by Judgment of
Law in Abeyance, without any expectation to come in esse, there he has the
qualified fee Concurrent' his quae in jure requiruntur, may charge or alien it,
as in the case of Parson, Vicar, Prebend, etc.

But where the fee simple is in Abeyance, and by possibility may every hour
come in esse; As if a lease for life be made, the remainder to the right heirs
of I.S. the fee simple cannot be charged, till I.S. be dead.

Lands intailed may be charged in fee, for the estate Tail may be cut off by
Fine or Recovery.

Also the estate Tail may continue, and yet Tenant in tail may lawfully charge
the Land, and bind the issue in Tail, 44 E. 3. 21, 22.

As if a disseisor make a gift in Tail, and the Donee in consideration of a
Release by the disseisee of all his right to the Donee, grant a rent charge to
the disseisee and his heirs, proportionable to the value of his right, this
shall bind the issue in Tail, Vide Sect. 1. Bridgewaters Case, and 59. fol.
48. b. Which Lands by the Rule of Littleton may be charged; and therefore if
the owner of those 13 acres grant a rent charge out of those 13 acres,
generally lying in the Meadow of eighty, without mentioning where they lie
particularly, there as the state in the land removes, the charge removes also.

If the Parson dye, and in time of Vacation, the Patron of the assent of the
Ordinary, and the Patron and Ordinary grant an Annuity or rent charge out of
the Gleab, this shall bind the succeeding Parsons for ever.

A Church Parochial may be Donative, and exempt from all Ordinary Jurisdicton,
and the Incumbent may resign to the Patron, and not to the Ordinary, neither
can the Ordinary visit, but the Patron by Commissioners to be appointed by him.
And by Littletons Rule, The Patron and Incumbent may charge the Gleab, and
albeit it be Donative by a Layman, yet mere Laicus is not capable of it, but
an able Clerk infra sacros ordines is; for albeit he come in by Lay Donation,
and not by admission, or institution; yet his function is spiritual. Vide 133,
530. 11 E. 3. Jur. utr. 3. 8. Ass. 29. 31. 13 Ass. 2.

As the King may create Donatives exempt from the visitation of the Ordinary,
so he may by his Charter license any subject to found such a Church or Chapel,
and to ordain that it shall be Donative and not Presentable, and to be visited
by the Founder, and not by the Ordinary. And thus began Donatives in England,
whereof common persons were Patrons, F.N.B. 35 E. 4. 2. A.B. Dyer 10. El. f.
273. 14 El. cap. 5. 2 H. 5. cap. 1.

Ordinarius, is he that has ordinary Jurisdiction in causes Ecclesiastical,
immediate to the King and his Courts of Common Law, for the better execution of
Justice, as the Bishop, etc. Regularly according to the Ecclesiastical Laws
allowed by the Laws of this Realm, viz. which are not against the Common Law
(whereof the Kings Prerogative is a principal part) nor against the Statute and
Customs of the Realm, The Ordinary and other Ecclesiastical Judges do proceed
in Causes within their Conusance; and this Jurisdiction was so bounded by the
ancient Common Laws of the Realm, and so declared by Act of Parliament, 25 H.
8. c. 19. 33 H. 6. 34. 32 H. 6. 28.

Note, that institution is a good plenarty against a Common person (but not
against the King, unless he be inducted) and that is the cause that Regularly
plenarty shall be tried by the Bishop, because the Church is full by
institution, which is a spiritual act, but void or not void shall be tried, by
the Common Law, 22 H. 6. 27. 38 E. 3. 4.

At the Common Law if an usurpation had been had upon an Infant or feme Covert,
having an Advowson by descent, or upon Tenant for life, etc. the Infant, feme
Covert, and he in the reversion were driven to their Writ of Right of Advowson;
for at the Common Law if the Church were once full, the Incumbent could not be
removed, and plenarty was a good plea in a Qu. imp. or Assize of dar.
Presentment; and the reason of this was, to the intent that the Incumbent might
quickly intend and apply himself to his spiritual charge: And secondly, the Law
intended, That the Bishop that had Cure of Souls within his Diocese, would
admit and institute an able man, etc. 6 E. 3. 28. 39. 52.

If the King do present to a Church, and his Clerk is admitted and instituted,
yet before induction, the King may repeal and revoke his Presentation. But
Regularly no man can be put out of possession of his Advowson, but by admission
and institution upon an usurpation by a Presentation to the Church; Cum aliquis
jus praesentandi non habens praesentaverit, etc. and not by collation of the
Bishop, 45 E. 3. 35. 38 E. 3, 4. 13 El. Dyer 292. 18 El. Dyer 348. 14. E. 4. 2.
7 H. 4. 32. fol. 344. b.

Nota, that an usurpation upon a presentation, shall not only put out of
possession him that has right of presentation, but right of Collation also.
Therefore at this day the Incumbent shall be removed by a Qu. imp. or Assize of
dar' presentment, if there be not a plenarry by six months, before the Test
of the Writ, but then the Incumbent must be named in the Writ, or else he shall
never be removed, 9 H. 6. 32. and 56. 19 H. 6. 68.

At the Common Law if hanging the Qu. imp. against the Ordinary for refusing of
his Clerk, and before the Church were full, the Patron brought a Qu. imp.
against the Bishop, and hanging the Suit, the Bishop admit and institute a
Clerk, at the presentation of another, in this if Judgment be given for the
Patron against the Bishop, the Patron shall have a Writ to the Bishop, and
remove the Incumbent that came in pendente lite by usurpation, for pendentelite
nihil innovetur, and therefore at the common Law it was good policy, to bring
the Qu. imp. against the Bishop, as speedily as might be. So it is good policy
at this day to name the Bishop in the Qu. imp. for then he shall not present by
lapse, 30 E. 3. Qu. imp. Statham. 5 E. 4. 115. 9 E. 4. 30.

Sect. 649, 650. fol. 345. a.
If Tenant in Tail of lands holden of the King, be attainted of Felony, and the
King after Office seiseth the same, the estate Tail is in Abeyance, there said
to be in suspense, 19 H. 6. 60. 29 Ass. P. Com. 562. 563. Walsinghams Case.

Tenant for life, the remainder in Tail, the remainder to the right heirs of
Tenant for life, Tenant for life grant to (...) Stat. suum to a man and his
heirs, both estates do pass, 44 Ass. 28. 44 E. 3. 10.

J^^ sive rectum signifies properly and specially in Writs and pleadings; when
an estate is turned to a right as by descent, disseisin, etc. where it shall be
said, Quid jus descendit, and non terra, 20 H. 6. 9.

But right does also include the estate in esse in Conveyances, and therefore
if Tenant in fee simple make a lease for years, and release all his right in
the land to the lessee and his heirs, the whole estate in fee simple passes.
Vide Sect. 465. Pl. Com. 484. lib. 8. fol. 153. Althams Case, 39. H. 6. 38.

And so commonly in Fines, the right of the land includes and passes the
state of the land, as A. cognovit tene^enta praedicta esse jus ipsius B. etc.
and the Statute says, Jus suum defendere (which is) statum suum. W. 2. cap. 3.
Pl. Com. 484. and 487. b.

And note, That there is jus recuperandi, jus inenandi, jus habendi, jus
retinendi, jus percipiendi, jus possidendi, fo. 345. b.

Title properly is, when a man has a lawful cause of entry into lands whereof
another is seized, for the which he can have no action, as Title of Condition,
Title of Mortmain, etc. Vide S. 429, 659, etc:

Every right is a Title, but every Title is not such a right, for which an
action lies, and therefore Titulus est justa causa possidendi quod nostrum est.

As by a release of a right a Title is released, so by release of a Title a
right is released also.

Interest, ex vi termini, extends to Estates; Rights and Titles that a man
has of, in, to, or out of Lands; and by the grant of totum interesse suum in
such lands, as well reversions as possessions in fee simple shall pass, Pl.
Com. 374. Seignior Zouches Case, and 487, 488. Nichol. Nichols Case, 23 H. 8.
Tail. Br. 32. 16 El. Dyer 325. b.

If Tenant for life be, the remainder in Tail, and he in the remainder in Tail
release to the Tenant for life all his right and state in the land: Hereby it
is said in in our Books, That the estate of the lessee is not enlarged, but the
release serves to this purpose, to put the state Tail into Abeyance, so as
after that he in the remainder cannot have an action of Waste, 43 Ass. p. 13.
41 E. 3. Waste 83. 11 H. 4. 67. 14 H. 7. 10. Pl. com. 482. per Dyer 27 H. 8.
20. Yet in that case (saving reformation) the lessee for life has an estate
for the life of Tenat in in Tail expectant upon his own life, 42 E. 3. 23.

But if Tenant in fee release to his Tenant for life all his right, yet he
shall have an action of Waste; and if Tenant in Tail make a lease for his own
life, he shall have an action of Waste, F N B 60. H 42 E. 3. 18. 41 E. 3. Waste
83.

Sect. 658. Fol. 347. b.
Here Littleton does add a Limitation to that which in this Chapter he had
generally said, viz. That an estate Tail cannot be discontinued, but where he
that makes the discontinuance was once seized by force of the Tail; which is
to be understood, when he is seized of the Freehold and Inheritance of the
estate in Tail, and not where he is seized of a remainder, or a reversion
expectant upon a Feeehold, which Freehold is ever much respected in Law, Vide
637, 592, 596, 597, 601, 640, 641.

CHAP. XII. Of Remitter.
Sect. 659. Fo. 348. a.
LOu home ad 2 Titles a terres ou tenements. Et adonques est adjudge eins per
force de son eigne title, ceo est a luy die un Remitter, pur ceo que ley luy
mitter destr, eins en la terre etc. per le pluis eigne and sure title. Quod
prius est, verius est, and quod prius est tempore, potius est jure.

A Remitter is an operation in Law, upon the meeting of an ancient right
remediable, and a latter state in one person where there is no folly in him,
whereby the ancient right is restored and set up again, and the new defeasible
estate ceased and vanished away, 25 Ass. p. 4. 11 H. 4. 50. a.

Here in this case (Titles) includes Rights, for being properly taken as in
case of a Condition, Mortmain, Assent to a Ravisher, etc. there is no Remitter
wrought unto them, because these are but bare Titles of Entry, for the which no
action is given, but a Remitter must be to a precedent right. And Littleton in
this Chapter puts all his cases, only of Remitters to rights remediable.
429. and 650. Sect. etc. 34 H. 8 Remit. Br. 50. 44 E. 3. Attaint. 22. 38 Ass.
p. 7.

Note two things: 1. That this Remitter is wrought in this case by operation of
Law upon the Freehold in Law descended without any entry.

2. That the Law so favors a Remitter, that if the discontinuee be an
Infant, or feme Covert, and Tenant in Tail after a discontinuance djsseise
them, and dye seized, the issue shall be remitted without any respect of the
privilege of Infancy or Coverture, 11 E. 4. 1.

In this case, and many other, the Law that abhors Suits of vexation, does
avoid circuity of action, for the Rule is Circuitas est evitandus, 11 E. 3. 3.
Ass. 85. 4 E. g. 35. 14 H. 6. 27. 10 H. 7. 11. F N B Mesne and Waste.

Sect. 660. Fo. 348. b.
Since Littleton wrote, and after the Statute of 2^ H. 8. c. 10. If Tenant in
Tail make a Feoffment in fee to the use of his issue, being within age, and his
heirs, and dies, and the right of the estate Tail descend to the issue, being
within age, yet he is not remitted, because the Stat^ executes the possession
in such plight, manner and form as the use was limited; and sic de similibus,
35 H. 8. Dyer 54. b. 6 E. 6. ib. 77. 1 and 2 P.M. 116. 1 and 2 P. M. 129. 191.
28 H. 8. 23. b. Pl. Com. Amy Townsends Case, 34 H. 8. Remit. Br. 49.

But if the issue in Tail in that case wave the possession, and bring a
Formedon in the Descend. and recover against the feoffees, he shall thereby be
remitted to the estate Tail. otherwise the lands may be so encumbered, as the
issue in Tail should be at a great inconvenience: but if no Formedon be
btought, if that issue dies, his issue shall be remitted, because a state in
fee simple at the Common Law descends unto him, Pl. Com. supra.

Nota, in this case, that the State of the land, out of which the rent issued,
being defeated, the rent is defeated also. Fo. 349. a.

But if Tenant in tail make a Lease for life, whereby he gains a new
reversion in fee, so long as Tenant for life lives, and he granted a
rentcharge, out of the reversion, and after Tenant for life dies, whereby the
grantor becomes Tenant in Tail again, and the reversion in fee defeated, yet
because the grantor had a right of the intail in him, clothed with a
defeasible fee simple, the rent charge remains good against him, but not
against his issue, which diversity is observable, 11 H. 7. 21. Edriches case.

If the heir apparent of the disseisee disseise the disseisor, and grant a rent
charge, and then the disseisee dies, the granter shall hold it discharged, for
there a new right of entry does descend unto him, and therefore he is remitted.

So if the Father disseise the grandfather; a grant and rent charge and dies,
now is the entry of the grandfather taken away, if after the grandfathet dies,
the Son is remitted. So as where our author puts his example of a fee
tail, it holds also in case of fee simple, and Littleton que la terre est
discharge del rent, etc. But the whole grant is not thereby avoided, for the
grantee shall have notwithstanding a writ of annuity, and charge the person of
the grantor, Lib. 2. fo. 36. b. Wards case.

Also Littleton here puts his case of things granted out of the Land. But if
the issue at full age by Deed Indent^^^, or Deed Poll make a Lease for years of
the land, and after by the death of tenant in tail, he is remitted: It is
holden that he shall not avoid the Lease, because it is made of the Land it
self; and the Land is become by the Lease in another, then it is in the case of
a grant of a rent charge. 33 H. 8. Die. 51. b. and vide Sect. 289. *

Sect. 661. Fo. 349. b.
Regularly, a man shall not remitted to a right remediesse, for the which he
can have no action, l. 3. f. 3. Marquess of Winchesters case. Neither an
action without a right, nor a right without an action, can make a remittance.
As if Tenant in tail suffer a common recovery, in which there is error, and
after Tenant in tail disseise the recoveror, and dies, here the issue in tail
has an action, viz. a writ of error, but as long as the Recovery remains in
force, he has no ^ight, and therefore in that case there is no remittance. If
B. purchase an Advowson, and suffer an usurpation and six ^oneths to pass, and
after the usurper grant the Advowson to B. and his heirs, B. dies, his heir is
not remitted, because his right to the Advowson was remediless, a right
without an action. Tenant in tail of a Manor whereunto an Advowson is appendant
makes a discontinuance, the discon^^ee grants the Advowson to Tenant in tail
and his heirs, Tenant in tail dies, the issue is not remitted to the Advowson,
because the issue had no action to recover the Advowson, before he recovered
the Manor, whereunto the Advowson was Appendant, 5 H. 7. 35. And so it is of
all other inheritance, regardant, appendant, or appurtenant, a man shall be
remitted to any of them before he recontinueth the Manor, etc. whereunto they
are regardant, appendant, etc.

Car null ne poit claimer droit en les appurtenances ne en les accessories que
null droit ad en le principal, Brit. fo. 126.

But on the other side, if a man be remitted to the principal, he shall also be
remitted to the appendant or accessory, albeit it were severed by the
discontinuee, or other wrong doer; and therefore if Tenant in tail be of a
Manor, whereunto an Advowson is appendant, and infeoffeth A, of the Manor with
the appurtenances, A. re-enfeoffeth the Tenant in tail, saving to himself the
Advowson, Tenant in tail dies, his issue being remitted to the Manor, is
consequently remitted to the Advowson, although at that time it was severed
from the Manor. So it is in the same case, if Tenant in tail had been
disseised, and the disseisor suffer an usurpation, if the disseisee enter into
the Manor, he is also remitted to the Advowson, 8 R. 2. Qu. imp. 199. 2 H. 4.
18. 14 H. 6. 15, 16. FNB. 25. b. and 36. f. 33 H. 8. Die. 48. b. 24 E. 3.
discontinuance, 16.

Sect. 663, 664. Fo. 350.
If the discontinuee, after the death of Tenant in tail make a charter of
feoffment to the issue in tail being within age who has right, and to a
stranger in fee, and make livery to the infant, in name of both: the issue is
not remitted to the whole, but to the half, for first he takes the fee-simple;
and after the remittance is wrought by operation of Law, and therefore can
remit him, but to a moity. Vide Sect. 288.

Si Tenant in tale infeoffe sou heir apparent, l'heire evant de plein age al
temps de feoffment, and puis le Tenant en tail mor, ceo nest remitter al
heir, pur ceo que il fuit sa folly, que il evant de plein age voile prender
tiel feoffment, etc. By this feoffment albeit the heir apparent has some
benefit in the life of his Ancestor, yet if he thereby (besides his own)
subject during his life, to all charges and encumbrances made or suffered by
his Ancestors, 40. E. 3. 44. 18. E. 4. 25.

Sect. 665. Fo. 351. a.
Nota, that the estate which does in this case work the Remitter, could not
have continuance after the decease of the wife; and so on the other side, if
the husband make a discontinuance, and take back an estate to him and his wife,
during the life of the husband, this is a Remitter to the wife presently,
albeit the estate is not by the limitation to have continued after the decease
of the husband; which case is proved by the reason of the case, which our
Author here puts.

If a man take to wife a woman seized in fee, he gains by the intermarriage,
an estate of freehold in her right, which estate is sufficient to work a
Remitter, and yet the estate which the husband gains depending upon
uncertainty, and consists in privity. 13. H. 4. 6. 18. E. 4. 5. 11. H. 7. 19.
10. H. 6. 11. 7. H. 6. 9. b.

For if the wife be attainted of felony, the Lord by escheat shall enter, and
put out the husband, otherwise it is if the Felony be committed after issue
had, 4. Ass. p. 4. 4. E. 3. Ass. 166. vide S. 58.

Also if the husband be attainted of felony, the King gains no freehold, but
a pernancy of the profits, during the Coverture, and the freehold remains in
the wife.

2. If she were possessed of a term for years, yet he is possessed in her
right, but he has power to dispose thereof by grant or demise, and if he be
outlawed or attainted, they are gifts in Law. Pl. Came. 260. b. Dame Hales case.
50. Ass. 5. 21. E. 4. 35. 7. E. 4. 6. 7. H. 7. 2.

Upon an execution against the husband for his debt, the Sheriff may sell the
term during her life; but the husband can make no disposition thereof by his
last Will. Also if he make no disposition or forfeiture of it in his life, yet
it is a gift in Law unto him, if he do survive his wife, but if he make no
disposition, and die before his wife, she shall have it again; and the same Law
is of Estates by Statute Merch. Stap. Eleg. and other Chattels realls in
possession. l. 8. fol. 96. Matthew Mannings case.

But if the husband charge the Chattell real of his wife, it shall not bind
the wife, if she survive him. 7. H. 6 1.

If a feme sole be possessed of a Chattell real, and be thereof dispossessed,
and then takes husband, and the wife dies, and the husband surviveth, this
right is not given to the husband by the intermarriage, but the Executor or
Administrator of the wife shall have it; so it is if the wife has but a
possibility. vide Sect. 58.

And so it is if the wife be possessed of Chattell reals in auter droit, as
Executor, or Administrator, or as Guardein in Socage, etc. Pl. Com. 294.
Osbornes case, and fo. 192. b. Wrotesleyes Case.

In the same manner if a woman grant a term to her own use, takes husband and
dies, the surviving husband shall not have this trust, but the Executors or
Administrators of the wife, for it consists in privity, P. 22. El. in
Cancel. Withams case.

Chattels reals consisting merely in action, the husband shall not have by the
intermarriage, unless he recover them in the life of the wife, albeit he
survive the wife, as a Writ of Right of Ward, a valor maritagij, a forfeiture
of Marriage, etc, whereunto the wife was entitled before the Marriage.

But Chattels reals being of a mixed nature, viz. partly in possession, partly
in action, which happen during the Coverture, the husband shall have by the
intermarriage, etc. As if the husband be seized of a rent-service, charge, or
seck, in the right of his wife, the rent become due during the Coverture, the
wife dies, the husband shall have the arrerages, but if the wife survive the
husband, she shall have them, and not the executor of the husband, 13 E. 3. Qu.
imp. 57. 14 H. 4. 12. F. N. B. 121. 11 R. 2. Account 49. 12 R. 2- Breve 639. 5
E. 3. Exec. 99.

So it is of an Advowson, if the Church become void during the Coverture, he
may have a Qu. Imp. in his own name, as some hold: but the wife shall have it
if she survive him, and the husband if he survive her, 50 E. 3. 13. 28 H. 6. 9.
7 H. 7. 2.

Now by the statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 37. if the husband survive the wife, he
shall have the arrerages, as well incurred before the marriage, as after, l. 4.
51. Ognels case. H. 17. El. Rot. 457. in Com. B. Sharps case, f. 351. b.

But the marriage is an absolute gift of all chattels personals in possession
in her own right, whether the husband survive the wife or no; but if they be in
action, as debts by Obligation, Contract, or otherwise, the husband shall not
have them, unless he and his wife recover them. And of personal goods en auter
droit, as Executor or administrator, etc. the marriage is no gift of them to
the husband, although he survive his wife, 21 E. 4. 4. 11 H. 7. 4. 26 H. 8. 7.
43. E. 3. 10. 4 H. 6. 5. 16 E. 4. 8.

If an estray happen within the Manor of the wife, if the husband dye before
seizure, the wife shall have it, for that the property was not in the wife
before seizure, 21 E. 3. 8. vide 10 H. 6. 11.

But note a diversity between a property in personal goods and a bare
possession; for if personal goods be bailed to a feme, or if she find goods,
or if goods come to her hands as executor to a Bailiff, and takes a husband,
this bare possession is not given to the husband, but the action of detinue
must be brought against the husband and wife, 39 E. 3. 17.

Sect. 666. Fol. 351. b.
By this case it appears, That albeit there be no moities between husband and
wife, yet this is a Remitter presently, and stands not upon the survivor of
the wife, as some have thought; for if the estate gained by intermarriage be a
sufficient estate to work a Remitter, a fortiori, an estate made to the husband
and wife, shall work a Remitter in the wife. And so it is if Tenant in Tail
infeoff his issue being within age, and his wife in fee, and dies, this is a
Remitter to the issue presently, by the death of Tenant in Tail, though some
have thought the contrary, 21. E. 3. 26. 29. E. 3. 43. 19. E. 3. Remit. 14. 35.
Ass. 12. 26. E. 3. 69. vide 676 Sect. 11. R. 2. Remit 12. 44. E. 3. 17.

Sect. 667. Fol. 352. a.
Estoppel, ie. a Conclusion, because a man's own act, or acceptance, stops or
closes up his mouth to allege or plead the truth. l. 2. fo. 4. b. Goddards
Case. Vide S. 41. and 693, 695, 679.

Note three kinds of Estoppel:

1. By matter of Record, viz. by Letters Patents, Fine, Recovery, Pleading,
taking of Continuance, Confession, Imparlance, Warranty of Attorney,
Admittance, 43. Ass. 29. 8. H. 4 7, 8. 22. Ass. 54. 15. E. 3. Estop. 239. 4. E.
3. ib. 133.

2. By matter in writing, as by Deed indented, by making of an Acquittance by
Deed indented, or Deed Poll, 4. H. 4. 1. 8. H. 7. 6. 13. H. 7. 24. 15. E. 4.
28. 41. E. 3. Estop. 12. 12. R. 2. Estop. 21 2. by Deseasance, by Deed
indented, or Deed Poll. 8. R. 2. Estop. 283. 35. H. 6. 18. 3. H. 6. 16. 16. H.
7. 5. 34. H: 6. 19. 14. H. 4. 29.

3. By matter in paiis, as by Livery, by Entry, by Acceptance of rent, by
Partition, and by acceptance of an estate, as here in the Case that Littleton
puts, whereof Littleton makes a special Observation, That a man shall be
estopped by matter in the Country, without any writing.

Note these few Rules concerning Estoppels:

1. That every Estoppel ought to be reciprocal, i. e. to bind both parties;
and this is the reason, that regularly a stranger shall neither take advantage,
nor be bound by the Estoppel, 33 H. 6. 19. 50. 30 H. 6 2. 31 E. 3. Estoppel
240. 33. Ass. 18. 30. Ass. 51. 14. Ass. 9. 18. E. 4. 1. Privies in blood as the
heir; privies in estate, as the feoffee, lessee, etc. privies in Law, as the
Lords by escheat; Tenant by the Courtesy, Tenant in Dower, the Incumbent of a
Benefice, and others that come under by act in Law, or in the post, shall be
bound and take advantage of Estoppels, and that a Rebutter is a kind of
Estoppel, 8 Ass. 53. Br. Fines 73. 8 H. 617. 21 E. 3. 35. 38. E. 331. 20 E. 3
Estop. 187.

2. That every Estopple, because it concludes a man to allege the truth, must
be sertain to every intent, and not to be taken by argument or inference, 21 E.
4. 4. 23. Ass. 14. 17 H. 6. Estop. 273. 18 E. 3, 30. 7 H. 6. 7. and 16.

3. Every Estoppel, ought to be a precise Affirmation of that which makes the
Estoppel, and not be spoken impersonally, as if it be said, Vt dicitur, quia
impersonalitas non concludit, nec ligat, 46. 3 E 33. 29 Ass. 38. Pl. Com. 398.
neither does a recital conclude, because it is no direct Affirmation 35. H. 6.
33. 46. 3 E 12 49 E. 3. 14. 8. Ass. 3. 45. Ass. 5. 3. El. Dyer 196. 11 El. Dyer
280. 9 H. 6. 60.

4. A matter alleged that is neither traversable nor material, shall not
estop, 5 E. 4. 7. 8 E. 4. 19. 10 E. 4. 12. 22 E. 4. 38. 32 Ass, 9. 35 H. 6. 20.

5. Regularly a man shall not be concluded, by acceptance or the llke, before
his Title accrued, 33 H. 6. 16. 4 E. 3. 22. 6 H. 4. 7. 31 E. 1. Guard 155.
F.N.B. 142. E.

6. Estoppel against Estoppel does put the matter at large, 12 H. 7. 4. 20 H.
6. 29. 3 H. 4. 9. 41 E. 3. 4 11 H. 4. 30.

7. Matters alleged by way of supposal in Counts, shall not conclude after
Nonsuit: otherwise it is after Judgment given; and after Non-sute, albeit the
supposal in the Count shall not conclude, yet the Bar, Tittle, Replication,
or other pleading of either party, which is precisely alleged, shall conclude
after Nonsuit; and hereby are the Books reconciled, 2 R. 3. 14. 2 R. 2. Estop.
10. 40 E. 3. 21. 128..4. 13. 18 E 3. 31. 35. 44 E. 3. 45. 17 Ass. 27. 45 E. 3.
2. 21 H. 7. 14. 5 E. 4. 7. ^ E. 4. 19. 3 E. 4. 11. 4 E 3. 54. 7 E. 6. Br.
Fstop. 162. 11. H. 4. 30. 30 E. 3. 21. 31 Ass. 14.

8. Where the verity is apparent in the same Record, the adverse party shall
not be estopped to take advantage of the truth, for he cannot be estopped to
allege the truth, when the truth, appears of Record, If a Fine be levied
without any Original, it is voidable, but not void; but if an Original be
brought, and a Retraxit entered, and after that a concord is made, or a Fine
levied, this is void in respect the veriety appears of Record, 37 Ass. 17. 38
H 12. 3 El. Dyer 222.

An Impropriation is made after the death of an Incumbent to a Bishop and his
Successors; the Bishop by Indenture demiseth the Personage for forty years, to
begin after the death of the Incumbent, the Dean and Chapter confirm it, the
Incumbent dies, this demise shall not conclude, for that it appears he had
nothing in the Impropriation, till after the death of the Incumbent, 7 Eliz.
Dyre 244.

9. Where the Record of the Estoppel does run to the disability, or
illegittimation of the person, there all strangers shall take benefit of the
Record, as Outlawry, excommengement, Profession, Attainder of Praemunire, of
Felonies, etc. Bastardy, Mulierty, and shall conclude the party, though they be
strangers to the Record, Vide Sect. 196. 197, ande.

But of a Record concerning the name of the person, quality or addition, no
stranger shall take advantage, because he shall not be bound by it.

But Nota, Reader, That in case of the Mulierty prima facie, an estranger shall
take benefit of it, etc. But yet because he may be a Mulier by the
Ecclesiastical Law, and a Bastard by the Common Law, therefore against such a
Certificate pleaded, the adverse party may allege the special matter, and
confess the Certificate of the Bishop, according to the Ecclesiastical Law,
and allege further the special matter according to the Common Law, whereunto
the adverse party must answer, and so are the Books reconciled, Bract. fo. 420.
26 Ass. 64. 39 Ass. 10. 11 H. 4. 84. 7 H. 6. 7. 33 Ass 5. 11 E. 3. Estop. 2 29.
21 E. 3. 39. 19 R. 2. Estop. 28. 2. 3 E. 23. 3. ib. 33 E. 3 Estop. Statham.
Stat. 9 H. 6. c. 11. 30 H. 6. 2. D. and St. 69. 34 H. 6 39. 18 E. 4. 2 b, 10 E.
4. 16.

Sect. 669. Fol. 353. a.
When a feme covert is received, she shall plead, as if she were sole; and this
is regularly true, yet holds not in all cases: for if a feme covert be
received in an Assize, and plead a Record and fail, therefore she shall not be
adjudged a disseisor, as she shoud be if she were sole, etc. 37 Ass. 1.

So if a feme covert only levy a Fine executory, and a Scire fac. is brought
against her and her husband, if she be received upon the default of her
husband, she shall bar the Conusee, which if she had been sole she could not
do and in some other cases, 17 Ass. 17. 29 E. 3. 43. 5 E. 3. 138 Voucher.

Again, If the husband levy a Fine of his wives land, and the Conusee grant and
render, the land to the husband and wife, although the wife be not party to the
Original, nor to the Conusans, and therefore she ought not by the Law to take
any present estate, but by way of remainder only: yet here it is proved by
Littleton, That the grant and render de fecto to the wife in presenti, is not
void, for then it could not work a Remitter, but voidable by Writ of Error, and
that avoidable estate does work a Remitter, T. 27 El. inter Owen and Morgan,
Rot. 276. in Com. B. l. 3. f. 5. Marg. of Winchesters Case, 7 E. 3. 64. 13 E.
3. Vouch. 119. Vide Sect.

Sect. 670. Fo. 353. b.
Si Baron and feme fesont un conusance de droit a un auter, etc. ou fesoyent un
grant and render a un auter, ou release per fine a un auter etc. lou le droit
del feme passera del feme per forne de mas le fine, en tout tiels cases, le
feme serre examine devant que le fine soit accept, pur ceo que tiels fines
concludont tiels femes coverte a touts jours, etc. mes lou riens est move en le
fine forsque tantsolement, que le Baron and la feme pregnant estate per force
de mes le fine, ceo ne concludam la feme, pur ceo que en tiel case, el jameres
ne serre my examine, etc. 15 E. 4. 28. 14 E. 3. 31.

Therefore if the husband and wife be Tenants in special Tail, and they levy a
Fine at the Common Law, and after the husband wife take back an estate to them
and their heirs, in this case the estate Tail is not barted; and yet against a
feme levied by her self, she cannot be remitted, because thereupon she was
examined; but in that case if the land descend to her issue, he shall be
remited, ^9 E. 3. 43. 43 E. 3. 5.

Sect. 671.
Note a diversity between a Remitter and a Descent: For if a woman be
disseised, and being of full age takes husband, and then the disseisor dies
seized, this descent shall bind the wife, albeit she was covert when the
descent was cast, because she was of full age when she took husband. But albeit
the wife that has an ancient Right, and being of full age, takes a husband,
and the Discontinue lets the land to the husband and wife for their lives,
this is a Remitter to the wife; for Remitters to ancient Rights are favored in
Law.

Sect. 672. Fo. 354. a
Here it appears, That the husband against his own alienation, if he had
taken the estate to him alone, could not have been remitted: But when the
estate is made to the husband and wife, albeit they be but one person in Law,
and no moities between them, yet for that the wife cannot be remitted in this
case, unless the husband be remitted also, and for that Remitters are favored
etc. therefore in this case in Judgment of Law, both husband and wife are
remitted, which is worthy of great Observation.

Sect. 673. Fol. 354. b.
Littleton having spoken of Remitters to the issue in Tail, who is privy in
blood; and to the wife who is privy in person, now he speaks of Remitters to
them in reversion or remainder expectant upon an estate Tail, who are privy in
estate: and this case proves, That the wife is remitted presently; for the
equity of the Law requires, that as the discontinuance continuance of the
estate in Tail, is a discontinuance of the reversion or remainder, so that the
Remitter to the estate Tail, should be a Remitter in the reversion or
remainder, 42 E. 3. 17 41 Ass. 1. 36 Ass. p. 4.

Tenant for life, the remainder to A. in Tail, the remainder to B. in fee;
Tenant for life is disseised, a collateral Ancestor of A. releaseth with
Warranty, and dies, whereby the estate Tail is barred, the Tenant for life
reenters, the disseisor has an estate in fee simple, determinable upon the
estate Tail, and the remainder of B. is revested in him. And so note in this
case, the estate for life, and the remainder in fee, are revested and remitted,
and an estate of inheritance left in the disseisor, 44 Ass. p. 15. 44. E. 3. 30.

If a Fine be levied sur grant and rend. to one for life, or in tail, the
remainder in Fee, if Tenant for life, or in tail execute the estate for life,
or in tail, this is an execution of the Remainder. 20. E. 3. Aid. 29.

A gift in tail is made to B. the remainder to C. in Fee, B. discontinueth and
takes back an estate in tail: the remainder in Fee to the King by Deed
enrolled, Tenant in tail dies, his issue is remitted, and consequently the
remainder as Littleton here says, and the diversity is between an Act in Law,
for that may divest an estate out of the King, and a tortious Act, or entry, or
a false and a fained recovery against Tenant for life, or in tail, which shall
never divest any Estate, remainder, or reversion out of the King. Pl. Com. 489.
Nichols case, and 553. Walsinghams case, 17. El. Die. 344. 25. E. 3. 48. Resceit
18. 49 E. 3. 16. Surre Staffords case l. 8. fo. 76 b.

But a Recovery by good Title against Tenant for life, or in tail, where the
remainder is to the King by defeasable Title shall divest the remainder out of
the King, and restore and remit the right owners. Cholmleyes case. l. 2. 53. 7
R. 2. Aid le roy. 61. 22. E. 3. 7.

Sect. 674. 675, Fo. 355.
Quod ei deforceat, is a writ that is given by the statute of W. 2. ca. 4. to
any Tenant for life, or in Tail upon a Recovery by default against them in a
Precipe, and lies against the Recoveror and his heirs; in which case the
particular Tenant was without remedy at the common Law, because he could not
have a writ of right. There has been a question in our Books upon these words
by default, etc. And some do hold contrary to three Objections made, etc. and
as to the first they say, That albeit that in the writ of waste, judgment is
not only given upon the default, yet the default is the principal, and the
cause of awarding of the writ, to enquire of the waste is an incident
thereunto: and the Law always has respect to the first and principal cause,
and therefore upon such a Recovery, a writ of deceit lies, and that writ lies
not but where the recovery is by default. 17 E 3. 58. 29 E 3. 42. F. N. B. 98.
b. 12 H. 4. 4. 19 E. 2 disceit 56. w. 2 ca. 3. 3 H. 4. 1.

So in an acton of waste against the Husband and wife, upon the default of the
Husband the wife shall be teceived, and yet the Statute there speaks also per
defaultam. So upon such a recovery in waste against the Baron and feme by
default, the wife shall have a cui in vita by the Statute, and it speaks
where the recovery is per defaul. 9 E. 4. 16. and albeit the defendent may give
in evidence, if he knows it, yet when he makes default, the Law presumes he
knows not of it, and it may be that he in truth knew not of it; and therefore
it is reason, that seeing the statute, that is a beneficial Statute has given
it him, that he be admitted to his quod ei deforceat, in which writ the truth
and right shall be tried; and so it is of a Recovery by default in an Ass.
albeit the Recognitor of the Ass. give a verdict, a Quod ei deforceat lies;
and all this was resolved by the whole Court of Common Pleas, and so the doubt
in 41 E 3. 8. well resolved. 2 H. 4. 2. 21 H. 6. 56. 44 E. 3. 42. Br. quod ei
deforceat 4 P. 33 Eliz Rot. 1125. inter Ed: Elmer, and William Thacker in quod
ei deforceat.

Nota, If Tenant for life make default after defaltation, and he in Reversion
is received and pleading to issue, and it found by verdict for the demandant:
the default and the verdict are causes of the judgment, and yet the Tenant
shall have a quod ei deforceat.

As to the 2. Ob. That the defendant may have an attaint, 1. It was utterly
denied, that an Attaint did lie in this case, for though it be taken by the
oath of 12 men, yet it is but an Enquest of Office, where upon no Attaint did
lie on either party, us upon an enquiry of Collusion, although it be by one
Jury, nor upon a verdict in a quale jus.

2. Admitting that an Attaint did lie in that case, yet it follows ex conseq
that a quod ei deforceat did not lie, 33 E 3. quod ei deforceat pl. ult. F.N.B.
156. Fleta l 5 ca. 11. 48. E. 3. 19. 40. Ass. 23. 33 H. 6. 25. 39 H. 6. 1.
F.N.B. 107.

For if an Ass. be taken by default, a quod ei deforceat does lie, and yet the
party may have an Attaint, for this is no enquest of Office, but a Recognition
by the Recognitors of an Ass. who were returned the first day, and not returned
upon the awarding of the Ass. by default. 17 E. 2 Attaint 69. 21 H. 6. 56. 34.
H. 6. 12.

As to the 3. Ob. That the damages should be the principal, because they were
at the common Law, that is an Argument that they are more ancient, but not that
they are more principal, and treble damages were not at the common Law (for
the common Law never gives more damage than the loss amounts unto) but are
given by the Statute of Gloucester, but the place wasted is worthier being in
the realty, then damages that be in the personalty, Et omne majus dignum,
trahit ad se minus dignum, quamvis minus dignum sit antiquius, and a digniori
fieri debet denominatio; and it is confessed, That in an action of waste,
against Tenant for life, or for years, the place wasted is the principal,
because the statute of Gloucester does give the place wasted and treble damages
at one time, for no prohibition or action of waste, lay against them at the
Common Law, and in an action of waste. 34 H. 6. 7. waste 50.

And in an action of waste, if the defendant confess the action, the
plaintiff may have judgment for the place wasted, and release the damages
which proves that the damgas are not the principal, for a man shall never
release the principle, and have judgment of the Accessory, and an action of
waste against Tenant for life, is as real, as an action aagainst Tenant in
Dower; and as to the case of 9 H. 5. It was answered, that it was an action in
the Tenuit, which is only in the personalty, and then the release of one does
bar both, neither could summons and severance lie in that case, but in an
action of wast (in the Tenet) either against Tenant for life, or years, the
release of the one does not bar the other, and in those two cases, Summons and
severance does lie- 6 E. 3, 47. 48. E. 319.

But when these 3. parts were resolved by the Court for the demandant, then the
counsel of the Tenant moved in arrest of judgment another point, viz. That the
judgment was given upon a nihil dicit, which is always after appearance, and
not per defaltam, and there upon judgment was stayed.

But to return to Littleton. Here he opens a secret of Law, for the cause of
this Remitter is, for that the Tenant for life in this case might have a quod
ei deforceat. And the Tenant for life at the common Law was remediless,
because he could not have a writ of right, and consequently the feme Covert in
this case could not be remitted by the taking of an estate to her husband, and
her, because her right was remediless, and could have no action, But when an
act of Parliament, or a custom does alter the reason, etc. thereby the Common
Law it self is alterd, if the Act of Parliament and custom be pursued, for
Alterata causa and ratione legis, alteratur and lex. and cessante causa and
ratione leg. cessat and lex. as in this case, the statute of W. 2. giving
remedy to this feme Tenant for life, in this case it gives her ability to be
remitted, etc. 14 H. 7 11. per Fineux 27 H. 8. 4. 6. Aid. 35 H. 6. guard 72. 29
E. 3. per wilbie, custom. l. 3. fo. 86. Justice Windhams cases,

And Littleton warily puteth his case, That the Recovery was had against the
feme, while she was sole, for there was a time when it was a question, whether
a Recovery being had by defalt against the husband and wife (the wife being
Tenant for life) the said statute gave a quod ei deforceat to the Husband and
wife, for that the statute gave it a against Tenant in Dower, and Tenant for
life, etc. and here the Husband is not Tenant for life, but seized in the right
of his wife, and therefore out of the statute; and of this opinion is one book,
* But Apices juris non sunt jura, and parum differunt quae re concordant) * 4.
E. 3. 38. 33. E. 3. Avowry 255.

The contrary has been adjudged, and so that point is now in peace. 5. E. 3.
4. 33. E. 3. 255. F.N.B. 156. a. 5. E. 3. 5. 2. E. 4. 13. F.N.B. 156. c. 33. H.
6. 46. 2. E. 4. 11. 19. E. 4. 2.

And the like in case of Resceit for him in reversion. But if the husband lose
by default, and the husband die, the wife shall not have a quod ei deforceat,
for a cui in vita is given to her in that case by a former statute, viz. W. 2.
ca. 3.

These things are worthy of due observation, etc. and Littleton in our books of
another kind of quod ei deforceat at the common Law upon a disseisin. Fo. 356.
a.

When the reversion is divested, the lessor cannot have an action of waste,
because the Writ is, That the Lessee did waste ad exhaeredationem of the
Lessor, and that inheritance must continue at the time of the action brought.

And Nota, That in an action of waste brought by the lessor against the lessee,
the Lessee in respect of the privity cannot plead general * riens en le
reversion. But he must show how and by what means the reversion is divested out
of him: and this holds between the lessor and lessee; but if the grantee of a
reversion bring an action of waste, the lessee may plead generally, That he
has nothing in the reversion. 45. E. 3. 21. 44. E. 3. 34, 35. F.N.B. 60. 23.
H. 8. waste. Br. 138. * 45. E. 3. 20. 8. H. 6. 13 30. H. 6. 7.

And yet in some special cases an action of waste shall lie, albeit the lessor
had nothing in the reversion at the time of the waste done. As if Tenant for
life make a feoffment in Fee upon condition, and waste is done, and after the
lessee reenter for the condition broken, in this case the lessor shall have an
action of waste. And so if a Rishop make a lease for life or years, and the
Bishop die, the lessee, the Sea being void does waste, the successor shall have
an action of waste. So if Lessee for life be disseised, and waste is done, the
lessee reenter, an action of waste shall be maintained against the lessee, and
so in like cases.

Here note, that albeit the action be false and feigned, yet is the recovery so
much respected in Law, as it works a discontinu^^. But if Tenant for life
suffer a common recovery, or any other recovery by covin and consent between
the Tenant for life and the recoverer, this is a forfeiture of his estate, and
he in the reversion may enter, etc. 5. Ass. p. 3. 5 E. 3. enter cong. 42. 15 E.
3. Age 95. 41 E. 3. 18. pe Finchden 22 E. 3. 2 b lib. 1. 15. Sir William
Pelhams case.

Since our Author wrote, the statute of 14. El. cap. 8. has been made
concerning this matter: Vide l. 3. 60. Lib. 1. fo. 15.

And Nota, That although the discontinu^^ grows by matter of Record, yet the
Remitter may be brought by matter in paiis.

Sect. 676. Author. al. Contr. 44 E. 3. 17. 44 Ass. 2. 43 Ass. 3. Vide Sest.
6^6. Sect. 677. Fo: 356. b.
In this case the estate, is in the feme covert presently by the livery before
any agreement by the husband, 15. 4. 1. b. 7 H. 6. 17. 1 H. 7. 12. b. 39 E. 3.
30. 57 H. 8. 24.

If the wife survive her husband she cannot claim in by the purchase made
during the coverture, but the law adjudgeth her in her better right. 41 E. 3.
18.

But if both estates be waivable, there albeit the wife prima facie is
remitted, yet after the decease of her husband, she may elect which of the
Estates she will. As if lands be given to the husband and wife, and their
heirs, the husband make a feoffment in Fee, * the Feoffee gives the husband
and wife, and the heirs of their two bodies, the husband dies. 18 El. Die. 351.
* the Feoffee gives land to the husband and wife, etc.

If Lands be given to a man, and the heirs females of his body, and he makes a
feoffment in fee, and take back an estate to him and his heirs, and dies
having issue a daughter leaving his wife grossement enseint with a Son, and
dies, the daughter is remitted, and albeit the son be afterward borne, he
shall not divest the Remitter.

Sect. 678. Fol. 357.
Covin and consent in many cases to do a wrong, do choke a mere right, and the
ill manner does make a good matter unlawful, 18 E. 4. 2. b.

Covina, is a secret assent determined in the hearts of two or more, to the
defrauding and prejudice of another, Pl. Com. 546. Wimb.

If a Disseisor, Intrudor, or Abator do endow a woman that has lawful Title of
Dower, this is good, and shall bind him that right has, if there were no
covin or consent before the disseisin, etc. 44 E. 3. 46. 11 H. 4. 60. 44 Aff.
29. 19 H. 8. 12. 18 H. 8. 5. 11 E. 4. 2. 7 H. 7. 11.

In all cases where a man has a rightful and just cause of action, yet if he
of covin and consent do raise up a Tenant by wrong, against whom he may
recover, the covin does suffocate the right, so as the recovery though it be
upon a good Title shall not bind; or restore the Demandant to his right, 41
Ass. p. 28. 25 Ass. p. 1. 27 Ass. 74. 15 E. 4. 4. a. 12. Ass. p. 10.

If Tenant in Tail and his issue disseise the discontinuee to the use of the
Father, and the Father dies, and the land descend to the issue, he is not
remitted against the discontinuee, in respect he was privy and party to the
wrong, but in respect of all others he is remitted, and shall deraign the first
Warranty, 11 E. 4. 2. 15 E. 4. 23. 14 H. 8. 12. 33 H. 6. 5. 12 E. 4. 21. b.

A. and B. joyntenants be entitled to a real action, against the heir of the
disseisor; A. cause the heir to be disseised, against whom A. and B. recover
and sue execution, B is remitted, for that he was not party to the covin, and
shall hold in common with A. but A. is not remitted, fo. 357. b.

Nota, it is regularly true, That a feme covert cannot be a disseisoress by her
commandment or procurement precedent, nor by her assent or agreement
subsequent, but by her actual entry or proper act she may be a disseisoress:
And therefore some do hold, that Littleton must be intended, that the husband
and wife were present when the disseisin was done; and others do hold, that
Littleton is good Law, albeit she were absent, for if that her procurement or
agreement be to do a wrong to cause a Remitter unto her in this special case,
she shall fail of her end, and remitted she shall not be; but in this special
case she shall be holden as a disseisoress by her covin and consent quatenus to
hinder a Remitter, F.N.B. 179. g. 12. E. 4. 9. 35 Ass. 5. 44. E. 3. 9. 23. 13
Ass. 1. Temps E. 1. Waste 128. 16. Ass. p. 7. 21. E. 4. 53. 21. H 7. 35. 3. H.
4. 17.

Sect. 679.
Vide Pl. Com. Amy Townsends Case, 12. R. 2. Remit. 12.

Sect. 680, 681. fol. 358.
Here note five things: 1. That a remainder expectant upon an estate for life,
works no Remitter, but when it falls in possession: for before his time he
can have no action and no Freehold in him, 18. H. 8. 3.

2. Though the woman might wave the remainder, yet because she is presently by
the death of the husband Tenant to the praecipe, it is within the rule of
Remitter, and her power of waiver is not material.

3. That a Freehold in Law being cast upon the woman by act of Law, without any
thing done or assented to by her, does Remitter her, albeit she be then sole
and of full age, vide S. 447.

4. That a Praecipe lies against one that has but a Freehold in Law.

5. That a woman shall be endowed where the husband has the inheritance, and
but a Freehold in Law, Brit. 83. b.

Sect. 682, 683, 684, 685. Fo. 359.
Vide 12. E. 4. Compare these four Sections well together.

A man absent can neither take Livery nor make Livery without Deed, Temps H. 8.
Feoffments, Br. 72. 40 E. 3. 41.10. E. 4. 1. a. 15 E. 4. 18. 18 E. 4. 12. 22 H.
6. 12.

Verba relata hoc maxim operantur per referentiam, ut in eis inesse videntur.
Et le fits nient conusant de ceo ne agrea a le feoffment, etc. Here it
appears, That if the Son be Conusant, and agrees to the Feoffment, etc. This
is no remitter to him. Vide Sect. 682.

If A. be seized in Tail, and have issue two Sons, and by Deed indented between
him of the one part, and the Sons of the other part, makes a lease to the
eldest for life, the remainder to the second in fee, and dies, and the eldest
Son dies without issue, the second Son is not remitted, because he agreed to
the remainder in the life of the Father, or if the like estate had been made by
paroll, if in the life of the Father, the Tenant for life had been impleaded,
and made default, and he in the remainder had been received, and thereby agreed
to the remainder, after the death of the Father, and the eldest Son without
issue, the second Son should not be remitted, because he agreed to the
remainder in the life of the Father.

Sect. 685. Fol. 360. a.
Acts of Parliament are to be so construed, as no man that is innocent, or free
from injury or wrong, be by a literal construction punished, or endammaged:
and therefore in this case, albeit the Letter of the Statute is generally to
give damage against him that is found Tenant, and the case that Littleton here
puts, D. being survivor is consequently found Tenant of the Land: yet
because he waived the estate, and never agreed to the Feoffment, nor took any
profits, he shall not be charged with the damages.

Sect. 686, 687. fol. 360. b.
Feint (ou fained) action, est tiel action, que commit que les perols de le
breve sont voyers, encore per certain causes home and cause ne title per la
ley de recover per mesne le action. Et faux action est lou les perolls de breve
Sont faux.

Sect. 687. postea vide.
As discents do remit the heir which comes in the Per, so succession does
remit the successor, albeit he comes in the post; and so in other cases where
the issue in tail of full age shall be remitted, there in the like case, shall
the successor be remitted also, and all mean charges and encumbrances. Vide
Sect. 150. Stat. Merton.

Sect. 688. Fol. 361. a.
Si home suist faux action, etc. and recover envers le Tenant en Tail per
defalt. Littleton adds (by default) because if the recovery passed upon an
issue tried by verdict, he shall never falsify in the point tried, because an
attaint might have been had against the Jurors; and albeit all the Jurors be
dead, so as the attaint do fail, yet the issue in Tail shall not falsify in
the point tried, until it be lawfully avoided, pro veritate accipitur. As if
the Tenant in Tail be impleaded in a Formedon, and he traverse the gift and it
tried against him, and thereupon the demandant recover; In this case the issue
in Tail shall not falsify in the point tried, but he may falsify the
recovery by any other matter: as the Tenant in Tail might have pleaded a
collateral warranty, or a release, as Littleton here puts the case, or to
confess and avoid the point tried; and Littletons case holds not only in a
Recovery by default, whereof he speaks, but also upon a nihil dicit, or
confession, or demurre. 12 E. 4. 19. 13 E. 4. 3. 11 H. 4. 89. 7 H 4. 17. 14 H.
7. 10, 11. 28. Ass. 32. 52. 34. Ass. 7. 10 H. 6. 5. 19 H. 6. 39. Br. faux
Recovery 55.

Sect. 689. Fo. 361. b. Vide Sect. 686, 687.
Here note, That a Remitter may be had after a recovery upon a feint action by
a disseisin and a descent, as well as by a descent after a discontinuance by a
Feoffment, etc.

Sect. 690. Fol. 362. a.
Here it appears, that if a Judgment be given against a Tenant in Tail, upon
a faint or false action, and Tenant in Tail dye before execution, no execution
can be sued against the issue in Tail, 10. H. 6. 6. 12. E. 4. 20. 23. El. Die.
276. l. 1. f. 106. Shelleys case. Pl. Com. 55. and vide les Author. supra cited,
etc.

But if in a common recovery Judgment be had against Tenant in Tail, where he
vouched and has Judgment to recover over in value, albeit Tenant in Tail dye
before execution, yet the recoveror shall execute the Judgment against the
issue in Tail, in respect of the intended recompense, and for that it is the
common assurance of the realm, and is well warranted by our Books, and was not
invented by Justice Cook, in the time of E. 4 (as some hold by tradition) but
it may be that it was, upon former authors and opinions of Judges discovered by
him, assented unto by the rest of the Judges. Vide S. 709. 15. E. 3. Bre. 324
1. E. 4. 5. 5. E. 4. 2. 12. E. 4. 20. 23. El. Die 376. l. 10. 37. 38. Mary
Portingtons case.

If a recovery be had against Tenant for life without consent or covine, though
it be without Title, and execution be had, and Tenant for life dies, the
reversion or remainder is discontinued, etc. but if such a Recovery be had by
covin between the Demandant and Tenant for life, then he in the reversion or
remainder may enter for forfeiture. So it is if Tenant for life suffer a common
Recovery at this day, it is a forfeiture of his estate. 5. Ass. 3. 5. E. 3.
enter cong. 42. lib. 1. 15. 16. Sir William Pelhams case.

Since Littleton wrote, there were two Statutes made for preservation of
Remainders, and Reversions expectant upon any estate for life, the one in 32 H.
8. the other in 14. El. But 32 H 8. extends not to Recoveries, when Tenant
for life came in as vouchee, etc. and that Act is repealed by 14 El. and full
remedy provided for preservation of the entry of them in reversion or
remainder. But the Statute of 14 El. extend^^^ not to any recovery, unless it
be by agreement or Covin, 32 H 8. ca. 31. 14 El. ca. 8.

2. If there be Tenant for life, remainder in Tail, the reversion or remainder
in fee, if tenant for life be impleaded by agreement, and he vouching Tenant in
Tail, and he vouch over the common vouchee, this shall bar the reversion or
remainder in fee, although he in reversion or remainder did never assent to the
recovery, because it was not the intent of the Act to extend to such a
recovery, in which a Tenant in Tail was vouched; for he has power by common
Recovery, if he were in possession, to cut off all Reversion and Remainders. L
3. fo. 60, 61. Lincoln Coll. Case.

So if Tenant for life had surrendered to him in Remainder in Tail, he might
have barred the remainders and reversions expectant upon his Estate.

3. Where the proviso of the Act speaks of an assent of Record by him in
reversion or remainder, it is to be understood, that such assent must appear
upon the same Recovery either upon a voucher, Aid prier, Receipt, or the like,
for it cannot appear of Record, unless it be done in course of Law, and not by
any extraiudiciall entry, or by Memorandum.

Sect. 691. Fol. 362. a.
Here it appears, That upon the plea of non tenure, or of a disclaimer of the
Tenant in a Formedon in the descending, albeit the express judgment be, that
the Tenant shall go without day, yet in the judgment of Law, the demandant
may enter according to the title of his Writ and be seized in Tail,
notwithstanding the discontinuance. 5. E. 4. 1. 36 H. 6. 29. 6 E. 3. 8. 4 E. 4
38. Bract. l. 5. f. 431. etc. Brit. ca. 84.

And in this case the demandant has not two rights, but has only one ancient
right, and is restored to the same by course of Law, and so Remitter here (in a
large sense) is taken for a recontinuation of the right.

Here note, that in such a praecipe, where the demandant is to recover damages,
if the Tenant plead non-tenure or disclaim, there the demandant may aver him
to be Tenant of the Land, as his Writ supposes for the benefit of his damage,
which otherwise he should lose, or pray judgment and entry. 13 H. 7. 28. 22 H
6. 44.

But where no damages are recoverd, as in a Formedon in descent, etc. there he
cannot aver him Tenant, but pray his judgment and enter, for thereby he has
the effect of his suit, and frustra fit per plura quod, etc. 8 E. 3. 434. 24 E
3. 9. 11 H. 4. 16. and 7 H. 6. 17.

A general averment is the conclusion of every plea to the Writ, or in bar of
replication, and other pleadings (for Counts or Avowries in nature of Counts
need not be averred) containing matter affirmed ought to be averred, and hoc
paratus est verificare, etc. Particular averments are, as when the life of
Tenant for life, or Tenant in Tail are averred, and there, though this word
(verificare) be not used, but the matter avouched and affirmed, it is upon the
matter an averment, and an averment contains as well the matter, as the form
thereof.

Sect. 692 Fol. 363. a.
Albeit in this case, and in the case before, the entry of the demandant is his
own act, and the demandant has no express judgment to recover, yet he shall
be remitted causa ^^a supra. 36 H. 6 Fo. 29.

Sect. 693. Fo. 363. b.
Here note a diversity. If a man of full age having but a right of action,
takes an estate to him, he is not remitted, But where he has a right of
entry, and takes an estate, he by his entry is remitted, because his entry is
lawful; and if the disseisor infeoffe the disseisee and others, the disseisee
is remitted to the whole, for his entry is lawful: otherwise it is if his entry
were taken away. 29. Ass. p. 26. 43. Ass. 3. 11 H. 7. ^0. 3 H. 6. 19. 40 E. 3.
43.

If Tenant in Tail be of a manor, where unto an advowson is appendant, the
Tenant in Tail discontinue in Fee, discontinuee grant away the Advowson in Fee,
and dies, the ^^e in tail recontinueth the Manor by Recovery, he is thereby
remitted to the Advowson, and he that right has shall present when the Church
becomes void. 8 R. 2. Qu. imp. 199. 26. H. 8. 4. F.N.B. 36. and 35. b.

The Patron of a benefice is outlawed, and the Church become void, an estranger
usurpeth, and six months pass, the King does recover in a qu. imp. and remove
the incumbent, etc. Advowson is recontinued to the rightful patron. 22. Ass. p.
33. Theobald Grinvile; and so note a diversity; a remitter cannot be properly,
unless there be two Titles, but a recontinuance may be where there is but one.

If the disseisor by Deed Indented make a Lease forlife, or a gift in Tail,
etc. yet the Deed Indented shall not suffer the livery made according to the
form and effect of the Indenture to work any Remitter to the disseisee, but
shall estop the disseisee to claim his former estate: and if the disseisor upon
the feoffment, does reserve any Rent or condition, etc. the rent or condition
is good. 13 H. 4. 5. 3 H. 4. 17. 8 H. 4. 8. 12 H. 4. 19. 35. Ass. 8. 17. Ass.
3. 43. E. 3. 17. Parkers Case. 21 H. 6. 2. per Paston.

Sect. 695. Fol. 364. a.
Note a diversity, A claim in paiis shall not hinder Remitter, otherwise it is
a claim of Record, because that does work a conclusion.

Sect. 696. Fol. 344. b.
Here note a (notable) diversity. If two joyntenants, or coparceners join in a
real action, where their entry is not lawful, and the one is summoned and
severed, and the other pursues and recovereth the moity, the other Joyntenant
or Coparceners, shall enter and take the profits with her, because their
remedy was one and the same. But where two Coparceners, and they are
disseised, and a descent is cast, and they have issue and dye, if the issue of
the one recover her moity, the other shall not enter with her, because their
remedies were several, and yet when both have recovered, they are coparceners
again. 10. H. 6. 10. 19 H. 6. 45. 31 H. 6. Ent. Cong. 54.

So here in this case that Littleton puts, then two joyntenants have not
equal remedy, for the Infant has a right of Entry and the other a right of
action; and therefore the Infant being remitted to moity, the other shall not
enter and take the profits with her.

If A and B. joyntenants in fee be disseised by the Father of A. who dies
seized, his Son and heir enter, he is remitted to the whole, and his
companion shall take Advantage thereof. Otherwise here in the case of Littleton
for that the Adventure is given to the Infant more in in respect of his person,
than of his right, whereof his companion shall take no advantage. But if the
Grandfather had disseised the Joyntenants, and the land had descended to the
Father, and from him to A. and then A. had dyed, the entry of the other should
be taken away by the first descent, and therefore he should not enter with the
heir of A.

But here in the case of Littleton, if after the descent the other Joyntenant
had dyed, and the infant survived, some say that he should have entered into the
whole, because he is now in Judgment of of Law, solely in by first feoffment,
and he claims not under the descent. Vide 35 Ass. p. ultimo.

** CHAP. XIII.
Of Warranty. Sect. 697.
A Communi observantia non est recedendum: and minime mutanda sunt quae certam
habuerunt interpretationem. A warranty is a convenant real annexed to Lands or
Tenements whereby a man and his heirs are bound to warrant the same, and
either upon voucher, or by judgment in a writ of Warrant Cartae, to yield
other Lands and Tenements to the value of those that shall be evicted by a
former title, or else may be used by way of Rebutter i.e. to repel or bar,
Bract. l. 2. fo. 37. and l. 5. fo. 380. etc. Glan. l. 3. ca. 1. 2. 3. 38. E.
321. 45 E 3. 18. Fol. 365. a.

Garronter en un sense signify a defender son tenant en sa seisin, and en
auter sense signify que si il ne defendant que le garrant luy soit tenue a
eschanges, and de fair son gree a la vaillaunce. Brit. Fo. 197. b.

By the Statute of Glocestor, four things are enacted.

1. That if a Tenant by the Courtesy alien with warranty and dies, that this
should be no bar to the heir in a Writ of Mordanc. without Assets in fee
simple; and if Lands or Tenements descend to the heir from the Father, he shall
be barred, having regard to the value thereof.

2 That if the heir for want of Assets, etc. does recover the Lands of his
mother by force of this Act, and afterward Assets descend etc.

3. That the issue of the Son shall recover by a Writ of Cosinage, Aiel and
Besail; and lastly, that the heir of the wife, after the death of the Father
and Mother, shall not be barred of his action to demand the heritage of his
Mother by Writ of Entry, which his Father aliened in the time of his Mother,
whereof no Fine was levied in the Kings Court. Fo. 365. b.

Concerning the 1. There be two points in Law to be observed.

1 Albeit the Statute in this Article name a Writ of Mordanc. and after writs
of Cosinage etc. yet a writ of Right, a Formedon, a writ of Entry ad Com.
legem, and all other like actions are within the purview of this Statute.

* 2 Where it is said in the said Act (if the Tenant by the Courtesy alien) yet
his release with warranty to a disseisor, etc. is within the purview of the
Statute, for that it is in equal mischief. 11 E. 2. gar. 83. 4 E. 3. gar. 63.
Pl. Came. 110. * 27 E. 3. 80. 14 E. 4. gar. 5. and 4. M. Die. 148. a.

If Tenant by the Courtesy be of a Seigniory, and the Tenancy escheat unto him,
and after he alien with warranty, this shall not bind the issue, unless
assets descend, for it is in equal mischief, 22. Ass. 9. and 37. temps. i.e.
gar. 86.

Note a diversity between a warranty on the part of the Mother and an estoppel;
for an estoppel, etc. shall not bind the heir, when he claims from the
Father: As if Lands be given to the husband and wife, and to the heirs of the
husband, the husband make a gift in Tail and dies, the wife recover in a Cui
in vita against the donee, supposing that she had fee simple, and make a
feoffment and dies, the donee dies without issue, the issue of the husband
and wife bring a Formedon in the Reverter against the Feoffee, and
notwithstanding he was heir to the Estoppel, and the Mother was Estopped, yet
for that he claimed the Land as heir to his father, he was not Estopped. 18 E
3. 9.

If a feme heir of a disseisor infeoffe me with warranty, and marries with
the disseisee, if after the disseisee bring a Praecipe against me, I shall
rebut him in respect of the warranty of his wife, and yet he demands the Land
in another right; and so if the husband and wife demand the right of the wife,
a warranty of the Collateral Ancestor of the husband shall bar 21. R. 2.
judgment. 263.

By the Statute of 11 (...). 7. c. 20. where the woman has any estate for life
of the inheritance, or purchase of her husband, or given to her by any of the
Ancestors of the husband, or by any other person seized to the use of her
husband, or of any of his Ancestors, there her alienation, release, or
confirmation with warranty, shall not bind the heir. l. 1. f. 176. l. 3. 50,
51. 59. 60. 61. 62. Die. 146. 362 D. and St. 55 Pl. Com. 56.

I will only add two cases, the one was. A man seized of Lands in fee, levied
a fine to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of his wife, and of
the heirs males of her body by him begotten for her jointure, and had issue
male, and after he and his wife, levied a fine, and suffered a Common recovery,
the husband and wife die, and the issue male enter by force of the said Statute
of 11 H. 7. and it was holden by the justices of Ass. that the entry, etc. was
lawful, and yet this case is out of the letter of the Statute, for she neither
levied the Fine, etc. Being sole, or with any other after taken husband, but is
by her self with her husband that made the jointure. Sed qui haeret in littera
haeret in Cortice; and this case being in the same mischief, is therefore
within the remedy of the Statute, by the intendment of the makers of the same,
to avoid the disherison of heirs, who were provided by the said jointure, and
especially by the husband himself, that made the jointure. M. 13. Jac. inter.
Harley, and West in eject. fir. in Com. B. Linc.

The other was, A man is seized of Lands in the right of his wife, and they two
levy a Fine, and the Conusee grant, and render the Land to the husband and wife
in especial tail, the remainder to the right heirs of the wife, they have
issue, the husband dies, the wife takes another husband; and they two levy a
Fine in Fee, and the issue enter, this is directly within the Letter of the
Statute, and yet is out of the meaning, because the State of the Land moved
from the wife, so as it was the purchase of the Husband in Letter, and not in
meaning. P. 17. El. in Com. B Lattons Case.

But where the woman is Tenant for life, by the gift or conveyance of any
other, her alienation with warranty shall bind the heir at this day. So if a
man be Tenant for life (otherwise than as Tenant per Courtesy) and alien in fee
with warranty and dies, this shall at this day bind the heir, that has the
reversion or remainder by the Common Law, not helped by any Statute. But all
this is to be understood, unless the heir that has the reversion or
remainder, does avoid the estate so aliened in the life of the Ancestor, for
then the estate being avoided, the warranty being annexed unto the estate is
avoided also, Sect. 725.

As to the second clause of the Statute of Glocestor, there are two points of
Law to be observed,

1. That by the express purview of the Statute, if Assets do after descend
from the Father, then the Tenant shall have recovery or restitution of the
lands of the Mother. But in a Formedon, if at the time of the warranty pleaded,
no Assets be descended whereby the Demandant recovereth, if after the Assets
descend, there the Tenant shall have a Sc. fac. for the Assets, and not for the
land intailed; because that if in this case the Tenant should be restored to
the land intailed, then if the issue in Tail alienated the Assets, his issue
should recover in a Formedon, Pl. Com. 110. a. l. 8. f. 53. Sims Case.

2. Note, That after Assets descended, the recovery shall be by writ of
Judgment ( viz. by Sc. fac.) which shall issue out of the Roll of the
Justices, etc. (to resummon him that ought to warrant, etc.) Also if the Tenant
will have benefit of the Statute, he must plead the Warranty, and acknowledge
the Title of the Demandant, and pray that the advantage of the Statute may be
saved unto him; and then if after Assets descend, the Tenant upon this Record
shall have a sc. fac. and if Assets descend but for part, he shall have a scire
fac. for so much, l. 8. fo. 134. Mary Shipleys Case.

But if the Tenant plead the Warranty, and Assets descended, etc. and the
Demandant takes issue that Assets not, etc. which issue is found for the
Demandant, whereupon he recovereth, the Tenant albeit Assets do after descend,
shall never have a scire fac. upon the said Judgment, for that by his false
plea he has lost the benefit of the said Statute. fol. 366. a.

Touching the third, sufficient has been spoken before.

For the last, Nota, That if the husband be seized of lands in right of his
wife, and makes a Feoffment in fee with Warranty, the wife dies, and the
husband dies, this Warranty shall not bind the heir of the wife without
Assets, albeit the husband be not Tenant by the Courtesy, 8 E. 2. gar. 81. 18.
E. 3. 51.

A Warranty may not only be annexed to Freeholds, or Inheritance corporeal,
which pass by Livery, as houses and lands, but also to Freeholds or
Inheritances incorporeal, which lie in grant, as Advowsons, and to Rents,
Common Estovers, etc. which issue out of Lands or Tenements, and not only to
Inheritances in esse, but also to Rents, Commons, etc. newly created. As a man
(some say) may grant a Rent, etc. out of land for life in Tail or in fee with
Warranty; for although there can be no Title precedent to the Rent, yet there
may be a Title precedent to the land, out of which it issues before the grant
of the Rent, which rent may be avoided by the recovery of the land, in which
case the grantee may help himself by a Warrantia Cartae, upon the especial
matter, and so a Warranty in Law may extend to a rent etc. newly created; and
therefore if a rent newly created be granted in exchange for an acre of land;
this exchange is good, and every exchange implies a Warranty in Law: and so a
Rent newly created may be granted for owelty of partition, 2 H. 4. 13. 30 H 8.
Dyer 42. Temps E. 1. Admeasurement 16. 32 E. 1. Vouch 294. 30 E. 1. Exch. 16. 9
E. 4. 15. 15 E. 4. 9. 29 Ass. 13.

A man seized of a rent seck issuing out of the Manor of D. takes a wife, the
husband releaseth to the Terre-tenant, and Warranteth Tenementa praedicta, and
dies, the wife brings a Writ of Dower of the rent, the Terre-tenant shall
vouch, for that albeit the release enured by way of Extinguishment, yet the
Warranty extended to it, and by Warranty of the land, all rents, etc. issuing
out of the land, that are suspended or discharged at the time of the Waranty
created, are waranted also, Vide Sect. 741. 45 E. 3. Vouch. 72. 9 E. 3. 78. 18
E. 3. 55. 30 E. 3. 30. 21 H. 7. 9. 3 H. 7. 4. 7 H. 4. 17. 10 E. 4. 9. b. 21 E.
4. 26. 14 H. 8. 6. 30 H. 8. Dyer 42.

Sect. 698. Fo. 366. b.
A Warranty that commenceth by disseisin is so called, because Regularily the
Conveyance whereunto the warranty is annexed does work a disseisin. The Example
that Littleton puts of this kind of Warranty, have four qulities:

1. That the disseisin is done immediately to the heir that is to be bound, l.
5. fo. 79. Fitzh. c. and yet if one brother make a gift in Tail to another, and
the Uncle disseise the Donee, and infeoff another with Warranty, the Uncle
dies, and the Warranty descend upon the Donee, and then the Donee dies
without issue, albeit the disseisin was done to the Donee, and not to the
Donor, yet the Warranty shall not bind him, 31 E. 3. garr. 28. The Father, the
Son, and a third person are joyntenants in fee, the Father makes a Feoffment
in fee of the whole with Warranty, and dies, the Son dies, the third person
shall not * avoid the feoffment * only for his own part, but also for the part
of the Son, and he shall take advantage that the Warranty commenced by
disseisin, though the disseisin was done to another, fol. 367. a.

2. That the Warranty and disseisin are simul, and semel; and yet if a man
commit a disseisin of intent to make the feoffment in fee with Warranty, albeit
he make the feoffment many years after the disseisin, yet the Law shall adjudge
upon the whole matter, and by the intent couple the disseisin and the Warranty
together, 19 H. 8. 12. l. 5. fo. 79. b.

3. That the Warranty, etc (if it should bind) should bind as a collateral
Warranty, and therefore commencing by disseisin shall not bind at all. A
lessee for years may make a feoffment, and a fee simple shall pass, so as
albeit as to the lessor it works by disseisin, yet between the parties the
Waranty annexed to such estate stands good upon which the feoffee may vouch
the feoffor or his heirs, as by force of a lineal Warranty. Note, there is a
feoffment de jure, and a * feoffment de facto.

If the Lord be Gardein of the Land, or if the Tenant make a lease to the Lord
for years, or if the Lord be Tenant by statute Merchant or Staple, or by Elegit
of the Tenancy, and make a feoffment in fee, he hereby does extinguish his
Seignory, although having regard to the lessor it is a disseisin, Vide Sect.
611. Brit. ca. Disseisin. 50 E. 3. 12. b. 8 H. 7. 5. 19 E. 2. Ass. 400. 3 E. 4.
17. 12 E. 4. 12. 10 E. 4. 18. F.N.B. 201. l. 3. f. 78. Fermors case. * Temps E.
1. Counterplea de Vouch. 126. 50 E. 3. ibid. 124.

The 4. quality is a disseisin, but that is put for an example. For if the
Tenant dies, and an Ancestor of the Lord enter before the entry of the Lord,
and make a feoffment in fee with Warranty, and dies, this Warranty shall not
bind the Lord, because it commenceth by wrong, being in nature of an
Abatement, and sic de similibus.

Sect. 700. Fol. 367. b.
If the purchase were to the Father and the Son, and the heirs of the Son, and
the Father makes a feoffment in fee with Warranty, if the Son enter in the
life of the Father, and the feoffee re-enter, the Father dies, the Son shall
have an Assize of the whole, 13 Ass. 8. 13 E. 3. gar. 24. 25. 37. 22 H. 6. 51.
8 H. 7. 6.

But if the Son had not entered in the life of the Father, then for the Fathers
moity, it had been a bar to the Son, for that therein he had an estate for
life, and therefore the Warranty as to that moity had been collateral to the
Son, and by disseisin for the Sons moity, and so a Warranty defeated in part,
and stand good in part.

If a man of full age, and an Infant make a feoffment in fee with Warranty, it
is good for the whole against the man of full age, and void against the Infant.
For albeit the feoffment of an Infant passing by Livery of seisin be voidable,
yet his Warranty which takes effect only by Deed, is merely void, Temps E. 1.
Voucher 207. 39. E. 3. 26. John Londons Case, 14. H. 6.

Sect. 701. Fo 368. a. b.
Duo non possunt in solido rem unam possidere, 19. H 6. 28. b. per Newton.

If a man has issue two daughters, Bastard eign and Mulier puisne, and dye
seized, and they both enter generally, the sole possession shall not be
adjudged only in the Mulier, because they both claim by one and the same
Title, 17. E. 3. 59. 11. Ass. p. 23.

Barretor, is a common mover, and exciter, or maintainer of suits, quarrels, or
parts, either in Courts, or elsewhere in the Country, l. 8. f 36. b. Case de
Barretry. fo. 368. b.

Extortion in his proper sense is a great misprision, by wresting, or
unlawfully taking by any Officer, by color of his Office, any money or thing
valuable, of, or from any man, quoth, non est debitum, vel quod est ultra debit',
vel ante tempus quod est debitum, Pl. Com. 64. l. 10. 10. 1. Beausages Case,. W
1. c. 26. etc. W. 1. c. 10. 42 E. 3. 5. 27. Ass. 14. Pl. Com. 68.

Robbery is apparent, and has the face of a Crime: but Extortion puts on the
visure of Virtue, for expedition of Justice, etc. and it is ever a companied
with that grievous sin of Perjury, Pl. Com. Dive and Mannings Case. But
largely, Extortion is taken for any Oppression by extort power, or by color or
pretense of Right; and so Littleton takes it in this place, 7 E. 4. 21.

Manutenentia, signifies a taking in hand, bearing up, or upholding of quarrels
and sides, to the disturbance or hinderance of Common Right, 1 E. 3. c. 14 20
E. 3. c. 4, 5.

By the Statute of 1 R. 2 c. 9. it is enacted, That feoffments made for
maintenance, shall (...) be holden for none, and of no value, so as Littleton
puts his case at the Common Law; for he seems to allow the feoffment,
where he says tiel feoffment fuit le cause, etc.

But some have said, That the feoffment is not void between the feoffer and the
feoffee, but to him that right has.

Now since Littleton wrote, there is a notable Statute 32 H. 8. c. 9. made in
suppression of the causes of unlawful maintenance, The effect of which Statute
is:

1. That no person shall bargain, buy, sell, or obtain any pretenced Rights or
Titles.

2. Or take, promise, grant, or Covenant to have any Right or Title of any
person, in, or to any lands, etc. but if such person which so shall bargain,
etc. their Ancestors, or they by whom he or they claim the same, have been in
possession of the same, or of the reversion, or remainder thereof, or taken the
* rents or profits thereof by the space of one whole year, etc. upon pain to
forfeit the whole value of the lands, etc. and the buyer or taker, etc. knowing
the same, to forfeit also the value. * Those words are but explanatory, and put
for example, etc.

3. Provided that it shall be lawful for any person being in lawful
possession, etc. to obtain or get the pretenced Right or Title, etc.

Nota, That Title or Right may be pretenced two manner of ways:

1. When it is merely in pretense or supposition, and nothing in verity.

2. When it is a good Right or Title in verity, and made pretenced by the act
of the party, and both these are within the said Statute: For example;

If A. be lawful owner of land, and is in possession, B. that has no right
thereunto grant to A or contracteth for the land with another, the grantor and
the grantee (albeit the grant be merely void) are within the danger of the
Statute, for B. has no right at all but only in pretense.

If A. be disseised in this case, A. has a good lawful right, yet if A. being
out of possession, grant to, or contracteth for the land with another, he has
made now his good right of Entry pretenced within the Statute, and both the
grantor and the grantee within the danger thereof, A fortiori of a right of
Action, quod nota. Pl. Com. 80, etc. Partridges Case.

It is further to be known, That a Right or Title may be considered three
manner of ways:

1. As it is naked and without possession.

2. When the absolute Right comes by release or otherwise to a wrongful
possession, and no third person has either jus proprietatis, or jus
possessionis.

3. When he has a good right and a wrongful possession. As to the first
somewhat has been said. As to the second, taking the former example, If A. be
disseised, and the disseisee release unto him, he may presently sell, grant or
contract for the land, and need not tarry a year; for it is a rule upon this
Statute, that whosoever has the absolute ownership of any Land, tenements, or
haereditaments (as in this case the disseisor has) there such owner may at his
pleasure bargain, grant, or contract for the land; for no person can thereby
be prejudiced, or grieved. 6 E. 6. Br. Maintenance 38.

And so if a man Morgage his Land, and after redeem the same, or if a man
recover land upon a former title, or be remitted to an ancient right, he may at
any time bargain, etc.

As to the third, if in the case aforesaid, the disseisor dies seized, and A.
the disseisee enter, and disseise the heir of the disseisor, albeit he has an
ancient right, yet seeing the possession is unlawful, if he bargain or
contract for the land before he has been in possession, by the space of a
year, he is within the danger of the Statute; because the heir of the disseisor
has right to the possession; and he is thereby grieved, and sic de similibus.

A Lease for years is within the Statute, for the Statute says not (the right
but any right) and the offender shall forfeit the whole value of the Land. 23.
Eliz, Die. 374. Pl. Com. Fo. 87.

But yet, if a man make a Lease for years to another, to the intent to try the
Title in an Eject. fir. that is out of the statute, because it is in a kind of
course of Law, but if it be made to a great man, or any other to sway or
countenance the cause, that is within this statute. M. 30. and 31. El. 28. 11.
inter Finch and Cocham in Com. Banc. Fo. 369. b.

A Customary right, or a pretense thereof to lands holden by Copy is within
this statute. l. 4. fo. 26. Copihold case.

If there be Tenant for life, the remainder in fee by lawful and just title,
he in the remainder may obtain and get the pretenced right, or title of any
stranger, not only for that the particular estate, and the remainder are all
one, but for that it is a mean to extinguish the seeds of troubles and suits,
and cannot be to the prejudice of any. 34 H. 8. Die. 52.

And where the Statute says (being in lawful possession, by taking the yearly
rent, etc. those words are but explanatory, and put for example: for howsoever
he be lawfully seized in possession, reversion, or remainder, it suffices,
though he never took profit. But the matter observable upon this proviso, is,
that if a desseisor make a Lease for lives, or years, the remainder for life,
in tail, or in fee, he in remainder cannot take a promise, or Covenant, that
when the disseisee has entered upon the Land, or recovered the same, that then
he should convey the Land to any of them in remainder thereby to avoid the
particular estate, or the interest or estate of any other; for the words of the
proviso be (buy, obtain, get or have by any reasonable way or mean) and that is
not by promise or Covenant, to convey the Land, after entry, or recovery, for
that is neither lawful, being against the express purview of the body of the
act, and not reasonable, because it is to the prejudice of a third person.

But the reasonable way or mean intended by the statute, is by release or
confirmation, or such conveyances as amount to as much.

Sect. 703. Fo. 370. a.
A Warranty lineall is a Covenant real annexed to the Land by him which either
was owner, or might have inherited the Land, and from whom his heir lineall or
collateral might by possibility have claimed the Land as heir from him that
made the warranty.

In a Jur. utr. brought by a Parson of a Church, the Collateral Warranty of
his Ancestor is no bar, for that he demands the Land in the right of his
Church, in his politic capacity, and the Warranty descends on him in his
natural capacity. 27 H. 6. garr. 48.

But some have holden that if a Parson bring an Ass. that a Collateral
warranty of his Ancestor shall bind him, for that the Ass. is brought of his
possession and seisin, and he shall recover the mean profits to his own use 34
E. 3. garr. 71.

But seeing he is seized of the freehold, whereof the Ass. is brought in jure
Ecclesiae, which is in another right then the warranty, it seems that it
should not be any bar in the Ass. The like Law is of a Bishop, Archdeacon,
Dean, Master of an Hospital, and the like, of their sole possessions, and of
the Prebend, Vicar, etc.

King H. 3. gave a Manor to Edmond Earl of Cornwall, and to the heirs of his
body, saving the possibility of Reverter, and dyed. The Earl before the Statute
of W. 2. c. 1. de donis Cond. by Deed gave the said Manor to another in fee
with Warranty, in exchange for another Manor; and after the said Statute Anno
28 E. 1. dies without issue, leaving Assets in fee simple which is Warranty,
and Assets descended upon King E. 1. as Cousin German, etc. And it was
adjudged, that the King as heir to the said Earl Edmond, was by the said
Warranty and Assets barred of the possibility of Reverter, which he had
expectant upon the said gift, albeit the Warranty and Assets descended upon the
natural body of King E. 1. as heir to a Subject, and E. 1. claimed the said
Manor as in his Reverter in jure Coronae, in the capacity of his Body Politic,
in which right he was seized before the gift, 45 Ass. 6. 6 E. 3. 56. Pl. Com.
234. and 553, 554. Vide 27 H. 6. garr. 40. 34 E. 3. garr. 71.

In this case how by the death of the said Earl Edmond without issue, the Kings
Title by Reverter, and the Warranty and Assets came together, and that the
Warranty was collateral; yet the King shall not be barred without Assets, as a
Subject shall be, and many other things are to be observed in this case, which
the learned Reader will observe. Vide Sect. 711. 712.

Sect. 704, 705. Fo. 371. a.
Littleton does agree with the Authority of our Books, 46 E. 3. 6. 5 E. 3. 14.
19 H. 8. 12. so as the diversities do stand thus: 1. Where the disseisin and
feoffment are uno tempore, and where at several times. 2. Where the disseisin
is with intent to alien with Warranty, and where the disseisin is made without
such intent, and the alienation with Warranty afterward made.

Sect. 706. ibid.
Upon every Conveyance of lands, etc. as upon Fines, Feoffments, Gifts, etc.
Releases and Confirmations made to the Tenant of the land, a Warranty may be
made, albeit he that makes the Release or Confirmation has no right to the
land, etc. But some do hold, that by Releases or Confirmations, where there is
no estate created, or transmutation of possession, a Warranty cannot be made to
the Assignee; 14 E. 3. Voucher 108. 16 E. 3. ibid. 87. 18 E. 3. 6. 12 H. 7. 1.
Vide S. 733, 738, 745.

Sect. 707. Fol. 371. b.
The opinion of Littleton in this case is holden for Law, against the opinions
in 35 E. 3. garr. 73. 11 H. 4. 33.

Sect. 708. Fol. 372. a.
Hereby it appears, that a Warranty that is collateral in respect of some
persons, may afterward become lineal in respect of others, 8 R. 2. garr. 101.
Whereupon it follows, That a collateral Warranty does not give a right, but
binds only a right so long as the same continues: but if the collateral
Warranty be determined, removed or defeated, the right is revived, 43 Ass. 44.
24 H. 8. tit. Tail. Br. 7. H. 5. 6. tit. Ass. 350. 34 E. 3. Droit 29. 19. H. 6.
59. 21. H. 7. 40. 5 H. 7. 29. 3 H. 7. 9. b. And yet in an Assize the Plaintiff
has made his Title by a collateral warranty, 16 Ass. p. 16. 27 Ass. 74. 29
Ass. 50. 43 Ass. 8. 14 H. 4. 13. 19 H. 6. 66.

Bar, signifies legally a destruction for ever, or taking away for a time of
the action of him that right has.

Nota, That in some cases an estate Tail may be barred by some Acts of
Parliament made since Littleton wrote; and in some cases an estate Tail cannot
be barred, which might when Littleton wrote have been barred: For Example; if
Tenant in Tail levy a Fine with Proclamation according to the Statute, this is
a bar to the estate Tail, but not to him in reversion or remainder, if he
makes his claim, or pursue his action within five years after the estate Tail
spent, 4 H. 7. c. 24. ct 32 H. 8. c. 36.

If a gift be made to the eldest Son, and to the heirs of his body, the
remainder to the Father, and to the heirs of his body, the Father dies, the
eldest Son levieth a Fine with Proclamation, and dies without issue, this
barreth the second Son; for the remainder descended to the eldest, Dalisons 2
El. and 7 El. lib. 3. f. 84.

If Tenant in Tail be disseised, or have a right of action, and the Tenant of
the land levy a Fine with proclamation, and five years pass, the right of the
estate Tail is barred.

If Tenant in Tail in possession, or that has a right of entry, be attainted
of High Treason, the estate Tail is barred, and the land is forfeited to the
King; and none of these were bars when Littleton wrote. A lineal Warranty and
Assets was a bar to the estate Tail when Littleton wrote, 26 H. 8. c. 13. 33
H. 8. c. 20. 5 E. 6. c. 11. St. pl. Cor. 18.

A Common Recovery with a voucher over, and a Judgment to recover in value,
was a bar of the estate Tail when Littleton wrote, 12 E 4. 19. Taltarums Case.

And of Common Recoveries, there be two sorts, viz. one with a single Voucher,
and another with a double Voucher, and that is more common and more safe; there
may be more Vouchers over, Vid. Sect. 690. and vide l. 3. f. 5. Cuppledicks
case, and fo. 94, 97, 106. vide post. **

If the King had made a gift in Tail, and the donee had suffered a Common
Recovery, this should have barred the estate Tail in Littletons time, but not
the reversion or remainder in the King. And so if such a donee had levied a
Fine with proclamation after the Statute of 4 H. 7. this had barred the estate
Tail, although the reversion was in the King, 38 H. 8. Tail Br. 41. Pl. Com.
fo. 555. 29 H. 8. Dyer 52 ** Com. Recoveries, etc. Vide l. 1. f. 62. Capels
case, l. 2. f. 16. 52, 74, 77. l. 6. f 41, 32. l. 10. f. 37. Mary Portingtons
case.

But since Littleton wrote, a Common Recovery had against Tenant in Tail of the
Kings gift, etc. is no bar, etc. by the Statute of 34 H. 8. c. 20.

And where the words of the Statute be (Whereof the reversion or remainder at
the time of such recovery had, shall be in the King) these ten things are to be
observed upon the construction of that Act.

1. That the estate Tail must be created by a King, and not by any Subject.

2. The King must have the reversion at the time of the Recovery.

3. The reversion or remainder cannot be barred, but where the estate Tail in
possession is barred, l. 8. f. 77, 78. Seignieur Staffords case.

4. If a Subject make a gift in Tail, the remainder to the King in fee, the
estate Tail may be barred by a Common Recovery, causa patet. l. 2. f. 52.
Chol^leys case.

5 So it is if the King had the remainder by descent.

6. The word (Reversion) in the body of the Act has reference to these words
(given or granted) and (Remainder) has reference to these words (otherwise
provided.) As if the King in consideration of money, or of Assurance of Land;
or for other considerations, by way of provision, procure a Subject by Deed
indented and enrolled, to make a gift in Tail to one of his Servants and
Subjects, for recompense of service or other consideration, the remainder to
the King in fee, and all this appear of Record; this is a good provision within
the Statute, and the Tenant in Tail cannot by a Common Recovery bar the
estate Tail. So it is if the remainder be limited to the King in Tail; bus if
he be limited for years, or for life, it is otherwise, Lib. 2. fol. 16.
Wisemans case.

7. Where a Common Recovery cannot bar the estate Tail by force of the said
Statute, there a Fine levied in Fee, in Tail, for lives, for years, with
proclamation according to the Statute, shall not bar the estate Tail, or the
issue in Tail, where the reversion or remainder is in the King, by reason of
these words in the said act (The said Recovery, or any other thing or things
hereafter to be had, done or suffered, by, or against any such Tenant in Tail,
to the contrary notwithstanding) which words include a Fine levied by such a
donee, and restrains the same, P. 31. Eliz. Rot. 1645. Notleys case. B. C.

8. But where a Common Recovery shall bar the estate Tail, notwithstanding
that Statute, there a Fine with proclamation shall bar the same also.

9. Where the said latter words of the Statute be (Had, done, or suffered, by,
or against any such Tenant in Tail) the sense and construction is, where Tenant
in Tail is party or privy to the Act, be it by doing or suffering that which
should work the bar, and not by mere permission, he being a stranger to the
Act.

10. Albeit the Preamble of the Statute extends only to gifts in Tail made by
the Kings of England before the Act ( viz. has given and granted, etc.) and
the body of the Act refers to the Preamble ( viz. that no such fained
Recovery hereafter to be had against such Tenant in Tail) so as this word
(such) may seem to couple the body and the Preamble together; yet in this case
(such) shall be taken for such in equal mischief, or in like case; and by
diverse parts of the Act it appears, That the makers of the Act intended to
extend it to future gifts, and so is the Law taken at this day.

A Recovery in a Writ of Right against Tenant in Tail without a Voucher, is no
bar of any gift in Tail.

If Tenant in Tail, the remainder over in fee cesse, and the Lord recover in a
Cessavit, this shall not bar the estate Tail, for the issue shall recover in
a Formedon: neither were either of these bars when Littleton wrote, 33. E. 3.
Judgment 252. 3 H 6. 55. 10 H. 6. 5. 14 E. 4. 5. b. 15 E. 4. 8. F.N.B. 134. b.
Pl. Com. 237. 28 E. 3. 95. F.N.B. 28. I.

Sect. 702. Fol. 373. b.
Nemo praesumitur alienam posteritatem suae praetulisse.

If a man that is innocent be accused of Felony, and it be found that he fled
for the Felony, he shall forfeit all his goods and chattels, debts and duties,
3 E. 3. Corone Staf.

But yet the general Rule is, Quod stabitur praesumptioni donec probetur in
contrarium, Bract. l. 1. c. 9.

It has been attempted in Parliament, that a Statute might be made, That no
man should be barred by a Warranty collateral, but where assets descended from
the same Ancestor; but it never took effect, for that it should weaken common
assurances, Rot. Parliament. 50 E. 3. number. 77.

Sect. 710, 711, 712.
If husband and wife tenants in especial Tail have issue, a daughter, and the
wife dye, the husband by a second wife has issue another daughter, and
discontinueth in fee and dies, a collateral Ancestor of the daughters
releaseth to the discontinuee with Warranty, and dies, the Warranty descends
upon both daughters, yet the issue in Tail shall be barred of the whole, for in
judgment of Law the entire Warranty descends upon both of them, 5 E. 2.
garr. 78. l. 8. fo. 41. Sims case.

Here note, That when one Coparcener does generally enter into the whole, this
does not divest the estate which descended by Law to the other, unless she
that does enter, claims the whole, and takes the profits of the whole. Vide
Sect. 398.

Otherwise it is after the parceners be actually seized, the taking of the
whole profits, or any claim made by the one, cannot put the other out of
possession without an actual putting out of disseisin. And in this case of
Littleton, when one Coparcener enters into the whole, and makes a Feoffment
of the whole, this devesteth the Freehold in Law out of the other Coparcener.

Item, when the one sister enters into the whole, the possession being void,
and makes a feoffment in fee, this act subsequent does so explain the entry
precedent into the whole, that now by construction of Law she was only seized
of the whole, and this feoffment can be no disseisin, because the other sister
was never seized, nor any abatement, because they both made but one heir to the
Ancestor, and one Freehold and inheritance descended to them, so as in
judgment of Law the Warranty does not commence by disseisin, or by abatement,
and without question her entry was no intrusion, Pl. Com. 543. fo. 374. a.

Tenant in Tail has issue two daughters, and discontinue in fee, the youngest
disseiseth the discontinuee to the use of her self and her sister; the
discontinuee ousteth her, against whom she recovereth in an Assize, the eldest
agrees to the disseisin, as she may, against her sister, and become
joynttenant with her. And thus is the book in the 21 Ass. p. 19. to be
intended, the case being no other in effect: But A. disseiseth one to the use
of himself and B. B. agrees, by this he is joyntenant with A. Fol. 374. b.

Nota, in these two last Sections four several Conclusions.

1. That a lineal Warranty does bind the right of a fee simple.

2. That a lineal warranty does not bind the right of an estate Tail, for that
is restrained by the Statute of donis Cond.

3. That a lineal Warranty and Assets is a bar of the right in Tail, and is not
restrained by the said Act.

4. That a collateral Warranty made by a collateral Ancestor of the donee, does
bind the right of an estate Tail, albeit there be no Assets; and the reason
thereof is upon the Statute of Donis Cond, for that it is not made by the
Tenant in tail, etc. as the lineal Warranty is, 3 E. 3. 22. 4 E. 3. 28. 50. M.
38 E. 3. Cor. Rege, Ab. de Colchest. case, 45 Ass. 6. Pl. Com. 554. 19 E. 4.
10. Vide S 703, 747.

To this may be added, That the Warranty of the Donee in Tail, which is
collateral to the Donor, or to him in remainder, being heir to him, does bind
them without any Assets. For though the alienation of the Donee after issue
does not bar the Donor, which was the mischief provided for by the Act, yet the
Warranty being collateral, does bar both of them, for the Act restrains not
that Warranty, but it remains at the Common Law, as Littleton after says.
And in like manner the Warranty of the Donee does bar him in remainder.

Note, Assets requisite to make lineal Warranty a bar, must have six
qualities.

1. It must be Assets (i e.) of equal value, or more at the time of the descent.

2. It must be of descent, and not by purchase or gift.

3. It must be Assets in fee simple, and not in fee Tail, or for another man's
life.

4. It must descend to him as heir to the same Ancestor, that made the
Warranty, Brit. 185. 4. E. 3. garr. 63. 16. E. 3. Ass. 4. 43. E. 3. 9. 7. H. 6.
3. 11. H. 4. 20.

5. It must be of Lands, or Tenements, or Rents, or Services valuable, or other
profits issuing out of Lands, Tenements, and not personal Inheritances, as
Annuities, etc.

6. It must be in state or interest, and not in use, or right of actions, or
right of entry, for they are no Assets until they be brought into possession,
24. E. 3. 47.

But if a rent in fee simple issuing out of the Land of the heir descend unto
him, whereby it is extinct, yet this is Assets, and to this purpose has in
Judgment of Law a Continuance, 31 E. 3. Ass. 5. 13. E. 3. Recovery in value
17. l. 3. f. 31. Butler and Bakers Case.

A Seigniory in franck-Almoign is no Assets, because it is not valuable, and
therefore not to be extended; and so it seems of a Seigniory of Homage and
Fealty, 14. E. 3. Mesne 7. Regist. 293.

But an Advowson is Assets, whereof Fleta l. 2. c. 65. says, Item de ecclesiis
quae ad donationem Domini pertinent, quot sunt, and quae, and ubi, and quantum
valeat quaelibet Ecclesia per annum secundum veram ipsius aestimationem, and
pro Marca solidus extendatur, ut si ecclesia 100. Marcas valeat per annum ad
100. solidos extendatur advocatio per annum. Brit. 185. 5. H. 7. 37. 32. H. 6.
21. 33. E. 3. garr. 102.

Sect. 714. Fol. 375. a.
Nota, that albeit in this case the issue in Tail must claim as heir of both
their bodies, yet the Warranty of either of them is lineal to the issue, 35 E.
3. garr. 73.

If Lands be given to a man and a woman unmarried, and the heirs of their two
bodies, and they intermarry, and are disseised, and the husband releaseth with
Warranty, the wife dies, the husband dies, albeit the Donees did take by
moities, yet the Warranty is lineal for the whole, because, as our Author here
says, the issue must in a Formedon convey to him the right as heir to the
Father and his Mother of their two bodies engendered, and therefore it is
collateral for no part.

Sect. 715, 716, 717.
Nunquam nimis dicitur, quod nunquam satis dicitur.

And here it appears, That it is not adjudged in Law a collateral Warranty,
in respect of the blood, for the Warranty may be collateral, albeit the blood
be lineal, and the Warranty may be lineal, albeit the blood be collateral. But
it is in Law deemed a collateral Warranty, in respect that he that makes the
Warranty, is collateral to the Title of him upon whom the Warranty does fall, 8
R. 2. gar. 101. vide Sect. 704.

Sect. 718. Fo. 376. a.
Every Warranty does descend upon him that is heir to him that made the
Warranty at the Common Law. Vide Sect. 3. 603, 735, 736, 737.

Hereupon many things worthy to be known, are to be understood. 1. That if a
man infeoff another of an acre of ground with Warranty, and has issue two
Sons, and dies seized of another acre of land of the nature of Borough
English, the feoffee is impleaded; albeit the Warranty descends only upon
the eldest, yet may he vouch them both; the one as heir to the Warranty, and
the other as heir to the Land. 40 E. 3. 14. So it is of heirs in Gavelkinde,
etc. 22 E. 4. 10. And in like sort the heir at the Common Law, and the heir of
the part of the Mother shall be vouched. 49 Ass. 4. 38. E. 3. 22. But the heir
at the Common Law may be vouched alone in both these cases, at the election of
the Tenant; and sic de similibus.

Also if a man dye seized of certain lands in fee, having issue a Son and a
daughter by one venture, and a Son by another, the eldest Son enters and dies,
the land descends to the sister; in this case the warranty descends on the
Son, and he may be vouched as heir, and the sister as heir of the land.

In which case, and in the other case of Borough English, the Son and heir by
the Common Law having nothing by descent, the whole loss of the recovery in
value, lies upon the heirs of the land, albeit they be no heirs to the
warranty. 32 E. 3. vouch. 94. 35 H. 6. 3.

Then put the case, that there is a warranty paramount, who shall deraign, that
warranty, and to whom shall the recompense in value go? some have said, that as
they are vouched together, so shall they avouch over, and that the recompense
in value shall enure according to the loss, and that the effect must pursue
the cause, as a recovery in value by a warranty of the part of the Mother shall
go to the heir of the part of the Mother, etc. Pl. Come. 515.

Some others hold, that it is against the maxim of the Law, that they that are
not heirs to the warranty should join in a voucher, or to take benefit of the
waranty which descends not to them, but that the heir at the common Law, to
whom the warranty descended, shall deraign the warranty, and recove in value,
and that this does stand with the rule of the common Law.

Others hold the contrary, and that this should be both against the rule of
Law, and against reason also; for by the rule of Law, the vouchee shall never
sue to have execution in value, until execution be sued against him. But in
this case excution can never be sued against the heir at the common Law,
therefore he cannot sue to have execution over in value. Secondly it should be
against reason, that the heir at the common law should have totum lucrum, and
the especial heirs totum damnum. 17 E. 2. Recover in value 33. 18 E. 3. 51. l.
1. 96. Shelleyes case.

I find in our Books, this reason is yielded, that the special heirs should
not be vouched only; for (say they) then could not they deraigne the warranty,
which should be mischievous, that they should lose the benefit of the warranty,
if they should be vouched only. 32 E. 3. vouch. 94. per Green.

But if the heir at the Common Law were vouched with them, (as by the Law he
ought) all might be saved; and therefore study well this point, how it may be
done.

If Tenant in general Tail be, and a common recovery is had against him, and
his wife, where his wife has nothing, and they vouch, and have judgment to
recover in value, Tenant in Tail dies, and the wife surviveth; for that the
issue in Tail had the whole loss, the recompense shall enure wholly to him,
and the wife albeit she was party to the judgment, shall have nothing in the
recompense, for that she loses nothing. Pl. Com. Fo. 514.

If the Bastard eigne enter, and take the profits, he shall be vouched only,
and not the Bastard and the Mulier, because the Bastard is in appearance heir,
and shall not disable himself. 17 E. 3. 59. 20 E. 3. vouch. 129. 5 H. 7. 2.

If a man be seized of Lands in Gavelkind, and has issue three Sons, and by
Obligation bind himself and his heirs, and dies, an action of debt shall be
maintenable against all the three Sons, for the heir is not chargeable
unless he has lands by descent. 11 H. 7. 12. 11 E 3. Det. 7. Die. 5. El. 238.

So if a man be seized of Land on the part of his Mother, and bind himself and
his heirs by Obligation, and dies, an action of debt shall lie against the
heir on the part of the Mother, without naming the heir at the Common Law;
and so note a diversity between a personal lain of a bond, and a real lain of
a warranty.

Sect. 719. Fol. 377. a.
Here it appears, that whenever the Ancestor takes any estate of freehold,
a limitation after in the same conveyance to any of his heirs, are words of
limitation, and not of purchase, albeit in words it be limited by way of
remainder, and therefore here the remainder to the heirs females vesteth in
the Tenant in tail himself. 24 E. 3. 36 27 E. 3. Age 108. 38 E 3. 26. 40. E. 3.
5. 37 H. 8, Br. nosme. 1. and 40. and tit done and Rem 61.

The issues inheritable must make their claim, either only by Males, or only by
Females, so as the Females of the Males or Males of the Females, are wholly
excluded, etc. 1 H. 6. 4. Pl. Com. 414. Vide Sect. 24.

But where the first limitation is to the heirs males, let the limitation be
for default of such issue to the heirs of the body of the donee, and then all
the issues, be they Females of Males, or Males of Females are inheritable.

If a man give Lands to a man, to have and to hold to him, and the heirs Males
of his body, and to him, and to the Heirs Females of his body, the estate to
the heirs Females is in remainder, and the daughter shall not inherit any
part, so long as there is issue Male.

Sect. 720.
Nihil simul inventum esi and perfectum; and saepe viatorem nova non vetus
orhita fallit; and therefore new inventions in assurances are dangerous. 22 H.
6. 33. l. 6. f. 42. b. Sir Anthony Mildmayes case.

Non prosunt dominis quae prosunt omnibus arts: quoniam, In suo quisque
negotio hebetior est, quam in alieno. 2 H. 4. fo 11. Action sur le case.

Sect. 721. Fol. 378. a.
Every remainder which comes by deed ought to vest in him to whom it is
limited, when livery of seisin is made to him, that has the particular estate.

1. Littleton says by Deed, because if Lands be granted and rendered by Fine
for life, the remainder in Tail, the remainder in Fee, none of these
remainders are in them in the remainder, until the particular estate be
executed. 7 R. 2. scire facias.

2. That the remainder be in him, etc. at the time of the livery. This is
regularly true, but yet it has diverse exceptions. As, where the remainder is
to commence upon limitation of time, viz. upon the possibility of the death of
one man before another, which is a common possibility. Pl. Com. Colthirsts
case, fo. 65. 29. 32 H. 6. tit. feoffments, etc. 99. 27. E. 3. 87. 12 E. 4. 2.
21 H. 7. 11. 7 H. 4. 23. 11 H. 4. 74. 18 H. 8. 3. 27. H. 8. 42. 38 E. 3. 26.
30. Ass. 47. 6 R. 2 qu Iur. Dam. 20.

A man lets lands for life upon condition to have Fee, and warranted the
land in forma predicta, afterward the lessee performs the conditions whereby
the lessee has fee, the warranty shall extend and increase according to the
State. And so it is in that case if the lessor had dyed before the performing
of the condition, etc. and yet the lessor himself was never bound to the
warranty; but it has relation from the first livery; and by this it appears
that a warranty being a Covenant real executory may extend to an estate in
futuro, having an estate, whereupon it may work in the beginning.

But otherwise it is, if a man grant a Seigniory for years upon condition to
have fee with warranty in forma praedicta etc.

And so it is, if a man make a Lease for years, the remainder in fee, and
warrant the Land in forma predicta, he in the remainder cannot take benefit of
the Warranty, because he is not party to the Deed, and immediately he cannot
take, she were party to the Deed, because he is named after the ^abendum, and
the estate for years is not capable of a warranty.

And so it is if Land be given to A. and B. so long as they ^oyntly together
live, the remainder to the right heirs of ^^m, that dies first, and warrant
the land in forma predicta, A. dies, his heir shall have the warranty; and yet
the remainder vested not during the life of A. for the death of A. must precede
the remainder, and yet shall the heir of A. have the Land by descent.

Sest. 722. Fol. 378. b.
Si le 1. fits alienast, etc. By the Alienation of the Donee two things are
wrought.

1. The Franktenement and Fee is in the Alienee.

2. The reversion is divested out of the donor; and therefore by the alienation
that transferreth the freehold, and fee simple to the Alienee, there can no
remainder be raised and vested in the second son. 27 H. 8. 24. 6. R. 2. quod
jur. clam. 23.

Also an estate of an inheritance in Lands, and Tenements cannot cease, or be
void before the state be defeated by entry, then if this remainder should be
good, then must it give an entry upon the Alienee to him that had no right
before, which should be against the express rule of Law, viz. That an estate
cannot be given to a stranger to avoid a voidable Act.

One Alienation cannot vest an estate of one and the same Land to two several
persons at one time.

If a man seized of an Advowson in fee, by his deed grant the next presentation
to A. and before the Church become void, by another Deed grant the next
presentation of the same Church to B. the second grant is void, for A. had the
same granted to him before, and the grantee shall not have the second avoidance
by construction to have the next avoidance which the grantor, might lawfully
grant, for the grant of the next avoidance does not import the second
presentation. But if a man seized of an Advowson in fee take wife; now by Act
in Law is the wife entitled to the third presentation, if the husband dye
before: The husband grants the third presentation to another, the husband dye,
the heir shall present twice, the wife shall have the third presentation, and
the grantee the fourth; for in this case it shall be taken the third
Presentation, which he might lawfully grant; and so note a diversity between a
Title by act in Law, and by act of the party, for the act in Law shall work no
prejudice to the grantee.

Periculosum est res novas and inusit at as inducere.

Eventus varios res nova semper habet,

vide. 87, etc. Sect. 723. fol. 379. a.
Here by the Opinion of Littleton, the Donor may re-enter for the condition
broken, for Vtile per inutile non vitiatur, which being in case of a condition,
for the defeating of an estate, is worthy of Observation. And it is to be
noted, That after the death of the Donor, the condition descends to the
eldest Son, and consequently his alienation does extinguish the same for
ever, wherein the weakness of this invention appears; and therefore
Littleton here says, That it seems that the Donor may re-enter, and speaks
nothing of his heirs.

A man has issue two Sons, and makes a gift in Tail to the eldest, the
remainder in fee to the puisne, upon condition that the eldest shall not make
any discontinuance with warranty to bar him in the remainder, and if he does,
that then the puisne Son and his heirs shall re-enter; the eldest makes a
feoffment in fee with warranty, the Father dies, the eldest Son dies without
issue, the puisne may enter. But if the discontinuance had been after the death
of the Father, the puisne could not have entered.

In this case four points are to be observed:

1. As Littleton here says, the entry for the breach of the Condition is given
to the Father, and not to the puisne Son.

2. That by the death of the Father the condition descends to the elder Son,
and is but suspended, and is revived by the death of the eldest Son without
issue, and descends to the youngest Son, 41 E. 3. vide Sect. 446.

3. That the feoffment made in the life of the Father, cannot give away a
condition that is collateral, as it may do a right.

4. That a Warranty cannot bind a Title of entry for a condition broken, but
if the discontinuance had been made after the death of the Father, it had
extinguished the condition; which case is put to open the reason of our Authors
opinion.

The ancient Judges and Sages of the Law, have ever (as it appears in our
Books) suppressed innovations and novelties in the beginning, as soon as they
have offered to creep up, lest the quiet of the Commonwealth might be
disturbed, 31 Ed. 3. Gager delivery 5. 22 Ass. 12. 38 Ed. 3. 1. 2 H. 4. 18,
etc. And so have Acts of Parliament done the like, 1 Ed. 3. cap. 15. Stat. 3.
18 Ed. 3. cap. 1. and 6. 4 Hen 4. cap. 2. 11 Hen. 6. cap. 23. 12 Ed. 4. cap. 8,
etc.

Sect. 726. fol. 380. a.
Here note this diversity; If the heir be within age at the time of the descent
of the Warranty, he may enter and avoid the estate either within age, or at any
time after his full age, 18 Ed. 4. 13. 35 Hen. 6. 63. 28 Ass. 28. 32 Ed. 3.
garr. 30. and Littleton says well, That the Infant in this case may enter upon
the Alienee, for if he bring his action against him, he shall be barred by this
Warranty, so long as the state whereunto the Warranty is annexed continues, and
be not defeated by entry of the heir; but if he be within age at the time of
the alienation with Warranty, and become of full age before the descent of the
Warranty, the Warranty shall bar him for ever.

Our Author puts his cases where the entry of the Infant is lawful; for
where it is not lawful when the Warranty descends, the Warranty does bind
the Infant, as well as a man of full age; and the reason is, because the state
whereunto the Warranty was annexed continues, and cannot be avoided but by
action, in which action the Warranty is a bar. And so it is of a Feme covert,
if her entry be not lawful, a Warranty descending on her during the coverture
does bind her: and albeit the husband be within age at the descent of the
warranty, yet if the entry of the wife be taken away, the warranty shall bind
the wife, 8 Ed. 3. 3. 3 H. 7. 9. Br. tit. War. 54. 33 H. 8. War. Br. 84. l. 1.
f. 67. a. A^chers Case, and 140. Chudleys Case.

Note a diversity between matters of Record done or suffered by an Infant, and
matters in fait, for matters in fait he shall avoid either within age or at
full age; but matters of Record, as Statute Merchant, Staple, Recognizances
knowledged by him, or a Fine levied by him, Recovery against him by default in
a real action (saving in Dower) must be avoided by him, viz. Statute, etc. by
Audita querela, and the Fine and Recovery by Writ of Error during his minority,
and the like; because they are judicial acts, and taken by a Court or a Judge,
therefore the nonage of the party, to avoid the same, shall be tried by
inspection of Judges, and and not by the Country, 20 Ed. 3. Audita querela 27.
F.N.B. 104. k. 6 Ed. 3. 39. 17 Ass. 53. 17. 21 E. 2. 4. 15 E. 4. 5. 8 Hen. 6.
30. 1 Hen. 7. 15. 6 Hen. 8. Saver default. Br. 50. 3 Hen. 6. 10. 1 Mar. Dyer
104.

And for that this nonage must be tried by inspection, this cannot be done
after his full age: But if the age be inspected by the Judges, and Recorded
that he is within age, albeit he come of full age before the Reversall, yet may
it be reversed after his full age, P. 13. Ja. R. in Banco Reg. fol. 380. b.

No negligence shall be adjudged in an Infant, where he is thereby to be barred
of his entry in respect of a former right, as by a descent, or of his former
right (as Littleton does here put an Example) by a Warranty, where his entry is
congeable.

But otherwise it is of Condition, Charges and Penalties going out of, or
depending upon the Original Conveyance, for the laches or negligence shall be
adjudged in those cases as well in the Infant, as in any other. vide Pl. Com.
355, etc. Stowels Case.

And see further there, where an Infant being Tenant for life or years, shall
be punished for doing or suffering of waste; and where he claims by purchase,
a Cessavit shall lie against him, if he pay not his rent by two years. And some
have said, if he have the Tenancy by descent, and he himself cesse, a Cessavit
does lie, and he shall not have his age, because it is of his own cesser, 31
Ed. 3. Age 54. But other Books (as some conceive them) be against that. vide 9
Edw. 3. 50. 28 Ed. 3. 99. 14 Ed. 3. Age 88. 2 Ed. 2. Age 132. and others; which
Books do not prove that the Cessavit does lie in that case, but the contrary,
that he shall have his age, to the end he may at his full age certainly know
what to plead, or what arrerages to tender, for the land was originally charged
with the Seigniory and Services, Sect. 728. **

Note three things concerning the construction of Statutes:

1. That it is the most natural and genuine Exposition of a Statute, to
construe one part by another, etc. for that best expresses the meaning of the
makers, Pl. Com. 75. 7 Ed. 3. 89. As here the question upon the general words
of the Statute is, Whether a Fine levied only by a husband seized in the right
of his wife with Warranty, shall bar the heir without Assets? And it is well
expounded by the former part of the Act, whereby it is Enacted, That Alienation
made by Tenant by the Courtesy with Warranty, shall not bar the heir, unless
the Assets descend. Bract. lib. 4. fol. 321. Fleta lib. 5. cap. 34. And
therefore it should be inconvenient to intend the Statute in such manner, as
that he that has nothing but in the right of his wife, should by his Fine
levied with Warranty bar the heir without Assets: and this Exposition is ex
visceribus actus.

2. The words of an Act of Parliament must be taken in a lawful sense, as here
the words being [Whereof no Fine is levied in the Kings Court] are to be
understood, whereof no Fine is lawfully or rightfully levied etc. and therefore
a Fine levied by the husband alone, is not within the meaning of the Statute,
for that Fine should work a wrong to the wife; but a Fine levied by the husband
and wife, is intended by the Statute, for that Fine is lawful, and works no
wrong, Pl. Com. 246. Seignieur Barklays case, l. 9. fol. 26. Abbot de Strata
Marc. and generally the Rule is, Quod non praestat impedimentum quod de jure
non sortitur effectum. Vide fol. 381. b. 11 H. 4. 80.

3. That constructions must be made of a Statute in suppression of the
mischief, and in advancement of the remedy, as by this case it appears. For a
Fine levied by the husband only, is within the letter of the Law; but the
mischief was, the heir was barred of the Inheritance of his Mother, by the
warranty of his Father without Assets: and this Act intended to apply a remedy,
viz. That it should not bar unless there were Assets, and therefore the
mischief is to be suppressed, and the remedy advanced, Et qui haeret in
littera, haeret in Cortice.

Sect. 731. Fol. 383. a.
Nullius hominis autoritas tantum apud nos valere debet, ut meliora non
sequeremur, si quis attulerit, 8 E. 2. gar. 81. 18. E. 3. 51. 7 E. 3. 84. Pl.
Com. 57.

The Judge if he knows it, ought not to take knowledge of a Fine, that
works a wrong to a third person, 33 H. 6. 52. 5 E. 3. 56. 2 El. Dyer 178. 1
H. 8. 1. M. 89. 4 E. 3. 41. 7 El. Dyer. 246.

Sect. 733. Fo. 383. a.
The feoffor may by express words warrant the land for the life of the
feoffee, or of the feoffor etc. but the Recovery in value shall be in fee. 38
E. 3. 14.

Et ego and haeredes mei Warranti^ tali and haered. suis tantum, vel tali and
haered. assign. and haered. assignatorum, vel assig. assignator. and eorum
haered. and acquietabimus, and defendemus, etc. Bract. fo. 37. 248. and l. 5.
380, 381. Brit. 106.

Per hoc autem quod dicit (acquietabimus) obligat se and haeredes suos ad
acquietand. si quis plus petierit servitii vel aliud servitium quam in carta
Donationis continetur. Per hoc autem quod dicit (Defendemus) obligat se and
haeredes suos ad defend. fi quis velit servitutem ponere rei datae contra
sormam suae donationis.

If a man be bound to A. in an Obligation to defend such lands to A. whereof
the Obligor has infeoffed him for 12 years, etc. in this case, if he be ousted
by a stranger without being impleaded, the Obligation is forfeit: But if he be
bound to warrant the land etc. the bond is not forfeit unless the Obligee is
impleaded, and then the Obligor must be ready to warrant, etc. 2 E. 4. 15. tit.
Det. 71. Qui been distinguit, been docet, fol 384. a.

A Warranty in Deed is created only by this word Warrantizo, but Warranties in
Law are created by many other words; they are therefore called Warranties in
Law, because in Judgment of Law they amount to a Warranty without this Verb
Warrantizo.

As Dedi is a Warranty in Law to the feoffee and his heirs during the life of
the feoffor, but Concessi in a Feoffment or Fine implies no Warranty.

But before the Statute of Quia Emp. ter. if a man had given lands by this word
Dedi, to have and to hold to him and his heirs, of the Donor and his heirs, by
certain Services, then not only the Donor, but his heirs also had been bound
to warrant.

But if before the Statute a man had given lands by this word Dedi, to a man
and his heirs for ever, to hold of the chief Lord, there the feoffor had not
been bound to Warranty but during his life, as at this day he is. Lestat. de
Bigamis c. 6. 2 H. 7. 7. 6 H. 7. 2. 48 E. 3. 2. 31 E. 1. vouch. 290. F.N.B 134.
b. 6 E. 2. vouch. 258.

Dedi, does import a warranty in Law, albeit there be an express warranty in
the Deed. For if a man make a feoffment by Dedi, and in the Deed does warrant
the land against I. S. and his heirs, yet Dedi is a general warranty during
the life of the feoffor, and so was the Statute expounded in both points. H.
14. El. in Com. Banc. And if a man make a lease for life reserving a rent, and
add an express warranty, here the express warranty does not take away the
warranty in Law, for he has election to vouch by force of either of them: and
in Nokes Case, note a diversity between a warranty, that is a Covenant, and a
warranty concerning a Chattell: l. 4. fo. 80. 8 E. 3. 69. 3 E. 3. Formedon 44.

Also this word axcambium does imply a warranty. Also a Petition implies a
warranty in Law; and homage Aunc' does draw to it self warranty. 4 E. 2.
vouch. 245. 22 E. 3. 3. 14 H. 6 2. 20 H. 6. 14. l. 4. 122. l. 1. 96. l. 5. fo.
17. l. 8. 75. Seignior Staf. case.

And note that the warranty wrought by this word dedi, is a special warranty,
and extends to the heirs of the Feoffee during the life of the donor only. But
upon the exchange and Homage Aunc'. the warrant extending reciprocally to the
heirs, and against the heirs of both parties: and in none of these cases, the
Assignee shall vouch by force of any of these warranties; but in the case of
the exchange and dedi, the Assignee shall rebutt, but not in the case of Homage
Auncestrel.

And so no man shall have a writ of contra formam collationis, but only of the
feoffee and his heirs, which be privy to the Deed; but an Assignee may rebutt,
by force of the Deed. 28 Ass. 33. 14 H. 4. 5. 11 E. 3. Avowr. 100. 30 H. 6. 7.
33 H. 8. Die. 51. 10 H. 7. 11 b. F. N. B. 163. a.

If a man make a gift in Tail, or a Lease for life of land, by deed, or
without deed, reserving a rent, or of a rent service by deed, this is a
warranty in Law, and the donee, or lessee being impleaded shall vouch, and
recover in value, and this warranty extends not only against the donor, or
lessor, and his heirs, but also against his Assignees of the reversion, and so
likewise the Assignee of lessee for life shall take benefit of this warranty in
Law. 6 E. 2. vouch. 105. 5 E. 3. 67. 3 H. 7. 13. 6 H. 7. 2. 7 E. 3. 6. F.N.B.
134. g.

When dower is assigned, there is a warranty in Law included, that the Tenant
in Dower being impleaded, shall vouch, and recover in value a third part of two
parts, whereof she is Dowable. 4 E. 3. 36. 43. Ass. 32. 50 E. 3. 7. F.N.B. 149.
m.

A warranty in Law and Assets is in some cases a good bar. In a Formedon in
the discender the Tenant may plead that the Ancestor of the demandant exchanged
the Land with the Tenant for other Lands taken in exchange, which descended to
the demandant, whereunto he has entered and agreed; or if he has not entered,
and agreed unto the Lands taken in exchange, then the Tenant may plead the
warranty in Law, and other Assets descended. 14 H. 6. 2. 15 E. 3. Bar. 255.

If Tenant in Tail of Lands make a gift in Tail, or a Lease for life, render
a rent, and dies, and the issue bring a Formedon in the discending, the
Reversion, and rent shall not bar the demandant, because by his Formedon, he
is to defeat the reversion and rent. Et non potest adduci exceptio ejusdem rei,
cujus petitur dissolutio. 38 E. 3. 22. 23. 24. 13 E. 3. gar. 35.

But if other Assets in fee simple do descend, then this wa^ranty in Law and
Assets is a good bar in the Formedon. 16 E. 3. Age 45. 31 E. 3. gar. 29.

Here four things are to be observed. 1. That no warranty in Law does bar any
collateral title, but is in nature of a lineall warranty, wherein note the
equity of the Law. Fo. 384. b.

2. That an express warranty shall never bind the heirs of him that made the
warranty unless they be named, but in case of warranty in Law, in many cases
the heirs shall be bound to warranty, albeit they be not named.

3. That in some cases warranties in Law do extend to execution in value, of
special Lands, and not generally of Lands descended in fee simple. lib. 4.
fol. 121. Bustards Case.

4. That warranty in Law may be in some cases created without Deed, as upon
gifts in Tail, Leases for life, eschanges, and the life. 45 E. 3. 20. b.

Also it is necessary to show who shall take advantage of a warranty, as
Assignee by way of voucher to have recompense in value.

If a man infeoffee A. and B. to have and to hold to them and their heirs and
Assigns, with a clause of warranty praedictis A. and B. and eorum haered. and
Assignatis, in this case if A. dies, and B. surviveth, and dies, and the
heir of B. infeoffeth C. he shall vouch as Assignee, and yet he is but the
Assignee of the heir of one of them, for in judgment of Law the Assignee of the
heir is the Assignee of the Ancestor, and so the Assign of the Assignee shall
vouch in infinitum, within these words (his Assigns) 14 E. 3. gar. 33. 13 E.
1. gar. 83. lib. 5. fol. 17. b. Spencers case. 38 E. 3. 21.

If a man infeoff A. to have and to hold to him, his Heirs and Assigns, A.
infeoffeth B. and his heirs, B. dies, the heir of B. shall vouch as Assignee
to A. so as heirs of Assignees, and Assignees of Assigns, and Assigns of
Heirs, are within this word (Assigns) which seemed to be a Qu. in Bractons
time, and the Assignee shall not only vouch, but have a Warrantia Cartae, 12.
E. 2. vouch. 263. 19 E. 2. gar. 85. 13 E. 1. ib. 93. 36 E. 3. gar. 1. 4 H. 8.
Dyer 1. F. N. B. 135.

If a man does warrant Land to another without this word (Heirs) his heirs
shall not vouch; and regularly if he warrant land to a man and his heirs,
without naming Assigns, his Assignee shall not vouch. But if the Father be
infeoffed with Warranty to him and his heirs, the Father infeoffeth his eldest
Son with Warranty, and dies, the Law gives to the Son advantage of the
Warranty made to his Father, because by act in Law, the Warranty between the
Father and the Son is extinct, 43 E. 3. 23. 24 E. 3. 3. 11 H. 4. 94. 5 E. 3.
Age 19. Pl. Com. 418.

But note a diversity between a Warranty that is a Covenant real, which binds
the party to yield Lands or Tenements in recompense, and a Covenant annexed to
the Land, which is to yield but damage, for that a Covenant in many cases
extends further then the Warranty. As for Example;

It has been adjudged, that where two Coparceners made partition of Land, and
the one made a Covenant with the other, to acquit her and her heirs of a Suit
that issued out of the Land, the Covenantee aliened: in that case the Assignee
shall have an action of Covenant, and yet he was a stranger to the Covenant,
because the acquitall did run with the land, 42 E. 3. b. per Finchden. fol.
385. a.

A. seized of the Manor of D. whereof a Chapel was parcel, a Prior with the
assent of his Covent, Covenants by Deed indented with A. and his heirs, to
celebrate divine Service in his Chapel weekly, for the Lord of the Manor and
his Servants, etc. In this case the assignees shall have an action of Covenant,
albeit they were not named, for that remedy by covenant does run with the Land,
to give damages to the party grieved, and was in manner appurtenant to the
Manor, 42 E. 3. 3. a. Laurence Pakenhams case. 6 H. 4. 1. Ralph Brabsons case.

But if the Covenant had been made with a stranger to celebrate divine Service
in the Chapel of A. and his heirs, there the Assignee shall not have an
action of Covenant, for the Covenant cannot be annexed to the Manor because the
Covenantee was not seized of the Manor. Vide lib. 5. fol. 17, 18. Spencers
case. 2 H. 4. 6. H. Horns case.

And note, that an Assignee of part of the Land shall vouch as Assignee.

As if a man make a feoffment in fee of two acres to one, with Warranty to him,
his Heirs Assigns; if he make a feoffment of one acre, that feoffee shall
vouch as Assignee; for there is a diversity between the whole estate in part,
and part of the estate in the whole, or of any part.

As if a man has a Warranty to him, his Heirs and Assigns, and he make a
lease for life, or a gift in Tail, the lessee or donee shall not vouch as
Assignee, because the whole estate is out of the lessor or donor, and by this
means he shall take advantage of the Warranty.

But if a lease for life, or a gift in Tail be made, the remainder over in fee,
such a lessee or donee shall vouch as Assignee, because the whole estate is out
of the lessor, and the particular estate and the remainder do in Judgment of
Law to this purpose make but one estate, 18 E. 4. 52. 10 E. 3. 58. 5 E. 3. 40.
Accord. H. 14. 1. in Com. Banc.

If a man infeoff three with Warranty to them and their heirs, and one of them
release to the other two, they shall vouch; but if he had released to one of
the other, the warranty had been extinct for that part, for he is an Assignee,
40 E. 3. 14. 40 Ass. 5. 33 H. 6. 4. 37 H. 8. Alienation etc. 31. 8 H. 4. 8.

If a man does warrant land to two men and their heirs and the one make a
feoffment in fee, yet the other shall vouch for his moity, 11 R. 2. Detin. 46.
7 E. 3. 35. 46 E. 3, 4.

If a man at this day be infeoffed with warranty to him, his heirs and
assigns, and he make a gift in Tail, the remainder in fee, the donee make a
feoffment in fee, that feoffee shall not vouch as Assignee (but * he that
comes in in privity of estate.)

If the warranty be made to a man and his heirs, without this word (Assigns)
yet the Assignee or Tenant of the Land may rebutte; and albeit no man shall
vouch or have a Warrantia Cartae, either as party, heir or Assignee, but in
privity of estate, yet any that is of another estate, be it by Disseisin,
Abatement, Intrusion, Usurpation, or otherwise, shall rebut by force of the
warranty, as a thing annexed to the Land, which sometimes was doubted in our
Books, 38 E. 3. 21. 26 E. 3. 56. l. 10. fo. 96. b. Seymors Case. 10 Ass. 5. 35
Ass. 9. 22 Ass. 3. 988. 31 Ass. 13.

But herein note a diversity, when he that rebutteth claims under the
warranty, and when he claims above the warranty, for there he shall not rebut.

And therefore if Lands be given to two Brethren in fee simple, with a warranty
to the eldest and his heirs, the eldest dies without issue, the survivor,
albeit he be heir to him, yet shall he neither vouch nor rebut, nor have a
Warrantia Cartae, because his Title to the Land is by relation above the fall
of the warranty, and he comes not under the estate of him to whom the warranty
is made, as the disseisor etc. does.

If a man make a gift in Tail at this day, and warrant the land to him, his
heirs and assigns, and after the donee make a feoffment, and dies without
issue, the warranty is expired as to any Voucher or Rebutter, for that the
estate Tail whereunto it was knit, is spent: Otherwise it is if the gift and
feoffment had been made before the Statute of Donis Cond. for then both the
donee and feoffee had a fee simple; and so are our Books to be intended in this
and the like cases, Lib. 3. fo. 63. Linc. Coll. case.

If A. be seized of Lands in fee, and B. release unto him, or confirms his
estate in fee with warranty to him, his heirs and assigns, All men agree this
warranty to be good: but some have holden, That no warranty can be raised upon
a bare Release or Confirmation, without passing some estate, or transmutation
of possession, 14 E. 3. garr. 108. 12 H. 7. 1.

But the Law, as it appears by Littleton himself, is to the contrary; and
that both the party, and (as some do hold) his Assignee, shall vouch; but he
that is vouched in that case must be present in Court, and ready to enter into
the warranty and to answer; and the Tenant must show forth the Deed of Release
or Confirmation with warranty, to the intent the Demandant may have an answer
thereunto, and either deny the Deed or avoid it; for that at the time of the
Confirmation made, he to whom it was made, had nothing in the land etc. for
otherwise the Demandant may counter-plead the Voucher by the Statute of W. 1
cap. 40. viz. that neither Vouchee, nor any of his Ancestors, had any seisin
whereof he might make a feoffment. And this is grounded upon the said Statute
of W. 1. Sil neit son gar. en present, que lun voile gar. de son gree, and
maintenant enter en respons, otherwise the Tenant must be driven to Warrantia
Cartae, 11 H. 4. 22. 10 E. 3. 52. 21 E. 3. 37. Vide Sect. 706. 738. and 745.
and Vide 20 E. 1. Stat. ad vocat. ad War.

But a warranty of it self cannot enlarge an estate, as if the lessor by Deed
release to his lessee for life, and warrant the land to the lessee and his
heirs, yet does not this enlarge the estate, 22 Hen. 6. 15. 2 Hen. 4. 13. 43
Ed. 3. 17. 43 Ass. 42. 12 Ass. 17. 12 Ed. 3. Tail. 3. 22 Ed. 4. 16. b. 44 Ed.
3. 10. 44 Ass. Bassingborns Ass.

If a man make a feoffment in fee with Warranty to him his heirs and assigns by
Deed, (as it must be) and the feoffee infeoff another by paroll, the second
feoffee shall vouch, or have a Warrantia Cartae as Assignee, albeit he has no
Deed of the Assignment, l. 3. 63.

If a man infeoff two, their heirs and assigns, and one of them make a
feoffment in fee, that feoffee shall not vouch as Assignee, 29 Edw. 3. 70. 17
Edw. 2. Joynd. in action 1. 11 Edw. 4. 8.

If a man make a feoffment in fee to A. his heirs and assigns, A. infeoffeth B.
in fee, who re-infeoff^th A. He or his assigns shall never vouch, for A. cannot
be his own Assignee. But if B. had infeoffed the heir of A. he may vouch as
Assignee, for the heir of A. may be Assignee to A. in as much as he claims
not as heir.

Sect. 734. fol. 386. a.
The Heir shall never be bound by any express warranty, but where the Ancestor
was bound by the same warranty, 31 Ed. 1. gar. 83.

Nota quod haeres non tenetur in Anglia ad debita antecessoris reddenda nisi
per antecessorem ad hoc fuerit obligatus, praeterquam debita regis tantum: A
fortiori in case of Warranty which is in the realty, Fleta lib. 2. cap. 55.
Brit. fol. 65. b. 11 Hen. 6. 48.

But a Warranty in Law may bind the Heir, although it never bound the
Ancestor, and may be created by a last Will and Testament. As if a man devise
lands to A. for life or in Tail, reserving a rent, the devisee for life or in
Tail, shall take advantage of this warranty in Law, albeit the Ancestor was not
bound, and shall bind his heirs also to Warranty, although they be not named.
Also an express Warranty cannot be created without Deed, and a Will in writing
is no Deed, and therefore an express Warranty cannot be created by Will, 18
Ed. 3. 8.

Sect. 736. fol. 386. b.
Note a diversity, the lien real, as the Warranty, does ever descend to the
heir at the Common Law; but the lien personal does bind the special heirs,
as all the heirs in Gavelkinde, and the heir on the part of the Mother, vide
Sect. 603, 718, 737. 11 E. 3. 7. 11 Hen. 7. 12.

If two men make a feoffment in fee with warranty, and the one dies, the
feoffee cannot vouch the survivor only, but the heir of him that is dead also;
but otherwise if two jointly bind themselves in an Obligation, and the one
die, the survivor only shall be charged, 17 E. 3. Joint. 41. 16 H. 7. 13. 29 E.
3. 46. 12 H. 7. 3. 22 E. 3. 1. 17 E. 3. 8. 30 E. 3. 43. 19 H. 6. 55. l. 3. f.
14. Mat. Herberts Case.

Two brothers by demi venters, the eldest releaseth with warranty to the
disseisor of the Uncle, and dies without issue, the Uncle dies, the warranty
is removed, and the younger brother may enter into the Land, Sect. 737.

Sect. 738. fol. 387.
A warranty may be limited, and a man may warrant lands as well for term of
life, or in Tail, as in fee, 38 Ed. 3. 14. 16 E. 3. Vouch. 87.

If Tenant in fee simple that has a warranty for life, either by an express
Warranty or by Dedi, be impleaded and vouch, he shall recover a fee simple in
value, albeit his warranty were but for term for life, because the warranty
extended in that case to the whole estate of the feoffee in fee simple: but in
the case that Littleton here puts, the Tenant for life shall recover in
value but an estate for life, because the warranty does extend to that estate
only, vide Sect. 733. and 706.

And here (in this Section) is employed, that a collateral Warranty gives no
right, but shall bar only for life, and after the party is restored to his
action.

Also note, that a Warranty may descend to the heirs of him that made it during
the life of another.

Sect. 739.
Si un home lessa ses terres a un aut. aver and tenant a luy and a ses heirs
pur term dauter vie, and le lessee mor. vivant o^luy a que vie, etc. and un
estranger enter en la terre, l'heire le lessee luy poit ouster, etc. The heir
of the lessee shall have the Land to prevent an occupant; and so it is in case
of an annuity, or of any other thing that lies in grant, whereof there can be
no occupant, 77 E. 3. 48. 18 E. 3. 12. 11 H. 4. 42. 7 H. 4. 46. 8 H. 4 15. Dyer
8 Eliz. 253. 18 H. 8. 3. 27 H. 8. 21 H. 8. Estat. Br. 10. 19 E. 3. Account 56.
33 Ass. p. 17. 22 H. 6. 33. 39 E. 3. 37. vide Sect. 387.

Sect. 740.
Chattels as well real as personal shall go to the Executor, or
Administrator, 11 E. 3. tit. Ass. 88. 11. Ass. 21. 10 Eliz. Dyer 276.

But if the Kings Tenant by Knights service in Capite be seized of a Manor,
whereunto an Advowson is appendant, and the Church become void, the Tenant
dies and his heir within age, the King shall present to the Church, and not
the Executor or Administrator: but if the Land be holden of a common person, in
that case the Executor shall present, and not the Guardian, 24 E. 3. 26. F.N.B.
33. b. and 34. a.

If a Bishop has a Ward fallen and dies, the King shall not have the Ward nor
the Successor, but the Executor, and the Ward shall be Assets in his hands. So
it is of Heriots, Relief, etc. 40 E. 3. 14.

But if a Church become void in the life of a Bishop, and so remain until
after his decease, the King shall present thereunto, and not the Executor or
Administrator, for nothing can be taken for a prefentment, and therefore it is
no Assets, 9 H. 6. 58. 11 H. 4. 7.

Sect. 741. fol. 388. a.
Here the collateral warranty does descend upon the issue in tail, before any
right does descend unto him, wherein this diversity is to be observed ( vide
Sect. 707.) where the right is in esse, in any of the Ancestors of the heir, at
the time of the descent of the collateral warranty, there albeit the warranty
descend first, and after the right does descend, the collateral warranty shall
bind, as appears in this case of our Author. But where the right is not in
esse in the heir, or any of his Ancestors at the time of the fall of the
warranty, there it shall not bind.

As if Lord and Tenant be, and the Tenant make a feoffment in fee with warranty
and after the feoffee purchase Seigniory, and after the Tenant cesse the Lord
shall have a Cessavit, for a warranty does extend to rights precedent, and
never to any right that commenceth after the warranty, 7 E. 3. 48. 30 Hen. 8.
42.

Also a warranty shall never bar any estate that is in possession, reversion
or remainder that is not divested, displaced, or turned to a right before, or
at the time of the fall of the warranty.

If a Lease for life be made to the Father, the remainder to his next heir, the
Father is disseised and released with warranty and dies, this shall bar the
heir although the warranty does fall, and the remainder comes in esse at one
time, lib. 1. fol. 67. Archers Case.

If there be Father and Son, and the Son has a rent service suit to a
Mill, rent charge, rent seck, common of pasture, or other profit appre^e^^^^
out of the Land of the Father, and the Father makes a feoffment in fee with
warranty and dies, this shall not bar the Son of the rent, common, etc.
quia in tali casu transit terra cum onere, and he that is in seisin, or
possession, need not to make any entry, or claim; and albeit the Son after
the feoffment with warranty, and before the death of the Father had been
disseised, and so being out of possession, the warranty descended upon him,
that it should not bind him, because at the time of Warranty made, the Son was
in possession, Temps E. 1. vouch. 296. 31 Ass. 13. 22 Ass. 36. 41 Ass. 6. (33
E. 3. 3. gar. 24.).. 10. f. 97. E. Seymors Case.

So if my collateral Ancestor releaseth to my Tenant for life, this shall not
bind my reversion or remainder, because the reversion, etc. continued in me,
45 E. 3. 31. 21 H. 7. 11.

But if he that has a Rent Common, or any profit out of the land in Tail,
disseise the Tenant of the land, and makes a feoffment to the land, and
warranteth the land to the feoffee and his heirs regularly the Warranty does
extend to all things issuing out of the land (i.e.) to warrant the land in such
plight and manner as it was at in the hand of the feoffor at the time of the
feoffment with Warranty, and the feoffee shall vouch, as of lands discharged of
the rent, etc. at the time of the feoffment made. Vide S. 698. 21 E. 4. 26. 28
H. 7. 9. 3 H. 7. 4. 7 H. 4. 17. 30 H. 8. Dyer 42. 30 E. 3. 30. 9 E. 3. 28. 45
E. 3. vouch. 72. F.N.B. 145. 14 H. 8. 6.

A woman that has a rent charge in fee, intermarries with the Tenant of the
land, an estranger, releas^th to the Tenant of the land with Warranty, he shall
not take advantage of this Warranty, either by Voucher or Warrantia Cartae, for
the wife if the husband die, or the heir of the wife living, the husband
cannot have an action for the rent upon a Title, before the Warranty made, for
if the heir of the wife bring an Assize of Mordanc. this action is grounded
after the Warranty, whereunto the Warranty shall not extend.

So it is if the grantee of the rent grant it to the Tenant of the land upon
condition, which makes a feoffment of the land with Warranty, this Warranty
cannot extend to the rent, albeit the feoffment was made of the land discharged
of the rent, for if the condition be broken, and the grantor be entitled to an
action, this must of necessity be grounded after the Warranty made.

But in the case aforesaid, when the woman grantee of the rent marries with
the Tenant, and the Tenant makes a feoffment in fee with warranty, and dies,
in a Cui in vita brought by the wife (as by Law she may) the feoffee shall
vouch as of lands discharged at the time of the warranty made, for that her
Title is Paramount.

So if Tenant in Tail of a rent charge purchase the land, and make a feoffment
with warranty, if the issue bring a Formedon of the rent, the Tenant shall
vouch causa qua supra. 7 H. 4. ^7.

But some do hold, that a man shall not vouch, etc. as of land discharged of a
rent service. 10 E. 4. 2. b. 28 E. 3. 55. 44 E. 3. 29.

Also no warranty does extend unto mere and naked Titles, as by force of a
condition, with clause of Re-entry, Exchange, Mortmain, consent to the
Ravisher, etc. because that for these an action does lie, and if no action can
be brought, there can be neither Voucher, Writ of Warrantia Cartae, nor
Rebutter, and they continue in such plight and essence, as they were by their
original creation, and by no act can be displaced or divested out of their
original essence, and therefore cannot by any warranty, l. 10. fo. 97. 41 Ass.
p. 46.

And albeit a woman may have a Writ of Dower, etc. yet because her title of
Dower cannot be divested out of the original essence, a collateral warranty
of the Ancestor of the woman shall not bar her. So it is of a feoffment causa
matrim. praelocuti, 34 E. 3. Droit 72. 21 E. 4. 82.

A warranty does not extend to any lease for years, or to any estates of
Tenants by Statute Staple, Merchant or Elegit, or any other Chattell, but only
to Freehold or Inheritance. And this is the reason, that in all actions which
lessee for years may have, a warranty cannot be pleaded in bar, as in an
action of Trespass, or upon the Statute of 5 R. 2, etc. 21 E. 4. 18. 82. 1 H.
7. 12. 22. 11 H. 7. 15, 16. 20 H. 7. 2. b. 14 H. 7. 22. 43 E. 3. 15. per
Finchden in Qu. imp. 15 H. 7. 9.

But in such actions which none but a Tenant of the Freehold can have, as upon
the Statute of H. 6. Ass. etc. there a warranty may be pleaded in bar.

Although a collateral warranty be descended, yet if the estate whereunto the
warranty was annexed be defeated, albeit it be by a mere stranger (as in this
case that Littleton here put by the discontinuee) the warranty is defeated: and
although the discontinuance remain, and no Remitter wrought to the heir, yet
the warranty is defeated, and bar removed, so as the issue in Tall may have
his Formedon and recover the land. Sublato Principali tollitur Adjunctum, 3 H.
7. 9. b. 16 E. 3. Continual Claim 10. 9 H. 4. 8. Pl. Com. 158.

Sect. 743. Fol. 390. a.
Si tenant in tail fait un feoffment a son uncle, and pui^ l' uncle fait un
feoffment in fee, ovesque gar. etc. a un auter etc.

When the uncle takes back as large an estate as he had made, the warranty is
defeated, because he cannot warrant land to himself.

And so it is if the uncle had made the warranty to the feoffee, his heirs and
assigns, and taken back an estate in fee, and after infeoffed another, yet the
warranty is defeated, for that he cannot be assignee to himself, 40 E. 3. 14.
16 E. 3. Vouch. 87. 19 E. 3. Vouch. 122. 17 E. 3. 73, 74. 20 H. 6. 29.

A man shall not regularly vouch himself as assignee of a fee simple. And yet
if the Father be infeoffed with warranty to him and his heirs, the Father
infeoffeth his heir apparent in fee, and die, he shall vouch himself, and be
heir in Borough English, by reason the act in Law determined the warranty
between the Father and the Son, 41 E. 3. 25. a.

But if a man make a feoffment in fee with warranty to the feoffee, his heirs
and assigns, and the feoffee reinfeoffe the feoffor and his wife, or the
feoffor, and any other stranger, the warranty remains still, 11 H. 4. 20, 42.
17 E. 3. 47, 49. 18 E. 3. 56. 29 E. 3. 46. 39 E. 3. 9.

Sect. 744. ib.
A man infeoffeth a woman with warranty, they intermarry, and are impleaded
upon the default of the husband, the wife is received, she shall vouch her
husband, etc. notwithstanding the warranty was put in suspense, 6 E. 2. Vouch.
257. 3 E. 3. ib. 201. 5 E. 3. 16. 178.

And so on the other side, if a woman infeoffe a man with warranty, and they
intermarry and are impleaded, the husband shall vouch himself and his wife by
force of the said warranty. 4 E. 2. Vouch. 245, 246.

An Infant en ventre sa mere may be vouched if God give him a birth, and if not
such a one heir to the warranty, but he cannot be vouched alone without the
heir at the Common Law, for Process shall be presently awarded against him,
Temps E. 1. guard. 1. 3. 31 E. 1. Breve 873. 8 E. 2. Vouch. 237. 11 E. 3. ib.
13. 9 H. 6. 24. Pl. Com. Stowels Case, per Saunders and Brown.

Tenant in Tail makes a feoffment in fee with warranty, and disseise the
discontinuee, and dies seized, leaving Assets to the issue; some hold that in
respect of this suspending warranty and Assets, the issue in Tail shall not be
remitted, but that the discontinuee shall recover against the issue in Tail,
and he take advantage of his warranty, if any he has, and after in a Formedon
brought by the issue, the discontinuee shall bar him in respect of the
warranty and Assets, and so every man's Right saved, 21 E. 3. 36. a. b. 38 E. 3.
21. 44 E. 3. 26. 45 E. 3. Title 32. 44 E. 3. ib. 31. 33 E. 3. ib. 4.

Sect. 745.
Note a diversity; In the case of an Appeal, the Defendant shall forfeit no
lands, but such as he had at the time of the outlawry pronounced, for that
there is no time alleged in the Writ, when the Felony was done: But in case of
Indictment, such as he had at the time of the Felony committed, for there is a
certain time alleged. And in the case of the Indictment there is also a
diversity to be observed; for it shall relate to the time alleged in the
Indictment, for avoiding of Estates, Charges, and Encumbrances, made by the
Felon after the Felony committed, but for the mean Profits of the land, it
shall relate only to the Judgment, as well in this case of Outlawry, as in
other cases, 33 E. 3. Forfeit. 30. 38 E. 2. 31. 3 E. 4. 25. 19 E. 4. 2. Pl.
Com. 488. b.

Felony, Ex vi termini significat quodlibet capitale crimen felleo animo
perpetratum. Glan.

If a Felon be convicted by Verdict, Confession or Recreancy, he does forfeit
his goods and chattels, etc. presently. A man is said convict before he has
judgment. For Felony by Chance-medley, or se defendendo, or petit larceny, a
man shall forfeit his goods and chattels, and no lands of any estate of
Freehold or Inheritance. Stanf. prerog. 45. b. 16 E. 3. Cor. 116.

By the Law at this day under the word (Felony) in Commissions, etc. is
included Petit Treason, Murder, Homicide, Burning of houses, Burglary,
Robbery, Rape, etc. Chancemedley, se defendendo, and Petit larceny.

Sect. 746, 747.
It is a general rule, That having respect to all those whose blood was
corrupted at the time of the Attainder, the Pardon does not remove the
corrupting of blood neither upward nor downward. Bract. l. 3. fo. 132. etc.
Brit. fo. 215 b.

As if there be Grandfather, and Son, and the Grandfather, and Father have
diverse other Sons, if the Father be attainted of Felony, and pardoned, yet does
the blood remain corrupted, not only above him and about him, but also to all
his children, born at the time of this Attainder.

But in the case of Littleton if Tenant in Tail at the time of his Attainder
had no issue, and after his pardon had issue, that issue should have been bound
by the warranty.

And if his Father had issue before the pardon, and had issue also after and
dies, nothing can descend to the youngest, for that the eldest is living and
disabled. But if the eldest son had died in the life of the Father without
issue, then the youngest should inherit.

Nota, That a judgment against a man for felony, is that he be hanged by the
neck until he be dead, but implicative, he is punished. 1. In his wife, That
he shall lose her dower. 2. In his children, they shall become base and
ignoble. 3. He shall lose his posterity, for his blood is stained and
corrupted, that they cannot inherit unto him, or any other Auncestrel. 4. He
shall forfeit all his lands, and tenements which he has in fee, and which he
has in tail, for term of his life. And 5. all his goods and chattels.

The wife of a man attainted of high Treason, or pety Treason shall not be
received to demand Dower, unless it be in certain cases specially provided
for. Stan. Pl. Cor. 195.

But the wife of a person attainted of misprision of Treason, Murder, or
Felony is dowable since our Author wrote, by the Statute of 1 E. 6. cap. 13. 5
E. 6. cap. 11. 5 El. ca. 1. and 11. 18 El. cap. 1. 12 H. 4. 3. Vide Sect. 55.

So if a Seigniory be granted with warranty, and the Tenancy escheat, the
Seigniory whereunto the warranty was annexed is extinct, and consequently the
warranty defeated, and it shall not extend to the land, and sic in similibus, 6
H. 4. 8. 45 E. 3. vouch. 72. Pl. Com. 292. 16 E. 3. Age 46. 28 H. 3. vouch.
281. 23 E. 3. garr. 77. Vide Sect. 200.

If a collateral Auncestrel release with warranty, and enter into Religion,
now the warranty does bind; but if after he be deraigned, now it is defeated.

Sect. 748. Fol. 393.
Per release de touts manners de garr. ou de touts covenants real, ou de touts
demandes, le. garr. est extinct. Et mults auters cases and matters y sont per
queux home poit defeat garr. etc.

As by a defeasance, as other things executory may. Also a warranty may lose
his force, by taking benefit of the same. 43 E. 3. 17. Pl. Com. Brownings case.

In a Precipe the tenant voucheth, and at the sequatur sub suo periculo, the
tenant and the vouchee make default, whereupon the demandant has judgment
against the tenant; and afterward the demandant brings a Scire facias against
the tenant to have execution. In this case the Tenant may have a War. Cartae.
And if in that case a stranger had brought a praecipe against the Tenant, he
might have vouched again, for by the judgment given against the Tenant, the
warranty lost not his force, but if the Tenant had judgment to recover in
value against the vouchee, he should never vouch again by reason of that
warranty, because he had taken advantage of the warranty; and it is to be
observed that upon the process of Summon. ad war. if the Sheriff return the
vouchee summoned, and he make default, the Tenant shall have a Capias ad val.
but if he return that the vouchee had nothing, then after the Sicut alias and
plures, a seq. sub suo periculo shall issue; and there if the vouchee make
default, the Tenant shall not have judgment to recover in value, for he was
never summoned, and it appears of Record, that he has nothing, but in the
Cap. ad Val. it appears that he had Assets, and he had been summoned before:
But in some special cases, there shall be two recoveries in value upon one
warranty. As if a disseisor give lands to the husband and wife, and to the
heirs of the husband: the husband alieneth in fee with warranty and dies, the
wife brings a Cui in vita, the Tenant vouch and recover in value, if after
the death of the wife, the disseisee bring a praecipe against the Alienee, he
shall vouch, and recover in value again.

So it is where the wife bringing a Writ of Dower against the Alienee, he shall
recover in value, and after her death, he shall recover in value again upon
the same warranty. 45 E. 3. vouch. 72.

In the same manner it is if a man be seized of a rent by a defeasible title,
and release to the Tenant of the Land all his right in the Land, and warrant
the Land to him and his heirs, if he be impleaded for the rent, he shall vouch
and recover in value for the rent, and if after he be impleaded for the Land,
he shall vouch, etc. again for the Land: But in these and the like cases, the
reason is in respect of the several Estates recovered, but for one and the
same estate he shall never recover but once in value, and though the Land
recovered in value be evicted, yet he shall never take benefit of that warranty
after, and as warranty may be defeated in the whole, so they may be defeated as
to the party of the benefit, that may be taken of the same. As he that makes a
warranty may make a defeasance, not to take any benefit by way of voucher.

In the like manner that he shall take no advantage by way of Warrantia Cartae,
or by way of Rebutter. 7 H. 6. 43. 13 Ass. 8. 13 E. 3. gar. 24, 25. 3. 7. 22 H.
6. 51. 8 H. 7. 6.

Sect. 749.
If Tenant in Tail alien with warranty and leave Assets, to descend, if the
issue in Tail does alien the Assets, and die, the issue of that issue shall
recover the Land, because the lineall warranty descends only to him without
Assets, for neither the pleading of the warranty without Assets, nor Assets
without warranty, is any bar in the Formedon in the descender.

But if the issue to whom the warranty and Assets descended had brought a
Formedon, and by judgment had been barred by reason of the warranty and
Assets; In that case albeit he alieneth the Assets, yet the estate Tail is
barred for ever: for a bar in a Formedon in the descender, which is a Writ of
the highest nature that an issue in Tail can have, is a good bar in any other
Formedon in the descender brought afterward upon the same gift. Temps E. 1.
gar. 89. 34 E. 1. ib. 88. 11 E. 2. ib. 3. 4 E. 3. 24. 5 E. 3. 14. 40 E. 3. 9.
14 H. 4. 39. 24 H. 8. a. Br. 33. 4. M. Die. 139. l. 10 37, 38. Mary Portingtons
case.

Epilogus.
Nulla virtus, nulla scientia locum suum and dignitatem conservare potest sine
modestia. Ratio est anima legis.

If by study and industry we make not the reason of the Law our own, it is not
possible for us to retain it in our memories. And we must couple arguments and
reasons together.

Quia Argumenta ignota and obscura ad lucem rationis proferia^^, and reddunt
splendida. Sir Richard Hankford. 11 H. 4. 37.

Home ne scavera de quel metal un campane est, sine soit bien bate, ne le ley
bien conus sans disputation.

Jeo aye disputir cest matter pur la apprender la ley. 41 E. 3. 22. Kirton.
Vide Sect. 377.

Lex plus laudatur quando ratione probatur.

Lex est sanctio sancta, jubens honesta, and prohibens contraria. Vide cest
definitio, Lib. 1. fo. 131. Chudleighs Case.

Al unique Dieu gloire. FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table.
A
ALien may purchase, what and how p. 2 Attainder, how it corrupts the blood 7
Arguments legal 11 Arguments from Statutes ib. Advocatio, what 15, 123
Advocatio medietatis ib. Armories, how descendable, 20 Authority with interest
or without, the difference 63 Attorney to deliver seisin ib. Accessaries, where
67 Ages, their several purposes in the Law 95 Agreement and Disagreement, the
time for the confirming Matrimony, the equal Obligation 96 Agriculture, its
commendation 98 Actus Legis 100 Aetas Legitima 101 Alienatio restricta 106
Acquittal, quotuplex 107 Appendant and Appurtenant, their differences 125, 126
Alienee plead, where not good, 735 Auter droit 133 Alien, his issue before
denization 134 Actio, quid and quotuplex 313 Alien, what actions 134 Annuity,
where it lies, and where not 150, 151 Ambiguitatis expositio 154 Assise of
Rent 164 Arrerages of Rents, how recoverable by the Statute 32 H. 8. cap. 37.
which could not be obtained by the Common Law 168, 169 Aenitia pars, quid 173
Account against a Bailiff 177 Against a Receiver ib.
Account, ratione objecti quotuplex 78 Privity requisite ib.
Agreement qualifies, etc. 112 Annus and Dies 272 Authority to be pursued, 274,
275 It differs from Right 283
Avowries, four kinds 291 Acts concerning possession, differ, 292 Abatement,
quid 302 Actions transitory, place not traversible sans special matter 310
Assise for damages only not many tenable 314 Action well begun, not abateable
per mort. etc. where, 314 Appellum, quid and quotuplex, 317 Annuity, not merely
in Action, 323 Attaint, Judgment in it ib. Assent with interest and without
it, differ 326 Attornament, quid: and propter quod 339 quotuplex 340
Attornnent not necessary, where and why 339, 340, 345 Attornment
countermanded, 341 Void for uncertainty 342
Attornament long after, etc. good ab initio, where ib. Attornment presumed ib.
Attornment, by whom, 344 348, 349, 350 Attornment requisite, to what Grants 345
To pass the estate, and where requisite to give privity, 347
Attornment need not to a Devise 355 Abeyance, where 377 Acts of Parliament,
how to be construed 403 Averment, general and special, 407 Acts of Parliament
for buying of Titles, extends not to an Ejec. Form. 419 Assets to bar on
Estate Tail, how qualified 428
B
Bastard who, his reputed name, its effect p. 3 Belliyu^ und^, who 82 Bishop
has a Barony 88 Breve, quid; quotuplex, respectu, materiae, formae,
efficientis, finis, objecti and adjuncti, etc. 90, 91 Brevia anticipantia 107
Burgh, quid 108 Brief abated 131 Borough English 147 Bailiff, who 175 Billa,
quid 177 Bar to issue in tail, what, 178 Baron and feme one person, 193
Beadle, his duty and oath, 245 Brief d'entry, quotuplex 251 Bastardus quis and
unde dicitur 258 Its divisions 258 Et under creationem habet.
Barrettor, quis 417
C
Conveyances fraudulent avoided, by whom p. 4 Challenge of a Juror or Witness,
do differ 5 Courtesy Angleterre, to whom it is extendible, and of what things
21, 22 Common sans number 23 Courtesy where no Dower 22 Consent, at what age it
is binding 26 Capacities for taking estates 55 Contract, quid pro quo 59
Copyhold Court, who is judge 79 Copyhold, who may grant ib. Copyholders Fines
89 Copyhold intailed 80 Cornagium or Castleguard, 87 Certificatio, quotuplex,
ratione efficientis and subjecti de quo 91 Capitulum, quid 104 Cognuzance
Spiritual 105 Capite Tenure, quid cui 113 Corporal service to the person of the
Lord ib. City, quid and propter, quid concilium Regis, uotuplex, 115
Consuetudo, quibus constituitur ib. ubi alleganda, and ejus Energia ib. 116
Courts Record, not Record, 122 Church, when said full 123 Church void
multifariam, ib. Claim in law of bill goods, 152 Coin bude 209 Calumniaque 163
quotuplex ib. Propter quid ib. of 164
Counterplea its effect 167 Chattels go not in succession 195 Conditio quid,
quotuplex ex quibus constat, qualis and quanta 203, 206 Condition broken entry
234 Condition possible becomes impossible, of what effect 207, 208 Condition
unlawful, how it enures distinct 208 Conditions in Obligation and Feoffment
differ 210, 211 Condition considered ratione objecti and ratione subjecti 211
Condition in Law, who shall take advantage of it 217 Condition and power of
revocation, different 219 Claim where it must be 224 Conditions of mortgage 225
Condition to be performed according to intent where, 226 Condition disabled 227
Condition not to alien, where good 221 Condition may prohibit what is prohibited
by Law 230 Condition to defeat a freehold must be shown by deed 231 Condition
in Law 237, 238 By Common Law and by Statute Law 243, 244 They are as strong as
Conditions in Deed ib. and 245
Condition in a will, what 246 Continual Claim, who may make it ib. Continual
Claim by a Recluse 275 Capias, where it lies and where not 316, 318
Confirmatio, quid and quotuplex 315 Confirmation and Release differ 325
Confirmation, what word necessary 328, 329 Chattels Reals not given to the
husband absolutely etc. 330 Confirmation by implication 333 Certitudo, legalis
quotuplex 334 Cognizee, what he may do before Attornment 353 Corentare
Capitulum, 357, 358 Conditions, Warranty, Estoppels, do ever descend to the
heir at the Common Law, not Spiritual 369 Casu Consilii 374 Common Law bounded,
379 Chattels of a Feme, how disposed by Marriage, 387 388 Covin does many times
choke a right 401. Covina, quid est ib.
D
Deed of Feoffments, its parts 4, 176 Deed its d^^e 5 Deed, when good 7 Deed,
its incidents 28, 29 Denization of what feme 7 Devise of lands effected by
other words then feoffee 9 Descent what, how 13 Demesne, unde 14 Degrees of
Kindred 18 Dower, at what age it is to be deserved 23 Dower, what 24 Dower,
what necessary causes to effect it ib. Dos non de Castro ib. Divorce a vinculo
matrimonii and a mensa and thoro, differenced 25 Dowm. by metes and bounds, 26
Dower per Custom 27 Dower ad ostium Ecclesiae, ib. Dower assigned, by whom, 27,
28 of what not 30
Dower ex assensu patris 28 Distress, of what, of what not 59 Disparagement,
quotuplex 96 Decanus, unde 104 Dispensatio, quid 106 Deforciamentum quid 303
Disclaimer, quotuplex 110 Devise of Lands, where and how, by Custom, by
Statute, ib. Disability to bring action, 135 how many ways 132, 133
Distress, where, and to what it is an incident inseparable, 160 Disseisina,
quid 161, 185 Denial of rent, a disseisin, 167 Discensus in Capita and in
stirpes 171 Disseisor, who 184 Disseisin, quid 302 Demand of Rent, where and
when 204 Descent, what 248 Descent of Corporal inheritances put him that right
has to an action aliter of incoporal, 249 Descent takes not away Entry,
unless disseisor has been in quiet possession five years, 250 Descent does not
call Entry, where 256, 257 Dum fuit infra aetatem, here it lies 263 Derogation
of a man's own act disallowed in Law 264 Descent of Chattels, none, ib.
Disseisor dying seized within five years, entry is not called by Stat. 32 H. 8.
33. 272 Defalta, quid 276 Saved ib.
Denization may be on condition 298 Demand, two kinds 321 Dedi and Concessi,
their power in Law 333 how pleadable ib.
Demise, its power ib. Departure in pleading, what 335 Distress not for
Cognuzee of a Fine without Attornment, 353 Disseisin cannot be of Rent, etc.
356 Discontinuance, quid 357 by what ways it was done, and whom it prejudiced,
ib.
Discontinuance, none of such things as lie in grant, 361 unless Warranty, etc
362
Defortiare, quid sig. 363 Discontinuance by Tenant in Tail 366, 367, 368 Dum
fuit infra aetatem 368 Discontinuance, who may make it 375
E
Escheat, unde p. 12 quomodo, ibidem. quid, 103
Escheat upon Indictment and Appeal, difference 12 Escheat, none from a Corpse
politic ib. Elopement loses Dower, 32 Estoppel, quid and quotuplex, 390,
391, 392 Excambium, its incidents necessary and convenient, 62, 289 Escuage,
quid, quomodo praestandum, and ubi 86, 87 Escuage, when assessed, and where it
ought to be 90 Escuage certain, what 99 Excommunication 141 who shall certify
it ib.
Exitus, quid 129 quotuplex est ib. and 130
Electio, cujus est, quomodo and quando 151, 152 Extortio, quid; and quomodo,
417 Executio, quid Executed and Executory, differ 206 Executors are bound,
though not named, not an heir, 212 Executors not Assignees in Law, where 213
Entry upon Condition given to stranger, by Statute 38 H. 8. cap. 34. with
conclusions and limitations 218, 219 Who claim merely by act in Law, cannot 219
And where the Condition respects a thing collateral to the Law, not 220
Exemplifications are pleadable 232 Estoppel restrains not the Jurors 233
Execution against issue in tail 405 Estate by wrong makes no degree in a Writ
of Entry 251 Entry follows the nature of Action 270 Entry of one Coparcener
is the entry of both 257 Entry sur Bastard to defeat his estate, who shall do
it 259 Entry into part for all, where it is good, where not 271, 272 Entry
forcible, what 274 Damages in it ib.
Englands extent 277 out of it how far it excuses, 278 acts out of it how
tryable, ib.
Execution 318 Elegit 320 within a year ib.
Executor may release before any Probate, etc. 322 Evidence given, what 336
Ecclesia fungitur, etc. 374 Entry ad terminum qui praeteriit ib.
F
Fee simple, what p. 1 Fee simple divided ib. Fee, its extent of signification
ib. Fee simple personal, what 2 Feoffment efficacious when other Conveyances
fail 9 Feoffment improperly called, ib. Fee simple gained by Agreement, where
10 Frankmarriage, its incidents and properties 17 Forfeiture for Felony 52, 53
Fine only for Alienation by the Kings Tenant, no forfeiture 55 Freehold,
quotuplex ratione subjecti in quo 68 Fidelitatem quis faciet, cui, and quomodo,
and quando 85, 86 quis non faciet 103
Frank-Almoigne, quid ib. qua relatione 106
Forum ratione Actionum and agentium quotuplex 105 Forresters view, where etc.
120 Forfeiture in a Praemunire 135 Feme sues sans baron 140 Favorites of Law
128 Finis sumitur tripliciter 131 Felonice, where to be used 132 Fictio Juris,
quale 159 Forfeiture, to whom 165 Frankmarriage by the Common Law 183
Forfeiture by alienation etc. how and where 267, 268 Fine, who bound by it 279
Fraudulent feoffments etc. 319 Fine bars a wife after five years after death
de baron, 358 Feme alien within the Statute 11 H. 7. c. 20. vide 359 Fine of
things which properly lie in grant, make no Discontinuance 365 Feme covert
received, how she shall plead 393 Felon convict, what he forfeiteth 461
G
Grants, how to be expounded p. 8 Guardian in Socage cannot present to Adv. 14
Gavelkinde Custom special, 22 Guardian may endow 31 Guardian pur cause etc. 100
Guardian in Socage, who ib. Goods stolen etc. at whose peril 101 Guardian in
Socage shall account ib. when he is chargeable 102
Grant, what 178 when void ratione rei 216
Guardian shall take benefit of a Condition for the advantage of the heir 20
Guardianship divested 263 Grants by Spiritual Corporations restrained 332 Grant
of a Rent by particular Tenant, with confirmation of him in reversion, where
good, 231, 332 Grant, when it ought to take effect 339 Gleab-land, where the
Fee is 374
H
Haereditamentum, its extent, 6 Haeres, quis 7 Heir, none propter delictum, ib.
and propter defectum subjectionis ib.
Heir cannot be of Goods and Chattels ib. Haeres astrareus quis 8 Haeres
apparens ib. Heirs, what is affected by the word ib. Haereditas est duplex ib.
Heirs, when necessary to pass a Fee 9, 10 Heir claiming, how 11 Heir-loom, what
15 Heirs n limitation, the effect, 17 Homagium, quid, quotuplex 83 quis
praestaret and cui, 84, 85
Homagium Ancestrale, quid 108 incidentia 108 interruptum decidit 111
Hyberniae Leges 148 (Heir) by descent and by purchase, the difference 171
Hotchpot, what 182, 183 Habendum Haeres, quis, per Leg. Civil. and Com. 248
Heir, not chargeable during minority, where 319 Hospitals, diverse matters
resolved concerning them 376 Husband does gain a Freehold in his wives right,
where 387 Husband seized in droit fa feme attaint, what is forfeited ib.
Husband, what is given to him by Law by Marriage, 387, 388, 389 Heir chargeable
by the Bond of his Ancestor in respect of the land only 431 Heir not bound
unless the Ancestor be 447
I
Jus Coronae, where it is 13 Inheritance, what and where, 14 Inheritances
entire 25 Jointure its efficacy 27 how concluding 29
Jointure, what is required to make it good 29, 30 Jus aequale quid utilitatis,
100 Incidens, quo^uplex 103 Interpretatio quomodo habenda 117 Jour generale and
speciale, 141 Infant amerced, where 131 Infant sues, by whom 143 Judicium
finale and interlocutorium qui distant Inconvenience not sufferable 161 Juror,
how he ought to be qualified 162 Infant, to what he shall be bound to, and how,
177, 348 what oath he shall take, 178 For what he is punishable 437
Joyntenants who, by what Conveyances 184 Jointure severed, where, 187, 196,
197 Jus accrescendi 189, 190 Joyntenant his right 191 Joyntenant may make
partition 192 Joint -heir, what will stand in it 193 Joyntenants reserve a
rent, how it shall enure 196 Issue, when found sufficiently 233 It is always
intended true until reversed 133
Juror eat or drink, its fineable 233 what land he ought to have 296
Infelix, quis 237 Jus, quotuplex 285, 381 Jus nudum, quid 286 Interesse
termini before entry, 293 Intensio, quid 302 quotuplex 303
Issue, when well found 309 Jurors bound to find things local and transitory,
when 311 Justification pleadable, where ib. where not b. 312 Placita,
quotuplicia sunt ratione objecti actionis, 313
Interpretationes benignae etc. 333 Incidents pass with the things themselves
338 Infant not have his age, where 371, 437 Juris utrum 374 Jus sive Rectum
quid significat 381 Interest, quid and cui 381 Judgment against a man for
Felony 45^ Infant en ventre sa mere vouche 460
K
King capable of an office, how 3 Knights Service Tenure is priledged 31, 32
King never deins age 55 Knights Service, its incidents what they are 337
L
Linea recta, its privilege, 10 Lineal assent prohibited, ib. Legum diversitas
ratione objecti circa quod versatur, 11 Limitations to estates 54 Law, its
construction in an uncertainty, what 55 Liberum tenementum quasi, where 56
Leafes for three lives, or 21 years, who may now make them 66
Lease, when it shall begin 58 Livery, quotuplex and quomodo 60 where not
necessary in a thing corporeal 61, 287
Livery, to whom to be made, ib. where not necessary 62
Legis Intentiones 94 Lex est Ratio Artificialis, 106 Ligeantia, quid and
quotuplex 134 Ley- gager 178 Livery must pass in a present Freehold, or not at
all, 221 222 Logic, its use in Law 246 Laches of an infant, what it effects
260 Of a Feme, where binding, where not 261
Livery deins view 270 Livery to one absent, cannot be sans fait 403 Lain
personal, differs from the Lain real 448
M
Mortmain what, its effect 2 Maxim, why so called 10 Messuagium, what it does
involve in the Law 67 Manerium, unde 79 Moratur in lege, quid est, propter
quod, quotuplex and quomodo 89 Marriage tendered and refused, the penalty, what
95 Monasteriorum, quot 105 Mesne 108 Mayhem, quid 132 Manumissio, quid, quomodo
efficitur 143 quotuplex ib.
Mesualty revived 160 Mesualty extinct ib. Moiety who has, and who has not,
how disposable, 193 Mortgage, duplici sensu, 207 Mulieratus filius, barred 206
Modo and forma, when in pleading they are material, 309 Mise, what 323 Mortmain
an affirmation of the alienation, where 372 Manutenentia, unde 417 Statuto
against it explained, 418

N
Name Christian and Surname, when necessary 3 Nobility, the inheritance in it,
how many ways 14 Nonsuit, when 145 Nonsuit regularly no bar, ib. where it is
a bar ib.
Nonsuit before appearance not peremptory, why 146 Non Compos mentis, who shall
plead it 262 Nemo potest etc. 339 Nobilities suppressed 436 Nonage tried by
inspection, 437
O
Office granted, when void, 3 Office, who is capable of it, ib. Occupant who,
against whom, of what, how prevented, 53, 54 Ordinarius, unde, and ejus
authoritas 105 Obligatio, quid 177 Offices forfeited by Non-user, where 243
where not ib.
Office relinquished, what it effects ib. Origo Rei etc 274 Omnis Ratihabitio
etc. 275 where it disableth 317
Officium Ordinarii 379 Officium Judicis de fine levando 439
P
Plea of Extra Feodum and horse de son Fee, the difference, 1 Purchase, who have
capacity, 2 for what purpose ib.
Purchase, by what name good, 3 Praecipe of land, by what name 4 Probatio,
quotuplex 6 Praesumptio, quotuplex ib. Presumption, when it moves a Jury ib.
Possibility sur possibility not intended 179 Purchase by ten Conveyances, what
they are 10 Proximum duplici modo, ib. Purchases first regarded 11 Professio
fratris, where 13 Placitum, unde 14 Prerogative, what 102 Parsons
Ecclesiastical 103 Parliamenti jurisdictio, membra, and alia incidentia, 114
Praescriptio, quid, a quibus 118 ejus incidentia 118 and de quibus
praescribatur 119
Parliamenti Actor' differ 120 Prescription, how pleadable 124 Praemunire, the
judgment, 135 Protectio quibus efficitur, ib. Protectio, quotuplex ib.
observanda quae, 136, 137 quam diu durat 272
Professio quod and consequentia 139, 140 Protestatio, quid 128 Pleas, where
tryable 129 Proprietas cui and quotuplex 15^ Parceners, who 170 many: One Heir
171 they have but one Freehold in respect of a strangers Praecipe ib.
Parcenary, vel Arithmetica, vel Geometrica proportione 172 Partition, when
good, ib. and 179 quotifariam 173 when by Writ, how returned 175 who are bound
176
Privities differenced 175 Partitione fac. by the Stat. 32 H. 8. against whom
181
Parceners by Custom, who, 182 Per quae servitia, who may have it, 269
Prisoner not bound, where, 275, 276 how kept 277
Privity, where requireable in a Release 293 Privity, quadruplex 294
Purpraestura, quid 303 Principles in Law not to be changed 310 Placitum, unde
and quomodo 334, 335, 336 Placitum ambiguum, and 335 Possession not lost of
things that lie in grant 337 Privation and Translation all one with death,
where 362 Parson, his estate to several respects 374 Parson, what actions he
may have 374 what he cannot have, 374
Parson cannot make discontinuance ib. Parson shall have aid, of whom ib.
Parsons Ecclesiastical, what estates they may make at this day 375, 376 Parson
may charge the Land, how 378 Plenary, what etc. 379 Presentation revocable by
the King 380 Praecipe lies against one that has but a Freehold in Law, 402
Praecipe where damages are to be recovered; no Tenure no Pleas 406
Q
Quarentina what, to whom, of what, 27 Quia Emptores terrar' its effect 56 Que
estate, where, in what, and how pleadable, 125 Queen, her Prerogative 141
Quaestio Juris per quos, etc. 128 Quaestio facti per quos, etc. ibid. Quis
Juris clamat, where it lies, and what is effected by it, 354 Quod ei
deforceat, where, what it is 395 Quare impedit, where it lies 380
R
Rent, out of what it may be reserved, and out of what not 58 Reservation
differs from Exception, how 59 Remanere, its signification 61 Relief, how much
paid 87, 97 what it is, the remedy for it, 97
Relief in Soccage, quanti, 101 de quibus praestationibus ibid.
Ransom, quid 132 Retraxit quid, and quotuplex 145 Retraxit a Bar ibid. Rem,
what, and quotuplex 148 out of what 149
Reservation, of what, and to whom, 149, 150 Void, where 215, 216
Rents and Annuity differ ib. Remedium duplex 153 Rents extinct and suspended,
where 156, 157 improved ibid. incident to the reversion 350
Release of a Seigniory 159, 160 Reversion its incidents 160 Remedies favored
in Law 161 Redisseisin joyntenancy is a general plea 162 against whom it lies
ibid.
Rents, what are disseisins of them 166, 167, 168 Rent granted sans fait 175
Rescous, when it may be made 166, 167 Release, its several operations in Law
197 by what words it enureth 207
Rent accepted will not make good a void estate 217 Revocation of uses 247, 348
Records what they are 276 Roll alterable ibid. Relaxatio, quotuplex, ratione
subjecti and objecti 281 Release in Law ib. what 282, 284, 290
Release to enlarge an estate requires privity 296 Right favored in Law 298
Release of Right and Action, differ 299, 300 Release to two disseisors, who
operateth, etc. 300, 301 Right and Title diverse 301 Release to mesualty
suspended, 307 Release good to a Tenant in Law 313 Release of actions
personals, how far it extends, or reals only, or both; their several extents
in bar, 315, 316, 317 Robbery, what 317 Remainder good, though the particular
estate be destroyed, where 327 Remainder without a particular estate, where 328
Right of Advowson at the Common Law 379 Remitter, quid and quomodo 383 Remitter
to Privity is Remitter to Accessory 386 Remitter to Tenant in Tail, 390
Remitters favored in Law, 394 and differ from Descent, ib.
Remitter to them in Remainder 395 Remitter works no Remitter till it falls in
possession, 402 Recovery by a faint Action works a Remitter 404 Remitter and
Recontinuance differ 408 Rebutter, where 411 Richels invention examined, 435
S
Suits of Inheritance moveable and immovable, how 4 Seized, when proper 14 Sur
cui in vita, where it lies not 22 Sponsalia 27 Senescallus unde, his duty, 81
Socagium, quid, unde 99 Serjeanty grand, quid, cui praestaretur, and ejus
incidentia 112 Serjeanty petit, quid, cui praestandum, and ejus incidentia 113
Servi, unde sic dicti 121 Servitudo, unde ib. Simonia 124 Severance, where 146
Sacramento repellitur infamis 147 Seisin of Rent seck, by what it may be 165
Surviuorship, not in trust, 185 Survivorship, where it shall take place 186,
187 Stranger shall take advantage of a limitation, pot of condition. 216
Surrender absolute and conditional 224 Succession in le post ^65 Statutes how
constrained ^95 Seisin to maintain a writ of Right, and to give a possessio
fratris, differ 309 Statute Merchant and Staple 319 Scire facias, where, etc.
320 Suspension, when 346 why ib.
Seisin of part, etc. good where 348 Surrender, proprie, and improprie 369
Surrender by deed, and without what 370, 371
T
Tenementum its extent 6 what passes by it ibid.
Tail Tallium unde 15 where that estate may not be barred 425
Tail what it was at Common Law 16 Tailed what may be ibid. Tail barred where,
and how 423 Ten. in tail, pres possession, how be is differenced from Tenant
pur vie 20, 21 Trial quid 128 Tenant apres possibility, who 23 Treason and
Felony punished 32 Terminus its signification in the Law 57 Terminus annorum
debet esse certus and determinatus 57 Tenant pur vie 53 Tenant pur ans 56
Tenant at will 66 What is his right ib. What his remedy 67 Differs from Tenant
at sufferance 68
Tenant by Copy, etc. who 68 Tenant by the verge, who 81 Tenure by Knights
service, what, by whom 87 its incidents 92, 93
Tenure quotuplex ratione correlativorum and praestationum 104 Testamentum
duplex 116 Tenementum quae complectitur 162 Tenants in common, objects of
several praecipes 181 Trust diversified 185, 186 Tenants in common, who 194,
195 What actions they may join in, what not 198, 199 Their grants, and
reservations how they enure 198 What actions are to be had betwixt themselves
201, 202
Tender of money and refusal, where peremptory 207 where not 209
Tender, who may to save a condition ib. 209 Tail, its incidents 229 Trespass
is joint or several at the will of the plaintiff 236 Tempus pacis and belli
265 Tenure abridgeable, how 336 Tenant in Tail, what actions he shall have 360
What not ibid
Tenant in Tail, where he cannot discontinue 367 Titulus: quid in C.L. 381
U
Use its nature in operation 18 Uxor de facto and de jure 26 Voyage Royal,
what and by whom 87 Villenagii tenura, quid, 121 Villain, who, what he may have
ibid. Villanus, quomodo talis 122 Villain regardant 124 Villain, where he shall
have action against his Lord 128, 130 Venire fac' in a wrong place 129
Utlegatus, might be killed any before the conquest 134 Villain privileged 143
Quotifariam 144
Verdict is twofold 234 Usurae no current, etc. 262 View: in another County 270
Usurpation, what it effects 280 Uses, how raised 295 What they are 296 The
remedy for them ib.
Usurpation, will cause a remitter 301 Usurpatio quid and quotuplex. 303
Verdict special 336 Visitation, by whom 379 Voucher per Tenant in Tail, is a
good action to remitter, where 406 Voucher single, double, etc. 223 Voucher by
an heir special, where and how 430
W
Witness who, when the trial is by witness 5 Witness challenged, for what 5
Wife, no witness against her husband 6 Woman when excluded to give testimony 6
Witness, a man in his own cause 6 Witnesses necessary 7 Words general, how
limitable 11 Warranties, upon whom they descend 12 Words in Tail to be
observed, 19 Waste, what, in what, and quotuplex ratione subjecti, 64 by whom,
and against whom the several Writs 65
Wardship in a double relation 97 Wardship may be granted without any Deed 98
Warrantus quis quomodo summonitus 109 Warrantia chartae 110 Waviata, or a woman
outlawed 127 Wager of Law, where it lies not 316, 323, 324 Warranty in Law
440, 441 Warrant, ratione efficientis duplex 167 Warranty, to whose benefit,
and who shall design 180 Warranty lineal nor collateral restrained by the
Statute de donques 229 Warranty collateral avoided by entry, where 266 When no
Rebutter 280 Waste Tenant pur vie punishable, where 372 Warranty works
discontinuance ab effectu, where, 373 Waste in the Writ, the wife received,
where 396 Waste damages not principal Waste by him in reversion, 399, 400
Warrantizo make Warranty indeed 440 Warrantia, quid, quotuplex and quibus etc.
401, 409, 410, 414 Warranty collateral and Assets, where a Bar 413 Warranty
commencing disseisin 415 Warranty defeated in part and good in part 416
Warranty respects natural capacity 420 Warranty, its extent, 457, 458
FINIS.

