Philosophia Maturata: AN Exact Piece of Philosophy, Containing The Practick
and Operative part thereof in gaining the Philosophers Stone; With the ways
how to make the Mineral Stone, and the Calcination of Metals.

Whereunto is added, A Work Compiled by St. Dunstan, concerning the
Philosophers Stone, And the experiments of Rumelius and Preparations of Angelo
Sala, all most famous Chemists in their time.

Published by Lancelot Colson, Dr. in Phys. and Chym.

London, Printed for G. Sawbridge, and are to be sold at his house upon
Clerken-well-Green, 1668.

A Preface relating to the life of St. Dunstan, the Author.
HOw reverent an esteem Antiquity has had of this holy man will appear, in that
so many famous Authors have written concerning him, to wit the Author of the
British Antiquities; History of Great Britain; Malmsbury, and Mat.
Westminster. He lived about the year of our Lord 946. having been at first a
Monk, after that Abbot of Glastonbury, then Bishop of Worcester, next of
London, and finally Archbishop of Canterbury: As to the Religious part of his
life, it was so exemplary, that after ages even to this time have esteemed it
miraculous: He flourished in the Reigns of Edred or Eldred, Edwin and Edgar
three Kings of England. In Edwins Reign he was Banished, during which time the
King by the Rebellion of his Subjects was deprived both of his life and
Kingdom, whom Edgar succeeding, highly favored and promoted. He Crowned Edw.
King at Kingston, this Edward was surnamed the Martyr, being murdered by the
procurement of Queen Elfrida. After whose death Etheldred was Crowned King by
Dunstan, with whom also he was so much in favor that he preferred him before
all his Nobles and laid up all his richest royal Housholdstuff, Charters and
Records with all his Wealth and Treasure in his Monastery, so that all things
were in his power, the King without his advice doing nothing either in the
public affairs of the Kingdom or in his own private negotiations: And as he
stood thus in his Royal Masters favor, with all fidelity to that great esteem
he employed his endeavors to enrich religious places either by the Danes
wasted; or by bimself founded: in this manner did our Author by the favor of
his Prince attain the highest honors, and surely not without great merit, his
extraordinary acquired parts and learning, deserving greater Eulogyes then this
narrow scantling of Paper can allow room for. At last full of honor and days
and replete with the grace and affection of his Prince, be received his Quietus
est from the cares of this world to enjoy the happiness of a better, leaving
behind him the pattern of his Religion, virtue and learning for the world to
imitate, a taste whereof you have in the ensuing discourses. Et sic Vive and
Vale Lector.

To the Understanding Reader.
THou art here presented with an ingenious piece of curious Art which may well
be entitled An exact Piece of Philosophy, for its subject is of such a nature
as none but such as are (...) Lovers of Wisdom, are able to comprehend, and
that has made some even pretenders to Learning cry out, That the Philosophers
Stone is indeed an invaluable Gemme, but such as deserves only to pass among
nominal, not real Jewels, but it would be a toylsom work, and to as little
purpose as certare de lana caprina, to give an answer to such Anomalus
Caprichio's.

The following tract (there is no doubt) will yield great satisfaction to all
such as knowingly pursue this kind of Philosophy, especially when they shall
consider the eminency of its Author, for it bears in front the Reverend
Character of Learned Dunstan, of whom the present world, at least those therein
that have conversed in this Science, cannot but know, that he was as exact as
diligent, and so diligent, that none before, nor hardly any since did ever
arrive herein to equal perfections with him.

But why should we waste time in making Eulogyes of him, of whom not only
antiquity, but even the wickedness of the present age speak both great and
honorable things, (to give them no greater a Title) Let the Work it self
advance (as no doubt it will) its own praise, for its Author needed not the
stilts of a vainglorious sustentation. Farewell.

AN Exact Piece of PHILOSOPHY.
Touching the Stone of Philosophers.
IT is chiefly to be understood, That the Ancient Philosophers did often
endeavor to compose in a most short time above the Earth, those things, which
by Nature, in many years, were perfected under the Earth; viz. To make most
perfect and most precious Sol and Lune; wherein they imitated the foresteps of
Nature, choosing to themselves most pure Earths, white and Red, which they
named their Sol and Lune; joining them together as Nature does, without
repugnance, until at length they were brought to a fixation and subtilty: This
thing also is needful for you to perform, if you desire to obtain the desired
end in this Science.

For Sol and Lune, is nothing else, but Red and White Earth, to which Nature
has perfectly joined Argent vive, pure, subtle, white, and Red, and so of
them has produced Sol and Lune.

It is therefore needful for thee, seeking this Science, That first thou get
these Earths, White and Red, subtle, pure and fixed, and in these two Earths
to fix two Mercuries, white in the white, and red in the red, without division,
and by their least parts, so as they may endure the greatest examen of the
fire, and may have such fusion, that as we see a great quantity of Water
colored with a little Saffron, so they may in the least quantity abundantly
tinge every metal, and all metalline spirits whatsoever, so as they be of the
same Kind and Nature, and may altogether and fully bring them to their own
quality.

And moreover, that in themselves they may be infinitely multiplied, and able
to free the body of Man from the worst and most deadly Diseases; which
Properties truly are not found in common Sol and Lune, without great Labor,
(and yet but only in part) because that the Vegetative power, the Mother of
all increase, for the most part, is long since extinct in them.

If thou know how to perform this, and to imitate the condition of the
inferior nature in making Metals, thou may worthily rejoice in the name of
a Philosopher, as being not meanly expert in natural things.

It is to be noted, That the more Ancient Philosophers used not common Sol and
Lune in this Work, and therefore they said, That their work needed not great
Cost and Charges, but that it might be as well performed by the Poor, as the
Rich: Which were altogether different from the truth, if it could not be
performed without Common Sol and Lune: For they are very precious and rare, and
hardly to be gotten of poor men without great labor. Indeed, many have brought
great quantities of Sol and Lune to nothing by this Art, and have unprofitably
spent and wasted their Time and Labor, to the destruction both of their Bodies
and Souls, which is much to be lamented.

Moreover, in these our Times, we know no man who does diligently and truly
find out the Philosophers Tinctures, but most of them labor absurdly and
vainly in vulgar Mercury, and in common Sol and Lune; therefore few of them
obtain this grace.

Let us take heed; for although Sol and Lune may be subtilated and mixed with
tinctures, and so reduced into lesser tinctures and Elixers with mean profit;
yet the true way according to the Doctrine of Philosophers, is not in them: for
Sol and Lune are two tinctures Principal, red and white, buried in one and the
same body, which by nature were never brought to perfect compliment, yet they
are separable from their dirty and earthy accidental dross, and afterward
according to their proper qualities, are made most fit ferments for pure earth,
white and red, so as in no sort they are said to need any other thing.

For the whole Work is one, and the thing it self is one, and all the whole is
derived from an Image. For our Ancestors knew, that the parts of this our Stone
are celestial and concrete; which were altogether absurd, if common Sol and
Lune were needful to the composition thereof.

For it is said, Take a body wherein is Argent vive, pure, clean, unspotted,
and incomplete of Nature: such a body after its complete and perfect cleansing,
is much better then the Bodies of Mineral Sol and Lune.

Of this self-same body, which is the matter of the Stone, three things are
chiefly said; namely, that it is a green Lion, a stinking Gum, and a white
Fume.

But this is spoken of Philosophers, purposely to deceive Folks, and to bring
them into doubts, by the many and different names.

But understand thou shall, one thing always is really signified, though
accidentally and by names it is said to be three: for the green Lion, stinking
Liquor, and white Fume, are spoken of one and the same subject, wherein they
altogether lie hid, until by Art they are made manifest.

By the green Lion, all Philosophers mean green Sol multipliable and
spermatick, which is as yet incomplete by Nature, having power to reduce Bodies
to the first matter, and to make fixed things spiritual and flying, and so it
is fitly called a Lion.

For as every Beast is subject to the Lion, so every Metalline body is
confirmed and strengthened by the power of this Liony and green Sol; namely, of
our Mercury, when it is Philosophically prepared.

This is bred and born with a certain water, which we call Argent vive of the
Philosophers, and white Mercury: Therefore their water White and Red, gives
unto us two tinctures, white and red, proceeding from one body and substance:
These are always named our Mercuries; and after due conjunction, decoction,
and digestion, we call our White and Red Stones.

By the stinking gum, we mean a certain stinking smell, proceeding from the
unclean Body in the first distillation, which is altogether like unto stinking
Assafaetida, that with a certain sweetness, whereof it is said before its
preparation, its smell is grievous; which is most certain: but after that, in a
due manner it shall be prepared and circulated into any quintessence.

This dignified matter of Philosophers abounds with unspeakable sweetness,
having power to cure the Leprosy, and other grievous Diseases; and without
this our living Sol, it is impossible to make aurum potabile, to cure with;
which of Philosophers is called the Elixer of Life, and of Metals.

Yet I deny not, but that Philosophers may very well and with good success,
dissolve Mineral Lune and Sol with radical things of their own kind, and as yet
not perfected by Nature, and so may attain to the highest mystery of this Art.

But certainly it is not for every mean Wit; it is for Princes who do most
abound with Sol and Lune: but this way is universally open and lawful unto all
men, yet chiefly for poor men, as being more brief, and of less Cost.

It is called a white Fume, because that in the first distillation, before the
red tincture does ascend, there rises a fume truly white, whereby the receiver
is clouded with a frequent milkish shadow and moisture, for which cause it is
called the Virgins Milk. Wherefore, wheresoever thou shall find a substance
endued with these three qualities, know that it is the true matter of the
Philosophers Stone.

There arises a Question very difficult, which much troubles fantastic
Heads, viz. our Stone shows it self in a foul shape, because it is in every
thing, and in every place; whence many men reading this, make choice of several
and stinking things, which with great labor they distill, calcine, and join
together. But let such hear what the Philosophers say, Who so seeks the
Philosophers Secrets in Turds loosethhis Labor, and in the end finds nothing
but deceit.

Yet there is also another thing which troubles these men's Brains, viz. our
Stone is bred between two Mountains, it is cast out into the Dunghill, and
trodden under men's feet, it is counted a most vile and contemptible thing, it is
generated between Male and Female, and lies hide in Thee, in Me, and in such
like things. And contrarily it is said, Our Stone cannot be in things differing
from its kind, namely, from the Nature of Sol and Lune; for nothing can give
that which it has not. A Nettle cannot produce a Rose, nor a Woman a Dog; How
then shall we resolve so many doubts rising from Contrarieties?

Truly, it is easily done; for it is plain, That nothing in this World, whether
it be Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral, can be generated without a natural and a
special appetite.

Therefore according to the Doctrine of Philosophers, which informs us only by
obscure Examples; We must understand that the Stone may be by Similitude in
every thing, and in all places, chiefly, because it is nothing else but a
specifical virtue and quality joined with natural heat, whereby every
compounded thing is brought to his perfectest determined end.

Things generally spoken are always generally to be understood, for what
earthly thing can be in every thing, and in all places, but only a specifical
Appetite, and a natural Heat; for these are the immediate and near causes
without which the Stone cannot be.

Whosoever therefore desires to understand the Stone, let him not depart from
his specifical quality and Original.

Of a Man comes a Man, of a Rose a Rose; so likewise from a matter which is
potentially Gold, having things necessary, and Excrements purged, arises Sol
by an inward Appetite; therefore from a Metal arises a multitude of metalline
tincture and perfection: The Stone is made of a metal, living, hot and moist,
when natural heat is joined with it, whereby it is made apt to generate its
like. For our Stone is most pure matter, viz. the nature of Sol, containing in
it self a vegetable heat, whereby it has power and virtue always to multiply
in its own specifical and natural form; therefore it is called the secret Fire
of nature, stirring up the compound, and perfecting it in our Glass into a
Stone, in like manner as seed, by reason of its own proper natural heat, and
radical moisture, if its mother Earth does putrify to admirable Generation
and Multiplication.

Whosoever therefore keeps not this our heat, our fire, our balnium, our
invisible and most temperate flame, and of one regiment, and continually
burning in one quality and measure within our Glass; I say, whosoever
understands not this Dunghill, horsebelly, and moist fire, shall labor in
vain, and shall never attain this Science.

Thou see therefore that the radical humidity, which is that first vegetable
Virtue, is the cause of multiplication of every thing in its kind. Therefore of
the Composition of Sol and Lune take our burning water, that Aqua vite, which
the ignorant do think, but falsely, to be extracted from Wine, Oil, and such
like Liquors.

I say, such green Sol and Lune, in which the vegetable virtue is not
extinguished, but is living, hot and moist, and has power to reduce all Bodies
to their vegetability; for by this, with Gods permission, bodies extinct, and
not multipliable, may more easily get the habit and virtue to germinate, which
of Philosophers is called the beginning and term from whence the Stone is
generated.

Marie the Prophetess in an Epistle to Aron, writes, That the Body taken from
little Mountains, is a Body white and clear, not suffering putrefaction nor
motion, and it is that which is generated between Male and Female; By those
little Mountains is understood Sol and Lune, which are naturally separated from
us by a great distance, by whose influence Gold and Silver are generated, both
which are in our Mercury.

By Male and Female, we understand Agent and Patient, Active and Passive, both
which are also in our active Mercury, and in our Passive Earth.

Whereby, without doubt, is inferred, that a mineral Earth and Water are the
Active and Passive matter, as the Philosophers Stone. And here hence appears
that community between the Poor and Rich; seeing that the Stone may be made of
one thing, without visible Sol and Lune.

But here by the way, I advertise thee, that betwixt the Elixer and the Stone
there is this difference; for the Stone rejoices in unity and simplicity, but
the Elixer in plurality.

The Stone therefore is one thing, our Mercury, Sol, Lune, our Lincture white
and red, which may be naturally joined with its own proper Earth, or with the
Earth taken from the little Mountains, and may easily be obtained by mortal
men. But the Elixer is the same vegetable Mercury, which yet by reason of its
fixation, is said not to be common, but consisting of many things, for it is
absolutely fixed in the Earth of common Sol and Lune: And therefore it always
consists of many things, viz. of Mercury vegetable, and of a different Earth,
which is neither Common nor fit for poor men. But of this Earth, it is not much
to be respected of what substance it is, so it be fixed.

Alphidius is of the same Opinion, saying, The Faeces, from whence this Earth
is taken, seeing it is of no value, is altogether to be rejected, and the
Mercury to be planted in another subtle Earth: For its own Earth is seldom
natural in the composition of the Elixer.

Yet, my Friend, I will name it to thee by its own Name, whereby the common
People name it; and it is the end of the Egg, whereby we understand the nature
of Metals, viz. Mercury rightly mixed by Nature, with its own sulphur, of its
own accord inclined by pntrefaction and growing.

From this Egg, three things must be considered; namely, The Yolk, the White,
and the Shell; and this last is only and altogether necessary for Philosophers,
which is called the end of the Egg; that is, the last part, rejoicing in
perfection, having the likeness of a little Mountain, and also generated
between Male and Female; which when it is perfectly calcined it exceeds all
Earths whatsoever in whiteness and subtilty, enduring the greatest fire,
embracing Tincture, and desiring a metal in Nature, which is hardly believed of
Workers in the Art, unless they being overcome by experience the Mistress of
things, that they be compelled to confess and admire it. But another Earth,
wherein there is any Mercurial humidity, will not drink up our Mercury with so
much greediness, and therefore it is not so commodious; the reason is, because
it abounds with its proper and natural humidity, but this has non such, for
its humidity was naturally transferred to the generation and union of the White
and the Yolk.

Yet we deny not, that this virtue is necessary, yet profitable for the
preservation of man's Body, which is derived from the outward parts to the
inward, yet so as it be mixed with the Elixer of life; this Earth is wholly
contemned, when the matter included is corrupted, and is cast out on the
Dunghill, and every where trodden under foot, and accounted unprofitable.

Sometimes I desiring to try whether it would join with our unctious humidity:
I put it thereto, which it drunk up with so great appetite as that it seemed
spongious, and a most fat congealation, rather then an Earth naturally naked;
from which when I had gently evoparated Mercury, it remained very Citron.

Here I will end and show what matter, and what way of practice is necessary
for this Work and Art.

Of the Practick, and Operative Part.
In the Name of God take a Drop of the Green Lion, which I have mentioned
before, and dissolve him in distilled Vinegar very well for ten days, stirring
the Compound strongly three times every day, that it may be well mixed: then
separate the Foeces three times by filter; afterward evaporate the Vinegar with
a gentle fire, until it be thick as Pitch, then pour it out, and keep it safe.

Having 12 pounds of the Green Lion thus brought into Gum, thou may believe,
that thou have seen Earth of Earth, and the Brother of Earth, whereof
Philosophers have so often spoken; put thereof three pound into a Glass, whose
third part may contain at least four Sextaries of Wine: put it into a Furnace
with Sand, so as the Sand may be two fingers thick under the Glass, and about
and above the Matter; then the matter being a little dried with a gentle heat,
put a Receiver not yet luted thereto: after a few hours, having received a
certain light Water, when thou see a certain white Fume begin to ascend, put
thereto another most long and most large Receiver, which lay close, least the
Spirits break forth, which are most necessary in this Work:

Note also, that from the first appearing of the White Fume, the fire must be
discreetly increased by little and little: This same tingeth the Receiver with
a certain thick and milky humidity which is our Lune, and therewith shall also
ascend a most red oil, called the Philosophers acreal Gold, a stinking
Menstruum, the Philosophers Sol, our Tincture, Burning water, the Blood of
Green Lion, our unctious humidity, which is the last comfort of Man's Body in
this Life; the Philosophers Mercury, the Solutive Water, which dissolveth Sol
under conservation of its Species; it has also many other Names.

Continue this Distillation from the first appearance of the white Fume 12
hours following: then remove the Receiver, and stop it close, lest the Spirits
be lost, which are very volatile and penetrative: And thus thou have the Blood
of the Green Lion, called The Secret Water, and most sharp Vinegar, by which
all Bodies may be reduced to their first Matter, and purges Man's Body from
all Infirmities.

This is our Fire always equally burning in one measure within the Glass, and
not without: This is our Dunghill, our Aquavitae, our Balmy, our Horsebelly,
working and producing many Wonders in the most secret Work of Nature: It is
also the Examiner of all Bodies dissolved, and not dissolved; a Fire hot and
moist, most sharp, a Water-carrying Fire in its Belly; otherwise it could not
have power to dissolve Bodies into their first Matter: This is our Mercury, our
Sol, our Lune, which we use in our Secret Work. Take the Foeces left in the
bottom, as soon as they are cold; for they are our Cross-Bill, far blacker then
Pitch, which thou may set on fire, by putting a kindled Cole into it; so as
they shall be calcined of their own accord into a most Yellow Earth: But this
Calcination suffices not for its perfect cleansing; put it therefore into a
Reverberatory, with a moderate heat, for eight days, and so many Nights
following, increasing the heat and flame, till it be white as Snow; they may
also be calcined in a Potters Furnace, being meanly hot.

Having this white Earth, thou may putrify and alter it, or the Calxes of
other Metals prepared, as I will teach you in that which follows, at thy
pleasure, into a new Whiteness or Redness, by means of our Lune or Mercury,
which putrifieth with them by Generation, and Vegetation; which Properties they
wanted before: for the Philosophers say, first calcine, then putrify and
dissolve; distill, sublime, descent, and fix often with our Aquavitae; wash and
dry, and make a Marriage between the Body and the Spirit; and if the Water be
congealed, by a natural commixture with the Body, then the Body shall dye of
the Flux, shedding its blood, and putting on many Colors; after the third Day,
he shall ascend and descend, first to the Moon, then to the Sun, through the
round Ocean Sea, and without end, sitting in a very little Ship; and when his
Journey is ended, he shall immediately obtain the Victory, for doing whereof,
there shall not need any great expense: And thus thou may wait again
patiently the Harvest, and thou should be filled with Joy and Riches. And now
we will speak of Putrefaction.

Take an ounce of this Calx hidden before in the Philosophers eg, and thereon
put of the red tincture to cover it two fingers; then seal it, and set it to
putrify eight days in a most cold place; which being ended, it will drink up
the humidity; again pour on as much of the tincture, and let it stand as before
for other eight days, continuing again the said imbibitions and times: let it
stand till it cease to drink any more tincture; remove it not from its place,
until it be blacker then any pitch; which being seen, set it into a natural
balmy, that the moisture with the black Earth may be digested, and fixed into a
white Mineral: then divide it into two equal parts, and work the one for the
white, and the other for the red stone: which thou shall thus easily perform;
Ferment the one part with the oil of Lune, that is, with white water, and the
other part with the oil of Sol, that is, with the red water; and so by greater
heat and digestion, it shall be converted into a most red powder, like Dragons
blood.

This powder being joined with a part of our Mercury, and circulated, is called
Aurum Potabile, Elixer of life and of Mettalls, which transmuteth Mercury and
all imperfect metals into most perfect Sol.

But here learn a general Rule; If thou ordain the Elixer only for the white,
then keep one part of the red work, distill the other part with a gentle fire,
taking the white water, which we call our white tincture, our Eagle, our white
Mercury, and Virgins milk, and having these two Mercuries, thou may practice
with them, either upon their own Earths, or upon the calxes of Metals prepared.

For it is said, The Earth is not much to be respected, so that it be fixed.
Therefore take which thou will, being first altered into whiteness; and for the
white work, you may ferment thus;

Take the Calx of Lune and Earth altered, equal parts, grind them together,
and temper them with white Mercury, named Virgins milk, which keep safe;
sublime the rest not fixed, and that which arises to the sides of the glass,
like Mercury sublimed, reiterate upon his proper calxes, grinding and tempering
with our Virgins milk, distilling and subliming as before, until no fire will
raise it.

This our Mercury sublimed and fixed, made of the white Earth of bodies
altered, arising at first admirably by the virtue and help of water.

This is that Mercury, instead of which the unlearned take the compounded of
common Mercury, Vitriol, and Sol sublimed; wherein they are deceived: when this
is thus fixed into white earth, it is afterward calcined, whereof is made an
Elixer or stone as follows; Put it into a circulatorie, and pour thereon
Virgins milk to cover it, then circulate it to the thickness of oil, by drying
and calcining it, as often as thou will, for by this means it may be augmented
infinitely.

But before thou make projection, congeal it into an oily powder, one part
thereof converts thousand, nay ten thousand parts of Argent vive, and the other
Metals into pure Lune, enduring all trialls.

In like manner thou shall work with the Red Water upon the calx of Metals, by
fermenting and subliming upon the calx of Sol altered.

And note, That thou can have no perfect ferment, until it be altered with
Mercury from their first qualities, into a new whiteness and redness by
means of Putrefaction and alteration, which before it wanted.

But when after putrefaction, it shall be reduced into Whiteness, then it
becomes spiritual, and is more apt to join better with our Mercury sublimed
naturally, and by the least parts, and also to be fixed together inseparably;
which would not be so natural, if one part were fixed, and the other part to
be separated.

Moreover, when spirits have not virtue to penetrate bodies, nor bodies
appetite to embrace spirits, it is impossible that they should be joined by
their least parts.

But contrarily, when ferments are made spiritual, then spirits will join with
spirits, and the body which was most perfectly fixed, is naturally disposed,
and inclined to return to his former fixation; which without doubt cannot
possibly be in bodies which were never perfectly fixed, but the body before
fixation, desiring a solid habit and fixation, draws with him, and into his
disposition, all spirits whatsoever, which are joined with him, and not
degenerating as Sulphur vive, Arsnick sublimed, Bole-Armonick, and such like.

Common Mercury sublimed, may very well be joined with spiritual ferments,
which with calx of ferment not altered, will never be perfectly joined.

Therefore this part of natural Phylosophie excludes all citrinations and
dealbations, which were not produced by a perfect alteration before the
tincture, were joined to their bodies and spirits.

For nothing can be made an Elixer, until it has passed the Philosophical
Wheel; which being unknown, all labor comes to nothing.

Of the abbreviation of the Work. Wherein almost all Elixers are contained, and
the ways to make them.
The First Abbreviation.
TAke Vitriol, calcine it into ashes, then beat them into most subtle powder;
put them in an Urinal, and pour thereto Virgins Milk to cover them, stop the
Urinal with a Linen cloth, and let it stand eight days, then add thereto as
much of the aforesaid Milk, reiterating this from eight days to eight days,
and when it will drink no more, let it stand in a cold place, close stopped,
until a certain Cristalline earth like Fishes eyes, appear in the upper part
thereof, which separate from the gross part remaining in the bottom, which put
into the Philosophers Egg to digest discreetly until it be perfectly fixed.

Then increase the fire, till it be perfect yellow, and then again increase the
fire, until it be red as Dragons blood: Then add to this a part of red Mercury,
to cover it, and congeal it by circulation into Oil, and afterward into Powder,
and do thus three times.

Project one part of this Powder upon forty of most pure Lune, melted with one
part of most fine Sol, and it shall be converted into most pure Sol: or if you
project it upon Amalgum of Mercury and Sol, or of Mercury and Lune, it shall be
more certain, and more plentiful.

But if thou will have Gold most perfect, and most high, take the Elixer out of
the Egg, put it in an Urinal, and pour upon of the foresaid red Mercury,
equally compounded, and mixed with a strong Corrasive made of Vitriol and
Sulphur, which evaporate from the Elixer with a most gentle fire, and by this
means the tincture of the one water and of the other, shall be fixed with the
Elixer, by augmenting its quantity and color; which being often repeated, the
Elixer shall be converted into the form of Oil, in which if you quench Lamins
of Lune nealed, they shall be throughout tinged into most perfect Sol, which
being melted with a part of most pure Gold, it shall be purer then any common
Gold.

But if you take as much of the white Earth of Mars altered as before, of Vi-
Vitriol, fixing it upon the calx of Sol altered, and afterward rubified, and
then convert it into Oil as before, with the said compounded water; thou shall
have a great Elixer, converting every Metal into most pure Gold.

This work may be done in twelve weeks: but it is not good for the health of
Man's body.

In the same manner with the ferment of Lune altered, thou may fix the white
Earth of Vitriol, and of Mars altered, which are reduced into Oil with the
foresaid Virgins Milk, being equally mixed with water of common Mercury,
sublimed, fixed, and calcined, so have thou the best Elixer to convert all
Bodies into most pure Lune.

The Second Abbreviation.
IF thou can artificially prepare the aforesaid white or red water, thou
may far sooner attain the end of the work. First therefore fix Mercury
sublimed, and calcine it, and then dissolve it in the other Mercury white or
red, until they be made one water: purify this water three weeks, and it will
alter the calxes of any Metal; for in this work is joined a twofold Water,
namely, natural and against nature.

The way to fix Mercury sublimed, is thus: First sublime Mercury; if there be
half a pound of it, join hereto half a pound of Saltpeter, and as much of
Vitriol, grinding and tempering the mixture with distilled Acetum, till all
become like white Paste; when they are thus incorporated, sublime seven times,
that of his own accord he may be clear, then fix it in this manner: put two or
three pound in a long receiver, stop the mouth, place it in ashes, so as the
Globe may be wholly covered; the first week, give it a gentle fire; the second
week stronger, and the third most strong: this done, it shall be very well
fixed. Again, dissolve it in Virgins Milk, after the foresaid way and order; if
thou want money, thou may obtain a branch or particular, in far shorter
time.

Thus, take the foresaid white compounded Mercury, and fix it upon the calx of
Lune, not altered by circulating it thereon, and when one part is fixed, add
more, repeating it often, until the calx it self melt like Butter on a fiery
Cole.

One part thereof projected upon ten of Mercury purged, makes good Lune for
Vessels and Houshold-Ornaments. This self-same way thou may handle our red
Mercuries composition, being made as before with the said water extracted from
Mercury sublimed, fixed, calcined, and dissolved in the said red Water, so as
it be then calcined upon the calx of Sol not altered, and thou have the best
tincture to convert Lune into Sol, whereof Rings and other things may be made.

The Third Abbreviation.
PUt into a Circulatory, an ounce of the calx of the Egg-shells very well
reverberated, and pour thereon of white or red Mercury to cover it; then nip
the glass, or stop it close with lute made of powder of Iron, Vitriol, and
Honey, well boiled together, circulating in balnco, till it be dried up into
powder.

This done, pour in more, observing the same order, until it be made oil; This
converts Mercury, and the other Metalls into most perfect Sol and Lune,
according to the nature and disposition of the Elixer.

After the same manner thou may circulate our Mercury upon the Calxes of
Metals. There can be no way shorter than this; for if thou put an ounce of calx
of Sol with Mercury, before likewise fixed, and pour thereto as much red
Mercury as may cover the calx two fingers breadth, then stop it close with
Paste compounded with Honey, Bolearmenick, and Iron dust, mixed and strongly
tempered and boiled, till it be stiff and black.

Then set the circulatory in a Furnace, and with gentle heat digest the red
Mercury into a red and fixed calx, then add thereto as much more of that
Mercury, circulate and dry it as before, till the Calx have drunk as much
Mercury as it can, and be converted into a thick blackish oil, and so thou have
an Elixer which converts ten parts of Mercury, purged and heated, into a most
red powder dry and fixed, which if thou also put into a Circulatorie with
increase, and digest by imbibition and congealation, as before, it shall be so
much increased in quantity: And thus thou may multiply this Elixer infinitely.

One ounce thereof will congeale a hundred of crude Mercury into powder; of
which powder, one ounce will convert ten of any metal into most pure Sol.

And this way thou may work with the Calx of Lune and Mercury joined
together, so as evaporation be made by Circulation, and adding our natural
white Mercury, until it be reduced into oil, proceeding in all points as in
the former, with the red Mercury upon the calx of Sol, and so thou shall have
a white Elixer converting all bodies into most pure and perfect Lune.

The Fourth Abbreviation.
TAke an ounce of the Earth of the quintessence, smelling most sweetly, and an
ounce of the Mercury of Virgins Milk; powder the Earth, and join it with the
Mercury.

This way shall be made a perfect composition in the first order for the white
Elixer, which by longer time and greater fire is reduced into a red Elixer; put
therefore the compound into a blind Urinal (as it is called) very close stopped,
and gest it in dung equally for 15 days; then take it out, and shut it up in a
Philosophers Egg, and digest it in a gentle heat, till it be black, and so
unto perfect whiteness. This we call a white Elixer: within this time, the fire
being increased, will be red, of which one ounce cements hundreds of Mercury
into Sol.

To multiply it, take a part thereof, and join it in the foresaid manner with
Virgins milk, digest as before, unto whiteness, and then unto redness.

In this second repetition, the Projection will be upon four hundred. By this
Projection thou may multiply it at thy pleasure.

The Fifth Abbreviation.
DIssolve the red Calx of Sol and Mercury in the first most strong Corrosive
composed of Saltpeter and Vitriol the common way; put the solution* in a
pelican in balneo, drawing off the one half, then stop it most close, dry it
up with a gentle heat; then add more of the Corrosive, observing the foresaid
order, in dissolving, evaporating and congealing ten times, until the
Corrosive cease to arise; which is then done, when by no fire it can be fixed
into powder, but remains like oil and thick.

This Elixer converts Mercury, and every metal into most perfect Sol; This
work ought to be done in a Circulatory placed in an Earthen Pot, wherein it
must stand covered with dung to the middle; This Pot must be full of holes in
the bottom, and must be placed upon the mouth of a Copper Vessel half filled
with hot water, as a Copper Vessel is placed of a Furnace, wherein fire must
be made to be continued discreetly for necessity of digestion.

This Experiment is called Rustum.

Of the Mineral Stone.
GOD is wonderful in his Works, who is Virtue, teaching the Truth.

Take in this name the Mercury white or red, simple or compounded, and dissolve
therein five stones of the Sea; Doing in all things as you did in Vitriol, and
thou shall have the great Elixer.

By the same way of utrifaction, all Mineralls may be altered, and so of every
fixed thing (a due matter being added) may be made an Elixer, for our Mercury
white and red must be joined with fixed things which want Mercury; and this way
the Metalline Bodies may be brought into a metalline form, namely a Vitrified
Powder, as also Egg-shells, which when they are perfectly calcined, will endure
fire more than Sol; and thereof being well and artificially tinged,
Philosaphers have made Sol in the space of one day, which Nature cannot do
underground in a thousand years: A thing hard and incredible to the unlearned;
yet true and most certain, and confirmed by the Testimony of many men.

Be thou therefore not solicitous or curious in choosing thine Earth, so that
it be of a Metalline Nature, and enduring the Fire.

Hereby Glass is made malleable, and by means of this Tincture, is converted
into transparent and fixed Metal, whereby it appears, that this Science is
possible.

For there is no Earth which does more easily embrace the Spirituality of our
Mercury, than that which is most deprived of Mercury, and moisture; which
Privation thou shall not find in Bodies of another Nature, although yet they be
very much calcined.

Wherefore it appears manifestly, that seeing Sol and Lune, are nothing else
but Earth, Red and White, wherein a most pure Mercury is fixed and joined by
the least parts, that Philosophers (having the same Elements) may artificially
imitate Nature in her Composition under the Earth, to produce the same effect:
for it is certain, that Earth may be fermented to Water, so as it be fixed; and
Water fermented to Earth, if it be perfect and cleansed; and this without the
help of any common Sol or Lune: And therefore Philosophers in their Writings
have taught, that the Stone is equally common both to the Poor and Rich.

These things considered, thou shall understand, that our Stone lies hidden,
and fecretly lurketh, often in places least suspected, and nothing esteemed,
whose matter and nearness, if it should be known, would produce most great
danger.

It is to be noted, that the Philosophers have found out diverse ways of
handling this one thing: But I answer for them all, and briefly conclude, That
our Earth does drink up and fix our Mercury; and that this Mercury does wash
and ting our Earth, and so does perfect it into the Stone, without any further
ferment.

For the white Mercury gives a most perfect Tincture of Lune, and the Red
Mercury of Sol: Therefore, when they are fixed in convenient Earths, they make
Sol and Lune, without the help of common Gold and Silver. Behold thou
understandest this Tincture, which we draw out from a vile thing of no price:
yet note, that he that has Salt in his Breast, may ferment this Tincture with
common Gold, whereby he may obtain incomparable Riches, yet with Wisdom, with
most great Cost, and not without danger.

For from Sol alone, by means of this Tincture, which is our burning Wine, is
made a most precious and a most perfect Elixer, white and red; for it rejoices
in fullness of white and red Sulpher, whereby may be made most perfect Silver.

Of this Work, I have written more fully in my Seventh Book; wherein I Treat of
the manifold plenty of Gold, and of the greatest Elixer of Life: But here also
I will briefly touch it. Understand therefore, that it behooves thee to alter
the Calx of Gold (with the foresaid Stone, equally mixed with the Water of
Mercury, sublimed and perfectly fixed) into most white and fixed Sulpher.

Then calcine it well, that the strength and poison of the Fire against Nature
put to it, do hasten to Putrefaction and alteration, may be utterly destroyed.

Then imbibe it with the foresaid simple Milk, until the Calx it self have
drunk up a reasonable quantity thereof, and that it be fixed.

Dissolve it again with the same Milk, and make it volatile; afterward fix and
calcine, and then bring it into Oil, with a little part of that Virgins Milk by
circulation, and so it shall be a perfect Elixer, converting Mercury, and each
imperfect Metal, into most perfect Lune: and by the same way, thou may
rubifie the other part with our Red Mercury, by fixing and calcining, and
afterward dissolving it with the same Red Menstruum; and at last by circulating
it into a thick Oil, which we call potable Gold, a curing and preserving Exixer
of Life, and of Metals.

Know also, That if our Red Mercury equally with Mercury sublimed and fixed, be
circulated with Lutrie, Vitriol, or Iron, before and after Rubification, be
digested into Oil, it will convert thine Lamins, of Lune nealed and injected
into pure Sol, which if thou afterward takes out, it will serve for all need
to live withal.

It is a general Rule, That if thou will be a Master of this Art, it is needful
to make all Medicines gumous and fusible, melting like wax of their own accord,
without Fume, upon a Plate nealed.

For by this means, each part will follow the other in Projection and will
jointly dilate themselves through the Pores of the Metal, without any
disjunction: but if any part be ponderous, it will separate the parts of the
Metal, and make it brittle.

Therefore the Medicine must be often subtilated, after that it is perfectly
fixed, that at least it may be an incombustible Oil, and rather may be called a
Species, then a Genus, because it is nothing else but a fixed Tincture of
Color.

If (this thing observed) thou can prepare thy Medicine thus, thou shall make
fair Metals, and malleable, or else not.

Also here understand, two Bodies to be dissolved with the Natural Menstruum,
is always the second Calx, not the first; and therefore it behooves thee to
dissolve Calx of Metals with a compound Mercury, as before is taught, that
they may sooner putrify, and be altered into the second Calx (which we call
Sulpher of Nature, and Foliated Earth) which we then dissolve and circulate
into Oil, with a Simple Menstruum; namely, Natural.

The Calcination of Metals.
NOw learn how Metals are to be calcined: Know therefore, that Saturn and
Jupiter we calcine only one way, which is this: Put either of them into a
great Iron Vessel, and in the Fire, so that the Flame may beat upon the Metal;
and draw off the Scum with an Iron Rake, to the sides of the Vessel, stirring
it often, until it grow white; then searse it, and gather the subtle Powder;
one Ounce is sufficient for thee.

Sprinkle Venus and Mars with the best Viniger well distilled, that they may
gather Rust: burn this with most strong Fire in an Iron Dish; when it is
red-hot, cool it in the best Acetum, evaporate that Acetum, and gather a most
red Earth; which dry, and keep safely.

Amalgame Sol and Lune, and grind it on a Marble with Powder of Salt, prepared
without any moisture, until no Mercury appear: then sublime and evaporate the
Mercury with strong fire; grind that in the bottom into most subtle Powder,
and sublime, until no Mercury remain with it; wash the Calx with hot Water, to
take away the Salt; dry it, and thou shall have a Calx more subtle then Meal.

Another way is thus: Take thin Lamins of Sol, neal and cast them into Mercury,
heated on hot Ashes; so the Mercury will drink up the Sol.

Note, That every Ounce of Sol requires four and twenty Ounces of Mercury; put
this a malgame in a larg Glass; bury it in Sand in a great Furnace, give it
Fire by degrees; after the sixth hour make it vehement: continue this heat five
days and nights, at each hour putting down the Mercury which ascends, with a
linen Cloth, bound with a little Iron Rod, and stopping the Glass with Lute,
till at last all become a Powder redder then Blood, which then we call the
first Calx, good and perfect; with which, if you mix Fire of Nature, to use his
Virtues, as it requires, thou can not err in this Science.

The Recapitulation.
I Have told out of what, and how thou shall make our Mercury white and red,
and how this Mercury is to be actuated and sharpened; how thou shall prepare
Calx, how to purify and alter them into a new Whiteness, which we call our
Mercury sublimed; how to abbreviate the time of Putrefaction and. Alteration;
how to fix and dissolve again, and then how to circulate into a white and red
Elixer; how by Imbibitions, with proper Waters white and red, they may be
infinitely multiplied to an incredible profit.

Learn therefore Patience, fear God and love him, keep these Secrets, and then
the Lord will bless thine Endeavors.

Saint Dunstan lived, and was Archbishop of Canterbury, in the Reign of King
Edgar, and Etheldred his Son, as appears by an Ancient Monument yet extant,
in St. Paul's Church in London, containing a Prophecy in these Words:

HEre lies Etheldred King of England, Son of King Edgar; to whom (on the Day
of his Consecration, after his Coronation) it is reported, that St. Dunstan,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Prophesied openly this Curse;

Because thou have aspired to the Kingdom, by the Death of thy Brother; in
whose Blood, the English, with thy infamous Mother, have conspired, the Sword
shall not depart from thy House, but shall be against Thee all the Days of thy
Life, destroying thy Seed, until thy Kingdom be transferred to another
Kingdom, whose King and Language the Nation, over whom thou Reignest know
not: Neither shall thy Sin, and the Sin of thy Mother, and the Sin of those
men, who were accessory to that wicked Council be expiated, but by a long
Revenge.

Which Things came to pass, as were foretold by that Holy Man: For Etheldred
having been in diverse Battles miserably vexed, and put to flight by King
Swans-Dansh and his Son, and at last straightly Besieged, and shut up in London;
He there miserably dyed, in the Year of our Lord, 1017. after he had Reigned
36. Years in great Tribulation.

DUNSTAN of the Stone of the Philosophers; With the Experiments of Rumelius of
New Market.
I.
TAke of the best red transparent oar of gold, as much as you can have, drive
its Spirit from it through a Retort; this is the Azoth and the Acetum of
Philosophers, from its proper minera, which opens radically Sol that is
prepared.

II.
Take the Minera of Venus or Saturn, drive their spirits in a Retort, each of
these dissolveth Gold radically, after its purification.

III.
Take Pulverised oar of Saturn, or vulgar Saturn calcined, extract its salt
with Acetum, or its Antinae, purify it in the best manner, that it be
transparent as Crystal, and sweet as honey, and be fluid in heat like Wax, and
brittle when cold.

This is the Tree, which is cut off, of unwholesome Fruits, on which must be
inoculated the twiggs of Sol.

IV.
Take of that Earth which lies waste in the Field, found every where in
Moorish grounds, into which the Astrals ejaculate their operations, being
adorned with all manner of Colors, appearing like a Rainbow; extract from it
its purest and subtillest. This is the Universal Menstruum for all; and is all
in all.

V.
Take of the Oar of Sol and Mercury a like quantity, grind each very well,
pour on it the Spirit of Mercury, that it stand over 3. fingers deep; dissolve
and digest it in a gentle warmth.

VI.
Take of the best Vitriol, or of the Vitriol of Venus, drive their Spirits in a
Retort, white and red; with this red Spirit being rectified and sweetened, you
may ferment and inbibe the subtle Gold Calx, and with the white Spirit you may
dissolve it after it has been purified.

VII.
Take quick Mercury, purify and dissolve it so long in alcolisated spirit of
Wine, till its impurity be separated from it, and become into its extreme
transparent easy fluid essence; like unto the white gluten of the Eagle, and
capable to receive the blood of the Red Lion.

VIII.
Extract the salt of the crude and white calcined Tartar, Purify and Clarify
it as often, till it be as bright as the tear of the Eye, and can be brought no
higher; therewith you may sharpen its own spirit of Wine, which dissolveth Sol
and Lune.

IX.
Take of the rank poisonous matter or stone, called Kerg swaden, exuviae, or
husks of the Metals, drive its spirit very circumspectly, receive it so, that
it may turn unto water, it reduces all metalls to a potableness.

X.
Take of the air or heavenly dew, being well purified, ten parts, and of
subtle Gold Calx one part, set it in digestion, dissolve and coagulate it.

XI.
Take the Urine of a wholesome Man, that drank merely Wine, make of it,
according to Art, the Salt of Microcosme, purify it very well, which does so
much accuate the Spirit of Wine, that it dissolveth Sol in a moment.

XII.
Take of the best Oar of Gold, pulverise it very well, seal it with Hermes his
Seal, set it so long into the vaporous fire, till you see it spring up and grow
a white and red Rose.

XIII.
This last Experiment he calls the Light. Take in the Name of the Lord, of
Hangarish Gold, which has been cast thrice through Antimony, and be laminated
most thinly, as much of it as you will, and make with quick Mercury an a
Malgame, then calcine it most subtly, with flowers of Sulpher, and spirit of
Wine burnt, as often, till there remains a fair subtle Gold Calx, of a
purple color. Take one part of it, and two parts of the above mentioned red
matter, grind it very well together for an hour on a warmed Marble, then cement
and calcine well by degrees for three hours in a circle fire. This work must be
Iterated three times, then pour on it of the best rectified spirit, that it
stand over it three fingers deep; set it in a gentle and warm digestion, for
six days to be extracted, then the Spirit of Wine will be tinged as deep as
blood; cant of that tincture, and pour on another, as long as ir will tinge it;
put all these tinged Spirits of Wine into a Violl, so that the fourth part only
be filled, and seal it hermetically, set it on the vaporous fire of the first
degree, let it be of that heat as hot as the Sun shines in July; let it stand
thus for forty days, then you shall obtain your wish.

The Author recommendeth this last Experiment very highly, affirming upon his
experimental practice, that this aurum Potabile is the highest Medicine next
unto the universal, and being taken in appropriated vehicles, Cures all
Diseases, without causing any pains at all.

Item, With this Aurum Potabile is Antimony prepared, so that it purges only
downwards, and carries forth all ill humors without molestation, and is
called the purging Gold; hence are his Pills of Gold.

It is prepared also by the help of Antimony into a diaphoretick gold, to
expel by sweating all malignant humors; and Mercurius vitae is made also with
this potable gold (if it be kept in a long digestion), their dose is according
to the Quality of the person.

Some Principal Preparations OF ANGELO SALA.
TAke of Sugar one ounce, of Rosewater one spoonful, boil these in a Skillet,
till it afford a small thread at the pouring forth; take it off the fire, being
cold pour to it one scruple of Annis oil, pour it on a a Trencher; this serves
against phlegm.

A Purge of his.
Take of the best Rhubarb, Mechoacan ana one dram, of Andromachus his Treacle
one scruple; infuse these overnight in Wine, cant it off, and let the party
drink it, and fast three hours upon it; it purges downward gently.

Hidromel, or Metheglin.
Take of the odoriferous crude Honey one part, of Fountain water six parts,
boil these, do not scum it, stirring it continually with a wooden Spatule, let
it not settle to the bottom, boil it way to the third part, then take it away
from the fire, let it grow cold, strain it through a cloth, barrel it, hang
into two drams of Ginger, and one grain of Musk, then stop it very well, set it
in the Sun or warm place for 6. weeks, thus the pure separateth from the
impure; draw it off into a clean vessel, stop it well, it will keep long, the
staler it is, the better it is.

The use of it; This Liquor tastes and smells like Malmesy, and is good for
such as have a short breath, and are troubled with a Ptissick; it is of an
abstergent and lenifying quality, it purges the Breast and Reins, cutteth
phlegm very much, preserves the vigor of the radical moisture.

A Water for the Toothache.
Take of the Greek Pyretrum, of the root of Masterwort, and Angelico, ana one
ounce; of Dragons blood, of calcined Lead, of each two ounces; of simply
distilled Vinegar two pound; infuse and extract its substance, in a warm place
for a sennight; then add to it one ounce of Niter, dip into it Cotton Wool;
apply and hold it to the place affected, it allayeth the Flux, and heals all
Infirmities, and stays the Rheum; it mundifieth the gums, it carnifieth,
sicatrizeth, and consolidateth, and instantly allayeth the pains of the teeth.

Balsom of Tobacco.
Take spirit of Turpentine, spirit of Juniper, of each one pound; of Indie
Tobacco leaves six ounces; infuse and circulate it for a sennight, and press it
out in the press, it cures all wounds in 24. hours.

A Stomachical Aqua-vitae.
Take of cut Galanga four ounces, of Ambergreece four grains, of rectified
Aquavitae 20 ounces, infuse these for a sennight, caut it off, dissolve as much
Sugar in it, as you may; it is good for a weak Stomach, for the Cholick and
griping in the Guts.

Aqua-Theriacalis, Against the Plague.
Take of Andromachus his Treacle two ounces, of the root of Angelica, and
Masterwort, of each one ounce, of calcined red Corals (which are calcined
between two Crutibles, for six or eight hours in a strong fire) four ounces; of
Flowers of Sulphur one ounce, of rectified Aqua-vitae three pound: infuse these
for four days, and extract, then add to it of rectified spirit of Vitriol one
dram; one dram of this used, serves against all cold Defluxious, Megrums,
Giddiness.

Pills for the Head, comforting and strengthening the Brains, which defend the
same against Corruptions.
Take wild Thyme four ounces; of white Agarick, of the best Rhubarb, of each 3.
ounces; of Spick, Ginger, Galanga, of each one dram; of rectified Aqua-vitae 15
ounces: infuse these for a sennight, caut it off, and press it out as much as
you can; then take of washed Alloes Succotrina six ounces: boil it in a glazed
Pot or Pan, to the thickness of Pitch, mingle one scruple of Saffron, and 5.
grains of Musk, keep it in a Leaden Box. It is to be used after Supper from one
scruple to one dram; take it in a new laid Egg, or in Wine made up into Pills,
purges gently, expels Wind.

For the Gowt.
Roast a sweet Apple in hot embers, and the flowers of Cassia, of a like
quantity, inbibe it with a Woman's milk, make a cataplasme; it is a certain
lenitive against the tormenting pains of the Gout.

A laxative Conserve of Roses.
Take of old Conserve of Roses two ouuces, of Diagridium one dram and a half;
of Cinamom, of Cloves, of each one scruple; of spirit of Wine, one dram; of
spirit of Vitriol, ten drops; of the best Musk 3. grains: make an Electuary
according to Art, without fire, in a glass Mortar; and when it works too dry,
or grows too dry, then put to it some Julip of Roses, and keep it in a Venice
glass: its Virtue is to purge without any detriment, it consumes all
superfluous humiditie of the body; its dose is even to half an ounce, to be
taken fasting.

A Compound extract of Diagridium.
Take of the best Diagridium two ounces, of the root of Mechoacan four ounces,
of Galanga, of Cinamom, of each one dram, of white Ginger half an ounce, of
oriental Saffron half a dram, of Musk five grains: Beat these and infuse them
in Aqua-vitae; extract and express according to Art: then reduce it to a
viscous matter, then add of Salgema half a scruple to each dram, and keep it
in a Glass. Its dose is from five to eight grains, in wine or broth; it purges
the Body without danger.

A Confection of Diagridium.
Take of the Compound extract of Diagridium six drams, of the powder of
Diacorels two drachms, of white Sugar three ounces; of Baulm water a sufficient
quantity; Make Lozenges, and keep them in a Glass well stopped. It purges the
Body without hurt, and is very good against abounding humors; it purges the
Brains and Back, and purges the whites, and running of the Reins, let the
cause be what it will; it is good against the Dropsy, and such like symptoms.
Its dose is from 2. scruples to 3, and is to be taken fasting.

A Laxative Unguent.
Take Alloes Heppatick, of Mirrh, of each six ounces, of Coloquint, of Agarick,
of Scamonie, of each one ounce and a half; of Sallet oil 24 ounces; of Goats
suet fix ounces; of old wine four pound; All these beaten grossly: Then boil
them gently in Wine in a glazed Pot, keep close the Oil and Suet, till the Wine
be consumed, then strain and keep it.

But if you will prepare it better, first boil them, then set it in
purification, in warm horse dung, for a whole month, then separate it, as
above: If the Belly be anointed warm with it, and then a warm cloth upon it,
it purges the body from abounding humors; it kills the Worms, and operateth
in other ways.

Our Dragons Blood.
Take of rectified Mercury 12 ounces, of lamins of steel 3. ounces; put these
into a Urinal well luted, and precipitate according to Art, iterating it a
second time; then take it out of the Vessel, put it into an Earthen Pan or
Glass, kindle five or six times Aqua-vitae on it; then being dried, keep it for
use: This is our Dragons Blood, which purges upward without any danger. Its
dose is seven grains even unto ten, in Conserve of Roses, or Conserve of Baulm.
It must be taken mornings fasting, and drink some wine after it.

A sweet Confection of Diadragon.
Take of our Dragons Blood six drachms, of the salt of Red Corals, and Pearls,
of each two scruples; of Saffron, Galanga, Cinamom, of each one scruple; of the
best Musk and Ambergreece, of each 6. grains, of white Sugar six ounces, of a
sufficient quantity of Rosewater.

Let the Sugar be boiled to the thickness of Manus Christi, in an Iron Pan,
then add the other Ingredients, and make rolls, which are kept close in a
glass; This Confection may be used in all Diseases where there is need of
purging; it attracteth from the Remoter parts, cuts Phlegm and Humors, where
it is needful. Its dose is from one dram to two, fasting: There is no better
Purge for Quartan and Tertian Agues; and is Medicinal against the Pox.

The bitter Confection of Diadaragon.
Take of our Dragons Blood six drachms; of the Salt of red Corals, of Mother of
Pearls, of each two scruples; of Cloves half a dram, of Saffron half a
scruple; of Aloes Succatrina two scruples; of Sugar six ounces; a sufficient
quantity of Marjoram water; make a Confection, as above: It may be used against
such Diseases, where Amber and Musk cannot be used, and where no sweet things
are admitted.

Head Pills.
Take of fresh Time ( Epithimus) four ounces; of the best Rhubarb, of
Mechoacan, of white Agarick, of each two ounces; of Galanga, of Cloves, of each
2. drams; of Marjoram one handful; of Musk, of Ambergreece, of each 5. grains:
Beat these, except the Musk and Ambergreece, then according to Art make an
Extract, with Aqua-vitae, to a solid form; then add Ambergreece and Musk, then
add the powder of Mastix, and the powder of Amber, of each one dram and a half;
make a mass, keep it in a glass or leaden Box. Its dose is one scruple, to be
used after Supper, or mornings, fasting; they purge without any danger, and may
be used several times, against several Infirmities of the Head.

Conserve of dry Roses.
Take the subtle powder of red Roses one ounce, of Rosewater 3. ounces, of the
spirit of white Vitriol one dram, of the best Musk and Ambergreece, of each
one grain, of white Sugar 12 ounces; infuse the Roses in Rosewater and the
spirit of Vitriol, keep them in maceration for 4. hours, in a glass, then boil
the Sugar with the Rosewater, to the consistence of Manus Christi, then
incorporate with them the Musk and Ambergreece in a glass Mortar: Thus is your
Conserve prepared, which is sufficiently red and odoriferous: This sort of
Conserve is more effectual than those which are prepared in the vulgar way,
especially where strengthening is needful, by reason of the spirit of Vitriol;
and the older this Conserve is, the better it is.

Electuary of Diacorals.
Take of our Conserve of Roses 12 ounces, of the salt of red Corals 2. rams, of
pulverised Orras, and of pulverised red Santals, of each one dram; of Rose
Julep two ounces; make an Electuary without fire in a glass Mortar, keep it
well closed; it is good against the Chollick, and illia^ passion, provokes
Urine, and corroborates the whole body; it mundifieth the reins and panicles of
the brains, and subtillateth the blood by its mundifying quality; and it is a
very good astringent after purging, and consequently it is admirable good for
the superfluous courses of women, as well of the white as of the red; yet so,
that the party be first purged. Its dose is from one dram to two at once, to be
used fasting.

An Electuary for the Stomach.
Take of our Conserve of Roses, of Conserve of Baulm, of each 3. ounces; of the
pulp of Quinces two pound; of skim'd honey four ounces; of spirit of Vitriol 20
drops; of Galanga, of Cinamom, of each half an ounce; It is best to incorporate
it in a Glass; It serves to comfort the stomach, being weakened by superfluous
humors; it strengthens and exhilerateth the heart, if continually used. Its
dose is half an ounce, at a time, to be taken mornings fasting.

Electuary Therebiminated.
Take of the whitest pulverised Sugar six ounces, of most subtly pulverised
Orras, and powder of Mastix, of each one dram; of syrup of Cinamom three
ounces; Let all these be incorporated in a glass Mortar; then add of the spirit
of Turpentine one dram, of oil of Nutmegs 5. drops; keep it in a glass. This
is an excellent Electuary to cut tough and viscous phlegm in the stomach and
breast; therefore it is good for those that are Rhumatick, and short breathed,
it purges the Reins, and provokes urine; being obstructed by gross viscous
humors; it may serve also against many infirmities and corruptions conceived in
the womb: It is of a digestive evacuating and mundifying quality, and
consolidateth also; its dose is from one dram to two, at evening to be taken
going to bed.

A Confection against the Hartake.
Take of the siderial Powder, one ounce; of white Sugar six ounces, a
sufficient quantity of Marjoram water. Make Lozenges of it, they are admirable
good for the aching of the heart: its dose is, as occasion serves, from two
scruples, to four scruples, more or less, as the Physician shall direct, and
it may be ministered at all times; but the party should use it continually, then
let it be taken mornings fasting.

An Antidote for the Womb.
Take of Pulegium Sylvestre, four ounces; of Mugwort two ounces; of Galanga,
Ginger, of each an ounce. Make an extract with these, with Aquavitae, according
to Art, to the consistence of Honey, and keep it in a Glass, adding to each
dram, half a scruple of vegitable Salt. Its dose is six grains, in water of
Mugwort. It provokes the Courses of Women strongly, therefore make use of it
circumspectly.

An Antidote against the suffocation of the womb.
Take of the Extract of Castorium 2. ounces, of the Extract of the Root of
Peony 1 ounce; of the Magistery of the Mother of Pearls, and Corals, of each
one dram; of subtly pulverised Craine, Humany two drams; of Saffron
oriental, half a dram; of Rectified Oil of Amber two scruples, incorporate
these in a Glass Mortar, and stopped close, keep it. It is of an admirable
efficacy, for the suffocation of the womb; its use is fasting, and may be
continued for eight days, or as long as there is occasion for it: Its dose is
half a scruple, and are to be made into Pills: it may be ministered also in
water of Marjoram and Pyony.

A Powder of Diacorels.
Take of Red Roses two ounces and a half; of the Salt of Coralls, half an
ounce; of the Spirit of Vitriol, two drams; of Sugar Candy, one dram; of
Ambergrease and Musk, of each four grains.

Make a Powder according to Art, and keep it well stopped in a Glass. This
Powder is good against Convulsions, and pains of the heart; it strengthens
the brains, and subtillateth the blood, and makes the heart glad, and causes
a good digestion in the stomach. Its dose is half a dram, in Wine, or other
proper Vehicle.

A Confection of Diacoralls.
Take of the Powder of Diacoralls two drams; of the Spirit of white Vitriol,
two scruples; of white Sugar two ounces, and a sufficient quantity of
Rose Water. Let the Sugar be boiled to the consistence of Manus Christi, put in
a Glass in warm Sand, then add the Powder to it, afterward the spirit of
Vitriol, then cast it forth into Tablets, and keep them in a Box of Wood, this
confection is a true Conservative of man's body: It is of an admirable virtue.
Its dose is half a dram, which is to be taken fasting.

A precious Antidote.
Take of our precious Magisterium of Extractum le Zourdicum, of each two drams:
of our precious golden Bezourd, of our golden Cordiel Electrum, of the Extract
of Opium Thebaicum; prepared with the juice of Lemons, of each one dram; of
Ambergrease two scruples, and fifteen grains of pure Musk, gr. b. of the
whitest Sugar an ounce: the dry Ingrediences must be well grounded on a Marble;
for two or three hours, to an impulpable Powder.

A Balsum of Treacle.
Take of the Treacle of Andromachus four ounces, of the Root of Masterwort,
Angelico, Pimpinella, Tormentilla, of each an ounce, of Galanga, of Ginger, of
each six drams, of the Salt of Read Coralls, and oriental Pearls, of the
Lemnian Earth, of each half an ounce; of Oriental Saffron, one dram; of
Camphire one scruple; of the best Musk, and of Ambergrease, of each half a
scruple; of the spirit of Turpentine, and of the spirit of Juniperberries, of
each ten ounces, of the best Aqua-vitae two pound, infuse all according to Art,
put it in a Glass, lute it, let it circulate in a Balny, for a month, then
separate the two Liquors, one from another. This Balsom looks very red, and
then this Aqua vitae, is deservedly called the Mother of the Balsum, both are
very good against all Infirmities, and are admirable good against the Plague;
the Balsum is for inward use, half a scruple, and of the water one dram. Both
cause sweat and Urine.

A Magisterie of Coralls and Pearls.
We have an Universal way to make the Magisterium, not only of Pearls and
Coralls, but of all other Gems. And this operation is performed only by the
help of our Phylosophick Aqua-vitae: we will tell you the manner how you ought
to proceed about the Magisterie of Coralls, which shall be the Pattern to
proceed also with the rest.

Take of the Powder of red Coralls, six ounces, of our Aqua-vitae twelve
ounces. Let the Coralls be infused in the Aqua-vitae, and let them be dissolved
thereinto a clear water. Then separate the pure from the impure, by
inclination, taking heed that you do not stir the feces; then take this
dissolution, set it in ashes in an Urinall well luted, distill the Spirits and
phlegm from it, so that a dry matter be left in the bottom of the Vessel; take
out that, and set it into a moist place, which in a short time, will wholly be
dissolved, leaving some earthliness of no value; take this Liquor, set it in
Sand, so that the humidity being dissolved into fumes, may have a dry matter
behind. Take it out of the Vessel, add a triple quantity of Spirit of Wine to
it, or Aqua-vitae, which is thrice rectifyed; Set it on circulating in a gentle
heat, for a month, either into a balny, or at the Sun, and it will yield some
Sediment; separate the clear by inclination, and in a balny, separate the
Spirit and Phlegm, and in the bottom of the Vessel remains the Magisterie,
in the form of a mucilaginious Oil, and this is the true Prima Materia; and
thus you have the Magisterie of Coralls, which looks very white, but the
Magisterie of Pearls, comes near to the color of Gold. Thus you may proceed
with all precious Stones which our Menstruum dissolveth into a clear water. The
Virtues of these Magisteriums, cannot so easily be described. Their Dose is
from three grains to five, and the use of it may be continued as long as there
is need of, and that without danger. It is ministered in Wine, Broth, or
distilled water. Electuary, or Confections, even as the Physician shall see it
convenient.

The great Magistery of Vitriol.
This Magistery is made by means of the four Principal Operations, which are
distillation, dissolution, Sublimation, and Circulation.

The first operation produces this Liquor.
Take of Roman Vitriol, or any other, which is good, as much as you please,
distill it in a retort, extracting only the spirit and water, and increase
your fire as much as you can, so that at last, nothing appear more in the neck
of the Retort, then let the Receiver grow could, take out the Liquor and keep
it: take out the feces also, or the Colchotar, for the following separation.

The second operation produces the Salt.
Take the foresaid Colchotar, pulverise it very subtly, dissolve it in common
water, and extract according to Art all its Salt, so that all the sharpness be
gotten out of the Colchotar Calcine this Salt: dissolve, and coagulate it five
times, so that it be very well rectified, still adding the Colchotar left, to
the other, but keep the Salt.

The third operation produces Sulpher.
Take the foresaid Colchotar, burn it in a great Crucible, then pulverise it
very subtly, and add a third part of that quantity of Salt Armonick;
incorporate these two very well, then sublime it very well luted in an Urinall,
observing the degrees of fire, and there will appear in the Alembick, a
yellowish matter; continue the fire, when no more fumes come forth out of the
Urinall, then let it cool, take out the sublimed matter, put it into common
water warmed, that the Salt Armonick be extracted, separate the clear water
from the Sediment; iterate this as often, till all the Salt Armonick be
extracted, and in the bottom will remain the Sulphur of Vitriol; of a green
color, which being dried, keep it.

The fourth Operation affords the Magisterium.
Take all the former Liquor, the Salt and Sulphur, join these three in a
Circulatory very well luted, circulate it in a Balny for a Sennite, then
separate the clear, and distill it in an Alembick, in a Balny, so that all the
water come over in the bottom, there will remain a green Liquor, which
contains Salt, Sulpher and Mercury of Vitrioll, which keep, for it is the
true Magisterie of Vitriol.

The Compound water of Vitriol.
Take the separated water in the Balny, from the said Magisterie, and to each
pound of it, add the following Ingredients, viz. take of rect^fied Aqua-vitae,
two ounces, of the Root of Peonie half an ounce, of red Roses of Palm,
Marjoram, of each one Pugill, put all into a Balny, into a Circulatory, for 24.
hours, then strain the Liquor, which will be very red, then add to each pound
of these, the following things of Cranium humanum one ounce, of Spodium half an
ounce, of Camphore half a dram; of Saffron half a scruple; of Ambergrease two
grains; put all these into a Glass, and circulate it for six weeks
continually, then separate by inclination the subtle from the thick, which
keep in a Glass well luted. And this is the most precious Liquor, which
works marvellously, in all the Spices of Convulsions, and is administered in
the following way.

The use of the Magistery of Vitriol, and its Compound Water.
If you intend to administer such noble Medicaments, which are of such an
admirable efficacy in the Falling Sickness, then this Order ought to be
observed; Before you begin, you must expect the new Moon, because this Disease
is then in its vigor, and then you must proceed in the following manner:
First, the sick party must be kept from all such meats and Sents, which
occasion and cause such a Disease; However, Wine must not altogether be
prohibited. Secondly, you must make an Aromatic, and vitriolized water to be
his Diet-drink, when ever he is thirsty between meals; in the mornings
fasting, you are to give three or five drops, according to the constitution of
the party; if our green Magisterie, with half a dram of the compound water in
Marjoram Wine, then the strife will begin against the Disease, and will cause a
Vomit to the party of clear water, refresh him after four hours are past.
Thirdly, the fit must be observed, and always when the fit is past, you must
minister unto him one scruple of the Compound vitriolised water, with Marjoram
Wine, and if the fit comes often, then you ought to minister but half a dose,
continuing it till the Disease be diminished, which will be about the new Moon.
At last, when you see it needful, minister the Magisterie once more: in brief,
he that will undertake to cure such a Disease, must be a Physician, and not a
Woman.

The Compound Liquor of the vitriolised Tartar.
This Lemmon Liquor, by reason of its temperature, may very well be used to
several infirmities, and to all such persons, where there is need of opening,
subtiliating, mundifying, and consolidating, and it works by sweat and Urine.

Take of white crude Tartar, of Viscous Vitriol, of each two drams; beat these
two together, distill them in a Retort, as much as possible you can, then let
the stilling-Vessels grow cold, and take the Liquor out of the Receiver, which
is muddy and stinking, pour it on again to the Caput mort, in a new Retort
well luted, apply a Receiver, and distill again; iterate this work a third
time, so that the Liquor be as clear as water: weigh the Liquor, add half its
quantity of rectified Aqua-vitae to it, then take of albified Vitriol, and
calcined Tartar, of each 20. ounces, put all these into a Retort, adding to it
all the Liquor, distill as long as any water and Spirits run over, then let the
Vessels grow cold, and keep that Liquor in a well stopped glass, to which add the
following matters:

Therefore take the said Liquor, and add to each pound three drachms of
Sassafras; of white Ginger two drachms; of Galanga, of Treacle, of Andromachus,
one dram and half; of Oriental Suffraca, six grains, of Ambergreece and Musk;
of each 3. grains. Put all these into a glass, circulate for six weeks in a
warm place, or in the Sun, then separate the subtle from the thick, by
inclination or decauting, and keep it as a Jewel.

The Vegitable Salt.
Take the Caput mort of the said Tartar and Vitriol, extract its Salt with
distilled common water, coagulate away one moity, and let it grow cold, to the
bottomward you see the transparent salt like Cristal, then coagulate the water
more, and let it grow cold, continue it so long till all the salt be gotten
out; which keep for a Medicinal use.

The use of the Compound Liquor of Tartar.
This Liquor may be used safely against all manner of obstructions of the body,
and it is a Specificum against the Pox. But its particular operations are
against the Sciatica, Gout in the hands, Chollick, Illiac Passion, and against
the torments and gripings in the Belly.

The manner of the using of it is this; You must take mornings an hour before
day in the best Wine, then the party must abide in the bed for half an hour,
then let him take warm broth, and the party will begin to sweat all the body
over, which comes very easily; After two or three hours sweating, let him
shift himself, and rise out of the bed, and eat some restorative: And this may
be used twenty or thirty times more or less, as you shall see occasion, using
every fifth day a moderate purgative; in this manner many Chronical Infirmities
are cured. Its dose is from two drams to 3. drams in Wine, and the oftener the
party makes use of, the better it will be for him, for it removes all peccant
matter, and renews the blood of the whole body.

The use of the Vegitable Salt.
This Salt may be ministered with such things which work and operate against the
gravel in the Reins, and the Stone in the bladder, because it is very proper
for such diseases. Its dose is half a dram at once.

A Specificum against the Cholick.
Take of the spirit of Juniper, and spirit of Turpentine, pour it on St.
John's Wort, press it out, add more of the fresh Flowers to it, till it be very
red; one scruple of it taken in broth, is an approved Medicament against the
Cholick; If St. John's Wort be digested in spirit of Wine for a month, then its
precious oil will swim at the top.

The green oil of Vitriol.
Take of Vitriol 2. pound, put it in an Urinal in a balny for a month, let it
be dissolved into a transparant green Liquor, its combustible Sulphur remains
in the bottom, decaut the Liquor from the phlegm, rectify it in a balny, then
you have the purging green oil wherewith you may cure the Falling Sickness.

FINIS.

