A Supplement By way of ADDITIONS to and AMPLIFICATIONS of the foregoing
TREATISE, CONCERNING COPYHOLD and CUSTOMARY ESTATES: Wherein the Grounds laid
down in the said Treatise are made good and confirmed by several Resolutions
and Judgments given in the Courts of the Common Laws of England in diverse
Cases.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, James Fles^er, and Henry Twyford, Assigns
of Richard Atkyes and Edward Atkyns, Esquires. 1668.

Cum Gratia and Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THE Learned Author of the before-going Book, entitled, The Complete
Copyholder, having in a very compendious manner treated of the Original of
Manors and how constituted; and of their Demesne Lands, as also of the several
Tenancies thereof, and of the nature of the Services, Qualities, and Courts
incident and belonging thereunto; and (amongst the rest) of Copyholders,
Copy-holds and Customary Estates, and their Tenures, Services and Customs,
distinguishing them from the other Tenures and Services; setting forth therein
likewise the Antiquity and Original of Copy-holds, the Services, Duties, and
other things incident to such Tenure; with diverse Customs, Prescriptions and
Vsages, claimed by such Copy-hold-Tenants, together with the manner of Grants
and Estates thereof, and how and in what manner they are either to be granted
or accepted of: Now because the drift of the Author of the said Book was (as I
conceive) to speak more particularly of Copyhold and Customary Estates then of
the other Tenures; and therefore the Author of the said Book has therein laid
down some general Grounds concerning the same, but has not confirmed them
either by Judgments or Precedents of the Common Law, which would have more
illustrated the same; and some things likewise concerning Copy-holds and
Customary Lands and Estates have been omitted by the said Author worthy to be
known by all Students and others whom the same may concern: therefore at the
request of diverse persons, by way of Amplification of what has therein been
formerly treated of by the said Author, and by way of Addition of what therein
has been omitted, I have added what hereafter follows by way of a Supplement
to the former Book; wherein I shall endeavor to contribute somewhat de novo,
and to make good the former Grounds laid down in the said Book, and what shall
be added thereunto, by several Resolutions and Judgments given in the Courts of
the Common Laws of England in several Cases concerning the same. And therefore
Surrenders (after a Grant thereof made) being one of the principal matters
which do concern Copyholders and their Estates, I shall first begin with them,
and then proceed to other matters concerning Copyholders and their Customary
Estates.

SECTION I.
What a Surrender of Copyhold or Customary Estate is; to whom, and in what
manner and place it is to be done; and who shall be said such a Tenant of a
Copyhold as may make such a Surrender.

SUrrenders of Copy-hold-lands and Copyholders are of two sorts; viz.
Surrenders Actual, and Surrenders in Law.

An Actual Surrender, according* to the Definition of Mr. Littleton, and the
best Description of it, is a Copy-holder's yielding up of his Copy-hold-lands
or Customary Estate into the hands of the Lord of the Manor, in the Court of
the Manor, or unto his Bailiff, Reeve, or Steward, to such Uses and for such
Estates as are particularly mentioned in the Surrender it self, made by a Deed
or Writing; or if it be by Word, in the presence of the Lord and Tenants in the
Court of the Manor. And yet it has been a great doubt and Question, whether of
Copy-holds or Customary Estates, any words used to the Lord himself shall
amount to make it a good Surrender.

Proofs.
Vide Mr. Littleton, in his Chapter of Litt. 15. b. Book of Entries, 131. acc.
Tenant by Copy, etc. fol. 15. Ad hanc Curiam venit A B, and sursumreddidit in
eadem Curia in manus Domini, etc. unum Messuagium, etc. ad usum C D. and
haeredum suorum, etc.

But if the Surrender be made in Court into the hands of the Lord or his
Steward, it must be to such a person or his Use who is in esse and capable of
such a Surrender, or that may take Presenty by force of the Surrender;
otherwise such Surrender, though it be an Actual Surrender made in the Court of
the Manor to the Lord or Steward himself, is not good.

A Copyholder in Fee surrendered his Copy-hold-lands into the hands of H. 7
Jac. B. R. Simpson and Sothern's Case. H. 17 Jac. in B. R. Bambridge and
Whitton's Case acc.
the Lord of the Manor, Habendum after his decease to the Use of an Enfant in
Ventre sa mier, and if the said Enfant died within age, then to the Use of J S
and his Heirs. In this Case these Points were Resolved. 1. If a Copyholder in
Fee does surrender his Copy-hold-lands into the hands of the Lord, to the Use
of himself and his Heirs, That in that Case, because the Limitation of the Use
to him who had it before was void, the Surrender thereof to the Lord himself
was also void. 2. That the Surrender made to the Enfant in Ventre sa mier was
not good as an immediate Surrender, and to take effect immediately, as the
intention of the Surrenderer was it should, because it was of a Freehold,
which could not begin at a day to come.

But yet Quere, If the Surrender be made into the hands of the Lord, to the Use
of the right Heirs of the Surrenderer, Vid. P. 30 Eliz. Allen and Palmer's
Case. Leon. part 1. 101.
if the Lands shall not continue in the hands of the Lord till the death of the
Copyholder who made the Surrender, for the Court doubted of it, Pasc. 30 Eliz.
in Allen and Palmer's Case.

A Surrender being then by the Copyholder himself, in the Court of the Manor,
to the Lord, of his Copyhold or Customary Lands; if then, upon the very Act
done, the Estate be in the Lord, or in the Surrenderer, or in whom it rests,
remains a Doubt. For Resolution thereof, I humbly conceive the Law to be, and
so it has been Resolved, That notwithstanding such a Surrender made, yet the
Estate remains in the Copyholder who surrendreth, and is not in the Lord, or
in any other person whatsoever. But in case where the Copyholder does
surrender his Copyhold in the Court of the Manor to the Use of the Lord
himself, (which he may do) there, by such a Surrender, the Land is immediately
vested in the Lord without any other Act done or required, because the Lord
cannot take a Surrender, as to make thereof an Admittance unto himself.

And to that purpose Vide Erish and Rive's Case, where it was Resolved, That
Vid. Cro. part 1. in Erish and Rive's Case, acc.
if a Surrender be made by a Copyholder of his Copy-hold-lands into the hands
of the Steward of the Manor to the Use of the Steward himself, that Surrender
is good without any farther Act, for the reason aforesaid.

Having thus showed what will be a good Surrender of Copyhold or Customary
Lands by an actual Surrender in the Court of the Lord of the Manor, I shall now
consider

SECT. II.
Whether a Copyhold may be said to be surrendered by any Act, Words, or
Agreement, made betwixt the Lord and the Copyholder, or by the Copyholder
with a Stranger made in the Court, in the Presence of the Lord or his Steward.

I Do conceive generally, that no Act or Words of the Copyholder can Vid.
Leon. 1. part, 172. Penruddock and Newman's Case.
pass his Copyhold in such a manner, as that the same shall be accounted to
amount to a good Surrender of the same. But yet it rests upon a Difference.

Proofs.
If a Copyholder bargains and sells his Copyhold by Deed of Bargain and Sale
enrolled, though it be to the Lord of the Manor himself, it is void, and shall
not amount to a Surrender.

If Tenant for life of Lands at the Common Law agrees with his Lessor, or him
in the Reversion, that he shall have his Interest in the Land for the Rent of
20 s. per annum; this Agreement will not amount to a Surrender of his Land by
the Common Law. A fortiori, If a Copyholder, or other Customary Tenant, shall
say to his Lord, or other person in the Court of the Manor, I agree to
surrender my Lands; these words will not be a present or an express Surrender,
nor will they amount to so much as a Relinquishing of his Estate: for in truth
it is not any thing in present, but an Act to be done in futuro: Like unto the
Case put by Wray Tr. 31 Eliz. in B. R. Sweeper and Randall's Case, Leon. 1
part, 178.
Chief Justice; A seized of the Manor of D demiseth the same Manor at will;
that it is no Lease. No more in the other Case shall it be a Surrender, or a
Relinquishing of his Copyhold or Copy-hold-estate. But yet notwithstanding it
will be agreed that in some cases an express and particular Agreement made by a
Copyholder with the Lord of the Manor for or concerning his Copy-hold-lands
will amount to a Surrender of the same.

The Case was, That the Lord of a Manor, pretending that a Copyholder had
forfeited his Copy-hold-lands, entered M. 32 Eliz. in Ce^ B. Collam and Sir Hugh
Portman's Case, Leon. 1 part, 191.
into a Communication with the Copyholder concerning the same: Upon the
Communication thereof had betwixt them, it was agreed, that the Copyholder
should pay unto the Lord the sum of 10 l, which he paid accordingly; and that
in consideration thereof, the Copyholder should have Election, whether he
would have the Land assured unto him by Copy or by Bill, for the life of him
and his Wife, or durante viduit ate of the Wife: who made his Election to have
the Land by Bill. It was the opinion of the Justices in that Case, That this
Agreement was a good Surrender of the Lands, and a good Estate thereupon vested
in the Wife for her life.

A Copyholder in Fee came into the M. 13 Jat. B. R. Betfield and Adams Case.
Court of the Lord of the Manor, and took a new Estate of his Copy-hold-lands
from the Lord to himself for life, and afterward to his Wife for life, and
after to his Son for life. It was a Question, whether this Act of the
Copyholder was the giving up and the relinquishing of his Estate of
Inheritance in his Copyhold, and did amount to a Surrender of his old Estate
therein. It was agreed in this Case, That if a Copyholder Vid. 29 Eliz. Co. 2.
part, Lanc's Case.
of Inheritance takes a Lease by Indenture for years of the Lord of his
Copyhold, that by that Act of his his Inheritance in his Copyhold is gone and
determined. But it seemed to be the better opinion of the Court, That although
that this taking of a new Estate shall imply a Surrender, and be accounted as
to some purpose to amount to a Surrender; yet in the judgment of Law it shall
be but as a Surrender to his Use for life, and after to his Wife and Son for
their several lives, and that still the Inheritance of the Copyhold remains in
him. But Quere this Case. For that H. 36 Eliz. in Co. B. Rot. 2640. in Adams
and Shepheard's Case, it seems to be adjudged to the contrary.

A Copyholder said to his Lord, that Vid. Colman and Bedil^'s Case, Anderson's
Reports 199. acc.
he would not hold his Land longer by Copy, but by a Bill under the Lord's hand
for his life, who made him such a Bill, which the Copyholder accepted of. It
was agreed by the Justices in that Case, That thereby his Copyhold was
determined.

SECT. III.
Of Surrenders out of Court; and where Surrenders to the Steward,
Deputy-steward, or into the hands of Tenants of the Manor, out of Court, shall
be good, where not.

BY the general Custom of the Realm a Copyholder may surrender his Lands in
the Court of the Lord of the Manor, or out of Court, to the Lord, by the hands
of Tenants of the Manor: But a Surrender out of Court to the Lord, or by the
hands of Tenants of the Manor, or of the Bailiff or Reeve, is not good without
a special Custom.

The Lord has such an absolute Interest in his Manor, that he may hold a Court
within his Manor at what time he pleases: But he is not compellable by his
Copyholder to hold or call a Court to accept of a Surrender. But if he does
accept of such a Surrender of his Copyholder out of Court, the same is good,
whether it be to his own Use, or to the Use of other persons. And as the Lord
may himself accept of a Surrender out of Court, so likewise may the Lord
himself grant new Copies of the Lands out of Court, and such Grants shall be
good. But the Lord himself cannot hold his own Court for any of the purposes
aforesaid. But the Lord himself may give authority unto others to take
Surrenders to the Use of others out of Court; and so may his Steward or
Under-steward give Conditions to others to take the like Surrenders out of
Court to others Uses, which Conditions shall be in the nature of a Dedimus
potestatem. And so it was Resolved in a Case out of Ireland, referred to the
Judges of England, to certify their opinions therein; where the Case was, The
Steward of the Court of a Manor in Ireland, being in England, sent a Writ in
the nature of a Dedimus potestatem to one who was in Ireland, to take a
Surrender there of Copy-hold-lands: and the opinion of the Judges here, to whom
the Case was referred to advise and certify their opinions was, That such a
Surrender taken by Dedimus was good enough. But note, that in such case it must
be intended, that such giving power to take a Surrender, if it be to be done,
it must be alleged to be done either by Prescription or Custom: for that
Surrenders generally taken out of Court must be by Custom.

Proofs.
If the Under-steward hold a Court 2 E. 6. Br. Tenant per Copy 26.
within the Manor, and grants Copies by Court-Roll, without the authority of
the Lord or of the high Steward, the Grants are good. But contrary it is, if he
do it out of Court, as it seems. And there it is a Quere, if the high
Steward out of Court may grant Lands by Copy. But it is clearly holden, that he
cannot admit a Copyholder upon a Surrender out of Court, without a special
authority from the Lord so to do.

A Deputy-steward may take a Surrender 19 Eliz. in Co. B.
out of Court, if the Office be granted to the Steward and his sufficient
Deputies, or to be exercised by him and his sufficient Deputies; as it was
Resolved 19 Eliz. in the Court of Common Pleas.

The Lord of a Manor may retain a 8 Eliz. Dyer 248.
Steward by Word, and such a Retainer shall be good until he be discharged,
and such a Steward may take a Surrender out of Court, as it is holden in Coke
4. part, in the Lady Holcroft's Case. And so was Co. 4. part, Holcroft's Case.
it Resolved Tr. 41 Eliz. in Harris and Jaye's Case in B. R. But Quere of the
first Vr. 31 Eliz. C. B. Bl^grave and Wood's Case, Godb. 142.
Point. For that Tr. 31. Eliz. in Co. B. in Blagrave and Wood's Case, the
opinion of the Justices was, That a Surrender to a Steward who was by word
only, out of Court, was not good.

In 17 Eliz. in Co. B. it was said by M. 17 Eliz. in C. B. by Dyer and Mounson.
Dyer and Mounson, That without a Prescription a Surrender of Copy-hold-land
could not be out of Court, nor an Admittance out of Court, neither to the Lord
himself nor to his Steward. But in diverse places it is used by Custom so to
be. And then and thereupon the doing of Fealty and the paying of the Lord's
Fine shall be presented by the Homage to be done at the next Court. And all
these things they said are to be done by Custom. And in that Case it was said
by the Lord Dyer, That a Surrender out of Court might be to the Lord himself,
to go by the way of Extinguishment.

A Copyholder in Fee did, according to the Custom of the Manor, surrender his
Copy-hold-lands into the hands of two Tenants; but the Surrender was to the Use
of J S, to take effect immediately after his death. In this case it was
Resolved, That as unto the Surrender into the hands of two Tenants, that might
be good, although it was out of Court, by Custom. But because in that Case the
Surrender was unto the Use of J S, to take effect immediately after the death
of the Surrenderor, and a Freehold cannot begin in futuro, or at a day to
come, by the Common Law, and for that the Estates of Copyholders shall be
directed according to the Rules of the Common Law; for that cause only the
Surrender was holden to be void.

But although a Surrender out of Court may be good into the hands of Tenants of
the Manor by Custom; yet until such Surrender be presented by them in the
Court of the Lord of the Manor, the Estate of the Lands does remain in the
Surrenderor, and nothing passes thereby.

A Copyholder in Fee did surrender M. 14 Jac. B. R. Froswell and Welshe's
Case, Bridgman 52.
into the hands of two Tenants, according to the Custom, to the Use of A and
B, who thereupon entered into and upon the Lands, and paid the Rent to the Lord;
but before any Court was kept for the Manor, the Tenants to whom the Surrender
was made, as also the Copyholder the Surrenderor, all of them died, and
thereupon the Heir of the Copyholder Surrenderor entered upon the said A and B,
and made a Lease for years of the Lands, which Lease was warranted by the
Custom. In that Case it was Resolved, That the Lease for years was well made,
because that before such time that the Presentment was made in Court of the
Surrender, the Interest of the Copyholder did remain in the Surrenderor, and
his Right descended unto and upon his Heir, and he might take and receive the
Rents and Profits of the Lands; for that no person can have a Copyhold or a
Copy-hold-Estate, but such a person who comes into the same by the Custom of
the Manor, viz. by Admittance of the Lord, which in this Case A and B did not
do. But in that Case it was doubted by the Justices, but not Resolved, Whether
the Acceptance of the Rent by the Lord at the hands of the said A and B did
amount to an Admittance or not.

There were two Joynt-tenants in Fee M. 9. Jac. Cro. 2. part, Porter and
Porter's Case.
of Lands which were holden by Copy. One of them, according to the Custom,
surrendered into the hands of two Tenants to the Use of his last Will, and
afterward he made his Will, and thereby devised the Lands. In that Case it was
holden by the Justices, That because the said Surrender was presented by the
Tenants in the Court of the Lord, that the said Surrender should bind the
Survivor; for that it shall have a relation to the first time of the Surrender.
But if in that case the Copyholder who made the Surrender had died before the
same had been presented, then the Copyhold had survived to the surviving
Joynt-tenant.

Two Coparcenors, Copyholders, were p. 10 Jac. B. R. Godb* 141.
in possession; the one did surrender her Reversion in the Moiety after her
decease. It was adjudged a void Surrender, because a Freehold could not
commence in futuro, as well of Copy-hold-lands as of Free-hold-lands.

A Copyholder surrendered a Message M. 8 Jac. in B. R. Cro. 3. part, Burgoyne
and Spurling's Case.
and 20 Acres of Lands into the hands of two Tenants out of Court, to the Use
of J S and his Heirs, upon Condition, that if he paid J S 100 l. before such a
day, the Surrender to be void. Before the day of payment he surrendered one
Acre, parcel of the 20 Acres, unto J D and his Heirs, and afterward he
performed the Condition by paying the 100 l. and afterward in Court he
surrendered the said Message and 20 Acres of Lands into the hands of the
Steward, to the Use of J N and his Heirs. It was found by the Jurours that the
first Surrender made to J S was never presented, but the two last Surrenders
were presented. In this Case it was Resolved, That by the Conditional Surrender
nothing passed, until it was presented; but the Interest, Right and Possession
remained in the Copyholder who made the Surrender, so as he might transfer it
to whom he thought good. For although it was a Surrender into the hands of
Tenants, and so according to the manner of the Surrender the same was good by
the Custom; yet because the said Surrender into the hands of Tenants was but
an Inchoation of the Case to whose Use the Surrender was made, which had no
farther perfection or prosecution, but became void by the performance of the
Condition, the first of the two last Surrenders presented, viz. the Surrender
to the Use of J D and his Heirs, stood good, and the last Surrender to the Use
of J N and his Heirs took no effect.

A Copyholder in Fee made a Letter Coke 9. part, Comb's Case.
of Attorney to two Tenants of the Manor, to surrender his Copyhold out of
Court unto the Use of J S and his Heirs: They surrendered the same accordingly,
and at the next Court brought in the Surrender into Court, (but no Custom was
found to warrant such a Surrender.) Notwithstanding in that Case it was
Resolved, 1. That it was a good Surrender, because he might do it de communi
jure without alleging any Custom. 2. When the Tenants showed the same in
Court, and the Authority which was given to make the Surrender, all which they
had done was Resolved to be good, and legally done.

SECT. IV.
Where, although Surrenders are made to the Lord or to Tenants out of Court by
Custom, yet nothing passes out of the Copyholder before Admittance: And what
shall be a good Admittance in such case, what not.

ADmittance is the life and perfection of the Copy-holder's Estate, and before
Admittance the Tenant is not a perfect Copyholder.

Proofs.
The Custom of a Manor was, That a M. 23 Car. B. R. Baker and Denham's Case.
Copyholder might surrender his Copyhold out of Court to the Use of another;
the party to whose Use it was, to be admitted at the next Court. Such a
Surrender was made, but before the next Court Cestuy que use died, and so was
not admitted. It was Resolved in this Case, That he was not a Copyholder
within the Custom; for by the Surrender before Admittance the Surrenderee has
no possesson, and the Heir is in by Descent, and holds by the Copy of his
Ancestor, and so the Cestuy que use is not a perfect nor complete Copyholder.
And it may be compared to the Case where a man makes a Feoffment in Fee of
Lands, and makes Livery within the View; it is no perfect Livery till he does
enter into the Lands, but the Feoffor may punish a Trespass there done in the
interim, for it is but inchoatum until he enter. And so it is in case of a
Copyholder; the Surrender is but quasi inchoatum, as before, till he be
admitted to the Copyhold, Vid. Froswell's Case before.

In 26 Eliz. the Question was, Whether 26 Eliz. Galloway's Case vouched in
Bulstr. 3. part, ^17.
the Copyholder might have an Action upon the Case against the Lord for not
holding his Court, and not admitting of him to whom a Surrender was made
according to the Custom of the Manor. It was Resolved in that Case, That the
Copyholder himself might have the Action. But in that Case it was Resolved,
That he to whom the Surrender was made, until Admittance, by force of the
Surrender had nothing; it was only an Act begun, and not perfected; and
therefore in such case he could not maintain the Action of the Lord for not
admitting of him.

A Surrender of a Copyhold is like to the Induction into a Benefice: before
Induction there is no Possession; so before Admittance there is no Possession.

A Copyholder, according to the Custom, M. 12 Jac, Robinson and Green's Case,
Bridgman 82, 83. Bulstr. 3. part, 238. acc.
did surrender out of Court into the hands of Tenants to the Use of J S and his
Heirs; which Surrender was delivered into the Court by the said Tenants and
there presented; which was accepted of by the Steward of the Manor, and an
Entry made thereof in the Court-Roll, and a Copy of the Surrender was delivered
unto J S; and in the Copy it was, viz. Compertum est per Homagium, that the
Surrender was to J S and his Heirs. It was the opinion of the Court in this
Case, That none of these colorable things did imply a perfect Admittance to
the Copyhold. For 1. The Acceptance of the Presentment by the Steward from the
Homage was no more then what he was bounden to do as being Judge of the Court.
2. The Entry of it in the Roll was but an Office of Duty, being but an Evidence
for the Lord, as also for him to whose Use the Surrender was; and so was the
delivery of the Copy to J S, the Cestuy que use. But none of these things did
imply the Consent or Will of the Lord, that the Cestuy ^ue use should be
admitted or have the Lands according to the Surrender; and all these things
together do not imply any Admittance, for all of them may be done, though no
Admittance be in the case.

Note, It was Resolved in the Court of M. 6 Jac. in B. R. Wilson and Weddall's
Case, ^^lv. 144.
King's Bench, That if a Surrender be of a Copyhold to J S, it is of no effect
until he be admitted Tenant: and if before Admittance J S does surrender the
Land unto another, a Stranger, who is admitted, yet nothing passes to the
Stranger by this Admittance of the Stranger.

SECT. V.
Where some things, and what things, may be done by the Copyholder or his Heir
before Admittance.

Proofs.
1. THE Heir of a Copyholder may Co. 4. part, Clark and Penyfather's Case.
enter and have an Action of Trespass before Admittance. 2. A Possessio Fratris
or Sororis may be of a Copyhold before Admittance. 3. A Descent shall not bind
the Heir of a Copyholder. 4. He may surrender unto a Stranger before
Admittance.

A Copyholder in Fee had Issue two Vid. 12 Eliz. Dyer 291.
Daughters by diverse Women, and died seized; the Daughters entered, and took the
Profits many years; and before Admittance, the eldest Daughter died without
Issue, and afterward the youngest Daughter was admitted to the whole Land, as
sole Heir to the Father. In this Case it was holden, That the possession of the
eldest Daughter, though before Admittance, should make her Sister, though of
the half blood, inheritable to the Land.

If a Copyholder in Fee by License 24 Eliz. in Co. B. Coke 4. part, 23.
Brown's Case acc.
makes a Lease for years, and the Lessee enters, the Copyholder having a Son
and a Daughter by one Woman, and a Son by another; the Land shall descend to
the Daughter of the whole blood, although that the Son died, and was not
admitted to the Copyhold as Heir to his Father. And that that should be
Possessio Fratris of a Copyhold before Admittance.

If a Copyholder does surrender to a 40 Eliz. in B. R. Arnold and George's
Case, Yelv. 16. acc.
Stranger, and the Steward will not admit him, and the Stranger enters, and
holds the Land; if the Lord bring Trespass against him before Admittance, he
may plead Not guilty, and his Plea shall be good, and it shall be found against
the Lord, because he is particeps criminis to the Admittance, because it shall
be intended, that the Lord would not suffer the Steward to admit him to the
Copyhold.

A Copyhold was seized by the Lord Tr. 3 Jac. B. R. Joyner and Lamber^'s Case,
Cro. 2. part, 36.
of the Manor, and he granted it to another in Fee, who died, and his Heir was
admitted; then the first Copyholder died, and his Heir entered, and surrendered
unto a Stranger in Fee. It was Resolved in that Case, That the Entry of the
Heir was lawful, though he was not admitted to the Copy-hold-estate, and the
Descent of the Land to the Heir of the Grantee of the Lord should not bind him.
And farther it was Resolved in that Case, That the Heir of the Copyholder
being in the Land, his Surrender of the Land unto a Stranger was good before
his Admittance.

SECT. VI.
Where the Lord is but an Instrument to convey the Copyhold by Admittance
only, and that the Surrenderee is in by the Copyholder, and not by the Lord.

ALthough generally (as before is said) Vide Plow. Com. 421. in Hare and
Bickley's Case.
a Copyholder cannot enter and have Seisin of the Land without the Admittance
of the Lord, no more then a Parson or Prebend can have Seism, or be full
Incumbent, till the Archdeacon has inducted him, or the Dean and Chapter
enstalled him: yet the Lord is but an Instrument used for the settling of the
Copyholder in his Copyhold, and to transfer the Land secundum formam and
effectum Sursumredditionis, and the Estate, Right and Interest in the Copyhold
does not pass as from the Lord; but upon the Admittance made by the Lord the
Copyholder is in by him who made the Surrender, and by the Custom, and seized
of the Copyhold secundum Consuetudinem Manerii, etc.

Proofs.
The Lord of a Manor demised Copyhold M. 40 Eliz. B. R. Pay and Brown's Case,
Cro. 1. part.
of Inheritance to A, upon Condition that he should pay to B 20 s. yearly
during his Minority, and 100 l. at his full age. A paid not the 20 s. but
surrendered the Land to the Use of P and his Heirs. The Lord admits him. B
attains his full age, and the 100 l. is not paid. The Lord enters for the
Condition broken, and grants the Land by Copy to B. P enters upon him. It was
holden in this Case, That his Entry was lawful, for that he to whose Use the
Surrender was made comes in by him who surrendered, and not by the Lord.

A Copyholder in Fee surrendered his Lands into the hands of the Lord by the
Tr. 15 Jac. B. R. Brook's Case, Poph. 125.
hands of Tenants, according to the Custom, without expressing to whose Use it
should be. At the next Court he was admitted Habendum to him and his Wife in
tail. It was objected, That no Use being expressed, the Surrender was void, and
the Admittance not good, to pass an Estate to the Wife not being named in the
Premises, but in the Habendum only. It was Resolved, 1. The Surrender was
good, for it shall be intended, that the Surrender generally made was to such
Use as was specified in the Admittance; and the Lord was only as an Instrument
put in trust to convey the Estate, and make such Admittance as he who
surrendered would have him to make. 2. That the Wife should take by the
Admittance, though she was not named in the Premises, but in the Habendum
only.

If a Copyholder surrendreth his Lands 33 Eliz. Co. 4. part, Westwick's Case.
to the Use of J S, the Lord has but a Customary power to make the Admittance
secundum effectum and formam Sursumredditionis. And if in such case the Lord
grants the Land to J S and a Stranger, all shall enure to J S, and nothing to
the Stranger. And if the Copyholder does surrender his Lands without a
Condition, if the Lord does admit the Tenant upon a Condition, the Condition is
void; for that after the Admittance the Surrenderee is in by him who made the
Surrender, and not by the Lord.

A Copyholder surrenders to the Use 28 Eliz. Co. 4. part, Bunting's Case.
of another; the Lord admits him to hold to him and his Heirs: yet he shall
have but an Estate for life, for that after the Admittance he is in by him who
made the Surrender, and not by the Lord.

The Custom of the Manor was, That Coke 8. part, in Swayne's Case.
a Copyholder for life might take Timber to repair: The King made a Lease of
the Manor, excepting Woods and Underwoods and Trees: The Lessee for years of
the Manor grants a Copyhold upon which were Timber Trees to another for life,
who cuts Timber to repair. It was Resolved, That in this Case, notwithstanding
the Severance and Exception, the Grantee should have the Trees, for that the
Estate of the Copyholder who comes in by a voluntary Grant is in by the
Custom, and the Lord is but an Instrument to make the Grant.

When a Copyholder surrenders to the Co. 4. part, in Tavernor's Case.
Use of another, and the Lord admits him; now he who is admitted is in by him
who makes the Surrender. For in a Plaint in the nature of a Writ of Entry in
the Per, he shall be supposed to be in the Per by him who made the Surrender,
because the Lord is but an Instrument to make the Admittance; and he who is
admitted shall not be subject to any Charges or Encumbrances of the Lord, for
the Lord has but a Customary power to make the Admittance secundum effectum
sursumredditionis, as before is said.

A Copyholder surrenders to the Use M. 37 Eliz. Cro. 1. part, Berry and
Green's Case.
of J S; the Lord refuses to admit him: he cannot enter, unless there be an
especial Custom to warrant it; but if there be, then he may enter.

SECT. VII.
Where the Admittance of the particular Tenant shall be the Admittance of him
in the Remainder.

Proofs.
A Copyholder in Fee by License made a Lease for years; the Lessee enters; M.
24 Eliz. Co. 4. part, Browne's Case.
the Copyholder, having Issue a Son and a Daughter by one Woman, and a Son by
another, died; the eldest Son died before Admittance. In this Case it was
Resolved, (amongst other things) That the Admittance of Tenant for life is the
Admittance of him in the Remainder, but not to bar the Lord of his Fine, which
he ought to have by the Custom.

The Father a Copyholder in Fee P. 36 Eliz. B. R. Coke 4. part, Fitch and
Huckley's Case.
made a Surrender to the Use of himself for life, and after to the Use of his
Son for life, and after to the Use of his last Will. The Father was admitted,
and died: The Lord pretending a Forfeiture entered, and granted the Copyhold to
a Stranger. Resolved, That the Admittance of the Tenant for life was the
Admittance of him in the Remainder; and then the Land could not vest in the
Grantee of the Lord.

It was Resolved by the Justices, That Tr. 36 Eliz. B. R. Deal and Higden's
Case, Moore 358.
the Admittance of Tenant for life of a Copyhold is the Admittance of him in
the Remainder, because he is to pay his Fine which is entire, and no Fine is
due to be paid by him in the Remainder to the Lord: but otherwise it is of him
in the Reversion. M. 39 Eliz. B. R. Cro. 2. part, Gippin and Bannye's Case.


A Copyholder surrendered to the Use of one for life, the Remainder to another
in Fee: Tenant for life was admitted: He in the Remainder surrendered to the Use
of J S; which Surrender the Lord accepted of, and admitted him, and then the
Tenant for life died. It was holden in this Case, That the Heir of J S should
have the Land, for that the Admittance of the Tenant for life was the
Admittance of him in the Remainder; and also because the Acceptance of the Lord
was quasi an Admittance to him in the Remainder.

A Copyholder in Fee surrendered to Tr. 2 Jac. B. R. Auncelme and Auncelme's
Case, Cro. 2. part.
the Use of his Wife for life, the Remainder to his younger Son in Fee, and
died: The Wife was admitted, but the younger Son refused to be admitted during
the life of his Mother, but afterward, without other Admittance, he surrendered
to the Use of J S. It was Resolved, That the Admittance of the Mother Tenant
for life was the Admittance of the younger Son in the Remainder, because they
made but one Estate.

A Copyholder had Issue 3 Sons, B, C, Hill. 31 Eliz. B. R. Bullein and Graunt's
Case, Leon. 1 part, 174^
and D, and surrendered to the Use of his last Will, and thereby devised the
same to his Wife for life, the Remainder to C and the Heirs of his body: The
Wife died after Admittance, and the Lord granted the Copyhold to D in Fee, who
surrendered to the Use of J S for life, and after died without Issue: B the
eldest Son entered. It was adjudged, That his Entry was lawful, and that
Admittance of him was not necessary; for that if a Copyholder surrendreth to
the Use of one for life, he in the Reversion or Remainder may enter without any
new Admittance.

SECT. VIII.
By what and whose Act, either of the Law, of the Copyholder himself, or of
the Lord, severally or all together, the Copy-hold-land or Estate shall be
gone, determined, or extinguished; and where suspended only.

HAving in the Sections before declared where a Surrender and Admittance
thereupon, either by the Lord or his Steward in Court, or to them, or into the
hands of Tenants out of Court, shall be good, and where not: Let us now look
upon this Division, and see in what case the Copyhold or Copy-holder's Estate
or Interest shall be said to be gone, determined, or extinguished; and by what
and whose Act it was or may be determined. First, It may be determined by the
Act of the Lord himself. 2. By the Act of the Copyholder. 3. By Acts of them
both joined together. And lastly, by the Act of the Law. All which will
evidently appear by the Judgments, Resolutions and Precedents after ensuing.

Proofs.
The Lord by his Act cannot, without Co. 2. part, 17. in Lane'^ Case.
the concurrent Act of the Copyholder himself, determine the Estate and
Interest which the Copyholder has in his Copyhold. And therefore the
Severance of the Freehold and Inheritance of the Land holden by Copy of
Court-Roll (being done by the Act of the Lord) does not determine the
Copy-holder's Estate, or extinguish the Copyhold. For although that the Estate
of the Copyholder be but an Estate at will, viz. ad Co. 4. part, 21. in
Brown's Case.
voluntatem Domini secundum Consuetudinem Manerii; yet Custom has so
established the Estate of the Copyholder, that he is not removeable at the
will of the Lord, so long as he performs the Customs and Services.

If a Copyholder will join with the Lord in a Deed of Feoffment of the Manor,
there, by that Act of them both, the Copyhold is extinct; as it was said by
the Lord Anderson Chief Justice, P. 24 Eliz. in Co. B.

A Feme-sole was Lady of a Manor, to Vid. Cro. 1. part, 5 acc.
which were diverse Copyholders: One of the Copyholders did intermarry with
the Seignioress of the Manor. It was the opinion of the Justices, That the
Intermarriage was only a Suspension of the Copyhold, and not an
Extinguishment of it. But afterward they joined in suffering a common Recovery
of the Land; and upon that their Act it was Resolved, that the Copyhold was
extinguished.

Husband and Wife Copyholders in H. 26 Eliz. in Co. B. Cro. 1. part,
Stockbridge's Case.
Fee to them and their Heirs: The Husband for Money obtained an Estate of
Freehold to him and his Wife, and the Heirs of their bodies. It was Resolved
in that Case, That by the Acceptance of the new Estate the Copyhold was
determined.

If a Copyholder does surrender to M. 29 Eliz. in C. B. Godb. 101.
him who has a Lease for years of the Manor to the Use of the same Lessee, by
that Act of his the Copy-hold-estate is extinct.

The Lord of a Manor sold the Freehold P. 30 Eliz. B. R. Leon. 1. part, 102.
Wakesield's Case.
of a Copyhold unto another, and so it was divided from the Manor; and
afterward the Copyholder did release to the Purchasor. It was the opinion of
the Justices, That by this Release the Copyhold was gone and extinct. But in
that Case it was said, That if a Copyholder be ousted, so as the Lord of the
Manor is disseised, and the Copyholder releaseth to the Disseisor, Nihil
operatur by such Release.

A Copyholder had common by Usage in the Wastes of the Lord as to his Message
and Lands belonging: The Copyhold comes to the Lord, who after grants the same
to the Copyholder cum pertinentiis. In this Case it was holden, That these
words, viz. (cum pertinentiis) could not create a new Common, and the Common
first holden was by Custom annexed to the Customary Estate, and was absolutely
extinguished.

If there be Lessee for life, the Remainder M. 9 Jac. in C. B. adjudge. acc.
for life of a Copyhold, and the first Tenant for life purchases the
Freehold of the Copyhold, and afterward levieth a Fine thereof, and five
years pass: It was adjudged, That in that Case by the Fine levied the Copyhold
was not gone nor destroyed, and that this Fine was not a Bar to him who was in
Remainder in life of the Copyhold.

There was Tenant for life of a Copyhold: P. 8 Jac. in Co. B. Moore and
Rideval's Case.
The Lord granted the Reversion of the Copyhold after the determination of the
particular Estate to another for 20 years: Afterward the Copyholder, who was
Tenant for life, by Deed made a Lease for life of his Copyhold, and made
Livery, which was a Forfeiture of his Copy-hold-estate. It was the opinion of
the Justices in that Case, That this Act of the Tenant for life was not a
Determination or an Extinguishment of the Copyhold: For although it was a
Determination of the particular Estate of the Copyholder, and that he in the
Remainder might enter; yet the Land remained Copyhold as it was before.

The Custom of a Manor is, That if 3 Jac. in B. R. Lashmor and Averi^'s Case,
Cro. 2. part.
a Copyholder in Fee dies sei^ed, his Wife shall hold the Land during her
life as Free-Bench: The Lord enfeoffeth the Copyholder of the Land. It was
adjudged, That she should not hold the Land for her life as Free-Bench, but it
was gone by the Purchase. Contrary, if the Lord had infeoffed a Stranger of the
Land.

C purchased a Copyhold from A Vid. 30 H. 8. Dyer, acc.
Lord of the Manor, to him and his Wife and their Child for their lives:
Afterward A by Indenture granted the Freehold to B for life, rendering Rent,
and made Livery: And afterward A levied a Fine sur Conusans de droit, etc. to
C of the same Lands, who afterward accepted of the Rent from B. It was holden
in that Case, That by the Acceptance of the Rent from B the Copyhold of C was
destroyed and determined.

Note, If a Copyholder takes a Lease M. 15 and 16 Eliz. in Co. B.
for years of his Copy-hold-lands, the Copyhold is determined: and so it is,
if the Lord leaseth a Copyhold for years which is escheated, the Copyhold is
determined. But if a Copyholder purchases the Manor, the Copyhold is not
determined, but suspended, because there is no Interruption, but it is able to
be granted again, because by the Custom it suffices that it has been demised
and demisable.

SECT. IX.
Of Forfeitures of Copy-holds and Copy-hold-estates; and what Acts or things
done by the Copyholder shall amount unto or be adjudged a Forfeiture of the
Copy-holder's Estate, what not.

THE general Grounds of Forfeitures of Copy-holds, or of their Estates, are
declared in the former part of this Treatise, unto which I shall refer you.
That which I shall now say is but by way of Amplification of those Grounds,
with some Judgments and Authorities in several Cases upon sundry differences.
All Forfeitures may be reduced unto these Heads: Either voluntary Acts done to
the prejudice of the Lord, or negligent or wilful refusal to do and pay his
Duties and Services to the Lord, which by the Laws and Customs of the Manor he
ought to do and perform.

Proofs.
A Copyholder makes a Lease either Coke 4. part, Murrel's Case.
for life or years of his Copy-hold-lands, which is not warranted by the
Custom of the Manor: now although such Lease shall be a good Lease as betwixt
the Copyholder and his Lessee, and he shall not avoid his own Lease; yet as
unto the Lord it is a Forfeiture of the Copyhold and of his Estate, and the
Lord shall take advantage of such Forfeiture, and may enter upon the Lands
leased.

So if a Copyholder makes a Lease of H. 37 Eliz. East and Harding's Case.
his Copyhold for 3 years by word, to begin at Michaelmas or at a day to come;
although it is a good Lease as betwixt the parties to it, yet it is a
Forfeiture of the Copyhold to the Lord; and so it was holden Hill. 37 Eliz. in
East and Harding's Case.

A Copyholder of a Manor made a P. 10 Jac. in Co. B. the Lady Mountague's
Case, Cro. 2. part, acc.
Lease of his Free-hold-lands for 10 years, and, to avoid a Forfeiture, made a
Lease of his Copy-hold-lands for one year; but covenanted with his Lessee, that
he should enjoy the Copy-hold-lands de anno in annum, during the 10 years. It
was the opinion of the Justices in this Case, That because this Demise of the
Copyholder was but for one year, and so warranted both by Law and Custom, and
it was but only a Covenant on the part of the Lessee that he should hold it
for a longer time, that this was no Forfeiture, although the Lord pretended the
same to be a Forfeiture.

The Lord licensed his Copyholder to M. 27 Eliz. in Co. B. by Anderson. Moore
184.
make a Lease of his Copy-hold-lands for 21 years, to begin at Michaelmas
following: The Copyholder by Indenture made a Lease accordingly; but
afterward, before Michaelmas, he made another Lease by Indenture to another
person, to begin at Michaelmas following. It was the opinion of the Lord
Anderson Chief Justice, Mich. 27 Eliz. in Co. B. That the making of this second
Lease, being without the License of the Lord, was a Forfeiture of his Copyhold.

A Copyholder for life has License M. 15 Jac. in B. R. Worlidge and
Banburie's Case, Cro. 2. part.
of the Lord to make a Lease for 3 years, if he so long live, and he makes a
Lease for 3 years without such Limitation. It was holden to be no Forfeiture of
his Estate in the Copyhold, because the Law makes such a Limitation to the
Estate which he makes, that it shall continue but during his life. But if he
had been a Copyholder in Fee, it had been a Forfeiture of his Estate to have
made such an absolute Lease, because he had done more then he was licensed to
do by the Law. And so it was adjudged in Hall and Arrowsmith's Case, which see
in Popham's Reports, 185.

If a Copyholder without License of M. 8 Jac. in B R. Ward's Case.
the Lord does erect a new House upon his Copy-hold-lands, some opinion has
been, That the same is a Forfeiture of his Estate. But I doubt much of that
Case, because the Act done is for the benefit and advantage of the Lord, and
not to his Prejudice. Quere of it.

SECT. X.
Where denial or refusal to pay his Rent, Fine, or to do his other Customs
and Services, shall be a Forfeiture of his Copyhold and Copy-hold-estate, and
where not.

Proofs.
A Copyholder in Fee was seized of H. 33 Eliz. Crispe and Fryer's Case in
Moore.
Land rendering Rent at Michaelmas and our Lady Day. The Lord at the last
instant of the day of payment demanded the Rent upon the Land, and the
Copyholder was not there, nor any for him, to pay it. It was a Question, if
his Nonpayment of the Rent was a Forfeiture of his Copyhold or not. And the
better opinion of the Court seemed to be, That it was a Forfeiture, because the
Copyholder was to take peremptory notice of the day of payment of his Rent,
and his not being there seemed to imply that it was a voluntary Denial, or
Refusal at the least, of doing the same. But Quere of it; for it was Resolved
in another Case, Tr. 21 Jac. in C. B. That Tr. 21 Jac. in Co. B.
not payment of Rent, or of the Fine upon Admittance to his Copyhold, was no
Forfeiture of his Copy-hold-estate, without there was some express verbal
Denial of it, which there was not in this Case.

A Copyholder seized by force of several M. 37 Eliz. B. R. Tavernor and Lord
Cromwell's Case, Cro. 1. part.
Copies of Black-acre by the Rent of 4d, White-acre by the Rent of 4d, and
Green-acre by the Rent of 6d, denied the Rent of Black-acre. In that case it
was holden to be a Forfeiture of that Acre, but no Forfeiture of the other two
Acres, because, although they were all in one hand, yet because they were
holden by several Rents, the Forfeiture of the one Acre cannot be the
Forfeiture of the other two Acres.

No Fine is either due or payable to the Lord, but either upon a Descent, or
Vid. Coke 4. part, 28. in Sands Case.
upon an Admittance. But if such a Copyholder upon his Admittance shall make
an absolute Refusal to pay the Fine to the Lord, the same is a Forfeiture of
his Copyhold and of his Estate. But there such a Fine must be reasonable. For
if the Fine assessed by the Lord be an unreasonable Fine, (of which the Judges
shall determine) a Refusal or Denial of the Copyholder to pay the same shall
be no Forfeiture of his Estate or Copyhold.

Note, It was Resolved by the Justices, M. 43 Eliz. Dalton and Hamond's Case,
Moor^ 622.
That if the Lord demands an unreasonable Fine of his Copyholder, and he
refuses to pay it, it is no Forfeiture; otherwise where it is a reasonable
Fine. If a Fine be certain, the Tenant is to bring it with him to the Court,
and to pay it before Admittance; and if he be not ready to pay it, it is a
Forfeiture, and so it was adjudged. But what shall be a reasonable Fine or an
unreasonable Fine, ought to be determined per arbitrium boni viri; and the
Court and Justices of it shall be Judges of the Reasonableness of the same, if
it be pleaded that the Fine demanded by the Lord, or the Distress for it, be
unreasonable or excessive.

A Copyholder seized of Copy-hold-lands M. 6 Jac. in C. B. Willowes and
Willowes Case, Coke Select Cases.
of the yearly value of 53s. 4d. per annum, and no more, surrendered them into
the hands of the Lord of the Manor to the Use of J S and his Heirs: The Custom
of the Manor was, That upon the Admission of any person a reasonable Fine shall
be assessed by the Lord or his Steward to be paid. The Steward at the Court
holden for the said Manor assessed a Fine of 5l. 6s. 8d. (the value of the
Lands for 2 years) to be paid by J S for a Fine; which Fine being requested of
him by the Lord to pay, he refused to pay the same; whereupon the Lord entered
upon the Lands for a Forfeiture. In which Case these Points were Resolved. 1.
That if the Fine assessed had been reasonable, yet a certain time was to be
set, and a certain place where it should be paid: for it shall not be intended
that the Tenant has sufficient Money about him to pay a Fine which is
uncertain to be assessed. 2. That the Fine assessed by the Steward was an
unreasonable Fine: and 3. That the Refusal was no Forfeiture.

If the Fine of a Copyholder be assessed H. 13 Jac. C. B. Denny and Lemon's
Case, Hob. 135. Co. 11. part, Godfrie's Case acc.
by the Lord or his Steward, be the Fine reasonable or unreasonable, the Lord
must demand the Fine of the Copyholder before he can enter upon the Copyhold
for not payment thereof, and the Reasonableness or Unreasonablenesse thereof
shall be adjudged by the Court.

Lands being Customary Lands, and P. 30 Eliz. B. R. Aumory and Eves Case, Leon.
1 part, 100.
by the Custom discendable to the younger Son, the Father died, the younger
Son being of the age of 2 years: Thirty years incurred after the death of the
Father, and no Court had been holden for the Lord of the Manor: But in the
interim the younger Son had made a Lease of the Lands to a Stranger; and after,
at the next Court holden for the Manor, he came into Court and prayed to be
admitted, but the Steward refused to admit him. It was holden in this Case,
That the Lease made by him was good, and that there was no negligence in him to
be admitted to the Copy-hold-estate; for that it was holden in this Case, That
if a Copyholder dies, his Heir within age, he is not bound to come at any
Court during his Nonage to pray Admittance, or to tender his Fine for the same;
and if the death of the Ancestor be not presented, nor Proclamations made that
the Heir come in to take up the Land and pay his Fine, the Heir shall not
forfeit his Land for such neglect, although he be of full age.

If the Homagers in a Court Baron 4 Eliz. Dyer 211.
being Copyholders do refuse to make their Presentiments, it is a Forfeiture of
their Copy-holds: and so it was Resolved to be by both the Chief Justices in
the Star Chamber in the Earl of Arundel's Case.

A Copyholder came not to the Lord's H. 13 Jac. B. R. Belfield and Adams Case,
Bulstr. 3. part, 81.
Court of the Manor to do his Suit and Service by the space of 3 years
together. The Question was, if it was a sufficient cause of Forfeiture of his
Copyhold. It was said by the Court, That it was no cause of Forfeiture, if a
Warning be not given by the Lord of the time of his Court to be holden, and
notice thereof given to the Copyholder himself; and the withdrawing of his
Suit by a Copyholder is only fineable: but if he does deny to do his Suit
and Serv^^e, then it is a Forefeiture of his Copyhold: and so was it adjudged
M. 14 Jac. in B. R. in Hammond and Winibank's Case.

Summons was given at the Churchdoor H. 36 Eliz. in Co. B. Godb. 142.
for a Copyholder to appear at the Lord's Court, and do his Suit and Service;
upon which Summons he did not Vid. M. 30 Eliz. C. B. Sir John Bruanche's Case,
Leon. 1 part, 104. Where general Warning of a Copyholder to appear at the
Lord's Court given within the Parish shall be sufficient, where not.
appear. The Doubt was, if it was a cause of Forfeiture of his Copyhold. It
was the opinion of the whole Court, That it was no cause of Forfeiture of his
Copyhold, because that it was not showed that it was the Custom to make such
Summons: and the Court said, That it were hard to make it a Forfeiture, because
perhaps the Copyholder had not Notice of it: and they held that in such case
Notice must be given to the person, and his Refusal must be a wilful Refusal.

The Custom of a Manor was, That if H. 25 Eliz. in B. R. Borneford and Sir
John Packington's Case, Leon. 1. part, 1.
a Copyholder died seized, his Wife should hold his Lands as her Free-Bench,
and be admitted Tenant, and that the Son should not be admitted Tenant during
the life of his Mother: and farther the Custom was, That if any Copyholder
committed Felony, and it were presented by the Homage, that the Lord might
seize the Copyhold as forfeit: The Copyholder died; his Wife was admitted to
her Free-Bench: The Son committed Felony; the Wife died. The Question was, if
the Lord might seize the Copyhold as forfeit. It was objected, He could not,
for that the Son was not Tenant at the time of the Forfeiture committed, and so
the Lord could not then seize, and the Custom should be taken strictly. But
notwithstanding it was Resolved, That the Lord should have the Land as forfeit,
and that the Son was a Copyholder within the Intent of the Custom.

If Husband and Wife be Joynt-Copy-holders of the purchase of the Husband;
during the Coverture the Husband is attainted of Felony, and dies: It is no
Forfeiture of any part of the Copyhold. But if the Purchase be made before the
Coverture, then it is a Forfeiture of the moiety.

The King being Lord of a Manor, a M. 5 Jac. in Scaceario, Godb. 269.
Copyholder within the Manor made a Lease of his Copyhold for 3 Lives; and
the surviving Tenant for life continued the possession of the Lands for 40
years. Though the making of such a Lease for 3 Lives was in Law a Forfeiture of
the Copyhold; yet because it did not appear upon the Endorsement of the Deed
that Livery was made, it was holden, That the King could not take advantage of
the Forfeiture.

If a Copyholder does bargain and sell his Copy-hold-lands by Deed indented
and enrolled, it was Resolved, The same was no cause of Forfeiture of the
Copyhold of which the Lord can take advantage, because the Copyhold did not
pass by the Deed: and so it was said it was adjudged in London's Case.

So, if a Copyholder for life surrendreth to the Use of another in Fee, and 35
Eliz. Bullock's Case.
besides that makes Livery of the Land; this is no Forfeiture of his Copyhold,
because the Estate passes by the Surrender, and not by the Livery.

If a Copyholder for life cuts down Timber Trees, it is a Forfeiture of his
Copyhold: and so it was adjudged in Belfield and Adams Case. But if a
Copyholder makes a Lease for years, and the Lessee cuts down Timber Trees, or
commits other Waste upon the Copy-hold-lands, the Lord cannot enter upon the
Land for a Forfeiture; but in such case the Lord is put to his Action upon the
Case against the Wrong-doer.

SECT. XI.
Where the Act of the Lord, and what Act of his, shall dispense with a
Forfeiture made by his Copyholder; where and what not.

Proofs.
A Copyholder commits Waste, and after Pasc. 5 Jac. Cro. 2. part, Mantlie and
Willington's Case.
the Waste done, the Lord accepts of the Rent from the hands of the
Copyholder. Quere if it shall bar him to enter for the Forfeiture. It is a
Quere not Resolved.

If Lands be demisable to two by Copy P. 5 Eliz. Moore 49.
for life successive, and the Custom of the Manor is, that they may not cut
Trees: if the first of them cutteth down Trees, it is a Forfeiture both of the
Estate of the present Tenant for life, and of the Estate of the other in
Remainder over.

If a Copyholder levies a Fine, makes a Feoffment, or suffers a common
Recovery which destroys the Estate: in such case no Acceptance of the Rent, or
Act done by the Lord, shall be available to make the Estate again good. But
where the Custom of the Manor only is broken; as if the Copyholder makes a
Lease of his Copy-hold-lands for more years then one year, or denies to pay his
Rent, or denies to be sworn of the Homage, or commits Waste: there his Estate
may be afterward confirmed, and there and in such case the Acceptance of the
Rent by the Lord will amount to a Confirmation of the first Estate.

In some cases, where an Estate of a Copyholder is forfeited by Law, yet by
Custom, and the Act of the Lord in his Court of the Manor, the Forfeiture may
be mitigated, and the Land shall not be utterly forfeited or destroyed. As
where the Custom is, That for Waste Copyhold shall be forfeited, a Custom
for to amerce the Tenant for the Waste done, and to distrain for the
Amercement, will be a good Custom to mitigate the Forfeiture of the Copyhold.

The Custom of the Manor where Copy-hold-tenements 17 Car. in B. R. Thorn and
Tyler's Case.
were demisable for lives was, That if any such Copyholder suffered his
Message to be ruined for want of Repairing, or by committing of Waste, if the
same was presented by the Homage, the Lord used to distrain the Cattle as well
of the Copyholder himself as of his Under-tenant levant and couchant upon the
Lands for the said Amercement. It was objected, That the Custom was not good,
for that it was an unreasonable Custom, that the Under-tenant should be
punished for the offense of the Copyholder, for the Undertenant is a Stranger
to the Custom, and Customs should be taken strictly. But it was Resolved that
the Custom was good: For by the Law, the suffering of the Copyhold Message
to fall to ruin, or to be wasted, was a Forfeiture of the Copyhold, and the
Custom did abridge and mitigate the Forfeiture, and the Undertenant for a year
was a Tenant to the Lord, and distrainable for the Rents and Services, and the
Charge lies upon the Land, and not upon the person; and therefore it was
Adjudged, That the Custom was good, and the Amercement lawful, and the
Distress of the Cattle of the Under-tenant levant upon the Land was lawful,
all of them being by the Act of the Lord in his Court, and by the Custom of
the Manor, in mitigation of the Forfeiture of the Land, and so for the good of
the Copyholder.

SECT. XII.
Whether Copy-hold-lands be within the Statute of Westminster. 2. and may be
entailed, or not; and where and by what Acts the Issues in tail may be barred;
and what shall be a Discontinuance of the Estate, what not.

WHether Copy-hold-lands are within the Statute of West. 2. cap. 1. de Donis,
etc. or may be entailed, has been much controverted, and many Judgments and
Resolutions have been on both sides; and it seems to be a Point not fully
agreed upon at this day. I shall therefore make some little mention what has
been said on either side, and leave it to the judgment of others. And first
for the Affirmative part, That Copy-holds are within the said Statute, and may
be entailed, I shall begin with Mr. Littleton himself. Tenant by Copy of
Court-Roll is, says he, where there is a Custom in a Manor time out of mind
used, that certain Tenants within the said Manor have used to have Lands and
Tenements to them and their Heirs in Feesimple or in Fee-tail: and in that
Chapter he particularly sets forth the manner of Grants of such Estates, viz.
Ad hanc Curiam venit A de B, and sursumreddidit in manus Domini, etc. unum
Messuaglum, etc. ad usum C de D, and Haeredum suorum, vel Haeredum de corpore
suo exeunt. Habendum sibi and Haeredibus de corpore suo exeunt. etc. By which
it appears to be the opinion of Mr. Littleton, that an Estate may and might
be of Copy-hold-lands. And herewith agrees the opinion of Mr. Plowden in his
Commentaries in Morgan and Manxell's Case. But note, that the opinion of Mr.
Littleton is, That there must be a Custom of the Manor to enable such Estates
of Copy-hold-lands.

It is said in Coke 3. part, in Heydon's Case, That where an Act of Parliament
does alter the Service, Tenure or Interest of the Estate, either in prejudice
of the Lord or of the Custom of the Manor, or in prejudice of the Tenants,
there such an Act of Parliament does not extend to Copy-holds. And therefore
the Statute of Westminster. 2. de Donis, because it extends to the Alteration of
the Service and Tenure of the Land, and is prejudicial to the Lord of the
Manor, does not extend to Copy-holds. But in that Case it is agreed, That by a
special Custom Lands might be entailed; for that it might be, that upon the
creation of the Manors Lands were given by Lords of Manors to hold by their
Tenants by particular Services and for particular Uses; viz. to some to them
and their Heirs in Fee-simple, to some others to hold to them and the Heirs of
their bodies begotten, and to some others for particular Estates, as for life,
etc. and such Estates having continued in their Issues time out of mind,
Custom has now enabled such Estates to be of Copy-holds in tail: and although
they have and enjoy such their Estates, be it either Fee-simple or Feetail, yet
it is but secundum Consuetudinem Manerii: and therefore and for these Reasons
and causes, although that Copyhold be not or could not be entailed within the
general words of the Statute de Donis, etc. yet by Custom time out of mind
used, they say that Copy-holds may be entailed.

36 Eliz. in the King's Bench, it was Adjudged, That where the Custom of the
Manor was, that Lands might be granted unto any in Fee-simple, in such case a
Grant of Lands unto a man and the Heirs of his body was within the Custom:
For a Custom which extends to the greater will extend to the lesser Estate.

Tenant in tail of a Copyhold surrendered M. 15 Jac. Lee and Brown's Case,
Poph. 128.
the same into the hands of the Lord, to the Use of J S, etc. In that Case 2
Questions did arise. 1. If Copy-holds were within the Statute de Donis, etc. 2.
Whether the Tail might be cut off by a Surrender. The Court doubted of the
first Point; but the better opinion seemed to be, That the Statute cooperating
with the Custom, they might be entailed.

A Copyholder had Issue 3 Sons, A, H. 31 Eliz. B. R. Bullein and Graun^'s
Case, Leon. 1. part, 174.
B, and C, and surrendered his Copy-hold-lands to the Use of his last Will, and
thereby declared the same to be to the Use of his Wife for life, the Remainder
to B his second Son in tail, and afterward to A in Fee. It was a Question in
this Case, if B had a Fee-simple conditional in the Lands, or an Estate-tail.
For if a conditional Fee, then a Remainder over of it could not be limited. It
was the opinion of Wray Chief Justice, That it was an Estate-tail in B, and not
a Fee conditional, and that Customary Lands might be granted in tail.

A Surrender of Copy-hold-lands was H. 34 Eliz. B. R. rot. 29^^ Stanton and
Barney's Case.
made within the Manor of Stevenson, to the Use of J S and the Heirs of his
body; and after Issue, he surrendered the Lands unto another. It was agreed by
all the Justices, That it was a Fee-simple conditional at the Common Law, and
after Issue that he might alien the Lands.

A Copyholder in Fee of the Manor M. 36 Eliz. B. R. Gravenor and Brook's Case,
Poph. 34.
of Fairchilds and Preachers, 3 H. 8. surrendered his Copy-hold-lands to the Use
of his eldest Daughter for life, the Remainder to the eldest Son of the said
Daughter and the Heirs-males of his body, the Remainder to the right Heirs of A
the Copyholder in Fee. In this Case it was said, That an Estate in Tail could
not be of Copy-hold-lands. It was the opinion of Fenner and Popham, That by
Equity of the Statute de Donis an Estatetail might be of Copy-hold-lands,
though not otherwise.

Now on the other side, That Copy-hold-lands cannot be entailed, nor are within
the Statute de Donis, etc. see these Cases and Resolutions following.

H. 35 Eliz. in Co. B. it was Resolved by all the Justices, that Copy-holds
were H. 35 Eliz. in Co. B. Pitts and Huckley's Case.
not within the Statute of Westminster. 2. de Donis: For if they were within that
Statute, then the Lord should not enter nor take advantage of the Forfeiture of
the Copyhold for Felony, (the contrary of which was Resolved in Borneford and
Sir John Packington's Case) but the Donor, and the Services should be done to
the Donor, and not to the Lord of the Manor; which is against the nature of a
Copy-hold-Tenure.

The Case was, That a Copyholder Tr. 18 Jac. in Co. B. Royden and Moulster's
Case, Cro. 3. part, 32, 33. Godb. 367. acc.
surrendered to the Use of one in Tail, there being no Custom to warrant such
Surrender. In this Case the Question was, whether a Copyhold might be entailed
within the Statute de Donis. It was holden by all the Justices, That it could
not be entailed within the Statute, and that for diverse causes. 1. Because it
is not within the Letter of the Statute, which speaks only de Tenement is per
Chartam datis: and Copy-holds cannot pass by Deed, but by Surrender only, as
is agreed on all sides. 2. Because they are not within the meaning of the
Statute, because that before 7 E. 4. 19. they were not of any account in Law,
being only Estates at will of the Lord secundum Consuetudinem Manerii. 3.
Because the said Statute de Donis provides only against those who might make
Disinherison by Fine or Recovery, which a Copyholder there could not do or
make, because that then upon such Grants in Tail the Reversion should be left
in themselves, which could not be, being to the prejudice of the Lord of the
Manor. And also 4. because it would be very mischievous, because then there
should be no means to dock or cut off such Entails, (common Recoveries and
Fines not being then in use) unless there were a special Custom to that
purpose.

Having thus declared and made mention of the several Cases and Resolutions in
this much-controverted Point, Whether Copyhold may be entailed within the said
Statute de Donis, etc. I shall not deliver any absolute opinion upon the same,
although I do much incline to the Affirmative part, being chiefly led thereunto
by the opinion of Mr. Littleton, and by the Resolution in Manxell's Case, and
of my Lord Coke in Heydon's Case, and a late Resolution in the said Point, 42
Eliz. in Erish and Rives Case, where it was adjudged in the Court of Common
Pleas, upon an Evidence given in a Case of Copy-hold-lands within the Manor of
Istleworth-Sion in the County of Middlesex; where it was Resolved, That no
Estate-tail could be of a Copyhold without a particular Custom to warrant the
same: but if there was such a particular Custom within the Manor to warrant
such Estates, then by the Custom cooperating with the Statute (as before is
expressed) Copy-hold-lands might be well entailed within the said Statute.

Admitting then that by an especial Custom of the Manor Lands may be entailed;
the next matter to be considered of is, By what and whose Acts the said Estate
shall be either discontinued or barred, and what shall amount to a
Discontinuance or a Bar to the Issue in Tail of such Estate.

In 13 R. 2. sits. Judgment 7. it is 13 R. 2. sits. Judgment 7.
said, That the Heir who is inheritable to the Copy-lands by Custom may
recover the same by Plaint in the Court of the Lord in the nature of an Assise
of Mort-dauncestor, but he shall not have an 15 H. 8. Tenant by Copy 24.
Assise of Novel Disscisin: And 15 H. 8. Tenant by Copy 24. The Heir of a
Copyholder Tenant in Tail shall recover the Lands in a Formedon in the
Discender.

The Custom of a Manor was, That Plaints in the Court of the Lord of the Manor
have used to be in real Actions. A Recovery was by Plaint in the nature of a
real Action against a Copyholder being Tenant in Tail, and a Recovery
thereupon had. It was holden in that Case, That the said Recovery shall be a
Discontinuance to take away the Entry of the Heir in Tail, because such Plaints
are warranted by the Custom, and it is an Incident which the Law annexeth to
the Custom, That a Recovery shall be a Discontinuance. But vide Tr. 36 Eliz.
in B. R. in Deal and 36 Eliz. B. R. Deal and Rigden's Case, Moore 358.
Rigden's Case. If it had been a Surrender in Court, it had been no
Discontinuance.

In 27 Eliz. in a Case concerning the M. 9 Car. in Co. B. Hill and Vpchurche's
Case, Brownloe 121.
Manor of Northhall in the County of Essex, That if Copy-hold-lands might be
entailed within the Statute of Westminster. 2. then a Custom of a Surrender of it
should be a Bar or a Discontinuance of such Estate; for as the Estate might be
created by Custom, so it might be discontinued by a Surrender by Custom. And
Tr. 38 Eliz. Field and Eliot's Case, A Surrender by Tenant in Tail of a
Copyholder in Fee makes a Discontinuance of it. But yet notwithstanding those
Authorities and Cases, I do conceive that a Surrender is no Discontinuance of a
Copy-hold-estate in Tail.

If a man be seized of a Copyhold in H. 30 Eliz. B. R. Right and Footeman's
Case, Leon. 1. part, 95.
the right of his Wife, or be Tenant in Tail of a Copyhold, and he does
surrender to the Use of another in Fee: It was holden in that Case, That the
same does not make any Discontinuance of the Estate of the Wife or of the
Estate-tail, but that the Wife or the Issue in Tail may respectively enter into
and upon the Land. And according to this it was adjudged in Gravenor and
Brook's Case before mentioned in 36 Eliz.

Copy-hold-lands were entailed, and 37 Eliz. in C. B. Lane and Hil^'s Case.
the Copyholder surrendered the said Lands to the Use of another man in Tail
with diverse Remainders over, and then he died. It was said in this Case, That
it was no Discontinuance of the Tail, but the Issue in Tail, notwithstanding
the Surrender, might enter. But it was said in that Case, That if it were a
Discontinuance, that in such case a Formedon in the Reverter did not lie by the
Tenant in Tail, because when a Copyholder makes a Gift in Tail, he has no
Reversion, but a Possibility; and the Lord shall avow upon the Donee for the
Rents and Services, and not upon the Donor.

In Trespass it was adjudged, That a H. 1 Jac. Oldcat^'s Case, Moore 753.
Surrender by Tenant in Tail of a Copyhold was not any Discontinuance of it,
no more then a Surrender by Tenant for life to another in Fee was a Forfeiture.

If an Enfant Tenant in Tail surrendreth H. 35 Eliz. Goales and Gran's Case
adjudge; acc*
his Copy-hold-lands to the Use of a Stranger, who is admitted; the Enfant may
enter at his full age, because it was not a Bar nor a Discontinuance.

It is not to be disputed or questioned whether a Common Recovery of Lands at
the Common Law with Voucher over and Warranty be a Bar of Lands entailed: It is
universally received by all Learned in the Laws of the Realm to be a Bar of
such an Estate, and the Inheritances of a great many persons of Quality and
others do depend upon such Common Recoveries had and suffered. But then the
Question has been, whether a Common Recovery had and suffered in the Court of
the Lord of the Manor shall be a Bar of an Estate of Copy-hold-lands entailed:
and for that, it will stand upon this difference, Where the Custom of the
Manor has always been, that such a Recovery there had shall be a Bar, where
not. For without a special Custom, I do conceive that by a Recovery had and
suffered in the Court of the Lord of the Manor an Estate-tail of
Copy-hold-lands cannot be barred: But where such a Custom is or has been out
of mind used, there I conceive that a common Recovery had and suffered in the
Court of the Manor will bar an Estate in Tail of Copy-hold-lands. I shall only
put you two Judgments and Resolutions to make good this difference, although
many others may be alleged.

Upon a special Verdict in an Action P. 37 Eliz. in B. R. Clun and Pease's
Case, Cro. 1. part.
of: Trespass it was found, That the Lands were Copyhold demisable in Tail,
with the Remainder over in Tail: That Tenant in Tail in possession suffered a
Common Recovery with Voucher in the Court of the Manor of these Lands, and
afterward died: But there was not any Custom found for suffering Recovery of
such Lands in the Court of the said Manor. It was holden by the whole Court in
that Case, That the Recovery should not bind the Tail but upon a Recompense in
value, and in that case the Issue could not have Land in value: Also the Lord
should lose his Fine, and the party to whose Use the Recovery was had should
hold the Lands without Admittance or Grant from the Lord, which is contrary to
the nature of a Copyhold.

The other Case was this. Land was M. 37 Eliz. in B. R. Eylett and Lane's Case,
Cro. 1. part.
demisable in Tail by Custom: A Copyholder demised the Land in Tail by Copy:
The Copyholder suffered a Common Recovery in the Court of the Manor with
Voucher and Warranty. The Court at the first doubted of it, because a Warranty
could not be annexed to such an Estate in Tail. But yet afterward it was
Resolved, That the Recovery there was a Bar of the Tail. And Note, for a
Conclusion of this Point, That at this day, by the Customs of several Manors,
Common Recoveries are had and suffered in the Courts of Lords of Manors for the
docking and barring of Estate tails of Copy-holds. And much inconvenience would
ensue, both if Copy-holds at this day might not by Custom be entailed, and
likewise if by Custom Common Recoveries had of Estatetails with Voucher over
in the Courts of Lords of Manors should not thereby be docked and barred.

SECT. XIII.
What things are incident to a Copyholder, and what he may take of common
right without the Grant or License of the Lord: And what Acts upon the Land
shall bind the Copyholder, what not.

IF a Copyholder according to the Custom does surrender into the hands of 2
Tenants to the Use of J S and his Heirs, and afterward the Copyholder dies
before the Presentment be made of the Surrender by the Tenants, and the Lord
before the Presentment accepts of the Rent of J S generally, but not as a
Copyholder: the Heir of the Surrenderor may e^ter into and upon the Lands, and
receive the Profits thereof to his own use, for that nothing vesteth in the
Surrenderee before Admittance, and the Inheritance of the Copyhold is in the
Heir quasi by Descent.

To have Common in the Wastes of Pasch. 45 Eliz. adjudge. acc.
the Lord is not a thing incident to his Copyhold, but is by Prescription or
Custom of the Manor. If therefore a Copyholder purchases the Inheritance of
the Land, the Interest of the Common being a thing entire is gone and
determined. But if the Copyholder does surrender part of his Copy-hold-lands
to the Use of another, who is admitted, yet his whole Common is not thereby
determined, but he shall have Common still for the Lands not surrendered.

A Copyholder may take House-bote, 9 H. 4. ^ Waste 59. Coke select Cases 68.
Hedg-bote and Plough-bote upon his Copy-hold-lands of common right, as a thing
incident to the Grant, if it be not restrained by a Custom, that the
Copyholder shall not take it but by Assignment of the Lord or his Bailiff. And
if the Lord, where the Tenant has such Botes, cuts down all the Woods and
Under-woods which are standing and growing upon the Lands, to prevent the
Copyholder of his Botes, he may have an Action of Trespass against the Lord,
as it was Resolved in Heydon and Smith's Case, Pasch. 8 Jac. in Co. B.

A Manor may be Copyhold, and holden M. 8 Jac. B. R. The King and Stafferton's
Case, Yelv. 190, 191.
of another Manor by Copy of Court-Roll: and if such a Copy-hold-Manor be
granted unto J S and his Heirs, J S may hold a Copy-Court within his said Manor
without a special Grant of it; for that of common right a Court Baron or a
Copyhold Court is incident to every Manor.

A Lord of a Manor grants a Copyhold P. 26 Eliz. C. B. Chaw and Dover's Case,
Leon. 1. part, 16.
for ^ Lives, and afterward takes a Wife: The 3 Lives end (...) determine: The
Lord enters into the Manor; and keeps the Copy-hold-lands in his hands for a
time, and then grants the Lands over again by Copy, and dies: The Wife of the
Lord enters, and clums Dower in it. In this Case it was Resolved, That the
Copyholder should hold the Lands discharged of the Dower, because the
Copyholder comes and is in the Lands by the Custom, which is paramount to the
title of Dower.

A Copyholder is feised of Lands at P. 5 Eliz. by Dyer. V^de Moore 50.
Common Law, and also of Lands holden by Copy of Court-Roll, and he by
Indenture, without License of the Lord, makes one Lease of both Lands, rendering
Rent. It was said by Dyer, That in such case the whole Rent is issuing out of
the Lands at Common Law, because the Lease as to the Copy-hold-lands was
utterly void.

If the Lord grants to his Copyholder P. 12 Eliz. in B. R. Moore 94.
the Trees growing upon the Lands, and which shall after grow, with liberty to
cut them down and carry them away; he may justify the cutting of the Trees
which are growing, and it shall not be a Forfeiture of his Copyhold, because
the Lord has by his Grant dispensed with it: But he cannot cut down the Trees
which shall there after grow, as it was said by Plowden and Popham.

If a Copyholder binds himself in a Pasc. 12 Eliz. in B. R. adjudge. acc.
Statute, his Copy-hold-lands shall not be extended upon the said Statute,
because the Copyholder in the eye of the Law has an Estate but ad voluntatem
Domini secundum Consuetudinem Manerii: But if a man be Tenant for life or years
of a Manor, and a Copyhold comes to his hands by Forfeiture or other
determination, and he binds himself in a Statute; although the Copyhold be
after granted, yet it may be extended upon the Statute, because the Copyhold
was annexed to the Freehold, and joined with it in the hands of the Lord, when
the Statute was acknowledged and entered into.

The Custom of a Manor was, That a Copyholder might cut and lop Trees M. 5
Jac. Swayn and Beckett's Case, Moore 812.
for Hedg-bote and other necessaries: The Queen made a Lease of the Manor to J
S, with Exception of Trees: King James granted the Reversion to J D in Fee: The
Assignees of the Term granted a Copyhold to other for 3 Lives, Habendum to
them successive: The Copyholder cut Trees. It was Resolved, That the
Copyholder was in by the Custom paramount the Exception, although he took his
Estate after the Exception, and therefore might justify the cutting of the
Trees for the Hedg-b^^e and other necessaries.

The Husband seized in Fee of Copy-hold-lands 35 Eliz. Co. 4. part, Bullock and
Dibles's Case.
in the right of his Wife surrendered the same to another, who was admitted, and
afterward the Husband died. It was Adjudged that in this case the Wife might
enter, and she should not be put to her Cui in vita.

If there be Lessee for life, the Remainder M. 9 Jac. in Co. B. adiudge. acc.
for life, of a Copyhold, and the first Tenant for life does purchase the
Freehold of the Copyhold, and levies a Fine thereof, and 5 years pass: it was
Adjudged, That this Fine should bar him in the Remainder of his Copyhold.

SECT. XIV.
Where the Lord of the Manor shall be Chancellor in his own Court, to
determine the Differences which arise betwixt Copyholders.

A Copyholder does surrender his Copy-hold-lands H. 25 Eliz. in B. R. Leon. 1.
part, 2.
to A, to hold the Lands till he has levied the sum of 100 l. upon trust
that afterward he shall surrender to the Use of B: A levies the money, and
being required to make the surrender to B, he refuses to do it; whereupon B
exhibits his Bill to the Lord in the Court of the Manor: The Lord there makes a
Decree, that A make the Surrender to B, which he again refuses to do; and
thereupon the Lord seizes the Lands, and afterward admits B to the same. It
was the opinion of the whole Court in this Case, That both the Seizure of the
Lord and his Admittance of B were lawful, because the Lord in such Cases of
Equity to execute Trusts is Chancellor in his own Court.

If a false Judgment be given in a Vid. 14 H. 4. 34.
Court Baron by the Steward against a Copyholder, the Copyholder in such case
shall not have either a Writ of Error or a Writ of False Judgment; but he may
sue in the Court of the Lord by Bill, to be relieved against such Judgment; and
the Lord, as Chancellor, may give him Relief therein, and shall restore the
Land to the party upon the false Judgment given by the Steward, and Restitution
made to the Copyholder.

SECT. XV.
Of Surrenders upon Conditions; and where such Surrenders shall be good, where
not.

Proofs.
A Copyholder in Fee surrendered out P. 31 Eliz. Co. 4. part, Kite and
Queinton's Case.
of Court his Copy-hold-lands to the Use of another and his Heirs upon
Condition: At the next Court the Surrender was presented, but in the
Presentment the Condition was omitted: He to whose Use the Surrender was made
being dead, the Lord admitted his Heir. It was Resolved in this Case, That the
Presentment of the Surrender was void, because it was not made in such manner
as the Surrender was made. But if the Conditional Surrender had been presented,
it had beed good, although it was not entered into the Court-Roll.

A Copyholder surrendered his Copyhold Tr. 2 Jac. B. R. Cro. 2. part, Hall and
Shardbrook's Case.
upon Condition, and afterward by Deed he released the Condition. Resolved it
was good without a Surrender, for that a Condition or a Right cannot properly
be said to be determined by a Surrender, but it may be by a Release.

The Case was; Grandfather, Father, M. 15 E. 3. 13.
and Son: The Grandfather died: The Father assigned Dower to the Grandmother,
being his Mother, who surrendered it back to the Father paying 10 l. per annum:
The Father died; his Wife brought Dower against the Son and recovered, because
the Father had the Fee and Freehold conjoined in the life of the Grandmother by
the Surrender. It was Resolved in this Case, That when the Wife of the Father
does recover Dower, she shall pay to the Grandmother so much Rent as does
belong to her proportion in Dower. And in this Case it was holden, That
although the Estate of a man be Conditional and defeasible upon a bad Title;
yet the Wife shall not be ousted of her Dower until the Conditional or
defeasible Title be defeated. And where Husband and Wife are Tenants for life,
and surrender to him in the Reversion, the Wife of him in the Reversion shall
be endowed, and yet the Surrender is but Conditional; for if the Wife of the
Tenant for life overliveth her Husband, the Surrender is defeasible: a fortiori
in case where it is not defeasible, as in this Case. And it was said in case of
a Surrender of Copy-hold-land, where it was Conditional, the Wife is dowable of
it, if the Condition do not determine the Estate in the lifetime of the
Husband: But a Feme is not dowable of Copyhold but by Custom of the Manor. H.
27 Eliz. Cro. 3. part, 68. Bright and Hubbard's Case.


A Copyholder devised his Lands to his Wife for life, and that she should sell
the Lands for the payment of his Debts; and surrendered to the Use of his Will:
The Copyholder died: His Wife surrendered the Land upon Condition to pay 12 l.
It was Adjudged, It was a good Surrender upon the Condition, and that it was a
good Sale made by her.

The Father, Copyholder in Fee, surrendered Tr. 33 Eliz. Cro. 1. part, Symonds
and Lawn^'s Case.
his Copy-hold-lands to the Use of his Son in Fee, upon Condition to perform
Covenants in an Indenture: The Son after Admittance surrendered to J S upon
Condition that if the Son pay 10 l. the Surrender to be void: The Son neither
pays the 10 l. nor performs the Covenants in the Indenture: The Father enters.
Resolved, That by the Entry of the Father both the Surrenders were avoided, and
there the Son might well enter after the death of his Father, and the Surrender
made by him to J S.

If a Copyholder does surrender his 33 Eliz. Co. 4. part, Westwick's Case.
Lands to the Use of J S and his Heirs absolutely, and the Lord admits the
Tenant upon Condition, it is void; for that after Admittance the Tenant is in
by him who made the Surrender, and not by the Lord.

The Custom was, That a Copyholder might out of Court surrender to the Tr. 28
Eliz. in B. R. Cro. 1. part, (...)dett's Case.
Use of a Stranger in Fee: The Lord of the Manor made J his Steward ad
exequendum per se, or his sufficient Deputy, who made A his Deputy pro hac vice
to take a Surrender of Husband and Wife, the Remainder in Fee: The Deputation
was farther, viz. Et ulterius faciendum quantum in me est: A took a Surrender
of the Husband and Wife upon Condition, which Condition was afterward peformed
and executed. Resolved in this Case, That although the authority to take the
Surrender was absolute, and to be without a Condition; yet when A took it upon
a Condition to be performed, it was a good Surrender made to him, by reason of
the words in the Deputation, Et ulterius faciendum, etc.

A Woman Copyholder durante Viduitate P. 39 Eliz. B. R. Oland and Barwick's
Case, Cro. 1. part, acc.
sowed the Land, and before Severance of the Corn she took Husband. Resolved,
That although the Estate of the Wife was uncertain, and determined by the
Limitation, and not by any Condition either in Fact or in Law, that the Lord
should have the Corn sowed upon the Lands.

A Copyholder in Fee of Lands discendable in Borough-English had 3 Sons, H. 2
Jac. B. R. Cro. 2. part, Cur^ies and Wolverston's Case.
and surrendered to the Use of his Will, and thereby devised his Lands to his
middle Son in Fee, upon Condition to pay to his 4 Daughters, to every of them
20 l. at their full age: The eldest Son had Issue 2 Daughters, and died: The
middle Son is admitted, and does not pay the Daughters their Sums at their
full ages: The youngest Son entered in the name of the Daughters, who disagreed
to it. It was Resolved, That it was a Condition, but not broken without demand
of their Sums at their full ages; and when they disagreed to the Entry, the
Entry of the youngest Brother was not lawful.

A Copyholder surrendered his Lands M. 13 Jac. B. R. Simpson and Sothern's
Case, Cro. 2. part.
into the hands of the Lord, Habendum after his death to the Use of an Enfant
en ventre sa Mier. Resolved that a Surrender to an Enfant en ventre sa Mier was
not good as an immediate Surrender, for that it cannot begin at a day to come.
And whereas a Remainder was thereupon limited over, it was holden to be void,
because it was to begin upon a Condition precedent, ( Vid. the Condition) which
was never performed; and therefore the Surrender into the hands of the Lord was
void, because he takes it but as an Instrument to convey it over.

SECT. XVI.
Where Custom which warrants the Lord or his Copyholder to grant greater
Estates, warrants the Grants of lesser Estates.

Proofs.
THE Custom of a Manor is, That 36 Eliz. Co. 4. part, Gravenor and Tedd's Case.
a Copy-hold-estate may be granted in Fee-simple. In that Case it was adjudged,
That an Estate thereof granted to one and the Heirs of his body is good, and
within the Custom; for Ubi licet quod est majus, non debet quod est minus non
licere.

The Custom of a Manor is, That 39 Eliz. in B. R. Downs and Hopkins Case.
Copy-hold-estates may be granted for life or lives: In such case a Grant is
made to a Woman durante Viduitate sua: And it was adjudged good, and within the
Custom, for that every Grant for life is durante Viduitate; but every Grant
durante Viduitate is not for life.

The Custom of a Manor out of mind H. 34 Eliz. B. R. Stanton and Barney's Case.
used was, To grant certain Lands, parcel of the said Manor, in Fee-simple,
and never any Grant was made to any and the Heirs of his body for life or for
years: The Lord of the Manor did make a Grant by Copy to one for life, the
Remainder over to another and the Heirs of his body. It was adjudged, That the
Grant and the Remainder over was good; for the Lord having an Authority by
Custom, and an Interest withal, might grant any lesser Estate: but otherwise
it is where one has but a bare Authority.

In Trespass the Issue was, if the Lord P. 29 Eliz. C. B. Kempe and Carter's
Case, Leon. 1. part, 56.
of the Manor granted the Lands per Copiam Rotulorum Curiae Manerii secundum
Consuetudinem Manerii praedict. It was given in Evidence, that the Lord of late
at his Court granted the Lands per Copiam Curiae, where it was never granted by
Copy before. In that case the Jury are bound to find quod Dominus non
concessit, as it was holden by the Court. For although de facto Dominus
concessit per Copiam Rotulorum Curiae, yet non concessit secundum Consuetudinem
Manerii praedict. But in that Case it was holden, If Customary Lands had been
grantable in Fee, if the same Land escheat to the Lord, and he grant the same
to another for life, it is a good Grant, and warranted by the Custom; for the
Custom which enables him to grant in Fee shall enable him to grant for life.

If a Copy-hold-estate fall into the M. 15 and 16 Eliz. in Co. B. adjudge. acc.
hands of the Lord by Escheat, Forfeiture, or the like, and the Lord make a
Lease thereof for years or life by Deed or without Deed, or if he make a
Feoffment of it upon Condition, or if the Copyhold so escheated, etc. be
extended upon a Statute or a Recognizance, or the same Land be assigned to the
Wife of the Lord in Dower; In all these cases the Land can never be granted
again by Copy, because after such Disposition thereof it was not demiseable.
But if the Interruptions were not lawful, but tortious, as if the Lord be
disseised, or if the Land be recovered against the Lord by a false Verdict, or
by an erroneous Judgment; yet after the Land is re-continued, and the
Interruption which was wrongful removed, the Land is grantable again by the
Lord by Copy.

SECT. XVII.
Who shall be said such a Lord of a Manor as may grant Copy-hold-estates; and
how long such Estates shall continue; and what persons shall be capable of
Copy-hold-estates, what not; and what may be granted by Copy.

EVery one who has a lawful Estate Coke 1. part, Instit. 58.
or Interest in the Manor, be it Fee, Fee-tail, Dower, Tenantry by the courtesy
of England, Tenantry for life or years, Guardian, Tenant by Statute-Merchant or
Elegit, are sufficient Lords and persons to grant Copy-hold-estates to others.
And in some special case Estates in Copy-hold-lands may be granted by such a
one who has no Estate or Interest in the Manor.

Proofs.
A Guardian in Socage held a Copy-Court Tr. 1 Jac. B. R. Soapland and Ridler's
Case, Owen 115.
in his own name, and granted Copies in Reversion. Adjudged he was Dominus pro
tempore, and had an Interest in the Lands; for he might make a Lease thereof in
his own name, and therefore he might both grant Copies, and also admit
Copyholders to Estates before granted. But the Bailiff of a Manor has no
Interest in the Manor, and therefore he cannot grant Copies of the Land holden
of the Manor.

The Custom of a Manor was, That P. 41 Eliz. B. R. Ga^ and Kay's Case, Cro. 1.
part.
Dominus pro tempore might make a Demise for 2 or 3 Lives in Possession or
Reversion: A Woman Tenant in Dower for life of the Manor granted a Copyhold to
J S and 2 others for their Lives, Habendum post mortem of A B, and died: A B
died. It was holden by the Court in this Case, That the Grant was good in
Reversion, although it was not executed in the life of the Tenant in Dower: And
Vide, That the Lord of a Manor for life, or any other particular Estate, having
Interest in the Manor, might grant Copies in Reversion of Lands which are
holden by Copy of Court-Roll, although the Grants were not executed in the life
of the Grantors; as it was adjudged in Sir H. 14 Eliz. the Earl of Oxford's
Case, Moore 95.
Peter Carew's Case. Quere: for Hill. 14 Eliz. in the Earl of Oxford's Case in
Moore 95. it is not good, unless it come in Possession during the life of the
Grantor.

Note, It was holden by the Justices P. 15 Car. C. B. Godb. 6. acc.
P. 15 Jac. in Co. B. That there ought to be a Custom to enable the Lord of
the Manor to make a Grant of a Copyhold in Reversion.

Generally, Things which lie not in Tenure, as Advowsons in gross, Commons in
gross, or the like incorporate Inheritances, out of which a Rent cannot be
reserved, cannot be granted by Copy of Court-Roll by the Lord of the Manor; nor
can they be holden by any Service to be done for them. But Advowsons
appendants, Commons appendants, and such things as are parcel of a Manor, and
which have Continuance, may be granted by the Lord of the Manor, to be holden
by Copies of Court-Roll, according to the Custom of the Manor.

In Trespass for cutting down of Under-woods, M. 38 Eliz. B. R. Cro. 1. part,
Hoe and Taylor's Case.
the Question was, Whether Under-woods might be granted by Copy of Court-Roll,
for that by such Grant or Lease the Soil passes not. But it was Resolved, That
Under-woods are a thing of Inheritance and perpetuity, which may have
Continuance for ever; for after they are once cut, they will grow again ex
stipitibus, and so they may be well granted by Copy.

In Trover and Conversion of 20 Loads P. 43 Eliz. B. R. Sands and Darcie's
Case, Cro. 1. part, acc.
of Tith-Hay, the only Question was, Whether Tithes were grantable by Copy. It
was objected they were not, because it is against the nature of Tithes, and
none could have a property in them before the Council of Lateran, and therefore
it was impossible to have any Custom so to grant them. But it was Resolved,
That they might be granted by Copy, if there had been a Custom time out of
mind so to grant them.

One Manor may be holden of another 39 H. 6. 9. b. Vid. M. 11 Jac. Moore and
Goodgreave's Case, Cro. 2. part. Coke 11. part, Sir Henry Nevil's Case. M. 37
Eliz. B. R. Sir John Bourn's Case, acc.
Manor, and may be demiseable by Copy of Court-Roll, and there may be Customary
Tenants, according to the Custom of the Manor; and so it was said, That a
Market or a Fair, although they are things of Privilege and Liberty only, yet
because they might be appendant unto or parcel of a Manor, or used with a Manor
and Lands, that an Estate might be granted of them by Copy of Court-Roll.

SECT. XVIII.
What Acts or things are inseparable, and must be done by the Copyholder
himself; and what acts and where may be done by his Attorney.

A Copyholder, notwithstanding that generally and according to the Custom of
the Manor he has an Estate of Inheritance in his Copy-hold-lands, viz.
secundum Consuetudinem Manerii; yet it has this Qualification, that it is ad
voluntatem Domini: and in that respect, upon the Original Grants of such
Estates, the Lords of Manors did reserve unto themselves certain Duties and
Services and Suits to be done by their Copyholders; some of which were so
inseparable to the person of the Copyholder, that they could not be done by
any other person; others were such as concerned and had respect both to the
Lord for his good, and the good of the Manor, as those which concerned the
particular good of the Copyholders themselves, or the Lands which they held of
the Lord.

The principal Duty inseparably to be done to the person of the Lord, and by
his Copyholder, is his doing of Fealty, Co. 9. part, in Comb's Case.
which upon every Admittance he is to do to the Lord, for that is especially
mentioned in the Copy granted by the Lord in these words, viz. Dat. Domino pro
Fine, and fecit Domino fidelitatem: and Fealty cannot be done but in person,
and not by an Attorney. And although (as Mr. Littleton says) Fealty may be
taken by the Steward of the Court of the Lord of the Manor, yet it is done to
the Lord himself, and it must be done by the Copyholder himself in person.

A Copyholder may take an Estate in the Copyhold by the Surrender of another
Copyholder into the hands of two Tenants of the Manor by Custom, (as before
is declared.) But then this Surrender must be presented in Court, and he to
whose Use the Surrender was made must personally appear in Court, and be there
admitted to the Land; and he cannot be admitted by Attorney.

The Suit and Service which is to be done in the Court of the Lord by his
Copyholder must be done in person, and not by another for him; and it is to be
done upon his Oath, and a man cannot swear by Attorney; and therefore he cannot
make an Attorney to do his Suit and Service, but the same must be done by him
in person.

Again, If a Copyholder, upon Notice given him of the special day of holding
the Lord's Court, and being summoned to appear and to do his Suit and Service,
shall wilfully neglect, or refuse to appear and do his Suit, it is a
Forfeiture of his Copyhold: and therefore such Suits and Services cannot be
done by Attorney, but in proper person.

A Copyholder of a Manor of the Earl Tr. 28 Eliz. in B. R. the Earl of
Arundel's Case, Leon. 1. part, 36.
of Arundel did surrender his Lands to the Use of his Will, and thereby devised
them to his youngest Son and his Heirs, who being in Prison made a Letter of
Attorney to J D, to pray to be admitted to the Land for his Use, and after such
Admittance to surrender the same Lands to the Use of J S and his Heirs, to whom
he had sold it for the payment of his Debts, who came into Court accordingly,
and prayed to be admitted, and make a Surrender of the Land to J S; all which
was done. In this Case it was Resolved by the Justices, That it was no good
Admittance, nor no good Surrender; for that the Heir ought to have come himself
in person in Court to take up his Land, and afterward to surrender it, or
otherwise have procured the Lord to appoint his Steward to have gone to the
Prison unto him to have been admitted, and afterward to have surrendered the
Lands.

Some particular things a Copyholder may do by his Attorney; as he may pay
his Rent by his Servant or Attorney, or tender it by them; and such Payment and
Tender shall be good. So if the Custom of the Manor be, That upon the death of
every Copyholder the Tenant shall pay and render his best Beast unto the Lord
for a Heriot, there the Heriot may be paid by the Heir before his Admittance,
or by the Executor of the Copyholder; and such Payment or Tender of it shall
be good.

So by an especial Custom within the Manor a Copyholder may appoint or M. 5
Jac. in B. R. Bale's Case.
nominate, in the presence of two Tenants of the Manor or other two sufficient
Witnesses, who shall have his Copy-hold-lands after his decease, and also that
they may appoint what Fine the Lord shall have for the Admittance of the
Tenant, so it be a reasonable Fine; and such Disposition of his Lands and
appointment of Fine shall be good by the Custom: But yet after such
Disposition made, the party who is to have the Land must in person come into
the Lord's Court, and pray to be admitted unto the same. And so was it very
lately adjudged in the Court of Common Pleas, both for the Point of the
Custom, that it was a good Custom, and Admittance.

A Copyholder dwelling in a Town M. 3 Eliz. B. R. Sir John Braunche's Case,
Leon. 1. part, 104.
long distant from the Manor, having Notice of the Court-day when it was to be
holden, upon Summons appeared not himself, but appointed his Son his Attorney
to appear and do the Services for him for his Copy-hold-lands. In this Case it
was holden by the Court, That such a person so appointed might essoign the
Copyholder, but not do the Services for him, for that none could do the same
but the Tenant himself.

SECT. XIX.
What Customs within Copy-hold-Manors shall be said to be good and reasonable
Customs, and what not.

Custom is the very Soul and life of Coke 4. part, 21.
Copy-hold-estates; for without Custom, or if they break their Customs, they
are at the Lord's will, for they hold their Lands ad voluntatem Domini,
although (as before is said) it be secundum Consuetudinem Manerii, etc. But
then the Customs must be reasonable, and not unreasonable Customs.

If the Lord does challenge a Custom Coke 1. part Institut. 59.
within his Manor, to have a Fine of every of his Copyholders of the said
Manor at the Alteration or Change of the Lord of the Manor, be it by
Alienation, Demise, Death, or otherwise; this is an unreasonable Custom, for
by this means his Copyholders may be oppressed by the Lords by the payment of
a multitude of Fines.

A Custom within a Manor, That every Coke 5. part, Pennieman's Case.
Alienation of Lands within the Manor shall be presented at the next Court
holden for the said Manor, upon pain that such Alienation shall be void, is a
good and reasonable Custom; for it is but reasonable that the Lord should know
who is his Tenant.

A Copyholder alleged a Custom Pasch. 6 Jac. in Co. B. Glascock's Case. Vid.
God Godb. acc.
within a Manor in Essex to be, That all the Tenants within the said Manor had
used to cut down Trees, to repair their Copyhold and Freehold Tenements
within the said Manor, and also to sell their Trees at their pleasures. It was
doubted if it was a good Custom: but the better opinion of the Court seemed to
be that the Custom was good.

The Custom of a Manor in Worcestershire M. 6 Jac. in Co. B. Paginton and
Hunt's Case.
was, That if any Copyholder committed Felony, and that the same be presented
by 12 Homagers in the Lord's Court, the Tenant should forfeit his Copyhold. It
was presented that J S, a Tenant of the said Manor, had committed Felony at
such a time; but that at the Assizes next after he was acquitted of the same:
After which the Lord seized the Lands. In this Case it was adjudged, That the
Custom was not good, because in judgment of Law, before Conviction or
Attainder he was not a Felon. But whether in that Case the Verdict and finding
of the Jurors upon the Bill of Indictment agreeing with the finding of the
Homagers, that the party had committed Felony, did entitle the Lord to the
Copy-hold-lands, notwithstanding the Acquitall of the Jury which was
afterward, was not Resolved.

A Copyholder did allege the Custom of the Manor to be, That the Lord might
grant Copies in Remainder with the assent of the Tenants, and not otherwise,
and that Copies otherwise granted in Remainder should be void. It was said,
That this Custom might be good, for it might be so agreed and granted by the
Lord at the beginning upon the Creation of the Manor; and that it seemed to be
grounded upon the reason of the Common Law, That a Remainder M. 31 Eliz. Co. B.
Godb. ^40.
should not be without the assent of the particular Tenant, and to commence
with his Estate, and that therefore it was a good Custom. Quere the Case, for
it was not Resolved, M. 31 Eliz. in Co. B.

The Custom of a Manor was, That those who claimed Copy-holds by Descent ought
to come at the first, second, or third Court, upon Proclamations made, to take
up their Estates, or else they should H. 7 Jac. in Co. B. Copley's Case.
be forfeited. A Tenant of the Manor (having Issue inheritable by the Custom
beyond the Sea) died: The Proclamations all passed, and the Heir did not return
in two years; but upon his return he prayed to be admitted to the Copyhold,
and proffered the Lord his Fine in Court, which the Lord refused to accept of,
and to admit the Heir, but seized the Land as forfeited. It was adjudged in
this Case, That it was no cause of Forfeiture, because the Heir was beyond the
Seas at the time of the Proclamations, and the Lord was at no prejudice, for
that, for any thing appeared in the Case, the Lord had taken all the Profits of
the Land in the mean time.

The Custom of a Manor was, That M. 7 Jac. in Co. B. by Dodderidge.
every Copyholder at his death should pay to the Lord his best Beast for a
Heriot: A Feme-sole within the Manor Tenant for life took a Husband, and died.
It was the opinion of Dodderidge in this Case, That although the Custom was
good, yet, as this Case was, no Heriot should be paid, because the Wife had not
any Goods, by Cattle to pay the same.

A Custom of a Manor was said to be, M. 42 Eliz. B. R. Cro. 1. part, Parker
and Combleford's Case.
That the Lord had used after the death of every one dying within his Manor to
have the best Beast of such a person for a Heriot, and to seize and distrain
for it. It was adjudged a void Custom, Vid. 3 and 4 Eliz. in Co. B. Wilson and
Wise's Case, Moore, acc.
not good to bind a Stranger: but such a Custom to extend to and bind the
Tenants of the Manor might be good.

The Custom of a Manor was, Quod Pasc. 24 Eliz. Moore. Vide Skipwith's Case,
Tr. 33 Eliz. in Co. B. Godb. 143. where the contrary seems to be adjudged.
quilibet tenens per Copiam poterit dimittere terras suas for life, in Fee, or
otherwise; and that a Woman Cooperta viro poterit devisare her Copy-hold-lands
to any other, or to her Husband, by the assent of the Husband. In this Case the
Court held, That the Custom was not unreasonable; but because it was poterit
devisare, where it ought to have been alleged usi sunt devisare, for that
cause it was said it was not good*

Note by the whole Court, That if the Pasc. 8 Jac. in Co. B. Rapley and
Chaffyn's Case, acc.
Custom of a Manor is alleged to be, That the eldest Daughter shall solely
inherit the Land, such a Custom may be good: But then such Custom shall be
taken strictly* viz. That the eldest Sister shall not inherit the Land by force
of the said Custom.

It was Resolved by the Justices, That Vid. Moore's Rep. 3 E. 6.
a Custom that a Lessee for years may hold the Land for half a year after his
Term ended, is no good Custom: But it was agreed, That the Lord of a Copyhold
might by Custom lease the same for life and 40 years after, and that such a
Custom was good.

A Custom was alleged, That all Inhabitants Tr. 14 Jac. in Co. B. Harbin and
Green's Case, Moore 887.
of certain Messuages holden of the Bishop of S had used to grind their Corn
which they used to spend in their Houses, or should sell, at certain Mills,
called the Bishops Mills in S, and not elsewhere, without the License of the
Bishop. It was the opinion of the Justices, That it was a void and unreasonable
Custom, to grind all their Corn there which they should sell, etc.

The Custom of the Manor of Y in the P. 13 Jac. Ford and Ho^k^n's Case, Moore
842.
County of Dorset was, That every Copyholder might name who should have his
Copyhold, and that the Lord ought to admit the Copyholder so named at the
death of the Nominator. Quere if it be a good Custom, because the person
nominated has neither jus ad rem, nec in re, the Interest being in the Lord,
and a man cannot gain an Interest to himself from the Lord against the will of
the Lord. And therefore it was holden, That where the party in that case
brought an Action against the Lord for denying to admit him to the Copyhold
upon such Nomination, the Action would not lie. But Quere that Case as to the
Custom, for that in 45 Eliz. in B. R. in Powell 45 Eliz. B. R. Powell and
Peacock's Case.
and Peacock's Case it was adjudged, That a Custom that a Copyholder in Fee
might nominate his Successor, and so in perpetuum, was adjudged a good Custom.
Vid. Hob. Reports 6, and 11. Brock and Spencer's Case.
And Vid. Brock and Spencer's Case in Hobart 6 and 11. a Custom that such a
Copyholder in Fee might* fell Timbertrees was adjudged a good Custom.

The Custom of a Manor was, That P. 41 Eliz. B. R. Parman and Bowyer's Case.
if any Tenant allowed his Lands holden of the Manor by Writing or Feoffment,
or devised them, or surrendered them into Vid. the same Case in Anderson's 2.
part, 125. where it seems the Custom was much doubed, if good, or ^ot.
the hands of the Lord of the Manor to the Use of another, that such
Alienation, Feoffment, Devise or Surrender ought to be presented within one
Year next after. It was said, It was no good Custom. But the Court ruled the
Custom to be good and agreeable to the Law; for that it is reason that the
Lord should know, etc. Tant. Vid. before.

A Custom was, That a Copyholder Vid. Willis and Bucknall's Case, in B. R.
Style's Reports, 311.
of Inheritance might make a Letter of Attorney to two Joynt-tenants, and
severally, to surrender his Copy-hold-lands in Fee to certain Uses after his
death. It was Resolved, That the Custom was a void Custom, because by the
death of the Copyholder the Lands were settled in the Heir, and an Authority
given to divest him was not good.

The Custom of a Manor was, That M. 21 Jac. Cro. 2. part* Page's Case.
the Land was devisable by Custom for 21 years, paying the treble value of the
Rent, and if the Lessee died, that the Term should be to his Heirs, paying for
a Fine one year's Rent, and if he assigned it, the Assignee to have it for one
year's value of the Rent, and that he might renew the Devise for 3 years value.
The Court held all the said Customs to be good and reasonable.

The Custom of a Manor was, That if P. 17 Car. in B. R. Thorn and Tyler's
Case.
any Copy-hold-tenant did suffer his Message to be ruined for want of
Reparations, and the same be presented in Court by the Homage, that such a
Tenant should be amerced, and that the Lord had used to distrain the Beasts as
well of the Under-tenant as of the Tenant himself, which were levant and
couchant upon the Lands, for such Amercement. It was said, That the Custom was
not good, but unreasonable, to distrain a Stranger's Cattle, such as the
Under-tenant was. But it was Resolved that the Custom was good: for the
Under-tenant, although he was but Tenant for a year, yet he should have all the
benefits and privileges which the Copyholder himself should have had; and qui
sentit Commodum sentire debet and Onus; and he is distrainable for the Rents
and Services due and payable to the Lord; and the Charge lies upon the Land,
and not upon the Custom: and therefore the Custom is good.

The Custom of a Manor was showed H. 37 Eliz. B. R. Brown and Foster's Case,
Cro. 1. part, acc.
to be, That any Copyholder of the Manor may surrender within any place of the
Manor into the hands of two Tenants; and if a Surrender be to the Use of a
Stranger, without expressing any Estate, that the Lord might grant it in Fee to
him to whom the Surrender was made. It was objected, That the Custom was
unreasonable, because it is to charge the Land with a greater Estate then the
Copyholder gave. On the other side it was said, That the Custom was good; for
that the Lord is Chancellor in his own Court, and might dispose thereof when
the Tenant leaves it uncertain. Quere; for the Case was not Resolved.

SECT. XX.
Where and in what case a Copyholder or his Lessee upon an Ouster may have and
maintain against the Ejector an Ejectione firm, and where and in what not.

Proofs.
IN Ejectione firm the Case was, The H. 38 Eliz. C. B. Wells and Partridge's
Case, Cro. 1. part.
Plaintiff was Lessee for years of a Copyhold; and the Custom of the Manor
was, That a Copyholder might let the Land for 3 years. It was the opinion of
Anderson Chief Justice, That the Lessee of a Copyholder cannot maintain
Ejectione firm; but if he might, he ought to show his Lessor's Estate, or his
License, or a special Custom, to warrant it.

A Copyholder made a Lease for M. 14 and 15 Eliz. Leon. 1. part, 4.
years by Indenture warranted by the Custom. It was adjudged, That the Lessee
should maintain Ejectione firm; although it was strongly objected, That if it
were so, then the Plaintiff should have an Habere facias possessionem, and so
Copy-holds should be ordered by the Laws of the Land.

The Custom of a Manor was, That if any Copyholder of Inheritance died, P. 33
Eliz. in B. R. Cole and Wall's Case, Leon. 1. part, 328.
his Heir within the age of 14 years, then the Lord of the Manor might grant
the Custody of his Body and Lands* to whom he pleased: A Copyholder of
Inheritance died, his Heir within the age of 14 years: The Lord committed the
Custody of his Body and Lands to J S, who, being ejected, brought a Writ of
Ejectione Custody of his Body. It was the opinion of the Justices, That the
Action did not lie. But it was agreed in that Case, That an Ejectione firm
lies upon a Demise of Copy-hold-lands by Lease for years by the Copyholder
himself, but not upon a Demise by the Lord of the Copyhold.

Note, It was Resolved by the Justices, Coke 4. part, 26. in Melwich^'s Case.
M. 8 Jac. in C^. B. Craneford and Freshwater's Case, acc.
That the Lessee of a Copyholder for a year may maintain an Ejectione firm:
for inasmuch as his Term is warranted by the Law by force of the general
Custom of the Realm, it is but reason that, H. 39 Eliz. Cro. 1. part, Goodwin
and Langhurst's Case, acc.
if he be ejected, he should have an Ejectione firm; for it is a speedy Course
for a Copyholder to gain the possession of the Land against a Stranger, being
no more then what right requires to be yielded him for the Recovery of his
Estate.

SECT. XXI.
What Statutes and Acts of Parliament do extend to Copy-holds and
Copy-hold-estates, what not.

SOme things concerning this Division being spoken of in the former part of
this Treatise, and some particular Statutes there being mentioned within which
Copy-holds are included, and in what not, I shall refer the Reader thereunto;
adding only a few Cases upon some particular Acts not therein mentioned, with
the Authorities and Resolutions of the Justices therein. And as concerning
within what Statutes Copy-holds are, I shall take and rely upon the general
Rule Coke 3. part* Heydon's Case.
which is put in Sir Edward Coke's 3. part of his Reports, in Heydon's Case,
viz. When a Statute or Act of Parliament does alter the Service, Tenure,
Interest of the Estate, or other thing in prejudice of the Lord or of the
Custom of the Manor, or in prejudice of the Tenant, there the general words of
such Statute or Act of Parliament do not extend to Copy-holds or
Copy-hold-estates: But when the Statute or Act of Parliament is generally made
for the good of the Commonweal, and no prejudice can come thereby, by
alteration of any Service, Tenure, or Interest, or Custom used within the
Manor, there Copy-holds and Copy-hold-estates are within the purview of such
Statutes or Acts.

Proofs.
It was Resolved by all the Justices, 6 Jac. in Co. B. Coke Select Cases 27, 28.
That no Tenure shall pay for a reasonable Aid to make the eldest Son Knight,
or to marry the eldest Daughter, but Tenure by Knight's-Service or Tenure in
Littl. 16. sect. 36.
Socage. Now Littleton says, that all Tenures are either Knight's-Service or
Socage: And the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 36. of reasonable Aid extends only
to such Tenures. The Question then is, Whether a Copy-hold-Tenure be within
that Statute. I shall not determine the Question, for that I do not find it
moved in any Book of the Common Law: But although I humbly conceive Copy-holds
be within the general words of Mr. Littleton, (all Tenures in Socage;) yet that
the said Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 36. does not extend to Copy-holds. Quere of
it.

The Statute of Westminster. 2. de Donis conditionalibus Statute Westminster. 2. de Donis.
I conceive does not extend to Copy-holds within the general words thereof. The
words of the Statute are of Gifts per Chartam datis; and Copy-holds do not pass
by Deeds, but by Surrenders. But yet it is conceived, that although they be not
within the general Words of the Statute, yet they are within the Equity of the
said Statute, if there be a Custom to warrant such Estates.

The Case was, A Copyholder in Fee H. 37 Eliz. in Co. B. Church and Wyatt's
Case, Moore 637.
surrendered his Copy-hold-lands to the Life of his Will; and having a Daughter
born, and his Wife with Child, he devised part of his said Lands to his Son or
Daughter which his Wife went with, and Haeredibus suis legitime procreatis; and
the residue thereof he devised to his Daughter born, to have to her and the
fruit of her body. One Point in this Case was, What Estate the Daughter born
had in the said Copy-hold-lands, if in Tail or not. It was said, It was a
Fee-tail in the Daughter born. But it was much doubted if it was an Estate
within the said Statute de Donis, etc. But in that Case it was agreed, That
Copyhold might be entailed by Custom cooperating with the said Statute, and
if not within the words, yet within the Equity of the said Statute.

The Statute of Praerogativa Regis, cap. Stat. Praerogat. Regis, cap. 9 and 10.
Co. 8. part, 170. in Towerson's Case. Co. 4. part, 127. in Beverly's Case.
9 and 10. gives the Lands of Idiots natural to the King, he finding them
convenient Maintenance out of the Profits thereof: But if the Idiot has
Copy-hold-lands descended unto him, the King shall not have the Wardship of
those Lands therewith, out of the Profits thereof to maintain the Idiot,
because the same would be prejudicial to the Lord of the Manor, of whom the
Lands are holden by Copy. But yet all Alienations made by an Idiot of his
Copy-hold-lands, after Office found, shall be avoided by the King.

Copy-hold-lands are not within the Stat. West. 2. cap. 20.
Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 20. of Executions.
For if a Judgment be had in a Court of Record against a Copyholder for Debt
and Damages, although the Plaintiff may have Execution by Fieri facias against
his Goods, or a Capias against his Body; yet he cannot have Execution of the
moyetie of his Copy-hold-lands by Elegit, for that Copy-hold-lands are not
within that Statute. And so it is, if a Statute-Merchant or Staple be
acknowledged by a Copyholder for the payment of Money at a day certain, which
is not paid, his Copy-hold-lands are not extendable for the same. And the
reason of these Cases is, because no person can come to Copy-holds but by
Admittance of the Lord; and the Lord should thereby lose his Fine which is due
upon Admittance, if the party might have the Lands upon Extent delivered unto
him.

If Tenant by the Courtesy, or Lessee Pasc. 12 Eliz. in Co. B. Moore 94.
for years, be of a Manor, and Copy-holds were in his hands by Forfeiture or
other determination, and he binds himself in a Statute, and afterward he
devises the Copyhold again; the Copyhold shall be liable to the Statute. But
if a Copyholder binds himself in a Statute-Merchant or Staple, his
Copy-hold-lands shall not be extended upon the said Statute, because therein he
has but an Estate at will.

Copy-hold-lands are not within the Statute Stat. 31 H. 8. cap. 13.
of 31 H. 8. cap. 13. of Monasteries.
The Guardians of the College of Otlery, Lords of a Manor, granted M. 25 and
26 Eliz. in the Exchequer, Leon. 1. part, 4.
Lands for 3 Lives by Copy, according to the Custom of the Manor; afterward
in 30 H. 8. they leased the Lands to J S, rendering the accustomed Rent, and
afterward surrendered their College to King Hen. 8. And if the Lease, being
within one year of the Surrender, was within the Statute or not, was the
Question. The Case is not adjudg'd, but a Quere made of it. But in that Case it
was adjudged, That if there be Lord of a Copyholder for life, and the Lord
grants a Rentcharge out of his Manor, of which the Copyhold is parcel, and
then the Copyholder does surrender to the Use of another, who is admitted; he
shall not hold the Lands charged: but if he dies, so as his Estate is
determined, and the Lord grants the Land to another de novo to hold by Copy,
the new Tenant shall hold the Land charged.

Copy-hold-lands not within the Statute of 32 H. 8. of Rents.
The Lord of a Manor (of which Tr. 27 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 1201. Sands and
Hempstrie's Case, Leon. 2. part, 109.
there were Copy-holds) granted a Rentcharge for life, and afterward made a
Feoffment of the Manor to J S and his Heirs, who granted a Copyhold for life:
J S died, and the Rent was behind, and the Grantee of the Rent distrained for
the Arrerages. It was Resolved in that Case, That the possession of the
Copyholder was not chargeable to the Distress, for that the Copyholder was
not in by him who immediately ought to pay the Rent, but in the possession of
the Land by the Custom. But Quere Hill. 18 Eliz. in Co. B. the Earl of
Westmorland's Case, Leon. 3. part, 59.
that Case: and vide Hill. 18 Eliz. in Co. B. the Earl of Westmorland's Case.
For there the Case was, That the Demesnes of a Manor were usually let for lives
by Copy, and the Lord granted a Rentcharge to J D pro Consilio impendendo for
life, and afterward conveyed the Manor to J N in Tail: The Rent was behind,
and the Grantee of the Rent died, and the Executors of the Grantee distrained
for the Arrerages. And there it was adjudged, That the Copyholder should hold
the Lands charged.

Copy-hold-lands not within the Statute of 32 H. 8. of Conditions.
A Copyholder by License made a Lease by Indenture for 21 years rendering Rent:
The Lessee covenanted to lay upon the Lands yearly 40 Loads of Dung: Afterward
the Copyholder surrendered his Lands unto another in Fee, M. 20 Jac. in C. B.
Plott and Plomer's Case, Cro. 1. part, 17.
who was admitted. The Point was, If he was such an Assignee as might have
Covenant within the Statute of 32 H. 8. Quere; for the Case was not Resolved.

A Copyholder by License of the Lord Tr. 10 Jac. in B. R. Brasier and Beale's
Case, Yelv. 223.
made a Lease for 60 years, if he so long lived, rendering Rent, upon Condition
to re-enter: The Copyholder surrendered to the Lessor of the Plaintiff in Fee,
who demanded the Rent, which was not paid. It was Resolved in this Case, That
the Entry of the Lessor was not lawful, for that Copy-hold-lands were not
within the Statute of Conditions, nor the Lessor such an Assignee as the
Statute intended: For the Assignee of a Copyholder being in only by Custom,
is not privy to the Lease made by the first Copyholder, nor in by him, but may
plead his Estate immediately under the Lord.

Note, That in no case, where the King claims a share in the Forfeiture of the
Lands, (as in the Statute of 2 H. 5. which speaks of Lands forfeited for
Heresy, viz. that the King shall have Annum, diem and vastum, as he has for
Lands forfeited for Felony) Copy-hold-lands are not within the general words of
such Statute; for that in such case, if the Copyholder commits Felony, the
Copyhold is presently forfeited to the Lord of the Manor; and therefore out of
the words of that Statute, and other the like Statutes.

The Statute of 12 Eliz. cap. 8. which speaks of Inquisitions or Offices found
by Escheators, does not extend to Copy-hold-lands: for although the same are
not found within the Inquisitions or Offices, yet the King shall not be
entitled to any of the said Copy-hold-lands, but all such Copyholders shall
and may hold and enjoy their Estates and Interests in their said
Copy-hold-lands as formerly they might have done; and the Interest of the
Copyhold is preserved by the said Statute, though it be not found by Office
after the death of the King's Tenant.

The Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 4. of Vid. 30 Eliz. in Scaccario, Leon. 1. part,
98.
Auditors and Registers of the Queen, does not extend to Copy-holds, for that
it should be a great prejudice.

Then for the second part of this Division.

Proofs.
Copy-hold-lands are within the Statute of 4 H. 7. of Fines.
If I levy a Fine of my Copy-hold-lands, Vid. 30 Eliz. Leon. 99. acc.
and 5 years pass; not only the Lord is thereby barred as to the Freehold of
it and the Inheritance, but I, who am the Copyholder, am also barred as to my
Possession: For the intent of the Vid. Coke 5. part, Sattyn's Case.
Statute was to take away all Controversies, and litibus finem imponere; and
Contention may as well arise and be about Copy-hold-lands as for
Free-hold-lands at the Common Law.

Copy-hold-lands are within the Statute of 29 Eliz. and other Statutes of
Recusancy.
A Recusant being convict for not paying Tr. 30 Eliz. in Scaccario, Saliard and
Ever^t's Case, Leon. 1. part, 97.
of 20 l. a month forfeited by the said Statute, a Commission issued out of the
E^chequer to enquire and seize all his Goods, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments liable to such Seizure: Upon the Return of the Commission it
appeared, That some of the Lands returned were Copy-hold-lands. It was a
Question if they were within the Statute. It was the opinion of the Court, That
they were within the Equity of the Statute: for the words of the Statute are,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which are forcible words; and the intention
of the Statute was, That the Queen should have all the Goods, and the Recusant
by the words of the Statute was only to have the third part of his Lands,
which is all that the Law gives him: And if Copy-hold-lands should not be
within the Statute, if a Recusant, who had great Possessions only of
Copy-hold-lands, should go unpunished, it was contrary to the meaning of the
Makers of the Act.

Copy-holds are within the Statutes of 13 Eliz. and 1 Jacobi.
It was Resolved by all the Justices, Tr. 15 Jac. in* B. R. Cris^ and Prat's
Case, Noth. 34, 35, and 36.
That Copyhold is within the Statutes of 13 Eliz. and 1 Jacobi, because it is
no prejudice to the Lord, for that there ought to be a Composition with the
Lord and the Vendee of the Lands; and although the Sale is and ought to be by
Indenture, yet the Vendee ought to be admitted by the Lord. 2. The words of the
Statute of 13 Eliz. expressly are, That the Commissioners shall dispose of Lands
as well Copy as Free; and the said Statutes shall be construed most
beneficially for Creditors, i. e. suum cuique tribuere.

There are diverse other Statutes and Acts of Parliament which extend to
Copy-hold-lands, viz. 1. The Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 13 and 14. of Forgery. 2.
The Statutes of 5 R. 2. of Departure out of the Realm, and 14 Eliz. of
Fugitives. 3. The Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 9. of Buying of Pretensed Titles.
All which Statutes extend to Copy-hold-lands; of which I might show many Cases
and Resolutions of the Justices in their several Courts. But because the same
would make this Section to be long and tedious, and my Intention was to use
much brevity in this Addition and Amplification of what in the former part of
this Treatise has been written concerning Copyhold and Customary Estates; I
shall here put an End to the Work.

FINIS.
The Contents of the several Sections.
SECTION I. WHat a Surrender of Copyhold or Customary Estate is; to whom, and
in what manner and place it is to be done; and who shall be said such a Tenant
of a Copyhold* as may make such a Surrender. Page 1 Sect. II. Whether a
Copyhold may be said to be surrendered by any Act, Words, or Agreement, made
betwixt the Lord and the Copyholder, or by the Copyholder with a Stranger
made in the Court, in the Presence of the Lord or his Steward. 5 Sect. III. Of
Surrenders out of Court; and where Surrenders to the Steward, Deputy-steward,
or into the hands of Tenants of the Manor, out of Court, shall be good, where
not. 9 Sect. IV. Where, although Surrenders are made to the Lord or to Tenants
out of Court by Custom, yet nothing passes out of the Copyholder before
Admittance: And what shall be a good Admittance in such case, what not. 17
Sect. V. Where some things, and what things, may be done by the Copyholder or
his Heir before Admittance. 21 Sect. VI. Where the Lord is but an Instrument to
convey the Copyhold by Admittance only, and that the Surrenderee is in by the
Copyholder, and not by the Lord. 23 Sect. VII. Where the Admittance of the
particular Tenant shall be the Admittance of him in the Remainder. 27 Sect.
VIII. By what and whose Act, either of the Law, of the Copyholder himself, or
of the Lord, severally or all together, the Copy-land or Estate shall be gone,
determined, or extinguished; and where suspended only. 30 Sect. IX. Of
Forfeitures of Copy-holds and Copy-hold-estates; and what Acts or things done*
by the Copyholder shall amount unto or be adjudged a Forfeiture of the
Copy-holder's Estate, what not. 36 Sect. X. Where denial or refusal to pay
his Rent, Fine, or to do his other Customs and Services, shall be a
Forfeiture of his Copyhold and Copy-hold-estate, and where not. 39 Sect. XI.
Where the Act of the Lord, and what Act of his, shall dispense with a
Forfeiture made by his Copyholder; where and what not. 48 Sect. XII. Whether
Copy-hold-lands be within the Statute of Westminster. 2. and may be entailed, or not;
and where and by what Acts the Issues in tail may be barred; and what shall be
a Discontinuance of the Estate, what not. 51 Sect. XIII. What things are
incident to a Copyholder, and what he may take of common right without the
Grant or License of the Lord: And what Acts upon the Land shall bind the
Copyholder, what not. 64 Sect. XIV. Where the Lord of the Manor shall be
Chancellor in his own Court, to determine the Differences which arise betwixt
Copyholders. 69 Sect. XV. Of Surrenders upon Conditions; and where such
Surrenders shall be good, where not. 70 Sect. XVI. Where Custom which warrants
the Lord or his Copyholder to grant greater Estates, warrants the Grants of
lesser Estates. 76 Sect. XVII. Who shall be said such a Lord of a Manor as may
grant Copy-hold-estates; and how long such Estates shall continue; and what
persons shall be capable of Copy-hold-estates, what not; and what may be
granted by Copy. 79 Sect. XVIII. What Acts or things are inseparable, and must
be done by the Copyholder himself; and what acts and where may be done by his
Attorney. 83 Sect. XIX. What Customs within Copy-hold-Manors shall be said to
be good and reasonable Customs, and what not. 88 Sect. XX. Where and in what
case a Copyholder or his Lessee upon an Ouster may have and maintain against
the Ejector an Ejectione firm, and where and in what not. 97 Sect. XXI. What
Statutes and Acts of Parliament do extend to Copy-holds and Copy-hold-estates,
what not. 99
FINIS.

