A SERMON Preached before Their MAJESTY'S, IN St. JAMES's ON ADVENT-SUNDAY
November the 28 th. 1686.

By THOMAS CODRINGTON Preacher in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Published by Their Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Nathaniel Thompson at the Entrance into Old-Spring-Garden
near Charing Cross, 1687.

A SERMON Preached before Their MAJESTY'S On Sunday Oct. 24. 1686.
Matthew. XXII. ver. 21. Reddite ergo quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari.

Render therefore to Caesar the things which are due to Caesar.


SImplicity of Heart, (Most Sacred MAJESTY,) simplicity of Heart, is one of the
fairest Whites, God carries in his Eye; nor does he love Plain-Dealer more than
he hates Dissembler.

And yet, what practice is there to be found, more common, and usual with Man,
than that of Dissimulation; insomuch, that it is believed, and said; he knows
not how to live, who cannot dissemble. Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere.

But were the Heart Transparent, were our Thoughts Visible, the Dissemblers
Trade would fail him: Since all dissimulation takes its rise from a Supposal,
that He, who hears our Words, sees not our Thoughts: For, to enlarge upon our
Love for him, who sees our Heart, and knows we Hate him, would be to run
Counter to our Aim, and break the Ladder we designed to climb by.

Hence, notwithstanding all those convincing Arguments they found in Scripture,
to believe our Savior CHRIST was God, notwithstanding all those unheard of
Miracles wrought in confirmation of this Truth, evident it is, the Jews
believed him only to be Man, and as mere Man dealt with him.

For, had they indeed believed him to be God, that is Scrutator Cordium, the
Searcher and Inspecter of all Hearts, speaking to him, who knew their meaning,
they doubtless would have spoke still what they meant, whereas in all their
smooth Addresses to him, we may observe their Tongue, and Heart, point several
ways, and by their daily attempts to entrap him with their Words, we are
convinced, they judged him ignorant of their Thoughts, and by consequence, not
God.

And yet, at those very times, they played the Hypocrites, and Angled with a
double Rod; our Savior, by manifesting that He knew their Design, made it
evident that He saw their Hearts, and was as well spectator of of their
Thoughts, as witness of their Actions.

Yet they run blindly on still, still believing that our Savior knew no more
than what he saw, made it their daily study to entrap him; but still imposed
upon, still ensnared themselves, and amply verified that Text which tells us, 1
Cor. cap. 3.
Sapientia hujus Mundi stultitia est apud Deum, The wisdom of Man is folly in
the Eyes of God; For, what greater folly can there be, then in order to obtain
our end, to choose those very Mediums lead from it? And such was this days folly
of the Jews.

They were much willing to believe, that being the People of God, they lay
under no obligation to pay either Tax, or Tribute to a Heathen Emperor; and to
make our Savior responsible for the denial of it, and for all Tumult should
ensue upon such denial, they address themselves this day to him in a most
humble way, and with a parcel of Sugared words, try to couch their Rebellious
Inclination under his Warrant; and so by making him an Enemy to Caesar's
Interest, render him a Foe to his own safe Being: And by betraying him thus to
Caesar's Anger, cause him to fall a much longed for Sacrifice to their malice.

But this their Wisdom showed it self true Folly, and soon they found themseves
entangled in that very Net, they spread to catch our Savior with.

For He, ever a friend to Caesar's just Prerogatives, and that Allegiance is
due from every Subject to his Prince, instead of quitting them from their
Obligation, he chains them faster to it; and lets them know, that whatever has
the taste of Rebel-humour, is no fit Viand to be dish'd for Heaven, nor God to
be enriched by Caesar's losses; But that whoever would stand fair in the Eye of
Heaven, must submit to those who rule the Earth. And that none does, or can
play his Game fair with God, who cuts the Cards foul to Caesar: and with this
Lesson in their Ear, away our Savior packs this pack of Treacherous
Hypocrites, saying, Reddite ergo quae est Caesaris Caesari: Go, and Render to
Caesar the things which are due to Caesar.

Since then Submission, Loyalty and Fidelity are things due to Caesar, I cannot
methinks at present, Employ my Time, or Labor better, than, by a short
enquiry, to find out, in the first place, who those are, That give indeed to
Caesar what is due to Caesar; that is, who act the Loyal, and the Faithful
Subjects.

And, in the next, and last part of my Discourse, to observe, what Precipice of
danger they walk on; what Curse, what Punishment they lie open to, who give not
unto Caesar what is due to Caesar; that is, in other words, who offer at, side
with, or promote Rebellion.

For the better discharge of which Spiritual Province, let us now first of all,
bend knees to Heaven, and address our selves for help to that ever overflowing
Fountain of Goodness, the Incarnate Word, by the Mediation of his Virgin
Mother, Ave Mariae.

Render therefore unto Caesar, the things which are due to Caesar.


Toward the final close of all things, Abundabit iniquitas: Iniquity, (says
our Savior Christ) shall abound.

But all Iniquity, consists either in a Recoil from our Obligation to God, or
in a Revolt from our Duty to Caesar.

We Recoil from God by Murder, Theft, Adultery, and all commission of such
other Crimes. We Revolt from Caesar by Treasonous Designs, Rebellious
Practices. But neither Treason, nor Rebellion, would find footing in the World,
if Caesar had his Due; nor any of these forementioned Enormities have Being,
if God enjoyed his Right.

Well then, in order to the suppression of Iniquity, and amendment of the
World, may our Savior say, Reddite quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari, Give to Caesar
what is due to Caesar; Since Caesar's Due, and God's just Right, are so
interwoven, that as Caesar cannot have His Due, while God wants His Right: So
neither can God have His Right, while Caesar wants His Due.

For, if to obey all Lawful Magistrates, be a Christian Obligation, and part of
our Duty to God, and this latter cannot be discharged, if the former be not
performed, how can we comply with our Duty to God in the fulfillment of this his
Precept, and yet not obey the command of Caesar, who is Supreme Magistrate of
all?

As then it cannot but seem a piece of Heathenish folly to think of living in a
due subjection to God, while we continue Rebels to Caesar; so must it needs be
a part of Christian Wisdom, to live in a due subjection to Caesar, that we may
not be looked upon as Rebels to God. Reddite ergo quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari.
Let us therefore be in all things true and faithful Subjects, since to be God's
by a just Conformity; we must be Caesar's by a due Compliancy, and by lying
under the censure of Enemies to either, we imprint upon our selves the
Character of Foes to both.

Our Savior in St. Matthew Cap. 21.
brings Two upon the Stage; the one of which, bid do a thing, says No, but does
it; the other, with a ready Compliancy, makes Answer, that he will, but does it
not.

Now the question is, Whether either of these may be justly ranked amongst
Loyal Subjects; since both appear to have strayed from their Duty; the one by
Opposal, the other by Neglect; in that Man's Words there seems to be Affront,
Abuse in this Man's Actions; and neither of them appear to carry look of
Loyalty, or make show of Duty.

And yet, He who opposes, (if we mind Commentators,) may be a Cordial Friend, a
Loyal Subject; And saying, No, he may not so much refuse to do the work
enjoined him, as make known that reluctance, he finds within himself to do it:
And this reluctance too, may be excusable, and an effect of Loyalty.

To which purpose we read how David, 2 King. 24.
set upon an overcurious pin, commanded Joab to number all his People. Joab
knew well such enterprise to be dangerous, and like, if prosecuted, to bring
from Heaven Vengeance down upon both King, and People; and thereupon when bid
to do it, He, in effect, said No, by showing great Reluctance to comply,
arguing against it, and wishing David to consider well, what the Event might be
of such a rash adventure: And yet because so ordered by his King, he did it
finally, though with much regret.

As then it may not seem to clash with the Duty of a Loyal Subject, modestly to
argue against what his King proposes; or reason calmly this, or that Case with
him; so it is his Obligation to Obey, when what is Commanded, is insisted on,
though he approve not of it. And thus, who says no, though over bold and
confident, may be True, and Loyal.

But who engages readily to comply, who tacks on Wings before his Sovereigns
Face, as it were, for greater Expedition, and when his Sovereign's back is
turned, casting them off again, Steers quite contrary ways; such Subject wears
a Heart, but little known to Loyalty; And if in power, may cause the Pillars
which support the Safety of his Prince to shake, and totter; not to stand firm,
and shockless.

But, how say you, how dare such Subject, having took upon him to make the
Wheels run on; how dare he, or how can he make them stop, and frustrate
expectation? Not by refusing to perform his Promise, but by contriving how to
obstruct Performance: That is,

Or by means of some more fair pretense, keep the Ship tottering to and fro, at
Anchor, till the Wind fails, which should, and might, had Sail in time been
spread, have bore it on with a lucky Gale to Action:

Or, by the help of long Delays, drawing by Degrees the Affair in hand from
Caesar's View, place it at last, amongst the things forgotten:

Or, finally, by new and new Stumblingblocks, still cast in the way, quite tire
out those that pursue it.

And hence it is, that our Savior Christ, sending the rough one off with a
gentle Character, leaves this Fair-spoken, but False-hearted Subject, under the
Arrest of more hard Censure.

And indeed with cause; for who says No, although he stand to it; that is,
although he openly, and violently Resist, in words, his Prince; when you have
spoke the worst of such Resistance, you can but liken it, as David does, Psalm.
19.
Sagettae volanti in die; To an Arrow shot by day; which seen, does little hurt.

But who above-Board plays his Sovereign's Game, and under Deck his own; who
says Amen to all things, and then obstructs the Execution of what has been
determined, Wounds with his very Balsom, Corrodes with Lenitives; wraps up the
Foe in Friend, the Night in Day, Eclipse, in Sunshine; And this is that Psalm.
19.
Negotium perambulans in tenebris, An Affair carried on in darkness; from which
the Royal Prophet begs, and begs hard, to be delivered, and so may every Caesar.

Loyalty, is of such Daunting Nature, and so Majestic Look, as gives none
leave barefaced to Assault it: And that all Attempts against it, are
unwarrantable, is made evident by those smooth Pretenses to break from it, all
make their Ushers to Disloyal Action.

Absalom, 2 King. c. 15.
now ambitious of a Crown, and hot upon contrivance how to gain it, in order to
that War he was determined to involve the Kingdom in, makes use of subtle
Artifice; and first, he strives to render himself acceptable to the People, by
taking their pretended wrongs to heart, Videntur mihi sermones tui justi: Your
Cause is good, says he, to each disgusted Subject, your Grievance great, and
all your Complaints just, and reasonable.

And having thus tried to endear himself, he next attempts, by throwing Scandal
on him, to make the King his Father Odious to them. Sed non est qui te audiat
constitutus a Rege: But alas, pursues he, where the main Spring is at a loss,
and moves not, how should the lesser Wheels keep steady in their motion! Your
King, your King, sleeps to his Charge, minds not his Obligation; It Is like
enough he may be still contriving, but it is to post himself well, and not You;
to Crown his own, not your despised wishes: The Law's in Fetters, Equity a
Bond-slave, Justice hides; and as, who should, and might effect it, want Good
Will; so those, who would, are destitute of Power to do thee Reason.

Thus Absalom laid the Train, that was to blow up Caesar; and when thus the
People are Alarmed, Caesar's beset, the Tide of Tumult's gathering, and if he
clap not Sluice down close upon it, the swelling Flood will soon break in upon
him; For what is it else, to say, Non est qui te audiat; you cannot be heard, you
cannot have Justice done ye, you cannot enjoy the benefit of the Laws, while this
King Reigns, but that you must attempt to get another. Non est qui te audiat.

That Man we cherish a sincere esteem for, we would have all the World to set a
value on; nor can we be true Friends to him, whose fierce Opponents we wish
well to, whose well known Foes we interleague with; since thus we do at once
both stroke, and buffet him, Own, and Renounce him, Hug him in our Arms, and
Cast him from us; a Practice neither Friendly, nor Faithful heart can be
acquainted with.

St. Luke Cap. 19.
makes mention of a certain Subject, or Servant, who having received from the
hands of the Lord a Talent to be improved, wraps it up in his Handkerchief, and
hides it deep in the Earth; and as he could not find in his heart to Improve
it, so neither would he venture to Impair it; but, when called for, delivers it
back just as he took it, without all improvement, without all impairment.

But, that sad Fate, o'retook this his indifferency, makes good what last was
said, and shows God a mortal Foe to double Dealing, and that more old than
helpful Art of Trimming, was, to his cost, made use of by this Servant; who, by
dividing himself betwixt those Two opposite Powers, God, and the World, thought
to provide at once both for his future Safety, and his present Ease.

He aimed to please God, by foulding up his Guilt in clean Linen, and taking
care to preserve it; And at the same, by Non-use, or concealment of it,
Ecclipsing the Glory of him that gave it, he cologu'd apparently with the
World; and, as afraid to incur the displeasure of the one, so unwilling to lose
his Interest with the other; while he catches at the favor of God, by
receiving his Bounty with a thankful Reverence, he strives to ingratiate with
the World, by neither glorying in it, nor making any good use of it. Matthew. 25.
Abscondit pecuniam Domini sui.

Many such Trimming Servants are in every Kingdom to be found, who driving on a
double Interest, and serving Two opposite Powers, by aiming to gain both, win
neither; or rather, who by studying to dis-oblige neither, injure both; For,
according to our Savior, who they are not for, they are against; and being in
reality for neither, neither has cause, with any pleasing Eye, to look upon
them, who are against both, and strive to keep the Scales in equal Poise, that,
They, in their Persons, and Fortunes, neither by the one, nor by the other's
too-prevalent Power, may suffer.

The truth on it is, to these, their private Interest may seem to be, both Ark,
and Dagon; and concerned for neither Parties happiness, farther than their own,
may seem depending on it; it is Cross, or Pile to them, who is uppermost, so
they keep safe; nor care they what Wind blows, so it fill their Sails, and
carry them out of danger.

And this Self-preservation so Bygots them, that what they do, they do not; and
with the same Breath, Unvote, what they have Voted.

For while they say to the one, Be Resolute, yet not Severe, nor Sudden; what
is it else they say, but, Strike, and hold your Hand: And in their Converse
with the other, while they tell him, he must not stout it with his Betters, yet
may lay claim to, and hold fast likewise what he reckons his, let who will tugg
for it: What amounts this advice to; What other sense carry such words, but
this, Comply, and yet be Refractory; Give Back, and Stand your Ground.

And how little then, upon the whole, are either of the two Powers, they hault
betwixt, indebted to such Counselors, obliged by such Abbettors; who pushing
on the one, do pull him back; and pulling back the other, push him on: and
looking on themselves, as Prop to both, give in reality Support to neither.

Since then, the thus disposed, cannot well be truly Loyal; let us take a view
of those are known to be so, and observe, who give indeed to Caesar, what is due
to him.

ALl the World once was subject to one Power, awed by one Scepter, controlled
by one Lawgiver; and then was Majesty indeed Majestic, set off, and Circled
with a Glory, each Dazzled Eye both Joy'd, and Feared to look on: Now, Crowns
look Dim on it, Scepters have lost their Awfulness, and strangely lessened is
that State, and Grandeur, with which Kings heretofore did Prop their
Sovereignty.

And sure the reason, in some good part, is, because Subjects, not Zealing now,
as formerly, their Prince's Glory, contribute less to the Augmentation of it,
beating their Brains, and studying how to increase their Own, not Caesar's
Luster, how to make themselves, not Caesar, High and Mighty: Whereas, whatever
they possess, of Power, of Treasure, or of Popular Fame, their Obligation, is,
to lay it all at Caesar's Feet, to dedicate it all to Caesar's Service, and
Ambition nothing, but the Name, and Character, of Loyal Subjects.

In confirmation of which Truth, we read, 2. King. c. 12.
How the forementioned Joab, General of David's Forces, having by a close and
vigorous Siege of their chief City, brought the People of Rabaath to treat of a
Surrender, leaves the final Agreement to King David himself; and inviting him
then, and not till then, down to the Camp, gives this reason for his
Invitation; Ne nomini meo ascribatur Victoria: Least, says he, to my Gourage,
and Conduct, and not to thy Valor, and Wisdom, O my King, the Victory be
Ascribed.

What Noble Soul, what Generous Spirit, did this great Warrior bear? who would
not suffer Fame to blow her Trumpet over any Head, but that of Caesar; who took
it off his own, to adorn his Sovereign's back with dress of Honor.

Such heretofore were Subjects to their Prince, such was the Loyalty of their
Hearts, such their Zeal, to place each Glorious wreath on Caesar's Head; and to
add new Rays unto his Luster, Eclipse their own, and take a pride to do it: Ne
nomini meo ascribuntur Victoria: Least I, says this great Champion, this brave
General, least I, and not my King, carry the name of Conqueror; and yet 'twas
He, and not his King that Conquered. Thus Joab.

And thus he gives the World to understand, That it is the Duty of each Loyal
Subject, reserving to himself the Toil, and Sweat of each noble Enterprise; to
resign the Glory of it, to his Prince, to keep for him the Laurel.

It is yet farther to be marked, how, that while Caesar stands Unshock'd, while
his Power prevails, and he bears high in the use of his Prerogatives, all are
his Champions, all stand by him, and Swords keep drawn on all sides to defend
him; but the Scene Changing, and Caesar now Opposed by some strong Hand, by
some fierce Danger threatened; Loyalty gives back, Swords sheath again, his
Champions fail him; and who, while yet he did enjoy a Calm, kept ever at his
Elbow, Sailed close by him; the Tempest up, provide for their own Safety, look
round for Haven, and give their Caesar leave to Ride alone upon the threatening
Billows.

And yet, it is Then, Then it is that Loyalty should give Proof of it self; then
it is, all faithful Subjects, by Adherence to him, by a Will, to run his Fate,
offer indeed to Caesar, what they Owe Him, that is, a Sacrifice of their Lives
and Fortunes.

This likewise is a Truth confirmed by Sacred History, which tells us, 2 King.
c. 15.
How that Absalom now in Arms, The Valorous Athai hasting to David's Aid, but
wished by him to withdraw from Danger, made this Reply; In quocunque loco
fueris, Domine me Rex, sive in Morte, sive in Vita, ibi erit servus tuus, Where
ever he shall be, says Athai, however Fate shall dispose of my Lord and
Sovereign, whether to his Ruin, or to his Safety; whether to his Glory, or
Reproach; in the same Bottom will he Embark himself, the selfsame Oar, is his
Servant Athai resolved to Row with.

Behold another glorious pattern of Fidelity, Rival to Joab, and no less
passionate Lover of his Prince: The one stood up a Zealot for his Glory, the
other for his Caesar's Safety.

Joab was content to hide amidst the Crowd of dimmer Lights, to make his
Sovereign shine a Star of the first Magnitude; Athai's Ambition was to be the
Shield should cover him from Danger; Both worthy to have Trophies, Trophies of
Gold erected to their Memory, though each did but his Duty, and no more, than
every Loyal Subject is bound to do.

Joab Inspires us, by lessening our selves, to make our Sovereign great; Athai
tells us, That it is a duty still Incumbent on us, to fall, as well as stand; as
well to sink as swim with Caesar, and keep for ever to those Paths he treads
in, whether these be paths of Safety, or paths of Danger, paths of Happiness,
or paths of Misery, paths of Life, or paths of Death. Quocunque loco fueris
sive in morte, sive in vita, ibi erit servus tuus.

To conclude this part of my Discourse: The same King David, 2 Kings. (...)
expressing once before his Armed Troops, a desire to taste of those Waters,
which were kept in the Cistern of Bethlehem, Three of his Soldiers withdrawing
from the rest, break in upon the Enemy; And, to fulfill their Sovereign's
Desire, to Crown his Wish, by offering themselves to as many Swords, as there
were Soldiers, to as many Wounds as there were Swords in the Philistian Army,
leave it to Posterity, as a plausible Truth, That not only the express Commands
of Sovereign, when a just one, are to be obeyed, but every Lawful Wish, each
his known Inclination, to be complied with, though sometimes at the expense of
Sweat and Blood.

And Now to comprehend in short, what more at length, I have discoursed of to
you, I must make use of those the Royal Prophet's words, Psalm. 44.
Eructavit Cor meum verbum bonum. My heart, says he, (speaking in the Person of
a Loyal Subject,) my heart has uttered a good word: And what great news is
this? has he not uttered many? What word is there, in all those spiritual
Lectures, he reads to us, which is not good? And why then speaks he, as if the
word now on his Tongue, were the only good one?

This is to show the Excellency of that word he is now about to utter, and make
us apprehend the more than usual goodness of it; And what then is it? Dico ego
opera mea Regi: Behold the words so excellently good, so truly plausible. Dico
ego opera mea Regi. My Works, says he, are such as need no Mask to hide them
from my King; I tell him frankly all, and dedicate my self, and them both to
his Service; all my whole study, all my contrivance is, to discharge fully, and
rightly my Duty to him.

I drive not on a double Interest; nor carry I an Indifferency who is
uppermost, so I keep safe; but will have Caesar sway without control, what
ever my Fate prove; Nor engage I in any promises before my Sovereign's Face,
but what behind his Back I labor to make good; in all Men's hearing, I own my
self an Enemy to his Foes, and take into my Breast, wear next my Heart, all
those who are his Friends; what ever Power, or Privilege, whatever Honors
ennoble and enrich me, I look upon as Grafts planted by Caesar's Gracious Hand,
and all the Fruits, they yield, Memorials of his Goodness; and thus find cause
to run all Hazards with him, and glory more to march through tearing Briars at
a distance from him, for his sake; than to be seated, for my own, on flowery
Bank, close by him: Nor reap I any comfort from those Works, though such, as
make all Mankind my Adorers, if these advance not my Caesar's Glory; if these
contribute not to my Caesar's Safety; Eructavit cor meum verbum bonum, dico
opera mea Regi. Thus acts he, and thus speaks he, and speaks it from his heart
each faithful Subject.

And thus in part you have been showed what things are due to Caesar; and what
the ingredients are, which make up that Noble Compound of a Loyal Subject. And,
as I doubt not, but that its Lovely Countenance, and those fair Charms sit on
it, have long since gained You to her, and made You set a Value on this True
Maid of Honor, LOYALTY.

So, the Monstrous Form, that Killing Asspect it appears with, those Frights,
those Fears, those Dangers, which attend it, cannot but cause you both to hate,
and shun, that blackest Feind, Rebellion; whose Nature, and whose Qualities, I
am now lastly to give you some account of.

Render unto Caesar the things which are due to Caesar.


There Is nothing Man delights in more than Liberty; Nor is there any thing more
grievous to him than Restraint; what wonder then, since all Subjection does
imply Restraint, if who do hate Restraint, abhor Subjection; which may seem to
be the greatest part of all Mankind, and yet to live a Subject is as
Con-natural to Man, as it is to be a Creature.

To which purpose we may observe, how that God had no sooner made Man, then
ennobling him with the Government of other Creatures, he took from him the
Command of himself; and injoining him under pain of Death, not to taste of such
a Fruit, he stripped him of that Supreme Dominion, we all hanker after, and
strive for.

And some will needs wonder, why God designing to make Man happy, and withal
foreseeing, that by a Recess from it, he would make both himself, and his
Posterity Unfortunate, would, nevertheless, lay such injunction upon him.

But the Case is clear, and neither could God have showed himself to be God,
but by Commanding; nor Man have known himself to be Man, but by lying under an
Obligation to Obey.

For had he been placed in a Region of Pleasure, absolute Lord over all things
created, without check to his Will, or restraint upon his Humor; by finding
his Power unbounded, he would have believed his Being independent; and upon a
rash Supposal that such his Being was from himself, he would have judged no
Tribute of Submission, Obsequiousness, or Compliancy, due to any one but
himself; and so standing up a God in his own Opinion, he would quickly have
forgot, all the Obligations, and laid all the Duty of a Creature, and Man
aside; and thus, more than probably speaking, not only to the Prejudice, but
the Nullment of Posterity, have brought upon himself the same unchangeable Lot,
those Apostate Angels, were Doomed to: Quid ei fuit, ut comederet, nisi quia
potestate uti vellet. Adam, says St. Augustine, De Vit. Do.
had no other motive to Eat of the forbidden Fruit, but to learn the Extent of
his Power, and try, whether he were King, or Subject, Master, or Servant,
Absolute, or Depending.

To the same effect, is that of David: Constitute super eos Domine
Legislatorem, ut sciant gentes, quoniam homines sunt, Appoint over Nations, O
God, a Lawgiver, or Supreme Magistrate, that they may know they are Men; For
what is this else to say, but that it is absolutely necessary, for Men, that
they may know they are Men, to live in a perpetual Subjection: And to make us
sensible of this our Obligation, and prevent all endeavors to shake it off, as
it is this day said to us, Reddite quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari. Give to Caesar,
what ye owe to Caesar; live ever in a due Subjection to him.

The first of Men contracted a heavy Debt, a long Score of Punishment, by
trying to unlink that Chain which held him in Subjection to God; And their
attempt to untwist the Line of that Submission, which is due to Caesar, has
cost many Nations dear; and God knows better how to overlook his Own, than
Caesar's Injuries; and sooner pardons, what is most offensive to his best
Friends in Heaven, than what is injurious even to his Foes on Earth.

For, if sin, be Conspiracy against God; whoever sins, acts the Conspirator;
and yet how soon, and easily, does God by pardoning greatest Crimes, forgive
the worst of those Conspire against him; and yet, as if he set more by his
Vassal, then Himself; how loud he threatens all that Plot mischief against Man;
how deeply he Resents each wrong, that is done him. Matthew. 25.
Quod uni ex meis minimus feastis, mihi feastis: What ever injury, says God,
you do to any of your Neighbors, you do to Me, and must expect an equal
Scourge for doing it.

Now, if what ever abuse we put upon the Meanest of our Fellow Subjects, God
take so to heart, can we frame Engines to bear down our King with, and yet he
not Resent it? Can fierce battery of Tongue, or Hand, play, with a daring
Insolence, on his Vicegerent's, and God plant none against it? Will he behold
his Second-self Assaulted, and sit down tamely with the Affront, and neither by
punishing Crime, nor Criminal, teach Men indeed to cry, Quis noster Do-Dominus
est; Who is there to control us?

No, no, (Dear Brethren,) Kings are a Sacred Race; God's first Anointed, his
chiefest Care, the Apple of his Eye; their Injuries, are his Wrongs, their
Contumelies, his Reproaches; and to prevent all foul Attempts against them, God
shoots off friendly Warning-piece, while he says, 1 Chr. 16. 22.
Nolite tangere cristis meos. Take heed of touching my Anointed. Words of a
daunting nature, and such as seem nearly to threaten all that presume to lift
up hand against them.

Ask David, why, unjustly persecuted, and that to Death by Saul, and every hour
in Danger, while Saul Reigned King, He did not in the Cave, where Saul was at
his mercy, by cutting him off, put a final Period to those Fears, those
Dangers, were never to have End while Saul had Being; ask him, I say, why he
forbore to do it, and he will tell you, Reg. 1.
Non extendam manum meum in Dominum meum, quia Christus Domini est. I would
not, says he, I durst not do it, because Saul being one of my God's Anointed,
to have drawn a Sword against him; to have laid violent hands upon him, would
have been, to prepare the Block for my own Head, to dress the Altar, on which I
could not but expect soon after to bleed my self a Victim.

And indeed so it is; and we may observe as well in Sacred, as in Profane
History, scarce any one King, though bloodiest Tyrant, Murdered by that Man, on
whom, soon after, the heavy Hand of Justice was not known to fall; and Blood
repaid with Blood.

Zacharias, King of Israel; Hela, King of Juda; Zenacherib, King of Syria, Reg.
3. 4.
were all Three Murdered by a Subject's Hand. Jabes the Murderer of Zarcharias
Reigned a few days, and then himself, by other hands, was both Dethroned, and
Murdered. The Sons of Zenacherib, by whose Sacrilegious hands the King their
Father fell, never once grasped the Scepter, never had Diadem on their Head;
but overtaken by revengeful stroke, dropped both a sudden, and signal Sacrifice
to God's Just Anger.

Zambri, whose bloody Arm King Hela fell by, sat Seven Days Enthroan'd, and
then Awakened Justice, as it were, to make amends for the Delay, dealt with him
more severely, then with either of the other Three Assassinates; For, as he
sat Revelling in his Palace, he saw his own Armed Troops beset him round; and
reading in their furious Look, his own sad Destiny; more instigated by those
Terrors, his then reviving Guilt surpised him with, then by the naked Swords
which threatened him, he set fire to the Roof which sheltered him; and by
making himself a Prey to the raging Flames, made known what fatal Blossom puts
forth from Bud of Treachery; and with Tragical Exit, gave Subjects all to know,
that, who, lets Treason Hatch within his Bosom, warms a chill Snake, gives life
unto a Serpent, will sting him soon to Death.

Such is the usual Lot of all who Conspire against their Sovereign; and at such
rate it is, still chastises that Horrid Crime of Regicide; and therefore seldom
it is, such Monster comes abroad.

But there is another Way, another Method, to Undermine a King's safe Being,
more frequently made use of, and so made use of, as to find place amongst those
very Actons, call for Applause, and carry look of Loyalty: And this more
refined piece of subtilty, is, to render weak the Staff, Great Caesar leans on;
disable whom he most appears to trust to, and run those down that are his chief
Support, and bear him up; and to find out, withal, such fair pretense to do it,
as Caesar often knows not how to dis-approve, nor yet allow of; not how, or to
Unhead it, or stop that Javelin, he sees flee at him; and is designed through
Subject's Breast to Wound him.

To which purpose we read, Dan. 6.
How the Prophet Daniel, though an Enemy to his False Gods, yet a True Friend
to King Darius, and highly Valued by him, because found ever Just, Upright, and
Loyal; insomuch, that as the Patriatch Joseph once in Egypt, so he in Syria,
next to the King, sat first at the Helm of Government.

This caused the other Nobles of Darius to Huff and Bluster; and, though they
knew Daniel to be no less Serviceable, than Loyal to their King; and that to
Mow him down, was to cut off Caesar's Right Hand, run back the Peoples
happiness, and take away their Guardian-Angel from them; They nevertheless,
Envy, and Malice raging High within them, resolved to be his Ruin.

And hereupon, laying their Heads together, as it were to Magnify, and Exalt
their Caesar, they frame an Edict, in which all are Commanded, under pain of
Death, for Thirty Days space, to bend no Knee, Adore, or pay Homage, to any
Power, but King Darius.

Good God! How high, and ventersomly does Malice soar, when once upon the Wing!
With what fierce speed, over King, and Subjects Head, does Envy Spur, when it
has Game before it! What Subtilties both make use of, to Over-whelm the
Innocent.

How soothing to a Proud, Vainglorious King, and how attractive, must needs
such Edict be, which placed him on a Heavenly Throne, and made him, first, for
one Months time, at least, of all the Thundering Deities: And yet o'th other
side, how truly prejudicial to Darius, was the same Law, by being Fatal to his
Servant Daniel; who, as his Enemies well foresaw, by persevering to Adore his
own True God still, would make at once a forfeiture both of his Life and
Dignity.

But what success had this their politic Design? a very sad one; for, Daniel
took safe, and sound, out of the Lyon's Den; Darius, notwithstanding all their
feigned Zeal to do him Honor, caused the Contrivers to be cast into it, and
saw them made a Prey to those Wild Beasts, forbore to injure Daniel.

Thus, these great Statesmen, blinded by Malice to their best Advantage,
hudwink'd by Envy to their truest Interest, mistaking Rock, for Harbor, Shelve
for Shore; and Shipwrack'd finally on those very Sands designed for Daniel^s
Tomb, paid the Debt due to all disloyal Hearts.

And truly, one of the greatest misfortunes, Man lies under, is to mistake his
Interest, by framing to himself false Idea's of his Happiness; is, to look
through a false Optic, and yet believe he takes the Form in; to seek for
Saftey in the Arms of Danger; lay hold on Ruin, for Preservative; and swallow
Poison, for the Antidote.

So were our first Parents, mistaken in their Measures; and we still Calculate
to the same false Meridian; Marching toward better Liberty, on that Road,
which leads to a worse Slavery, than That we strive so hard to gain Release
from.

To get off the Nettle, we often cast our selves on piercing Thorn; exchange
the scratch of Pin, for wound of Dagger; and to avoid the weight of
Pepper-Corn, often put our Shoulders under the Load of Millstone.

Quisque suos patimur Manes. Man to himself is never easy; knows never when
he is well: And to better it, the means he takes, still worsens his Condition.

The Frogs you know, as story goes, were much dis-satisfied to want a King; and
having one Alloted them, who suffered all abuses, and himself, finally, to be
trampled on; they still remained uneasy, complained, and muttered, till at
last a King was given them, to look on whom, was to awaken Danger, and to
approach him, certain Death; and this was all they got by changing Sovereigns.

Dum Creatures can take warning, and once for all, to shut the Door upon those
Evils, that fatal Womb of Change, is ever big with, who once Reigns over them,
Reigns King for ever: And, what his Subjects the first Minuite of his Reign,
are to him, he finds the same, to the last Period of it; and they by instinct
of Nature, enamored of Peace, do still enjoy it.

Man, who has Reason for his Guide, and knows by long, and sad Experience, how
Fatal Change often proves; knows Peace to be greatest Good; War, the worst Evil;
still is for Change; still hankers after War; still takes occasion to Quarrel
with the Government he is under; fault Caesar too: And taught, by too much
Clemency, to presume, and dare, gives first his Tongue, and then his Hand leave
to Assault him. But, Psalm. 2.
Qui habitat in Caelis viridebit eos, and Dominus Subsannabit eis. God Laughs
at such daring Folly; and yet to show how hateful it is to him, he Dulls,
Benums, Infatuates all take to it.

And indeed, who makes Scrutiny, will soon find, That all Rebellion, is true
Infatuation; For, if Peace and Plenty go Hand, in Hand, and Truth and Justice
keep ever folded each in others Arms, and where these Goddesses walk, all
Happiness walk by them, what greater Infatuation, what truer frenzy can there
be, than by a War, and that too, a Domestic one, to drive such Guests away; and
by admitting Rage, Rapine, and Injustice in their Room, ring our own
Tolling-Bell, and dig a Grave to bury all our Joy, and Comforts in.

Quesivimus bona, and ecce turbatio; We fancied better settlement, says the now
Unhudwink'd Rebel, but met with more, and worse Disturbance: We caught at
Ease, but grasped new Toil, new Troubles; We aimed at Liberty, but continue
Slaves; We could not bear with shadow of Restraint, and now behold we groan
o're-charg'd with Fetters: In a word, in what we did, we thought we played the
Sober, and the Wise Ones, but find, too late, we acted Frantic, played the Fool.

Omnis sapientia eorum devorata est: A Rebellious Spirit, a Tumultuous Humor,
makes a quick Prey of Wisdom, soon devours all humane Prudence; and causes
misled Man, to whet those Weapons, he should dull; hope for what he ought to
fear, and Dare, where he should Tremble; overthrow, what it is his Interest to
prop, and set his shoulders to bear up, what his best safety wills him to pull
down. Omnis Sapientia eorum devorata est.

The Jews, of all the People in the World, by Nature, most Stubborn, and
Rebellious, gave ample Testimony of this Truth; who were no sooner free from
one Scourge, than by some second petulant Attempt, some daring Enterprise, they
called loud for another; and like true Franticks, still for themselves, they
bundled up fresh Rods, and by new Rebel-Actions, barred their back for new
stripes.

Heavy, and grievous was that Yoke proud Pharaoh kept them under; and long, and
earnest was their Prayer to God, as well it might, for a Delivery; which now
obtained; they had as yet scarce tasted those longed for sweets of Liberty,
when the old R^bel-Humour, seizing on them, they are again for Bondage; and
with Tumultuous Outcry, ask to be led back to it. Exodus 14.
Cur eduxisti nos de Aegypto, ut moriremur hic in solitudine: Why have thou led
us out of Egypt, to destroy us here in the Desert? Thus, they to Moses; And in
these words, what, upon Examination will be found but Folly, Frenzy, and
Infatuation.

For, what more foolish, or more frantic question, then to ask Surgeon why
he bound up my wounds? What more true, or plain Infatuation, then to pick
quarrels with Physician, because he stopped my Ague, chased my Fever from me?
To hate my Shield, because it kept the blow off; to rail at Winds, for bringing
me to the Haven, or forceably break from him, I am only safe, while held by.

All this, their Rebel Humor, caused the Jews to do; for, Moses, in conducting
them out of Egypt, played skilful Surgeon, acted wise Physician, as often
as he tried by wholesome Documents, by good Advice, to render them pliable, to
make them faith^l.

He took their Yoke off, and transformed their Slavery, into a glorious
Liberty; he Scourged their Foe, to free them from the Lash; made threatening
Sea as Haven to them; and, to their Enemies, such Haven, threatening Sea: In a
word, he made the Waves entomb their Enemy King; Shipwrack'd all Egypt, to set
them safe on shore: And now behold they ask him, why he did it? Complain, and
Mutter, as if both God, and He, were their worst Foes, and all the Miracles
wrought for their Preservation, had, in reality, been nothing else, but close
Design to Ruin them. Cur eduxisti nos de Aegypto, ut moriremur hic in
solitudine: Why have Thou, and God brought us out of Egypt, to destroy us here
in the Wilderness.

This Tumult was occasioned, not so much by the present want on it, as by the
fear of wanting Food once under such barren Clime; and who, but Men by
Rebel-Passion lost to their Wits, could entertain such fear; as if that Hand,
that Power, which, in their sight gave Being to such Prodigies, and with such
Train of Wonders, such Troop of Miracles, conducted them out of Egypt, could
not find means to quench their Thirst, to satisfy their Hunger.

But Rebel will be Rebel, do what you can to gain him. And now that precious
Viand, known by the name of Manna, spread round upon the Earth, they lay
Encamped on; in taste, to every one, what he most longed to feed on, so Rich,
so Pleasant, and so Delicate, as made them judge it to be the Food of Angels;
who could have thought, but that such signal proof of an Omnipotent Patron
watching over them, must needs for ever banish all their Fears, and fix them in
their Duty?

But Mutinous Hearts, are ever restless; and they again by raising Outcry, and
picking Quarrels with this Sacred Food, caused God again to Arm; and thus
convince us, That where Rebellious Humor carries sway, Infatuation is abroad,
and busy; Two Fatal Evils, inseparable each from other; that creates Danger,
this blinds us to it: At other times, God throws a Dart, or Two, and then lays
by his Quiver; But when Rebellion is on Foot, all his Darts fly, his Quiver
empties; Saggitas meas complebo. It Is then, says God, that I am forced to
learn, what stock of Darts is by me.

This David was aware of; sighed to know it, and thereupon with trembling Voice
cries out, Sagittae tuae Acutae: Some of thy Arrows, O my God, says he, are
sharp indeed, very sharp pointed: And what, Great Saint, to do with? What Mark
to hit? What Butt to shoot at? In corda inimicorum Regis. These killing
Javelins, says he, must not be flung at every guilty Head, each sinful Breast,
but are reserved to pierce the Heart of those who Plot against their King, are
Foes to Caesar: In corda inimicorum Regis.

Which is, in effect, to say, that This, or that slite wound, may serve for
punishment of other Crimes, but Treason never fails to meet with Death, since
every Dart there fixed, whatever Wound the Heart receives, proves always deadly.

To wind up then, and for prevention of such Mortal Blow, to shun the stroke of
such Heart-piercing Arrows; Reddite quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari: Give unto
Caesar, what ye owe to Caesar, that Caesar may return what is due to You.

Caesar's your Guardian, ^aesar's your Protector; the Title's Glorious, but the
Burden Heavy. Your Dangers, are his Perils; your Frights, his Fears; your
Troubles, are his Anguish: In every Storm that shakes ye, Caesar's tossed, by
every Arm assaults ye, Caesar's threat'ned; in every injured Subject, Caesar's
wronged; in every vigilant Eye, it is Caesar watches; in every aching Heart, it is
Caesar mourns; in every wounded Bosom, Caesar bleeds: What Tribute then of
dutiful Compliancy has Loyalty to pay, which is not Caesar's due; who carries
on his Back whole load of Kingdom, and in his Breast, the Cares, and Fears of
All Men.

It Is true; the great, and powerful of this World, were ever looked upon as the
Mark of Envy; But, if the Judgment of the most Sage, and Wise, have in it
poise, or weight, These are the Men, call for Compassion, and deserve our Pity.

Cares, Fears, Mistrusts, Doubts, Jealousies, Anxiety, are their Inseparable
Companions; and, while the Low, and Despicable, enjoy the sweets of Peace, lie
safe at Anchor, the High, and Mighty, are Sailing ever on Tempestuous Sea, and
tread no Paths, but what are lined with Fears, beset with Danger.

All Pomp, and State's but Pageantry, Life, a Dream, which proves as sweet to
him, keeps Straw for Boulster, as unto those have Bed of Down to stretch on:
Purples, to the Eye, speak Bliss, make show of greatest Happiness; but every
fold that is in them, folds up Trouble, wraps up Cares, which make the strongest
shoulders shrink to bear them.

Diadems cast Luster from them, proudly Sparkle, but it is with painted Ray,
with Glowworm Beam, which does but little warm, and little cherish. Great
Potentates, are great Shadows, which take indeed more room up, and spread
farther, than those of other Mortals, but as soon reach their Point, and as
soon Vanish: Their smoothest Calms, have ever something of rough Tempest in
them; their brightest Day, is found a kin to Darkness; and in their fairest Orb
Clouds meet, and gather: Their Heart weighs often heavy, while their Look is
lightsome: Their surest Hope, Fears intercept, and Mix with; and Sorrow ever
keeps an Elbow on the self-same Pillow, all their Joys adhere to.

It Is true, they can Ennoble, they can Empower, they can Enrich; but whom?
Those, who too frequently make their Rise instrumental to his Fall, they owe it
to. Those, who employ their Might, to render him Powerless they received it
from; those, who are prodigal of their Wealth, to make him poor, that gave it;
those, whose contrivance, is, to Eclipse his Glory, they took their Luster
from, to undermine his Bliss, gave birth to all their Happiness, and Shipwreck
him, who placed them in the Haven.

Thus Caesar's greatest Privilege, their best Prerogatives proves often fatal
to them; thus, they reap Anguish, where they sowed Seed of Comfort: Thus by
mistake of Foe, for Friend, of False, for True one, of Evil, for good Subject,
Caesar's too often become their own Supplanters, and see their Government
shocked, their Safety threatened, by those very hands, they Armed to keep off
Danger.

Many strong motives then, there may be found, to entertain Compassion for all
Caesar's, and strive by due Compliancy, to ease their Cares, but none, by fierce
Alarms to Augment them; 'specially, where the Rod, they govern with, has more
of soft Wax, than stubborn Iron in it: Where neither on their Tongue, proud
threats do sit, nor in their Hearts, designing Malice found; nor, in their
words, yet, any taste of Gall; nor in their Edicts, any marks of Tyranny; nor
in their deeds, Oppression.

Where such a Caesar's found, what Heart, what Breast, can let a thought in to
disturb his Peace? What obligation, by all the Laws, as well of Heaven, as
Earth, are all his Subjects under to obey him? With what forceable Impulse,
with how strong Influence, do both God, and Nature inspire each Head, to bow to
such a Caesar? each Tongue to praise him; each Heart to love him; each Hand,
each Arm, to arm in his defense, and cleave fast to him.

For, if it be a Crime, the Angels start at, for Subjects to contrive the Ruin
of their Prince, although, the worst of Men, though fiercest Tyrant, and hated
too by Heaven; What crying Sin is theirs? what Characters of Guilt stamp they
upon their Conscience, who Plot the downfall of a Good, a Graoious, and a
Clement Caesar?

A Caesar, Heaven more than once, has showed it self a Trusty Friend to, ^od a
sure Guardian: A Caesar, so far from all Tyrannical designs, as not to
entertain a Thought, or vent a Word, or do an Action; But what, if looked into,
by impartial Eye, will soon be found to aim at nothing more, than settled Peace
of Realm; to Level at nothing farther, then his whole Kingdoms Joy, his Peoples
Happiness: A Caesar, finally, who knows not how to cherish other hopes, than
those of placing once his all-dear Subjects on a secure Level; nor lives
acquainted with any other fear, than that of seeing Danger make way toward
them.

And how ungrateful, how unjust a work then may it seem, to Pile up Thistles,
and and plant the way with Thorns, such Caesar walks in? what pity it is, where
Cares already throng, to add fresh Troubles to them? where Soars abound, to
give new Ulcers Being.

'Specially, while we, through every part, and point of such sad Scene, are
like our selves to suffer; since where the Head is threat'ned, and in danger,
no Member of the Body can be safe; nor Blessing hoped for, where Curse is our
due.

I told ye, how that all Tumultuous outcry against Caesar, was clamor against
Heaven; and that to cast Contumelies on his Vicegerents, was, with the like
Contempt, to dart Reproach at him, that so empowered them; and that, who lifts
up Rebel-hand against them, arms with blind fury against God himself, and makes
his life a Nursery of misfortunes.

In a word, one and the self-same thing t'may seem to be, for any Nation to be
addicted to Rebellion, and to be marked out for Misery, doomed to Scourges, and
become the Anvil, on which God's Anger, and his Justice, are lastingly to beat
on.

For your own sakes then, if not for his; and if not to purchase holding
Blessings, to avoid at least Eternal Curses, Reddite quae sunt Caesaris,
Caesari; Give unto Caesar, what ye owe to Caesar; be True, be Faithful all, be
Loyal Subjects.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
(...) dele of. p. 6. l. 4. dele ^ver p. 6. l. 6. read Maria p. 10. l. 20. r
withdrawing. p. 11 (...) p. 14. l. 24. r. Gift. p. 19. l. 2 r. ascribatur p
20. l. 12. 17. 22. r. Aethai Ib. l. 1^. r. (...) 14. r. Aethai, p. 24. l. 10.
r. dico ego opera. p. 28. l. 16. r minim^ fecistis, mi^ fecistis. ^ 29. l. ^.
dele Do. Ib. l. 15. r. Christ's. p. 32. l. 6. r. Actions. p. 35 l. 3 r. the
right F^rm. p. 36. l. ult. r. irr^it. p. 37. l. 1. r eos. Ibid. l 18. r.
Quaesivi^us. p. 42. l. 4 r. Sagittas. p. 47. l. 5. r. God. Ib. l. 20. dele and.


