

Argumentum Anti-Normannicum: OR AN ARGUMENT PROVING, From Ancient Histories
and Records, THAT William, Duke of Normandy, Made no absolute Conquest of
England by the Sword; in the sense of our Modern Writers.

Being an Answer to these four Questions; VIZ.

I. Whether William the First made an Absolute Conquest of this Nation at his
first Entrance?

II. Whether he cancelled and abolished all the Confessor 's Laws?

III. Whether He divided all our Estates and Fortunes between himself and his
Nobles?

IV. Whether it be not a grand Error to affirm, That there were no Englishmen
in the Common Council of the whole Kingdom?

London, Printed by I. D. for Mat. Keinton, Ionath. Robinson, Sam. Sprint. 1682.



An Explanation of the Frontispiece, warranted by the Authorities cited in the
following Argument.
NO sooner had the King Harold victorious over the K. of Denmark and Tosta,
Harold's Brother at York.
Valiant HAROLD conquered the Danish King, and his own Brother, the daring
TOSTA, but news was brought him, William D. of Normandy, at the same time,
lands in Sussex
That the NORMAN Duke was arrived at Pemsey in Sussex; whereupon, with haste he
went to meet him, and at Harold meets him at Hastings, where they ^ight.
Hastings gave the NORMAN battle, which proved fatal to him.

For he was, as you may see, Harold slain.
slain, between the NORMAN Long-Bows, and ENGLISH Spears, leaving the Duke
VICTOR in the Field.

WILLIAM, proud with this Success, marches with all speed up to Berkhamstead,
near LONDON. The D. oomes up to London.


The Rest of the ENGLISH (if they had looked upon his coming, as a Design to
conquer the Nation, and not to assert his pretended legal Title against
HAROLD,) were then able to have driven him back to his own Country, or at least
found him a Tumulary in this, (for there was not a fifth part of the Strength
of the Nation that felt the Force of the Arms) but Duke WILLIAM and the ENGLISH
soon came to an Agreement, and the latter entered into solemn Compact to make
him King. Enters into Compact with the English, to make him King.


Thereupon BRITANNIA holds forth to him the Scepter with one Hand, Britan.
gives him the Scepter.
And

With the other shows him the excellent and most famous Laws of St. EDWARD. And
St. Edward's Laws to keep.


As also, at the same Time, a Noble Prelat tenders him the Coronation Oath: A
Bishop tenders the Coronation Oath.
The ENGLISH first being asked, by the Bishop, If they would assent to have the
Duke their KING? and if he should then be crowned? To which they all, with an
unanimous consent, answered, Yea, Yea; Whereupon he takes the Coronation Oath;
The William took, at his Coronation.
the sense of which take as follows.

This Scepter, (Fairest Queen) I most thankfully receive, Sacramentum Willielmi
Se^^oris. Ante ^^stare S. Petri Apostoli coram Clero and Populo jurejurando;
Promisit se velle Sanctas Dei Ecclesias ac Rectores earum defendere, necnon and
cunctom Populum, sibi subjectum just, ac Regali providentia regere, rectam
Legem Statuere and tenere, rapinas in justaque judicia penitus interdicere.
Hoveden pars Prior. fol. 258. l. 14.

Exacto prius coram omni Populo jurejurando, quod se modeste erga subjectos
ageret, and aequo sure Anglos, quo Francos, tractaret. Malmsb. lib. 3. fol.
154. b. l. 8.

Rex pro bono pacis, juravit super omnes Reliquias Ecclesiae Sancti Albani,
Tactisque Sacrosanctis ^vangeli^s, bonas and approbatas Antiquas Regni Leges,
quas Sancti ac pii Angliae Reges ejus Antecessores, and Maxim Rex Edwardus
Statuit, inviolabiliter observare. Mat. Paris. Vitae Viginti trium Sancti
Albani Abbatuum. fol. 48. l. 37.


and with it do solemnly Promise and Swear, to govern both Church and State in
Peace.

And I vow to Rule my Subjects with that Justice and prudent Care, as becomes a
good King.

I will ( with the Advice and Consent of my Great Council) enact right Law:
Which done, The Invocation.
be Witness all ye Saints, that to the utmost of my Power, I will my self
religiously keep and observe it.

For what can be more vain and inconsistent with the common Reason of all
Mankind, than for a Prince publicly and solemnly to ordain a Law, and the next
moment after to break and abrogate it in his Closet?

All Rapines I will forbid, and all false Judgments; no illegal or ARBITRARY
ACTS, under pretense of the Preragative-Royal, will I suffer or permit to the
oppression of my ENGLISH Subjects, between whom, and my Normans, I will
administer EQUAL RIGHT.

And that God, Angels, my NORMANS, and You, (O Sacred Queen) may all be
Witnesses and Parties to the sincerity of my Heart, That I will not take the
English-men's Inheritances by Injustice, or thrust them out of their Paternal
Possessions by wrong; That I have not, nor will pretend to any Absolute, or
Despotical Power over their Lives, Liberties, and Estates; nor violate, break,
or after, the Fundamental Rights of the Kingdom (as Tyrants do, who only design
to enslave their People). I do here solemnly promise and swear, in the presence
of all Ye mighty Powers, inviolably to observe and keep the Sacred Laws of St.
Edward my Kinsman.

Which said, the Archbishop of York sets the Imperial Crown upon WILLIAM's
Head; and thus of a Duke of NORMANDY, he was created KING of ENGLAND.

TO MY Worthy FRIEND, The Learned Author of Argumentum Anti-Normannicum.
GReat Britain! fairest Queen of all the Isles,
Enriched at Home with bounteous Natures smiles!
Thou such a self-sufficiency do own,
All Countries need thy Stores, but thou want none;
Divided from the World, Thou to thy self art one.
The Sea, and Continent, proclaim Thee Great,
Proud Monarchs have lain Captives at thy Feet:
The Scales of the Western World are in thy Hand;
Each Kingdom's Fate depends on thy Command.
Where e're thy Friendship, and thy Force combine,
Against that State in vain the Rest design.
To Thee no Ills from Foreign Foes can come,
The basest and more dangerous are at Home.
No Desert Beasts of Prey thy Land does bear,
But yet worse Beasts within thy Bowels are,
Who would thy Rights and Ancient Glories tear.
Those having lost their Liberty of Mind,
From vanquished Sires a weak excuse would find.
Are these thy Sons? Or Marks of thy disgrace?
Who own themselves a slavish conquered Race?
The Norman Duke on Terms received the Crown,
Swore, He Would by Edward's Laws support his Throne,
Which sure no absolute Uictor would have done.
That Title which his Great Successor has,
Came from the Pact, not from the Breach of Faith.
That gives the Bounds to all incroaching Might,
And sets the Banks about the Subjects Right:
Who pulls them down, lets in a raging Sea,
Which drowns, and swallows up all Property.
Who e're attempt to let that Torrent in,
At their own Houses may the Waste begin;
Let them for others Till their proper Land;
Or under some base Favorites Command,
May they, whilst others riot with their Stores,
Without Relief beg at their Native Doors.
Under their Countries Curse, their Tyrant's Scorn,
May they with never-ceasing Pangs be torn,
Who violate the Sacred Trust to which they are born.
But blessed be Thou, and all, who dare, like Thee,
Bravely assert their Countries Liberty.
Our well built Freedom thou do make to appear,
And its Foundation from Time's Rubbish clear.
The Norman swore to Laws by which we are free,
Laws were more his, than our Security.
Him King the People's joint Consent alone
Did make, which by that Sacred Oath he won:
Or that same joint Consent had made him none.
We were no Norman Slaves; nor French could be,
Had we enough True Englishmen like Thee.
But now, my Muse, before you end, take care
Humbly to close up all with Heaven in Prayer;
Prayer for that King, who does Great Britain Rule,
Who of this Isle is the Universal Soul:
In whom so many glorious Virtues shine,
As make him seem to be of Race Divine.
May Heaven continually His Guardian prove,
And keep Him safe in all His Subjects Love!
Long may unruffled Peace adorn His Crown;
May all the Laws in their smooth Channel run;
And flowing Justice still support His Throne.
Thus blessed, and thus united here at Home,
What cannot Britain's Monarch overcome?
Oh may Great Edward's, and Fifth Henry's Soul,
By Heavenly Power be transfused to him whole!
May He ride Mighty Admiral of the Seas,
Scourging His stubborn Enemies into Peace;
His Envying Neighbors all their Powers disown,
Strike to His Flag, and tremble at His Frown;
And the humbled World be glad to pay him fear,
And awful veneration every where.
That this may be, --
May the Illustrious Senate of the Land,
With their Wise Councils, ever by him stand;
He pleased in them, and they resolved to show,
What the utmost stretch of Loyalty can do.
Then will his Glories shine in brightest state,
At the Head of such a joint Triumvirate:
Then King and People doubly will be blessed,
And Europe then enjoy a lasting Rest.
For this let all our Vows to Heav'en be sent,
To see Great Charles happy in's Parliament.
Argumentum Anti-Normannicum.
SIR;
YOu were pleased, some time since, (in my happiness of a short, but free
conversation with you) to tell me, You had a mind to read how far I could give
you satisfaction in a few Points you had raised to your self, concerning the
Norman Conquest; and that within a little while I should have a Paper from you
wherein they should be contained: You were not long, Sir, in justly acquitting
your self of your promise to me; I did receive the Furniture of these ensuing
Arguments, by the four Questions you sent me, and hope there is nothing to be
found in them, but unbyassed and venerable Truth, which surely none will be
offended to hear. I have endeavored to pay all possible Respect to You, and to
Justice; and, as far as my Abilities could reach, in so small a Treatise, have
impartially offered my Thoughts upon them, and now beg your candor in judging
me.

Your Questions, Sir, are these.

The First Question.
I. Whether William, Duke of Normandy, (who was afterward William the First)
got the Imperial Crown of England by the Sword, and made an absolute Conquest
of the Nation at his first Entrance?

The Second Question.
II. Whether this first William did abolish all the English Laws, and changed
the whole Frame and Constitution of the Government?

The Third Question.
III. Whether it be true, That the English had neither Estates nor Fortunes
left, but all was divided between the King and his Normans?

The Fourth Question.
IV. Whether it be not a grand Error to affirm, That there were no English Men
in the Common Council of the whole Kingdom?

I shall take them, Sir, in the order you have sent them to me; and so first
begin with your first Question.

The First Question.
Whether William, Duke of Normandy, (who was afterward William the First) got
the Imperial Crown of England by the Sword, and made an For England thus much I
dare speak, and under the rule of Modesty protest, That sithence the Universal
Conquest of William, who first commanded and imposed Tribute upon this Land,
(for Conquerors may command) Tribute and Subsidy have been as justly, both by
the Law of God, and the Law of Nations, paid in England, as in Jewry; yea, and
justly continued, as a remembrance of a Conquest. Dr. Pulbec Pandects of the
Law of Nations, c. 10. p. 69. One Blackwood wrote a Book, which concluded, That
we are all Slaves by reason of the Conquest. Vid. Mr. Pety^. Misc. Parl. p. 66.
And t^ is Position is maintained by an Anonimus Author, in his full and clear
Answer to Mr. Pety^'s Ancient Right of the Commons of England asserted. Page
35. in the Margin.
Absolute Conquest of the Nation at his first entrance?

AS you have stated the Question, Sir, and desire to know what is my Opinion of
it; with submission to others, better informed, and who are more able to
maintain the Truth of those Principles I proceed upon, than my self, I shall
return you this modest Answer, as my Sense and Judgment in the Point, viz. That
I cannot conclude in the Affirmative, for these several constraining Reasons.

1. That William laid a far greater stress upon his Claim and Titles to this
Kingdom, than ever he did upon his great and mighty Conquest, will be very
plain and evident, if you please but to consider with me these following
Particulars.

1. In that before his Conquest, when the People had chosen Harold, the Son of
Earl Godwin for their King, after the Death of Edward the Confessor, and had
put aside Edgar Atheling, by right of Blood and Inheritance entitled to the
Crown: This Norman Duke made his loud Complaints of the Injuries done him, in
not electing him, for he was Edward the Confessor was Son to Ege^^ed K. of
England by Emma, Sister to Rich. ^. Duke of Normandy, who was Grandfather to
Duke William; so that K Edward and Duke William were Cosen Germans once
removed, as this farther shows you. Richard 1. Richard 2. Emma. Robert. Edward.
William.
Cosen German to the Confessor, who died Edward married Edith, the Daughter of
E. Godwin; but whether upon a vow of Chastity, or upon impotency of Nature, or
upon any hatred to her Father, or suspicion against her self (for all these
Causes are alleged by several Writers of those Times) he forbore all private
Familiarities with her.
without Issue; and therefore pretended that the Right truly devolved upon him.
But, it seems, as ill luck would have it, this Duke they knew to be a Bastard,
and neither the Saxon Law, nor the Norman Custom, could help him in such a
Case, and so that Title did him but little good. Well, what therefore was to be
his next Work? Why,

2. Truly his Pretense was then, That the Confessor had designed him for his
Successor, Mat. Paris. 1. Antiq Brit. Eccles. 96.
and by his last Will had bequeathed this Kingdom to him; And this was
confirmed by the consent of the Nobility, and principally of Harold himself:
and hereupon considering how Harold had trickt him, and set the Crown on his
own Head, he sends over several Ambassadors, with Commission to require him to
remember the Oath he had formerly made to the said William in the time of his
Extremity, when he was his Prisoner in Normandy; Which was, That he, the said
Harold, should assist him in the obtaining of the Crown of England, if ever
Edward died without Issue.

3. And receiving but unkind Returns from Harold, Will. M^lmesb. (...) 3. fol.
56. l. 25^.
by way of Answer to his Demands, which thus the Historian relates, De Regno
addebat praesumptuosum fsuisse, quod absque Generali Senatus and Populi
conventu and Edicto, alienam illi haereditatem juraverit; That as for him to
take an Oath to deliver up the Inheritance of any Realm, without the general
consentand allowance That is, without the assent of the Wittenagemot, Mycel
Synod, or Parliament.
of the Senate and People, could not but be a great piece of presumption, yea,
although he might have just title so to do; Praeterea iniquum postulat, ut
imperio decedat, quod tanto favore civium regendum susceperit. Malmsb. l. 3. f.
56. l. 30.
wherefore it was an unreasonable Request of the Duke now to require him to
renounce the Kingdom, in which he was so well settled to the good liking and
content of his People. This Norman Duke, not to be his own Judge, refers himself
to the Pope (then Alexander the second) to decide the Matter, and so resolved
that the infallible Chair should determine who had the Justest Title to the
Crown and Kingdom, Harold or Himself. And the good old Gentleman (who would not
be behind-hand with him in civility for so great a kindness, as was the
Appealing to him, and so flattering him with a Judicatory Power over Princes)
easily was induced to pronounce sentence on William's behalf.

But all these blustering Pretenses of nearness in Blood, (which it seems his
Son Henry thought to be the best flower in his Garland, when he In his Charter,
whereby he advanced the Abbey of Ely into the degree of a Bishopric.
calls himself the Son of William the Great, (pray, Sir, be pleased to observe,
it is not of William the Conqueror) Qui Edwardo Regi Haereditario Iure
successit in Regnum, Seldeni ad Eadmerum and Notae and Spicileg. fol. 211. lin.
39.
Who succeeded to King Edward in the Kingdom, by Right of Inheritance) or the
Confessor's bequest of the Crown to him. Or lastly, the Pope's definitive
Sentence in William's favor. All these blustering Pretenses of his, I say,
availed but little with Harold; and therefore you must think, it could not but
incense the Duke of Normandy very greatly, so that he had now a just cause of
open quarrel against Harold, for the Reasons you have heard: And thereupon
convening his Parliament, or Assembly of three Estates, which consisted of the
Clergy, Nobility, Nobility is taken in France for Gentlemen, as well as for
Earls, or persons of like dignity.
and Commons; V^^stegan's restitution of decayed Intelligence in Antiquities,
dedicated to King James. page 173.
the Nobility, in fine, promised to serve him, and the Clergy and People to
aid him with Money, according to their several Abilities, and such offers as
they made, were forthwith set down in writing by a Secretary there present. So
that being thus supplied, and assisted with several other of his Friends, he
makes for England; and was no sooner arrived at a place in Sussex, called
Pevenessey, (now Pemsey) and got well on Land, but, by his Proclamation, he
declared upon what Occasions he thus entered the Realm; and so preparing to give
Harold Battle, he hereby seemed as if he would have all the World to know, his
Quarrel was more Personal than National. But this I will speak more
particularly and largely to, when I come to mention some of the Charters he
made after he was established King.

And as Perjury seldom or never escapes unpunished; so here was a visible
Instance of the Divine Justice upon Harold for his breach of Oath and Covenant
to the Duke; for in the Battle of Hastings he met with his Reward, losing both
his Crown and his Life at once, and leaving William to finish the day with
Victory, over those that were yet resolved to dispute the Cause with him.

And now being rid of his stubborn Enemy, and in the heat of the Chase got to
London, he possessed himself of that Kingdom which he pretended was his own by
Right before from the Titles we have already mentioned. Yet however it was in
no such haughty and insulting way, as many boast of, and would gladly have
their unwary Readers to believe, upon their bare Credit and Testimony; but he
chose the more grateful and complying Artifices of a Courtier, and settled
himself in it by a kind of mutual Agreement, and express compact, as now I hope
will be clearly demonstrated by what I shall offer to you after this his
(pretended absolute) Conquest. For,

1. Though he was victorious over his great Adversary Harold, yet if he had been
an absolute Conqueror, (as has been of late so vigorously asserted by our
Modern Writers) what urgent necessity was there for him, or how did it stand
him in such mighty stead, still to keep himself armed with the aforesaid
Titles, that so he might have the more colorable pretense of Right and Justice
on his side, in laying a legal Claim to this Imperial Crown? For, methinks, if
he had a full possession upon such a forcible entry, as is pretended, this had
been a stronger Title than any thing else he could have alleged: for how
could, or durst, a vanquished, enslaved Nation, dispute with him, when he rode
triumphing on their Backs, and had lashed them into an entire submission of
vassalage? But,

2. Let us see the manner of this first King William's Coronation; and whether
or no he did not take an Oath at the same time, which was, in sense and
substance (if not just in the words themselves) the very same with that which
the Ancient Saxon Kings used likewise to take upon their Coronations. And for
your full satisfaction herein, I shall give you the parallel of them both
together, and begin first with

The Oath of either King Edward, In vitae AElf^edi Magni, fol. 62.
or King Ethelred, (for Dunstan crowned both of them at Kingston) about the
Year 970. [Promissio Regis vel Edvardi vel AEthelredi, (utrumque enim Dunstanus
Kingstoniae Coronavit) circa Ann. 970.]


This writing, Hoc Scripto, de litera ad literam, descriptum est ad scriptum
illud, quod Dunstanus Archiepiscopus tradebat Domino nostro Kingstoniae, ipso
illo die quo Consecratus erat in Regem; atque illi interdicebat ne ullam
sponsionem daret praeter sponsionem illam, quam deposuerat in Altari Christi,
quemadmodum Episcopus illi dictaret.
punctually to a Letter, corresponds with that Writing which Dunstan the
Archbishop delivered to our Lord the King at Kingston, that very day of his
Coronation; and did then forbid the King, that thenceforth he should make any
other Oath, than that which he had made at the Holy Altar, or what the Bishop
should dictate then unto him.

In the Name of the Holy Trinity, In Nomine S. Trinitatis, Ego tria promitto
Populo Christiano, meisque subditis.
I do promise three things to Christian People, and my Subjects. The Oath of
the Saxon Kings at their Coronation. The Oath which William the First took at
his Coronation. 1. 'That I will peaceably govern the Church of God, and the
People of my Kingdom.' 1. That he would defend the Churches of God, and all
their Pastors. 1. Dei Ecclesiam, ac Universum mei Imperii Populum Christianum
vera pace fruiturum.
2. 'That I will utterly interdict Rapines, 2. Me Rapi^nam, omnemque
iniquitatem, omnibus ordinibus interdicturum.
and all Injustice to all Orders of Men.' 2. That he would govern all People
that were his Subjects with Justice, and with that prudent care which became a
good King. 3. 'That I do promise, 3. Me promissurum and mandaturum in omnibus
Judiciis, Justitiam and Misericordiam; ut nobis omnibus, proinsinita sua
miseratione, propitius sit, Clemens ac Misericors Deus, qui vivit and regnat,
etc.
and will command, That in all Judgments, Justice and Mercy shall be mingled
together, to the end, that God, who is the Omnipotent Judge of the World, and
rules over all, may be pleased, out of his infinite Compassion, to be
propitiously good and merciful to us all.' 3. That he would both enact, and
himself keep, right Law, and to the utmost of his Power, would interdict all
Rapines, and false Judgments. 4. And he added one Article more to the Oath,
than was in that of the Saxon Kings; and it was extraordinarily necessary to be
done, rebus sic stantibus, and that was, Quod aequo jure Anglos and Francos
Tractaret, That he would govern both the English and French by the same
equality of Law without respect to either. Christianus Rex, qui haec
observaverit, sibi promerebitur honorem mundanum; quinetiam illi Deus aeternus
miserebitur tam in hac vita presenti, quam in AEterna illa, quae nunquam
deficit.
'That Christian King who shall observe these things, shall deservedly acquire
all earthly Honor; moreover the everlasting Lord God shall take Compassion on
him, as well in this Life, as that which is Eternal and Endless.' This Oath too
he took at the Altar of St. Peter, before ever he was Consecrated, and the
Clergy and Laity were equally Parties and Witnesses: After which he was
Anointed and Crowned by Aldred Archbishop of York; for Stigand the Archbishop
of Canterbury, was not admitted to that Office, because of some defect in his
Investiture.


But if he shall do contrary to what he promised God, Ac si irritum fecerit
quod Deo erat promissum, tum deinceps egregie verget in pejus, mox quidem in
populo suo; and omne demum quicquid sit, convertetur in pessimum.
thenceforth he shall daily decline, and his Subjects shall fail in their
Allegiance, and every thing will be turned from bad to stark naught, unless in
time he reforms the Errors of his Ways.

Meditate often with thy self, Hoc tecum saepe meditare, quod debeas in Dei
Judicio gregem proferre and sistere, in quem Pastor in hac vita constitutus es;
and prospice quomodo conservasti quod Christus Sanguine suo olim redemit.
that thou shall one day bring thy whole Flock before the Tribunal of God,
whose Shepherd thou art here ordained, and therefore often consider with thy
self, and look forward how thou have kept those whom Christ with his own dear
Blood, has formerly redeemed.

It is the Office of an Anointed King to judge no Man unrighteously; Regis
Consecrati jus est male judicare neminem; Viduas, Orphanos and Perigrinos tueri
and conservare; latrocinia prohibere; scortatores corrigere; incestuosos dis
jungere ac funditus extirpare; veneficas and incantatores del^re; Parricidas
and perjuros terris exterminare; pauperes eleemosynis fublevare.
to protect Widows, Orphans and Strangers; to interdict Robberies; to punish
Whoredoms; to separate and utterly to extirpate all incestuous Persons; to
abolish and cut off Witches and Enchanters; to banish Parricides and perjured
Persons out of his Dominions; to comfort the Poor with Alms.

To call Grave, Senes, Prudentes, and Sobrios sibi in consiliarios ascribe^e.
Sober, and wise Men to counsel and advise him.

To choose just and good Men for his Ministers and Officers, Justos sibi in
Ministros constituere; quia quicquid ^psi injustum fecerint ejus (Autoritate)
universi illius rationem tenetur ille reddere in die Judicii.
because whatsoever illegal Actions they shall commit (under his Authority) he
must, at the Day of Judgment, give an account for.

And the reason of all this is evident, both from the Laws of God and Man; the
King is Debtor Iustitiae to all his People, to rule and govern them by Law:
Exact Collect. p. 28, 29.
Which, as his late Majesty said, is the Inheritance of every Subject, and the
only security he can have for his Life and Estate. Bract. lib. 3. fol. 107. a.
b.
Ad hoc autem creatus est and electus, writes Bracton, ut Iustitiam faciat
Vniversis: and that dum facit justitiam Vicarius est Regis aeterni, Minister
autem Diaboli, dum declinet ad injuriam. Henry the Third, upon a Charter
granted by his Father King John, and confirmed by himself, declares, Qui vero
id quod dictus Pater noster eis per Chartam suam concessit, Rot. Claus. 9. H.
3. pars prima. m. 18.
and nos postmodum annuimus infringere nequaquam volumus, sicut nec de jure
debemus; much less a Coronation Oath. Edward the first tells the Pope, upon a
Message sent him, That he could not answer without consulting his Parliament;
and gives this for his Reason, Iurejurando in Coronatione nostra prestito sumus
adstricti, Rot. Claus. 3. E. 1. m. 9. in Schedula.
quod Iura Regni nostri servabimus illibata, nec aliquid, quod Diadema tangat,
Regni ejusdem absque ipsorum requisito consilio faciemus.

Observe, lastly, that Edward the Third, that famous Conqueror of two Kings,
the Scottish and French, has left recorded to Posterity a definitive Sentence
and Judgment in this Point, as an indisputable rule of Right and Justice;

That he ought, Pulton Stat. 25. E. 3. f. 150.
and was bound by his Coronation Oath, to keep the Law of the Realm.

This Law of the Realm, Cited in White's Sacred Laws, p. 69.
or Land, was looked upon, in the judgment of these Parliaments, as 27. E. 1.
the Law of Ancient Time, 25. E. 3.
of old Time used, and 42. E. 3.
the Old Law; whose Age made it the more venerable, and gave an addition of
honor to it.

Well, having thus shown you the Coronation of King William the First, and
given you the Solemn Oath he at the same time took, even before his
Consecration, that so he might give all possible satisfaction to the English,
of his resolving to rule accordingly; and also having made it plain, that it
was the same in substance with that the Ancient Saxons took before him; I shall
now descend briefly to set before you some of his own Charters, as likewise
some of William the Second's, and of Henry the First's, his Children, and
succeeding Kings; and from them evidence to you, I hope demonstrably, that it
was not so much his Conquest he relied upon, when he was settled in this
Imperial Throne, as his claim to the Crown of England, Iure Hereditario, by
Right of Inheritance. And for the proof of this, be pleased to accept of these
ensuing Instances.

1. In Nomine Patris, Carta Antiqua litera D. N. 4.
and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, Amen. Ego Willielmus Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum,
Haereditario Iure Factus.

2. In Nomine Patris, Carta 4. E. 4. m. 27. per Inspex.
and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, Amen. Ego Willielmus Rex Anglorum Haereditario
Iure Factus.

3. In nomine Sanctae and individuae Trinitatis, Monast. Anglican. Vol. 1. fol.
317.
Ego Willielmus Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum, notum facio omnibus, tam posteris quam
praesentibus Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, and
omnibus ^idelibus Francis and Anglis, Quod cum in Angliam venissem, and in
sinibus Hasting cum excercitu applicuis^em contra hosts meos, qui mihi Regnum
Angliae injuste conabatur auferre.

4. In ore gladii ( says William the First's Charter) Carta Westmper Inspex.
1. E. 4. part septima m. 26. Mr. Seld. Review, p. 483.
Regnum adeptus sum, Anglorum devicto Haroldo Rege cum suis Complicibus, qui
mihi Regnum cum providentia Dei destinatum and beneficio concessionis Domini,
and Cognati mei gloriosi Regis Edwardi concessum conati sunt auferre, etc.

Come we now to his Second Son, William Rufus.

5. Willielmus Rex Anglorum, Carta Regis Willielmi Rusi vide Monast. Anglican.
Vol. 1. fol. 352.
Willielmo Vicecomiti Filio Baldewini, and omnibus Baronibus suis and
Ministris, qui habitant in Devonescira, Salutem. Notifico vobis, quod mea
condonatione Ecclesia beati Olavi Regis, and Martyris a Monachis belli
aedificata, in honor beati Nicholai, quam cum omni terra quae pertinet ad
Ecclesiam suprascripti Martyris meo privilegio, videlicet Literis and Sigillo,
liberam facio, and ita liberam and quietam per omnia cum saca and soca, and
thol and theme, and infangenetheof, and warpeni, and murdro, and omnibus
consuetudinibus, and operibus and auxiliis, sicut Pater meus liberam fecit
Ecclesiam Sancti Martini de bello, ubi hostem devicit, and ubi Coronam Regni
haereditariam sibi bellando adquisivit. T. Walchelino Wintoniensi Episcopo and
Rogero Bigot apud Wintoniam.

From William Rufus proceed we to his Brother, Henry the First.

And, says he,

6. In Nomine Sanctae and Individuae Trinitatis, Ex Hist. Eliensis Eccles. M.
S. in Bibl. Bodleana (inter Codices Cant. I. 58.) lib. 3 fol 2. a. Monast.
Anglican. Vol 1. fol. 95.
Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, Anno Incarnationis Dominicae MCVIII
Indictione... Anno vero Pontificatus Domini Paschalis Papae secundi, Regni
quoque mei similiter, Ego Henricus providente divina clementia Rex Anglorum and
Normannorum Dux, Willielmi Magni Regis Filius, qui Edwardo Regi Haereditario
Iure successit in Regnum, etc.

7. Again, Monast. Anglican. Vol. 2. fol, 845.
Ego Henricus Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum, Filius Magni Regis Willielmi, qui beatae
memoriae Edwardo in Regnum Successit.

8. To give you one Charter more. Ex MS. Domini Rogeri Owen Equit. Aurati.
The words of that of Henry the First, to the Abbey of Westminster, are, Pro
memoria Edwardi Cognati mei, qui Patrem meum liberosque illius in Regnum suum
adoptivos haeredes instituit.

And thus have I given you, as it were, a threefold Cord (not easily to be
snapt asunder) to bind hard my Assertion, and to convince those, who will not
suffer themselves to be overrun by an obstinate Prejudice, or captivated by a
biased Interest, that our first William, when he came in, gained not such an
absolute Uictory as is pretended, over this Nation, (for when he came in, he
had not subdued the fifth part of it) but came to the Crown by the Election and
Consent of the Clergy and People. And, foedus pepigit, he made a Solemn
Covenant with the English, to observe and keep those Laws, which were bonae and
approbatae, and antiquae Leges Regni.

And this, Sir, is what I shall endeavor clearly to make out to you in my
Answer to your Second Question.

The Second Question.
Whether this first William did abolish all the English Laws, Quest. 2.
and changed the whole frame and Constitution of the Government?

ANd doubtless not; for as my Lord Coke says, Lord Coke's Preface to his 8th
Report.
The Grounds of our Common Laws at this day, are beyond the Memory or Register
of any beginning, Ex vita Abbatis Sancti Albani.
and the same which the Norman Conqueror then found within this Realm of
England: And those Laws he swore to observe, which were good, approved, and
ancient.

Now, that these were only his Norwegian Laws, sure none can, or ought to
believe, after they have thoroughly examined these plain Truths, which I shall
here offer to their fair perusal.

1. If they please to consider what was the Title of the Laws, called the Laws
of King William the First, published by Mr. Seldom, with his learned Notes upon
Eadmer, (and since with the Saxon Laws).

Why, truly, the Title was plainly this; These are the Laws and Customs which
William the King granted to the whole People of England after the Conquest of
the Land. ^elden ad Eadmerum, fol. 173.
These were those which the King^ Edward his Cousin held before him. Ce sont
les Leis and les Custumes que li Reis William grantut a tut le Peuple de
Engleterre, apres le Conquest de la Terre. Ice les me^smes que le Reis Edward
sun Cousin tint devant luy.
In these Laws recited by Hoveden, in the Life of King Henry the Second, King
Edward's Laws are confirmed in these words; This we command, That all Men have
and hold the Law of Edward the King in all things; together with those Laws
which we have added for the profit of the English.

So that here was no abolishing of the Old Saxon Laws that he found, when he
came to govern this Kingdom, nor any setting up of new ones in their stead: No,
so far was he from any such Designs of introducing new Laws, (which must needs
be then the absolute Results of Arbitrary Will and Pleasure, to show the sad
and calamitous Effects of an entire Conquest) to the overthrow of those so
firmly established already; that, you see, he gives his Confirmation to King
Edward's Laws, which indeed, generally speaking, were but a Collection of those
the Historian calls, Bonas Leges ab antiquis regi^^us latas, Malmesb. de Gest.
Regn. Angl. lib. 2. fo. 42. l. 21.
non quod ille statuerit, sed quod observaverit; not so much the Laws of his
own making, as those he caused to be strictly observed and put in execution.

From the Title of his Laws, proceed we

2. To the Confirmation it self, and here I shall acquaint you with the manner
of it, in all its necessary Particulars.

This William the First, with his French and Normans, putting many hardships
upon the English, which occasioned great Disorders and Convulsions in the
State; several of the Saxons chief Nobility, betook themselves to Arms for the
sake of their Avitae Consuetudines, to which they bore an immutable and an
immortal Love, and which they feared some were endeavoring to take away and
change them, though on the other hand they were obstinately resolved never to
part from them, Seld. Tit. of Hon. fol. 523.
for they had a Majoribus didicisse aut Libertatem aut Mortem; and they would
rather undergo the worst Calamities of a more cruel War, than they would tamely
quit and abandon those dear Laws and Customs, to which they had so long been
used, and were so well acquainted with.

The King hereupon, to keep the People in a greater observance of their Duty,
Ex lib. Monast. de Litchfield. Co. 8. Rep. in Pref.
and withal, not forgetting the Oath he had taken at his Coronation, caused
twelve of the most discreet and wise Men, in every Shire throughout all
England, to take an Oath before himself, to deal sincerely and uprightly,
without turning either, ad dextram, out sinistram, that is, as my Lord Coke
interprets it, neither to flatter Prerogative, or extend Privilege; and to
declare and lay open the Constitutions of their Laws and Customs, without
concealing, adding, or in any sort varying from the Truth. But finding William
and his Norman Barons, who were Norwegians by extraction, were for introducing
the Norwegian Laws: Apud Lambard. fol. 149.
This the English thought a more killing blow than that of his Victory; and
therefore Vniversi Compatriotae qui Leges edixerant, tristes affecti, being all
of them in a great Consternation, they beseeched him that they might still
retain Leges proprias, their own Laws; and enjoy Consuetudines Antiquas, their
Ancient Customs, in which their Fathers lived, and ipsi in eis nati and nutriti
sunt, quia durum. Id. Ibid.
valde foret sibi suscipere Leges ignotas, and judicare de eis quas nesciebant,
and themselves were born and bred up in, because it would be very hard to
receive Laws unknown, and to judge of those things they understood not. And when
William denied, they warmly reinforced their Requests, and then conjured him,
per Animam Regis Edwardi, by the Soul of King Edward, qui sibi post diem suum
concesserat Coronam and Regnum, and cujus erant Leges, that he would not impose
a Yoke upon them which they were not able to bear, and which would only gall
their Necks, and make them the more fretting and unruly.

King William finding there was no Remedy, though he was long resolute, at last,
in a Common Council of his Kingdom, yields; and by his Magna Charta, (the
groundwork of all those that after followed) he confirmed to them their
Ancient Laws, Apud Cl. Lambard. fol. 158.
ad praeces Communitatis Anglorum. Blessing it with the Seal of Security, and
Wish of Eternity; closing it up with this general: Co. li. 8. in Pref.
And we further Command, That all Men keep, and observe duly the Laws of King
Edward; rearing up the Frontispiece of his Gracious Work with his Glorious
Style, Ex Libro MS. de legib. antiq.
Willielmus Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum, Dux Normannorum, Omnibus hominibus suis
Francis and Anglicis, Salutem. Statuimus imprimis super omnia unum Deum per
totum Regnum nostrum venerari, unam fidem Christi semper inviolatam custodiri,
pacem, and securitatem, and concordiam, judicium and justitiam inter Anglos and
Normannos, Francos and Britones Walliae and Cornubiae, Pictos and Scotos
Albaniae, similiter inter -- and Insulanos, Provincias and Patrias quae
pertinent ad Coronam and dignitatem, defensionem and observationem and honorem
Regni nostri, and inter omnes nobis Subjectos per Vniversam Monarchiam Regni
Britanniae firmiter and inviolabiliter observari.

Ingulphus, Secretary to William in Normandy, and afterward made Abbot of
Crowland by him, is an unexceptionable Witness, to prove that the English Laws
were then anew confirmed; and he says, Ex Ingulpho Abbate Crowlandense, fol.
519. b. l. 37.
I brought this time with me, from London, Attuli eadem vice mecum de Londoniis
in meum Monasterium Leges aequissimi Regis Edwardi, quas Dominus meus inclitus
Rex Willielmus authenticas esse and perpetuas, per totum Regnum Angliae
inviolabiliter tenendas sub poenis gravissimis proclamaret, and suis
Justitiariis commendaret, eodem idiomate, quo editae sunt.
(where he had been about the business of his House) to my Monastery, the Laws
of the most just King Edward, which my Lord William, the renowned King of
England, had proclaimed authentic and perpetual all England over to be kept,
under most grievous Penalties, and commended to his Justices in the same Tongue
they were set forth.

And this Proclamation was not all (to allay the Storms, which perhaps the
violation of these Laws had raised); For the good of Peace, says an ancient
Monk, he swears, upon all the Relics of the Church of Saint Albane, touching
the Holy Gospel, Abbot Fredrick ministering the Oath, Mat. Paris in vit.
Fretherici Abbatis S. Albani. fol. 48. l. 39.
the good and approved ancient Laws of the Realm, Bonas and approbatas antiquas
Regni Leges, quas Sancti and Pii Angliae Reges ejus Antecessores and maxim Rex
Edwardus statuit, inviolabiliter observare.
which the Holy and Pious Kings of England, his Ancestors, and especially King
Edward set forth, inviolably to keep.

Thus, we see the Mighty Conqueror is himself conquered, and solemnly
renouncing all Arbitrary Will and Power, submits his Will to be regulated and
governed by Justice, and the ancient Rights of the English Men.

Besides that, the Laws that were continued and confirmed, were the old Saxon
Laws, and the Additional Laws were made for the Benefit and Advantage of the
English, not Normans. And those Laws of Saint Edward, which the English were so
fond of, this William solemnly swore, before God, Angels, and Men, for ever
inviolably to keep and observe.

But before I leave this your Second Question, Sir, I think it will be no ways
improper to give you the signification of the word Conquest, and in what sense
Historians, and learned Antiquaries have understood it.

1. Matthew Paris Mat. Paris. fol. 941.
has it thus, Rex Angliae ex Conquestu, dicitur tamen, quod beatus Edwardus,
eo quod haerede caruit, Regnum legavit Willielmo Bastardo Duci Normannorum.

2. Sir Henry Spelman Spelm. Gloss. tit. Conquestus. fol. 145.
in his Glossary, says, Willielmus Primus Conquestor dicitur, quia Angliam
conquisivit, id est, acquisivit, purchased, non quod subegit, not that he
subdued it.

3. Sir John Skene, Skene. p. 39.
Clark of the Register Council, and Rolls, to King James in Scotland, in his
Book, De Verborum significatione, tells us, That Conquestus signifies Lands
quhilk any Person acquiris, and possessis, privato jure, vel singulari titulo,
veluti donatione, vel singulari aliquo contractu.

4. And it seems to me not improbable, that the Title of Conqueror, rather than
of Victor, was assumed by him, as being a word more mild, and originally
signifying, as it does in Scotland, a Purchaser; which is, he that comes to a
real Estate, not by hereditary Descent, but by Bargain or Gift, etc. Mr. Skene
de Verborum signific. ver^o Conquestus.
Conquestus dicitur ratione primi Conquestoris, and cum transmittitur ad ejus
haeredem, exuit naturam Conquestus, and induit naturam Haereditatis.

5. And that the word Conquestus did signify what the Historians say it did, we
have Records to justify their Exposition, whereof I shall produce one, and that
is above 480 Years ago. It says, Robertus Filius Nigelli petit versus Richardum
Battle Capitale Messuagium, etc. Ricardus venit and dicit quod pater, etc.
fuit persona Ecclesiae de Conquestu suo, etc. and dedit, etc. Placita de
terris. Mich. 2. Johan. penes Camerar. Scaccar. remanen. Now surely none can
make the word Conquestus, here, to signify that the Father of Battle got the
Advowson by Conquest, in our modern sense, but that he had it by his own
purchase.

6. Sir Roger Twisden, in his Preface before King William's Laws, and he well
enough understood the full meaning of the word Conquestus, says, Non existimo
Willielmum primum de omnium Anglorum terris ad voluntatem suam and pro libitu
in modum absolutae dominationis disposuisse. Apud Lambardum. in Prefac. 1550
I do not in the least imagine, that William the first had the disposition of
the Lands of all the English, according to his own Arbitrary Will and Pleasure,
and after the manner of an Absolute Conquest.

Now, Sir, by these several Explanations of the word, I think it is very
obvious to any impartial Considerer, that, (however we construe and interpret
it now, being either urged by Flattery or Interest so to do) it never did, even
in that Age it self, import or signify such an absolute and entire Conquest,
as to carry along with it the enslaving of the whole English Nation, after
William's Victory over Harold. Nay, though every Body will acknowledge, that this
Harold came to the Imperial Crown of England a totius Anglie Primatibus ad
Regale Culmen electus. Ab^ev. Chron. Rad. de dic^ro. fo. 479.
by a general Election of the Chief of the Nation, yet there is an Ancient
Author calls him Conqueror; And what then shall we think of the signification
of the word, but that it was an Acquest at most, and that too by the Voice and
Suffrage of the People; says he, MS. ex Bib. Domini Wild defuncti.
Heraldus strenuus Dux Conquestor Angliae.

But, Sir, this is not all; I must beg your patience and leave, for the better
illustration of the word Conquest; and to disabuse the World in this Point, to
present you with this following Summary SERIES Of the Styles of our several
descendant Kings, from this William the First, inclusively, to the Great King
Edward the Third; and therein make an Observation, which perhaps as yet has
scarcely been taken notice of.

The Styles of the Kings.
1. WIllielmus W. 1.
Rex Anglorum, etc. and sometimes Willielmus Cognomento Bastardus Rex Anglorum,
etc. 2. Willielmus W. 2.
Rufus Rex Anglorum, etc. and sometimes Willielmus Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum,
etc. 3. Henricus H. 1.
Rex Anglorum, etc. and sometimes Henricus Willielmi Magni Regis Filius. 4.
Stephanus Steph.
Rex Anglorum, etc. and sometimes Stephanus Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum, etc. 5.
Henricus H. 2.
omitted Dei Gratia, and used this Style, Henricus Rex Angliae, etc. and
sometimes Henricus Filius Imperatricis Matildae Rex Angliae, etc. 6. Richardus
R. 1.
Rex Angliae, etc. 7. Johannes John.
Rex Angliae, etc. and added this, Dominus Hiberniae. 8. Henricus H. 3.
Filius Johannis Rex Angliae, etc. 9. Edwardus E. 1.
Rex Angliae, etc. 10. Edwardus E. 2.
Filius Edwardi primi, Rex Angliae, etc.
And now we are come to the great Epoch of Time, when the Style of our Kings
altered. Edward the Third, in the beginning of his Reign, in several Records,
writ himself, Edwardus Filius Edwardi Filii Edwardi, that is, Edward, the Son
of Edward the Second, the Son of Edward the First. But this distinction not
being well approved of, and having considered, that before the Conquest there
had been two King Edwards, he in all Fines, and in general Records, writ
himself, Edwardus Rex Angliae, etc. tertius post Conquestum, which was done in
the second Year of his Reign, Anno Dom. 1328. which Rule was followed by
Richard 2. Hen. 4. Hen. 5. Hen. 6. and so to succeeding Kings downwards.

And, Sir, to give you a further proof, that King William did not Cancel and
Abolish all the English Laws, nor change, as is so much affirmed, the whole
Frame and Constitution of the Government, be pleased to hear the Judgment of
Mr. Seldom, and the Opinion of Sir Winston Churchill; and I hope they are such
unquestionable Authorities, as may sufficiently balance, if not totally
depress the fiercest of Gainsayers.

I shall begin with the great and ever famous Seldom, (for whose Memory, as
truly deserving, I have the highest regards) and shall transcribe his words at
large, which may not only serve for a good Solution to this your Second
Question, but indeed may possibly fully satisfy you as to your other three.

His words are;

The Laws of before, S^lden's Review of his History (...) Tithes. p. 482, 483,
484.
as well as of after the Norman Conquest, (as it is vulgarly called) are here
gathered, and are perhaps equally observable, as the Rest, in the consequent of
a general consecration of Tithes to the Church in England. For neither were the
Laws formerly made, abolished by that Conquest, although by Law of Vid.
Quintilian. lib. 5. Institution. cap. 10. Athe. Gentil. de Jere belli. lib. 3.
cap. 5. and Hottoman illust. Quaest. 5.
War, regularly all Rights and Laws of the Place conquered, be wholly subject
to the Conqueror's Will. For in this of the Norman, not only the Conqueror's
Will was not declared, that the former Laws should be abrogated, (and until
such Declaration, Laws remain in force, by the Opinion of Calvin's Can. fol.
17. b
some, in all Conquests of Christians against Christians) but also the ancient
and former Laws of the Kingdom were confirmed by him. For in his fourth Year,
by the Advice of his Baronage, he summoned to London, omnes Nobiles, sapientes,
and Lege sua eruditos, ut eorum Leges and Consuetudines audiret, as the words
are of the Book of Litchfield, and afterward confirmed them, as is further also
related by in H^ 2. p. 347.
Roger of Hoveden. Those, Lege sua eruditi, were common Lawyers of that Time,
as Godric and Al^win were then also, who are spoken of in the Book of MS lib.
2. p. 3^. and 30. in Bibl. Cotton.
Abingdom, to be, Legibus Patriae optime instituti, quibus tantae secularium
facundia and praeteritorum memoria eventorum inerat, ut caeteri circumquaque
facile eorum sententiam ratam fuisse, quem edicerent, approbarent. And these
two, and diverse other Common Lawyers then lived in the Abbey of Abingdon, Quorum
collationi nemo sapiens (says the Author) refragabatur, quibus rem Ecclesia
publicam tuentibus ejus oblocutores elingues fiebant. You must know, that in
those days, every Monk here in England, that would, might remain so secular,
that he might get Money for himself, purchase, or receive by descent to his own
use. And therefore it was fit enough for practicing Lawyers to live in
Monasteries. But what had those praeteritorum memoria eventorum (that is,
Reports, and adjudged Cases of the Saxon Times) availed in their skill, if the
former Laws had not continued? More obvious Testimonies to this purpose, are
had out of Videsis Cok. Praefax. ad Relat. 3. and 8. and si placet Not. ad
fortesc. p. 7, and 8.
Gervase of Tilbury, Ingulphus, and others, and we here omit them. But also,
indeed, it was not to be reputed a Conquest, or an Acquisition by right of War,
(which might have destroyed the former Laws) so much as a violent recovering of
the Kingdom out of the hands of Rebels, which withstood the Duke's pretense of
a lawful Title, claimed by the Confessor's adoption, or designation of him for
his Successor; his nearness of Blood on the Mother's side, not a little also
aiding such a pretense to a Crown. For the Confessor's Mother Emme, was Sister
to Richard the Second, Duke of Normandy, to whom, William was Grandchild and
Heir. But these were only specious Titles, and perhaps examined curiously,
neither of them were at that time enough. And howsoever his Conscience so moved
him at his death, that he professed he had got Historia Cadohensis.
England only by Blood and the Sword; yet also by express Declaration in some
of his Patents, he before pretended his Right from the Confessor's Gift. Chart.
Eccles. Wes^m in inspex. part 7. 1. Ed. 4. m. 26. and vid^ Camb. page 104.
In ore gladii, says he, Regnum adeptus sum Anglorum, devicto Haraldo Rege,
cum suis complicibus, qui mihi Regnum cum providentia Dei destinatum, and
beneficio concessionis Domini, and cognati mei gloriosi Regis Edwardi concessum
conati sunt auferre, etc. And the Stories commonly tells us, That the Confessor
Successionem Angliae ei dedit. And although Harold also pretended a Devise of
the Kingdom to himself made by the Confessor in extremis, and urged also that
the Custom of England had been from the time of Augustine's coming hither, MS.
sive Author Guil. Pictav. sive quis alius, sit in Bibl. Cotton.
Donationem quam in ultimo fine quis fecerit, eam ratam haberi; and that the
former Gift to the Norman, and his own Oath for establishment of it, were not
of force, because they were made, Malmesb. lib. 5. de Gest. Regum p. 56. a.
alii in Will. 1. and videsis Mat. Paris in Hen. 3. p. 1257. Edit. Londin.
absque generali Senatus and Populi conventu and edicto; yet for his own part,
he was driven to put all upon the Fortune of the Field, and so lost it. And the
Norman with his Sword, and pretense of the sufficiency and precedence of the
Gift made to himself, got the Crown, as if he had been a lawful Successor to
the Confessor, and not an Universal Conqueror. All this is plain out of the
Stories, and justified infallibly by that of the Titles of many common Persons
made to their Possessions in England, after his Kingdom settled, upon the
possession of themselves or their Ancestors, in time of the Saxon Kings,
especially of the Confessor. But this was always in case, where they by whose
possession the Title was made, had not incurred Forfeiture by Rebellion. Many
such Titles are clearly allowed in the Book of Doomsday, written in the
Conqueror's Time: One especially is noted by the most learned Camden in his
Norfolk. That, as I remember, is touched in Doomsday also, but enough others
are dispersed there which agree with it. How could such Titles have held, if he
had made an absolute Conquest of England, wherein an Universal Acquisition of
all had been to the Conqueror, and no Title could have been derived, but only
from or under him? More might be brought to clear this, but we add here only
the judicious Assertion of a great Shard. in cas. in itin. temp. Ed. 3. fol.
143. b.
Lawyer of Edward the Third's Time; Le Conqueror, says he. ne vient pas pur
ouster eux que avoient droiturell possession, mes de ouster eux que de leur
tort avoient occupy ascun ierre en disheritance del Roy, and son Corone. It
was spoken upon an Objection made in a Quo Warranto against the Abbot of
Peterborough, touching a Charter of King Edgar, which the King's Council would
have had void, because, by the Conquest all Franchises, they said, were
devolved to the Crown. But, by the way, for that of his nearness of Blood,
which could not but aid his other pretended Title; let it not seem merely vain,
in regard of his being a Bastard. There was good pretense for the help of that
defect also. For, although the Laws of this Kingdom, and, I think of all other
Civil States at this day, exclude Bastards (without a subsequent Legitimation)
from Inheritance; yet by the old Laws used by his Ancestors and Countrymen,
that is, by those of Norway, a Prince's Son gotten Vid. Roger de Hoveden in
Rich. 1. fol. 425, and 347.
on a Concubine bond or free, was equally inheritable as any other born in
Wedlock; which was, I believe no small Reason, why he stood at first so much
for the Laws of Norway to have been generally received in this Kingdom. And
some Stories also which make mention of Duke Robert his getting William on that
Arlet or Arlec (as she is sometimes written) say, That she was to him a good
while vice Vxoris. So Henry of In Bibl. Cotton.
Knyghton Abbot of Leicester: Transiens (says he) Robertus aliquando per
Phaleriam Vrbem Normaniae, vidit puellam Arlec nomine Pelleparii Filiam, inter
caeteras in Chorea tripudiantem nocte sequente illam sibi conjunxit, quam vice
Vxoris aliquamdiu tenens Willielmum ex ea generavit. And he tells us also the
common Tale of tearing her Smock. If she were so his Concubine, or Vice-conjux,
(between whom and a Wife, even the old Fide Legate. 3. L. Item Legato 49.. 4
Imperials make no other difference but Honor and Dignity; and by them also
some kind of Inheritance is allowed to Authent. 89. c. 12. discretis igitur,
etc.
such Bastards as are Naturales liberi, that is gotten on Concubines); it was
much more reasonable that her Son should be reputed as Legitimate, than that
the Son of every single Woman, bond or free, whether Concubine or no, should be
so, as the Laws of Norway allow. And when he had inherited his Dukedom, he
made, doubtless, no question, but that his Blood was as good in regard of all
other Inheritances, that might by any color be derived through it. And
therefore William of Malmsbury well styles him proxime consanguineus also to
the Confessor, as he was indeed on the Mother's side. And those Videsis Malmsb.
de Gest. Reg. lib. 2. fol 52.
of the Posterity of Edward Son to Iron-side, were then so excluded or
neglected, that their nearness on the Father's side could not prevent him. You
may see the common Stories of them. But whereas that excellent 18. E. 4. fol.
30. a.
Lawyer Littleton says, That William the Conqueror was called a Bastard,
because he was born before Marriage had between his Father and Mother, and that
after he was born they were married, (which indeed by the C. tit. de Not. lib.
c. eum quis 10, etc.
Imperials, and by the general Law of Videsis Bacquet de Domaino du fr-tract.
du Bastardise. c. 9, etc.
France, would have made him wholly legitimate); I doubt he had but little or no
ground to justify it. Had he been so legitimate, it is not likely he should
have been styled so commonly and anciently Bastardus; which Name, even in his
Apud Cambden in Richmondia.
own Charters he sometimes used with cognomenta; as also the Bastards of the
old Philip Duke of Burgundy were wont to do; although of later Time it be
reputed as a Name of dishonor; and the actio injuriarum, or an Action upon the
Case lies wherever it be falsely objected, as some will Videsis Pont. Heuterum
de liberis Natural. c. 12.
have it. But these things prove enough, that this William seized the Crown of
England, not as conquered, but by pretense of Gift or Adoption, aided and
confirmed by nearness of Blood; and so the Saxon Laws formerly in force could
not but continue: And such of them as are now abrogated, were not at all
abrogated by his Conquest, but either by the Parliaments or Ordinances of his
Time, and of his Successors, or else by non-usage or contrary Custom.

Surely then none can believe, that William claimed only by the Sword, and made
an absolute Conquest; or that he abolished all the old Saxon Laws, and
constituted a new Frame and Systeme of Government, entirely for the Interest of
his Normans, and to the slavery and ruin of the whole English; nor can any one,
methinks, after this, categorically attest that there were no English Men in
the Common Council of the whole Kingdom; or that the English had neither
Estates nor Fortunes left; and that therefore it were of no great matter and
consequence to them, by what Law, Right, or Property, other Men held their
Estates.

But not to dwell upon the great Authority of this Learned Man, we will now
hear what Sir Winston Churchill can inform us as to your Second Question;
Whether the Laws were totally abolished, and a New Government set up, according
to the Arbitrary Will and Pleasure of this Norman Conqueror?

And thus he writes, in his Book dedicated to his present Majesty.

Duke William, Sir Winst. Churchill's Divi Britann^ci. fol. 189.
better known to us here by the Name of the Conqueror, who with like
Confidence, and not unlike Injustice, (as Rollo did Normandy, the seventh in
Descent, from whom was this Duke) invaded England, pretending a Donation of the
Sovereignty from his near Kinsman King Edward the Confessor, confirmed, as he
alleged, by his last Will and Testament, in the presence of most of the
English Nobility. Id. fo. 190.
But what we allow to the Courage, we must take from the Wisdom of the English;
that being subdued, they continued nescia vinci, vexing the Conqueror, after
they had submitted to him, by such continual Revolts, as suffered him not to
sheath his Sword all his Reign; or if he did, urged him to continue still so
suspicious of their Loyalty, that he was forced always to keep his hand upon
the Hilt, ready to draw it forth, having not leisure to intend what was before
established, much less to establish what he before intended: So that they put
upon him a kind of necessity of being a Tyrant, to make good his being a King:
Yet such was the moderation of his mind, that he chose rather to bind them
stricter to him by the old Laws, than to gall them with any New, guarding his
Prerogative within that Citadel of the Borough Law (as they called it) from
whence, as often as they began to mutiny, he battered them with their own
Ordnance, and so made them Parties to their own wrong; and however some that
designed to preoccupate the Grace of Servitude, gave him the ungrateful Title
of Conqueror, which he esteemed the greatest misfortune his good Fortune had
brought upon him) thereby to proclaim his Power to be as boundless as his Will;
which they took to be above all Limitation or Contradiction; yet we find he
suffered himself to be so far conquered by them, that instead of giving to, he
took the Law from them, and contentedly bound himself up by those, which they
called St. Edward's Laws; which being an abbreviation of the great Tripple Code
of Danique, Merke, and West-Sexe Laws, was such a form of Combination, as he
himself could not desire to introduce a better; and if any thing looked like
Absolute, 'twas his disarming them, when he found them thus Law-bound hand and
foot.

From this Authority, Sir, I think, it is very plain and obvious, That I. Here
was no Absolute Conquest. II. That neither were all the Saxon Laws cancelled
and abolished, by the coming in of this Conqueror.


I. That here was no Absolute Conquest; because,

1. Though here was an invading England, yet it was upon pretense of a Donation
of the Sovereignty from Edward the Confessor, confirmed by his last Will, and
that in the presence of most of the English Nobility. And so it was only an
endeavor to get his own upon the Claim of an alleged just Title; which showed
he had, at least, more reason to demand, than Harold, who, at best, was an
Usurper to detain the Crown: And so the Quarrel to be more Personal than
National.

2. The Conquest could not be Absolute, for though he was, by a happy success
over Harold, possessor of the English Throne; yet says my Author, The Nation
continued, nescia vinci; so that whenever he was Tyrannical and Arbitrary, they
were continually vexing him with their Revolts.

3. This Conquest could not be absolute, because then the English must have
been perfect Slaves and Vassals to his uncontrollable Beck; but (alas!) here
Sir Winston tells you, the Norman Conqueror could find them no such easy Beasts
of Burden, their Necks would not bear the Yokes of his Severity; for they were
several times up in Arms against him, and that after they had submitted to him:
so that at most this could be but a submission upon terms.

4. He was so far from being in love with the gaudy name of Conqueror, that
when some, that designed to preoccupate the Grace of Servitude, gave him that
ungrateful Title, he esteemed it the greatest misfortune his good Fortune had
brought upon him. And,

5. The Conquest surely could not be absolute, for then it would have been very
idle and ridiculous for any one to say, what Sir Winston, no doubt, but upon
good and mature consideration, has thought fit to say of him, that if any
thing looked like absolute; and hereby you may plainly take notice, that he
seems to wonder how any Man can pretend to make him an absolute Conqueror, when
he could hardly find so much as any thing to look like it. But,

II. I shall observe to you, that neither were all the Saxon Laws cancelled and
abolished by the coming in of this Conqueror.

1. If King William might have done despotically whatsoever he had a mind to,
then what necessity was there for such a moderation of his Mind, as the Author
hints to us?

2. Because he found the People were not to be galled with any New, he chose
rather (but it was a choice upon Necessity) to bind them stricter to him by the
Old Laws; that is, in plain downright English, they would not yield to him,
nor to his Government, unless he resolved to circumscribe his ruling of them,
within the bounds of the good Old Laws, in which they were born and bred; and
make his French and Normans come over and buckle to them.

3. He suffered himself to be so far conquered by them, as to let them have
their Old Laws; and it was with a kind of good satisfaction too: For,

4. The Book tells you, He contentedly bound himself up by those which they
called St. Edward's Laws: And was there not, do ye think, very good Reason for
his so doing? when thereby,

5. He understood at length, that it was a guarding his Prerogative, to keep
within that Citadel of the Borough Law.

6. And lastly, We cannot rationally think he would, after he had thereby
thoroughly looked into them, cancel and abolish them; since those Laws were
such, as, it is said, he himself could not desire to introduce a better.

I hope, Sir, all these Deductions arise naturally from the words themselves,
without any force or strain upon the sense; and what I have said, may be
sufficient to convince you, that King William still kept to the Saxon Laws, and
did not change the whole Frame and Constitution of the Government; as, you say,
is very strenuously, and with heat, asserted by several of our Modern Authors.

I shall yet make bold with your Patience, Sir, and show you what Florentius
Wigorniensis, (a famous Historian in King Stephen's Time) and Brompton from
him, say upon this Point, and so conclude my Argument.

Henricus primus omnes malas consuetudines and injustas exactiones (quibus
Regnum Angliae injuste opprimebatur) abstulit, ^oren. Wig. fol. 650.
pacem firmam in toto Regno suo posuit, and teneri praecepit. Legem Regis
Edwardi omnibus in commune reddidit, cum illis emendationibus, quibus Pater
suus illam emendavit.

Brompton's words are the same, In Hen. 1. fol. 997, 998.
and therefore I shall content my self with only referring you to the Book,
without repeating them to you. And, Sir, from hence we may learn,

1. That this King Henry's Father, William the First, was so far from
cancelling and abolishing K. Edward's Laws, that he made them to be the Common
standing Laws of the Land, to be equally and inviolably observed as well by the
Normans as the English, for he says, omnibus came in commune reddidit; unless
you will understand the word Omnibus to be a particular Universal, and so only
to include the Normans: And if so, then it follows likewise, That instead of
the Normans giving to the English their Laws, the English Laws were imposed
upon the Normans.

2. And whereas there were, it is confessed, some Additional Laws made in his
Time, yet you may plainly observe hence, that they were grounded upon, and but
a better Improvement and Melioration of the Confessor's Laws; and they were for
the Sake, Benefit, and Advantage of the English, as you will find hereafter.

3. Henry the First, Son to this Conqueror William, took away omnes malas
consuetudines and injustas exactiones, etc. by which England had been sorely
oppressed, under his Brother William Rufus, and restored the English to their
former Rights and Liberties; and he renewed and confirmed the Ancient Saxon
Laws, as his Father had done before him, as it is well noted in the
continuation of the History of Bid, Bid Histor. lib. 3. cap. 30. fol. 347.
In Concilio peritorum and proborum virorum Regni Angliae.

4. But if there had been no Freemen but the Normans; if the Normans had all
the Estates of the English given them; if there were none but Normans in the
Common Councils of the Kingdom; how is it possible to be supposed, by any that
will allow themselves the free use of their Reason, that Henry the First would
ever make such a Grant; or, if he did, that the Normans would ever submit to
it; or (what is much more unlikely) give their consent to out themselves of all
their new-gotten Possessions, and reduce themselves back to this notorious
Dilemma, viz. either to live Uassals and Slaves under the English, or else
vertere solum, return to Normandy, from whence they came.

There is one thing more which I cannot but mention, and that is, The
inconsiderateness of those Men, who so mightily cry up the absolute Conquest of
William the First over the English, as if they were utterly broken and crushed,
and all their Laws and Customs destroyed; when, as it is demonstrably manifest,
Sim. Dunelm. An. 1088. fol. 214. Angli cum fideliter juvabant.
that at the Time of Robert and his Normans, Treason and Conspiracy against
William Rufus then King, and his Brother, to cut off him, and make Robert King
in his room; I say, then the Interest of the English was so great and powerful,
that it kept the Crown upon Rufus's Head, maugre all the Power of the Normans,
who universally joined with Robert.

But, Sir, now I will consider the import of your next Question.

The Third Question.
III. Whether it be true, The Anonimous Author against Mr. Petyr. p. 43.
That the English had neither Estates nor Fortunes left, but all was divided
between the King and his Normans?

THough it be confessed, that this first William obtained the Imperial Crown of
England; yet I think I have clearly made it out to you, Sir, that it was by a
Reception upon Terms, and not by Right of Conquest; and it is no less obvious,
that the Laws in general, which were, after such his Acquisition, ratified and
confirmed, and which continued in full force and power, were the old Saxon
Laws; and though it cannot be denied, but that he did introduce some new Laws
of his own, yet those, quas constituimus, you have heard, were made, ad
utilitatem Anglorum, for the Benefit and Advantage of the English, without the
least mention either of the French or Normans. And observable too it is, that
those Laws were made per Commune Concilium totius Regni. Apud Lambard. inter
Leges Guliel. primi, fol. 170. de Statut. 55.

1. And if so, Sir, methinks this seems as one strong Argument, that the
English could not have all their Estates and Fortunes violently ravished from
them; nor the King and his Normans, at their coming in, could not absolutely
sweep away all the Stakes, because the good Old Law was still in its full being
and virtue; Co. 12. Report. fol. 65.
which was the Metw^nd and Measure to try the Causes of the Subjects; and, In
his first Speech to his first Parliament, in Engl. Stat. 1. Jac. c. 2. fol.
1157.
by which, says the wise King James, the People's security of Lands, Livings,
and Privileges, were preserved and maintained; and, which also is, K. Charl.
1. Declaration to all his Loving Subjects published with the Advice of his
Privy Council. Exact Collect. etc. p 28.
the Inheritance of every Subject, and the only security he can have for his
Life or Estate. And then they could not lose all they had at this rate, but it
must be by a manifest wrong to the Privilege, as well as well-being of the
People; and, no doubt, if the Law had its due course, as I have made that plain
it had, but that their Native Rights were easily recoverable; and the ravaging
Normans could not keep them in spite of all Justice; for that were a total
abolishing of the Law.

2. But in the next place, Sir, I make no question but that I shall convince
you, that the English, at least those who lived in Peace before, and at his
coming to the possession of the English Throne, did quietly and peaceably enjoy
their Inheritances; and their Titles and Claims to them from their Saxon
Ancestors, were held good and allowed; which, to be sure, they never could have
done, had this Kingdom received such an universal Change and Revolution, as so
many of our late Learned Authors would needs have us firmly to believe.

Says Sir Richard Baker, Sir Ric. Baker's Chronic. fol. 23.
in his Chronicle of this King's Life and Reign; Though he has had the Name of
Conqueror, yet he used not the Kingdom as gotten by Conquest; for he took no
Man's living from him, nor dispossessed any of their Goods, but such only,
whose demerit made them unworthy to hold them, as appears by his Act to one
Warren a Norman, to whom he had given the Castle of Sherborne in Norfolk. The
Story is faithfully this, as you may find in Cambden's Britannia; The King, it
seems, had given away Sherborne to Warren a Norman, and one that was his great
Favorite; which Edwinus de Sherborne perceiving, who was the true Owner of the
Castle, and an English Man, demands, before the King, his right, in open Court,
tells him it did, de jure, belong to him, upon this Reason of Law, for that he
never had took up Arms against the King, either before his coming in, or since;
whereupon the King, Mr. Petyr's Ancient Right of the Commons of England
asserted. Pref. p. 24.
vinculo juramenti astrictus, gave Judgment of Right against the Norman, and
Sherborne recovered the Lordship.

Sir Henry Spelman tells you the Story, which he has taken out of an Ancient
Manuscript, concerning the Family of the Sharborns, thus; Spelm. Gloss. verbo
Drenches. p. 184.
Edwinus de Sharborne, and quidam alii, qui ejecti fuerunt e terris suis,
abierunt ad Conquestorem, and dixerunt ei, quod nunquam ante Conquestum, nec in
Conquestu suo, nec post, fuerunt contra ipsum Regem in Consilio and Auxilio,
sed tenuerunt so in pace. Et hoc parati sunt probare quomodo ipse Rex vellet
ordinare. Per quod idem Rex fecit inquiri per totam Angliam si ita fuit, quod
quidem probatum fuit: prop^er quod idem Rex praecepit, ut omnes illi qui sic
tenuerunt se in pace in forma praedicta, quod ipsi, rehaborent omnes terras and
donationes suas adeo integre and in pace ut unquam habuerunt, vel ten^erunt
ante Conquestum suum. That is;

Edwin of Sharborn, and several others that were ejected out of their Estates
and Possessions, went to the Conqueror, and told him, that they never either
before, or in, or after the Conquest, were against him the said King, either by
their Advice, or any other Aid, but kept themselves peaceably and quietly. And
this they were ready to make out, which way soever the King pleased to appoint.
Whereupon the said King ordered an Inquisition to be made throughout all
England, whether it were so or no; which was plainly proved: Therefore he
presently commanded, that all those who so kept themselves peaceably in manner
aforesaid, as these had done, should be repossessed of all their Estates and
Inheritances as fully, amply, and quietly, as ever they had or held them before
his Conquest.

This is a Case so full to the Point, and so plain to every common
Understanding in its self, that it would be frivolous to make any deductions
from it. I shall presume to repeat to you the words of a great and Learned Judge
in the Reign of King Edward the Third, and give you his judicious Assertion of
this Argument, (though it be cited before in that of Mr. Seldom) because it was
agreed on as a main positive Rule of Law; and they are these;

Le Conqueror (says he) ne vient pas pour ouster eux, Johannes Shardelowe unus
Justic. de Banco. Rot. Pat. 16. E. 3. Pars 1. m. 2. in Dugdales Chronica Series
annexed to his Origines Juridiciales. fol. 44.
qui avoient droiturell possession, mes de ouster eux que de lour tort avoient
occupy ascun terre en desheritance del Roy and son Coronne. The Conqueror came
not to oust those who had a Right Possession, but to dispossess those, who, of
their own wrong, had enjoyed any Land to the disherison of the King and his
Crown.

What shall we think after all this? That notwithstanding, the English who had
not been in Arms against William, had no Estates or Fortunes left, but all was
divided between the King and his Normans? Surely no, but just the contrary,
that they did enjoy them in as full, peaceable, and quiet a manner as ever they
did, before he came to be this high and mighty Conqueror.

But again, let me give you, Sir, another Instance to enforce the Truth of this
Argument.

In the 14. Rich. 2. some 290 Years ago, there happened a memorable Suit
between the King and the Prior of Coventry, Placita coram Rege Hill. Anno ^14.
R. 2. Rot. 50. War. vid. Dodsworth and Dugdales Monastic. Anglican. Vol. 1.
fol. 305. Col. 1.
in the King's Bench, the King demanding Annuam Pensionem pro uno Clericorum
Regis, as holding de Domino Rege per Baroniam.

The Prior pleads, that he held Prioratum praedictum, upon the foundation of
Leofric, quondam Comitis Cestriae, founded in the Time Sancti Edwardi Regis
Angliae, and produces the Charters in Court, and then conveys the Title of
Descent, thus;

Ibidem recitatur Charta ejusdem Regis Edwardi, Jus Anglorri^i ab antiquo.
(...) 16. in the Addition, etc.
quas Donationes and Concessiones diversi alii Reges confirmaverunt, and dicit
quod postea per processu^ temporis nomen Abbatiae praedictae divertebatur in
nomen Prioratus, eo quod Leof winus ad tunc Abbas ibidem creatus fuit in
Episcopum Cestriae, and ordinavit per Assensum Monachorum ibidem quod Abbatia^
praedicta ex tun^ foret Prioratus (...) and quod Superiores ejusdem Ecclesiae
forent Priores successive in perpetuum, and dicit quod de ipso Leofrico, quia
obiit sin^ Haerede de corpore suo descendente, Advocatio Ecclesiae praedictae
tempore Willielm' Conquest Angliae cuidam Hugoni Comiti Cestriae, ut
Consanguineo and haeredi, ipsius Leofrici, viz. Filio Erminilde sororis ejusdem
Leofrici, and de ipso Hugone cuidam Richardo ut Filio and haeredi, Not. This is
the Hugh to whom it is imagined by some, that William gave all the Lands of the
County of Chester.
and de ipso Richardo cuidam Ranulpho, ut Consanguineo and haeredi, viz. Filio
Matildis Sororis praedicti Hugonis and de ipso Ranulpho cuidam Ranulpho ut
Filio and Haeredi, and de (...) so Ranulpho Filio Ranulphi, quia obii^ sine
Haerede de corpore suo descendente, Advocatio praedicta simul cum Comitatu
Cestriae and Huntingdon, and aliis diversis Castris, Maneriis, terris and
tenementis cum pertinentiis in Anglia and Wallia quibusdam Matildae, Mabilliae,
Ceciliae and Margeriae ut Sororibus and Haeredibus praedicti Ranulphi, inter
quas propertia facta fuit de praedictis Comitatibus, Advocationibus and
Castris, Maneriis, Terris and Tenementis cum pertinentiis supradictis. Et
praedicta Advocatio, simul cum toto praedicto Comitatu Cestriae, cum
pertinentiis allocata fuit praedictae Matilde pro^proparte sua in Allocationem
diversorum aliorum Castrorum, Manneriorum, Terrarum and Tenementorum cum
pertinentiis praedictis Mabilliae, Ceciliae and Margeriae separatim
allocatorum, and de ipsa Matilda descendebant praedicta Advocatio simul cum
praedicto Comitatu Cestriae cum pertinentiis post propertiam praedictam cuidam
Iohanni Scot ut Filio and haeredi praedictae Matildae, qui quidem Johannes Scot
Advocationem praedictam simul cum praedicto Comitatu Cestriae cnm Pertinentiis
dedit Henrico quondam Regi Angliae Filio Regis Iohannis and haeredibus suis in
perpetuum, etc. Praedictus Prior sine die.

From this great Record, Sir, I think it is clear and evident;

1. That Leofric was Earl of Chester in the Reign of Edward the Confessor, and
that he dying without Issue, the Earldom of Chester, and the Right of Advowson
of the Priory of Coventry, tempore Willielmi Conquestoris Angliae, descended to
Hugh Earl of Chester, ut Consanguineo and Haeredi ipsius Leofrict, as being the
Son of Erminelde, Sister of Leofric; and that from that Hugh, descended Richard
his Son and Heir; and from Richard descended Ranulf, as consanguineus and
haeres, that is the Son of Maud, Sister of Hugh; and from that Ranulph another
Ranulph his Son and Heir, etc.

2. Now if William, when he came in, made an absolute Conquest, this Title had
been impossible to have been maintained.

3. It appears further, That the Plea of the Prior was allowed; for the Record
says, Praedictus Prior sine die. And the Advowson aforesaid, simul cum
Comitatu Cestriae and Huntingdon, and aliis diversis Maneriis, Terris and
Tenementis, cum pertinentiis, etc. did descend. And it is to be observed, that
Judgment being given upon solemn Debate and Trial, neither the Judges, nor the
King's Counsel, so many hundred Years ago, as in the Age of Richard the Second,
knew any thing of this new received Notion of an absolute Conquest. And again,

4. It Is yet further observable, that the Charter of Leofric, and the Title of
the Prior had been confirmed, per diversos alios Reges, who must certainly have
greater knowledge of the Nature of William the First his Conquest or Government,
than any Man can pretend to in our Times.

But further, Sir, I will make bold with your Patience, and give you some few
Instances, of the very many that I could, out of Doomsday Book, to satisfy
you, that there were many Proprietors of English Men, who had their Freehold
Estates, upon Titles paramount to any of the Conqueror's Donation. Those I
shall take from that industrious and worthy Gentleman, Mr. Attwood's Book,
entitled, Ius Anglorum ab Antiquo, Jus Anglorum ab Antiquo. p. 80, 81, 83, 87,
89, 90.
where, in his excellent History of the Conquest; among others he has these
following, Viz.

Surrey. 1. Hugo de Port was a very great Proprietor, Pa. 8o. He was not Tainns
Regis.
as may be found under the Title, Terra Hugonis de Port: Many Manors he had;
and as appears in Hampshire, he had at least two Manors, Cerdeford and
Eschetune, from his Ancestors, before William's Entrance.

And even this is a ground to believe, he was a great Man, that he had a
Surname, or Addition:

Because, if we believe the Great Antiquary, Camb. Rem. p. 136.
Mr. Cambden, Sir-names were not settled among the Common People fully, till
about the Time of Edw. 2.

2. The Earl of Moreton, a very powerful Prince, ^pse Comes ^enuit Estreham
T.R.E.
as I may call him, held Estreham in Tenrige Hundred, in the Time of King
Edward. He enjoyed several other great Possessions of the Gift of King William.
I doubt not indeed but he was Norman born, yet he was here before the entrance
of the Norman Duke, and might, not improbably, be in Favor with King Edward
the Confessor, Camb. Rem. ^ p. 136.
who was all Frenchified. He, to be sure, had some Lands within the Kingdom of
England, which he enjoyed not from William's Division. Page 176.


Hampshire. 3. Ralph Mortimer held several Possessions, some of which he had
Iure Haereditario, from before the Reputed Conquest. Ipse Radulphus tenet
Ordie: This Manor T.R.E. extra Ecclesiam emptum fuit, eo pacto and
conventione, ut post tertium haeredem cum omni pecunia Manerium Ecclesia Sancti
Petri de Episcopatu recuperet; nunc qui tenet Radulphus, est tertius haeres.

Dorsetshire. Dorsete.
4. Ten Thains hold Chimedecome. Ipsi tenuerunt T. R. E. pro. 1. Manerio. Omnes
qui has terras tenuerunt T. R. E. potuerunt ire ad quem Dominum volebant.

Staffordshire. Statfordscire
5. Alric holds Stagrisgeshowe. And Aswold holds Chrochesdene. And 14. more
hold Lands of Titles, Ipsi has Terras renuerunt T. R. E.
Prior to King William's, amongst which the Earls, Hugh de Ferriers, and
Alberic de Vere; the first of which held St. Warburgh of Chester, in the Time
of the Confessor.

6. And lastly; Vctred held several Lands in the Time of King Edward, as in the
Time of William the First. Besides, several dispossessed, who have their Titles
allowed.

I think these six Instances are enough (referring the more curious to Mr.
Attwood's Book before mentioned, or to the great Survey it self) to bear out my
Assertion, That the English had Estates and Fortunes still in their hands,
which they held in King Edward's Time, and did not derive under King William's
Title.

Having now given you these six Individuals, I shall offer you three more, and
they are from the Charters of King William; the one to the Dean of St. Paul's,
confirming to him the Lands, etc. belonging to that Church, and this was upon
the day of his Coronation too: The other is to the Abbey of Westminster: and the
third to the City of London, granting to them the Liberties and Franchises
which they enjoyed in the Time of Edward the Confessor.

To begin with that made to the Dean of St. Paul's.

1. Ego Willielmus Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum, Carta Regis Williel. Conquestor. in
Appendice in Histor. Eccles. Cathedr. S. Pauli. By Sir Will. Dugdale. fol. 190.
una cum Mathilda Regina, Principibusque meis, coram conventu Sacerdotum Dei,
Reverendis scilicet Archiepiscopis Aldredo and Stigando, caeterisque Episcopis
and Abbatibus hujus Patriae, terras Monasterii Sancti Pauli, quae in tempore
Antecessorum meorum a quibuslibet hominibus ablatae fuerant, and injuste
detentae, omnes in die primi Diadematis and Coronationis meae, Deo, ejusque
Apostolo Paulo in Lundonia, and eorum servitoribus in perpetuum possidendas
restitui, and eas ex omni part liberas esse concessi.

2. William the first gives the Church of Westminster, Cartae. Antiq. C. C. n.
31.
decimam de Wic de eadem part quae ad me pertinebat, atque iterum reddidi
eandem partem eis injuste ablatam quam Rex Edwardus antea dederat.

So that we see, that as on the one hand William the First gave them the Tithes
of that part which was his right; so likewise he restored the Tithes of that
part which was unjustly taken from that Church, and which Edward the Confessor
had before given. And no Conquest was here pretended, but the Precedent proves
the quite contrary, viz. that there was none insisted on.

3. And now I come to that respecting the City of London.

Williem King grets Williem Bisceop and Godfred Porteregravan portgrave.
Saxonice.
Porterefan, and ealle ya Burghwarn binnen London Frencise and Englise
frendlice, Hollinshead's 3 d Vol. fol. 15. 2. Col. n. 21,
and IC kiden eoy, yeet IC will yeet git ben ealra weera la gayweord, ye get
weeran on Eadwerds daege Kings. And IC will yeet aelc child by his Fader
yrfnume, aefter his Faders daege. And IC nelle ge Wolian, yeet adnig man eoy
aenis wrang beode. God eoy heald.

Willielmus Rex Salutat Willielmum Episcopum and Goffridum Portegrefium, and
omnem Burghware infra London Frans. and Angl. amicabiliter. Et vobis notum
faeio, quod ego volo quod vos sitis omni lege illa digni qua fuistis Edwardi
diebus Regis. Et volo quod omnis Fuer sit Patris sui haeres post diem Patris
sui. Et ego nolo pati quod aliquis homo aliquam injuriam vobis inferat. Dens
vos salvet.

Englished in Stow's Survey of London, Stow 's Survey of London. fol. 740.
thus:

William King great William Bishop and Godfrey Porters and all the Burgeis,
within London Frensh and English. And I grant you that I will that ye be all
your. Law worth, that ye were in Edwardis days the King. And I will that ich
Child be his Faders Eyer. And I nyl suffur, that any Man you any wrongys beed.
And God you keep.

Now it is evident from this Charter;

1. That it was made, immediately upon, or after, the Coronation of William;
because, you see, he styles himself King.

2. This may seem to justify, not only what the Historians, who lived nearest
his Time, (as Pictaviens^s, etc.) but what his own Laws do likewise declare,
viz. That he was crowned King by compact with the English, and at the same time
swore inviolably to observe King Edwards Laws, which he confirmed to them.

3. With this further, That he denounced a severe Prohibition, that no Man
should offer any affront, or do any wrong to the Citizens of London.

4. And for a complete assurance of all this his Love and Kindness to the City,
he concludes with a Prayer to Heaven, That God would keep and bless them.

But by the way give me leave to show you (though I think likewise it does not
a little contribute to the strength and validity of my Argument) the Greatness
and Power of the City of London in those early Times, I shall transcribe the
words of a Learned Writer concerning it, and so leave it to your more serious
consideration.

William Stephanides, Stephanid. Descriptio Nobilissimae Civitatis Londoniae,
in Stow 's Survey, etc. fol. 704. de sit^ ejusdem.
a Monk of Canterbury, born (as Stow says in his forecited Book) of
Worshipful Parents in the City of London, and who lived in the Reign of King
Stephen, in his description of it, has these words.

Inter Nobiles Vrbes Orbis quas fama celebrat, Civitas Londonia, Regni Anglorum
seeds una est, quae famam sui latius diffundit, opes and merces longius
transmittit, caput altius extollit. Foelix est aeris salubritate, Christiana
Religione, firmitate munitionum, natura situs, honor Civium, pudicitia
matronali, ludis etiam quam jucunda, and Nobilium foecunda virorum.

Vrbs ista viris est honorata, Id. fol. 705.
armis decorata, multo habitatore populosa, ut tempore Bellicae cladis sub Rege
Stephano bello apti, ex e^ exeuntes ostentatui, haberentur 20000 Armatorum
Equitum, 60 mill Peditum aestimarentur. Cives Londoniae ubicunque locorum prae
omnibus aliis Civibus ornatu morum, vestium and mensae, locutione, spectabiles
and noti habentur.

Which in English is thus;

Of all the celebrated Cities in the World, this of London is the Metropolis of
England; a City of a very extensive Fame in its self, but much more honorable
by the Native Treasure and Commodities which she exporteth. Happy is she in the
temperature of her Climate, in the soundness of her Doctrine, strength of her
Forts, agreeableness of her Situation; in the Credit and Reputation of her
Citizens; the unblemished Chastity of the Female Sex; innocently pleasant, even
in her Recreations, and honored with a numerous Train of Nobility.

The Grandeur of this City chiefly consists in the Properness and Valor of her
Men; in the bravery of her Armor, the multitude of her Inhabitants: so that in
the fatal Wars in King Stephen's Reign, there appeared, on a Muster, 20000
Horse, and 60000 Foot, all armed Soldiers. The Citizens of London are known
and esteemed beyond all other Persons, wheresoever they travel, for their
gentile Deportment, their good Apparel, their Table, and Discourse.

So that we see from hence, that in the Reign of King Stephen, who was Nephew
to King William the First, (from whose Death, to King Stephen's Reign, there
were not fifty Years) the City of London was very great and powerful; but had
the English Citizens been all destroyed, and had all their Estates and Fortunes
been (as is so positively affirmed) taken away from them by William the First,
it had been impossible, in so short a Time, for them to have risen again to
that degree of Fame and Renown through all this part of the World, as the
Historian, who was an Eyewitness of it, so credibly assures us.

My next design is to show you, That from the General Direction of the Writs
and Charters in King William the First his Time, it is plainly demonstrable,
that William, the pretended Conqueror, did not divide all the Lands of England
amongst his Norman followers to hold of him.

1. (...) Rob. (...). Dugdal. Hist. of St. Paul's, in the Appendix. fol. 196.
ealle his (...)

Id est;

1. W. Rex Saluto Osmundum Episcopum Saresburiensem, Nota, Here are English
Sheriffs, and other English Officers, as well as French.^
and Robertum de Ely, and Petrum de Valoniis, omnesque praefectos suos et
fideles, Francos et Anglos, amice.

2. Willem (...) mines b'pes (...) mind (...) Chart. Antique. I.
.

Willem great mines Bishops, Here were Engl. Thains. Thahi Appellatione vi^i
interdum Nobiles, interdum liberae Conditionis Homines, interdum Magistratus,
atque saepenume^o Ministri notantur. Gloss. in sin. Lambard. de p^is. Angl leg.
fol. 223. Col. 1. tic. Thanus.
and mind Eorles, and ealle mind Thegnes, Freneisse and Englisce.

3. W. Rex Anglorum Monast. Angl. Vol. 1. fo. 185.
O. Episcopo Sarisburiensi et L. Abbati Glastoniensi et A. Vicecomiti
omnibusque Baronibus Francigenis et Anglis de Sumerseta, et de Wiltunscire,
Salutem.

4. Willielmus Rex Angliae Archiepiscopo T. Eboraci, Id. fol. 397.
et Iusticiariis et Vicecomitibus, et omnibus Baronibus and Fidelibus suis,
Francis et Anglis de Eboraciscire, et de Carleoli, Salutem.

5. Willielmus Rex Anglorum Walterio Vicecomiti, Id. sol. 29.
et omnibus Baronibus suis Francigenis, et Anglis de Comitatu de Glocestre,
Salutem.

6. Willielmus Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum, Id. ibid.
Fidelibus suis Francigenis et Anglis, Salutem.

7. Willielmus Rex Anglorum Episcopo de Suthsexa et. Vicecomiti, Id. ibid.
et caeteris Baronibus suis Francigenis et Anglis, Salutem.

8. Willielmus Rex Angliae, Id. Vol. 2. so. 845.
G. Vicecom' et Baronibus suis de Caerleil, Salutem.

9. Willielmus Rex Angliae Thomae Archiepiscopo et Bertramo de Verdun, Id. fol.
845.
et Baronibus suis, Francis et Anglis de Everwicscire, Salutem.

10. Henricus Rex Angliae Richardo Episcopo London, Cart. Antiq. N
et Vic' et Praeposito, et omnibus Baronibus et Fidelibus suis, Francis et
Anglis, de London et Middlesex, Salutem.

11. Henricus Rex Angliae Vic' et Baronibus London. Id. Ibid.


12. Henricus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dugdal. Hist. of St. Paul's, in the
Appendix. fol. 197.
Archiepiscopis et Episcopis, et Comitibus Angliae; et Hugoni de Boclande, et
omnibus Baronibus and fidelibus suis, Francis et Anglis, de Lundonia, et de
Middlesexa, et de tota Anglia, Salutem.

By these Writs and Charters, Sir, (though many more of the like nature might
easily be given) I think, with submission, my Argument is firmly maintained;
and the plain English of them all is, no more than this, That in William the
first's Time there were English Barons as well as French Barons, in
Somersetshire and Wiltshire; in Yorkshire and Carlisle; in Gloucestershire and
in Sussex: and the direction of the Writs and Charters is equally given to them
both, without any difference of Power or Authority mentioned, otherwise, than
that the French Barons had the precedence of the English in those Writs and
Charters: As is assersed by the said Anonimus Author against Mr. Petyt. p. 151.
With what force of truth then can it be defended, That the Norman Nobility
were at that time the only Nobility, I appeal to the World.

But, I pray, now hear two Branches of his MAGNA CHARTA, or Great Charter,
which he granted to the English, and they run thus;

1. Volumus etiam ac firmiter praecipimus and concedimus, Apud Cl. Lambard. LL.
Will. p^im. fol. 170. c. 55.
ut omnes liberi homines totius Monarchiae Regni nostri praedicti, habeant and
teneant terras suas, and possessiones suas, been and in pace libere AB OMNI
EXACTIONE INJUSTA, and AB OMNI TALLAGIO; ita quod nihil ab eis exigatur, vel
capiatur, nisi SERVITIUM SUUM LIBERUM, quod de Iure nobis facere debent, and
facere tenentur, and prout STATUTUM est eis, and illis a nobis datum et
concessum JURE HaeREDITARIO in perpetuum, PER COMMUNE CONCILIUM TOTIUS REGNI
NOSTRI praedicti.

The Second Branch is;

2. Hoc quoque praecipimus, Id c. 63.
UT OMNES HABEANT ET TENEANT LEGES EDWARDI REGIS in omnibus rebus, adauctis
hiis quas constituimus AD UTILITATEM ANGLORUM.

Sir, I think by these two Branches, you may plainly see, King William when he
came in, was so far from forcibly taking away the Lands and Possessions of the
English, and sharing them among his Normans; that he does, if possible, more
strongly establish their Es^ates to them, by confirming the good and ancient
Laws of Edward the Confessor, which were their best security of all they
enjoyed before his entrance; and not only so, but by freeing them from all
unjust Taxes and Exactions, excepting only their free Service, which of right
was owing to him, and which they were to do, as it was agreed on by themselves,
and granted by him to them by hereditary Right for ever, and that by the Common
Council of the whole Kingdom; and this was done too wholly for the sake and
benefit of the English.

I shall trouble you, Sir, with one more very memorable Record, as late as to
the 26. Hen. 3. which shows, That from before the coming in of this Norman
Conqueror, down to that Time, the English had a Property continued to them; and
so then this MIGHTY MAN of VICTORY did not govern them as an entire and
absolute Conqueror, whatever our late Writers have been pleased to publish to
the World.

The words of the Record are; Pro Iacobo Archamgere. Communia de Term. ^^nct.
Mich. 35. sin. and An. 36. incipien. H. 3. Ro^. pr. penes Remem. dom. These.


Rex Baronibus; Jus Anglorum ab Antiq. p. 112, 113. Serjantia tempore Edwardi
Confess.
Mandamus vobis quod occasion arrentationis Serjantiarum, assessae per
Robertum Passelewe, non distringas Jacobum de Archamgere per 2. Marc. and
dimid. de Tenemento quod de nobis tenet per Serjantiam in Archamgere, (in
Comitatu Southampton, etc.) per Chartam Beati Regis Edwardi Antecessoribus
ipsius Jacobi super hoc confectam, sed ipsum Jacobum de praedictis 2. Marcis
and dimid' quietum esse faciatis in perpetuum; quia Chartam praefati beati
Edwardi confirmavimus, and ipsam volumus inviolabiliter observari.

Breve est in forulo Marescalli, and Mandatum est Vicecomiti Southhampton
comparat. die Iovis, die 15. Ian. Anno Domini, etc.

The English of it is this: For Jacob Archamgere.

The King to the Barons: We command you, that by the occasion of the Rent of
Serjanties, assessed by Robert Passelewe, you shall not distrain Jacob of
Archamgere by two Marks and an half, for the Tenement which he holds of us by
Serjantie in Archamgere, in the County of Southampton, and granted by the
Charter of the Blessed King Edward, to the Ancestors of this Jacob; but he the
said Jacob shall for ever be freed from the aforesaid two Marks and an half;
because we have confirmed the Charter of the aforementioned St. Edward; and we
will have it to be inviolably observed.

I shall make no Remarks upon this Charter, because it is obvious to every
intelligent Reader; the thing I drive at, is, to prove, That the English were
not violently dispossessed of their Properties, which they quietly held and
enjoyed in the Time of Edward the Confessor, but that they still enjoyed them
as before, notwithstanding all the vain pretenses to the contrary.

And now, Sir, I shall close up this third Point, with a remarkable Passage or
two out of Ordericus Uitalis, a famous Historian, who lived and writ in the
latter end of the Reign of H. 1. and beginning of K. Stephen, and for that
reason must needs be admitted (next to a Testis Ocularis) for a Testimony
beyond all exceptions.

His words are, Omnia disponente Deo in spatio trium mensium per Angliam pacata
sunt, cunctique Orderic. Vitalis Eccles Hist. lib. 3. fol. 503.
Praesules Regnique Proceres cum Willielmo concordiam fecerunt, ac ut Diadema
Regium sumeret, (sicut Mos Anglici Principatus exigit) oraverunt. Hoc summopere
flagitabant Normanni, qui pro fasce Regali nanciscendo suo Principi subierunt
ingens discrimen maris and Praelii. Hoc etiam divino Nutu subacti optabant
Indigenae Regni, qui nisi coronato Regi servire hactenus erant soliti.

The next Paragraph but one to this goes on thus.

Denique Anno ab incarnatione Domini MLXVII. Indictione V. in die Natalis
Domini, Angli Lundoniae ad Ordinandum Regem convenerunt, and Normannorum Turmae
circa Monasterium in armis and equis (ne quid doli and seditionis oriretur)
praesidio dispositae fuerunt. Adelredus itaque Archiepiscopus in Basilica
Sancti Petri Apostolorum Principis, quae Westmonasterium nuncupatur, ubi
Edwardus Rex venerabiliter humatus quiescit, in praesentia Praesulum and
Abbatum Procerumque totius Regni Albionis, Gulielmum Ducem Normannorum in Regem
Anglorum consecravit, and Diadema Regium capiti ejus imposuit.

Gulielmus Rex multa Lundoniae postquam coronatus est, prudenter, Id. lib. IV.
fol. 505, and 506.
just, clementerque disposuit: quaedam ad ipsius Civitatis commoda vel
dignitatem, alia quae genti proficerent Universae: Nonnulla quibus consuleretur
Ecclesiis terrae. Jura quaecumque dictavit optimis rationibus sanxit; Judicium
Rectum nulla persona nequicquam ab eo postulavit. Neminem, nisi quem non
damnare iniquum foret, damnavit. Suis quoque Primatibus digna se and gravitate
praecepit, and diligenter aequitatem suasit; Esse jugiter in Oculis habendum
aeternum Regem, cujus vicerint praesidio. Nimium opprimi victos non opportere,
victoribus professione Christiana pares, ne quos just subegerint, injuriis ad
rebellandum cogerent. Seditiones interdixit, caedem, and omnem rapinam
fraenans, ut Populos armis, ita legibus Arma. Tributis and cunctis rebus ad
Regium siscum reddendis, modum, qui non gravaret, imposuit, Latrociniis,
Invasionibus, Malesiciis, locum omnem intra suos terminos denegavit. Portus and
quaelibet itinera Negotiatoribus patere, and nullam injuriam fieri jussit. Sic
omnino proba ejus in regnando initia fuere, and incrementa probitatum ad
utilitatem Subditorum liquido fulsere, que in bonis perseverantia laudabilisque
finis evidentibus signis confirmavere.

The sense of which is,

King William having sworn inviolably to observe the Laws of Edward the
Confessor, as I have already acquainted you, and being crowned King, the whole
English Nation in three months time quietly submitted to him; which the
Historian observes to be by Divine Providence: And they much relied upon the
force of that Solemn Dath he took; and great cause they had for their doing so;
for,

Remarkable is it, that in the beginning of his Reign, he made a conscience to
keep it; and this the Historian plainly proves: for so far was he from
pretending to be a Conqueror, or from exercising absolute Power and Sovereignty
over the English, that you see he denied to none right Judgment who required it
of him; he condemned none but those who deserved it by the condemnation of the
Law; he strictly commanded his great Men, to whom he had given the Estates of
those who had been bold in Arms against him, under King Harold, that they
should behave themselves with all due moderation and temper; and he invited
them to Acts of Justice by his Example: He charged them always to have God
before their Eyes, by whose Arms they had so far overcome; That they should,
nay ought, not too much to oppress those they had got the better of, who were
Christians with them, lest those whom they had justly subdued, should by such
their Oppressions be forced to rebel again; he strictly forbad them all
Violences, that they should restrain themselves from all Cruelties and Rapines;
That as the People should be kept in Peace by his Arms; so their Arms should
submit to, and be governed by the Laws.

Nor did he only give this admirable Advice, Apud Lambar. LL. Will. prim. fol.
170. c. 55.
but he prudently governed himself, and set easy Boundaries to those Services,
Taxes, and Aids, quod de jure facere debent, which were due to him by the Law;
he absolutely denied all Pardons and Grace to Robbers, and all disturbers of
the Public Peace, and wicked Persons: He commanded all the Roads to be free
and open for Travelers, and that no Injuries should be done them; so that the
beginning of his Reign was, as it were, a Golden Age; and his Clemency, and
other Acts of Goodness, still shone brighter to the happiness of his Subjects,
which was confirmed toward the Loyal and Dutiful, by his steady and
commendable perseverance.

Where, in all this, is there any pretense to absolute Conquest and despotical
Dominion:

And now to conclude; I shall produce an Evidence, that is omni exceptione
major; it is Gulielmus Pict avensis, who, (as Ordericus Vitalis in fine litri
tertii writes) was, Regis Gulielmi Capellanus, and writ the Acts of William the
First. And he categorically says it, That Nulli tamen Gallo datum est quod
Anglo cuiquam injuste fuerit ablatum; that is, according to the Judgment given
in Sharborn's case, That those who had kept themselves unconcerned, and had
neither, consilio vel auxilio, assisted Harold against William, had the full
and free benefit of the Saxon Laws, and had not their Estates unjustly taken
from any of them, and given to his French and Normans. Gulielm. Pictavens. in
Gesta Gulielm. Ducis Norman. and Regis Anglorum. fol. 208.

But I will leave this, Sir, and now come to your fourth and last Question.

The Fourth Question.
IV. Whether it be not a Grand Error to affirm, The Anonimus Author against Mr.
Petyt. p. 37.
That there were no English Men in the Common Council of the whole Kingdom.

Our Government, In his Argument for the Bishops Right in judging in Capital
Causes in Parliament. Postscript. p. 2,
says the Learned and most judicious Mr. Hunt, by a King and Estates of
Parliament, is as ancient as any thing can be remembered of the Nation. The
attempt of altering it in all Ages accounted Treason, and the punishment
thereof reserved to the Parliament by 25. Ed. 3. The conservancy of the
Government being not safely to be lodged any where, but with the Government it
self. Offenses of this Kind not pardonable by the King, because it is not in
his Power to change it. This is Our Government, and thus it is established, and
for Ages, and immemorial Time has thus continued; a long succession of Kings
have recognized it to be such.

This too perhaps will be granted, Sir, in some sense, that for a long Series,
and Tract of Time, the Government has been so; but the main pinch and stress
of your Question, as I apprehend it, is this, Whether after William the
Conqueror had settled himself as well as he could on the English Throne, he did
admit any of the English to sit in the Great Council of the Nation, and to
Advise and Consult, de arduis and Vrgentibus negotiis Regni? And I hope this I
shall make plain and evident to you, That the Grand Court of Parliament was in
substance the same that it was before the coming in of this Conqueror, and that
there were English Men Members of it in the Time of the Conqueror.

It Is not to be denied, but that the same Courts, that were in the Saxon Time
for administration of Justice, continued after William the first was made King,
and the Footsteps of them remain yet to this day: I shall mention a few, and so
come to the main Point in Argument.

1. County Courts.
1. As it was their Wisdom to preserve the Ancient Landmarks; LL. Hen. 1. c. 6
apud Lambard fol. 180.
so was it likewise both their Wisdom and their Care to continue their due
Privileges and Interests. Their County Courts were still kept up, and every
County had its Court, and every Court its wonted Jurisdiction: L L. Guil. c. 42
fol. 168.
no complaint must be to the King's Court, if Right might be done in the
County; no Distress must be taken but by Warrant from the County, and that must
be after complaint thrice made. L L. Guil. c. 6^^
The County Court must be called, as our Ancestors have appointed: such as will
not come as they ought, shall be first summoned, and in case of default,
distrained; at the fourth default, Reddatur de rebus hujus hominis quod
calumpniatum est, quod dicitur Ceargel; and insuper Regis forisfactura; that
is, The Complainant shall be satisfied out of the Distresses so taken, and the
King also for his Fine. These are the express Laws of the Conqueror's own
establishment. The last of which also was confirmed by another express Law,
saving that he would allow but of two Summons and two Distresses before
Execution.

I shall give you a memorable case to prove the continuance of this Court.

Odo, Seldom 's Titles of Honor, 2d Part c. 5 f. 581 ^. Eadmer. His. Nov. l.
1. p. 9 and videsis notas ad eundem. p. 197. de placito apud Pinendenem inter
^anfrancum Archiepis^opum and Odonem Bajocens^m Episcopum.
the Conqueror's half Brother, was by him made Earl of Kent, and therewith had
the Gift of a large Territory in Kent, and taking advantage of the King's
displeasure at Stigand, the Archbishop, of Canterbury, possessed himself by
Disseisin of diverse Lands and Tenements belonging to that See. Lanfrank, the
succeeding Archbishop being informed hereof, petitioned to the King that
Justice might be done him secundum Legem Ierrae, and the King sends forth a
Writ to summon a County Court: The Debate lasted three days before the Freemen
of the County of Kent, in the presence of many chief Men, Bishops and Lords,
and others skilful in the Laws; and the Judgment passed for the Archbishop
Lanfrank, upon the Uotes of the Freemen. This County Court was holden by
special Summons, and not by adjournment, as was allowable by the Saxon Law upon
special occasions: And this Suit was originally begun, and had its final
determination in the County Court. And the County Courts, in those days, were
of so great esteem, that two of the greatest Peers of the Realm, one a Norman,
the other an Italian, did cast a Title in fifteen Manors, two Lordships, with
many Liberties upon the Uotes of the English Freeholders in a County Court; and
that the Sentence was allowed and commended by the King, and submitted to by
all. But,

2. Hundred Courts.
2. The Hundred Courts were still continued, and they were of two sorts. The
first whereof was holden twice a Year, and all the Freeholders within the
Hundred, were bound to appear for the service of their Fees; and was the
Sheriff's Court, and such appearances were called the Sheriffs Turns, where it
belonged to Sheriffs to enquire of all Personal Offenses, and of all their
Circumstances done within those Hundreds. The other was the more ordinary
Court, belonging to the Lord of the Hundred, to whom also belonged the Fines in
cases there concerned. This Court was to be held once in each Month; and no
suit to be begun in the King's Court, that regularly ought to begin in the
Hundred. No Distringas to issue forth till three demands made in the Hundred.
And three Distresses then to issue forth; and if upon the fourth the Party
appear not, execution then to be by Sale of the Distress, and the Complainant
to receive satisfaction.

3. And so likewise were the Court Barons, etc. continued, and the Lords held
Pleas either in their own Persons, or by their Stewards.

But not to forget, Sir, your Question, I shall now show you what the Sovereign
Court of Parliament was, and whom it consisted of in the Saxon Times; and for
this I think it will be needless to give you any more than one Instance (which,
as by the way, it does impregnably assert, That the Commons of England were an
Essential and Constituent Part of the Saxon General Councils; so does it, I
think, fully and clearly refute and bassle that novel Erroneous Notion, The
Anonimous Auth^r, p. 20. in the Margin.
viz. That there are no Commons to be found in the Saxon great Councils, Idem.
p. 13, 14.
nor any thing that tends toward the proof of the^ Commons of those Times to
have had any share in making Laws in those Councils.) The memorable Instance,
is the mighty Law of Tithes, which was made and ordained, A Rege, Baronibus,
and Populo. Lambard. de priscis Augl Legibus c. ^. fol. 139
By the King, his Barons, and his People. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. f. 621.


Now William the first, in that little time of Rest he had from Foreign Wars
with the French King, and his Neighboring Princes to Normandy, did apply both
it and himself in the setting of Laws here, which was done, not ex plenitudine
Regiae Potestatis; no, nor by the Norman Barons cooperating with that Power;
but by the joint Advice, and unanimous Consent of the Grand Council of the
Lords and wise Men of the Kingdom of England: To prove which, I shall produce
the Testimony of Ancient Writers, whom no Man of Historical understanding can
modestly impeach of Partiality, Faction, or Interest, in the Case in Question.

1. The first shall be taken out of the Chronicle of Litchfield, Lambard. fol.
158.
which tells us, That this William, in the fourth Year of his Reign at London,
Consilio Baronum suorum, by the Advice of his Barons, caused a General Meeting,
or Assembly, to be summoned, Per universos Angliae Comitatus, omnes Nobiles,
Sapientes, and sud Lege eruditos, ut eorum Leges and consuetudines audiret;
i.e. of all the Nobility, wise Men, and such as were skilled in the Laws,
through all the Counties of England, to hear what their Laws and Customs were.
And after this was done, at the request of the English Community, he did
consent that they should be confirmed; and so they were ratified and kept
throughout all his Kingdom. The words are, Ad preces Communitatis Anglorum, ex
illo die Magna Authoritate veneratae, and per universum Regnum corroboratae and
conservatae sunt Leges Sancti Regis Edwardi, prae caeteris Regni Legibus.

From this Testimony, I think it will plainly appear;

1. That the Barons sui here of William, cannot absolutely exclude the
English, and only signify his Norman Barons, upon those Authorities and
Reasons, I have already offered, to prove, That there were equally Barons
Francigeni and Angli nostri, in his Time, (as you may see in my Argument under
the third Question.)

2. That the King having, by the Counsel of these his Barons, summoned all the
Nobility, wise Men, and those that were skilled in the Laws of the Land,
throughout all the Counties of England, he then and there ratified and
confirmed the Laws of St. Edward.

3. And to prove that this general Assembly of the Nobility, wise Men, and able
Lawyers, were a PARLIAMENT, I shall now give you the Judgment of Mr. Seldom,
Selden's Tit. of Hon. f. 580.
in his own words, which are these, viz. That, William the first, in the fourth
Year of his Reign, or MLXX. (which was the Year wherein he first brought the
Bishops and Abbots under the Tenure of Barony) Consilio Baronum suorum (says
Hoveden In Hen. 2. p. 343 E. Land.
out of a Collection of Laws, written by Glanvill) Fecit summoniri per
universos Consulatus Angliae, Anglos Nobiles, and Sapientes, and sua Lege
eruditos, ut eorum jura and Consuetudines ab ipsis audiret. And twelve were
returned out of every County, who showed what the Customs of the Kingdom were,
which being written by the hands of Aldred Arch bishop of York, and Hugo,
Bishop of London, were, with the Assent of the same Barons, for the most part,
confirmed in that Assembly, which was a Parliament of that Time.

And a little lower, he says, This might be the same Parliament, wherein the
Controversy between Thomas Archbishop of York (he was consecrated after the
death of Aldred, the same Year; and to the same Year this Controversy is
attributed) and Vlstan Bishop of Worcester, touching certain Possessions, was
determined.

So that from hence, it is easy to observe; That

1. There were English Men in this Council, by the words ANGLOS NOBILES, etc.
And,

2. Besides the Confirmation of the Laws of St. Edward here mentioned, it may
reasonably be supposed, That the Law for bringing the Bishops and Abbots under
the Tenure of Barony, was first made in this Parliament. And that

3. Likewise, the great Case between the Archbishop of York, and this same
Bishop of Worcester, was here judicially determined. And,

4. If there were no English Men in this great Council, how then came it to
pass that the Bishop of York and London were there, who certainly were Bishops
in the Saxon Times? And it may also seem not improbable, that there was then an
universal Consent among them, that these two Bishops should be entrusted to
write down for them the English Laws.

5. And there is one great Thing more, to close withal, which is, That at this
Parliament, when the Saxon Laws were confirmed, there was a particular Law past
in favor of the Normans, Catta Regis Willielm. apud Lambard. c. 54. fol. 170.
qui ante adventum Guilielmi Cives fuerant Anglicani, that they should be
participes Consuetudinum Anglorum, quod ipsi dicunt Anhlote and Anscote, and
persolvant secundum Legem Anglorum.

The meaning of the words Auhlote ^^d Anscote, as Sir Henry Spelman Sir H.
Spelm. Gloss. verbo. Anhlote. f. 31.
informs us, is vulgo Scot ^ Lot; that is, That every such French Man should
not be charged with double Taxes and Duties as a Foreigner, but that he should
pay his easy share and proportion as any natural English Man. But then,

II. It was in such a grand Assembly of wise Men of the Kingdom, where Lanfranc
was elected to the Sea of Canterbury; for it was by the Assent of the Lords and
Prelates, and of the whole People; that is to say, by the Parliament of England.
This likewise was about the fourth Year of the Conqueror; And an Ancient
Historian writes thus of his Election: Gervas. Dorobernens. Act. Pont. Cant.
fol. 1653. l. 5.
Eligentibus eum Senioribus ejusdem Ecclesiae cum Episcopis ac Principibus,
Clero and Populo Angliae, in Curia Regis in Asumptione Sanctae Mariae.

But another Contemporary Writer gives it you in these words;

Rex mittens propter illum in Normanniam, Relat. Willielm. prim. ad finem
tract. de Gavelkind a Syla Tailor. p. 194.
fecit eum venire in (...) gliam, eique Consensu and Auxilio omnium Baronum
suorum, omniumque Episcoporum and Abbatum, totiusque Populi Angliae commisit ei
Dorobernensem Ecclesiam.

III. There was another General Council or Parliament held at Westminster, Ex
Ca^tulario Coenobii Westmonasteriensis in Biblioth. Cotton. sub effigy
Faustinae. A. 3. Dugd^l. Orig. Ju^idic. sol. 16.
in the fourteenth Year of this King, where, by his Charter, he confirmed the
Liberties of that Church, after he had subscribed his own Name, with the Sign
of the Cross; adding many of the great Clergy, and Temporal Nobility; and
instead of cum multis aliis, says, multis praeterea illustrissimis Virorum
personis, and Regni Principibus diversi ordinis omissis, qui similiter huic
confirmationi piissimo affectu Testes and Fautores fuerunt. Hii autem illo
Tempore a Regia potestate diversis Provinciis and Urbibus, Provincia, i.e.
Comitatus. Seld. Tit. Hon. fol. 273, Spelm. Gloss. ^ it. Provincia. f. 471.
ad Universalem Synodum pro causis cujuslibet Christianae Ecclesiae audiendis
and tractandis, ad praescriptam Celeberrimam Synodum quod Westmonasterium
dicitur, Parliamentum, Synodus magna nuncupatur. Somneri Gloss.
Convocati, etc. In the Margin of the Book, there is writ this Remarque, Nota
hic hos omnes convocari a Rege sua auctoritate ad causas Religionis tract
andas, tam Nobiles de Clero, quam Principes Regni, cum aliis inferioris gradus,
Convocatio quorum videtur esse Parliamentum.

IV. I think, by the general direction of the Writs of this King, as also by
that of his Charters, (some of which I have given you in my Argument to your
third Question, and therefore shall refer you back to them) it is plainly
demonstrable, that William had as well English Barons as French Barons; and
that his Barons were always a part of his great Council, will hardly, I
suppose, be denied by any. And that one Law of his, which may be called the
First MAGNA CHARTA in the Norman Times, by which the King reserved to himself
from the Free Men of this kingdom, nothing but their free Services due to him
according to Law; in the conclusion says, That they, L L. Guilielm. c. 55.
to wit, the English, shall hold and enjoy their Estates well, and in peace,
free from all unjust Exactions and Tallage; and this ratified and confirmed by
the Common Council of the whole Kingdom, which cannot be restrained to the
Norman Barons only. So that herein is asserted the Liberty of the English
Freemen, and of the Representative Body of the Kingdom.

These, I think, are uncontrovertible Proofs and Evidences. 1. That there were
General Councils, or Parliaments, in this first William's Time. 2. That in
these Parliaments, the English Barons as well as the French Barons were
present. 3. And lastly, That there likewise was, as an essential part thereof,
1. The Communitas Anglorum, the Community of Englishmen. 2. Besides the
Bishops and Nobility, there were the Clerus and Populus, the Inferior Clergy
and People of England. And, 3. Not only the Great Clergy, and the Temporal
Nobility, but the Principes diversi Ordinis, a Regia potestate diversis
Provinciis and Vrbibus ad Vniversalem Synodum Convocati, etc. viz. The Chief
and Principal Men of several Ranks and Degrees in Condition, were summoned by
virtue of the King's Writ, out of their several respective Counties, Cities,
and Buroughs, to this General Synod, or Parliament.


And, Sir, if this be so, I doubt not but that both your self, and all
judicious and unbiassed Persons, (who have not resolved to espouse a Party, and
who will not suffer themselves to be drawn aside by any novel unwarrantable
Opinions, but will fairly submit their Judgments to clear and perspicuous
Truth, when once it manifestly appears) I say, both you and they will certainly
rest satisfied in these great and powerful Authorities, which I have here
presented to public view, and serious consideration: and I think these have
sufficiently made out and proved, That 1. William the first, vulgarly called
the Conqueror, did not get the Imperial Crown of England by the Sword, nor made
an absolute Conquest of the Nation at his first entrance. 2. Nor that he
abolished all the English Laws, or changed the whole Frame and Constitution of
the Saxon Government. But, 3. That the English had still Estates and Fortunes
continued to them; and that it was a great mistake in any to affirm, That the
King and his Normans divided and shared them all among them. As likewise, 4. In
the fourth place, It has been a grand Error to ascertain, That there were no
English Men in the Common Council of the whole Kingdom, in the Reign of William
the Conqueror.


Now, Sir, as a corroborating Testimony, to explain and enforce what I already
have said, I shall conclude my Discourse at present with a very memorable and
studied Speech of a Person of great Learning and Abilities in his Time,
collected out of a large Original Manuscript (which I have seen) of Sir Roger
Owen, a very great Antiquary, that lived in the Time of King James; and one,
who, as appears by that Book; was a Man not only of wonderful Knowledge, and
admirable Observation in the Records and Histories of his own Nation, but also
in those of Foreign Countries.

This was a Speech of the then Lord Whitlock, in November. 1650. upon the House's
long and smart Debate touching the Act for putting all the Books of Law, and
the Process and Proceedings in Courts of Justice into the English Tongue: In
which Debate some spoke in derogation and dishonor of the Laws of England.

For some vindication whereof, and for satisfying some Mistakes, he delivered
his Opinion in the House to this effect.

It is now newly printed, in Mr. Whitlock's MEMORIALS OF THE ENGLISH AFFAIRS,
etc. and is here truly transcribed.

Mr. Speaker;

THe Question upon which your present Debate arises, is of no small moment,
nor is it easily or speedily to be determined; for it comprehends no less than
a total Alteration of the Frame and Course of Proceedings of our Law, which
have been established and continued for so many Years.

I should not have troubled you with any of my weak Discourse, but that I
apprehend some Mistakes and dishonor to the Law of England, if passed by
without any Answer, may be of ill consequence; and having attended to hear them
answered by others, who are not pleased to do it;

I held my self the more engaged, in the duty of my Profession, to offer to
your Judgment (to which I shall always submit) what I have met with, and do
suppose not to be impertinent, for the rectifying of some Mistakes which are
amongst us.

A worthy Gentleman was pleased to affirm, with much confidence, (as he brought
it in upon this Debate) That the Laws of England were introduced by William the
Conqueror, as (among other Arguments, he asserted) might appear by their being
written in the French Tongue.

In his first Assertion, that our Laws were introduced by William the Conqueror
out of France, I shall acknowledge, that he has several both Foreign and
Domestic Authors, whom he may follow therein; The Foreign Authors are,
Iovius, AEmilius, Bodine, Hottoman, Dynothus, Volateran, Berault, Berkley,
Choppinus, Vspargensis, Malines, and Polidore, who affirm this erroneous piece
of Doctrine; but the less to be regarded from them, because they were strangers
to our Laws, and took up upon trust what they published in this Point.

Of our own Countrymen, they have Paris, Malmesbury, Matthew Westminster, Fox,
Cosins, Twyne, Heyward, Milles, Fulbeck, Cowell, Ridley, Brown, Speed, Martyn,
and some others.

All of them affirm, That the Laws of England were introduced by William the
Conqueror: But their Errors are refuted by Sir Roger Owen in his Manuscript;
who says, That Roger Wendover, and Matthew Paris, were the first Monks that
hatched these addle Eggs.

I shall endeavor to show you, That the Original of our Laws is not from the
French; that they were not introduced by William the Conqueror out of Normandy:
And I shall humbly offer to you my Answer to some of their Arguments, who are
of a contrary opinion.

Polydore, Hist. Angl. l. 9. affirms, That William the Conqueror first
appointed Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace, erected Ten^res, brought in
Trials by twelve Men, and several other Particulars of our Laws.

For Sheriffs, their name Scire Reeve, shows them to be of the Saxon
Institution. And our Histories mention the division of Shires by King Alphred;
but in truth, it was much more ancient.

And it is apparent by our Books and Records, some whereof are in the Hustings
of London, and in the Tower, that the same things were in use here long before
the Time of King Will. I.

Sir Roger Owen shows at large, That Livery of Seisin, Licenses, or Fines for
Alienation, Daughters to inherit, Trials by Iuries, Abjurations, Utlaries,
Coroners, disposing of Lands by Will, Escheats, Gaols, Writs, Wrecks,
Warranties, Catalla Fellonum, and many other parts of our Law, and the Forms of
our Parliaments themselves, were here in being before the Time of Duke William.

Agreeing hereunto are many of our Historians, and learned Antiquaries.

But it is objected, That in the Grand Custumary of Normandy, the Laws are
almost all the same with ours of England, and the form of their Parliaments the
same with ours.

That the Writer of the Preface to that Book, says, It contains only the Laws
and Customs which were made by the Princes of Normandy, by the Council of their
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Wise Men; which shows the forms of their
Parliaments to be the same with ours, and the Laws in that Book to be the
proper Laws of Normandy, and ours to be the same; therefore they argue, that
our Laws were introduced from thence by William the Conqueror.

This will be fully answered, if that Grand Custumary of Normandy was composed
in our King Edw. 1. his Time, (as good Authors hold it was) then it cannot be,
That our Laws or Parliaments could be derived from thence.

These Learned Men say, That this Custumary was a mere Translation of our
Law-Book, Glanvill; as the Book of Regia Majestas of the Laws of Scotland is;
and the like of the Laws of Burgundy.

They farther add, That the first establishing of the Custumary of Normandy,
was in Hen. 1. his Time; and afterward again, about the beginning of Edw. 2.
his Time.

If the Laws in the Custumary were introduced there from England, it will then
be granted, that the Laws of England were not introduced here by William the
Conqueror: But I think it very clear, that their Laws were brought to them out
of England; and then you will all agree to the conclusion.

Our King Hen. 1. conquered Normandy from his Brother Robert, and was a Learned
King, as his Name Beauclerke testifies; whom Ivo calls, an especial Establisher
of Justice. Sequerius relates, That this King established the English Laws in
Normandy.

Herewith do agree Gulielmus Brito, Armoricus, Rutclurius, and other French
Writers; who mention also, That the Laws in the Custumary of Normandy, are the
same with the Laws collected by our English King Edward the Confessor, who was
before the Conqueror.

An additional Testimony hereof, is out of William de Alenso Revile, who, in
his Comment upon the Custumary, says, That all the Laws of Normandy came from
the English Laws and Nation.

In the Custumary, there is a Chapter of Nampes, or Distresses, and decreed,
That one should not bring his Action upon any Seizure; but from the Time of the
Coronation of King Richard; and this must be our King Richard the first,
because no King of France was in that Time of that Name; and the words Nampes
and Withernams, were Saxon words, taken out of the English Laws, signifying a
Pawn, or Distress, and in the same sense are used in the Custumary.

That which puts it further out of scruple, is, That there are yet extant the
Manuscripts themselves of the Saxon Laws, made in the Parliamentary Councils
held by them here; which are in the Language and Character of those Times; and
contain in them many of those things which are in the Norman Custumary.

It is no improbable Opinion, That there was a former Establishment of our Laws
in Normandy, before the Time of Hen. 1. and that it was by Edward the
Confessor, who (as all Writers of our History agree) was a great Collector and
Compiler of our English Laws.

He lived a long time with his Kinsman Duke William in Normandy, who was
willing to please the Confessor, in hopes to be appointed by him to be his
Suc^essor; wherein the Duke's Expectation did not fail him.

The Confessor having no Children, and finding Normandy without a settled
Government, and wanting Laws, advised with his Kinsman, Duke William, to
receive from him the Laws of England, which he had collected, and to establish
them in Normandy; which Duke William and his Lords readily accepted, for the
good of their People; and thereby obliged the Confessor.

Another proof hereof is, That such Laws as the Normans had before the Time of
Duke William, were different from those in the Custumary, and from the English
Laws.

As their Law, That the Husband should be hanged if his Wife were a Thief, and
he did not discover it: The meaner People were as Slaves, and the like: and the
Trial of Theft by Ordeil, which then was not in England.

Wigorniensis reports, That the Normans who came in with Queen Emma, the Wife
of Etheired, were so hated of the English, for their injustice and false
Judgment, that in the Time of King Canutus, they were, for this cause,
banished; and it is the less probable, that they being so unjust themselves,
should introduce so just Laws as ours are.

Between the Conquest of Normandy by Rolio, and the Invasion of England by Duke
William, there were not above 160 Years; that of Normandy was about Anno 912.
that of England Anno 1060.

It is not then consonant to Reason, that those Normans, Pagans, a rough
Martial People, descended from so many Barbarous Nations, should, in the time
of 150 Years, establish such excellent Laws among themselves, and so different
from the French Laws, among whom they were, and all parts in the World except
England.

And such Laws which were not only fit for their Dukedom and small Territory,
but fit also for this Kingdom, which in those days was the second in Europe for
Antiquity and Worth, by confession of most Foreign Historians.

If we will give credit to their own Authors, this Point will be sufficiently
evinced by them. These words are in the Proem of the Custumary, which is
entitled Descriptio Normanniae.

Hucusque Normannicae CONSVETVDINES LATOREM sive Datorem SANCTVM EDWARDVM
Angliae Regem, etc.

The same is witnessed by Chronica Chronicorum, That St. Edward, King of
England, gave the Laws to the Normans, when he was long harbored there.

And that he made both the Laws of England and Normandy, appears sufficiently
by the conformity of them, for which he cites several Particulars, as of
Appeals, and the Custom of England, ad probandum aliquid per credentiam
duodecim hominum vicinorum, which, he says, remained in Normandy to that day.

Polydore forgetting himself what he wrote in another place, says, of King
Henry the Seventh, that when a Doubt was made upon the Proposal of Marriage of
his Daughter to Scotland, that thereby England might in time be subject unto
Scotland.

The King answered, No; and that England, as the Greater, will draw it to
Scotland being the less, and incorporate it to the Laws of England, as (says
the Historian) it did Normandy, though the owner thereof was Conqueror of
England.

And Sir Roger Owen, in his Manuscript, affirms, That there is not any of our
Historians, that lived in the space of 200 Years, immediately after the
Conquest, which does describe our Laws to be taken away, and the Norman Custom
introduced by the Conqueror.

Some of them (and not improbably) mention the alteration of some part of them,
and the bringing in some Norman Customs, effectual for the keeping of the Peace.

There is yet behind the great Argument most insisted on, and often urged by
the Gentlemen of another Opinion, which is the Title of William, who is called
the Conqueror; from whence they conclude, That by his Conquest he changed the
Laws and Government of this Nation, and that his Successors reckon the
beginning of their Reigns from his Conquest.

To this is answered, That a posse ad esse non valet Argumentum: the Conquering
of the Land is one thing, the introducing of new Laws is another thing; but
there is direct proof to the contrary of this Argument.

Duke William never Sir-named himself the Conqueror, nor was so called in his
lifetime, as may appear by all the Letters Pattents and Deeds that he made,
wherein he is called Guilielmus Rex, Dux, etc. never Conquestor; and our
Ancient Historians give him the same Titles, and not that of Conqueror.

In the Title of Nubrigensis's Book, he is Surnamed William the Bastard.
Malmsbury calls him William the First; Hoveden, William the Elder.

Adam de Monmoth says, That 1. Ed. 3. this word ( Conquest) was found out to
denote and distinguish the certain Edward; because two of the same name were
Predecessors to this King, and to the Conqueror, who claimed the Crown as Heir
to Edward the Confessor, but (says he) we call him the Conqueror, for that he
overcame Harold.

Duke William himself claimed to be King of England as Successor, and Adopted
Heir of the Confessor, by his Will, and Harold's renounceing of his Title by
Oath.

The Register of St. Albans, Matthew. Paris, and others, attest, That the Barons
of England did homage to him as Successor; and he relied on them in his
Foreign Wars, and the Check given to him by the Kentish Men, and the Forces
gathered by the Abbot of St. Albans, brought him to engage to confirm the Laws
of the Confessor; and as his Successor by legal Right, they admitted him to be
their King.

Volaterus writes, That he was made Heir to the Confessor, and was Uncle to him.

Another affirms, That Edward by his Will left England to him.

Paulus AEmilius, and Fulgasius, are to the same purpose.

Pope Alexander the 11 th, sent him a Banner, as Witness, that with a safe
Conscience he might expel Harold the Tyrant, because the Crown was due to him
by the Confessors Will, and by Harold's Oath.

Agreeable hereunto are Gemiticensis, Walsingham, Malmesbury, Huntington,
Ingulphus, Paris, Pike, Wendover, Gaxton, Gisburn, and others.

The Ancient Deeds of the Abbey of Westminster (which were sometime in my
Custody) do prove this.

King William, in his Charter to them, sets forth his own Title to the Crown,
thus, Beneficio Concessionis and Cognati mei gloriosi Regis Edwardi.

In his second Charter, dated Anno 15. of his Reign, he says, in honor of
King Edward, who made me his Heir, and adopted me to Rule over this Nation.

In his Charter, dated 1088. of the Liberties of St. Martins the Great, in the
Manuscript thereof, are these words;

In Example of Moses who built the Tabernable, and of Solomon who built the
Temple,

Ego Guilielmus Dei dispositione, and consanguinitatis Haereditate Anglorum
Basileus, etc.

The Charter of Hen. 1. his Son, to this Abbey, in honor of Edward my Kinsman,
who adopted my Father and his Children to be Heirs to this Kingdom, etc.

In another Charter of Hen. 1. in the Book of Ely, he calls himself the Son of
King William the Great, who by Hereditary Right succeeded King Edward.

It is true, as to his pretense of Title by the Will of the Confessor, Matthew
Paris objecteth, That the Devise was void, being without the consent of the
Barons.

To which may be answered, That probably the Law might be so in Hen. 3. Time,
when Paris wrote, and was so taken to be in the Statute of Carlisle, and in the
Case of King John.

But at the time of Duke William's Invasion, the Law was taken to be, That a
Kingdom might be transferred by Will.

So was that of Sixtus Rufus, and Asia came to the Romans by the Will of King
Attalus; the words by Annaeus Florus are, Populus Romanus Bonorum meorum HAERES
esto.

Bithinia came to the Romans by the last Will of their King Nicomedes, which is
remembered by Vtropius, together with that of Libia.

Cicero in his Oration tells us, That the Kingdom of Alexandria, by the last
Will of their King, was devolved to Rome.

And Prasutagus Rex Icenorum in England, upon his Deathbed, gave his Kingdom
to the Emperor Nero.

As to Examples in this Point at Home, This King William the first, by his
Will, gave England to his younger Son William Rufus.

King Stephen claimed by the Will of Henry the first.

King Henry the eight had Power, by Act of Parliament, to order the Succession
of the Crown as he pleased, by Will.

And the Lords of the Council, in Queen Mary's Time, wrote to her, That the
Lady Iane's Title to the Crown, was by the Will and Letters of Edward the sixth.

As. the case of Hen. 8. was by Act of Parliament; so Duke William, after he
had conquered Harold, was, by the general consent of the Barons and People of
England accepted for their King; and so his Title by Will confirmed.

And he both claimed, and governned the Kingdom, as an Heir and Successor,
confirmed their Ancient Laws, and ruled according to them: This appears by
Chronica Chronicorum, speaking of William the Bastard, King of England, and
Duke of Normandy, he says, That whereas, as St. Edward had no Heir of England,
William having conquered Harold, the Usurper obtained the Crown under this
Condition, That he should inviolably observe those Laws given by the said
Edward.

It is testified likewise, by many of our Historians, That the Ancient Laws of
England were confirmed by Duke William.

Iornalensis says, That out of the Merchen-Lage, West-Saxon-Lage, and
Dane-Lage, the Confessor composed the Common Law, which remains to this day.

Malmesbury, who lived in Duke William's Time, says, That the Kings were sworn
to observe the Laws of the Confessor, so called, (says he) because he observed
them most religiously.

But to make this Point clear out of Ingulphus, he says, in the end of his
Chronicle, I Ingulphus brought with me from London, into my Monastery, (
Crowland) the Laws of the most Righteous King Edward; which my Lord King
William did command, by his Proclamation, to be Authentic and Perpetual, and
to be observed throughout the whole Kingdom of England, upon pain of most
heinous punishment.

The Lieger-Book of the Abbey of Waltham, commends Duke William for restoring
the Laws of the Englishmen out of the Customs of their Country.

Radburn follows this Opinion, and these Laws of Edward the Confessor, are the
same in part which are continued in our GREAT CHARTER of LIBERTIES.

A Manuscript entitled, De Gestis Anglorum, says, That at a Parliament at
London, 4. W. 1. the Lawyers also present, that the King might hear their Laws,
he established Saint Edward's Laws, they being formerly used in King Edgar's
Time.

There is also mention of the twelve Men out of every County, to deliver truly
the Estate of their Laws: The same is remembered by Selden's History of Tithes,
and Titles of Honor, and in a Manuscript Chronicle bound with the Book of Ely
in Cotton's Library.

One of the worthy Gentlemen, from whom I differ in Opinion, was pleased to
say, That if William the Conqueror did not introduce the Laws of Normandy into
England, yet he conceives our Laws to be brought out of France hither, in the
time of some other of our Kings, who had large Territories in France, and
brought in their Laws hither; else he wonders how our Laws should be in French.

Sir, I shall endeavor to satisfy his Wonder therein by and by; but, first,
with your leave, I shall offer to you some Probabilities out of the History,
That the Laws of England were by some of those Kings carried into France,
rather than the Laws of France brought hither.

This is expressly affirmed by Paulus Iovius, who writes, That when the English
Kings reigned in a great part of France, they taught the French their Laws.

Sabellicus, a Venetian Historian, writes, That the Normans, in their Manners,
and Customs, and Laws, followed the English.

Polydore Virgil, contradicting himself in another place than before cited,
relates, That in our King Hen. 6. Time, the Duke of Bedford called together the
Chief Men of all the Cities in Normandy, and delivered in his Oration to them,
the many Benefits that the English afforded them, especially in that the
English gave to them their Customs and Laws.

By the Chronicle of Eltham, H. 5. sent to Cane in Normandy, not only Divines,
but English Common Lawyers, by the agreement at Troys.

So there is much more probability that the Laws of England were introduced
into France and Normandy, than that the Laws of Normandy, or any other part of
France, were introduced into England.

If the Normans had been Conquerors of England, as they were not; but their
Duke was only a Conqueror of Harold, and received as Hereditary King of
England; yet is it not probable they would have changed our Laws, and have
introduced theirs; because they did not use to do so upon other Conquests.

The Normans conquered the Isles of Guernsey and Iersey, yet altered not their
Laws, which in their local Customs are like unto ours.

The like they did in Sicily, Naples, and Apulia, where they were Conquerors;
yet the Ancient Laws of those Countries were continued.

I hope, Mr. Speaker, I have, by this time given some satisfaction to the
Worthy Gentlemen who differed from me, that the Laws of England were not
imposed upon us by the Conqueror, nor brought over hither, either out of
Normandy, or any other part of Fran^e, but are our Ancient Native Law^.

I must now come to endeavor also to satisfy the Wonder; If they were not
brought out of Normandy, or some other part of France, how come they then to be
written in the French Language!

Sir, It is to me an Argument, That because they are written in French,
therefore they were not brought in by Duke William the Norman; for the French
Tongue was not the Language of Duke William, and the Normans.

They had not been then in Duke William's Time, past four descents in that part
of France; and it is improbable, that they, in so short a Time, should lose
their Native Tongue, and take up, and use the Language of another Country,
which was conquered by them.

The Normans came from Sweden, Gothland, Norway, and Denmark, between whose
Languages, and with the High Dutch, their Neighbors, there is a great
affinity; but between these Languag^, and the French, there is none at al.

Vlphilus holds, that the Dutch Tongue came from the Goths. Iornandus says,
The Goth's Tongue came from the Dutch. All agree, That between those Languages
and the French there is no affinity.

It is so improbable, that Duke William should cause our Laws to be in French,
that when he proclaimed them, (as Ingulphus testifies) he commanded that they
should be used in the same Language they were written (in English) to his
Justices, and gives the Reason, Lest by Ignonorance we should happen to break
them.

But it has been further objected, If Duke William did not cause our Laws to
be written in French, what then should be the Reason, that the Grand Custumary
of his Norman Laws were written in the French Tongue?

The Reason thereof is given, That the Normans, being a Rough and Martial
People, had few Clerks amongst them, but made use of those French, amongst whom
they then lived, and whose Language they then began to be acquainted with, and
to understand.

But when they were in England, they had not so much use of those Clerks, and
that Language, but more of the English.

And probably it might be, that the Confessor had been so long in France, that
he was more Master of that Language than the Normans, and that the Normans
understood that Language better than the English, and thereupon the Custumary
was written in the French Tongue.

But it does not therefore follow that Duke William must cause the English Laws
to be written in the French Tongue: but it is more likely, that he might cause
them to be continued in their Native Idiom, which was much nearer in affinity
to his own Northern Language than the French was.

That the French Tongue was not introduced, as to our Laws and other things, by
Duke William into England, appears, in that the French was in great use with us
here, both before, and some-time after his Invasion.

Beda affirms, That in Anno 640, it was the Custom of England to send their
Daughters into the Monasteries of France, to be brought up there; and that
Ethelbert, Ethelwulf, Ethelred, and other Saxon Kings, married into the Royal
Blood of France.

G^^bor notes, That before the Time of Duke William, the Normans and English
did so link together, that they were a Terror to Foreign Nations.

Ingulphus says, That the Saxon Hand was used until the Time of King Alfred,
long before the Time of Duke William; and that he being brought up by French
Teachers, used the French Hand.

And he notes many Charters of Edward and Edgar written in the French Hand, and
some Saxon mixed with it, as in the Book of Doomsday.

That Edward the Confesso^, by reason of his long being in France, was turned
into the French Fashion, and all England with him.

But that William the first commanded our Laws to be written in the English
Tongue, because most Men understood it, and that there be many of his Patents
in the Saxon Tongue.

I suppose we may be satisfied, that William the first did not cause our Laws
to be written in French, though the French Language was much in use here before
his Time.

And if he did not introduce the French Language into England, the Argument
falls, That because they are written in French, therefore he brought them in.

But, Sir, I shall offer you some Conjectures, how it came that our Laws were
Written in French, which I suppose might be begun in the Time of our K. Hen. 2.
who was a Frenchman born, and had large Territories and Relations in France,
and with Frenchmen, of whom great Numbers came into England; and they and the
English matched, and lived together, both here, and in some parts of France.

Hence it came to pass, (as Giraldus Cambrensis notes) that the English Tongue
was in great use in Bordeaux, and in other parts of France, where the
Englishmen were resident and conversant; the like was, when the Frenchmen
were so conversant in England.

Matthew Westminster writes, That he was in hazard of losing his Living, because
he understood not the French Tongue: and that in King Hen. 2. and King
Stephen's Time, who had large Dominions in France; their Native Country, and
the Number of French, and of Matches with them, was so great, that one could
hardly know who was French, and who English.

Gervasius Tilsberiensis observes the same: And Brackland writes, That in Rich.
1. Time, preaching in England, was in the French Tongue. Probably Pleading
might be so likewise; and in King John's Time, French was accounted as the
Mother Tongue.

There are scarce any Deeds of our Kings in French before Hen. 2. his Time, the
most are in Ed. 1. and Ed. 2. their Time.

That our Laws were pleaded and written in French before Edw. 3. his Time,
appears by the Stat. 36. Edw. 3. c. 15. which recites the Mischief of the Law
being in French; and enacts, That the Law shall thereafter be pleaded in
English, and enrolled in Latin.

This is one ground of the mistaken Opinion of Lambard, Polydore; Speed, and
others, That Duke William brought in hither both the Norman Laws and Language;
which I apprehend to be fully answered, and the contrary manifested by what I
have said before on this Subject.

Polydore's Mistake may appear the more, when he asserts, that by the Stat. 36.
Edw. 3. Matters are to be enrolled in English, which is contrary to the express
Words, that they are to be enrolled in Latin.

Many of our Law Books were written in Latin before the Norman Invasion, as
appears by the Ancient Rolls of Manors, and Court Barons, and our Old Authors,
Glanvill, Bracton, Tilsbury, Hengham, Fleta, the Register, and the Book of
Entries.

The Records at Westminster and the Tower, and other Records yet extant, are in
Latin; and many Books of our Law in Latin, were translated into English, about
Edw. 3. his Time.

Most of our Statutes, from Edw. 1. his Time, till about the middle of Hen. 7.
his Reign, are enrolled in French, notwithstanding this Stat. 36. Edw. 3.
except the Stat. 6. R. 2. and some others in Latin.

R. 2. H. 4. H. 5. and H. 6. used to write their Letters in French; and some of
our Pleadings are in French, and in the Common Pleas to our Time.

But, Sir, our Law is, Lex non Scripta, I mean our Common Law, and our
Statutes, Records, and Books, which are written in French, are no Argument that
therefore the Original of our Laws is from France: but they were in being
before any of the French Language was in our Laws.

Fortescue writes, That the English kept their Accounts in French, yet
doubtless they had Accounts here, and Revenues before the French Language was
in use here.

My Lord Cook says, That the Conqueror taught the English the Norman Terms of
Hawking, Hunting, and Gaming, etc. yet no doubt but that these Recreations were
in use with us before his Time.

And though Duke William or any other of our Kings before, or after his Time, did
bring in the French Tongue amongst us, yet that is no Argument, that he or they
did change, or introduce our Laws, which undoubtedly were here long before
those Times; and some of them, when the French Tongue was so much in use here,
were translated, written, and pleaded, and recorded, in the French Tongue, yet
remained the same Law still.

And from the great use of the French Tongue here, it was, That the Reporters
of our Law-Cases and Judgments, which were in those Times, did write their
Reports in French, which was the pure French in that Time, though mixed with some
words of Art.

Those Terms of Art were taken, many of them, from the Saxon Tongue, and may be
seen by them yet used; and the Reporters of later Times, and our Students at
this day use to take their Notes in French, following the Old Reports which
they had studied, and the Old French, which, as in other Languages, by time
came to be varied.

I shall not deny, but that some Monks in elder Times, and some Clerks and
Officers might have a Cunning, for their private Honor and Profit, to keep up
a Mystery, to have as much as they could of our Laws, to be in a kind of
Mystery to the Uulgar, to be the less understood by them: But the Counselors
at Law, and Judges, can have no advantage by it; but perhaps it would be found,
that the Law, being in English, and generally more understood, yet not
sufficiently, would occasion the more Suits.

And possibly there might be something of the like nature as to the Court Hand;
yet if the more Common Hands were used in our Lawwritings, they would be the
more subject to change; as the English, and other Languages are, but not the
Latin.

Surely the French Tongue used in our Reports and Law Books, deserves not to be
so enviously decried. as it is by Polydore, Aliot, Daniel, Hottoman, Cowell,
and other Censurers.

But, Mr. Speaker, if I have been tedious, I humbly ask your pardon, and have
the more hopes to obtain it from so many worthy English Gentlemen, when that
which I have said, was chiefly in vindication of their own Native Laws, unto
which I hold my self the more obliged by the Duty of my Profession; and I
account it an honor to me to be a Lawyer.

As to the Debate, and Matter of the Act now before you, I have delivered no
Opinion against it, nor do I think it reasonable, that the generality of the
People of England should, by an Implicit Faith, depend upon the knowledge of
others, in that which concerns them most of all.

It was the Romish Policy, to keep them in Ignorance of Matters pertaining to
their Souls Health; let them not be in Ignorance of Matters pertaining to their
Bodies, Estates, and all their worldly Comfort.

It is not unreasonable, that the Law should be in the Language which may best
be understood by those, whose Lives and Fortunes are subject to it, and are to
be governed by it.

Moses read all the Laws openly before the People in their Mother Tongue: God
directed him to write it, and to expound it to the People in their own Native
Language, that what concerned their Lives, Liberties, and Estates, might be
made known unto them in their most perspi^uous way.

The Laws of the Eastern Nations were in their proper Tongue.

The Laws at Constantinople were in Greek; at Rome in Latin; in France, Spain,
Germany, Sweden, Denmark, and other Nations, their Laws are published in their
Native Idiom.

For your own Country, there is no Man that can read the Saxon Character, but
may find the Laws of their Ancestors yet extant in the English Tongue.

Duke William himself commanded the Laws to be proclaimed in English, that none
might pretend ignorance of them.

It was the Judgment of the Parliament, 36. Edw. 3. That Pleadings should be in
English; and in the Reigns of those Kings, when our Statutes were enrolled in
French and English; yet then the Sheriffs, in their several Counties, were to
proclaim them in English.

I shall conclude with a Complaint of what I have met with abroad, from some
Military Persons; nothing but Scoffs and Invectives against our Law, and
Threats to take it away; but the Law is above the reach of those Weapons, which
at one time or another will return upon those that use them.

Solid Arguments, strong Reasons and Authorities, are more fit for Confutation
of any Error, and Satisfaction of different Judgments: When the Emperor took a
Bishop in complete Armor in a Battle, he sent the Armor to the Pope, with
these words, Haeccine sunt vestes Filii tui?

So may I say to those Gentlemen abroad, as to their Railings, Taunts, and
Threats against the Law, Haeccine sunt Argumenta horum Antinomianorum? They
will be found of no force, but recoiling Arms.

Nor is it ingenious or prudent sor ENGLISHMEN to deprave their Birthright,
the Laws of their own Country.

Thus, Sir, have I impartially given you my Sentiments of UUilliam the first
his Conquest, which has been so terribly and frightfully represented and
published to the UUorld, by the Ignorance, Interest, and Artifice of some
Modern UUriters: Thus have I, as an English Man, endeavored to do my Country
Justice, and to support the true Honor, both of our worthy Saxon Ancestors,
and of our excellent and famous Laws against Conquest and Slavery; as also to
justify the Ancient Parliamentary Right as well of Lords as Commons.

But yet for your fuller and clearer satisfaction in this so weighty a Point, I
shall refer you, if you please, to the Learned and Judicious Discourses writ,
in some measure, more particularly upon this Subject, never yet sufficiently
answered to my Conviction, though I have industriously compared and considered
all the pretended Answers and them together, (without the least of bias or
prepossession; and I heartily could wish others would do the like, and that for
TRUTH's sake.)

The Discourses are these, viz.

Mr. Seldom 's Iani Anglorum Facies Altera.

Mr. Sylas Taylor's History of Gavelkind.

Mr. Petyt's Rights of the Commons of England asserted.

And Mr. Attwood's, Iani Anglorum Facies Nova.

And his,

-- Ius Anglorum ab Antiquo.

You would likewise, I suppose, be extremely pleased in the perusal of another
Learned and Modest Book, written by an Anonymous Anthor, entitled, Patriarcha
non Monarcha.

Authors, for whose Names Posterity will have a greater respect than we at
present have; and that for their discovery of Truth, and refuting so many
Vulgar Errors.

I am, SIR, Your most Faithful Servant, etc.
FINIS.
The Appendix.
ABbas de Middleton tenet in Capite de Domino Rege Mannerium de Middleton, etc.
ex Feoff^menti Regis AEthelstani and nullum servitium fecit nisi Orationes. In
Rotulo de Inquisitionibus Dominicorum Dorse^shire. An^. 4to. R. H. Fill. R. I.
Here we see that King AEthelstan, who reigned above 740 Years ago, infeoffed
the Abbey of Middleton, of the Manor of Middleton; and that by virtue thereof,
the Abbot held it in Capite, 4. H. 3. and did no Service for it, but only to
pray for the Souls of him, and other succeeding Kings; and all this, you see,
found by Inquisition, in the Fourth Year of Hen. 3.

Rot. Cartar. 19. H. 6. Nu. 16. m. 27. per Inspex.
Pro Decano and Capitulo Sancti Martini Magni London. per Inspeximus.
Inspeximus Cartam, quam celebris Memoriae Dominus Willielmus quondam Rex Angl.
progenitor' nostri, fecit Deo and Ecclesiae Sancti Martini Magni London, in hec
verba.
QUia inter multa bona opera, quae fideles Christi pro animarum suarum salute
operantur, hoc precipun estimatur and tenetur, Quod institution and edification
Sanctae Matris Eccte devota mente impenditur in qua suorum Dei supplicationibus
peccata a pio Deo diluuntur, quod Moises in mystici Tabernaculi constructione
pmonstravit, quod etiam Salomonis industria pfiguravit, dum Templum Dno
Artificiosum and honorabile edificaret, suturam significans Eccleam summo a
fidelibus debere honor decorari, quorum vidlt exemplo in nomine Dm nri Jesus
Christi, Ego Willus Dei dispositione and consanguinitatis haereditate Anglorum
Basileus Normannorumque Dux, and Rector eujusdam fidelis mei Ingelrici scilicet
petitioni acquiescens Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Abbatuum, Comitum and
Vniversorum procerum meorum, Sacro Consilio parens omnes possessiones terrarum,
quas tempore venerabilis ac dilectissimi cognati and predecessoris mei Regis
Edwardi. Idem Ingelricus acquisierat quod ipsius insignissimi Regis Animae
Salute, necnon and peccatorum meorum Remissione, concedo and Regia auctoritate
imppm corroboro and confirmo Deo and Eccle Beati Martini, quam infra muros
London. sitam pfatus Ingelricus and Erardus Frat ejus de propriis suis
Redditibus in delictorum suorum Remediun honorabiliter ad Dei laudem, and
Canonicalem Regulam imppm servand and tenend construxerunt. Sunt igitur haec
terrarum nomina, etc.

Et si quas alias libtates vel consuetudines, aliqua Ecclearum Regni mei Angl
meliores het; si quis vero hoc in aliud quam concessimus transfer psumpferit,
cum Juda Proditore Dei h^e^edibas luat penas. Scripta est haec Chartula An ab
Incarnatione Dm M. LX. VIII. scilicet secundo Anno Regni mei; pacta vero est
haec Donatio die Natali^ Dm, and postmodum in die Pentecost confirmat, quando
Matil conjux mea in Basilica Sancti Petri Westminster in Reginam divino nutu est
consecrata, etc.

Ego Willus Rex Anglorum and Dux Normannorum sub Sigillo Sancte, quas
indeclinabiliter consensi atque roll oravi. Ego Matil Regina consensum prebui.
Ego Ricus Regis Fill annui. Ego Stigandus Archiepiscopus subscripsi. Ego
Aldredus Archiepiscopus confirmavi. Ego Willus Land Episcopus, infra cujus
muros pfatum Monasterium situm est, signaculo Sancte Crucis subarravi, and
libtatem omnimodam quantumcumque me pertinet possibilitati, concessi. Ego Odo
Baiocensis Episcopus concessi. Ego Hugo Luxoniensis Episcopus intersui. Ego
Goiffridus Episcopus corroboravi. Ego Hermannus Episcopus concessi. Ego
Leouricus Episcopus concessi. Ego Giso Episcopus concessi. Ego Edwinus Abbas.
Ego Wolwaldus Abbas. Ego Baldwinus Abbas. Ego Agelsinus Abbas. Ego Turstinus
Abbas. Ego Brand Abbas. Ego Alswinus Abbas. Ego Sithricus Abbas. Ego Wills Fill
Osbti Comes. Ego Robtus Frat Regis Comes. Ego Edwinus Comes. Ego Robtus Comes.
Ego Marchere Comes. Ego Waldeof Comes. Ego Rogerus de Monte Goverii Comes. Ego
Ricus Fill Gislebti Princeps. Ego Wills Malet Princeps. Ego Arfastus Regis
Cancellarius. Ego Michael Regis Capellanus. Ego Gislbtus Capellanus. Ego
Osbinus Capellanus. Ego Wills Capellanus. Ego Thomas Capellanus. Ego Bernardus
Capellanus. Ego Walterus Capellanus. Ego Robtus Capellanus. Ego Johes Sancte
Roman Ecclie Cardinalis Presbit per Gallias and Angl concedente Papa Alexandro
vices Apostolicas gerens, huic constitutioni interfui, and quantum Apostolice
Sedi pertinuit libtatem Ecclie psenti Signo confirmavi. Ego Pe^rus Sancte
Roman Ecclie similit Cardinalis Presbit and Cancellarius, ab eodem Papa in
Angl elegatus, huic Constitutioni acquiescens propria Manu subscripsi.

I give you this Charter, Sir, as a further Proof and Evidence for me, in these
Particulars, viz.

1. You may observe by these words, Consanguinitatis haereditate Anglorum
Basileus, that here King William made an absolute disclaimer of Conquest, in
the second Year of his Reign, and only insisted on, (what he knew full well was
his surer hold,) his claim by Hereditary Right.

2. And this is so much the more considerable, as it was done in his Great
Council of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and Vniversorum procerum
suorum, a word of a large signification, as well in Historians as in Ancient
Records, for under the word Proceres were comprehended Principes Civium, vel
Civitatis; And the former Instances I have given you of other General Councils,
and the Parts thereof in this King's Reign, fully agree with this
Interpretation.

3. The Claim and Protestation of the Commons made the Parl. 2d H. 5. Rot.
Parl. 2. H. 5. Pars secunda N. 10.
which says, That so as hit has ever be their Liberte and Freedom, that thar
should no Statute, ne Law, be made of less then they yaffe thereto their
assent, considering that the Commune of your Land, the which that is, and ever
has be a Membre of your Parliament, been as well Assentirs as Petitioners. And
which was ratified and confirmed by the King and Lords, and so became an Act of
Parliament, was, but an Affirmation and Declaration of the Ancient Law of the
Land: And the same Right cannot be denied by any Man to the Lords.

4. And that he confirmed (as the Custom of succeeding Kings have done to this
day) all the Possessions of those Lands to the Church of St. Martins le Grand,
which they had in the Time of EDWARD the CONFESSOR.

Now if this fond Notion of William's Absolute Conquest be true, then either
the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and Commons, in Parl.
15. R. 2. knew it, or they did not. That they were ignorant of it, is not
easily to be presumed, because they lived within ten of three hundred Years
ago, and no doubt but there were some Learned Men among them, that knew the
ancient Constitutions of the Nation: And if they did, then were they guilty of
the greatest madness and folly that ever was, when the Commons prayed that
King; En plein Parliament que nostre Seigneur le Roy s^it and estoise ausi frank
en sa Regalie Liberte and Dignite Royale en son temps come ascuns de cest Noble
Progenitors, Rot. Parl. 15. R. 2. N. 13.
Roys d' Eng^ furent en lour temps nient contresteant ascun Estatut on
Ordinance fait devant cest hures a contraire and mesment en derogation de la
Libertee and Franchise de la Corone qu'il soit adnulle and de null force and
puis touz les Prel^tes and Seigneures Temporels prierent en mesine le manner
and sur ce nostre Seigneur ledit Roy mercia les dits Seigneurs and Communes de
la grant tendresse and affection qu^ils avoient a la Salvation de son Honeur
and de son Estate and a cause que lour dit priers and requests luy semblerent
honestes and resonables il sagrea and assenta pleinement a ycelles.

Now can any Man, of but an ordinary understanding, think, That the Parliament
intended, by this Act, to out themselves of all their Ancient and Legal Rights,
and totally to give up their Estates and Fortunes to the King's absolute
Disposition? Is it possible almost to be supposed, that they designed to
confound and overthrow the whole Polity and Government of the Kingdom, and
reduce all to the Arbi^rary Will and Power of a New Conqueror, without a
Conquest? What Man is there (that is not become servile to Common Opinion, and
implicit Suppositions) of so Inventive a Faculty, as to conjecture such grand
Absurdities? And yet these, and many more, are the direct Consequences of those
that endeavor to maintain and justify these pernicious Principles.

For the Petition and Law is, that Rich. 2. should be as free in his Regality,
Liberty, and Dignity Royal, as any of his Noble Progenitors Kings of England;
then it naturally follows, That he was to be as Free and Absolute as William
the Conqueror: And then what is the Conclusion and Result, The Anonymus Author
against Mr. Petyt. p. 43.
But that the English were neither to have Estates nor Fortunes left them: and
therefore it could be no great Matter to them, by what Law, Right, or Property,
Men held their Estates; And so farewell to Parliaments.

But we know, and are well assured, That never any such Imagination entered into
the Minds of the Lords and Commons, in 15. R. 2. Ras. Stat. 15 R. 2. f. 161.
not only by the Laws made then in that Parliament, but by those in the next
Parliament, held the next Year after. Id. 16. R. 2. fo. 163.


The Commons granted to the King, That ( pur la grant Affiance, Affection, and
Assurance) for the great Trust, Rot. Parl. 16 R. 2. N. 8.
Affection, and Assurance they had in the Noble Person of the King, in his most
excellent Knowledge, and his most sage Discretion; and also for the great
tenderness they had for his Crown and the Kingdom ( and les drots dicels) and
the Rights thereof, ( s' accorderant and assenterent) they agreed and assented,
in full Parliament, That the King, by good deliberation, and Assent of the
Lords of his Wise Council, might take the whole Matter, touching the Statute of
Provisors, to him; and that he should have full Power and Authority to modify
the said Statute against the Pope and Court of Rome; and to Ordain, by the
Deliberation and Assent aforesaid, in such manner as he should think best, to
the Honor of God, and of Holy Church, and the Salvation of the Rights of his
Crown, and of the Estate and Profit of this Realm, and to put the same in
execution when done.

And that (au proschein Parliament) at the next Parliament, all the Matter
aforesaid should be fully shown (as ditz Communes) to the said Commons; and the
Reason thereof is memorable, viz. (au sin quils purront alors par bon avisement
agreer, si Dieu plest, a y^elles;) That the Commons then might, upon good
advice, agree thereto, if it should so please God.

From all which it evidently appears;

1. That no Law could be made in Richard the Second's Time, or in any of his
Progenitors, Kings of England, (which cannot but take in William the First)
without the Assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament.

2. That none of those Kings could abrogate or make void such Laws, when made,
without the like assent.

3. That though the General Phrase, viz. That King Richard should be and stand
as free in his Regality, Liberty, and Dignity Royal in his Time, as any of his
Progenitors were in Theirs; and that the King says, That the Desires and
Requests of the Commons, seemed honest and reasonable to him, and therefore he
gave his Royal Assent to that Law: Yet neither the King, nor the Lords, could
ever believe, that it was honest and reasonable; or that it was any part of the
Liberty and Dignity of the Crown, to change the whole Frame and Constitution of
the English Government, by altering and making Laws at Will; by taking away the
Subjects Possessions, and bestowing them upon whomsoever he pleased; by
destroying the ancient Course and Power of Parliaments; and, in a word, by
turning all things topsy turvy.

And thus we have the Evidence and Proof of the greatest Authority that can be
given, against the Absurdity, as well as falseness, of King William's Absolute
Conquest, viz. a Law and Statute of the Kingdom.

To conclude all, I shall make bold to borrow the words of that great Assertor
of the Protestant Cause, against the Intolerable U^urpations of Papal Power,
the so eminently Learned and Pious Thomas now Lord Bishop of Lincoln, in his
Treatise of Popery, or the Principles and Positions approved by the Church of
Rome, etc. in Quarto, page 116. and say, If any Man can truly and impartially
(as to the sum and substance of the Testimonies here cited, for I neither need,
nor will undertake for every particular Circumstance, or Typographical Error)
either show,

1. That I have misquoted the Authors and Books I cite; and that such Passages
do not occur in the places quoted.

2. Or (if they do occur) that I have mistook their meaning, as to the Purposes
for which they are produced.

I say, If any Man can, and will ingeniou^^y show me either of these, I shall
be so far from not confessing my Fault, or declaring how I was misled into it;
that I shall have a bearty value for any such friendly admonition, and receive
it with all the grateful acknowledgment as becomes me: For my only design is,
the Detection of Error, and Establishment of Truth to future Generations, and
not to have the World imposed upon by the Tricks, Impostures, and Artifices,
which too many have been guilty of, either to promote their own particular Gain
and Interest, (to which such care not what they Sacrifice) or, upon a far
worse, and more grievous Consideration, to bring the whole Nation into dividing
Parties and Factions; and thus by Embroyls and Entanglements, to throw them at
last into fatal Convulsions, to the destruction both of Prince and People.

FINIS.

