TRVE INTELLIGENCE FROM IRELAND.

DATED FROM DVBLIN the second of April, and received here the eleventh.

LONDON: Printed for H. Blunden. 1642.

DVBLIN THE SEcond of April. 1642. Good Sir,
AFter my humble duty remembered, etc. In my last, not by the last Post, but
by the Post before, I certified you what then had been done by our Army
abroad; and that night our Lieutenant General came home, and all the Army
(blessed be God) very safe and well. And have not ever since been forth but
once, viz. on Saturday last Sir Simon Harecot our English Colonel, with about
an hundred and twenty horse, went forth to view the Country six miles from
this City toward the County of Wicklowe, and espying some Rebels made toward
them: whereupon the Rebels fled, and betook themselves unto the Castle of
Kilgobbon, where our horsemen watching them that none should get forth, sent
hither for aid. And there was present aid sent them about a thousand Foot and
Horse, and that night they besieged the Castle, the next day there was (being
Sunday the 27th.) sent unto them two pieces of Ordnance to batter the Castle:
and after 21. shot made, it was very hardly won; but in placing the ordnance,
Sir Simon being directing how it should be done, was shot in the left shoulder,
and on Monday last he died; And with him was shot Lieutenant Cook dead in the
place, and Sergeant Major Berry, both which came over the last week with the
400 Firelocks out of England, and with them were about ten more of our men
lost, Serieant Mayor Berry is yet living, but not like to recover. And that
night was the Castle won, and about two hundred men, women and children in it
(of the Rebels) slain, and that night our men blew up the Castle with powder,
since which we have had no further proceedings here. On Monday last the 28 news
came from Sir Henry Tichborne, that he had taken Dundaulke, and it is credibly
reported of all, that he has slain eight hundred men in the taking of it, and
has recovered in Dundawlke, three pieces of ordnance, and about thirty
thousand pounds in money, plate, and goods for pillage. He won before that
Ardee, and set a garrison there, and another in Bewly Castle. It is reported
that he slew since he went from Tredath eleven hundred men with the loss of a
very few men; and he would now go for the Newry, where is the chief Magazine
that the Rebels have, and most of their Treasure, but that he wants men; for
the whole Army of his was but three thousand; of which, part were left to keep
Tredath, part at Bewly Castle, part at Ardee, and now if he leave a Garrison
also at Dundawlke, he will not have men enough to go against the Newry, for
that is a strong place. Thus has God prospered that man, for he is a good man;
we cannot certainly hear what strength they have on our side in the North, nor
what my Lord President of Mounster has done, I am afraid it goes hard with our
friend there. We hear that my Lord President of Connaugh is forced to retire to
the Castle of Athlone. And that diverse Castles where our friends are, are hard
besieged, and that the Castle of Geashell is surrendered upon composition, where
our Lady Affa^y kept, but not with the safety of all their lives that were in
it. The nineteenth instant came my Lord Dunsany to Dublin, and submitted
himself, and is in the Castle, and his son, and some other Gentlemen with
them; We are yet in great straight for moneys, and I am afraid we shall be in
as great want of Corn shortly, except we have good supply out of England, for
our Army burns all before them, and we are not stored beforehand, but from
hand to mouth. It is yet somewhat reasonable, because men have not money to
store up any, and for fear of burning: some quantity ha^h been brought in
these three weeks past, and now comes but very little in. At Tredath they have
a very great Market, and between this and that the way reasonable clear; but
on Wicklowe side, to the Southwestward, the Rebels are in great number, I think
our Army goes that way shortly. Thus with my humble duty remembered, and my
love to my brother John Cole, and sister his wife, and the rest of my brothers
and sisters, I take leave. Resting ever,

Your obedient Son, ROBERT COLE.

FINIS.

