DAILY DEVOTIONS. OR THE Christians Morning and Evening SACRIFICE. Digested
into Prayers and Meditations, for every day in the week, and other occasions.
With some short Directions for a Godly Life.

By JOHN COLET, D. D. Dean of St Paul's, London, and Founder of that Famous
School near adjoining.

The Nineteenth Edition, with a brief Account of the Authors Life, by Dr.
Fuller.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultrey, and Edw.
Evets at the Green Dragon in St Paul's Churchyard. 1684.

The Effigies of JOHN COLLETT Dr of Divinity and Some time Dean of St Paul's
Church London who departed this Life Ano Dom: 1519 Aged 53 years.


The Life of that Reverend Divine, Dr. Colet, sometimes Dean of S. Paul's.
JOhn Colet, Son of Sir Henry Colet, Mercer, and twice Lord Mayor of London,
was the only surviving Child his Parents had of two and Twenty. Thus GOD,
though He breaks the Ring, left them the Diamond in preserving him alive.

In his Youth he visited Foreign ^arts, and the scattered Perfections ^f
several Nations he collected and ^istilled into himself; returning home, in
Oxford he publicly expounded all Saint Paul' s Epistles, with no less profit
to others than Applause to himself. He taught the Learned there to beat their
Swords into Mattocks, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, to turn disputes
into Doctrines, Controversies into positive Divinity.

Then began the beams of his worth to shine in the Court, and King HENRY the
Seventh (a knowing Prince who generally grounded His favor on Desert,) for his
well Expounding Saint Paul' s Epistles, made him Dean of Saint Paul's in London.
Here Colet read his former Lectures over again, preferring rather to set on the
Table, wholesome cold meat, which had been there once before, than to feed his
Auditors with flesh half raw, though hot from the spit.

But day shall as soon be without Night, as a grand merit without envy
attending it. Some accused him as not through paced in his Religion; and
confining on Heresy in some Opinions, as denying due reverence to Images and
Saints, etc.

But as our Colet preferred the immediate going to GOD before mediation of
Saints, so GOD gave him the happiness to have direct access to his Earthly
King, without applying himself to the favor of Courtiers. King Henry the
Eighth had the hearing of his Cause, and dismissed him with this worthy
Testimony: Let other men choose what Doctor they please, this Man shall be my
Doctor.

He was (as I may say) a Luther before Luther, for his Doctrine. A strict
shunner of vice in himself, and punisher of it in those that were under him.
Look in this Treatise to behold his Faith, and on Saint Paul's School (which he
Founded) to see his Charity.

By T. F. D. D.

A fruitful Direction, and Order of a good Christian Life, very profitable to
be regarded of all people. With sundry fruitful Precepts to be followed; made
by that worthy man, Dr. Colet, sometime Dean of S. Paul's.
REmember first of all (virtuous Reader) that it is high wisdom, and great
perfection thy self to know, and then thy self to despise; thou must know that
thou have nothing that good is of thy self, but of GOD: for the gifts of GOD's
nature and all other temporal gifts of this world, which be lawfully and truly
obtained, well considered, are come to thee by the infinite goodness and grace
of God, and not thy self. Wherefore and in especial it is necessary for thee to
know, that GOD of his great Grace, has made thee his Image, having regard to
thy memory, understanding and will, and that GOD is thy Maker, and thou his
wretched Creature and thou art redeemed of God by the passion of Jesus Christ,
and is thy helper, thy refuge and thy deliverer from all evil, and to consider
and know the Goodly order which GOD, of his infinite wisdom has ordained thee
to be ordered by: as to have these temporal goods for the necessity of the
body, the body and sensual apperites to be ordered by the Soul, the Soul to be
ordered by reason, and grace to know thy duty to GOD, and to thy Neighbor; and
by all common reason if thou do keep this convenient order to GOD and his
Creatures, they shall keep their order to thee: but if thou do break thy order
to thee of likelihood they shall break their orde^ to thee; for how should thy
Wife, Children, Servants, and other Creatures with thee which thou have doing,
do their duty, and keep their order to thee if thou do not so to GOD and to
them? And also think thou of a surety, that if thy sensual appetite be not
ordered by reason and grace, thou art worse ordered than a beast; for thou then
live out of order, and so does not a Beast; which is a great shame and rebuke
to thee, being a reasonable creature, and without the great mercy of GOD, it
shall be thine eternal destruction: wherefore I say consider what thy sin is,
in the ignorance of God, of thy self, and of thine own evil, and of his
holiness: and search thine impenitency in this, that thou make too light
account of GOD's justice, and therefore thy heart waxes hard; it is far
without feeling of faith, either toward God, or love toward thy Neighbor, so
that thou likest and love sin, and have no grief nor hatred for it: examine
further, whether thou have not neglected GOD's Word, either not in diligent
hearing of it preached or read, or when thou have heard it, in not regarding
it: nay, whether thou have not had more delight to read unprofitable blessings,
savouring altogether of the flesh, such as thou should ^e afraid once to
think of, as it would have beseemed thy holy profession, and whether thou have
not rebelled against it, whilst thou have withstood the working of it, that
thou should mortify the old man, changing it and gaining upon it daily,
till it be framed to Gods most holy will: and if thou shall find these things
in thee, then judge thy self of sin, that thou be not judged of the Lord, for
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God Moreover judge
thy self for putting no difference between Gods will and thy corrupt will,
through which thou have neglected Gods will, and love thine own to fly from his
and follow thine own; which then has plainly showed it self, when his was
plainly taught to be contrary to thine, and yet thou did yield to it, in
breathing forth unseemly and ungodly pangs, rageings, and murmurings against
it; and therefore judge thy self of this intolerable pride of mind, and
stubbornness of heart, and of those unbridled affections, rebelling and
murmuring against God, and mis-judging of him that reproves thee: Further see
whether thou have judged thy self for neglect of Prayer, when thou have omitted
many days, never regarding it, but as a profane person have not once thought
of t^^ duty therein: and when thou have prayed, have done it in the ceremony,
without taste or remorse of faith or sin, in such coldness and broken sort, that
there has been no life nor comfort in it: Judge thy self, whether in Prayer,
thou have practiced the exercises of a broken heart healed in Christ, and
changed into righteousness whether the just mediation of God's goodness moves
thee to offer the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and works in thee the love
thereof, that thou might be stirred up to love him, and to walk in that
obedience that he requires of thee: And because the abusing of Gods Creatures
is a great sin, examine thy self, whether thou do misuse them in
forgetfulness of God, in pride of life to please thy self in the creature more
than in the Creator, seeing with the abuse of them to set forth thy self in
pride, to please thy self and the fleshly eyes of others, rather, than in
humbleness, to use them to the pleasing and praising Almighty God the Creator:
In the use of all which things, the love of God, which appears unto thee to a
continual meditation, to make thee to spy out sin in thy self, and to judge
that to be sin, which is sin indeed, and in no wise to mince or diminish it, or
to cover it with the figg-leaves of thine own vain excuses, but to lay it open
before the Lord, nakedly and plainly as it is; so that thou call not sin
righteousness, nor righteousness sin; good evil, nor evil good: but condemn
that which thou know to be sin, to abhor it, to flee from it, without all
hypocrisy and cloaking of it with self-love, or nourishing it, or else with
lightness and contempt to dwell in it; and therefore thou must examine this sin
thoroughly, of not applying thy heart and mind to meditate and understand, to
believe and taste of the work of thy salvation wrought in Christ crucified,
through which thou walk in security, wanting faith, and yet not feeling thy
want, wanting the food of life, and the taste of God, and yet hungrest not after
it, but think thy self full when thou art empty, and nevertheless, art empty
and poor indeed, to beg it at Gods hands the supplyer thereof; through which
thou feel not the incorporation into Christ's body, feel the effect thereof
in CHRIST's Death: to Die from sin in his Resurrection, is to live no
Righteousness in his Ascension: to ask after Heavenly things, and to leave the
Earth and flesh, at his coming again, to be ready with faith and joy to meet
him: An^ here withal weigh what a great sin it is, not to hearken to the Spirit
of God, when (...) might work in it, whereby thou do grieve in and quench it,
when thou do not gladly obey it, and yield to the motions of it; and
therefore judge thy self for not putting off the old man with all his works,
and for not putting on the New Man, in bringing forth the fruits of
regeneration, for not considering thine exile in the flesh from GOD, or in this
World from Heaven: to lament it, and the cause of it, and to extol the
Providence of GOD, by which thou live: and for being idle, vain, ^roud, in
thinking, speaking, and doing. Again, for not feeling the estate of GOD's
afflicted Church, to sorrow in the affliction of it: for not seeking zealously
to glorify his Gospel, through which thou art not thoroughly touched for any
false Doctrine, Idolatry, or sin: for standing against which, the Saints of God
have been, and still are persecuted and killed, and yet thou live carelessly
without feeling of it, and art at a good point, sink it, or swim it. To
conclude then, I mean by sin, whatsoever is declared to be sin in the word of
God, which lies either seen or unseen in our hearts, of what estate soever we
be, (...) appears in life, which is found out (...) the word of God, and so
adjudged, which thou ought to lament before God in the ^xercises of a broken
heart, to beat down thy heart with humbleness, to cause thee to beg mercy with
aching heart, and very need, to seek that heavenly Physician Jesus Christ, and
of eager desire to feed on him by faith, to the assurance of life and
Salvation, that the sweetness thereof may work in thee the love of thy God to
praise him, the love of his written Word to do it, and in doing it to deny thy
self, thy will, affection, and life; that with humbleness thou may walk
always with and before the Lord in the holiness and righteousness that pleases
him, knowing that His eye does search thy heart and life, to see in it his will
done and obeyed: and always practicing that which is good that thou may
please Him, and therefore must ask mercy; and so if thou continually strive and
labor to do it, He does accept of thy imperfect doings in Christ to encourage
thee to take better hold, and to do better, etc. Wherefore think, and thank
God, and utterly despise thy self, and think thy self a wretch, in that God
has done so much for thee, and thou have so often offended his Highness, and
also done him so little service: and surely it is also great wisdom for thee to
think, that if it had pleased God for to have given to all other men grace, as
he has given to thee, that they would have served him better than thou have
done: wherefore by his mercy, and grace, call unto thy remembrance thy degree
or dignity which Almighty God, of his goodness has called thee unto, and
according thereto, yield thy debt, and do thy duty: First, and principally,
honor God as thy Maker, love him as thy Redeemer, fear him as thy Judge.
Secondly, thy Neighbor which is thy superior obey: have concord and peace
with them which be like with thee in degree, and have mercy on thy inferiors.
Thirdly, provide thee to have a heart purged, and a good custody of thy tongue:
and in all thy words and deeds have ever in thy mind that thou shall die
shortly, and that God hears and sees every thing; and that nothing is so
privily done but it shall be made open. And every morning among other
Meditations and Prayers, pray unto the Lord God, that the day following thou
may use this wretched world, in thy thoughts, words, and deeds, that thou
may by the merits of Christ's passion, eschew the pains of Hell, and come to
the Joy everlasting; And (...) executing thereof, keep truth in words (...)
deeds, defend no man nor no matter against the truth. In all things think and
trust in God, and he shall direct thy ways: Trust not to thine own wit, but
fear God, and he will keep thee from evil: Be content to hear good counsel,
though it be contrary to thy will; for he is a very fool that will hear nothing
gladly but what is according to his own mind: do no man harm, lest thou suffer
the same; as thou would be done unto, so do thou unto others: be such to
others as thou desire they should be unto the. If thou be Religious, remember
that the due execution of true Religion, is not in the wearing of the habit,
but with a clear mind in very deed, to execute the rules of true Religion, and
the ordinances thereof: If thou be lay and unmarried, keep thee clean unto the
time thou be married, and remember the sore and terrible punishment of Noah's
flood, and of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, done to man for mis rising
flesh; and if thou intend to marry, or to be married, and have a good Wife;
thank God therefore, for she is of his sending; and remember that there be
three things pleasing to the Spirit of God, that is to say, concord between
brethren, love and charity between Neighbors, and a man and wife well agreeing
together: and having in remembrance, that the intent of marriage is not in the
beastly appetite of the flesh, but to eschew the evil thereof, or to have
children. And if thou have children, as much as thou may, bring them up in
virtue, to be the servants of God; for it were better for them and thee not to
be born, than otherwise. In thine Authority, busy thee rather to be beloved of
thine inferiors, than to be dreaded. Let thy subjects and servants rather
serve and obey thee for love, than for dread or need: With such a Sovereign
goodness govern thy Subjects, that they may be glad to serve thee, both in
punishment and in cherishing: Keep a measurable mean, be not too straight,
forget not to keep a convenient measure in all thy works: go not to meat but as
a reasonable man, with thanks to GOD for his gifts, and then remember, that
more be sick and die by superfluities of meats and drinks, than otherwise.
Wherefore eat with measure, to live in health; at thy meat have no other but
honest communication, and such as is according to thy knowledge; backbite no
man, be merry in honesty, for sorrow and care has killed many, and no profit
is therein. In no wise swear without compulsion of the Law; for where (...)
great swearing, from thence is never the ^^ague of GOD. In no wise brawl nor
chide; for Solomon says, Better is a little with joy, than much with brawl and
contention: And he says, An evil person is ever chiding; and therefore the
Angel of God shall be set against him: Be content at all times to give part of
that which God has sent thee, for he that will not hear the cry of the poor,
shall cry to God and not be heard. With good providence and discretion, see the
time where, when, how, why, and wherefore thou speak, do, or biddest any
thing to be done: when thou deemest or judge any thing to be done, in poor or
rich, behold and consider the cause, and not the person: be as meek in other
men's cause and offenses, as in thine own; sit never in doom and judgment,
without pity and mercy; for while thou have pity and mercy on other men's
offenses, thou have mercy on thine own: for in what measure thou measurest to
others, it shall be measured to thee again; yet thou must execute judgment: for
to do mercy and justice is more pleasant to God, than to pray, or do sacrifice
unto him; Judge no man by light suspicion, prove first, and then judge; in
doubts, refer the Judgment and Sentence to Gods might, and what thou know
not, commit it to God. might, have little or none affection of these earthly
and transitory things; for blessed i^ the Rich man that trusts not in money or
treasure; remember as as man loves, so he is; for the lover is in the thing
loved, more properly than in himself: wherefore if a man love earthly things,
he may be called an earthly man; but if he love properly Heavenly things, or
God, he may be called an Heavenly or a Godly man: therefore love God and
heavenly things, for undoubtedly that is the best and most assured love; for
they be, and ever shall be permanent, and all earthly things be soon vanished
and ended, and so the love of them is in vain. Also it is high wisdom to fear
God; for that he says himself, Fear not him that can kill the body, and cannot
hurt the Soul; but fear him that can kill the body and also the Soul, and
commit them to everlasting pain. Wherefore every evening before thou go to bed,
call to thy remembrance, as much as thou can, thy thoughts, words, and deeds,
said and done that day: and if any have been to thine own profit, and to the
pleasure of God, heartily thank him, for by his grace it was done: and if any
have been contrary to his will and plea^^re, ask heartily mercy, and reconcile
thy (...) shortly to Him by repentance, to eschew the everlasting destruction
of thy soul: For as S. Augustine says, there is not a greater madness, than
for a little temporal delectation which is soon done, to lose the eternal Joy,
and to be bound to everlasting pain: From the which, the Almighty Father by his
infinite power and mercy, bitter passion and infinite wisdom of Jesus Christ;
and by the infinite goodness and charity of the Holy Ghost, keep us now and for
ever.

Amen.
Jam. 5. 20. Let him know, that he which has converted a sinner from going
astray out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude
of sins.
What Prayer is.
PRayer is an humble Request either of the heart, or tongue, or both unto God,
proceeding from our belief and acknowledgment of his power, as God, and of his
goodness, as our Father in Jesus Christ, to supply all our necessities, with
thanksgiving unto him for any blessing received.

The parts of a Prayer are usually three:

1. Humble Confession. 2. Petition or Supplication. 3. Hearty Thanksgiving.
1. Confession.
Which is an humble and penitent repetition of our sins and wickedness, with an
acknowledgment of punishments and miseries thereby deserved, and with an
earnest desire and prayer for absolution, and that for JESUS Christ alone.

He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and
forsakes them, shall have mercy. Prove. 28. 13.
I said I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin, Psalm. 32. 5.
If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1. 19.
My misdeeds prevail against me; O be thou merciful to my sins, Psalm. 67. 3.
2. Petition.
Petition or Supplication is that part of Prayer, in which we beseech God, the
Author of all good, and punisher of all ill, for all the Mercies, Comforts,
Graces, and Blessings of this Life, and the Life to come, and for deliverance
from all fears, ills, dangers, and punishments of this Life, and the Life to
come, for our selves and others, and all for the merits of Christ Jesus alone,
and his mediation.

Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry unto thee: have mercy upon me, and
hear me, Psalm. 27. 8.
Hear me, O GOD, in the multitude of thy mercies: even in the truth of thy
Salvation, Psalm. 69. 14.
Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse me from my secret faults, Psalm.
19.
Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness; according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses, Psalm. 51.
Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. Romans 10.
3. Hearty Thanksgiving.
Thanksgiving is an humble joyful acknowledgment and expression of our thanks
unto Almighty God for any mercy or blessing received, or promised; and for
preservation and deliverance from any calamity, danger, or distress, with
denial of our own merits of the least of these, and a magnifying of the
greatness and goodness of GOD unto us in and through Jesus Christ.

Give thanks unto the Lord and call upon his Name, Psalm. 105.
Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord JESUS, giving
thanks to God the Father, and by him, Col. 3. 17.
My mouth shall daily speak of thy Righteousness and Salvation, for I know no
end thereof. Psalm. 71. 13.
O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders he does for the children of men: that they would offer unto him the
Sacrifice of thanksgiving, Psalm. 107.
O Lord thou art my God, I will exalt thee, I will praise thy Name, for thou
have done wonderful things. Isa. 25. 1.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits he has done unto me?

I will take the cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the LORD.

Psalm. 116.
MOST Comfortable Prayers FOR Sunday Morning.
O Lord my God and heavenly Father, blessed be thy Name for ever: dispose my
heart; open my lips, and give me thy Holy Spirit, to a true acknowledgment of
all my sins, that my prayers may be heard of thee, in the Name of thy Son Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Psalm.
HEar me when I call, O God of my Righteousness: for thou have set me at
liberty when I was in trouble: Have mercy upon me, and hearken unto my Prayer.

My voice shall thou hear betimes, O Lord, early in the Morning will I direct
my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

For thou art the God that have no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall any
evil dwell with thee.

Therefore, O Lord, rebuke me not in thine indignation, neither chasten me in
thy displeasure.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak; O Lord heal me, for my bones are
vexed.

Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul; O save me for thy mercies sake.

For in death no man remembers thee, and who will give thee thanks in the pit?

Wherefore away from me all ye th^^ work vanity, for the Lord has heard the
voice of my complaint.

The Lord has heard my petition, the Lord will receive my prayer.

For why? my righteous God tries t^^ very heart and reins.

And my help comes of God, which preserves them that are true of heart.

Therefore, will I give thanks unto the^ O Lord, with my whole heart, and I
w^^^ speak of all thy mavelous works.

I will be glad and rejoice in thee, y^^ my Songs and praise will I make of
th^^ O thou most Highest!

For God is a Righteous Judge, strong and patient, and God is provoked every
day.

If a man will not turn, he has bent his Bow, and will whet his Sword, and
make it ready.

Morning Prayer.
MOst mighty and gracious God, which have brought me out of the Nights
darkness, into the light of thy Truth to see the light of thy Love, that I may
rejoice in the day of my visitation and Salvation, whereby the day spring from
on high has visited me, and in the day of Salvation thou will succor me. This
day make me hear thy voice, and not harden my heart through unbelief or
deceitfulness of sin, but that by Faith I may enter into thy promised rest:
give grace unto me, O Lord, and to all thy people to walk warily, diligently
and dutifully in my vocation, to do such good works wherewithal thou may be
well pleased; and that walking in thy ways, I may work out my salvation with
fear and trembling; and that all my meditations, thoughts, words, and works,
may tend to the edifying of my Christian Brethren, the discharge of my duty,
the consolation of my conscience, and the glorifying of thy most holy Name,
which art my God, my guide, my savior and defender; to whom be all Praise and
Glory, Power, Might, Dominion and Majesty, now and for ever.

Amen.
Morning Prayer.
I Yield thee humble and hearty thanks, O heavenly Father, in thy Son Jesus
Christ, for thy innumerable benefits poured upon my Soul and Body, and that
thou have kept me this night past from many evils, both Spiritual and Corporal,
and of thy great mercy, do offer and give unto me time and space to repent,
and amend my life, so as I might live henceforth, not as I will, but as thou will: and as my body does draw continually nearer and nearer to the end (the
grave I mean) so my soul might approach unto his end, that is Heaven, and not
Hell: for in one state we stand not still, but either we are nearer the happy
state of Life, or else the unhappy condition of Death Eternal. Wherefore, O my
dear Father, I beseech thee to be merciful unto me, and as of thy goodness thou
give me time to repent, so of the same thy goodness in Christ. I humbly
beseech thee to give me thy gracious gift of true, holy, perfect, and perpetual
repentance, that I may more and more lament my former sinful life, trusting
unseignedly in the rich mercies of thee my God, through the merits of thy Son
Jesus Christ, for the pardon of all my sins: And grant, O Lord, I beseech thee,
that I may unseignedly purpose, and effectually labor to amend my life this
day, and so long as I have to live, to the praise of thy Name, and the good
example of others. And forasmuch as thou know my weakness, my ignorance, and
great untowardness, to carry any cross or affliction, that Thou will of thy
merciful goodness, so temper and order all things toward me this day and ever,
that I be never tempted or proved further than I shall be able to bear, but so
to help me in the same, as may be most for thy Glory, and my comfort. And
although (O God) thy Goodness, Mercy, and Truth, to Mankind in all thy Works
does abundantly appear; yet herein chiefly Thou declarest thy self to be most
favorable, merciful, and gracious, that not suffering us to walk in darkness,
ignorance and blindness, Thou have given us thy most holy and blessed Word, to
be a lanthorn to our feet to lighten our steps in the pathway of everlasting
Life, lest we should walk in the shadow of death: In which thy most blessed and
sacred Word, thou have finally and perfectly set forth unto mankind, so much of
thy glorious Majesty as was expedient for us to know; and not only that, but
have herein also fully expressed thy most holy and blessed Will, whatsoever is
necessary for the Salvation of Mankind, to be known, to bring him to life
everlasting. Give me grace, most merciful Father, that for so high a treasure
left among us, I may be thankful, reverently embrace, accept, and esteem of the
same, as the most precious jewel in Earth, and be therein confirmed most
strongly, that all things therein contained be most undoubtedly true, not by
any mortal Man, but by the most Holy Spirit in Man, penned and written to the
comfort and behoof of Man: And that I may most humbly, lowly, and with most
high Reverence submit my self thereunto, as becomes thy eternal Majesty, and
the Word proceeding from thy most blessed mouth: that I may with reverence and
obedience, read, hear, and occupy my self in the same, to the comfort of my
soul, and the increase of thy Glory: Lighten my understanding (most dear
Father) with thy most holy Spirit, that I may learn clearly, conceive and
understand the things therein contained, which no mortal man can conceive, save
those that have learned of thee, and whom thou by thy holy Spirit do lighten
and instruct. Guide me, dear Father, with thy most holy Spirit, that having the
true understanding of the mysteries therein contained, I may be fully
established and confirmed in the true knowledge of thee my dear Father, and of
thy beloved Son my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and in conscience thoroughly
persuaded, that I have my full perfect salvation and life everlasting in him,
and through his atonement made by his death and passion. That I do not vainly
abuse the knowledge of thy most sacred word to satisfy vain curiosity, or brag
of knowledge, but only to the relieving of my hungry and wounded conscience, to
the loosing of my fettered soul, and the appeasing of my sorrowful heart: that
I may to the end of my life walk in sincerity before thee my heavenly Father,
in the comforts of thy dear Son my Savior, upholden still by the merciful
power of the holy Ghost; to thine everlasting praise and glory for ever.

Amen.
A Confession to God the Father.
O Lord my God, I confess unto Thee, that my heart is unclean, that I am of
polluted lips, wallowing in the dung, and stinking in the rottenness of mine
own sin, so that I may justly tremble to appear before thy glorious presence,
much more to present unto thee thy pure praises out of my defiled mouth: but
who, except thou, O Lord, can make me clean? and what is pure which thou have
not purged? Therefore, O Father of life, O Lord of Light, with all the Forces
of my Soul, I do beseech thee to help me thy servant, whom of thy mercy thou
have created: cleanse my filthiness, lighten my darkness, inflame my coldness,
quicken my dullness, awake my drowsiness, revive my deadness: repair the ruins
of my Soul, enlarge the frame of the understanding thereof, cleanse it from all
earthly corruption, garnish it with thy heavenly graces, that it may be
conveniently both sit and furnished to receive Thee, that thou may make thine
entry, and possess that which is thine own, both by Creation, and also by
Redemption: and that as thou art exalted above all Creatures; so above all
creatures, I may honor thee and praise thee, not with that affection wherewith
my weakness is able, either to do or to desire, but with that perfection
wherewith in duty I should, and wherewith thy Saints and Angels indeed do: for
what worthy praise can I give unto thee, by whose goodness I was created, by
whose mercy I was redeemed, by whose power I am preserved, and by whose grace I
look to be glorified? when I was not, thou did make me; when I was lost and
forlorn, thou came down and tookest mortality upon thee to redeem me: these
and many other benefits have I received, some in hand, and some in hope,
although through my own sinful demeanor, I have almost both let go my hold,
and lost my hope: therefore, O Lord, I most humbly beseech thee save thy
servant, save one of thy Members, though poor and feeble; save I say, a part of
thy self, be as great in pardoning those that are submitted unto thee, as in
punishing those that are rebellious: pour upon my heart the sweet streams of
thy mercies: confirm my life, settle my faith, settle me in a right and upright
course, and continue me in the same even unto the end: grant this, O Father,
through thy dear Son Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Devout Prayer to Jesus Christ.
O Most sweet Savior, and merciful Redeemer, Jesus Christ the Son of God, who
although thou art High, yet art thou most humble; and as thou art Omnipotent,
so art thou most meek; and as thou art most Mighty, so art thou most merciful:
to thee O Christ the giver of all Felicity, the Father of Heaven has given all
Power both in Heaven and in Earth. Thou art the true Pastor of our Souls, thou
art our Messiah, thou casts off none that sue unto thee; but as thou have
taken away the handwriting that was against us, and have fastened it to the
Cross, so art thou ready to impart the merits of thy Passion to all such as
write true repentance of their sins, call upon thee faithfully: wherefore my
sweet Savior, I most faithfully and unfeignedly acknowledge the benefits that
thou have bestowed upon me, and steadfastly believe that thou being an
immaculate Lamb, in whose mouth was never found guile, did suffer most cruel
torments at the hands of sinners, for the love of us most wretched sinners: for
the which cause I most heartily beseech thee, and most humbly pray thee to
accept me into the number of them whom thou will receive to mercy and favor;
and although I of my self be most unworthy thereof, yet thy merits can make me
worthy; to them I fly, craving that I may be so armed and defended by them,
that I may subdue the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, even as thou have
gloriously conquered Sin, Death, and Hell. Thou see, O my Savior, how I am
daily and hourly beset with these three enemies, and so hardly besieged of
them, that without thy help, I can by no means escape, but that I must needs be
a prey unto one of them: strengthen me therefore, O Lord, that neither the one
with carnal Lust, neither the other with delectable pleasures, nor Satan with
all his craft and subtle devices, get the dominion over me: thou have bought
me, thou have paid for me; save, keep and defend me, be always ready at the
voice of my crying; pour into me thy grace patiently to abide thy divine
pleasure in all things: make me both at this present, and all the days of my
life to have in my mind, and profoundly to root in my heart the mysteries of
thy painful passion, and so to be filled with remembrance thereof, that sin may
no more prevail with me, and that Satan mine old enemy may well perceive that
he has neither part nor fellowship in me, but that I am both Body and Soul
altogether thine: to whom, O my sweet Savior, with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be ascribed all power, glory, and honor for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to the Holy Ghost.
O Holy Spirit, worthy of all honor, which make up the Almighty. Trinity,
which proceedest from the Father and the Son, and art equal to either of them
in glory, but differing from them but only in property of person, which of thy
goodness, forgivest the sins of them that amend, which with thy holy breath
cleansest men's minds, comforting them when they be in sorrow, cheering them up
with pure gladness, when they be in heaviness, leading them into all truth when
they be out of the way, kindling in them the fire of charity when they be a
cold, knitting them together with the glue of peace when they are at variance,
and garnish them with sundry gifts which profess the Name of thy Son Jesus
Christ, by whose working, all things live which live indeed, whose delight is
to dwell in the hearts of the simple, which thou have vouchsafed to consecrate
for Temples to thy self, wherefore I do beseech thee, O dear Father, to
maintain those thy gifts in me, and to increase them daily more and more, that
by thy Governance the lusts of the flesh may dye in me, and the desire of the
Heavenly Life may quicken and increase. Let me so pass, I beseech thee, O my
God, through the misty desert of this world (thy light go before me) as I may
never be desiled with Satan's vices, nor be entangled with any Errors
disagreeing from thy Truth, which the true Catholic Church has delivered unto
us by the instinct of thee, which live and raignest with the Father and the
Son everlasting; to whom be all honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
A fruitful Prayer to God.
O My dear Lord and God, what is this World? it is evil, it is a place of vain
pleasure, a cage of iniquity, or rather lump of misery; and what am I, Lord,
what am I, but a friend of this present evil World, and an enemy to thee? what
am I but a child of wrath, and son of darkness, so glued to sin, and lymed with
iniquity, that my body is a body of sin? what then, O Lord, shall I do? shall
the mountain of sin oppress me, or the world with the baits of vanity so choke
me, that I shall never like an Eagle fly to the carcass, nor be able to cry for
help to thee the only Morning Star, which are wont to spread forth the beams of
comfort unto the needy in time of extremity? O Lord my God, give me the wings
of Faith to flee unto thee, and pour upon me the dew of thy blessing, that I
may bud and bear the fruit of holiness, through the operations of thy gracious
beams: Give me thy Grace, that I fail not in my vocation, that I may do good,
and eschew evil, and so make good that vow which I made unto thee in my
Baptism. Save me from falling, and stay my feet from slipping, by thy holy
Word, which is the glass of thy Will, that being guided over this misly desert,
I may arrive at the land of Promise, and Palace of rest in a lively faith,
through thy dear Son Jesus Christ, to whom be all honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Church, and true worship of GOD.
O Most gracious God and loving Father, look in favor, I do beseech thee, upon
the Church generally dispersed throughout the whole World, and whom by the
malice of Satan, and tyranny of Antichrist, thou see continually assailed
with many and great dangers. Be thou therefore, O Lord, a castle of defense, a
buckler and rock strong and forcible, to withstand the force and fury of all
adversaries that rise up against it. And for the better comfort, endue it with
faith unfeigned, wherein it and every member thereof, may safely run and repair
under the shadow of thy sacred wings, whenever perils approach. Graciously
guide and govern it, by taking the defense thereof into thine own hands, to
whom it specially and alone belongs; and let it hold on the true course of
professing and practicing of thy true Religion, that the adversaries thereof
may have no cause to condemn it through sin, which howsoever it may seem to
dwell in the most godly while we live here; yet let us always have an eye and
diligent watch over all our thoughts, words, and works, that our light may
shine to thy Glory, our good, and example to others, in Peace and War, in
Comfort and Calamity, and not to be dismayed at any noise and report of the
greatest danger whatsoever. Thou art, O Lord my God, my only comfort and
riches; what am I, that I dare speak unto thee? I am thy poor servant, yea, and
much more poor and vile, than I either know, or dare show forth: and yet Lord I
remember this one thing, that I am nothing, that I have nothing, and that I am
nothing worth: Thou alone art Good, thou alone art Righteous, thou alone art
Holy: Thou know all, thou do all, thou fillest all: only the wicked thou
sendest empty away: remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and fill me with thy
favor: Thou will that none of thy works should serve in vain: for how can I
stand upright in this wretched world, unless thy mercy and favor hold me up?
turn not therefore thy cheerful countenance from thy servant, defer not to help
me from day to day, withdraw not thy comfort, that my Soul be not as the
thirsty Land, but teach me to do thy Will, for that thou, O my God, art my
wisdom, and know what is meet and convenient for me, to whom with the Son
and the Holy Ghost, be all Glory for ever.

Amen.
Prayers for Sunday Night.
O Lord my God and Father, blessed be thy name for ever: dispose my heart, and
open my lips, etc.

A Psalm.
HOW long will thou forget me? O Lord, for ever? how long will thou hide thy
Face from me?

How long shall I seek counsel in my soul, and be so vexed in my heart? how
long shall mine enemies triumph over me?

Consider and hear me, O Lord my God; lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in
death.

For why? my trust is in thy mercy, and my heart is joyful in thy salvation.

Therefore will I sing of the Lord, because he has dealt so lovingly with me;
yea, I will praise the Name of the Lord most Highest.

I will thank the Lord for giving me warning, my reins also chasten me in the
Night season.

I have set God always before me, for he is on my right hand, therefore I shall
not fall.

Wherefore my heart was glad, and my Glory rejoiced, my flesh also shall rest
in hope.

For why, thou shall not leave my soul in Hell, neither shall thou suffer thine
holy One to see corruption.

Thou shall show me the paths of life; in thy presence is the fullness of joy,
and at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore.

O hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

So shall he hear me out of his holy Temple, and my complaint shall come before
him, it shall enter even into his ears.

He shall send down from the height to fetch me, and shall take me out of many
waters.

Thou shall also light my candle; the Lord my God shall make my darkness to be
light.

The Lord lives, and blessed be my strong helper, and blessed be the God of my
Salvation.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
A Confession to God.
O Lord my God, and everlasting Father, I do acknowledge and confess before thy
High and Glorious Majesty, that I was bred and born in sin and corruption: and
that since my birth I have not ceased, nor do cease, daily to transgress thy
holy commandments, in respect whereof I cannot escape ruin and destruction,
according to thy rightful justice: yet notwithstanding, forasmuch as I am
sorry, that I have offended thee my Lord and God, and do condemn both my self
and my sin, receive me to mercy; and as it has pleased thee to love us, even
when we were thine enemies, and for assurance thereof, to give unto us thine
only and well-beloved Son, to be a Mediator and Advocate between thee and us,
promising us to obtain whatsoever we shall ask of thee in his Name; vouchsafe,
O most loving God, and dear Father, to pardon and forgive me in his Name, and
for his sake, and not only to cleanse my heart from all vanity and uncleanness,
but also to govern and guide me by thy holy Spirit, in all my ways, that I may
live according to thy holy and heavenly Will, all the days of my life, to the
glory of thy Name, through the same thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ, to whom
with thee and the Holy Ghost, be praise and glory for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer against the temptations and malice of Satan.
O Heavenly Father, and eternal God, unto thee do we cry: Protect and
strengthen us, O Lord, against the temptations of Satan, which is the sworn and
extreme enemy to our Salvation, a slanderer and our accuser, who rages and
rangeth in a deadly hatred against thy Flock, and by all means seeks the
destruction of all mankind, diverse and sundry ways laying snares to entrap us
and our Souls, preying for any occasion whereby he may allure us unto shameful
offending: for as many corporal affections as be in man, so many occasions does
he take to tempt us, and thereby to wound us: He lays snares to take us in
wealth, in poverty, in pleasure, and in the inticements of the flesh, in
anguish of mind, in ambition and desire of glory, in the wearisomness of our
calling and inferior condition, in cares both for the back and the belly, and
in lust of revenge, night and day: whether we sleep or wake, he is always about
to devour us, that our senses may be corrupted from the simplicity that we owe
unto Christ, even as the Serpent deceived Eve by his subtilty. Therefore, O
thou Son of God, which art the blessed seed, bruising the head of the Serpent,
bring and bruise this mine enemy (Satan) under thy feet: Thou my chief
Champion, which of thine own accord, enteredst into temptation, that so thou
might, as it were, hand to hand wrestle with this mine enemy, and purchase a
triumph for me by thy victory: hold him fast bound that he exercise not his
cruelty upon me as he desires, but make me partaker of thy victory: that even
as thou have in thy body overcome Satan, so utterly suppress him in me thy
unworthy servant: And I beseech thee, O Lord, to give unto me thy whole Armor,
that I may, like a right good Soldier, resist in the evil day, and vanquish
this my strong enemy: gird me with the truth; put upon me the breastplate of
Righteousness, and let me be shod and prepared for the Gospel of peace; and
above all things give me the shield of Faith, which can extinguish all the
fiery darts of wicked spirits; bestow upon me the Helmet of salvation, with the
sword of the Spirit, and the Word of God, that through thee I may encounter
valiantly, and gloriously attain the Victory: And Holy Spirit, Almighty GOD,
comfort thou and strengthen my mind against so diverse conflicts of Satan, which
beset me by many snares, and especially then most of all, when I seek
deliverance by other means than by thy word revealed: and grant, that leaving
thy Word delivered unto me, I look not after new revelations, or violent
ravishings, but may resist the Devil by thy word and power during my whole
life. O dear Father, to whom it is more easy to do all things, than for me to
think any good thing: Do thou but speak a word, and thy deadly sick servant (my
soul) shall be made whole: Help O Lord, for the great mercies sake, for thy
truth sake, and for thy dear Son Jesus Christ's sake, and let thy strength
suffice against my weakness and thy holy Spirit against my sinful Flesh and old
man: Thou art faithful, O Father, who have promised that I shall not be tempted
further than thou will make me a*ble to bear: Give now therefore thy grace and
strength unto thy servant, that I man with a strong faith in thine infallible
Trut^ and promised mercy, vanquish and subd^^^ whatsoever rebelleth against thy
most blessed will: preserve and keep holy my soul and body, and let them not be
defiled, and made a dungeon of wicked Spirits, through delectation in sin.
Shall now alas, the Devil, the World, or the Flesh, pluck from thee, that thing
that presently cries to thee with assured trust in thy promised help? Nay
Father, but grant that I may by thy mighty Power turn all their crafts,
deceits, and raging assaults unto the increase of my faith, and that by
experience of thy fatherly assistance, in this my present temptation, I may
with assured hope and trust in thy ready help and comfort, overcome my sad
enemies hereafter in like assaults, and praise thy holy Name for the Victory,
through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior, to whom be all power, praise, and
glory for ever, World without end.

Amen.
A Prayer for grace to do the will of GOD.
O Most bountiful Father, extend thy favor toward me, and let it be with me,
and labor with me, unto the end; and give me thy grace to wish and to covet
such things as may be grateful to thee, and acceptable in thy sight, let thy
will be mine, and let me always follow thine, and agree therewith: Grant that I
may like that which thou do, and never like or mislike any thing but that
which thou do like or mislike. Assist me, O Lord, to crucify my self to all
worldly things: set me free from wicked affections of the mind, and heal my
soul of all unbridled desires and sins, that being inwardly healed, and purged
thoroughly, I may be made fit to love, strong to suffer, and constantly to
continue: And above all things, grant that I may have rest and peace in Thee;
for thou art the true peace, thou art alone the quietness of mind, and without
thee all things are hard and troublesome; In this peace, that is in thee alone
which art the chiefest and everlasting felicity, I will repose my self both now
and for ever, and constantly persevere and continue in the same through Jesus
Christ my Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer not to distrust the mercy of God.
THY mercy, O Lord my God, endures for ever, and thy loving kindness toward
thy Children, is not able to be uttered; the truth of thy promise never fails
thine Elect: Thou have made calm the troubled waves of wavering thoughts which
overwhelm my soul, and brought me to the quiet Haven of thy merciful protection
and defense, and have delivered mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling,
and my heart from distrust: O Lord my God and loving Father, let this thy great
mercy and loving kindness showed upon me, never depart out of my mind and
heart, but that I may be thereof continually mindful all the days of my life?
And for these thy unseparable mercies toward me, grant good Lord, that I may
have a thankful heart to render due honor, praise, and thanksgiving unto thy
Majesty: acknowledging from the bottom of my heart thy wonderful works in me:
And that I may hereof be more assured, I beseech thee good Lord, that as thou
have begun to deliver me, so I may feel more and more daily thy good will and
mercy toward me, increase in me true understanding of thy heavenly Will, and
thy blessed Word: strengthen my faith in thy loving promises, that I may be
assured of thy protection, and mine election and salvation: Make me daily more
and more to love Thee, my dear Father and God, un^eignedly, for all thy
goodness showed unto me, to have my full delight and joy in thee, and walk
before thee in sincerity of heart, and godly conversation: that I may here on
earth glorify thy Name; and after this life with all thy faithful flock,
possess that everlasting inheritance, which thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord has
purchased; to whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory for
ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to be always bent to Heavenly things.
O I would to God, that that day might once Shine, in the which I might see my
Redeemer, and all these temporal days would end! for the days of this world are
few; short, full of evil and sorrow, where man is defiled with many sins,
oppressed with griefs and cares, disturbed with thoughts, wrapped in vanities,
compassed with errors, molested with temptation, drowned in sensuality, and
crucified with Poverty: O when shall there be an end of these manifold and
miserable labors? when shall I be delivered from the miserable bondage of
wickedness? when shall I only remember thee, O Lord? when shall I fully and
perfectly rejoice in thee? when shall I be out of all danger, and delivered
from all grief of Body and Soul, and come to true liberty? when shall I rest in
that quiet, secure, and undisturbed peace, where peace is both within and
without in all things? O Lord Jesus, when shall I see thee, and behold the
Glory of thy Kingdom, which thou have prepared for thine Elect from the
beginning? I do wish to be joined to Heavenly things, but temporal Pleasure,
and mortal passions, keep me back from them; In mind I would fain vanquish all
wickedness and vice, but yet I am constrained to be subject to the froward
flesh, and I unhappy wretch am at controversy with my self: for whilst my soul
aspireth upward, my flesh draws downward: O what passions do I inwardly
suffer! For when my soul begins to contemplate of Heavenly things, then
presently heaps o^ carnal thoughts withdraw me from Prayer. O my God do not
linger from me! depart not in anger from thy servant: Thunder forth thy
Lightening-bolt, and disperse my worldly thoughts abroad, and drive away all
the temptations of mine enemy: Turn my senses unto thee, O my dear Father, and
make me to forget all earthly things: Grant that I may cast of all sinful
thoughts and fantasies: O eternal verity succor me to the end that no vanity
do tempt or remove me from thee: O heavenly Father help me! for all vanity and
impureness melts before thy face, which live and raignest ever one God, in
Power and Glory world without end.

Amen.
An Evening Prayer.
O Eternal God, and merciful Father, hear my voice, and listen to my Prayers,
and forgive all my sins which this day I have done in the sight of thee, and be
not angry with thy servant for ever, but listen unto thine only begotten Son,
which makes intercession to thee for me; for his sake hear me, and have mercy
upon me: defend me this night (of thy merciful goodness) from unclean and
troublesome spirits, and from the snares and illusions of the Devil: preserve
me from all dangers, and save my Body and Soul from destruction: and grant that
this night, I may sleep quietly without grief or trouble, that in darkness I
may behold with the eyes of my heart, the light of thy countenance shineing
upon me; for in thee alone do I trust; Thou art my Lord and God, into thy hands
I commend my soul and body now and ever: Therefore O Lord, let thy unspeakable
mercy preserve me, thy endless sweetness rejoice me, thy heavenly truth
strengthen me, thy knowledge embrace me, and thy goodness keep me, now and
evermore.

Amen.
Prayers for Monday Morning.
O Lord my God and Heavenly Father, blessed be thy Name for ever: dispose my
heart, open my lips, and give me thy Holy Spirit, etc.

A Psalm.
HElp me, O God of my Salvation, for the glory of thy Name; O deliver me, and
be merciful unto my sin, for thy Names sake.

O remember not mine old sins, but have mercy upon me, and that soon: for I am
come to great misery.

My Soul has a desire and longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord, my
heart and my flesh rejoices in the Living God.

Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will be always praising thee.

Preserve thou my soul therefore O my God, and save thy servant that puts his
trust in thee.

O comfort the soul of thy servant, for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my
soul: For thou Lord art good and gracious, and of great mercy unto all them
that call upon thee.

And blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, and in whose heart are thy
ways.

O Lord I have cried day and night before thee, O let my Prayer enter into thy
presence: incline thine ear to my calling.

And be merciful unto me, O Lord, for I will call daily upon thee, for thou
do wondrous things, thou art God alone.

O turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy
servant, and help the son of thy handmaid.

Show some good token upon me for good, that they which hate me may see it, and
be ashamed, because thou Lord have helped me, and comforted me.

O satisfy me with thy mercy, and that soon, so shall I rejoice and be glad
all the days of my life.

Show thy servants thy work, and thy children thy Glory.

And the glorious Majesty of the Lord my God be upon me: prosper thou the work
of my hands upon me, O prosper thou my handy work.

A Morning Prayer.
O Almighty God, and merciful Father, which gave the children of Israel in
charge, to offer a daily Morning and Evening Sacrifice unto thee, that thereby
they may glorify and thank thee for the benefit of their protection both night
and day; receive of me, O Lord, the calves of my lips which I lay upon thine
Altar, being my morning Sacrifice of thanksgiving unto thee: I glorify thee, O
eternal God, for thou have broken the bands wherewith I was tied this night, by
reason of the midst of darkness, and have delivered me from the shadow of
death, by bringing me safe and sound to the beginning of this day: wherefore I
will praise thy Name, and magnify thee for ever. O Lord continue thy goodness
toward me this day, and grant that all my Prayers and works may both begin and
end in thee? vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep me this day without sin, and fill me in
this present hour with thy favor and Grace, that all this day and ever I may
rejoice and delight in thy Praises: Grant merciful God that descending into my
soul, I may reprehend and condemn mine own spots and vices within me: deliver
me, O Lord, from lying lips, and save me from a deceitful tongue: keep me, O
Lord, from the edge of the Sword, from sudden death, from the infectious
pestilence, from mortal sickness, and deadly vexation. O Almighty sanctifier,
both within and without, keep me this day from danger of blood-thirsty men
whose feet are swift to shed blood. For into thy hands this day and ever I
commend my spirit: and that I may watch upon thee my Maker both night and day,
beseeching thee to protect me in the day of my trouble, that the Enemy have no
advantage of me: and grant, O Lord, that if in thy justice for punishment of my
sin, or of thy gracious favor for trial of my Faith, and exercise of my
patience, thou suffer me to fall into any distress or danger: to give me I
beseech thee a contented mind, to yield to thy good pleasure, and assured hope
and belief, as all things are wrought to thy Glory, so they may work for the
best unto me as one that loves thee: Grant this, O most merciful Father; To
whom with thy Son, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, for ever and
ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for forgiveness of Sins.
O God, the God of my Salvation, I do here acknowledge my sins unto thee, and
mine iniquities I have not hid: Wherefore, O my God, turn thy face toward me,
and let thy loving mercy ever more and more extend unto me; for I am miserable,
sinful, and poor, and I come unto thee the fountain of all help. Forgive my
sins, wash me and I shall be whiter than snow: let me taste of thy old loving
kindnesses that have been ever of old, ready to forgive, and to embrace them
that turn from their evil ways, as appears by David, Peter, and many others,
who repenting of their sins, found favor: Wherefore have mercy upon me, O God,
have mercy upon me: and according to the multitude of thy compassions, do away
mine iniquities: O cleanse me from my secret sins, and cover my known sins with
the Righteousness of thy Son Jesus Christ: remove mine iniquities far away from
thee, and be not angry with thy servant for ever: O enter not into judgment
with thy servant; for if no flesh before thee be justified, what shall become
of me who have so highly offended; Lord my God, full of mercy and pity, I
appeal unto thee, I flee unto thee, I rest upon thee: leave thy displeasure
against me; and how weak soever and unable I am to stand in thy presence, yet
let thy spirit of strength hold me up, and say unto me, Fear not, for my Grace
is sufficient for thee. I take upon thy love, I rest upon thy favor in Christ,
reject me not, though there be no good in me: Pour down that absolute good
thing, even thy Grace, and let it direct to amendment of life. Thou have said,
that thou art wellpleased in Christ thy Son, in him be thou also pleased with
me, and receive me again into thy love, through his merits, by whom every
sinner receives free access unto thee: and although I for my part, most loving
Lord, am a vessel full of many faults and enormities; yet dear Father have
mercy upon me, and cast me not from thy presence, but rather endue me again
with a new Spirit, and a lively feeling of thy Will, and an ableness to do
hereafter, that I may fill up the residue of my days in sincerity, holiness,
and righteousness, and in the due service of thee; that from henceforth,
instead of straying from thee, I may dwell and be shrouded under the shadow of
thy wings: and that instead of sin which has miscarried me, I may embrace
Piety, Godliness, and true Zeal: and instead of ignorance, whereby I have so
long gone astray, I may take hold of thy saving truth, that it may be a
lanthorn unto my seet, and a light unto my paths, that I may rest safe in thee
through a lively faith that never decays: and here I wait for thy loving
kindness and mercy, O Lord, promised in Christ, in whom I am bold with deep
sighs of heart, to cry, and say, Lord forgive mine offenses, cover my sins, and
lay not my former evils to my charge: And for the better performance of this my
duty unto thee, from henceforth (good Lord) quench all the corrupt motions of
my mind, striving with thy divine pleasure; that being thus inwardly renewed in
my mind, and reformed in my conversation, I may serve thee with gladness,
through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior, to whom be all glory and honor for
ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for knowledge to do the will of God.
O Lord God and Heavenly Father, the God of all wisdom, and understanding, I
acknowledge, that by thy just sentence in that general corruption, which I have
drawn from Adams Ioins, I am deprived of all spiritual wisdom, and knowledge of
thee and thy will, and that there is nothing in man, but blockish and beastly
ignorance, such as springs from infidelity, and is most contrary to thy will:
There is none that understands, there is none that seeks God: O Lord have
mercy upon me, most miserable and vile wretch, and open mine eyes that I may
see the mysteries of thy profound and excellent truth; increase, O Lord, all
holy desires in me, to attain the knowledge of thy will; let my whole delight
be in it to meditate therein day and night, that it may be more precious unto
me than Gold and Silver, many times fined. Further, howsoever thy graces and
gifts, O Lord, are to be acknowledged in men; yet because thy good pleasure is
so, that all men should carry the scars of ignorance and infirmity: draw in my
whole delight, I beseech thee, and kindle all my affections, to the love of thy
Law and Testimonies, and to those Scriptures that were written and indicted by
thine own self, and thy spirit; for those, good Lord, contain thy whole will in
that everlasting Covenant that thou have stricken with thy Saints: This O Lord,
is that well spring of wisdom and grace that shall make us wise before thee,
howsoever the world condemn it of madness and folly: Teach thou me, O Lord, and
I shall be taught: open thou mine eyes that I may see the excellent things of
thy Law: reform my heart, that self-love and vainglory may be quite vanquished
and slain in me, that I may only set before mine eyes thy glory: O gracious
God, spoil this power of Satan in me, that by thy means thy good gifts of
knowledge and wisdom be not abused against thee, thy Gospel and Glory; that I
be not carried through emulation, spite, or envy of any man's credit, or gifts,
to set my self against thy truth; but give me true humility, that above all
things I may rejoice in the advancement and praise of thy Name, whether it be
with my honor or shame, with my peace or trouble, with good report or evil
report: I know, O Lord, that true wisdom is from thee alone, and that thou have
so ordained thy servants in so gracious a dispensation of thy gifts, that they
who have the greatest need of theirs that are the least; the greatest
Masterbuilders, of them that are but laborers, and basket-bearers in thy
Church: The unity of thy Spirit, and the bond of Peace, knit us fast together,
and hold us in to reverence each other, and to be at one in thy work: O knit
our hearts together, that we may all seek thee to thy eternal Praise; to whom
only belongs Renown, Glory and Honor, for ever, etc.

A fruitful Prayer to God.
ALmighty and Eternal God, my Creator and lover, I praise, adore, and bless
Thee; for that in my offenses and ungratefulness, thou have so mencifully and
leisurably forborne and suffered me to live even to this hour, whereunto thou by
thy benefits have brought me, giving anto me thy wretched servant, life and
necessaries thereunto belonging, appointing Angels to be my keepers. O my good
God, who knows whether till evening my life shall be prolonged, or what death
is appointed for me: O merciful God and Heavenly Father, grant that I may with
hearty repentance truly repent my sins, and inwardly bewail that ever I
offended thy Godly Majesty: suffer not my soul to depart this body, before it
be (through thy mercy) perfectly reconciled unto thee by grace, and bedecked
with thy merits and virtues: O merciful Savior, if these things I desire,
stand with thy Pleasure and Will, grant them I beseech thee, although I be not
worthy to be heard: And in thy mercy, grant that by the merits of thy passion,
I may be purged from all my sins; and that at the hour of my death, I may be
stricken with true and vehement contrition, and being knit with thee in perfect
charity, I may immediately fleet unto thee my sweet Redeemer, safely from all
damnation, desiring this one thing at thy hands, that thou will remember my
fragility, unworthiness, unstableness, and miseries, together with thine own
goodness and most charitable mercy, praying thee never to forsake me, or leave
me, but that thou will always possess and govern me, according to thy will; to
whom be all glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to be restored to Gods Favor.
O Almighty and everlasting God, and Father, which have made Heaven and Earth,
and all things therein contained! O incomprehensible unity! O always to be
worshipped most blessed Trinity! I humbly beseech thee, and pray thee, by the
assumption and crucified humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou would
drive from me all kind of wickedness and sin, creating in me a clean heart, and
a right spirit: O Lord Jesus, I beseech thy goodness, for the exceeding great
love which drew thee out of thy fathers bosom, in the womb of thy holy Virgin,
and for the assumption of man's nature, wherein it pleased thee to save me, and
to deliver me from eternal death; That thou would draw me out of my self unto
thee my Lord God: And grant that this my love may recover again to me, thy
grace to increase and make perfect in me that which is wanting, to raise up in
me that is fallen, to restore to me that which I have lost, and to quicken in
me that which is dead and should live: That so I may become conformable unto
thee in all my life and conversation, Thou dwelling in me, and I in thee, my
heart being suppled with thy grace, and settled in thy Faith for ever: O my
God, loose and set at liberty my Spirit from all inferior things; govern my
Soul, and so work, that both in soul and body I may be holy, and live to thy
Glory, world without end.

Amen.
A Prayer to Christ to rest in his Love.
O My most loving Savior, I have chosen thee, I wish and look for thee, I run
to meet thee, and I do renounce all things that are not of thee; whatsoever
thou will I will, and whatsoever thou will not, I forsake and utterly detest in
my heart: and whatsoever shall hereafter happen unto me contrary to this
present choice of my mind, not to impute the same unto me, but according to
this choice of my soul judge me. For all things which I ought not to do, I
utterly forsake them; and if at any time hereafter, I shall chance by any
sinister occasion, to agree to any thing that may be a cause to withdraw thy
mercy from me, I do now at this present hour utterly detest them: And here, O
my sweet Savior and Redeemer, if it please thee, or stand with thy Glory,
grant I beseeeh thee in this my present life, that I may be delivered and
preserved from all offenses wherein I have offended, and from all the pains
whereunto deservedly I ought to come after my death; and that thou will with
the hands of thy mercy immediately after this life receive my soul into
everlasting joy and felicity, there to reign with thee for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to God to grant our Petitions.
O Christ, which art the strength of the weak, and the salvation of all
believers, and an aider of the oppressed, yea, our life and safeguard in the
peril of death, I beseech thee, that pitying mine Afflictions, thou will
vouchsafe to grant me my petitions, which at this time I have asked at thy
hands; so shall I serve thee here in the Kingdom of Grace, and hereafter in thy
Kingdom of Glory, where I beseech thee, O Lord, that I may have a place to
dwell with thee eternally, which live with God the Father, and the Holy Ghost
everlastingly; to whom be praise and Glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
Prayers for Monday Night.
O Lord my God and Father, blessed be thy Name for ever: dispose my heart, and
open my lips, etc.

A Psalm.
MY Song shall be of mercy and judgment: Unto thee O Lord, will I sing. O let
me have understanding in the way of Godliness.

When will thou come unto me? I will walk in my house with a perfect heart.

I will take no wicked thing in hand; I hate the sins of unfaithfulness, there
shall no such cleave unto me.

Hear my Prayer, O Lord, and let my crying come unto thee.

Hide not thy face from me in the time of my trouble, incline thine Ears unto
me! when I call, O hear me, and that right soon.

My days are gone like a shadow, and I am withered like grass.

But thou, O Lord, endurest for ever, and thy remembrance throughout all
Generations.

And I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of mine age: As for thy
years, they endure throughout all Generations.

Praise the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his Holy Name.

Praise the Lord O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits.

Which forgiveth all thy sin, and heals all thine infirmity.

Which saves thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and
loving kindness.

He will not always be chiding, neither keeps he his anger for ever.

For look how high the Heaven is in comparison of the earth, so great is his
mercy also toward them that fear him. Glory be to the Father, etc.

Confession to God the Father.
O Lord Almighty, the God of our Father, and Lord of Mercy, which have made
Heaven and Earth, with all their Ornaments, which have bound the Sea by the
word of thy Commandment, which have shut up the deep, and sealed it by thy
terrible and Glorious Name, whom all do ^ear and tremble before thy Power, for
the Majesty of thy Glory cannot be born, and thy angry threatenings toward
sinners is ^mportable; but thy merciful promises are unmeasurable, and
unsearchable, for Thou art the Lord God most High above all the Earth, long
suffering and most merciful, and sorry for the malice of men; and thou, O Lord,
according to thy great Goodness, and of thine infinite Mercies, have appointed
repentance unto sinners, that they might be saved. Therefore thou, O Lord, that
art the God of the just, have not appointed repentance to those which stand to
justify themselves in thy sight; but thou have appointed repentance unto me
that am a sinner; for I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned above the number of
the sands of the Sea: my transgressions, O Lord, my transgressions are
multiplied, and are exceeding many, so as I am not worthy to behold, or lift up
mine eyes unto the Heavens, for the multitude of my unrighteousness. I have
provoked thine anger, O Lord, and done evil before thee, in committing
abominations, and multiplying of offenses: Now therefore I bow the knees of my
heart, beseeching thee for Grace: I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned, and I
acknowledge my wickedness, desiring thee by Prayer to forgive me: O Lord
forgive me, and destroy me not with mine iniquities, neither do thou always
remember mine evils to punish them, but save me that am unworthy, according to
thy great mercies: And I most humbly beseech thee, O Lord, not to suffer my
soul to perish, which Thou have bought so dearly with thy most precious Blood,
and make me poor in Spirit and low of Heart, submitting me wholly into thy
hands: so as my desire and my delight may be always to thy will and pleasure,
which is always good and godly: and grant my poor soul rest in thee; for thou
have said, They shall never be confounded that put their trust in thee: which
trust, good Lord, grant me never to forsake for any vain trust, temptation or
tribulation that may happen to vex my soul; but grant me thy holy Spirit to
comfort and defend me from all things that should procure thy displeasure: Thou
that art in Trinity one God and Lord over all, give ear to my Prayer, and
pardon all my sins, so shall I praise thee for ever and ever all the days of my
life, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior, to whom be glory for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to Jesus Christ.
O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy upon me, and forgive the great offenses
which I have done in the sight of thee this day: and give me grace, O Lord, for
the love of thee, to despise sin and worldly vanity. O Jesus help me to
overcome the temptations of sin, and the ma^ice of my spiritual enemy, and
strengthen my soul and body to exercise the works of virtue, whereby I may come
to thy everlasting joy and felicity.

Grant me a ^ast purpose, O merciful Jesus, to amend my life, and to remove the
sins of my youth far from me; Jesus lighten me with Ghostly Wisdom for to know
thy goodness, and those things which are most acceptable unto thee; and give me
grace to give good and profitable example, that none may be hurt by me; make me
to proceed from virtue to virtue, until I be grown a perfect man in thee. Let
me not return to those sins which by my confession have accused me, and with
sorrow have oppressed me, The horrible sentence of endless death, the terrible
judgment of damnation, thy wrath, ire, and indignation, merciful Lord, let
never fall upon me: Jesus give me grace to fly evil company; and when I come
among them, I beseech thee to preserve me, that no occasion of sin overcome me:
keep my mouth, O Lord, from slanderous speaking, lying, false witness bearing,
cursing, swearing, uncharitable chiding, dissolute laughing, and words of
vanity. O sweet Jesus make me perseverant in the blessed service of Thee, in
holy Exercises, and virtuous Meditations: Lord keep my Soul and Body, and make
me to slay all sinful delectation, and patiently to suffer injuries and
rebukes, in following thine own most Holy and blessed Example. Provide, good
Lord, that life for me which thou know most for thine honor, and my
comfortable stay in thee; Jesus grant me, specially in the time of Prayer, to
fix my mind on thee, and thou to remember my wretchedness. The blood that ran
from thy blessed heart, wash my soul from all sin and iniquity, and purchase to
me thy grace, faithfaithfully to serve thee, O my Lord God, my might, my life,
my light, lead me and feed me in this mortality, and at the hour of death, when
I shall be accused before thee, have mercy upon me, break my froward heart, and
make it obedient unto thee. From sudden and unprovided death, good Lord,
deliver me; by the virtue of thy most excellent and glorious Divinity; by the
virtue of thine incarnation, and by the merits of thy passion and resurrection,
grant me these supplications which I have made to thee: And by thy own and only
mediation, purchase for me a gracious life, and a blessed ending; and after my
bodily death, give me everlasting life with endless bliss, that I may reign
with thee for ever and ever, in the world to come.

Amen.
A Prayer for the attaining of a free and quiet mind.
O Most gracious and merciful God, keep me, I beseech thee, from the cares of
^his world, that I be never too much in^angled therein, by reason of the
manifold things which this body needs: nor taken with the vain delight of
that which does hurt the soul; nor finally broken and overthrown with sorrow: I
say not from those things which the vain world does greedily hunt after, but
from those miseries which suppress the mind of thy servant, by a common and
penal course of mortality, and so withdraw me that I cannot enter into by the
freedom of thy Spirit: O my God, which art sweetness unspeakable, make all
fleshly joy, which withdraws me from the love of eternal things, to be
grievous and odious unto me: Let not flesh and blood, O my God, let not flesh
and blood overcome me: Let not the World, and the vain glory thereof, deceive
me; nor Satan with his subtilty supplant me: Give me strength to resist,
patience to endure, and constancy to persevere unto the end. Grant me for the
comfort of thy Word, the most comfortable Ointment of the Holy Ghost: And for
the lust of the flesh, pour on me the love of thy Name. The very meat, drink,
and apparel, with other things necessary for the nourishment of the body, are
even burdensome to a fervent spirit: But grant, O Lord, that I may use those
things moderately, and never be snared with an over-greedy desire of them: All
things are now to be rejected, for their nature would decay: Again, to covet
superfluous and every pleasing thing, thy sacred Commandments do forbid; for
the flesh would insult over the spirit: Wherefore between those things let thy
hand direct me, O Lord, and teach me to do nothing out of measure. Grant this,
O most merciful Father, to whom with the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor
and Glory.

Amen.
A Prayer for Hope.
O Eternal Father, the author and giver of all Hope and Comfort, I beseech thee
to fill me with all joy and peace, in believing, that I may abound in hope,
through the Power of the Holy Ghost; and above hope, in hope believing, ^ay
never doubt of thy Promises, but in sure confidence of heart, apply to my self
^he remission of my sins, and believe veri^y that I please thee in Jesus
Christ, and ^oking in a certain and strong hope, for ^e salvation of my soul in
the life to ^^me. And albeit, the helps and happi^ess of this present world
appear not un^ me; yet I beseech thee, O Lord, let me ^^^^tain a steadfast hope
among all the ter^rs of conscience, and never suffer the same to be taken away
from me by any snare of Satan. O thou only begotten Son of God, which have
loved me, and given me everlasting comfort in hope through grace: Comfort my
heart, and establish my heart in every word and good work; that I stick not
uncertain, neither be tossed between hope and fear; but may hold fast the
confidence and rejoicing of hope unto the end: And assist me, O my God, and
Father, I beseeh thee, that in all the ways of temptation and troubles in this
world, I may patiently depend on thee, looking for corporal deliverance,
according to thy will: And though the same come not as I wish, but be kept from
me for a season, yet let me never doubt of thine aid and deliverance, but hope
that coming it will come: And I beseech thee* O Lord, to grant me thy grace;
that having this hope, I may purge my self from all offensive things to thee,
and serve thee my loving God, through Jesus Christ m^ Lord and Savior, for
ever.

Amen.
A Prayer against the Power of Satan.
O Lord my GOD, how do we daily pass the limits of thy will? We sin at least
seven times a day, and pledge Mother Eva in the dregs of nature: This is the
frailty of the flesh, and this is the weakness of all Adam's issue: A miserable
case, O Lord, unless in thy mercy thou will wrap us, and cover us with the
white raiment of thy Grace; that we being thine may never despair for any brunt
of storm^ng Satan, be it never so perilous. O lord, save me, in thy mercy
behold me, ^ave pity and compassion upon me, and ^ark not my steps that are
crooked; but ^ast the eye of thy favor upon thy Son Christ, who was content to
suffer the ^leeding pains of the Cross, to satisfy thy ^rath, and to deliver
us from the sting of ^hellish conscience: Wherefore I beseech ^ee, O Lord, and
most dear Savior, not (...) observe mine iniquities; but to wash ^e from the
guiltiness of sin, in the ^^ood (...) thy mercies, and so to save me, that
^^ing dead in iniquity, and yet saved (...) thine infinite pity, I may give
(...) glory unto thee, and sing with Our ^other, the Church, that Salvation
belongs unto thee (O Lord) to whom be praise and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for the desire of a Godly Life.
O My Lord God, how happy were I, if I might never hereafter in thought, word,
or deed, commit the thing that should displease thy Divine Majesty. That life
is the longing of my soul, and the substance of my wish, and the effect of my
desire; my heart coveteth to see that blessed time, and my joys then should be
such as no mortal man can tell. Truly, Lord, to know thee, with the Son and the
Holy Ghost, is the true perfection of eternal life, the end of all blessedness,
and the sum of all delights. No eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has it
pressed into the depth of any man's understanding, to value the inestimable
charity, delectation, and pleasure, of the same felicity; when we shall behold
the Majesty of God face to face.

And verily most glorious God, I have reposed this hope in my heart, and do
assure my self, through faith in thee, that these eyes wherewith I read these
lines shall see that Glory, and this flesh wherewith I am clothed in
corruption, and nou^led in mortality, shall be a member of that immortal
Kingdom: Unto the which, Lord, at thy appointed pleasure bring me; to whom,
with the Son and the Holy Ghost, be all Power and Glory, for ever and for ever.

Amen.
An Evening Prayer.
O Omnipotent and eternal God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three in Persons
and one in Substance, and from everlasting: I extol thy sacred Majesty, I
praise thy unspeakable Mercy, thy Divine Truth I magnify; for that of thy
fatherly goodness, thou have graciously heard me at this time, giving me a
penitent heart, modesty to utter the same: Therefore will I praise thee for
this, and all other thy goodness this evening; and going to rest, I will give
thee thanks, because thou have kept me this day of thine only Mercy, without
any merit of mine, from all danger both in soul and body. O Christ and King of
Glory, I beseech thee bless and defend me this night; let my rest be in thee,
and grant me thy grace, that neither much sleep overwhelm me, nor Satan invade
me, nor the flesh betray me unto him. Let mine eyes sleep, but let my heart
wake: O Lord lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death, lest the subtle
tempter overtake me, and I sleep a continual and perpetual sleep, and awake no
more: For thou art my everlasting helper. Keep me as the apple of thine eye,
hide me under the shadow of thy sacred wings (O LORD) that neither ugly
visions, nor horrible dreams, nor sights, nor monstrous apparitions trouble me
in the dark. In thy name, O JESUS, will I go to rest this night; give sleep
unto mine eyes, and slumber to mine eyelids; compass me about, and raise me
again to the joyful sight of tomorrow light; and after this my miserable life,
bring me to the beholding of eternal happiness, that in thy light I may see
light, and evermore praise thee for ever.

Amen.
Prayers for Tuesday Morning.
O Lord my God and heavenly Father, blessed be thy Name for ever: Dispose my
heart, open my lips, and give me thy holy Spirit, etc.

A Psalm.
O God, my heart is ready, my heart is ready; O Lord, I will sing and give
praise with the best member I have.

I will sing and give thanks unto thee, Lord, among the People, and I will sing
Praises unto thee among the Nations.

For thy Mercies are greater than the Heavens, and thy truth reaches unto the
Clouds.

Set up thy self therefore, O GOD, above the Heavens, and thy Glory above all
the Earth.

That thy beloved may be delivered: Let thy right hand save me, and hear thou
me.

O help me against mine enemy, for vain is the help of man.

Through God I shall do great acts, and it is he that shall tread down mine
enemies.

And deal thou with me, O Lord God, according to thy Name, for sweet is thy
mercy.

Then will I give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart secretly among
the Faithful, and in the Congregation.

The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein.

His work is worthy to be praised and had in honor, and his righteousness
endures for ever.

The merciful and gracious Lord has so done his mavelous works, that they
ought to be had in remembrance.

The works of his hands are verity and judgment, all his Commandments are true.

He sent Redemption unto his people, he has commanded his Covenant for ever:
holy and reverent is his Name.

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, a good understanding have all
they that do thereafter, the praise of it endures for ever. Glory be to, etc.

A Morning Prayer.
BLessed be my Lord God which does wondrous things; and blessed be the Name of
his Majesty for evermore: which has set the Sun to lighten the day, and
ordained the Moon and the Stars to govern the night. O most high God, which by
thy unspeakable wisdom have distinguished the day from the night; and have so
decreed, that while the World shall last, this course of times and days shall
never have end, so that man in the night may rest, and in the day labor until
the evening: for these and all other thy benefits I praise thy Name, and give
thanks unto thee for thy great Glory. O God, the guider of my life, forsake me
not; turn from me the filthin^ss of desire; remove from my heart all
concupiscence, and take from thy servant too over-bold a stomach: suffer me not
to run beadlong into riotousness; let not unlawful love overcome me, and give
not thy servant over into an impudent mind. Turn mine eyes that they behold no
vanity; strengthen me in thy way, and grant that mine offenses in this World
overcome me not: And I beseech thee, O Lord, with a most a^dent affection, that
this day and ever thou will keep me and all mine; and that thou will be unto me
a mighty Protector, firmament of strength, a covering against heat, a shadow at
Noontide, a defense from falling, an assister from offending, a comforter of my
Soul, a lightner of my mind, a giver of health and happiness in Christ JESUS my
Lord and Savior; to whom be all glory, honor and power, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Confession to GOD.
O LORD, I am unworthy thy Comfort, or any spiritual consolation, by reason of
my sins! that which I deserve is punishment, because I have so often offended
thee, and in so many things so grievously sinned; And yet, O gracious and
merciful GOD, who wilt not that thy works should perish, to declare the
richness of thy goodness upon the vessels of thy mercy, far beyond the manner
of men. But what have I done, O Lord, that thou should impart upon me any
spiritual comfort at all? truly I have done no good, but always have been prone
unto sin, and slow to repent: and this is so true, if I should deny it, that
thou will find me guilty, and no man durst stand up to excuse me; and
therefore, O most dear Father, I do confess that I am worthy all reproach and
contempt, and most unworthy to live among thy Sons and Servants: yea, and
because it is true, I will yet confess against my wickedness, that so the
sooner I may obtain mercy at thy hands. But what shall I (wretch that I am)
say, being full of all manner of shame and infamy? What shall I say? Nothing
but this; I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned, take mercy upon me, forgive me,
suffer me yet a while to bewail my wretchedness before I pass over into the
Land of promise, covered with the shadow of death; for what do thou else of a
guilty and miserable man require, but that he afflict and humble himself for
his sins; from a true repentance and humbling of the mind arises hope of
Pardon, the troubled conscience is relieved, the favor of God, which was lost,
is recovered, and man is preserved from the vengeance to come; and with a holy
kiss, both God and the sorrowful soul do meet together: With the which work of
true repentance endue me, Good Lord, that I may do thy sacred Will in this
life, and in the end enjoy everlasting happiness in the World to come; through
Jesus Christ my Savior, to whom be all glory power and might, for ever and
ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for true Repentance to be purged of sin.
O Lord my God, what do I daily, but wander in the field of vanity? what is my
heart but a filthy prison of corrupt thoughts? What is my mouth, but a stinking
chanel of vain words? what are my feet, but chariots to bloodshed? what are my
hands but battlers with charity? what is my head, but a castle of wicked
devices? and what is my life, but a fardel of iniquity? I am nothing better
than a dead tree, the root is perished, the bough withered, being good for
nothing but for the fury of the flame? what then, good Lord, shall it be so?
what, shall I burn, sweet Jesus! O save me for thy Names sake, and quicken ^me,
create a new heart within me, that I may bring forth much fruit, and for ever
flourish, like a Tree planted by a river side. O pour the Oil of Grace into my
defiled heart, and season it with the salt of thy mercy, lest the fume of mine
iniquities ascend up to thy nostrils, and provoke thy fury against me. Pour
down some drops of thy precious blood from the clouds of thy Mercy, to quench
out the angry flame of sin, which of my self I am not able to put out by the
virtuous water of any merit: O Lamb of God, let me eat thy flesh and drink thy
blood, that I may live by thee, and cloth me in the wool of thy mercy, that
no winter or storm of sin do pinch my silly soul. Thou, O God, art full of
compassion and long-suffering, which continuest thy mercy for thousands, taking
away iniquities, sins, and offenses. Thou call us after thy wonted mercy, by
thy Word, to repentance and hearty conversion; for unto all and every one is
repentance and forgiveness of sins preached in thy Name; therefore unto thee, O
most merciful Father, do I cry, desiring thee to look back upon me thy unworthy
servant, with the eyes of pity, even as thou looked'st back upon the sinful
woman in the banquet: likewise favor thou me, O Lord, as thou did the
Publican, who standing afar off, smote his breast, and said, Lord be merciful
unto me a sinner: And grant, O Lord, that among the fears and terrors of
conscience, I may take hold of thee by a lively Faith, and never in the sight
of conscience do yield my self, and despair; but upholden by the voice of the
Gospel, I may flee unto thee my Redeemer, and have by faith, peace with God.
And thou my Savior which have suffered for me in the flesh, give me grace,
that likewise in the same mind I may be armed for the mortifying of my flesh;
that henceforth I may live not after the lusts of men, but after the will of
God, and keep the Devil under (O LORD) that he compel not my troubled
conscience to despair, either by heaping or ripping up mine offenses, or
extenuating thy mercy; and grant that I may come unto thee by hearing thy word,
unto Repentance, that thereby the Angels in Heaven may continually have
occasion to rejoice before thee, which live and reignest ever one God, world
without end.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Aid of GOD's Holy Spirit.
O Dear Father, forasmuch as every man living is of himself before thee but as
a beast, neither knowing thee, nor the things concerning their duties unto
thee; I as one of the most perverse, filthy and corrupt, do here humble my self
before thee, begging at thy hands, that thou have promised to give unto as many
as ask it of thee, thy holy Spirit, that heavenly Comforter, which reveals
thee and thy will to the simple and ignorant, which also stireth up the minds
and inward affections of thy children to call upon thee, by preparing their
hearts, and opening their mouths to celebrate thy Name; bestow it, good Father,
bestow it upon me, thy unworthy servant, and upon all thy children; and grant
that although all of us are of corrupt affections, and polluted lips, yet we
may be sprinkled with that Heavenly Hyssop, that we may have our hearts
cleansed of the corrupt affections of this World; and the eyes of our
understanding opened, that we may see the good things we should ask; and our
feet that are fettered with the cares of vain things, may be set at liberty,
that we may walk the right way unto the Kingdom of Heaven; and that the hands
of our souls may apprehend and take hold of the Righteousness of thy Son Jesus
Christ; and that by the aid of the same Spirit, we may cast off all
impediments, letts, and encumbrances that detain us from coming unto thee.
Sanctify me within and without; wash me and I shall be whiter than Snow; let
thy truth and thy spirit meet together in my soul, that my prayers may enter
into thy presence, and that thine ears may incline unto my humble petition, so
shall I declare thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy truth in the night
season. Thou know whereof we be made, thou forgettest not that we are but
dust, and unprofitable children; not fit, apt, nor able of our selves to pray
unto thee, and praise thy Name: therefore, good Lord, allure me unto thee, to
seek thee; and grant that with my whole heart and mind, I may always rejoice
and be comforted by thee, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to acknowledge God in his Works.
O Most mighty and eternal God, thou by the creation of the world and all that
therein is, have sufficiently declared thy self to be the everlasting and
Almighty God, for that these things do far pass the reach of man's wisdom: and
not herein only have thou declared thy self to be God; but in that also that
thou do continually guide and govern the same and all things of thee created:
Seeing therefore, O most merciful Father, that we have both in our selves, and
also in thy creatures so manifest Testimonies that thou only, O Lord, art that
eternal and loving God, which do reign in all thy creatures, guiding and
governing them by thy Heavenly Providence; Grant I do beseech thee, that my
heart may be hereof fully assured, to acknowledge thee not only to be God
eternal, who have created all things; but also that I may in heart be fully
persuaded that thou, O Lord, do govern all things according to thy most
blessed will; so that nothing can be done in the whole world without thine
appointment, and that thou have such a singular care over thine Elect; so that
not so much as an hair of their heads shall fall without thy Providence: Grant
therefore, O Lord, I beseech thee, that I may hereof be fully assured in my
Heart and Soul, and that I may in all my doings set thee before mine eyes,
acknowledging thee to be my only Lord and Father; and by the working of thy
holy Spirit in me, I may be confirmed in Faith, comforted in Soul, and lightened
in Understanding; that always here on Earth I may glorify thy holy Name, and
after the dissolution of this my mortal body, I may attain thy everlasting joy
with thy Elect, in thy glorious Kingdom, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A very fruitful Prayer to GOD.
WE are all Publicans, O LORD, open the ears of thy favor unto our cry, and
have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us; we sin daily, but yet save us, of pity
save us; O show thy compassion upon me, and let me not dye a Judas death, let
me never tune the doleful song of Cain; but ingrave in my heart a full and
lively faith in thee; that never doubting of thy bounteous mercy, I may with a
free conscience set Satan at defiance, and all his hellish band; O merciful
Lord, hear this my cry, and defend me with thy Grace against the power of
Satan, who roareth of cruelty, and lurketh in every corner of malicious
subtilty to tear me with the claws of his fury and merciless envy: Defend me
with faith against him. O Lord, lay the plaster of comfort to my wounded
conscience, and cover me with the wings of thy favor, that I may live and die
in thee; and so be blessed for ever; to whom, O Father, with thy dear Son, and
the Holy Ghost, be all power for ever.

A Prayer to Jesus Christ.
O My Lord God, and sweet Savior Jesus Christ, grant unto me most frail
sinner, and miserable wretch, thy grace and mercy; and that I may ever have
present before the eyes of my soul, thy most holy life and behavior; and that
for my possibility and power, I may in living and manners follow the same: And
grant me, good Lord, to profit, grow, and increase therein, to such perfections
as may be acceptable unto thee, for the salvation of my soul: lighten, Lord,
and make clear and bright my heart with the glorious light of thy Grace, that
it may ever go before me, and follow me in all my acts, so that by thy conduct
and guiding, I may accomplish and fulfill all that may please thy goodness, and
utterly eschew and avoid the contrary; and vouchsafe, sweet Savior, so to
order and direct all my cogitations and thoughts, all my speech and words, all
my acts and deeds, in thy Law and Commandments, and in thy Monitions and
Counsel; and so take me (good Lord) unto thee, that here in all things doing
thy will, I may by grace become one of thy saved souls, to live with thee, my
Redeemer, for ever.

Amen.
Prayers for Tuesday Night.
O Lord my God and Father, blessed be thy Name for ever. Dispose my heart, and
open my lips, etc.

A Psalm.
MY GOD, my GOD, look upon me; Why have thou forsaken me, and art so far from
my health, and from the words of my complaint?

O My GOD, I cry unto thee in the day time, but thou hear not; and in the
night-season also I take no rest.

And yet thou continuest holy, O Thou Worship of Israel.

Wherefore unto thee, O LORD, will I lift up my soul, my GOD, I have put my
trust in thee: O let me not be confounded, neither let mine enemies triumph
over me.

O remember not the sins and offenses of my Youth, but according to thy mercy,
think thou on me.

Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse me from my secret faults.

Keep thy servant also from presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion over
me, so shall I be undesiled and innocent from the great offense.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart be always
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my Strength and my Redeemer.

For thy Name sake, O Lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

Look upon mine adversity and misery, and forgive me all my sins.

Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry unto thee, have mercy upon me, and
hear me.

O hide not thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure.

Thou have been my succor, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
Salvation.

I should utterly have fainted, but that I believe verily to see the goodness
of the Lord in the Land of the Living.

Therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without ceasing, O my God,
and I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

Glory, etc.
A Prayer for the remission of sins.
O Most loving and bountiful Father, forasmuch as it is most meet, right, just,
and requisite, that all flesh should praise, magnify, and worship thee, and
should without ceasing give thanks unto thee, who only art the Creator and
Maker of all things, who of thine own mercy and goodness, did send down thine
only begotten Son, to take our nature upon him, and to suffer death for our
sins, thereby to make a recompense for the offenses which Man had committed
against thee: And all this thou did of thine exceeding bounty and kindness,
without any desert of Mankind, not being so much as by any one Prayer, or yet
treaty thereunto incited: I being therefore, O dear Father, imboldened with
such an inestimable benefit, so freely given and bestowed, do without any fear
at this time appear before thy Divine Majesty, prostrating my self before the
seat of thy Mercy, and with all humbleness of heart and mind do make this my
Prayer unto thee: despise me not O Lord, being defiled with sin and iniquity;
be ^merciful unto me a sinner, lighten the evil-sighted eyes of my mind, open
the stopped stopped ears of my heart, that I may both see and hear, and
understand that which thou teach, and do always that thou command; and
that I be not only a hearer of thy Word; but a practiser of the same in my life
and conversation; Save and defend me from all shame and reproach; be thou my
shield and buckler against all temptations; cleanse my mind and thoughts from
all uncleanness; keep and preserve me from all danger both in body and soul,
and guide me with thy grace, so to spend this my small, short, and transitory
time in this world, that I may be a member of Christ, and partaker of thy
eternal felicity: to the which, seeing that by mine own weakness I shall never
be able to aspire, I do here, O Lord, take hold of that promise of thine, where
thou have said; Come unto me all ye that labor, and I will refresh you: this
is my hold-fast, this is my anchor and sure stay, for verily, sweet Savior,
when I look upon mine own frailness, and behold how ready I am to offend, then
I quake for fear; but as soon as I call to mind thy great love and Kindness,
and thou will not the death of a sinner; and that in what day soever he does
heartily repent and call unto thee, then thou will hear him; then I am
relieved, then I am not a little comforted, knowing surely that Thou will
perform that which thou have promised: in faithful assurance whereof, I now say
unto thee, Turn thou me, O my GOD, and I shall be turned: be favorable unto
me, O Lord, be favorable unto me thy servant, and heal my soul which is
wounded with sin, for I do acknowledge mine iniquity, and am heartily sorry for
mine offenses, through which I have either in word or deed, thought, or any
other kind of way offended thee; blot them out of thy remembrance, and let the
Blood of that immaculate Lamb, JESUS Christ, wash them away: let mine old
offenses decay and die in me, that I never commit them any more, or by any
means renew them in thy sight; and in the mean time do not withdraw thy grace
from me, but cause me to do all that good is. O Father remove thy wrath away
from me, and restore me to thy favor; turn thou thy loving countenance unto
me, and plentifully pour forth thy mercy upon me; Guide thou my footsteps in
thy paths, and suffer me not at any time to stray from thy ways; let me always
have the fear of thee in my heart; and if at any time through weakness and
frailty I do transgress thy Commandments, yet do thou not therefore, good LORD,
reject me, but be thou that good Samaritan, and pour the oil and wine of mercy
and forgiveness into those wounds which sin shall make in me; make me thy
servant, and so endue me with thy grace, that I may unfeignedly with heart and
voice serve, honor, and praise thee, through Jesus Christ, my Lord and
Savior, to whom be praise and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer setting forth the power of GOD's Grace.
O Lord my GOD, who have created me after thine own Image; give me Thy Grace
which is most excellent and necessary unto all Salvation, that I may subdue my
wicked nature, drawing me always unto sin and destruction: for I see in my
flesh the Law of sin rebelling against the Law of my mind, and leading me
captive to the satisfying of my vain desires in many things; so that without
the assistance of thy most heavenly grace, poured zealously into my mind I am
unable to resist the assaults thereof: Yea LORD, I take thy grace, and that
much grace of thine, whereby my nature, prone to all impiety even from my
youth, may be subdued and overcome; for Nature being fallen through the offense
of the first Man, and desiled through sin, the punishment whereof has
redounded unto all mankind; so that, that nature which at the first thou did
make good and righteous, is now counted for the sin and infirmity of the
corrupt nature; insomuch as the motions left unto it tend always unto evil and
inferior things; hence O Lord it is, that touching the inward man, I am
delighted with thy Law, knowing that thy statutes are good, righteous and holy;
and that they reprove wickedness, and teach that which is to be avoided; but in
my flesh serve the Law of sin, whilst I obey the appetite more than reason;
hence it is, that to will is present with me; but alas I find no means to
perform; hereof it is, that often times I purpurpose to do many things well;
but because thy heavenly favor and grace is wanting, which may help mine
infirmity, I flee back and retire; yea, hereof it is, that I know indeed the
way of righteousness, and see, as it were, in a glass what my duty is; but
through the weight of my sin, I have no power to arise unto perfection: O Lord
how greatly do I lack thy grace, both to begin what good is, and also to
proceed thoroughly in goodness: for without it I can do nothing, but through the
help thereof, I can do all things in thee: O Heavenly Grace, without which
neither the merits of Man, nor the gifts of Nature are of price whatsoever: For
the gifts of Nature are common, as well to the wicked as to the good: but thy
Grace is a gift peculiar only to the Elect, which whosoever have, are counted meet
and worthy eternal life. Finally it is so excellent, that without doubt,
neither the gift of prophecy, nor the working of Miracles is any thing worth:
yea, neither faith nor hope, nor any other virtue are of price or accepted of
thee, without love and grace: O blessed Grace, which makes him rich with
virtue, who is poor in spirit: Come, O come down unto me, and fill me early
with thy comfort, that my mind with weariness and hunger faint not: O Lord, I
beseech thee impart thy grace unto me, that is sufficient for me, though I have
nothing in me else that nature would require; yea I protest, if that be with
me, I will dread no temptation, nor trouble whatsoever; this is my strength,
that brings counsel and help; yea, it is both mightier than all enemies, and
wiser than the prudent; it is the Mystery of Truth, the teacher of Discipline,
the light of the mind, the comfort in affliction, the expeller of sadness, the
remover away of care, and the nourisher of Religion. At a word, without it,
what am I but withered wood, and a root most unprofitable, to be cast away?
Wherefore, O Lord, let this thy grace both go before, and also follow me,
whereby I may continually apply my self to well-doing, through Jesus Christ my
Lord and Savior; to whom be all honor and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for a competent living.
O Almighty GOD, and loving Father, who of nothing have created all things
living; thy Providence is so great over them all, that thou suffer not the
most vile and simplest of them all to perish for want of relief, and things
requisite for them, seeking the same at thy hands; yea, and such is thy favor,
O Lord, toward Man, that thou do most miraculously provide for him, in that
all the rest of thy creatures thou have ordained for his use and service, and
yet not for all alike; for it has pleased thee to make some poor, and some
rich; some thou exaltest, and some thou keep low; some to live at case, and
some by labor, and yet none live without thy Providence: and I among the rest
of thy creatures, do acknowledge my self greatly bound unto thee, for helping me
hitherto; and as thy silly creature and work of thy hands I humbly prostrate my
self in heart before thy Majesty, beseeching thee favorably to look down upon
my necessity, and grant me whatsoever thou see necessary for me, even a
competent and necessary portion here; not overmuch, lest I wax proud, and
disdain my inferiors; and if it be thy will vouchsafe unto me, not over
little, lest urgent necessity drive me to overmuch care, and overmuch care
carry me to unlawful means, and so I run headlong into thy displeasure; but by
truth in my calling I may be able to live and wade through the hardness of this
world, and be rather helpful to the poor, than burdensome to the rich. O Lord
bring it thus to pass; for without thy blessing and Fatherly furtherance, I
cannot sufficiently execute, neither can that prosper, thereupon the whole
state of my longing and maintenance depends: wherefore good Lord bless my
understanding and endeavors, to the prosperous execution of all things which
concern my vocation and calling, and grant, O Lord, that whatsoever does happen
unto me; as poverty or Riches, I may be of a patient mind, that in adversity I
run not headlong into such means as are ungodly; neither in prosperity wax the
prouder, but wait thy good pleasure in them both with thankfulness, and
evermore live in thee and by thee, and in the end reign with thee in Heaven,
where thou ^ittest as author and giver of all thy Blessings. Grant this, O most
merciful Father; to whom with thy Son, and the Holy Ghost, be all power and
glory for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to subdue our affections.
O Lord, Mighty and Merciful, who did create Man, in the beginning, simple,
sincere, and without spot of sin: In which his integrity and innocence he then
presented thine own Image, which was pure and without spot of sin; and yet such
was man, that he fell from thee by disobedience, whereby he corrupted his ways,
and became ^ar unlike unto thee, being defiled with all vanities, wherein alas,
we all of us wallow, the most with greediness: wherefore most dear Father in
JESUS, Christ, create in me new thoughts, new affections, shape in me true
obedience that I may mortify and kill all sin, and vain inclinations which
rise up against Thee; let sin no longer bear rule in me, O Lord; but let thy
grace more and more abound, that all that I do think, speak or do, may b^
favoring more of the desire of Heaven and Heavenly things, than of earthly and
carnal desires; that so I may be approved, not only before men, to be as ought,
but to thee to be as Thou requirest; to whom, O Lord, be all honor and glory
for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Kings Majesty.
O Lord Almighty, the Governor, Preserver, and continual Protector of Princes,
to whose beck and will all Kingdoms of the Earth are subject, look in mercy and
favor, O Lord, I beseech thee, upon the state of thy servant, our dear
Soverign Lord King Charles, and his Royal issue; be thou unto him and them a
safe refuge in all time of danger; and let thy holy Spirt be unto him a
continual guide in all his acts and procedings; direct him, to comfort, defend
and support us, and either to bring our enemies to a perfect peace, in
embracing the Truth with us, or confound their power and devices for ever.

An Evening Prayer.
O Heavenly Father, and eternal GOD, I honor thee, I praise thee, I yield thee
most hearty thanks for all thy benefits; and at this time especially, O Lord,
because thou have patiently and attentively heard my petitions, and have given
me soberness and humbleness of mind, to utter the same without any
interruption. I bless Thee my everlasting GOD, and with all my heart give thee
thanks, for that not only thou have saved me this day from death, from hurts,
and from all perils from my cradle; but have defended both my soul and body
from all Misfortunes and Dangers: Therefore my soul magnifieth the Lord, and my
spirit rejoices in God my Savior, for he has looked upon the afflictions of
his servants: and now among all other thy goodness, O Lord, hear; O Lord,
forgive; hearken, O God for thy Name sake, for it is called upon by me: O GOD
of Heaven and earth, in the evening do I call upon thee, that remitting my
sins, Thou would receive me into thy Protection, and keep me this Night, that
the Devil have no power over me; for Thou, O Lord, art my everlasting
Protector; for behold, whether I sleep or wake, whether I live or die, I am
always thine: let thy mercy follow me, O Lord, all the days of my life, that I
may dwell in thy house and praise thee, and that I may in acknowledging thy
greatness confess my sinful and wretched weakness: And visit me, O Lord, and
drive from me all the assaults of mine enemies, both bodily and ghostly; and
let thy holy Angel be with me, and keep me this night, and evermore, by thy
grace; and ever let thy blessing be upon me this night, and for evermore.

Amen.
Prayers for Wednesday Morning.
O Lord my God and Father, blessed be thy name for ever: dispose my heart, and
open my lips, etc.

A Psalm.
IN thee O LORD, have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion: deliver
me in thy Righteousness.

Bow down thine Ear unto me, make have to deliver me.

Into thy hands I commend my Spirt, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou God
of truth.

I have hated them that hold superstitious vanities, and my trust has been in
the Lord.

I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have considered my trouble,
and have known my soul in adversity.

Show thy servant the light of thy countenance, and save me for thy mercies
sake.

O how plentiful is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee, and that thou have prepared for them that put their trust in thee.

Wherefore I will confess my wickedness, and be sorry for my sin; I will take
heed unto my ways, that I offend not in my tongue.

Therefore withdraw not thou thy mercy from me, O Lord, but let thy loving
kindness and thy truth always preserve me.

For my soul is a-thirst for God, yea, God, yea even for the living God; when
shall I come to appear before the presence of God?

Yea as the Heart desires the waterbrooks, so longs my soul after thee, O God.

Wherefore send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me and bring me
to thy holy hill, and to thy dwelling.

Why art thou so heavy, O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within me?

O put thy trust in God, for I will yet give Him thanks, who is the help of my
countenance, and my God. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
holy Ghost, etc.

A Morning Prayer.
O Most merciful and loving Father, I thank thee for the sweet sleep and
comfortable rest that thou have given me this night; and forasmuch as thou have
commanded by thy holy Word, that no man should be idle, but always occupied in
godly and virtuous exercises, every man according to his calling: I most humbly
beseech thee, O Lord, that thine eyes may attend upon me, that thy grace may
daily defend me in danger: succor, cherish, and comfort me in all my needs and
distress; and govern all my counsels, studies, and labors, in such wise, that
I may spend this day according to thy blessed will, and the discharge of mine
own conscience in thee; that warily avoiding all things that may displease
thee, and setting always before mine eyes thy fear, I may (thy grace assisting
me, and thy holy spirit guiding me) work that which is acceptable before thy
divine Majesty, unto thy praise and glory for ever.

Amen.
A fruitful Confession to GOD for sins committed.
O Gracious GOD, have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, look favorably upon
me, incline thine ears toward me, and hide not thy Face now my soul is
troubled. O Almighty GOD, from whose Sight there is no covert, and against
whose power there is neither resistance nor flight; I beseech thee to cast off
the blind burden of fleshly affections; subdue my reason, regenerate my will,
and purify my nature; lead my desire that I may seek thee; lighten my
understanding that I may see thee; for I can neither seek thee without thou
direct me, nor see thee except thou reveal thy self. LORD, forgive mine
ignorance, forget my presumption, Pardon mine iniquities, relieve my
necessities; Let my sins no longer be a cloud between my Prayers and thy pity,
between thy goodness and my distress; most gracious GOD, who art merciful
toward all, suffer me not to be destitute of thy Mercy: for although I have
committed that whereby I may be destroyed, yet have thou neither forgone nor
forgotten that whereby thou art wont to save: O wretch that I am, how coldly do
I cry, how weakly do I crave, how senseless is my unclean soul? alas I am
nothing but vanity, a rotten root, without any life or virtue; a barren ground,
bringing forth nothing but sin, shame and damnation: I am unable either to give
thee any thing, but of thine own goods, or do any thing for my self, but by thy
free gift: Wherefore O my sweet Savior, by the tender love, and by all thy
mercies, reach thy helping hand, draw my soul out of the mire of sin, wherein
it is fast set, that I perish not in the presence of thy pity: deliver me from
the snares that the enemy has laid to take the soul of sinners, either wilful
or secure.

Put away occasions of evil before me, guide me unto thee the streightest
course; and so long as I am to continue in this vile vale of misery, settle me
in that state of life wherein I may best please thee: Give me grace, O gracious
God, although I have hitherto had no care to live well, yet I may now wholly
and holily bend my care to dye well; and that from henceforth I may live in thy
fear, and die in thy favor, rest in thy peace, and remain in thy joy for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for Patience.
O Most gracious and omnipotent Father, whose mercy is everlasting and power
infinite, bow down thine ear and hearken unto my Prayer which I make before
thee, beseeching thee of thy accustomed goodness, to endue me with the works of
Mercy and deeds of charity; and above all things, to give me patience in
adversity, meekly to suffer, and patiently to take whatsoever it shall please
thee to lay upon me, and never to murmur or to grudge thereat, but always to
think thy loving and gentle correction to be much less than the deserts of my
great and manifold offenses. And again, if I be not under correction, then am I
not thy child! for what father is he that corrects not his children whom he
most entirely loves? this then is a most evident token that thou love us,
when as thou correctest us: for as the Scripture says; Whom God loves, him He
chasteneth. Thou ^eest all things, Thou understandest and know all things;
so that not so much as one little sparrow lights upon the ground without thy
knowledge, yea and our very thoughts are fore-known unto thee; Thou disposest
and orderest all things as seems best to thy holy will and pleasure. By thy
help I may do all things, but without thee I can do nothing. When thou pourest
upon us thy creatures, thy good gifts and benefits, Thou do it to this end;
that we acknowledging the same, should thereby be encouraged to serve, honor
and obey thee; and contrary wise, when thou strikest us with thy rod of
correction, thou do it to put us in mind that we have transgressed thy
Commandments; that we have not hearkened unto thee, but willingly fallen into
the puddle of sin, and following our own appetites, have provoked thy just
wrath and indignation against us. Thus thou dealest with us, O Lord, to the
intent that we suffering bodily punishment, and feeling the smart of the same,
may thereby be admonished of our duties; and with true compunction of heart,
desire to be released from the scourge that we have deserved. This, O heavely
Father, I acknowledge to be our duty; but alas, I for my part have not
performed the same as I ought; yet I beseech thy goodness not to execute the
rigor of thy Justice upon me, but to stay thy hand; and before thou give me
any greater wound, to behold my humility and repentance, and here I do offer
thee, O Lord, according as the poor widow did, all which I am able to give;
that is, a sorrowful contrition of heart for my former offenses done and past:
wherefore I beseech thee to give me grace, that what way soever it shall please
thee to punish me, (...) may take it patiently, and say, Naked I came into this
World, and naked I shall return to the Earth again: The Lord gives, and the
Lord takes away, even as it pleases the Lord, so be it. Suffer me not, O
Lord, to despair, or to think that thou dealest unjustly with me; but say,
Shall I receive Prosperity at the LORD's hands, and not be con^ent with
adversity? and always to think upon this, Happy are they whom thou ^ost punish;
for though thou make a wound, Thou also give a plaster; though Thou
smitest, thy hand makes whole again: Mine iniquities are great, be thou
merciful unto my wickedness; O deliver me from thine anger, and press me not
further than I shall be able to bear; but now (...) acknowledge that whatsoever
trouble thou have sent me, or wilt lay upon me, is either for the punishment of
mine iniquities, or for the trial of my Constancy; I may with repentant David,
find remission of my sins; and with patient Job, release of mine adversity, and
obtain such favor in thy sight, that I may so pass this life, that I may
afterward live with thee in thy eternal Glory: grant this O^ most loving
Father, for thy dear Son's sake Jesus Christ; to whom with the holy Ghost, be
all Honor and Glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for Humility.
O My sweet Savior Jesus, it is thine own Lesson: Be humble and meek as I am:
it is thy Word also; My sheep hear my Voice: but Lord what shall I do, the
flesh is proud, I daily rebel against thy holy will, I envy my superiors, I
love not my equals, I despise mine inferiors: This is the fruit of the ^lesh,
O Lord, but thou art love and life, O loving Jesus; and therefore, I beseech
thee of thy tender love to pity me, and to endue me with the spirit of
humbleness, that being poor i^ in spirit, I may with the little ones of thy
Kingdom be blessed and live for ever: O Lord, for the avoidance of pride, give
me thy grace to consider, that by it an Angel became a devil, and Man was
excommunicated from the Paradise of pleasure; desire of Sovereignty begat the
devil, sin, death and damnation; so that out of it, as a most filthy puddle,
issued a whole Sea of mischief and misery: Of this cup of pride, father Adam
drank, when by his disobedi^nce he lost thy favor, and by the taste of ^n
Apple, thought to be thy Co-mate, in knowing of good and evil; Give me thy
Grace not only to consider this but also ful^y to digest it; that detesting it
as a venomous Viper, I may in humbleness of heart ^erve thee holily and
soundly, without hy^ocrisie, who art the pattern of low liness, and a mirror of
humility, continually to ^e looked upon, and truly to be followed. (...) life
and lover of Souls, give me grace ^lways to hear, and hearing thy word, to
^ollow thee my Lord and God, both now and for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for Gods fear.
O Almighty and eternal God, thy Holy Word teaches us, that thou art not ^nly
a Father, but also a LORD; not only (...) Forgiver, but also a revenger; not
only (...) Savior, but also a Judge: and as thou be^^g a Father, a Savior,
and Forgiver, do ^ardon and show Mercy; so thou being a lord, a revenger and
a Judge, punishest and condemnest: Neither does thy Holy Word set forth unto us
a Gospel which com^orteth us, quickneth us, shows us Joy full tidings,
quieteth our Consciences, and brings us unto everlasting life; but also a Law
which reproves, accuses, condemns, wounds, and slays our Consciences,
ye^ and throws us down headlong into everlasting perdition, so that by this
we may see, that we may not only love thee as Father, Savior, and forgiver;
but also fear thee as a Lord, a revenger, and a Judge, for as much therefore, O
most gentle Savior, and most righteous Judge, as nothing does so mightily put
away sin, and make us to walk in the way of thy Commandments, as reverently to
fear thee, and to stand in awe of thy Judgments and heavy despleasure: I most
entirely pray and beseech thee, to give me that fear which thou requirest of us
in thy holy Word, and whereunto thou have promised so many large and bounteous
benefits, that I may not only love thee as a Father, and honor thee as a
Savior, but reverence thee as a Lord, and fear thee as (...) Judge; O Lord,
all things are open to thine eyes, neither is any thing hid from Thee, which
see the most inward thought and secrets of our hearts. Give me grace O Lord,
I beseech thee, that in all my enterprises, I may ever set thy fear before mine
eyes, and so stand in aw of thee and of thy Righteous judgments, tha^ I attempt
nothing whereby I should provoke thy heavenly displeasure against me; but so
walk in thy fear, and in thy holy Ordinance, that I may at all times love thee
as a Father, honor thee as a Savior, reverence thee as a Lord, and fear thee
as a Judge; So shall it come pass, that I reverently loving thee as a child
does his Father, shall not only avoid all such evils as might make thee my
heavy Lord, and fearful Judge; but also embrace those virtues, which shall both
evidently declare my faithful love, true honor, unfeigned reverence and humble
fear toward thee; and also thee my Lord and loving Father, and most merciful
Savior; to whom be all honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for the desire of Heavenly things.
O My GOD, O the sweet life of my soul! what other thing besides thee ought I
to look after? what, have I not all things if I do possess thee who have
created all things? There is nothing of any estimation, but only such things as
thou have made; for whatsoever grace of ^omliness, pleasantness, fineness,
sweetness, virtue, dignity or riches, consists in any creature, the same
proceeds from thee, O God, and all things abundantly slow without any lack: O
Creator most excellent, thou art the pleasure of all things, thou art the
abundant fullness of perfect joy, and the unmeasurable Sea of all holy delight:
Thou art that light and incredible clearness and passing brightness, which they
do hear, see, taste and feel, that are inwardly joined unto thee, through
exceeding pureness of heart, while they yet remain in this present exile: The
loving embracements, nor the dainty kisses of the Mother, appeaseth the weeping
of her tender child; nor the pleasant countenance of the husband toward his
loving wife, are but as shadows and of no value, in respect and consideration
of the sweet embracements, wherewith thou, O Lord, do allure the souls of
those that love thee: But if poor banished men can be so blessed and happy, and
that they can see such incomparable goodness, who see thee but in a dark
shadowed glass: how much more happy ought we then to judge of thy holy
Citizens who see thee face to face? those thy beloved children, do now most
manifestly know, and in themselves do feel how much thou do favor and love
them, and from the beginning have loved them: thou O Lord, it is that does
qualify, gladden, refresh and satisfy with a delicate desire of enjoying thy
company, the hearts and wills of all men; and to say all, O eternal GOD, thou
art all in all, in that most holy City of New Jerusalem: That is the happy day,
and the singular day, whereof thou O Lord Jesus have spoken to thy Disciples:
In that day you shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you:
O day so much wished-for with most hearty desire, wherein the holy souls shall
be united unto thee, O GOD, and shall be inspired with a mavelous light of
wisdom, and transformed into the brightness of eternal Glory; O Jesus grant I
beseech thee, that so long as I am in the darkness of this misty desert, that
the eyes of my mind may behold and contemplate the most shining light and
brightness of thee, O God, and that I may always praise thee for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to God for zeal in Prayer.
O My GOD, and Father, I beseech thee, that if at any time I feel in my self
any faintness or failing of fervency in calling upon Thee, that Thou will
kindle within my heart the Heavenly heat of thy most holy Spirit, that I may
burn in the Zeal of thee and thy holy house; and grant me thy Grace O LORD to
cry with thy holy Apostle for the increase of Faith; that being awakned and
stirred up by thy most tender and Fatherly affection and instigation, I may
enjoy the effect of all my godly and necessary desires, which thou have
promised to give unto me in thy Son JESUS Christ; for whose sake I expect all
good things at thy hands: make my heart the undefiled instrument of peace and
perfect thoughts, and my tongue the Trumpet of thine eternal Praise, my body
the habitation of the Holy Ghost, mine eyes the windows to behold the worthy
way that leads to Thee; my legs the supporters of my body and Soul, toward the
attaining of thy heavenly Kingdom: O LORD, thou know my hearty desire is
always to serve thee, and evermore to abide in thy love and favor: Grant unto
me, LORD, of thy gracious goodness, that I may live in thy Law, walk in thy
way, and die in thy Faith; and that I may clearly be delivered of the bondage
of sin, and be wholly out of death and damnation: give me the peace which the
world cannot give; grant me the joy which thine Elect do possess; sustain me
with the comfort that never shall be void; erect me with the hope that always
shall persist; instruct me with thy Word that ever shall endure; and advance me
to thy Kingdom that never shall have end: then shall thy Glory still live in
me, and I shall never die, but Reign with thee for ever; to whom, O Father, be
all honor and glory, world without end.

Amen.
Prayers for Wednesday Night.
O Lord my God and Father, blessed be thy name for ever: dispose my heart, and
^pen my lips, etc.

A Psalm.
O LORD my GOD, thou have searched me out, and known me, thou know my
downsitting, and ^y uprising; thou understandest my thoughts long before.

Thou art about my path, and about my ^ed, and spyest out all my ways.

For lo, there is not a word in my tongue, but thou, O Lord, know it
altogether.

My reins are thine, thou have covered me in my mothers womb.

I will give thanks unto thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made:
mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well.

My bones are not hid from thee, though I be made secretly, and fashioned
beneath in the earth.

Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect; and in thy book were all
my members written.

Which day by day were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them.

O how dear are thy counsels unto me, O God, O how great is the sum of them!

O enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the ungodly; preserve me from wicked men,
which are purposed to overthrow my goings.

Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the incense; and the lifting up of
my hands be an evening Sacrifice.

Set a watch, O LORD, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips.

O let not my heart be inclined to any evil thing, let me not be occupied in
ungodliness with the men that work wickedness, lest I do such things as please
them.

But teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God, let thy
loving Spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousness.

A Prayer for mortification.
O Righteous God, and merciful Father who art so pure and clean, that no
corruption rests in thy sight; and ^ith there is required in all men the
sincere and inward zeal of the soul, and an absolute killing of the motions of
the flesh, and mortifying of all carnal affection: look favorably upon me, O
LORD, in whom does dwell an innumerable troop of foolish fantasies, and an heap
of sinful affections: I find and feel, O LORD, that though many times to will
be present with me, yet to perform is not in my power; sin does prevail, and
death through sin swalloweth me up, so that I rest in darkness of sin, by
giving scope unto mine own perverse will; and such is my miserable estate, that
being thus of my self, flesh and blood slattereth it self, and concludes that
whatsoever I purpose in an evil desire, so that it break not forth into open
gross wickedness, that I am holy enough, that I am as sincere as is requisite,
and that I stand too fearful of thy judgment. When thou know, O Lord, that
all and every the least conceit of sin, breaking into action, in what covert
measure, or mean degree soever, it by and by endangereth my soul, and deserves
sudden judgment; and therefore let it please thee, O Father, that as thy dear
Son, through thy surpassing love, has reconciled all such unto thy favor
again, that are truly penitent, so let thy holy Spirit continually work to the
taming of my unbridled flesh; and let me, by the same Spirit, come to a true
mortification of all the evils that rise up in me; So shall I deny and forsake
my self, and follow thee; so shall I leave my self, and come to thee; hate my
self, and love thee; conquer my self, and serve thee.

And here thou ^eest, O my dear Father, that I am most weak, and without the
continual working of thy grace, I cannot in any measure suppress my desires,
but that they rather the more strongly rise in me: I cannot deny my self, but I
rather deny the working of thy grace in me; I do not only not mortify my sins,
but sin rather reviveth and becomes strong in me, in as much as it bringth
forth fruit, not unto life, but unto death: therefore I beseech thee, O
heavenly Father, to sanctify me that I defile not my self with the filthiness
of the flesh, nor fleshly things, howsoever they may seem to please me: let me
not be deceived with the pleasing judgments of worldly men, who affirm sin to
be no sin, darkness to be light, and light to be darkness, Atheism to be
Religion, and sanctity to be sin. O dear Father, many are the Enormities that
rise up in us, and defended not only as things tolerable, but as things
laudable: wherefore I beseech thee to mortify these evils, and let me no
longer be sotted with the filthy fashions of this world: extinguish the flames
of carnal desires, repress the rageing lusts of the flesh: and grant that I may
with shame, and with due watchfulness avoid all things that have but the
appearance of evil; but being thus inwardly subdued, I may make outward
profession, that whatsoever I do, it may be simply grounded upon a good
conscience: and let me still retain this in memory, O Lord, that I cannot
follow mine own will and thy word, that I cannot impart my affections to the
deed of the flesh, and the works of the Spirit, that I cannot walk in darkness
and light, in the way of death, and in the way of life: wherefore, O most dear
Father direct me in my whole life, and separate me from the World, and worldly
things; and let me dwell with thee in all Godly meditations and contemplations,
and let me use the things of this world as I used them not: and being thus
truly mortified in the body, and quickened in the spirit, I may look in
continual watchfulness for the dissolution of this my mortal body, that my soul
may ascend, and in the end, both soul and body may for ever more enjoy the
eternal joys of Heaven.

Amen.
A Prayer against desperation.
O Most merciful GOD, greatly have I sinned, and alas am guilty of many crimes:
therefore unto thee do I cry, O most holy Father and eternal God, keep me in
thy Name, that in Temptations and extremities I never faint in courage;
Moderate and mitigate my vexations, let them come to a joyful end, that I fall
not into the most heinous sin of incredulity and despair. O Christ JESUS,
Savior of the world, whose mercy comes unto us like a stream, who art my
eternal happiness, I do from the botto mof my heart beseech thee, to increase,
establish, hope, and strengthen patience within me; for this certainly is true,
that one little drop of thy sacred Blood shed for us is of more power to save
us, than all our enormous sins to condemn us: wherefore, O sweet Savior, look
upon me with the eyes of mercy, as thou lookedst back upon Peter in the Hall of
the Highpriests Palace, after he had both renounced thee, and cursed himself:
O God the holy Ghost be thou present with me in mine extreme need, when the
Devil will accuse me, and my conscience bear witness against me; when I shall
be environed with horrible danger and temptations, and all things set
themselves against me.

Strengthen my heart at that time, O comfortable Spirit, with the Zeal of thy
Testimony, that undoubtedly I may believe the forgiveness of sins, the
resurrection of the flesh, and everlasting life, which shall be given to all
believers. O blessed Trinity, and eternal God of one essence, give grace that
in every combat, especilly at the point of death, being mindful of thy
Covenant made with me in Baptism, and of thy most comfortable promise annexed;
which is, that all that believe and are baptized shall be saved, I may never
doubt either of thy merciful good will toward me or of the free remission and
forgiveness of my sins; but by often remembrance of this Sign and Covenant, I
may daily more and more be confirmed in faith and hope of eternal happiness:
and here, O holy Trinity, lift up my sorrowful heart, and pour upon me the
wholesome comfort of thy Heavenly bliss, and at the point of death refresh me
with the sweet light of thy cheerful countenance; that with exceeding joy I may
desire to depart, and come to thy heavenly house, where Thou live and
reignest as my eternal GOD and Father, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Power of GOD's Spirit to abide in us.
O Omnipotent and eternal GOD, and Father, which comfortest such as be
sorrowful, and who give all good gifts, thou of thy free favor and love,
have willed us in all our affairs and necessities, and as often as we stand in
need of any of thy blessings, or feel our selves burdened with any kind of
tribulation or affliction either of body or mind, to call upon thee in the Name
of thy Son Jesus Christ, and thou will grant what we want; most humbly I
beseech thee, to send down upon my dark understanding, the bright beams of thy
most holy Spirit, to lighten me, and to direct me in all my supplications and
prayers; and especially at this time, O Lord, for that thou know my weakness
and ignorance to be such, as I am altogether unable to frame my requests
according to thy will, or to seek that which is for mine own souls health;
wherefore I most humbly beseech thee, O Lord, in the Name of him thy Son, to
address and prepare my heart to the true understanding, and unfeigned calling
on thy Name for such things as thy wisdom shall think most expedient for me,
both to the obtaining of thy heavenly Kingdom, which is before all things to be
sought for, and for temporal blessings best known to thee; which in respect of
my ignorance, my dullness, my corruption, my weakness, and the guilt of mine own
conscience, I cannot crave in such due and faithful manner as I ought; and
therefore, most dear Father, I here beseech thee in the Name of thy Son Christ,
that thou will ai^ me with thy holy Spirit in my prayers; that being of my self
dull, I may be made Zealous; and whereas I am of my self cold, I may be thereby
made fervent and faithful, that my Prayers be not as a smoke which vanishes,
or as the wind which passes away, being only in the lips, and not firm in the
heart; let it be effectual and an acceptable sacrifice, sweet and pleasing in
thy sight; and that nothing pass the bounds of thy unfeigned lips, that which
may beseem a single heart, always sounding thine honor, and setting forth of
thy most glorious praise: let thy holy Spirit, O Lord, come unto me; let it
continue with me, work, and prevail effectually in me, unto the end; that I may
both at this time begin, and for evermore continue as thou will est I should,
namely in Faith; that I fall not into any temptation, in hope that I may
constantly look for, and faithfully attain unto perfect understanding of thy
will, and ableness in all things to fulfill the same; make me also, good Lord,
fervent in love, that I may freely and unfeignedly, even from my very heart,
forgive and forgot all injuries, wrongs, and evil doings, of such as by any
means have offended me, with hearty prayer for their amendment, that I
approaching unto the Throne of thy mercy, in a pure and single heart, may
heartily, as well for all others, as for my self, for things necessary both for
my soul and body, make my humble petitions unto thee, and in thy good time,
taste that most sweet fruit of my humble desires, according unto thy will; so
shall I show forth thy praise, and give glory to thy Name for ever and ever,
world without end.

Amen.
A Prayer for the victory against sin.
O LORD, there is no Victory without Fighting, nor any Crown without Victory;
give me therefore power, O Lord, that fighting valiantly, I may be crowned
gloriously in Heaven with thee to live for ever: minister strength unto me,
that I may over-master mine enemies, and give me the spirit of patience, that
continuing unto the end, I may be found and taken as a faithful Soldier of thy
Son Jesus Christ, and so be blessed: let me not faint in fear, but let me fight
in a lively says, which over-matcheth all the whole world; plant me a natural
branch, by the power of thy holy Word in the Vine Jesus, and make me able to
endure every crack: let no canker of sin, eat me, let no worm of a guilty
conscience gnaw me, let no blast of the world overcome me; but stay me up with
thy mighty hand, and be ever at my elbow, that I may be crowned though I be
crossed, and saved, though now soused in extreme misery; in this is all my
hope: for surely of my self I am but a vapor, a worm; I am born of a woman in
sin, a sinful child by nature, and to my power wage battle with Satan against
my self, to my utter undoing, O Lord, unless thou regenerate me, and assist me
with thy Spirit, always to resist him; which do, O gracious God, I beseech thee
for thy great mercy, to whom be all power and glory for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to be mindful of death.
O GOD, in whose hands consists the life of all mankind, for thy Son Christ's
sake, vouchsafe to give me grace to set before mine eyes, as a most certain
mark, whereto this frail body of mine must tend it self, the Image of that
which is to the faithful the end of pain, and the beginning of pleasure; the end
of misery, and the beginning of bliss: but to the secure and careless, the end
of their pleasures, and beginning of eternal pains. And vouchsafe, good LORD,
that I may have an earnest desire of serving thee, and leading my life
according unto thy will, that whenever it shall please thee to call me out of
this life, I be not through fear stricken with doubt of condemnation, but even
at the last gasp, through unfeigned Faith in Jesus Christ, may take and have
taste of eternal Salvation, that death be not bitter or terrible unto me; but
rather when it comes, I with joy receive the same in the Name of thy Son JESUS
Christ. Bless me, good Lord, from the second death, the everlasting destruction
both of body and soul, and justify me in the death of thy Son that my Name may
be registered in the Book of Life. O Lord comfort my guilty conscience with the
everlasting light of thy bountiful savor, and let me have place among thy
Saints in thy Heavenly Kingdom. LORD, for thy mercies sake, after this my
bodily death, give me the fruition of thy presence, in the rich Palace of
endless bliss: to whose merciful Protection I commend with all humility and
reverence, my soul and body. Lord Jesus preserve me, Lord Jesus comfort me,
Lord Jesus pray for me; for only into thy hands that have redeemed me, O Lord
thou God of truth, I commend my soul both now and for ever:

Amen.
A Prayer for a happy departure out of this life.
O Most gracious and eternal GOD, thy years endure throughout all generations,
and thy days are without end or beginning, but the days of Man are determined,
which he cannot overpass, and the number of his Months are foreknown unto thee:
wherefore instruct me O LORD, that being always mindful of my mortality, I
never promise unto my self many years, nor long life in this pilgrimage of
mine, so shall I not live securely, deferring my conversion to thee from day to
day; nor yet put confidence in this frail and uncertain life, as that rich man
spoken of in the Gospel: but give me grace, that in thy fear I may daily
prepare my self to depart out of this prison; for nothing is more certain than
death, though nothing more uncertain than the hour thereof: therefore I beseech
thee O Lord, to let me have always before mine eyes an image and mediation of
my departure, the better to know the fleeting and vanity of this srail and
cumbersome life; that I may live to thee my God, being sound in faith, and
strong in hope, looking with cheerfulness for the day of my departure, and the
joyful appearing of thy Son Jesus Christ my Redeemer; and make me I beseech
thee, O LORD, a faithful and wise servant, looking for the coming of my Lord,
for that I know not when he will come, lest by a sudden hour of death being
overtook, I being found unready; but contrariwise, by prudent watching in true
conversion and repentance, I may covet to be dissolved, and to be with CHRIST
my Redeemer; and grant also, O LORD, that at the point of death, having escaped
all hardness and temptations, I may triumph like a Conquereor, and behold the
power and presence of thy holy Spirit; and let my last word be that which thy
Son did utter upon the Altar of the Cross, saying, Father into thy hands I
commend my spirit; and when my speech is taken from me, hear O God the
groanings of my heart; and the hour of death being come, let thy servant depart
in peace, through JESUS Christ my Lord and Savior; to whom be all praise and
glory, for ever and ever,

Amen.
A Petition to GOD the Father.
O Omnipotent GOD and Father, I have asked here at this time many things of
thee, and yet not deserved any; I confess alas, that not only those things
which I require be not due unto me, but in stead of them most grievous
punishments; yet O LORD, lay not my sins to my charge, for if thou should, I
were not able to abide or stand in thy sight, but O LORD, I most humbly beseech
thee, that thou will forgive me all that is past; and grant that I may never
hereafter offend in the same again: and vouchsafe I beseech thee of thy
goodness O Lord, to direct, sanctify, and keep my heart and body, my senses
and doings, my talk and communication, in thy most holy Laws and Commandments;
and that thy holy Angel may be with me, to direct my feet unto the way of
peace, truth and health; that I may be whole, safe and free in thee, and by
thee, both here and in the world to come. O Christ hear me, and save me, which
live and reignest with the Father and the holy Spirit; God in perfect unity;
to whom be praise for ever, world without end.

Amen.
An Evening Prayer.
O Heavenly Father, I with all humility and reverence of heart and mind,
beseech thee this night, which thou have ordained for man to rest in, that thou will guard and protect me with thy good guiding Spirit; and albeit my sinful
flesh shall slumber and sleep, yet grant that my soul may continually keep
watch and ward; let not the enemy find me slumbering and sleeping, as careless
in the cradle of sinful security, lest that whilst I am unarmed, that is, naked
and destitute of thy help and favor, he enter in and break up the house of my
sinful body; and make such havoc and spoil, and that my infected leprous soul,
deformed by means of mine iniquity, and wounded with the dangerous darts of
transgression, be thrown with the body of sin, unto the lake of destruction;
make me still, O good Lord, to consider that the bed is the plain pattern of
the grave; make me to understand, that when I am laid of my self; without thy
Heavenly Providence, I cannot be able to rise again; make me also to
acknowledge that sleep is the very Figure of death, to whose stroke, at thy
appointed pleasure I must submit my self; endue me with love and charity to all
men; let my lamp, O Lord, be garnished with oil, that whenever thy messenger
death shall draw nigh, and knock at the gate of my body, I may at his summons
in the day of the Resurrection of the dead, be ready to attend on thee my Bride
with my burning lamp; that is with a steadfast faith, when as by Faith I shall
be clothed with a new: for my mortal body shall be then covered with
immortality and the corruption of my sinful and rebellious flesh then changed
to incorruption and perfect purity: thy righteousness shall be mine, thy merits
shall make me perfect and holy, by virtue whereof, hell shall lose his victory,
death shall lose his sting, my faith and hope shall have its end and reward;
and I with thy Saints, continually dwell in love and charity with thee and my
Heavenly Bridegroom Christ Jesus; to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost,
be ascribed all power and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Prayers for Thursday Morning.
O Lord my God and Heavenly Father, blessed be thy Name for ever: dispose my
Heart, open my Lips, and give me thy Holy Spirit, etc.

A Psalm.
SAve me O GOD, for thy Names sake, and avenge me in thy strength. Hear my
Prayer, O God, and hearken to the words of my mouth. An offering of a free
heart will I give thee, and praise thy Name, O Lord, because it is so
comfortable.

I will praise God, because of his Word, I have put my trust in God; and will
not fear what flesh can do unto me.

In Gods word will I rejoice, in the Lords word will I comfort me.

For thou have delivered my soul from death, and my feet from falling, that I
might walk before thee in the light of the Living.

Therefore will I call unto the most High God, even unto the God that shall
perform the cause which I have in hand.

He shall send from Heaven, and save me from the reproof of him that would eat
me up.

He verily is my strength and my Salvation, he is my defense, so that I shall
not greatly fall.

For the greatness of his mercy reaches to the Heavens, and his truth unto the
Clouds.

Wherefore my soul thirsts for him, my flesh also longs after him, in a dry
and barren land where no water is.

Thus have I looked for thee in holiness, that I might behold thy power and
glory.

For thy loving kindness is better than the life it self, my lips shall praise
thee.

My soul shall be satisfied even as it were with marrow and fatness, when my
mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips.

Because thou have been mine helper, therefore under the shadow of thy wings
will I rejoice. Glory be, etc.

A Morning Prayer.
O Heavenly Father, which like a diligent Watchman attendest always upon thy
children, whether they wake or sleep, and mightily defendest them, not only
from Satan that old enemy of mankind, but also from all other their
adversaries; so that through thy Godly power, they be harmless preserved: I
most humbly thank thee, that it has pleased thy goodness so to take care of me
thy unprofitable servant this night past; that thou have both safely kept me
from all mine enemies, and have given me sweet sleep unto the comfort of my
body. I most entirely beseech thee, merciful Father, to show the like goodness
toward me this day in pre^erving my body and Soul, that mine enemies may have
no power over me, and that so likewise I may neither breath, ^peak, or do any
thing that may be displea^ing to thy Fatherly goodness, dangerous ^o my soul,
or hurtful to my neighbor; ^ut that all my enterprises may be agree^ble to thy
most blessed will, which is always good and godly, doing that that may always
advance thy glory, and ^nswer to my vocation, that whenso^ver Thou shall call
me from this vale of misery I may be found the child not of darkness, but of
light, and so for ever to reign with thee in glory, who art the true and
everlasting Light; to whom with the Son and the Holy Ghost, be all power and
glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for true sorrow of heart for sin.
O Most merciful God and dear Father, vouchsafe I beseech thee to look down
with thy fatherly eyes of pity upon me most vile and wretched sinner which lie
here prostrate in heart, before the feet of thy bottomless mercy; for I have
sinned against the throne of thy glory, and before thee O Father; yet
nevertheless, forasmuch as thou art the God of all comfort, and again desire
not the death of a sinner, make me I pray thee, by infusing thy precious oil of
comfort into my wounds, that I may joyfully run with the lost son into the lap
of thy pity; for lo^ thou art my hope and trust, in whom (...) repose my self,
having in thee full confidence in faith; yea, and I most vile wretch, do here
accuse my self unto thee O Father, in that I have so sore and grievously
offended thy Almighty goodness in the committing of so many grievous and
manifold offenses; I have not kept the least of thy most holy Commandments,
like as thy righteousness may require the same of me; but in what manner soever
I have offended against thy eternal Majesty, whether it has been by day or by
night, secretly or openly, O merciful GOD, I am sorry for it, even from the
bottom of my heart, yea my soul mourns that I am not a thousand times more
sorry than I am: and here in token of true repentance, I do knock and strike my
heart and say in bitterness of my heart and soul, Lord GOD the Father, have
mercy; Lord GOD the Son, have mercy; Lord GOD the Holy Ghost, have mercy, and
spare me of thy infinite goodness now and for ever; and let my heart have part
of thy abundant grace, so as I may change my sinful life, and put off the old
man with all concupiscence, and that I may die unto the world, and the world to
me: give my soul grace, O my GOD, to desire in thee only to rejoice and repose
my self, and that I may utterly renounce and forsake the vain assistance of
this World, so that thou may find me ready with the good servant in the
midnight of death, which shall suddenly steal upon me, like a thief ere I be
aware: wherefore be thou to me at that time (O Lord) a tower of strength, a
place of refuge, and a defensible GOD, namely against the face of the Devil,
who then will be ready to devour me, and against desperation, which then will
be ready to grieve me: let then thy comfort cleave fast to me, thy mercy keep
me, and thy grace guide me; fetch then again, Lord GOD the Father, that which
thy puissant might has shapen; fetch then again, Lord GOD the Son, that which
thou have so wisely governed, and bought with thy precious Blood; take again,
thou Lord GOD the Holy Ghost, that which thou have kept and preserved so
lovingly in this region of sin, and vale of misery, three persons and one GOD;
to whom be all glory and power, for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for Wisdom.
O Almighty and everlasting GOD, it is thy gift, that babes and men of base
degree have the knowledge and understanding of thy will, and men of profound
learning, deep study, and worldly appearance often want the same. It is thou
which expellest darkness, and give light; which take away ignorance, and
plantest knowledge and wisdom, denying the same to none that unfeignedly ask it
at thy hands; without the which nothing can be obtained which good is, nor
nothing avoided with the evil: and that did Solomon very well consider, who had
a promise at thy hands, that whatsoever he asked he should obtain: vouchsafe
therefore, O Lord, to send it down from Heaven, where it attends about thy
fear, and replenish my heart with the knowledge of it, that I may perfectly
know what thy divine will and pleasure is in all things, and that I may always
direct my ways by rule thereof, loving thee, and above all things, continuing
most thankful for all thy Fatherly benefits bestowed and conferred upon me, and
that prosperity overcome not, nor in adversity I be foolishly moved to seek
remedy elsewhere than at thy hands only, who art my God, and who have promised
to give wisdom to all them that unfeignedly ask it: O Lord hear my prayer, and
let my cry come unto thee; give perfect wisdom, whereby I may truly discern the
difference between the Heavenly revelation, which is wisdom from above, and
vain cogitations of worldly wits, considering that the one in all things, as
well in adversity as prosperity, continues most constant, stable, patient, and
firm: whereas contrariwise, the other seeks with more diligence to avoid the
afflictions, troubles and calamities which thou Iayest upon thy children; but,
most sweet LORD, and Heavenly Comforter, grant that it may be far from my heart
to think that any thing comes to pass otherwise than by thy Almighty
providence, who wills nothing, nor do any thing but what is most expedient
and necessary for the use of the bodies and souls of thy servants, which we
cannot rightly conceive without this especial gift of thine, wherewith for thy
Son Jesus Christ's sake endue me, that I be not led by fond conceit, or deceive
my self with worldly experience; but governing my self according to thy will,
and measuring all my actions, words and thoughts, by the right rule of
knowledge; in the end I may be found in the number of those discreet Virgins,
who had their Lamps continually burning, and not in the number of those that
were taken unprovided; that the coming of thy Son Jesus Christ be not terrible
unto me, but most acceptable and joyful; that in the end I may have free
entrance into that most glorious Kingdom, which thy Son JESUS Christ has
purchased with his blood for all true Believers in him; to whom with the Father
and the Holy Ghost be all glory for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for the true Worship of GOD.
O Most gracious God and loving Father, establish my heart and mind in the true
Worship of thy divine Majesty; Make me to believe thy Holy and Sacred Gospel,
wherein I am daily and hourly instructed, to love, fear, honor, and obey thee;
to renounce all superstitious ceremonies whereby thy Worship is defaced, thy
Glory profaned, and thine Honor greatly diminished; give me thy grace to hate
sin and iniquity, and to renounce and forsake the vanities and wanton pleasures
of this wicked and sinful world: Arm me, I beseech thee, to mortify and bring
under the rebellious appetites and strange lusts of the flesh; and finally,
give me power from above, to withstand Satan the Prince of darkness, and all
his damnable ministers, who by diverse temptations provokes and allures us from
Godly purity, and perfect integrity which passes only from Christ Jesus to us
who is the fullness of our perfection and holiness) to all kind of evil impiety
and uncleanness; by means whereof, thy Worship is greatly profaned, and of a
set purpose contemned: make me, O LORD, I beseech thee, by the power of a
fruitful faith, to resist and bridle the concupiscnce of my flesh, in such sort
that my soul may triumph with victory, and continue constant in worshipping
thee: prepare my heart and mind, to spread forth the glory of thy Name; keep my
tongue from all filthy talk, and uncomely gestures, lest by the exercise of
sin, I contemn thy Worship, and provoke thee to displeasure against me; set
thou a watch before the gates of my mouth, that my lips by grace may be always
made open to sound forth thy praise: be merciful to mine offenses, think thou
not on mine unrighteousness, but of thy clemency forgive thou freely, and
pardon graciously all my sins; make me faithful in Christ JESUS, shorten these
dangerous days of iniquity, increase the number of thy chosen and peculiar
Saints; hasten thy coming, O Savior Christ; that I with the fellowship of thy
Saints, heavenly Angels, and the blessed company of Martyrs, may celebrate thy
praise, and worship thee in thy glorious Kingdom, before thy Father, my GOD,
and the holy Ghost; to whom be praise and glory for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for Charity.
O Infinite Charity, thou Son of GOD, to whom the Father has surrendered all
power in Heaven and earth: I have offended thee, and endangered my soul
desperately: for Charity, O Charity! thou shall judge the world in equity, and
I have not Charity abiding within me: I love for gain, I hate mine enemies, I
pray not for them that curse me and speak evil of me: I have of thy benefits,
and yet I spare nothing for them that have need: O eternal Charity, I have
hereby incurred the peril of thy just judgment: Whereof, O heavenly Charity
have mercy upon me, and quit me from a replying conscience, and the court of
the Devil; for else will mine own life exclaim against me, and crave damnation
of my uncharitable conversion: O Lord my sweet Savior, I beseech thee for thy
bloody sweat, in the bottomless pit of thy mercy to drown all my
transgressions: adopt me thy Brother, and give me thy holy Spirits testimony as
a gage and earnest of mine adoption and election; that being free from sin, I
may serve thee with a free conscience, in hope of an unwavering faith in mercy.

Amen.
A Prayer for the feeling of GOD's Favor and Grace.
O My LORD GOD, and dear Father, I here crave thy assistance and grace, that
feel all things to work in me contrary to thy will: for blind is my mind,
crooked is my will, and perverse concupiscence is in me as a spring and
stinking puddle: faint is my faith, my sinful life increasing, and my sins
still abounding, so as from offending thee O Lord, I cannot cease neither day
nor night, and my sins are heavy upon me, pressing me down even to Hell, such
is the weight thereof; moreover when I prepare my self to amendment of life,
and think steadfastly to serve and please thee, even soon after does my corrupt
nature offend and displease thy divine Majesty; so that I am prone and ready to
run headlong into all kind of sin and wickedness: such is my strength, such is
my force and weakness in performing those things which thou requirest at my
hands; by reason whereof I am moved to doubt of thy goodness toward me, unless
thou of thy mercy and pity send thine aid from above, and pour into me thy most
healthful grace, that I may most assuredly and faithfully trust in the merits
of my Savior Jesus Christ, which is of far greater force, virtue and effect,
in preserving me, than all my sins and offenses are in condemning and casting
me away: wherefore O Father, as thou requirest thus strictly that I should
believe without doubting; so would thou in all my needs I should come unto
thee as a Father, and make my moan without mistrust of being heard in thy good
time, as most shall make for thy glory and my comfort: Lo therefore, to thee
dear Father do I come, in thy Son Jesus Christ, praying thee of thy great mercy
and goodness, to be merciful unto me, that I may love thee with all my heart
for ever; that my works may be ever found holy in thy sight, and that I may
always not only strive against sin, but also overcome the same daily more and
more, as thy children do, and above all things desire the sanctifying of thy
Name, the coming of thy Kingdom, the doing of thy Will here on earth, as it is
in Heaven, and that only through my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom be
all honor and glory, for ever and ever,

Amen.
A Prayer to GOD to bless our endeavors.
O My Celestial Father, be favorable unto me thy repentant servant, fled from
mine enemies to thy help and succor. Impute not my sins unto me, for Christ's
sake; for I have heard thy fatherly voice, and it sounds daily in mine ears
out of Heaven, promising me, and affirming constantly thy self to be appeased
with me for thy Sons sake, whom thou command me to hear and believe, who is
made of thee my righteousness, my salvation, my Peace, my Mediator and
intercessor, my fulfiller of the Law, my deliverer, and my whole holy
accomplisher of all my just desires, and my Savior Christ Jesus, God and man,
in whose Name at this time I attempt and take in hand all my just doings,
according to my calling, desiring thy gracious goodness, O Lord God and Father,
to prosper it, further it, and give it happy increase, that whatsoever I take
in hand, justly to finish the same. O holy Father, bless all my endeavors with
thy blessed increase, and let me not seek mine own will, but ever to pray that
thy will be fulfilled; and let me not be led into temptation, but deliver me
from all evil, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to live uprightly in our Calling.
O GOD of all comfort, and giver of all consolation, forgive my sins, cleanse
and wash me from all iniquities which disable me to perform my calling in such
sort as becomes me: and through the blood of thy Son, purify my heart and my
imperfections, and sanctify me with thy grace, that my sins being forgiven, I
may rest in thy favor and continual comfort, and be daily blessed with new
gifts; that I may be found perfect in my calling, seasoned so with a lively
faith in thee, that thy holy Spirit may continually dwell and bear rule in me,
and lead me to the due performance of those things which thou requirest to be
done in my calling; that all unnatural affection being truly mortified, I may
only rest in thee, and rely on thee, and be ruled by thee in all things: Good
Father, grant that I may take the direct and right course in my vocation to
eternal life, in which course consists the inward peace of the Soul, which is
only delighted in thy inviolable truth, revealed by thy Son, and is left unto
us in His Word and last Will, in which his last Will and Testament are
comprehended all necessary Rules, and the sacred discipline whereby thy
children are to guide themselves in their several callings; which directions
are comprehended in three principal virtues by thee bestowed on them that seek
them at thy hand in the Name of thy Son; as Faith, Hope and Love; which three
are so united and knit together in one, in thine elect children, that they
through thy grace go not awry in their calling: I therefore dear Father, being
of my self ignorant, and of mine own power unable to comprehend the height of
my calling, instantly beseech thee in mercy to behold me an unperfect creature,
without these Virtues; and so adorn me with them, that I may be made perfect in
all good works of the Spirit, that my labors and endeavors be not in vain in
thee: and grant that I may join, with all my travils, desires and endeavors,
faith with ^aith, knowledge with knowledge, temperance with temperance,
patience with patience, godliness with godliness, brotherly kindness with
brotherly kindness; and with brotherly kindness, that I be not unfruitful in my
calling, but may acknowledge thy Son Jesus Christ, and in him have peace of
conscience, that I may be patient in troubles, long-suffering in wrongs,
faithful in expecting hope in distress, rejoicing in heart, quieted in mind, in
hope to enjoy at thy hands, and in thy good time whatsoever makes for the true
comfort of my soul, and the relief of my body; that in all true and inward
feeling of thine aid, my calling may be made perfect, and sealed with the seal
of thine own Spiritual Probation; so shall I thy unworthy servant be directed
in the true knowledge of Thee. O blessed Lord, and loving Father, except thou
thus direct me, I cannot stand, but shall fall into many miseries: for no
Estate, no Degree, no Calling, Office, Function, or Trade of life can prosper,
or be rightly performed without thy continual aid, direction and providence:
therefore good Lord guide me by thy Spirit, increase my faith, give me wisdom
and ableness in all things, to execute my calling as I ought: and to the
execution thereof, bless all my members, make them apt and ready instruments to
perform their duties, that in no point I fail in a Christain proceeding
therein: and bridle me in the nature of flesh and blood; which unless thou
season my affections by thy Spirit, will so much the more glory, by how much
that thou have exalted me, and enabled me to live in this world in higher
reputation than other men, whereunto flesh and blood is ready to attribute
chiefest hearts ease, and by that subtle shift Stan many times moves us to
rely upon vain things. Wherefore, O good Father, vouchsafe, I beseech thee, to
ground all my affections upon thy fear that I be not miscarried in my calling
from the true obedience of thee; without which, neither honor, profit, wealth,
wisdom, or any other blessing of thine can stand, relieve or comfort me: be
pleased therefore, dear Father, with me, and grant that all things that I take
in hand, may begin in knowledge, proceed in fear, and end in love, that the
whole course of my life may be blessed with good effect in all mine
enterprises, that neither mine enemies rejoice at my miseries, the Godly be
offended at my rashness, nor my estate hindered by my foolishness: grant this,
good Lord, for thy dear Sons sake Jesus Christ; to whom be all honor and glory
for even.

Amen.
Prayers for Thursday Night.
O Lord my God and Heavenly Father, blessed be thy Name for ever: dispose my
heart, open my lips, and give me thy Holy Spirit, etc.

A Psalm.
GRacious is the LORD, and righteous, yea, our GOD is Merciful.

The Lord preserves the simple; I was in misery, and He helped me.

Turn thou again unto my rest, O my soul, for the Lord has rewarded thee.

And why? thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my
feet from falling.

What reward shall I give unto the Lord, for all the benefits that he has done
unto me?

I will offer unto Him the Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and call upon his Name.

For why? the Lord is on my side, therefore I will not fear what man can do
unto me.

The Lord takes my part with them that help me; Therefore shall I see my
desire upon mine enemies.

It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in man: it is
better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in Princes.

The Lord is my strength and my song, and is become my salvation.

The right hand of the Lord has the preeminence, the right hand of the Lord
brings mighty things to pass.

I will not die but live, and declare the works of the Lord.

The Lord has chastned and corrected me, but he has not given me over to
death.

Thou art my God, and I will thank thee: thou art my God, and I will praise
thee.

O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for
ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

A devout Prayer to GOD the Father.
O Most blessed LORD, and loving Father, I wretched sinner do here ask at thy
hands mercy and grace, who am in thy sight most weak to stand in thy truth; and
most frail to fall, and to break thy holy commandments, by the keeping of which
we are known to be thy true servants, and by nothing else. O most merciful LORD
GOD, I acknowledge my self daily to break the same: but where I have thus
offended, I humbly ask of thee mercy and forgiveness; and Lord, for the true
performance of the same, I humbly ask of thee strength to make me stand strong
in faith, knowledge to work thy blessed will, the power to resist all error
and wicked imagination, thy wisdom to know the truth; for I confess and know O
LORD, that all the worldly wit, policy, knowledge, and strength is but
foolishness in thy sight. Therefore I ask and continually crave, O Lord, that
thy holy Spirit may guide all the imaginations, thoughts and desires of my
heart, so that it may be my spiritual heart, and not my fleshly heart: for the
most perfect among the children of men, lacking the wisdom, shall not be
regarded, for the thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and our forecastings
are uncertain: and why this corruptible body is so heavy to my soul that it
keeps down my understanding, that it museth most on vain things; wherefore
good Lord I beseech thee, comfort my sick soul, that it may walk in thy ways,
and work thy will; and like as thou know the secrets of my heart, and the
desires of the same; and how I would walk in thy truth, and work in the works
of the same truth: so Lord, I beseech thee, refresh my soul according to thy
merciful calling, that I may be sted fast in the true faith, and that I may
never swerve from the holy and most blessed Ordinances of the Church; but that
I may use them, receive them, and honor thee in them, according to thy most
holy will, as in things which thou have left to declare thy love unto us, and
to assure our hope, and exercise our faith, that it should not be idle or
wavering; for all things are possible unto thee, though they seem never so
impossible unto us. O most loving Father, I know that by my sins I am not
worthy thy blessed comfort and help, in this troublesome time of temptation,
and trying of our faith; for that I am as one laden with ignorance, not knowing
the height of thy high mysteries, nor the deceitfulness or subtle arguments of
my Ghostly enemy, which daily does assault my sinful soul, that I can find no
rest: therefore, O LORD, like as thou know my will and hearts desire is to
serve thee, and live and die in thy perfect faith: so I beseech thee never to
suffer the subtle persuasions contrary to thy truth, to take place or root in
my heart, but like as thou have created my heart, and given me a will to order
the same, so Lord, I most humbly yield the same again into thy hands, desiring
thee by thy holy Spirit so to direct my ways, that they may be acceptable in
thy sight, now and for ever, through Jesus Christ my Savior; to whom with the
Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to obtain the true love of GOD.
O Lord my God, teach me thy humble servant, teach my heart, I beseech thee,
with what reverence it should think of thee; tell my Soul with what delight it
should love thee: give my tongue some power to pour forth praises unto thee;
correct my weakness, recreate my hope, direct my desires, finish the work thou
have begun, and bring me to the fullness of thy mercy. O LORD, my GOD, I bow the
neck of my soul under the feet of thy Majesty, and in the lowest degree of
reverence, do give thee most humble and hearty thanks. I yield thee praises, O
LORD, although base and bare, far unanswerable to thy deserts; yet something my
weakness is bound to perform, namely, to settle my mind to be hold and love
thee. O that my heart did so languish with thy love, that it might melt the
moisture of my body into tears! that the bowels of my soul were so inflamed
with thy love that it might consume all drossie desires, dry up the very marrow
of my bones! O that I were sick for the love of Him who dyed for the Love of
me! LORD, although I be not worthy so to love thee, yet art thou much more to
be loved than I can express; therefore do not so deny me of that whereof I
acknowledge my self unworthy, that thy self be deprived of that thou art most
worthy: and grant O Lord I beseech thee, for thy mercies sake, to my soul, that
it may love thee as thou have deserved, that I may be worthy to give that which
thou art worthy to receive; so shall I then be worthy of that whereof now I am
most unworthy: O most dear Lord, I feel in my heart a weak warmness of thy
love; but my prayer is that the coals were thoroughly kindled with desire, and
blown with delight into a full flame: O sacred fire, how comfortably do thou
burn? O heavenly Light, how sweetly do thou shine? how desirous are they more
and more to burn whom thou do inflame? how are they delighted whom thou do
enlighten? hear O my God, hear O light of mine eyes, increase my desire, and
grant my request, stop not thine ears against me because of my sins, endue my
soul with thy love, subdue my flesh with thy fear, that I may always think of
thee jointly both with trembling and trust: settle the love of thee in me, and
the care of me in thee; let my prayer come unto thee, and thy mercy unto me;
let the joy of thy happiness remain with me, and the compassion of my miseries
with thee; let my heart love thee, let my flesh fear thee, and let my whole
substance in this world joy wholly in thee, that I may enjoy thee wholly in the
world to come, by thee, O Christ, who art my Savior and Deliverer; to whom
belongs all power and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer in heart to feel spiritual comforts
O Lord GOD and most dear Father, now I fully know the heart of man is not in
his own power; for thou have taught me by thy d^minishing the Spirit of comfort
in my heart, that it is thou only which make joyful the heart of man; and
which diminishest the same joy according to thy good pleasure and will:
therefore O dear Father, I beseech thee to send me thy most blessed comfort,
and strength of Faith into my heart, to fill the same with spiritual joy; and
that by the working of thy holy Spirit in me, the comfortable promises of thy
merciful Protection may be sealed in my heart, and sink deep into my soul, that
I may be fully assured that thou art my strong rock and house of defense, that
thou do keep me as the apple of thine eye, and that thou will not lay more
upon me than thou will give me strength to abide; but that thou will assuredly
at thy appointed time, renew my heart, and the whole power of my mind, that I
may fully glorify thy Name. Thy Holy Spirit, O Lord, in me, (which is the
assurance of my Salvation) does continually send forth unspeakable sighs and
longings for thy full and joyful presence: I beseech thee therefore, O dear
Father, for thy Son JESUS's sake, hearken to my prayers, and grant my requests:
make tender my hard and stony heart by thy holy Spirit, that I may from the
bottom of my heart acknowledge thee to be my most merciful God and Father, and
all things in thy holy Word to be most certain and true, and reverently embrace
the same, and in my soul to take comfort and joy of the same, that I may even
to my lives end walk before thee in sincerity of heart, being assured of my
salvation, through that one alone sacrifice for my sins, made by thy dear Son
Jesus Christ; to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be all honor and glory for
ever.

Amen.
A fruitful petition to GOD.
O LORD GOD of infinite wisdom, inspire my heart, and direct my voice, that I
may not think nor utter any thing before thy Majesty, but that which thou
know to be expedient for me to ask, and glorious for thee to give. Turn not
my prayer, Good Lord, into perdition, nor my suit into sin; for thou art the
God of my Fathers, on whom I wholly depend; save me for thy mercies sake; O
save me as I have always put my trust in thee, and when through the
perverseness and froward inclination of my nature, I fall into any wickedness
and sin, leave me not, good Lord, unto them; acquit me from the inordinate lust
of the body; let no desire of uncleanness take hold upon me, and give me not
over to an unshamefast and obstinate mind. Lord, here I stand, vile wretch
before the throne of thy dreadful presence, hoping that I shall be heard, not
in the faintness of my faith, but in the power of thy promises. O weigh my
weakness, and grant my desires, as thou know most meet for me; then can I
want nothing, and my conscience shall be comforted with all spiritual
consolation in Jesus Christ; to whom with thee, O Father, and the holy Spirit,
be ascribed all power and glory for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to be ingrafted into Christ.
O LORD, it is mercy without merit, that I am a branch of the Vine Jesus; that
I am the house and Temple of the Holy Ghost, It is of Justice that thou have
appointed thy house to be a place of prayer, and of duty therefore that we
should pray unto thee; For this, O Lord, I thank thee, that thou have made me
thy child, to lodge me; and I acknowledge, that of duty I am bound to serve
thee; but give me O Lord, the grace of thy Spirit to conduct me in the way of
thy will: cleanse or create a new heart within me, that I may be a fit lodging
for thee, and yield up the savoury sacrifice unto thee, which thou requirest of
every Christian; I mean the sacrifice of prayer, the sacrifice of the heart,
which savoureth sweetly unto thee. And at this time, in hope of the assistance
of thy holy Spirit, I desire thee, that as thou have of mercy covered me under
thy wings of safety; so thou will defend and keep me from all the storming
rages of Satan, who is wont not only by day, but also, and that especially, by
night, to undermine man when his senses are fettered in bands of rest; but I
hope, O good Lord, that as I am then most unable, and at all times else to
withstand the buffets and assaults of Satan, so thou will be most ready to
succor me; and partly, because thereby thou shall unlock the riches of thine
infinite mercy and pity; and partly, because thou love every thing which thy
hands have made. For which, and for all other thy blessings, I yield thee all
honor, power and glory, which is due only to thy blessed Majesty, for ever,
world without end.

Amen.
A Prayer against evil imaginations.
O Lord, cleanse my heart, I do beseech thee, from all impure and wicked
cogitations and thoughts; give me a clear conscience, shame-fac'd eyes, modest
hands, and a tongue to tell the truth: and, seeing there is nothing hid that
shall not be discovered, good Lord, I beseech thee to search my thoughts, and
renew in me thy holy Spirit; direct my feet in thy ways, that walking after
thee in the path of the righteous, I may pass through this vail of misery,
bearing thy banner stoutly in my warfare, and in the end obtain everlasting
joy, the promised hire of such as have born thy Cross, and valiantly fought
with the armor of faith against temptations and all evil; vouchsafe, O Lord,
to grant all these my supplications and petitions, for thy dear Sons sake,
Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior; to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be
ascribed all power and glory for ever,

Amen.
An Evening Prayer.
O Heavenly Father, the giver of all good things, and the protector of all
those that love thee, I yield thee most humble and hearty thanks, not only for
keeping and preserving me this day, but all my life; that neither my enemies
have prevailed against me as they sought, nor any other danger which in this
world is incident unto mankind has overcome me, but have like a loving Father
and careful purveyor, given and provided for me all things necessary; for which
thine inestimable love, I cannot sufficiently praise thee. O Lord, forgive mine
offenses which this day (...) have committed and done against thy Almighty
Majesty: pardon them, O God, for Jesus Christ his sake, and vouchsafe me thy
grace to amend my life, and to return ^nfeignedly to the serving of thee; And
^orasmuch as I cannot continue without ^hy continual protection, vouchsafe to
ex^end the same unto me thy wretched crea^ure this night, that I may quietly
take my rest, which thou have appointed for ^he refreshing of my wearied and
weak ^ody; And further, I beseech thee, O Lord, to guard and defend me, that
nothing hurt me; keep me also, good Lord, from sudden and unprovided death, and
preserve me by the watch of thy holy Angel, that I may take my rest this night
in thee until the morning, and then give my self to the fulfilling of my duty,
and the discharge of my vocation, and the doing of thy will unto my lives end;
for which thy favor, I humbly beseech thee, and for all things else necessary
for me, and for all other whom thou have commanded us to pray for; and namely,
for all such as are in any kind of affliction in body or mind, for the
testimony of thy truth, that thou will strengthen them and thy whole Church in
pure Religion; and here, O Lord, I beseech thee to embrace me with the arms of
thy mercy; vouchsafe to receive me into the bosom of thy love, shadow me with
thy wings, that I may safely take my rest in thee this night, in the Name of
thy Son Jesus Christ, in whose Name I refer me wholly to thy loving protection,
beseeching thee that when this life shall end, my last sleep being come, I may
take my everlasting rest with thee in thy eternal Kingdom; for the which
Kingdom, I do heartily beseech thee of thine inestimable goodness, both of my
self and all other thy dear servants, that we may attain the same, for the
glory of thy holy Name, and our endless comfort, through the merits of thy
dearly beloved Son, our Lord and only Savior, Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Prayers for Friday Morning.
O Lord God and heavenly Father, blessed be thy Name for ever: Dispose my
heart, open my lips, and give me thy holy Spirit, etc.

A Psalm.
MY soul truly waits still upon God, for of him comes my salvation.

In God is my help and my glory, the rock of my might, and in God is my trust.

I called upon him with my mouth, and gave him praise with my tongue.

For thou, O Lord God, art the thing that I long for, thou art my hope even
from my youth.

Through thee have I been helped up even since I was born, thou art he that
took me out of my mothers womb, my praise shall be always of thee.

Wherefore praised be God which has not cast out my prayer, nor turned his
mercy from me.

O let my mouth be filled with thy praise, that I may sing of thy glory and
honor all the day long.

Cast me not away in time of age, forsake me not when my strength fails me.

My mouth shall daily speak of thy righteousness and salvation, for I know no
end thereof.

I will go forth in the strength of the Lord God, and will make mention of thy
righteousness only.

For thou, O God, have taught me from my youth up until now, therefore will I
tell of thy wondrous works.

Thy righteousness, O God, is very high, and great things are they that thou
have done, O God, who is like unto thee?

O what troubles and adversities have thou showed me, and yet did thou turn
and refresh me, yea, broughtest me from the depth of the earth again.

Therefore will I praise thee, and thy faithfulness, O God, which art the holy
One of Israel.

My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long, for there is
no end thereof. Glory, etc.

A Morning Prayer.
O Lord, the glorious face of the Sun which shows it self, and casts its
beams over the whole world, I take it for an argument and earnest penny of thy
good will toward thy children, in the number of whom I account my self, though
chief of sinners, and not worthy to loose the latchet of thy shoe; for if we
enjoy such a benefit in this strange country together with thine enemies, then
what joyous sights, what store of thy goodness shall we reap in our natural
country, the blisful Land of Canaan where we shall not see this worldly Sun,
but thee, even thee, good Lord, face to face, the Son of thy glory, and only
Star of Majesty! Such joys, O Lord, shall we have in the beholding of thee, as
neither the eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor heart ever conceived: such
joys, I say, as pass the reach, not only of man, but also of Angels, to esteem:
blessed are the doorkeepers of this house of joy, where thou, O Lord, the Son
of righteousness, do most clearly spread forth the beams of thy divine power.
Oh how long shall I live in this prison, how long shall I journey in this body
of sin? wherefore, O God of comfort, and Father of mercy, I do not doubt, but
that as I wander in this field of vanity, so thou will recall me by the light of
thy Gospel to thine house, there to dwell and reign for ever.

Amen.
An humble Confession to Almighty God.
O Most mighty God and merciful Father, I present my self before thy Majesty,
defiled with the filthiness of many and most grievous sins, whereof I do
confess I am not able to answer thee one of a thousand, if thou, O Lord,
should enter into judgment with me! for in sin was I born, and therefore am
guilty of original corruption, and in sin have I lived and continued, and
therefore stand guilty of actual transgression, which has broken forth upon
me, in thought, word and deed, from time to time, continually, even unto this
present hour: wherefore, I humbly crave thy mercy, and the grace of forgiveness
in Jesus Christ: for therein I confess, O Lord, stands the only hope of my
comfort and salvation: And forasmuch as it has pleased thee to give thine own
Son to be a slain sacrifie for our sins, and to offer the grace of
reconciliation, by preaching the Gospel to all them that repent and believe the
same: good Lord, I beseech thee vouchsafe to make me of that blessed number;
work true repentance in my heart, increase my faith, and give me grace to bring
forth the fruits thereof, that so it may appear that I have not received thy
grace in vain: and for this purpose, good Lord, I beseech thee bless the
Ministers of thy Word: and give them grace to speak it as it ought to be
spoken, and give thy people grace to hear it attentively, to believe it
steadfastly, and to follow it obediently: that so serving thee faithfully in
this life, we may live and reign with thee for ever in the life to come.

Amen.
A Prayer for the increase of Faith.
O Almighty God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: by thy Word we are taught
to love thee, fear thee, and serve thee; and in true godliness and sincerity of
life, is the only way and means to continue thy love and favor toward us,
without the which we cannot but perish: and that belief and confidence in thy
Son Jesus Christ, is the only means of our redemption and atonement with thee,
and the only hold of our salvation, whereof we cannot be sufficiently assured
without thy special gift of faith, which is the anchor whereto the cable of our
salvation is fastened; which being broken, the hope of our salvation cannot but
decay and be of none effect: vouchsafe therefore, O most merciful God, to plant
one spark of true faith in my heart; and that it may grow to such perfection,
that I may know thee, perfectly love thee, duly fear thee, and unseignedly
acknowledge Jesus Christ to be sent into this wretched world to save us
miserable sinners: O Lord, grant me to take such hold of his Death and Passion,
Resurrection and Ascension, that by his Death I may have pardon, and by his Re
surrection rise to righteousness, and by his Ascension ascend with him to thy
celestial glory; and finally attribute the cause and means of my salvation to
proceed only of his Passion: increase this faith in me, good Lord, daily more
and more, that it may grow by the working of thy holy Spirit to full
perfection, accompanied with good works and godly behavior, without the which
I confess that faith cannot be: withhold not from me, good Lord, that singular
gift of thine which is the stay of my happiness; and the want thereof, a most
certain token of my perdition; no good thing is wanting to him on whom thou
vouchsafest to bestow this gift; to him all things are light, and in him
remains no darkness at all: banish, most sweet Lord, therefore all misbelief,
all wavering and doubting out of my heart, and plant instead thereof unfeigned
faith, that applying the same to every affliction both of body and mind, I may
vanquish and overcome Satan, withstand the delights of this world, and suppress
the corruptible motions of the flesh, and enjoy at thy good pleasure health of
body, and soundness of mind, and all things requisite for me. A most precious
jewel is faith; for thou have said, that whosoever hears the Word, and
believes in Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, shall have everlasting life;
then on the contrary, he that believes not, is in danger of everlasting death.
O Lord, increase my faith, wherein I may believe in that thy Son, and take hold
of all his promises; who said, that whosoever believes in him shall want no
manner of thing that is good; Lord, I believe, help my unbelief, and give me
faith; yea, but as a grain of mustardfeed, and I shall be able to remove Satan
out of his desired habitation, and to expel him and his ministers, and walk no
longer according to the will of the flesh; but casting away the works of
darkness, enjoy the pure light of the Gospel, and persevere and abide therein
without fainting, in any tribulation or vexation of spirit, going forward in
hope, in fear, in love, and unfeigned zeal toward thee, and obtain at thy
merciful hands whatsoever is necessary in this life; and after this life ended,
enjoy thy celestial inheritance; which grant me for thy Son Jesus Christ his
sake, to whom be all honor, etc.

A Prayer or Thanksgiving for the Passion of Christ.
O Lord Jesus Christ, God and man, we thank thee for that of thy only and free
mercy, without any works or worthiness at all of ours, thou have redeemed us
miserable sinners, through thy most innocent and holy Passion: O sweet Jesus,
how. bitter and great were thy pains? how. horrible and cruel thy punishment?
how grievous and lamentable thine afflictions? how bloody thy wounds? thy
dolours how diverse? and thy death how shameful, which thou suffered for us? O
how inestimable was thy love, that moved thee to endure such and so great
torments to reconcile us to thy Father! in the Mount of Olives, through our
infinite sins lighting upon thee, thou did sweat (contrary to our nature)
blood, that the drops like blood trickled upon the earth, and so after a
mavelous manner blood came out of thee, being expelled by the resolutions of
the Spirits, nature being broken and languishing by reason of thine intolerable
sorrows and torments: and thy Disciples being fled, thou wast, and also did
most voluntarily commit thy self into the hands of most cruel Jews, which
brought thee most rigorously bound, without compassion, fromthe presence of one
corrupt Judge unto another more cruel, where thou wast most unjustly condemned;
thy blessed body was so mangled, that even an Ethnic pitying the same, uttered
these words; Behold the man! Finally, for our enormous offenses, thou wast
afflicted with a most odious kind of death, and so in the extremity of pain
thou did give up the Ghost, commending the same unto thy Father in wonderful
patience; that so by thy torments having quitted us from all guiltiness, as
well of fault as of punishment, we might be healed; to this end thou did bear
the burden of our sins upon the wood of the Cross, that thou might recover
the peace of souls, and obtain the true righteousness for as many as believe in
thee: wherefore, O Jesus Christ, thou Son of the living God, for these torments
and all other thy passions, I will honor and praise thee for ever, beseeching
thee most humbly, that thy passions may work and take effect in me; and that
always being mindful of the same, I may rejoice therein, and make it a comfort
for my self against all the temptations of Satan, and the fear of sin and the
Law, and that thy Cross may be an example unto me; that walking in thy steps, I
render not rebuke, but for rebuke may, imitate thy long-suffering, praying for
such as persecute and offend me; and finally, that I may so think upon, and
celebrate the cause of thy death, that the consideration thereof may utterly
extinguish all the flames of unlawful concupiscence, and bury the inticements
of the flesh, and nourish the love of virtue within me, that so being wholly
dead unto sin, I may live unto righteousness, and serve thee which barest our
sins in thy body upon the Cross, which live and reignest with God the Father
in the unity of the Holy Ghost, one God for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for mercy for our offenses.
O Lord, I am a grievous sinner, I have passed and broken the banks of thy
Commandments from the womb to this day; I have with the Pirate Satan, sailed in
the ship of iniquity, so that I may say with Paul, I am chief of all sinners.
This must I needs confess to thee, thou God of Justice, and this worm of
conscience biteth me; what then, good Lord, shall the worm devour me? shall
this snake of conscience sting me to death? What, good Lord, is the stream of
thy mercy stopped? are the rivers of thy grace dried up? do thou not call me,
saying, Come unto me? Yea, good Lord, and therefore despair I will not, it is
not thy will that any sinner should perish; and thou have not only said, but
sworn it, that thou will not the death of a sinner, but rather his conversion
and life. Behold therefore, dear Father, I come unto thee, being a grievous
offender, in hope of pardon, in the Name of thy Son, who by his own testimony
came into this world to save sinners: he was content to blot out that
obligation which Satan had against me, by the flood of his most precious blood
which issued out of his glorious side. In this pool he has washed away the
leprosy of sin, were it never so desperate, O Lord and gracious God, I have
wasted my days in vanity, I have from time to time trodden under my feet the
pearls of Christian profession; even from the womb have I been a rebellious
traitor to thy Majesty, a friend to this world, to godliness an enemy. But now,
O Lord, I cry unto thee, forgive me, forgive me; Now I come unto thee,
therefore cover me with the wings of thy mercy, that I perish not; good Lord,
accept thy Sons merits for a satisfaction for my sins, drown them in the stream
of thy mercy, and cast them behind thee for ever, good Lord, I beseech thee. Oh
sweet Lord, look upon me with thy most precious and piteous eye, lest that be
destroyed which thou of thy great goodness have made, and Christ thy Son of
inestimable love, and infinite charity has redeemed, through his bitter
passion. This is the total sum unto thee of all my suit, O Lord, mercy, mercy,
O Father of mercy: mercy is the thing that I beg, have mercy and pity upon me;
be thou my shepherd to defend me, my Castle of defense to save me against the
power of the Devil: thou have store of mercy for them that ask it; Therefore, O
Lord, for the wounds of thy dear Son have mercy upon me: let not sin sting me
to death, but lay to my fore soul the salve of thy mercy: grant this, O dear
Father, of thy merciful compassion; to whom be all glory for ever, and for
ever, world without end.

Amen.
A fruitful Prayer to God the Father.
O Lord my God, wherein is my hope fixed in this life, or what is my greatest
comfort of all things that are any where under the cope of heaven, but only
thou my Lord and God, whose mercy is infinite? when was it with me well if thou
were absent, or ill if thou were present? doubtless I would rather choose to be
poor for thee, than rich without thee, and rather to be with thee a pilgrim on
earth, than without thee to possess Heaven: where thou art, there is joy and
peace of conscience; where thou art not, there is woe and destruction; thou
alone art the thing I desire, and there is none can assist me in my troubles
but thou alone, O God: thou art my hope, thou art my confidence, thou art my
comforter in all things most faithfully: all men seek their own, but thou
desire naught but my welfare, and turnest all things for me to good,
therefore in thee, my Lord and God, I place all my confidence, on thee I do lay
all my calamities and troubles; for without thee whatsoever I behold, is as
frail and transitory: For neither can friends profit, nor strong men help, nor
wise men counsel well, nor learned books comfort, nor riches save, nor secret
place hide, unless thou be present to help, strengthen, comfort, instruct and
keep: for whatsoever seems to belong to the attainment of peace and felicity
without thee, is nothing, and brings indeed no felicity at all; so that thou
art the chiefest end and perfection of life, and that in thee to trust, above
all things* is the chiefest comfort of thy servant. O my God and Father of
mercy, bless, make my soul holy with celestial happiness, that it may be thy
sacred habitation and temple purged from all filthiness. O Lord, according to
the greatness of thy mercy, look upon me, and hear the supplications of thy
poor servant, living far off, a banished man, in a savage country: Protect and
keep the soul of thy servant, among so many dangers of this mortal life, and
bring me by the conduction of thy savor into the country of eternal glory,
through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior; to whom be all honor, power and
glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
Prayers for Friday Night.
O Lord my God and Father, blessed be thy Name for ever. Dispose my heart, open
my lips, and give, etc.

A Psalm.
WIth my whole heart have I sought thee, O let me not go wrong out of thy
commandments. Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy free Spirit.

Stablish thy word in thy servant, that I may fear thee, and turn away mine
eyes, lest they behold vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way.

So shall I always keep thy law, yea, for ever and ever.

Yea at midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee, because of thy righteous
judgments.

O let thy merciful kindness be my comfort, according to thy word unto thy
servant.

And let thy loving mercies come unto me, that I may live, for thy law is my
delight.

My soul has longed for thy salvation, and I have a good hope because of thy
word.

O how sweet are thy words unto my throat! yea, sweeter than honey unto my
mouth.

Through thy commandments I get understanding, therefore I hate all wicked ways.

Order my steps in thy word, so shall no wickedness have dominion over me.

O let my soul live, and it shall praise thee, and thy judgments shall help me.

I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost: O seek thy servant, that I do
not forget thy commandments. Glory be to the Father, etc.

A Prayer for the suppressing of corrupt affections.
O My God and most loving Father, I do acknowledge that I have most highly
offended thy sacred Majesty, by my gross and most filthy life, and have
provoked thee to anger by my abominable wickedness: wherefore, O Lord, be
merciful unto me, and pardon me this great wickedness; look not upon me, good
Father, with the eyes of Justice, neither do thou draw against me the sword of
Judgment; for then how shall I that am but dust and ashes stand in thy sight,
when thy wrathful indignation comes forth as a whirlwind, and thy heavy
displeasure as a mighty tempest; seeing the earth trembles, the depths are
discovered, and the very Heavens are shaken when thou art angry? Exercise not
therefore, good Lord, thy fury against me, that am but as chaff before the
wind, and as stubble against a flaming fire: Though I have sinned grievously in
thy sight, preferring my wicked desires before thy holy Commandments, esteeming
the pleasure of a moment before eternal and everlasting joys; yet am I bold, O
merciful Father, to prostrate my self before the Throne of thy Majesty,
heartily to beseech, and humbly to entreat thee, that thou will not deal with
me according to my deserts; for I have none in heaven to fly unto but thee, nor
in the earth of whom I may receive any comfort, but at thy fatherly hands,
which are stretched out day and night, to receive all that by earnest
repentance turn unto thee, and to refresh their distressed consciences:
wherefore, O Lord, in the multitude of thy mercies I approach unto thee,
desiring thee to look down from the height of thy sanctuary, upon me poor and
wretched sinner, and to wipe away mine offenses, and to blot out my misdeeds,
especially all those my ungracious, unclean, and ungodly acts, that they may
not come up in remembrance with thee, nor be imputed to me for ever.

For thy Sons sake, O Lord, in whom thou art well pleased, and in whom thou
wast fully satisfied upon the Cross for my sins, grant me free pardon and
remission, in that I have so foolishly, by my exceeding frailty committed
against thee; but quicken thou me, O Lord, that art the fountain of life, and
call thou out of heaven thy dwelling place, that my wandering soul may hear the
voice of her shepherd, and follow thee wheresoever thou leadest. O give me thy
helping hand, and by thy Spirit cast down, subdue, and mortify my raging ^usts
and affections; let me not any longer be occupied in ungodliness, lest mine
enemies triumph over me: pluck up, O my good Father, these roots of bitterness,
that no unsavory fruit may come of the Tree, which thou of thine own hand have
planted. I desire, I look, I call, I cry for thy assistance, that I may conquer
and subdue all the sinful and unruly motions of my heart. O blessed Savior,
that have granted so many petitions upon earth, to them that were careful for
the body, fulfill (...) pray thee this my desire: mortify, good Father, in me
the old body of sin, and give unto me a new body, purged from these works, to
serve thee the living God: ^enew my spirit daily, that I may cast away these
works of darkness: why should my body, made by thy hands, and my soul framed
according to thy Image, be given over as a prey into the hands of Satan?
Deliver me, O Lord, from the snare of the hunter, and preserve me from the hand
of mine enemy, who lies in wait for my spiritual life, and labors for my
everlasting destruction. To thee I fly, O Lord, for succor, hide me therefore
under the shadow of thy hand, that none of the fiery darts of Satan take hold
on me. And so, good Lord, to conclude, for the love thou bear unto mankind,
for thy Sons sake Jesus Christ, who has taken our nature upon him, grant that
I may not be tempted above my strength, but that in all temptations I may fly
unto thee, as mine only comfort and salvation, and that thou will of thy mercy
and goodness, give me grace and desire to withstand all the motions of my
sinful flesh and affections: which word of thine, I beseech thee, O Lord, to
perfect and fully accomplish in me, that I may do all things pleasing in thy
sight for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for redress of a sinful life.
O Most merciful God and dear Father, grant that with heart I desire thee, with
desiring seek thee, in seeking find thee, in finding that I love thee, and, by
loving thee, that I turn not again to my former sins, which thou have redeemed:
give me, O Lord, a repentant heart, and a contrite spirit: quench in me O King
of glory, the lust of my flesh and kindle in me the ^ire of thy love. O my
Redeemer take from me the spirit of pride, and most favorably enrich me with
the measure of humility; remove from me, O my Savior, the fury of anger, and
graciously arm me with the shield of patience: O my Creator, root out of me all
rancour, and endue me with a cheerful and meek heart, and bestow upon me a
perfect faith, right hope, and constant love: preserve me from all vanity,
inconstancy of mind, wavering of heart, scoffing of tongue, wicked slandering;
from the vice of hypocrisy, the poison of flattery, contempt of the poor,
oppression of the weak, from greedy avarice, cankered envy, and deadly
blasphemy: root out of me, O my Lord and Maker, rash boldness, contumacy,
frowardness, negligence, idleness, blindness of heart, obstinacy of mind,
savage conditions, contempt of that good is, rigor toward my neighbor: O my
God and merciful Father, I beseech thee in Jesus Christ, to bless me with the
works of mercy, and zeal of godliness: to suffer with the afflicted, to
minister to the needy, to counsel them that go astray, to comfort the
sorrowful, to pardon them that trespass against me, to love them that hate me,
to render good for evil, to imitate the good, to beware of the evil, and to
embrace virtue, to guard the door of my mouth, to watch the enemies that
compass my lips, to despise worldly things, and earnestly to thirst after the
Heavenly: through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior; to whom be all honor and
glory for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for continual remembrance of our end.
O God, the only giver of life, and the maintainer and preserver thereof, and
the life after death; grant me true consideration that this body of mine is
builded upon an earthly foundation, and framed of the substance of dust and
clay, which is not durable, the glory whereof vanishes like the flower of the
field, which is soon cut down and withered; the body is the mansion, or rather
the prison of the soul, and the same so frail, weak and feeble, subject to so
many causes that procure the dissolution of body and soul, that death often
happens when we think least thereon; wherefore grant, O God, of my life, that
I may have such continual care, foresight, and diligent respect unto the
direction of my doings, cogitation, and words, as I load not my poor Soul so
much with the burden of senseless security, sin and iniquity, that the body
being suddenly entangled with the snares of death, be carried where there is no
rest nor joy, but continual mourning and anguish of mind: O my most loving
Father, lighten mine Eyes that I sleep not in sin, nor wander in darkness,
according to the will of the flesh; but make me always willing to come unto
thee, even with desire; when it pleases thee to call me: let not me, as it
were, draw backward when thou invitest me to the sweet banquet of thy Heavenly
Kingdom, as by thy Word and Gospel preached and revealed unto us, which is an
especial calling of us: and when I feel my self grieved or vexed with any kind
of sickness or disease? which is another of thy calling of us, and an especial
warning that we must die: yea, and when I am at my daily business, or when I
eat or drink, when I am in my best temperature and health, at all times, and in
all places give me grace to think that Death stands at my Elbows always ready
to strike me, and that I sleep not in sin and security, and the time suddenly
come of my departure, and so be taken unprovided and perish without repentance.
O Lord such is the blindness of our nature, that we think this World a
continual being for us, covet even with greediness to see many days, where we
heap sin upon sin, to the over-burdening of our poor Souls, seldom or not at
all thinking to die: but grant, my most sweet Lord, that as I desire to live,
so I may have a greater desire to live well, that I may make a happy end,
abandoning the fear of death, that the cogitation thereof may dwell in peace
within the mansion of my heart, and when it shall approach near unto me, I fly
not from it, but that I may go forth with joy to meet it: considering that it
is a means to end my woes and to begin my joys; it is the finishing of sorrow,
and the entrance into bliss, where is nothing but joys unspeakable, and
contrary here on Earth, nothing but care and woe: which moved thy servant Job
to call his life a warfare, where is nothing but conflicts between the flesh
and the spirit, daily increase of sin, and continual care of vanity.

O God give me a careful heart to love thee; whilst I live here give me
continual fear, unfeigned zeal, perfect faith, and godly care to do good unto
all men, and earnest desire to come unto thee, who art the end of all trouble
and labor, the beginning of bliss, the end of death, and the beginning of
life; whereunto, sweet Lord, grant that with unfeigned desire, I may faithfully
endeavor my self to come, where thy Son is gone before to direct us the way,
and making all those that thou find with the lamp of true faith burning in
their hearts, partakers of the Everlasting joys thereof: in number of whom, O
sweet Lord, accept me here, and cleanse me from all my sins, that I may appear
among them in the World to come, through the same thy Son Jesus Christ my Lord
and Savior; to whom be all praise and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to Jesus Christ for Heavenly Comfort.
O Jesus, grant I beseech thee, I may rest and repose my self in thee before
any Creature, before all honor, power, dignity and consolation, over and above
all hope and promise; yea, and above all the host of Heaven. O when shall it
be fully granted unto me, that I shall for sake my self, and see how sweet and
pleasant thou art O Lord my God! O Jesus the brightness of Eternal glory, the
comfort of the wandering Soul, my mouth is bent toward thee without speaking,
and silently speaks unto thee. How long will my Lord my God, withdraw himself
from coming unto me? come unto me thy servant, comfort me O Lord, thrust forth
thy helping hand, O God, and deliver me; for without thee there can be no
restful day, nor quiet hour: thou art my joy, thou art my comfort, and without
thee I am comfortless: O Jesus, infinite in pity, infinite in power, infinite
also both in thy rewards, and in thy revenge; I am weak, but willing with my
Soul to love thee, with my flesh to fear thee, with my mind to honor thee,
with my mouth to praise thee, and with my whole heart to serve thee; but alas,
I am so clogged with corruption, I am so drowned in flesh and blood, that I
scarce either dare or can list up my head, and look unto thee; and yet why
should I be ashamed when thou do invite me? Why should I be faint, when thou
do not only encourage, but also enable me, or at the least accept my weak
endeavors? Strive then, O thou very bowels of my Soul, strive with all your
strength to raise up your thoughts out of this mire of mortality, wherein they
stick, and out of these waves of fleshly affections, wherein they float;
advance thy self, O my Soul, toward thy Oreator; frame thy affections to love
him for his goodness, to honor him for his greatness, to rejoice in him for
his merits, to pray unto him for his mercies, which daily thou do need, and
by needing do crave, and by craving do obtain, if not according to thy
desires, yet very far above thy deserts; wherefore, blessed be thou O Lord my
God, which have done this goodness unto me thy Servant. What can I say more
unto thee, O Lord, but humble my self in thy sight, and be always mindful of
mine iniquity and unworthiness; for of all the wonderful things in Heaven and
Earth, there is none like unto thee O Lord. Thy works are excellent, thy
judgments are upright, and by thy providence all things are grounded; O Father
of wisdom, laud and praise be unto thee; my mouth, my Soul, and all the powers
of my heart shall praise thee without ceasing O my God, both now and for ever.

Amen.
A fruitful Prayer at the end of Prayer.
O Most righteous God, for thy great mercies sake hearken to these my Prayers
which I have now made unto thee, and consider Lord the desires and thoughts of
my heart, in thy mercy, and let mine unfeigned Prayers enter into thine Ears;
hear, O Lord, for I am destitute of thy help, take care for my Soul, save me
thy unworthy servant, which wholly trusts in thee; have mercy O Lord, have
mercy upon me, for I will never cease crying unto thee for thy help and mercy.
In the day time will I call on thee, and in the night my cry shall not be hid
from thee. O thou God of the Heavens, and maker of all Creatures, hear me a
most wretched Creature, calling on thee; and take away from me all my sins, and
make steadfast my faith and confidence in thee, and in thy promises; that I
putting my trust in them, may have as thou have promised, Everlasting Life,
through the merits of thy Son Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior; to whom be all
praise and glory, for ever and ever, World without end.

Amen.
An Evening Prayer.
O Eternal God, Omnipotent and merciful Father, I prostrate my self before thy
Throne, beseeching thee in the Name of thy Son Jesus Christ, to blot out all my
transgressions, by which I have offended thy Divine Majesty this Day; forgive,
Lord, all the sins which from my youth I have done, and be merciful unto me;
guide me with thy wisdom; that when I walk, I may go with me, when I sleep, it
may keep me, and when I awake, I may talk thereof. O Lord be thou my Watchman
and protector this night, that troubles and vain cogitations do not invade me,
neither the fear of Death overwhelm me, nor my sleep in the night, alter my
thoughts and understanding when I should take rest; but grant me a good and
quiet sleep, going unto my Bed, which represents my Grave, that rising in the
Morning to render due praise and thanks unto thee my Protector, I may likewise
at the Day of Judgment rise as one of thy chosen Children, upon thy right hand
into Heaven, where I may sing praises unto thy holy and blessed Name for ever.

Prayers for Saturday Morning.
O Lord my God and Father, blessed be thy Name for ever. Dispose my heart, open
my lips, and give me thy holy Spirit, etc.

A Psalm.
WHom have (...) in Heaven but thee O Lord, and there is none upon Earth that I
desire in comparison of thee.

My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.

For (...), they that forsake thee shall perish, and thou will destroy them
that commit fornication against thee.

But it is good for me to hold me fast by God, and to put my trust in my Lord
God, and to speak of all his works.

For God is King of old, the help that is done upon Earth he does it himself.

Wherefore I will cry unto God with my Voice, even unto God will I cry with my
voice, and he shall hearken unto me.

When I am in heaviness I will think upon God, when my heart is vexed I will
complain.

I have considered the days of old, and the years that are past.

I call to remembrance my Song, and in the night I commune with mine own heart,
and search out my spirits.

Will the Lord absent himself for ever, and will he be no more entreated?

Is his mercy clean gone for ever, and is his promise come utterly to an end
for evermore?

Has God forgotten to be gracious, and will he shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure?

And I sald it is mine own infirmity, but I will remember the years of the most
High.

I will remember the works of the Lord, and call to mind the wonders of old
time.

I will think of all thy works, and my thinking shall be of thy doings. Glory,
etc.

A Morning Prayer.
O Almighty Protector and Keeper both of the Souls and Bodies of the faithful,
I yield thee humble and hearty thanks, for defending me, and saving me this
night past and all the rest of my life hitherto from sudden death, and from all
other perils and dangers whereunto my Soul and weak Body are subject to fall,
and wherewith I am so beset, that had I not been preserved by thee, it could
not otherwise have been, but my body had perished and my Soul been carried into
everlasting perdition: But most sweet Lord, my succor and defense, who has
continual regard of the safety of thy servants, and never suffer est them to be
overcome with any kind of danger, vouchsafe to forgive me, whatsoever I have
committed and done against thy Divine Majesty, either sleeping or waking this
night, or at any time secretly or openly heretofore, by reason of the
corruption which remains in me: and grant that as I have by thy protection
passed this night, so I may enjoy at thy merciful hands, whatsoever thy
Fatherly Providence shall think meet and convenient for me, and so in hope of
thy loving kindness and mercy, go forward this day, and all my life in perfect
love, unfeigned zeal, and continual obedience to thy most blessed will; that,
so continuing unto the end I may receive the reward of thy Celestial Kingdom,
which thy Son Jesus has purchased for all true Believers in thee; in number of
whom, sweet Lord, for the mercies of him thy Son, make me, that I with them,
and they with me, may continually sing laud and praise unto the Trinity
eternally,

Amen.
A Confession to God for sin.
MOst gracious God, and loving Father in Jesus Christ, I confess mine
unrighteousness, which makes me unworthy to come before thee, not only in
regard of mine original corruption, which I traduced from disobedient Adam, but
in regard of my continual sins, and actual evils, which I daily commit against
thee, whereby, I cannot but be offensive unto thee, and ever loathsome in thy
sacred Eyes: but alas, such is mine estate, that being considered as it is in
and of my self, that I can bring forth no better fruits than the Tree of Adam's
disobedience; whose roots, as they are sin, so bear they sin in me, and
consequently procure death and destruction: but dear Father, as by Adam sin
entered and took hold of himself, and of all his Posterity; so by thy Son Jesus
Christ we are all justified by our adoption into his, righteousness of thy free
love, if we take hold of thy promises in him, and become obedient unto thee:
and therefore, dear Father, howsoever our corruptions, as they are in us of our
selves, have bewrapped us in bondage to sin and death; so let thy Sons merits
be unto us a sufficient ransom for our Everlasting liberty; not only to come
freely to the Throne of grace, but in the end to obtain the joys eternally with
him in Heaven, who lives and reigns with thee and the holy Spirit for ever,
World without end.

Amen.
A Prayer for the true worship of God.
O Most gracious God and loving Father, establish my heart and mind in the true
Worship of thy Divine Majesty: make me to believe thy holy and sacred Gospel,
wherein I am daily and hourly instructed to love, fear, honor, and obey thee:
to hate sin and iniquity, to renounce all superstitious Ceremonies, whereby thy
worship is defaced, thy glory profaned, and thy honor greatly diminished:
Give me grace to hate sin, and to renounce the vanities and wanton pleasures of
this wicked World: and finally, give me power from above to withstand Satan the
Prince of darkness, and all his damnable Ministers, who by diverse temptations
provokes and allures us from godly purity, and perfect integrity, (which
passes only from Christ Jesus to us, who is the fullness of our perfection and
holiness) to all kind of evil, impiety and uncleanness: by means whereof thy
glory is greatly profaned, and of a set purpose contemned; make me, O Lord I
beseech thee, by the power of a fruitful faith, to resist and bridle the
conconcupiscence of my flesh, in such sort, that my Soul may triumph with
Victory, and continue constant in worshipping thee, from whom passes the
fullness of my joy; prepare my heart and mind to spread forth the glory of thy
Name, keep my tongue from all filthy talk, and uncomely gesture, lest, by the
exercises of such sin, I contemn thy worship, and provoke thee to displeasure
against me, set thou a watch before the gates of my mouth, that my lips may by
grace be made open to sound forth thy praise and glory; be merciful to mine
offenses, think thou not on my unrighteousness, but open thy clemency, forgive
thou freely, and pardon graciously all my sins, make me faithful in Christ
Jesus, shorten the dangerous days of iniquity, increase the number of thy
chosen and peculiar Saints; hasten thy coming, O Savior Christ, that I with
the Fellowship of thy Saints, heavenly Angels, and the blessed Company of
Martyrs, may celebrate thy praise, and worship thee in thy glorious Kingdom,
before thy Father, my God, and the Holy Ghost; to whom be all honor, praise
and glory, for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer taken out of the first Psalm.
O Almighty and most gracious God, take away from me I beseech thee all evil
counsels, and then my sins; suffer me not to run into an ungodly and wicked
life, and finally, keep my mind far from the contempt of godliness, and
scorning of virtue, and instead of these evils. Grant that I may continually be
occupied in thy Law and sacred Scriptures, and that I be not carried about like
the wicked, as light dust, and fruitless chaff, with every blast of affection
and doctrine; but rather that I be as a Tree planted by the Waterbrooks, and
endued with the life of thy Spirit and Faith, I may also by the same Spirit
bring forth the fruit of good works; and that whatsoever I take in hand it may
prosper, and tend to the praise and glory of thy Name, and furtherance of my
salvation; and that at the last, when the wicked shall fall away in thy
judgments, I may stand steadfast, and be made perfect, through Jesus Christ my
Lord and Savior for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to be unloosed of the bands of Satan.
O Lord, by thy mighty power subdue the works of Satan in me; O thou wicked
Seducer, thy works are destroyed, thy bands are broken, thou shall not take or
bind me: avoid sin, thou have lost thy sting, thou wast condemned in the flesh,
nailed to the Cross, and crucified with my Lord Christ; avoid Death, for thou
art dead; and Hell, for thou art swallowed up in Victory; avoid thou Dragon and
all thine Angels, for Michael has beaten thee, and broken thy head; he has
freed us from sin, and led away captivity captive; even he, Satan, has
over-mastered thee, that cried out unto me, Fear not, for I have overcome the
World; even he that has promised to be with me to the end of my Pilgrimage,
and cries out, that if he be with me, none can be against me; fight therefore
Satan as long as thou will, thou shall, at length be put to the foil; for the
mighty Lion of the Tribe of Juda tells me, that there is no condemnation to
them that be in him; that Jesus is the Conqueror of the whole World, and
vanquisher of thee, rage thou never so much; therefore I say, avoid from me,
for in Christ Jesus I have passed the Sea of my sins, thy cursed Army; and if
thou follow to pursue me, thou shall be drowned in the red Sea of Christ's
blood; to whom be all honor, power and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to obtain the Kingdom of Heaven.
O Father, merciful and Everlasting, be merciful unto me and give me a feeling
of thy blessed will; open unto me the way of true knowledge, prepare my steps
to walk aright, that in all the course of my life, I may be guided aright, and
savor more of Heavenly, than of Earthly things; and let my whole delight be to
meditate righteousness; let me embrace equity, and execute justice, and abound
in love, mercy, sanctity and true holiness; and furnish me largely, good Lord,
with all spiritual graces, whereby I may continually seek thy Everlasting
Kingdom, and practice the righteousness thereof for ever; illuminate my
understanding by thy Spirit, and let thy Word be my whole comfort, and the use
thereof my continual delight; and abandon, good Lord, all superfluous care of
worldly things from my thoughts, that I may by a continual holy meditation of
thee, and things above, use the things of this life as if I used them not;
knowing this, and assuring my self by thy promise; that if I seek and covet to
have my conversation on things spiritual, all temporal things shall be assuring
my self by thy promise; that if I seek and covet to have my conversation on
things spiritual, all temporal things shall be ministered unto me: all which my
Petitions, grant me, O Father, for thy dear Sons sake Jesus Christ my Lord and
Savior, to whom be all glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
Prayers for Saturday Night.
O Lord my God and heavenly Father, blessed be thy Name for ever: Dispose my
heart, open my lips, and give me thy holy Spirit, etc.

A Psalm.
OUT of the deep have I called unto thee, O Lord, Lord hear my Voice.

O let thine Ears consider well the voice of my complaint.

If thou Lord, wilt be extreme to mark, what is said, or done amiss, O Lord,
who may abide it?

I look for the Lord, my Soul does wait for him, in his Word is my trust.

My Soul melts away for very heaviness, comfort thou me according to thy Word.

O take from me the way of lying, and cause thou me to make much of thy Law.

Make me to go in the paths of thy Commandments, for therein is my desire.

O take not the Word of thy truth utterly out of my mouth, for my hope is in
thy Judgments.

I will never forget thy Commandments, for with them thou have quickened me.

Wherefore, O ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there
is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption.

For when I called upon thee, thou heardest me, and enduedst my Soul with much
strength.

And though I walk in the midst of trouble, yet shall thou refresh me.

The Lord shall make good his loving kindness toward me, yea, thy mercy, O
Lord, endures for ever, despise not then the work of thine own hands.

Wherefore I will praise the Lord, for the Lord is gracious, O let us sing
praises unto his name, for it is lovely.

Thy Name, O Lord, endures for ever, so does thy memorial, O Lord from
Generation to Generation. Glory be, etc.

A most fruitful Prayer for a blessed aad godly life.
O Merciful Father, the honor of my salvation, and my defender in whom I only
put my whole trust; I unhappy wretch have many ways stirred thee up, I have
done evil before thy face, I have provoked thy displeasure, I have sinned, and
thou have suffered me; I have offended, and yet thou sustainest me: Yea, and
besides all this, while I defer from time to time, thou tarriest for me. O
Lord, the God of my health, I cannot tell what to answer, there is no place to
fly from thee, or to hide me; thou show me the way to live well, and give
me knowledge how to go: Wherefore, O Father of mercy, and God of all
consolation, strike my heart with thy fear; that with fearing I may escape
those things which thou threatnest, and grant me the comfort of thy salvation,
that in loving, I may obtain those things which thou promisest: O Lord, which
art my strength and deliverer, tell me how I shall think of thee, teach me with
what words I shall call upon thee, and the works wherewith I may please thee: O
most mighty God, that art blessed for evermore; I commit into thy hands at this
time, and at all other times else, my Soul, my Body, and all my thoughts,
affections, words and works: my memory, my faith, my belief and continuance in
the same, that thou may defend them with thy most mighty power, that thou
may keep them day and night, and every moment of time, hear me, O Holy
Trinity, and keep me from all evil, from all offenses, from all deceits and
despites of the Devil, and from all mine Enemies, visible and invisible: give
me, O Lord, perfect sense and understanding, that I may be able to perceive
thine exceeding and great mercies: teach me what I shall ask, and grant that
thou will hear that which I require: give me tears from the bottom of my heart,
that may unloose the bands of my sins; If thou regard me not, I perish; if thou
look upon me I live; if thou examine my righteousness, I stink and am corrupt,
being dead; but if thou look on me with mercy, thou raisest me out of my grave:
spare my Soul, spare my sin, visit me that am weak, heal me that am diseased,
give me a heart to fear thee, a mind to love thee, Ears to hear thee, and Eyes
that I may always see thee: I ask, Lord, remission of all my sins, have mercy
on me, and hear me, O Lord my Salvation, I have asked some things which (...)
need, I have remembered those things which I fear: wherefore vouchsafe me thy
grace, O Lord, to live in thy true fear to my lives end, through Jesus Christ
my Lord and Savior: to whom be all honor and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for Faith, and ableness to pray.
O Most gracious God and dear Father, I thy unworthy servant, ignorant o^ all
good things, unprofitable and unfit to serve thee, by reason of my corruption*
do yield thee all humble thanks, that thou do vouchsafe me access to the
throne o^ thy mercy in Christ, where all wisdom* aid, consolation and comfort
do abound* and from whom all good gifts and graces do most frankly flow unto
thy Children (...) I here a Sinner, in regard there is in me no strength to
stand, nor wisdom to walk nor faith to frame my affections accord*ing to thy
will, do heartily crave supply of the good gifts at thy hands: where*fore dear
Father, grant me thy holy Spirit; which being inspired into m^ by thy divine
power, may work i^ me such effects as are fit for the strengthening of my weak
understanding, and for the increase of faith, and renewing the inner man, I may
become a fit member of thy Church; good Father sanctify me within and without,
purify mine affections, and let me be made holy in all my proceedings: direct
me to call upon thee aright, and shape in me a sound course of life, and let
faith unfeignedly be the ground of all my desires that I may be thereby renewed
daily in lively hope of thy gracious deliverance, whenever I am touched with
any calamity: dear Father, banish all unbelief in me, and make me thereby
faithful, that by thy divine working, I may be able to conceive aright, speak
aright, and walk aright: O learn me, and I shall be learned, teach me, and I
shall understand and do thy will; then shall neither prosperity puff me up, nor
calamities cast me down, nor any evil make me afraid: O happy man that is so
far in thy favor, that obtains this blessing at thy hands! therefore I ^^y
unto thee my Allsufficient, and truly helping God and Father, be pitiful to thy
perplexed children: to thee I fly and will not faint, for I believe thy
promises, Lord help my unbelief: thou art the cause and absolute perfection of
my soul, the Preserver of life, the everlasting and only good that I seek, from
whom, as from a lively spring flows whatsoever is good, either for soul or
body: make perfect therefore in me this good gift, O Lord increase it in me
more and more daily; that I applying the same in humble manner, with reverent
prayer to thy divine Majesty, both for corporal and spiritual relief, may be
continually heard, and so resting herein under the shadow of thy sacred wings,
may be safe and secure in all my miseries: good Lord I here commend mine estate
unto thee in all patience, humbly beseeching thee, that in thy good time, I may
reap the fruit of a lively confidence in thee: namely, what in this life is
expedient for the preservation and maintenance thereof, and after this life,
the absolute end thereof, that is, eternal salvation in Jesus Christ; to whom
with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all glory for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer, to be defended against our enemies.
O Lord strengthen my faith, and arm me with continual hope in thee, whereby I
may be able to withstand all the cruelties of mine adversaries, in such sort
that they may know it to be thy self who fightest for me, and defendest my
cause against their fury: behold O Lord, my trust is in thee, thy rod and thy
staff, comfort me, and stay me up, that I fall not into their hands by trusting
unto mine own policy or wisdom, which is but a foolishness before thee; nor to
the help or friendship of man, which is but vain: but lead thou me, O Lord,
guide me in all my doings, cogitations and words, lest I erring from thy
Commandments, incline my heart to vanity and vice; mine enemies take just
occasion to say, ah, we saw it with our eyes, and bring up an evil report of
me, and that deservedly: O Lord guide me in all truth, establish my heart with
true desire and ableness to walk uprightly in all thy ways: vouchsafe to keep
me from the dangerous desires of fleshly lusts, and from haunting the place
suspected or polluted with uncleanness, lest mine enemies, taking just occasion
by my lewd behavior, speak that indeed which may redound to my shame and
deserved infamy. Finally, O Lord, keep me from all evil; and though by reason
of my corruption I be naturally inclined to wantonness and excess, thou will
give me sobriety, lowliness, love, even to mine enemies, chastity, wisdom, and
discreet understanding both of their wills and mine own weakness, that so
through thy grace, leading the whole course of my life in sincerity and godly
behavior, I may magnify thy holy Name, who so regards the prosperity of thy
servant, that thou suffer him not to fall into the hands of all such as
should eat him up; and let not the adversaries of thy truth, O Lord unjustly
rejoice over me. I am in thy hand, and they are within the compass of thy
power, stay their fury, let them not take effect in their devices against me; I
refer all things to thy heavenly providence, and wholly commit my self into thy
hands, humbly praying thee for Jesus Christ's sake, to deal with me and them,
according to thy mercy and loving kindness: and not after our deserts: be thou
merciful unto me, and evermore mightily defend me, unto my lives end conducting
me uprightly in all my ways, for the glory of thy holy Name; to whom with thy
Son and the Holy Ghost, be all honor, power and glory, for ever and ever,

Amen.
A Prayer for the opening of the eyes of our understanding.
O Sweet Jesus, lighten me with the brightness of eternal light, and drive all
darkness, as it were, from the mansion house of my soul: suppress the wandering
thoughts, and break in pieces these violent temptations: fight thou my God for
my defense, and vanquish those evil beasts, to wit, the intieing desires of the
flesh, that by thy power I may get peace, and sing out thy praises in the holy
Court of my soul: send thy light and truth which may lighten the earth, for I
am rude earth, good for naught, until thou enlighten me; pour out thy favor
from above, and replenish my soul with thy heavenly grace: O Lord lift up my
mind, which is pressed down through the weight of sin, and stir up the same
wholly to the desire of heavenly and celestial things, that having tasted the
sweetness of supernatural happiness, it may greatly grieve me even to think of
this world; take me, O Lord, or rather pluck me from all momentany pleasures of
earthly and vain things, and join me unto thee by an indissoluble band of good
will, for thou alone do suffice thy friend, and without thee all things are
vain, and of no price in my heart, to whom, O my Lord God, be all glory for
ever.

Amen.
A Godly Meditation, or Prayer.
O Lord my God, I altogether unhappy and comfortless, have grievously offended
thee; how often have I trespassed against thee, and how often have I deserved
thy displeasure, and yet how seldom have thou punished me? how often have thou
been good and merciful unto me, how often have I promised and vowed amendment,
and how little and seldom have I performed it? I dare not lift up mine eyes
toward heaven, because I have sinned against it, and in earth I cannot look
for refuge, because I have been a slanderer, and a shame unto it; what then,
shall I despair? no, for God is merciful, and a good Savior, he does visit
them that live in darkness, and is a cheerful light to them that sit in the
shadow of death; he wills us to forgive our brother, though he offend seven
times, yea, and infinitely, and is more merciful than any man can be: return
thee therefore unto thy Lord God, pray unto him humbly for grace, and continue
thee to bewail thy sins past, because he that loves thee, provokes thee daily
with his gifts to love him, and will not leave till he have made perfect his
work begun, and brought his mercy to full effect in thee; what natural cause
begins his work, and leaves it in the half way imperfect? and as by natural
order and right course things do proced and increase by little and little, from
the less to the more; even so does God first dispose us to his mercy, and then
increasing his goodness, daily bestows on us, in the end, the treasure of his
grace, the inheritance of everlasting joys; yea, very love, works in natural
causes to bring forth their effects to perfection, which if it be so in
creatures, what will the Creator do, which is love it self, and infinite
goodness! he will withdraw thee from thy sins, and make thee clean and pure,
and finally bless thee with eternal life. O Lord, I come unto thee, humbly
waiting for thy mercy, thou art my hope and help, according to thy great
goodness and mercy in Jesus Christ, have mercy on me now and for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer for perseverance in Prayer.
O Lord my God, according to thy Commandment, in mine afflictions and
necessities I seek to thee for succor by continual Prayer, and calling upon
thy Name; therefore most dear Father, strengthen me by thy holy spirit, that I
may still persevere in Prayer, and with longing desires patiently wait for
thee, O Lord, being assured, that although it appear not as yet, thou art
always present with me, and heardest my complaint, and wilt, when thou see
thy time, declare thy self manifestly in renewing my heart with spiritual joy;
stir up O Lord, I beseech thee, my sluggish nature to call upon thee
continually, appointing thee neither the time, nor the means of my deliverance;
but leaving all to thy good will and pleasure I may in the mean time never
cease by continual Prayer to call for thy merciful deliverance: and when thou
shall mercifully take upon thee to deliver me, I may then fully with my whole
heart acknowledge thy goodness toward me, and that it never slip out of my
heart, but that I may continue thankful for the same all the days of my life,
whereby thy glory in me may be declared and my soul relieved, though Jesus
Christ my Lord and Savior.

Amen.
An Evening Prayer.
O My Lord God and merciful Father, I humbly beseech thee in Jesus Christ, that
thou will vouchsafe to hide and bury all my sins and transgressions whatsoever,
from my infancy unto this present time I have committed and done against thy
divine Majesty. O Lord be thou my light in darkness, then shall my light be as
clear as the day. O heavenly Father bless me; O blessed Son keep me, O Holy
Ghost, three Persons and one God, deliver me this night from all sin and evil
that may be hurtful to my soul and body, that so with confidence to thee, I may
lay me down to rest, and none make me afraid, because thou art my Protector. O
holy Spirit, at my last gasp be thou my light, yea, when my strength fails,
my sight departs, mine ears wax deaf, and my mouth dumb; and when all my
senses for sake me, then give me some sense of eternal life, that I may taste
in this mortal body, the beginning of thine everlasting comfort: and at my
departure out of this world, I may behold by faith, thy divine presence, and so
sleep quietly to eternal life, through Jesus Christ thine only Son, my Savior;
to whom be all honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
Short Directions before the Receiving of Christ's Holy Sacrament, His Blessed
Body and Blood.
SAcraments should of all men be admired and honored; not so much respecting
the service which we do unto God in receiving them as the dignity of the sacred
and secret gift we thereby receive from God. They are the visible signs of
invisible graces, which indeed is the very end these heavenly Mysteries were
instituted for: They are the powerful instruments of God to eternal life; for
as our natural life consists of the union of the body and soul, so our life
supernatural in the union of the soul with God: His flesh is meat, his blood is
drink, not by surmised imagination, but truly, even so truly through faith we
perceive in the body and blood, Sacramentally presented, the very taste of
eternal life.

For the worthy receiving of this Sacrament, these four things are very
considerable.
1. Preparation, or Examination. 2. Faith. 3. Repentance. 4. Thanksgiving.
1. Preparation consists in self-examination, and in an act of the soul
reflecting upon it self in a general survey of our spiritual state in grace,
comparing our present condition, which we find in our selves, with the word of
God, by which will quickly appear what good we should have done, and the evil
we should not have done.

S. Paul's admonition is, that before the receiving of this holy Sacrament,
there should be a strict examination: Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat and drink of this Cup. 1 Cor. 11. For he that drinks unworthily, drinks
his own damnation.

Therefore certainly great is the danger to us, if premeditation precedes not
this great undertaking. Thus says the Lord, Consider your ways, Hag. 1. 5.
Consider well what you go about, for this duty is no perfunctory employment, no
exercise by the bye, but such a work as ought to be done exactly, seriously,
with deep meditation and study, recollecting in privacy, and calling to
question all thy actions past, the omission of good duties, and the doing of
evil, sweeping, as it were, all the corners of thy heart, and view thy self in
the glass of God's Law, by which quickly will appear thy great and many sins,
of all kinds whatsoever; as want of love and fear of God, abusing his mercies
and blessings, neglect of works, of charity, piety, and justice, offending thy
God by blaspheming, cursing, and customary passion: Intemperance, by gluttony
and drunkenness, lust and uncharitable desires, hatred, malice, backbiting and
all manner of evil imaginations; these are they that defile thy soul, and
except we do as the Prophet commands us, Isaia. 1. 16. Wash us, make us clean,
put away the evil of our doings before the Lord's eyes, and cease to do evil,
we shall at the last be rewarded with them that had not on the wedding garment:
Therefore laying aside all carnal security and self-dissimulation, Commune with
thy self and be still, Psalm. 4. Search thy soul, enquire of thy conscience, and
rip up thy bosom sins, and confess them to the Lord in deep sorrow and
contrition of heart, imploring his mercy, steadfastly purposing by his blessed
assistance to lead a new life: Accuse thy self, and say with the Prodigal in
the Gospel, Good Father* I have sinned, I am not worthy of the least of thy
mercies; it is thy mercy I am not consumed! And with Mary Magdalene, cast thy
self down at the feet of Jesus, and wash them with tears, in tokens of thy
sorrow, and signs of thy love; and be truly sorrowful for so often offending so
precious, so merciful a God as our God, the greatness of whose love cannot be
measured, whose mercy has no bounds. Therefore, O my soul, contemplate of the
great goodness of our good God, which has this day sent salvation to thy soul,
and calls thee to this great feast, to be partaker of the precious body and
blood of Jesus Christ, being prepared by humble repentance to receive in faith
and joy thy blessed Redeemer, giving thanks always to God the Father through
our Lord Jesus Christ, whose mercy is everlasting, whose truth endures from
generation to generation.

2. Faith, which is a certain knowledge with an assured confidence kindled in
our heart by the Holy Ghost, being assuredly resolved, that the free remission
of all our sins, everlasting righteousness, and life eternal, is given unto us
through the mercies and goodness of Almighty God, for the alone merits of Jesus
Christ. For, by Grace are ye saved through Faith, and not of your selves, it is
the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8.

Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is in Jesus
Christ, Romans 13. 24.

For as by one man's disobedience all were made sinners; so by the obedience of
one shall many be made righteous, Romans 5.



3. Repentance, which is a godly sorrow for sin wrought in the heart by the
supernatural grace of the Holy Ghost, turning from all our evil ways unto God,
is meekness and humility of spirit. Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your
hearts, and be no more stiff-necked, Deuteronomy. 10. 16.

Wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved! How long shall thy
vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4. 14.

Return ye now every one from his evil ways, and make your doings good, Jer.
18. 11.

Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord, Lam. 3. 4.

Return again unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thine own
iniquities, Hos. 14. 1.

Draw nigh to God, clanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye
doubleminded, Jam. 4. 8.



4. Thanksgiving, praising God the Lord for all his benefits and mercies,
especially for sending his only Son Jesus Christ: to die for the remission of
all our sins, and always to be mindful of the greatness of his goodness, and
the unworthiness of our deserts.

Worthy is the Lamb that was stain, to receive power, riches, wisdom, and
strength and honor, and glory, and blessing, Rev. 5. 12.
I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praises unto my God,
while I have a being. Psalm. 104.
Accept, I beseech thee, the free-will-offering of my mouth, O Lord, Psalm. 11.
Let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of
our lips, giving thanks to his Name. Heb. 13. 15.
An humble confession before the Sacrament.
O Most mighty God and merciful Father, which according to the multitude of thy
mercies, do put away the sins of those which truly repent, and remembrest
them no more; open O Lord I beseech thee, the eyes of thy mercy upon me thy
most unworthy servant, who in heart earnestly desires pardon and forgiveness
of all my sins and offenses! the number of which exceeds the ordinary
expectation of mercy! and such they are, as cannot bear any conformity with
excuse! the total sum whereof, is the breach of all thy Commandments, both in
thought, word, and deed! thy blessings and benefits I have abused! thy
judgments and punishments not feared, the means of my own salvation utterly
neglected, and most grievously by my wickedness have I provoked thy wrath and
indignation against me! my life that was appointed for the service of thee the
living God, has been for the most part spent in the service of the Devil, in
the desires and sinful lusts of the flesh! my doings have been evil, my desires
and thoughts wicked, and so detestable has the whole course of my life been,
that my soul trembles to look up to Heaven for fear of thy displeasure:
should thou therefore, O Lord, be extreme to mark what is done amiss, and
take vengeance for my sins, I were as dust before the face of the wind, and in
justice might be swept away into the place of everlasting torment.

But, O Lord, with thee there is mercy, that thou might be feared: thou art
a God of all comfort and consolation, a merciful, loving, and gracious Father,
ready and willing to hear all penitent sinners, that in heart are sorrowful for
their sins! In the Name therefore of Jesus Christ my blessed Redeemer I humbly
prostrate my self before the Throne of thy Mercy seat, accompanied with no
other hope than such as proceeds from the richness of thy mercy, that for his
only sake, thou will have compassion upon me; for in humility of spirit and
contrition of heart, I submit my self to thy goodness, beseeching thee not to
let my sins be a cloud between my Prayer and thy pity, thy goodness and my
distress; but forgive and forget all my transgressions, all my mis-doings, let
them be sins of what condition soever; whether sins of my youth, or sins of my
age, sins of my body, or sins of my soul; secret and open sins, notorious and
presumptuous sins, sins of pride, envy, hatred, malice, etc. Good Lord remit
them all, and of thy great goodness grant me perfect remission and absolution
for the same! for which the Prophet David, Out of the depth of my misery, I cry
unto thee for the depth of thy mercy. O Lord hear my petitions, and consider my
tears! the contrition of my heart, and the sorrow of my soul! and in the merits
of his blood that was so plentifully shed on the Cross for penitent sinners,
wash away the multitude of my transgressions, that my soul, by thy mercy, being
cleansed from the stain of sin, I may be found a worthy partaker of this great
mystery.

And now, O Lord, that I am about to receive the blessed Sacrament of the body
and blood of Jesus Christ; how shall I, that am so great a sinner, dust and
ashes, dare to presume to approach thy Table! The Heavens in thy sight being
not clear, and the pillars of the Earth shake at thy presence. What then shall
become of me miserable that I am! Yea, Lord, thou have provided a special
means, and in thy Gospel left us a command, Come unto me all ye, etc. Which
command I obey, and in confident assurance of thy promise in Christ Jesus, I
trust thou will have mercy upon me, in the easing and refreshing of my soul
that is wearied with the burden of my intolerable sins! Wash me thoroughly from
my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin, and renew a right spirit within me:
And of thy gracious goodness direct me in this great action, with a reverend
and awful fear of thy Majesty, that all the faculties of my soul and body may
be intent rightly to apprehend, and joyfully to receive this eternal food, this
bread of life, this heavenly and wonderful mystery! and that by thy grace I may
obtain the virtue, fruit, and benefits of the death and passion of my Savior;
and by the same, the remission of all my sins, and everlasting salvation,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer before the receiving of the Communion.
O Most holy and heavenly God and Father, which by the immortal seed of thy
Word have begotten us to be thy children, and with the same (as with milk) do
nourish us purely as new born babes, as also with the divine mysteries of thy
holy Sacraments (as by a visible word) do confirm and strengthen us in faith
and righteousness; and having so adopted us into thy family, continually
feedest and nourishest us unto eternal life: we humbly beseech thee so to
prepare our souls to the due receiving thereof worthily, that we may thereby
effectually feel, taste, and feed on thy Son Jesus Christ (the true Manna and
Bread that came down from Heaven) that we may by him have eternal life: pardon
(O Lord) pardon our unpreparedness in coming to the participation of so holy
and divine Mysteries: Make thy Word and Sacraments always so powerful and
effectual in our ears and hearts that we may thereby be sanctified and renewed
unto all holy obedience unto thy will in the mortification of our sinful
corruptions, and renewing of thy perfect, Image in us (unto holiness,
righteousness, sobriety, truth, knowledge, faith, and temperance) through his
most power full and glorious Resurrection. Stablish our Conscience in the
assurance of our salvation, by the remission of our sins in the blood of thy
Son, which was shed for us on the Altar of the Cross (as a Sacrifice of
expiation, to cleanse away all sin) O Lord, seal and confirm this Covenant of
Grace in our hearts by these holy Sacraments (pledges of thy grace and love
toward us) that at no time we may stagger at thy promises, nor fall away from
hope and confidence in thee; but being hereby incorporated into one Body, we
may partake of one Spirit, and grow in love one toward another (as members of
the same mystical Body) that we may forgive one another, as thou have forgiven
us. O Lord, make us ever thankful for thy manifold and great mercies, in
providing unto us such means and helps of our salvation; and grant that we may
not put any confidence in external actions and exercises thereof (in any hope
to be justified thereby) but that we may thereby exalt our minds to heavenly
and spiritual contemplations, and by faith be firmly united to thee our Head in
Heaven, to be made one with thee, and thou with us: and howsoever heretofore we
have transgressed and defiled our selves, as well with our natural impurities,
and actual impieties, henceforth (being now washed and purified in the blood of
the Lamb which was sacrificed for us) we may have our conversation in Heaven;
and being new creatures in Christ, may have new thoughts, desires, and
delights, (far from the lusts of our former ignorance) and may live ever unto
him and with him, who sits at thy right hand, our Redeemer and Advocate, and
shall return to be our Judge, to justify and acquit us before thee; to whom,
with thee, and the Holy Ghost, be all praise, etc.

A Psalm.
1. AS the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee,
O God.

2. O let thy merciful kindness be my comfort, according to thy Word unto thy
Servant.

3. Help me, O God of my salvation, for the glory of thy Name; O deliver me,
and be merciful unto my sin, for thy Name's sake.

4. O remember not my old sins! but have mercy upon me, and that soon, for I am
come to great misery.

5. Consider and hear me. O Lord my God, for my trust is in thy mercy.

6. Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my mis-deeds.

7. Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness: according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away my offenses.

8. Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

For I acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me.

10. Behold, I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

11. Thou shall purge me with Hyssop, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash me,
and I shall be whiter than snow.

12. Make me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me.

13. O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, but according to thy
mercy, think thou upon me, O Lord, for thy goodness.

14. For thy Name sake, O Lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

15. Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me; for I am destitute and in
misery.

16. Remember not, O Lord, mine iniquities nor the iniquities of my
forefathers, neither take thou vengeance of my sins, but spare me, good Lord,
whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood, and be not angry with me for
ever.

17. Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.

18. Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in whose
spirit, there is no guile.

19. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart, and will save
such as be of an humble Spirit.

20. O taste and see how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that puts
his trust in him.

21. O Lord thou have dealt graciously with thy servant according to thy word.
Glory be to, etc.

O Most gracious Lord God, I beseech thee help thy servant whom of thy mercy
thou have created, repair the ruins of my soul, enlarge the frame of my
understanding thereof, cleanse it from all filthy corruption, and garnish it
with all heavenly graces, that it may be both conveniently fit, and furnished
to receive thee, that thou may make thy entry, and possess that which is thy
own, both by creation and redemption and merits of thy passion, through Jesus
Christ.

Amen.
Before the receiving. Ex Liturg.
GRant O most merciful Father I beseech thee, that I receiving these thy
Creatures of Bread and Wine, according to the holy institution of our Savior
Jesus Christ, in remembrance of his death and passion, may be partaker of his
blessed Body and Blood, and that my sinful body may be made clean by his Body,
and my sinful soul washed through his most precious Blood which was shed for the
remission of all my sins, through the same Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Immediately before the Receiving. Matthew. 8. 8.
Lord, I am not worthy thou should come under my roof: but speak the word
only, and my soul shall be healed.

II.
O Lamb of God, let me eat thy Flesh, and drink thy Blood, that I may live
everlastingly by thee; and cloth me with the wool of thy mercy, that no winter
or storm of sin do pinch my silly soul.

III.
O blessed Jesus, let the Blood that ran from thy blessed Heart, wash my soul
from all sin and iniquity, and purchase me thy heavenly grace and benediction:

Amen.
Immediately after Receiving.
PRaise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name,
and forget not all his benefits, which saves thy life from destruction, and
crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness, Psalm. 103.

I will give thanks unto the Lord for he is gracious, and his mercy endures
for ever, Psalm. 106.

Alleluja, Salvation and Glory, and Honor, and Power, be unto the Lord our
God, Amen. Revel. 19. 1.

Thanksgiving after the Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament. Ex. Liturg.
O Almighty and everlasting Lord God; I thy most humble servant, according to
my bounden duty and service, do render unto thy Fatherly goodness, all possible
praise and thanksgiving, for that thou have vouchsafed to feed me with the holy
mystery, and spiritual food of the precious Body and Blood of Jesus Christ thy
Son and my Savior; assuring me thereby of thy grace and favor toward me; and
that I am a member incorporate in thy mystical body, the blessed company of
faithful people; and also heir through hope of thy everlasting Kingdom, by the
merits of his most precious death and passion: and grant me, O Lord, for the
time to come the assistance of thy grace and heavenly benediction, that I may
continue in all such good works as thou have prepared for me to walk in; to the
glory of thy Name, and my everlasting comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord:
to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be all honor and glory world without end.

Amen.
A Psalm.
1. PRaise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name,
which saves thy self from destruction, and feeds thee with the Bread of
Heaven.

2. I will always give thanks unto the Lord, his praises shall ever be in my
mouth.

3. Thy merciful kindness is evermore toward us: and thy truth, O Lord, is
everlasting.

4. Great is the Lord, and mavelous to be praised, there is no end of his
greatness.

5. He loves Righteousness and Judgment; the earth is full of the goodness of
the Lord.

6. Be glad, O ye Righteous, and rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful all ye that
are true of heart.

7. I will give thanks unto thee with my whole heart; I will speak of thy
mavelous works.

8. O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his holy name.

9. Let my heart be filled with gladness, and my mouth with praise, that I may
sing of thy glory, and with the rest of thy Saints give honor to thy Majesty
in the eternal fruition of thy presence through Christ.

10. My mouth shall speak of the praise of the Lord; and let all flesh give
thanks unto his holy name for ever and ever. Amen.

Verse. Praise the Lord.

Resp. The Lord's name be praised.

O Almighty and eternal God; what worthy praise can I give unto thee, by whose
goodness I was created, by whose mercy I was redeemed, by whose power I am
preserved, and by whose grace I hope to be glorified; and for all other thy
blessings and benefits which I enjoy both in soul and body; and especially, for
feeding me this day with the precious body and blood of Jesus Christ. I will
therefore offer unto thee the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and always
praise thy holy Name, beseeching thee to pour upon my heart the sweet streams
of thy mercy; conform my life, confirm my faith, and guide me by thy grace,
that thy servant may with strong assurance of thine infallible truth and
promised mercy, vanquish and subdue whatsoever rebelleth against thy blessed
will; keep holy my soul and body, and let them not be defiled through
delectation of sin; but that my full delight and joy may be in thee, and walk
before thee in sincerity of heart and godly conversation, that I may here on
earth glorify thy name, and after this life with all thy faithful flock
possess that everlasting inheritance: which thy Son Christ Jesus has
purchased, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory world
without end.

Amen.
John 5. 14. Behold thou art made whole, sin no more lest a worse thing come
unto thee.
1 John 1. 17. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all sin.
Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear Children, and walk in
love, as Christ also has loved us, and given himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor.
Ephesians. 5. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord. See then
ye walk circumspectly, redeeming time, because the days are evil.
Jude 25. To the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and
Power, both now and ever.
Amen.
Prayers for the Sick.
REmember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our Forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins, but spare us good Lord, spare thy people, whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us good Lord.

O Lord I beseech thee favorably to hear the prayers of thy servant, that I
which am rightly punished for my offenses, may by thy goodness be mercifully
delivered for the glory of thy Name: through Jesus Christ, who lives and
reigns world without end. Amen.

ALmighty and everlasting God, in whose hand consists the life of all mankind,
which correctest those whom thou receivest; mercifully I beseech thee to hear
my complaint, and despise not the prayer that I make now in the time of my
trouble, in the vexation of my spirit, and the anguish of my soul. I remember
thee, and cry unto thee for mercy; O thou that have created, and made me of
nothing, and redeemed me from the bondage of sin, death, and everlasting
destruction, by the most precious blood of Jesus Christ, shed upon the Cross
for the ransom of all my sins. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, have mercy upon me,
bow down thine ear unto my cry, and cast me not away in thine anger, though for
my wickedness I have deserved thy wrath and heavy displeasure against me: And
now for my transgressions, in thy indignation thou have stricken me with
grievous sickness, and I begin to fall as leaves beaten with a vehement wind,
yet are thy punishments less than my deservings. But of thy mercy and goodness,
O Lord, correct me not to death, but to amendment of life; for thine own sake,
for thy holy Names sake, for Christ Jesus sake be merciful unto my sin, for it
is very great, and there is no rest in my bones, by reason of my transgression:
Spare thy Servant, O God, which confesses his sins; pour thy sanctifying Grace
into my heart, and work thereby true and immediate repentance, and restore me
again to thy favor, according to thy gracious promise in Jesus Christ: Let thy
merciful providence so govern all this sickness, that I never fall into utter
dakness, ignorance of thee, or inconsideration of my self; let the faintness of
my spirit, and the condemnation of my self, be overcome with thy irresistible
light, thou God of all consolation; grant that I may be mindful, of the great
account that I have to make at the day of Judgment, and that I may bear in mind
the image of that which is to be faithful, the end of misery, and the beginning
of all happiness; but to the secure and careless, the beginning of eternal
pain; Strengthen my faith, accept my repentant tears, speak peace to my soul
and conscience, and say, thou art my salvation, My grace is sufficient for
thee; then shall my heart rejoice, and my soul shall be right glad, desiring to
be dissolved, and be at peace, that after this my bodily death, I may enjoy the
eternal fruition of thy heavenly presence: Let me not, O Father, in this my
trial, be stricken with fear of condemnation, or distrust thy promises, but in
sure confidence of heart, apply to my self the remission of my sins, that at
the last gasp, by faith in Jesus Christ, I may have a taste of eternal
salvation: let not death (if thou please to send it) be terrible or bitter unto
me; but when it comes, I may with joy receive the same, and having escaped the
hardness of temptation, and the peril of Satan, I may triumph like a Conqueror,
and behold the power and presence of thy holy spirit: let my last words be
those which thy Son did utter upon the Cross saying; Father, into thy hands I
commend my spirit: and when my speech is taken from me, hear the groanings of
my heart, and the desire of my soul, that thy servant may depart in peace;
through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom be all Praise, Power, Might, Majesty,
and Dominion, now and for ever.

Amen.

The Sick says Job 14. 1.
MAn that is born of a Woman, has but a short time to live, and is full of
misery; he comes up and is cut down like a flower; He flees as it were a
shadow, and never continues in one state. In midst of life we are dying: of
whom shall we seek for succor and comfort but of thee O Lord God our Maker?

A Psalm.
1. IN thee O Lord have I trusted, let me never be confounded; but rid me and
deliver me in thy righteousness, incline thine ear to me and save me.

2. O Lord rebuke me not in thine indignation, neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

3. Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord ^eal me, for my bones are
vexed.

4. Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul; O save me for thy mercies sake, for
in death no man remembers thee, and who shall give thee thanks in the pit?

5. Consider and hear me, O Lord my God, lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in
death, show me thy mavelous loving kindness, thou art the Savior of them
that put their trust in thee.

6. Thou have been my succor, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
salvation! look upon my affliction and pain, and forgive all my sins.

7. O remember not my old sins, but have mercy upon me, and that soon, for I am
come to great misery.

8. Preserve thou my soul therefore, O my God, and save thy servant that
puts his trust in thee.

9. O comfort the soul of thy servant, for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my
soul.

10. O turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: give thy strength unto thy
servant, and help the son of thy handmaid.

11. Show some good token upon me for good, that they which hate me, may see
it, and be ashamed, because thou Lord have helped me, and comforted me.

12. O satisfy me with thy mercy, and that soon: so shall I rejoice and be
glad all the days of my life..

13. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long: I
am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint; my heart is like
wax, it melts in the midst of my bowels.

14. Help me, O God of my salvation, for the glory of thy Name, O deliver me,
and be merciful unto my sin, for thy Names sake.

15. The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of
all their troubles.

16. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart, and will save
such as be of an humble spirit.

17. O tarry the Lord's leisure: be strong, and he shall comfort thy heart, and
put thou thy trust in the Lord.

18. O put thy trust in God, for I will give him trauks, which is the help of
my countenance, and my God: Glory be to the Father, etc.

O Lord my God and Heavenly Father, who art the health of all men living, and
the everlasting life of them which die in faith; open I beseech thee the eyes
of thy mercy upon me thy sick servant, who in heart is truly sorrowful for all
my sins; and of thy fatherly goodness, according to the multitude of thy
mercies, put away all my transgressions out of thy remembrance: renew in me
what has been decayed by the fraud or malice of the Devil, or by mine own
frailty; preserve me in the unity of the Church, consider my contrition, accept
my tears, and assuage my pain, and if it be thy blessed will, restore me to my
former health; or if otherwise thou have appointed, give me grace so to take
this visitation, that after this painful life ended, I may dwell with thee in
life everlasting. Amen.

Lord Jesus preserve me, Lord Jesus comfort me, Lord Jesus pray for me; for
only into thy hands, who have redeemed me, O Lord thou God of Truth, I commend
my soul both now and for ever.

Amen.
The Sick says.
Lord have mercy upon me, Christ have mercy upon me.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto one, Write, from henceforth, Blessed
are the Dead which dye in the Lord.

A Psalm.
1. O Lord rebuke me not in thy indignation, neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

2. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones are
vexed.

3. My soul is also sore troubled: but Lord, how long will thou punish me!

4. Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake.

5. For in death no man remembers thee: and who shall give thee thanks in the
pit?

6. I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my bed, and water my Couch
with my tears.

7. My beauty is gone for very trouble, and worn away because of all my enemies.

8. Through thee have I been holden up ever since I was born: thou art he that
took me out of my mothers womb, my praise shall be always of thee.

9. Cast me not away in the time of Age: forsake me not when my strength
fails me.

10. O hide not thy face from me, nor cast away thy servant in displeasure.

11. Thou have been my succor, leave me not O God of my salvation.

12. I am poor and needy, make have unto me, O God, thou art my help and my
deliverer, O Lord make no long tarrying, O Lord deliver me from the power of
the enemy.

Lord help thy poor servant that puts his trust in thee.

Send me help from thy holy place, and evermore mightily defend me: be unto me
a strong Tower, O Lord, and evermore cover me with thy wings.

O Lord, hear my Prayer, And let my cry come unto thee.

The Sick says.
I know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the Earth in the
last day, and shall be covered again with* my skin, and shall see God in my
flesh; yea, and I my self shall behold him, not with other, but with the same
eyes.

O Almighty and immortal God, the Savior and defender of all that put their
trust in thee; the only refuge and hope of the distressed in time of need,
mercifully behold the sorrows of my heart, and the groanings of my spirit: thou
have, O Lord, of thy power made me of naught, and in thy good time I shall
return to naught again. I brought nothing into the world, neither shall I carry
any thing away when I depart: thou art my portion, my salvation, my Mediator,
and my Savior. O blessed Jesus, by thee came grace and life to the chosen, O
receive me to thy mercy; thou sufferedst most cruel death for my sake, and art
risen the first fruits of them that sleep, thou art crowned with power and
glory, destroyed'st death, and give eternal life to all believers: thou, O
Savior Christ, shall raise me up in the last day, and give me possession of
thy everlasting Kingdom, which thou have purchased in thy blood and
righteousness, according to the will of our merciful Father, whom thou have
pacified and pleased, for my redemption and salvation; for the performance of
the oath which in his eternal and unsearchable purpose he promised our
Forefathers, whereof in thy merciful favor thou have called me to be
partaker, whereby I am taught and comforted by thy holy Spirit, to despise this
world, and this corrupt tabernacle of sinful flesh, which of it self has
deserved nothing but death and damnation, and wholly to rely upon thee.
Therefore, O Lord, stand by me, and defend me against the assaults of Satan,
that after triumphant victory, through grace and power in thy Spirit, I may
joyfully give over this fleshly being, and come into thy presence, O Lord, to
rest in blissful peace, until the delivery of thy Saints, with whom I am in
assured hope, by the witness of thy Spirit, to have my portion of the
inheritance of perpetual salvation, and life everlasting, through Jesus Christ.
Amen.

O my soul be joyful in the Lord, and despise not his correction, neither faint
thou at his rebukes.

For whom the Lord loves, him he corrects: yea, he scourges every child
whom he receives.

Thy sins were innumerable, neither could thou claim ought of duty, but
death and damnation.

Thy merciful Lord has accepted thy tears, and repentant groanings, and turned
away his face from thy offenses, he freely has forgiven thee thy sins.

And because thou have repented, and trusted in his mercy, he has put them all
out of his remembrance, neither will he think on them any more.

He will receive thee into his house, and crown thee with glory and kindness.

Thou shall stand before his presence in the Sanctuary everlasting.

With Angels and Arch angels, with the Patriarchs and Prophets, with the
faithful Witnesses, and with all the rest of the chosen Children of grace, to
honor him, to serve him, to magnify him, and praise him, with continual
thanks in eternal joy and felicity, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Psalm.
1. O God my God look upon me, why have thou for^aken me, and art so ^ar from
my health, and from the words of my complaint?

2. How long will thou forget me O Lord, for ever; how long will thou hide thy
face from me?

3. O God I cry in the day time, but thou hear not; and in the night season
also I take no rest.

4. And thou continuest holy, O thou Worship of Israel.

5. Call to remembrance, O Lord, the tender mercy, and thy loving kindne^^
which have been ever of old.

6. Show thy servant the light of the countenance: and save me for thy merc^^
sake.

7. Thou have been my succor, leave m^ not, neither forsake me, O God of my
salvation.

8. My time is in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies.

9. O keep my soul and deliver me: le^ me not be confounded, for I have put my
trust in thee.

10. O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my God, my goods are
nothing unto thee.

11. The Lord himself is the portion of mine inheritance, I have set God always
before me, for he is on the right hand, therefore I shall not fall.

12. Wherefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiced: my flesh also shall
rest in hope.

13. For why, thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither shall thou suffer me
to see corruption.

14. Thou shall show me the path of life; in thy presence is the fullness of
joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for ever more.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

O spare me a little, and suffer me to recover my strength, O Lord, before I go
from hence, and be no more seen.

Now O my soul, look upon Christ Jesus the Righteous, thy Advocate and
Redeemer, who is ready to receive thee; therefore be glad in him, and give
thanks, rejoicing in the visitation of the Lord, by which he has prepared thee
for the heavenly Jerusalem, and everlasting bliss! (...) acknowledge, O Lord I
have deserved to die, and the desire I have to live, is for the amendment of my
life, and in some better measure to set forth thy glory; therefore good Father,
if it be thy pleasure, restore me to health again; and grant me long life. But
if thou have in thy eternal decree appointed this sickness to be a preparation
to my immediate dissolution, and by it to call me out of this transitory life;
I resign, commit, and willingly commend my spirit into thy hands and holy
pleasure; beseeching thee to bless me from the second death, the everlasting
destruction both of body and soul. Let my soul thoroughly consider of the
account I have to make to thee my God, and how few minutes soever it has to
remain in my body, let the power of thy Spirit recompense the shortness of
time, and perfect my account before I pass away. Be pleased O Lord in the
reconciliation of thy Son for my sins. Let the infiniteness of my offenses rely
upon the infiniteness of thy mercy by his sufferings: breath inward comfort to
my heart, and confidence in thy gracious promises; that though my body be going
the way of all flesh, yet my soul may go the way of all Saints. Lord hear me
and help me, stand by me and save me, and if it be thy determination to lay my
body in the grave, to receive my soul into thy Kingdom, to rest in joy and
peace for evermore, through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The Sick says,
O My soul, thou which art endued with the image of God, redeemed with the
blood of Jesus Christ, enlightened by the Holy Ghost, adorned with virtue, and
accounted with Angels:

Love thou him who loves thee, trust in him who cares for thee, seek thou him
who seeks thee.

My soul, O Lord, heartily desires to attain to that supernatural City,
whereof such things are spoken: My heart longs, my soul thirsts till I
enter into my Masters Joy.

To which everlasting joy, O Lord, receive my soul, where all thy Saints
rejoice in eternal joy and thanksgiving, singing praises and Allelujas to thee
the Lord our God.

Eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, neither entered into the heart of man,
the things that God has prepared for those that love him.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
Directions for the SICK.
MAN for the violation of that great Command which God his Creator gave him in
the beginning, has exposed him and his posterity to a certain and sure doom,
in these words: Thou shall dye the death; For the wages of sin is death; the
gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.

Variable, and therefore miserable is the condition of man: this hour, this
minute in health, in the next by a sudden change and alteration at the point of
death: In the morning flourishing like a Palm, like a green Bay Tree, in the
evening cut down, dried up and withered; for we consume away in thy
displeasure, and are afraid at thy wrathful indignation, Psalm 90. All flesh is
grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the field, Psalm. 40. The glory of
man is as the flower of the field, which withers and falls away, 2 Pet. 2.
4. He considers we are but flesh, and as the wind that passes away, Psalm.
78. Our life is but of a short continuance, and full of trouble; man comes up
like a flower, vanishes like a shadow, falls sick and dies, sleeps, and
rises not until the heavens be no more, Job 14. As soon as thou scatterest us,
we are even as asleep, and sade away suddenly, and in thy anger all our days
are gone, and ended as a tale that is told: And what man living shall not see
Death? Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, Genesis 3. 19. Thy body shall
return to earth, the center of the body; and thy soul to Heaven, to God which
gave it, to everlasting glory, who at the last day, the day of the
Resurrection, will re-collect, reunite thy Body, though turned to Atoms, to
thy soul, at the voice of the Angels Trumpet, Arise ye dead and come to
Judgment; the Righteous to receive everlasting happiness, and the wicked
eternal torment.

Wonderful and great has the love of God been unto mankind, in our Creation,
Redemption, Preservation, and giving us assured hopes of eternal salvation,
through Jesus Christ our Lord; for being fallen from blessedness, by the sins
of our first parents, into the snares of Satan, and thereby become his
bondslaves and servants, overcome by sin, Job 8. and being servants of sin, we
are freed from Righteousness, Romans 6. God so loved us, that he sent his only
Son to be reconciliation for our sin, Joh. 4. 10. Rich is his mercy whereby he
loved us, Ephesians. 1. Christ suffered for our sin, to bring us unto God, being put
to death in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit, 1 Pet. 3. He sent redemption
to his People, Holy and Reverend is his Name, Psa. 111. He gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2. Therefore blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, for he raised up a mighty Salvation for us in the House of
his servant David, Luke 1. 68.

Our Life here on Earth is a warfare, full of trouble, misery, and vexation of
spirit, a daily tempest, and continual struggling between the mind and the
flesh; the Law of God, and the Law of sin; and so numerous are the calamities
and troubles of our days, that were it not for the hope of Heaven, it would be
little better than Hell it self, crosses and afflictions, troubles and
molestations unavoidably rush in upon us, as fast as Jobs Messengers, hourly
and daily; for men, as they are all the Sons of their Mothers, are subject to
all misery, born to live few days, in many dangers: whose glory may well be
compared to the shadow in the Sun, which in the morning of our greatness, is in
a goodly luster; at noon at the full, beside us; at night in the wain, quite
behind us. There is nothing in this Vale of misery permanent or certain;
prosperity and adversity not long asunder: Health and sickness often at
variance; no joy, no happiness, no felicity, no tranquillity for continuance
can be expected here in this World. The only ease and consolation to our
distresses, the blessedness of content and rest to our wearisome Souls, is to
be looked for in the World to come: What honor, glory, pleasure of earthly
delight soever, but is subject to instability, possible and uncertain? which
made the wiseman upon his experience cry out, Vanity of Vanity, all is Vanity.
And the singular motive to a man in any affliction for the sufferance of
sorrow, need, sickness, or any adversity whatsoever, is, that by the sweet
united blessings, patience and content, at the last by paying an inexcusable
debt to Death, which, who so lives, of what state or condition soever, cannot
but think he must die, will bring us to that eternal rest, to the blessed
enjoyment of everlasting felicity, to dwell in glory for evermore: For blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them, Rev. 14.
13.

Death is a sleep, a departed breath from dead earth, inlivened at first by
breath cast upon it; to die is to be no more unhappy, it is true to those
over-swayed by nature, death is accounted a misery, but to men refined by the
light of Judgment, it is esteemed the only remedy against misery, as it is the
wages of sin, it is due to us; and as it is the end of all grief and sickness,
it belongs unto us. It delivers us from all cares and troubles, and brings us
to all joys unspeakable; by it we shall receive fullness of grace, perfect and
accomplished regeneration and perfect glory, which while we are on earth, we
have but in part: here we see darkly, as in a glass, then shall we see face to
face: the heavens you behold, shall be superinvested with new endowments, made
everlasting habitations for the Saints prepared; by death we pass to
immortality, nor can we attain eternal life, but by leaving this life; yet
corporal death is no period of life, but a passage to eternity; though our body
sleep a while in dust, it shall rise again after thy likeness: As for me, says
the Prophet David, I will bebold thy face in righteousness, and shall be
satisfied when I awake. Holy Job says, Though all my flesh be consumed to
bones, yet thy Spirit blowing upon dead bones, can revive them, and couple them
again with sinews, and cloth them with flesh. The dead men shall live
together, with my dead body shall they arise, awake and sing ye that dwell in
the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the
dead, Isa. 26. 19. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and though after my skin
worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God; if the earthly house
of this tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building of God, an House not made
with hands eternal in Heaven, 1 Cor. 5. Christ is risen from the dead, and made
the first of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15. Though in Adam we all die, yet in
Christ shall all be made alive. That body that was sown a natural body, shall
rise a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15 Therefore let us be comforted, and not fear
the pains of death, the approach of which suddenly makes a man to know himself;
he tells the proud and insolent they are but dust, and in an instant makes them
to repent and hate their fore-past happiness; he takes an account of the rich,
and proves him a begga^, having interest in nothing but in the earth that fills
his mouth; shows the beautiful their desormity, and they hate it; he draws
together the far stretched greatness, all the Pride, Cruelty, Vainglory, and
ambition of man, and covers it all over with dust in the narrow limits of a
grave; And though for some years the body lies mouldred in the grave, it shall
at the last be raised in honor and glory; purified, perfected, and
immortalized from a dungeon of misery, to a place of all felicity, to our own
Country, into Paradise, where we shall meet with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the
Patriarchs and Prophets, Saints and Angels, our Friends and Kindred gone before
us, which we shall see and behold in Mount Sion, the City of the everliving
God, in the company of innumerable Angels, praising and magnifying the Lord of
Heaven, in white Robes, and Palms in their hands, following the Lamb
wheresoever he goes.

I will wait till my changing comes, then shall thou call me, and then shall I
answer thee, O Lord, I come and appear before thee, Job 14. 14.

As the heart pants for the water brooks, so longs my soul for thee, O Lord,
^s. 42. 1.

And for as much as all mortal men are subject to many sudden perils, diseases
and sicknesses, and ever uncertain what time we shall depart out of this life;
there should no day pass without consideration for our last end; which
meditation is very requisite, both for them that are in perfect health, and
those that feel the hand of God by sickness: that death will come is certain,
but when, how, or where, is very uncertain. It is appointed for all men once to
die, Heb. 9. 27. but the day when, God has not revealed, because we should be
ready every day; it comes as soon to the young man, that glories in his
strength, as to some in a good old age; to the rich fool in a night, as to the
poor in the anguish of his soul; to some violently, to others untimely by
accident; to some by sudden and unexpected death without warning; to all, some
one way or other. And being Almighty God has pleased to lay this sickness upon
you and therein time to repent, assure your self it is his visitation sent to
you to try your faith and patience, or else to correct and amend what is amiss
in you, or whatsoever has offended your heavenly Father; for every child whom
the Lord loves he corrects, to prepare for a better world; affliction seals
us up to adoption; by it he exercises his Children, and the graces he bestows
upon them: it is special means to further our contrition and repentance: In
affliction, says the Lord, they will hear me. David's troubles made him pray;
Hezekiah's sickness made him weep; and misery drew the Prodigal child home: We
have the Prophets examples and patterns of bearing afflictions patiently; which
though the punishment and shame is of sin, God turns to be the subject of his
honor and glory, in saving a sinner that calls upon him in faith and true
repentance, to Heaven. His chastisements are signs of his Fatherly love; which
though for the present, seem grievous unto us, afterward it brings quiet
fruit of righteousness, to those whom the Lord gives grace to make a
sanctified use of it, for which he has inflicted this sickness on you.

And know you certainly, though your sins are many and grievous which you have
committed, by the temptation of the Devil; yet upon your true repentance, God
has promised to forgive; the benefits of which, are the escaping eternal
death, God's everlasting punishments, and the attaining eternal salvation:
where sin abounds, there grace much more abounds. God calls all those that are
heavy laden, to refresh and ease them of all their trouble, the Lord forsakes
no man, till man forsakes him: Look not so much upon the greatness of thy
sins, as to the riches of his mercy, and let thy soul be comforted in the
All-sufficient atonement of the blood of Jesus Christ. Let the (wicked says
the Lord) forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him
return unto me, and I will have mercy upon him, and I will pardon him
abundantly: Let not your conscience be terrified at the remembrance of your
transgressions, for there is no sin bars a man from salvation, but incredulity
and impenitency. Therefore lift up your hearts unto the Lord, call unto him for
mercy, repent earnestly of your sins, and have a lively considence in Christ's
merits, and doubt not but upon your humble contrition and sorrow for sin, with
sighs and tears (the blood of a wounded soul) God will receive your soul into
everlasting happiness, to live in eternal glory, which he of his infinite mercy
grant, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The sick says,
O God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon me, miserable sinner.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy upon me miserable sinner.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, have mercy upon
me, miserable sinner, etc.

By thine Agony and bloody sweat, By thy Cross and Passion, By thy precious
Death and Burial, By thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and by the coming
of the Holy Ghost,

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, In all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of Judgment,

Good Lord deliver us.

I Humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon mine infirmities, and
for the glory of thy Names sake turn from me all those evils that I most
righteously have deserved; and grant that in all my troubles I may put my whole
trust and considence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee (if I live) in
holiness and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through Jesus Christ
our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

The friends of the sick party shall exhort him to examine himself of his
estate, both toward God, and toward man; that so by the condemning of
himself, he may find mercy at the hands of God, for Christ Jesus sake.

1. Of the confession of his faith.

2. Of his sins and offenses, both against God Almighty, either public or
private; or his Neighbor in word or deed.

3. Of his considence and faith in Jesus Christ, for the death and passion he
suffered for all sinners.

4 Advise the party to send for the Minister, that he may pray with him; for
the Lord has promised to hear the prayers of the Faithful for us, and to
forgive us our trespasses; And that he may give him the holy Communion of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, the living Bread that came down from Heaven; If
any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever: the Bread that I give, is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the World; for whosoever eats my
Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him at the
last day, Joh. 6. 51.

5. Advise him to call to mind what injury or wrong he has done to any man in
word or deed, that he may like good Zacheus, make satisfaction where he has
injuriously and fraudulently taken and detained from any man, by oppression or
deceit, his goods or money; for without restitution there can be no Repentance;
and if no Repentance, no expectation of salvation.

6. Advise him also to set his house in order, for death will not be long in
coming, and that the covenant of the grace is not revealed to any: And to make
a judicious distribution of his estate, not forgetting the poor.

The sick says,
1. I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

2. I am fully persuaded, and undoubtedly in my conscience believe, and do
confess and acknowledge before God and you here present, that every Point and
Article of this my belief is true, and necessary to Salvation.

3. I acknowledge that I have been a grievous sinner, offending my God many
ways, both in thought, word, and deed, and am guilty of the breach of all his
Commandments; deserving for the same his heavy wrath and indignation against
me; I am sorrowful and mourn in my soul for them, trusting that the Lord for
Jesus Christ his sake, who sits at the right hand of God, making
intercession for my sin, will have mercy upon me, and grant me forgiveness for
the same, and after this life ended, receive me to his eternal habitation.

4. I confidently believe that Jesus Christ is the only Mediator and Savior of
all mankind, and that I shall be saved by the only merits of his precious Death
and Passion, which he suffered on the Cross for my Salvation; denying all
meritorious works of my own, and that there is no name under Heaven whereby I
may be saved, but in the name of Jesus Christ.

5. I do from my heart freely forgive all the World, all those that have any
way wronged, injured, or offended me by word or deed, as I desire to be
forgiven of God. And I desire likewise, all men whom I have often offended, by
committing any unjust, unconscionable, or uncharitable act or deed, to forgive
me being sorry for what I did, to their prejudice or hurt.

O Lord, I beseech thee, hear my Prayer, and spare me which do confess my sins,
that I, whose conscience by sin is accused, by thy merciful pardon may be
absolved, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

O Lord my Redeemer, have mercy upon me, and receive my Spirit.

A Prayer to be said by those that visit the Sick.
O most mighty and eternal God, which have compassion on all men, and hate
nothing that thou have made, mercifully we beseech thee to have compassion on
this thy servant, who by thy visitation has been sorely afflicted, and by the
same even brought to the termination of his days, and end of his life: be
pleased good Lord to have mercy upon him, acept of him as the work of thine own
hand, a Lamb of thy fold, thy servant, redeemed by Jesus Christ; who is willing
by thy appointment, to leave this miserable World, in full assurance of thy
mercy in Jesus Christ, for the remission of his sins: guide him good Lord, in
this his last journey, that he, being quit of all the troubles of this
transitory World, may safely by thy power be conducted to the Haven of eternal
happiness, into the arms of thy unspeakable mercy, to everlasting peace, to
perpetual joy, and there to reign with all the company of Saints and Angels in
eternal Bliss for evermore.

Good Lord we beseech thee, by the abundance of thy goodness, by the multitude
of thy Mercies, by the merits of thy Death and Passion, by the glorious
Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ, have mercy upon him: deliver him
from the burden of his sins, the fear of Death and the power of Hell; and give
him a quiet and joyful departure, and receive him in thy favor to the fullness
of Joy in thine everlasting Kingdom, to reign with thee world without end.

Amen.
Thanksgiving after Recovery
O Lord my God and heavenly Father, seeing it has pleased thee of thy infinite
mercies to withold my life from the pit of corruption, and in good measure
restored me again to my former health, crowning me with mercy and loving
kindness, my soul and all that is within me shall praise thy holy Name: I will
praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, and sing praise unto thy Name, O thou
most High, for the health of my body; I bless thee for it with my soul: And
good Lord, give me also the health of my soul, then shall I magnify and praise
thee for thy goodness, with soul and body. This gentle correction has brought
me nigher unto thee, and upon thy forbearance I have promised amendment of
life; and that I may so do, assist me with thy grace, give me constancy and
perseverance in good works, and keep me from relapsing into those sins which
induced thy former judgments: and though the custom of sin take away the sense
of sin, and my infirmities being many; yet, good Lord, forsake not my soul in
any temptation, neither suffer me to fall into such notorious sins again, which
I have truly repented me of; but so guide me by thy grace in the small
remainder of my days that I have to live in this World, that my life may be
ordered by thy governance, and always do that which is righteous in thy sight,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Psalm. 116.
I Am well pleased, that the Lord has heard the voice of my Prayer.

2. That he has inclined his ear unto me: Therefore will I call upon him as
long as I live.

3. The snares of Death compassed me round about: And the pains of Hell gat
hold upon me.

4. I shall find trouble and heaviness, and I shall call upon the Name of the
Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my soul.

5. Gracious is the Lord and righteous: yea, our God is merciful.

6. The Lord preserve the simple: I was in misery, and he helped me.

7. Turn again then unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has rewarded thee.

8. And why thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and
my feet from falling.

9. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the living.

10. I believed, and therefore will I speak, but I was sore troubled: I said in
my have, All men are liars.

11. What reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the benefits that he has
done unto me?

12. I will receive the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

13. I will pay my vows now in the presence of all his people: right dear in
the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.

14. Behold (O Lord) how that I am thy servant, I am thy servant and the Son of
thy handmaid, thou have broken my bonds in sunder.

15. I will offer unto thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving: and will call upon
the Name of the Lord.

16. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, in the sight of all his people: in the
Courts of the Lords house, even in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise the
Lord.

A Morning Prayer for a private Family.
O God the Father, Creator, and Maker of all things in Heaven and Earth; O
Christ, the Redeemer of all Mankind; and thou (O blessed Spirit) the Sanctisier
of all the Elect, have mercy upon us; spare us most miserable sinners, whom
thou have redeemed, and be not angry with us for ever; but hearken unto our
Prayers, receive our petitions, and grant our requests, for Jesus Christ his
sake, our only Lord, and blessed Savior.

We thy poor and unworthy servants, in all humility of Soul and Body, and
unfeigned acknowledgment of our bounden duty, prostrate our selves before the
Throne of thy mercy seat, praising and magnifying thy Fatherly goodness, for
the abundance of thy blessings, for the multitude of thy mercies continually
heaped upon us; beseeching thee for Christ his sake to be merciful to all our
sins committed against thy divine Majesty; upon the consideration of which, we
confess we are not worthy to appear in thy sight, much less to ask a blessing
at thy hands; for by reason of our corrupt Nature in us derived from our first
parents, our inclination has been prone to commit all manner of sin and
wickedness against thy goodness; thy Laws and Precepts we have broken both in
thought, word, and deed; out of our hearts proceed evil and wicked
imaginations, which defile the soul, and the whole man is altogether
abominable; the eyes that now look up to thee for mercy, have beheld vanity;
our tongues that now call upon thee, have blasphemed thee; our hands now lifted
up to heaven, have been lifted up against thee; our feet have been willing to
run to commit any mischief by the temptation of Satan; our wills being
continually averse to thy commandments; the Law of sin is in our members,
repugnant to the Law of our mind, making us altogether unworthy of the least of
thy mercies; and miserable that we are, the numberless number of our sins have
been multiplied as the number of our sinful days have increased; these things,
O Lord, we have done to our shame, and, if thy mercy prevent not, judgment, to
our utter destruction of soul and body; we must acknowledge thou who art our
Creator, who have made us, by the precious death of Jesus Christ redeemed us,
and by thy holy Spirit sanctified us; and many are the blessings and benefits
which we enjoy both in soul and body; therefore by the contrition of ou^
hearts, by the testimony of our Consciences, we stand convicted, and at the
horrid thought of our sins we are mightily astonished; what shall we say, or
wherein shall we open our mouths, who shall deliver us from the misery due to
us for our transgressions? nothing can be expected in this life but misery and
confusion, and in the world to come, eternal condemnation. But yet, O Lord, in
obedience of thy command, and in confident assurance of thy endless and
unspeakable mercy, promised in Jesus Christ to all sinners, with sorrow in our
hearts, with shame in our face, in humility of spirit, we appeal from thee, to
thee; from thee a just Judge, to thee a merciful Father; from the Throne of thy
justice, to the seat of thy mercy; beseeching thee to have mercy upon us, O
Lord, to have mercy upon us, and turn thy face away from all our sins, and blot
out all our transgressions; for the only meritorious death and passion of Jesus
Christ thy innocent Lamb, who so abundantly shed his blood on the Cross to take
away the sins of the world; accept we entreat thee, that inestimable price of
his suffering, for a full ransom for all our sins; remit them unto us, and
divert thy Judgments and punishments from us, and assure us of thy love and
favor in Christ: and for the time to come, work in us by the graces of thy
holy Spirit, true and unfeigned Repentance, and faith with strength against
sin, and grace in some better measure to do thy will; reform our affections,
transform us out of sin, into the glorious liberty of thy own children, to live
in newness of life, in holy conversation, and continual obedience to thy divine
Majesty.

And seeing O Lord it has pleased thee of thy goodness to deliver us from the
power of darkness, and all dangers of the night past, affording us quiet and
comfortable rest, bringing us safe to the beginning of this day: our souls and
all that is within us shall praise thy holy Name; desiring continually to
render unto thee all possible praise and thanksgiving for the incarnation of
our Blessed Savior, for our Redemption by passion, for our Creation, Election,
Justification, and Sanctification in some good measure, and assured hope of
Glorification in the World to come: we likewise bless thee for our lives,
health, liberty, peace and prosperity, for our preservation, and deliverance
from evil since we were born, for the freedom of thy Gospel, for the comfort we
enjoy under His Majesty's happy Reign; for delivering our Church and Kingdom
from Foreign Invasion; for sparing and giving us so long a time of Repentance:
for these thy blessings and benefits our Souls shall praise the Lord of Heaven,
whose mercy endures from generation to generation.

Bless and defend us (O Lord) this day, direct and protect us in the same,
bless our going out and coming in; let thy Spirit guide us in all our Actions,
deliver us from the temptation and malice of the Devil, and keep us both in
Soul and Body from all his devices, and let thy grace preserve and guide us in
all our ways, that we may walk circumspectly, and strive to avoid all
occasions of committing or running into such sins, which by nature we are apt
to fall into: set a watch before the door of our lips, that we may not offend
thy Majesty by ill words, or blasphemous Oaths; keep us we beseech thee from
violent passions, which provoke thy wrath and indignation against us; and guide
our feet in the way of peace, which leads us to Everlasting Salvation: Let the
dew of thy blessing descend upon our labors, and prosper thou the work of our
hands: O prosper thou our handiwork; make us diligent and dutiful in our
calling; and that we may have a good Conscience in all our dealings, not any
way to defraud any man, knowing one day we must give an account for all our
words and deeds: And good Lord, we beseech thee so to bless our endeavors,
that we may raise such a competency and convenient sufficiency, void of
wretched care, for the supportation of our lives, in a modest and civil manner;
and especially give us hearts and minds contented with what thou shall be
pleased to lay upon us, strength and patience in all afflictions and
temptations, troubles and adversities, which seal thy Children to Salvation:
give us meekness, and humility in prosperity, and constancy in well doing; and
for the small remainder of our lives, that we have to live here on Earth, give
us grace to consecrate it to thy service, and live in thy fear, not setting our
hearts on transitory things, but carefully labor to redeem the time; not
deferring our repentance, but endeavor to make our calling and election sure,
working our salvation in fear and trembling, before we go hence and be no more
seen: And grant us, O Lord, that when the race and course of our natural life
here on Earth is finished, we may at the last receive a crown of righteousness,
which thou from the beginning have laid up for them that fear thy Name.

In these our Prayers we further entreat thee, O Lord, for a blessing upon thy
Church universal, more especially we beseech thee to continue the peace and
prosperity of these Churches wherein we live, and every member thereof; more
especially, ever mightily protect and defend, from all evil and danger; and
bless with the chiefest of thy blessings, thine Anointed, and our dread
Sovereign Lord King Charles, the Queens Majesty, James Duke of York, and the
rest of the Royal Progeny: Bless the Lords of his Majesty's honorable Privy
Council, the Reverend Clergy, and all Civil Magistrates: bless all our Friends
and Kindred and acquaintance; bless us all, good Lord, from the highest to the
lowest; help and comfort all our brethren, that in this transitory life be in
trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any other adversity: Comfort the
comfortless, help the distressed, and defend all that travel by Land or Water;
and work in all and every one of us, true fear of thy holy Name, and constant
resolution to serve thee to our lives end.

Good Lord hear, Lord hearken unto us we beseech thee, and accept of this our
Morning sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; hear our prayers, and grant our
petitions that we have asked, and all other blessings, which thou in thine
infinite wisdom know most necessary for us, and thy whole Church, we ask and
crave at thy merciful hands, in the Name, and through the Mediation of thy dear
Son, our blessed Redeemer, our only Lord and blessed Savior Jesus Christ, in
that most excellent form of Prayer, which he in his holy Gospel has taught us,
saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, etc.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the Fellowship of the
Holy Ghost be with us all for evermore.

Amen.
An Evening Prayer for a private Family.
O Eternal God and Heavenly Father, which have made of one blood all mankind,
and breathed into us the breath of life, and assigned times and length of our
life in this world, which thou continuest according to thy good pleasure; and
if thou withdrawest thy hand, we soon perish, and are returned to dust, whence
we were taken: we will therefore show forth thy power in the Evening, and
magnify thy goodness for saving us this day from dangers, and from our birth,
in the whole course of our lives, hitherto preserving us; for thou art a God of
patience, pity, and much forgiveness; showing mercy unto thousands, and
blotting out all our offenses. O Lord, we pray thee set not before thine eyes
the horrible confusion, uncleanness, and wickedness of our hearts, (being
replenished with loathsome darkness, of ignorance, errors, doubtings, and
distrust) yea, our vile hearts have been turned away from thee, and all the
powers of our souls and bodies are filthily defiled and weakened with
wickedness; only we cry aloud unto thee, favorably to consider the troubles
and sorrows of our hearts, to strengthen our infirmities, and to pardon our
most horrible offenses: for we are wounded and weak and cannot be helped but
only through thy exceeding great mercy, There is no health in our flesh,
because of thy displeasure, neither is there any peace or rest in our souls, by
reason of our sin; yet hear thou us (O Lord) for thy Holy namesake, for Jesus
Christ his sake pardon and forgive us all our sins that we have committed
against thee this day; and grant us thy grace, that we may amend our lives, and
unseignedly serve thee in the several duties of our Callings, to thy glory, and
the comfort of our own Souls; remit our punishments, restore us to thy wonted
favor, and receive us into thy most gracious protection, and keep us this
night and evermore, that the Devil may have no power over us, nor the sin of
wickedness may be able to hurt us. Whether we sleep or wake, live or die, we
are always thine, thou art our Creator and Redeemer; guard us about with the
Armies of thy Holy Angels in our habitations; expel and remove far away from us
wicked Spirits (our mortal enemies) and graciously protect us from our
persecutors which lay snares to subdue us: Do thou (O God) assist us, that we
may peaceably sleep and rest in thee: hide us in thy Tabernacle from the strife
of all men, and we will fear no evil, for thou that keep us, do neither
slumber nor sleep: thy rod and thy staff do always comfort and defend us: Let
thy mercy (O God) prevent and follow us all the days of our lives, that we may
dwell in thy House of defense in longness of days, praising thee evermore,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one true, gracious, and everlasting God, ruling
and reigning world without end.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed, etc.

Lighten our darkness we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend us
from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son, our
Lord and Savior, JESUS CHRIST.

Let thy mighty, hand and outstretched Arm, O Lord, be still our defense; thy
mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear Son our Salvation; thy true
and holy word our instruction; thy Grace and holy Spirit our comfort and
consolation, to the end, and in the end, So be it.

Amen.
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
A TABLE OF THE PRAYERS Contained in this BOOK, VIZ.
COmfortable Prayers for Sunday Morning. page 1. A Confession to God. 8. A
devout Prayer to Jesus Christ. 10. A Prayer to the Holy Ghost. 12. A Prayer for
Sunday Night. 17. A Prayer for Grace. 23. A Prayer not to distrust the Mercies
of God. 25. An Evening Prayer. 28. Prayers for Monday Morning. 30. A Prayer for
forgiveness of sin. 34. A Prayer to be restored to God's favor. 40. Prayers
for Monday Night. 43. A Prayer against the power of Satan. 53. A Prayer for the
desire of a godly life. 54. An Evening Prayer. 55. Prayers for Tuesday Morning.
57. A Prayer of true Repentance, and to be purged of sin. 62. A Prayer for the
aid of God's Holy Spirit. 64. A Prayer to acknowledge God in his works. 66.
Prayers for Tuesday Night. 70. A Prayer for the remission of Sins. 72. A Prayer
setting out the power of God's Grace. 75. A Prayer for a competent Living. 78.
An Evening Prayer. 82. Prayers for Wednesday Morning. 84. A Morning Prayer. 86.
A Prayer for Patience. 89. A Prayer for Humility. 92. A Prayer for God's fear.
93. A Prayer for Wednesday Night. 99. A Prayer for Mortification. 101. A Prayer
against desperation. 104. A Prayer for the power of God's Spirit to abide in
us. 106. A Prayer to be mindful of Death. 110. A Prayer for an happy departure
out of this Life. 112. An Evening Prayer. 115. Prayers for Thursday Morning.
117. A Prayer for Wisdom. 122. A Prayer for Charity. 127. A Prayer to God to
bless our Endeavors. 130. A Prayer to live uprightly in our Calling. 131.
Prayers for Thursday Night. 135. A Prayer against evil Imaginations. 146. An
Evening Prayer. 147. Prayers for Friday Morning. 149. A Prayer of thanksgiving
for the passion of Christ. 156. A Prayer for mercy for our offenses. 159.
Prayers for Friday Night. 163. A Prayer for redress of a sinful Life. 168. A
Prayer for continual remembrance of our end. 170. A Prayer to Jesuss Christ for
Heavenly Comfort. 173. An Evening Prayer. 177. Prayers for Saturday Morning.
178. A Prayer to obtain the Kingdom of Heaven. 186. A Prayer for Saturday
Night. 188. A Prayer for a Blessed and Godly Life. 190. A Prayer for defense
against our Enemies. 194. A Prayer for the opening the Eyes of our
Understanding. 197. A Prayer for perseverance in Prayer. 200. An Evening
Prayer. 201. Short directions for Receiving the Blessed Sacrament of Christ's
Blessed Body and Blood. 202. An humble Confession before the Receiving of the
Sacrament. 208. A Prayer before the Receiving of the Sacrament. 211. A Psalm
before the Sacrament. 214. A Thanksgiving after the Receiving the Sacrament.
218. A Psalm of thanksgiving. 219. A Prayer for the Sick. 223. Directions for
the Sick. 240. A Morning Prayer for a private Family. 258. An Evening Prayer
for a private Family. 266.
FINIS.

