A PRACTICAL DISCOVRSE OF GOD'S SOVEREIGNTY: With other Material points,
deriving thence.

Ephesians. 1. 11. -- Who works all things after the Council of His own Will.

LONDON, Printed by Ben. Griffin for E. C. 1673.

An Account of the Treatise and Publication.
THE General Heads of this Discourse, (with other sound Principles, generally
owned by the Churches of Britain) the Author was somewhat Instructed-in from
his Childhood; and had heard but little of their contraries, till a few years
since, that he fell in acquaintance with some who held the General Point: That,
he means, which would make the Grace of God in Christ, to be General and alike
to All; suspending the whole success thereof on the Humane Will; without any
peculiar Assistance afforded to Any, but what is given in Common unto Men.
Which yet he thinks more rightly termed General, as having the Generality of
Men in Nature, for Abettors of it. Not that he thinks All who hold for it, to
be in a Natural state; For, as of Most the Judgment is better than their
practice; so, of Some he hopes the practice may be sounder than their Judgment:
But so to hold, and practice accordingly, he cannot but judge extremely
perilous to the Souls of Men.

Diverse occasional conferences he had with those of That way: In all which he
found it their drift to Insinuate that Principle: (Not caring much to discourse
of any thing else, but still diverting into that channel:) And this, with that
Confidence of their own, and contempt of the contrary Judgment; such uncomly
Reflections (from some of them) upon their Opponents, and slight regard of the
Scriptures brought against them; as in no wise beseem'd a Contending for the
Faith.

He also found their opinion mostly grounded upon words and phrases of a
variable interpretation; Not weighing the Scope of the Text, nor how the sense
they gave of it, might accord with those of a contrary Import. It was still
their way, to bring Those that were plain and express, to be tried by those of
a doubtful sound: Whereas (indeed) the contrary Course had been more Regular,
and likely to find-out the Truth.

Not that any Scripture is doubtful in it self, or would seem so to us; were
the scope and context rightly understood: But, the same word being used in
diverse places to a different purpose; for want of well-observing, or rightly
taking the Scope, is easily turned from its proper Intendment.

It is true, he found among them a general agreement against our Doctrine of
Election: and yet, as much differing among themselves as they do from us: Some
holding Election, upon Faith foreseen; Others, That Men are taken into
delightful Love when they do actually believe, and not before; Others of them,
That there is no Man Elected till he has Persevered in Believing to the last
Moment of his life; And Others again, That there is no Election at all, of
particular persons as such, but of the entire species of Men from Eternity.

This put him upon searching the Scriptures more Setly, touching the Doctrine
of Election; Wherein the farther he went, the more he was confirmed in what he
had first received. And as he went-on, found those other Points of Peculiar
Redemption, Effectual Calling, and Final Perseverance, so interwoven with That
of Election, and dependent thereon; as very Naturally induced a Discussion of
Those also* And as Preparatory thereto, it seemed expedient to preface the
whole with the Doctrine of God's Sovereignity: the reasons whereof, with its
usefullness, you will find in the Treatise it self. It also lay before him, to
observe, What useful Instructions derived from these Doctrines, above Those of
the contrary tenor.

Of this Work was oft-times a Stop and Laying-aside, as Resolved to proceed no
farther: Not so much from the want, as Redundancy, of Matter, which he
conceived to be in the Scriptures for it; but found himself too-narrow to
make-it-out: Partly also, from the difficulty of bringing his scattered
Miscellaneous Notes, to a Consistency. But, by one Impressing Occurrence or
Other, it still Revived and went-on afresh; till at length, his Gleanings grew
into a shock; Which then he bound-up and designed it a Legacy to his Children,
To whom only he thought to commend it.

But, so it was, (in the Providence of God,) That some parts thereof came to
the view and hearing of several Ancient and Sober Christians, who expressed a
very hearty Resentment and Approbation of it; Affectionately wishing it might
be printed, for more general use; as That which might help to confirm the
Tenure of Those already possessed of the Truth, but still remain subject to
sifting.

One amongst them (who had cast a favorable Aspect on the contrary Point;)
professed himself well-satisfied with what he had found in this, touching the
Impotency of natural Free Will, though assisted with General Grace; Urging also
the publishing of it, For that he thought, the plainness thereof might render
it more Convincing to some (that were looking another way) than learned
Disputes.

Another Consideration (which also had its weight) was laid in the Balance;
viz. The usefulness it might be of, To antidote young Professors (or
Probationers in Religion;) who being scarce out of the shell of their Natural
Understanding, are pronely Receptive of Notions that spring from a Covenant of
Works; which, by means of so familiar a discourse of Nature's weakness, with
the Necessity and Invincible efficacy of Divine Grace, they might happily be
Armed-against.

Repeated instances prevailed (at length) for a willingness to make it public;
in case it should also obtain Approbation from approved Divines; whose Test and
Judgment he would first submit it unto: Retaining (nevertheless) a deep sense
of his manifold insufficiency for such a work; and praying, that his personal
weakness and obscurity may not prejudice the Truth.

I shall only add (by the way) a word of Religious education: That though it do
not confer Grace, yet it may prove (and has so to many) a good Preservative
from evils in practice, and errors in Judgment; which others (who had not that
Merciful advantage) have more aptly fell-into. Besides, When God comes to work
effectually; Those Notions of sin, of Christ, and of Grace, (of which before,
they had but the Form;) have proved of singular use to facilitate the work.

The Lord vouchsafe His presence with it! Amen.

A PRACTICAL DISCOURSE OF Gods Sovereignty.
THis Great and Fundamental Attribute I have chose to begin with, as a meet
Introduction to the following discourse; It being indeed, the foundation of
all; and that which gives Life and Virtue to every Divine Truth: Without the
knowledge whereof, (in some measure) and practical yielding thereto, we shall
want a principal means of quieting our understandings, touching the Points that
follow. I gather the sum of what I intend, into this Proposition; viz.

That, Sovereign Power belongs to God. By [ Sovereign Power] I understand, that
absolute Dominion, which the Great God, blessed for ever, has over his
Creatures, to dispose and determine them, as seems him good.

That there is such a Power, and that this Power belongs to God, no other
Reason needs be assigned, but that He is God, and there is n^ne besides him:
There can be no more, because (1) There can be but one Infinite; for such a
being fills Heaven and Earth; and so, no place or room for another. (2) There
can be but one Omnipotent, For, He that is such, has all others under his
feet; Besides, where One can do all, more would be impertinent. (3) There can
be but one Supreme; Supreme power may reside in Many; (as in mixed Monarchies
and Commonwealths,) but as Lawmakers and Supreme, they are but One. (4) There
can be but one first Cause, from which, all being else derive their Original;
and that is, this blessed One we are speaking of; Of whom, and for whom are all
things, 1 Cor. 8. 6. And if he be the Author of all, he needs must have a
Sovereign Right and Power to determine all; as to their being, so also, to
their Order, Efficacy, and End.

It is a Truth so natural, and obvious to Reason it self; that other proof
seems as needless, as that the Sun is the fountain of light: Nor shall I
suppose, that any who will read this discourse, can so far forget themselves to
be Creatures, as to seek a proof of their Creators Sovereignty; The things that
are seen, so loudly proclaiming his Eternal power and Godhead. But since, with
our easy admitting the Notion, it is none of the smallest difficulties, to own
it in our practice, and bear our selves answerably toward him; Since also, so
huge a weight is born on the shoulders of this Supreme Attribute, and our souls
are so highly concerned in the interest and influences of it; it needs must be
our duty, and well worthy our time, to look or the Instances of it, and to mark
and consider them well; as things greatly importing our Instruction; whereby we
may know something of the Greatness of that God, in whose hands our souls are;
as also, of our infinite distance from him, and nothingness to him; and so,
with the more humbleness of mind, and self-abasement; as also, with the more
Faith, and Creature-like affiance, submit unto him, and bear our selves upon
him.

To this end, the Scriptures have enrolled diverse Ensigns of Sovereignty, by
which, as by so many footsteps, we are led to the Absolute Will, and Power of
God, as the Cause and Ruler of all.

The Great Act of Sovereignty was Gods Decree for making the World, and of
doing, or permitting to be done what ever should be in it, to the folding of it
up. The Heavens and the Earth, and all the hosts of them, as yet had no being:
It was at his pleasure, whether he would make them or not: And if he would,
what being he would give them; to what End, and how that end should be
accomplished. And that these were all ascertained by the Decree, is evident;
For, known unto God were all his works (which he would do in time) from the
beginning of the World. Acts 15. 18.
The scheme and substance whereof, (and I hope, without intrusion) may be drawn
to this effect: That the Great God being infinitely good and blessed in
himself; was also infinitely prompt and well-pleased to Communicate of that his
blessedness: To which end, he designed to raise up Creatures, Angels and Men:
That for the manifestation of his Sovereignty; He would confirm a certain
number of those Angels in their primitive state, leaving the rest to
themselves: Who falling from that state, should be cast down, and reserved in
chains of darkness unto the judgment of the great day. That in this lower
World, he would set up the first Man to be the head and Representative of all
that should come of him. That this single person should be created in the Image
of God, fit to enjoy Communion with him, and endued with power to abide
therein. That to manifest the weakness of Creatures, and their perpetual
dependence upon God; he would thus leave him to his first stock: and being so
left, the fallen Ange^ tempting him to disobedience, and also prevailing; both
himself, and all his posterity by this Revolt, should fall under the curse.
That for the declaration of his Sovereign Grace, He would (and accordingly did)
choose a certain number of Adam's posterity, and ordain them to eternal life:
And to make known the power of his wrath and his just displeasure against sin,
he would leave the Rest in that state of perdition they would bring themselves
into: That of these Vessels of wrath, Satan himself (whom they chose to follow)
should be the Head and Ruler; as also, over them that were Elected, for a time;
viz. until the Messiah, (their true and proper Head, and into whom he had
chosen them) should rescue them out of his power. That to this end, (and that
he might also be known to be just, as well as Merciful in justifying of them)
the Son of God should take on him the place of a second Adam, and come into the
world with an humane body; In which he should fulfill all Righteousness, and by
the infinite virtue and merit of his death, should satisfy the Law in all its
demands; destroy the Devil; dissolve his works; and Reconcile the Elect unto
God: That he should be raised again from the dead, and invested with all power
befitting the Captain of their Salvation: and so, might effectually minister to
them whatever should be requisite for bringing those his Sons to glory. This I
take to be the sum of God's Decree; the Great Ensign or Standard Royal of
Sovereignty; whereof all the other Ensigns are Effects or consequents, and
subordinate thereto.

visible Ensign of Sovereignty was Creation, or, God's giving the World an
actual existence, in time, according to his Decree from everlasting; Bringing
that huge (yet void and formless) Mass, at first, out of Nothing; and then this
glorious fabric out of that Confusion: His hanging the Earth upon nothing: His
assigning to every sort of Creatures, Job 26. 7.
such Form and Station, Order, Use and Efficacy; and impressing on them, such
Laws and Instincts of nature, as seemed him good; which also was effected by
his word: what he would, was done with that immediate suddenness, as if the
things themselves had proceeded with his breath. Ps. 33. 9. Genesis 1. 3. v. 9. Ps
104. 3.
The instant production of light: The waters seperating from the other
Elements, and gathering into a body; and their going up and down to the place
He had sounded for them; with many others (of which ye have an Index in the
first of Genesis) are witnesses of it: as also, His so fixing this
'stablishment, that they continue this day according to his Ordinance, Ps. 119.
91.

Consequent to this, as a second Ensign of Sovereignty, universal Providence,
by which the Creation is sustained, and all inferior Causes guided to their
designed End; and this, notwithstanding all supposeable accidents, which might
possibly come between, to obstruct or divert them: And that the Creatures have,
at times, deviated from their first Rule and settlement, is no derogation to
the Doctrine of Gods Sovereignty; but rather an illustration of it; as showing,
that the Creatures are still in His hand, as Clay in the Potters. Hence we find
their innate propensions to be sometimes suspended; Otherwhiles acted beyond;
and at times again, quite contrary to, the law of their nature: and this, not
casually, nor by the force of created powers, nor yet for any private or self
concern; but to serve some special and superior End, which their Lord had to
be done: To instance a few; And

1. Of Creatures without life: As, the windows of Heaven opening, Genesis 1, 6, 7.
Ps. 10^, 9.
and the fountains of the great deep breaking ^p, (Notwithstanding the
Firmament above, and the bounds beneath, Exodus 14. 21. 22. Josh. 10. 13. Judge.
5. 20. 2 K. 20. 11.
) to drown the world of ungodly men, Genesis 7. 11, and 12. The Red Sea's dividing
and standing up as a wall, to make way for his Peopl's escape: The Sun and
Moon's standing still, till they were avenged on their Enemies: The Stars, to
the same end, fighting against Sisera: The Suns going back in Ahaz his Dial, to
help Hezekiahs Faith: Dan. 3. 22, 27.
The fiery Furnace devouring those, at a distance, who cast in those holy
Confessors; and not so much as touching them that were cast into it: The winds
and the Seas, (which are such turbulent and lawless Creatures) they stir not,
nor breathe, but to fulfill his word, Ps. 148. 4. Mark 4. 39.

2. Of living Creatures, that have not the use of Reason: How readily went they
by pairs into Noah's Ark, at Gods appointment! The Frogs, Genesis 7. 8, 9.
Lice, Locusts, etc. with what supernatural boldness did they assault and
perplex the Egyptians! That the Magicians themselves confessed, Exodus 8. v. 13.
31. Number. 21. 29. 2 Pet. 2. 16.
the finger of God was in it: and as strangely withdrew, when their work was
done. Witnessed also, by the dumb Ass's reproving the Prophets madness: 1 K.
13. 24
The Lion's killing the seduced Prophet, for breaking God's command; yet not
eating the carcass, nor tearing his Ass. 1 K. 17. 6.
A Ravenous bird bringing Elijah food in his solitary condition. The Whales
receiving Jonah, and at Gods command, casting him on dry Land, without harm:
Jonah 1. Dan 6. 22, 24.
17. with chapter 2. 10. And the Lions not hurting Daniel in their Denn; yet
greedily devouring his accusers. It must needs be a Sovereign power, which thus
Intends, Restrains, Inverts, the course of nature, at his will.

supremacy, and Rightful Dominion, is the general Vote and subscription of Men,
especially, the most knowing, and such as best understood him: They own it, (1)
In their Practice or Actions; Abel offers the firstlings of h^s Flock to God:
Genesis 4. 3, Abraham leaves his native Country, Gen 12. 4. Genesis 22 2.
at Gods command, to go he knew not whether: He also offers his only and
innocent son Isaac, ver. 10.
in whose life and posterity all Nations were to be blessed. Job, when stripped
of all, falls down and worships, Job 1. 21. When his two sons were destroyed by
fire from Heaven, Lev^t 10. 2, 3.
Aaron held his peace: Eli, when that tingling sentence was denounced against
his house; It is the Lord (says he) let him do as seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.
18. David, when driven from Gods Sanctuary, and his throne usurped by Absalom,
Behold here I am let him do to me as seems good to him, 2. Sam. 15. 26. The
men of Nineveh, their destruction was pronounced peremptorily; of which they
had no promise of Remission; and consequently, no visible ground of hope; yet
they believed God, fasted, lay in sackcloth, and turned from their evil way,
Jonah 3. 5. (2) They likewise own it in their confessions and attestations:
Melchisedeck styles him, The M^st High God, Possessor of Heaven and Earth, Genesis
14. 19. and Abraham does the like, verse 22. Job professes, that though he
were Righteous, yet if G^d will contend with him, he will not answer, but make
supplication to his Judge, Job. 9. 15. The Lord has made all things for
himself, Prove. 16. 4. For his pleasure they are and were creaated, Rev. 4. 11.
We are the Clay and thou our Potter, Isa. 64. 8. He works all things after
the Council of his own Will, Ephesians. 1. 11. He gives not account of any of his
matters, Job 33. 13. In his hand is the soul of every living thing, chap. 12,
^0. He is the God of the spirits of all flesh, Numb. 16. 22. All Nations before
him, are less than Nothing and Vanity, Isa 40. 17. He stils the tumult of the
people, Ps. 65. 7. If it be of God ye cannot overthrow it, Ps 33 11.
Acts 5. 39. The Council of the Lord, that shall stand, Pro. 19. 21. The lot is
cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord, Pro. 16. 33.
The Kingdom is the Lords, and he is Governor among the Nations, Ps. 22. 28.
Thou Lord art exalted above all Gods, Ps. 97. 9. Nehuchadnezzar, that proud and
potent Monarch, whose greatness reached unto Heaven, and his dominion to the
end of the Earth, All Nations trembled before him, whom he would, he slew; and
whom he would, be kept alive; who said in his heart I will ascend into Heaven,
I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God: I will be like the most high:
And who is that God, that shall deliver out of my hand? Yet even he, this Child
of pride, is made to confess One higher than himself, and to bow before him;
proclaiming to the World, That the most High does according to his will, in the
Army of Heaven and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his
hand, or say unto him, what do thou? Dan. 4. 22. ch 5. 19. chapter 3. 15. chapter 4.
34, 35, and 37, verses. and Isa. 14. 13, 14. It might farther be instanced in
Cain, Pharaoh, Baalam, and other wicked men; how they were forced (against
their wills) to acknowledge the Sovereignty of God; as appears by comparing
Exodus 5. 2. with chapter 9. 27, 28. and Nu^b. 22. 18. Darius also, in Dan. 6. 26,
27, 2.

Fourthly, Another evidence or witness, we have from the Elect or Good Angels:
These show it by their ready submission to any service He is pleased to appoint
them: Zach. 6. 5. 6, 7.
They are Gods Inetlligencers: Not that he needs their advises, but to manifest
his Sovereign greatness: They are also his Messengers, He sends them on His
errands, to negotiate His affairs among men, and to reveal His purposes
concerning this lower world; as appears by many Scriptures. They are His
Chariots, Ps. 68. 17. His Reapers, Mat. 13. 39, 49. The Executioners of His
Judgments, 2. Sam. 24. 16 2 K. 19. 35. and Christ's attendants at His coming,
Math. 25. 31 The Apostate Angels, or wicked spirits: though the testimony we
have from them, is not from love or good will, yet is it as great an evidence
of Gods Sovereiguty, as any other; in that, being enemies to God, proud, and
imperious, they are yet overawed, and constrained to submit: we find them
subject to His rebukes, Zech. 3. 2. And hence it was, that the Devil answered
not again, when that dreadful sentence was pronounced upon him for seduceing
our first Parents: we have him also presenting himself before the Lord, to give
account of his actions; and touch Job, Job. 2. 1, 6.
or any thing he had, he durst not, without leave from God* nor vary a jot^
from the rule prescribed him. In the Evangelists are many instances of Christ's
commanding them forth with auth^rity; yea, a whole legion at once, Luke* 8. 30.
32, 33. Nor could they so much as enter into the Swine, without his leave, Mark
5, 12. And, which is more, they were subject to the Apostles, who had but a
delegated, or second-hand power committed to them, Luk- 10. 17.

Lord himself asserting His Sovereign Prerogative. In how lofty a style, and
with what Imperial authority, does He utter himself to Pharaoh! And in very
deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to show my power on thee: Exodus
9. 1^. The Apostle quotes the place to prove, that God may raise up men, and
appoint them to what use and service he will, Romans 9. 17. Who has made the
seeing or the blind, have not I the Lord? Exodus 4. 11. I kill and I make alive:
Deuteronomy. 32. 39. I will show mercy on whom I will show mercy: Exodus 33. 19. I am
the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God: and who as I,
shall call and shall declare it, and set it in order before me: since I
appointed the ancient people, and the things that are coming and shall come?
Isa. 44. 6, 7. My Council shall stand, I will do all my pleasure, ch 46. 10.
chapter 40. 12. to the end. My word shall accomplish that which I please; it shall
prosper in the thing whereto I send it, Isa. 55. 11. And if the Prophet be
deceived, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet, and I will destroy him, Ezekiel.
14. 9. A remarkable story to the same purpose, we have in the 1* Kings, 22.
touching the lying spirit, and the effectual Commission he had from God, to
persuade, and also to prevail. How should we tremble before God, at the hearing
of such a word! But yet, I do not reckon the last two as acts of pure
Sovereignty; but rather, as punishing one sin, by leaving to another: Because
that when they kne^ God, they glorified Him not as God; Nor liked to retain Him
in their knowledge, God gave them over to a Reprobate mind Rom: 1. 21 and 28.
(Notwithstanding which) there is an impression of Sovereignty; in that he deals
not so with all who are alike obnoxious to it.

Sixthly, Another Ensign is formed of those several Acts Institutes, which
cannot be derived (at least, so properly and immediately) from any other
Attribute, as that of Sovereignty: I shall instance a few; viz. The putting of
Man's everlasting condition, upon his eating or Not-eating the fruit of such a
Tree, Genesis 2. 16, 17. In not destroying Adam presently upon his disobedience;
And in the free promise of a Savior, unsought unto for it, Genesis 3. 15. In
protecting Cain, when he had forfeited his life to Justice, Genesis 4. 15. In
Preserving Ham from the deluge, though as wicked as those that perished, chapter 7.
13 and 16. In ordering the blessing to Jacob, who sought it unduly; and denying
it to Esau, who sought it diligently, and to whom it belonged of natural Right,
Gen: 27. 19, 34, 38. In the sudden turning of Esau's heart to love Jacob, whom
he had inveterately hated; and came with full purpose to destroy him: yet, in a
trice, his heart is melted, he weeps on his Neck, and offers himself and
soldiers to be his Convoy, Genesis 27. 4^* with chap. 32. 6. and chapter 33. 4, 12. In
causing a fear to fall on the Amori^es, that they did not pursue Jacob, when
highly provoked by his Sons cruelty on the Men of Sechem, Genesis 35. 5 In sending
to Sihon a message of peace, when He had determined to cut him off; and to that
end, had hardened his spirit, and made him obstinate, D^ut. 2. 26, 27, 28, 29,
30. In causing those nations to destroy one another, who came leagued to
destroy His people, 2 Chronicles. 20. 1, 22, 23 verses. In destroying Esau's mount
Irrepairably, and for ever; when as Israel, whose land also was full of sin,
shall not be forsaken, Obad. ver. 9, 16, 18, 21. and Mal* 1* 4. Especially,
considering, that these were the several effects of His loving the One, and
hating the other, and that before they had done either good or evil, ver. 2, 3.
and Romans 9. 11, 13. In sending Ezekiel to a rebellious house that would not
hear; and not sending him to them that would, Math. 11 21. Acts 16. 6, 7. Mark
4. 11, 12. Luke 8 10.
Ezekiel. 3. 6, 7. chapter 12. 2 and 3. In hiding the Mysteries of His kingdom from
the wise and prudent, and revealing them to Babes, Math. 11. 25. And speaking
in parables to the Multitude, lest they should be converted.

In punishing (sometimes) for lesser trespasses, and that s^verely, and in his
own; whiles winking at those o^ a greater magnitude in other men: Moses is
excluded Canaan for a hasty word, though smartly provoked; when Jonah's but
mildly reproved for passionately expostulating, Vzzah dies for but touching the
Ark, 1 Samuel 5. 1. 1 Chr. 13, 9, 10.
when the Philistims bore it away in triumph. Hezekiah but shows the
Ambass^dours from Babylon, his house and treasures; 2 K. 20. 13, 17.
and for this, his sons and all must go into captivity. Not that any sin is
little in it self, or punished beyond the demerit of it: but, the Lord is
pleased thus to do, partly to show his displeasure against sin, and that will
not bear with it, even in those that are dearest to Him: but partly also (if
not chiefly, in such like cases) to set forth His Sovereign Greatness, Job. 33.
18.
and the uncontroulableness of His matters. The 73 Psalm is full to the same
purpose. That also of Job, and the manner of God's dealings with him, is much
to be remarked: He had lived a very strict and holy life, ( Not a Man like Job,
Job. 1. 8.
in all the earth, the Lord himself seems to glory in him) unto which, all
outward blessings were promised, and freedom from such sufferings; and when
bereft of all, Job 2. 3.
held fast his integrity* yet the Lord goes on the afflict him, and leaves him
wholly (saving his life) in Satan's power. Had he been a wicked Man, (as his
friends objected) those sufferings had evidenced the Justice of God* but nonw
His Sovereignty: which also seems to be intended by that speech of God to
Satan, ( chapter 2. 3) Thou movedst Me against him, to distroy him with^ul a cause.

Seventhly, There are yet other footsteps of Sovereignty, by the Lord's
constant overruling the Designs and Actions of Men, to bring His own councels
to pass* albeit, improper in their own nature; yea, disservient thereto; and
sometimes contrived on purpose to prevent them: The project of building the
Tower of Babel, was to keep that rebellious Rout together; but it turned to
their utter dispersion. Laban dealt hardly with Jacob, Genesis 11. 4 and
thereby to keep him low, and to serve himself of him; but God takes occasion
hence, to give him Laban's substance; and that by Lahan's consent and
agreement. Genesis 29. 27. and chapter Ge. 37. 9, 18. Chapter 39. 20 C^ 41. 40. Chapter 42. 6.
Chapter 50. 20.
30. 27, 43. To obviate Joseph's dreams, his brethren sell him into Egypt; and
by this means, the Lord keeps them all alive, and accomplisheth that honor to
Joseph, which they settly intended to prevent. Pharaoh lays ins^perable
burdens on the People, to diminish them; and the Lord Multiplies them under it;
The more they were oppressed, the faster thy grew. Genesis 27.
Exodus 1. ^2. Jacob's dissimulation and palpable abuse of his fathers
infirmity, was made a means of obtaining his blessing, though contrary to his
father's intendment. M^ses, a keeper of Sheep, a Man slow of speech, Exodus 31,
10.
and one that had no mind to the work; shall be God's Ambassador to Pharaoh,
Chapter 4. 10, and 13
(the proudest and most inflexible Monarch upon earth) and bring Israel out of
bondage. And who shall be His Commander in chief, to deliver His People from
their potent oppressors? but Deb^rah, a Woman; At another time, Judge. 4. 4. Chapter
6. 15.
Gideon, whose family was poor in Manasseh, and he the least in his father's
house: And though he had a numerous and powerful enemy to deal with, and (one
would think) had need of all the hands he could make, to fight them; yet, his
Army of Two and thirty thousand, must be reduced to Three hundred Men; and they
to have no other Arms, but trumpets and lamps in their pitchers: Judge. 7. 3, 6.
7. Chapter 3. 31. Chapter 15. 15.
and by these He delivers them from that huge host. And much like this, was
Shamgar's killing Six hundred Men with an Ox-goad; and Samps^n a Thousand, with
the jaw bone of an Ass. It may further be traced, in His producing contrary
effects by the same cause; and then again, the same effect by causes contrary.
Exodus 4. 6. and 7
So Daniel had a fairer countenance with pulse and water, than those who eat of
the King's own provision, Dan. 1. 15. In causing the wrath of Man to turn to
His praise; which in the nature and tendency of it, Ps 7. 6 10 Job. 5. 12. and
13 Ps. 5 10. Hester. 7. 10.
is to destroy them that praise him. By His catching the wise in their own
craftiness; and causing them to fall by their own devises; Plungeing them in
their own ditch. 1 Kings. 22. 2^, 22, 30, 34. ver The persecution of the Saints
at Jerusalem, was designed to suppress the doctrine of Christ; which yet was
thereby dispersed into many Countries, and caused to grow mightily: so, The
Preacher's imprisonment proved to the furtherance of the Gospel. Acts 8 2: 4.
Phil. 11. 2. 14.
And since the Scriptures were finished, humane stori^s and our own
observation, do abundantly stand for the Matter in hand: Do but consider how
it prevailed, to the dethroning of Satan, and turning the World upside down;
and this by means the weakest and most unlikely (to R^ason) that could be
pitched upon: Not the Sword and Spear; the Bow and Battelax; the barded Horse,
and the Martial Heroes of the Earth; but by the bare word of God: And this, not
by the hand of the learned, Scribes and Pharisees, Lawyers, Doctors, Poets,
Phil s^phers; but by poor illiterate Fishermen, Carpenters, Publicans,
Tent-makers: And who shall be the ^ubjects and party Militant of this
never-to-be-conquered kingdom? Not the Wise and Prudent, Mighty and Noble; 1.
Cor 1. 27.
but Babes, the poor, weak, base, despised, and things that are not; and by
these He confounds the things that are. Rev. 12. 11. 14. 12
And by what Arms? Patience and faith in the blood of the Lamb.

Consider also, the constant persecution of the Church, and that by Men o^ all
sorts, especially, Those of greatest power and policy; the barbarous
devastations that have been made upon it; and with what implaca^le enmity the
World is edged against it; and that yet it stands invincible, and is still
getting ground; ye cannot but acknowledge, the evident footsteps of Sovereign
Power; That the Most High bears Rule over all; and as for the Councels of the
wise, He turns them backward, Isa. 44. 25. Dan. 4. 25, 26.

Eighthly, An especial Ray of this glorious Power, shines actual predominating
the Spirits of Men; as at first, in choosing; so now, in Calling and Converting
whom He will. One would think that a Rational being should better discern his
own interest; and out of choice, comply with the will of his Maker, as who must
needs best know, what is best for His Creature; and who, in Reason, can have no
other design upon him, but his own good. But, we find it otherwise; the best
things degenerated turn the worst, and are hardliest reduced: Of all Creatures,
Man fallen, does most avert, impugn, and resist, when God would turn him out of
his natural course; Notwithstanding, that the sorest of evils do attend his
present state; and all desirable happiness would apparently follow his change.
Yet, so wedded he is to his Lusts, and headstrong in his own Will; that none
of these things move him: But On he goes, and On he will; yea, though an
incensed Angel, with a drawn sword, should withstand him. To crush them to
nothing, or break them in pieces, were easily effected; a little of Divine
Power would do that: But, to humble a proud and lofty Spirit; To soften and
melt an obdurate heart; To tame, meeken, and reconcile, a Sanguinary Rebel; To
change the very inwards of One habituated in Sin and enmity against God, and
make him pliable to Divine impressions; ^This highly proclames the exceeding
Greatness of His Power; it is a glorious Trophee of Divine Sovereignty: Which
also is farther conspicuous, in Maintaining the work begun; and bearing it on
through all oppositions: For, there needs the same Power to preserve the new
Creation, as at first to raise it: The way of God, being altogether upwards and
supernatural, there is a great pronenesse in creatures to Revolt from it; (like
a Rolling stone on the steep of a hill) The Remains of old nature, would
torrent-like bear down all, if Sovereign Power did not bar up the One, and
sustain the Other. For a spark of Divine nature to live in the breast, of a
lapsed Creature, is as great a miracle and as high an effect of Sovereign
Power, as all the Instances before enumerated, and More.

Lastly, The Sovereignty of God, is most glorious and adorable, in Ordaining
His own son, who was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners, and
was also United to the Second Person, to be the Mediator, and to make His soul
an offering for sin: And then, in His Eternal disposing of Men's everlasting
condition. To show, or not to show, Mercy unto Men equally dignified (or
rather, Indignified) in themselves; To make, of the same lump, one Vessel to
honor, and another to dishonor; is the highest act and demonstration of
Sovereign power concerning Men: Which thing, when ever we hear of, or think
upon; we should put our mouths in the dust.

Before I come to the Inferences, I would add a Caution or two, to prevent
those sinister deductious, which our deceitful hearts may be apt to draw from
this Sovereign Truth:

First, Caution. 1.
See that you make not God the Author of sin, by charging His sacred Decrees
with Men's Miscarriages; as if they were the Cause or Occasion of them; which
we are sure they are not, nor can be, any more than the Sun is the cause of
darkness. Be it always remembered, That the Lord's Rejecting of Men puts
nothing of evil into them; Nor necessitates the will; It only leaves them to
their own ways, which they freely choose: yet Banking them in and stopping
them up, as He did the Fountains of the Great Deep; lest they Deluge the World
with sin.

Secondly, Go not about to palliate, Nor think to extenuate your sin, by
Arguments fetched from those Decrees: That sin of the Jews in Crucifying Christ,
was in no wise, lessened; because the Council of God had determined the thing
to be done: For, they perpetrated it with wicked hands. Nor is any Man's
Unbelief ever the less culpable, from God's Eternal disposement of Men's
conditions; For, it is not upon that consideration, that they stumble at the
Word, or turn the deaf ear to it; or resist it: but from their own natural
blindness and enmity against it.

And so I come to the Inferences: And

First, Infer. 1.
From the Scriptures so copiously holding it forth, I infer, That the Doctrine
of God's Sovereignty is a very teaching Doctrine, and full of instruction; and
consequently, that it is both a Duty, and much for our Profit, to be well
acquainted with it: And great confidence I have, That the farther ye go in an
humble fiducial disquisition, and contemplation of it; the clearer will be the
Reason thereof; and the more usefulness will still appear to be in it. Let
Reason but keep its own place; (that is, let it work by the Rules of Right
Reason) and nothing will be more consonant thereto, than that the Most High
should bear rule over all, and Do according to his Will; and that Men, who are
Atoms of Clay animated by his breath; should own Him for their Sovereign Lord,
and accordingly submit to Him; yea; though so it were, that our own personal
welfare were not concerned in it: It will be of singular Use and Moment to us,
in the whole of our lives: Nothing, like this, will allay those carnal
Reasonings, which are so unreasonably prone to put in their Verdict of
spiritual things; (which yet, Carnal Reason has no cognizance of) and will
(indeed) be silenced by nothing else: The Apostle, therefore, in Romans 9. ver.
19, 20, 21.
thinks them not worthy a further Reply, whose captious Enquiries the
Sovereignty of God will not satisfy.

A second Inscrence, Infer. 2.
which naturally flows from this Doctrine, is that of the Psalmist: Oh, come
let us Worship and bow down, Ps. 95. 6.
and kneel before the Lord our Maker. Let us give Him the glory of this great
Attribute, by a Real and Practical Owning that indispensible bond of obedience
which it lays upon every Creature: We are highly obliged by it, both in point
of subjection, and in point of faith.

1. In point of subjection, to His Laws, Ordinances, Providence

First, For the Laws of God, and His Appointments: These we are to attend, Job
22. 3. 35. 7.
observe, obey; I cannot say, For the Lord has need of them; (For, neither can
our Righteousness profit Him; nor our wickedness impair Him; He that is Wise,
is wise for himself) but do it because the Lord has commanded; Ps. 9. 1^.
He is the Lord thy God and worship thou Him. Pro. 45 11.
This is that strong Reason by which He has backed both Commands and
Prohibitions: Exodus 20. 2.
I am the Lord thy God: Thou shall do thus: And thus thou shall not do; I am
the Lord: This he sets in the front of All; and with this He closes the R^re,
and Guards them on every side. Moses brings it in as a convincing Reason, why
we should love God with our whole heart, and keep his Commandments, (namely)
because he is the Lord, and He only: Deuteronomy. 6. 4. No One, therefore, may
pretend to a right of giving Laws to Men, or to an interest in their love and
obedience; save with respect to God, and the authority they have from Him.

And though He is sometimes pleased, (and it is a great condescension in the
great God) by arguments taken from our own Good, to draw us to obedience: ( Do
it, for it is your life:) Deuteronomy. 32. 47.
yet, in our spirits, That of His Sovereignty and Glory, ought to have the
preference. To cast out Ishmael, was a thing grievous to Abraham; but being
Commanded of God, he debates it Not, Nor delays to do it. Therefore, hold on
your way, though never so great Obscurity be upon it at present: Mind your
duty in the midst of discouragements: Do as Peter; who, though he had labored
all night and caught Nothing; yet, Master, At thy command I will let down the
Net again.

2 Be subject to His Ordinances: If He please to Command the using such Means,
L^ke 5. 5.
as have no Natural virtue toward such an effect, (as in Moses stretching his
hand over the Sea; and smiteing the Rock with his Rod: so, Water in baptism,
Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper) Presume not to say, What is there in
these? Godliness is a Mystery, which only faith can understand: There is no
Divine Institution, but has Meat in it that you know not of; which, if rightly
used, will speak for it self. If He please to make Clay of Dust and spittle;
Contemn it not; but submit to His Will and way; and be thankful for thy Cure.
Judges 12* ^. with Chapter 16. 1^
Sampsons hair was an Ordinance to him; which when he slighted, the spirit of
God left him; and he became as other Men; and recovered not his strength until
it was grown again.

3. As touching the Providence of God; Observe them and Submit to them: look
not upon them as Empty things: The least may yield you Instruction; as also,
the Most unlikely: Out of the Eater comes forth Meat, and out of the strong,
sweetness: Though the thing be a ^iddle to an heart uncircumcised; Plough with
His Heifer, and ye shall find it.

Neither look on them as Things Impertinent; But say, rather, Is there not a
Cause, though I see it not? The Lord does nothing in vain.

Neither yet look on them as Things Contingent: Math. 10 29 30
A sparrow falls not without His will; and the hairs of your head are all
Numbered: Ps. 39 9.
David was Dumb, and opened not his Mouth; why? Because Thou Lord did it; And
Shimei's Cursing he bears patiently, 2 Samuel 16. 10.
on the same account; It may be the Lord has bidden him.

There may be Such a Mixture and Confusion of things, and your expectation so
delayed and frustrated, That your froward untamed heart may be ready to Wrangle
it out; Eccles. 8. 14.
Why falls it alike to All? Why to the Just, according to the Work of the
wicked; and to the wicked according to the work of the Righteous? Or, why One
event to them All? This is not to Enquire wisely: you should rather conclude,
and say, (as the Disciples, in another Case) The Lord has need of them: That
is, He has occasion to use such a Providence, to fulfill a Word. If ye would
Cast so, as to lie by your Mark, this Attribute of Sovereignty gives you the
best Ground. Search and Observe as much as ye will, so you take Faith along
with you; Without which ye can do Nothing Warrantably. Faith is a Sworn Officer
to the Great king, and has a key for every lock that is fit to be opened; It
forces Nothing; but where it cannot Enter, it stands without, and Waits a
fitter season. Let Faith also, be Chief Speaker in all your Debates: And then,
the Result will be, That Carnal Reason, and Present Sense, (though very
Tenacious and Stubborn) shall yield the Cause, and let you go.

The Sum of all, is this, That though ye be not Conscious to your self, of any
particular Cause or Miscarriage, besides what is Common to Men, (which was the
Case with Job) Lay your hand upon your Mouth, as Job did; The Most High does
according to His Will: Dan. 4. 34: 35.
This, even the proudest of Kings acknowledged, when his understanding returned
to him; and so do you: And know, That if your spirit be out of frame in your
present Condition; it would not be better in any other.

Secondly, Our Faith also is highly concerned in the Sovereignty of God: For,
It both obliges to Believe in Him, and also affords Matter for Faith to work
upon. To these Ends, the Lord holds it forth to Abraham Once and Again: Genesis
17, 1.
I am God Almighty etc. This was it, enabled him to believe he should have a
Son; even whiles the Deadness of his own Body, Romans 4. 19.
and of Sarah's Womb, wrought strongly against it. This also was that made him
so readily assent to the offering up of this Son, when he had him. He had as
much to say against it, as could well be supposed; For, the Promise was, That
in Isaac all families of the Earth should be blessed: which Promise and this
Command, Abraham's Reason could not Reconcile: The Contradiction would surely
have Run him down, had not his faith in this Great Attribute, held fast and
guided the Reigns; Suggesting to him, That He who gave Isaac a being from a
Withered Stock, was able also to raise him from the dead: Heb. 11. 19.
Abraham there fore disputes it Not; Stands not so much as to consider upon it:
but up he gets him Early, to do it: And hence he obtained that honorable
title, James, 2. 23.
to be called, The friend of God.

Ye have seen Now, what Abraham did; Go ye, and do likewise: Take hold of Gods
Sovereignty as your own; and to be improved for your good: Faith gives a
Propriety in any Attribute it looks upon; and draws out the virtues and
Influence thereof, for it self. And therefore, What ever difficulties are in
your way, be not disheartened by them; but call in this Sovereignty of God, by
faith, to your help: Remember the ready subjection which all Creatures do pay
to his Word; By which alone (without Creatures service) He can level the
Mountains, and make Crooked things straight, Restra^^, Alter, Invert, and Turn
upside down, the very Course of Nature: so that That which is death in it self,
shall be life to you. New Cords and Wyths, when touched by his word, are as
flax and tow, when touched by the fire; Iron shall be as straw, and brass as
rotten wood: Therefore, lengthen the Cords, and strengthen the stakes of your
faith: you cannot believe for greater things or better than God can do for you:
Even sin it self, which is the Great (and in truth, the only) evil; It is His
enemy as much as yours; And you may be sure, He would not have suffered its
being in the World, if He had not a Power to Correct and Curb it; yea, and to
destroy it too, at His pleasure. Take hold of His sovereign strength, and your
work is done.

But here also a Caution or two, may be seasonably added.

1. That if death in the pot have once been healed, and your borrowed Ax-head,
(sunk once past hope of Recovery) have been brought again to your hand, look
that Remissnes grow not upon it: Beware, ye gather not Wild Gourds a second
time; Nor persume to throw the helve after the Head: The Divine Power is too
great a thing to be trifled with; or Made to serve with the ^ollies of Men.

2. That you never look on this Great Attribute of Sovereignty, without your
Mediator; As without whom it would be matter of Terror and Amazemeut to
sinners: It is He only can render It Propitious to you. As Nothing is pleasing
to God, but in and through Christ; So, Nothing in God, is Comfortable to Men,
or for their Eternal Good, but as it comes to them through Him: As Waters out
of the Sea immediately, are not potable, unless they be first exhaled by the
Sun; or pass through some vein of Earth, which makes them Congruous to our
Nature.

I shall mention two particulars, of Nearest Co^cerment to us; wherein we are,
in a special manner, to have respect unto the Sovereignty of God.

1. As touching your own Condition, ( your everlasting Condition) Submit to
Mercy, to Sovereign Mercy: that is, yield your self to God without Capitula^ing
or Mak^ing terms with him: Those Syrians well under stood the Meaning of this;
They put Ropes on their heads, and themselves in the Conquerors hands, 1 K. 20.
31.
upon an uncertain Conjecture, ( Peradventure they will save us a live:) So do
ye, although ye have but a [ May be] we shall be hid. Zeph, 2. 3.
Mind your Duty, and leave the issue to God: Believe above hope, and against
hope: Follow God in the dark, as your father Abraham did, Not knowing whether
He would lead him: Thus to do, is To give Glory to God. Therefore Fear the
Lord* and Obey the voice of His Servant, even then, when ye are in Darkness,
and have noe light, (Namely, of His special Favor and love, to you in
particular.) And though never so great discouragements are before you, from the
Guilt of sins Committed the power of Indwelling Corruption, and your present
Aversness to Beleiveing; and hear withal, That Faith is the Great Commandment:
let your heart answer, Is it my Duty, (my Duty) to believe? Nay, then I must.
Remember His Greatness; His absolute Dominion; The ^ncontrollableness of His
Matters; That He has concluded All in unbelief* That He might have mercy upon
All: Romans 11. 32.
(that is, That the Salvation of Those who shall be saved might appear to be of
Mercy, and be so acknowledged) To him, therefore Commit your Cause, and Commit
it to Him as your Sovereign Lord; and so leave it with Him; And see, that you
take it not out of His hand again, by your doubting the issue of it: And know
that then is your Soul nearest to Peace and settle meant, when brought to this
Submission: Be in subjection unto the Father of Spirits, Heb 12. 9.
and live.

But, let not the Word be misconstrued: I do not mean by [ Submission] That you
should be satisfied under a denial of Mercy, on the account of God's Absolute
Dominion: I cannot think That a Necessary term or qualification, in your
^reating with God for Salvation: For

1. I do not find, That God requires such a Submission, as the Condition of
obtaining Mercy; Nor that He has made any Promise to give such a Submission,
in order to that end; Nor any Instance in scripture of Men's having or
endeavoring such a frame of spirit, in that business; Nor yet, That Men are
any where taxed for-Not att^ning to it. They are blamed indeed, and that
worthily, For not submitting to the Righteousness of God; (that is, For not
Renouncing their own, and flying to That of Christ:) And this blameworthiness
you cannot escape, if finding your self lost and undone, you will not presently
run to Christ, without first finding in your self Something that may seem to
commend you to him.

2. Such a Submission seems Repugnant to God's revealed Will: For, if this be
the Will of God, even our sanctification, That we should believe in His Son,
and love Him with our whole heart; Then it cannot be his Will, That we should
be willing to Remain in an unsanctified estate, in unbelief and enmity against
Him; which are the inseparable Conjux of Willingness to be Separated from God.

3. Because the promise of Ease and Rest, is made to the Weary and Laden,
coming to Christ; Not to a Contentedness to be divided from him. And the
promise of Satisfaction, is to your bungring and thirsting after Righteousness;
Not to the C^ssation of your desire, without the Thing which only can satisfy.

4. Because, To be satisfied without obtaining Mercy, is to be satisfied with
an utter incapacity to Glorify the Grace of God, and to enjoy Communion with
Him; which are the principal End and Duty of Men.

5. It is Cross to the Genius and Concreated Principle of the Reasonable
Creature; which is, to seek its own happiness; In any thing short of which, it
ought not to acquiesce.

6. Such a submission cannot be Requisite in Preparatory work* because, That
would suppose the highest pitch of Grace attained (if yet it be a Grace, and
attainable) before you believe; and consequently, That it is not a Grace out of
Christ's fullness; for ye are supposed to have it before ye go to Him.

And therefore, when I say, ye must submit without Capitulating or making
terms* my meaning is, ye are not to Treat upon terms of your own Making; Nor
propound any thing to God, but What Sovereign Mercy propounds to you, as the
Way and Means of obtaining your Great End: And great Reason ye have for this
Submission; for herein lies your Interest; Those being (in truth) the only
Terms, by which a lost and sinful Creature can be rendered salvable, or capable
of being saved: (as may further appear in the Sequel of this discourse.)

I think (with humble Submission) That if any Point of time may be supposed
before the Decree, It was Then that Absolute Dominion bor^ sway: But, ever
since Election came in, It is Grace that Reigns: Not, That Sovereignty is
Ceased* but Transferred: Before, it was in Power but Now in Grace: In Grace, as
touching the Elect; and in Justice, as touching the Rest* Grace is the
Attribute God delights to honor; And all the Other, are (if I may so speak)
Subjects of This: Even Christ Himself was made a Servant, to perform the
pleasure of His Grace.

So then* That you are to Submit unto, is the good pleasure of God's will, as
held forth in the Covenant of Grace; undertaking for, and perfectly able to
save you; and as having His Sovereign Power engaged to make it good: Which
seems the scope of that passage in Moses his prayer for the people, Numb. 14*
17, 18, 19.
when they had highly provoked God; Let the power of my Lord be Great,
according as Thou ^ast spoken etc. It was to pardon, and still Own them for His
people. And to this agree all those Scriptures which hold forth the Power of
God, as the ground of Faith; as that by which He is Able to pardon sin, Isa.
27. 5.
To subdue miquity, and to hold your Souls in life: you are therefore directed*
If ye will have peace with God* to take hold of His strength: Which cannot be
meant of Contentedne^s^ in having that strength put forth to destroy, but as
being perfectly Able and engaged by His Covenant to Save you. As to the time
When He will manifest His love to you; As also touching the manner and measure
of His dispensing it; the good pleasure of God's Will is expressly and with all
quietness of spirit, to be Submitted unto: But as to the Thing it self, You
ought not to be said Nay: but as he who had power with God and prevailed* Hos.
12. 14. Genesis 32. 26.
He wept and made supplication, but still resolved, I will not let thee (...)
except thou bless me.

2. As for the other nearest Concernment, touching your Children, deal in like
manner for them, by submitting them to the same Mercy. It is true, That next to
your own personal salvation, there cannot be a greater evidence of God's love
to you, than to Choose your Children after you* Nor any thing more desirable
to you: Therefore Command them, Genesis 18. 19.
and Instruct them, to keep the way of the Lord; That He may bring on them the
blessing you most desire for them: But be not Over-solicitous and east down,
because you see not yet, the Marks of Election upon them: The Lord does not
(indeed): bind himself to take all a Believers Children* Nor does He limit
Himself from taking any others: There is Nothing declared ^ouching His Purpose
to Take All the One, ^^est they should from thence take occasion to be Remiss
in their Duty* (which, still Conversion, is very natural to us) nor does He
exclude the Children of others; For, that ^ight discourage and weaken their
hands to that as is good. In this various dispensing of His everlasting love;
He is pleased (...) His liberty and sovereign Prerogative, That (...) greatly
manifests his love to Believers, in so frequent (...) Choosing of their Seed:
And the Freeness of His Grace, in Not-rejecting altogether, the Seed of Others.

Inference 3.
Thirdly, How happy and sovereignly blessed are Those who have an Interest in
this Great and Sovereign Lord! Which Every One is blessed with, that has, in
truth, taken hold of His Covenant: For, That takes in all between the Two
Eternities, and Eternity it self withal: And the spirits or strength of the
Whole, lies in those few (but very Compendious) Words, [ I will be your God.]
When the Lord would comfort His People to purpose, and p^t on their Eagles
wings, What a glorious Narrative does he make of His Power and Sovereign
Greatness! in Isa. 40. from v. 12. to v. 26. And then tells them That all this
is Theirs, v. 27. And if God be yours, All things are yours: Who and where is
he, that can supplant you of His blessing? y^u may rejoice in His Highness, the
thoughts whereof are Matter of terro^r to other Men. After the rehearsal of all
the happiness and Glory that Men or Angels are capable of, it shall all be
comprised in this, as the Original thereof, and sum of the whole, Blessed are
they whise God the Lord is! Psa. 144. 15.


Inference 4.
Fourthly, We may see here, the Reason Why God does sometimes defer to Answer
the Doubts and Querie's we stick at, and most desire to be Resolved about: It
is not only to show His Sovereignty; But to bring our hearts to a submiss and
practical acknowledgment of it. Moses was very unwilling to go on his Message
to Bharaoh: Many pretenses he had to put it by; when as the danger he might be
in for killing the Egyptian, was the bottom-Objection; (though he speaks it
not Out.) Indeed, the men who sought his life, were now dead* Which, if the
Lord had told him of, at first; all those excuses had probably) been spared.
But He was pleased to conceal it from him, until He had brought him to a full
compliance with His Will; Exodus 3. 11. with Ch 4. 10, 13, 19
and then reveals it to Him Vnask'd. So likewise, He would not take off His
hand from Job, until He had well learned him this lesson. Job. 42. 2 6, 7.
Say not therefore (because you hear not from God so soon as you would.) The
Lord has ^orsaken me, My Lord has forgotten Me: But follow that good
Resolution recorded in Isaiah. I will wait upon the Lord, who h^deth his face
(for the present) from the House of Jacob, Isa 49. 14.
and I will look for Him, v. 17.

Inference 5.
Fifthly, Let no Man, then, who will Say, The Lord, He is God, presume to
entrench on His Sacred Royalty, by seeking a Reason of His Decrees, beyond or
besides the Good pleasure of His Will: Even Sovereigns of dust, will not admit
it in Subjects, though of the same Mould with themselves. It is an Imperial
Secret, The Chief of the ways of God: It belongs to himself alone to know it:
and the knowledge thereof would not profit us Now. Besides, There is enough
revealed, of great importance to us, at present; On which to employ the utmost
of our time and strength. By Over-grasping we may sprain our hands, and unfit
them for service which lies within their Compass; But we gain Nothing.
Therefore, go not about to fathom this Great Deep: Who, but one of shallow
understanding, would think to measure the Sea by handfulls? or to give a
Demonstrative Reason of its various and convertible Courses? Remember That you
Magnify His Work; Job, 36. 24.
but lessen it Not by pretending to Comprehend it. Eccles. 8. 17.
Sanctify the Lord in your heart, and fear before Him!.

Inference 6.
Sixthly, This gives a Reason, why Men of the largest Capacity, for Learning
and Natural understanding, are so mightily Puzzelled and Labyrinth'd in
Spiritual Matters; particularly The Doctrine of Election: Why they do so
strongly oppose it, and are so hardly Reconciled with it: They are not, in
truth, subdued to the Doctrine of God's Sovereignty: And therefore, whiles in
discussing those points of Faith; they judge as their Natural Optic represents
them; they lose both themselves and the Truth: Which yet, (in some degree) is
made known unto Babes, (Men of low stature to them) whose spirits the Lord has
subdued, to rest contented with what their Father is pleased to tell them; And
for the Rest, (as, namely, the Manner and Reason of God's Disposements and
Dispensations) they live by Faith in His Righteousness; Waiting for the day
that shall Reveal all things; when the Tabernacle of God, which yet is in
Heaven, shall be let down among Men, (or They taken up into it) and these
hidden things of Sovereignty, shall be more openly known amongst them.

Inference 7.
Lastly, This Doctrine of God's Absolute Dominion, Clears away all that
Made-ground and Rubbish, which the Principles of Free-Will-Grace, do found
their Election upon; and shows us the only true and Proper foundation of
Scripture Election; with those other Important Truths which hold upon it; or
are Consequents of it: All which, have their Head in the Sovereignty of God;
and Derived thence, as Rivers are from the Sea; As through his blessing and
Grace, may appear afterward. And so I shall close up this first particular,
with that holy Rapture of the Psalmist, Be thou Exalted, Lord, in thy own
strength, so will we sing, and praise thy Power. The Lord has prepared His
Throne in the Heavens, and His Kingdom rules over all! Bless the Lord, ye His
Angels that Excel in strength. Bless the Lord, all ye His Hosts; ye Ministers
of His that do His pleasure! Bless the Lord, all His works, in all places of
his Dominion! Bless the Lord o my Soul!

OF THE RIGHTEOUSNESS of GOD.
HAving founded this Discourse on the Sovereignty of God, as the best and most
natural ground of Satisfaction (or captivation) to Reason, touching Election:
So now, as a means to qualify our Spirits, and Reconcile them with the
Doctrine of Sovereignty; it seems expedient to annex that of His
Righteousness: and, I think, there is not a more evident Proposition, than

That there is no Unrighteousness with God. Prop.
This, as we are indispensably bound to believe; So, to be well grounded in the
faith of it, will be of exceeding great Usefulness to us, in every Condition;
especially under those darker Administrations, which we do not see the Cause
and Reason of: When Matters of great Import, seem to be Confused, or Neglected:
When all things in view, fall out alike to All; and you cannot know either Good
or Evil, by all that is before you: I shall therefore Collect some of those
Considerations, from which you may find light and influence in the dark and
cloudy day; and by which (as a Means) I my self was drawn in and guided to this
Determination; before I had searched the Scriptures, expressly, concerning this
Subject: And they may serve, both as Arguments to Demonstrate the Proposition;
and as Antidotes against those poisonous Contradictions, which carnal Reason
and unbelief, will be too often forging and flinging in upon us. And

The First is founded on that Infinite Blessedness which the Most High God was
possessed of in Himself, Arg. I.
before the World or any Creature was made. He did not make them for any Need
He had of them, Rev. 4. 11.
but for His Pleasure: And if He needed them not, there could be no Need or
Reason Why He should make them such, Or to such an End, as not to be Meetly
Overruled, and their End attained, without doing wrong to any. The Motives by
which Men are induced and swayed to do Wrong, are chiefly Two:

1. To attain something they have not; Ahab slew Naboth for his vinyeard; 1
Kings 21. And Athaliah all the seed Royal, to get the Throne; 2 Kings 11. Or,

2. To Secure What they have: Pharaoh oppressed the People, lest growing
Mighty, they should shake off his yoke, and get them out of his Service, Exodus
1. 10. Jeroboam set up his Calves, to keep the people at home, and firm to
himself, 1 K. 12. 27, 28. And the Jews, they put Christ to death, lest the
Romans should come, and take away their Place and Nation; John 11. 48.

These two have shared the parentage of all the Oppression and Wrong-doing that
have been in the World: Neither of which is Compatible with our Great and
Blessed God: For all things are His already; He posseffeth the Heavens and the
Earth, and all the hosts of them, with an Absolute Power and Right to dispose
them; And what can be added to That which is Infinite? And as for Securing what
He has, Of whom should he be afraid? For (1.) There is no God Besides him;
Isa. 44. 6.
The Lord Himself who needs must know it, if there were Another, professes
Solemnly, That He knows not any. verse 8.
And (2) As for Creatures, They are all more absolutely under His subjection,
than the smallest dust under our feet is to us: Ch 40. 17.
The Nations are to Him less than nothing and vanity. He need not so much as
Touch them, to bring them down: it is but Gathering to himself, Job, 34. 14, 15.
His spirit, and His breath, and they perish together: Let the Lord but
Withold His sustaining Influence, and they fall of themselves: But He remains
the same to all generations.

Secondly, Arg. II.
Consider the Infinite perfection of His Nature, Holy, Holy, Holy! Isa. 6. 3.
i. e. Perfectly Holy: He is Glorious in Holiness, Exodus 15. 11. Now, In
Holiness is not the least tincture of its Contrary: 1 John. 3. 5.
God is Light, and in Him is no darkness at all. He is Good, and does Good, Ps:
119. Is Righteous, Joh. 3. 7.
and does Righteousness; All His works praise Him: The Righteous Lord will do
no iniquity. It is an high demonstration of His Excellency, 2 Timothy 2. 13.
That He cannot deny Himself; that is, He cannot do any thing, that is in the
least degree, contrary to His Holy Nature: Nothing that needs to be Retracted,
or to alter His mind about it: His Will is the Rule of Righteousness; and
Righteousness, the Rule of His Will: The Saints of old, were perfectly of this
mind; Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Right? Gen 18. 25. Romans 3. 6.
And the Apostle Puts it as a Question not to be answered, That if God were
Unrighteous, How then shall He Judge the World?

Thirdly, Arg. III.
Consider Further, The constant Rule and Measure of God's Dispensments; which
is not done Fortuitously, nor Rashly; Isa. 28. 17.
but with Deliberation and Exactness; He Lays Judgment to the Rule, and
Righteousness to the Plummet: He will not punish without a Cause, nor more than
is deserved: Touching the sins of Sodom: Genesis 18, 21.
I will go down (says God) and see whether they have done [altogether]
according to the Cry of it. Renders to every one [according] to their Deeds,
Romans 2. 6. and Gives them a [just] recompense of Reward. Heb. 2. 2. He will not
Cast away the perfect Man, Job. 8. 20.
Nor help the wicked. Eliphaz puts the question with great confidence (as well
he might) Who ever perished being Innocent? Job. 47.
His Righteousness is such, that it even holds his hands until the Innocent be
out of danger. The Angels were straightly commanded, Not to begin the execution
of God's wrath on the wicked world, until His Servants were Marked out: Rev 73.
And when the Lord came to destroy S^dom; He hastens Righteous Lot to Zoar;
with this only Argument, Gen 19. 22.
I cannot do any thing until thou be come thy her.

Fourthly, Arg. IV.
It is further evidenced, by the Laws He has given unto Men; The sum of which
is, To do Righteously; And the End of them, the good and welfare of the
Creature. After a thousand years experience of These, compared with the issue
of Men's Inventions, Nehe. 9. 13.
They are acknowledged to be Right Judgments, Good statues, and laws of Truth:
What an admirable Catalogue have we in Romans 12.

(1) Of such as concern our duty toward Himself immediately, this is the Sum,
Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou serve: There is
Nothing more equal and just, than to Worship and serve Him Whose we are; To
love and live to Him from whom we have our life and breath.

(2) Such as refer more immediately to Our selves; As Temperance, Chastity,
Moderation, Sobriety, etc. These (as is evident to all) do greatly conduce to
our outward welfare, both in point of health, estate, Posterity, etc. (And what
evil Consequents do attend the Contraries of those Virtues, might be every
day's observation:) More especially, such as relate to our spiritual state and
Welfare; of which, more particularly, under the Next Argument.

(3) Such Commands also, as respect our duty toward Men; As to do justly; To
show Mercy; To follow peace with all Men; Every One to Mind his own business;
And not intermeddle with Others: so, To be subject to the Powers that be; and
To pray for those in authority; (The Neglect of which duty, may be a Cause of
our disquietment from them; at least, it may prove an eclipse of our
Joyfulness in suffering under them, etc.) The Sum of this kind of Duties we
have in that Standing Uncontrollable Rule, Of Doing to Others, as we would they
should do unto us.

On the Contrary, there is Nothing forbidden, but what tends to our hurt: As,
if it were needful, might be Demonstrated by Instances Innumerable.

To this also, might be added, the strict Injunctions that God has laid upon
the Subordinate Dispensers of His Law; as (namely) To Judge the People with
Just Judgment; Deu. 16. 18, 19. Deuteronomy 27. 19. Job 13. 10.
Not to Wrest Judgment, Nor respect persons: yea, He Curses them that pervert
Judgment, And will surely Reprove them that accept persons, Chapter 4 17.
etc. And shall Mortal Man be more just than God? Will He under such penalties
Command Men to do thus, and not do so Himself?

Fifthly, Arg. V.
Another Beam of the Righteousness of God shines forth in His putting the
Matter of our Duty into such a Way and Method, as renders it most Facile, and
is mostly conducible to our Chief End: As 1 To Remember our Creator in the days
of our youth: For, the Work of Conversion and Turning to God; must needs be
much easier Then, than when habituated in an evil course: For, Long impenitency
(besides the provocation it is to God) estranges the Mind more from Him; Makes
the Spirit more Inflexible, and harder to be wrought upon; It Multiplies our
Work, and Substracts our strength: For One accustomed in evil, to learn to do
well; and for a Blackmoor to change his skin, are things of a like possibility:
It Is a very Rare and Difficult thing for a Man to be born again, when he is Old.

2. To Watch against, and suppress the first motions of sin; and to avoid what
ever might be an Occasion, or have Tendency toward it: Mal. 2 15.
and in order thereto, To take heed to our Spirit; Pro. 4. 23. 1 These 5 22.
Jud. v. 23. Job 31. 1.
To keep the heart with all diligence; To abstain from all appearance of evil;
to hate the garment spotted by the flesh; and to make a Covenant with our eyes,
as Job did: (For, the professed practice of some Saints, is Directive to
Others, and Equivalent to a Command.) To keep an Enemy from Rising, is much
easier than to Quell him being up; yea, To Nip sin when it is young, is the
ready way, Not only to keep it low, but to kill it; as the continual plucking
off Buds from a Tree or Plant, destroys the Root.

3. To. 14. 23.
Not to do any thing, the lawfulness whereof is dubious to us; Which, as it is
a sin in it self; so it tends to obscure to us the true sight of things; and
emboldens to farther attempts. So also, Not to Mind only the Lawfulness of
things, but their Expediency; 1 Cor. 6. 12.
The not-heeding of which, proves often an occasion of sin to Others, whereof
we cannot be Guiltless: So likewise, 1 These. 5 19.
to Cherish all Motions to Good; Not to quench the Spirit; and to hearken (or
listen diligently) what the Lord God will speak: Exodus 15. 26. 1 K. 19. 12.
Who often times delivers His Mind with a Still and a small voice; which doubly
obliges our Attention.

4. In His pressing with so much weight and Necessity, those great Duties of
Faith, Love, Patience, Self-denial, etc. (1) Faith, which consists in
Submitting to the Righteousness of God; Taking hold of His strength; and
Following the conduct of His Wisdom: And in order thereto, showing us our own
sinfulness, weakness, and folly; with the vanity of all Created Bottoms, which
have always failed at the greatest need; and so, drawing our hearts to lean on
Himself, In whom alone we have Righteousness and strength.

(2) Love; This is a powerful, Active, Candid, and Obligeing Principle; It
bears all things; Thinks no evil; Takes all in good part; Makes That both
portable and pleasant, which without Love would be both harsh and burdensome.

(3) Patience, and Meekness of Spirit: These mitigate the Dolor of any
suffering; Judges 8. 3.
and often prevent or allay the storm that is rising: A soft Answer turns away
wrath, Prove. 15. 1.

It also breeds Experience; 1. That any affliction may be born, through Him
that strengthens: 2. That afflictions are all for our profit: 3. That we could
not well have been without them: 4. It also gives to understand the Lords
meaning in them, which the Noise of tumultuating passions would drown to us:
And, as a Means to work this Patience, the Lord sets before us, 1. That there
is a Cause of every Chastening; and that cause is from our selves; and
therefore, no cause to Complain: 2. That He afflicts not willingly; Only when
there is Need, and no more than Needs must: 3. That He has many Gracious Ends
in afflicting; 1 Pet. 16.
As (1) To humble for sin committed; as in Joseph's rough dealing with his
Brethren: (2) To Purge out Dross; as in the case of Manasseh, 2 Chr: 33. 11 and
13. and the Whole Church, Isa: 27. 9. (3.) To Prevent sins we should otherwise
fall into; 2 Cor. 12. 7.
Thus He kept Paul from being Exalted above measure: Jer. 45. 4, 5. Ps 73. 25.
(4) To Wean us from the World; This He expected from Baruch, And this effect
it had upon Asaph. (5) To Exer^ise our Graces: As Abraham's great faith, by his
various temptations; And Paul was much under Infirmities, That he might Magnify
the power of Christ. (6) By lesser temptations, and deliverance from them, we
are fitted for Greater, and ^ur Faith strengthened, both to bear, and to get
through them: Which Greater, had they come before, might have Overturned us.

(4.) Self-denial: This is a duty of nearest concernment to us, since we have
no such enemies as self-love, and fleshly lusts, to war against our souls.
These things considered will show, that David's Conclusion is Right and
Genvine; Good and Upright is the Lord, therefore will He teach Sinners in the
way: Even Reason it self might tell us (to be sure, Sanctified Reason and
experience will) That thus to Command and Direct, is To lead in the Right way;
and it highly Commends to us the Righteousness of God.

Sixthly, Arg. VI.
It is yet farther made out, by His affixing Rewards and punishments, to Good
and Evil works respectively, according to what is the proper Result and Natural
product of them: Gall. 6. 7.
Whatsoever a Man sowes that shall he Reap: 1 Cor. 15.
Every Seed shall have its own body: He will give to every One, Isa. 3. 10. 11.
Jer. 32. 19. Pro. 3. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 9.
according to His ways; and the fruit of his doings. Holiness has in it, a
Natnral Tendency to life and peace: It is a Tree of life: Grace and Glory grow
from the same Root: Salvation is the End of Faith; the Flower that grows upon
it. Isa. 32. 1^.
The Work of Righteousness is Peace, and the Effect thereof, Q^ietness and
Assurance for ever. It is sometimes called, The Way of life, Prove. 12. 28.
Sometimes the fountain and wellspring of life Chap 14. 27. And it tends to
life, Rom 11. 16.
Chap. 19, 22. For, if the Root be holy, the bran^hes cannot be otherwise.

It Is so likewise with Sin: Death follows Sin, not only as a punishment for
delinquency, but as its natural offspring: Original corruption is the Root;
Pro. 23. 29, 30.
Sin, the Stalk that grows next upon it; and Death the finishing, or full corn
in the ear: This pedigree of it, ye have in James, Chap. 1. 14, 15. If there
were no Justice to Revenge Sin, Sin would be vengeance to it self: Sinners lie
in wait for their own blood, Pro. 1. 18. Pro. 13. 21.
It is their own wickedness that corrects them, Jer. 2. 19. The way of Sin
inclines to death, and its footsteps to the Dead: Ch 2. 18. Chapter 5. 5.
Its steps take hold on ^ell. Unbelief may be an instance for all; as out of
which, all Sins else are derived: This was the Root of Adam's apostasy; Number.
14. 11. Romans 11. 20. Heb. 3. 12.
and of all that Peoples Rebellions in the Wilderness. Faith is that which
holds the Soul to God, its life and blessedness; Unbelief, its departing from
Him; or the letting go of its hold; the loosing of the knot; upon which the
Soul falls off of its own accord: And the first step from God, sets in a way of
Death; As a branch breaking off from its Stock, dies of itself. This was Adam's
unbelief; In all Men since, it is a Refusing to Return.

This Doctrine is still further confirmed by the general unanimous consent and
affirmation of Those best able to Judge: Arg. 7.
(1.) They assert it; Job, a Man of great Wisdom and integrity, ( Not his like
in all the Earth, Job 1. 8.) and none so sorely afflicted; yet, says Elihu to
him, (by way of Counsel; as what himself would do in the like case) I will
ascribe Righteousness to my Maker, Job 36. 3. And, Surely God will not pervert
Judgment, Chap. 34. 12. God is known (i. e. He is known to be God) by the
Judgments which He executes, Psalm. 9. 16. The Lord is Upright; there is no
Unrighteousness in Him, Psalm. 92. 15. He loves Righteousness and hates
Iniquity, Psalm. 45. 6, 7. The Scepeer of his Kingdom is a Right Scepter, ver.
6. Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation of His Throne. Ps 97. 2.
Deuteronomy. 32 4. Rev 19. 2.
That True and Righteous are his Judgments, is the voice of those in Heaven.

(2) They submit to it, even then when most provoked by Men's injurious dealings
with them for His sake; and when the Lord's own hand has been most severe
toward them: Aaron held his Peace, Levit. 10. 3. It is the Lord (says Eli)
let Him d^as seems Him good: 1 Samuel 3. 18. 2 K. 20 19.
Hezekiah also, Good is the word of the Lord. Yea, they have done thus, when by
the light of natural Reason they could see no reason for it: Witness Job; who,
when plundered of all, because he feared God and eschewed evil; and could
justify himself to the height, as to any hypocrisy: Job 9. 15.
yet says he, I will make supplication to my Judge. Look on our Lord and
Savior Himself, and see His confession; Our fathers cried unto thee and were
delivered; But I, Ps 222. 4.
though day nor night I am not silent, Thou hear me not: How does He close
His complaint? Not, Thou dealest more hardly with Me who less have deserved it,
but [ Thou art Holy.] Jeremy, indeed, began to object, because the way of the
wicked prospered, and they were happy that dealt treacherously: But, he
presently bethinks himself; withdrawes his plea and yields the cause; Ier. 12.
1.
Bighteous art thou O Lord, when I plead with thee. I might instance the
Suffrage, even of wicked Men; and of the most obdurate among them; whose
Consciences, at times, have enforced their confession of this Truth; and the
testimony of an Adversary proves strongly. ^ haraoh subscribes to it; The Lord
is Righteous, I and my People are wicked. Exodus 9. 27.
As also does Adonibezek, and Saul, Judge. 1. 7. 1 Samuel 24. 17; 19.

(3) The Saints triumph in the Righteousness of God (as well they may) and call
upon others to do the like; The Lord Reigns, Let the Earth rejoice: Psalm. 93.
97. 99. O, Let the Nations be glad and sing for joy; Ps. 67. 4. Ps. 96. 11, 13.
For thou shall judge the People Righteously: Let the Heavens rejoice, and the
Earth be glad before the Lord; For, He comes, For He comes to judge the
Ear^h, Romans 53.
etc. And hence it was, that Paul and the rest of them, though the present
sense of their suffering, was grievous; yet they gloried in them; And Rejoiced
greatly, in hopes of that Glory, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
and Crown of Righteousness, which God, as a Righteous Judge, had prepared for
them.

Eighthly; Arg. VIII.
The Righteousness of God is yet further illustrated, by The End and Event of
his darkest dispensations. Isa. 10. 22. The consumption decreed shall overflow
with Righteousness; and Nothing else shall be in it: His people, though long
under oppression, He brought them forth at last, with the greater Substance:
His leading them about in the Wilderness, as it were in a Maze, forty years
together; and bringing them back again to the place they had bin at, many
years before; Ps. 107. 7.
yet it proved to be the Right way, And it was for their good in the latter
end. Deuteronomy. 8. 16.


David's long persecution by Saul, made him the fitter for the Kingdom; and
adapted him for the Office of principal Secretary to the Great King;
opportunely acquainting him with all the affairs of the heavenly State and
Council, that are fit to be known of men: And by his hand and experience, they
are Firmed to us; and this amongst the Rest, Blessed is the Man whom Thou
chastenest, Ps. 94. 12.
and teach him out of thy Law. We see it also, by the end the Lord made with
Job; Job 23. 10. 42. 12.
He brought him forth like gold, and doubled His blessings upon him: The Basket
of good figs, were sent into captivity for their good: Jer. 24. 5. Phil. 1. 19
Paul's afflictions turned to his Salvation: Even Christ himself, whose
temptations, sorrows, and sufferings where such, as never were known by Men;
Heb. 2. 17, 18.
they were intended, and accordingly did, perfect and enable Him for His Office
of Mediator.

Lastly, Arg. IX.
Consider the Elect, those precious Souls whom the Lord had loved from
everlasting; and determined to bring them to Glory: yet, having sinned, Not one
of them shall enter there, without satisfaction first given to His Justice: To
3. 26. Heb. 6. 20. with Chapter 9. 12, 23
Even These, He will not Justify, but in such a way, as to be Just in so
doing: The Mercy-Seat it self must be sprinkled with blood: Especially,
consider Christ himself, the First Elect and Head of all the Rest, and the
Compact made with Him; Who, though he were a Son, His Beloved Son, In whom his
Soul delighted; yet if he will undertake for Sinners, He must stand in their
stead; Isa. 53. 4, 5.
All their Sins must meet upon Him, and He must bear the punishment due to
them: It was not possible That Cup should pass from him; No, though He sought
it with strong cries and tears; and that of Him that was able to Save Him, who
also loved Him as His own Soul: He was not, He might not be Released, until He
had paid the utmost Mite. For, albeit That Grace is perfectly Free to Men, in
Pardoning and Saving of them; yet Justice must be satisfied, and Christ was
'bated Nothing. This last unparalleld Instance, and high Indication of
Incomparable Justice, does greatly illustrate the point in hand, Namely, That
our Great and Sovereign Lord cannot but do Right.

Inferences from the Righteousness of God.
Inference 1.
First, May this Doctrine prove an Eternal blast, to the vain and presumptuous
Confidence of impenitent Sinners; Who, Eccles. 8. 11.
because vengeance is not speedily executed, have their hearts fully bent and
set in them to do evil: Because the Lord at present holds His peace, Is. 50. 21.
they think He is like Themselves, etc. Let them certainly know, that He is
able to deal with them: And further, That His Righteousness obliges Him to
vindicate Himself: Exodus 34. 7.
He will by no means clear the Guilty, Nor be always silent: Though slow, yet
Sure; and strikes home at last: Ps 2. 5.
He will arise to Judgment, and set their sins i^ order before them; and
Reckon with them for all the hard speeches, which they (ungodly Sinners) have
uttered against Him: The Sight whereof shall strike their trembling Souls
(notwithstanding their stoutness Now) with horror and amazement; and make even
all their Bowels ready to gush out: Ps. 68. 21.
He will wound the hairy Scalp (the proud and presumptuous head) of every one
that goes on in his wickedness: A Dart shall strike through his Liver, Pro. 7.
23. Job, 15. 26.
and down with him to Hell, the Nethermost hell, in a moment. Why then will you
run against the thick Bosses of his Bucklers? Isa. 33. 14
and set Briers and Thorns in array, against a Devouring* flame? Can dried
Stubble dwell with Everlasting burnings? Job, 9. 4.
Did ever any harden himself against God and prosper? Chapter 27. 8.
No, nor never shall? Where will his hope be, when God takes away his Soul!
Therefore take up betimes, Ps. 46. 10
leave off and know that He is God.

Inference. 2.
Secondly, Let this Doctrine for ever vindicate the holy and good ways of God,
(both Those he walks in toward us, and those He commands us to walk in toward
Him) from all those senseless Imputations of Harshness, Moroseness, Nicety,
Preciseness, or what ever else the profaneness or Ignorance of Men can tax
them with: For: as it is said, so it is found, by the certain and fober
experience of all that fear Him, and (against such experience, no Reasoning is
to be admitted) I say, it is a General Infallible Experiment, That all the ways
of Wisdom are pleasantness to him that walks in them: which argues, That those
who think otherwise, are ignorant of them; and therefore not competent Judges.
It Is granted, indeed, That those whose hearts are in these good ways of God,
have their steps too often turned aside, and go haltingly in them: But in
Truth, the Fault is not in the Way, but in the Men: There is some Fracture in
their bones, or dislocation of Joints; Something is out of order. A Creeple
will limp in Solomon's Porch, (on the smoothest pavement) when one that is
sound, (wind and Limb) will Run and leap upon Craggy ground. The Law and our
hearts were once at perfect agreement; the discord came in by our voluntary
swerving from our first Make. Therefore, admit not the least Motion, that looks
but awry on the Commands or Disposements of God; but Justify them to the
height, and take shame to your self, as Paul himself did, The Commandment is
holy, but I am Carnal. To. 7. 12.

Inference 3.
Thirdly, If the Lord cannot but do Right, Then let us all take heed of sin,
which the Holiness and Justice of God are so inexorably bent against, He will
not Pardon without satisfaction: Yea, Beware of Little Sins, (Little, I mean,
in esteem with Men, or in comparison of some others) Your Nearness to God will
not excuse you: You have I known [therefore] you will I punish: Amos, 3. 2.
Number. 20. 10, 12
Even Moses his servant, for once speaking unadvisedly, was shut out of Canaan;
and though he would fain have gone into that good land, and solicited the Lord
much about it, as if he would have no Denial; yet the Lord would not hear him;
Speak no more to Me of this Matter. To make light of the least sin because
Grace abounds, is to sin against your own soul; and to make the precious blood
of Christ a Common thing; (the least is the price of blood) Although He love
thee, and that so, as Never to take His loving kindness from thee; yet He will
not let thee go altogether unpunished: Yea, the Lord may hide from thee the
sense of His love, and Make thee feel His, displeasure even to the breaking of
thy bones, etc. For, He must discountenance sin; and that for our good, as well
as to Vindicate the honor of His Righteousness.

Inference. 4.
Fourthly, You that acknowledge God's Uprightness, and profess to be His
Children, Convince the World of the truth of your Principles by your practice:
Show yourselves to be His Offspring, by your likeness to Him: Do Justly, love
Mercy, Phil. 2. 15.
Walk humbly; To be blameless and harmless and without Rebuke, is your best
Argument to Refute the World's calumnies; and to prove your selves to be the
sons of God. Show it also, by your justifying God, even whiles He wraps Himself
in a Cloud, Job, 22. 14.
and His Footsteps are not known.

Inference. 5.
Fifthly, Then let None Stumble at present Administrations, Nor admit of a
sinister or suspicious thought, Isa: 10. 22.
touching this Holy Lord God: The Reason of His Ways, may be unknown, cannot
be unjust: He sees through the dark cloud, though you and I cannot. We know,
the Lord does not afflict willingly; and His people are, in heavyness but for a
season, 1 Pet 1. 7, Job 34. 31.
and if need be: Then surely, It Is meet to be said unto God, I have borne
Chastisement; (i. e. My Sin procured it for me, and I have no cause to
complain) I will offend no more. Job 33. 23, 24.
Acknowledge his, uprightness, and he will be Gracious unto thee. And do it,
when thou can not see the Reason of His Judgments, nor their Tendency;
Eccles. 3. 14.
taking it still for a Rule, That all the ways of God are perfect; Nothing can
be put to them; Nor any thing taken from them. 'Twas a good Re^olution in Job,
Job 9. 15. Job 13 15.
That though he were Righteous, yet would he not answer God; but make
supplication to his Judge: And though he should slay him, yet will he trust in
Him: And this he would do, even whiles he thought he might maintain his own
ways before Him.

Be Patient therefore: Jam. 5. 7. Ps. 9. 8.
Tbe coming of the Lord draws nigh; who will judge the World with
Righteousness: Let neither the wickeds prosperity, nor the daily Chastenings of
His own People, Ps 73 17.
be an offense to thee: Go up into the Sanctuary of God; There thou shall know
the end. It shall not always be carried thus; There will be a Reckoning, for
the good things they had in their life time: when those that have lived in
pleasure, will wish that their Souls had been in thy Souls stead, under all its
pressures; And it shall be no grief of heart to thee, to remember thy Morta'
and momentany sufferings; Rom 8. 18. Heb. 12. 11.
when thou ^eest such peaceable ^ruits of Righteousness brought forth thereby:
When thou shall be wrapped up, with an holy amazement, and shall say in thy
heart, Isa 49. 21. Chapter 60.
I lost my Children and was desolate; A Captive and Removing to and fro; (had
no abiding place) who has begotten me these! Whence came they! What root
sprang they from! 2 Cor. 4. 17
My Light afflictions were not worthy to be compared with this Glory! He Will
never repent that he sowed in tears, who brings home his Sheafs with such Joy.
But, as you go along to this your blessed home, and sweet Place of Eternal
Rest; Eccles 8. 12, 13
it may be worth the while to Ruminate such Scriptures as these; Though a
Sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged (he goes
unpunished) yet surely it shall be Well with them that fear God; But it shall
not be Well with the wicked: Ps 58. 11.
Verily, There is a Reward for the Righteous; Verily He is a God who judges in
the Earth, And His judgment is according to Truth; Romans 2. 2.
And blessed are they that wait for Him, Isa. 30. 18.

Inference 6.
Lastly, All the Objections that are levied and brought against the Doctrine of
Election (as to the Absoluteness, Personality, and Eternity of it) The
Peculiarity of Redemption; The Efficaeious Predominance of Grace in Calling;
And Believers invincible Perseverance in Faith and Holiness; Would all be
disbanded and sent to their own Place, Were but this One Truth, (which none, in
words, will deny) truly believed and Received in Love; viz. That God has an
absolute Right of Dominion over His Creatures, to dispose and Determine of
them, as seems Him good; and that, In the Doing thereof, He cannot but do
Right,

And so I come to the Matter firstly intended.

OF ELECTION.
THe Doctrine of Election, (in the latitude of it) contains the whole Sum
and Scope of the Gospel* And our Minds, if honestly subdued to the Doctrine of
God's Sovereignty, cannot be employed about a more excellent Subject.

It is called, The Foundation of God; not only, because of the Supereminency
of it; but as a Foundation of His -- Own laying, which God Himself and Alone,
is the Author of; and the Basis whereof is Himself: It is that Foundation which
stands sure, and keeps them All sure who stand upon it.

ELECTION is the pitching of Everlasting love, Or the Good Pleasure of
God-Choosing and Decreeing to Eternal life: It is the Great Charter of Heaven;
God's special and Free Grace Deed of Gift to His Chosen Ones; Made over in
trust unto Jesus Christ, for their use and benefit.

Now, in Deeds of Gift, to make them Authentic, there must be inserted, (1)
The name of the Donor, or Person that gives: (2) The Name of the Donee or
person to whom: (3) The quality and extent of the Thing that is Given (4) The
time when it was done: (5) The Consideration that moved thereto: (6) In case of
Impotency, it is usual and necessary to ordain some Friend as Feoffee in trust;
who is to stand seized or Possessed of the Gift for the Donee's use: All which
are evidently found in Scripture Election, and may be Summed into this
Proposition,

That there is a Peculiar People, who were personally chosen of God, in Christ,
according to His own good pleasure, and ordained to Eternal Life, before the
World began. Before I come to a downright proof of the Proposition, Proposition
I shall First Explain the Terms, And Secondly Produce a few Instances of a
lower kind of Election, s^il. To Matters of a lower Concern, than That of
Eternal Life; which yet might be intended for a Type, and Shadow of it.

I. For Explanation: This word [ Peculiar] denot^s the Exemption or Privileging
of a Person or Thing, from the power of another, in whose jurisdiction it was
or seemed to be. It sometimes signifies Riches or Substance, which is of a
Man's own proper getting, by Labor and Industry. It is also used, to
denominate such part of a Man's Estate, as he keeps in his own hands; which our
Law calls, his Demesne Lands. In all which respects, the Elect are aptly termed
a Peculiar People: For (1) Though Satan be Prince of the world, and rules on
every side; yet, as touching the Elect, it is but an usurped and temporary
jurisdiction that he has over them: They do, indeed, belong to another Prince,
to whom their Chief Lord has given them: who therefore in the appointed time,
will reseue them from that usurpation. (2) They are the Lord's Treasure o^
Inheritance, obtained by labor indeed, with Sweat and Blood: Than which,
nothing is more a Man's own, nor hardlier parted with; Such was the portion
bestowed by Jacob on his beloved Joseph, Genesis 48. 22.
even That which he g^t with his Sword and with his Bow. And (3) They are the
Lord^^ Demesnes; He keeps them in His own hands: Ten^^rs them as the Apple of
His eye: He will not betrust them in the hands of others; No, not of their own
selves.

To [ Ordain] is used here, in the same^sense as to Predestinate, Appoint,
Prepare, Decree, or Predetermine, things to come: Which is done in such sort
and manner, that the Event shall certainly succeed; and that, just as was
Fore-intended and Designed. In this sense Men cannot be said to Predestinate,
because they cannot, with any certainty, Determine of things not yet in being:
But, all things were present with* God from Eternity; And His Decree the Cause
of their Futurition, or Stan^ing forth.

By [ Eternal life] I understand, Not only the Saints Actual possession of
Blessedness and Glory; (which consists in their perfect Conformity to God, and
Communion with Him) but also, Whatever is Requisite thereto, by way of Right,
Preparation, or Otherwise; wherein are comprehended, The Mediation of Christ;
Effectual Calling; and Final Perseverance in Faith and Holiness: Which are,
indeed, but so many parts, or Subdivisions of Election: Ye have them all in one
verse in the Old Testament, both as Appropriate to the same Persons, and as
being inseparable: It is in Isa. 62. 12. Where Those for whom the high way is
prepared and cast up, are said to be The Holy People; (there is their Election)
The Redeemed of the Lord; (That implies the Office of Christ as Mediator) They
are also said to be Sought out; (which imports their Effectual Calling:) And A
City not forsaken: (This implies their Perseverance:) And they are here put in
Succession, as they fall in Order of time; Election is therefore called, A
Preparing unto Glory, Romans 9. 23.

They were [ Personally] Chosen; that is, the Objects of Election were singled
forth and pitched upon by Name.

Chosen [ In Christ, or Into Christ] as their Head and Mediator; That thereby,
their Election might be secured; that is, that the Good things and Benefits
they were Chosen unto, might (by their being in Christ) be Righteously theirs,
and accordingly applied to them.

[ Before the World began] The same thing for brevity sake is commonly called
Eternity: and in Scripture Phrase, From Everlasting.

[ According to His Own good Pleasure] This shows us the Root of Election; Or,
the great Bottom-Ground, on which it is founded; Exclusive to all things else,
as being any way Causal, Contributory, or Motive thereto.

2. For Instances of a lower kind of Election. Consider here, God's Choosing
and Destinating certain Persons by Name; and Some of them, before they were
born, to signal and eminent Service in the world: wherein they were Patterns of
the Election we are treating of: and may well be Reckoned a Collateral Proof
and Evidence of it.

Abraham was pitched upon, to be the Root and Father of God's peculiar people;
Whom He would Own and Honor above the Nations of the World; And that in him,
All Families of the Earth should be blessed: Which contains a Promise, That the
Messiah, or Savior of the World, should come of his posterity: A wonderful
high Honor! But, what was there in Abraham; Genesis ^2. 1^ 8.
that might Move God thus to prefer him above the Rest of his Kindred? Was he
any thing more to God, or had he served Him better than other Idolaters with
whom he lived? No, in no wise: and yet the Lord singled him forth and called
him alone. Isa. 51. 2.
And, in truth, no other Reason can be given for it, than what is given for His
love to Abraham's posterity; He loved them because He loved them. Nor was he
pitched upon to be the Father of many Nations, Deuteronomy. 7 7. 8.
nor Sarah to be the Mother of them, for any natural fruitfulness in them above
others: For, Abraham's body was now dead; And Sarah, besides her Natural
barrenness, was past the age of Child bearing; which occasioned her to laugh at
the promise: For who (indeed) would make choice of a dried Stock and a barren
Soil to begin his Nursery with? In such materials is nothing to induce to it.

The same course He was pleased to take with Abraham's immediate Seed: He takes
not all of them; but, In Isaac shall thy Seed be called. Thus Isaac was taken
and Ishmael left. And though Abraham's prayer was heard for Ishamel, so as to
have him blessed with outward things; yet, as to the main thing, God rejects
him; and Resolves To establish his Covenant with Isaac, Genesis 17. 19.
with Isaac, who was yet uuborn.

The like also He does by Isaac' s Children: Jacob he loved, Gen 25 23. Mal. 1.
2, 3. Romans 9. 12, 13.
but Esau He hated: Which is both the Prophet's, and Apostle's exposition of
those words [The Elder shall serve the Younger] And this difference was put
before they were born; yea, and entailed also upon their posterities: The One,
are the people of his wrath, Obad v. 10, 18. Eze. 35. 5.
against whom He has indignation for ever; Their Captivity shall not Return;
When the whole Earth rejoices they shall be desolate, etc. But for Jacob, the
Lord will bring them back to their own Land, and plant them, and build them
assuredly; Jer. 32 41.
and do them good with His whole heart.

But let be observed, It was not Jacob's more worthy demeanor, whether
foreseen or acted, that procured him the blessing: Esau did more for it than
He, and more sincerely; He hunted for Venison, Genesis 27 5. 31. 43.
and for true Venison; such as his Father loved; which he also makes ready, and
brings with speed, big with expectation of his blessing; which also he seeks
importunately, with tears and hitter crying.

Now, what good thing does Jacob do, to inherit the blessing?

1. He goes about to invade Another Right; for the blessing belonged to the
Firstborn. 2. He seeks to pervert the known intention of his Father, which was
to bless Esau. 3. He abuses his Father with counterfeit Venison. 4. He takes
the Name of God in vain, Gen 27. 20.
to make his dispatch the more probable. 5. He seeks it by fraud and downright
lying: He clothes his Neck and Hands with the Kids skin; and roundly affirms
himself to be Esau. (Very improper means to obtain a blessing!)
It need not be asked, which of the Two's deportment was most deserving: One
would easily conclude the blessing to be Esau's: But see the Event! He that
carries himself unworthily, carries away the blessing; He that behaves himself
dutifully to obtain, is dismissed without it: And though his Father blessed Jacob
unwittingly, and by mistake; yet, when he came to know it, he was so far from
reversing what he had done, That he passionately aff^rms it; I have blessed
him; yea and he shall be blessed.

Would we know, now, the Reason of this strange and (according to men)
irrational Event? it was, That the Purpose of God, Rom 9. 11.
according to Election might stand (The elder must serve the younger) Not of
Works, but of Him that Calls. And it is wonderful to observe, how God
ordered the Series and whole course of this Transaction, as intending it a full
and pregnant example of Eternal Election: For, it holds forth to us, The
Sovereignty of God over His Creatures; The freeness of His Grace, in Choosing
those that are less deserving; The Sure effect of His Purposes; His wise and
certain Ordering of things relating to such an End; And His using of Means and
Instruments therein, quite besides the Natural Scope of them, and contrary to
their own Intendment.

Then for the Israelites; This people the Lord Chose in Abraham 400 years
before He publicly owned them: L^vi t. 20. 26. Deuteronomy. 7. 6. 14. 2. 26. 18. 19.
They are expressly termed An Elect Nation, as being separated from the Rest of
the World; An holy, special, preculiar, people unto God; He took them for His
Own portion, the Lot of his Inheritance: Read his own words, (for they are
precious words with those to whom they appertain) Levit. 20. 26. Ye shall be
holy unto Me: For I have severed you from other people, that ye should be Mine:
Deuteronomy. 7. 6, The Lord thy God has Chosen thee to be a special people unto
himself, above all people that are on the face of the earth: Chap. 26. 18, 19,
The Lord this day has Avouched thee to be His peculiar people, and to make
thee high above all Nations: Deuteronomy. 10. 15, The Lord had a delight in thy
fathers, to love them, and He Chose their Seed after them, even you above all
people, etc. But were they as far above other Nations in goodness, in
greatness, or excellent demeanor? And was that it which entitled them to this
honor? No such matter; As appears (1) by the Reason there assigned; Exodus 19.
5.
Ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto Me, above all people, [For all the Earth
is Mine.] It is, as if the Lord had said, There is no difference between you
and other Nations; All the earth is Mine, and I may take where I will; I am not
ty^d to any: I might take of them, and discard you; They cannot carry it more
unworthily than you have done, and will do; I looked from Heaven, and
considered their works and yours; I see that your hearts are fashioned a like:
And (2) Their after^demeanour did abundantly verify it; and the Lord foresaw
it; I know that thou would deal treacherously, Isa 48. 8. ver. 4.
and wast called a transgress^r from the womb; That thou would to obstinate,
thy Neck an iron sinew, Jer 32. 30.
and thy brow brass; and that thou would do only evil from thy youth up:
etc. What then was the Cause or Motive of God's choosing them above others? It
was His undeserved love and favor to them; Deu* 7. 8. ^h. 9 4.
He loved them because He loved them.

Come to David: God had provided Him a King among Jesse's Sons, and Samuel must
go to anoint him: but it must be Him whom the Lord should Name to him: 1 Samuel
16. 1. 12.
Not the eldest, or good lie person: And therefore, says he, (when they pass
before him,) The Lord has not Chosen this; Nor this; Nor these, But David:
It Is true, the Lord did not mention David's name to Samuel; but, He did what
was equivalent; for, when David comes in, He tells him, This is He, Anoint him.
And observe, This [he] was the youngest, the meanest, and most unlikely; scarce
reckoned as one of the family: (for he was not brought in among the Rest.)
Then, Note his Circumstances; H^s employment was to keep the sheep; His
exercise, what was it, but such as is reckoned effeminate? He addicted himself
to Music: see also his Complexion or Constitution of body, White and Ruddy; no
promising character of a Martial Spirit: And yet this Man (or rather, this lad
and stripling) thus qualified and thus educated, he must be the Captain of the
Lord's host; who yet had the greatest enemies to deal with; and therefore had
need of a Man of courage and conduct to be over them. Well! let David's birth,
complexion, employment, education, be what it will; Never so unlikely in all
humane respects; yet, this David is, and he must be the man, whom the Lord will
honor, to Rule his people, to fight their battles, and to do exploits. In this
choice, the Lord was pleased to set-by whatever is taking with men; He sees
not as Man sees, i. e; He regards not Men for their Natural accomplishments:
If for any thing, it must be (probably) for some excellent endowment of the
Mind; and that of Wisdom is of as weighty consideration in the choice of a
Prince, as any other: But this is no Inducement or Motive to God; He respects
not any that are wise of heart: Job 37. 24.
And if He did, it Was not here to be had; David had no Prince-like qualities
above his brethren, until afterward: Which thing is plainly intimated in the
thirteenth verse, where it is said, The Spirit of the Lord came upon Him [from
that day forward.]

Then for Jeremy, The Lord ordains him to be a Prophet; sets him over Nations
and Kingdoms; commissionates him to Root out and pull down; To build and to
plant: etc. Why? what had Jeremy done, that the Lord should call him to so
Imperial a work? Sure, no great matter; for this he was ordained to, before he
was born; Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; I sanctified thee and
ordained thee a Prophet: Jer. 1. 5. It also appears by his own Confession, how
unmeet he was for such a work, and how unwilling; I cannot speak for I am a
Child, ver. 6.

Another Instance may be Cyrus; This man was decreed to a great and noble work;
Isa. 44. 28. Chapter 45. 1. 6. v. 13
It was, in brief, to destroy the Golden Monarchy; To break in pieces the
hammer of the whole Earth, To Release God's people out of Captivity, and to
build His Temple: and this more than an hundred years before Cyrus was born:
The Lord styles him his Anointed, His Elect, H^s Shepherd, and One that should
perform His pleasure; ver. 4, 5.
And He calls him by his Name too; which is twice repeated as a thing to be
remarked: And to enforce it the more, He adds a note of Narrower observance; I
have called thee [even] by thy Name.

Was Cyrus thus chosen, because he would be a puissant Prince? Or did the Lord
make him puissant and victorious, because appointed to such a work? Hear what
the Lord Himself (who best knows the ground of His own Designation) says of
him; Chapter 45. 1.
Thus says the Lord to His anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden,
(i. e. I gave him strength and taught him how to use it) I will loose the loins
of Kings, and open to him the two leafed Gates; I will go before him, ver. 2.
-- I will break in pieces the Gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of
iron, etc. But what shall Cyrus have done, That the great God should do him
this honor? He did not so much as know the Lord; which also is twice repeated,
as a matter worthy our observation.

Lastly, Paul; The Lord from Heaven commissionates him His Preacher General
among the Gentiles; to bear His Name before Kings; To Mawl and Ransack the
devil's kingdom; and to turn the World upside-down; (Witness his doings at
Ephesus, Athens, and other places:) And this he was called to, even whiles in
the heat of his persecuting fury against that Name, which now he is sent to
preach: And that there was no motive on Paul's part, himself is witness, where
speaking of that his Call, he ascribes it to the pleasure and power of God, as
much as he does his natural birth, Gal. 1. 15.

I might also bring in the Stories of Sampson, Josiah, John Baptist, and
others, to the same effect: but that time would fail.

Now, These instances may not be valued as Historical Relations only; (that
would be too narrow a meaning for them) but according to the Scripture-way of
inferring and improving to spiritual Uses; and so, they will be a good
Preparatory proof of the business in hand: For, if there be an Election
personal unto things of a temporary Concernment; and that, so long before some
of the persons were in being: If also, there be an absoluteness in God's
Decrees concerning these; How much more in Matters of Eternal weight! And if
the Lord did not look out of Himself for the mo^ing consideration on which He
selected those persons to their several honors, and atchievments; (and if He
had, He should have found none) Much less can Election to Eternal Salvation,
and Union with Himself, be founded in the Creature: Does God take care for
Oxen? From the less to the greater is a Scriptural way of arguing, and proves
strongly.

I come now to a more direct and positive proving the Proposition; wherein my
present scope is not so much to prove, That there is an Election; as What this
Election is; viz. How it is Qualified and Circumstantiated: And this respects
the Objects of Election, with the Manner, Time, and Motives of it.

And yet, as introductive to these, it may be expedient to touch on the Other;
And so (for the cleerer discussion thereof) I cast the Proposition into six
branches.

I. That there is an Election of Men to Salvation. II. That, this Election is
Absolute. III. That, it is Personal. IV. That it is from Eternity. V. That the
Elect are Chosen in Christ. VI. That Election is founded upon Grace.
These being made good by positive Scripture, or Arguments deduced thence; It
will not much concern us what is alleged to the contrary.

I. There is an Election of Men to Salvation.
That is, there are Some, a certain Remnant, that shall be saved; and this by
virtue of Election. This is clearly employed in those noted and compendious
sentences, Romans 11. 7, The Election ^ath obtained: Acts 2. 47, The Lord added
to the Church such as should be saved: and Chap. 13. 48, As many as were
ordained to eternal life, believed. But, more expressly, in Romans 11. 5, There is
a Remnant according to the Election of Grace: 1 These. 5. 9, God has not
appointed us unto wrath; but to obtain Salvation: and 2 These. 2. 13, God has
from the beginning chosen you to Salvation.

And these are called The Election, or Party of Elect Ones; as those
Circumcised, are called the Circumcision; and the Angels that stood, are
distinguished from those that fell, by the title of Elect. They are also said
to be chosen Vessels; and Vessels of Mercy; as those that are left, Vessels of
wrath, and Sons of Perdition: The Scripture still sets them forth by
distinguishing characters;

I. As a Party separate from the World; I ( says Christ) have chosen you out of
the World, Joh. 15. 19. and Chapter 17. 9, I pray not for the World, but for them
which Thou have given me: and ver. 16, They are not of the World, even as I am
not of the World: Mark 4. 11, Unto [you] it is given to know the Mystery of the
Kingdom of God, but unto [them without] all things are done in parables. Of
Jacob and Esau ( who were an evident type of this Separation) it is said to
Rebekah, Two Nations are in thy Womb, and two manner of people, Gen 25. 23. And
of Jacobs posterity, The People shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned
among the Nations; Number. 23. 9. Isa. 43. 21. Chapter 63. 18 1 Pet. 2. 8, 9.
And This People ( says God) have I formed for my self: These are the People of
His Holiness; The Rest are Adversaries.

II. As Men of another Race or Kindred; and as springing from another Root: 1
John. 5. 19.
We are of God, and the whole World lies in wickedness: ( Or, in that Wicked
One, as their Root and Head) He that is of God, Joh. 8. 47.
hears God's Word: Ye therefore hear them not; because ye are not of God. The
one Party are said to be Children of Light; 1 These. 5. 5. 1 John 4. 4. 6 Joh.
8. 23.
the Other, of the Night: The One, of God; the Other, of the World: The One is
from Above; the Other, from Beneath: God is the Father of the One; ver. 42, 44.
the Devil, of the Other.

III. As Men subject to another Head; We are Thine ( says the Church to God)
Thou never bear Rule over them: Isa 63. 19 Joh. 6. 37.
All that the Father gives me ( says Christ) shall come to me: My Sheep hear
my voice; I know them, and they follow me; And a Stranger they will not follow:
And this, because One is their Master even Christ. Matthew. 23. 8.
Of others He says, that they will not come unto Him, John 5. 40,

IV. As belonging to Another World. Mat. 13. 38.
The good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom; And they are distinguished from
the Children of this World, Luke 20. 34. 35
as a Party accounted worthy to obtain the world to come: And accordingly we
find, That None are admitted into the New Jerusalem, but whose names were found
written in the Book of Life: Rev. 21. 27 Chapter 20. 15.
And whose name soever was not written there, was cast into the lake of fire.
On the same account, Judas is said to go to his own place; Acts 1. 25. And the
Elect, into the Kingdom prepared for them, Matthew. 25. 34.

II. Election is Absolute.
In this are two things of great import; Irrevocableness and Independency: The
Decree is Irrevocable on God's part, and Independent as to humane performances:
God will not go-back from His Purpose to save His People; Nor shall their own
unworthiness or aversness make void His most Gracious intendment. And hence ( I
suppose, it is, that) those various expressions of this same thing (viz,
Predestinate, Ordain, Prepare, Appoint) have nothing subjoined that is like a
conditional. There are, indeed* a kind of Conditions (or rather Quali^ications)
that must and always do, precede the final compleatment of Election; (as
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ) which
therefore may be called Conditionals of Salvation, but not so to Election.

Election is the great Fundamental Institute of the Gospel; It is That, which
in humane States is called the Supreme Law, which is both Irreversible in it
self, and requires that all inferior administrations be accommoded thereto:
So, the Salvation of God's Elect, being the highest law of the Heavenly State
and Kingdom; must, on the same (and firmer) ground, remain Inviolable. It is
That for which all things else have their being: The Plot whereby God designs
to Himself the highest Glory: And for which He has been at such Cost; that,
should His designment miscarry, the whole Creation could not countervail the
damage. He could not therefore (for God cannot deny Himself) I say, He could
not so contrive the grandest Design of His Glory, as that it should ever need
to be R^voked or Altered: Nor could He leave it obnoxious to disappointment;
(which it must be, if ventured on a created bottom) Yea, it behoved Him (as
Supreme Lawgiver) so to determine and subjugate All; that the great End of all
might remain infrustrable.

It Is granted true, That the best-founded States upon Earth are subject to
mutation: Princes may die, and then their thoughts perish: Their minds may
alter, and depart from their first Resolutions: Successors may drive a contrary
Interest: Unlook'd-for accidents may entangle them: Foreign Enemies may
encroach upon them, and obstruct their work: Or the Peoples own folly may be
such, as to mar and defeat the best-lay'd designs for their own good. Humane
affairs are exposed to a Thousand Incidents, which humane prudence can neither
prevent nor provide against.

But it is not so with God, No Event can be new to Him; He declares the end
from the beginning: His Judgment and Purpose cannot alter; He is of one mind,
and who can turn Him? He is also Immortal, and the thoughts of His Heart stand
fast to all generations: No Creature can seclude it self from His Government;
Ps. 33. 11.
In His hand is the soul of every living thing: Yea, the most casual (to us)
and opp^site Emergencies, are by His Power and wisdom, reducible to His
purpose; and cannot resist their being made subservient to His Will. And this
may be one Reason, why Election is so often affirmed to be From the beginning,
and From the Foundation of the World; viz. to show, That whatever should be in
time, should be subordinate to Election; which is all one as to make it
Absolute.

The Absoluteness of Election may be evinced by such Arguments as these.

I. If it were not Absolute, Arg. 1.
it would be but after the Covenant of Works: which being conditional, how soon
was it broken, even by One who had power to keep it! And if Man in that honor
did not abide in it; how should he Now, when so strong and brawny a bias is
grown upon his heart, Genesis 6. 5.
that he runs Counter ever since? If there had been a Law given that could have
given life; Gall. 3. 21.
Righteousness should have been by the Law; Which shows, that the New Covenant
does more for us than the Old; for it gives life; and then it must give the
performance of the Condition, which that life hangs upon. It also shows that
the first Covenant did not give life; and that it fall'd because it was
conditional: The Law shows our duty, but gives not wherewith to perform it; The
new Covenant does both, by writing the Law in the heart.

All under the Covenant of Works, are without God, without Christ, Ephesians. 2. 12.
and without Hope: and this, because strangers to the Covenant of Grace, or
Grace of Election. If therefore the Elect shall be in a better Condition than
before; their Election must be Absolute: And that it might be so, 2 Timothy 1 9.
the New Covenant was made with Christ on their behalf; Tit. 1. 2.
and is that Grace given us in Him, before the World began.

II. Election must be granted Absolute, Arg. 2.
because whatever can be supposed the condition of it, is a part of the Thing
it self: Genesis 12. 7.
Much like that promise of God to Abraham, To thy Seed will I give this land:
In which promise, the Lord undertakes as well to give Abraham a Seed to inherit
that land, as that land to his Seed: and accordingly we find, that the next
Head of that Seed, Gall. 4. 23, 28.
was born by virtue of the Promise: So the whole course and Series of things
conducing to the final accomplishment of Election, is included in it, and
ascertained by it; and that with such firmness and security, as if the end it
self had been attained, when the Decr^e was made; as (namely) Redemption from
Sin; Effectual Calling; and Perseverance to Glory: (of which more fully under
those Heads) which also seems to be the meaning of the Apostle in 1 John 2. 25,
where he makes Eternal life it self, to be the Substance of the Promise.

III. It must be Absolute, Arg. 3.
because by such an Election only can Salvation be Insur'd. This bottom Adam
had not in his Primitive State; He was made upright, but his Continuing that
state, was hung upon his well-using of what he had, without any additional
help, besides his original Stock. In him may be seen the utmost that created
Grace, of it self, can do; even in a state of Perfection: Unto which being
left, How soon did he degenerate and come to Ruin! And all his Posterity would
have run the same course, if placed in his stead; as we know they have done
(One by One) Notwithstanding all the helps, which are given in common, unto
men. And it is no wonder, Since Now they have so strong a Bias to evil, which
Adam had not. And if there be any advantage cast in, (which some do affirm, and
call it The New Covenant) the more is our Doctrine confirmed: For, the more
helps they have, if yet they fall short; (as they do) the more evident it is,
That nothing short of such an Election will secure them. An Example of this we
have in the Old World; who, by all their Natural Ingeniosity, and long lives to
improve it, together with Noah's sixscore years preaching, and the Spirits
striving; were not led unto God; but still grew from bad to worse, until all
the imaginations of their hearts were only evil, Genesis 6. 5.
and that continually. And this was not the Case of a few, or some; but of the
whole Race universally; ver. 12.
All flesh had Corrupted his way.

It is True, That Noah was found Righteous; and as true it is, That Election
was it that made him so, as ver. 8, But Noah found Grace in the eyes of the
Lord; and this, in the same sense, 1 Timothy 1. 16.
That Paul obtained mercy, Scil. By Mercy's obtaining or taking hold of him.

It may also be seen in the people of Israel; who, over and above their Common
or Natural Grace, had many helps and additions, Ps 147. 19 20.
that others had not; Ezekiel. 16. 51.
The Lord dealt not so with any Nation, Isa. 1. 6.
as with them; And yet, the Generality of them so bad, That they justified
their Sister Sodom.

The first Covenant thus failing; such was the Grace of our Lord, (foreseeing
it) as to determine of a second, or New Covenant; by which He would fix and
secure a Remnant, and that Infallibly: And hence it is termed, The Covenant of
Grace, as not depending at all upon Works; and This is That Grace that Saves,
Ephesians. 2. 5, 8.
and Reigns to Eternal life: Ephesians. 2. 5, 8. Romans 5. 21.
And these are those sure mercies of David, recorded in the 55 of Isaiah. It is
the Absoluteness of it, that makes it a Better Covenant.

IV. There is the same Reason for the Absoluteness of Men's Election, Arg. 4.
as of Christ's. That Man or humane Body, which the second Person was to Assume
and Unite to Himself, was not Ordained to that Union, upon any Condition
whatever, as (namely) If He should fulfill all Righteousness, Destroy the
Devil, dissolve his works, and make Atonement for sin: For these He could
never have done without that Union: And that His Ordination thereto was
Absolute, appears by Heb. 10, 5, A Body have Thou prepared Me; And Luke 1. 35,
That Holy Thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God.
Matthew. 1. 21, He shall save His people from their sins. In which places the
Absoluteness of the Decree for that Man's being United to the Son of God, is
evidently set forth. And, That our Election, (as to this Circumstance of it)
holds proportion with that of Christ, ye will see more fully afterward.

V. It was necessary That Election should be Absolute because of the
Absoluteness of God's Decree for the death of Christ; Arg 5.
unto which He was Foreordained unrepealably; 1 Pet. 1. 19, 20
And all that were saved before He suffered, were saved on the Credit of that
Decree. The Scripture also tells you plainly, Rev. 13. 8.
That He was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World; Math. 26 39, 42.
and that it was not possible That Cup should pass from Him. And if it be a
thing below the prudence of Men, to lay down the price without securing the
Purchase: Then surely, the Wisdom of God would never determine the death of His
Son, for Men's Salvation, and leave the Salvation of those very Men at an
uncertainty; which needs it must be, if Election were not Absolute.

Lastly, Arg 6.
It might also be argued from the Nature of Divine Promises; which are patterns
and Declarative Copies of the Decree. Now, the Promises touching Spiritual
blessings, are Absolute; Ps. 119. 89.
They are of that Word, which is for ever settled in Heaven: See the Promises
of sending Christ to be a Redeemer, Genesis 3. 15. The Holy Ghost to sanctify and
lead into all Truth, Joh. 16. 7. To sprinkle clean water upon them: Ezekiel 36. 26
To give them a New heart: To cause them to walk in his Statutes: That He will
be their God, and they shall be His people, Jer. 24. 7.
and shall not depart from Him; That if they sin, He will Chastise them with
the rods of Men; but His everlasting kindness He will not take from them: And
that at last He will present them faultless before the Presence of His Glory.
Jude, ver 24.
These all, with others of like tenor, are delivered in Positive and Absolute
Terms; without any show of Reservation, Proviso, Condition, or Hesitation about
them. And if These (which are Transcripts of the Decree) be Absolute; It
follows, That the Decree also is the same. And on this Ground it is, Romans 8.
33 34.
the Apostle stands, when he challenges all the World to Nullify God's
Election; which he never would have done, had it not been Sovereignly Absolute.

III. Election is Personal. AND IV. It is from Eternity.
These two I put together in proof, because they are frequently joined in
Scripture.

It was not the whole lump of Mankind, that was the Object of Election; Nor was
this Election (as some speak) a Decree to Elect such as should happen to be
thus and so qualified: But, Certain Determinate Persons were Chosen by Name, or
singled out from among the Rest, and ordained to Eternal life. Our Savior
styles them The Men that were given Him [out] of the World, John 17. 6. And
they were Given Him by Name (as well as number) and by those Names He knows
them, John 10, 3, and 14. And that this Election was transacted from Eternity,
is evident, John 17. 23. with ver. 24. Ephesians. 1. 4. Rev. 13. 8. and Chap. 17. 8.
etc.

These may be Argued,

I. From the Example of Christ's Election: Arg. 1.
It was not a person uncertain, that was to be Lord and Christ; but, the Second
Person in Humane Nature: And this Capacity He sustained from Everlasting. Pro.
8. 23. 31.
Nor was it Any Body, which He might assume, 1 Pet. 1. 19, 20.
but that very same numerical Body, that was prepared for Him; Heb. 10. 5. with
Psalm. 40. 7. And this very Person He loved before the foundation of the World,
John 17. 24.

It is worthy Observation, how particular the Decree was, even in things
Circumstantial to our Lord Christ; As that He should come of Abraham's Stock,
of Judah's Tribe, of David's Lineage, Be conceived in a Virgin, Born at
Bethlem, and this, when the Scepter was departing from Judah; That He should be
Buffeted, Scourged, Spit-upon, hanged on a Tree; His hands and His fect
pierced; That gall and vinegar should be given Him to drink; That a bone of Him
should not be broken; (even whiles on both sides of Him, they were) That His
Garments should be parted, and lots cast on His Vesture; As also, That He
should rise again the third day, etc. And that these were all Decreed, appears
by the Prophesies of them; which are the Decree exemplified (or Drawn out of
the Register.) As touching His Resurrection, It is said Expressly, Ps 2. 7.
I will declare the Decree: And the same is as true of all the Rest.

And if the Election of the Head was Personal and from Eternity; why not theirs
that should make up His Body, since They did as really exist Then, as the
Humane Nature of Christ did? Besides, it was very agreeable, That He and They
should both be appointed together; For, He could not be an Head, but with
respect to a Body: And that they were expressly Determined of, appears by 139
Psa. v. 16. In thy book were all my Members written, when as yet there was none
of them. If any say, That was meant of David's Members? I answer, That if God
thought the Members of an Earthly body worthy His Registring; He could not be
less particular and Exact, about the Mystical Body of His Son: Besides, David
was His Type.

Christ also was Ordained to be a Savior, and that by His death; 1 Pet. 1. 20.
and both from the foundation of the World: It was therefore expedient, Then
also to be Determined, How many, and who in particular, should have Salvation
by Him: He was not To die for Himself, but for those, whose security He
undertook. Now, it is not a thing proper, to speak of Security or Bail, but
with respect to a Debtor or Offender; And that Debtor or Offender must be known
too, and Named; Or else, the entering of Bail is an Insignificant Act;
especially, where the Surety has no debt or default of his own to be charged
with. Our Lord and Savior did not offer Himself (if I may so speak) for some
body's sins, but uncertain whose: Aaron knew Whose Trespasses he offered for;
Their Names were graven on his breast plate: Not their National Name, ( viz.
Israelite or Believer) but their Personal Names, Reuben, Simeon, Levi, -- So
had our Great High Priest, or He could not have made atonement for us: And
that place ( Rev. 13. 8.) points at the same time for both; Those words [ From
the foundation of the World] do refer as well to the writing of their Names in
the Book of life, as to the Lamb's being slain. And if it be said, It must
referr to that as was last named; then let ver. 8. of the 17. Chap. speak for
it; where, deciphering those who shall wonder after the beast, he says they
are such whose Names were not written in the hook of life, from the foundation
of the World: what can be more express!

II. The Design of God in the death of Christ, Arg. 2.
could not otherwise be secured. Had the design been, To Purchase Salvation for
Believers, without ascertaining the Persons that should believe; it had been
uncertain, Whether any should be saved, because uncertain Whether any would
believe. If Certain, That some would believe; This Certainty must be Decreed;
(For Nothing future, could be certain Otherwise.) And if it was Decreed, That
Some should believe; The Individuals of that [ Some] must be Decreed also: For,
Faith is the Gift of God; and could not be foreseen in any, but whom He had
Decreed to give it unto. Which laid together are a good demonstration, That
those Christ should die for, were as well Pre-ordain'd, as That He should die
for them, and that definitely and by Name.

III. It may further be Argued, Arg. 3.
from the Fathers preparing a kingdom from the foundation of the World, and
Mansions, or Places in it.

To prepare the way of this Argument; Consider the Punctuality of God's
disposements in things of a Lower Moment: He did not Create the Earth in vain;
( i. e. To stand empty and void, as at its first formation) Nor the several
quarters thereof to be Inhabited indefinitely, by some Nation or Other, who
should happen to get possession of them: But He divided to the Nations their
inheritance and the bounds of their Habitation: Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
Mount Seir was given to Esau, Acts. 17. 26.
and Ar to the Children of Lot: Each Nation had its limits staked out, Deuteronomy. 2.
5, 9.
and this from the days of old. And if we may distinguish of Acts in God, and
of Time in Eternity; His Purpose to firm and bring forth those Nations, must
needs be as early, as to Create and furnish those parts of the World which they
should Inhabit.

Now, Earthly Settlements being of trivial Moment to the Heavenly Mansions; it
seems a good Consequent, That if yet, particular Nations were fore-appointed
for particular Provinces on Earth; Much more should particular Persons be
designed for those particular Mansions in Heaven: And, if either were appointed
before the other; It must be the Persons: For, the Sabbath was made for Man, and
not Man for the Sabbath.

The Domestiques of God's House or Place of Glory, are a sacred State and Order
of Kings and Priests; and Each individual Person has his place or Appartiment
set out for him. Those Glorious Palaces were not prepared for Believers
indefinitely; but for certain Determinate Persons particularly; The Twelve
Apostles shall have their Twelve Thrones, and every One his Own: This is
evident by our Savior's answer to the Mother of Zebede's children; Math. 20. 23
To sit on my right hand and on my left, is not Mine to give; but it shall he
given to them for [whom] it is prepared of my Father: If for Believers
indefinitely, why not for these two Brethren as soon as any other: especially
since they first made request for them? The Truth is, those Places were not now
to be disposed of; it was determined, who should have them, long before; even
From the foundation of the World. Matt. 25. 35.
The scope of this Answer was not to show, That the places requested for, were
prepared for Believers; (for these were Believers who made request for them)
but that they were Appointed for Certain particular Persons, and they must have
them.

Much might be added, in confirmation of these two branches, But, by these I
hope, it is clear, That Election is Personal and from Eternity.

V. Election is in Christ. OR, The Elect are Chosen in Christ.
It was requisite, the New Covenant should have an Head and Mediator, as well
as the Old; That Righteousness and life might flow from Him into all the Elect
Seed; as sin and death had done from Adam: In which respect, Christ and He are
set forth as Parallels, in Romans 3. from ver 12. to 21.

The benefits which the Elect are Chosen unto, they are made partakers of by
their Union with Christ; He is the Root in whom the Fullness dwells: Not only the
Foundation on which the Church is built; but the Rock which affords all the
Spiritual Materials of the Heavenly Temple; Even the Cement that holds one part
to another, and the whole to Himself; and this, by virtue of the Decree. For,
we are to Consider, that there is a Decretive Union before the Actual, and That
influenceth This into Being; and that as really, as the determined death of
Christ did the Salvation of Those who died before Him.

Though Christ be not the Cause of Election; yet He is the Grand Means, by whom
we obtain the blessedness we were Chosen unto: By Him it is, That We have
Access into that Grace, Romans 5. 2.
wherein we stand: And we shall find, that the Epistles generally, when they
speak of the Great things relating to Salvation; do still bring in Christ as
the Person principally concerned about it.

Salvation (indeed) is a Gift; Tit. 3. 6
it is perfectly Free: yet not to be had, Romans 5. 18, 19.
but in Christ: It comes upon us through His Righteousness. As by One's
disobedience many were made sinners: so by the Righteousness of One ( by means
of their Oneness with Him) shall many be made Righteous.

Mankind (by their Apostasy in Adam) had destroyed in themselves, the whole of
that Principle, which would have lead them to God, as their life and
blessedness: And had (withal) contracted such an Eumity against Him, and
Repugnancy to all Overtures for Returning to Him; (And this Gulf was so fixed)
as would for ever have kept God and us asunder; had not that blessed Project of
Choosing in Christ been set on foot to dissolve it. It could not be done by any
Created Power; Nor could Creatures so much as propound a Way for it: And if
they could, who durst so harden himself, as to Mention the Thing, which only
could do it! But, The Great God, blessed for ever, He finds out a way for it:
And the same Love that ordained to Eternal life, would also put it in such a
way, as should surely take effect: And to this end, ( viz. That Those Ordained
to Salvation, might be both Rightfully entitled to that Salvation, and
successefully brought into it) They were put into Christ by Election: He was
the Chief and Eminent Elect One; The Firstborn and Prince of the Family; and
all the Elect besides were given to Him (as younger Brethren) to be maintained
upon His Inheritance.

It is plain to him that reads, That the whole of Salvation was laid upon
Christ; That He bears up the Pillars of it; and that all shoulders else had
been too weak: He is both the means and Center, by whom, and in whom, God will
have all things gathered together in One: He was made God with us, That we
might be made One in God; as appears by the scope of His Prayer in the 17th. of
John. In Him the Father is well pleased; and out of Him there is nothing
pleasing to God, or good for Men: We are therefore said to be Chosen in Him Ephesians
1* 4.
; To be Called in Him Phil. 3 14.
; To be Created in Him Ephesians. 2. 10.
; To be Preserved in Him ^ude, v^r. 2.
; and in Him to be blessed with all spiritual Blessings. Blessings in
themselves, e. Ephesians. I. 4.
would not be so to us, if not in Christ; And being in Him, all things are
turned into blessings to us: For, now Nothing can come at us, but as coming
through Him; and what ever so comes, is Ti^ctured, by His Divine Excellency,
and made Propitious to us: And hereby it is, That the Thing we were Chosen
unto; is effectually and unfailably Provided for.

There may diverse good Reasons and Ends be assign ^^d for God's Choosing the
Elect in Christ: As,

I. That by bringing in Man's Restoration this way, Arg. 1.
He might (as it were) Baffle His great Adversary, and Outshoot him in his own
Bow: And it well became the Wisdom and Grace of God, Thus to do. The devil
thought, by Poisoning the Root, to Vitiate and Ruin the whole Stock and
Progeny; and he failed not of His Design. The Lord would therefore, by putting
His Elect into a Head incapable of Degeneracy, Retrieve that Ruin; and not only
recover them, but bring them into a Better Estate than that they had lost: He
would set up a Man, that should be too hard for the Devil; and be able, both to
Destroy Him, and Dissolve his Works: And He has accordingly done it. In which
Method of Man's Recovery, is a great Answerableness to the Method of his Ruin;
And it is a Thing, the Lord would have us to mind, Romans 3. 12* 21.
as appears by the Parallel beforementioned.

II. That by showing us His Righteousness in the way and manner of our
Recovery; Arg. 2.
we might the more readily subscribe to His Righteousness in the imputation of
Adam's sin: For, without the sight and knowledge of One, we cannot with any
heartiness submit to the other. Hence, Some, in their too-bold Arguings against
Election, have alleged, That What Adam did, was without their Consent.

III. If the Elect had not been in Christ, Arg. 3.
the satisfaction He undertook for Sinners, could not have availed them. As
Adam's sin could not have been ours, if not in him: So neither the
Righteousness of Christ, if not in Him: Our sins could not have met upon Him,
nor we have been Justified and Reconciled by the blood of His Cross; If He had
not sustained our persons, and stood in our stead. Another's Act cannot be
mine, either as to Profit or loss, if there be not some kind of Oneness between
us.

IV. If not in Christ, Arg. 4.
we could not have been Sanctified: The Lump was sanctified the first fruits;
Romans 11. 16. The Wilde-Olive-Nature could not be suppressed and changed, but by
grafting into the True. As a Man cannot be Naturally born, Without relation to
Adam as his Natural head: so it is impossible to be born again, (or Regenerated)
without the like relation of Union to Christ as his Spiritual Head: There is no
being a New Creature, without being in Christ: 2 Cor. 5. 17.
They that are joined unto the Lord (and they only) are one Spirit with Him.
The branch must be in the Vine, before its sap can be derived into it: He that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, must be One; There must be a
Contact, (a touching of Him) before this virtue can come from Him.

V. They were Chosen into Christ, Arg. 5.
That the Salvation they were Chosen unto, might be invincibly secured; of
which, this putting them into Christ, is a pledge irrevocable. Their Union with
Him, is their stability; It is That makes them hold out (as He Himself did)
till all is finished: Isa. 42. 4.
He did not fail, nor was discouraged; so neither shall they; and this because
he is their Head; This makes them victorious over all the power of the enemy.

Election, indeed, makes their Salvation sure; but it is by this way of Putting
them into Christ: In whom the heirs of the World to come are preserved; whiles
the World of ungodly are deluged in Perdition --. Genesis 6. 18.
( Adam, therefore, whiles a Common Person, and as such, could not be said to
be in Christ: If he had, he could not have fallen:) For, Joh. 5. 26.
the Father has given the Son to have life in Himself; (i. e. to have it as a
Root) That all in Him might still be supplied from an increated Grace and
Power; which holds them fast to Himself; and so, from Withering and falling
off. It is not Grace received by us, that keeps us: But that Grace which
received us to the Glory of God the Father; Romans 15. 7.
which still Communicates a fresh supply, Through Jesus Christ.

Having gone these few steps, toward the Compass and extent of Election; It
concerns us also to know; where this broad River has its Head: What Rock it
is, That this Immense Fabric is built upon: That we may not give the honor of
it to another; nor endanger our selves by settling on a wrong foundation: To
show which is the Scope and Subject of the Sixth particular under this General
Head: viz.

VI. That Election is founded upon Grace: Or, The good pleasure of God's will,
is the only Original Cause and Motive of Election.
As in Men's Genealogies, there is no stop, until you come up to God the Father
of all: Luke. 3. 23. 38.
So is it in the order of Causes relating to Men's Salvation: The efficiency of
all things that are mediate and subordinate, depending on God, as First and
Sovereign: His Willing the futurition of them, is the cause of their being: and
We shall never judge Rightly, unless we come up to the Will and Good Pleasure
of God, as the Sovereign Rule and Law of His Works: And this, I term, The
[onely] Original Cause of Election, to shut out Faith foreseen, with all the
works and worthyness of Men, from being any way Causal, Influential, or Motive
thereto; and so from sharing in the Glory of God's Grace; which He is very
jealous of, and will not impart to any.

The Ground, or Moving Cause of God's Election, is quite different from the
manner of Men; who commonly pitch upon things, for some Natural Aptness, or
Meetness of them for their Work: They will not take a knotty, cross-grained, or
wind-shaken piece of Timber, to make a Pillar of State: But, the Lord pitches
upon such (and such to choose) the poor, base, weak, foolish, things of the
world; the worst of Men, and chief of Sinners: (The instances of Paul,
Manasseh, Mary Magdalen, and others, make it evident:) and of these, He is
pleased to make Pillars for the House of God; (Pilluis of State indeed!)
whereon to write His own Name, to manifest thereby His Sovereignty, Holiness,
Wisdom, Power, Righteousness, and Free Grace to Eternity.

The Lord's way and method, in bringing His Sons to Glory; is the best
Demonstration of the Right order of Causes: For, though there be a Concurrence
of many things, as Causes and Effects, one of another; yet if observed in their
Order, they will still lead us up to the Goad Pleasure of God, as First and
Supreme; and perfectly Independent: The Current of the New Testament Runs
wholly this way; and hangs the whole of Salvation, both Means and End, expressly
on the Divine Will: Luke 1^. 32, It is your Fathers good pleasure to give you
the Kingdom: Chap 10. 21, Thou have hid these things from the Wise, and
revealed them to babes; For so it seemed good in thy sight: Romans 11. 5, A
Remnant according to the Election of Grace: Ephesians. 1. 5, Predestinate to the
Adoption of Children, according to the good pleasure of His Will: Redemption
also, and the forgiveness of Sins, according to the riches of His Grace, (the
same Grace that Elected.) Ver. 7, The making known the mystery of His Will;
this also is according to that His Good pleasure, which He had purposed in
Himself, Ver. 9. Yea, all the operations of God, whether for us, upon us, or by
us, they All have their Rise from the same Spring, and are Carried by the same
Rule: He works all things after the Council of His Own Will; Ver. 11. And for
the Old Testament, you have it sufficiently exemplified there, in the Instances
before given; and especially touching the ground of God's love, to the People
of Israel; (who, in that respect, Deuteronomy. 7. 8. Ch 9. 4. Chapter 10. 15.
were the Arch-type of the Spiritual Election) vi^. That His own good pleasure
was the only cause of His Choosing them above other Nations; He loved them,
because He loved them.

And good Reasons there are, why Election should be founded upon Grace; and why
it could not, with respect either to God's Glory, or the Elect's Security, be
founded otherwise. And the

I. Is from the Sovereignty of God: Whose Will being the Supreme Law, admits
not a Co-ordinacy; Much-less will it stand with Sovereign Power to be Regulated
by the will of another: That would be a Contradiction to Sovereignty; For, that
which Regulates, is superior to that which is regulated by it. Sovereign
Princes (to show their Prerogative) affirm their acts of Grace, to be of their
own mere Motion; And their Grants are reputed the more Authentic for being so
expressed. The like we find in Scripture frequently ascribed to God; That He will
have Mercy, on whom He will have mercy: Rom 9. 18.
That He works all things (not by Motives from without, Ephesians 1. 11.
but) after the Council of His own Will: Rom 9. 16.
That it is not of Men's Willing or Running, but of God who shows Mercy.

When the World had been drowned for their obdurate impenitency; the Few that
remained, were as bad as before; and those that should come after the Lord
foresaw would be the same. One would think, now, The natural Result of this
Experiment should be, I will utterly cut them off, and be troubled with them no
more: But, the Lord's thoughts are not our thoughts; He argues and concludes in
another Mode; I will not again any more Curse the ground for man's sake. And He
is pleased to give the same Reason here, why He Will not; as before, why He
would; asis seen, by comparing Genesis 6, 5, and 7. with Chap. 8. 21.

See also the Instance of God's dealing with Ephraim; He was wroth with Him and
smote Him; and Ephraim so far from Relenting, That he went on frowardly: (i. e.
Stubbornly, as Resolved in his Course) I hid me (says the Lord) and was wroth
Esa. 57. 15.
This, one would think, (if Ephraim had in him but a spark of Ingen^ity) should
have Moved him to alter his Course. But, what cares Ephraim! He still keeps the
same way; and it was the way of his heart; not an inconsiderate Pet, or sudden
Temptation; but Natural and fixed: All which the Lord sees and considers; and
having laid all together, Resolves to heal him, Isa. 57. 18.
and Restore Comforts to him.

On the other hand; Those good Souls who feared the Lord and Obeyed the voice
of his servant; Isa. 50. ^1.
They yet walked in darkness, and had no light: ye may be sure, They would
gladly have understood their Condition, (namely, That they were such as feared
the Lord) Their Will could not be Wanting to a Thing so greatly importing their
Comfort; Nor they were not Idle in seeking for it: They Walked though in the
Dark; but could not Walk themselves out of it: They are still as they were,
They had no light. By these contrary Examples ye may see, That the Sovereignty
of God still keeps the Throne, and His dispensments of Mercy (whether in
purpose or in Act) are not Governed by the Wills of Men; They are things too
low to be Counselors to God. And if it be thus in things of temporary
Concernment, much more in that great business of Eternal Election; which is the
Sublimest Act of Sovereign Power. (And yet, This hinders not, but That every
Man, at last, shall be judged according to his works.)

II. Arg. 2.
Election must be founded only upon Grace, because Grace and Works are
Inconsistent in the Cause of salvation. The scripture is every Cautelous of
admitting any thing as a Concomitant with Grace, in this Matter; yea, although
it be a Thing that does always accompany Grace, and That without which a Man
cannot be Saved: The Apostle puts them in opposition, and is very intent on the
Argument, as a thing of great Moment, in Romans 11. Where, first he shows, That
amidst that general Defection of the Jewish Nation, there still was a Remnant
whom God had Reserved: These he terms, The Foreknown, ver 2. and in the 7. ver.
he calls them plainly, The Election: And then, lest any should ascribe it to a
false cause, (as in that parallel Case he resembles it to,) viz, That they had
not bowed the knee to Baal; but stuck to the True Religion, when others fell
off; he tells us, No; Their Election was founded upon Grace: And as for Works
they had no place in the Causality of it. By Grace he means, the Free Favor of
God; who is not moved by any thing without Himself; But what He does, He does
it Freely; without respect to Men's desert; Nay, their Vndesert rather, is an
expedient Consideration in this Act of Grace. By, Works, I understand All that
Self-Righteousness, Goodness, Conformity to the Law, Or what ever else is
performable by Men. These ( viz, Grace and Works) he proves as inconsistent as
Contraries can be; and that the least Mixture would vary the kind. If but a
s^ruple of Works be taken in, Grace is no more Grace; For, to him that works,
is the Reward not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt; Romans 4. 4. Grace and Faith,
are well agreed: These both have the same scope and end: But, Romans 4. 4.
Grace and Works have always Clash'd: The setting up of the One, is the
deposing of the other: Either the Ark must Out, or Dagon down; One Temple
cannot hold them both. Romans 3. 28.

To the same effect is the drift of that discourse in Gal. 5. It appears from
Acts 15. 1. That some there were, who taught a Necessity of Circumcision; as
without which they could not be saved: Pretty willing they were to admit of
Christ, so they might join Circumcision with Him, and keeping the Law of Moses.
But, this dangerous daubing with things unmixable, our holy Apostle could not
brook; both as reflecting on the honor of his Master, and undermining their
only Foundation: And therefore, to keep them from or bring them off, that
perilous Quick-sand; he tells them expressly, These two cannot stand together
in that matter: For, if they be Circumcised, they are Debtors to the whole Law;
and Christ is become of none effect to them; because they are fallen from
Grace. It is, as if he had said, If you take in any part, though never so
little of Legal Observances, as Necessary to your being Justified, ye forfeit
the whole benefit of Gospel Grace. The Grace of Christ is sufficient for you;
He is a Savior Complete in Himself; and if you look (though but a squint) at
any thing else; it is a Renouncing of Him: He will be Savior altogether or not
at all. And therefore he tells them again, and that with a kind of vehemence;
Gall. 5. 2.
That if they be Circumcised, Christ shall profit them Nothing.

And as a Man may not put in his Claim for Justification on account of his
Works; so neither of his Faith, as if That were M^terially or Influentially
Causal of Justification: For, Faith it self, as it is the Believers Act, comes
under the Notion of a Work. Let us therefore Consider, What part it is that
Faith holds in this Matter? least whiles we cast out Works, as not standing
with Grace; we make a Work of Faith. It is Faith's Office, to make the Soul
live wholly on Another; and to Renounce Self- ability, as much as Self- desert:
To apprehend that Righteousness by which Grace Justifies; Not only to be
Justified thereby upon your Believing; but to work in you even that Faith, by
which you apprehend it; Isa. 45. 24.
answerable to that of the Prophet, In the Lord have I Righteousness and
Strength. He that will be Saved must come as an ungodly Person to be justified
freely by the Grace of God: He must reckon himself an Ungodly Man, to the very
instant of his Justification. True it is, The Just shall live by Faith; but
it is also true, That it is not their own Faith, or act of believing, that they
live by, (though not without it:) Which also seems the Apostle's meaning, where
he says, The life, which I now live, I live by the Faith of the Son of God:
Where note, That as Faith is the life of a Believer; so Christ is the life of
his Faith; I live (says he) yet not I but Christ lives in Me: Christ was his
life; and he lived on Christ, by virtue of Christ's living in him.

Notwithstanding all which, it is evidently true, and must constantly be
affirmed, That Grace and Works will still be together in the way of Salvation;
(the one does not extinguish or exclude the other) Only not as Colleagues or
Joint-Causers thereof: But rather as a Workman, and his Tools, which himself
first makes, and then works with them; By Grace ye are saved through Faith;
Ephesians. 2. 8.
and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God: Even this believing or
Acting faculty is a Creature of Grace's raising up; and therefore, in the
Throne it is meet that Grace should be above it. Works (therefore) how good
soever, are not the Cause of Salvation; and if so, then not the cause of
Election; for This (indeed) is the Cause of them both: And Works (if right and
truly Good) will always be ready to own their Original, and to keep in their
own place; Where also they will be most considerable, and do the best service.

III. Arg. 3.
That the good pleasure of God's Will, gives Rise and Foundation to Election,
is further argued from Men's Incapacity to afford any ground or Motive to God,
for such a Gift. Adam stood not so long as to beget a Son in his first Image:
It is s^en by his firstborn Cain, what all his natural S^ed would naturally
be. And though there be some that do Magnify Man, and presume to speak of him
at another rate: yet evident it is by Scripture Light, and experience of those
Renewed, That Man fallen is po^r, blind, Naked, and at enmity with all that is
truly good: and that he is never more Remote and far off from God, than whiles
in high thoughts of himself, Glorying in his own Understanding, Strength,
Worthyness, Freedom of Will, Improvement of Common Grace, and the like: For,
These make him proud and presumptuous, and to have slight thoughts of that
special and peculiar Grace by which he must (if ever) be Renewed and Saved.
But, the Lord Himself (who best knows him) reports the matter quite otherwise;
(and we know that His witness is true) viz. That all the imaginations of their
heart are only evil continually: Genesis 6 5.
That their inward part is very wickedness: Ps. 53. 1.
That every Man is brutish in his knowledge: Jer 10 14 ver. 8, 21.
Altogether brutish and foolish; yea, even their Pastors; (that is, the very
best and most intelligent amongst them: Ch 4. 22. Eccles. 91*3.
) They are wise to do evil, but to do good have no understanding: And their
hearts are full of madness: --

And it was not thus only with the Gentile Nations, who were left to walk in
their own way; but even with the Jews, Isa. 5. 4.
who had all the means of becoming better that could be devised, (Excepting
that of special Electing Grace, which took-in but a Remnant:) They were called
Jews, Rested in the Law, Made their boast of God, Knew His Will, Approved the
things that were excellent; Were confident that they were a Guide of the blind,
and a light to them that were in darkness, Instructors of the foolish, Teachers
of Babes, -- And yet all this while, and in the midst of all these high
seize, did not teach Themselves: Romans 2 from 17 ver. to 21.

And in Romans 3. where they are Ranked together, he proves them to be All under
Sin, None Righteous, None that understands, None that seeks after God, None
that does good, [No not One] Yea, This depravement of Nature was so deep and
indelibly fixed, That the Lord Himself tells them The Blackmoor might as soon
change his skin, as they learn to do well. All which, with abundantly more, be
speaks a condition extremely remote from yielding a Cause of this blessed
Election.

IV. If God's love to Men had its Rise and Beginning from their love to Him, it
would not have that singular eminency in it, Joh. 3. 16.
that is justly ascribed to it: [ So God l^ved the World --!] So as not to be
expressed; So as not to be paralel'd; So as not to be understood, until we come
to that State wherein we shall know as we are known. By this it is, 1 Cor. 13.
12.
that God's love to Men is so highly celebrated, in 1 John 4. 10, [Herein] is
love; Not that we loved God, but that God loved us. And, Behold what manner of
love the Father has bestowed up on us! 1 John 3. 1.
Which surely then is not after the manner of Men; Matthew. 6. 46.
For, even Publicans do so; Luke. 6 32, 35.
and Sinners love those that love them: But, to love Enemies, and whiles
Enemies; (as to love a Woman, (a Wife) that is an Adulteress) this is according
to God's love to His Chosen.

But, Notwithstanding these Scriptures (with others) seem purposely written to
obviate such conceptions as would feign our loving of God, to be the ground and
Motive of His love to us: Yet, great endeavors there are to Father Election
upon foreseen faith and works, which That They call the Covenant of Grace, has
(they Say) qualified and capacitated all Men for; and which certain more
pliant, ingenuous, and industrious persons (as they speak) would attain unto,
by the helps they have in common with other Men: But, this pedigree of Election
is excepted against as being not rightly deduced: For,

1. Men having (in Adam) divested themselves of all that was holy and good; the
Lord could not foresee in them any thing of Worth or Desirableness, but what
Himself should work in them Anew, and that of pure Grace and favor: For, sin
and deformity could not be motives of love; And, that the Elect (of themselves)
were in no wise better than other Men, is evident by the Scriptures
late-quoted; where the Holy Ghost asserting the universal depravement of humane
nature, ex^empts not one. But, if such excellent and distinguishing
qualifications as Faith and Holiness had been foreseen, (and so, imputable to
them) the Spirit of Truth would not have Ranked them Even with the Children of
wrath, as He does, Ephesians. 2. 3. But,

2. If they were otherwise, what could they add unto God? Job 37. 24. Chapter 35 7.
Chapter 41. 11.
Or whereby could they oblige Him? He respects not any that are wise of
heart. If thou be Righteous, what give thou Him? And who has prevented Me (
says the Lord) that I should repay him? (i. e. Who is he that is a fore hand
with God, Deuteronomy. 10. 17.
in doing ought that might induce His favor?) He regards not Persons, nor
takes Rewards: He is not propitious to any for what they can do for Him, or
bring to Him.

Take Paul for an Instance: He walked up to the light he had; Was blameless;
lived in all good Conscience; knew no evil by himself; (a rare degree of legal
Righteousness!) But, that it was not this moved God to make him a Chosen
Vessel, he thankfully acknowledges, with self-abasement, upon every occasion:
Tit. 3. 5. Tin. 1. 14. 15. 2. Tim. 1. 9.

3. Faith follows Election: God respects the person before his offering. (you will
say perhaps) Abel was respected as a Believer, and his offering for his Faith?
True, But that Faith of his was not the primary cause of God's respecting him.
If Abels Person had not been respected first, he had never been a Believer:
For, Faith is the work and gift of God; and (according to the course of all
judicious Agents) he that will work, must first pitch on the Subject He will
work upon; and he that gives, on the person he will give unto. Heb. 11. 6.
Besides, Romans 14. 23.
Abel could do nothing before he Believed, that might move God to give him
Faith: therefore it could not be Abel's foreseen Faith that was the Cause of
his Election. The Scripture speaks often of iron-sinew'd-Necks and Brazen
Brows; and of Men's being in their blood, when the Lord said They should live:
As also that God loved Jacob before he had done any good thing: and that the
Saints love God because He loved them first: But nowhere of Foreseen Faith and
Holiness as the Cause and Ground of God's love to Men.

4. Faith and Holiness are Middle things: They are neither the Foundation nor
Top-stone of Election. They are to Sovereign Grace, as Stalks and Branches are
to a Root; by which the Root conveyes its virtues into its principal fruit:
Ephesians. 2. 8, By Grace ye are saved [through] Faith: 2. These. 2. 13, Chosen to
Salvation [through] Sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the Truth. They
are no more the Cause of Election, than the Means of an End are the first Cause
of Purpose: Nay, no more than Tatnai's propension to build the Temple, and to
provide Sacrifices for the God of Heaven, was the Cause of Darius his Decree
that those things should be done, Ezra 5. and 6. Chapters.

5. If men be Predestinate to Faith and Holiness, (as they are) according to
Romans 8. 38, ^9. and 1. Pet. 1. 2. Then they were not seen to be such before
their Predestination: Or if they were, then their Election (as to that
particular) would seem impertinent: There can no Rational account be given, why
Men foreseen to be such, should be so solemnly predestinate thereto. So
likewise, If Salvation be the inseparable product of Faith and Holiness,
according to John 5. 24, He that believes [hath] everlasting life, and shall
not come into condemnation: 1. Pet. 1. 9. Receiving the End of your Faith, the
Salvation of your Souls: Then, to ordain to Salvation those foreseen to be so
qualified, would seem a thing both needless and insignificant: It would look
like the sending of Men where they would have gone of Themselves.

Such sapless, irregular, and injudicious Notions are very unworthy that
Celebrious and for ever Adorable Act of Predestination. And if duly weighed,
would set us further off from the doctrine of Self-advancement, which stands in
so point blank opposition to the Doctrine of God's Grace.

V. Arg. 5.
It could not stand with the wisdom and Goodness of God, to found the Salvation
of His People on a failable bottom: Which it must be said to be, if dependent
on any thing besides His own Immutable Will: For, whatever it was, that
Election had being from, by that also it must be maintained. What then would
become of it, if built on that goodness which is as the Morning cloud and early
dew? Mos. 6. 4.
The Creature's will, even whiles in a state of perfection, was too slight and
fickle a thing to build this eternal weight upon: And if Man at his best estate
was vanity, how much more afterward, when so strong a Bent to vanity came upon
his will!

VI. Lastly, To derive Election from any Root besides the Good pleasure of God,
is to frustrate the principal End of Man's Salvation, viz. the Glory of God's
Grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. and Chap. 2. 7. This Attribute (of all the Rest) He will
not have ecclipsed, nor entrenched upon: It Is so Divinely sacred, as not to
admit the least humane touch. For which very cause, the Lord has so contrived
that blessed design and Plot of His Glory, that all boasting is excluded: And
no flesh shall Glory in His preseuce. But if any thing in the Creature be
entitled to the Causality of Election, Flesh will Glory; and instead of
excluding Man's Boasting, Grace it self will be excluded, (which is far from a
Glorifying of it) as is plain from, Romans 11. 6.

I would here Resolve a Quere or two, which some have urged from the Scripture,
As

1. How can this Doctrine stand with the [General] love and good will of God
toward Men; who ('it is said) will have all to be saved? 1. Tim. 2. 4.
In General; the literal sense of words is not to be rested on, when the like
phrase of speech elsewhere used, or evident scope of the same or other
Scripture, agrees not to it: The design and current of the whole must guide the
construction of particular parts. More particularly:

1. Though the Doctrine of General Love will not stand with that of Special
Election; yet the Doctrine of Special Election will stand without That, and
against it: For, there is nothing more plain, than that there is an Election of
men to Salvation; as also, That the natural Import of Election, is, To Choose
One or more out of Many: Now this necessarily implies the Leaving of Some; and
consequently, The Not-willing of Salvation to All; For,

2. The Will of God cannot be resisted: What He wills shall come to pass,
because with His willing the End, He Wills also the Means; and that such as
shall compass His End: Isa. 46. 10, My council shall stand, I will do all my
pleasure; i. e. What I please to will, That I will have done.

3. If the word [ All] be here taken universally, it takes in Unbelievers as
well as Others; as if God would have them to be Saved: And if you will explain
this by other Scriptures; (as, namely, If they do believe) These also must be
considered with those that show How and by Whom that Faith must be wrought; and
who they are it belongs unto: and they tell us, That Faith is the Gift and
operation of God, Coll. 2. 12. Ephesians. 2. 8. And That Election is that which
intitles to Faith; Romans 11. 7.

4. The Apostle is not here discoursing the Extent of God's special love;
Whether All Men universally are concerned in it: but exhorting Believers to a
General duty; viz. To give thanks for Kings, and all in Authority; because of
the benefits we have by Government: And to pray for them; Not only for their
peaceable governing of us; but if otherwise, that God would turn their hearts,
and make them Nursing Fathers to His Church. And to enforce the Duty, There is
no degree nor state of Men exempted from Salvation: God has chosen some of
every sort; and therefore we ought not to shut any out of our prayers.

5. The word [ All] is often used, when but a part (and sometimes, the lesser
part) of the thing spoken of, is intended by it. As on the contrary, when the
Universality of the subject is intended, it is expressed by Singulars; As, He
that believes shall be Saved; and Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise
cast out. It sometimes signifies All of such a sort: so Eve is said to be the
Mother of All Living; Not of all Living Creatures, but all of her own kind. It
other times intends Some of all Sorts: as where it is said All the Cattle of
Egypt died, Exodus 9. 6. And the hail smote every tree, and every herb, ver.
25. And yet other Cattle are mentioned after, and a Residue of Trees are said
to be escaped, ver. 19, 25. and Chap. 10. 5. So here, God will have all Men to
be saved; That is, some of every Sort and degree; Gentiles as well as Jews;
Kings and Men in authority, as well as those of a meaner Rank. The same in
Joel; I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh: Joel 2. 28.
that is, upon some of every Age, Sex, and Degree, without distinction; Young,
Old, Masters, Servants, Sons, Daughters, etc. as it follows there.

6. To these Universal terms do belong diverse Restrictions, which must be
gathered from the Scope; Col. 1. 23, The Gospel is said, to be preached to
every Creature under Heaven: and yet Men only are intended; and not All of them
neither; For the Gospel had reached but a small part of the World at that time,
and not the whole of it yet. Acts 15. 21, Moses has in every City them that
preach him: It must be understood only of Cities where the Jews dwelt and had
Synagogues; which were but few in comparison. Acts 8. 4, They that were
scattered abroad, went every where preaching the Word; i. e. They balked no
place nor person; but preached where ever they came: At first it was confined
to the Jews, but now without limits. 1 Cor. 4. 5, Every Man shall have praise
of God: It can be meant only of Good and Faithful Servants, which are but a
Remnant to the whole piece. Ephesians. 4. 5, God is said to be the Father of all; and
yet, Satan (we know) is the Father of the far greater part of the World. Col.
1. 20, Christ is said to Reconcile all things; and yet, all the Angels (which
are Things, and of the Chiefest of Things) must be exempted: The Good Angels,
because they never were at enmity: and the evil Angels, because Not
Reconcilable. Ephesians. 1. 10, That He might gather together in One all things in
Christ: This [All things] seems plainly to intend the Elect; for they are the
subject discoursed of in the whole Chapter: and in Matthew, Those gathered
together are styled The Elect, Mat. 24. 31. In Heb. 12. 8, All are said to be
partakers of Chastisement: and yet it can be meant only of Sons; for Bastards
are not partakers of it; as it follows there. So also, John 6. 4^, They shall
be all taught of God: It respects only the Sons of the Church, ( i. e. such as
are Elected) whose iniquities are forgiven them, and their sins remembered no
more: It is the tenor of the New Covenant, which is made with the House of
Israel; that is, Jews in Spirit, or the Elect Nation, Heb. 8. 10, 11. Jer. 31.
34. And if these terms Universal [All and Every] are sometimes applied to the
Elect exclusive of Others; why not as well in the place whence the Quere is
taken?

I have instanced these, to show what Contradictory Notions would follow,
should the vocal sound of words be adhered to: What a Sandy foundation
Universal- Election is built upon: And how likely we are to lose the Truth,
whiles we listen to an uncertain sound; the meaning whereof may yet be had from
the Context, and General Current of the Scripture.

2. How shall this kind of Election be reconciled with Acts 10. That God is no
Respecter of persons?
1. This shows the inconvenience of Minding the literal sense of words above
the Scope: The former Exception takes-in All; and now This excludes All: for,
if literally taken, God should have respect to None. 2. The Jews were an Elect
Nation; and so, this objection will lie against that Election as much as this
we are upon. 3. The scope of the place plainly intends, That God respects no
Man's person either less or more, for his outward condition, or Carnal
privileges. Till Then, the partition was up, and the Lord seemed to Regard only
the Jewish Nation; suffering All besides, to Walk in their own Ways, Acts 14.
16. But Now had God to the Gentiles also granted Repentance unto life, Acts 11.
18. You Will say, They were Fearers of God whom He thus accepted? True; but That
was not it which firstly induced His Acceptance, or intit'led them to it;
(although it was their Evidence for it.) If Men fear not God till He has put
His fear within them; Then, their fearing Him, does not precede His Respect
toward them, but follows upon it. Job. 15, 16.
And this is the Favor which he bears to His Chosen, Psalm. 106. 4.

3. If Men be ordained to Salvation absolutely, What need or use is there of
good works?
There are diverse good Uses and Ends of good works, and good Reasons for God's
ordaining them to be walked in; without supposing our Walking in them, the
Ground, Condition, or Motive of our Election: As

1. To show forth His virtues whose Offspring we profess our selves to be:
Mat. 5. 45, That ye may be (i. e. that ye may appear and approve your selves to
be) the Children of your Father which is in Heaven.

2. To Convince Those without; That they by our good conversation may be won
over, and learn to do well; Or else be compelied to Glorify God in the day of
visitation.

3. For Encouragement and Example to Weaker Christians; who yet are but
Children in the good ways of God, and are aptlier led by Example than Precept.

4. That by having our Senses exercised about holy things, we might become more
holy; and so, more capable of Communion with God here, and meetened for our
Heavenly Inheritance.

5. Good works are a part of Election; and the Elect are as absolutely ordained
to them, as to Salvation it self, Joh. 15. 16.

Objections I did not intend to meddle with: But considering that That which
follows of this kind, (though done for another account) may help to discover
the lightness of what is alleged against our Doctrine of Election, I have
therefore inserted it here; And hope it shall prove to its further Confirmation.

There is no Election, nor Decree of Election, of particular persons as such;
but of the entire species of Men from Eternity?
Election is the Choosing of Some from among others; and it always supposes a
greater Number out of which the choice is made: And consequently, The taking
(or Choosing) of All, is quite besides the nature of Election. The Scripture
says, They are chosen out of the World, Joh. 15. 19. Then the World is not
Chosen: i. e. The entire Species of Men is not the object of Election.

God has not decreed from Eternity to Elect any person of Mankind upon any
terms, but that in case he lives to years of discretion, he may possibly
perish?
This is excepted against, 1. Because the person of Christ Himself is not
exempted: 2. Because as possibly the death of Christ might be in vain: 3. It
makes the Decree and Election two things, and diverse in respect of time. That
Election was from Eternity, is proved from Ephesians. 1. 4. And that the Elect shall
not perish, is absolutely promised, John 10. 28.

Threatenings of Damnation are absolutely inconsistent with a peremptory Decree
to conferr Salvation?
No more then the threatening of death upon Adam, was inconsistent with God's
purpose to send him a Savior: Genesis 2. 17. with Chapter 3. 15. Act. 27. 22. with.
v. 31.
So likewise, that Caution [That Except the Mariners stayed in the ship, they
could not be Saved] was well consistent with that peremptory Promise [ That
there should be no loss of any Man's life.] The Promise of safety was absolute;
but their actual obtainment of it was Conditional: Yet so, as That the
performance of the Condition on their part, was as Certain by the Decree, as
Safety upon their performance of it: For, He that determined the safety of
their lives, Determined also That it should be Effected by their abiding in the
Ship; and That this Caution, or threatening of danger, in case they went out;
should be a means to prevail with them for that abiding; and so it did.

In like manner, that saying of the Apostle, Romans 8. 13. If ye walk after the
flesh, ye shall die; was very consistent with what he had said before in Chap.
6. 14, That Sin shall not have dominion over them: and That Nothing should
separate them from the love of God, Chap. 8. 39. For, as the Lord deals with
reasonable Creatures; So He makes use of Rational Arguments, Motives, and
Cautions to work upon them: Both End and Means, and Inducements to the use of
those Means, were all determined together.

We judge it a very senseless pant ^n a further, to give his child complete
assurance under hand and Seal, that he will make him his (...) against all
possible interveniences; and yet presently threaten him, if he be not dutiful,
to disinherite him?
Undutiful Children may dare to judge thus of their Fathers actions: and
Children (that otherwise are dutiful and good, yet) whiles Children, may have
Childish conceptions of what their Ancients do: But Men grown up, and
acquainted with their Fathers prudence and goodness, will lay their hand upon
their mouth.

The promise and purpose of God to give Canaan to Abraham's seed; was so
absolute, That (by the Objectors own confession) all their unworthyness would
not deprive them of it: It is also evident by their demeanor, and the Event at
last: Exodus 32. 10. Number. 14. 12. De^t. 9. 14.
yet, how often does the Lord threaten to disinherite them? and to blot out
their name from under Heaven? Did Moses, now, go and charge God foolishly? Did
he tell Him, It Is a senseless part thus to threaten after so absolute an
engagement to the Contrary? No, he puts the Lord in mind of His promise to
their Fathers; Of His Mercy in pardoning them ^for^time; what reflection it
would have on His honor among the Egyptians, If He should now destroy them:
etc. Not a word of Complaint, That first to promise, and then to threaten, is a
senseless thing: It had been senseless in Moses thus to do, and in no wise
consistent with His duty: But more directly:

It were no senseless part in a Father, to purchase an Office for his Son, and
so to settle it on him; that it s^all not be in his own power to Reverse it:
And yet, (keeping to himself the knowledge of that Settlement) propose the
enjoyment thereof conditionally, viz. upon terms of obedience to his fathers
Commands; The tendency of all which, is but to prove himself the Son of such a
father, and to Meete^ him for his place: And the more to oblige his Son to a
studious preparing himself for it; to lay before him the evil and danger of a
Negligent course; by which (if persisted in) he might render himself incapable.

But surely, supposing this Father to have the same power over his Son, as God
has over the heart and Spirit of His people; He will so order him by
Instruction, discipline, and good principles; that he shall not run into a
Forfeiture.

Besides, Threatenings of Damnation are not properly appliable to Believers, who
know themselves so to be: For he that believes, Joh. 5. 24.
is passed from death to life, and shall not come into Condemnation: However,
at times, for want of a through knowing their State, unthankfulness for it, or
some other miscarriage; they bring themselves under doubtings of it. But for
such as have Complete assurance under God's hand and seal, (as the Objection
speaks) They are sealed up to the Day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. Romans 8. 15.
with a Seal that never shall be loosed.

In case any person were so adjudged to Eternal life from Eternity, that there
is no possibility of miscarrying; then there was no necessity of Christ's dying
for him?
The Assertors of Absolute Election do hold with the Scriptures, That Election
is in and through Christ: The same Decree that ordained to Salvation, ordained
also the death of Christ, in order thereto; That God might be Just in
Justifying: He has appointed us to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ,
1 These. 5. 9, 10. It might be inferred, with as much show of Reason, That if
such an End be appointed to be wrought by such a Means, then that Means is
unnecessary to that end: That if God has Chosen Men to salvation through
Sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the Truth, then holiness and faith
are Needless things: These are absurd reasonings, which the Truth never Owns.

We judge such an Election to be an open Enemy to Godliness, For who will
strain and toil himself for that which he knows he shall obtain by an easy
pace?
The Doctrine of Conditional Election can be no friend to Godliness, whatever
it may pretend; since all that a Man does on that account, ultimately ends in
self. Godliness is to Aim at God as our Chief End, in all that we do: Now, One
that holds, the Elect sure of Salvation, and believes himself to be one of
them, and yet goes on to fear God and obey Him; Glorifies God more than he that
performs the same duties for kind, (and perhaps, greater in bulk) in
expectation of life thereby. The Pharisees fasted oftener than Christ's
Disciples; but were not such real friends to Godliness as they: Long prayers,
fastings, and Alms-deeds, are all Nothing without Love: and who (do you think)
will Love God more, he that believes himself sure of God's Love unchangeably;
or One that holds, That after all his toiling and straining, he may possibly
have Run in vain, and lose all at last? And who would think, that a Master in
Israel should Reason so absurdly? who counts it a toil to eat his Meat when
Nature requires it; especially when it is most agreeable both to his palate and
constitution? All the ways of God are pleasantness to them that walk in them;
And these would not leave them again, although their future happiness were not
concerned in it: If they be grievous to any, it is from their unacquaintedness
with. His Love; 1. John. 5. 3.

It must needs make men very remiss and lo^se in the Service of God.
Christ knew, that the Angels had charge over Him, and that He should not dash
His foot against a stone; yet never the less careful of His own preservation:
Paul was sure of the Crown of Righteousness; and yet as diligent in beating
down his body, and^ strained as hard in Running his Race, as any of those, who
lay the stress of Salvation upon their works.

Such a Notion of Election, lays the honor and necessity of that great
Ordinance of Preaching the Gospel, in the dust: For, if the Elect (so called)
shall as certainly be saved by a weak, simple, or Corrupt Ministry, and this
(it may be) enjoyed but a day or two in all a Man's life, or loosely attended
upon, wherein is the Ministry of the Gospel to be esteemed?
That peremptory Decree, That [ Summer and Winter, Day and Night, shall not
cease;] takes not away the Necessity of the Sun's being in the World, Gen 8. 22.
Nor of its daily Risings, Settings, and various Revolutions: For, by these (as
the Necessary Means thereof) must the Decree be made good. So, The Absoluteness
of that other part of the promise, ( That Seed time and Harvest shall not
cease) does no whit discharge the Husbandman either of his ufefulness or duty;
but evinceth the One and inforceth the Other; Giving also Encouragement to him
in his Work.

The force of this Answer will not be evaded by alleging, That God affords
them Means proper and sufficient for seed time and harvest; (that is, they have
fitting Seasons, with Seed-corn, horses, plows, and other Utensils of
husbandry) and that is all the Promise intends; and if they improve them not,
the fault's their own: True, it is so, and they shall smart for their Neglect:
But what will become of the Promise, and Sureness of the Covenant? Therefore,
this is not All that God does for Men in this point: He that Decreed How long
the Earth shall endure, and what number of Men He will raise up upon it; Did
also Decree His own upholding thereof, during that time, and by what Means
those Men should be propagated and kept alive; and did accordingly put into
Mankind, the Principles of Self-preservation; by which they are Naturally
prompted to the use of them, as they are to Eat, Drink, and Sleep: He has set
the World in their heart. Eccles. 3. 11.

As the Elect shall certainly be saved, and also prepared for that Salvation;
so has the Lord appointed them such a Ministry, and for so long a time, and
their attendance thereon, in such manner, as best agrees to His Own intent;
and which He will bless and make effectual for that End: As is seen in His
sending Paul to certain places, where he must preach and not hold his peace;
Why? because God had much People in that City: i. e. Many of His Elect Ones
were there; who must be brought in by Paul's Ministry: Bythinia and other
places, he is not suffered to go into, though he would; God had not yet any
Work for him there.

Those that are to be taken, the Lord will bring under the Means (as He did
that Shoal of Fishes under Peter's Net, Witness the Eunuch, Joh 21. 6.
Cornelius, the Jailour, and others) And this Means whether Powerful or Simple
in Men's esteem, ^tis all one to God; His word shall accomplish That He sends
it for: and the weaker the Means are, the more is the Power of God magnified:
Act. 2. 9 10, 11, 41, 47.
See Acts 2. How by Illiterate Men's Ministry, He took them by thousands, and
added to His Church daily, such as should be saved. So then, the Ministry of
the Gospel is in no wise made useless or disesteemable by the doctrine of
Absolute Election; but is rather Greatened thereby, as being the Power of God
to that Salvation He has Chosen us to.

Of what great consequence to the World, are the Richest Gifts of Wisdom,
Knowledge, Utterance, etc. if all th^se who are in any possibility of being
saved by them; may and shall as certainly be saved without them?
That the Richest gifts of Wisdom, Knowledge, Utterance, are of no great
consequence to the World, is no Consequent of the Doctrine of Absolute
Election; For, They are given for the Perfecting of the Saints, and edifying
the Body of Christ; (that is, The Elect:) And all the diversities of Gifts,
Manifestations, and Operations, do concur to the same End; Since it is the same
God, who Works all in all; (that is) He appoints Men to Salvation; These
Gifts, as a Means to prepare them for it; and Makes them Effectual thereto.

But, that those richest Gifts of Wisdom, Knowledge, and Utterance, are of no
great use or consequence to the World; is a very (...) Consequent of that
Doctrine, which tells the World, that the Sun, Moon, and Stars do preach the
Gospel sufficiently for Salvation: Which, if they do, wherein (indeed) are
those Richest Gifts to be esteemed? And to what end is this waste? Why should
the best of Men suffer Stripes, Imprisonments, and Death, for doing That which
might be done by those above the reach of danger? And withal, it is too well
known and obvious, That Men of greatest Knowledge, Utterance, and depth of
Reason, (such as are styled the Princes of this World) They are not always,
(Nay, very rarely) the fastest Friends of Truth and Godlin^ss: And those Few
that are, are not always most successeful in their Work; Eccles. 9. 11. When
as Some others, meanly furnished in comparison, 2 Cor. 10. 10. with Acts 17. 6.
have Turned the World upside-down. The Lord oft-times rejects the Wise and
Prudent, and reveals himself by Babes; To take from men, occasion of boasting;
and to make it appear, that the Faith of His People does not stand in the
Wisdom of Men, 1 Cor. 2. 5.
but Power of God.

Upon what account can Men be pressed to a frequent, diligent, conscientious,
attendance on the Ministry; if Salvation, and consequently Preparation, and
Meetness for Salvation, shall as certainly be had by a broken, careless,
superficial, attendance in this kind?
On what account did the Lord so frequently admonish that People, To keep the
Law without turning aside; To Circumcise their hearts; and to be no more
stiff-necked; and this, as the Condition of their obtaining Canaan; if all
their unworthyness could not deprive them of Canaan? (which, the Author of this
Objection elsewhere affirms, it could not) But further; As Men are Creatures,
it is their duty to serve and honor God; and in order thereto, to wait upon
Him in His Ordinances, and that with all diligence; although the business of
their Salvation were not concerned in it; but much more since it is, if any
thing of Self-Concern, may enforce a Duty: And truly the present sweetness,
that is in the ways of God, is Argument sufficient to induce our most serious
attendance thereon.

But, that Salvation, or Meetness for Salvation, may as certainly be had by a
careless Attendance; is far from the Doctrine of Absolute Election to Assert:
For, it presses it still, as an important duty, to give all diligence to make
our Calling and Election sure. But really, Remisness in duty, is the natural
result of that Doctrine which teaches, That a Man possibly may lose all he
has run-for at the last step: For, who will strain and toil himself (as they
term it) for an uncertainty? And if there be any such, who neglect their duty,
because if Elected they are sure to be saved; they give but a sorry evidence of
their state: And they are (commonly) such as most eagerly oppose the Doctrine
of Election; and not of those who hold for it.

Such an Election as we contend against, we judge to be most unworthy the most
excellent Nature of God; and to be at manifest defiance with His Wisdom,
Holiness, Mercy, Justice, etc.
If the Election contended against, be such as the Objectors Arguments are
pointed at; It is such as (I suppose) was never held by any: And then, it is
ill-spent time to set up Counterfeit Notions, and make a great business of
confuting them.

But it is Absolute Election, without respect to Men's Works, that is striven
against: And for this, we say

1. Absolute Election is no way contrary to the wisdom of God, but most
consonant thereto; For, how can it stand with His Wisdom, to determine the
death of His Son for the Salvation of Men; and leave it undetermined (and
consequently uncertain) whether any one person shall have Salvation by it?

2. It is so far from being at manifest defiance with the Mercy of God; that it
is most congruous and suitable to the very nature of it. To show Mercy, is To
open the heart to one in distress; To love and do good to Enemies, whom he
might as justly have destroyed, and was no way obliged to spare, much less to
advance them: Nay, perhaps they were deeplier involved in guilt than other Men,
even the Chief of sinners: which is sure the highest illustration of Mercy, and
far from a manifest defiance with it.

3. It does not oppose the Justice of God; For, to whom is He Debtor, or can
be? All had a stock in Adam; and having lost it by their own default, God is
not obliged to Restore it; Therefore, no Injustice to Repair One, and not
Another.

Does it argue any Sovereign or high strain of Grace, when Ten Thousand have
equally offended, to pardon o^e or two; and implacably resolve to punish and
torment all the Rest to the utmost extremity? And this against all possible
interveniency of Sorrow and Repentance for their fault?
It were very desirable, that men, whiles they suppose to contend for the Grace
of God, would so order their words as becomes the gravity of such a Subject:
Eccles. 5 1.
And much more that they come not so near to a Downright reproaching that
Glorious Grace; of which we cannot have apprehensions awful enough. The men
who thus speak, had need to try their spirits, whether they be of God, Since
from the same premises they draw Conclusions quite contrary to Those who (we
know) spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. In Scripture account it is no
de^ogation to the Grace of God, that He called Abraham alone; leaving Millions
besides to their perishing condition. Nor can I believe that Moses understood
it a Disparageing of God's love to Mankind, when he tells us, That He chose
that Nation alone for His own peculiars, who yet were the Fewest of any People.
One of a City, and two of a Family, were less in proportion than One or Two of
Ten Thousand; yet no complaint upon it, by those interessed in that Grace. It Is
the property of God's Children to admire that He loves any, and especially
themselves; and not to find fault because He loves not All alike. Who am I
(says David) that thou have brought me hitherto! And Christ's Disciples, Lord
why will thou manifest thy self to us, (us Twelve) and not to the World* It Is
therefore the more strange to consider, Why and how, any that call themselves
of the Brotherhood, came so to espouse the quarrel of those without; and that
with such Eagerness, as to strive and fall-out among themselves about the
others Concerns. But to Answer more directly;

1. This Remnant is not so contemptibly to be spoken of: Rev. 5. 11.
They are Ten thousand times Ten thousand, and thousands of Thousands: And how
small soever the number be, (if it were but One, it were more by One than the
whole Creation could deserve: But I say, How few soever the Number be) no Man
knows but himself may be One of them; unless by despising the Grace of God in
Election, he have proved it otherwise to himself.

2. To pitch on a Few whiles in their blood and Enmity against God, and Resolve
even then, to make them everlastingly happy; and that against the Natural bent
of their own will; was a Grace much more high and Sovereign, than to save them
for their own better improvement of what they have in common with other Men:
(For that would not be of Grace but of Debt.) Or, if the Lord should bring Ten
Thousand times that number into a Salvable condition; (as they speak;) but so,
as that very possibly Not one of them shall ever be saved; it would not bring
the Thousandth part of that Glory to His Grace, as to Save a Few invincibly.

3. If the Lord did foresee, That but Few would believe; and yet Resolved to
save n^ne but such as should believe: Then the Objection (as to Fewness) falls
on the Objectors Doctrine as much as ours.

4. As for Godly sorrow, Faith, and Repentance; they are the Gift of God, and
proper to the Elect: And so, no Reason to suppose the interveniency of these in
them that are left: Or to fear an implacable Resolution to punish and t^rment
Any in whom these Possibilities go forth into Act.

Other allegations they have against the Doctrine of Election, which will admit
of as plain a Solution as those above: But it being my purpose to collect what
I should find in the Scriptures for it, and not to controvert the Point; I
proceed no farther; but go on to the Usefulness of the Doctrine. Only, by the
way, let me premise a Caution or two.

1. Caution 1.
Let no Man Tax God with Injustice or Partiality, because He takes not All; Or,
because Not Those of highest esteem among Men: Do not the Princes of the World
exercise Dominion over Men like themselves? Or is there a Subject so mean, but
will think himself wronged, if Questioned for disposing his own? (which yet is
his own but as borrowed.) And shall vain Man presume to a^raign his Sovereign
Lord! Isa 45. 9.
Woe to him that striveth with his Maker: If you must be Meddling, let it be
with pot-sheards of Earth like your selves.

2. Caution 2.
Let no Man disvalue this Doctrine of Election, because it takes-in but a
Remnant. Why are they styled The [little] flock, but to heighten the Mercy and
Privilege of it in their Esteem! Noah did not contemn the Grace of God to
himself and his Sons, because the World of Ungodly were excluded the Ark; Nor
the Remnant that escaped the Sword in Egypt, Jer. 44. 28.
did not reckon their own Deliverance ever the less Mercy, because the Rest of
their Countrymen had not a Share in it. Men do not use to slight their own
Immunities, for other's Not-being interessed in them; But rather, to value
themselves the more upon it.

And now, as a Means to Prevent or Remove the evil Surmises Cautioned against;
with those other sinister Deductions which carnal Reason may be apt to suggest;
Let us draw up a few of those Many and Worthy Improvements this Doctrine is
capable of, above and beyond that of the contrary tenor: As also, of those
Laws of Duty which it lays upon us. And here I would see first what fruit may
be gathered from the several branches of the Proposition; and Then, what from
the Cross, or whole of it promiscuously.

1. Inference.
Since there is an Election of Men to Salvation, Put you in for a part and
interest in it: Though their Number be but Small, Cast-in your Lot, and make
One among them. My meaning is, That though never so few are the Objects of
Election, you will make it your business, to prove your self of that Few: If
but Two in the whole World, who knows but thou may be One of them? It Is our
Savior's Argument, They are but Few that go in at the strait gate; Therefore
strive. The Ninevites had not that ground to believe, God would accept them,
that you have; for their Ruin was pronounced in peremptory words; and no room
expressly left for Repentance; and yet they humbled themselves and turned from
their evil ways, upon this only consideration, Who can tell if God will turn
away his fierce anger, Jonah. 3. 9, 10.
that we perish not? It Is a happiness worth your Venturing for: For (1) you can
lose nothing by endeavoring: (2) You can hardly have a more solid evidence of
your being Elected, than to have your heart taken with Electing love, and
casting your self upon it; And (3) never did any perish who ventured on th^s
Bottom.

II. Inference.
From the Doctrine of Election's Absoluteness, is evidenced the exceeding
Riches of the grace of God, in that He has not left this great Concern to
humane contrivance: but has laid it more sure and safe, than Men themselves
would have done: For, it is too evident (by the Reasonings that are used to make
Election Dependent and Conditional) how it would have gone, if left to the
wisdom of Men.

But I shall not doubt to affirm, That this Doctrine of Election's
Absoluteness, is much aforehand with that which teaches it to be Conditional,
both in point of Encouragement and otherwise; And that as well Before believing,
as Afterward.

1. Before a Man comes to believe: (supposing him to be Notionally instructed
therein Before) For, being under conviction of the Greatness, and Multitude of
his Sins; and finding the power of indwelling corruption so Insuperable: Having
also a sight of the Holiness of God: It needs must prove a difficult Matter to
believe, that there is Mercy and Pardon for such a One as he; Or, that ever
those domineering lusts should be made to submit: But then considering, 1. That
Electing Love pitches on the Chief of Sinners: 2. That it flows not from, nor
is sounded upon, any condition to be performed by Men: And 3. That Election has
in it All that conduces to life and Godliness; (These things, I say,
considered) it cannot but have a far greater influence on the Soul, to cleave
unto God, and follow hard after Him; than if his Election were suspended upon
his Doing that which he finds in himself no power to p^rform. For, he sees by
woeful (and yet, through Grace, happy) Experience, That as the Law is made weak
through the weakness of the flesh; so also, (setting aside the Absoluteness of
Electing love) all the means of Grace which are given in Common among Men,
would be wholly ineffectual to Salvation: Which difficulties, Electing love in
the Absoluteness of it, will Supersede and set him above them all.

2. After a man comes to Believe, this Doctrine of Absolute Election, is of
singular use and benefit to him, both as tending to keep him on his feet, and
to raise him when he is down.

(1) It is a great Preservative in time of Temptation: The Remembrance of that
love which looked upon him, when he was in his blood, and said he should live,
and has now also made good its Word to him; must needs operate strongly with a
gracious heart, against what ever might be unworthy of such love: Let the bait
be never so aptly suited, he will turn from it in a holy disdain (as good
Joseph did) How can I do this Wickedness, Gen 39. 9.
and sin against God, who has dealt so bountifully with me!

(2) Nothing more tends to Recovery after a fall, than the Consideration of the
Freeness of God's Love at first, and His Mighty Power in Quickening, when
altogether dead; And that both these (viz. This Love and this Power) are
engaged by an Absolute Covenant to bring every one that takes hold thereof,
unto Glory; and therefore, will receive him, not only After, upon his Return to
his Duty; but in the Midst of his backslidings He will come and heal him. The
Lord's way of dealing with Ephraim, ver. 17, 18. ver. 21, 22.
set down in the 57. of Isaiah is an instance pertinent to the case in hand:
And in the 44. Chap. He does, as it were, Clench and fasten this Nail in a sure
place; Remember, O Jacob, I have formed thee; Thou shall not be forgotten of
Me: I have bloted out thy sins; Therefore return unto Me: And Jer. 3. 14.
Return, O backsliding Children, for I am married unto you, (to wit, by His
Covenant of Election.) To this purpose also is the edge of Samuel's Argument
applied, in 1 Samuel 12. 20, 22, Fear not; ye have done all this wickedness; yet
turn not aside from following the Lord: As if he had said, your wickedness
(indeed) is great, ye have highly provoked the Lord by your casting Him off;
yet be not discouraged, as if the Lord would therefore cast off you; For, the
Lord will not forsake His people: (But why?) Because it has pleased the Lord
to make you His people. And in ver. 24. he further backs it with the
remembrance of the great things God had done for them aforetime: Than which,
there is nothing of stronger tendency to a Soul's recovery.

III. From the [Personality] of Election, and IV. From the [Eternity] of its
Original, I gather in general:

That since the Scriptures have so highly Renouned these two Circumstantial
parts of Election, Inference.
by so frequent a mentioning of them; and that, on occasions of the solemnest
import: We ought not to pass them by as things of indifferent notice; But, as
being diversely Instructive, Worthy to be kept, and soberly contended for. The
Holy Ghost does not use to inculcate matters of Ordinary observance, or little
import; But, as Noting to us, some great importancy in them; as taxing (also)
our sloth, and aptness to neglect them; and to stir up our minds to make the
more diligent search, What, and what manner of things they are; and how to be
improved. In particular:

From the Personality of Election, I Infer.
I. Inference.
That it ought to be minded as matter of the highest honor to the Parties
concerned. The Lord illustrates Moses at no ordinary rate, when He tells him [
I know thee by name] and doubtless, intended that Moses himself should so
account of it, and be highly s^tisfied therewith, though denied in some other
things he would fain have had. Thu^ also Paul signalizeth those eminent Saints,
who were his Fellow Laborers in the Gospel, Phil. 4. 3.
That their [names] were in the Book of Life. And our Savior propounds it to
His Disciples, as matter of highest Exultation, That their [names] were written
in Heaven. That our poor insignificant names should be written in God's book,
and l^id up among His Treasures in Heaven; when the Generality of Names (even
Names of Note) are written in the Dust! let it not seem a light matter to us:
Isa. 56. 5.
For this is that Everlasting Name which never shall be cut off.

II. Inference.
The knowledge of this thing, (namely, that God has thus taken Notice of our
Names) is a great Privilege: It enlarges the heart to higher expectations; it
gives boldness (or freedom) of speech toward God; as if Nothing were too great
for such a One to ask. See how Moses grows upon it: No sooner, Exodus 33. 17.
says God, [ I know theeby name] But Moses, as rapt into the Second, and fain
would be in the Third Heaven; presently replies, [ I beseech thee show me thy
Glory]

III. Inference.
As it is matter of Honor, and Privilege: So it will prove one of your best
Titles to your Heavenly inheritance. It will signify something one day,
(however by some too lightly esteemed Now) when it shall be the great
distinguishing character between you and the World: Whoever he be that derives
not his Genealogy from this Register, Nehe. 7. 64.
will be put from the Heavenly Priesthood. The New Jerusalem admits None, Rev.
20 15.
but whose Names are written in the Book of life! yea, [ every One] that is not
found written there, Chapter 21 27.
shall be cast into a lake of fire. Therefore, Give all diligence to make your
Election sure.

IV. Inference.
It also imports Matter of Duty from us. When Princes conferr titles of honor,
lands, or Immunities; They use to reserve some kind of Rent or other
acknowledgment; To mind their Subjects (though Favorites) of whom they hold.
You have no such way of Owning your great Benefactour, Nor no such Means of
being Considerable in the World; as by bearing the badge and impress of Him who
gave you this Name of honor. Let His Name, therefore, be Named upon you; Carry
His Name in your bosom; bear it on your Shoulders, and the Palms of your hands;
Let the Choice of your Affections, The Chief of your Strength, and the whole of
your Activity, be employed for His honor: Let every thing you do, bear an
Impression of Him whose Name is Holy.

Then, from the Antiquity of Election.
I. Inference.
Let the Ancientness of Electing love, draw up our hearts to a very dear and
honorable esteem of it. Pieces of Antiquity: (though of base Metal, and
otherwise of little use or value;) how venerable are they with learned Men! And
ancient Charters, how careful are Men to preserve them; although they contain
but Temporary privileges, and sometimes but of Trivial Moment! How then should
the Great Charter of Heaven, so much Elder than the World, and Containing
Matters of Eternal Weight and Glory! Which also has been confirmed by so many
Promises, Exemplified by Multitudes of Cases, with a Seal affixed more precious
than Heaven it self; (All which proclaim The Eternal Validity of it) How should
this ( I say) be had in everlasting Remembrance, and the thoughts thereof be
very precious to us! Lying down, Rising up, and all the day long Accompanying
of us! And how careful should we be, Not only to keep this Charter
uncancelled, but also to keep it clean from all sorts of Dust and soil, by
which the legibleness thereof might any way be obscured to our selves or Others!

II. Inference,
Let Election's Eternal Origin, be an Argument for Its Eternal Duration; and
so, of the Saints Invincible Perseverance to Glory. That which is from
Everlasting shall be to Everlasting: If the Root be Eternal, so are the
Branc^es. Surely, For this good End (among others) is it twice recorded in the
Revelation, Rev. 13. 8
That Their Names were written in the book of life [from the foundation of the
World] Namely, Ch 17. 8.
To signify and assure, That the Elect shall be safely and surely kept from
those dreadful Apostacies, which the Rest of the world shall fall into. And
hence (perhaps) it is, That we read of Nothing done in Eternity, but Election
and things peculiar thereto as the Promise of Eternal life; The Lamb slain; The
Kingdom prepared, etc. Election is an Eternal Fountain, that never leaves
Running whiles a Vessel is empty, or capable of holding more; and it stands
open to all Comers: Therefore come, and if ye have not sufficient of your own,
Go and borrow Vessels, Empty Vessels, not a Few; Pay your debts out of it, and
live on the Rest to Eternity.

V. From the Doctrine of Cho^sing in Christ:
I. Inference.
It is an high Demonstration of God's love to His Chosen Ones: We may say of it
as Huram to Solomon, Because the Lord loved His People, 2 Chr. 2. 11.
He set His Son over them. It is also an eminent proof of His Manifold Wisdom,
To Contrive the blessedness of His people in such a Manner, as should most
Certainly secure their obtainment of it; Most signally illustrate His love to
them; and so, most affectionately winn upon their hearts, and oblige them to
Himself for ever. We may hence also discern something of that Immense Greatness
and Holiness of God, That though He so loved His Elect, Joh 17. 21.
as to make them One in Himself; That Union could not be admitted without a
Mediator equal with Himself.

II. Inference.
Gather hence, your stability and safety: What ever straight or difficulty you
are Entering upon, Drink of this Brook in the way, and lift up your head. What
ever pertains to life and Godliness, Grace and Glory; This life and That to
come; is all laid up in Christ: (As all sorts of Food in the Ark, for those
who found Grace in His sight) All Fullness dwells in him, and that for you. He
is not only a Root stable in himself, but stablishing to you: Communicating
sap and spirit to all his Branches: Whiles there is life in Him you cannot die.
This is That makes the Saints stand Firm and sacred in the midst of dangers; 1 John 5. 18.
The evil one touch^th them not. Let all the Rebell-Crew of adversaries (Satan,
the World, your own evil hearts) associate themselves, and take Counsel
together; it all comes to naught: Let their Asaults be Renewed again and again,
they are still beaten off: They gird themselves and are broken in pieces: They
gird again, and again they are broken in pieces. Thus it is, and thus it shall
be, Isa. 8. 9.
to the end of our Warfare, For God is with us. This was it made David
fearless, even in the valley of the shadow of death, Ps. 23. 4
The Lord was with him. And those three Noble Confessors, they walked secure in
the fiery furnace, Dan. 3. 25. 27.
because the Son of God was Among them. Therefore Do All, Suffer All, and
Expect All, as being in Christ, and not otherwise. But woe to him that is
alone, who when he falls has not Christ to help him up.

III. Inference.
Let this your Relation to Christ be evidenced by your Likeness to him: He that
is joined to the Lord is one Spirit. The holy Oil that was poured on your Head
runs down to the Skirts of His Garm^n^s; ( i. e. to the very meanest of His
Followers) and they carry a-long the precious scent with them, where ever they
go; (or should do, as Paul did, 2 Cor. 2. 14.) It is natural to those married
to Christ to bring forth fruit unto God; and see it be such as will abide the
Test; Rom 7. 4.
Endure all sorts of weather, and be bettered by it.

IV. Inference.
This Doctrine illustrates That of Justification; as showing Wherein the true
Matter of Justfying Righteousness does consist; and How it comes to be Ours:
Our Faith, (or Act of Believing) cannot be the Matter of it, for that it is an
imperfect thing; and so, cannot be Reckoned in the place of perfect
Righteousness: For It must be a Righteousness perfectly perfect that Justifies,
as it was a sin sinfully sinful that Condemned. This Righteousness also must
be our own (and is) in a way of Right; (as Adam's sin also was) though
performed in the person of Another. Christ and Adam being Paralels in their
Head-ship, the imputation of the One's Guiltiness, and of the other's
Righteousness, are Righteously applied to their respective seeds. And this was
a Main end of the Lord's Putting Those He would Justify, into Christ; That He
being made sin and a Curse for them, They might be made the Righteousness of
God in Him; and so, God might be Just in Justifying of them. Faith (in this
matter) holds the place of an Evidence or Seal of that Righteousness which
belonged to us, as being in Christ, before we believed; and is given us on the
account of our Interest therein, Phil. 1. 29.
that we might apprehend it; and enjoy the Benefits of it: Which is surely, a
far better Ground to build our Justification upon, than our weak and imperfect
faith, which stands in need daily of the Righteousness of God, for its own
support. Therefore.

V. Inference.
Make it a main part of your Care and business, To get into Christ and to abide
in Him.

VI. The founding of Election upon Grace, Affords Us diverse useful
instructions: As,
I. Inference.
To fall down, and Adore the Great GOD for this unspeakable discovery of His
love to Men. It is one of the Richest Mercies that He would not betrust us in
our own keeping: That Another, (and He One that had not the least need of us)
should be more provident for us than we would have been for our selves: That
our Chiefest Interest should have the highest security: That it should be
founded upon Grace; (the Attribute which Our Great King most delights to
honor.) And that He should do it (as it were) against our wills; (For so it
is, in as much as to graft our happiness on the Will of Another, is contrary to
Nature) Of all Bottoms, we should not have pitched it there; and yet, in truth,
no other ground would hold us: His Name may well be called Wonderful; Psalm.
118. 23.
It is not after the manner of Men; This is the Lords doings, and let it be
Mavelous in our eyes.

II. Inference.
It shows what Reason we have to discard and Casheir for ever, that Groundless,
and blindfold opinion, which lays the stress of Salvation on a thing of
Naught: (For, what else is the Will of a frail and Mutable Man?) To forsake a
living fountain, and Rest on a Cistern, a broken Cistern, What folly is it! To
cast our Eagles wings, and trust to a foot out of Joint; who would do it, that
is not void of understanding? Surely, Job was aware of it, when he professes,
He would not value a life that depended on his own Righteousness, Job. 9. 15
with 21.

The Grace of God is little beholden to that Doctrine which would give the
Glory of it to a graceless thing: And as little have the Souls of men to thank
it for: It feeds them with dreams and fancies; Isa 8. 21.
which, when they awake, will leave them hardly bestead and hungry. Therefore,
sit not down under the shadow of that G^urd; It has a worm at the Root; And
they will not be held guiltless, nor kept from the Scorching Sun, whoever they
be that shelter themselves in the Covert of it. It Is a spark of Men's own
kindling; wherewith though compassed round, they will lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50.
11. Therefore let those who disrellish this Doctrine, because it founds not
Salvation upon Self, look well to their standing and shift from it in time.

III. Inference.
Fall in practically with the Doctrine of Election as founded upon Grace. As it
was Grace which gave you your Elect being; So, let it be your Spirit and utmost
endeavor to improve this your being, to the praise of that Grace.

1. Give it the sole honor of Election's Original: Suffer not Free Will Grace,
or any thing else, pretend to a share in the parentage of it: Let not your
faith, whether foreseen or perfected, be reckoned the groundwork, or Motive,
of your Election; Romans 11. 18.
It is a branch of it, and the branch (you know) cannot bear the Root: Even
Faith it self must not (yea, if it be right, it will not) gather where it has
not strewed. Own nothing (therefore) that may detract from the honor that is
due to Sovereign Grace.

2. Bear your self upon this Grace, against all your weal^ness and
unworthyness: Let not these discourage you, but rath^r plead them as occasions
by which Grace will be manifested, and show it self to be What it is. Thus did
David, Pardon my Sin, Ps. 25. 11.
for it is great: And Moses, when all that peoples obedience could not furnish
him with an Argument for God's continuing His presence with them, what is his
Plea? They are an honest ingenu^us people? Tractable to thy Commands? plyant to
thy will? They are worthy for whom Thou should do this; For they love thy
Company, and have bu^lt Thee a Tabernacle? No, there is none of this Stuff in
it: But, Exodus 34. 9. Isa. 48. 4.
let my Lord, I pray thee, go with us; For it is a stiffnecked people; their
Neck is an iron sinew, and their Brow brass; Therefore, go Thou with us, to
better us, to soften us, and to pardon us: And by this shall the freeness of
thy Grace appear to us: For, How else shall it be known that I and this people
have found Grace in thy Sight? Exodus 33. 16.
But yet, withal,

(1) Look that you make not a light Matter of your Sins or of your Sinfulness:
you cannot think bad enough of your self or of them; nor be too much humbled:
Only, be not cast down.

(2) Use the Means that Grace has appointed: Watch and be Sober; Watch unto
Prayer; Put on the whole Armor of God, and keep it close about you; Your Sword
and your Shield, be sure you forget not: But still let your eyes be toward the
hand of Grace through Christ, for Council, Strength, Agency, and every good
thing; And depend on it for conserving and actuating the Grace it has wrought
in you, as Plants do on their Roots: The Spouse, after Married to Christ, Cant.
1. 4.
prays to be Drawn to Him.

(3) Whatever befalls you, Remember the Good Pleasure of God is in it; Levit.
10. 3.
Hold your peace as Aaron did; or if you will speak, 1 Samuel 3. 19.
let your speech be seasoned with Salt, It is the Lord, let Him do as seems
Him good.

Other useful Instructions from the Doctrine of Election in General and
Together.
I. Inference.
It being a Doctrine of so great Importance, be not indifferent about it: Put
your self on the trial touching your interest in it, and bring forth your
evidences for it: Observe what are the properties of Elected Ones, and see if
they stand on your side:

1 As touching the Great business of Salvation, Do you submit to Mercy without
Indenting, and making terms with God? Have you laid your self at his feet, with
[ Peradventure He will save me alive?] And if He say, I have no pleasure in
thee; Lo, here I am, and here I will lie: If I must perish, I will perish here:
I cannot die in a better place or posture. Thus did Job, when the Lord seemed
to set Himself against him, as resolved to destroy him; yet still he resolved
to Trust in Him, and to hold fast his Integrity. Job. 13. 15.
This is a Love more Noble, and of an higher Extract, than those are acquainted
with, who Conclude, That upon their doing This and That, (which they suppose
every Man has power to do) they shall be saved: For, such kind of love is
Mercenary; He will not stir, Nor look toward the Vinyard, until he have
agreed for his penny: (which yet, he is not Content with when he has it) The
Other goes in and falls to his Work; and leaves to his Master, to give him What
is meet; which also he leaves to his Master's Judgment, Mat. 20. 2, 7, and 10.
and not his Own: and truly, he speeds never the worse for his so doing. (But I
would not be taken to intend a Contentation or Willingness to be destroyed:
This, I hope, is cleared before, under the first general Head.)

2 Do you Own God's Sovereign Commands without disputing? Abraham did thus, in
the business of Isaac; although he could not see how the Promise of God, and
the killing of his Son, could stand together: And so will Abraham's Children
do. They know that their Lord is a Great King, has absolute Dominion, and
gives account of none of his Matters: What He is pleased to Command, their
duty is to obey, without asking a Reason Why? Or, how will these things
Consist? Such demands (they know) become not the lips of those who live upon
Grace.

3 Does your love toward God, hold the same Course that His love has done
toward you? All that God has done, or will do for His Chosen, it is the
Product of Electing love: Does all your Obedience Rise from Love? And does this
love of yours grow out of His? Is His Electing love the Root of it? Is all that
you do toward God, in a way of Gratitude? and with Design to Glorify His
Grace? And when the Lord seems to go from you, Do ye follow the harder after
Him? As He, for a long time, followed you, waiting That He might be Gracious
unto you. This is truly a God-like Love; The eminency whereof lies in this,
That He loved us when enemies to Him; and loved us into a likeness to Himself:
Answerable whereto, we shall love Him, Job. 13. 15.
even whiles our fears may apprehend Him to be our enemy: And through the power
of His Love secretly working in our hearts, go on to love Him, until the Glory
of the Lord be Risen upon us. You could not thus love God, 1 John 2. 19.
if He had not loved you first.

4 Do you Rejoice in the thoughts of Electing love, What it is, and Whence it
came? What it has designed you for, and will bring you unto at last? Is it
your delight to Converse with the Book of Life? And do you Rejoice more That
your Names are written in Heaven, than if Devils were Subject to you? When your
flesh and your heart fail you, do you look to Electing Love as your Strength
and Portion, and Count it a Goodly heritage? Do you aim at That which Electing
Love has defigned you for, and because so Designed; If by any Means you may
attain to it? And are you better Satisfied to be at the Good Pleasure of God,
than at your own? And bless his Wisdom and Grace, for undertaking the disposure
of your Eternal Interest? Such fruit could not be, but from that Seed of God.

Let me add a few Tokens more of True love, according to the Carriage of it
among Men.
1. He that loves Another, will delight in his presence, and seek Occasions of
Conversing with him. 2. Being absent, he thinks much upon him, and gives
welcome entertainment to whatever may be a Remembrance of him. 3. He will seek
the Well-pleasedness of him who is the object of his love. 1 By presenting
things lovely to him. 2 By avoiding whatever may disgust him. 3 By a wary
preventing, or speedy removing, what might give the Other occasion to be
jealous of his love to him. 4. He will Heartily Interpret whatever might seem a
declining of the Others love to him; And not be satisfied until it be
recovered, or better understood.
II. Inference.
If you be of this happy Remnant of Election, Then look for ill usage from the
World: Esau (you know) hated Jacob because of the blessing; and so will the
World you, so soon as it comes to be discerned: Think it not strange, John 15.
18, 19.
but take it as an Appendix of Election; As a part of That you were Chosen
unto; And as That by which (partly) you must be fitted for the main End. Heb 2
10.
Your Lord Himself was made perfect through Sufferings: And Those Foreknown
were Predestined to be Conformed to their Head, Romans 8. 38. chapter 6. 5
in Suffering as well as Glory.

III. Inference.
Having trusted Electing love for Eternal Salvation, see you distrust it not
for things of lesser Moment. When the Lord Ordained you to life, He Ordained
also All those various occurrences, Windings, and Turnings you should be
exercised with in your way thither: And ('it is sure,) He does nothing in vain.
There is need of all sorts of weather for the Earth's good: All-Fair would
destroy it. Know it therefore of a Truth, that all your Concerns were
Fore-determin'd of God; and that so well, as all your Prudence and love to your
selves could not Mend it: Nor can all your Care and Solicitude alter any of
them, either as to Matter or Form; No, Not to change the color of an hair:
Matthew. 6. 25.
Therefore, Take no thought.

But whence is it, That Believers, who have trusted God for their Souls, should
yet make so difficult of Trusting Him for their Outward Man? And so Comber
themselves with unprofitable burden?
Earthly things are nearer our Senses; and thence we are more sensible of the
Comfort of them, as also of their want. They also seem more within our line and
Compass; and so we Reach more earnestly after them, and are answerably
troubled, when we fall sho^t: Whereas we should carry it for Temporals, as we
do (or should do, rather) for our Souls, and Spiritual portion; That is, look
to our present Duty, Be diligent in our place, and Content with such things as
we have; Heb. 13. 5.
Bearing our selves as becomes the Children of such a Father, so Rich, Wise,
Bountiful, Tender and Faithful to us: Who always gives the best supply; and
That in the best Proportion, Manner, and Time.

Have therefore your Faith exercised; As about the Greatest, so also about the
Smallest and Commonest Matters: Use Grace, and have Grace; It is want of Use
makes lame of your right hand; and Much using renders more useful. Faith is the
head of your Spiritual senses; And if That be Active, the Rest cannot be idle,
Nor much at a loss. Faith also is a plain Dealer; It represents things as they
are; Shows them in their true Dimens^ons, with their use and end. See
therefore, that you never hold a Consultation, unless Faith be present, yea and
President too; Else All will be in disorder at once: One Act of Faith shall
sooner Remove the Mountain, than all the Cattle on a Thousand hills.

Lastly, Inference.
You that have closed with this Truth, and having made diligent search, do
find in your selves those Marks of God's Elect; sit down and take the Comfort
of it; Let this Joy of the Lord be your strength; Eat your bread, and drink
your wine (or Water either) with a Merry heart, since God has accepted you. If
David's heart was so taken with that love which chose him to be King before the
house of Saul; how should our Souls be rapt into the third Heaven, That We
(poor unworthy wretched We) should be taken into that peculiar favor in which
the generality of Men have nothing to do! How should it affect our hearts!

Art thou of those who are Wise or Noble according to the flesh? Be filled with
an holy Amazement and exultation, (Rejoice with trembling) That the Great GOD
(to whom thou wast no more than others thy Consorts that are left; and who
commonly Chooses the base and foolish, thereby to Magnify His Grace) should
thus go out of His way to call in thee; And has also made His Call effectual
to thee; even then when thou wast environed with a world of temptations to
obstruct it.

And if thou be a Man of low degree, (poor, weak, foolish, of no account among
Men, even as one that is Not) and has the Lord regarded thee in thy low
estate, and Magnified thee, by setting His love upon thee? Has He taken thee
from the dunghill, to set thee among Princes; even the Princes of the World to
come? This is that Exaltation which the poor should always Rejoice in,
according to James 1. 9.

Were you the head instead of being the tail; Were the Necks of your enemies
under your feet? yea, were the Devils themselves made subject to you; It could
not afford you the thousandth part of that Cause of Rejoicing, as that your
Names are written in Heaven.

Are other men prosperous in the world, and free from trouble, whiles you are
reduced to a low estate, and chastened every Morning? Have, perhaps, but an
handful of Meal, and a little oil in a Cruze, etc. yet think not your Portion
Mean or hardly dealt out: your good things are to come; They are growing in the
other World; And at the time of harvest, the Lord will send his Angels for you:
yea, your Lord Himself will come and fetch you thither: And you shall be for
ever with Him; In whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose Right hand are
Rivers of pleasures for evermore: And then you will Sing, [The lines are fallen
to me in pleasant places] At least, say so Now. As Abraham dealt by his
Concubines children, so does God by the Ishmaels of the world; He gives them
portions, and sends them away; But the Inheritance He reserves for His Isaacs;
To them He gives all that He has; yea, even Himself: And what can we have more!

OF REDEMPTION.
IN this Point we are equally concerned with that of Election, as the Great
Comprehensive Means of bringing-about the Greatest End, viz. the Glory of God
in the Salvation of His Chosen.

That our Lord Jesus Christ has a Body or Church, to whom He is Head and
Savior; is not supposed a Question. But, Who they are that do make-up this
Body; Whether the Whole of Mankind universally, or Some particular Persons:
Whether He had in His death the same respect to All as to Some: And whether Any
of those he died for, may miss of the benefits accruing by His death; are
questions of great Import, and worthy a serious deliberation: To Resolve which,
is the scope of the present Discourse; The Substance whereof is in three
Positions.

I. That the Body or Church of Christ consists of Elect Persons. II. That for
These it was that He laid down His life. III. That the intent of His death
cannot be frustrate.
For the [I] of These.
By this [Body or Church] of Christ, I understand the Designed Subjects of his
Spiritual Kingdom, or Members of His Mystical Body, to whom He was appointed by
the Father to be Head and Savior; and They to stand related to Him as their
Prophet, Priest, and King: Which threefold office He bears peculi^rly toward
the Elect, The Church of the Firstborn, and heirs of the World to come. And of
These does His Body consist: i. e. It is made-up of These exclusive to Others;
Their number is certain and entire, and cannot be broken, either by Addition or
Diminution. Of this, the Tabernacle was a figure, 1. In respect of its Symmetry
or Proportion of parts; which induced a singular beauty upon it; Toward which,
Nothing could be added, nor any thing abated. 2. In that all the parts and
Dimensions thereof were predetermined of God; and not left, in the least, to
humane Arbitrament or Contingency: And these are expressly said to be Patterns
of things in the Heavens; Heb. 9. 23. ch 12. 23.
that is, Of the Heavenly Temple, or Church of the Firstborn which are written
There.

This Couclusion is drawn from sueh premises as these;
1. In that our Lord and Savior so manifestly shows Himself concerned for the
Elect, as having some peculiar Interest and Propriety in them, and charge of
them. With These his delights were from Everlasting; Prove. 8. And as soon as
they were actually in being, He began His actual Converses with them: and
therein did even confine Himself to the Elect Seed. With what unbelievable
Patience and Goodness did He superintend the Church or Elect Nation, A^ts 7.
46, 48.
forty years together in the Wilderness! bearing them as on Eagles wings, and
tendering them as the Apple of His eye! And when he dwelt upon Earth, He went
not beyond the bounds of the Holy Land; where also all His delight was among
the Saints. Ps. 16. 3.
These He made his Consorts, and Men of His Council. And when ye find Him with
others, it was for the Elect's sake that were among them. How frequently, and
with what well-pleasedness does He speak of These! Professing His love to them,
and that according to the highest pattern, John 15. 9. As the Father bath loved
Me, so have I loved you. And how great things He would do for them; Not to the
Halfing of His Kingdom, Joh. 10. 15, 16. ch 6. 40.
but the laying down of His life for them; Gathering them in, Raising them up,
and giving them to sit with Him in His Throne. Rev. 3. 21.
But, for the World, He takes little notice of them, except with a kind of
contempt and comination; Let them alone: Shake off the dust off your feet: Joh.
7. 34.
Give not that which is holy unto dogs: etc. Yea, though they seek Him, they
shall not find Him: Isa. 65. 1.
But for His Elect, He is found of them, even whiles they think not of Him: The
Instances of Matthew, the Woman of Samaria, the possessed Gadaren, His People
at Corinth, -- are Records of it. And all this, because These are His Portion,
and the lot of His Inheritance; Deuteronomy. 32. 9, 10. As Christ our Head is not of
this World; so neither is his Kingdom, nor the Subjects of it.

It is true, The Father has given Christ to be Head over All: But, His
Headship over Men in general, and His Headship over the Church, have a far
different respect and consideration: He is God of the whole Earth, but
Jeshurun's God in a way peculiar to His Chosen: Deuteronomy. 33. 26. Isa. 44. 2. An
Headship of Dominion He has over Rebels; And service He has from them,
(though they think not so, nor intend any thing less:) Nebuchadnezzar was His
hired Days-man against Tire, Ezekiel. 29. 18. Isa. 45. 1. Ps. 60. 8.
and Cyrus against Babylon; whose right hand He held, though they knew Him not:
So, Moab was his Washpot: But, for the Elect, they are His natural Subjects;
(though not naturally so:) They are His by another title, and to another End:
and so intimate is the Relation between Him and Them, that they are said to be
Of His flesh, Ephesians. 5. 30.
and of His bones: They both have one Soul and Spirit; He and They make one
perfect Man. chapter 4. 13.


That the whole World is put in subjection to Christ, is for the Elect's sake;
the power He has over others, is in order to their Salvation; Ephesians. 1. 22.
He is Head over all things to the [ Church] that is, To Subject, Dispose, and
Order all for the Church's good; As in the seventeenth of John, He is said to
have power over all flesh, that He might give eternal life (not to all He has
power over, but) to as many as the Father had given Him: Which [ Giving]
imports [ Election] as going before it: And therefore He says in v. 6. I have
manifested thy name to the Men which Thou gave me out of the World: Thine
they were, (that is, by Election) and Thou gave them Me: It may be said of
them, as in Heb. 10. 5. A Body have thou prepared Me; which, though chiefly
intended there of His humane Natute, as true it is of His Body Mystical; Ps.
139. 16.
All the Members of which were written in God's book (of Election) when as yet
there was none of them. He therefore prays for These as a party distinct from
the World, and Given to him for an higher End; as appears by comparing the 2,
6, 9, 21, 24, 26, verses of that 17 John.

II. We find, That [ Church] and [ Elect] are but two several Titles of the
same persons, in a several respect: [ Elect] as Chosen of God to Salvation; and
so, they are called The Church of [God,] and said to be Sanctified by God the
Father, Jude v. 1. And the Church of [Christ] as given or committed to Him by
the Father in order to that Salvation, John 17. 6. It was this Church to whom
the Apostles inscribed their Epistles, where we find them sometimes intit'led [
Beloved of God] Romans 1. 7. Sometimes, The Church of God, and Sanctified in
Christ; 1 Cor. 1. 2. At other times, Saints and Faithful Brethren in Christ;
Col. 1. 2. Then, Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14. 33. And Church of the
Firstborn, Heb. 12. 23. And sometime, expressly [Elect] 1 Pet. 1. 2. By all
which is signified, That the Church of Christ consists of Elect persons: That
these various Appellations, are but so many terms indifferently used about the
same Subject; and All as Notes of distinction from the World.

When Christ shall appear in His Glory, then shall His Members be gathered to
Him; Zach. 14. 5. The Lord my God shall come, and [all the Saints] with thee.
And Paul (diseoursing the same thing) says, They that are Christ's at His
coming; 1 Cor. 15. 23. which shows, That they are Christ's so as Others are
not. And that it is meant of Elect persons, appears by our Savior's own words,
when speaking of that His Coming, and of the same Persons who are said to be
His, and to come with Him, He gives them expressly That Denomination, He shall
send forth His Angels, and they shall gather together His [Elect] Mat. 24. 33.
But, as for the Rest of the Dead, they lived not again till a Thousand years
after; Rev. 20. 5. Therefore, these [ Rest] were no part of This Body. It may
also be noted, That those who did not Rise with the Saints, are specified here
by the same Word or Note of distinction, as Those Not-Elected are in Romans 11.
The Election has obtained, and the [Rest] were blinded; v. 7. And that Those
who had part in the first Resurrection, are the same persons that are written
in the Lamb's book of life, is evident, by comparing Rev. 20. 4. with chap. 13.
8.

III. It was of Necessity, that the Body or Church of Christ should be composed
of the Elect Seed;

1. Because none else were fit to be of this Body, but such as should be like
the Head of it. Carnal Members would be as uncomely to a Spiritual Head, as one
of the Brutes to be Adam's companion. The King's Daughterelect (to make her a
suitable match for his Son) must be all-glorious within: Not only of the same
outward metal, (for so were those other Creatures with Adam) but made in the
same Mould, and endued with the same Spirit and Understanding: There must be a
congruity in all the parts throughout: They must be copies of Him; each one
resembling the Children of a King: Judge. 8. 18.
If the Head be Heavenly, so must the Members: They cannot walk together, if
not thus agreed.

2. This likeness to Christ is proper to the Elect: It Is a Royal privilege
intailed upon them, and cannot descend or Revert to any out of that line. That
this likeness to Christ is requisite to all His Members, and also peculiar to
Elect Persons, are both attested in Romans 8. 29. Whom He did fore know, He also
did Predestinate to be conformed to the Image of His Son; that He might be the
Firstborn among many Brethren: Which implies, that the Fore-known (or Elect)
only are predestinate thereto; and, that were it not for Predestination, the
Firstborn should have but a thin Assembly to Preside amongst: (indeed, nothing
but blanks for His great adventure and long expectation.) In Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5.
he further appropriates those Spiritual blessings (by which Men are conformed
to Christ) to the same persons; Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ; [According as He has Chosen] us in Him: -- Having Predestined us to
the Adoption of Children, etc. By these two Scriptures it appears, that God's
Children and Christ's Brethren are the same persons; and that they were made so
by Election. But, are Christ's Brethren and His Church the same Persons? Take
your solution from Hebr. 2. 12. I will declare thy Name unto my [Brethren] In
the midst of the [Church] will I sing praise unto Thee.

3. This likeness to Christ is not attainable by any without first being in Him
as their Head; For which cause the Elect were Chosen in Him. Ephesians. 1. 4.
It is out of Christ's fullness that all Grace is received: and in order to that
Reception, there must be Union. The branch cannot bear fruit of it self, Joh.
15.
(nor indeed be a branch) unless it grow out of the Vine. For which cause and
end, the designed Members of His Body were separated from their wild Olive
root, and put into Christ by Election: And hereby they are made partakers of
the fatness of that Heavenly Root; ( i. e. of the Spirit of Christ, which is
called the Anointing, in 1 John 2. 27.) In this respect the First and Second
Adams are set-forth as paralels touching headship to their respective Bodies.
As from Adam their natural Head, all Mankind have derived their natural being;
So from Christ their Spiritual Head, do all the Elect Seed receive their
Spiritual being and Nature. On which account he is styled The everlasting
Father, and They His Children; Isa. 9. 6. Heb. 2. 13. They were all in Christ
from Eternity, in as just (but spiritual) a Reality, as Mankind in Adam, or
Levi in Abraham's loins when Melchisedee met him. Eve's production (as to the
manner of it) was paternal of this: She was made of Adam's substance, but she
came not out of his loins, but out of his Side: So is the New Creature
extracted out of Christ's; They are bone of His bones, and flesh of his flesh;
Genesis 2. 21-23.
(spiritually understood.) And none can thus proceed from Him, but such as were
in Him Decretively by Election: Men are blessed with these spiritual blessings,
as being in Christ, and not otherwise: Ephesians. 1. 4. Tit. 3. 5, 6.

Inferences.
I. Infer. 1.
We gather hence the honorable and safe estate of the Church, which has the
Son of God to be Head and Savior of it!

II. Infer. 2.
Let no Man pretend to this honorable Relation, without something to show for
it; by which he may avouch his Membership to Christ. The currentest mark and
^vidence whereof, will be your conformity, not to Men or Self; but to Christ
Jesus your Head: It is that must denominate you Christians indeed. At latter
day Christ will know None, but who have made their Robes white in the blood of
the Lamb. All Hang-by's and Ivy-claspers will then be shook off, and no One
retained but such as have His substance in them. Many shall come and plead
their works, What they have been, and what they have done; and their old
hypocrisy will be so Immovable and Impudent, that they l even expostulate the
matter with Him, Mat. 7. 22.
Have not we Prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name cast out Devils? and done
many wonderful works? etc. Of whom our Lord will profess, ver. 23.
That He knows them not; No, nor Never knew them: He knows His own by their
likeness to Him; He knows, and cannot but know, the Members of His Body; My
sheep I know, but who are ye? will He then say to all that are but professing
Members of Him: Which will be, indeed, a Doleful conclusion of their groundless
(though specious) Confidence! Look to it therefore in time.

III. Infer. 3.
Let those who are really of this Body, bear themselves worthily, both toward
their Head and FellowMembers: And let That be your badge of distinction from
Christians merely Nominal.

1. Own the Supremacy of your Head, by giving Him the Pre-eminence in all
things: Call no Man on Earth Master, ( i. e. In point of Faith:) Give unto
Caesar all that belongs to him; yet so, as still to have respect unto Christ as
the Supreme Law giver.

2. Submit to His Government; Steer your course by His Councels, and follow His
Conduct: Go after Him wherever He shall lead you: Let all your sens^s have
their Seat in your Head: Let every thing be understood by you, according to His
sense and interpretation of it.

3. Expose your self for Him; Stand between Him and Wrongs; Preserve His honor
and Interest with the utmost hazard of your self: Let life and death be as
things indifferent to you, so as Christ may be Magnified in you; Phil. 1. 20.

4. Look to this your Head for supply of all Grace: From His fullness it is to
be had, and No where else. Therefore, Hold to your Head, lest Notions beguile
you of your Reward, Col. 2. v. 18, 19. Be sure, withal, that you keep to your
Place and Duty, lest you miss of the Nourishment that belongs to you: A Member
out of its place, is (for the time) as a Member cut off. Joh. 154, 5.


5. Adorn your Head by a constant Reaching at perfect Conformity to Him; Show
forth His virtues; Be holy as He was; Let all your fruits be such as are meet
for such a Root. God the Father is the Head of Christ; and ye know, that He
bore the express Image of His Person, in all that He did: He could do Nothing
but what He saw the Father do: So do you by your Head Christ; Make Him your
Example: And in order thereto, live upon Him as your immediate Root; and give
Him the honor of His own productions.

Then Carry it toward your Brethren as Members of the same Body.

1. Usurp not upon them, as if more than a fellow-member with them. Judge not
the Strong, Nor despise the Weak: Who made thee a Judge? There Is none but has
need of forbearance from others; and the less you see your need, the more need
you have of it.

2. Intrude not into Another place and office: Each Member has its own, to
which it is fi^ted: This it best becomes, and here it will be most useful;
Elsewhere it would be both useless, and a deformity; as a finger, or other
Member, if transposed and out of its own joint.

3. Show your Co-membership by your love and tender regard toward others: Heb.
5. 2.
Have compassion on the Ignorant, and those out of the way (as your Head
toward you.) If One be weak or Wounded, let him that is Strong and Whole,
support and bind it up: If one foot stumble, let the other step in for its
help: Gal. 6. 1.
Consider thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Members of the same Natural
body, need no Arguments to persuade to this duty; they do it by Instinct: And
the want of Compassionateness in us toward others, (though it shall not dry
up, yet) may much restrain, at least in our apprehension, the Springs of
Christ's pity toward our Selves.

4. Let the good of the whole have the preference before a particular part; And
let That of a lower use deny it self for the safety and assistance of That
which is more Noble: This (in a degree) is to lay down our life for the
Brethren. He that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of Men; and a good evidence it is of your Membership to Christ.

IV. Let every One that is of this Body, Infer. 4.
be well apaid with his Lot; Be glad and Rejoice for ever in this your Portion.
James 1. 9.
This is the Exaltation the brother of low degree should value himself by.
Whatever your Rank or condition may be in the World, Rest contented with your
place, and be thankful for it: Desire not (your self) to change it; But strive
to fill it up, and be as useful in it as you can. Look also for Troubles, and
think them not strange: The Captain of your Salvation was made perfect through
sufferings; and the servant may not look to fare better than his Lord. Heb 3.
10.


V. If Jesus Christ be your Head, Infer. 5.
Be confident then of all Love, Council, Care, and Protection from Him: Union
with Him intitles to All He has. It is Natural to the head, to love, and to
Cherish the Body, and every Member of it: To Contrive and Cast-about for its
welfare and safety: As a Man cherishes his own flesh, so does Christ His
Church, Ephesians. 5. 29. What though be, in thy self, an uncomely Member? 1 Cor. 12.
23.
He will put the more Comeliness upon thee; He will cloth thee, and Feed thee,
and Physic thee: He will give Grace and Glory, and No good thing will He
withold from thee: Ps. 84. vlt.
For, He being the First born, Prince and Head of the family, all the younger
Brethen are to be Maintained upon His Inheritance.

VI. Rest also assured of safe Conduct to the Promised land. Infer. 6.
Adversaries and difficulties you will certainly meet with: Remaining
Corruptions (like the mixed multitude) will be tumultuating and tempting
within; The Amalel^ites and People of His wr^th will stand in your way without,
Or be falling on your Rear, to Cut Off the weak and feeble; And the Serpent
will yet be Nibling and bruising your heel: But higher than that he cannot
touch; your heart and your head are out of his Reach, and therefore you are
safe; yea this Serpent himself shall be bruised under your feet shortly-Come
(will your Captain say to you) Come, Romans 16. 20.
set your feet on the Neck of this King of pride, I^sh 10. 24. Rev. 18 6.
and do by him as he has done by others, and would have done also by you: Give
him double according to his works. This is the time when ye shall Judge Angels;
Cor. 6. 3.
And all under the Conduct of this your Head and Captain; Who will Now present
you to His Father even before the presence of His Glory, Jude. ver. 24.
with exceeding Joy!

[II] That Christ gave Himself a Ransom for the Elect: Or. The Redemption
wrought by Jesus Christ, was peculiarly designed for Elect Persons.
The Most High, who divided to the Nations their Inheritance, He gave the Elect
to Christ, as His portion: And though Satan (through their ill husbandry in
Adam) has got a temporary Mortgage upon them; yet the Fee-simple, or Right of
Inheritance, remains in Christ: and therefore, at the year of Jubilee (that is,
in the time appointed by the Father) they return to Him as the Right heir,
though not without both Conquest and full Price.

By [ Christ's giving Himself a Ransom] I understand the whole of His
humiliation; What ever He Did or Suffered, as M^diat^r, from His Incarnation to
His Resurrection: All which are Summarily expressed by [ the blood of his
cross;] as all the preci^us fruits of His death, Ephesians. 1. 7. Coll. 1. 11.
are by [ Forgiveness of Sins] This was the price wherewith He bought them that
should be Saved. Election is the Original Pattern; according to which, the line
and compass of Redemption is to be measured: The S^n can do nothing, but what
He sees the Father do, Joh. 5. 19.

To make Redemption larger than Electing love, is to Overlay the Foundation;
and what is so built, will surely suffer loss: It therefore behooves us to see,
That we separate not what God has conjoined, either by stretching or
streightning the Bounds He has set. The Jews were opinion'd, That the Promise
of the Messiah belonged only to Them, exclusive to the Gentiles: Others since,
would extend it to all the Sons of Men universally and alike; (Not considering
the Reason why the Promise was made to the Woman's feed, and not to Adam's.)
But the Messiah Himself, who best knew the End of His Coming, and Line of the
Promise; exempteth none; but extends it to all Nations indifferently: Yet so,
Isa. 53. 10.
as that He Restrains it to the Elect among them. These are called His Seed,
and the Travel of His Soul; with respect to whom, He should make His Soul an
Offering for Sin. These also He terms His Sheep, and Himself the Good
Shepherd, (as well He might) Whose own the Sheep are, and for whom He died;
Joh. 10. 15, I lay down my life f^x the Sheep. And that He might not be taken
to in tend Those only of the Jewish Nation, He presently adds And other Sheep I
have, which are not of this Fold, them also must I bring: And the Evangelist
says, in Chap. 11. That He should not die for that Nation only, but for the
Children of God which are scattered abroad; This ^e expresses by [Gathering
together] which was the effect of his death, according to Ephesians. 2. 13. Where
they are said to be made nigh by the blood of Christ; and that He Reconciled
both (i. e. Jews and Gentiles, or The Elect scattered among both) unto God, in
one body by the Cross; according to the Father's Compact made with Him, and
Recorded in Isa. 49. 6. It also appears by Isa. 53. that they were [ Sheep]
whose iniquities were laid upon Christ, ver. 6. And again ver. 8, For the
transgression of [my People] was He stricken: (Where note, That we do not find
any party of Men termed Sheep, the People of God, and His Children, in
distinction from Others, but with respect to some peculiar Interest He has in
them above others: And what that Interest may be, excepting Election, does not
appear to us; For those other Sheep were not yet Called, and therefore not yet
Believers, and Sheep on that account; but as they were of Gods Elect.

For though All Men were lost, Christ was not sent but to the lost Sheep of the
[House of Israel] that is, Those Persons of the lost and perishing world, whom
God had chosen for His Peculiars, as He did the House of Israel from among the
Nations; and who in that respect, were a special type of the Spiritual
Election. And on this account, the Promises of the New Covenant were made to
the Church under such Names and Titles as were proper to that People as
distinguished from other Nations.

In Isa. 62. We find [Holy] and [Redeemed] applied to the same persons: Whether
it be meant of Elective Holiness or Actual, it comes to One; For, both of them,
together with Redemption, do refer to the same Subject: For, as Actual
Sanctification is the Fruit and Consequent of Redemption; so, Election is the
Root of them both; as ye have it in 1 Pet. 1. 2. Elect unto obedience and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. To be Holy, is to be sacred, selected,
and set apart for holy uses, by appointment of God: And they were Actually
sanctified by the sprinkling of blood: He^. 9. 19. 23.
In both which respects, the People of Israel, the Tabernacle, Temple, Priests,
Altars, etc. are all said to be Holy.

In Luke 1. 72. God's sending of Christ is said to be, In performance of His
Holy Covenant; Genesis 3 15.
which was first proclaimed in Paradise, as made with the Woman's Seed; and
afterward renewed with Abraham; Genesis 12. 3.
and is therefore termed, The Merry promised to Abraham and to His Seed: And
who are Abraham's Seed? Not the World, but Believers; that is, The Elect: For,
These only obtain Faith, Romans 11. 7. And Gal. 3. 29. Says plainly, If ye be
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed: and Romans 9. 8.

In Tit. 2. we read, That it was a Peculiar People, that Christ gave Himself
for and purchased; i. e. A People peculiarly His Own: It denotes some special
propriety He has in Them above Others: and so, a special Cause for His giving
Himself for them. We also find, That [ Peculiar and Purchased] are so nearly
allied, that one word is used to signify both; 1 Pet. 2. 9.

According with this; is that in the 1 Pet. 1. 20, where Christ is said to be
Manifested for those He writes that Epistle to: That they were persons Elected,
is evident by the 1. and 2. ver. And Elect unto the sprinkling of His blood:
And as they were Elected to it, so in the 17. John, He professes to make it
good, ver. 19. ver. 11, 15.
For their sakes (says Christ) I sanctify my self; and twice in the 10. John,
That, He laid down His life for the Sheep; Which is perfectly exclusive of
others, as where He says, My Righteousness extends unto the Saints; and he
that believes shall be Saved; that is, Such, and None else.

It also appears from Acts 20. 28. That it was the [Church] of God, that He
purchased with His own blood. Now, the Church and the World, are plainly
distinct, as a Garden enclosed is from the Common Fields. That the Church
consists of Elect persons, is proved before; and that it was the Church He dyed
for, is proved by this Scripture; As also, from Ephesians; 5. 25, Where Husbands are
required to love their Wives, as Christ loved the Church, and [gave Himself for
it:] which shows, That as the Husband's love to his Wife, is another kind of
love, than what he bears to others of the same Sex; So is Christ's love to His
Church; and therefore, His death, which was the special effect of that His
love, is peculiar to the Church only.

In Revel. 5. we Read that the Elders sing a New Song to the Lamb, because He
Redeemed them to God by His blood, ver. 9. Among other Reasons for that Style
of Elders, this may be one, That they were Chosen from the days of old; (For,
their Names where written in His book of life from the foundation of the World,
Rev. 1^. 8.) They are also said to be Redeemed [ out of] every Kindred, and
tongue, and People and Nation; which Rationally implies, That the Bulk of those
People and Nations were not Redeemed with them. And again in the 1^. Chapter A
certain Number are said to be Redeemed [from the Earth] and [from among Men:]
If Some from among Others, It follows of course, That those Others were
exempted. (Here note by the way, That these Elders were now in Heaven, above
the Clouds of misconception and prejudiced Opinion; and therefore, no Reason to
misdoubt their testimony.) And further, These Redeemed Ones are there also
styled, The First Fruits unto God and to the Lamb; which appellation
insinuates, That they were separated from the Rest, as the First Fruits under
the Law were, by God Himself, Who took them for His Own portion, Numb. 2. 13.
and Chap. 8. 16. They are likewise said, To have the Father's name written in
their Foreheads, Rev. 14. 1. (Election marked them out for Christ) And to be
written in the Lamb's Book of life; and that as a Lamb slain, Rev. 13. 8. And
on that account says to His Father; Thine they were, and Thou gave them Me,
Joh. 17. 6. Where also in His prayer for those whose Sacrifice He was now to
offer, He styles them, The Men which the Father had given Him [out of the
World] And in ver, 10, All Mine are Thine, and Thine are Mine: i. e. All that
were Christ's in order to Redemption, were first the Father's by Election: It
is as if He had said, All that I undertake for, are Thine El^ct: And All Thine
Elect I undertake for: He therefore reciprocates the terms of Relation, Turns
them to and again, To show the Sameness of the Persons concerned in both. From
all which it seems undeniably evident, That as a certain Number were Elected;
so a Certain Number, and Those the very same Persons, were Redeemed.

The Ground and Truth of this Assertion, is further confirmed by such Arguments
as these:
I. The Levitical Sacrifices were offered for the House of Israel, Arg. 1.
exemptive of other Nations; (Save only such as became Proselytes:) And These
being a Type of the Spiritual Election, It follows That this Sacrifice of
Christ (typified by Theirs) was also Peculiar to Jews in Spirit; or Spiritual
Jews. So, Aarons's making atonement for his Household, and bearing the names of
the twelve Tribes on his breast plate, were typical of our Great High Priest's
bearing the Names and sustaining the persons of those for whom He offered
Himself on the Cross. Of all those legal shadows, Christ and the Church of the
firstborn, are the Body and Substance.

II. The Right of Redemption among the Jews (which shadowed this) was founded
on Brotherhood: Arg. 2.
Hence I infer, That that Relation (spiritually taken) was both the Ground and
Limit of Christ's office as a Redeemer. The Apostle's discourse in Heb. 2.
seems to point at this; where he says They were Brethren, Children, and Sons,
whom Christ should deliver from bondage; Make Reconciliation for their Sins,
and bring to Glory. But, how came they to be God's Children and Brethren to
Christ, above others? It was by Predestination; and That was it entitled them
to Redemption; as is evident by comparing the 5 and 7 verses of Ephesians. 1. Having
predestined us to the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ; In whom we have
[Redemption] through His blood. And it is worthy your notice, That by the law of
Redemption, a stranger (that is, One that was not of the Brotherhood) might not
be Redeemed; Levit. 25 46. and 48. with 41. and 54.
But One that was, though he were not Redeemed, must yet go free in the year of
Jubilee: which shows the peculiar respect the Lord has for his peculiar People.

III. The Saving benefits of Redemption do not redound to any but Elect
persons. Arg. 3.
What ever is onewhere ascribed to Redemption, as ^he special fruit and
consequent thereof; is elsewhere ascribed to Election, and to This as the first
and Original Root: And, that Redemption it self is the Fruit of Electing love,
is evident by the 1 Pet. 1. 2. (quoted before) Elect unto Obedience and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. They are also said, to be Blessed with
all spiritual blessings in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4.
according as He had Chosen them in Him: And if all spiritual blessings be
dispensed by the Law of Election; then all the saving benefits of Redemption
(which are the same with those of Election) must be dispensed by the same Rule;
and so, to the same persons only. We also find, Joh. 17. 6.
That Christ's actual distribution of the Gifts He received for Men, is guided
answerably: He manifests the Father's name to the Men He had given Him [^ut] of
the world: To These He expounds that in private, which to others He spoke in
parables: And thus He did, Because to them it was given to know the Mysteries
of the Kingdom of God, Math. 13. 34. and 36. ver
but to the Multitude it was not given; And Election was That as gave it them,
(as it follows there) For So it seemed good in thy sight. In like manner, the
Apostle in Romans 8. puts Election and Redemption together, as pertaining to the
same persons; And Justification (which is the next effect of Redemption) he
makes also an unquestionable consequent of Election: Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifies: Who shall condemn? It is
Christ that dyed. The question being put concerning God's Elect, and the Answer
referring to those for whom Christ died; is a plain implication, That
Redemption and Justification are commensurate with Election; That either of
them concerns only the same persons; and that neither of them extends to
any, but whom the other also taketh-in.

IV. The price of Redemption was of that Precious and Matchless Value, Arg. 4.
that it could not be parted-with, but with respect to the Certainty of the End
for which it was paid. Now the End of Redemption was the Salvation of Men;
below Which there could not be an End worthy the death of Christ; And This
Nothing could secure but Election; The Elect always have abtain'd, and shall:
This is a Rule affirmed in Rom: 11. 7. But for the Rest, they are blinded; that
is, They are left to their own voluntary Misunderstanding; And being so, Not
only they Do not, Job. 12. 39.
but they c^nnot believe. And to what end should Christ make His Precious Soul
an Offering for Such! Men that never shall believe; and consequently never be
Saved? Surely To no better purpose than for the World of ungodly, whose Spirits
were in prison two thousand years before. Those whom the Lord intends to save
alive, He appoints an Atonement to be made for them; Numb. 16. ver. 46, 47.
But for those He intends to kill, (which is always done justly) He will not
accept an Offering, Judge. 13. 23
and therefore not appoint it; As He did not (under the Law) for those Crimes
which Men were to dye for.

V. I confine Redemption to Elect persons, Arg. 5.
because Intercession (which is of equal latitude with Redemption) is limited
to These exclusive to Others. The Priests of old, were to pray for those whose
sacrifice they offered; And what they did, was a pattern of our Savior's
Priestly office; Whom likewise we find to Sacrifice and pray, only for the
same persons: He is an Advocate for those for whose sins He is a Propitiation,
1 John 2. 1. Whose transgressions He was smitten for, For them He makes
Intercession, Isa. 53. 8, 12. For their sakes He Sanctified Himself, and for
Them it was that He made that solemn prayer in the 17, of John. And He now
prays for them, as being just now to- offer their Sacrifice: He also shuts out
the World expressly from having any interest in it, I pray not for the World,
but for them which Thou have given Me. And He adds the Reason (the foundation
Reason) why He would pray for These, [For, they are Thine] i. e. They were the
Father's by Election: For, in all other respects the Earth is the Lord's, and
the Fullness thereof.

VI. This Doctrine is further Warranted, Arg. 6.
by those Genuine and Necessary Conclusions, which follow from diverse express
Scriptures touching this Subject; As 1. That those who are planted with Christ
in His death, shall be also in His Resurrection, Romans 6. 5. 2. That those for
whom Christ was Crucified, their old Man was Crucified with Him; That the body
of sin should be destroyed, Romans 6. 6. 3. That those dead with Christ, are
freed from sin; and shall appear with Him in Glory, Romans 6. 7. and Coll 3. 3,
4. 4. That those for whom Christ died, are Justified and Reconciled, Romans 5. 8,
9, 10. 5. That for whom He was made sin and a Curse, They are made the
Righteousness of God in Him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. 6. They that are Redeemed, do follow
the Lamb; and are made Kings and Priests unto God, Rev 5. 9, 10. Chap. 14. 3* 4.

All which blessings (with many the like) are the inseparable fruits of
Redemption. But it is obvious to all, That all men are not like unto Christ in
Newness of life: All have not the body of sin destroyed in them: All are not
freed from sin: Nor shall All appear with Christ in Glory: All are not
Justified and Reconciled: All are not made the Righteousness of God in Christ:
All do not follow the Lamb: Nor are All made Kings and Priests unto God: Whence
it should follow, That All are not Redeemed.

VII. Another Argument for Peculiar Redemption, Arg. 7.
is founded on the End of Christ's death, with the Merit and Efficacy of it:
Tit. 2. 14.
He gave Himself, That He might Redeem those He dyed for, from all iniquity:
Hence it follows, That if Christ dyed for all, then All shall be saved; (for
iniquity only can be their Ruin) Or else, That Christ fails of the End of his
Death. But, Christ cannot fall short of His End in dying; For, all power in
Heaven and Earth is committed to Him, for the Making of it good: And yet, All
Men are not saved: (The Saved Ones are but a Remnant) Therefore He gave not
Himself to Redeem All.

It is the Father's will, That of All He has given to Christ He should lose
Nothing; but should give them Eternal life: Hence it follows; Either, That all
men were not thus given to Christ; or if they were, Then All must have Eternal
life; And if they have Not, The Father's Will is Not done: But, The Father's
Will is done; (as is abundantly evident) and yet, All men are not saved:
Therefore.

That which Christ laid down His life for, That He Merited; And what He
Merited, is due to those for whom it was Merited: ( He was not cut off for
Himself.) Now, The Principal thing intended and Merited by the death of Christ
was the Justification of Sinners; Romans 3. 26.
And That God might be Just in Justifying of them. If therefore He Merited this
for All, then All must be Justi^ied; and it cannot be justly denied to Any:
For, it is their due by virtue of a Price; which also was paid to that very
end; and this, by God's own appointment; Who (we know) cannot condemn any for
whom Christ died: Romans 8. 34.
His Justice shall not be liable to such a Reflection. Whence it seems to be
safely concluded; That if All men are not Justified, justification does not
belong to all; and consequently, That Christ did not give Himself for All. And
as touching Efficacy; Adam's transgression was efficacious on the Will, and
whole Man to Deprave, why not (then) the Righteousness of Christ to Restore;
since the Pre-eminence, in that very thing, is given to Him? Romans 5. 17.

VIII. Arg. 8
The Doctrine of Special and Peculiar Redemption is further confirmed by those
Inglonious and hurtful Consequents which do attend the Doctrine of General
Redemption (as it is commonly held forth) which (1) seems to reflect on the
Wisdom of God, as imputing to Him such a Contrivance for Men's Salvation, as
was altogether frustruble. (2) It also seems to tax God of Injustice; Isa. 53.
8.
as Not discharging Those whose transgressions are answered for by their
Surety; or else, That the Sufferings of Christ were not sufficient to make a
Discharge due to them? Or (3) It insinuates a deficiency of Power, or want of
good will, to prosecute His design to perfection: (4) It suspends the virtue
and success of all that Christ has done for Men, upon something to be done by
themselves, which He is not the Doer of* and consequently, that Men are
Principals in procuring their own Salvation: And so, Christ shall have but His
Thousands (in truth His Nothings) whiles Freedom of Will shall have its Ten
Thousands to cry up the praise of Men: This is not That the Lord alone should
be exalted. (5) It would also follow, That those who are Saved and gone to
Heaven, have nothing more of Christ's to glory in, and to praise Him for, than
those, who are perished and gone to Hell: For, according to the Principles o^
General Redemption, He did and does for all alike; and not a jot more for the
one party than for the other. (6) It makes Men presumptuous and carnally
secure. How many have sooth'd-up themselves in their impenitency and hardness
of Heart, and fenced themselves against the Word; upon this very Supposition,
That Christ died for all, and therefore for them: And why then should not they
look to be saved as well as any other? and so they lean (pretendedly) on the
Lord and transgress: Not considering, that those for whom Christ died, He
purchased for them a freedom from sin, and not a liberty of Sinning; Nor
impunity, but upon terms of Faith and Repentance. And that the Tempter disturbs
them not in their rest upon such a foundation, may be a principal Reason why
Men so stiffly adhere to it; and that those of the General principle are so
seldom troubled with terrors of Conscience.

But yet, (notwithstanding all this) it is not denied, that all Men, even those
that never heard of Christ's Redemption, have benefit by His death, (and more
might have, did they not stand in their own light) albeit He had not, in His
death, the same respect to all as to some. The mixed Multitude that came up
with Israel, It was not for them that Moses was sent to Pharaoh, That the Sea
was divided, and the Egyptians drowned; That the Rock followed the Camp, and
that they had Mannah from Heaven, etc. though these being in company with
Israel, had a share in those outward benefits. So the Lord gives water in the
Wilderness; by which the Beasts and Owls have benefit, in their kind; and yet
it is not for their sakes that the Lord does it; but for His People, His
Chosen, Those whom He had formed for Himself.

I should now come to the Inferences: But finding this Doctrine of Peculiar
Redemption as much opposed as that of Election, and upon the same grounds:
Observing also a great readiness in Men to embrace the Notion of General
Redemption; (which proceeds partly from Nature's unableness to discern a Reason
why One Man should be Redeemed, and not Another: Partly, for that it is
grateful to lapsed Nature to fancy it self active in its own Recovery: Partly
also, from an aptness to catch at any thing that pretends to give quiet under
Convictions.) ^ hope it shall not be time lost to see their exceptions against
Our Doctrine; What they allege in defense of their own; and how groundless in
both. In the doing of which, I shall take but the substance of what I have
heard, and not intermeddle with jangling disputes.

Is it not plain by Romans 5. 14, 15. That the Restoration by Christ is as large
and extensive as Adam's sin?
The Comparison there stated, is Not put Extensively; (i. e. in respect^ of the
objects of Sin and Grace) but Intensively; (i. e. in respect of the different
efficacy of the several Means by which those several Effects are produced. The
Apostle therefore (to obviate such objections) Restrayn^s it in ver. 15, But
not as the offense, so also is the free Gift: i. e. The Free Gift of
Righteousness and life does not extend to Men Universally and Efficaciously, as
sin and death did: And he gives the Reason of it; For, if through the offense
of One Many be dead; Much more the Grace of God, and the Gift by Grace, has
abounded unto Many: q. d. If the Free Gift had took-in All, as the offense did,
Then All must have been Saved; For that, Grace has abounded more than the
offense: (Which must be Meant of the powerful and prevalent efficacy of Grace:
For, as to the Objects, It could not take-in more than All) And therefore,
those toward whom it has thus abounded, shall surely partake of the benefits
of it: As All in Adam died, so All in Christ shall be made alive.

But if some only are Redeemed, And Those but a Few in Comparison; Then all
ground of Believing is taken away from the most of Men?
1. The Makers of this Objection will not say That All Men are Saved; albeit
they hold, That All are Redeemed: And therefore to hold and affirm That Christ
did not Dye for All; hinders None from believing, any more, than That Many of
Those He dyed for, are not Saved: yea To teach That Christ dyed for all, and
that yet the Generality of Men shall dye in their sins and Perish for ever; is
a greater impediment to b^lieveing, than to teach That He dyed only for Some,
and that every One of this [ Some] shall certainly be Saved.

2. He that will know his own particular Redemption before he will Believe,
begins at the wrong end of his Work; and is very unlikely to come (that way) to
the knowledge of it. The first Act of Faith is not, That Christ dyed for All,
or for you in particular: The One is not true; the other not certain to you,
Nor can be, till after you have believed: He that would live, Must submit to
Mercy, with [ Per adventure] He will save me alive.

3. There are Reasons enough, and of great weight, to induce Men to believe,
without laying General Redemption for the Ground of their Faith: As

(1) That faithful saying, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
and worthy of all acceptance, That Jesus Christ came to save Sinners; and
such are you.

(2) That He gave His Life a Ransom for Many; Math. 20. 28.
and you may be of that Number as well as Another.

(3) That those He died for, shall be Justified upon their believing; Romans 5.
8, 9. Phil. 1. 29.
and shall have Faith also upon their seeking for it, as a part of His
Purchase, and given on His behalf.

(4) That to Believe on His Son, is the will and Commandment of the Everlasting
God; Whom we ought to obey, although our Salvation were not dependent on it.
Romans 16. 26. 1 John 3. 23.

(5) Those many faithful Promises assuring Salvation to them that believe; Mark
16. 16. Joh. 3. 16, 36. Chap. 6. 47. Matthew. 11. 29. And

(6) Lastly, The Remediless danger of unbelief; He that believes not shall be
Damned; as Mark 16. 16. Joh. 8. 24. etc. And, if such Considerations as these,
will not prevail with you to believe; the Notion of General Redemption,
together with the general successlessness of it (to be sure) will never do it.

Redemption is often set forth in terms that import a Universality: As, That
Christ takes away the Sin of the World: That He is the propitiation for the
Sins of the whole World, etc.
The word World has many and various acceptions in Scripture: It is not
always meant of Men, but something else; And when Men are intended, it seldom
intends the Universality of them; yea it is often understood of a very few in
comparison of the whole: It would therefore be very great Rashness, to
appropriate or limit so general a term to any particular Sense; and much more,
if extended to Men Universally; as is shown, in part, by the following
Instances.

1 The word [World] is taken for the place of Men's habitation upon earth:
Nahum. l. 5, The earth is burnt up at His presence; yea, the [ World] and all
that dwell therein.

2 For the Inhabitants of the World, good and bad together, Psalm. 9. 8, He
shall judge the World in Righteousness.

3 For the Things of the world, and dispositions answerable to them: Eccles. 3.
11, He has set the World in their heart.

4 For the time of the Worlds continuance from one Remarkable period to
another: The time before the flood is called the old world; and the time of
Christ's Kingdom, the world to come.

5 The particular time of a Man's life upon Earth; Mat. 12. 32. Whosoever
speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, in this World;
Nor in the World to come.

6 For the extent or Compass of the Roman Empire; Luke 2. 1, There went a
Decree from Caesar Augustus, That all the World should be taxed.

7 For the time, and state of things, after the dissolution of the present
frame; Luke 20. 35, They that shall be accounted worthy to obtain that World,
and the Resurrection, etc.

8 For the Religion and Manners of the World: Acts 17. 6, These that have
turned the World upside-down are come hither.

9 For the troubles which Christ's Disciples meet with in the World: Joh. 16.
33, Be of good Comfort, I have overcome the World.

10 For the splendor, honor, wealth, pleasure, or whatever else in the World,
is taking with the hearts of Men: Gal. 6. 14, I am Crucified to the World, and
the World to Me.

11 To set forth the greatness of something that cannot well be expressed: Job.
21. 25. The World it self could not contain the books that should be written.

12 For the Gentiles in distinction from the Jews: Romans 11. 12, If the fall of
them (that is, the Jews) be the riches of the World, etc.

13 For the Multitudinous increase of some particular Party: Job. 12. 19, The
World is gone after Him.

More of this kind might be cited; But these may suffice to show, How much it
behooves to consider well the scope and Context of Scripture; and Not to be led
by the Vocal sound of words.

There are yet, two other Senses of the word [ World] which come nearest the
Matter in hand: -- One is that which takes-in the whole party of Wicked Men
alone, and by themselves; As where it is said, The Saints shall judge the
World: 1 Cor. 6. 2.
It must be intended of the World of ungodly; For, the Saints shall not Judge
one another. That All the World wondered after the Beast, Rev. 13. 3, 4. Chapter 14.
4.
And worshipped the Dragon: This also must be meant of the Herd of Idolaters,
exemptive of Those who followed the Lamb. And again, The [whole World] lies in
wickedness: 1 Job. 5. 19.
Here ye have the very words, and in the same Manner connex'd, as in the place
objected; which therefore may well be supposed to be of as large a
Comprehension: And yet, it cannot be meant of the Universality of Mankind; But,
of such of them as are under the power and conduct of Satan; which the Saints
are not; and so, cannot be any part of the [World] or [whole World] there
intended.

The other sense of the Word, seems Couched in the places objected; where
Christ is said, To take away the sin of the World; And to be a Propitiation for
the sins of the whole World: For it seems Agreeable to Reason, to understand
the word in a Restrict and limited sense here, as in the places above-quoted.
For, if by [World] is sometimes meant The World of Ungodly, as separate from
the Saints: By like Reason, at other times, it may be meant of the World of
Saints as separate from the Wicked; especially, when there is Nothing in the
Context and scope of the place, to Contradict it. And what then should hinder
but that the word [World] in the places objected, may be so^ly intended of the
[World of Elect] exclusive of Others, As the [World that lies in wickedness] is
of those Others exclusive of the Elect? To be sure, There can be no peril in so
understanding it: For, we know that Christ is the Propitiation for their sins:
But, To affirm it of the whole of Mankind, as it has no solid foundation; so
many uncomly, and unruly Consequents do attend it: some of which are shown
before.

To end this Debate, I would ask the Objector, What World it was that Christ
would not pray for? For, by knowing that, it may be gathered, What World it was
that He died for. It could not be That for which He would not Pray; For, the
Priest was bound to pray for Those for whom he offered. It must then be
Another; And so, it seems, there be two Worlds.

1 A lesser World, which consists of Elect Persons, and was taken out of the
World Vniversall^: (As the Israelitish Nation was out of the Egyptian; Deuteronomy. 4.
34. Or, as the Christian Church at first was out of the Jewish:) These our
Savior styles, Joh. 17. 6. v. 9.
The Men which His Father gave Him [out of the World:] For These it was that He
sanctified Himself; And for these He prayed: And of These consists that World
whose Sin He takes away; and for whose Sins (even of the whole of it) He is
the Propitiation. These are the Men that shall be counted worthy of the World
to come; And they are as properly termed a World, as that blessed Place and
State they shall be in: Luke 20. 35.
Or, as the Dwellers upon earth are denominated a World, from the Place of
their habitation, Ps. 9. 8.

2 There is also a World of Ungodly, Joh. 15. 19. chapter 17. 6. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Rev.
13. 3 and 4 with v. 8. 1 John 5. 19.
from among whom that lesser World are taken and separated; Of whom it is said,
The Devil is their God; And that their Names are not in the Lambs book of life:
But, the whole of it lies in wickedness: And, This is the World for whom Christ
would not vouchsafe to pray: Then surely He would not make His Soul an offering
for their sins.

The Reason why all Men are not Saved, is not because Christ did not die for
all; but because they will not Believe?
Men's Not believing in Christ, is not the Only, or first, procuring Cause of
their Condemnation; but their Rebellion and Apostasy from God: Albeit, the
Condemnation of those who reject Christ, is greatly aggravated by their
Not-receiving Him: As One Condemned, or Condemnable, for an Act of Treason,
refusing a Pardon; His Refusal is (indeed) the next and immediate cause of his
execution, and perhaps shall heighten the Rigor of it: But, his treasonable
practice was the first procuring cause of his death: which also he should have
suffered for, if no such pardon had been tendered to him. It must always be
granted and Maintained, That Faith is the one thing necessary on our part, in
order to our being Saved: And as true it is, That this Faith adds nothing of
virtue or Merit to the Cross of Christ. Where Men are said to be Justified, or
Saved, by Faith; it is meant of the Object of Faith, and not of the Act: For,
the Righteousness of Christ alone is the Matter of our Justification; which
this Objection seems to deny.

2 Christ's Redemption extends to Unbelief: For this Purpose was the Son of God
Manifested, 1 John 3. 8.
to destroy the works of the devil: Of which, Unbelief is the Chief. And He
gave Himself to Redeem from [all] iniquity: Tit. 2. 14.
And if from All, then Unbelief (which is the Sum and S^um of all) cannot be
exempted: For, Otherwise ( scil. If He had Redeemed from all but this) that
Redemption would little avail us; It would be, as if One should purchase your
pardon for pilfering felonies; but let the Guilt of your Treasons lie still
upon you: Or, undertake to Cure a Man of his frenzy, upon condition he will
be Sober! What will they do, who content themselves with such a Redemption as
this!

3 Faith it self is a Grace of Christ's own Working; It flows from His Fullness:
Joh. 1. 16.
He apprehends us before we do or can apprehend Him. The People's Sins under
the Law, had not been expiated by the Sacrifice without sprinkling the blood;
And it was not themselves who sprinkled it, but the Priest: And can we think
that Christ shed His Blood for those on whom He will not sprinkle it? That He
died for Those to whom He will not give a little faith; when as without that,
all that He does besides will not profit them? If any say; He would, but they
will not: I ananswer, This [ Will not] is their Unbelief; which He is to take
away by [ making them Willing] A Will to believe is Believing; Ps. 110
And in the day of His Power they find it. And for any to say, That a Will to
believe, is not purchased by Christ; Heb. 9. 12. 14.
is a great derogation from the virtue and Merit of His sufferings. This is
further Argued, where the Office of Christ, in order to Effectual Calling, is
treated of.

Inferences.
From what has been proved in behalf of Redemption, as peculiar to the Elect,
I infer,
I. The important necessity of Trying the Spirits, Infer. 1.
and the Doctrines they bring, whether they be of God. A pla^sible outside, and
fair show in the flesh, are no Argument of Truth in the bottom. Takingness with
Nature, should Render things suspicious to us, rather than approved. Our best
rule of Judgment in this case, is that of our Savior; The Tree is known by
its fruits. And if by this we measure the general point, it will be found
wanting in what it pretends to, and not-a-little Reprovable.

1. In stead of Magnifying the Grace of Christ, and Merit of His sufferings, it
does (in effect.) Nullify both. It makes Redemption general as to Persons, but
not as to Things: That is, it Redeems the whole of Mankind from part of their
bondage; but no part of them from the whole of it;) Or upon such a Condition as
no Man in nature is able to perform: which (sure) is too defective to be the
Devise of Sovereign Wisdom and Grace: That cannot be called An Universal
Remedy that suffers it self to be Worsted by the disease. I doubt not at all,
That the blood of the Son of God in our Nature, is of infinite Merit; but
withal, that is of like Infinite Virtue and Efficacy; and will for ever
operate accordingly. But, if the success and saving effects thereof should
depend upon something to be done by Men, which Redemption it self does not
Invest them with; then will Men come in for a share with Christ, in the glory
of their Salvation: yea, in this case, any addition of humane ability,
annihilates the Grace of Christ; Gal. 5. 2. Whereas, to depend upon Christ for
Sanctifiction as well as Righteousness; To expect from Him a Power to Repent
and Believe, as well as Acceptance upon your believing, gives Him His true
honor, as intit'ling Him to the whole of your Salvation; which is (indeed) His
proper Due, and due to Him alone. And this may be a main Reason, why Men
professing the Name of Christ are so generally strangers to Faith and Holiness:
They do not seek it at the hands of Christ as a part of His purchase, according
to John 5. 40.

2. In stead of laying a foundation for Faith, and an help to believing; the
General Doctrine nuzzles the Soul in its unbelief upon a presumption of Power
in himself to believe when he will. We little think how much presumption and
carnal security derive from this Root: whereas Peculiar Redemption in the
vigor and latitude of it, ( viz. as procuring us a Right to Faith and
Holiness, with the Spirit of Christ to work them effectually in us;) is a far
greater encouragement to apply our selves to Christ for them, as a part of His
purchase; Phil. 1. 29.
and that without which we cannot partake the other benefits of His death. And
I cannot but think, that any Man in His right mind, (upon a due enquiry, and
through considering the Matter) would rathet depend upon such a Redemption, as
redeems from all iniquity; (though the persons concerned in that Redemption, be
but few) than on that which is supposed to Redeem All universally upon
condition of Faith and Repentance, but does not Reedeem from impenitency and
unbelief. In That Redemption let my part be that saves from Sin; That slayes
the enmity; That Reconciles to God effectually; that makes an end of sin, and
brings-in everlasting Righteousness; that does not only bring iuto a Savable
state conditionally; but works also, and maintains those Conditions and
Qualifications, that have Salvation at the End of them.

II. Since your propriety in Redemption is founded on your Interest in Electing
love; Infer. 2.
Give all diligence to make your Election sure; Spare not for pains; It Is fruit
will be worth all the cost and labor you can bestow upon it: If clear in this
point, the whole body will be full of light. And, among other Evidences of
Election, Look over those specified before under that head. Then Make out your
Interest in Redemption, by walking worthy of Redeeming love; which cannot be
done, but by being and doing fomething more than others: Some singular thing it
must be, that must warrant your claim to that singular Privilege. Holdforth
therefore in your life, the effects of your Union with Christ in His death: As
he gave Himself for you; so give up your self to Him. As He is for you; so, be
you for Him (for Him only) and not for another: 2 Cor. 8. 5. Hosea 3. 3.

1. Determine to know nothing, but Jesus Christ and Him Crucified: Count all
things else not worth your knowing, for in truth all knowledge, without this,
will come to Nothing. Let all (therefore) be loss and dung, for the excellency
of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, Phil. 3. 8.

2. Let nothing be so dear to you, as not to part with it for God, when it is
called for; and rise early to do it. This is love, 2 John 6.
that we walk after His Commandments. The Lord parted with His delight for you
from Eternity: There Is nothing more Reasonable, Nothing more Natural, to an
heart rightly placed; than that you should love and live to Him, who died for
you: And, whoever has known the Grace of God, and the love of Christ, in
truth; cannot but so judge.

3. Let not Christ be Divided: Know Him for your Lord as well as your Redeemer;
Take Orders from Him as your Captain General; Receive your Law from His Mouth;
What ever He bids you do, Do it; Follow Him where ever He goes; and Carry it so
as becomes His Attendants: The Armies in Heaven follow Him upon white Horses,
Rev 19. 14.
and arrayed in white: Be not your own Director in any thing, Nor overhasty;
Stir not up your Beloved until He please; But Await His Counsel and Conduct, as
preferring His knowledge of times and Seasons, with the manner and method of
His Working and prescribing, before your own.

4. Let Nothing divide you from Christ: Let Nothing but death, yea, let not
death it self, separate between you and Him. Nothing (you see) could separate
Him from you; yea, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
had it not been for you, and such as you are, He had not dyed. We are not our
own, we are bought with a price; which is the highest engagement, in every
state and Duty; whether living or dying, Romans 14. 8.
to be the Lord's.

III. Christ's giving Himself a Ransom for you: Infer. 3.
warrants your largest expectation of Good things from Him: What Sins too great
to be pardoned? or iniquities so stubborn as not to be subdued? Heb. 9. 14
or Graces so precious, as not to be obtained? The Lord delights in nothing
more than Mercy; The only Bar was Sin; which being dissolved by the blood of
Christ, Grace and Glory run freely. The making us Kings and Priests unto God,
yea, One in the Father and Himself, being the thing He dyed for; Joh. 17. 21.
no inferior good thing can be withholden from us Faith and Holiness are great
things (indeed) and highly to be valued: yet let me say, That even these and
all other good things, when laid totogether; will be but a very little heap to
that Grace which put us into Christ; 1 John 4 10.
the honor and privilege of Union with Him; and the price He has paid for
our Ransom: Herein is Love that God sent His Son to be the Propitiation for our
Sins: The Purchase is paid; Releafes are Sealed; and He in possession; All
things are ready: It is now but His Giving forth the Revenue that lies by Him;
which also He delights to do.

IV. This Doctrine also prepares a Chief corner Stone for the Saints
Perseverance. They for whom Christ died, died with Him; and if dead with Him,
they shall live with Him; Romans 6. 8. Even the Righteousness of God is engaged
to Save them; and then He must either prevent, Remove, or Overruled, what ever
would hinder that Salvation. Therefore unto Him that loved us, and washed us
from our sins in His own blood, Rev. 1. 5, 6.
be glory and dominion, for ever and ever, Amen.

[III] That the purpose and end of Christ's death cannot be frustrate: Or Those
whom Christ dyed for, cannot miss of the benefits accruing by His death.
All the Councels of God from eternity; All His promises and Declarations
holding forth those Councels; and all His Dispensations in order to their
accomplishment, have a special relation to Christ as dying for His people; and
their actual Salvation thereby, as the end thereof.

Now, the End of a Thing is that for which the Thing it self, is; and but for
which, it had not been: it is that the Chief Agent principally proposes, and
aims at: and if he be wise, he will certainly use and appoint such Means, and
Order them in such manner, that the thing designed shall not miscarry.

Men (indeed) may miss of their End: They aim at This, and That Is produced; (as
in building the Tower of Babel:) But this is still from some imperfection in
themselves; Either the Thing it self is not feasible; Or the way to it is
imprudently contrived; or the Means unduely applied; their minds alter; or they
are made to desist by a power above them, etc. But, God only wise and Almighty,
it is not so with Him; None of those things, which impede the designs of Men,
can happen to His; There can be no other Event of them, but what He setly
intended: The least of His Purposes shall never suffer disappointment; much
less that great Design of Men's Salvation by the Death of Jesus Christ: For,

1. The Thing it self i^ feasible: Millions of Souls are gone to Heaven on His
account.

2. It was so wisely contrived, That all Interests concerned are secured and
satisfied; God is Just in J^stifying; The Sinner saved, even whiles Vengeance
is taken on his Sins; and Christ well pleased with a Seed to serve Him.

3. The way of obtainment is such as will certainly compass the End: The Divine
Power is engaged in it, which rests not (in the least) on the concourse or
compliance of any frustrable Instrument.

4. His Heart cannot be taken off from it: It is That which His blessed
thoughts have run upon from Eternity; and those Thoughts of His stand fast to
all Generations. And,

5. No higher Power can supersede His Decree; He is Sovereign Lord, and
controlleth all.

There he diverse Arguments which readily offer to confirm the Matter in hand.

I. The first is from the Nature and Import of Redemption: Arg. 1.
It was not the mere depositing of the Ransom demanded, as a pledge to secure
the Creditor's Satisfaction, in case the Treaty took effect: Nor was it such a
pledge as might be resumed or paid-back, in case it succeeded not: Neither yet
was the Price of that undervalue and imperfection as to need the addition of
any thing from without it self, to make it effectual: But such a Price it was,
so paid, so accepted, and so qualified, as for ever concludes all Parties and
Interests concerned in it. It was in all respects Adequate to, and worthy of,
the Purchase designed by it. Redemption is a term of large comprehension; It is
next to Election, and carries in it All that Election has Chosen us to: It
does not barely make Men Releasable, or Capable of pardon: but the Actual and
Eternal Deliverance from Sin, Satan, Death, and the Law; together with the full
and perfect Salvation of Redeemed Ones, is included in it. And this is not
barely affirmed, but evident proof will make it good. A Witness or two for each
of these.

1. The Redemption wrought by Christ imports Satisfaction: Without this, the
World had not been Reconciled; Nor could it be said the pleasure of the Lord
had prospered in His hand: But both these are affirmed; Isa. 53. 10. 2 Cor. 5.
18, and 19. and Heb. 2. 17. expressly, That He made Reconciliation for the Sins
of the People: Yea, our Grand Creditour proclames Himself satisfied, by His
sending from Heaven to Release our Surety.

2. Justification, or Deliverance from Guilt: Ephesians. 1. 7, In whom we have
Redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of Sins. Gal. 3. 13, Christ has
Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law; being made a Curse for us: He blots out
the Handwriting against us, Nailing it to His Cross, Col. 2. 14.

3. It imports the vanquishing and binding of the Strong Man; who would not
else have let-go the Prey: By death He destroyed Him who had the power of
death; that is, the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. By the blood of His Cross He spoiled
Principalities, and Powers, and triumphed over them, Col. 2. 15.

4. Freedom from the power of sin: Romans 6. 6, Our old Man was Crucified with
Him, -- that henceforth we should not serve Sin: Upon which it follows; Sin
shall not have dominion over you, ver. 14.

5. Inherent Holiness, or Sanctification: Col. 1. 21, You that were sometimes
enemies in your mind, now has He reconciled; in the Body of His flesh through
death, to present you Holy, etc. ver. 22. -- We are sanctified through the
offering of the Body of Jesus Christ; Heb. 10. 10. and Romans 6, 18, Being then
made free from Sin, ye became the Servants of Righteousness: And that it was by
virtue of Christ's death, appears by ver. Heb. 9. 14.
8, For, if we be dead with Christ, we shall also live with Him.

6. It likewise imports Resurrection: Joh. 6, 54, 55, I will raise Him at the
last day; For my flesh is meat indeed, (that is, as Crucified) Christ dying,
was the death of death; Hos. 13. 14.

7. It also extends to the actual possessing of Redeemed ones, with blessedness
and Glory: Romans 8. 30. Wh^m He justified, them He glorified. Liberty of entering
into the holiest, is by the blood of Jesus, Heb 10. 19. and Rev. 5. 9, 10. That
have Redeemed us unto God by thy blood; and have made us Kings and Priests: (It
is the voice of Those in Heaven.)

Now, All these are in Redemption, they proceed out of Christ's fullness as a
Redeemer: And for this cause it was, that Paul cared not to know any thing but
Jesus Christ and Him Crucified. It is true, That the Resurrection of Christ,
His Ascension, Sitting at God's right hand, and Intercession have their
respective influence into every of those particulars aforenamed; but they all
spring from His Crucifixi^n: If He had not dyed, He had not been a Priest for
ever (as He is) after the order of Melchisedeck, Heb. 9. 12.

II. Another Argument is from the inestimable worth and dignity of the Ransom
that was given: Arg. 2.
It was the life of the Son of God; Matthew. 20. 28. Heaven and Earth will bear
no proportion in value to this price of Redemption: which therefore could not
be parted-with for a doubtful or uncertain Purchase. In this lies the stress of
the Apostle's Argument; Who when He would set forth the happy estate of God's
Elect, and prove them above the Reach of danger; He does it in two words, (but
very significant ones) [ Christ has dyed] Who shall condemn? It is [Christ
that dyed] Romans 8. 38. The Eminency of the Person, and the sufferings He
submitted to; as they greatly illustrate His love to Men; So they strongly
affirm and insure the event of His death: If reconciled to God by the death of
[His Son] much more Saved by His life, Romans 5. 10. It may truly be said of
every one He died for, Ezekiel. 18. 9.
He is just, He shall surely live. But this in the same respect and sense, as
those then unborn were said to be sanctified through the offering of the body
of Jesus Christ, Heb. 10. 10. And their Old Man to be crucified with Him: Romans
6. No Man is actually justified till he actually believes: But Repentance and
Faith being purchased by Christ, for those He died for; They shall as certainly
be made to Repent and Believe, as that Christ died for them, Phil. 1. 29.

III. The Righteousness of Christ is more prevalent and effectual to His Seed,
Arg. 3.
than Adam's transgression was to his: All his Posterity (indeed) fell under
the Curse by it; yet so, that there was still (through the Intervention of
Grace) a possibility of Release: But the Righteousness of Christ has so
perfectly recovered and 'stablished His Seed, that their justified 'state can
never be lost. And the Reason is, because Grace has outdone Sin, and gone
beyond it, Grace has abounded much more, Romans 5. 20. Which super-abounding of
Grace, cannot referr to the Subjects of Grace, as if they were more in number
than the Subjects of Sin; (for, sin came upon All, and Grace cannot come upon
more than all:) But it is meant of the prevalent efficacy of Grace; and the
permanency of its effects toward all that are the Subjects of it: Romans 5. 21.
And, thence it is, that Grace is said to Reign, and that to Eternal life.

IV. If the End of Christ's death might possibly be frustrate; Arg. 4.
as possibly the very end of God's making the World, might suffer
disappointment. All things were made for Himself; and by this scale they ascend
to Him; The World for the Elect, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.
The Elect for Christ, and Christ for God. All His works praise Him; but above
all, that of Redemption, as of highest note and eminency. Most conspicuously
does the Glory of God shin^-forth in the face of Christ as Dying; and as dying
for such an End; (viz. the Salvation of His People:) It is the chief of the
ways of God, the very Meridian and height of His Glory, (not essential, but
manifestative) both in this world, and that to come. It therefore behoved Him
so to lay it, that of all his designments, This might be sure to succeed. For,
do but subtract the sureness of its Effect; and leave His Redeemed in a
perishable condition; and it draws a blemish instead of beauty, upon all the
Divine Attributes.

1. The end of God's setting forth Christ a Propitiation, Romans 3. 25, 26.
was to declare His Righteousness in the Remission of sins; (which it does
doubly,) 1. That without satisfaction, sin could not justly be remitted. 2.
That satisfaction being given, it could not justly be imputed; Who shall
condemn? It is Christ that dyed. Romans 8. 34.
But if those for whom this plenary satisfaction has been given, should not be
justified and effectually saved, Divine Justice would be as liable to
impeachment, as if He had saved them without: And so, the thing designed for
the honor of His Righteousness, would turn to its disparagement.

2. It would not accord with the love and goodness of God toward His Elect,
that That which was meant for their Recovery, Joh. 3. 19.
and was also a price well-worthy their Ransom; should possibly turn to their
deeper condemnation: (for, so it must if they be not effectually saved:) This
could not be that Pleasure of the Lord which should prosper in the hands of
Christ.

3. It would not be according to the Faithfulness and Truth of God, that Christ
should fail of That He was promised, and earnestly looked-for, as the fruit of
His Sufferings; which was a Seed to serve Him: Isa 49 6. chapter 53. 10. Prove 8. 31.
The thoughts of which were matter of complacency to Him from Everlasting. But
if those He died for, should not only abide in the same condemnation He came to
deliver them from; but under a much sorer vengeance than if He had not
undertaken for them; How grievous would it be to Him, and contradictious to the
Faithfulness of God!

4. Another End of Redemption was, That the manifold Wisdom of God might
shine-forth in the sight of Angels and Men. Christ crucified is the Wisdom of
God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. But if it were so contrived, that the Thing chiefly designed
might possibly miscarry, it would be no illustration of Wisdom. Will one of
common prudence part with His Jewels and choycest treasure, and that in such
manner as never to be regained, and leave his purchase knowingly under hazard?
Men (^^deed) may possibly waste their Estates in Trials and Essays that come
to nothing, but did they foresee the success, they would not so expose their
prudence to reproach.

5. The Greatness and Power of God would suffer an eclipse, if it were in the
power of Creatures to defeat. His most wise and holy Designments, and hinder
the accomplishment of His greatest work: What would the Egyptians say, but
that He destroyed them, because not able to go through with what He undertook?
Numb. 14. 16.

6. Lastly, If the end of Christ's death might possibly be frustrate; Then that
blessed project for glorifying the Grace of God, might possibly be disannulled
and come to nothing: For, None but Saved Ones do or can glorify that Grace.

V. Another Argument for the Sure effect of Christ's death, Arg. 5.
is, because He has the Management of the whole work committed to Himself; as
well the Application or Redemption, as the procurement of it: He is the
Repository Root, and Treasury, wherein all the benefits of Redemption are laid
up; and the Great Almoner by whose hand they are dispensed. Adam was no more a
public, Person after his fall: The new Stock was not entrusted with him, but
put into the hands of Christ, who will give a better account of it: For

VI. There is Nothing wanting to Him (who is our Redeemer) which might any way
conduce to the final Compleatment of His Work. Arg. 6.
There are Five things mainly requisite, to make a great undertaking
Successeful; viz. Authority, Strength, Understanding, Courage, and
Faithfulness: All which, the Captain of our Salvation is eminently invested
with; Joh. 3. 35.
The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into His hand.

1. Authority; He was appointed to His Office: (For, as Mediator, the Father
is Greater than He:) He came not of Himself, but the Father sent Him, Joh. 9.
42. He was called of God, Isa. 42. 6 Heb. 7. 21.
Heb. 5. 4, 5. It was laid on Him, and undertaken by Him, in the way of a
Covenant, And Confirmed hy an Oath; Never to be Reversed; which also may partly
be the Meaning of God the Father's Sealing Him, Joh. 10. 18. Isa. 61. 1.
Joh. 6. 27. The Government is laid upon His Shoulder; He has the Key of David
committed to Him, Rev. 3. 7. Which shows the absoluteness of His Authority:
Gen 41. 44.
Without Him, No man can lift up his hand or his foot in all the Earth.

2. Strength or Power; These cannot be wanting to Him, if All in Heaven and
Earth be sufficient for it, Matthew. 28. 18, And this he has, That He might give
Eternal life to as many as He dyed for, Joh. 17. 2. Which if they should miss
o^, it would be said, That all power was not able to Save them. He that made
the World, is surely well able to Govern it, and to overruled whatever comes
into it: He would never have suffered sin (the only enemy) to invade it, if He
could not have quelled it at pleasure. Isa. 63. 1. Chapter 9. 6.
Their Redeemer is strong; The Lord of Hosts is His name; He shall [thorowly]
plead their cause: Jer. 50. 34.
He must reign until He shall have put all enemies both under His own feet and
ours, 1 Cor. 15. 25. Romans 16. 20.

3. Understanding, or Knowledge; This cannot be wanting to Him, who is the
Wisdom of the Father; The Lord has given Him the tongue of the Learned, that
He might speakwords [in season] to him that is weary, Jsa. 50. 4. He knows His
work what it is; How to effect it; and who they be that are concerned in it.

(1) He knows what His work is; that it is, To seek and to save that which was
lost: Not to bring Men into a salvable condition, (as some speak) but to Save
them, Mat. 1. 21. His work was, To open the blind eyes; To bore the deaf ears;
To restore the withered Limbs; To cleanse the Lepers; To heal the Sick; To
raise the Dead; To cast out Devils; To preach the Gospel, and to cause those it
belongs unto, to hear and receive it: he knows they are Dead, and He knows as
well, that He is to Quicken them: and thence we have it in Joh. 5. 25, The Dead
shall hear and live: And Chap. 10. 16, Other Sheep I have; Them also must I
bring; and they shall hear my voice. He is also to keep them, Joh. 17 12. 22.
Chapter 6. 39.
and look to them, so as that one be not lost; and sinally, To raise them up at
the last day, and to take them to Heaven with Him: All which He is perfectly
acquainted with, His work is before Him. Isa. 40 10.

(2) As He knows His work, what it is; so the best season and method for its
performance. He came in the fullness of time; when things were ripe for His
coming: He came Then when there was most need of Him; the Devil's Kingdom at
the highest, his Oracles in greatest credit, the World most oppressed by the
Roman Power, and the true Religion near quite depraved among the Jews. It
argues a Dextrous understanding, To take an enemy in his Ruff, at his highest
pitch of strength and confidence, and throw him on his back: To succor a
distressed Friend or Ally, when brought under foot, and set him on his high
places; This the Scripture calls A strengthening of the Spoiled against the
Strong: Amos 5. 9.
And thus does our Lord Jesus Christ, Who is (partly) therefore said to be of
Quick understanding. Isa. 11. 3. Chapter 52. 13.
In all His Undertakings He deals prudently: And to This it is, that Hannah
ascribes success; The Lord is a God of [knowledge] and His Purp^ses come to
pass, 1 Samuel 2. 3.

(3.) He knows Who they are for whom He is to do it. The fruits of his death
are not as things to be given in common; They fall not indifferently upon Men,
(as Rain upon all sorts of ground:) He knows Whom he came to Redeem; Not their
Number only, but their Names; They were all written in his bo^k: And so well is
He versed in it, Joh. 10. 3.
That He calls them all by their Names: He does not omit any, nor call One
for Another: He knows Whom the Father has Chosen and Given to Him: chapter 13. 18.
He can neither forget them, Nor Mistake them: They are written in His breast,
and on the palms of His hands, Isa. 49. 16.

(4.) To a Great undertaking is required Courage, or Greatness of Spirit; to
confront opposition, and cutthrough difficulties: And if this be wanting, all
other Endowments will signify little, as to success. And how was our Lord and
Redeemer qualified as to this! When He was entering into his passion, (against
which He prayed, If it were possible, that Cup might pass from Him:) He then
needed Courage in the Abstract; and we find That He had it answerably. In
Isaiah 50. 7, the Prophet brings Him in as putting on His Armor of proof:
Therefore have I set my face as a Flint, and I know that I shall not be
confounded. In the greatness of this His strength, did He travel through all
those Contradictions of Sinners, Temptations, Reproaches, Blasphemies, etc. And
when His hour was come, He did not Recoil, nor hide Himself from them; No, nor
stay till they came where he was; Joh. 18. 4.
but goes to meet them. And though He might have had more than twelve Legions
of Angels for asking; He waives their assistance, and in His own single person,
Undertakes both this World and the Powers of darkness; yea, and the Wrath of
His Father too; which was much more grievous, and of far Greater terror, than
all the Rest. And in all this, He was Alone; there was None with Him. And, that
an Angel appeared to Him from Heaven strengthening Him; It was rather a Token
and Part of His deep humiliation, (That the Mighty God should seem to want, and
so admit the proffered service of His Creature) than a lessening of His
sufferings. Luke 22. 43.
Now, all this was for the Procurement of Redemption; And can He then be
wanting to the Effectual application of it? He cannot shrink at the sight of
straggling parties, that has Won the pitched battle, and remains absolute Master
of the Field: For this also, we have a sure word of Prophecy, in Isa. 42. 4, He
shall not fail, nor be discouraged, until He have set Judgment in the Earth.

(5.) Faithfulness: This also is a grand and Necessary qualification for an
high Undertaking: And for this our Redeemer is also signally Eminent. To do the
Father's Will, was That He came for from Heaven: And this was His Will, Joh. 6.
38, 39.
That of all He had given Him, He should loose nothing; but should Raise it up
at the last day: that is, That He should give them Eternal life; as it is in
the 17 John 2. And we find Him professing, That He had done it accordingly, (v.
12.) and that He will do it, (v. 26.) according to His Promise so often
repeated in the 39, 40, 44, 54. v. of John 6. And He keeps them, in
Faithfulness to His trust; viz. That the Scripture might be fulfilled. Joh. 17
12.
Judas was let-go, to fall by his own transgression; Whom (doubtless) He could
and would have kept, as He did the Rest; had he been (as they were) committed
to His Charge: For, He gives to every one, according as He received for them;
as is seen by comparing Psalm. 68. 18. with Ephesians. 4. 8. In the one place, it is
said, He received Gifts for Men; and in the other, (which is a quotation of the
former) He gave Gifts to Men: Those therefore for whom He Received Eternal
life, cannot fail of it, unless He should fail of His Trust; which indeed He
cannot do, for He is Faithful in all His house, and That as a Son: Heb. 3. 5, 6.
and joynt-interest (you know) is a Natural and prevalent Obligation to
Faithfulness. If any should offer to dispossess Him, He would answer as Naboth
did Ahab; 1 Kings 21. 3.
God forbid that I should part with the Inheritance of my Father. And His
Faithfulness further appears, in that He makes it a Main part of His business
now in Heaven, to have this work perfected; He ever lives to make Intercession
for Those He died for, Heb. 7. 25. There is great weight put upon this, in Romans
8. 34, Who is he that Condemns? It is Christ that died; yea rather, that is
Risen again -- Who also [maketh Intercession] for us. And the sum of His Prayer
is, (1) That Those given to Him, might be kept from evil, John 17. 15. (2) That
they might be One in the Father and Himself, v. 21. And (3) That they may be
Where He is, to behold His Glory, v. 24.

Now then, If the Salvation of Those He died for, was the End of His death: If
it be the Father's Will, that they should be saved: If also this Salvation be
the Thing for which He prays: Joh. 11 22.
And, whatsoever He asks of God, He will give it: It needs must follow, That
the End of His death cannot be frustrate.

Inferences.
I. This Doctrine, Infer. 1.
holding forth the Impossibility of Frustrating the end of Christ's death; is a
Manifest proof and Argument for the Doctrine of Peculiar Redemption (before
asserted:) For, If the Salvation of Those He died for, was the End of His
dying; and the Intent of His death cannot be frustrate; Then He had not in His
eye and design, the Salvation of them that are Not Saved.

II. It gives Believers high encouragement in their Conflict against sin.
Infer. 2.
For, if our old Man was Crucified with Christ, That the body of sin might be
destroyed in us; and the intent of His death cannot be frustrate; Then sin
shall not have Dominion over you. Than which there is Nothing more strengthens
your hands in fighting against sin; as is Argued in Romans 6. 6, 12, 14, and 22,
verses.

The truth is, We have nothing to do, (in comparison) but to take the prey: for
the enemy is beaten to our hand. Eleazar slew, 2 Samuel 23. 10.
and the people returned after him only to Spoil: So is it here: Our business
now, is, to display our General's Trophies; To tell of His Victories, and
prepare our selves for His triumph; That we may be suitable Attendants on Him
at that Glorious and longed-for Day.

There are Straggling parties (indeed) who watch for our halting; and seldom
(else) can they have advantage against us: But their heart is broken; and if
followed in our Captain's victorious Name, they will still be Recoiling; Nothing
daunts them more than to see you stand to it: Your Adversary would make you a
Bridge of Gold, or any thing; (even to the half of his Kingdom) so you would
sound a Retreat; or speak no more in that Name. Gird up therefore the loins of
your Mind; let an holy Magnanimity possess you; as knowing your Conflict shall
end in your being Crowned. You Run not for an Uncertainty; therefore fight not
as they that beat the air: For, it is Nevertheless true, that your enemy is
stubborn, and your constant pursuit will make him desperate: Since he may not
have quarter, he will do all he can, Not to die alone: He will stand on his Stumps
when his legs are off; or lie on his back, and fight: (for his Malice is
implicable) He will never give-over, till quite out of breath; (and yet he will
not be quite without, whiles we have any; We must expire together) But here
lies the odds; That We, dying in the Conflict, shall rise again with Marks of
honor; and our Laurel hold green to Eternity: yea, we shall sit with our
Glorious Captain in His Triumphal Chariot, Rev. 3. 21. but our enemy lies in
eternal silence, and his Name shall Rot; or be Remembered only to Greaten our
Glory: Only (as before,) be sure you stand to it; set your face as a flint; as
your Lord and Master did; and know, That as he was not Confounded, so neither
shall you: All that he had, you have on your side, and the Merit of His
improvement added to it: What Power the Father gave to Him, He delegates to
you; even a power over all the power of the enemy; As it were an Antidote or
Supersedeas, to invalidate all that comes against you. Wherefore then should we
doubt? Though they come about you like Bees, In the Name of the Lord you shall
destroy them. Remember the advantages you have; Besides the bruifing of your
enemie's head, and that incurably; your own Head is in Heaven; and He is there
as on a Mount, to behold both yours and your enemies posture, and to send-in
relief; which He never fails to do at a dead lift: And He makes intercession
for you; whiles you are fighting, His hands are up, and never weary: and
therefore you may be confident of success. It was by virtue of His prayer, that
Peter's faith did not fail, when there was but an hairs breadth between him and
death: Pro. 30. 4. Jer. 31. 10, 11.
The Devil Winnow'd, but Christ stood-by, and held the Wind in Hist fist: The
Lord will keep His people, because He has Redeemed them.

III. Since the Lord has So firmly Secured the blessedness of His Redeemed
Ones; Infer. 3.
Then let None who hope themselves of that happy Remnant, darken their
evidences: Do Nothing, Omit Nothing, whereby your Interest in Redemption may be
rendered doubtful to you; lest you loose the Comfort and Strength which the Lord
intends His People, by thus firmly insuring of it.

IV. This also Confirms the Doctrines of Peculiar and Absolute Election; Infer.
4.
Effectual Calling; and Final Perseverance: As is very obvious to them that
will seriously Mind it. Every of which, has something of that kind, under
those respective heads.

And so I come to Effectual Calling, as the next great effect of peculiar
Redemption.

OF Effectual Calling.
THe Doctrine of Calling, (which I term Effectual to distinguish it from that
which is Outward only, and prevails not) respects the Means whereby, and the
Manner how, God's Elect are actually prepared for that Salvation He has chosen
them to: It is God's revealing His Son in them; and He does it by the Holy
Ghost; whose office it is, to Sanctify Whom the Father has Elected, and
Christ Redeemed. These three acts of Grace are peculiar to the Three Persons
respectively; as ye have it in Jude, v. 1.

Next to the Glory of His Grace, and the honor of His Son, the Lord has
placed the Blessedness of His People, as the principal End and Scope of all He
has done in the World* or will do, till He foldeth it up. It could not
therefore stand with His holy wisdom, to leave those He was pleased to choose
unto Salvation, to the conduct of their own Understanding and Will; with such
other helps as they have in common with other Men; and thereon to hang the
whole of His great design: For, by such a course, it would not only be
frustrable, but certainly defeated. For prevention whereof, and that the
purpose of His Grace might stand; He has made it of the very substance of
Predestination, to prepare and apply the Means, as well as to appoint the End;
which, in the Sacred Language, is termed, a Giving of all things pertaining to
life and Godliness.

The Sum of what I intend upon this Subject, 2 Pet. 1. 2.
is comprised in this Proposition;

That what ever things are requisite to Salvation, are given of God freely, to
all the Elect; and wrought effectually by the Divine Power; as the necessary
Means of that Salvation, to which He has appointed them.
By [Salvation] here, I understand, the Saints perfect settlement in
Blessedness and Glory: And, by [things requisite thereto] all those Gifts,
Graces, and Operations, that are any way necessary to their actual obtainment
of that State.

The [Divine Power] is that Ability of working, which God has reserved to
Himself; and is not Moved or Governed by the Creature's act, but by the Good
pleasure of His Own Will.

That diverse things are Requisite to Salvation, needs no proof: My business
therefore is, to show

I. What these Requisites are. II. Whence they come. III. To whom they do
belong, and by what Right? IV. The Way and Manner of God's dispensing them.
I. What these Requisites to Salvation are.
They are of three sorts; Some to be done for us; Some upon us, or in us; and
others by us; yet so, as Not without the special assistance of that good Spirit
who began the work, and who works all in all.

The Great thing to be done for us (next after Election) is Redemption from
sin: This was a work of infinite moment, and as far above the Undertaking of
Creatures; For,

1 The Justice of God, that must be satisfied, bya bearing the Curse due to
Transgressors: By this, we are saved from wrath; and without This, Divine
Justice will not open the house of His Prisoners.

2 All Righteousness must be fulfilled, by an absolute perfect Subjection to
the Law: By this we are interested in Eternal life; and without it, there is no
Entering into Rest.

3 The Devil (who had the power of death) must be destroyed, and his works of
darkness (by which he leads captive at his will) dissolved; That life and
immortality might be brought to light; and the prey delivered. None of which
works could ever have been performed, but by One of the same Nature with the
parties peccant or agressing; and yet equal in power and dignity with the
Majesty offended: For which cause and end it was, That God sent forth his Son
made of a woman, and made under the law, Gal. 4. 4, 5.
etc. That what the Law could not do, because of its weakness through the
flesh, the Son of God in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3.
might condemn sin in the flesh. (This was the proper subject of the former
Head.) The end of which Redemption was To bring in the next sort of Things
requisite to Salvation, viz. Such as are to be Done upon and in the Elect;
namely, their Reconcilement to God, and Receiving the Adoption of Sons. This is
the actual performance of what was intentionally in Election, and Virtually in
the death of Christ; as the necessary way to their ultimate End.

The sum of these Requisites lies in Faith and Sanctification; the One imports
their Right, the Other their capacity; Faith intitles, and Holiness meetens:
Both which, though expressed as two, are always together as if but One; and as
inseparable as light from the sun: and without These, our little world would
still be in darkness, notwithstanding all the light that shines about us, or
within us: Neither knowing our danger, nor how to escape it.

1. Faith; This, in general, is that spiritual light in which we see our
selves by nature the children of wrath, and wholly unable to change our state;
and withal, do apprehend God Justifying freely by His Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ; Romans 4. 24.
and to that end, do Roll our selves upon him; and give up our selves to His
Laws and Government. It is of the Essence of Faith to empty the Soul of self:
and

1. Of its own understanding: It is a beam of Divine light, which evidenceth
all a Man's natural knowledge to be ignorance and darkness* as to Spiritual
things: The Apostle speaks of it, as of a Faculty newly given: and the Nature
of its new objects, requires it; For, the natural man [cannot] discern the
things of God: They that have the best eyes now, were sometimes Darkness.

2. Faith empties the Soul of its own Righteousness.

1. By discovering the uncleanness of it, Isa. 64. 5. 2. By showing the
necessity of a Better, Romans 3. 20. 3. In whom this better is to be found, Romans
10. 4. 4. That it may be attained and had; Romans 3. 25. 5. That being attained,
the Soul is happy, and may triumph over all, Romans 8. 34. 6. That this better
Righteousness and its own cannot stand together, Gal. 5. 2. Romans 10. 3. And
then
3. The next work of Faith is, To empty the Soul of its own Strength; that is,
of all confidence in himself, as to the obtainment of that better
Righteousness. He makes it (indeed) his business, to be shut of his own; and
most gladly would be Invested and clothed-upon with the Righteousness of God;
but finds it a matter of transcendent difficulty: Now he is convinced, it is no
easy matter to be saved; since To believe, and to keep the whole Law, are
things of an equal facility, i. e. They are (in truth) both alike impossible to
him: Isa 27. 5.
He therefore, takes hold of the Strength of God, to work this Faith in him;
And so, by a Faith unseen, believes to a Faith that is visible: It Is Faith that
is at work all this while, though the Soul knows it not till afterward.

II. Sanctification (or Inherent holiness.) This consists in the expulsion (or
rather subduction and bringing under) of Corrupt nature, by bringing in the
Divine, and setting it uppermost in the Soul: Col. 1. 13.
It is an Actual translating of us out of Satan's Kingdom into His Own: It is,
To have Christ formed in us: To bear the Image of the Heavenly: To have
Dispositions according to God; and an heart after His Own. It is sometimes
called Regeneration, or a being born again: John 3. 7. Romans 11. 17.
The separating a Man from his Old stock; and grafting him into the New;
Whereby the Law becomes written in the heart: It is also called, The Passing
away of old things, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
and a be^oming New of all. Not that the old faculties are destroyed or blotted
out, in Regeneration; but reduced duced, Col. 3. 10.
or Renewed, according to the Image of Him that Creates it. As the Body, when
it shall be Regenerated (or raised again) It shall be the same that was sown,
but so changed in its qualities, as if it were another: So, in the Regeneration
of the Soul; the same Understanding, Will, Affections, Memory, remain; but are
quite otherwise disposed and qualified, according to the New Objects they are
to Converse with, 1 John 5. 20.

And being thus quickened by the Spirit of li^e from God, and set upon their
feet; they are capacitated for action, viz. in Things to be done by them: And
now, say they (as Daniel, Dan. 10. 9. 19.
Now) let my Lord speak, for Thou have strengthened me: And thence-forth, their
work and business is, to Glorify that Grace that has saved them; To walk
before God in the daily exercise of those Graces He has given them; To press
after Perfection; (that is) a Meetness for that State of Glory, which these
things are preparatory to; (which the Scripture calls, A walking worthy of the
Lord,) To show forth his praises, the virtues of Him that has called them;
Making His Law their Rule, and His Glory their End above all; And all in way of
dutiful Gratitude. For, though you may and ought to have respect to your own
Salvation, peace and comfort; yet so, as to substitute all to the Glory of
God's Grace. And take this, by the way, (to encourage you in your duty) That
the Glory of God and His people's blessedness, are so intertwisted, as never to
be divided: Whiles you keep That most directly in your eye and scope, your own
Concerns are most currently goingon; They fall-in together, and keep in the
same Channel.

II. Whence these Requisites to Salvation come?
That Jesus Christ, that Great Fundamental Requisite, or One thing necessary,
is the Gift of God, sent into the World by Him, and set forth a Propitiation
through faith in His blood; is above all need of proof. But the present enquiry
is, touching the Author of Faith and holiness; The Efficient Cause of
Regeneration; What Power it is, by which the New Creature is formed and brought
forth? Our Assertion is That the New Creature is God's workmanship entirely and
alone. This, the Scripture seems evident for: But, being a Truth unacceptable
to Nature; And there being some, who Owning the Name deny the Thing; we must
the more intently look to the proof of it: and our Argument for it is this;
That the Mew Creature must be wrought either by a Divine Power; Or, by a
Natural power; Or, by the concurrence of both together: But,

I It cannot be wrougbt by a Natural power; and that for these Reasons (among
others.)
1. Because it is a Creature; I.
and of all Creatures the Noblest and most excellent. All the Virtuo^i in the
World are not able to make an Atom: They may refine and sublimate things that
are: but cannot give the least being to that which is Not. How then should the
Natural Man give Being to the New Creation? To suppose such a thing, would be a
degrading to the Divine Nature; A setting the Image of the Heavenly below that
of the Earthly: For, He that builds, is worthy of more honor, Heb. 3 3.
than the thing that is built by him.

2. Nothing can afford That it has not in it self: II.
Now, Every Soul in nature is Darkness, and possessed with an habitual aversion
from God: And light is not brought out of darkness; nor a clean thing out of an
Unclean: No man will expect Grapes from thorns: the product will be according
to That of which it is produced; Every Seed will have its own body; Matthew. 7.
18. Joh. 3. 6.
An evil Tree cannot bring forth good fruit: That which is born of the Flesh is
flesh, and will never be better. Therefore the New Creature, being a Divine
Thing, cannot be Educed of Natural Principles.

3. The Natural Man is not only void of all virtue and property that tends to
Regeneration; III.
but is Opposite thereto: To be grafted into the true Olive Tree, Romans 11. 24.
is contrary to Nature: He is Enmity against God: and Enmity being a Principle
incapable of Reconcilement, it cannot be supposed it will help to destroy it
self. They will not so much as seek after God, Psalm. 10. 4. John 8. 44.
nor take Him into their thoughts. Satan they follow with natural Motion, but
as for the word of the Lord, Jer 44. 16 chapter 2. 25. chapter 17. 9.
they profess stoutly, They will not hearken unto it: They have loved
Strangers, and after them they will go: So desperately wicked are the hearts of
Men: They are even made up of fleshly lusts, which war against the Soul, And
whatsoever has respect to its happy Restorement. And this Enmity is maintained
and animated;

(1) By the Darkness that is in them, which all men in Nature are filled with;
or with false lights, which are equally P^rnicious and obstructive to this
Work: By reason hereof, the most glorious objects, though just before them, are
hid from their eyes; 1 Cor. 2. 14.
They do not, nor they cannot discern the Things which are of God: They have
false Conceptions of every thing, Call Good evil, and evil Good; put light for
darkness, and darkness for light; and the most excellent things are commonly
furthest off from their approbation. It Is a known Experiment, That the more
Spiritual any Truth is, the more will carnal Reason object against it; John 3.
9. ch 6. 52.
How can these things be? and How can this Man give us of His flesh to eat? By
all the understanding that Men have before Conversion, they are but more
strongly prejudiced against the Truth: Acts 17. 18. 1 Cor. 1. 19-23.

(2) This Enmity is further Confirmed and Fixed, by the Naturality of it. If it
were an Adventitious quality, it might possibly be separated: But Now it cannot
by any humane power. And that it is Natural appears, in that the Universality
of Mankind is infected with it: It is not Here and There One; Romans 3 9 18.
But All and Every one: Jews and Gentiles, are all under sin: None that
understands; None that seeks after God; Genesis 6. 13.
None that does good, no not One: Every imagination of their heart is only
Evil, and that continually; Every Man is brutish, Jer. 10. 14. Psalm. 51. 3. 58.
5.
and altogether filthy: and this in their Root; Conceived in sin; Go astray
from the womb, etc. It also grows up with them, and the longer it lives the
worse it is, and the more Impregnable: Romans 8. 7.
It is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.

And though, at times, they look another way (like Bullets of Stone or Lead,
which acted by a foreign power, are mounted into the Air) their upward Motion
quickly cease, because it was not Natural; They come again to their Center of
their own accord, and there they will live and die: As was verified in Saul,
Ahab, Agrippa, and others.

4. The New Creature cannot be the Product of Natural Power, IV.
because every thing is Received and Improved according to the Nature of that
which receives it. Plants and other Creatures, turn all their Nourishment into
their own Species and Property: A Vine and a Thistle both planted in one Soil,
have the same Sun, Dew, Air, and other Influences common to both; yet, each one
Converts the whole of that it receives into its own Substance and kind. You may
Plant and Prune and dig and D^ng an evil Tree, bestow what cost and pains you
will upon it; it does all but enable the more pregnant Production of evil
fruit: Just so does the Natural Man, Jude ver. 4.
even turn the Grace of God into lasciviousness: As to the Pure all things are
pure; Tit. 1. 15. Psalm. 119. 67. 2 Chr. 28. 22.
so to the Impure all things are defiled. David by his afflictions learned to
keep God's Law; but Ahaz trespassed yet m^re: Good Josiah his heart melts at
the reading of the Law, chapter 34. 27, 31. Jer. 36. 23. Romans 7. 8, 10.
he humbles himself and falls to Reforming; but wicked Jehoiakim, he cuts the
Roll in pie^es and burns it: Thus Sin, (i. e. Corrupt Nature) works death by
that which is Good.

II. The New Creature is not wrought by the Concurrence of Divine and Natural
Power [together:] For,
1. The Holy Ghost needs no assistance in His work: I.
Who and Where is he that stood up for his help, when He moved on the Waters,
Job. 38 4.
and brought forth this World into form? When He weighed the Mountains in
Scales, and the hills in a balance? Isa 40 12 15.
He that made all things of Nothing, cannot be supposed to need the aid of any.
As Man had nothing to do in the Conception of Christ's humane Nature, but the
Power of the Most High was alone in that work; so also it is in forming Christ
within us. Why should He call in the aid of another, unless deficient of
Himself? And He must greatly be streightened that takes-in the help of an Enemy.

2. If the Holy Ghost had need of Help, II.
the flesh affords Him not the least: For,

(1) The Natural Man is without strength: Romans 5 6.
The best-Natur'd Man in the World, until Regenerate, is but Flesh; And all
flesh is grass, 1 Pet. 1. 24. Job. 26. 2.
and the glory of it as the flower of grass; which fades in a Moment: It is an
Arm that has no strength. And it is not only so in it self, but it renders
weak and impotent what ever Relyes upon it, or may be used by it, for any
spiritual End. A Straw in the hand of a Giant, will make no deeper impression,
than if in the hand of a Stripling: The Law it self, Romans 8. 3.
which was ordained to life, is made weak through the flesh.

(2) The Flesh is an opposite principle; at perfect enmity against the Holy
Seed; (as you see before:) It answers as Pharaoh, Exodus 5 2.
Who is the Lord that I should obey Him? It Is whole business is to crush the
workings of the Spirit; and the Conflict cease not, but in the total
Overthrow of the one party. The Flesh and the Spirit always have been, are,
and will be Two: Yea, even where the Enmity has lost its dominion, it will
maintain a Conflict to the last; And if the one fights against the other, after
the New Creature is formed; it will doubtless oppose the first formation of it.

(3) If we should suppose the flesh able, in any respect, to give assistance in
this work; the Holy Ghost would none of it. 2 Cor. 5. 16. Deuteronomy. 22. 10: Deuteronomy.
22 9.
What Concord has God with Belial? such Mixtures are Abomination to Him: He
would not permit His people to yoke an Ox and an Ass together in p^oughing; Nor
to sow their Land with diverse seeds: And if in building an Altar, their Tool
were lift up upon it, the Lord reckons it defiled. Exodus 20. 25.

(4) Suppose a possibility of Conjunction, What would be the issue of it? When
the Sons of God went in to the daughters of men, Giants were born to them, Genesis
6. 4. If Creatures of several kinds should couple together, what can be
produced, but a Monster in Nature? such Monsters (in Spirituals) are
hypocrites, and temporary believers; In whom there is something begotten on the
will of Man, by the Common strivings and inlightenings of the Spirit; which
attains to a kind of formality; but proves (in the end) a lump of dead flesh;
It never comes to be a New Creature; as you s^e in Herod and Agrippa. An Owl's
egg, though hatched by a Dove or Eagle; will prove but a Night-bird; The Seed of
the bondwoman will be Carnal, though Abraham himself be the father of it.

A little further to illustrate this Truth; let us briefly review, What things
in the world, that are Common to Men, can be supposed to influence their hearts
so as to bring them to God; They may all be Reduced to five; A prosperous
Condition, Afflictions, The Word of God, The strivings of the Spirit, and
Miracles.

1. Prosperity: This, we find, has not done it: How many have been the worse,
and how few (if any) the better for it? Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked: In the
time of the Judges, Deuteronomy 32. 15.
when ever they had respite from trouble they presently fell to id^a^ry: when
Vzziah was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction. 2 Chr. 26. 16.
The Papacy, at this day, and for Centuries past; who in such splendid
prosperity, and who so wicked! They are not in trouble like other Men; their
eyes stand out with fatness, etc. But are they bettered by it? Ps. 73.
No, Pride compasses them about like a chain, and they set their Mouths
against the Heavens. Let favor be showed to the wicked, Isa. 26. 10
yet will he not learn Righteousness.

2. Afflictions and Judgments will not do it. It appears by Amos, Chapter 4. ver.
6-11. That that people were loaded with variety of judgments; yet they turned
not to Him that smote them; Isa. 1. 5. ^ chapter 57. 17.
The more they were stricken, the more they revolted. The Lord was wroth with
Ephraim, and smote him; He hid His face from Him, and was wroth: (which, if any
thing, should have Moved him:) But what cares Ephraim? He went on frowardly in
the way of his Heart. The Jews continue to this day, in their unbelief; though
wrath be come upon them to the uttermost. The Antichristian world, when vials
of wrath were powered forth upon them; they blasphemed God, Re^. 16. 9, 11 Hos
7. 9. Pro. 27. 22.
and Repented not: Bray a fool in a Mortar, yet will not his foolishness depart
from him.

3. The Word of God, and his Ordinances; Neither is it in these, to turn the
heart back again. Of this, the people of Israel are a pregnant example: Romans 3
2. Deuteronomy. 4 7.
To them were Committed the Oracles of God; No Nation had God so nigh them, as
they; and yet the most stubborn stiff-necked people, that ever the earth bore.
2 Chr. 36. 15, 16 Jer. 25. 3, 4.
The Lord sends them His prophets, rising early and sending: And see how they are
used! First, they slight His Messengers, and send them away empty: Then they
fall to beating and imprisoning of them: Jer. 37. 15.
yea, they proceed further (for this enmity knows no bounds) Some they Stoned;
Others they slew with the Sword: Lu. 20. 10-15
When was there One that escaped them? At last, He sends them His Son; Surely,
they will Reverence Him! No, This is the heir; Come, let us kill Him: And thus
they went-on Till there was no remedy.

4. The World of Ungodly in Noah's time; Genesis 6. 3.
After warning of the flood, they had the Spirit of God striving with them
Sixscore years together: And yet, Not a Man in the whole Universe
prevailed-upon. The people in the Wilderness; How many ways did the Lord
strive with them, by mighty deliverances, terrible Appearances, Merciful
Providence, Dreadful Judgments; And this, Forty years together! and yet,
still they went-on Rebelling against Him, and vexing his holy Spirit. Isa. 63.
10.


5. Miracles will not do it: What a Multitude of These, mingled with Judgment,
where shown upon Pharaoh! All which did but further harden him. Exodus 7. 14,
22. Chapter 8. 19. Chapter 9. 7, etc*
Then the People in the Wilderness; Take but that one Instance of Korah and his
Company; The Earth clave asunder, and swallowedup the chief of the Mutineers,
with all that they had; They went alive into the Pit: Number* 16. 32. ver. 35.
Two hundred and fifty more were consumed by fire from Heaven: Which one would
think should cause them to fear the Lord, and do no more presumptuously; and
yet, the next thing we hear of them, ver. 41*
on the very Morrow, they are at it again; And that, v. 41.
not a Party of them, but the whole Congregation.

All which considered, and laid together; It follows with much evidence,

III. That the New Creature is the Product of Divine Power alone.
The Evangelist John is clear on our side, touching this Original and Pedigree
of it; Both Whence it is not, and whence it is: Joh. 1. 12.
It is born (1) not of blood; It belongs not to, nor is brought forth in, any
as they are Men, made of flesh and blood; To. 9. 7.
Nor as they are Abraham's feed according to the flesh: Nor (2) is it born of
the will of the flesh, The carnal and sensual affections have nothing to do in
the spiritual birth: Nor (3) of the will of Man: The rational faculties, by
which Men are set above the Rank of other Creatures; these do not contribute
toward our Divine Sonship: But (4) It is of God: i. e. It is His Work alone;
and the Natural Man has nothing to do in that birth: he is perfectly unactive
in it, Ezekiel. 37. 5, 9, 14:
even as the Dry bones in causing themselves to Live: Or as Lazarus in Reviving
himself; of whom it is said, Joh. 11. 44.
He that was dead came-forth bound hand and foot: Which was such a
Demonstration of Divine Power, that the Pharisees themselves acknowledge, v. 48.
If they now let Him alone, all men will believe in Him. (And if it were not
so, the Lord alone should not be exalted) And with this fallsin that other
beloved Disciple James, James 1. 18. 2 Pet. 1. 3.
Of His own will begat He us: i. e. By His Own Divine Power, He forms and
brings-forth the New Creation, without any assistance from the Old, or
Cooperation of it. Peter, he also tells us, It is born of Incorruptible Seed:
1 Pet. 1. 23. John 3. 8.
And John, again, That It is born of the Spirit: which is, plainly, to be of the
Offspring of God. Of like tenor is that of the Prophet, Isa. 26. 12.
Thou have wrought all our works in us: Ephesians. 2. 10.
and that of Paul, We are his workmanship; Ps. 100. 2.
As also That of the Psalmist, It is He that has made us (and not we our
selves) His people. We find it here, and in John, expressed both Negatively and
Positively; as purposely and for ever to exclude whatever is in Man, from
being so much as thought contributary to the New Creation; and that the whole
Work might be Fathered upon God only: Which is indeed, the natural Result of
all those Scriptures which speak of this Work under the Notion of a Creature;
which necessarily implies, That the whole of It, both Matter and Form, is from
the Creator: (For, in truth, a Creature's foundation is Nothing, besides the
good pleasure of God.) It may further be Noted, That in James, The Father of
Lights is said to beget it; and in the Galathians, Jerusalem which is above, is
said to be the Mother of it: and in John (as before) that It is born of the
Spirit: And, if Father and Mother; Begetter and Bringer-forth, are both in
Heaven; what shall the Man of Earth found his pretensions upon, as to the
Parentage of the New Creature?

And further, It is worthy of Remark,

1. What sort of Instruments were mostly used in this Work; Not the Learned,
but Illiterate Men: And of These, such most eminently, as had neither elegancy
of Speech, 2 Cor. 10. 10.
Nor Majestic presence: And the End of this was, That it might appear, and Men
might be Convinced, That their Faith stood not in (was neither made nor
maintained by) the wisdom of Men, 1 Cor. 2. 3, 4, 5.
but the Power of God.

2. The natural unaptness of the Persons (commonly) wrought upon, to Receive
those highborn Principles: Not many of the Wise and Noble; but the poor, base,
and foolish; (i. e. In comparison of Others) And why These? Truly, it was to
make good the Truth that is here asserted, viz. That no flesh might Glory in His
presence. ^ Cor* 1. 26, 27.
And yet likewise take Notice, That the Wise and Noble were not excluded;
Witness the wife of Herod's Steward, Joseph, Nicodemus, and Sergius Paulus,
Acts 13 7.
a Prudent Man: Which further illustrates the Power of God, in that He did, by
those weak and contemptible Means, bring-in also such as These.

3. The Scripture's so emphatically ascribing the Work unto God: which kind of
ascription, were very improper, if Faith and Holiness were things so Common,
and easily attained; and the Natural Man so Able and Virtuous an Engine in that
Work, as most Men imagine. Paul siles it, The Faith of the Operation of God:
(...). 2 12.
Isaiah makes it dependant on the Arm of the Lord [Revealed] (i. e. Made-bare,
Isa. 53. 1.
and put-forth to the utmost:) Our Savior, He attributes it to God the Father,
as [ Lord of Heaven and Earth:] And Paul, again, To the exceeding Greatness of
His Mighty Power, even the same by which He raised Jesus Christ from the Dead;
Even Then, when the sins of all His People lay upon Him; And all the Malice,
Strength, and Subtilty, of the Powers of Darkness, were up in Arms against it:
Which was, indeed, the highest Indication of Divine Power, that ever was
put-forth, or shall be.

III. Our next Enquiry is, Who those blessed Ones are to whom these Requisites
to Salvation do belong? and by what Title?
The Answer is, They all do belong to Elect Persons, and That in right of their
Election.

To put Effects in the place of Causes; and Causes, of Effects; is a great
absurdity in Natural things: and yet, how prone are we to it, in Matters of
Divine Concernment! which chiefly comes from the pride of our Spirits; who fain
would be Somebody in procuring our own happiness; and do therefore ascribe it
to any Cause, rather than That which is proper to it. This is a Great Evil; and
the more perilous and catching, because espoused by Some of
no-common-profession; and That with great pretenses of Reason for it. To Refute
which, your most rational course will be To search and consult the Scriptures;
whose testimony and right Reason, do always sort-together: And if by this
Ascent you follow Salvation, and all the Conducements thereto, up to their
Head; you shall find them all to be entirely and absolutely of God, and
contained in the same Decree: And consequently, That Faith and Holiness are the
Effect and certain Consequent of Election.

The genuine Import of Scripture-Salvation, is broad and comprehensive;
extending to all manner of Requisites, which any way conduce to the perfect
accomplishment of the thing it self: Outward Salvation, what ever belongs to
the Outward Man's preservation; As Water, Bread, Walls, Bulwarks, etc. Isa. 26.
1. Salvation will appoint Walls and Bulwarks: i. e. The promise of Salvation,
implies and carries in it, all things pertaining to Safety: So, Spiritual
Salvation, what ever pertains to Blessedness and Glory; as Redemption, Faith,
Holiness, and Holding-out to the End: Any of which being absent, would
invalidate all the rest; As one Round of a Ladder pluck'd-out, hinders your
ascent to the Top. If One gives me a piece of Land that is round-inclosed; the
Law gives me a Way to it (though no express mention thereof in my Deed) so as
to take the profits: Otherwise, little would his Gift signify to Me! Salvation
is That the Elect are endowed with; Faith and Holiness, the necessary Way to
their actual possession: And therefore, These they must be ordained unto (and
are) as well as to Salvation it self: For, being Predestinate to the Adoption
of Sons, Romans 8. 28. Ephesians. 1 5. 1 John 3. 2.
and to be conformed to the Image of Christ; (which is not perfectly
accomplished till His appearing in Glory) they must be Predestinate also to all
those intermediate Dispensations and Graces, which are requisite thereto: For,
Right to the End, gives Right to the Means: They are therefore said to be
Chosen to Salvation [through] Sanctification of the Spirit, 2 These. 2, 13.
and belief of the Truth. In order of Intention, God wills the End first, and
then the Means; In order of Execution, the Means first, as directive to That
End: To. 8. 30. Ephesians. ^* 4, 8, 10*
The End is the cause of the Means, and Election the Cause of them both.

The Promise of Canaan to Abraham's Seed, did virtually contain what ever must
come between the making of the Promise, and the final performance of it; As (1)
To multiply his Seed into a Nation. (2) To keep Esau, Laban, and Others, from
hurting them. (3) To provide for them in time of famine. (4) To preserve and
increase them in Egypt, notwithstanding the Egyptians craft and cruelty to
suppress them. (5) To bring them forth with an high hand, in contempt of
Pharaoh's Resolvedness against it, and his Potency to withstand it. (6) To
divide the Sea before them, and provide them a Table in the Wilderness. (7) To
cause their Enemies hearts to faint, and become as Water. (8) To send the
Hornet before them, and to fight for them, etc. (For Otherwise, the Lord's
giving them Canaan, had been but as the Pope's giving England to the Spaniard,
that is, If he could get it:) And lastly, To pardon their manifold great and
high provocations; by which they exposed themselves to wrath and extirpation
daily: So is it in the Case of Election; It draws with it even All that is
tendent to the Saints actual Investiture with Glory. The Apostle therefore
linketh Eternity past with Eternity to come: He makes Election and
Glorification the two extreme points of the Compass; Calling and Justification
(which are parts intermediate) he founds upon the First, in order to the Last;
and gives you their Set-course, in Romans 8. 38. Whom He did Foreknow, Then also
He did Predestinate: (To what?) to be conformed to the Image of His Son; And
whom He did Predestinate, them also He Called; (And what did He Call them to?
He Called them to Holiness, to Glory and Virtue:) 2 Pet. 1. 3.
And whom He Called, them also He Justified and Glorified: These All do belong
to One and the same persons, and that by virtue of the Decree; and no one of
them did ever go alone.

The like Succession of Causes and Effects ye have in the 16th of Ezekiel;
Ezekiel. 16. 6-12
The Lord finds them in their blood, that is, in their natural condition: He
enters into Covenant with them, and makes them His Own; (there is Election:)
Then He Washes them, and that thoroughly; (there is their Justification:) And
then Adorns them, (there is their Sanctification;) which always is Consummated
in Glory.

In the 17th of the Acts, Acts 17. 1-5.
ye have Paul preaching at Thessalonica: The same Doctrine was propounded to
all indefinitely; (and it must be so, for the Minister knows not the Elect from
other Men) But the Holy Ghost, who searches the deep things of God, and has
the Management of this Work committed to him, Joh. 10. 3. Isa. 27. 12.
He knew the Elect by Name, and accordingly took them; Gathered them One by
One; (each One in his proper time) and opened their Ear to discipline; Making
them That they were Chosen unto. And the same Apostle, in his Epistle to the
Thessalonians, where he Celebrates the effects of this Sermon, brings in their
Election as the Cause of their Conversion; Knowing* Brethren beloved, 1 These.
1. 4, 5.
your Election of God, [For] our Gospel came not to you in Word only, (as it
did to others) but in power: So in the Acts, Acts 13. 48. chapter 2 47.
As many as were Ordained to Eternal life, believed: And the Lord added to the
Church daily, (whom di^ He add?) such as should be Saved. Effectual Calling is
a sure Demonstration of Election, and the first Effect by which it can be known.

That precious Faith through which we are Saved, is obtained through the
Righteousness of God, 2 Pet. 1. 7.
and our Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 7. (1) It is given through the
Righteousness of God the Father; and so, it either respects His Ordaining us to
Eternal life; In which Act He did implicitly engage Himself to give us Faith,
(which may therefore be called The Faith of God's Elect: Tit 1. 1.
) Or else, it respects His promise made to Christ, Isa. 53. 10. Tit. 1. 2. with
2 Timothy 1. 9.
That setting His Soul an Offering for sin, He should see His seed: Or it may
be intended of both. (2) The Righteousness of Christ is concerned in it two
ways; (1) As the Meriting or procuring Cause thereof; and so, this Faith
belongs, of Right, to every one He died for, according to Phil. 1. 29. Or (2)
As He is that faithful Servant, who gives to every One according as He has
received of the Father for them. In all which respects, it evidently flows from
Election. To confirm which, he says expressly in his former Epistle, That they
were Elected unto Obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: 1
Pet. 1. 2. So, in the 1 to the Ephesians. The Mystery of His Will is said to be
Made known to them, Ephesians. 1. 9.
According to His good pleasure which He had purposed in Himself. The same
Intendment we have in the Corinths; The preaching of the Gospel is to them that
perish, 1 Cor. 1. 18.
foolishness; but to Us who are [Saved,] it is the Power of God: And in
Timothy, Who has [Saved] us, and Called us with an Holy Calling: In both
places, Saving is put before Calling; and then it must be before Faith: And how
Men are Saved before they Believe, unless by Election, (or Redemption, which is
commensurate with Election) does not appear to us. To this purpose it is further
Observable, that in Romans 8. the Apostle sets Predestination before Calling, as
in Timothy, and the Corinths, he does Saving; And in Romans 9. He puts Calling in
a tense subsequent to Election or Preparing unto Glory. To. 9. 23, 24.


The Apostle Jude, his sentence also accords with it; He directs his Epistle To
them that are Sanctified by God the Father, Jude 1.
And Preserved in Jesus Christ, and Called: Where, by [ Sanctified] he means [
Elected] separated or set apart: In this sense the word is used elsewhere,
where it will not admit of any other: Exodus 31. 13, I am the Lord that does
Sanctify you: And more plainly in Numb. 8. 17, All the Firstborn of the
Children of Israel are Mine: On the day that I smote every Firstborn in the
Land of Egypt, I [Sanctified] them for my self: Here no other thing but
Choosing, Selecting, or Setting apart, can be intended: And I see no Reason,
why it should not be so understood in that of Jude.

And it is termed an Holy Calling, Not only as it Calls us to Holiness; but,
as it is Sacred, Peculiar, Set apart, and appropriated to an Holy People, viz.
Those whom the Lord has set apart for Himself: Whose Eternal Sanctifying them
in His Decree, was the Original Cause of their being Sanctified Actually; He
loved them with an Everlasting love, and [ therefore] with loving kindness does
He draw them: Jer. 31. 3.
And this their Actual Sanctification is so indubitable a Consequent of the
Decretive, and so Appropriate to the same persons; that the same word is used
for both, as it is also for Redemption; For their sakes (says Christ) I
Sanctify my Self, Joh. 17. 19. A lightsom Instance of this, we have in Numb.
11. 26. Eldad and Medad, (though they came not up to the Tabernacle with their
Brethren; yet) being of them that were [ Written] the Spirit came-upon them,
and they Prophe^ied in the Camp: Election finds out Men when they think not of
it. So, the Lord first Determines Jeremy to his Office; Jer. 1. 9^.
Then puts-forth His hand and fits him for his Work: Even Christ Himself was
first appointed to His Mediatory Office; Isa 61. 1.
And then the Spirit came upon Him, because so appointed.

Quer. In the 1 John 16. it is said, That to them which Received Him, He gave
power to b^come the Sons of God: which seems to put their believing before
their Sonship.
Sol. Albeit, that Faith goes before the Manifestation of our Sonship, yet not
before our Sonship it self: The Adoption of Sons is That we were
Predestinated-to, before the foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1. 4 and 5. That
(therefore) in John, must be understood with that of Moses, when he pleads with
God for His presence with His People; So shall we be separated from all the
People that are on the face of the Earth: Not, Exodus 33. 13.
that this Separation was Now to be made; It was done before, Deuteronomy. 7. 6.
Levit. 20. 24. But, his meaning is, That by the Lord's going with them, this
their Separation should be Manifested. The same sense of the word, ye have in
Matthew 5, Matthew. 5. 44.
Love your Enemies, Bless them that Curse you; That ye may be (that is, that ye
may appear to be) the Children of your Father which is in Heaven: v. 45.
In like Manner We become the Sons of God by Faith: Gall. 3. 26.

The budding of Aaron's Rod, was not the Cause of God's Choosing him to the
Priesthood; Numb. 17. 5. Acts 1. 24, 26.
Nor the falling of the Lot upon Saul, and afterward upon Matthias, the Reason
Why God designed them the One to the Kingdom, and the other to the Apostleship;
They were both appointed before, and those Events were but the Effects of that
their fore-appointment, and Evidences of it. So, the Giving of the Spirit is
that which follows Election; Because Sons, Gall. 4. 6.
God has sent forth the Spirit of His Son into your hearts. Although the
Manifestation of our Adoption, and our actual enjoyment of its privileges, Ephesians.
1. 4, 5, 9, 11
are in time; yet, the Thing it self is from Everlasting.

Pursuant to this, our Savior manifests the Father's name to the Men He had
given Him out of the World; Joh. 17. 6, 8. chapter 10. 26, 27.
And These receive it: The Sheep hear his voice, and follow Him: Of others he
says expressly, Ye believe not, because ye are not of my Sheep: chapter 8. 47.
He that is of God, hears God's word; ye therefore hear them not, because ye
are not of God. The same Reason He gives for His different Ministration toward
His own, Mat. 13. 11.
and Others; To the One it was [ given] to know the Mysteries of the kingdom
of God; To the other, it was [ not] given: And therefore, having ended His
parables, He dismisses the Multitude, as having noe more for them; but to His
Disciples He expounds every thing in private: and ye see, He puts it upon
Election, as that which had invested them with this prerogative above the Rest,
[To you it is given] i. e. It belonged to them by God's Donation and
appointment: They are first Saints by Election, Then Saints by Calling.

When Christ appeared to Paul going to Damascus, they that were with Him, were
all in a Maze; A voice they heard, but knew not what it spoke: Why so, since
they were as likely to yield as he? Truly, it was not intended for them; and
therefore, their Ears were not boared, Nor the speech directed to them, but to
Paul; and to Paul by Name: But why to Paul above the Rest, since he was the
Ringleader and Chief Persecutor in the Company? Paul was a Chosen Vessel; And
this, in brief, was the Reason of it, as you have it recorded in Acts 22. 14,
The God of our Fathers has chosen thee, [That thou should know His will.]

The Jews had many Means of knowing the Messiah, and Inducements to believe in
him, which the Gentiles had not; And yet, These embrace the Gospel, whiles the
Jews Reject it: Those who sought after Righteousness, fell short of it; Romans
10. 20.
when Those who sought it not, attained it: For the bottom-Reason of which
different Dispensation We are referred to Election, Romans 11. 7, The Election
has obtained, and the Rest were blinded.

How variously are several Men affected in hearing the same word! The Sheep and
the Rest, have both the same Outward means: One Neglects it; (attends not at
all, or Regards not what he hears:) A second quarrels it; (as the Jews often
did:) A Third is persuaded almost; (as Agrippa was, and those that would hear
Paul again of that Matter:) A Fourth is Pricked in the heart, and called
effectually: It Is a stumbling block to some, Foolishness to Others, And to some
it is the Power of God; Acts 2. 39.
And these [some] are such as were Elected; of Those to whom the Promise was
made; and are therefore termed The Called according to His Purpose, Romans 8. 28.
Romans 8. And again, in 2 Timothy 1. 9, They are said to be Called according to His
own Purpose and Grace which was given them in Christ before the World began:
They are first Chosen, Ps. 65. 4.
and then Caused to approach unto God.

There is almost no end of Scriptures to this purpose: I shall instance one
more, and so close up this Particular. All the blessings which the Saints are
blessed with in time; are all bestowed according to God's Decree of Election,
before time; as is manifest from Ephesians. 1. ver. 3, 4, 5. Where I observe, 1. That
Election goes before the Actual Donation of Spiritual blessings; 2 Timothy 19.
For, These are given in time; That was before time; And That which comes After,
cannot be the Cause of That which went Before it: One Effect may be the Cause of
another; but not the Cause of That which caused it self. 2. That the Actual
Donation of Spiritual blessings, is [ according] to Election: i. e. Election is
the Rule by which the Dispensation is guided: It is Adequate with Election, and
Answerable thereto, even as the Impression is to the Printing-Types; Or, as the
fashion of David's body, to the platform thereof in God's book; and the
Tabernacle to the pattern shown in the Mount; According to which, all things
were made, as well in respect of Number Weight and Measure, as Form and Figure.
Spiritual blessings are not given to One More or Fewer, or in other manner, but
just as Election has laid it forth: Which also is further confirmed by Rev.
21. 27, Where we find, That None are admitted into the Holy City, but whose
Names were written in the book of life; And Whosoever was not found written in
that book, was cast into the lake of fire, chap. 20. 15. Which shows, That at
the latter day, Acts 13. 48.
it will be taken for granted, That as many as were ordained to Eternal life,
believed; And that all and every One without the list of Election, dyed in
Unbelief; That the Election obtained, Romans 11. 7.
and the Rest were blinded. Therefore, Faith and Holiness are not the Cause,
but the Certain effect and inseparable Consequent of Election.

IV. Our last Enquiry is, Of the Way and Manner of God's Dispensing spiritual
Blessings? And that is, Effectually and Freely.
I. Effectually.
The Soul is not turned to God by a Twyne-Thread; Nor does the Lord content
Himself, with Wishing and Woulding that it might be so, after the manner of
Men; who either are Indifferent in the thing, Or have not Wherewith to Effect
their desires: Nor merely by propounding, Moving and striving, by Moral
Suasions, Instructions, Threatenings, and the like; (which are of little avail
with a dark Understanding and fixed enmity, which every Natural Man is acted
by:) But, by the putting-forth of a Power Invincible; A Power that will not be
said Nay; but what it Wills, That it will do; What it undertakes, it
goesthorow with. To do a thing Effectually, is to do it Perfectly, Thoroughly,
Successfully; that is, So to use and apply the Means, that the End designed is
surely brought-to-pass; And this, Notwithstanding all the Weakness, Aversness,
and Repugnancy of the Carnal Mind against it.

I might produce Instances not-a-few, touching God's Effectual Working to
bring-about things of lesser Moment: How unwilling was Moses to be His
Messenger to Pharaoh? Exodus 3 and 4.
So opposite to it, That when he had no farther plea nor excuse to make, chap.
4. v. 13.
he carries it Perversely toward the Lord; ( send by the hand of him whom thou
should send:) But having designed him for the Work, He leaves him not, until
He had won him to it. ver. 18.
So, Pharaoh resolved he would not let the people go; But, I will stretch out
my hand, (says God) and he shall let you go; ver. 20.
Much more will He make His Arm bare, for the salvation of His Chosen.

And it must be so done,

I. Because otherwise, the Elect should be in no better condition than Other
men; For, until conversion, Satan has as fast hold of them as of the Rest.
Adam's fall was the Devil's Masterpiece; To bring men into his own
condemnation, is the Trophee he glories in; and being a Prince both proud,
subtle, and Imperious, you may not think he will be Baffled, or Complimented
out of his hold: Entreaties, Menaces, and force of Arguments, are of no weight
with him; He laughs at your strong Reasons, and Counts them but rotten wood;
Mark 5. 4.
Jesus I know, and His Spirit I know; but what are these! No, this kind goes
not forth by consent; Nothing will move him, but that Power which Heaven and
Earth do bow under: He that made him, (and he only) can cause his sword to
approach unto him, and take the Prey from this Terrible One: And for this it
was, that our Savior tells the Apostles, (when he sends them to turn Men from
Satan unto God) That all power in Heaven and Earth was committed to him: Math.
28. 18.
And that, in this power He will be with them to the end of the World Which was
(indeed) but Needful; For, they had surely gone on a sleeveless errand, (a weak
and fruitless design,) if Christ himself thus empowered had not gone with them.

And for the Elect themselves, They are (of themselves) no better disposed to
this work, than those that Never shall be wrought-upon: They are Enemies in
their minds, Darkness, Dead in sins, and Children of wrath, even as Others: And
this they are by Nature: Their State, therefore, could never be changed, if a
Power Invincible and Invincibly Resolved in what It undertakes, were not
engaged in it. And hence it is, that we find those Imperial terms [ I will] and
[ Ye shall] so much in use about this Matter. Thus the Lord began with the
Serpent; (which was a leading Case to all that follows,) It [shall] bruise
thine head: In which compendious word, the destruction of Satan and Sin, is
effectually provided for: And elsewhere He speaks as much for quickening the
Soul; I [will] put my Spirit within you, and [ cause] you to walk in My
Statutes; Ezekiel. 36. 27, 28.
Ye [shall] be my People, and I [Will] be your God; [They shall] Return unto me
with their whole heart; (with many Others.) The Lord still utters Himself in
terms of Omnipotency, as puttingforth an Almightiness of Power; which, as it
needs not, so it will not, (yea, it cannnot, with a Salvo to his honor) admit
the least Dependence upon Created power, to make it successful: Isa. 55. 11.
His word shall not Return unto him void; It shall accomplish that which He
pleases, and prosper in the thing whereto He sends it: John, 11. 44.
He that was dead, comes forth at his word, though bound hand and foot.

II. Conversion is a Creation-work; II.
which (though done by degrees) must be gon-thorow with, and that by Him who
laid the foundation; Or all the foregoing parts (for want of a Cap-stone) will
moulder and come to nothing. As when Adam was to be made, The Lord first
prepares the Earth; then moulds it in such a form; and then breathes into him
the breath of life; Else, that lump had never been a living Soul: So, in the New
Creation; The Lord works, and goes-on to work, and leaves it not, until He has
set it going. He does not only cause the light to shine into darkness; but
gives withal a suitable understanding; 1 John 5. 20. Joh. 1. 5.
a faculty connatural with the object; as without which, the darkness would
never comprehend it. Ezekiel might have prophesied till Doom's day, ere those
dry bones would have lived, if the Lord Himself had not caused breath to enter
into them: Jam. 1. 17. 2 Cor. 4. 6.
And, probably, He is called The Father of lights, (plurally) to denote, that
as well the light comprehending, (or capacitating our comprehension) is from
God; as That to be comprehended: Psalm. 36. 9.
In His light we see light.

III. God's Effectual Working in this Matter, III.
and the Necessity of His so working, may also be Argued from the common sense
of those already wrought upon, and brought-in; by whose Prayers and Confessions
it is evident, That they still needed a powerful and effectual influence to
Carry-on the Work already begun: Turn Thou Me and I shall be Turned; Quicken us
and we will call upon Thee; Draw me, and We will Run after thee; Not that we
are sufficient of our selves to think any thing, but our sufficiency is of God;
I live* Gall. 2. 20.
yet not I, but Christ lives in me: etc. Hence it readily follows, That if
those already Turned, and made partakers of the Divine nature, whose hearts are
in the good ways of God, and who desire Nothing more than to Walk in them;
cannot yet keep themselves Going, without a Continued Efficacious Influx and
Spring from Above; Much-less can the Natural Man (without the like Supernatural
and Divine Efficacy) effectually bend himself to a Compliance with them: Prove.
13. 19.
It is It is an abomination to fools to depart from evil.

IV. IV.
If the Lord did not Work Effectually, He should loose the honor of His work.
If the Efficacy of Grace should depend on the humane Will; (i. e. If Grace be
rendered Effectual by some Motion or Act of the Will, which Grace is not the
Author of) Then will Nature assume the Priority; Works will glory over Grace;
and Free Will will be said to be better then Free- Grace: For, that the less is
blessed of the Better, Heb. 7. 7.
is without contradiction; And that, that which sanctifies, is Greater than
that which is Sanctified by it, is so obvious, That Christ appeals it to the
Reason of Fools and Blind. Math. 23. 19.
If therefore you will grant, That Grace is Better than Nature; Follow it must,
That the Will is Blessed and Sanctified by Grace, viz. by its powerful and
effectual operation upon it. And here (indeed) lies the honor and efficacy of
Grace; Not in a Vincible Moving, Exciting, Persuading, or Threatening the Will
to a compliance; but in making the Will actually and willingly complyant with
It self. And thus the Lord Does, and thus He will Do, where ever He will be
Gracious; tho never so muchagainst the present mind and natural propension of
the subject: And yet, there no such thing as Forceing the Will; As you may see
afterward.

V. V.
The Doctrine of Effectual Calling is further confirmed from the office of
Christ as a Redeemer; which was not only to purchase, Ephesians. 1. 7. Ephesians. 2. 13,
16. Heb. 2. 17. Romans 5, 9 and 10. Coll. 1. 20. 21, 22. Dan. 9, 24.
but to put us in actual possession of the good things He purchased for us.
Redemption and Reconciliation are Relates, Comensurate, and Inseparable: It is
not only a Reconcilable state that Redemption puts us into, but a state of
actual Reconcilement; It slayes the enmity, makes an end of Sin, and brings-in
everlasting Righteousness. On this account our Savior bears that glorious
title, Thou shall call His name Jesus; Math. 1. 31.
for he shall save His people from their sins: and, For this Cause was the Son
of God manifested, that He might destroy the works of the Devil. Now, 1 John 3
8.
of these works, Blindness of mind is the firstborn, and fostermother to all
the Rest; 2 Cor. 4 4.
it is this keeps the soul in unbelief, as under locks and bars; and therefore
must, of necessity, be dispelled; which can only be done by causing the true
light to shine Effectually; as He did the light of this world in the first
Creation; which the Apostle, in 2 Cor. 4. 6, Resembles it to. Isa. 42. 7. Luke
1. 79. Isa. 49. 9.
Hence those frequent mentions of His being sent To open the blind eyes, To
give light to them that sit in darkness, And to bring forth the Prisoners from
the Prisonhouse: which may not be valued as things in design, yet liable to
obstruction; but, to be as certainly performed as that Christ should dye. In
the 107 Psalm: it is spoken of as done already; He brought them out of darkness
and the shadow of death, Ps. 107. 14.
and brake their bands in sunder: And that he speaks it of Redeemed-Ones,
appears by v. 2. First take them as in Darkness; and he is so to give them
light, as to guide their feet into the way of peace. Mark 8. 13-25.
That story of the blind Man in the 8 Mark, is a pertinent shadow of it; Christ
spits on his eyes, and puts His hands upon him; as yet he saw but darkly, Men
as Trees walking: but He puts His hands on him again, and dismisses him not
until He had made him see clearly. Zach. 9. 12.
Then take them as Prisoners, (and Prisoners in the pit;) and he that will
Deliver them, must not only open the Grate, but disarm their guard, knock off
their shackles, and [ bring them forth] as the Angel did Peter, Acts, 12. 6, 7.
Joh. 10. 3 and 15 with Zech. 9. 11 and 12.
even whiles the keepers stood before the door; He so Calls His Sheep, that He
leads them out: and this He does by the blood of His Covenant; it is That
makes those in the Pit to be Prisoners of hope. And these Effects, as duly flow
from Redemption as light from the Sun: it is therefore expressly said, That the
blood of Jesus Christ^oleanseth from all Sin: 1 John 1. 7.
And that we are sanctified through the offering of His Body. Heb. 10. 10.
This gave the Apostle to argue so positively, in Rom: 6, That if planted
together in His death, Romans 6. 5.
we shall be also in His Resurrection: and to put that Emphasis upon it, in
chap. 5. That, If Reconciled to God by the death of His Son; chap. 5. 9, 10.
[ Much more] shall we be saved by His life. That saying of Christ, in the
10th. of John, is much to our purpose; And other Sheep I have; Joh. 10. 16.
Them also must I bring, and they shall bear my voice: This [Must] imports a
duty not to be dispensed with; He had received a Commandment for it from the
Father: And this [ Shall,] ver. 18.
that Effectual working whereby they are made to believe. The Sheep of
themselves, lie as cross to this work, as other Men; ( what have I to do with
thee? cries the possessed Gadaren) but being His sheep, Mark. 5. 7. Psalm. 110.
Isa. 29. 22 and 24 Psalm. 68. 18.
He must make them willing. But suppose they stopp their ears? Then He is to
bore them; for He received gifts for the Rebellious. Men's Averseness does not
loose Christ his Right; nor shall it render his work ineffectual. For this very
end, God raised him up, Acts, 3. 26. chap. 5. 31.
viz. To bless His People in turning them from their iniquities, and to give
them Repentance; and that such as has Forgiveness of Sins annexed to it: Which
also He does as a Prince; i. e. As One invested with Power to Remove whatever
might let the effect of His work: To Him are committed the keys of hell and of
Death. Rev. 1. 18.
From these premises I safely conclude, That what Christ as a Redeemer came to
do, that He does and will do; and that None of His work shall fall to the
ground. What He says in the 17 John, is prophetical of what He will say at the
latter day; I have finished the work which thou gave me to do; Of all that
Thou have given me, I have lost Nothing; I have manifested thy Name unto the
Men which thou gave Me: I have given them the words which thou gave Me, and
they have received them. Jeh. 17. 6 and 8.


More might be added; but by these I hope it is evident, That Jesus Christ was
not only a Redeemer, to pay our Ransom; but the Officer appointed of God, to
set us at liberty, even that glorious liberty of the Sons of God: Isa. 53. 10.
and This is that pleasure of the Lord which shall prosper in His hand.

II. Freely.
All that God does for Men, or Gives to them, in order to their Salvation, is
Given and Done freely. Now, a thing is then said to be thus Given or Done, when
it proceeds from the mere Good will and favor of Him that Works, or Gives;
without respect to any thing done or deserved by the Receiver: Dan. 2. 30.
It is a voluntary act; supposing no obligation on him that gives, Nor
attractive or obliging virtue, in him that receives; nor yet, expectation of
Recompense from him.

Much need not be said to prove the free-giving of the things we are speaking
of, Did we duly consider three particulars:

1. The Sovereign Greatness of Him that gives; It is the Most High God,
Possessour of Heaven and Earth; Who is Infinitely and Independently blessed in
Himself; and therefore, cannot be Added unto, nor Receive from any Creature:
Who can give to Him, that gives to All their life and breath?

2. The superexcellent, and unspeakable worth of the things that are Given: The
first and Chief, is our Lord Jesus Christ; whose dignity is such, That Heaven
and Earth are too low a price to set Him at; (especially, To be given as He
was:) and in Him, Righteousness and Strength; Adoption and Reconciliation;
Grace and Glory.

3. The vanity and wretchedness of those on whom they are bestowed: Both
Scripture and Experience, speak nothing of them in their Naturals, but what
bespeaks a Condition every way deplorable, and incapable of yielding Motives
for such a Gift; as is shown before.

But being so greatly in love with our selves, and fond of our own
improvements; and so stiffly bent to a Covenant of works: To help us off from
those dangerous bottoms, let us dwell a while on the following Considerations.

I. What is the Nature and Import of the Covenant of Grace. This Covenant is
that, which all professing Christians profess to be saved by; how-ever they
differ about the Import and Latitude of it. But, if we receive the Scriptural
Notion, (which needs must be the Rightest) we shall find, That it is of the
very Nature and Substance of this Covenant, To give freely and absolutely;
without Conditioning for anything to be done by Men, as the ground and Motive
thereof. All that God does for those He will save, is for His Name sake; which
Name is recorded in Exodus 34. 5 and 6, The Lord God, Gracious and Merciful,
etc. To be Gracious, is To do well to one that deserves ill: And if otherwise,
it would be but after the Covenant of Works, or first Covenant: Which yet was
not faulty or defective in it self; for it gave a sufficiency to obtain the
benefits contained in it; which if they had used and improved as they might,
there would not have needed a second. But, the Lord forknowing the Creature's
mutability; and consequently, what need there would be of another kind of Power
and Grace, than that Adam was Created with; Did therefore determine of a
second; which in Tit. 1. 2, is called, The hope of Eternal life, which God who
cannot lie, promised before the World began.

It is called the Covenant of Grace, not only as designing the Glory of His
Grace, in the saving of men; but as giving freely, and of mere Grace and
Favor, whatever must bring-about that Salvation: For, Where else can lie the
difference between the two Covenants? It cannot be in respect of the easiness
and difficulty, of the duties enjoined by either; For, Faith and Repentance are
much more above the compass of natural power, than to forbear the forbidden
Tree: But the difference lies in this, That the New Covenant consists of better
Promises; And, this Betterness stands in the Free, Absolute, Independent
engagement of God Himself, to Invest His Covenanted Ones, with all things
conducing to the Blessedness held forth; And that, as well what is to be done
on their part, as on His Own upon their doing of it; That is, (plainly) To Give
to them and Work in them, Whatever in this Covenant He requires of them. The
law shows matter of Duty, but gives not wherewith to perform it; The Covenant
of Grace does both, by writing the law in the heart. And without this, it would
still have been but a Covenant of works, be the Duties enjoined whatever you
will. It therefore runs not upon Conditional or Failable terms, (I will [If] ye
will:) but Absolute and Sovereign, [I will] and [ye shall.] This Covenant does
not only give life upon terms of Believing; but Faith also and Holiness, as the
necessary means of attaining that life: And this, not upon your ingenuous
compliance, (as some term it) or better improvement of what you have in common
with other Men; (such allegations the Lord disallows, and often Cautions
against,) but of Grace. It Is a Covenant made-up of Promises; and Promise (by
Scripture intendment) is always Free; both freely made and freely performed;
without the desert or procurement of Men. Take Isaac for instance; Abraham's
body was now dead; Genesis 18. 11. ver. 14.
and Sarah, (besides her natural barrenness) it ceased to be with her after the
manner of Women; and yet, Sarah shall have a Son. But, How? The Promise had in
it (though Abraham and Sarah had not) whatever might tend to Isaac's conception
and birth; Gal. 4. 23, 28.
and for this cause, He was called The Son of the Promise; as also Believers
are, Romans 9. 8. Gal. 3. 29. They are also termed, Heirs of Promise, Heb. 6. 17.
And, on this account, Christ is called The Promised Seed; and the Holy Ghost,
The Spirit of Promise. viz, To show the Independent freeness of those Divine
Gifts: The Promise of sending them; Their actual Coming; and Effectual
operations, are all free, and free in all respects: This Dew from the Lord
waits not for Men. Mic. 5. 7.


For further illustration, the Jews are a pertinent Instance, as ye read in
Jer. 32. from v. 30. to the 36. They had done nothing but evil, from their
youth up; and were a continual provocation: And when scattered among the
Nations, they were no-whit bettered; but caused, even the Heathen to blaspheme:
And yet, notwithstanding all this, the Lord will Gather them, and give them an
heart to fear Him for ever, v. 37. to v. 44.: And this, even whiles they were
not moved, neither could they blush, chap. 8. 12. See also, with what
inexpressible freeness of Grace, the Lord deals with them, in Isa. 43. v. 25.
I, even I, am He that blotteth out thy transgressions, -- and will not remember
thy sins. But, what is the Introduction to this so great a Promise? See it, and
wonder at it! Thou have not called upon Me, O Jacob; Mi^. v. 22. ver. 23. ver.
24.
but, thou have been weary of Me, O Israel: Thou have not brought Me the small
Cattle of thy burnt Offerings; Thou have bought Me no sweet Cane with thy
money; -- but, have made Me to serve with thy sins, and wearied Me with thine
iniquities: I, even I (whom thou have dealt so ingratefully with, Isa. 64. 3.
and disingenuously, even I) am He that blotteth out thy transgressions, for
mine own sake. And this was a Great thing they looked not for; As (indeed)
considering themselves and what their demeanor had been, they had no Reason to
look for it.

Hence it is clear, That Grace respects not the worthiness of Men in what It
does for them; Nay, it must respect their Unworthiness rather, as that by which
Grace is more illustrated, and the glory thereof more advanced; according to
Romans 5. 20. Where sin abounded, Grace did much more abound. And Paul proclaims
it as verified on himself, 1 Timothy 1. 13. I was a Blasphemer, and a Persecutour,
and Injurious: But I obtained Mercy; -- and the Grace of our Lord was
[exceeding abundant] -- v. 14; and hereupon he falls to Adoring that Grace;
Now, to the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God, be honor and
Glory, for ever and ever, Amen; v. 17.

The Riche^ of Mercy is made-out by Saving the Chief of sinners; and in
quickening us when dead, Ephesians. 2. 1 and 4. And it is very observable, That the
Apostles (when ever they mention the Grace of God in Saving, Quickening, etc.)
do not give the least intimation of Men's Worthiness, Preparedness, Compliance,
or any such thing; but [ Dead in Sins] and [ Quickening] come one in the neck
of the other; as light does upon darkness, which, in no sort, induces the
light, or prepares the dark Earth or Air for it: as is abundantly evident in
all their Epistles. And how often, (and in good earnest) does the Lord declare
against all the pretensions of Men, as to their activeness in this Matter, in
Isaiah, Jeremy, Ezekiel, Hosea, etc. And as a bar to those pretensions, The
Holy People, He calls A People sought-out; and, that He is found of them that
sought Him not; with many others. This I shall end, with a very observable
Instance within my own Memory: (and I bring it not in for proof, but
Illustration) I knew a Man, who when he came under convictions, endeavored
with all his might to stifle them: His Convictions grew stronger, and he
hardened himself against them. He saw their tendency; but so opposite to it,
that he resolved in express terms, [He would not be a Puritan, whatever came
of it.] To the Church he must go; (His Master would have it so:) But, this was
his wont, To loll o^r the seat, with his fingers in both his ears; (Here,
General or Conditional Grace was (surely) non-plus'd). But a Chosen Vessel must
not so be lost; Now steps-in Electing Grace, and by a casual slip of his
Elbows, drew-out the stoppers, and sent-in a Word, (from the Pulpit) which,
like fire from Heaven, melted his heart, and cast it in a New Mould. Surely, in
this, the Lord did not wait for the Man's compliance or improvements; His work
was not Originated thence, nor dependent thereon.

II. II.
If all that pertains to Salvation were not given freely, Salvation it self
should not be of Grace: For, to him that works is the Reward not reckoned of
Grace, Romans 4. 4.
but of Debt: But, Salvation is of Grace, Ephesians. 2. 5. By Grace ye are saved.
And again, v. 8. By Grace ye are saved, through Faith; Where also, lest the
adding of Faith, should occasion (in their esteem) a lessening of this Grace,
or seem to detract from the Freeness of it; he cautiously subjoyns, That this
Faith is the work of that Grace [Not of your selves, It is the Gift of God.]
For, if Grace be perfectly free in Choosing, it must be answerably free, in
Giving and Applying the Means to bring-about the End it has chosen us to: For,
if the Effect of the Means should depend upon something to be done by Men,
(which Grace is not the Doer of) then works would put-in for a share in the
glory of Men's salvation, and so the Grace of God would be dethroned, and be as
if it were not; Grace is no more Grace, as is argued in Romans 11. 6.

III. III.
Spiritual blessings must be given freely, and of pure Grace, because the
Natural Man cannot perform any such Act, as might be Motive for such a gift.
Things materially good they may do; (as Cain in offering the first fruits) but
not acceptable, because not done in the due manner, that is, in Faith: the want
of which makes Incense it self an abomination. Isa. 1. 13, 14.
If without Faith it be impossible to please God; then it must be impossible to
do ought asore you believe, that may move God to give you Faith. Salvation is
promised to Faith, Remission of sins to Repentance, The blessed vision to
Purity of heart; -But we find not these Graces promised to any Act or
Qualification inferior to, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Tit. 3. 5.
or precedeing the Graces themselves: Our holy Calling, and the washing of
Regeneration, we are not entit'led-to by works of our own.

IV. IV.
If any of the Requisites to Salvation should be given upon conditions, Reason
would it should be That which in worth and virtue contains all the Rest; and
without which, the Rest had never been, or been of none effect; And that is,
Our Lord Jesus Christ; of whom it is said, That all the fullness of the Godhead
dwells in Him bodily: Coll. 2 9. Joh. 1. 16. Romans 5 8.
and that, Out of His Fullness all Grace is received. The giving of whom, was
the most superlative commendation of God's love to Men; and is therefore
termed, That Gift of God; Ioh. 4. 10. And as touching the Free and
Vnconditionate giving of Christ, we have an authentic Record in Genesis 3. 15. It
shall bruise thy head: Which words do contain an Absolute, free Promise to
send the Son of God in the Nature of Man, to be a Redeemer. And we evidently
know, That His actual coming and performance thereof, was not suspended upon
any good thing to be done by Men: How could it, when after the Fall, they did
not nor could do any thing, but what might turn His heart against them?

For evidence hereof, We need not go out of the Context; Do but observe the
First Adam's Carriage, and the Manner of it, just before the Promise was made:
First, They believe the Serpent rather than God; Then they break the
Commandment of life, when they had neither need nor occasion so to do. This
done, and finding themselves lost, they do not so much as seek after God for
help, but rather to hide themselves from Him: so far from confessing
themselves faulty, that they charge God foolishly, and shift the blame of their
miscarriage upon Him; The woman whom [Thou] gave to be with me, she gave me
of the Tree -- And the Serpent (which also is a Creature of thy Making) he
beguiled me etc. Here Is nothing in their deportment, that looks like the Motive
of such a Promise. But, tho they Run from God, He will not so part with them;
yea, He follows them, finds them out, and for a door of hope freely pronounces
this gracious Promise, of sending One to destroy this old serpent, the Devil;
and consequently the Serpentine Nature, that had now instilled and Mingled it
self with theirs. It is the first promulgation of the Gospel, and speaks with
as much absoluteness as words can express, It [Shall] bruise thy head. This I
shall stand the more upon, because it is the First that was made in Time, and
That out of which, all following Promises are educed.

The intent of this Promise, was Adam's Recovery and Comfort; who (doubtless)
at this time, was in a very disconsolate Condition, as lying under a fresh
sense of the happiness he had lost, and the woeful estate he was now plunged
into: And therefore, 'twas necessary, (if Adam shall have Comfort by it) that
the terms thereof be altogether free and Absolute. For, suppose them to be
Conditional, as, (namely) If Adam shall now repent and Convert himself; If he
shall better improve a second stock; (or rather, the cankered Remnant of that
he had at first,) My Son Then shall come into this lower World, to still that
Enemy and Avenger; His life shall go for thy life, I will be friends with thee,
and restore thee to thy first Estate. All this, and more of this kind, had
yielded but little comfort or hope to a guilty and defiled Conscience; who
found himself not only naked and wholly bereft of his Primitive Righteousness;
but at enmity with his Creator, and a bondslave to Satan: For, such Reasonings
as these, would have brokein like a flood, to bear-down and stifle all hopes of
future success; viz. If when I was in so blessed a state, and endued with power
to keep it; upon so slight a temptation I yielded and fell; How should I Rise
now I am down and my strength is gone? If when I had freedom of Will and stood
upright, so easily I warped into crooked paths; How can I hope to Return and do
better, now my Will is perverted, and bent to a contrary course? If whilst I
had eyes in my head, and saw things with cleerness, I yet lost my way and
wandered; How should I think to recover it, being now both sadly bewildred, and
my eyes put-out? How should I bring a clean thing out of an unclean, who kept
not my heart clean when it was so? How should I gain more with fewer talents,
who ran my self out of all when I had abundantly more? Grapes will not grow
upon Thorns, nor Figgs on Thistles: Nay, were my Primitive'state restored again,
on the former terms; I could not expect to keep it, having this woeful
experience of so causless and dreadful an Apostasy, etc.

It was therefore importantly necessary, that this first Promise, made upon so
great and solemn an occasion, and bearing in it all the hopes and comforts of
God's People to Eternity; should be thoroughly free and absolute, and not depend
(in the least) upon any good thing to be done by Men, as a condition of it.

And if Christ be given freely, there is good ground of arguing thence, the
free-giving of lesser things; as does the Apostle in Romans 8, He that spared not
His Son, how shall He not with Him freely give us all things? Math. 6. 25.
Is not the life more than meat? Is not Christ more than Faith and all Grace?
Has God given us the flesh of His Son, which is Meat indeed; and will He not
restore our withered hand to receive it? It cannot be; especially considering,
That this may be done with a Word; and without This, the Other would be lost,
and as water spilt on the ground.

But, though this Promise of Christ, be virtually a Promise of all Grace; yet,
because of our slowness of heart to believe, and to win us off from our
legallizing Notions; the Lord condescends to gratify His People in Words as
well as Substance: And therefore,

V. To make it expressly evident, that all Spiritual blessings are perfectly
free, He has put them all into Absolute Promises.

Not that all Promises run in that tenor: Many of them have Conditions annexed;
which also (in their place) are of very significant usefullness: Genesis 22.
12-18. Joh. 3. 16. chap. 14. 6. Math. 5. 8. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Mark. 16. 16. Joh. 10.
9.
1. As proofs of our willing Subjection to God. 2. Directives by what Mediums
we must get-to the Blessedness designed us. 3. How we must be qualified for the
enjoyment of it. 4. As Marks and Evidences of our being in the way to it; and
of those to whom it does belong. But, this Annexion of Conditions, does not
imply a power in Men to perform them; (though performed they must be, before we
enjoy the promised Good;) Nor does the effect of those Promises depend upon any
Act to be done by us, which some other Promise does not provide us with. But,

That Great Fundamental Promise, on which is founded our hopes of Eternal life,
Tit. 1. 2.
was Absolute; ('it was given before the world;) Though dearly conditional to Him
with whom the Compact was made; yet perfectly free and Absolute to us: And
therefore the adding of Conditions to After-Promises, may not be taken as
invalidating that First Promise, Or as a Defeazance to it: It Is a Scripture
Maxim, That the Covenant which was before confirmed of God in Christ, Gal. 3.
17.
the Law which was Four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul; that
it should make the Promise of none effect. The like may be said of Promises
made in Time; viz, That the Conditionalness of Some; does not make-void the
Absoluteness of Others. As the Law was to Christ, such are Conditional Promises
to the Absolute; They show what we should be and do, and (by consequence) that
we can neither be nor do as we should; and thence Infer, The Necessity of
Divine Grace to undertake for us: And then (indeed) is the Freeness of Grace
adorable, which promises help in terms of an Absolute tenor. And accordingly
we find, That whatever is, in one Scripture, made the Condition of Acceptance
with God, and Eternal life; In other Scriptures those very Conditions are
promised without Condition: Some of which we have a Prospect of in the
following balance.

Conditional Promises.
Wash ye, make you clean; Cease to do evil; learn to do well: Come now, and
though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow, Isa. 1. 16, 18.

Repent and turn; so iniquity shall not be your ruin, Ezekiel. 16. 30. Make you a
new heart, and a new spirit, v. 31.

Hear and your Soul shall live, Isa. 50. 3. If thou shall seek the Lord thy
God, thou shall find Him, if thou seek Him with thy whole heart, Deuteronomy. 4. 29.

Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, Deuteronomy. 10. 6.

Return O backsliding Children, Jer. 3. 14.

If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land, Isa. 1. 19.

I will yet for this be enquired of by the House of Israel, Ezekiel. 36. 37.

He that endures unto the end, the same shall be saved, Math. 24. 13.

Promises of the Condition.
Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: From all
your filthiness will I cleanse you; Ezekiel. 36. 25. I will forgive your iniquity;
and your sin I will remember no more, Jer. 31. 33.

I will put a new spirit within you, Ezekiel. 11. 19. A new heart also will I give
you; and a new Spirit will I put within you, chap. 36. 26.

Thou shall return, and obey the voice of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 30. 8. They shall
return unto Me with their whole heart, Jer. 24. 7. I am found of them that
sought me not, Isa. 65. 1.

The Lord thy God will Circumcise thine heart, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.

I will heal their Backslidings, Hosea, 14. 4.

Thy People shall be willing, Psalm. 110. 3. I will cause you to walk in my
Statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 27. Phil. 2. 13.

I will pour upon the House of David, the Spirit of Grace and Supplications,
Zach. 12. 10.

They shall not depart from me, Jer. 32. 40. Who shall confirm you unto the
End, 1 Cor. 1. 8. Jer. 3. 19.

These are some of those Many exceeding-Great and Precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.
4.
by which we are made partakers of the Divine Nature: And if duly considered,
would much conduce to establish the present Truth, which asserts the Absolute
freegiving of All things pertaining to life and Godliness; ver. 3.
And this, nothing more plainly contradicts, than to make the Dispensments of
Grace to depend on the Wills and improvements of Natural Men: To shut-out
which, is a principal scope of Absolute Promises; 1 Cor. 1. 29. Chapter 12. 6.
Phil. 2. 13.
That no flesh should glory in His presence: Since it is God that works all
in all; and That of His own good pleasure.

Now, If any should ask, (by the way) Wherein the special love of God to Elect
persons discovers it self before their Conversion?

I cannot assign any plain or Open discoveries of it, by which the Elect may
be known from other Men: All outward things fall alike to all: The heir, whiles
a Child, differs nothing from a Servant; although he be Lord of all, (by
Election) Gal. 4. 1. Yet there are diverse gracious operations of that love
toward them, even in common providence; Albeit, they are not perceived till
afterward; As

1. In keeping-alive the Root or Stem they were to grow from; which might be a
principal cause of His adding 15. years to Hezekiah's life; viz. for Josiah's
sake who was to come of his lineage; Manasseh his grandfather not being yet
born. So, those days of tribulation were shortened, and many of the Jews kept
alive, (by the Providence of God) for the Elect's sake, that should be of their
progeny, (perhaps two thousand years after.)

2. In preserving the Elect themselves from many a death which they were
obnoxious to, before their Conversion; As He also did Manasseh: And this was
the Cause, when Satan had them in his Nett, and had dragged them to the pits
brink, That the Lord sent from Heaven and saved them: Psalm. 57. 3. Job 33. 24.
Deliver him, I have found a Ransom: He is Mine, and I have designed him to
another end.

3. In keeping them from the unpardonable Sin: Thus Paul (being a Chosen
Vessel) was kept without that knowledge of Christ, which some of the Pharisees
had: For otherwise, his persecuting the Church of God had bin incapable of
pardon; as appears by 1 Timothy 1. 13. I obtained Mercy, because I did it
ignorantly.

4. In casting the lot of their habitation, where He has planted, or will
plant the means of Grace: Or bringing them by His Providence, where some
effectual Word shall be spoken to them: The One is verified in those who dwelt
at Corinth, Where Paul must preach and not hold his peace; For (says the Lord
to him) I have much People in this City. Acts 18. 9.
The Other, in those who were come to Jerusalem at the feast of Pentecost, from
all parts of the World; Which gave them the opportunity of coming together, and
of hearing Peter's Sermon; By Means whereof, Thousands of them were converted.
It is farther exemplified by the instance of the Eunuch, Acts 8. 27: As also in
the story of Zacheus, whose intent reached no higher but to see what manner of
person Christ was, Luke 19. 3, 9.
being so much talked of abroad; And there Salvation meets both him and his
house.

There are Nevertheless diverse things alleged, (by way of objection) against
this Doctrine: which yet, the Scriptures, with Reasons drawn from thence, and
sanctified experience, do afford a plentiful Bar and Answer to: And this
service they have done, to bring some things to mind, (before omitted) that may
prove to the further clearing and confirmation of the Truth.

All men universally, Others as well as those you call the Elect, have a
sufficiency of Means for Salvation?
If this were true, it would follow; Either, that faith and repentance are not
of those Means; for all men have them not: Or else, that men may Repent and
Believe, and yet fall short of Salvation; for, all men are not saved. We go
not about to lessen the Means afforded to any; Or their sin in Neglecting or
Not living-up to the Means they have: and yet we cannot assent, That all men
Now have such a sufficiency.

1. Preaching in parables, was not a Means proper for Conversion: yet thus did
Christ frequently speak to the multitude. Nor was it intended for Conversion;
for, He thus did, Mark. 4. 12.
That in hearing they might not understand. If it be said, They had the Gospel
afterward more plainly preached by the Apostles; I answer, That then they had
it not so before; and That contradicts the objection. Some (indeed) among the
Jews, by the evident testimonies of Christ's Divinity, were Convinced, That He
was the Messiah but it came not up to a perfect work; Joh. 12. 42. Isa. 53. 1.
They did not Confess Him: And why? Because the Arm of the Lord was not
Revealed to them: That is, (as Moses speaks) The Lord had not given them an
heart to understand. Deuteronomy. 29. 4.


2. Sufficiency is to be estimated by success: That which does not accomplish
the End, cannot be said to be sufficient. If you say, It proves successless,
because men will not Comply with it; It is answered, That a Willingness to
comply, is a part of the Means; which if they have not, they have not Means
sufficient. A power to Will, without a Will to use that Power, will signify no
more than an Arm without strength. But what think ye of those who are without
God and without hope? Is this to be boasted of, and relied upon? Ephesians. 2. 1^.
Or is it not a deplorable kind of sufficiency that leaves men in a Godless and
hopeless condition?

If it be said again; They had a sufficiency, but by their misusing thereof,
they lost it? Let me ask; Can there be a more palpable proof of a thing's
insufficiency, than its unability to preserve it self? and the general
successlessness of it? But,

3. Means may be proper enough, and (in their kind) sufficient, toward the
production of such an event; and yet, the Event never succeed, for want of
something else which also was requisite for it. Planting and Watering, are
proper and sufficient, as means and second Causes; and yet, they are nothing as
to success, without the special operation of God. Who could Reason more
strongly than Paul? or speak more eloquently than Apollo? and yet the success
of their Ministry was as God gave to every Man. 1 Cor. 3. 5. Job 36. 10. chapter
33. 16.
It is God that opens the ear to discipline, and seals instruction; when
His hand is sett-to, then it is Authentic and powerful, and not before: This
is further Confirmed by the following Instance; The Jews had means of being
purged, and yet they were not purged; Ezekiel. 24. 13. But in chap. 36. 25. The
Lord takes the work into His own hand; I will sprinkle clean water upon you,
and you shall be clean: From all your filthiness and from all your Idols will I
cleanse you: A New heart also will I give you -- and so on to v. 28. By which
it appears That the Lord will not only afford them Means, as aforetime, and
leave the improvement thereof to themselves; (For, that He saw would not do:)
But Now He will take the whole upon Himself; Jer. 33. 6.
as ye have it in Jeremy, I will bring it health and Cure, and I will Cure
them. I will cause them to walk in my Statutes and do them: That is, He will
give them an honest and Good heart, Luke 8. 15.
which shall bring-forth fruit to perfection. These are the Means proper and
sufficient to Salvation; and less than this, will not do it.

Men have as full a sufficiency of Means, as is just and meet for God to give?
1. I would ask, whether it be just and meet to do good? And if it be, Why not
the Chiefest Good that men are capable of; Which is, To have their hearts
turned to God, and United to Him for ever?

2. The Objection seems to attribute more to Man, in the business of his
salvation, than to God: For, If all that God can justly or Meetly do in order
thereunto, will not Save him, without something done by himself, which God is
not the Doer of; then will Man be reckoned for Chief Agent in the work; Isa.
10. 15.
and so, the Ax will boast it self against Him that handles it. Suppose a
Plaster or Medicine to be made of Twenty Ingredients; and one of them to be of
that Sovereign virtue, as to influence all the Rest: All which, if that be
wanting, will but ulcerate the wound, and heighten the distemper; That One must
needs be reputed the Principal.

3. It is not to be supposed, That the Great and only Wise God would set-up a
Creature whose will He cannot justly and meetly Overruled; especially, in
things requisite to the very End for which he was made. Nor, that he should
make him for such and End, as that any thing conducible thereto, may not be
justly and meetly done for him, in order to its accomplishment.

4. It cannot be Righteous or Meet for Men to Affirm, nor for the honor of
Sovereign Majesty to admit, That the Creature's will should limit, divert, or
frustrate, the will and Intent of their Creator: It was Religiously said of
One, I will not have him for my God, [who has not power over my Will.]

5. Suppose a man crazed in his head, and you intend him an honor or office,
which he never will be capable of without the full use of his Reason; Is it not
meeter, and does it not argue an higher degree of love, Prudence, and Justice,
to cure his distemper, (though in a way contrary to his present mind) than to
Wait his complying with your prescriptions, which (as he is) he will never
understand? And what hinders, but that God may do so by his People, Even give
them an heart to know Him, and to fear Him for ever? Save only, that this
Quaggy principle of Man's freedom of Will, will not Comport with it.

But if a sufficiency of Means to Repent and Believe, be not afforded to All;
how shall God be just in punishing for Neglects?
The Justice of God will not need our Salving, especially by a balm of our own
making: Whether He judge or justify, He is Just in what He does; though purblind
Reason sees not How. His Judgments are a great Deep; and it follows not, That
there is no bottom, because our line will not Reach it. God dealt not so (in
respect of Means) with any Nation as with Israel; And the Men going with Paul
to Damascus, the Lord would not give them to see His face, nor to hear His
voice; (both which He vouchsafed to Paul;) and yet He needs no vindication or
Apology, for punishing their unbelief: Romans 2. 12.
They that have sinned without law shall perish without law.

2. Men are justly obnoxious to punishment, for Neglecting, or Not-improving
the means they have; albeit those Means (when made the best of, that Nature
can) will not save them: They are punishable for Not-feeding and not-clothing;
and yet, by doing these, Men are not justified. The least transgression lays
open to wrath; and you cannot by keeping some Commands, compensate the breach
of Others.

Where it is said, I will write my law in their hearts; and cause them to walk
in my Statutes, etc. There is no more intended by it, but the Giving of Things
or Means proper to such an End, if they will but Improve them?
The sense objected, cannot be the mind and limit of that most gracious
promise; Deuteronomy. 10. 16. with 30. 6. Ezekiel. 18. 31. with chapter 36. 26.
For, the Promise is as broad as the Command; And if the Command carries in it,
as much as the words of it do import, then also does the Promise: But, the
Command does not enjoin only a Using the Means that tend to such a duty; but
the actual and perfect performance of the Duty it self; Therefore does likewise
with Promise. Besides, the heart and Will are One; And if the law be written in
the Will, then is the Will Compliant with what the Law commands: To write it in
the heart, is to make it Natural; and so it is more than a Means, It is the
Thing it self.

2. That Doctrine is hardly bestead, and not much to be credited; which (for
its support) must put such a construction on the highest, Rev. 22. 18, 19.
and most absolute Promises that God has made, as will render them weak and
fruitless Things.

3. Where God has absolutely said, That such a thing He will do; For Men to
put-in Conditions or Limitations, is, To raze or interline a Record; which is a
Felonious act: And how He will deal with those who add-to, or take-from the
words of His prophecy, you have recorded in the last Chapter of His book. It is
ill trifling with Sacred things!

4. A Physician that undertakes to cure a Man of his frenzy, and to keep him
in his right mind; is not said to have done his Work, or made-good his Word
(what ever Means have been applied to him) if the Patient continue his former
distraction, or Relapse into it.

5. There is no need or Reason, why the Lord should Promise, or make show of
Promising, more than He intends to perform; (for, That would be as a broken
staff;) Or, Why He should express himself in terms of a fuller, or more
absolute Engagement, than might in all points consist with His Wisdom, Justice,
Holiness, etc.

6. Lastly, The Objection is further excepted against and rejected; Not only
as it makes Man the chief Agent in his own salvation; but as denying, That God
does any thing more for them that are Saved, than for them that perish: If Men
make themselves to differ, the Gospel-designe of Magnifying Grace, is dashed at
once.

But, is it not said, To him that has shall be given? i. e. He that Improves
what he has shall have more; If they use Common Grace well, they shall have
Special?
1. The well-using of Common-Grace, is a duty that lies upon all: but is no way
Meriting, or Moving God to bestow the special: He is above all humane Motives;
and is not wrought upon by them, as Men are: This is seen by Paul, whom special
Grace took hold-upon, even whiles in the heat of misusing that which is Common:
1 Timothy 1. 13. with Acts, 9. 4.
There was no space of time between his being a Persecutour, and his obtaining
Mercy.

2. What proportion is there (in value) between an handful of Clay, and a
Talent of Gold? Infinitely more is the disproportion between the Grace of
Faith, and all that a Natural Man can do for the obtaining of it.

3. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin; but a Man's Sin cannot be a Motive for
his Good: Remember who it was, and what condition he was in, Act. 8. 18, 19
that profer'd money for the Gift of the Holy Ghost: Improvements for Faith, is
but the same.

4. It would not become the Wisdom, Power, or Grace of God, to build on a
Foundation made-ready to His hand; He needs it not, nor will it Sort with His
Design; which is to have His Grace acknowledged the Alpha and Omega of Men's
Salvation.

5. Lastly, A Will to improve, is as much from God as the Thing to be Improved:
A Man can receive nothing except it be Given him from above: Joh. 3. 27.
The thing given, and power to receive or improve it, are both from Thence: And
things from Above are not fetched down by Men; but they Come-down When and upon
whom, Jam. 1. 17.
the Father of lights pleases.

Men are commanded To make them a New heart; which must imply, an Ability So to
do: For, how can it be just, to require things impossible; And that under so
severe a penalty?
Whatever is employed in the Command, such Allegations do surely imply, that the
framers of them are much unacquainted with the Scriptures; or extremely Rash in
drawing Conclusions from them. There are Reasons enough, and holy ends, which
do justly warrant such Commands, without supposing those to whom they are
given, Able Now to perform them: -- As

1. Perhaps, the Lord speaks it Ironically; Deriding their vain confidence, 1
King. 18. 27.
as Elijah did the Priests of Baal, when he bids them Cry aloud, for he is a
God: Will you hence infer, That Baal was a God? Isa. 41. 3.
Or that Idols can show things to come, because the Lord bids them do it,
thereby to Evidence their godhead? Or, that Adam had advantaged himself by his
Fall, Genesis 3. 22.
because the Lord says, The Man is become like One of us? The like form of
speech is sometime used concerning Babylon; Jer. 51. 8. with chapter 46. 7.
( Take balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed;) even then when His
device was to destroy her. So here, as upbraiding those carnal Jews with their
fond opinion of Self-sufficiency, Freedom of Will, and Power to do great
matters: Make you a New heart, for why will ye dye? q. d. You know, that the
end of these things is death; you pretend to an high pitch of ability; That Men
may be as Good as they will, and turn when they please; and yet you go-on in an
evil way; If you can make you a New heart, do it; Why will ye, by neglecting so
easy a matter, fall under a sentence of Death?

2. To let them know, God has not lost His right of Commanding, tho Men have
lost their power of obeying: Time was when they had it, and power to keep it;
But, having lost it, God is not bound to restore it; nor unjust in punishing
those neglects which arise from the want of it. It is man's duty To seek after
God, Acts, 17. 27.
though it be a [ Peradventure] whether they shall find him or Not.

3. Hereby to convince them, what was that One thing necessary; (to wit) The
change of the heart; as without which, all labor is spent in vain upon them;
As in the parable of the Sower: Luke 18. 12. 15. Jer. 31. 19.
The Root must be holy before the fruit; Grapes will not grow upon thorns; nor
the Stony, Thorny, or Highway-ground, bring-forth to perfection: When Ephraim
was Turned, then he Repented, and not Before.

4. That being convinced of the Necessity of such a change, Romans 7. 8, 9, 23.
and finding their own endeavors wholly ineffectual, (as Paul did;) they might
see also, the Necessity of Free Grace, and of the Divine power, to do it for
them; and so, have their eyes turn'd-off from themselves, and drawn
thitherwards; even toward those hills of Strength: which the Church had an eye
to, when they prayed, Turn thou me and I shall be Turned. Jer. 31. 18.


5. If the giving a Command from God, does infer in Men a power to obey; then
it will follow, That Men have power to keep the whole law; and that, without
turning aside, to the right hand or to the left; Deuteronomy. 5. 32.
and to make themselves holy as God is Holy: (for, these are Commanded) But,

6. That the Lord intends not such a Conclusion should be made upon His
Command, appears from the 17 Jer. v. 1, The Sin of Judah is written with a pen
of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond; Graven on the table of their heart;
i. e. So, as not to be blotted-out by humane Wit or strength: And therefore,

7. He tells them expressly, It is as impossible for them to make themselves a
New heart, as for the Ethiopian to change his skin: -- For, Jer. 13. 23.
who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? They that Sanctify themselves,
and they that offer Swines flesh, Isa. 66. 17.
shall both be consumed together.

Why then are Men enjoined attendance on the Means, if there be so little in
them?
If there were no other Reason or end, this were enough, That God has
Commanded it: That binds us to use the Means, though not the Means to effect the
thing it is used for: Nor is the Means so much to be considered, as God's
Institution and appointment; Nor the use thereof to be Rested-on; but, the
Grace and power of God giving influence thereto; Who Himself is not bound to
Means or Method: Ordinarily, He is found in His own way; and out of it we are
not to look for Him.

But, To what end is the Gospel preached in terms universal, and Universally
to All; if some particular and determinate persons only, can Receive it?
The Counsel of God concerning Election is secret: The Minister knows not who
are the objects of it; and therefore must preach to All, 1 Samuel 9. 16. with 10.
20, 21.
according to his Commission. The Lord deals in this, as in the Matter of lots:
Saul was foreappointed to be King; yet all Israel must come-together, and lots
must be cast on the whole Nation, 1 Samuel 16. 5* 10.
as if the person were yet to be pitch'd-upon. The falling of the lot was
wholly Contingent, as to Men; Another might have been taken as well as he it
fell upon: But, Prove. 16 33.
the Lord disposes it, and casts it on the right person. So, touching the
Gospel, It is sent to a place where (perhaps) but one, or very few Elect
persons are, and those only shall be taken by it; and yet, it must be published
to the whole City promiscuously: But, the Holy Ghost, Who knows the deep
things of God, bring it to the heart of those for whom it is intended; and
there it fixes: Which the Jailer, Lydia, and other Examples, make evident.

Man is a Rational Creature, and accordingly to be proceeded with: But this way
and manner of Conversion, destroys all Freedom of Will; and makes Conversion a
Compulsory thing
The Will cannot be forced; Nor does this Doctrine hold-forth any such thing: A
Man may be forced to Act against his Will; but Not to Will against his will. He
may will that to day, which yester day he willed not; But, this Change is so
far from being an Infringement, that it is rather an effect and demonstration
of his Freedom.

There be three sorts of Compulsion; Violent, Natural, and Rational.

1. Violent; when a Man is constrained to do That which his Will is
opposite-to. Thus the Israelites to serve the Egyptians, and to go into
Captivity: So also Paul and other Saints are led captive to That they would
not: Romans 7.
By this kind of Compulsion it is, that Satan is cast-out, (as is proved
before:) But, the Will, in Conversion, comes not under this kind of Constraint;
Nor any thing like it.

2. There is a Natural Compulsion; Thus Men and other Creatures are Compelled
to Eat, Drink, Sleep, and breathe: There needs no violent hand to enforce it,
nor (indeed) Arguments to persuade to it; They do it by Instinct, which God
has endued them with, for their own Conservation: This is proper to the Soul
Converted.

3. There is also a Rational Compulsion; (which is nearest the Case in hand:)
This is, when the Understanding and Judgment are Convinced of the Goodness,
Necessity, or Expediency of a Thing; which before he judged otherwise of. Luke
15. 17. 2 King. 7. 3, 4.
For this, see the Prodigal's Reasons for Returning to his Father; and the
Lepers, for going to the Syrians Camp: Their Reason told them, It was better to
go where there was hope, than tarry where there was None. See also the
Arguments for the Saints living to Christ; His Love constrains them; yet no
breach of their liberty; albeit, that Ere-while they were Otherwise minded.

The first of these, ( viz. That which is violent) our Doctrine has nothing to
do with. It is true, There is a Drawing in Conversion; and there would be no
Conversion without it; Joh. 6. 44.
No Man can come to Christ except he be Drawn: Which Drawing implies, either an
Aversness, or (at least) a Disability, in him that is Drawn; and consequently,
a kind of force, or extrinsecal Power put-forth upon him: But let me say, It is
such a Force, as the enlightened Soul most gladly sujects it self unto; and
would not be from under the power and blessed Influence of it, for a World. Let
it therefore be observed, How the Father draws; It is, in the most Genuine and
kindly way that can be conceived; He draws by Teaching: Joh. 6. 45. Judge. 8.
16. Exodus 5. 16.
Not as Gideon taught the Men of Succoth; Nor as the Taskmasters drew the
people to their burdens: But, as Jacob was drawn into Egypt; who need not be
forced to dislodge and remove his Tent, when he found himself surrounded with
famine, and heard there was corn in Egypt; That the King had sent Wagons for
him, Genesis 45.
and provisions for the way; telling him withal, That the Good of all the land
was before him: Especially considering, that his beloved Joseph was there
alive, and in greatest honor, ready to Receive him. In like manner, When the
Soul has a sight of the Holiness of God, and of its own Vileness; Of the
Purity, Streightness, and just severity, of the law; With its own Uncleanness,
Crookedness, Guiltiness, and Disability to bear the Vengeance of it: That, in
God alone is all its blessedness: and that yet, it cannot possibly come at him,
but as dried Stubble to a Devouring flame. And yet again, If he comes not, he
dies in the place where he is, and must dwell with everlasting burnings; And
withal hears of a Mediator who casts out None that come to Him; and by whom
he may come to God both safely and acceptably; There will need no violent hand
on the Will; Even love to himself will make the Soul Wings.

There is, indeed, a violent (or rather, Almighty) Restraint and Casting-out of
him that did usurp upon the Will, and pervert it, by deluding the understanding
with false glosses and Carnal Reasonings; Which being dispelled by the true
Light's shining, the Will falls-in with it, and follows with perfect freedom.
Christ offered no violence to the Man, when He cast-out the legion, but thereby
restored him to his proper freedom; Luke 8. 35.
For, We presently find him at Jesus feet Clothed and in his Right Mind;
Desiring Now to dwell with Him, the Sight of whom (before) was a torment to him.

The Understanding (when the faculties are put in order by Renovation) is the
spirit of the Will, which therefore looks and goes the same way, as of Course,
(as the wheels did after the living-Creatures) Ezekiel. 1. 19.
without any foreign or violent Constraint: It has Now a Spring within it, by
which it is Moved and Guided (it self being also Renewed and sanctified)
according to this Renewed Light: As a Needle, that is rightly touched, Needs
not be fore'd to look toward the Pole; Matthew. 6. 22.
It will do it by Sympathy: If the eye be single, the whole body is full of
light.

But, suppose the thing objected to be true; (Namely, That in Conversion, the
Will suffers violence;) It no way deserves to be Styled Cruel or Tyranical
(as some (extremely tender in Nature's Concerns) do presume to speak;) Nor
(indeed) to be complained of, in the least; Since the tendency and issue
thereof is an Infinite good. Was it not a Mercy to Jeremy, That the Word of the
Lord was as fire in his bones, that he could not forbear speaking; rather than
be confounded for holding his peace? How much better is it, To enter into life
halt or maimed, than go into hell with a whole skin! I hope, there is none so
much besides themselves as to judge otherwise of it; Or complain of their being
compelled to go to Heaven, tho it were by a Whirlewind and Charet of fire. At
first, (I grant) it is pure necessity drives to Christ; but Afterward, His
personal Excellency and Loveliness constrain* to abide with Him; (A Sweet and
Blessed Compulsion!) And now you would not leave Him again, although the first
necessity of your going to Him were quite at an end.

But still we say, (as before) That the Will is not violated, but changed: and
that in a due and orderly way, by being made subject to an enlightened
Understanding; Than which, there is nothing more pleasant and Natural to it.

Now, As touching Inferences upon this Doctrine, I reduce them to two sorts: 1
Cautionary, To prevent the Misusing so Great a truth: 2 Directive, to
draw-forth some of the spirits of it, into practice: And of these, Intermixedly
and Briefly (though capable of much enlargement.)

In General; Take notice, That the scope and design of the Doctrine, is not to
foster Remissness in Duty; Nor to Countenance a stupid or carnal quiet: But, to
set forth the Fullness Freeness and Prevalent efficacy of Divine Grace; With
the Creatur's nothingness (as to any considerable Act) in this Matter. More
particularly:

I. I.
Presume not your self Interessed in the Promise of Eternal life, until you
find in your Self those necessary Evidential Qualifications of Faith and
Regeneration: Or at least, a truly earnest and restless pursuit after them; I
will not let Thee go except Thou bless me. Genesis 32. 26. II.


II. Let not the Means be despised, because of themselves not Sufficient to
save: Where the Means are, the Lord expects that Men should use them; and we
read not of any Saved without, where they might be had.

III. III.
Let no Man sit still in the wilful or careless neglect of his duty;
pretending, That if Elected, he shall surely be Saved; If not, all he can do
will not help him: Such a disposition argues a great height of Pride, or
Sullenness of spirit, and Enmity against God: Fly from it as from Hell; It is
truly that Death which Hell follows after. As on the contrary, ye can hardly
have a more hopeful symptom of your State, than a serious attendance upon God
in His way: And in seeking to know your Election, begin at the Right End; Give
all diligence to make your Calling sure; and the certainty of your Election
will fall-in upon it.

IV. IV.
Take notice (from the Import and Tenor of the Contrary Doctrine) what standing
need and usefulness there is of those often repeated Cautions, To Try the
spirits; Search the Scriptures; Take heed how you hear; and Not to be led by
fair shows in the flesh; (which is, to be caught with chaff.) The more smooth
and pleasing notions are to the carnal Ear, the more to be suspected, and
thoroughly examined before they pass. Let the Drift of the Law and testimony
determine the Question; And that will tell you, Those Doctrines are not to be
held guiltless, that cry-up that Excellent Creature Man; with the Strength and
capacity of natural Reason; the sufficiency of Free-will-Grace; (and truly I
know not what; For they are not after the pattern of wholesome words;) Making
These the great hinge whereon the Design (that glorious Design) of Grace in
Election, The Mediation of Christ, and the Holy Ghost's operations, must all
hang and Move; yea be frustate too, and come to nothing; except the Reason of
Man will dethrone it self, and submit to That which it reckons foolishness.
Remember, that Godliness is a Mystery; which it could not be said to be, if
Reason could comprehend it. With all your care and circumspection therefore,
avoid and fly-from that dangerous quicksand; which the Jews sunk into the
perished; Romans 9. 31. 32.
and how many, in our days, are in danger of it! It has slain its Thousands
for others single Tens.

If you think to have faith, or special Grace, upon your Improvement of that
which is Common, you mistake your Mark; you build on a wrong foundation; and
are yet under a Covenant of works: Gal. 3. 10. Romans 9. 31, 32.
under which no Man was ever Saved, Nor shall be. This was the Case with those
who followed after the law of Righteousness, and did not attain to it: What was
it that hindered? They sought it (as it were) by the works of the law: And yet
the Gentiles, who sought it not, attain^d it. Where Note, by the way, That
those who do not at all, seek after Righteousness and life, are in as likely a
Way to speed, as those who seek it unduly; that is, by works of their own.

In vain is Salvation looked-for from the hills of Natural freedom,
Free-will-Grace, Humane Improvements, or what ever else is of highest esteem
with Men: None in such danger of being broke-off, (that is, of losing That they
profess and seem to have,) as Those who are high-minded, who stand on their
terms, and will not yield without taking their baggage with them: It was the
very same with those Carnal Jews, We have Abraham to our father, Were never in
bondage to any Man; And, Are We also blind? If thy Carnal heart have been
hankering that way, and now brought-off; Bless the Lord for it, Remember the
danger thou have escaped, and come no more There: And bear in thy heart (as a
frontlet between thine eyes) that good word recorded in Jeremy, Jer. 17. 5, 6,
7.
which shows the danger of making Flesh thine Arm, and the blessedness of
Trusting only in the LORD.

V. Infer. V.
If the Divine power be so absolutely Necessary, Then be sure that you rest not
on Mean is or Ministry, though the best; Use them as Means, but st^ll have your
eye toward that Power and Grace, which alone can make them effectual: Elisha
smote the Waters with Elijah's Cloak; 2 King. 2. 14. Joh. 11. 43.
but it was the God of Elijah that parted them hither and thither, to make a
way over: Men Rolled the stone from Lazarus his grave, but Christ was He who
brought Lazarus forth. Our duty is to mind our duty, and to have our faith in
God, as the principal part of it; For he it is, who is both the Maker of our
plaster, and the layer of it on: Who also does influence and Manage it for us,
from first to last.

VI. VI.
If all that pertains to Salvation, be given in Right of Election; Then let
every Soul that seeks for Spiritual Gifts, and would be sure to speed, apply
himself to Electing love; and let all your thankfulness for all that you have
or hope for, be referred to that love: For, That is the Rock out of which they
are hewn; the Fountain and spring from whence they proceed. See the Bounty and
Nobleness of it! Electing love not only provides your Home, but sends you
Wagons and Provision for the Way: Regard not your Stuff; (what ever you have of
your own, be it good, or be it bad;) For, the good of all the land is yours.
Make mention of nothing that is properly Thine, Psalm. 25. 11. Romans 7. Jer. 1. 6.
Romans 4. 21.
except the Greatness of thy sins, (as David) The power of Indwelling
Corruption, (as Paul) Thy Unability to Serve Him, (as Joshua and Jeremy:) that,
without Faith thou can not please God, Nor give Glory to Him: That without
Holiness thou can not shew-forth His virtues, nor answer the End for which He
has Chosen thee: And (finally) that thou can be Sanctified by that Will
only, Heb. 10. 9, 10.
which Wills thy Sanctification.

When Moses would prevail for the Gracious presence of God with that People,
what does he plead for it? Remember (says he) this Nation is Thy People; And
Wherein shall it be known, Exo. 33. 13, 16, Deuteronomy. 10. 15.
that I and Thy People have found Grace in Thy sight? Is it not in this, That
Thou go with us? Here you see, he makes God's presence with them, an
Evidence of His having Chosen them; And from His Choosing them, he draws an
Argument Why He should be with them. Moses durst not say, They are a People
that keep thy Commands; They are persons of a very honest ingenuous
disposition, (as some speak;) A Tractable sort of Men, that have complied with
Thee, and better Improved Thy Favors than their Neighbors have done; Therefore
Own them, and Go with them: No, but Consider (I pray Thee) that they are Thy
People; Thou have Chosen them above all people; and therefore deal with them
above the rate of Thy dealing with other Men.

In like manner, Having received any special Favor from God; Sacrifice not to
your better deservings: but as Daniel, (who, though a Man of great Wisdom, yet
says he) This secret is not Revealed to me for any Wisdom that I have more
than any living. Dan. 2. 30.
Thus also, we find David deporting himself, when Nathan brought him that
gracious message from God, how great things He would do for him and for his
House; what does David put it upon? Thou Lord God know thy servant: i. e.
Thou know, that I have done nothing which might move Thee to this Munificent
bounty: 2 Samuel 7. 20, 21.
But for thy Word's sake, and according to thine own heart, Thou have done all
these Great things: This is the voice of the Man after God's own heart.

Again, Suppose you have done any signal service for God; Retire into
self-abasement, and Magnify God that He was pleased to vouchsafe you that
honor: Thus also did David; when setting his affection to the House of God, he
had gathered that huge incredible Mass of Treasure for the building of it: He
wonders not so much at his having gotten it, (though that might well be wondered
at;) as that he had an heart so freely to Devote it to that Sacred use; Who am
I, 1 Chr. 29. 14.
(says he) and what is my People that we should be able to offer thus
willingly! For, all things are of Thee. He acknowledges their Willingness to
offer, to be as much of God, as the Offering it self. And Paul, having labored
more abundantly than all the Apostles, puts from himself the honor of it; 1
Cor. 15. 10.
Not I, but the Grace of God that was with Me.

Three or four Things (in seeking for spiritual blessings) be sure to keep
still in your mind.
1. That you must be Nothing in your self: New Wine is not for old bottles; The
Bottles must first be Undone, and made-up Anew; Math. 9. 17.
Or else, The Wine will be spilt, and the bottles perish. All your imaginary
Righteousness, Wisdom, Strength, etc. must be parted from you: And to part with
them, is as necessary, as to leave your Made-ground, and build on the firm Rock.

2. That Spiritual Blessings are a Gift, and will not admit of any Plea which
may seem to make them Wages. What the Scriptures hold-forth as a Motive with
God, That you may plead, and that is His Name: And indeed Nothing else is
pleadable at the Throne of Grace. Esteem not your self the better for what you
may carry with you; Think not to be accepted because of your present: It is not
your Money, nor your double money in your hand, that Isa. 55. 1.
will fetch you Corn from Above, (tho it may from Egypt:) Silver and Gold, Joh.
7. 37.
Works and Worthiness, are of no value at the Mint of Free Grace: There it is,
and Thence ye must have whatever may render you welcome at the Court of Heaven.

3. Be not over-solicitous how you shall speed; Nor think you shall fare the
worse for coming in so tattered and pitiful a Condition: Free Grace is
Compassionate, Rich, Bountiful: you are not the less welcome because you bring
Nothing: The best qualification is to find your self ill-qualified, Empty,
Hungry, Poor, Naked, Blind, Miserable. Electing-love has provided Enough, and
More; Not bread and water only, (though these are very welcome to an hungring
and thirsty soul;) but Wine and Milk, Wine on the lees, Isa. 25. 6. Rev. 19. 8.
A feast of fat things: Not Aprons made of figleaves, or Coats of Beasts-skins;
but Long Robes of Linen, fine and white: money made of Leather, or base
Metal, (that would burden One to carry a Month's provision of it;) But Gold;
Rev. 3. 18.
and of That the finest, and tried in the fire; which has nothing of Dross or
Cankering Rust adhering to it. And if thou have but little, look on that little
as an Earnest of More; To him that has shall be given: Is. 42. 3.
Although thou be but smoking flax, He will not quench thee.

4. Be sure you leave not Out your Mediator, the Lord Jesus Christ: Electing
love does All in Him, and so must you: Ask all in His Name, and then say, Lord,
He is Worthy for whose sake Thou should do this! And withal Take heed of
Patching; Join not Law and Grace together, lest the Rend be made worse: The
Righteousness wherein you must appear before God, is not made-up of diverse
sorts and pieces, partly His and partly your own: but a Seamless Vesture,
wrought throughout of one kind of substance, and by One hand: In this you may
appoach with boldness, and touch the top of the Golden Scepter.

VI. Infer. VI.
Having so Firm and Impregnable a Rock to found your faith upon, why should the
Greatest of Difficulties, even the power of Innate Corruption, Discourage any
Soul from Casting it self upon Electing love; As that which is perfectly Able,
and the very design of it, is, To Subdue iniquity as well as to pardon it? It
chose us not because we were or would be Holy, Ephesians. 1. 4.
but That we might be so; And to that End, Undertakes the whole of our Work for
us; It is between us and Sin, as it was between Israel and the Canaanites:
Until the Lord began to Drive, they did not stir; They were Giants, too big
for Grass-hoppers to deal with; Had iron Charets, and Cities walled up to
Heaven; And yet, that Company of Grass-hoppers turned them out; And this,
because the Lord who gave them that Land, was in the head of them; He went
before them, and cut-out their way for them: Whiles He drove, they were driven;
When He ceased, Psalm. 44. 2 and 3. Exodus 23. 28.
the work stood-still; Nay, His own People were Routed and put to the worse.
And we shall find both Moses and Joshua still using Arguments fetched from the
Covenant that God had made with them, by which always they were Supported. Let
us do likewise, Make Election our All; Our Bread, Water, Munition of Rocks, and
what ever else we can suppose to Want: Here we are sure of Supply and Safety;
It Is a Tower that is really walled up to Heaven; A Never-to-be-emptied Cloud of
Mannah; and a Jacob's Well that is Never dry: It Is deep indeed, and you have
Nothing to draw-with; yet be not disheartened; Stay by it, and the Well it self
will Rise-up to you, Numb. 21. 17.
rather than you shall want.

VII. Infer. VII.
Having done all you can, and in the midst of your Doing, Walk humbly, as
living on Another's bounty: Assume not to your self, but ascribe the whole of
your Salvation, and of all the Conducements thereto, to Electing Grace; and
hang-on that Root alone: Even Faith it self, as it is the Believers act, is not
to be Rested in, Nor to share in this Glory; We may say of Faith, as he to
Foelix, Acts 24. 2, 3.
By thee we enjoy much quietness: (but the honor thereof chiefly belonged to
Caesar who gave them that Governor:) Give unto Faith its due; Accept always
and in all places, the benefits you have by it, with all thankfullness: For, it
does you many good Offices, and you cannot live without it; Only in the Throne
let Grace be above it; For, That Is the Potentate which puts Faith in that
Capacity, and maintains it there; And the truth is, True Faith is best
contented with its proper place. To this End the Lord tells His People, It was
not their Sword, nor their Bow; that drove out their Enemies: But, (say some)
It was the Sword and Bow which God put into their hands, and which they
Manfully employed? No, God will not have Men arrogate so much to themselves;
Psalm. 60. 12. Judges, 7. 2.
but to acknowledge, It is God that subdues our enemies under us. The People
with Gideon He reckons too many to give the Midianites into their hands, Lest
they should Vaunt themselves against Him. Faith and other Graces are Mighty
only through God: As they are His Workmanship, so it is He only can keep them
Going, (as a Watch or other Engine cannot wind-up it self.) To frame a
Perpetual Motion, no Man has ever attained; No, not in trifling Matters. As
thou had no hand in changing thy heart at first; So neither, of thy self, in
carrying-on the work afterward; All our Sufficiency is of God: Even all the
Strivings of the Saints are according to the Workings of God in them. Gal. 2.
8. Col. 1. 29.
It Is true indeed, That a good Tree will bring-forth good fruit; but not
without Sun, Air, Dew, and other Heavenly influences; For, if separate from
these, the Tree it self will dye: So, without a continual Communication of
virtue from Above, Cant. 4. 16.
the New Creature can neither Act nor live. Depend therefore on that Radical
Grace (i. e. On the God of all Grace;) for Preserving and Actuating the Grace
He has given you. Gal. 4. 9.
Rest not in this, That you know God, but rather That you are known of God.

I shall close this head, as John the Apostle does his first Epistle; where
having asserted the Divinity of Christ, he presently subjoyns, Little Children
keep your selves from Idols: So say we, 1 John 5. 21.
of Electing love; (which was (indeed) the Root and Cause of Christ Himself as
a Mediator;) Whatever you lean-upon besides and without respect to That, you
make an Idol of it.

OF Perseverance OR The certain and effectual Progress of Election.
FOR the firmer support and comfort of Believers, notwithstanding the present
weakness of their Faith; As also, to allure and bring-in Others, who are
hankering about the door, or yet in the highways and hedges; It has pleased
the Holy and only Wise God, to indulge us with plain and positive assurance of
the certain continuance and going-on, of All who have once believed and
received the Grace of God in truth; Albeit, that many concerned in this
assurance, attain not to it.

That Faith and Holiness do inseperably follow Election, is shown before: Our
business now is to show, that Faith and Holiness are of an abiding nature, and
shall never be lost: And this is that we call PERSEVERANCE. Which being the
Crown and Glory of all the former Points; and that as secures to us the
comforts arising thence; being also as much impugned as any of Those: the proof
and confirmation thereof, is apparently necessary, and tending to profit: And I
trust, it shall not only appear, that the Doctrine is True; but also replete
with Arguments promotive of Holiness; by which, the contrary opinion will best
be contradicted: For, so it is, in the Wisdom of God, that every Truth has that
in it, as properly tends to its own defense and establishment.

It Is the property of Men truly wise, to enterprise only attainable things,
and things worthy their wisdom; as also, so to frame and module the means, as
not to miss their intent: Much more must it become, and be incumbent upon Him
who is Wisdom it self, so to do: If, then, the Ultimate End of all things, be
the Glory of God; and the second great End, the Salvation of His Chosen: It may
well be concluded, that the properest means for attainment, are pitched upon;
and those, such as will compass his End. Hence also, we may be satisfied, that
all intermediate Occurrences. (However improper in their own nature, and casual
to us,) were all fore-appointed of God, and that by a Decree most wise and
fixed; and consequently, are and shall be so dispensed, as not to hinder, but
help-on and bring-about, the thing principally designed; which therefore shall
not ( cannot) miscarry, nor be finally disturbed.

However therefore, 2 Cor. 2. 17.
Men of corrupt minds may stumble at the Word, Change the Truth of God into a
lie, and turn his Grace into lasciviousness; and some others, (not of design
but) by mistake and unacquaintedness with the true state of the Question; may
disapprove and object against it: Yet may not the Truth be discarded, nor its
friends be shy to Own it; But strive the more industriously, by their Sobriety,
Meekness, Holiness, and all good fruits, to make the World know; that To the
Pure all things are pure; whiles to other Men (through the impurity of their
own spirits) all things are defiled, and turned into sin: And in particular,
that the Doctrine of God's unchangeable love to his Chosen, and their Endless
abiding therein, is no way an inle^^, or Encouragement to sin, or Remissness in
Duty; but is, indeed, the powerfullest strengthner against Apostasy; and most
effectual quickner to Gospel obedience.

As touching this Doctrine, the substance of what I intend, is reduced into
this Proposition: viz.

That all and every one of God's Elect, Prop.
being once Regenerate and Believing; are and shall invincibly be carried on,
to the perfect obtainment of Blessedness and Glory.
Toward the Evidenceing of this Truth, 1. let us take-in things of a lower
consideration, than that of Eternal Salvation; and see, how those persons
(formerly instanced) being destined of God to eminent service in the World,
were carried through, and that completely, to the end of their work;
Notwithstanding the greatest difficulties and natural impossibilities, that
stood in their way to impede it. By which will appear the sure effect of God's
Purposes, even in the midst of all intervenient Obstructions; and will
contribute (not a little) to illustrate the Truth in hand.

1. I begin with Abraham's seed: In Genesis 12. 7. The land of Canaan is given
them by Promise: Isaac, in whom this Seed should be called, was not yet born;
Nor yet, until both his Parents were past age. Genesis 18. 11.
To help this, the Lord bringsback the Sun many degrees; makes it a new
springtime with them, and gives them Isaac. When Isaac was Married, his wife
proves barren: chap. 25. 21. verse 23.
After twenty years waiting, the Lord (in answer to prayer) gives her
Conception. Now, two Children they had; the Elder of which, the Lord rejects;
and the other, (to whom the Promise belonged) in danger every day to be killed
by his Brother; and so, the line of the Promise in danger of failing. chap. 27.
41. chap. 28. 2. chap. 31. 41. v. 23. and 24.
Jacob, to save his life, flies to Padan-Aram; there Laban deals hardly with
him; and when he made homewards, follows him with evil intent: But, the Lord in
a dream takes him off. No sooner is he escaped from him, chap. 32. 6.
but Esau comes against him with four hundred Men, full bent to revenge the old
grudge: The Lord turns his heart in a moment, chap. 33. 4. v. 12.
and melts him into brotherly affection; that instead of destroying Jacob, he
proffers himself to be his Guard and Convoy. When Simeon and Levi had so highly
provoked the Canaanites, chap. 34. 25. chap. 35. 5.
that it was a Thousand to One but they would come and cut off Jacob's family
at once; the Lord causes a terror to fall upon them, that they do not so much
as look after them. When a seven years Famine was coming on the land; chapter 37.
28. with chap. 41. 54.
(likely enough to eat up poor Jacob and his house) the Lord, by a strange
Providence, sends an Harbinger to make provision for them in Egypt. When
oppressed by the Egyptians, and all means used to destroy them, and that both
with craft and cruelty; Exodus 1. 12.
the Lord so orders the Matter, that the more they were oppressed, the faster
they grew; and by an high hand brings them out at last.

In the Wilderness, they carry themselves as unworthily toward God, as ever
People did; doing all that in them lay to cut off the intail of that good land,
by their unbelief, and daily repeated Rebellions; insomuch that the Lord
threatens to dispossess them: But, for his Promise sake made with Abraham,
withdraws his hand and spares them.

I might instance also, the great streights and dangers they were in at the
Red Sea, which the Lord divided for them; Afterward for want of water, which
he brings them out of a Rock: Then for Bread, which also he gives them from
Heaven: How they were denied passage by some, and waylaid by Others; and yet
carried on and delivered: and at last, how the Lord drove out those Giants,
whom they despaired of Overcoming; and so gave them the land in possession,
accordto his promise hundreds of years before: There failed not ought of any
good thing the Lord had promised: It all came to pass, Josh. 21. 45.

2. Joseph: Little Joseph is one whom the Lord will honor; Genesis 37, 7, 9, 11.
which in several dreams he intimates to him: His brethren do therefore hate
him; and, to frustrate his dreams, (which signified their subjection to him)
they conspire to kill him: v. 18.
And how shall Joseph escape? They are ten to one against him, and he the
least. Reuben (who being the eldest, was most concernd, v. 22.
in point of honor, to hinder Joseph's advancement;) he shall relent at the
very motion of making him away, and out of respect to his Father shall deliver
him. Well, though they will not presently kill him, they will cast him into a pit;
v. 24.
where, in all likelihood, he must perish: But, in the good providence of God,
v. 28.
the Ishmaelite Merchants pass by in the very nick of time, ere any wild beast
shall have found him, or his brethren determined worse against him: To them
they sell him, and by them he is brought into Egypt, (far enough out of Jacobs
inquiry) and sold to the Captain of Pharaoh's guard; (a person likely enough to
deal roughly with him. Genesis 37. 2, 3, 4.
But, here the Lord ownes him; and to bring him into favor makes all that he
does, to prosper: which his Master observing, puts the management of all his
estate into Joseph's hands. Now there is fair hopes of his coming to honor:
But, v. 7.
how soon is it dashed! Joseph being a goodly person, his lascivious Mistress
tempts him to folly; v. 9.
Which the fear of God keeping him from, v. 17.
the misreports him to his Master, charging her own wickedness upon him. v. 20.
Hereby Potiphar's favor is lost, and Joseph cast into Prison; and dealt so
hardly with, Ps. 105. 18.
that The Iron entered into his soul. Now, all hopes of preferment are gone, and
what will become of his dreams? Yet still, the Council of the Lord, that shall
stand; and this downfall of Joseph, Genesis 40.
shall prove another step to his rising: And to make way for it, two of
Pharaoh's Servants shall fall under their Lord's displeasure, be put in prison,
and committed to Joseph's keeping: Here they shall dream; Joseph shall
interpret, and the event shall answer it. Now the day begins again to dawn upon
Joseph, and by the chief Butlers restorement, some hopes of his enlargement:
but this again is soon overcast, for the Butler forgate him. Notwithstanding all
which, the providence of God do still pursue his Decree, Genesis 41. chap. 42. 6.
and cease not, till Joseph is Lord over Egypt, and his brethren bow down
before him.

3. David: 1 Samuel 16. 12.
God promises David to give him the Kingdom, and anoints him to it. What,
notwithstanding all possible interveniences? Yes, for the promise is absolute:
Has the Lord said it, and shall he not do it? If therefore, Saul cast a
Javelin at him (unsuspected,) to nail him to the Wall; a sharpeness of eye, and
agility of body, shall be given him to discern and avoid it: If he determine
evil against him, Jonathan shall advertise him of it. 1 Samuel 19. 20* 24.
If he send Messengers to Naioth to apprehend him; they shall forget their
errand, and fall a prophesying: And if he send others, and others after them;
they shall do likewise: yea, Saul himself shall turn prophet for a day and a
night together, that David may have time to escape, If he be in a City that
will betray him, and not a friend among them to advise him of it; the Lord
Himself will be his intelligencer, 1 Samuel 23. 12.
and send him Out. If Readiness Army have encompassed him, and no way left to
escape; the Philistines shall invade the land, v. 26, 27.
and tidings shall come in the very instant, and take him off. If an host do
encamp against him, Ps. 27. 3.
he will not be afraid: Why so? The Lord had made an absolute promise, and
therefore if no help on earth, He shall send from Heaven and save me: Ps. 57. 3.
Yea, David's wavering, (at times) and the weakness of his Faith, shall not
hinder it: and the Reason of all, we have in 1 Chronicles. 17. 7. and 8. The Lord
took him to be Ruler over his People, and therefore he was with him where ever
he went.

4. Josiah: A Child shall be born to the house of David, Josiah by name; 1
Kings 13. 2.
who shall offer the bones of Jeroboam's priests upon his Altar. If (therefore)
Athaliah determine to destroy all the seed-Royal, Joash shall be stolen from
among the rest, 2 Kings 11. 2.
and reserved; and by him Davida's line shall be continued: Hezekiah, though
sick unto death, he shall not dye; 2 Kings 20. 6. with chapter 13. 16.
but be healed (as it were) by a miracle; and fifteen years added to his life,
rather then Manasseh, who must be Josiah's Grandfather, shall be unborn.

5. Paul: Paul was a chosen Vessel, appointed to preach Christ to the Gentiles;
and at last, to bear witness of Him at Rome: And this must be done, although
Bonds, Imprisonments, and Death it self, do attend him in every place. If they
lie in wait for him at Damascus, and watch the gates night and day, Acts 9.
23-25.
to kill him; he shall be let-down by the Wall in a basket, and so escape them:
If all Jerusalem be in an uproar to kill him; the chief Captain shall come with
an Army and rescue him, chap. 21. 31-33
(though no friend to Paul, nor to his Cause:) If more than Forty Men have bound
themselves with an oath, that they will neither eat nor drink, till they have
killed him; his kinsman shall hear of it, Acts 23. 14, 23
and by his means the chief Captain shall be his friend again, and grant him a
sufficient Convoy; and this attempt shall be an occasion of sending him to
Rome, where his last testimony is to be given. If Jews and Gentiles make an
assault together, to use him despitefully and to stone him; he shall be aware
of it, and by fleeing save himself; (by which means also the Gospel shall be
further spread.) Acts. 14. 5, 6.
But, suppose he be left in their hands; and they so far prevail, as to stone
him, and drag him out of the City; then (sure) his work's at an end? No, All
this shall not hinder; Death it self shall not separate Paul from his work. chapter
16. 19, 20.
It is not his being twice stoned, nor his thrice suffering Shipwreck, Nor his
being in deaths often, nor any thing else, that shall make-void the purpose of
God for his bearing witness of Christ at Rome; as is abundantly evident by the
stories of him, and the event at last.

Other instances might be produced, to the same effect; But, by these we may
take an estimate of the thing under proof; and rationally infer, that if the
Lord be so exact and punctual, in performing his word touching these lesser
things; carrying on His work through such a preass of natural oppositions; much
more will He be, in securing and bringing about the Eternal welfare of his
Chosen: That as he dealt by His People of old; He bear them upon Eagles wings,
(above the Reach of danger) and kept them as the Apple of His eye; Exodus 19. 4.
Deuteronomy. 32. 10.
(with all possible care and tenderness) until He had brought them to Himself:
So will He carry it toward His Elect; For, he values the World but little,
save with respect to them

II. Now, for a more direct proof of the Doctrine: Though two or three
Witnesses might suffice to establish it; yet, since the Scriptures do abound
with Testimonies for it; (the Collection whereof may be useful to us, for
helping our faith in times of obscurity and danger: as also, to fortify
against the assaults of such as teach final Apostasy) I am somewhat the larger
in bringing them together; with some of those Genuine Deductions that flow from
them.

In the Old Testament, are many Petitions and Resolves made by holy Men, which
import the truth of this Doctrine; As, (namely) That the Lord will perfect that
which concerns them: Ps. 138. 8.
That He will not for sake the work of His own hands: That He will guide them
by His Counsels, Ps. 73. 24.
and after receive them to Glory: And that, in the mean time, None of their
steps shall slide; and this, because It is God that girds them with strength,
and He will make their way perfect, Psalm 18. 32. (with many others, 37. 31.
26. 1.
as also in Paul's Epistles.) In every of which is employed a Promise of the
thing prayed for, or concluded upon: For, without such a Promise they could not
have done it in faith; nor meetly have given them down as matter of instruction
to Others. But, we know they spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; 2 Pet.
1. 21.
Who knowing the deep things of God; What His Decrees were; and what was
contained in the Promise of Eternal life before the World; Tit. 1. 2.
drew out their hearts to Believe, and formed their prayers accordingly. But,
besides these, we have many express promises and affirmations of it.

In the 10th. of John, v. 28.
Our Savior says, His sheep shall never perish; which is, in effect, their
faith shall never fail: For, safe they cannot be from perishing, without the
securement of their Faith: John 4.
And in John 4: (speaking of the Spirit of Holiness which Believers receive
from Him) He says expressly, Whosoever drinks thereof, shall never thirst:
(i. e. It shall never be dried up) but shall be in him, v. 14.
a Well of Water springing up to Everlasting life.

Prove. 10. 30, The Righteous shall never be removed, (i. e. They shall never
fall back into their former state;) and the Reason is, Because the way of the
Lord is strength to the upright; v. 29. Whether by [ the way of the Lord] be
meant, His way or manner of dealing with upright Persons, which is, to increase
their strength; (according to Job 17. 9.) Or, of the Genuine property of God's
ways; which is, to afford that peace and satisfaction to those who walk in
them, that they are daily more habituated and connaturalized to them, and
estranged from all ways else; they are both to the purpose in hand.

Prove. 24. 16, A just Man falls seven times and rises up again; He falls not
so as to lie where he fell; He falls not into mischief, as the wicked does:
yea, he rather gets ground by his fall, as v. 5, A Man of Wisdom increases
strength; By the sense of his own weakness, he is led to strength everlasting;
as was Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 10.

Prove. 12. 21. There shall no evil happen to the Jsust: Then, not the greatest
and worst of evils; which is, To depart from the living God: So, v. 3. The root
of the Righteous shall not be Moved; His fruit may sometimes be Blighted, or
blown off, and his branches tossed with a tempest; but still, his Root is where
it was; His life is hid, and free from all Commotion; and shall (therefore)
renew both his fruit and branches; Jer. 17. 7, 8.
according to that in Jeremy, He that trusts in the Lord shall not cease from
yielding fruit.

Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart
from Me. This (say some) is the promise of affording them Means, but not of
effecting the end; Therefore see Chap. 3. 19. Thou shall call Me my Father, and
[ shall not] depart from Me: And this, because He works Effectually in them
that believe; 1 These. 2. 13.
As at first in causing them to believe, so now in maintaining and perfecting
their Faith.

Psalm 84. 11, The Lord withholds no good thing from them that walk
uprightly: And if so, then continuing to walk uprightly, (being a good thing)
shall not be withheld from them. Which deduction is also warranted from Job.
17. 9. The Righteous shall hold-on his way, and He that [hath] clean hands
shall be stronger and stronger; as also from Prove. 4. 18. The path of the Just
is as the shining light, which shines more and more, unto the perfect day. And
David further backs it in Psalm 26. 1. where from his present Faith, he
concludes his future progress; Psalm. 66. 7.
I have trusted, I shall not slide; and this, because The Lord holds his soul
in life, and suffers not his feet to be moved.

Mark 16. 16. He that believes shall be saved: And John 11. 26. Whosoever
lies and believes in Me (says Christ) shall never dye: i. e. He that once
has Faith shall never lose it: For, to say, He shall keep it, if he do not lose
it, (as some would give the sense) had been a Comfortless and empty Notion, and
an injudicious way of speaking. This is yet further confirmed by John 5. 24, He
that believes is passed from death to life, and [shall not] come into
condemnation. The Reason of all which is, that their Faith is founded on a
Rock; Math. 7, 15.
which Wind and Waves may beat and break themselves against; But never the Rock
it self, nor That which is built upon it: He that trusts in the Lord, is as
Mount Zion, which [cannot] be moved: No, Not so much as One of the stakes of
that Tabernacle shall be removed, Psalm 125. 1.
Isa. 33. 20.
Chap. 45. 17, 1 Pet. 2. 6.
and that for ever: They shall not be ashamed nor confounded [World without
End.]

It would very much allay that superlative cause of Rejoicing, [ That our Names
are written in Heaven,] If possibly they might be blotted out again; since we
find in our selves such a proneness to Revolt, (which every one acquainted with
his own heart, must acknolwedge:) But we are sure, Christ would not propound to
us a failable ground of rejoicing: For, that would have been an inviting us to
lean on a breakable staff: which kind of dependence, He is evermore calling us
from.

Believers (indeed) are sometimes foiled, but never overcome: Though they fall,
(and that seven times in a day, as was said) As often do they rise again: And
it is no disparagement to their leader, (yea, it is the Glory of a General) to
give his enemy advantages, and take them again at his pleasure, to his enemies
greater confusion and overthrow. Satan got nothing by his Winnowing Peter;
Peter lost some of his Chaff, (which well might be spared) and the Tempter lost
many an after-advantage; For, the World of Believers have been the warier ever
since.

To this second sort of evidence, I shall only add That of the Holy Apostle,
in Romans 8. He was persuaded (that is, He was thoroughly swayed in his faith, to
believe it for himself, and deliver it down to the Ages to come, as a Truth
infallible) That neither Height nor Depth, Nor any other Creature shall be able
to separate from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans 8. 38,
39.
He reckons up all that can be named; and, lest any thing might have slipped him,
he brings in Height and Depth; as being those two extremes that take in All,
and more than Men can think: and then resolves, That even These shall not be
able to do it. And surely, if the super-celestial height of God's Holiness, Nor
the infra-infernal Depth of sin, shall separate from that day of Glory, (which
the sons of God were Predestined to, and for which they were both made and
Redeemed, called into and groan for;) then are Believers Roundly secured
against final Apostasy.

III. A third sort of evidence for Confirmation, are certain Arguments or
Reasons why the Saints must needs Persevere in Faith and Holiness.
By this word [Needs must] I do not understand any other kind of necessity,
than well consists with perfect freedom; such a Necessity as was upon Paul to
preach the Gospel; which was a work he rejoiced in: such as was upon Jesus
Christ to bring-home his sheep; and to lay down his life for them: Luke 12. 50.
How was He straightened till it was accomplished! That it was written in his
heart was no hindrance to the freedom of his will: The expression is well
warranted also where it is said, That the Scripture (speaking of Judas his
fact) must needs be fulfilled, Acts 1. 16.

The first Argument, Arg. I.
John 1. 13.
in proof of Perseverance, is founded on the Saints Extract or Original; They
are born of God: And this has the force of a double Argument.

1. As God is their Father and Eternal Root: Our Savior holds forth this
Relation, as the ground of our Faith in prayer, Math. 6. 9. And He begins with
it Himself, when He prays for His own Glory, and that His Disciples might be
partakers of it, John 17. 1. To the same end, He frequently uses that style of
Father, in the Gospel of John; as in particular, That He ascends to His Father,
and our Father, John 20. 17. It is to strengthen our Faith in God (through
Himself) on the account of His Fatherhood to us. The Father loves the Son,
John 3. 35. And, He loves His Believers, as He loves Christ Himself, John 17.
23. On which ground the Apostle concludes, That He cannot but give us all
things else, Romans 8. 32. Believers are, (in truth) the product of His love,
both in respect of Election and Regeneration; and being so, He cannot but have
a paternal affection for them; to administer to them, whatever tends to their
sustentation and growth; and to keep-off what ever would intercept or weaken
His gracious influences toward them: Having once loved them, John 13. 1.
He loves them for ever. They may therefore be confident, That what He has
begun in the Spirit, He will not let end in the flesh: That having begun a good
work in them, Phil. 1. 6.
He will also perform it: For, As they have their spiritual Being from Him, as
the Father of it; so it is Natural to Him to derive his virtues into them
without intermission, as for a Vine to send up its sap into its own branches,
or the Sun to cherish the plants of its own production. All the natural
affections that are in Creatures toward their own, are but drops of His
Immense fullness: A Mother may possibly forget the Child of her Womb; but, the
Lord cannot forget His Offspring: That none may hurt, them, (nor they
themselves) He will keep them night and day, Isaiah 27. 3. chap. 46. 3, 4.
and water them every moment. They are born by Him from the Belly, and carried
from the Womb; and even to their old age He will carry them and deliver them.

2. The new Creature, as it comes from God; so, it exists in Him, and lives
upon Him; and it is Natural to it, to seek its nourishment where it had its
Original: Nothing can satisfy it, but that great Deep from whence it sprang;
As a Newborn child (that has not the use of Reason) will hunt for the breast
by natural instinct, and not be qulet without it: As soon as ever Paul was
converted, Behold he prays, Acts 9. 11. Having once received the Spirit of
Christ, they cannot but incline after Him, (as Elisha did Elijah upon the
casting of his Mantle on him:) It is natural to them, 1 K. 19. 19, 20.
as for sparks to fly upwards: They are said To be baptized with fire; Not
only, because of the purifying Nature of fire; but in respect of its Aspiring
quality; it will be Mounting, and not rest till it come to its own element.
Obstructions many it meets withal, but still it presses onwards, and by
degrees bears-down all before it, and carries that with it in which it dwells,
to the place of its birth; As the Dove could not Rest, till she came to the
Ark, whence she set-out? This is lively set forth by our Savior in John 7. 38.
He that believes in Me, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living Waters:
[Rivers] that bear down all opposition: and Rivers of [ living] Waters; not
Landflouds, which are but of short continuance; or standing Pools, subject to
drying up: But such Rivers as have an-Immortal Head.

We see how All things tend to their Center; Prove. 4. 16.
The wicked sleep not unless they do evil; They can bear the want of things
most necessary to their being, rather than cease from sin: John 8. 44.
Acts 1. 25.
They are of the Serpents brood, and the lusts of their Father they will do:
Judas was a Devil, and that carried him headlong to his own place. And if being
born of the Devil, habituates men with so strong and restless a bent to
Devilish lusts; the Divine Nature must needs work as efficaciously toward God,
and Godlike Actions. And if it were not so, the Divine Nature had never born an
humane stock to Heaven: The first fruits of the Spirit possess them with an
earnest expectation and longing for the harvest. Romans 8. 23.


There are, indeed, Remainders of the Old Man, which will still be opposing the
New; and many contests there are between them: But Grace (like him that is
Advocate for the King) will ever have the last word, and will also go out
victor: ye may see it in Jeremy; The word of the Lord was made a Reproach to
him; He therefore resolves to stifle it, and will no more speak in His Name:
But, how succeds this carnal resolution? The word of the Lord was in his heart,
as fire shut up in his bones: Jer. 20. 8, 9.
He was weary of forbearing, He could not hold. And Jonah, When he thought
himself cut off, Jonah 2. 2, 3.
and in the belly of hell; (yet (says he, yet) will I look again toward thy
holy Temple: As the Needle that is rightly touched, Ps. 84. 7.
never Rests but in pointing toward the Pole:) and when obstructed in their
Course, Ps. 42. 7.
they cry the more earnestly, Oh, when shall I come and appear before God!

II. Another Argument is taken from the Graces themselves which are the subject
of Perseverance, Arg. II.
viz. Faith and Holiness; Which let us consider, first, as They are a Gift;
Then, in the Genuine use and property of them.

1. As they are a Gift; They are of those, good and perfect Gifts which come
down from above, from the Father of lights, with whom is no Variableness, James
1. 17.
nor shadow of Turning. This Attribute of God's Unchangeableness, is fitly and
significantly added, to show, That as good and perfect gifts only, are from
God, and from Him only; so, That He never Changes in His Purpose concerning
those to whom He once gives them: They are of those Gifts that are without
Repentance. As also, That these His Gifts do partake of His own unvariableness;
They cannot dye, nor turn to be any other than what they are at first, save
only in point of Perfection: There can happen no after-unworthiness in those He
gives them to, which He did not foresee when He gave them; (which seems to be
implied in the following words, v. 18.
[ Of His Own Will begat He us:] and so, no cause why He should withdraw
them, which should not as well have hindered His giving them at first. As the
word of God is not Yea and Nay; 2 Cor. 1. 19.
so neither are His Gifts. They are also God's Workmanship; And we know, (says
Solomon) That whatsoever God does, Eccles. 3, 14.
it shall be for ever; Nothing can be added to it, Nor anything taken from it.

2. Let Faith and Holiness be considered in the Genuine use and Property of
them. Nothing so endangers the Soul, as self-fullness; Faith (therefore) was
ordained to empty out self, and devolve the soul on Another, ( viz. Christ)
which the more it does, the safer it is; And having once done it, it never
undoes it again. Faith (also) is an Active Grace, and diligent; Luke 19. 26.
Math. 13. 10.
and therefore thriving: He that has it, shall have more of it; (Then sure he
shall not lose that he has:) It is always Traveling, and never tired; 1.
Because it travels in the strength of Omnipotency: and 2. Because it works by
love; Which is the most kindly and efficacious Principle of service and great
Acts. Love is an Endless skrew; It has truly attained the perpetual Motion; It
enables to endure all things and fails not, 1 Cor 13. 7, 8. All that God does
for His people is from love, John 3. 16. and all that they do for God, grows
from the same Root; They love Him, [because] He loved them, first; 1 John 4.
19. Love is That which renders a Work both pleasant to the Agent, and
acceptable to the Object of it. Faith (therefore) working by love, shall never
be weary of its work, nor fail of its end; Romans 4. 16.
It is of Faith, That it might be sure.

And as for Holiness, (which is a disposition according to God, and capacitates
for the blessed Vision) a little of it in Truth, Math. 12. 20.
is of infinite worth; The very smoke of it shall not be quenched: And it would
be strange, if a thing so precious should be liable to putrefaction: But it is
not; yea, it changes other things, but is it self never changed: It is of a
spreading nature; compared therefore to leaven, which is put into the Soul and
hid there, till the whole lump be seasoned: It is of an assimilating property;
there is an Heavenly Tincture in it, which sanctifies all that it touches; To
the pure all things are pure. It also meetens for Converse with God; and it
draws and ingageth the Soul to Him; There it is as in its proper Element, and
out of which it cannot live: And, by this Converse it is both increased and
sublimated.

A Natural Body once in being, can never be reduced to Nothing: How then should
Things of Divine substance? They are Born of incorruptible seed, which lives
and abides for ever: And as the seed is, such will be the fruit; The Older it
grows, the firmer it is; He that has clean hands shall be stronger and
stronger: They are the Holy Seed, And therefore, tho they cast their leaves (at
times) yet their substance is in them, By which they are still renewed.

To all which might be added, that Notion also in Romans 8. 30. which
infers, That to be sanctified, is all one as to be glorified: Holiness is
the seed of Glory; and holy persons are in Glory; ( viz. as to its kind, and
the certainty of their obtainment;) although (indeed) it has no glory at
present, in comparison of that which shall be; as the seed of a Rose or Lilly,
compared with the flowers they will grow into; and which are virtually in them.
According with this, is that of our Savior, John 3. 36. Ps. 37. 31.
He that believes [hath] everlasting life: It argues the certainty of their
Perseverance; The law of his God is in his heart: None of his steps shall
slide: Isa. 65. 8.
And therefore he says, Destroy it Not, there is a blessing in it.

III. Another proof rises from the Nature, Arg. III.
extent, and design, of Providence; or from the Intent and Purpose of God, in
that great variety of things which believers are exercised with in the world.
There are three things considerable, to make out this Argument;

1. That there is a Divine Providence which Governs the World: As in dividing
to the Nations their inheritance, and bounding their habitations, at first; so,
by continuing them in possession, or Outing them, at his pleasure; and this
(oftentimes) by very unlikely means, and overruling things accordingly: Seir
being given to Esau, and Ar to the Children of Lot; and their term not being
yet expired; the Lord inclines them to let Israel pass through, and to give them
meat for their money: whereas the Amorites, who were destinied to destruction,
He hardens their spirits and makes them obstinate; that they deny them passage,
and come out against them in battle. Deuteronomy. 2. 29, 30.
So, when he would translate the Chaldean Monarchy to the Persians; He
enfeebles the one, Jer. 51. 11.
Isa. 45. 1*5.
but stirrs up the Others spirits, and Girds them with strength. How often does
the Scripture repeat, That the Lord reigns, Ps. 93. 1. 97. 1. 75. 7.
That He puts down One and sets up another, That He does according to His Will
in the Armies of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the earth? Dan. 4, 35.
How evident is it in his humbling of Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, and others! This
Providence reaches to all manner of Persons, times, and things; and
Circumscribes them: It leaves not the least thing to a Contingency; Even
Ravens, Sparrows, and Lillies, yea, and the hairs of your head are all numbered
and under the Conduct of the Providence of God, Matthew. 6. 26.

2. That the design and course of God's Providence, Eezk. 24. 25.
is to accomplish His Purpose. As Providence governs the World; so Purpose is
the Director of Providence. He is a Provident Man that orders his affairs
prudently: i. e. so that nothing is wanting, nor any thing spent in waste. Both
these are in the Providence of God eminently: for 1. It is All-sufficient;
supplies all needs; Gives all things pertaining to Means and End: 2. It does
Nothing in vain, Nothing superfluous or impertinent to His Purpose. Things most
casual to Men, are levelled at a set and Certain End: What the Lord speaks with
His Mouth, He fullfills with His Hand, 1 Kings 8. 24. and His Act shall not
vary a tittle from His Decree, which is clearly the meaning of that in the
Acts, Known unto God are all His Works from the beginning of the world. Whence
was it, that Esau tarried so long at his hunting, that he was overfainted? That
Jacob was making pottage just when Esau comes home, which set his appetite on
edge after it? But, that the Purpose of God according to Election might stand:
The Elder must serve the younger; which now came-to-pass by the sale of his
birthright. And thus the Providence of God makes even the profaneness of Men,
subserve to His End. The Lord had determined to cast Judah and Jerusalem out of
His sight, for their obstinacy: And to this end (that is, To make way for it)
it came-to-pass, 2 King 24. 20.
that Zedekiah rebelled against the King of Babylon: It was to fulfill the
word of the Lord declared in the 2 Chronicles. 36. 21. (tho that was far from the
Rebellers intent.) So He gave Cyrus all the Kingdoms of the Earth, that he
might build His Temple at Jerusalem; and it was to fulfill His Purpose before
recorded by Jeremy the Prophet; as ver. 22. and 23. In like manner, Herod,
Pilate, and the Jews, they all conspire the death of Christ, and each party on
a several account; not thinking (in the least,) to fulfill the determinate
Counsel of God; yet, That was it, which Providence intended, in permitting the
Thing to be done; as is plain, by Acts 2. 23. As also, the Soldiers, in parting
His garments and piercing His side; It was their barbarous rudeness which put
them upon it; But, Providence designed to make-good a Prophecy, These things
[therefore] the Soldiers did, John, 19. 24. All that God does in the World, is
the Transcript, or Impression, of His Decrees.

3. That the Providence of God never fails of Its End: Our God is in Heaven,
and does whatsoever He will. Ps. 115. 3.
He will Work, and who shall let it? And what will He work? The things that are
coming and shall come: Isa. 44. 7.
He has both devised and done it, Jer. 51. 12. His Purpose is, To preserve His
People, Isa. 54. 17.
and therefore, No Weapon that is formed against them shall prosper: Whosoever
gathers together against them shall fall for their sake, Isa. 54. 15. And, As
He has purposed, so shall it stand; Chap. 14. 24. The Scriptures abound with
instances to prove it. As on the Contrary, When the Lord will execute Judgment,
it shall be performed, albeit the Means be never so weak and improbable; Though
the Army of the Chaldeans were all wounded men, yet shall they burn Jerusalem
with fire, Judges 3. 31. chapter 15. 15.
Jer. 37. 10. SHAMGAR shall kill six hundred Men with an Ox-goad; and SAMPSON,
a Thousand with the Jaw Bone of an Ass. These things considered and laid
together, (though chiefly referring to Temporal things) do strongly enforce
the Argument, for things of spiritual Concernment: Inasmuch as things of
Eternal Moment are worthy of more peculiar regard and security.

Now, All a Believer's exercises (which may seem to endanger him) are either
from the guilt of sins committed; From the power of indwelling corruption; From
Satan's temptations; or Persecution from the World: None of which come on them
accidentally, but as things fore-appointed of God, and for a good intent. It is
for the Elects sake that all things else have their being, 2 Cor. 4. 15. And
are all caused to work together for their good, Romans 8. 28. As (namely) to
humble them for sin; To wean them from the World; To indear JESUS CHRIST to
them; To show them the usefulness of Ordinances; To exercise and try their
Graces; To purge out their dross; To enable them to succor others; To
demonstrate the Wisdom, Power, and Faithfulness of God toward them; To meeten
them for Heaven; And to make them groan and long to be clothed upon with their
house from thence; As might plentifully be made out by the Scriptures, and the
visible effects thereof upon those who have been exercised thereby. To instance
a few particulars: David, after that great miscarriage in the matter of Vriah,
with his broken bones upon it; walked the more humbly and warily all his days:
He was also the more intent on that great duty of Teaching sinners the way of
God. Psalm. 51. 13.
Peter, he also got ground by denying his Master; Thereby he came to see his
own weakness, the need he had of Christ's support, and continual prayer for
him; and we hear no more of his carnal confidence, after that: But, What a
clamor and outcry does he make against our adversary the Devil! 1 Pet. 5. 8.
to warn others (by his own example) what danger they are in: And doubtless,
what the Tempter got by Peter's fall, he lost the double of it by the
after-watchfulness of Others; For that is the designed end, Luke 2^. 32.
viz. To strengthen, stablish, settle them, ver. 10. Paul had a Messenger of
Satan let looss upon him, to buffet him: The end of which was to humble him,
and To show him the sufficiency of the Grace of Christ. It Is likely also, That
he got as much by that thorn in his flesh, as by his Rapture and Revelations:
To be sure, they did well together, and poized him the better for his work.
Job. 23. 10 with chapter 40. 4. and chapter 42. 6.
The like effect upon Job. Mary Magdalen the remembrance of the seven devils
that once possessed her, and of that love which cast them out; How did it
heighten her love to Christ, and keep her heart in a melting frame! She loved
much, because much was forgiven her. The People's forty years travel through
that great and terrible wilderness, Deuteronomy. 8. 15, 16.
among fiery Serpents and scorpions; It was To prove them, and to do them good
in the latter end: They were also sent into captivity for their good: Jer. 24.
5.
Isa. 27. 9.
This was all the fruit intended, To take away their sin; and to make them
partakers of His holiness. Heb. 12. 10.


I grant, (indeed) These things are Physic, which Nature desires not: Yet let
me say, They are as needful in their season as our food; and in very
Faithfullness we must have them: which also appears by the scope of the new
Covenant; (Of which more afterward.)

Upon all which, It is safely inferred, That all these things works God with
Man; Not to destroy him, but To bring-back his soul from the pit, Job 33. 29.
and 30. They are all made to turn to their Salvation: They have always
triumphed over them, Romans 8. 37.
and been more than Conquerors, through Him that loved them.

And if this be the fruit and Result of all that does or can befall a Believer,
whiles in this World: (and there is no more of evil or danger when this is done)
then welcome let them be, as another Demonstration of their INVINCIBLE
PERSEVERANCE. Ps. 107. 43.
Who so is wise, and will observe these things; even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

IV. A fourth Argument for the Saints Perseverance, Arg. IV.
is built on their Union with Christ; Which is of that Intimateness, that the
Scripture sets it forth by terms of nearest Relation; as Foundation and
Building, Vine and Branches, Father and Children, Husband and Spouse, Head and
Members; Yea, They are both called (interchangeably) by the same Name; He is
called Jacob, Psalm. 24. 6. And they are called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. And
(which is more, if more can be) He communicates to them that title which one
would think Incommunicable, viz. The Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. with
chap. 33. 16. And this Union is such as can never be broken; It is no more
possible, than for the Union which is between God and Christ to be dissolved:
For, the same Oneness (for kind) is between Christ and them, as between the
Father and Christ; which is plain by that passage of His prayer in the 17 John,
ver. 21. That they all may be One (How one?) as thou Father art in Me and I in
Thee, That they may be One in Us. They are so near to Him, that they are said
to be Of His flesh and of His bones, Ephesians. 5. 30. as also, That they are one
Spirit, i. e. 1 Cor. 6. 17.
He and They are Actuated by the same Spirit, as the head and members of the
same Body are by One Soul. And this is the true reason why Believers cannot
walk after the flesh, because The Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus (as
their root) rules in them, Romans 8. 2. Jude ver. 2.
They are preserved in Christ as Noah was in the Ark; or as branches in their
own stock: For, this difference is still to be Noted, That Believers have not
this life in themselves, as Christ has; but they have it in him, which is
better for them than if in their own keeping: For, being in Him as in a Root,
It is natural to Him to Communicate, and as natural to them (by virtue of the
Divine Nature communicated to them) to Derive from Him: And so, Because (and
whiles) He lives, Joh. 14. 19. 1 John 5. 12.
They shall live also: He that has the Son, has life: and they have it in a
way of Right; as he that is possessed of the soil, has right to all that grows
upon it. All that is Christ's is theirs; There is a happy Commutation of
Interests; Their debts with the consequences thereof are devolved upon Him; and
all that was His in imputed to them. And His care of them is such, that He will
be able to say at the latter day, Of All that Thou have given Me I have lost
nothing; Joh. 18. 9. 17. 12.
Jer. 22. 24.
He will not leave an hoof behind: The signet on his right hand (Men of
shineing outsides) may possibly be plucked thence; but the least joint of His
finger shall not. No man (who is Compos mentis) will suffer the meanest part of
himself to Gangrene and perish, if it be in his power to help it: How then
should our Lord Christ? Ephesians. 5. 25.
Who besides the natural affection He has to those of His own Body, has also
received a Commandment from the Father, Joh. 6. 40.
to keep them safe: and is perfectly qualified, in all respects, to make it
good. On this account, Col. 2. 10.
as well as others, they are complete in Him. Believers are so One with Christ,
that whatsoever he did, they are said to do it with Him; verse. 11.
Romans 6. 6.
ver. 4. and 5.
Ephesians. 4. v. 8.
Chap. 2. 6.
Gal. 2* 20.
Circumcised with Him; Crucified with Him; Buried with Him; Rose with Him;
Ascended with him; And they sit in Heaven with him. It is no more possible for
Believers to miscrary finally, than for Christ Himself to be held under the
power of the grave; There is one law for them both: It Is a faithful saying, 2 Timothy 2. 11.
If we be dead with Him, Romans 8. 17. Chap 6. 9.
we shall also live with him; If we suffer with him, we shall be glorified
together. As Christ once raised, dies no more; so shall None of those raised
with Him, return any more to corruption: For, He gave himself for his Church;
not only to sanctify and cleanse it for once, Acts 13. 34.
Ephesians. 5. 25. 27.
but Once for All; and to present it without spot or wrinkle at the last day:
By that one offering, He perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Heb. 10.
14.
These are those sure mercies of David, recorded in the 55th. of Isaiah, and
explained in that 13th of the Acts.

It is not for Nothing, that our blessed Lord and Savior so often repeats that
good word and promise touching Believers, in John 6. v. 39, 40, 44, 54; (which
surely He did, as being greatly pleased with the thoughts of it) I will raise
him up at the last day: and, I will raise him up at the last day, -- q. d. I
will be with him unto the end of the world, and see him safe in Heaven: And
this may be said of it, (as by Joseph to Pharaoh) The thing is doubled, Genesis
41. 32.
because it is established of God, and He will bring it to pass.

V. Another Argument for Believers invincible Perseverance, Arg. V.
is, That all the Attributes of God do stand engaged for it: Virtue invincible
having undertaken it, Needs must it succeed.

1. Power: In Jer. 32. 27, God's Sovereign Power over all flesh is laid-down as
the ground of their faith, touching their Return from Captivity, and His giving
them a new heart; and for His so keeping them, that they should not depart from
Him any more, Jer. 32. 7. with ver. 36 to 41.
as they had done. So, when He would strengthen His fainting People, He styles
Himself, The Everlasting God, The Lord, The Creator of the ends of the Earth,
Isa. 40. 28.
who faints not, Neither is weary: And in Chapter 62. 8, His Right hand, and the
Arm of His strength, are engaged by an Oath.

In the 2 Timothy 1. 12, The Apostle argues the certainty of his salvation from
the Power of God; (which he could not have done with any good Reason or
Comfort, had not that Power been engaged for it): I am not ashamed -- For I
know Whom I have believed; and that He is [able] to keep That I have committed
to Him, against that day: And he gives the like Counsel to others, where he
points at the [Power] of God, 2 Cor. 9. 8.
to make all Grace abound in them: and in Romans 11, The Calling of the Jews, and
grafting them into Christ, Romans 11. 23.
is laid on the same Rock; For, God is [able] to Graft them in again. Col. 1. 11.


In Ephesians. 6, He tells them what kind of enemies they were to wrestle with;
Ephesians. 6. 12.
viz. Principalities, and Powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places: (A
sort of Adversaries too potent for spirits housed in Clay:) But, to harness
them fitly for the battle, he shows them a Power that is higher than those; and
(indeed) as much above them, and more, than they above us: And with This he
would have them to Invest themselves, Ephesians. 6. 10.
Be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of His might: This is an Armor
complete; aptly termed The [whole] Armor of God; ver. 11.
and in this strong Tower Believers are safe.

So likewise in Ephesians. 1. Ephesians. 1. 18.
To confirm them touching the hope of his Calling, he brings-in The Mighty
Power of God, even That Power by which He raised Jesus Christ from the dead,
ver. 19.
and sent Him at His own Right hand, ver. 20.
far above all Principalities and Power, ver. 21.
and putting all things under His feet: Wherein he sets forth Christ as a
pattern of what God will do for Believers; They shall be raised and set above
all. 2 Chr. 6. 36.
And though they sometimes fall, (as there is no Man that sins not) Let it
make them more Wary, but not discourage them: Ps. 37. 24.
For, They shall not be [utterly] cast down; and this, because The Lord
upholdeth them with His hand. The Archers may shoot at them, and sorely grieve
them; Genesis 49. 23, 24
yet shall their Bow abide in strength, and the Arms of their hands be made
strong by the hands of the Mighty God of Jacob. And well it is for us, That the
Divine Power has undertaken this difficult Work; and that the Scriptures do so
clearly avouch it. For nothing less could be a Buttress sufficient to stay our
Faith upon, touching our holding-out to the End: Isa. 40. 26.
But, because, He is strong in Power, Not one fails.

2. Wisdom: This is an ability to fit and direct Things to their proper End. In
matters of lesser Concern, we find the Lord so laying His Work, that it cannot
miscarry: It therefore it be His good pleasure to Ordain Men to Salvation, His
Wisdom requires, that it be in such a way as is sure to succeed: and that all
sorts to Impediments be so overruled, as not to interrupt, but be made
subservient to His great End: Luke 14. 29. 3^.
Having counted His cost and paid if off, and also begun to build; it behooves
His Wisdom to see that His work be done, and brought to perfection: And
accordingly to provide Instruments suited to His Work; such as He knows Will do,
and Not Over-doe, the thing intended: As the Husbandman sorts his grain to the
Nature of the soil, Isa. 28. 25-28.
and threshing instruments to the capacity of his grain; he uses not a wheel is
needful: Chap. 27. 8. Psalm. 37. 23.
so, He stays His Rough wind in the day of the East-winde. He does not only
design the End of a Man's journey, but every step in it is of His ordering;
Job. 31. 4.
The Lord preserves His going-out, and his coming-in. Ps. 121. 8.
In Isa. 26. 7. The Lord is said, To weight the path of the Just: which
(surely) is meant, Not only of His observing their works, and dispensing to
them accordingly; but, as preponderating What they are to do, and what is
requisite for their doing of it; and so, apportioning their strength and
assistance answerably: As at making the World, He weighed the Mountains in
scales, and the hills in a balance; that its parts might be of equal weight:
Or, as one that is to Run in a Race, and must carry Weights about him; it will
be his wisdom to have them evenly poised: So, the Lord sets one thing against
another, in our souls Concernments. In Romans 16, Paul brings-in this Wisdom of
God, Romans 16. 25. 27
(as well as His Power) to help their Faith, touching their establishment: and
the Apostle Jude, in the close of his Epistle, gives Glory to God, [ as the
Only Wise God] upon the account of His keeping them from falling; Jude, v. 24,
25.
and presenting them faultless before the presence of His Glory.

3. Honor: The concernment of God's honor, is also an important Argument for
proof of this Doctrine: The Lord's manner of dealing with His People of old,
and the Reason of it, is an Instance above Contradiction. The Promise of giving
them Canaan, was not more Absolute than the Promise of Salvation to Believers;
Nor was it less clogged with Conditions, Threatenings, and Cautions, (which were
afterward added:) But, the promise being once made absolute, Genesis 15. 18.
[ To thy seed will I give this land] the Lord held Himself obliged in honor,
Chap. 12. 7.
to make it good. How often did He seem to be pouring out His wrath to destroy
them? First in Egypt, Then in the Wilderness: (as appears by Ezekiel. 20. 8, 13,
21, 22, and 40 verses.) And what was it that kept it off? It was the Interest
of God's Honor; This put Him upon finding out Ways to deliver them; Ezekiel. 20.
14.
I wrought (says He) for my Name's sake: The Lord did (as it were) labor and
work to suppress His righteous fury, incensed by their intolerable
provocations: His Name and honor were concerned, and that held His hands; He
had once made an absolute Promise, which therefore must be made-good, though they
made themselves never so unworthy of it.

The like ye have in Isaiah 48, They had dealt very treacherously, (than which,
Nothing is more provoking:) But, (says the Lord) For my Names sake will I
deferr mine anger, v. 9. And Again, v. 11. For mine Own sake, even for mine Own
sake, will I do it; For, how should My Name be polluted? The Lord will
overlook a Thousand transgressions, rather than expose His Name and honor to
Reproach, as once it was by a temporary suspension: To Recover which, and that
His Name might be sanctified, He will bring them home again; yea, though it be in
the eyes of Men, a Thing impossible; and they themselves do think so likewise;
For, Our hope is lost, and we are cut off, (say they) Ezekiel. 37. 11. and Lam. 3.
18. My hope is perished from the Lord. Whether at home, or abroad, they still
caused His Name to be profaned: And for this His Holy Name, He had pity on
them, Ezekiel. 36. 20, 21. For, if He should have cast them off for ever, It would
have been said, Either That He did not foresee how unworthy a people they would
be; Or, He was not able to keep them in their own Land; Or to bring them back
again: Or else, That He was Changeable in His Purposes, and not true to His word,
etc. some reflection or other they would cast upon Him, which He could not bear.
All which, and much more of like kind, is applicable to Belivers, with respect
to their Perseverance.

4. Justice, or Righteousness; There can hardly be found a firmer support, or
more plenary consolation to Believers, than That the Justice of God is engaged
to save them; For, The Righteous Lord will do no iniquity. He would not
Justify (No, Not) His very Elect, but in a way consistent with His
Righteousness: For which cause, He set-forth Christ a Propitiation for sin.
Surely then, having received the Atonement, He will not expose His Justice to
censure, by leaving them, in any wise obnoxious to comdemnation. Salvation
(Now) is their due: Romans ^. 1, 7.
His Grace has made it so, By both giving, and accepting such a price for it
as engages Righteousness it self to save them: For, Who shall eondemn, ver.
33. 2 These. 1. 7, 8.
since it is Christ that died? It is as Righteous a thing with God, To give Rest
to His People, as tribulation to those that trouble them: Paul therefore builds
his expectation of the Crown, upon this Attribute as well as any other;
Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
which the Lord the [Righteous] Judge shall give me at that day. Yea, this
Righteousness of God secures to them, Their holding out, To finish their
Course, andto keep the Faith; as well as the Reward when their work is done.
God is not unrighteous to forget His [Peoples] labor of love; Much less [
Christ's.] This gave the Apostle to be persuaded better things of those he
writes to, than to be subject to Falling-away: Heb. 6. 9, 10.
The blood of the Everlasting Covenant is engaged to make them perfect in every
good work, chapter 13. 20, 21.
to do His will: Yea, They shall bring forth fruit in their old age; Ps. 92.
14, 15.
and this, To declare that the Lord is Upright, and no [Vnrighteousness] is in
Him.

5. The Faithfulness (or Truth) of God, is also concerned in the final
Perseverance of Believers: For, having drawn them from all Created bottoms, to
a total Relyance on Himself; He cannot but give them That they have trusted Him
for: The Lord will not be to His people as that broken staff Egypt was to the
Jews, to fail them at their greatest Need; which is, when they are lost, driven
away, broken, and sick, and (perhaps) have no mind to Return; as Ephraim, who
went on frowardly: Then is the fit time for the Faithfulness of God to discover
it self, Isa. 57. 17. 18.
by seeking them out, Ezekiel. 34. 16.
Bringing them back, Binding them up, Healing and Comforting them. To heal
their backslidings, as it shows the Freeness of God's love, so His faithfulness.

The Lord will not behold iniquity in Jacob: Numb. 23. 21.
i. e. He will not take notice of it, so as to Recede from His Word: For, He
could not but see their perverseness and Murmurings: for which He punished them
severely; and sometimes made as if He would disherite them: but still He
Remembered His Covenant, and that Restrained it, that He could not Cast them
off: The Lord had blessed, and therefore Men should not Reverse it; Neither
themselves, by their insufferable Contumacy; nor Balaam by his Enchantments.
The Lord loves Judgment, Numb. 23. 20.
( i. e. Truth and Faithfulness;) and therefore He forsakes not His Saints,
Ps. 37. 28.
They are preserved for ever. The Saints are in league with God; Ps. 50. 5.
They have made a Covenant with Him by Sacrifice: And it is a league of His own
propounding, by which He has obliged Himself to protect them. And, though Men
may break their Compacts, the Holy One of Israel will not; Numb. 23. 19.
He is not Man that He should lie, Ps. 16. 1.
nor the son of man that he should Repent. David having made God His Fortress,
Ps. 31. 3, 4.
concludes from thence, that the Name of God was engaged to lead and guide him.

Those Corinthians were as liable to temptations as other Men who fell by them:
for they had strong Remainders of Corruption, (as appears by both the
Epistles) and a subtle Adversary to observe and draw it out: Besides, They were
highly gifted, and so thought themselves above the Rank of ordinary Christians;
than which, nothing could more expose them to danger: But, notwithstanding all
these disadvantages, they shall be kept; The Faithfulness of God that secures
them, 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9.
and shall confirm them unto the End: For, God is faithful (says he) by whom
ye were Called: It is as if he had said, God would never have Called you into
the Fellowship of his Son, if He had not resoved to keep you there. So again, in
Chap. 10. 13, he tells them, God will not suffer them to be tempted above that
they are able: And he brings it in as an Inference from the same Propofition of
The Faithfulness of God. He likewise lays the stress of his confidence for the
Thessalonians being preserved blameless unto the Coming of Christ, upon the
same Attribute; 1 These. 5. 23, 24.
Faithful is He that Calls you, who also will do it: And when he would move
the Hebrews to purpose, to hold fast the profession of their Faith without
wavering, Heb. 1^. 23.
he uses the same Engine still; Faithful is He that promised,

Peter, he also directs the Saints to Commit their Souls unto God, 1 Pet. 4. 19.
in well-doing, as unto a [Faithful] Creator. Now, the Scripture always
propounds to us, such Attributes and Motives, as are proper to the matter in
hand; and therefore, in styling God (here) a [ Faithful Creatour] it is as much
as to say, 2 Cor. 5. 5.
He that has wrought you for this self same thing, is God; who is Faithful to
His purpose, or first Intent of His Work; and will therefore perfect it,
Notwithstanding the fiery trial you are to pass under; you may therefore build
upon it, 1 Pet. 4. 12.
and commit your selves to Him accordingly.

And how does the Lord condescend to Men of Low degree, for the support of weak
Believers! 2 Timothy 2. 13.
If we believe not, (i. e. Though our faith be so weak and insensible to us, that
we doubt the very being of it, yet) He abides faithful: He will not quench the
smoking flax, Isa. 42. 3.
Nor suffer His Faithfulness to fail. Ps. 89. 33. Mal. 3. 6.
The Reason why the sons of Jacob are not consumed, is not from their
Unchangeableness but God's

6. Mercy: This Attribute also, freely contributes to the Saints Perseverance.
Mercy (properly) respects Men in distress, to support and bring them out,
not-having of their own to help themselves: This, none are so se^sible of as
Believers; and therefore, Them especially will Mercy provide for: Hos. 14. 3,
In thee the Fatherless finds Mercy, Psalm. 59. 14. The God of my Mercy shall
preserve me. Mercy is the Name of God, and His Glory, Exodus 34. 7. Mercy is His
Way, Ps. 25. 10.
All the paths of the Lord are Mercy: and it is His pleasant Path, called
therefore His Delight, Micah 7. 18. It pleases Him above any thing: yea, He
takes pleasure in them that hope in His Mercy, Psalm 147. 11. We may say (in a
good sense) His Throne is upholden by Mercy. Prove. 20. 28.
It is Mercy that makes Men to fear Him, Ps. 130. 4. The 136 Psalm throughout,
is an Encomium of Mercy, as That which does all for us: and this, because it
endures for ever. In the 138 Psalm, the Prophet grounds his confidence touching
his Perseverance, upon this Attribute expressly; viz. That God would Perfect
that which concerned him, because His Mercy (which began the work) endures for
ever. The great Covenant is Founded in Mercy, and is therefore styled The sure
Mercies of David, Isa. 55. I shall not add, touching this Attribute; For, if
all the Rest be on our side, (and you see They are) the Mercy of God must needs
be for us, since it is That (indeed) which has enlisted and brought-in all the
Rest.

VI. The Saints Perseverance may also be Argued from the Ends of their being,
Arg. VI.
with the Author or those Ends: (This, the Scripture puts weight upon.) Their
Ends are, To glorify God, and to be glorified with Him: But, neither of these
can be attained without Persevering: Not the first, For, nothing so dishonours
God, as Apostasy: Not the latter, because such only as endure to the End,
shall be saved. They must (therefore) Persevere, Or those Ends will be
frustrate; which will not stand with the Author's authority.

That these were the ends of their Being, is evident, Isa. 43. 21, This People
have I formed for my self; and v. 7. I created him for my Glory. The Apostle
also is very express for it, in 2 Cor. 5. where, speaking of that Divine
building in the Heavens, prepared for Believers; he tells us, They were wrought
for that self same thing. The manner of expression is much to be remarked: It
is not barely said, This End, or this thing, we were made for: but (in effect)
This very thing, and nothing else, (to be sure nothing less) was the very scope
and end of our Creation, both old and new, even of all God's workmanship upon
us. And, as evident it is, That God Himself is the Author of those Ends, and
that therefore they cannot miscarry. Upon this ground the Lord would have his
People to found an Vndauntable confidence, (as well may be gathered from His so
frequent indigitating of it.) In Isa. 43. He thus fortifies them against the
sorest of evils; Fear not, for [ I] have Redeemed thee; [I] have called thee:
and ver. 7. [ I] have created him; [I] have formed him: yea [I] have made him:
[I, even I the Lord] ver. 11. and Chap. 41. 10. Fear thou not, for [I] am with
thee: [I] will strengthen thee, [I] will help thee, yea [I] will uphold thee:
The emphasis lies in the person active. [I] i. e. I the Lord, (a note of
infinite signification and security to Believers!) The Apostle also, in that 2
Cor. 5. That Believers might know themselves invincibly secured, he points us
to God, as the Great Author of those important Ends, and Almighty Undertaker
for their accomplishment; He that wrought us for the self same thing, is [God]
It is as if he had said, It is impossible we should lose the thing we were
wrought for, because, it is God that wrought us for it: It is not the
designment of an Idol; that is, Of some Ignorant, Rash, Fallible, or Mutable
Agent; such a One as may possibly be surprised by unlook'd-for accidents;
Circumvented by a sublimer understanding; Overborn by a power above him; or
Recede from his purpose, through levity and fickleness of his nature; etc. But it
is [ God] who is wise in Heart and Mighty in strength, Job 9. 4. It is He from
whom all things that are, have their being, and are perfectly under His Rule
and obeisance: He had Eternity before Him, to lay His Design surely; and
accordingly He declares the End from the beginning, and changes not. It is
therefore as impossible for Him either to Do, or neglect to do, or suffer to
be done, any thing whereby His purpose might suffer disappointment; as it is
impossible That God should lie. He would never have set-up those Ends as the
Sum and Upshot of His great Design, if He had not Determined to see them
made-good. And therefore (as says the Apostle) We are always confident, That
when absent from the Body, we shall be present with the Lord, ver. 6 and 8.

This is also further confirmed by that compendious Promise, Jer. 31. 33. I
will be their God, and they shall be my People: Every word (here) has a
peculiar emphasis; 1. That He will be a [ God] to them: 2. [ Their] God: and 3.
[ for ever]: This [ I will] imports both a fixed Resolution, and Time without
limit. It is as if He had said, Though other lords have had the Rule over you,
and you have still a Proneness to Revolt to them; It shall not be: I will not
be Outed any more; I Will heal your backslidings, and be your God still: I Will carry
it toward you and for you, as becomes a God to do: and I will make you such a
People, as becomes God to own; I will not be ashamed to be called your God,
Heb. 11. 16. It would (indeed) be both a disparagement and dissatisfaction to
God, if His People should fail of that He made them for; which (certainly)
cannot be, because God is theirs; and if God be theirs, all things are theirs,
both this World and that to come; 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.

Lastly, Arg. VII.
For the final Perseverance of Believers, a Principal Argument is fetched from
the Sovereign Decree of Election. I call it Sovereign, partly Because it is the
highest Manifestation of God's absolute Dominion over His Creatures, in
Choosing whom He would, and passing-by the Rest: Partly also, because all sorts
of things what soever are subjected to it, and made subservient to its final
accompli^hment. And this I take, for a principal Reason why Election is so
frequently placed in Eternity, (or, before the Foundation of the World) viz, To
show, That the very Fabric of the World, and all Occurrences therein, were so
contrived and framed in God's Decree, as having Election for their primary
scope and End: That this first Cause is the Supreme Moderator of all
intermediate Causes, and is it self subject to None.

It was not any loveliness in Elect persons, which moved God to love them at
first; so neither shall their unlovely backslidings deprive them of it, (though
it may be eclipsed, by their own default, to the breaking of their bones.) The
Lord Chose them for that blessed Image of His Own which He would afterward
imprint upon them, and this He still prosecutes through all dispensations.

That Elect Nation the Jews, They apostatized from God, and did worse than any
Other; yet, the Lord would not utterly cast them off. In Samuel's time their
wickedness was very great; yet, says he, (to stay them from total apostasy;)
The Lord will not forsake you: But, what is the ground of that his great
confidence, and grand Warranty? The very same that now we are upon; The Lord
will not forsake you, because, [It has pleased the Lord to make you His
People:] Not because they remembered their duty and returned to God; but because
He remembered for them His Covenant: In pursuance whereof, He long maintained
their title, Notwithstanding their often-repeated forfeitures; and when in
Captivity, brought them home again. And indeed, Ezekiel. 16. 62, 63.
Nothing so melts the hearts of Those in Covenant with God, as the the Lord
should be pacified toward them after all their abominations.

The manner of God's dealings with this people, is especially Instructive, to
help the faith of the spiritual Election, upon all occasions; as holding-forth
the special Regard the Lord has for them, because of His Covenant: That though
He may, and will, punish their iniquities, yet His loving kindnefs He will not
take from them. Ezekiel. 36. 11.
And He puts it still upon His having once Chosen them, as you have it in
Jeremy, chapter 41. 9, I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away. This later
Clause, [ And not cast thee away] seems added to show, That His Choosing them
was an Act unrepealable: q. d. I knew aforehand What thou would Do, and how
thou would prove: and, if I had meant Ever to Cast thee off; yea, if I had
not Resolved against it; I would not have Chosen thee at all; But, since I
have, Be sure I Will stand by thee, I will strengthen thee, I will help thee, I
will uphold thee with the Right hand of my righteousness.

It is true, The body of that Nation, for their unbelief, are now broken off:
(There is a suspenfion of the outward part of the Covenant:) Not, that God
inteds an Utter Rejection of them; Romans 11. 7.
For, such as have part in the special Election, are always saved: And the
time will come, when All Israel shall be saved: Romans 11. 24.
For, as touching the Election, They are beloved still, though yet unborn. For
their sakes it was, That the days of tribulation were shortened, Matthew. 24.
22. Which answers to Isa. 65. 8. Destroy it not, there is a blessing in it. --
The Lord will not so much respect What they have deserved, as what His own
Covenant is, concerning Abraham's Seed: Which Minding of His Covenant, is from
the Vnchange ableness of His Purpose; And therefore he says; Romans 11. 24.
They shall be grafted in again. Yea, though they be driven into all lands,
Scattered into Corners, Mingled with the Heathen, and become so like them as
Not to be known asunder; yet, being His Chosen Ones, and within His Covenant,
He will bring them out of their holes, Isa. 27. 12.
and Gather them [One by One:] i. e. He will do it accurately, exactly,
punctually, So as none shall be Wanting: Though Sifted among all Nations, Amos
9. 9.
Not [One] Grain shall fall to the Earth.

The Reservation mentioned in Romans 11. is God's Omnipotent Safe-garding His
Elect, when the Generality of the Nation fell to Idolatry; They would have gone
All, as well as Some, 2 These. 2. 11, 12, 13.
had not Election held them back; as appears by comparing the 4 and 5 verses.
It is therefore said to be, [ According] to the Election of Grace: Which
intimates, That Election was the Pattern or Original, and Reservation the Copy
of it. And, That this was not a single Case, or Restrained to the time that
then was, is evident from Math. 24, Where our Savior foretells, That the
Subtilty of Deceivers, and temptations of the time, should be such; and the
Torrent rise to that height and strength; That it will be a thing next to
Impossible, Not to be Carried away by it: But, for the Elect, They are
safeguarded from it: How? By the coming-in of the First and Sovereign Cause; By
the virtue of which, the force and influence of all those second Causes, shall
either be prevented, or Romoved, Mitigated, Inverted, Ezekiel. 9. 6.
shortened, or Overruled; and the faith of his Sealed Ones so Confirmed, Rev.
7. 3.
that they shall not be hurt by them: Yea, (and which is more) Those very
things which are destructive to Others shall work life in Them. Deuteronomy. 23. 5.
This turned Balaam's curse into a blessing to Israel; Phil. 1. 19.
and Paul's afflictions to his salvation: Luke 21. 28.
They are to Them, a Cause of lifting up the head. And if it were not so, the
Apostle would never exhort us To count it all joy when we fall into diverse
temptations: Jam. 1. 2.
In the midst whereof, 1 Samuel 2. 9.
He keeps the feet of His Saints. For, surely (says God) They are my People,
Children that will not lie: Isa. 63. 8.
i. e. They are of Those I have Chosen and set apart for my self; and therefore,
they shall not frustrate my Purpose in Choosing-them; which seems employed in
that word [So] So He was their Savior: q. d. I will Save them, because I have
made them my People.

And for further confirmation, take Notice, That this Sovereign Decree is
always Regnant; Dan. 2. 44.
It is that Kingdom which Rules over all, and shall never be broken. Psalm. 89.
34. My Covenant will I not break. Nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips: and v. 18. My Covenant shall stand fast with him. It is meant of the
Covenant made with David and his house; Or (rather) with Christ and His
Spiritual Seed, Of whom David was a Type. And that we might have strong
Consolation, the Lord binds it with an Oath, Once (i. e. Once for all, and Once
for ever; it was so full and perfect, that it needed no Alteration, Amendment,
or Repetition) Once have I sworn by my Holiness, That I will not lie unto
David; v. 35. And how Impossible it was, That this Covenant should be
overruled or broken, appears also in Jer. 33. 20, 21. where, speaking in the
Name of God, he delivers it thus; If you can break my Covenant of the Day, and
my Covenant of the Night, that there should not be Day and Night in their
Season; Then may also my Covenant be broken with David my Servant: (Here note
by the way, That Day and Night take their turns, but still it is in their
Season.) And David himself says of it, That it is a Covenant Everlasting; ^
Sam. 23. 5.
Ordered in all things and sure: i. e. What ever might possibly fall-in to
Interrupt it, There was that Order observed in the composition of the Covenant,
and such a Power laid up within it, as should certainly overrun and bear-down
those Impediments, triumph over them all, and hold on its way; (As all the
Tempests and tumults that may happen in this lower World, can in no wise
Obstruct the course of superior Orbs:) He therefore declares, (in high, yet
humble, expressions) He desired no other or better security for his Salvation.
And it is not unlikely, That David and Solomon were both of them left to those
great backslidings, to give a proof of the Sureness of this Covenant; which
indeed was sufficiently done by them, and tried to the utmost: For, they both
broke the Covenant, on their part; and yet the Covenant was not Nulled: No
thanks to them, but to that Sovereign Grace that had laid-in Provision before to
prevent it, by making it Absolute and Vnrepealable. Yet the Lord will not
Connive at their miscarriages; but If his Children forsake my law and break my
Statutes, I will visit their transgressions with the Rod; Ps. 89. 31, 32.
Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him; Nor suffer
my Faithfulness to fail. ver. 29.
It must be granted, There was, at times, a seeming to make-void this Covenant;
and great complaints are made upon it: But it revives again, and joy comes in
the Morning, as is evident by the Close of that 89 Psalm, Blessed be the Lord
for evermore, Amen and Amen. Its return was the more welcome for its temporary
absence; and therefore he meets it with a double Gratulation, Amen and Amen! It
was but in a little wrath, that He hid His face from them, and that but for a
Moment too; but with everlasting kindness will I have Mercy on thee, Isa. 54. 8.
says the Lord thy Redeemer. The Mountains shall depart and the hills be
removed: ver. 10.
-- But my kindness shall not depart from thee, Neither shall the Covenant of
my peace be removed, says the Lord that has Mercy on thee.

In Jer. 31. 37. another Impossibility is instanced in, to show the Eternal
Validity of this Covenant; Thus says the Lord, If heaven above can be
measured, and the foundations of the Earth searched out beneath; I will also
cast off all the seed of Ifrael, for all that they have done, says the Lord.
The Lord Himself (you see) is both the Alpha and Omega of this great sentence;
To show, That both ends of the Covenant are in His own hands.

By these Scriptures (with many others) it is apparent, that there shall be no
Faileur on God's part: and if so, Then there shall be None at all; because He
has taken on Himself the performance of the whole. Believers (therefore) shall
invincibly be carried-on (Notwithstanding all kind of impediments) unto the End
of their Faith, the Salvation of their Souls.

Yet does not this Doctrine go free of Contradiction: And truly, considering
how clear and pertinent the Scripture is for it; It seems to me, That if the
first Impugners of Perseverance had not found themselves in a Toil; and so,
Necessitated to oppose it, for the maintenance of other principles they had
before taken up and espoused, and which would not consist with this; They would
never have set themselves against it: But, Errors (like Truths, in that) do
hang on a string; Or, as links in a Chayn, The first Mover draws the rest
after. But I trust, through help from Above, all the objections, that are laid
against this Doctrine, shall prove a further confirmation of it, by one hand or
other: The chief that I have met with, are these that follow.

The Doctrine of Absolute Perseverance deprives Men of the sharpest bit which
God has given them to Curb the unregenerate part of the Soul: We mean the fear
and dread of Eternal fire?
The Law is good, if a Man use it lawfully: So is Fear in its time and place;
Out of which, it is as a Bone out of joint. The Law works by Fear, as a
Schoolmaster unto Christ; It is ordinarily the first occasion of our motion
toward believing: The heir whilst a Child, may be under the tutorage of fear;
But, when Faith is grown-up, then cast-out the Bondwoman and her Son; Fear
shall not be heir with Faith: For, though it be a good servant, it is an ill
Master. For Fear to predominate Faith, is, for servants to ride, Eccles. 10. 5.
and 7.
whiles Princes walk on the Earth; which is an Error the Earth cannot bear.
Believers (who know themselves so to be) receive not the spirit of bondage again
to fear: They are acted Now by another principle: (as a horse that is thoroughly
broke and well-wayed, is better Managed by a gentle hand, than a biting Curb:)
Faith works by love. It is not (henceforth) the fear of wrath, but the sense of
Christ's love in delivering from wrath, that both Curbs the unregenerate part,
and carries to higher acts of obedience than fear is capable of; Although at
times, all sorts of Motives may be needful to keep them going: 2 Cor. 5. 14.
And the Lord, for exercise of their Graces and other holy ends, may let the
dearest of His Children long conflict with their Fears; Under which He yet
supports them, and brings them forth like Gold, at last. (See Ethan's
complaint, and the Close he makes, in the 89 Psam. See also, that excellent
Treatise, A Child of light, etc.)

But, as touching this Fear, in the sense objected, (which supposes it the
best Curb to Sin, and promoter of Perseverance,) it ought to be rejected. How
far it may influence a Man that is wholly Unregenerate, as a Curb to His lusts,
is not the Question here; But, if Saul and Judas ran headlong to hell with this
bit in their mouths; then is not this sharpest bit the most Effectual Curb.
That which weakens, and tends (indeed) to destroy the Root of Sin, must needs
be more effectual, (as to the main end) than That which only Restrains some
puttings-of-it-forth. Acts, 15. 9.
But God purifies the heart by Faith: 1 John 3. 3.
And, Every one that has this hope, purifieth himself as He is pure: There is
no such virtue given to Fear: but, on the Contrary, The spirit of Fear is put
in opposition to the Spirit of Power, of Faith, and of a sound mind. 2 Timothy 1.
7.
But, what ever influence this fear may have upon persons unregenerate; they
are not deprived of it by the Doctrine of Perseverance; for This concerns only
Believers.

The Objection lies further open to diverse Exceptions; As,

1. Because it puts an indignity on the Wisdom and Grace of God, as if He had
taken from Believers, some expedient help to Perseverance, by his giving them
Absolute Promises: (whereas, we should rather suspect our own understandings
and Renounce those opinions which Necessitate such unnatural Inferences, to
support them:) For, do but separate the Promises from their Absoluteness, and
their strength is gone; Romans 8. 2.
They would prove as the law; Weak, through the weakness of the flesh. The Lord
knows, that Beleivers have both the difficultest work, and deepest sense of
their own insufficiency; and that nothing more weakens their hands, than
doubtings and fears: And for this cause, has made His Promises absolute. Thus,
we find, He Armed Joshua to the battle; There shall not any Man be able to
stand before thee, Josh. 1. 5.
all the days of thy life: I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee: And hence
he draws him an Argument, to be strong and of a Good Courage. ver. 6.


In like manner, Samuel; when the People were greatly preplexed because of
God's displeasure against them; To confirm them in their duty, he Comforts them
against their Fears: Fear not (says he) ye have done all this wickedness; yet
Turn not aside from following the Lord: (And what is the strong Reason by which
he fixes them?) For, the Lord [will not] forsake His People: (The Objectors and
Samuel were not both of a Mind.)

Paul, (likewise) Exhorting Believers to that great duty of keeping-down Sin,
Romans 6. 12.
that it might not Reign; Because the sharpness and heat of the Conflict, might
otherwise make them Recoyl; He gives them (as an high Cordial) Assurance of
Victory: tells them, in plain and express terms That Sin [shall not] have
Dominion over them: ver. 14.
(Here they are at variance with Paul:) Nor do they better Accord with Peter
and John; The One directs us, To give all diligence to make our Calling and
Election [sure: 2 Pet. 1. 10.
] And this, as a principal means to keep us from falling: And the Other makes
it the Scope and End of his whole Epistle, That Believers may [know] they have
Eternal life; 1 John 5. 13.
and that they might [goon] in Believing. Which kind of Arguments had been very
unduly applied, if Giving them assurance touching the Event, had not been a
strengthening of them in their Duty; and much more, if it would have proved an
Iudulgence to the Unregenerate part.

2. Let Fear be considered in its Ordinary and natural effects; and 'twill
easily appear, That Nothing is less pleasing to God, or more unapt for the
Service of Perseverance. As a Man's principle is, such will be his obedience;
Slavish observance is the best that slavish fear can produce; which is no way
acceptable to an Ingenuous Spirit; God loves a Cheerful Giver, not
Samaritan-Worship, for fear of Lions. Such service will also be weak and
wavering; for, Nothing so unsettles the Mind as Fear: It enervates the Soul and
takes away its Strength: 1 Samuel 25. 37
Nobal's heart dyed within him for fear of David: Matt. 28. 25.
and the Soldiers who kept the Sepulcher, were as dead Men for fear: The
obedience therefore which comes from thence, can be but a dead obedience. The
Effect cannot rise higher then the Cause. Pharaoh let Israel go because of the
plagues; Exodus 14. 5.
which being a little removed, Isa. 33. 14.
he Repents his obedience, and chides himself for it: And those hypocrites,
though Fearfulness surprised them, Remained hypocrites still. This Fear (also)
will consist with the greatest impieties; Those very Samaritans who thus feared
the Lord, 2 King. 17. 41.
did also worship their graven Images.

3. Fear puts upon using unlawful Means: Genesis 26. 7. 1 Samuel 21. 13. Gal. 2. 12,
13. Hos. 7. 11. 1 Samuel 28. 7.
Isaac, to deny his wife; David, to feign himself mad: Peter and other holy
Men, to dissemble. It sends men to Egypt for help, as it did the Jews; yea, to
hell, as it did Saul. Therefore, both Satan and wicked Men, are still
endeavoring to put God's people in fear; Neh. 6. 14, 19. Zach. 2. 2.
as they would Nehemiah, whereby his work had ceased. And Satan stood at
Joshua's right hand to resist him; that is, to accuse him, and so to put him in
fear, because of his filthy garments; Thereby to discourage him in the work of
his office.

4. Let Fear be compared with its Contrary, viz. Faith: This removes the
Mountain, whiles fear fixes it; yea, makes it to be, where (indeed) is no such
thing. Fear made the unbelieving spies to bring up an evil Report of the good
land, and to fancy impossibilities of obtaining it: Faith made Caleb and Joshua
Magnanimous, Number. 13. 30.
Let us go up at once (say they) and possess it; chapter 14. 9.
For we are well able to overcome it; yea, they shall be bread for us. These
two, who feared no Miscarriage under an absolute Promise, were Carried-in; All
that doubted, Mat. 14. 29, 3^.
were shut out. Peter, whiles confident, walked on the Waves; when he began to
doubt, he began to sink. Josh. 23. 10.
It was Faith made those Worthies valiant in fight; Heb. 1^.
Enabled One to chase a thousand, when Fear caused a thousand to flee at the
rebuke of One; 1 Samuel 14. 13.
yea, at the shaking of a leaf.

An handful of obedience springing from Faith and confidence in God, is more
acceptable to Him than sheafs and loads arising from Fear of wrath. 1 Cor. 13.
3.
If Paul (for fear of hell) had given his body to be burned, it had been
Nothing: But, Faith and love render small things of value with God; (the
Widow's Mite, and a Cup of cold water.) And it is worthy of Remarque, That when
the fruits of the Spirit are reckoned up, Gal. 5. 22, 33.
this Fear is not so much as named among them: And certain it is, That the more
lively and sensible our love is to God, the less will be our fear of hell; For,
perfect love casts out fear. 1 John 4. 18.


5. If Fear were such an Effectual Curb to sin, or help to Perseverance, There
would not be so many Promises of Delivering God's people from their fears: Nor
could they so Affectionately bless God for their being delivered: Nor so
Resolutely set themselves against it: Neither would there be so many Commands
and Injunctions laid upon them, Not to be Afraid.

1. Commands and Injunctions against Fear: Jer. 46. 27, Fear not thou, O my
servant Jacob, -- for I will save thee: and again, ver. 28, Fear thou not, -- I
will correct thee in measure: i. e. Meetly, and proportionably, according to
the scope of my Covenant, which is to save thee. The Lord would not have His
People to think themselves in danger of being Cashiered, when they are
Chastened; which seems the Import of that in Isa. 41. 9. I have chosen thee,
and not Cast thee away; Fear thou not, ver. 10. So, Heb. 10. 35, Cast not away
your Confidence: Joh. 14. 27, Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be
afraid: and Luke 12. 32. Fear not little Flock; It is your Father's good
pleasure to give you the kingdom. Innumerable are the Injunctions laid upon
God's people against Fear: Isa. 35. 4. chap. 43. 5. chapter 41. 13. and 14. chap.
44. 2. Jer. 30. 10. Dan. 10. 19. Joel 2. 21. Zeph. 3. 16. Hag. 2. 5. Zach. 8.
13 and 15. Math. 10. 28. Act. 27. 24. Rev. 1. 17, etc. Therefore freedom from
this Fear, is no impediment to Perseverance.

2 Promises of delivering from Fears. Jer. 30. 10.
Jacob shall be in quiet, and none shall make him afraid. Psalm. 112. 10.
He shall not be afraid of evil tidings; Prove. 1. 33.
He shall be quiet from fear of evil. The promise is not made to Fear and
fainting, but to Faith and Confidence; Ps. 27. 14, Be of good courage, and He
shall strengthen thy heart. If it had bin the mind of Christ, that Believers
should still be under this Fear; He would not have told them, Joh. 5. 24.
They are passed from death to life, and shall not come into condemnation:
Math. 19. 28.
That they shall sit upon Thrones: That their Inheritance is reserved in heaven
for them; 1 Pet. 1. 4, 5.
and they kept for it; and that by the Mighty power of God. The Result of all
which, is, That having these Promises, we should cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit; 2 Cor. 7. 1.
perfecting holiness in the Fear of God: Luke, 1. 74.
To serve Whom without fear, was a main End of Christ's Redemption.

3 Examples of Christian Resolution, Not to fear. Psalm. 23. 4, yea, though I
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none evil. Ps. 27.
3, Though an host encamp against me, my heart shall not fear. Isa. 50. 7,
Therefore ( that is, Because the Lord God had promised to help him; Therefore)
have I set my face as a flint, and I know that I shall not be confounded. Ps.
46. 2, We will not fear, though the Earth be Removed. Ps. 56. 4, I will not fear
what flesh can do unto me. and Ps. 49. 5. Wherefore should I fear in the days
of evil, when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about? These, if any
thing, should have put him in fear; but his Faith resolves against it;
according to Isa. 12. 2, I will trust, and not be afraid. i. e. He would not
willingly admit the least mixture of fear with his Faith; Neh. 8. 14.
and good Reason for it, since the joy of the Lord was his strength.

4. Instances of Thankfulness for deliverance from fears.

Psalm. 34. 3. O Magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt His Name together.
(But, what is the occasion of this joyful triumph?) I sought the Lord and He
heard me, and [Delivered me from all my fears] v. 4. Psalm. 27. 6. Therefore
will I offer in His Tabernacle Sacrifices of Joy; And the Reason of it was,
That God would hide him in His own Pavillion, v. 5. That is, He would secure
him from danger, and set him up above His Fears: Which surely, he could not,
with any good Reason, have Rejoiced in; Nor have prayed, that God would Restore
to him the joys of His Salvation; if the Dread of Eternal fire, had been so
good a friend to Perseverance.

Scriptures to this purpose might be multiplied: But these (I hope) may have
left the Objection without footing. But, besides our Scripture Proof, It is
evident in Experience; That nothing so Elevates the Spirit and Courage of a Man
in great undertakings, as assurance of Success: But, whiles he is wavering, and
doubtful How he shall speed, especially whiles he meditates Terrors, and of
them the Dreadfullest; his hands are enfeebled, Nor he has not his Wits about
him: That which tends (in truth) to make a Man Steadfast, Immovable, and
always to abound in the work of the Lord; is not the fear of Miscarrying, and
losing all at last; but, Faith and a certain knowledge, that his labor shall
not be in vain in the Lord, 1. Cor. 15. 58.

If a Man once believing cannot lose his faith, Why is it said, Let him that
stands, take heed lest he fall? and Look to your selves, that we lose not the
things we have wrought? If no possibility of losing, what need such Cautions,
and so great Circumspection?
The Maker of this Objection has elsewhere granted, that the possession of
Canaan was sure to Abraham's seed, so as all their unworthiness could not
deprive them of it: And yet we find, their Induction and actual Possession,
yoked (afterward) with as many Conditions, Cautions, and limitations; as the
Promise of Salvation to Believers, any where is; and yet, Nevertheless Certain.
But, for more particular answer,

1. It is evident, That a Righteous Man may fall; and as evident it is, That he
cannot fall finally: For, though he falls Seven times in a day, as often does he
Rise again, Pro. 24. 26. And this, because the Lord upholdeth him with His hand,
Psalm. 37. 24. And Psalm. 145. The Lord upholdeth all that fall: Either He stays
them when they are falling; Or, He so Orders and limits the matter, that they
fall not into mischief, Hos. 14. 4.
as others do: And, to be sure, He Will set them on their feet again. The Absolute
Promise cannot be Nulled or discertain'd by Cautionary words elsewhere
delivered: Gal. 3. 17.
It cannot therefore by meant of a Total and Final falling away, which the
Scripture-Current expressly Runs against.

2. There are Considerations enough and of great weight, Why Believers should
take heed of Falling, without supposing a Total loss of their Faith; (The
breaking of a Man's bones, is ground sufficient for such a Caution, although he
be sure that his Neck shall be safe:) The dishonor done to his Father; The
shame that is put upon Christ; Grieving the Comforter; Scandalizing the good
ways of God; stumbling the Weak; Strengthening the Wicked; The unfitting of him
for his duty; Interrupting his Peace and Communion with God; etc. Every of
which will weigh deep, with a soul that is born of God.

3. The Lord brings-about His Purposes (for most part) by Means; Of which,
Cautions are a part; and by which (as a Means) He keeps-off the evil
Caution'd-against. In the 1 John. 2. 28. the Apostle exhorts them to abide in
Christ: (whom certain Professors had relinquished, v. 19.) And, as purposely
intending to obviate this objection, he tells them, That they shall abide in
him, v. 27. Whereby he strengthens them to their duty.

For the other place objected, ( viz. Look to your selves that we lose not the
things we have wrought;) It is one thing to lose (for a time) the Sense and
Comfort of Our state; as David, Heman, and Others, did; and another thing to
lose the state it self; which a Believer shall never do, as is shown before. Of
much like Import is that in 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. verses, where he exhorts
them, To give all diligence, to add one Grace to another: And, to help them in
their work, he tells them, 1. What advantages they shall have by their Sodoing;
They shall not be unfruitful in the knowledge of Jesus Christ; i. e. It shall
evidence to them that the knowledge ledge they have, is a real knowledge; which
cannot be known from that which is formal only, but by such an effect. That
also by this Means it shall be increased; The using of things well, and to
their proper End, being the readiest way to their Improvement, according to
john 7. 17. He that will do my Will, shall know of my Doctrine. 2. He then sets
before them, the loss they shall have, in case they neglect this great Duty of
Adding Grace to Grace: They will become blind; that is, Unable to see afarr
off; And forget, That they were purged from their old sins; that is, Their
Remisness in this duty will bring obscurity upon their Evidences; That which
was clear to them before, will Now become Clouded, and be as if it were not; It
may seem to them, That they are short of that Rest, Heb. 4. 1.
which yet is sure to them; And so, they will be put to begin their work Anew:
Whereas, if they do these things, they shall never fall; i. e. They shall not
fall from their stedfastness, Nor lose that clear sight and assurance which now
they have, touching their good estate, viz. as being partakers of the Divine
Nature, and Purged from their old Sins; Which those Neglects might put out of
their sight; and so, lose them the sense and comfort of what they had wrought.

We read in John 6. 60. That many of Christ's disciples forsook him: In
Timothy, Of some, who as concerning the Faith, had made Shipwreck: And of Simon
Magus, who once believed, and was afterward found in the bond of Iniquity?
The Objection has an entire Answer made-ready to its hand, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Acts
8. 13, 23.
in 1 John 2. 19. They went out from us, because they were not of us; For, if
they had been of us, they would [no doubt] have continued with us. Seeming
Faith may really be lost, as theirs was; And Real Faith may Seemingly be lost,
as was the Apostles, Luke 24. 21. Heb. 4. 1. Seeming Faith is really lost,
Phil. 1. 18. Romans 2. 20. 1 Timothy 6. 5.
because it was but Seeming; Real Faith cannot be lost, because it is Real.
Yet, we shall find, That that which is but seeming, is frequently called by the
name of that it seems to be; As in Matthew. 13. 12. It is said, That which he
[hath;] In Luke 8. 18, (speaking of the same thing) it is rendered, That which
he [Seemeth] to have: So those who forsook Christ; they were disciples but in
show; They never believed in truth; as appears by the 64 verse of the 6. John,
Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed not: And this ( viz.
because it was but a seeming faith they had) He gives as the Reason of their
Now-forsaking Him.

As for Simon Magus the Answer is as clear concerning him; where let us
consider,

1. That a Man may be said to believe, and yet not be a Believer; As a
Right^ous Man To Sin, and yet not be a Sinner. To be a Believer, is to be
thorow-paced in faith; To believe all that is to be believed; and to have the
heart united to it: Thus Simon believed not; and if he had, he could not have
thought the Holy Ghost vendible for Money.

2. His faith seems to be only such a belief concerning Philip, as the
Samaritans sometimes had concerning Simon; viz. Acts 8.
That he was the great power of God. For, finding himself over-matcht by
Philip, who cast-out the Spirits which he (perhaps) had possessed them with; he
could not, now, but give the precedence to Philip, as having a greater power
than himself: and therefore, he continued with Philip, wondering at what he did;
v. 13.

3. Simon's believing might be only an outward professional faith, taken-up for
by-respects; (which may well be supposed) to preserve his interest and repute
among the people, who now began to fall from him, and to follow Philip; whose
disciple he himself will profess to be, rather than be quite cashiered.
Besides, this profession of his, might (in his conceit) be a step toward his
purchasing the gift of the Holy Ghost; which if he could obtain, he had then
been again in as good a Condition, for reputation and profit, as before.

If any would say, We read not of this distinction of faith, into true and
false. I answer.

The Scripture frequently speaks of persons and things, according to Vulgar
Esteem; or what they profess^d themselves to be; 2 Chr. 28. 23.
Ahaz is said To Sacrifice to the Gods of Damascus that smote him: and yet
neither were they Gods, nor did they smite him: but it is spoke according to his
own superstitious opinion of them. So, those 400 Men who prophesied before Ahab,
1 King. 22. 6.
They are called Prophets; Not that they were so indeed, but because they So
professed themselves; or because So reputed by Ahab and the people. A prophet
is one that is inspired by the Holy Ghost; which those Men were not, but by a
lying spirit. Now, Simon Magus was no more a true Believer, ver 22.
than those true Prophets; Nor his faith any more of the right kind, than their
predictions true prophecies. We also find, that the Scripture makes the
Coming-to-pass of the thing foretold, to be the evidence of a true prophet:
According to which Rule, Pers^verance to salvation is to demonstrate the truth
of faith; and wherever this follows not, there faith was but pretended; They
profess to know God, Tit. 1. 16. 2 King. 17. 32. ver. 34.
but in deeds do deny Him, As of those Samaritans before mentioned, It is said,
They feared the Lord; and presently after, that They feared [not] the Lord;
They feared him in show, but not in truth.

4. The Foundation of God stands sure; having this seal, The Lord knows
them that are His: 2 Timothy 2. 19.
He brings it in to comfort believers, touching the Sureness of their standing;
when others, of as glorious outsides, make Shipwreck of the faith: It stands
sure, because the Lord knows them that are His: He knows whom He has Chosen;
For whom He has received the Atonement; whom He has Called, and caused to
take hold of His Covenant; And these shall surely be kept, Notwithstanding the
woeful backslidings of others.

If one that believes not Now, may have faith hereafter; Then, one that is Now
a Believer, may lose his faith, and turn Apostate?
It follows not, That, because Christ can bind Satan, and cast him out;
therefore Satan can do so by Christ. He can come into the Devil's Nursery, when
He will; Take a Crab-stock and transplant it, and Graff it with a Noble Cyons:
But Satan cannot come into God's Vinyard, (which is a Garden enclosed) and take
thence What him pleases. One who is now dead in sin, may be quickened; but,
being once alive, can dye no more: It is Christ's own Assertion, He that
lives, Joh. 11. 26.
and believes in Me, shall never dye: Which cannot be meant of any other but a
spiritual death; which is all one with losing his faith.

A Righteous Man may turn away from his Righteousness; and that so, that he
shall dye for it; Ezekiel. 18. 24.
There is a twofold Righteousness, 1. Moral; Such as Paul had before his
Conversion; This a Man may continuein to the last, and yet not be Saved: 2.
There is a Gospel Righteousness; (1) Imputed; This is the Righteousness of
Christ, by which we are Justified: (2) Infused, This is the Divine Nature
communicated by the Spirit of Christ, whereby we are Sanctified: These two go
inseparably, and can never be lost. But, The Righteousness spoken of in the
place objected, seems to be of the former Sort, viz. Moral or Outward
Righteousness; For, Outward Conformity to the Law, was the Condition of their
possessing the land of Canaan, with long life and prosperity in it. This (if
they retained it) gave them a legal Right to those Promises: If they turned
from it, they ran into a forfeiture: And lose it they might, for they had no
promise That they should abide in it. But, the New Covenant undertakes for
That, as is evident by comparing Jer. 31. 31-33. with chap. 32. 40. But if any
will yet suppose, The Righteous Man spoken of in that 18. of Ezekiel. to be meant
of a true Believer; there is (I hope) in the Answers foregoing, to Solve it.

If any should alledg:-But suppose a Believer be taken away in his Sin, (as
perhaps, Josiah was) and has not time to Repent of it? I Answer, 1. It cannot
be proved that this was the case with Josiah: He (probably) had time sufficient
between his Wounding and his Death: For, he was carried from Megiddo to
Jerusalem, before he dyed: But 2. There was That in him that would have
Repented; and God reckons of a Man according to what he would Do: It being in
David's heart to build him an House, it was accepted as if he had done it. The
Root of the matter is in every Regenerate person, which if it had time, would
put-forth it self in fruits: and therefore They shall not be dealt with as
barren trees, which have not that substance in them.

The Promise of Perseverance, is not made to Faith, that That shall not fail;
but in reference to the favor of God, viz. That if Men go-on to Believe, they
shall abide in his love?
Thus to give the sense of the Promise, is 1. To enervate it, to make it speak
but according to the Covenant of works: It bereaves it wholly of that B^tternes
the Scripture ascribes to it, in Heb. 8. 6. 2, It renders the Promise as
speaking fallaciously; as making show of That it intends not: It would be but
as if he had said, You shall keep the favor of God, if you do not lose it. 3.
Faith is the Soul's Coming to God; Unbelief, its departing from Him: The
Promise (therefore) that secures against departing from God, secures your
Continuance in Believing: He that undertakes you shall be Crowned, does
virtually undertake for your holdingout to the end of your Race.

Others again, dispose Otherwise of those Promises, recorded in the 36 of Ezekiel.
and 32 of Jeremy, touching Men's notdeparting from God; Restraining them to the
Jewish Nation, and to the last Days.
To this, may readily be answered,

1. That the Time which then was, when the Apostles wrote, is called The last
time, 1 John. 2. 18. Acts 2. 17.

2. Albeit that some particular times and persons are more peculiarly concerned
in the Promises of the old Testament, especially such as refer to temporal
things; yet is there no one Promise, but, in the spirituality of it, belongs to
Every one that belongs to Christ, (that is, Jews in spirit:) No Scripture is of
private Interpretation; and therefore Not to be Confined to those particular
times or persons, when and to whom they were delivered; They were written for
the use of All; 1 Cor. 10. 11. And

3. We find them accordingly applied in the New Testament; The Promise made to
Joshua touching the success of his Warfare in Canaan, Josh. 1. 5. with
is by the Apostle applied to Believers in general, Heb. 13. 5.
as an Argument against overmuch carefulness in a Married'state, and for
Contentedness with our present condition: Isa. 29. 13. with
So likewise, the Prophecy of Isaiah, touching the hypocrites of his time, is
by Christ applied to the Pharisees: Math. 15. 7, 8
And the Promises made to the Jews, in Isa. 54, 13. and Ier. 31. 33, are
applied to the Gentiles, in John 6. 45. and Romans 4. 15. and. 16.

This Doctrine of Absolute Perseverance, lays the Reigns of Security on the
Neck of the flesh, and of the old man in believers?
1. This Objection is (in effect) the same with the first; Only it speaks
broader; which shows, That the farther Men go in opposing the Truth, the worse
language they give it. That Many who disbelieve the Doctrine of Perseverance,
have given the Flesh its full Range and liberty, -- Needs no proof: But, That
any Believer has made that impious improvement of it, will never be made-out.

2. The Objection deserves no Quarter; because it highly Reproaches the
Goodness and Faithfulness of God; as if, for a Fish, He had g^ven His People a
Scorpion; For so it would be, If His Giving them Absolute Promises, should
prove an Indulgence to the flesh.

3. It also Contradicts the known and constant way of holy Men's Arguing and
Inferring from Absolute Promises, and the highest Assurance: See a few
Instances of this; Col. 3. 4, When Christ our life shall appear, then shall ye
also appear with him in Glory: The Result of it is, Mortify therefore your
Members which are upon the Earth. 1 Ioh. 3. 2; [We know] That when He shall
appear, We shall be like Him: And what is the fruit of this knowledge? Every
Man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as He is pure. The like
ye have in 2 Cor. 5. 1, For, we [know] that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, Eternal in the Heavens: and what the effect of this great Knowledge was,
ye have in the 9. v. Wherefore We labor, That whether present or absent, we
may be accepted of Him. In 2 Cor. 6. 18. is repeated the Sum of the New
Covenant; I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters,
says the Lord Almighty: See now the use he makes of it; (And all Believers
have the same Mind:) Having therefore these Promises, let us cleanse our selves
from all filthyness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

Job knew, That his Redeemer lived, and that he should live with him; and yet,
as to holiness and integrity, Not a man like him in all the Earth. And that
holy Man Asaph was fully assured of Persevering infallibly, Psalm. 73. 24, Thou
shall guide me by thy Counsel, and afterward Receive me to Glory. This did not
loosen the Reigns, but made him cleave closer to God, Renouncing all but Him
and His service; Whom have I in Heaven but thee? v. 25: And, It is good for Me
to draw nigh to God, v. 28. The like frame of Spirit we find in David, Psalm.
23, [ Surely,] Goodness and Mercy shall follow me all the days of my life; His
Result also, is, I will dwell in the house of God for ever.

And, that these were not temporary fits and flashes, but from a stled
Principle; is further apparent by his manner of Reasoning, in Psalm. 27. 5, 6,
In time of trouble He shall hide me in His pavillion: (no safer place on Earth,
nor in Heaven:) Luke 12. 19.
and now shall my head be lifted up above mine Enemies round about me. What
follows upon this Mounted Assurance? Soul, take thy ease, eat, drink, and be
merry? O No! But, [ Therefore] will I offer Sacrifices of Joy; I will sing,
yea, I will sing praises unto the Lord! He was now upon his high places, out of
the Reach of danger; but did not grow Remiss upon it, Restrain Prayer, and
giveover Calling upon God; but falls the more servently upon that which shall
be the Upshot of all in Heaven: He would rather have been Remiss without this
Assurance, as himself confesses at the 13. verse, I had fainted, unless I had
believed to see the Goodness of the Lord in the land of the living.

Paul s assurance of obtaining what he ran-for, was a Mighty strengthening to
him in his Race: Who so Crucified to the World as Paul? so abundant in all kind
of service, or more ready to dye for Christ, than he? Who yet had the fullest
Assurance of holding-out, and of Receiving the Crown of Righteousness at last;
And, that Nothing should separate him from it.

By these ye may gather, That Believers are of a Nobler Extract, than to love
God the less, because He loves them so Much; and that it is no trivial Slander
to Insinuate, That Believers, (especially, such as have Assurance,) are most
exposed and given to backsliding: Which is (sure) an Unnatural consequent of
their being Sealed to the day of Redemption. Such objections do also argue the
Authors of them Not well-acquainted with the good ways of God; Nor with that
spiritual obligeing sweetness that is found in them; Which any One who has
tasted thereof in truth, would not Turn-from, although his future happiness were
not concerned in it. Nor do they Consider the frame and nature of the New
Creature; which has spiritual senses, fitted to discern what makes for its own
preservation, and what makes against it. Had you Fifteen years added to your
life, and a Certainty of it; Would you therefore forsake your food, and disuse
the ordinary means of preserving life? The Jews had an Absolute Promise, That
God would save Jerusalem from the King of Assyria, (who then besieged it;) Did
they setope their Gates, and draw off their Guards upon it? Sense and Reason
would teach them Otherwise; Which Grace does not destroy, but perfect. It is a
sparkle of that Heavenly fire, which cannot live out of its Element; nor can
all the Waters under Heaven, quench it. It is a part of the Divine Nature, and
so loves and hates, as the Father of it does; and It will cleave to Him in
every State: If He save me Alive, I Will Serve Him; If He kill me, I Will yet trust
in him; In life and in death, I will be the Lord's. This is the natural
disposition of the New Creature; It favors only the things which are of God:
And the higher-tasted They are by Assurance, the more is he Aloft, and above
the lure of carnal Divertisements; Not to be Reigned or led by them. Therefore,
Let God be true, and His Prophets and Apostles be reckoned for faithful
Witnesses; And every one that speaks Otherwise, a liar.

The next thing, in course, is To consider What improvement may be made of this
Doctrine: Which, one would surely conclude, of very great usefulness, since the
Scriptures are so greatly concerned about it.
In the General, it affords Matter of eminent Support to Believers; especially
in difficult Cases: It also evinceth Matter of Duty, on the Believers part: And
from the Examples forequoted, something of Direction in reference to both: Which
I shall here put intermixedly together.

First, Infer. I.
Stand still, and behold the Salvation of the Lord! And at the sight of this
great thing, Say in your hearts, with an holy Astonishment, What has God
wrought! Let your Souls be filled and enlarged with everlasting admirings of
that Grace (that Sovereign Grace) which has thus impregnably secured the
Salvation of His Chosen; That no Manner of thing, whether with in them or
without them, shall be able to hinder them of it: Even the Gates of hell shall
not prevail against it: No, Not so much as one of the stakes thereof shall be
Removed, and that for ever. Shaken you may be, and tossed with tempest; but
never Over-turn'd because ye have an Eternal Root. Electing love is of that
Sovereignty, That it Rules and Overrules all in Heaven and Earth Christ Jesus
our Savior and Lord; The Holy Ghost our Sanctifier Councellor and Comforter,
in all that they have done, do, or will do, do still pursue that scope: All
Ordinances, Providence, Temptations, Afflictions, and whatever can be Named,
(be it good, or be it bad, in it self) Life, death, things present, and things
to come, are all made Subservient to the Decree of Election; And do all
Worktogether, To compass and bring-about its Most glorious designment.

If the Course and Conduct of Common Providence were truly lined-out; It would
yield an illustrious Prospect: How much more the Conduct, Order, and End, of
those special Providence, which are proper to, and conversant about, Election!
When all the pieces thereof shall be brought-together and set-in-order, how
beautiful will it be! Angels and Men shall shout for the Glory of it! Then
'twill be evident, God has done nothing in vain, or impertinent to your
blessedness: That what ever has befallen you here (however contr^ry to your
present sense and opinion of it) was d^spensed in very faithfu^ness to you.
That if any of those manifold (and seemingly Cross) Occurrences, you have been
exercised-with, had been omitted; it would have been a Blank in your story, a
blot in your Scutcheon of honor. When you shall see, What Contrivances have
been against you; what Art, Subtilty, Malice, and Power, they were
agitated-with; How unable you were to Fore see, prevent, avoid, or repel them;
And how all the Attributes of God and His Providence, each one in its time and
place, (which was always most seasonable,) came-in to your Rescue; Retorting on
your adversaries, and safeguarding you; yea, how that which was death in it
self, was made to work life in you; How amiable and admirable will the story of
it be! That when your faith was weak, the Lord did not withdraw from you; That
when it was at its height and strength, He then did for you above all you could
believe or think; and through an unspeakable Preass of Difficulties and
Contradictions, He carried-on his work in you; even bearing you on Eagle's
Wings, until He had brought you to Himself; How will you Magnify His work, and
Admire it then! Begin it Now.

Secondly, Infer. II.
Let us study more the Knowledge and Contents of this Great truth, of Believers
Invincible Perseverance; the Rise, Progress, and Tendency of it; and what
advantages it yields us; which (indeed) are many and very considerable.

1. As it is a part of the Doctrine of Election; which teaches That Nothing in
us, but Grace and love in God, was the only Original Cause of our Salvation:
The knowledge whereof will work in the Soul, an holy Ingenuity and love toward
God, whom nothing offends but Sin. Simon answered right, Luke 7. 43.
when he said, He that had most forgiven him, would love most: Whence it
follows, That he who believes the Free Remission of all his sins from first to
last; must needs love God more than One who believes only the pardon of those
that are past, and that so, as that they may all be charged upon him again: Or
if not, That yet he may possibly perish for those to-come; perhaps in the last
Moment of his life; For, he is not sure (Nay, it is very doubtful, if dependent
on his own natural will) That Faith or Repentance shall be his last Act.

Now, This Grace of Love being the strongest and most operative Principle; he
that is led by it must act accordingly; that is, 2 Cor. 4. 16.
Vigorously, and without weariness, as Paul did. And Joseph, having received
large Tokens of God's love to him, and expecting more yet; argues against and
(with an holy disdain and sleight of hand) puts-by the Temptation, How can I
do this, and sin against God, who has dealt, and will deal, so bountifully
with me!

2. As it teaches the soul to Depend upon God for its keeping, as having His
Almighty Power absolutely engaged for it: Whereas, if the efficacy and event of
all that God does for Me, should depend upon something to be done by Me, who am
a frail Creature, and prone to Revolt; I should still be in fear, because still
in danger of Falling, and losing all at last: And this Fear, being an
enfeebling passion, must needs render my Resistance and all my endeavors, both
irregular and weak: Whereas a Magnanimous and fearless spirit, who sees himself
Clothed with a Divine Power, shall have his Wits (as we say) more about him; to
discern Dangers and Advantages; and consequently, how to eschew the one, and
improve the other.

3. As it gives assurance, Our labor shall not be in vain: This made those
believing Hebrews to endure that great fight of afflictions, and to take
joyfully the spoiling of their Goods; Heb. 10. 33, 34.
because they [knew] they had: in Heaven a better and more-enduring substance.
All manner of Accomplishments put-into-one, and made your own; would not so
invincibly Steel your foreheads, and strengthen your hearts, as, To be Sure of
Success, and to come off Conqueror: The Apostle therefore brings it in, as the
highest encouragement in our Christian Warfare, in Romans 6. 14. and chap. 8. 37.
And our blessed Lord Himself (who, of all others, had the hardest Chapter to
Run-through;) It made His Face as a Flint, Isa 50. 7.
because [He knew] He should not be Confounded.

Thirdly, Infer. III.
Make it one, and that a Mayn part of your business, to foyl and disprove the
Objections that are brought against this Doctrine: And your Nearest way to it,
is, Growing in Grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. with chap. 1. from the 5th. verse to the
10th.

1. Lay-aside, and Castaway every weight, especially the sin that does most
easily beset you; your bosom sin, whatsoever it be; Isa. 2. 20. 1 These. 5. 5, 6
Cast them to the Moles and to the Batts: They are not fit-Mates for Daylight
Creatures: It is a Noble prize you Run-for; Therefore, Clogg not your self with
any thing that may hinder, or retard your pace.

2. Keep your selves in the Love of God: that is, keepup and maintain a
spiritual sense of His love to you, and a lively answer of holy affections
toward Him. Whatever may tend to obscure or lessen your sense of it, have
nothing to do with that unjust thing; keep your self from Idols; let nothing
have an interest in your love but God; and all things else, but in subordination
and with respect to Him only.

3. Watch against the Beginnings and first Motions of sin; Nip it in the bud;
Abstain from all appearance of evil; and walk not on the brink of your liberty.
It is easier to keep-out an Invader than to Expel him being Entered; To
keep-down a Rebel, and prevent his Rising, than to Conquer him when he is up.
Great and black Clouds have small beginnings; the bigness of your hand (at
first,) may rise and spread, to cover the whole Heavens. Therefore, keep-off
sin at staffs end.

4. Be diligent and industrious in it: Think not, because it is God who
performs all things for you, that therefore you may sit-still, or be Remiss
in your duty; your Arms and Armor were not provided to Rust in your Tent.
There may be (indeed) such a Juncture in Providence, that it may be your duty
(and so, your strength) to sit-still; as was theirs at the Red Sea: Exodus 14.
13.
This is, when all farther Motion is shut-up to you; and then the Lord will do
His Work without you: But usually, There is something to be done on our part:
Though the Lord would go-forth before David, and smite the Philistims; yet David
must bestir himself: This thing is constantly to be affirmed, 2 Samuel 5. 24.
That they who have believed in God, be careful to maintain good Works; Tit. 3.
8. And do it the rather, To cut off occasion from them which desire occasion;
that wherein they glory, they may be found even as we, 2 Cor. 11. 12.

5. Cleave to Jesus Christ, and to Him only; and trust not to your holding of
him, but to His holding of you: This did David when he says, Psalm. 73. 23.
Thou hold me by my Right hand. Follow Him, as Men (whose dependence is upon
it) follow the Court: Whiles following Him, you cannot do amiss; nor want any
good thing, whether for Council, Strength, or Otherwise.

6. Forget what is behind, and press on toward perfection; That if possible,
you might attain to the Resurrection of the Dead; i. e. To be perfectly holy:
Though Perfectness, in the perfection of it, is not attainable here; yet, the
higher you aim, the higher shall your Attainment be; and the farther-off from
losing what you have. Keep the Mark still in your eye, and shun whatever might
intercept your Sight of it.

These are some of the ways to make your Calling and Election sure: And if ye
do these things, ye shall prove this Doctrine to be true; And either Prevent or
Retort those Carnal and groundless Calumnies that are brought against it.

Fourthly, Infer. IV.
Since there are such Arguments for Believers Invincible Perseverance; Let us
all so demean our selves, That we may have them all stand on our side, for
proof and evidence That we are of that happy Remnant, whom the Great God has
set-apart for himself; And whom He has made and wrought for this self same
thing; And as it was His purpose, so let it be our Spirit and practice, to
glorify His Rich Grace.

1. If born of God, let us shew-forth the virtues of our Father; and bear our
selves as His Children, both toward Him, and toward the World: Let us live
upon Him, and live to Him; Rejoicing always before Him; first, for His Own
blessedness, and then for our own as derived from His, and by Him reserved in
Heaven for us; And all, as designing to honor Him as our Father.

2. If we have Faith, let it appear by our Works: It must be some singular
thing that must distinguish us from other Men: It is not profession, Nor Words,
Nor Actions neither (as to the Matter of them, and so far as visible to Men,)
that will approve us Believers; but the Principle whence they grow, and the End
they drive at; The Result of Abraham's faith was, To give Glory to God.

3. Let us carry our selves under all dispensations not only quietly but
thankfully; and so as to Answer God*s End: Walk humbly; Hate the thing that is
evil; Have the World under your feet; Esteem preciously of Christ; Honor His
Ordinances; let every Grace have its perfect work; and Rejoice in hopes of that
glory, which all these things are preparatory to.

4. If One with Christ, and He our Mediator; Then let us walk as He walked; who
held His own Will always subject to His Father's; Reckoning it His Meat to do
His Will, and to finish His Work: Let us also wait His Advice and Counsel in
every business, and follow it; Commit our Cause to Him, and Interest Him in all
our Concernments.

5. Apply our selves to every Attribute of God, according to the present
occasion; and dwell upon them, and leave them not, until we have the Grace and
Help intended by them -- They are all made over to the heirs of Salvation, to
live upon: Let it not be said, That in the midst of our abundance we are in
streights!

6. If made for the Glory of God, Make-good your End: He is glorious in
Holiness, and by Holiness only can you glorify Him. Bear (therefore) on the
forehead of your Designs and Conversation, that Royal Inscription [ Holiness to
the Lord:] By this, you will set-to your seal, That God is true; and approve
your selves to be Children that will not lie. 'Twill also be of singular use
and service to your selves, as to that other End of your Being: That you have
glorified God on the Earth, will be a substantial argument That He will
glorify you in the World to come. Joh. 17. 14.
For, tho your personal Righteousness be not your Title to the Heavenly
Inheritance; yet your constant progression in Holiness, will be your best
evidence (next the immediate witnessings of the Spirit) that you have a Title,
and that your Title is good. Since, therefore, we were made for, and expect such
things, 2 Pet. 3. 11.
What manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy conversation and Godliness!

7. If under the Covenant of Grace, let us reckon our selves strengthened with
all might, and hold to it, as having all our salvation in it; Both Keeping,
Support, Recovery and Settlement, Grace and Glory. Not Minding so much how any
thing looks or feels at present; but what is the End it tends-to; For if the
End be good, the Means (as such) cannot be otherwise. And truly, we cannot have
a better evidence of our Interest in this Covenant, Isa. 56. 4 and 6.
than a total Devolving of our selves upon it.

And well it is for us, (who find in our Selves such a proneness to backslide,)
That our Eternal condition does not depend on our selves; 2 Timothy 2. 19.
but upon that foundation of God mentioned in Timothy; where the Apostle,
speaking of some who had made Ship-wreck of the faith, lest true Believers
should faint in their minds, at the sight and apprehension of it; he tells
them, That Nevertheless (that is, Notwithstanding this woeful backsliding of
some, perhaps of eminent profession, yet) the foundation of God stands sure;
q. d. They that are of this Foundation are sure to be kept: And he firms it
with this Seal, The Lord knows them that are His: He knows whom He has
Chosen, and concerning whom He has Covenanted, That they shall not depart from
Him; and therefore He will not let them go; (They shall be kept as those Seven
thousand were, from bowing the knee to Baal.) Adding this Caution withal, That
every one which names the Name of the Lord, should depart from iniquity;
Which, as it is a Means of God's appointing, to keep from Apostasy; So, it
shall be to them an evidence, That they are of that Foundation, and shall be
kept. For, it being his scope, to Comfort believers against their Misgivings,
which arise from a sense of their own weakness, and a like aptness in
themselves to Revolt; He needs must use an Argument suited to such an End: And
therefore, in saying [ The foundation of God stands sure;] He must intend,
Believers standing-sure upon it: For, The standing-sure of the foundation,
would be small Comfort to us, if yet We might be blown off it, or sink besides
it.

Does God take care for Sparrows? for Oxen? for Ravens? Much more for believing
souls, who have Committed themselves to His keeping. Let the Fowler do all he
can, Not a sparrow shall fall to the ground: you will say, Without the Will of
God, they cannot? And the Will of God is, That they shall not: ( A thousand may
fall at his side, and ten thousand at his right hand; Psalm. 91. 7.
but it shall not come nigh him.) He that determined such a sparrow shall not
fall; determined also, to keep him from that as would cause him to fall: And
therefore, either the Fowler shall not find the Bird; or the Bird shall discern
his approach, or smell the powder, and be gone: Or, if he shoot, he shall miss
his mark; Or if he hit, it shall light-on the feathers that will grow-agen; Or,
on some fleshy part, that may be licked whole; Or perhaps, it shall open an
Ulcer that could not otherwise be Cured: A Believer's heel may be bruised, but
his vital-parts are out of Reach, and therefore safe.

Fifthly, Infer. V.
Let this Doctrine of Believer's invincible perseverance in Faith and Holiness,
strengthen your hearts against all sorts of doubts and fears, which may arise
from the presence of Indwelling-Sin, with its frequent and sturdy
insurrections; Since He that has begun, Phil. 1. 6. 2 These. 1. 11.
will also perfect His Work with Power. Judge righteous Judgment: Of our selves
(indeed) we cannot judge worse than we deserve; but of our state, we may:
Therefore, For help in this Case, Consider.

1. That though the New Nature shall certainly expunge the old, at last; yet the
Work is not perfected here: But, this for your present relief; That the Best
Principle is still predominant and getting ground, (how ever your present sense
may judge of it;) and the old party shall never recover its Wasting condition:
For, the Kingdom of God once in the heart, will surely Work and spread it self,
till the whole lump is favored by it. (To assure us of this, is the drift of
diverse Parables in the Gospel.) Mat. 13, 31, 33. chap. 25. 29.
To him that [hath] shall be given: He that [hath] life, shall have it more
abundantly: As it was God who girded you with strength, Joh. 10. 10. Ps. 18. 32.
so He will make your way perfect. Suppose, that Faith and Holiness be at
present, but as two little flocks of kids; And sin (like the Syrians Army)
fills the Country: Be not dismayed; The king of Israel will clear the Country
of them: His spirit shall lift up a Standard against them; and though they
comein like a flood, by Him shall their proud waves be stayed. The Lord says to
you in this Case as He did to Jeremy; I have made thee an Iron Pillar and
brazen Walls, against the whole land: They shall fight against thee, but they
shall not prevail against thee: Jer. 1. 18, 19. Or as once to His People,
concerning the Giant Og; Fear him not, For I have delivered him into thy hand,
with all his Army.

2. This Sickness is not unto death: The Conflict is not to weaken or destroy,
but for the trial and improvement of your faith and other Graces: The very
trial whereof is a precious thing, 1 Pet. 1. 7.
and shall be found so at last; both to the Glory of Him that tryes you, and
yours who are tried: Abraham, David, Job, and others, are pregnant examples of
this; They came-forth like Gold; More pure, solid, and flexible. David indeed,
though he held-fast his confidence a great while; yet still being pursued and
Over-prest, Every day involved in dangers anew; and having once admitted Carnal
Reason to be of his Council, he began to flagg in his faith, ( I shall one day
perish, -- and All men are liars-) But it was in his haste, Not considering the
sureness of an Absolute Promise: He therefore (when he had better weighed it)
confesses his fault, and Recovers from it: And his faith was improved by his
trial; For, being come agen-to itself, he comfortably concludes, That Goodness
and Mercy shall follow him all the days of his life; and (Notwithstanding his
present exile) he shall dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. Ps. 23 7.


3. Be it always Remembered, That God reckon's of a man according to what his
Mind is; And you ought so also to reckon of your self: This was Paul's course,
in Romans 7. where he thus reasons; Now, If I do that I would not; It is no
more I that do it, Romans 7. 20.
but sin that dwells in Me. Before Conversion it was Saul, but Now it is Sin.
Believers may be led-captive (at-times) even after they have sworn fealty to
their true Lord; But still they are His in their Mind, and that is their Mark.
It is the same with that in John; Whosoever is born of God, does not Commit
sin; And, he cannot sin, because he is born of God: 1 John 3. 9.
i. e. He does not, nor he cannot sin, as the Devil's children do; for their
Wills are in it; (according to John. 8. 44, The lusts of your father [ye will
do:] But, a Regenerate person, The evil he does, he [Allows not:] And this is a
staying Consideration, That if with our Mind we serve the law of God, Romans 7.
25.
it shall not Ruin us, that with our flesh we serve the law of Sin.

But how shall I know it? If you be forced, you will Cryout; and if you Cry, it
is a Rape; and shall not be charged to your account: ye have the Law for it, in
Deuteronomy. 22. 25, 26, 27. So, Exodus 21, 13. with Deuteronomy. 19. 4, 6.
he that kills a Man [ against his Will] is not reckoned a Murderer, Nor
worthy of death; albeit, the Act it self, be the same that another Man, whose
will was in it, shall dyefor.

4. Believers are Trees of Righteousness, and of the Lord's own planting; and
therefore, they shall not fear when heat comes. Jer. 17. 7 8.
They have their Autumns (too often) and blighting Winds; (perhaps ^n the
Springtime too) and also luxuriant branches and Suckers, proceeding from the
Old stock; which rob the good Ones of their sap, and make their fruit less both
in bulk and beauty: But still their substance is in them, and therefore they
Revive, and flourish again. And whiles those Suckers are Nipt and Prun'd-off,
Joh. 15. 2.
the true Branches are preserved and Cherished; They shall bring-forth fruit in
their old age. P^. 92. 14. 1 John 3. 2, 9. chap. 2. 27. 2 ep. Joh. v. 2.
They that are Now (i. e. Once; They that are Once) the Children of God, shall
never be Otherwise: save only in a greater likeness to their Father And though
their living on Him, and their likeness to Him, be very weakly; (especially at
times, as the Natural life of Infants is) yet, being born, they must be kept;
And the Will and Care of their Father is, Ephesians. 4. 13.
To Nurse them up to a Perfect Man.

You 'I say, (perhaps) That never had any such cause of Complaint as you; and
possibly it may be so: To be sure, you know not that They had: And those you
compare your self with, have said as much of themselves; and they had the like
Cause; (for our hearts are fashioned alike; Only, each one best knows the
plague of his own:) Agur, a Man of great Wisdom and Holiness, says of himself,
That he was more brutish than any Man. Prove. 30. 2.
But, suppose it be true, That Others corruptions have not broke-out as yours
have done; yet May not this put your faith to a ^tand; Much less Make you
weary, Recoil, or to faint in your Minds: For, the same Grace that prevented
them, can pardon you; and will if you cast your self upon it. Ye may (indeed)
be allowed to complain of your sins; for, Nothing else have ye to complain of:
Therefore, Complain and Cry-out as loud as you will, Romans 7. 24.
Oh wretched Man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? But
withal, Betake you to the same Refuge that he did, ver. 25.
and abide by it; I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord! Here you may
triumph over all, both Complaints and the Causes of them.

It must always be granted, That to Overcome Sin, Combined, Entrenched, and
fortified, as it is; is a great Undertaking, and must be gon-through with;
There is no Retreit to be sounded, Nor Armor provided for your back; Every
Mother's son must either kill or be killed in this Combat; There Is no
Compounding the Difference, Nor discharge in this Warfare, till the day be
perfectly Won: But What a Recruit is there levied, and always stands ready, as
a sure Reserve! viz. That though the Conflict be sharp, the success is sure. In
order whereto, (among^t other Rules and Articles of War,) bear in mind these
few following:

1. Entangle not your self; but shun and avoid whatever may prove a clog, or
unfit you for duty.

2. Exercise yourself in things that will teach you to handle your Arms; and
tending to Nourish your faith.

3. Stand on your Guard watchfully; that ye be not surprised by sudden
excursions, or under pretense of friendship.

4. Arm your self with the same Mind that was in Christ; set your face as a
flint, and conclude, That ye shall not be confounded.

5. Submit to the place your General has set you in. It must have been some
body's lot, and why not yours? and the hotter it is, the more honorable.

6. Look that ye fight with proper weapons; which are only to be had at the
Covenant of Grace, and the Cross of Christ; And There they are never wanting:
And be sure, ye go not down to the Philistines, either to forge or sharpen.

7. Fight not as one that beats the air; but as having (indeed) a sturdy
adversary to deal-with; whom yet you are sure to Overcome.

8. Look still on your Captain, to observe what He says and Does, and do
likewise: To take-up your Cross, and endure hardship, are necessary
accoutrements to a Soldier of Christ.

9. Wait on the Lord to Renew your Strength; who then bestirrs Himself most,
when your strength is gone; Then He lays hold upon Shield and Buckler, Ps. 35. 2.
and standsup for your help.

10. Lastly, (and to Influence all) Mind the Lord of his Covenant; even Then,
when (it may be) your self think on it with trouble, as doubting your interest
in it: Pray Him to remember it for you; and with the same Goodwill wherewith He
made it: Beseech Him to look-on His Bow in the Cloud, which Himself has set
there, as a sure sign between God and you; That though the skies be Red and
lowering, The Clouds return after the Rain, and the Billows go-over your head;
you shall not be deluged by them: By this it is, that ye are hedged-about, and
walled-up to Heaven. Therefore, Stand not like Men in suspense; as unresolved
to fall-on; or doubtful how to come-off; But On, On, the day's your Own; The
Lord of Hosts pursues them; And let all the Sons of God shout for joy.

Sixthly, Infer. VI.
since Believers only are interessed in the Covenant, and that Faith is a
Necessary Instrument which the Covenant will not work without; and without
which, you cannot work with it, Nor see your Interest in it; Look-well to your
Faith: first, That it be of the right kind; ( viz. such as Renounces Self, and
lives upon Grace;) And then, having found it such, Be sure ye keep it well, and
improve it to the utmost. Two uses, especially, are to be made of it; (1) As
your Shield, to supply the place of all other pieces of your Armor, when
broken or loose; as well as to safeguard them, when they are whole and Tite
about you. If your helmet be out of the way, and fiery darts come pouring down;
Hold up your Faith between your head and them; Faith is the truest quench-coal
to the fire of hell. If your Sword be forgot, or laid-aside, or wants an edge,
etc. your Shield, if well applied, will Retort your enemies weapons on his own
Pate. (2) Faith is your spiritual Optic, which shows you things of Greatest
Moment; and Not Otherwise Visible: Even Chariots and horsemen of Fire, are not
discernible without it. If temptations from the World do endanger you; Turn
your Faith that way, and through it view and consider, how Shallow and
short-lived the pleasures of it are; and how Momentany your sufferings. Then
look-at the World to come; The Glory of it, and your interest in it; And how
much your Crown will be Brightened by the scowrings you have pass'd-under here;
and dwell on the contemplation of it. Bend not your eye so much on the peril or
length of your passage, as on the longed-for shore that lies beyond it; And
reckon the Surges of that dreadful gulf (which is yet betwixt you and It) but
as so many strokes to waft you Thither. Heb. 11. 26.
This was the course that Moses took, and Christ Himself: Nothing so blunts the
edge of Satan's temptations, Chap. 12. 2.
or the World's, as this Faith of God's Elect.

Therefore, see that you hold-fast your Faith; Keep it as your life; (keep
That, and it will keep you;) and let it not go until ye die. Then (indeed) it
will leave you, because then it will have done you all the service it can; even
the whole of what it was ordained-for. But, shall I say, That Faith will then
be dissolved and go-to-nothing? I would rather express it as the Apostle does
the state of the saints, that shall be found alive at Christ's coming, 1 These.
4. 17.
[ They shall not die, but they shall be changed.] Faith shall Then be turned
into Sight, and we shall have the Real presence, Full possession, and Perfect
immixed fruition, of that Blessedness we have believed and hoped-for.

7. Gather hence, Phil. 1. 23.
both the Reason and Rationality of the Saints desires to be dissolved: They
knew, that when this Earthly Tabernacle went-down, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2.
they had a better, and more capacious building in Heaven. They also found,
That spirits, whiles dwelling in Flesh, are too-much straightened and infirm,
either to bear the Glory they were made-for, or to express an answerable
thankfulness for it: And for this they groned; Not to be unclothed, (as weary
of their present state) but to be Clothed-upon with their House from Heaven. 1 John 3. 2.
They were NOW the sons of God; but what they should be, (and fain would be-at)
did not appear to them; Nor could, till the vail were Rent, which hung (as yet)
twixt them and the Holy of Holies. Romans 8. 23. 2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians. 1. 14. Romans
8. 21.
The first fruits of the Spirit, (which were both an Earnest and Foretast of
future Glory) inspired them with servent desires of liberty; that glorious
liberty which belonged to them, as being the Sons of God. They had, by faith,
laid-hold on Eternal life; This they had still in their eye, and earnestly
pursued; And so intent they were upon it, that they even forgot what was
behind, (tho very Memorable in its time.) The Much they had attained, they
counted for Nothing, to what was coming; Nor reckoned for any Cost, to gain
that inestimable Pearl, viz. The prize of the high Calling of God in Christ.
Phil. 3. 14.
This (they knew) was a thing too-big for Mortal senses, tho as highly Refined
and sublimated, as capable of whiles Mortal: and therefore longed for that day,
when Immortality should be their clothing. The love of God shed-abroad in their
hearts, had given such a Divine Tincture, Romans 5 5. Cant. 5. 4.
and so Transformed and Wid'ned their souls; as nothing could satisfy, but
that Immense Deep from whence it came. Coll. 3. 4.
They knew, That when Christ their life should appear, they should see Him as
He is; Not under shadows, as of old; Nor in a state of humiliation, as when
upon earth; nor, as since, under Memorials and Representtations; but in His
state of glory: The sight of which, would make them like himself; and till
Then, they could not say, It is enough. They knew, that the very Quintessence
of Heavenly beatitude, consists in the vision of God; and that Heaven it self,
with all that Innumerable company of Angels, and spirits of just Men made
perfect, (though a very glorious and desirable society) would not satisfy
Heaven-born Souls, if their Lord Himself were not there in His Glory. Hence
those holy exclamations and outcries, Psalm. 73. 25. Psalm. 42. 2.
Whom have I in Heaven but Thee! and When shall I come and appear before God!
Good Jacob would go and see his Beloved before he died; and These would die, to
go and see Theirs. This is the second time that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence from the heirs of Salvation; Math. 11. 12.
They know it is theirs; and that they were wrought for that self same thing; 2
Cor. 5. 5.
and being theirs they might lawfully take it by force.

8. Infer. VIII. 2 Pet. 3. 12.
(And for a close of all) ye have seen what Paul and others did; Go you, and do
likewise; Hasten to the day of God; and wait for it as they that watch for the
Morning: 1. Affectionately, as a thing greatly desirable, especially after a
dark and toilsom night: 2. Patiently and with Quietness; Not precipitating, but
as knowing it will come, and that in the duest season: 3. Attentively, as not
willing to loose the smallest sound of your Master's feet: 4. With Diligence
also and Preparedness; that neither Oil nor Lighting may be to-seek when the
Cry is made. Be always Ready, and Then Groan: Groan (I say) for that day of
Glory, when life and Immortality shall be brought to light in Perfection: When
your self, with all the Elect of God, meeting in that Great and General
Assembly, Heb. 12. 23.
the Church of the firstborn which are written in Heaven; may be entirely,
universally, and everlastingly taken-up in admiring Electing love, which so
gloriously and happily shall have wrought all our works for us; and brought us
to the ultimate End it designed us for; which was, To be ever, with the Lord;
To see Him as He is; and to experiment the sum of that great Petition, in the
17. Joh. 17. 21.
John: -- That they may be One in us.

And in your way thither, Carry this assurance still before you; That the same
hands which laid the Foundation, will also lay the Top-stone, and that with
shoutings; And you shall lift-up to Eternity, Zach. 4. 7, 9. Deuteronomy. 33. 29.
that loud and joyful acclamation, Grace, Grace, unto it! Happy art thou, O
Israel! who is like unto thee O People saved by the Lord, the shield of thine
help, and the sword of thine Excellency! 2 Samuel 22. 1 7.
All thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon
their high places! And (which is more than Angels and Men can utter besides)
GOD shall be all in All! 1 Cor. 15. 28.
(To proclaim which, was the End of this work.) Amen.

FINIS.

